 
19 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2022-23) 
                 
         
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                  
         
                 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER 
AND SANITATION 
 
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2022-23) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
         
         
         
NINETEENTH REPORT   
          
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
February, 2023 / Magha, 1944 (Saka) 
  


 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2022-23) 
          
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER 
AND SANITATION 
 
 
                 
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2022-23) 
 
 (Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
 
         
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   10.02 .2023 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 10.02.2023 
  
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
February, 2023 / Magha, 1944 (Saka) 
  


 
 
W. R. C.  No. 74 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2023 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha  (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CONTENTS 
 
  Page 
 
Composition of the 
Committee 
 
……………………………………………………………… (iii) 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………… 
 
(v) 
 
CHAPTER - I Report……………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER – II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government…………………………… 
 
21 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………… 
 
38 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of   which the replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee……………...................................... 
 
39 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still 
awaited…………………………………………………….. 
 
45 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 11.01.2023  
 
46 
 
 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixteenth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
 
47 
 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2022-23) 
  
 Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel      -            Chairperson 
 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Vijay Baghel  
3.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan   
4.  Shri Bhagirath Choudhary 
5.  Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary  
6.  Shri Guman Singh Damor  
7.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit  
8.  Dr. K. Jayakumar  
9.  Shri Dhanush M. Kumar  
10.  Shri Sunil Kumar  
11.  Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone  
12.  Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav  
13.  Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
14.  Shri Sanjay (Kaka) Ramchandra Patil  
15.  Shri P. Ravindhranath  
16.  Ms.  Nusrat Jahan Ruhi  
17.  Smt.  Agatha K. Sangma  
18.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi  
19.  Shri Chandan Singh  
20.  Shri D.K. Suresh  
21.  Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22.  Shri H.D. Devegowda  
23.  Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde  
24.  Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
25.  Smt. Mausam Noor  
26.  Shri Sharad Pawar  
27.  Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad  
28.  Shri Arun Singh  
29.  Sant Balbir Singh  
30.  Shri Pramod Tiwari  
31.  Vacant  
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Chander Mohan   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood  - Director 
3. Shri Ram Lal Yadav   - Additional Director 
4. Ms. Kiran Bhargava   - Committee Officer 
  

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2022-23) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Nineteenth 
Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in their Sixteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2022-23) 
of the Ministry of Jal Shakti -Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation. 
 
2.  The Sixteenth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 23 March 2022. The Action Taken replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received in this Secretariat on                     20 
July, 2022. 
 
3.  The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 11.01.2023. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
07 February,  2023 Chairperson 
18 Magha, 1944 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 

CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2022-23) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Sixteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation) for the year 2022-
2023. 
 
2. The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 23.03.2022 and was laid 
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report contained 18 
Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government.  These have been 
examined and categorized as follows:  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Serial Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 16, 17 and 18 
 
Total:12 
Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government: 
 
Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Serial Nos. 1, 5, 7, 12, 13 and 15                                                  
Total:06 
Chapter-IV  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial No. NIL 
Total:00 
Chapter-V 
 
4. The Committee desire that replies to recommendations made in the 
Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 

2 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
A. Analysis of Budgetary provision of Jal Jeevan Mission  
 
Recommendation No.1 (Para No. 2.1 and 2.2) 
 
6. The Committee noted that Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) was announced in August, 
2019 to enable every rural household to have assured and clean water supply through 
Functional Household Tap Connections (FHTCs) by 2024, which is being implemented 
in the States/UTs in a Mission Mode. As on March, 2022, out of 19.18 crore, 8.96 crore 
(46.48%) rural households had access to clean potable water supply at their homes. 
The Committee were happy to note that the State Governments/Union Territories of 
Haryana, Telangana, Goa, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, D & N Haveli and Puducherry 
have achieved cent percent target of providing tap water connections to households. 
The Committee also appreciate that States like Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and Gujarat 
which have achieved more than 90% household coverage and are expected to achieve 
cent percent coverage very soon.  The Committee, however, expressed concern over 
the plight of bigger States like Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, West Bengal, 
Rajasthan, Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala and Tamil Nadu which are providing below 
40% FHTCs to their households. The Committee, therefore, desired that the 
Department should impress upon these State Governments to take appropriate steps 
for providing tap water connections to all the households in keeping with the target year 
fixed. 
  
The Committee further observed that as against the demand of Department of 
Drinking Water & Sanitation for allocation of an amount of Rs. 91,258 crore, Rs. 60,000 
crore only has been allocated for the year 2022-23.  Keeping in view the fact that 
around 53.52% of rural households still require Functional Household Tap Connections 
(FHTCs) in different States/UTs, allocations under JJM for the year 2022-23 seems to 
be inadequate as the budgetary support provided is short by Rs. 31,258 crore against 
the initial demand. The Committee, therefore, urged the Department to strive to utilize 
the allocated funds at the earliest so that they have sufficient justification to ask for 
additional funds at the RE stage.    
  
7. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“Department has identified 13 major States having more than 9.08 Crore (95%) 
of the remaining households (HHs) across the Country and has been regularly 
impressing upon them to prioritize the coverage of remaining HHs.  A recent 
meeting at the level of Secretary (DDWS) has also been held with these 13 
States in Odisha to review the progress under JJM, identify challenges being 
faced, sharing experiences and best practices, etc.  

3 
 
Allocation of the fund for the year 2022-23 among the States/UTs have been 
completed. So far, in the current financial year i.e. in April & May, 2022, States/ 
UTs reported to have utilized an amount of Rs. 5,664.85 Crore for 
implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission.” 
  
8. The Committee note that as per the Action Taken Replies furnished by the 
Department allocation of funds to the States/UTs for the Financial Year 2022-23 
has been completed.  The Committee recommend that the Department should 
ensure that the allocated funds are released in a time bound manner so that the 
pace of the projects under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) is not adversely affected due 
to lack of funds. Further, the Committee observe that initially the Department had 
sought an allocation of Rs. 91,258 crore under JMM, however, Rs. 60,000 crore 
only had been allocated for the year 2022-23. The Committee further observe that 
the States/UTs have utilized an amount of Rs. 5,664.85 only in the months of 
April- May 2022. The Committee are of the view that with this pace of utilization of 
funds, the Department may not be in a position to seek enhanced allocation of 
funds during the Revised Estimates stage. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Department should impress upon the State/UTs the benefits of the 
Scheme and recognize JJM as an opportunity for accessibility of funds for 
providing Functional Household Tap Connections (FHTC) in rural households.  
Further, the Committee recommend that the Department should make concerted 
efforts to impress upon the Ministry of Finance for enhanced allocations at the 
stage of Revised Estimates under Jal Jeevan Mission. 
Furthermore, the Committee observe that the target date set under JMM to 
achieve the target of Functional Household Tap Connections (FHTC) to all 
households in rural India is 2024, which is fast approaching. The Committee note 
that mainly smaller States/UTs have been able to achieve cent percent target of 
providing tap water connections to households (HHs). By the Department’s own 
admission, the Department has identified 13 major States having more than 9.08 
crore (95%) of remaining HHs across the country. In this connection, the 
Department has informed that recently a meeting at the level of Secretary (DDWS) 
has also been held with these 13 States in Odisha to review the progress under 
JJM, identify challenges being faced, sharing experiences and best practices, etc. 

4 
 
The Committee are of the considered view that holding such meeting can only be 
a step towards encouraging and engaging States to enhance the pace of 
implementation of the Scheme. The Committee, however, are interested in being 
apprised of the outcome of the meeting and the measures undertaken by the 
Department to overcome the challenges/bottlenecks being faced by various 
States. Further, the Committee are of the considered view that mechanism should 
be evolved to find optimal and innovative solutions to the problems being faced 
by major States, in consultation with concerned States/UTs along with other 
stakeholders including issues related to depletion of ground water, matching 
State share and its non-availability/delayed availability as well as contribution by 
local community. Further, the Committee desire that States may be incentivized 
to take appropriate measures for providing tap water connections to all the rural 
households in keeping with the target year fixed.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard by the Department within three months 
of presentation of this Report. 
B. Under-utilization of funds under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) 
 
Recommendation No.2  (Para 2.3) 
 
9. The Committee noted that during the fiscal year 2021-22, under Jal Jeevan 
Mission (JJM), Rs. 50,011/- crore was allocated at BE stage which was reduced to Rs. 
45,011/- crore at RE stage, while the actual expenditure incurred was only Rs.28,238/- 
crore. While analyzing State wise financial performance, the Committee find that only 
three States namely Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Meghalaya have utilized cent per 
cent of Central allocation of funds, while 11 States namely Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Kerala, Sikkim, Nagaland, Assam, Odisha, Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh and 
Mizoram have utilized only 50% to 75%. Further, the Committee were surprised to note 
that bigger States like Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, 
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu have utilized below 
25 % of Central allocation.  The Committee were dismayed to note the under-utilization 
of funds which clearly indicate lack of financial prudence and fiscal discipline, thus, 
adversely affecting the implementation and monitoring of the programme as a whole. 
This undoubtedly deprive the targeted beneficiaries' access to safe and clean potable 
water at their homes. The Committee, therefore, took  into consideration such dismal 
performance pertaining to the fund utilization, urged the Department to initiate suitable 
corrective measures during the current financial year to achieve a better performance 
under the scheme and apprise the Committee of the action taken in this regard. 
  

5 
 
10. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“Since the announcement of the mission, 6.40 (33.40%) Crore rural households 
have been provided with tap water connections. Thus, as of date, out of 19.14 
Crore rural households across the country, 9.63 Crore (50.30%) households are 
reported to have potable tap water supply in their homes. States of Goa, Haryana 
and Telangana and UTs of A & N Islands, DNH & DD and Puducherry have 
provided tap water supply to all rural homes. As on date, every rural household in 
108 districts and 1.53 lakh villages across the country have started getting tap 
water supply in their homes. The year-wise details of tap water connection 
provided so far, is as under:                                                    
                                                                   (No. in lakh) 
Time/ Year Tap Water 
Connections 
Cumulative Tap Water 
Connections 
15.08.2019 3,23.63 3,23.63 
2019-20 82.62 4,06.25 
2020-21 3,22.62 7,28.87 
2021-22 2,08.36 9,37.23 
2022-23* 26.91 9,63.52 
                * as on 06.06.2022 
  
However, State governments, during implementation of the programme, have 
inter alia indicated bottlenecks like uneven geographical terrain, scattered rural 
habitations, depletion of groundwater, adverse climatic conditions, delay in 
obtaining statutory/ other clearances, and extended periods of lockdowns in 
CoVID pandemic, price rise/ inflation etc. thereby delaying the implementation 
and fund utilization under the programme.  
 
Further, delay in release and non-availability of matching State share also 
delayed utilization of fund. To address the issue, several meetings including 
conferences, workshops, review meetings through video conferences, field visits, 
etc. at highest levels are being held from time to time with States/ UTs, wherein 
they are advised to plan and expedite the implementation of the programme to 
achieve the goal in a time-bound manner.  
  
In 2019-20, a sum of Rs. 10,000.66 Crore was allocated for the mission and the 
entire amount was utilized. Similarly, in 2020-21, Rs. 11,000 Crore was allocated 
and utilized. In 2021-22, for Jal Jeevan Mission, Rs. 45,011 Crore has been 
allocated in the Union budget and an amount of Rs. 40,125.64 Crore was 
utilized. In 2022-23, an amount of Rs. 60,000 Crore has been allocated for the 
implementation of the Mission. 
  
Details of major review meetings held in 2022-23 are as under: 
  

6 
 
i. Post budget discussions and webinar on Jal Jeevan Mission in February, 
2022; 
ii. Joint review meetings with the Chief Ministers of States and Lt. Governors 
of UTs. Recently held with J&K and Uttar Pradesh in April, 2022; 
 
iii. Conference of Ministers in-charge of rural water supply of States at 
Guwahati, Bengaluru, Kolkata and Jaipur during February to April, 2022; 
 
iv. More than110 State/ UT visits have been undertaken for understanding the 
JJM planning and implementation on the ground, key issues, challenges, 
suggesting measures to speed up the implementation as well as 
documenting good practices; 
  
v. Review meetings at Odisha in June, 2022.” 
  
 11. The Department in Action Taken Reply has furnished that out of 19.14 crore 
rural households across the country, 9.63 crore (50.30%) households are reported 
to have potable water supply in their homes. Considering the pace of 
implementation, the Committee are apprehensive about the achievement of the 
desired target of FHTC in all rural households by 2024. The Committee had noted 
that the under-utilization of funds clearly indicate lack of financial prudence and 
fiscal discipline. Further, considering the dismal performance pertaining to the 
fund utilization, the Committee had urged the Department to initiate suitable 
corrective measures during the current financial year to achieve a better 
performance under the scheme and apprise the Committee of the action taken in 
this regard. The Committee observe that the Department in the Action Taken 
Reply has merely mentioned about the bottlenecks being faced by the States 
while no details of corrective measures or outcome of the visits/meetings have 
been provided.  The Committee are of the view that merely enumerating the 
bottleneck will not go a long way in achieving the set target, rather a 
comprehensive review of the Scheme needs to be undertaken by the Department, 
keeping in view the bottlenecks identified by the States/UTs and also by further 
identifying the practical considerations/difficulties being faced in implementation 
of the Scheme and modifying the Guidelines accordingly. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard by the Department within 
three months of presentation of this Report.  

7 
 
 
C. Early finalization of Annual Action Plans (AAPs) under JJM 
 
Recommendation No.3 (Para 2.4) 
  
12.     The Committee noted that as per the JJM guidelines, the States/UTs have to 
finalize their Annual Action Plans by April-May every year. Thereafter, funds are 
released from time to time throughout the year and regular field visits and review 
meetings are held to ensure implementation of these Annual Action Plans to achieve 
the goal of Jal Jeevan Mission. The Committee noted that the Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) 
has entered third year of its implementation of providing Functional Household Tap 
Connections (FHTCs) by 2024 across the country in entirety. The Committee were of 
the considered view that since Annual Action Plan are an yearly exercise they should be 
completed well in time without any delay for enabling better utilization of funds and 
implementation of works/ programmes as per the timelines fixed. The Committee, 
therefore, recommended the Department to ensure early finalization of Annual Action 
Plans by all States preferably by March end of every year, so as to ensure completion of 
works within the timelines fixed.                                                        
 
 13. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“Discussion with States/ UTs for finalization of Annual Action Plan (AAP) (2022-
23) for implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission was started in March itself from 23rd 
March 2022 to 27th April 2022.” 
  
14. The Committee note that discussion with States /UTs for finalisation of 
Annual Action Plan (AAP) (2022-23) was initiated from 23rd March to 27th April, 
2022.  The Committee, however, are of the considered view that in the annual 
exercise of preparation of Annual Action Plan, the process of finalization of AAPs 
should be completed by March every year so that the funds are allocated and 
sanctioned before the commencement of the new Financial year. Further, the 
Committee recommend that the funds are released at the earliest in the new 
financial year (FY) so that the process of implementation /execution of projects 
under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) can continue/start in the new financial year and 
not halt/wait for the want of funds. 
D. Village Action Plan (VAPs) and Village Water & Sanitation Committees 
(VWSCs) 
 
Recommendation No.4 (Para No. 2.5) 
 
15.     The Committee observed that under JJM Village Panchayat or the Village Water 
& Sanitation Committee (VWSCs) is an integral partner in the planning process. The 
plan prepared by the Village, which is generally known as Village Action Plan (VAP), is 

8 
 
based on the participatory approach. The aggregation of VAPs is done at the district 
level, and a District Action Plan is prepared and these in turn are again aggregated at 
the State level. The multi-villages schemes are being designed and planned at the State 
level in consultation with the villages. Similarly, Gram Panchayat or its sub-
committee/user group i.e. Village Water & Sanitation Committee (VWSC)/Pani Samiti, 
has been empowered to plan, implement, manage, operate and maintain village water 
supply system. As reported by the Department, the Committee noted that there are 
6,04,631 lakh rural villages in the country, out of which 4,68,366 lakh (77%)of rural 
villages have constituted VWSC and 3,79,280 lakh (62%) rural villages have prepared 
Village Action Plans as on 09.02.2022. The Committee expressed their concern that 
very poor progress has been made by some States like Madhya Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Odissa, Telangana & West Bengal in preparing/setting up VAPs/ VWSCs. The 
Committee were of considered view that the preparation/ constitution of VAPs and 
VWSCs is very important and, untill and unless, these are completed/set up and made 
functional across the country, the target may not be achieved within the deadline. 
Further, VAPs and VWSCs play very important role in monitoring and implementation of 
the scheme and are crucial link in the success of Jal Jeevan Mission. The Committee, 
therefore, recommended the Department to take up the matter seriously and chalk out a 
time bound plan in consultation with States/Union Territories for constitution/preparation 
of VWSCs and VAPs at the earliest and also apprise the Committee of the steps taken 
in this regard. 
                                                                              
16. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“The States/ UTs have been requested to expedite constitution of VWSC and 
preparation of VAPs during Annual Action Plan discussion and in regional 
conference. As on 06.06.2022, VWSCs have be constituted in 4.96 lakh villages 
(82%) and VAPs prepared in 4.06 lakh villages (67%). The lagging States have 
been requested to take requisite action for constitution of VWSCs and 
preparation of VAPs”. 
 
17. The Committee take note of the efforts being made by the Department for 
expediting the constitution of Village Water & Sanitation Committees (VWSCs) 
and preparation of Village Action Plans (VAPs). Yet, as on 6.06.2022, VWSCs have 
been constituted in 82% of the villages and VAPs prepared by 67% villages only. 
The Committee therefore, reiterate that VWSCs and VAPs are crucial link to 
achieve success in Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) and that a time bound plan in 
consultation with States /UTs be chalked out for constitution /preparation of 
VWSCs and VAPs. Further, the Committee are of the considered view that in 
consultation with concerned States/UTs and Ministry of Panchayati Raj, platforms 

9 
 
like Panchayat Sammelans and Panchayat Awards may be utilised to effectively 
convey the importance of VWSCs and VAPs among the rural local bodies. 
E. Waiving off of user charges from the local communities 
                                                                              
Recommendation No.5 (Para No. 2.6) 
 
18.     The Committee noted that under extant guidelines of the JJM, 5 % contribution 
has to be made by local communities towards the capital cost in cash and or in kind or 
labour in hilly/forested areas, NE/Himalayan States & villages having more than 50% 
SCs or STs population and 10 % of the capital cost in case of other villages, for in-
village piped water supply infrastructure and related resources development to be 
implemented by Gram Panchayat and or VWSCs/Paani Samiti/User Group etc. Further 
willingness of the community contribution from at least 80 % of the household is pre-
requisite for taking up water supply scheme. However, the GPs and/ or its sub 
committees may consider exempting individual contribution from poor, infirm, 
divyangjan or widow with no source of steady income. In this regard, the Committee 
observed that in the erstwhile National Rural Drinking Water programme there was no 
such stipulation of mandatory community contributions towards the capital cost. The 
Committee are of the considered view that since providing water to rural population is 
not only a basic necessity but also an integral function of a Welfare State, like 
India,  any mandatory contribution by community would perhaps undermine the efforts 
for realization of the goal of providing water connection to every household. Further, 
considering the poor economic conditions of the rural masses, the Committee 
recommended that the Department should seriously consider waiving off the community 
contribution towards the capital cost of water supply infrastructure and related source 
development. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps/initiative taken by 
the Department in this regard. 
 
19. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 “To instill the ‘sense of ownership’ among rural masses, under Jal Jeevan 
Mission (JJM), there is a provision of community contribution to the extent of 5% 
of the cost of in-village infrastructure in case of North Eastern & Himalayan 
States, forested/ hilly areas, SC/ ST dominated villages and 10% in rest of the 
areas.  
  
Under JJM, willingness of the community and contribution from at least 80% 
households of the village is a pre-requisite for taking up water supply scheme. 
The community contribution can be in the form of cash and/ or kind and/ or 
labour. Further, Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. Village Water & 
Sanitation Committee/ Pani Samiti/ User Group, etc. may exempt individual 
contribution from poor, infirm, divyangjan or widow with no source of steady 
income.  

10 
 
  
Further, provisions have also been made for rewarding the community with 10% 
of the cost of in-village infrastructure, after successful commissioning of the 
scheme, which would serve as revolving fund to meet any unforeseen 
expenditure due to major break down, etc., thereby assuring continuous water 
supply.”  
  
20. The Committee take note that there is a provision for community 
contribution to instill the ‘sense of ownership’ among rural masses and provision 
for rewarding the community with 10% of cost of in-village infrastructure, which 
will serve as revolving fund to meet unforeseen expenditure. The Committee, 
however, are of the considered view that since providing water to rural population 
is not only a basic necessity but also an integral function of a Welfare State, like 
India,  any mandatory contribution by community would perhaps undermine the 
efforts for realization of the goal of providing water connection to every 
household. Further, considering the poor economic conditions of the rural 
masses, particularly in view of the recent COVID pandemic, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should seriously consider waiving off the 
community contribution towards the capital cost of water supply infrastructure 
and related source development. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
steps/initiative taken by the Department within three months from the date of 
presentation of the Report.  
F. Coverage of Aspirational/JE/AES affected District 
 
Recommendation No.6 (Para 2.7) 
  
21. The Committee noted that 117 districts with low Human Development Indices 
(HDIs) have been identified as Aspirational Districts by the NITI Aayog. As per the data 
furnished by the Department, only 39.78 % of the households in 117 Aspirational 
Districts have tap water connections. While States like Haryana, Telangana, Himachal 
Pradesh, Punjab, Bihar and Sikkim have covered more than 85 % of their household in 
the Aspirational districts with the tap connections,  States like Uttar Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Uttrakhand, Kerala and 
Assam have less than 30 % household coverage. The Committee also observed that 61 
districts of the 5 States namely, Assam, Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West 
Bengal are affected with Japanese Encephalitis/Acute Encephalitis Syndrome 
(JE/AES), which is a serious health hazard which mostly affects children and young 
adults which can lead to severe morbidity and mortality. So far, only 40.43 % 

11 
 
households are provided with tap water connections in these JE/AES districts. Thus, 
there is undoubtedly urgent requirement of covering more households in the 
Aspirational/JE-AES districts under the ambit of clean water supply. The Committee 
observed that the ‘need of the hour’ is to bridge the gap in supply of safe drinking water 
in the lagging Aspirational/JE-AES districts, and bring them at par with the other districts 
of the Country in terms of availability of safe drinking water. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended the Department to chalk out a time bound action plan in cooperation with 
respective State Governments for coverage of all targeted Aspirational districts and 
JE/AES districts with tap water connections. 
 
22. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“Providing tap water connection in Aspirational districts is priority area in 
implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission. States have been urged to expedite 100% 
tap water connection in Aspirational district, water quality-affected and JE-AES 
affected districts by December, 2022. 
 
Under the mission, 10% weightage is assigned for population residing in 
habitations affected by chemical contaminants including heavy metals, while 
allocating the fund, to prioritize the coverage in these areas. Further, 0.5% of 
annual allocation has been earmarked for 5 States namely Assam, Bihar, Tamil 
Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal having 61 JE/ AES affected priority 
districts over and above JJM fund under coverage component.  
 
As reported by States, as on 06.06.2022, safe drinking water through tap water 
connection have been provided in 45.83% and 45.26% households in 
Aspirational and JE-AES affected priority districts, respectively. 
  
This Department vide letter dated 13.04.2022 has requested Central Prabhari 
Officers for Aspirational districts to review implementation of JJM in aspirational 
districts during district visits and review meetings and also shared an indicative 
list of key aspects to be reviewed for implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission.  
  
This department vide letter dated 29.04.2022 has requested States/ UTs for 
coverage of water quality-affected areas, Aspirational and JE-AES affected 
districts to be given top-most priority to be completed by 31st December 2022. 
  
Department has been reviewing the status of tap water connections provided in 
JE–AES affected priority districts with States from time to time through several 
meetings including conference, review meetings through video conference, field 
visits etc. States have been advised to expedite the implementation of schemes 

12 
 
to ensure provision of safe drinking water through tap connections in remaining 
households in JE-AES affected priority districts by December, 2022.” 
  
23. The Committee take note of the efforts being made by the Department for 
providing tap water connection in Aspirational district, water quality-affected and 
JE-AES affected districts by December, 2022. The Committee note that as on 
06.06.2022, safe drinking water through tap water connection have been provided 
in 45.83% and 45.26% households in Aspirational and JE-AES affected priority 
districts, respectively. The Committee are apprehensive whether the Department 
will be able to achieve the desired target by December, 2022.  The Committee 
would like to reiterate that Department in consultation with State Governments 
chalk out realistic time bound actionable plan to make available safe drinking 
water round the year through tap water connections in all targeted Aspirational 
districts and JE/AES districts.  
G. Non-completion of road repair works after laying of pipelines under JJM 
Recommendation No.7 (Para No. 2.8) 
 
24.     The Committee were happy to note that the laying of pipelines under Jal Jeevan 
Mission (Gramin) is undertaken at a massive scale throughout the country for providing 
safe and clean drinking water to the rural masses. However, the Committee noted with 
concern that in several States after laying water pipelines, the damaged roads are not 
rehabilitated or repaired due to the negligence and callousness on the part of the 
concerned authorities. The Committee noted that the damaged roads are often filled 
with soil or kept open instead of bringing them back to their original form. This not only 
gives shabby look but also lead to obstacles/hassles to the commuters. The villagers 
face a number of hardships ranging from day to day commutation to potential danger of 
accidents, particularly at night. The Committee, therefore, urged upon the Department 
to look into the matter seriously and issue advisories to the States / authorities 
concerned to ensure that the damaged roads get repaired promptly soon after laying of 
the pipelines by the contractor/implementing agencies. 
                                                                              
25. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“To avoid any hardships to the villagers, the Department has been taking this 
issue with States at all levels. Further, the States vide letter dated 22.11.2021 
and reminders dated 17.03.2022 and 27.05.2022 have been advised to take up 
rural water schemes in a way with minimum damages to infrastructure such as 
roads/ highways and to restore the roads/ highways immediately in case of 
damages done while laying of pipelines for water supply systems.” 
                                                                                                                               

13 
 
26. The Committee take note of the communication issued to States advising 
to take up rural water schemes in a way with minimum damages to infrastructure 
and to restore the roads/ highways immediately in case of damages done while 
laying of pipelines for water supply systems. However, the Committee would like 
to again bring it to the notice of the Department that often in several States after 
laying water pipelines, the damaged roads are not rehabilitated or repaired and 
are filled with soil or kept open. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that 
Department look into the matter seriously and issue advisories to the States / 
authorities concerned to ensure that the damaged roads including the village 
roads that are used by the villagers on daily basis are repaired promptly soon 
after laying of the pipelines by the contractor/implementing agencies so as to 
avoid everyday hardship to the villagers. 
H. Rural areas with contaminated water supply 
 
Recommendation No.8 (Para No. 2.9) 
 
27.     The Committee noted that there were 35370 rural habitations in the country which 
are affected with water contamination. Out of these, 1792 habitations are affected with 
arsenic, 2064 with Fluoride, 20185 with Iron, 10356 with Salinity, 765 with Nitrate and 
208 with Heavy Metals. The data provided by the Department reveal that out of 35,370 
quality affected habitations, only 2017 habitations have been covered with Community 
Water Purification Plants (CWPPs), which is less than 6 % of the total quality affected 
habitations. The Committee noted that this reflected a very sorry state of affairs and 
people of these areas are constrained to drink contaminated water which are harmful to 
their mental and physical health. The Committee were also not satisfied with the 
progress of setting up of CWPPs as it is moving at a snail’s pace in all quality affected 
habitations, though there  is sizeable reduction in CWPPs from 32,271 (as on 24.02.21) 
to 26,198 (as on 21.02.22).Thus, the Committee noted that there was an urgent need to 
speed up the implementation of the scheme and ensure timely setting up of CWPPs in 
all the contamination affected areas till piped water supply reaches every rural 
household/habitations. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the 
Department should prepare an emergent plan in consultation with the State 
Governments to set up CWPPs in all the areas within the stipulated time frame. Till such 
time, all such habitants are brought under CWPPs coverage, potable water may be 
provided through mobile water vans/tankers carrying safe and clean drinking water or 
small water purification dispensers be installed at designated places.  
                                                                         
28. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 

14 
 
 “Water being a State subject, Government of India is regularly requesting the 
States to prioritize the coverage of water quality affected habitations. States have 
once again been advised to expedite the implementation of schemes to ensure 
provision of safe drinking water through tap connections to all households in 
quality–affected habitations by December, 2022. Further, the progress reported 
by State is also monitored on daily basis through the online monitoring system 
JJM –IMIS. 
 
Under JJM, provisions have also been made for the States/ UTs to take up 
Community Water Purification Plants (CWPPs) to provide 8-10 lpcd potable 
water to meet drinking and cooking need of every household residing in such 
villages/ habitations, purely as an interim measure, till the commissioning of 
regular water supply scheme for providing potable water through tap connection 
to every rural household.  
 
As reported by States, the number of habitations having water quality issues in 
drinking water sources during last four years and current year is as under: 
 
Year Number of affected 
habitations 
As on 01.04.2019 57,539 
As on 01.04.2020 54,166 
As on 01.04.2021 36,054 
As on 01.04.2022 27,160 
As on 06.06.2022 26,930 
  
 
29. The Committee note that in Action Taken Replies, the Department has 
informed that States have been advised to expedite the implementation of 
schemes to ensure provision of safe drinking water through tap connections to 
all the households in quality affected habitations by December, 2022. The 
Committee hope that the desired goal is achieved as per target date. The 
Committee, however, would like to bring it to notice of the Department that the 
reply is silent on Committee’s recommendation that till the Community Water 
Purification Plants (CWPP) are established in habitats affected with contaminated 
water, potable water may be provided through mobile vans/tankers carrying safe 
and clean drinking water or small water purification dispenses be installed at 
designated places.  

15 
 
The Committee urge the Department to engage with States to ensure that 
Functional Household Tap Connections (FHTCs) with assured and regular supply 
of water are provided to the water quality affected habitations as per the target 
date. The Committee further reiterate the Department to continue efforts to bring 
such habitations under the ambit  of CWPP  coverage  for assured  availability of 
safe and clean drinking water to the community in these habitations so that the 
adverse impact of contaminated water on the human capital  and their quality of 
life is obliterated. The Committee desire that the status of action taken by the 
Department may be furnished to the Committee in three months from the date of 
presentation of the Report.  
I. Social Audit System 
 
Recommendation No.11 (Para 2.12) 
  
30.   The Committee felt that any mechanism which ensures proper monitoring and 
increasing the transparency at the ground level regarding the functioning of the SBM 
(G) need to be encouraged and implemented earnestly. In this regard, the Committee 
noted that as per guidelines, Social Audit meetings are to be held in each Gram 
Panchayat, once in six months. The GPs will assist in organizing Social Audits of the 
programme and the Districts and Blocks shall be responsible to ensure the adherence 
to this schedule. The Committee were apprised that the Manual on Social Audit, issued 
from time to time, has to be referred while conducting social audit under SBM (G). 
Further, the Committee were apprised that few States like Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh have conducted social audit in some villages. However, 
the Department had not furnished the details as also the reasons for non-conducting the 
Social Audit in ‘letter and spirit’ by other States. The Committee were of the considered 
view that such non compliance with the guidelines for conducting of social audit once 
every six months is tantamount to a blatant disregard to an important aspect of the 
Scheme which is meant for bringing transparency and accountability. Hence, the 
Committee recommended that it is high time that a regular and periodic social audit 
system should be effectively put in place in all the Gram Panchayat level and its findings 
be brought regularly in the public domain for better transparency and credibility of the 
scheme. The Committee strongly urged the Department to issue necessary advisory to 
all States/UTs to conduct social audit at regular intervals for ensuring that there is 
effective implementation of the flagship programme in rural areas. 
   
31. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“Advisory has been issued to all the States/UTs on 14th July,2022 by the 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS) emphasizing the 

16 
 
importance of organizing social audit of Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) 
[SBM(G)]for effective implementation of the programme.  The States/UTs have 
been requested to ensure that social audit of SBM(G) is conducted in all the 
Gram Panchayats (GPs) adhering to the time schedule stipulated in the SBM(G) 
guidelines and the findings are displayed for the public in GP office for better 
transparency and credibility of the scheme.”  
  
32. The Committee observe that advisory has been issued to all the States/UTs 
emphasizing the importance of organizing Social Audit of Swachh Bharat Mission 
(Gramin) (SBM(G)) for effective implementation of the Programme. The 
Committee reiterate that advisory should be issued to State/UTs periodically in 
order to highlight the crucial role of social audit in ensuring the success of 
SBM(G). The Committee further note that States/UTs have been requested that 
the findings of Social Audit are displayed for the public in Gram Panchayat (GP) 
Office for better transparency and credibility of the scheme. The Committee are of 
the considered view that in order to enhance the transparency and create an 
environment and acceptability of Social Audit as a tool to accomplish the goal of 
SBM(G) by the targeted date,  the findings of Social Audit Reports may be made 
available on Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) platform. 
 
J. Third Party Inspection 
 Recommendation No.12 (Para No. 2.13) 
 
33.    The Committee noted that under the JJM, the State Water & Sanitation Missions 
(SWSMs) have empanelled third party verification agencies to check the quality of work 
executed by the Implementing Agencies. From the data furnished by the Department, 
the Committee were surprised to note that 14 States/Union Territories have not reported 
the details of the empanelment of the third party inspection agencies. Moreover, the 
Committee noted that the numbers of Inspecting Agencies engaged by the States were 
abysmally very low in comparison to the size of the States. The Committee, therefore, 
urged the Department to direct the States/UTs to empanel more and more third party 
inspecting agencies, so as to ascertain the veracity of works executed by the agencies. 
The Committee also stated that they would like to be apprised of the reasons for non-
reporting of data by States/UTs in this regard. 
  
34. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :-  
 “Provisions have been made for carrying out third party inspection of the assets 
created under JJM. State Water & Sanitation Missions have been empowered for 

17 
 
empanelment of third-party inspection agencies. So far, as reported, 147 third 
party inspection agencies have been engaged in 28 States/ UTs.” 
   
 35. The Committee note that in Action Taken Replies, the Department is silent 
on apprising the Committee on the reasons for non-reporting of data by 
States/UTs in regard to the empanelment of third-party inspection agencies. The 
Committee are of the view that third party inspection has a pivotal role in 
ascertaining the veracity of the works executed by various agencies and ensuring 
the quality and sustainability of the infrastructure created under SBM(G). The 
Committee further note that 147 third party inspection agencies have been 
engaged in 28 States/UTs. The Committee, however, reiterate the earlier view that 
the number of third party inspection agencies is abysmally low considering the 
size of the country and the scale of the programme. The Committee, therefore, 
urge that the States/UTs be directed to empanel additional third party inspection 
agencies with past experience in the field of expertise and credible credentials. 
K.  Issue of contamination of water in Ganganagar district, Rajasthan 
 
Recommendation No.13 (Para No. 2.14) 
 
36.   That Committee noted that contamination of water is a serious issue as it is directly 
related to the health of the people. The problem is extremely alarming as the number of 
cases of cancer in certain areas is rising alarmingly. The Committee in their earlier 
Reports also underlined the issue of water contamination especially in Ganganagar 
district of Rajasthan and its adjoining areas and urged upon the Department to take up 
the matter with the State Government of Rajasthan to prepare a time bound action plan 
for installing water purification plants on priority basis to ensure supply of clean and 
potable drinking water in the rural habitations. However, the Committee were concerned 
to note that no tangible progress has been made in this direction to mitigate the 
suffering of the affected people in the Ganganagar district. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterated that the Department should  take up the matter at the highest level with the 
Government of Rajasthan, so that inhabitants of Ganganagar district are provided with 
clean drinking water at the earliest.   
 
37. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :-   
“As informed by the State of Rajasthan, canal based water sources are used for 
water supply schemes for 2,834 villages in the Ganga Nagar district and 1,076 
villages are covered through water supply schemes with water sources from 
Ganga Canal system. Raw water from the canal-based system is purified and 

18 
 
chlorinated before supplying to villages. Further, chemical testing of the raw water 
samples is done from time to time and results of latest chemical testing done in 
November, 2021 has revealed that chemical contaminants are under the 
permissible limits. 
  
Further, this Department has requested the State of Punjab, Punjab Pollution 
Control Board, Central Pollution Control Board and Dept. of Water Resources, 
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation to take corrective action required to 
avoid discharge of industrial waste in Ganga Canal.” 
  
38. The Committee noted the Department’s effort in addressing the issue of 
contamination of water in Ganganagar district and request made to State of 
Punjab, Punjab Pollution Control Board, Central Pollution Control Board and 
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
(Dept. of WR,RD&GR) to take corrective action required to avoid discharge of 
industrial waste in Ganga Canal. The Committee, however, are concerned that 
despite the best efforts of the Department no concrete impact has been observed 
on the ground level. The Committee would like to state that considering the 
gravity of the problems faced by the people, merely requesting the concerned 
stakeholders would not be sufficient to address the issue of contamination of 
water in the Ganganagar district. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Department should take up the matter of industrial pollution and functioning of 
Effluent Treatment Plants  (ETP) along the bank of Indira Gandhi Canal in Punjab 
at the highest level with the State Government Punjab, Punjab Pollution Control 
Board, Central Pollution Control Board and Dept of WR,RD&GR including Central 
Ground Water Board.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the details viz. 
number of ETPs, total capacity, total amount of polluted water generated vis-à-vis 
treated.   
Further, the Committee note that the Department has mentioned that 
chemical testing of the raw water samples is done from time to time and results 
of latest chemical testing done in November, 2021 has revealed that chemical 
contaminants are under the permissible limits. The Committee would like to know 
whether the samples have been tested for Heavy metals and presence of 
pathogen/bacteria etc. and the details of the latest testing may be shared with the 

19 
 
Committee. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Department within three months of presentation of this Report. 
L. Increase in unit assistance under SBM (G) 
 
Recommendation No.15 (Para No. 2.16) 
39.   The Committee noted that at present financial incentive of Rs. 12,000/- to BPL and 
identified Above Poverty Line households, under SBM (G), are being provided for 
construction of toilets. The Committee were of the considered opinion that the existing 
per unit assistance is grossly insufficient and nowhere near to the actual cost of 
construction of toilets even if a beneficiary puts his own labour. The Committee were of 
the opinion that the incentive be enhanced commensurately keeping in view the rising 
cost of the construction material of the toilets. They, therefore, strongly recommended 
the Department to consider the feasibility of enhancing the per unit assistance for 
toilets, from the existing rate of Rs. 12,000/- to Rs. 20,000/- for BPL and identified APL 
households in rural areas.  
 
40. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :-   
“Out of the incentive amount of Rs.12000/- for construction Individual Household 
Latrine (IHHL), the Central share amount provided in the North Eastern (NE) States 
and the Himalayan States of Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and UT of Jammu & 
Kashmir is Rs.10,800, and in the remaining States it is Rs.7,200.  NE States and 
Himalayan States as mentioned have to provide minimum share Rs.1,200 and 
remaining States have to provide minimum share Rs.4,800.  The States can provide 
higher State share funds by providing additional funds. The beneficiaries should 
also be encouraged to add their own share in order to promote ownership and 
usage of the toilets.” 
  
41. The Committee had strongly recommended the Department to consider the 
feasibility of enhancing the per unit financial assistance for construction of toilets 
under Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) [SBM(G)]. The Committee take note of the 
casual nature of Department's approach reflected in the Action Taken Replies that 
the States can provide higher State share funds by providing additional funds 
and that the beneficiaries should be encouraged to add their own share. The 
Committee would like to highlight the fact that Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) 
[SBM(G)] is the flagship programme of the Government and Individual Household 
Latrine (IHHL) is the first step towards attaining the lofty goals of ODF2.0 (Open 
Defecation Free 2.0) under SBM(G)-II.  

20 
 
In view of the critical importance of IHHL under SBM(G), the Committee  
strongly recommend that Department should re-examine the issue and consider 
enhancing central share amount in the total incentive amount for construction of 
IHHL across the States/UTs so that it acts as a model for the States/UTs to follow. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate the Department to consider the feasibility of 
enhancing the per unit assistance for toilets from the existing rates of Rs 12,000 
to Rs 20,000 for Below Poverty Line and identified Above Poverty Line  
households in rural area 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 2.3)  
 
Under-utilization of funds under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) 
  
The Committee note that during the fiscal year 2021-22, under Jal Jeevan 
Mission (JJM), Rs. 50,011/- crore was allocated at BE stage which was reduced to Rs. 
45,011/- crore at RE stage, while the actual expenditure incurred was only Rs.28,238/- 
crore. While analyzing State wise financial performance, the Committee find that only 
three States namely Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Meghalaya have utilized cent per 
cent of Central allocation of funds, while 11 States namely Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Kerala, Sikkim, Nagaland, Assam, Odisha, Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh and 
Mizoram have utilized only 50% to 75%. Further, the Committee are surprised to note 
that bigger States like Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, 
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu have utilized below 
25 % of Central allocation.  The Committee are dismayed to note the under-utilization of 
funds which clearly indicate lack of financial prudence and fiscal discipline, thus, 
adversely affecting the implementation and monitoring of the programme as a whole. 
This undoubtedly deprive the targeted beneficiaries' access to safe and clean potable 
water at their homes. The Committee, therefore, taking into consideration such dismal 
performance pertaining to the fund utilization, urge the Department to initiate suitable 
corrective measures during the current financial year to achieve a better performance 
under the scheme and apprise the Committee of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
  
       Since the announcement of the mission, 6.40 (33.40%) Crore rural households 
have been provided with tap water connections. Thus, as of date, out of 19.14 Crore 
rural households across the country, 9.63 Crore (50.30%) households are reported to 
have potable tap water supply in their homes. States of Goa, Haryana and Telangana 
and UTs of A & N Islands, DNH & DD and Puducherry have provided tap water supply 
to all rural homes. As on date, every rural household in 108 districts and 1.53 lakh 
villages across the country have started getting tap water supply in their homes. The 
year-wise details of tap water connection provided so far, is as 
under:                                                    
                   

22 
 
 
 
 
             (No. in lakh) 
Time/ Year Tap Water 
Connections 
Cumulative Tap Water 
Connections 
15.08.2019 3,23.63 3,23.63 
2019-20 82.62 4,06.25 
2020-21 3,22.62 7,28.87 
2021-22 2,08.36 9,37.23 
2022-23* 26.91 9,63.52 
                * as on 06.06.2022 
  
However, State governments, during implementation of the programme, have inter alia 
indicated bottlenecks like uneven geographical terrain, scattered rural habitations, 
depletion of groundwater, adverse climatic conditions, delay in obtaining statutory/ other 
clearances, and extended periods of lockdowns in CoVID pandemic, price rise/ inflation 
etc. thereby delaying the implementation and fund utilization under the programme.  
  
Further, delay in release and non-availability of matching State share also delayed 
utilization of fund. To address the issue, several meetings including conferences, 
workshops, review meetings through video conferences, field visits, etc. at highest 
levels are being held from time to time with States/ UTs, wherein they are advised to 
plan and expedite the implementation of the programme to achieve the goal in a time-
bound manner.  
 
In 2019-20, a sum of Rs. 10,000.66 Crore was allocated for the mission and the entire 
amount was utilized. Similarly, in 2020-21, Rs. 11,000 Crore was allocated and utilized. 
In 2021-22, for Jal Jeevan Mission, Rs. 45,011 Crore has been allocated in the Union 
budget and an amount of Rs. 40,125.64 Crore was utilized. In 2022-23, an amount of 
Rs. 60,000 Crore has been allocated for the implementation of the Mission. 
  
Details of major review meetings held in 2022-23 are as under: 
  
v. Post budget discussions and webinar on Jal Jeevan Mission in February, 2022; 
vi. Joint review meetings with the Chief Ministers of States and Lt. Governors of 
UTs. Recently held with J&K and Uttar Pradesh in April, 2022; 
 
vii. Conference of Ministers in-charge of rural water supply of States at Guwahati, 
Bengaluru, Kolkata and Jaipur during February to April, 2022; 
 
viii. More than110 State/ UT visits have been undertaken for understanding the JJM 
planning and implementation on the ground, key issues, challenges, suggesting 

23 
 
measures to speed up the implementation as well as documenting good 
practices; 
  
vi. Review meetings at Odisha in June, 2022. 
(O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl. dated: 20.07.2022) 
  
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No.3 (Para No. 2.4) 
 
Early finalization of Annual Action Plans (AAPs) under JJM 
  
2.4     The Committee note that as per the JJM guidelines, the States/UTs have to 
finalize their Annual Action Plans by April-May every year. Thereafter, funds are 
released from time to time throughout the year and regular field visits and review 
meetings are held to ensure implementation of these Annual Action Plans to achieve 
the goal of Jal Jeevan Mission. The Committee note that the Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) 
has entered third year of its implementation of providing Functional Household Tap 
Connections (FHTCs) by 2024 across the country in entirety. The Committee are of the 
considered view that since Annual Action Plan are an yearly exercise they should be 
completed well in time without any delay for enabling better utilization of funds and 
implementation of works/ programmes as per the timelines fixed. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to ensure early finalization of Annual Action 
Plans by all States preferably by March end of every year, so as to ensure completion of 
works within the timelines fixed.  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
       Discussion with States/ UTs for finalization of Annual Action Plan (AAP) (2022-23) 
for implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission was started in March itself from 23rd March 
2022 to 27th April 2022. 
  
(O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl. dated: 20.07.2022) 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No.4  (Para No. 2.5) 
  
Village Action Plan (VAPs) and Village Water & Sanitation Committees (VWSCs) 

24 
 
  
The Committee observe that under JJM Village Panchayat or the Village Water & 
Sanitation Committee (VWSCs) is an integral partner in the planning process. The plan 
prepared by the Village, which is generally known as Village Action Plan (VAP), is 
based on the participatory approach. The aggregation of VAPs is done at the district 
level, and a District Action Plan is prepared and these in turn are again aggregated at 
the State level. The multi-villages schemes are being designed and planned at the State 
level in consultation with the villages. Similarly, Gram Panchayat or its sub-
committee/user group i.e. Village Water & Sanitation Committee (VWSC)/Pani Samiti, 
has been empowered to plan, implement, manage, operate and maintain village water 
supply system. As reported by the Department, the Committee note that there are 
6,04,631 lakh rural villages in the country, out of which 4,68,366 lakh (77%)of rural 
villages have constituted VWSC and 3,79,280 lakh (62%)rural villages have prepared 
Village Action Plans as on 09.02.2022. The Committee express their concern that very 
poor progress has been made by some States like Madhya Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Odissa, Telangana & West Bengal in preparing/setting up VAPs/ VWSCs. The 
Committee are of considered view that the preparation/ constitution of VAPs and 
VWSCs is very important and, untill and unless, these are completed/set up and made 
functional across the country, the target may not be achieved within the deadline. 
Further, VAPs and VWSCs play very important role in monitoring and implementation of 
the scheme and are crucial link in the success of Jal Jeevan Mission. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to take up the matter seriously and chalk out a 
time bound plan in consultation with States/Union Territories for constitution/preparation 
of VWSCs and VAPs at the earliest and also apprise the Committee of the steps taken 
in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
    The States/ UTs have been requested to expedite constitution of VWSC and 
preparation of VAPs during Annual Action Plan discussion and in regional conference. 
As on 06.06.2022, VWSCs have be constituted in 4.96 lakh villages (82%) and VAPs 
prepared in 4.06 lakh villages (67%). The lagging States have been requested to take 
requisite action for constitution of VWSCs and preparation of VAPs. 
(O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl. dated: 20.07.2022) 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.6  (Para No. 2.7) 
  
Coverage of Aspirational/JE/AES affected District 
  

25 
 
The Committee note that 117 districts with low Human Development Indices 
(HDIs) have been identified as Aspirational Districts by the NITI Aayog. As per the data 
furnished by the Department, only 39.78 % of the households in 117 Aspirational 
Districts have tap water connections. While States like Haryana, Telangana, Himachal 
Pradesh, Punjab, Bihar and Sikkim have covered more than 85 % of their household in 
the Aspirational districts with the tap connections,  States like Uttar Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Uttrakhand, Kerala and 
Assam have less than 30 % household coverage. The Committee also observe that 61 
districts of the 5 States namely, Assam, Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West 
Bengal are affected with Japanese Encephalitis/Acute Encephalitis Syndrome 
(JE/AES), which is a serious health hazard which mostly affects children and young 
adults which can lead to severe morbidity and mortality. So far, only 40.43 % 
households are provided with tap water connections in these JE/AES districts. Thus, 
there is undoubtedly urgent requirement of covering more households in the 
Aspirational/JE-AES districts under the ambit of clean water supply. The ‘need of the 
hour’ is to bridge the gap in supply of safe drinking water in the lagging Aspirational/JE-
AES districts, and bring them at par with the other districts of the Country in terms of 
availability of safe drinking water. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department to chalk out a time bound action plan in cooperation with respective State 
Governments for coverage of all targeted Aspirational districts and JE/AES districts with 
tap water connections. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
          Providing tap water connection in Aspirational districts is priority area in 
implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission. States have been urged to expedite 100% tap 
water connection in Aspirational district, water quality-affected and JE-AES affected 
districts by December, 2022. 
  
Under the mission, 10% weightage is assigned for population residing in habitations 
affected by chemical contaminants including heavy metals, while allocating the fund, to 
prioritize the coverage in these areas. Further, 0.5% of annual allocation has been 
earmarked for 5 States namely Assam, Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West 
Bengal having 61 JE/ AES affected priority districts over and above JJM fund under 
coverage component.  
 
As reported by States, as on 06.06.2022, safe drinking water through tap water 
connection have been provided in 45.83% and 45.26% households in Aspirational and 
JE-AES affected priority districts, respectively. 
  
This Department vide letter dated 13.04.2022 has requested Central Prabhari Officers 
for Aspirational districts to review implementation of JJM in aspirational districts during 

26 
 
district visits and review meetings and also shared an indicative list of key aspects to be 
reviewed for implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission.  
  
This department vide letter dated 29.04.2022 has requested States/ UTs for coverage of 
water quality-affected areas, Aspirational and JE-AES affected districts to be given top-
most priority to be completed by 31st December 2022. 
  
Department has been reviewing the status of tap water connections provided in JE–
AES affected priority districts with States from time to time through several meetings 
including conference, review meetings through video conference, field visits etc. States 
have been advised to expedite the implementation of schemes to ensure provision of 
safe drinking water through tap connections in remaining households in JE-AES 
affected priority districts by December, 2022.  
(O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl. dated: 20.07.2022) 
   
Comment of the Committee  
 (Please see Para No 23 of Chapter I of the Report)  
 
 
Recommendation No. 8  (Para No. 2.9) 
  
Rural areas with contaminated water supply 
  
The Committee note that there are still 35370 rural habitations in the country 
which are affected with water contamination. Out of these, 1792 habitations are affected 
with arsenic, 2064 with Fluoride, 20185 with Iron, 10356 with Salinity, 765 with Nitrate 
and 208 with Heavy Metals. The data provided by the Department reveal that out of 
35,370 quality affected habitations, only 2017 habitations have been covered with 
Community Water Purification Plants (CWPPs), which is less than 6 % of the total 
quality affected habitations. This reflects a very sorry state of affairs and people of these 
areas are constrained to drink contaminated water which are harmful to their mental and 
physical health. The Committee are also not satisfied with the progress of setting up of 
CWPPs as it is moving at a snail’s pace in all quality affected habitations, though 
there  is sizeable reduction in CWPPs from 32,271 (as on 24.02.21) to 26,198 (as on 
21.02.22).Thus, there is an urgent need to speed up the implementation of the scheme 
and ensure timely setting up of CWPPs in all the contamination affected areas till piped 
water supply reaches every rural household/habitations. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Department should prepare an emergent plan in 
consultation with the State Governments to set up CWPPs in all the areas within the 
stipulated time frame. Till such time, all such habitants are brought under CWPPs 
coverage, potable water may be provided through mobile water vans/tankers carrying 

27 
 
safe and clean drinking water or small water purification dispensers be installed at 
designated places.  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
       Water being a State subject, Government of India is regularly requesting the States 
to prioritize the coverage of water quality affected habitations. States have once again 
been advised to expedite the implementation of schemes to ensure provision of safe 
drinking water through tap connections to all households in quality–affected habitations 
by December, 2022. Further, the progress reported by State is also monitored on daily 
basis through the online monitoring system JJM –IMIS. 
 
Under JJM, provisions have also been made for the States/ UTs to take up Community 
Water Purification Plants (CWPPs) to provide 8-10 lpcd potable water to meet drinking 
and cooking need of every household residing in such villages/ habitations, purely as an 
interim measure, till the commissioning of regular water supply scheme for providing 
potable water through tap connection to every rural household. 
  
As reported by States, the number of habitations having water quality issues in drinking 
water sources during last four years and current year is as under: 
 
Year Number of affected 
habitations 
As on 01.04.2019 57,539 
As on 01.04.2020 54,166 
As on 01.04.2021 36,054 
As on 01.04.2022 27,160 
As on 06.06.2022 26,930 
  
 (O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl. dated: 20.07.2022) 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No 29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation No.9  (Para No. 2.10) 
  
Water Quality Testing Laboratories 
  
The Committee note that the water testing laboratories play pivotal role in 
assisting and facilitating States/UTs in proper monitoring of supply of quality drinking 
water to the households besides enabling upgrading & improving the functioning and 
strengthening of the drinking water supply plants. As reported by the Department, as of 
now, there are 2021 drinking water quality testing laboratories at different levels i.e. 28 
at State Level, 659 at District Level, 89 at Block level, 1181 at Sub-Divisional Level and 

28 
 
64 Mobile Laboratories. However, while scrutinizing the data, the Committee noticed 
that the number of water testing laboratories have got reduced by more than 10 % 
during the last two years. The Committee are perturbed to note that in only six States in 
the entire country namely Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Punjab, Tamil Nadu 
and Tripura water quality testing laboratories have been set up at Block Level. The 
Committee, in their successive Reports have stressed the need for having more and 
more water testing laboratories to provide quality potable water to the rural populace. 
However, the Committee are aghast to note that instead of increasing, the number of 
water testing laboratories being set up are decreasing over the last two years. The 
Committee are unable to comprehend the reason behind the reduction in testing 
laboratories, when the issue of contamination of water is rising as it indirectly affects the 
rural economic growth of the country. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
for increasing the water quality testing laboratories across the country on war footing by 
addressing the issue with utmost alacrity. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
       Drinking Water being a State subject, it is the States who set up/ upgrade drinking 
water quality testing laboratories. Further, States/ UTs review the functioning of these 
laboratories and based on updated data latest numbers are being reported. As reported, 
as on date, there are 2,043 laboratories at different levels viz. State, District, sub-
division and/ or block level in the country.  
 
 All States/ UTs have been advised that all district must have district level laboratory, in 
bigger States, at the regional level, district level lab should be upgraded into State level 
lab in different regions of the State and the existing network of drinking water quality 
testing laboratories in the State may be reviewed and strengthened by setting up/ 
exploring Public Private Partnership for additional labs at regional level, district level and 
block/ sub-division level in the State and ensure that all drinking water sources are 
tested once for chemical contamination and twice for bacteriological contamination.  
  
Also, ‘Drinking Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance Framework’ has been firmed up 
in consultation with various stakeholders and has been released as a guiding tool for 
setting up/ strengthening the drinking water quality testing laboratories and providing 
technical support to implementing agencies for labs institutional framework; required 
infrastructure, manpower/ experts, equipment, staff qualification & experience; roles & 
responsibilities of laboratory personnel; laboratory gap assessment & improvement 
plan; NABL accreditation/ recognition process etc.  
  
Further, to enable States/ UTs to test water samples for water quality, and for sample 
collection, reporting, monitoring and surveillance of drinking water sources, an online 
JJM – Water Quality Management Information System (WQMIS) has been developed at 

29 
 
national level in partnerships with Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), and is in 
public domain at: 
https://neer.icmr.org.in/website/main.php 
  
This portal also provides automated alerts to concerned authorities in States/ UTs, if the 
water sample tested is contaminated, to initiate remedial actions. 
  
All the laboratories have been opened to public. On this portal an individual can register 
his sample and choose nearby water quality testing laboratory to get the water sample 
tested at nominal cost and receive digital report. Thus, testing of water samples and 
reporting in rural areas, has been made accessible and easy for making consumers 
aware about the quality of water being supplied in their homes. 
 
Under JJM, provisions have been for States/ UTs to utilize upto 2% of their annual 
allocation for WQM&S activities inter alia which includes setting up and strengthening of 
water quality testing laboratories, procurement of equipment, instruments, chemicals, 
glassware, consumables, hiring of skilled manpower, accreditation/ recognition of 
laboratories, etc. This fund can now also be used by States towards building cost for 
setting up a new laboratory at regional, district, sub–divisional/ block levels, NABL 
accreditation of laboratories engaged under Public-Private Partnership (PPP) or public– 
public partnership.  
(O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl. dated: 20.07.2022) 
 
Recommendation No.10  (Para No. 2.11) 
  
NABL Accredited Laboratories 
  
The Committee also note that there is considerable increase in the number of the 
National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) accredited 
water quality laboratories in the country. There are at present 444 NABL accredited 
water quality labs in the country in comparison to 70 in the last year. Data furnished by 
the Department reveals that the States like Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya 
Pradesh, Punjab and Rajasthan have more than 50 % of their laboratories, NABL 
accredited. However, a few big States like Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Uttrakhand and Tamil Nadu are still having less than 10 % of their total 
laboratories accredited under NABL. While appreciating the efforts made by the 
Department for NABL accreditation, the Committee feel that there is still lot more to be 
done in this direction. The Committee, therefore strongly feel the necessity of getting all 
the water quality testing labs in the country accredited from NABL. They urge upon the 
Department to expedite the accreditation process of all the labs on priority basis, within 
a definite time period.  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  

30 
 
          In order to ensure that the labs are equipped with facilities States have been 
advised for accreditation of Drinking Water Quality Testing Laboratories as per ISO/IEC 
17025 at least for parameters of basic water quality importance and gradually upgrading 
to other parameters as per local conditions. 
  
648 laboratories (59 in year 2022-23) have been NABL accredited with joint efforts with 
States/ UTs from only 30 NABL accredited laboratories at the time of inception of Jal 
Jeevan Mission in Aug. 2019. Department has been reviewing the lab accreditation/ 
recognition status with States/ UTs from time to time and requesting States/ UTs to 
expedite the process of upgradation, accreditation/ recognition of laboratories.   
For effective monitoring, while preparing for Annual Action Plan, concerned State has to 
mandatorily formulate plan for NABL accreditation/ recognition of labs. The State have 
planned to accreditation/ recognition of 1,429 labs during the year 2022-23. 
 (O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl. dated: 20.07.2022) 
 
 Recommendation No. 11  (Para No. 2.12) 
 
Social Audit System  
  
The Committee feel that any mechanism which ensures proper monitoring and 
increasing the transparency at the ground level regarding the functioning of the SBM 
(G) need to be encouraged and implemented earnestly. In this regard, the Committee 
note that as per guidelines, Social Audit meetings are to be held in each Gram 
Panchayat, once in six months. The GPs will assist in organizing Social Audits of the 
programme and the Districts and Blocks shall be responsible to ensure the adherence 
to this schedule. The Committee are apprised that the Manual on Social Audit, issued 
from time to time, has to be referred while conducting social audit under SBM (G). 
Further, the Committee have also been apprised that few States like Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh have conducted social audit in some villages. 
However, the Department have not furnished the details as also the reasons for non-
conducting the Social Audit in ‘letter and spirit’ by other States. The Committee are of 
the considered view that such non compliance with the guidelines for conducting of 
social audit once every six months is tantamount to a blatant disregard to an important 
aspect of the Scheme which is meant for bringing transparency and accountability. 
Hence, the Committee recommend that it is high time that a regular and periodic social 
audit system should be effectively put in place in all the Gram Panchayat level and its 
findings be brought regularly in the public domain for better transparency and credibility 
of the scheme. The Committee strongly urge the Department to issue necessary 
advisory to all States/UTs to conduct social audit at regular intervals for ensuring that 
there is effective implementation of the flagship programme in rural areas. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

31 
 
       Advisory has been issued to all the States/UTs on 14th July,2022 by the 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS) emphasizing the importance of 
organizing social audit of Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) [SBM(G)]for effective 
implementation of the programme.  The States/UTs have been requested to ensure that 
social audit of SBM(G) is conducted in all the Gram Panchayats (GPs) adhering to the 
time schedule stipulated in the SBM(G) guidelines and the findings are displayed for the 
public in GP office for better transparency and credibility of the scheme.  
(O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl. dated: 20.07.2022) 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No 32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 14 (Para No. 2.15) 
  
Under-utilization of funds under Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM-G) 
  
The Committee are concerned to note that there is continuous decline in the 
trend of allocation of funds for Swachh Bharat Mission-Gramin (SBM-G) at RE stage 
during the last three years. For the fiscal year 2021-22, Rs. 9994.10 crore was allocated 
at BE stage which was reduced to Rs. 6000/- crore at RE stage, while the Department 
has been able to release a sum of Rs. 2100/- crore only to States/UTs. The Department 
has stated that funds are released to the States based on their demands, availability of 
funds and performance of States, however,  due to Covid-19, the States have not been 
able to utilize the funds as per the estimated targets during the current financial year. 
The Committee are of the view that consistent reduction of allocations at RE stage and 
under-utilization of funds reflects lack of financial prudence and planning, besides 
slacking in expenditure management on the part of Department. Taking a serious view 
on recurrent reduction / under-utilization of funds, the Committee desire that the 
Department should make concerted efforts in close coordination and cooperation with 
States and implementing agencies to fully utilize the allocated funds so as to  minimize 
the scope of reduction of allocation at RE stage, so that the targets under the mission 
are fully achieved. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
       In order to ensure that funds allocated under the programme are utilized by the 
States/UTs efficiently and effectively, detailed discussions were held in March-April, 
2022 with all the States/UTs individually on their Annual Implementation Plans (AIPs) 
for the year 2022-23.  States were advised to ensure that the targets set by them are in 
line with achieving the goal of the programme by the set timelines. Suggestions were 
also given to the States/UTs for expeditious implementation of the AIP. 
  
Regional Conferences covering all the States/UTs were held under the chairmanship of 
Union Minister of Jal Shakti during March-April 2022, to review the progress made and 

32 
 
to emphasize the States/UTs to speed up the programme implementation on ground 
and effective and expeditious utilization of funds during 2022-23. 
 
Regular review meetings are also being held regularly with Chief Secretaries and 
Principal Secretaries of the nodal departments in the States/UTs to pursue them for 
expeditious implementation of the programme and effective utilization of funds  
(O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl. dated: 20.07.2022) 
 
Recommendation No. 16  (Para No. 2.17& 2.18) 
  
Solid and Liquid Waste Management (SLWM) 
  
The Committee note that Solid and Liquid Waste Management (SLWM) is one of 
the key components of the SBM(G) Phase-II in creating clean villages. Under the 
scheme, it is incumbent on the States to promote Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) interventions for SLWM so as to motivate Community/Gram 
Panchayats demand such a system. States must also provide capacity building to equip 
Panchayats to operate and maintain the system. The Committee note that as per 
Annual Implementation Plan (AIP), during the year 2021-22, against the target of 
covering 2,07,945 villages with infrastructure for Solid Waste Management (SWM), only 
46,347 villages could be covered with SWM infrastructure. Similarly, a target of 
1,82,517 villages to be covered with Liquid Waste Management was set but only 21,734 
villages were covered with LWM infrastructure. The Department informed the 
Committee that the projected targets could not be accomplished due to complexity 
involved in taking up SLWM activities. The Committee would like to be informed about 
the complexities involved in executing the SLWM activities in rural villages and remedial 
measures taken by the Department to remove the bottlenecks in carrying out the SLWM 
works so that the target set under the scheme are achieved. 
  
2.18   The Committee also urge upon the Department to launch workshops/ awareness 
campaigns throughout the year so as to motivate people to demand for creation 
of  SLWM infrastructure in their villages as it is directly related to the hygiene / health of 
the rural masses besides the potential to create huge job opportunities.  
  
      REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
     SBM(G) Phase-II focuses on transforming the villages from ODF to ODF Plus which 
includes sustainability of ODF status and making solid and liquid waste management 
(SLWM) arrangements in the villages. In comparison to construction of IHHLs, SLWM 
activities are technical in nature and involve multiple verticals that require proper 
planning and effective implementation after considering the nature and volume of the 
wastes generated in the rural areas. The main complexities involved in the programme 
are indicated below:- 

33 
 
  
 Capacity building of the large nos. implementing agencies and functionaries at 
various levels with respect to planning and implementation of activities of 
different verticals of SLWM e.g. biodegradable waste management, non-
biodegradable waste management, grey water management, faecal sludge 
management. 
 Requirement of different technology options/solutions for managing the various 
types of solid and liquid wastes considering India’s varied geographic and 
climatic conditions. 
 Responsibility and funding for operation and maintenance of SLWM assets 
 For some SLWM activities like Plastic Waste Management and Faecal Sludge 
Management in the rural areas near to cities/towns, convergence with urban 
facilities is the preferred approach to achieve economy of scale and to avoid 
duplication.  For this regular coordination with urban counterparts at State and 
district level is required for integrated planning, implementation and operation of 
services. 
 Convergence of funding with 15th Finance Commission tied grants (which goes 
directly to Rural Local Bodies) for sanitation activities under SBM(G). 
 Behaviour change of masses on various aspects of solid and liquid waste 
management 
  
DDWS has taken various steps to help the States tackle the above complexities for 
smooth implementation of the programme. The major steps are given below: 
  
 DDWS is focusing on undertaking training programmes for master trainers 
through partner training agencies for implementation of ODF Plus activities.  The 
master trainers can further impart trainings to block/GP functionaries. Till date 
1162 master trainers in 11 States have already been trained.   
 For capacity strengthening of field functionaries, an Interactive Voice Response 
System (IVRS) based SBM Academy (an online learning course on ODF Plus) 
launched. 
 A number of orientations of State/district officials on ODF Plus and 15th FC tied 
grants have been organised by DDWS. 
 A national workshop on Rapid Action & Learning on Grey Water Management 
was held on 26-27thMay, 2022 in collaboration with UNOPS. More than 120 
participants including Mission Directors, State Coordinators, State Consultants, 
Development Partners participated in the workshop. 
 A national workshop on capacity building for ODF Plus was organized on 12th 
July, 2022with the support of UNICEF.  More than 150 participants including 
Additional Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries/Secretaries, Mission Directors, 
State Coordinators, State Consultants, Development Partners, participated in the 
workshop. 

34 
 
 Knowledge Management portal of SBM(G) facilitates cross sharing of best 
practices that happen in different States. 
 To facilitate knowledge sharing of best practices on all verticals of ODF Plus 
among districts and States across the country, DDWS organised a one-day 
workshop on 26th March, 2022for officials implementing SBM(G). 
 A capacity building dashboard has also been developed by DDWS for monitoring 
of capacity building activities being undertaken by States/UTs. 
 The States have been advised to hire Programme Management Units having 
expertise on specific areas, by using IEC and capacity building funds. 
 Technical Manuals and Toolkits on different verticals have been prepared and 
shared with all the States/UTs for better understanding.  
 DDWS is providing resource persons for orientation/workshop/training programs 
organized by the States, as and when requested. 
 Technology manuals on various interventions have been prepared by DDWS and 
released to States. Workshops have been organized to disseminate the 
information of various technologies.  
 DDWS has launched a Start-up Grand Challenge to scout technologies that 
could support sustainable, affordable, scalable and responsive solutions to 
SLWM in rural areas. 
 A joint advisory has been issued by the DDWS and Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs for convergent action plan at State/district levels for Plastic Waste 
Management and Faecal Sludge Management for urban and rural areas. 
 DDWS has issued manual for utilization of 15th Finance Commission tied grants 
on ODF Plus activities. In coordination with Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR), 
provision has been made for incorporating the sanitation plan as part of Gram 
Panchayat Development Plan in eGramSwaraj portal. Trainings have been 
imparted to PRIs so that the effective plan can be developed to achieve the ODF 
Plus goal. A joint review meeting was also held on 21st June, 2022 with the 
States under the co-chairpersonship of Secretary, DDWS and Secretary, MoPR. 
 Standard Operation Procedure (SOP) for amending the development plans 
prepared and circulated to all States/UTs.  Orientation provided to all States on 
the SOP with support of MoPR. 
 Liquid Waste Management has been a priority under the programme and for this 
the soak pits which is the easiest solution is promoted.  A 100 day campaign 
called ‘Sujlam’ (सुजलाम) was launched on 25th August, 2021 focusing on 
construction of one million soak pits in the rural areas.  The target was fully 
achieved with encouraged participation from all the States/UTs and the 
communities, and more than 10.9 lakh household and community level soak pits 
were constructed.   To continue the momentum, Sujlam 2.0 was launched on 
22nd  March, 2022 (World Water Day). Under Sujlam 2.0, about11.5 lakh soakpits 
have already been reported constructed. So far, States/UTs have reported on 

35 
 
IMIS about 59% villages having partial or full saturation regarding Grey Water 
Management. 
 A National Film Competition for GPs on ODF plus components was organised 
during April-August 2021. A total of 4340 entries received. 
 Organised a National Wall Painting Competition on ODF Plus components which 
ran from 15th August to 15th October, 2021. Around 90,000 entries received 
from the States/UTs. 
 Short films of 3-4 minutes duration on all ODF plus components prepared and 
disseminated. 
 All the villages across GPs have been advised to ensure writing of slogans on 
ODF Plus components at important public places viz. Panchayat office, school, 
community halls, haatbazaars, etc. 
 States/UTs have been advised to take up regular information, education and 
communication (IEC) and inter personal communication (IPC) activities to make 
the rural population aware about ODF sustainability and SLWM. DDWS also 
uses mass media to make the people aware on importance of sanitation.  
  
As reported by the States till 16th July, 2022, 90,607 villages have been covered with 
Solid Waste Management and 68,127 villages have been covered with Liquid Waste 
Management.  And, 90,080 villages have declared themselves ODF Plus (Aspiring–
48,490; Rising–15,191;  Model–26,403).  
(O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl. dated: 20.07.2022) 
Recommendation No. 17  (Para No. 2.19) 
  
Implementation of schemes in Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) villages 
  
The Committee observe that Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) was 
launched on October, 2014 in which all Members of Parliaments (MPs) have to adopt 
one village in a year with the aim of making it as ‘Adarsh Grams’. Accordingly, the 
Government have urged the State Governments to accord top priority to the SAGY 
villages in speedy implementation of the various on-going schemes. The Committee 
express their serious concern over the sorry state of affairs in the villages adopted 
under SAGY as no priority has been given for the SAGY villages in the implementation 
of developmental schemes,  especially Jal Jeevan Mission and Swatch Bharat Mission 
and as a result, the promised holistic development of the villages under SAGY is not 
taking place. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Department to ensure 
implementation of both the flagship schemes of the Department in the SAGY villages on 
top priority basis and also issue necessary direction to the States in this regard.  The 
action taken in this regard may be apprised to them within three months of the 
presentation of the Report. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
JJM 

36 
 
       Providing tap water connection in SAGY villages is priority area in implementation 
of Jal Jeevan Mission. The States/ UTs have been requested to expedite tap water 
connection in SAGY villages during Annual Action Plan discussion and in various 
meetings.  
  
For prioritizing the coverage, Ministry of Rural Development has also been requested to 
take up the matter with States for providing tap water connection in SAGY villages 
during planning and review meetings and expedite work so as to achieve Har Ghar Jal 
well before 2024. As reported, so far 17.24 lakh (56.57%) rural households in SAGY 
villages have been provided with tap water connection at their home. 
  
SBM 
  
For implementation of SBM (G), States have been advised to give priority to the SAGY 
villages.  Advisory in this regard was issued to all the States/UTs on 26th March, 
2021.  Another advisory has been issued to all the States/UTs on 13th June, 2022 to 
ensure that all the SAGY villages are being prioritized for implementation of SBM (G) in 
the State.  Provision of separate monitoring of progress of SAGY villages has been 
made in the IMIS of SBM (G). As reported by the States, so far out of the total 6,295 
SAGY villages, 1358 villages have been covered with Solid Waste Management and 
899 villages have been covered with Liquid Waste Management. 1,325 villages have 
been declared ODF Plus (Aspiring-770, Rising-155, Model-400).    
(O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl.  dated: 20.07.2022) 
 
Recommendation No. 18 (Para No. 2.20) 
  
Information and Increased Participation of MPs 
  
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the Members of 
Parliament of the concerned districts are not being involved by the respective States at 
the time of laying of foundation/inauguration of the drinking water works / schemes in 
their Parliamentary Constituencies. Besides, Members of Parliament are not taken on 
board or informed as and when nodal officers from Centre/State conduct inspection 
/meeting with the scheme implementing authorities. Since, Members of Parliament have 
ear to the ground and are aware of the problems / issues faced by the people at village 
level, as they have vast repertoire of experience, they should be involved at every stage 
of implementation of the schemes particularly JJM & SBM(G). The Committee while 
taking a serious view of the non intimation of information regarding inspection of central 
/ State teams and non involvement of Members in stone laying/inauguration of works 
taken up in their constituencies, strongly recommend the Department to frame 
guidelines/ instructions, on the lines of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), 
whereby the Member of Parliament of a constituency is invited at the programme of 
laying the foundation stone of the new works/projects. The Committee also desire that 

37 
 
the MPs are invariably informed well in time regarding the inspections/meetings 
conducted to review the implementation of schemes in their district, for their valuable 
contribution. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
JJM 
          This Department has issued an Advisory to all States/ UTs vide letter dated 
29.01.2021 wherein roles of Hon’ble MPs in planning and implementation of Jal Jeevan 
Mission was elaborated and they were requested to ensure their active participation and 
making it a ‘Jan Andolan’ Further, vide reminders dated 03.08.2021, 27.10.2021, 
20.12.2021 and 25.02.2022, States/ UTs have been advised to ensure that Hon’ble 
MPs are: 
  
i. consulted while preparing District Action Plans for water supply schemes and are 
also invited as ‘special invitees’ in all the DWSM meetings;  
 
ii. invited to various official functions organized for bhoomi pujan, inauguration/ 
commissioning of schemes, etc. for which district/ divisional level officers to be 
sensitized.  
  
Further, the matter has also been raised in various meetings being held from time to 
time with States/ UTs. 
    
SBM 
As provided in SBM(G) Phase-II Operational Guidelines, all the Members of Parliament 
of the district are members of District Mission/Committee of SBM(G) which is 
responsible to carry out regular block and GP level reviews of programme 
implementation.  An advisory has also been issued to all the States/UTs on 4th July, 
2022 by the DDWS to ensure that meetings of the District Mission/Committee of SBM 
(G) are held regularly and the Members of Parliament of the districts are invariably 
invited in all such meetings.  The States/UTs have also been advised to sensitize district 
level officers that the Members of Parliament may also be invited during the stone 
laying/inauguration of works, if any, taken up in their constituencies. 
  
SBM(G) is also covered in the review of District Development Coordination and 
Monitoring Committee (DISHA) constituted by Ministry of Rural Development, which is 
chaired by Members of Parliament 
  
(O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl.  dated: 20.07.2022) 
  

38 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 NIL 
  

39 
 
CHAPTER – IV  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
Recommendation No.1  (Para No. 2.1& 2.2) 
   
Analysis of Budgetary provision of Jal Jeevan Mission  
  
          The Committee note that Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) was announced in August, 
2019 to enable every rural household to have assured and clean water supply through 
Functional Household Tap Connections (FHTCs) by 2024, which is being implemented 
in the States/UTs in a Mission Mode. As on date, out of 19.18 crore, 8.96 crore(46.48 
%) rural households have access to clean potable water supply at their homes. The 
Committee are happy to note that the State Governments/Union Territories of Haryana, 
Telangana, Goa, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, D & N Haveli and Puducherry have 
achieved cent percent target of providing tap water connections to households. The 
Committee also appreciate that States like Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and Gujarat 
which have achieved more than 90% household coverage and are expected to achieve 
cent percent coverage very soon.  The Committee, however, express concern over the 
plight of bigger States like Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, West Bengal, 
Rajasthan, Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala and Tamil Nadu which are providing below 
40% FHTCs to their households. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department 
should impress upon these State Governments to take appropriate steps for providing 
tap water connections to all the households in keeping with the target year fixed. 
  
The Committee further observe that as against the demand of Department of 
Drinking Water & Sanitation for allocation of an amount of Rs. 91,258 crore, Rs. 60,000 
crore only has been allocated for the year 2022-23.  Keeping in view the fact that 
around 53.52% of rural households still require Functional Household Tap Connections 
(FHTCs) in different States/UTs, allocations under JJM for the year 2022-23 seems to 
be inadequate as the budgetary support provided is short by Rs. 31,258 crore against 
the initial demand. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to strive to utilize the 
allocated funds at the earliest so that they have sufficient justification to ask for 
additional funds at the RE stage.    
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
       Department has identified 13 major States having more than 9.08 Crore (95%) of 
the remaining households (HHs) across the Country and has been regularly impressing 
upon them to prioritize the coverage of remaining HHs.  A recent meeting at the level of 
Secretary (DDWS) has also been held with these 13 States in Odisha to review the 
progress under JJM, identify challenges being faced, sharing experiences and best 
practices, etc.  

40 
 
Allocation of the fund for the year 2022-23 among the States/ UTs have been 
completed. So far, in the current financial year i.e. in April & May, 2022, States/ UTs 
reported to have utilized an amount of Rs. 5,664.85 Crore for implementation of Jal 
Jeevan Mission. 
(O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl. dated: 20.07.2022) 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.5  (Para No. 2.6) 
  
Waiving off of user charges form the local communities 
  
The Committee note that under extant guidelines of the JJM, 5 % contribution 
has to be made by local communities towards the capital cost in cash and or in kind or 
labour in hilly/forested areas, NE/Himalayan States & villages having more than 50% 
SCs or STs population and 10 % of the capital cost in case of other villages, for in-
village piped water supply infrastructure and related resources development to be 
implemented by Gram Panchayat and or VWSCs/Paani Samiti/User Group etc. Further 
willingness of the community contribution from at least 80 % of the household is pre-
requisite for taking up water supply scheme. However, the GPs and/ or its sub 
committees may consider exempting individual contribution from poor, infirm, 
divyangjan or widow with no source of steady income. In this regard, the Committee 
observe that in the erstwhile National Rural Drinking Water programme there was no 
such stipulation of mandatory community contributions towards the capital cost. The 
Committee are of the considered view that since providing water to rural population is 
not only a basic necessity but also an integral function of a Welfare State, like 
India,  any mandatory contribution by community would perhaps undermine the efforts 
for realization of the goal of providing water connection to every household. Further, 
considering the poor economic conditions of the rural masses, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should seriously consider waiving off the community 
contribution towards the capital cost of water supply infrastructure and related source 
development. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps/initiative taken by 
the Department in this regard. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
      To instill the ‘sense of ownership’ among rural masses, under Jal Jeevan Mission 
(JJM), there is a provision of community contribution to the extent of 5% of the cost of 
in-village infrastructure in case of North Eastern & Himalayan States, forested/ hilly 
areas, SC/ ST dominated villages and 10% in rest of the areas.  
 

41 
 
Under JJM, willingness of the community and contribution from at least 80% 
households of the village is a pre-requisite for taking up water supply scheme. The 
community contribution can be in the form of cash and/ or kind and/ or labour. Further, 
Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. Village Water & Sanitation Committee/ 
Pani Samiti/ User Group, etc. may exempt individual contribution from poor, infirm, 
divyangjan or widow with no source of steady income.  
  
Further, provisions have also been made for rewarding the community with 10% 
of the cost of in-village infrastructure, after successful commissioning of the scheme, 
which would serve as revolving fund to meet any unforeseen expenditure due to major 
break down, etc., thereby assuring continuous water supply. 
(O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl. dated: 20.07.2022) 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 7 (Para No. 2.8)  
  
Non-completion of road repair works after laying of pipelines under JJM 
  
The Committee are happy to note that the laying of pipelines under Jal Jeevan 
Mission (Gramin) is undertaken at a massive scale throughout the country for providing 
safe and clean drinking water to the rural masses. However, the Committee note with 
concern that in several States after laying water pipelines, the damaged roads are not 
rehabilitated or repaired due to the negligence and callousness on the part of the 
concerned authorities. The damaged roads are often filled with soil or kept open instead 
of bringing them back to their original form. This not only gives shabby look but also 
lead to obstacles/hassles to the commuters. The villagers face a number of hardships 
ranging from day to day commutation to potential danger of accidents, particularly at 
night. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Department to look into the matter 
seriously and issue advisories to the States / authorities concerned to ensure that the 
damaged roads get repaired promptly soon after laying of the pipelines by the 
contractor/implementing agencies. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
      To avoid any hardships to the villagers, the Department has been taking this issue 
with States at all levels. Further, the States vide letter dated 22.11.2021 and reminders 
dated 17.03.2022 and 27.05.2022 have been advised to take up rural water schemes in 
a way with minimum damages to infrastructure such as roads/ highways and to restore 
the roads/ highways immediately in case of damages done while laying of pipelines for 
water supply systems.  
(O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl. dated: 20.07.2022) 

42 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 12 (Para No. 2.13)  
  
Third Party Inspection 
  
The Committee note that under the JJM, the State Water & Sanitation Missions 
(SWSMs) have empanelled third party verification agencies to check the quality of work 
executed by the Implementing Agencies. From the data furnished by the Department, 
the Committee are surprised to note that 14 States/Union Territories have not reported 
the details of the empanelment of the third party inspection agencies. Moreover, the 
numbers of Inspecting Agencies engaged by the States are abysmally very low in 
comparison to the size of the States. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to 
direct the States/UTs to empanel more and more third party inspecting agencies, so as 
to ascertain the veracity of works executed by the agencies. The Committee would also 
like to be apprised  of the reasons for non-reporting of data by States/UTs in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
        Provisions have been made for carrying out third party inspection of the assets 
created under JJM. State Water & Sanitation Missions have been empowered for 
empanelment of third-party inspection agencies. So far, as reported, 147 third party 
inspection agencies have been engaged in 28 States/ UTs. 
(O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl. dated: 20.07.2022) 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No 35 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 2.14)  
  
Issue of contamination of water in Ganganagar district, Rajasthan 
  
Contamination of water is a serious issue as it is directly related to the health of 
the people. The problem is extremely alarming as the number of cases of cancer in 
certain areas is rising alarmingly. The Committee in their earlier Reports also underlined 
the issue of water contamination especially in Ganganagar district of Rajasthan and its 
adjoining areas and urged upon the Department to take up the matter with the State 
Government of Rajasthan to prepare a time bound action plan for installing water 
purification plants on priority basis to ensure supply of clean and potable drinking water 
in the rural habitations. However, the Committee are concerned to note that no tangible 
progress has been made in this direction to mitigate the suffering of the affected people 
in the Ganganagar district. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Department 

43 
 
should  take up the matter at the highest level with the Government of Rajasthan, so 
that inhabitants of Ganganagar district are provided with clean drinking water at the 
earliest.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
        As informed by the State of Rajasthan, canal based water sources are used for 
water supply schemes for 2,834 villages in the Ganga Nagar district and 1,076 villages 
are covered through water supply schemes with water sources from Ganga Canal 
system. Raw water from the canal-based system is purified and chlorinated before 
supplying to villages. Further, chemical testing of the raw water samples is done from 
time to time and results of latest chemical testing done in November, 2021 has revealed 
that chemical contaminants are under the permissible limits. 
  
Further, this Department has requested the State of Punjab, Punjab Pollution Control 
Board, Central Pollution Control Board and Dept. of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation to take corrective action required to avoid 
discharge of industrial waste in Ganga Canal. 
  
(O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl. dated: 20.07.2022) 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No 38 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 15 (Para No. 2.16)  
  
Increase in unit assistance under SBM (G) 
  
The Committee note that at present financial incentive of Rs. 12,000/- to BPL and 
identified Above Poverty Line households, under SBM (G), are being provided for 
construction of toilets. The Committee are of the considered opinion that the existing per 
unit assistance is grossly insufficient and nowhere near to the actual cost of 
construction of toilets even if a beneficiary puts his own labour. The Committee are of 
the opinion that the incentive be enhanced commensurately keeping in view the rising 
cost of the construction material of the toilets. They, therefore, strongly recommend the 
Department to consider the feasibility of enhancing the per unit assistance for toilets, 
from the existing rate of Rs. 12,000/- to Rs. 20,000/- for BPL and identified APL 
households in rural areas.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
      Out of the incentive amount of Rs.12000/- for construction Individual Household 
Latrine (IHHL), the Central share amount provided in the North Eastern (NE) States and 
the Himalayan States of Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and UT of Jammu & Kashmir 
is Rs.10,800, and in the remaining States it is Rs.7,200.  NE States and Himalayan 
States as mentioned have to provide minimum share Rs.1,200 and remaining States 

44 
 
have to provide minimum share Rs.4,800.  The States can provide higher State share 
funds by providing additional funds. The beneficiaries should also be encouraged to add 
their own share in order to promote ownership and usage of the toilets. 
 (O.M. No. H-11013/3/2022-Coord/Parl. dated: 20.07.2022) 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No 41 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  

45 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF 
THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
07 February,  2023 Chairperson 
18  Magha, 1944 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
  

46 
 
Annexure-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2022-23) HELD ON TUESDAY, 11 JANUARY, 2023 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1700 hours in Committee Room, ‘D’ Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel  –  Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 LokSabha 
 
2. Shri Vijay Baghel 
3. Shri Sunil Kumar 
4. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
5. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
6. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
Rajya Sabha 
7. Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde 
8. Shri Arun Singh 
9. Sant Balbir Singh 
10. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Chander Mohan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood  - Director 
3. Shri Ram Lal Yadav   - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt Draft Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti- Department 
of Drinking Water and Sanitation.  
3. The Committee further took up for consideration the Draft Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of Jal 
Shakti (Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation). After deliberation, the Committee 
adopted the aforesaid draft Report without any modification and authorized the 
Chairperson to present the Reports on their behalf to both the Houses of Parliament 
during the next Session. 
 
4. ***    ***  ***   ***   ***   ***  
5. ***    ***  ***   ***   ***   ***  
6. ***    ***  ***   ***   ***   *** 
 
7. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee 
has been kept. 
   
The Committee then adjourned. 

47 
 
*** 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH 
REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations                  18 
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 16, 17 and 18 
              Total - 12  
       Percentage -66.67% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
 view of the Government’s replies 
  
Sl. Nos. NIL                            Total - NIL 
              Percentage- 0%  
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government      
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Sl. Nos.1, 5, 7, 12, 13 and 15  
       
Total - 06 
      Percentage 33.33 - %  
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government 
is still awaited  
 
Sl.  Nos. NIL          
 
Total - NIL 
                Percentage - 0% 
 
 
 