1 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2021-22) 
                 
         
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                                 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI  
( DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2021-22) 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Water Resources] 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
December, 2021 / Agrahayana,1943 (Saka) 
 
  


2 
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2021-22) 
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI  
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION) 
 
 (Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
         
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.12.2021 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 07.12.2021 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
      December, 2021 / Agrahayana,1943 (Saka) 
  


3 
 
 
 
W. R. C.  No. 69 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
   
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2021 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha  (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
  

4 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  Page  
Composition of the 
Committee 
 
……………………………………………………………… (ii) 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………… 
 
(iv) 
CHAPTER - I Report……………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER – II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government…………………………… 
 
7 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………… 
 
22 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
the replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee…............................. 
 
23 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still 
awaited…………………………………………………….. 
 
26 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Minutes of the First Sitting of the Committee held on 
21.10.2021……………………………………………….. 
 
27 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Eleventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee………………………………………………… 
28 
 
 
  

5 
 
 
 
COMPOSITON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2021-22) 
 Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal                   - Chairperson 
 
 LOK SABHA   
2.  Shri Vijay Baghel  
3.  Shri Bhagirath Choudhary  
4.  Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary  
5.  Shri Guman Singh Damor  
6.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit  
7.  Dr. K. Jayakumar  
8.  Shri Dhanush M. Kumar  
9.  Shri Sunil Kumar  
10.  Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone  
11.  Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav  
12.  Shri Nihalchand  
13.  Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
14.  Shri Sanjay Kaka Patil  
15.  Shri P. Ravindhranath   
16.  Ms.  Nusrat Jahan Ruhi  
17.  Smt.  Agatha K. Sangma  
18.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi  
19.  Shri Chandan Singh  
20.  Shri D.K. Suresh  
21.  Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi  
 RAJYA SABHA  
22.  Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder  
23.  Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur  
24.  Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
25.  Smt. Mausam Noor  
26.  Shri Arun Singh  
27.  Shri Subhash Chandra Singh  
28.  Shri Rewati Raman Singh  
29.  Shri Pradeep Tamta  
30.  Vacant  
31.  Vacant  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.C. Sharma - Additional Director 
3. Shri Satish Kumar - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2021-22) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Fourteenth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Observations 
/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eleventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) “Demands for Grants (2020-21)” of the Ministry of Jal 
Shakti (Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation).  
2. The Eleventh Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid 
on the table of Rajya Sabha on 08 March, 2021.  The Action Taken replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received in 
this Secretariat on 28 May, 2021. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was 
considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 21.10.2021. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
     New Delhi Dr. SANJAY JAISWAL  
      December,  2021 Chairperson  
     Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2020-21) 
having been authorized  
  

7 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2021-22) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Eleventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation) for the year 
2021-2022. 
 
2. The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 08.03.2021 and was 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report contained 19 
Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government.  These have 
been examined and categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13,14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19 
 
Total:16 
Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government: 
 
Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Serial Nos. 7, 8 and 9 
Total:03 
Chapter-IV  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial No. NIL 
Total:00 
Chapter-V 
 
4. The Committee desire that replies to recommendations made in the 
Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
 

8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Rural areas with contaminated water supply 
 
[Recommendation Serial No. 7 (Para Nos. 2.10 & 2.11)] 
6. With regard to rural areas with contaminated water supply, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note with concern that as on 15th February, 2021, 
48,969 rural habitations in the country are affected with water contamination, 
out of which 3,112 habitations are affected due to Arsenic contamination, 
2,972 with Fluoride, 31,142 with Iron, 866 with Nitrate contamination, 300 with 
Heavy Metals and 10,575 habitations with high Salinity in water.  
The Committee further note that under National Water Quality Sub-
Mission (NWQSM) was launched in March, 2017 as a part of erstwhile 
National Rural Drinking Water Programme (now subsumed under JJM) to 
provide safe drinking water to identified 27,544 Arsenic / fluoride affected rural 
habitations by March, 2021. As on 15 February, 2021, barring 78 habitations 
rest of the habitations have been covered under the scheme. However, the 
Department is silent with regard to action taken for providing clean drinking 
water to habitation affected with other contaminants like Iron and Salinity 
which constituted bulk of the water quality affected habitations. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should also focus their 
attention on these habitations. The Committee understand that to tackle the 
problem of contamination of drinking water sources, the Government has 
undertaken a massive awareness drive/ campaign from time to time, to 
enlighten rural masses about the impact of consuming unsafe water on health 
which is laudable. The Committee, however, are of the considered view that 
though the piped water supply is the only solution to tackle water quality 
problems, till such time piped water supply reaches every rural 
household/habitation, alternate arrangement should be made to supply clean 
water by installing Community Water Purification Plants (CWPPs) in each 
Gram Panchayat/ Habitation in the country. The Committee have been 
informed that 32,277 CWPPs have been set up in the country so far by 
various States. The Committee is quite sceptical as to whether these CWPPs 
are adequate enough to cater to the requirements of all quality affected 
habitations. The Committee, recommend that Department in consultation with 
States assess the total requirements of CWPPs and draw an action plan to 
set up adequate CWPPs in all the habitations.” 
7. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“Jal Jeevan Mission aims at providing potable water to every rural 
household through tap water connection by 2024 with a special focus on 
water quality-affected areas. However, planning and implementation of piped 
water supply scheme in water quality-affected habitations based on a safe 
water source takes time, purely as an interim measure, provisions have been 
made to set up Community Water Purification Plants (CWPPs) to provide 8-10 
lpcd potable water to meet drinking and cooking need of every household, in 
these habitations.  
States are being repeatedly requested to install CWPPs in all the 
remaining habitations on priority. During annual planning exercise, States are 

9 
 
 
 
being impressed upon to provide potable water in all these quality-affected 
habitations during this year itself.” 
8. From the action taken reply furnished, the Committee note that the 
Department have merely mentioned the relevant provisions of the JJM 
guidelines and stated that States have repeatedly been requested to install 
Community Water Purification Plants (CWPP) in all the remaining habitations 
on priority. The reply is silent with regard to action taken or proposed to be 
taken with regard to provision of safe drinking water to those habitations 
which are affected with contaminants like Iron and Salinity. Further, the reply 
also does not state in specific terms as to whether any action plan has been 
prepared for setting up CWPPs in all water quality affected habitations. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that there should be 
focussed attention towards habitations which are affected with water quality 
issues on account of pollutants like Iron and Salinity and that a time bound 
programme be formulated in consultation with concerned States for setting up 
of CWPPs in all water quality affected habitations.  
 
B. Issue of contamination in Ganganagar district, Rajasthan  
[Recommendation Serial No. 8 (Para No. 2.12)] 
 
9. On the issue of contamination in Ganganagar district, Rajasthan, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note with concern that the Ganga Canal flowing from Punjab 
to Rajasthan contains harmful and untreated chemical reportedly released by 
the industries located in Punjab. Due to consumption of this water, rural 
villages located in Ganganagar and adjoining areas are facing serious health 
problems. This is a grave issue having direct bearing on the health and well-
being of rural villagers who are using this water for consumption and number 
of Cancer cases are reportedly increasingly day-by-day. The Committee while 
expressing their grave concern over the matter, urge upon the Department to 
take up the matter with the State Government for installing water treatment 
plants on priority basis in the Ganganagar district of Rajasthan and adjoining 
areas, so as to ensure supply of clean and potable drinking water under the 
Mission”. 
 
10. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 “The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. State of 
Rajasthan has been requested to take immediate action in the matter.” 
11. The Committee are unhappy to note that the response of the Department 
to its recommendation regarding reported release of harmful and untreated 
chemicals by the industries located in Punjab into Ganga Canal, has been very 
casual and routine. The Committee find the reply bereft of any concrete action 
plan for installing water treatment plants on priority basis as suggested by the 
Committee. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Department in 
consultation and coordination with the State Government of Rajasthan should 
prepare a time bound action plan for installing water treatment plants, so as to 
ensure supply of clean and potable drinking water in the rural villages located 
in Ganganagar and adjoining areas.  

10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Water Quality Testing Laboratories 
[Recommendation Serial No. 9 (Para No. 2.13)] 
12. With regard to need for water quality testing laboratories, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
“Under the JJM scheme, the Department is assisting and facilitating 
States/ UTs in setting up, upgrading & improving the functioning and 
strengthening of drinking water quality testing laboratories by providing policy 
guidelines, technical and financial support. The Committee find that during the 
examination of Demands for Grants (2020-21), the then Secretary, 
Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation had informed that there were 
2,232 water testing laboratories in the rural areas, out of which 28 were State 
Level Laboratories, 732 District Laboratories, 244 Block level Laboratories 
and 1146 Sub-Divisional Laboratories. However, the Committee from the 
written reply submitted by the Department in connection with examination of 
the Demands for Grants (2021-22), note the figures relating to water testing 
laboratories as 2,032 in total, out of which 28 are State level laboratories, 675 
District laboratories, 93 block level laboratories and 1,143 Sub-Divisional 
Laboratories. The Committee in their Fourth Report on Demands for Grants 
(2020-21) of Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation had already 
emphasized the need for having more and more water testing laboratories in 
the water contaminated rural areas. However, the Committee are perturbed to 
note that instead of showing progressive increase in the number of 
laboratories been set up, the number of laboratories have actually been 
reduced this year as compared to the previous year. The Committee feel that 
Water Quality Testing Laboratories are a crucial link in the success of JJM, as 
they play important role in ascertaining and ensuring that the water being 
utilized at the rural level do not contain any harmful ingredients which are 
detrimental to the health and well-being of the rural population. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend the Department to open sufficient number of water 
testing laboratories and also apprise the Committee about the reasons for 
reduction in the number of water testing laboratories functioning during the 
on-going financial year.” 
13. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“Strengthening of water quality testing laboratories by setting-up/ 
upgradation of State district/ sub-division/ block/ mobile laboratories is an integral 
component of Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance (WQMS) under JJM.Upto 
2% of the allocation to States/ UTs is made available for utilization on WQMS 
which inter alia includes activities like setting up/ upgradation of Labs, 
procurement of equipment, instruments, chemicals, glassware, consumables, 
hiring of outsourced human resources, NABL accreditation, etc.All States/UTs 
have been advised that in every State/UT, there has to be a State/UT level 
laboratory and in bigger States/UTs, State/UT level laboratories should be set up 
in different regions so that all nearby sources are tested regularly. Further, all 

11 
 
 
 
districts must have a district-level laboratory and setting up of the same should be 
accorded highest priority. For effective monitoring, concerned State has to 
mandatorily formulate plan for strengthening of existing laboratories and NABL 
accreditation/ recognition of labs along with other WQMS activities under Annual 
Action Plan. Further, in order to facilitate States/UTs to get NABL accreditation/ 
recognition expeditiously, matter of speeding up of accreditation/recognition 
procedure and its simplification has been taken up with NABL. This aspect is 
being highlighted for compliance in all review meetings, which are held regularly 
with States/ UTs. 
Further, the drinking water quality laboratories in the States/UTs have also 
been opened up to public so as they can get their water samples tested at 
nominal rate and ascertain the quality of water being supplied in their homes. 
States/UTs were asked to map all these laboratories on ‘Water quality 
management information system’ where testing can be done. In this context, 
States/UTs reviewed the functioning of these laboratories and based on updated 
data, latest numbers have been reported. The Department has worked with 
NABL for expediting accreditation of State/UT and district level laboratories and 
recognition of sub-division and block level laboratories. States/UTs have been 
advised to ensure appropriate and effective IEC activities and training should be 
taken on priority to bring high level of awareness on various aspects of safe 
drinking water sources, including the critical role of improved sanitation and 
hygiene for public health. 
 
14. The Committee are perturbed to note that the action taken reply of the 
Department is evasive and does not mentioned the reasons for the dwindling 
number of water testing labs in the country. In their reply, the Department have 
merely reiterated the guidelines, wherein State/UTs have been advised to 
utilize 2 % of funds earmarked for Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
(WQM&S) activities which inter alia include activities like setting 
up/upgradation of labs, procurement of equipment, instruments, chemical 
glassware, consumables, NABL accreditation, etc. While expressing their 
concern over the reduction in the number of water testing laboratories 
functioning in the Country, the Committee reiterate their recommendation that 
the reasons for fall in the number of laboratories in operation may be 
furnished along with the steps taken for setting up more water quality testing 
laboratories in the Country in co-operation and coordination of the respective 
States/UTs.   
D. Unspent balances with the Implementing Agencies 
[Recommendation Serial No. 19 (Para No. 2.24)] 
15. With regard to unspent balances with the Implementing Agencies, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee notice that substantial amounts of unspent balances 
were accrued under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) at the end of the financial years 
2018-19 and 2019-20, to the tune of Rs. 2,436.37 crore and Rs. 6,431.85 
crore respectively. Similarly, under Swachh Bharat Mission-Gramin (SBM-G), 
there are consistent unspent balances to the tune of Rs. 10,683.89 crore and 
Rs. 10,475.26 crore at the end of the financial years 2018-19 and 2019-20 
respectively. The Committee are concerned to note that the problem of 
unspent balances is more prominent under JJM in certain States like West 
Bengal, Rajasthan & Uttar Pradesh and similarly under SBM (G) in States like 
Odisha, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh & Rajasthan. The Committee 

12 
 
 
 
find the response of the Department in this regard unsatisfactory and 
repetitive in nature wherein general reasons such as non-timely release of 
States’ shares have been cited and few changes in the funding pattern have 
also been intimated. However, the Committee are constrained to note that 
despite efforts made by the Department, there are huge unspent balances 
under Jal Jeevan Mission and Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) which are 
only increasing over the years. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Department should vigorously pursue with State Governments and all 
other stake holders for optimum utilization of allocated funds. For this 
purpose, the Department should have strict monitoring mechanism and sound 
financial management in place to ensure not only full utilization of the 
allocations but also for achieving the targets fixed under each Scheme.  
16. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“JJM-Under Jal Jeevan Mission, the unspent balance of Rs. 6,431.85 
Crore for FY 2019-20 was a major concern and the Department made 
vigorous efforts for transfer of Central share by State Finance Departments 
and timely utilization of Central as well as State share. Due to these concerted 
efforts and despite of disruptions due to COVID 19 including lockdowns, 
implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission on the ground accelerated and more 
fund utilized. As a result, unspent balance on 31.3.2021 has reduced to Rs. 
4,826.95 Crore. Public Financial Management System (PFMS) has been put 
in place for monitoring the expenditure under JJM. States/ UTs are advised to 
transfer the Central fund along with matching State share to the implementing 
agency within 15 days of the Central release. Further, the ‘escrow account’ 
receiving funds from Centre under JJM will on-board with PFMS platform. 
This will ensure better monitoring of utilization of Central as well as matching 
State/ UT share.  
 SBM- Under SBM(G) Phase-II, various measures have been taken to 
ensure financial prudence and transparency such as (i) the States/UTs have 
been directed to maintain a  Single Nodal Account at State level for making all 
the payments under the programme to avoid parking of funds at lower level 
and to bring transparency in monitoring of unspent balance, (ii) the funds will 
be released in four installments (instead of two installments as done earlier) to 
reduce parking of funds, (iii) the Department is in the process of on-boarding 
all the States/UTs on Public Financial Management System (PFMS) of Govt. 
of India and making payment through REAT/DBT modules of PFMS so that 
real time monitoring of utilization of funds can be done.  Physical progress is 
also now being monitored through a Mobile App developed for capturing the 
progress of all the sanitation activities being undertaken in villages under 
SBM(G) Phase-II. 
 
17. From the action taken reply furnished by the Department of Drinking 
Water & Sanitation, the Committee note that a slew of measures have been 
taken/being taken by them to mitigate the problem of unspent balances. The 
Department stated that under JJM, vigorous efforts were made for transfer of 
Central share by State Finance Departments and timely utilization of Central as 
well as State share and as a result, unspent balance as on 31.03.2021 has been 
reduced to Rs. 4826.95 crore. Similarly, under SBM (G), the Department have 

13 
 
 
 
taken various measures to ensure financial produce and transparency, so that 
real time monitoring of utilization of funds could be done. The Committee, 
while acknowledging the efforts made by the Department in this regard, 
express the hope that the measures taken would yield desirable results. The 
Committee urge upon the Department not to show any laxity in the matter and 
expect them to keep an hawkish eye on fund utilization and a strict tab on the 
State Governments so as to ensure liquidation of unspent balances under both 
the flagship schemes of the Government. 
  

14 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation Sl. No. 1 (Para No. 2.1)  
  The Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation is the nodal agency 
responsible for policy planning, funding and coordination of programmes for safe 
drinking water and sanitation in rural areas of the country. In the Union Budget 2021-
22, an allocation of Rs. 60,030.45 Crore have been made for Department of Drinking 
Water & Sanitation, which is a massive increase of 179.17 percent compared to the 
allocation for the year 2020-21 (BE), which was Rs. 21,494.10 Crore. Out of this, Rs. 
50,011 Crore alone has been made for implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission which 
witnesses steep hike of 334.87% compared to 2020-21 (BE) allocation of Rs. 11,500 
Crore. The Committee also note that the Government have made an allocation of 
Rs. 9,994.10 Crore for implementation of Swachh Bharat Mission-Gramin (SBM-G) 
for 2021-22, which is same as that of BE allocation for 2020-21. The Committee 
place on record their deep appreciation to the Government for substantially 
enhancing the allocation for the assured potable water supply through Functional 
Household Tap Connection (FHTC) by 2024 in the rural sector. The Committee have 
been informed that under SBM (G) Phase-II, the focus is to ensure ODF 
sustainability and construction of IHHLs for newly emerging households and under 
the category of Solid Liquid Waste Management (SLWM), components such as solid 
waste management, Gobar Dhan, plastic waste management, greywater 
management and Faecal Sludge management would be given impetus. Under JJM, 
keeping in view the timelines set up by each State/ UT to provide every rural 
household with FHTC, States/ UTs have been asked to prepare their Annual Action 
Plan for 2021-22, which will be finalized in April–May, 2021. The Department have 
also accorded highest priority to water quality-affected habitations for providing every 
household with functional tap water connection. The Committee hope that various 
activities/ works undertaken during 2021-22 under both the schemes would yield the 
desired outcome and immensely benefit the targeted beneficiaries in the rural areas 
of the country. Further, the Committee express the hope that enhanced allocation 
made to the flagship programmes would be fully utilized and works already 
sanctioned and undertaken under water and sanitation sectors under these schemes 
are completed. They also expect that the timelines set by each States for achieving 
the target of providing FHTCs to each rural household would be adhered to and the 
JJM would achieve the goal of providing FHTCs to 100 per cent households by the 
year 2024.  
 
 Reply of the Government  
 
JJM:  Jal Jeevan Mission is a time-bound, mission mode programme, which aims at 
providing household tap water connection to every household by 2024. Two States 
and 2 UTs namely Goa, Telengana, Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Puducherry 
have become " Har Ghar Jal Rajya". During 2021-22, apart from finalization of 
Annual Action Plans of States based on detailed discussions, the implementation of 
JJM is being taken up with Chief Ministers of the States by the Union Minister for Jal 
Shakti. Implementation of JJM will be reviewed regularly with States/UTs by the 
Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation towards providing FHTC to all rural 
households by 2024.  

15 
 
 
 
SBM-G:Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) [SBM(G)] Phase-II has been launched 
for achievement of ODF plus objectives with the focus on Open Defecation Free 
(ODF) sustainability and Solid and Liquid Waste Management (SLWM) 
arrangements in rural areas. Under the programme, various activities for sustaining 
the ODF status such as awareness generation for continuous usage of toilets, 
covering the left out households/newly emerging households with toilets, retrofitting 
of toilets, construction of CSCs and SLWM activities like collection and segregation 
of waste, construction of community compost pits, plastic waste management units, 
community soak pits, Waste Stabilization Ponds, Faecal Sludge Management, etc. 
are envisaged to be taken up during 2021-22. States/UTs were advised to prepare 
their Annual Implementation Plans (AIPs) for 2021-22 for taking up the required 
activities and to submit to the Department. Accordingly, the AIPs have been 
prepared and submitted by the States which have also been discussed with the 
States. The funds will be released to the States keeping in view their AIP demand 
and budget allocation for the programme for 2021-22. The progress of the States 
with respect to their AIP will be monitored by the Department and the States will be 
pursued and supported to meet their AIP targets. However, sanitation being a 
behavioural issue, the focus is given on inculcating behaviour change towards 
regular use and maintenance of toilets and adoption of proper waste management 
practices. The funds are utilized by the States on creation of the ODF plus assets/ 
mechanisms to ascertain adaptation of such sanitation and hygiene behaviour by the 
people and proper use & maintenance of such assets constructed under the 
programme. 
  
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
Recommendation Sl.No. 2 (Para No. 2.2)  
The Committee note that the funding pattern of the flagship schemes 
implemented by the Department is in the ratio of 50:50 under JJM and 60:40 under 
SBM (G). For North-east and Himalayan States funding pattern is in the ratio of 
90:10. Besides central assistance/ funding, balance funding has to be done by the 
States/ UTs concerned. For effective and proper implementation of the schemes, the 
States need to release their matching share of funds for both the schemes timely so 
as to ensure that the schemes do not suffer for want of availability of funds. The 
Committee have been informed that under both the schemes there have been 
considerable delays in release of States matching share into single nodal account, 
which is reviewed by the Department regularly. The Committee urge upon the 
Department to impress upon all the States/ UTs to release their matching share of 
funds timely and without delay under both the flagship schemes, so that the intended 
funds reach the targeted beneficiaries on time and that beneficiaries identified under 
the scheme are able to reap the benefits well within the intended time-frame. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the efforts made by the Department in this 
regard.  
 Reply of the Government  
  
 JJM -It is indeed an issue that some States are unable to transfer Central 
grants and also release matching State share within 15 days of Central release. The 
Department/ Ministry has been consistently pursuing the matter with State 
Government at the highest level including Chief Secretaries of respective States. 
Union Minister, Jal Shakti regularly keeps on impressing upon respective Chief 
Ministers to ensure timely transfer of grant in the single nodal account of the 

16 
 
 
 
implementing agencies of States. Further, for prudent financial management, the 
following steps are being undertaken in Jal Jeevan Mission: 
i) Provisioning of matching State share has been made an integral part of 
Annual Action Plan exercise held in the beginning of every financial 
year so that the target can be firmed up accordingly; 
ii) Provisions are also being made for operating single nodal account of 
States as an ‘escrow account’ so that delay in transfer of Central fund 
to implementing agencies is avoided; and  
iii) Throughout the year, several review meetings at highest levels, are 
being held from time to time with the State govt. officials to review the 
physical and financial progress under JJM so that the overall target can 
be achieved well within time.  
With these concerted efforts of the Department, most of the States/ UTs have 
in-principle agreed to release the State share well within the time along with shortfall 
in State matching share of previous years.  
SBM(G) Phase-II guidelines provide that the States have to release their 
proportionate State share within 15 days from receipt of Centre share under the 
programme. The States are also regularly followed up for timely release of their 
proportionate State share. Presently there is shortfall in the proportionate State 
share release in respect of Telangana and West Bengal only. They are being 
regularly followed up.  Letters have also been sent to the Chief Ministers of these 
States from Minister, Jal Shakti to release the proportionate State share at the 
earliest. 
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
Recommendation Sl.No. 3 (Para Nos. 2.3 & 2.4)  
Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) was announced in August, 2019 and the same is 
being implemented in the States/ UTs to enable every rural household in the country 
to have assured potable water supply through Functional Household Tap 
Connections (FHTCs) by 2024 in a Mission Mode. The Committee note that as on 
15.08.2019, out of 18.93 Crore rural households, 3.23 Crore (17%) households were 
reported to have tap water connections. As on 15th February, 2021, 6.73 Crore 
(35.12%) rural households out of 19.18 Crore have access to potable water supply at 
their homes. The Committee lauds the efforts made by the State Government of Goa 
and Telangana for achieving 100 % households with tap water connections i.e. “Har 
Ghar Jal Rajya”.  
The Committee note that as per Operational Guidelines framed under JJM, to 
achieve the objectives under the scheme re-verification and firming of baseline data 
of household tap connections was to be done by States/ UTs before March, 2020 
and report the same on Integrated Management System (IMIS) of the Mission. It is 
not clear to the Committee as to whether the baseline data has been firmed up and 
re-verified by the States and reported on IMIS. The Committee, therefore, urge upon 
the Government to ask the States to complete the process and apprise them of the 
baseline data and its re-verification and reconciliation, so as to ascertain the actual 
number of households which are to be provided of FHTCs in the rural areas of the 
country.  
 Reply of the Government  
  All the States/ UTs were requested to re-verify and firming up of baseline data 
of household tap connections. States/ UTs after revalidation had reported that there 
were around 18.93 Crore rural households in the country as on 01.04.2020 out of 

17 
 
 
 
which 3.23 Crore were having tap water connections. It has further been considered 
in the Department that the ‘number of rural household’ is a dynamic data and 
therefore States/ UTs are allowed to update the same on regular basis. As on 
16.05.2021, out of more than 19.19 Crore rural households across the country, 7.41 
Crore (39%) households have been provided with tap water supply. 
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
Recommendation Sl.No. 4 (Para Nos. 2.5 & 2.6)  
The principal objective behind the coverage of rural households with 
Functional Household Tap Connections (FHTCs) is to provide each house with safe 
drinking water. The Committee is of the view that mere provision of tap connection 
without ensuring assured availability of water in the pipeline would not serve the 
purpose and will defeat the very objective of JJM. The Committee find from their 
collective experience and ground reality that there are instances galore, wherein taps 
are being fitted but water supply is not there. The Committee feel that a monitoring 
mechanism is required to be put in place at the district level, whereby the supply of 
water is monitored on a real time basis. For this, the Department should also 
leverage on latest technological tools such as GPS, internet of Things (IoT) etc. 
Besides the Department should also undertake field visits at regular/ periodic 
intervals to check the availability of water as also the proper functioning of the tap 
network.  
The Committee also urge the Department to devise special strategies for 
supply of safe drinking water to rural habitations of hilly areas where the households 
are not only very scattered but also in some places there is difficult terrain. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
  For time-bound implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission, a four-tier institutional 
mechanism has been set up at National, State, District and Village level. District 
Water & Sanitation Mission has been tasked with overall implementation and 
monitoring of works being undertaken under JJM at District level. Further, following 
major mechanisms have been put in place for effective monitoring of works being 
undertaken in JJM: 
a. For targeted delivery and monitoring of specific outcomes, every functional 
household tap connection (FHTC) is being linked with the Aadhar number of 
the head of the household, subject to statutory provisions; 
b. Every asset created under JJM is being geo-tagged; 
c. a real time dashboard for monitoring physical progress at National, State, 
District and Village level; 
d. A robust JJM-IMIS has been put in place;  
e. Third party inspection (TPI) by the States to check the quality of works; 
f. Functionality assessment of schemes and tap water connections; 
g. Measurement and monitoring of water supply in villages through sensor-
based IoT solution. 
  Under JJM, special focus has been given towards innovations in drinking 
water sector to enable communities to optimize the existing infrastructure, capital 
investments, operating costs, and thereby provide safe drinking water at an 
affordable cost. In areas with harsh climatic conditions as in high altitude cold 
deserts and in areas facing extreme terrain challenges or sparsely populated hot 
deserts, local innovations/ technological solutions viz. Solar Energy based stand-
alone water supply systems for scattered/ isolated/ tribal/ hilly villages, Community 

18 
 
 
 
Water Purification Plant (CWPP) in groundwater contaminated areas, etc. are being 
explored. Further, a team of technical experts under the chairmanship of Principal 
Scientific Advisor to Government of India has been constituted to invite and examine 
various innovation technologies for use in water sector. In hilly, forested, tribal and 
drought prone and desert areas, to provide tap water to scattered households, 
relaxation has been given to cover habitations with less than 20 households or 100 
population. Further, in hilly areas, solar-based and gravity-based water supply is also 
encouraged so as people living in these small hamlets and in remote areas, continue 
to get assured water supply. In hilly and mountainous regions, springs are major 
source of water and under Jal Jeevan Mission, to strengthen and augment these 
springs, springshed management have been promoted. A 2–day training workshop 
of State/ district officials having springs as a water source was held on 27 – 28 
February, 2020 at Dr. R. S. Tolia Uttarakhand Academy of Administration, Nainital. 
The Department also came out with a document entitled ‘Provision of potable 
drinking water in mountains through participatory springshed management’, which 
has been extensively shared with concerned States/ UTs.       
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
 
Recommendation Sl.No. 5 (Para No. 2.7)  
Due to ever-increasing population, the demand for clean and potable drinking 
water is increasing day-by-day. Therefore, it has become very essential to find out 
new sources of water and also recharge/ replenish the fast depleting water table. 
Underlining the importance of water in human lives, the Committee observe that 
concerted efforts should be made to conserve water to the maximum extent possible 
and urge the Department to mandate installation of Rain Water Harvesting structures 
existing/ new rainwater harvesting structures by all GPs/ VWSCs, more particularly 
in drought prone and dessert areas especially in Rajasthan as these areas, due to 
their geographical position, are lacking in water sources. Furthermore, the 
Committee stress the need for revival and rejuvenation of traditional water bodies 
including recharge of bore-wells, cleaning up of lakes and ponds in the villages as 
these water bodies have the potential to become assured source of water. The 
Department should adopt a convergence model, whereby the JJM can be dovetailed 
with other schemes like MGNREGA, Repair, Renovation & Restoration of Water 
Bodies (RRR), so as to attain assured and seamless supply of water in all the rural 
habitations. The Committee note that rural masses are largely unaware about the 
importance of water conservation techniques due to lack of awareness and 
education. Therefore, the Committee recommend the Department to take up these 
issues with State Governments and urge upon them to formulate schemes for 
promotion of RWH and also undertake IEC activities for educating the people of the 
importance of water conservation and rain harvesting through print and electronic 
media and to make the RWH programme a people's movement.  
Reply of the Government 
The concern expressed by committee to ensure availability of water over long- 
term has been noted by the Department and suggestions of committee for JJM is 
being undertaken. In order to make the household tap water connections functional 
on long-term basis, all the Gram Panchayats or its sub-committee/ Pani Samiti etc. 
are required to make 5–years Village Action Plan (VAP) inter alia which includes 
drinking water source strengthening, recharge activities like construction of rainwater 

19 
 
 
 
harvesting structures, revival and rejuvenation of traditional water bodies including 
recharge of bore-wells, cleaning up of lakes and ponds, etc. to ensure long-term 
water availability. Under VAP, provision has been made for Gram Panchayats to 
dovetail funds from 15th Finance Commission grants, MGNREGS, DMDF, CAMPA, 
JJM, PMKVY, SBM (G), MP/ MLA LAD funds, DMDF, CSR fund, etc. at village level. 
Under JJM, the provision is also made to enable States/ UTs to deploy ISAs 
to mobilize the village community and help them plan, design, implement and 
monitor the various activities taken up in VAP. Apart from this, to create awareness 
among the rural population about water conservations measures and other 
associated activities, States/ UTs are permitted to utilize upto 5% of funds allocated 
under JJM for support activities. In the review meetings of JJM, States/ UTs are 
advised to expedite the preparation of VAPs that include O&M, water conservation, 
source strengthening, greywater reuse etc. Under JJM, a 100 – days campaign was 
also started to provide tap water supply to schools, anganwadi centres 
ashramshalas, etc. Under this campaign, rainwater harvesting and grey water reuse 
structures was also included so that future generation is sensitized and understands 
the importance of conserving water. During 2019-20, this Department launched Jal 
Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) to create awareness about water conservation in 1,592 blocks 
of 256 water stressed districts. Under this campaign, targeted activities were 
undertaken under five areas of intervention namely i.) water conservation and 
rainwater harvesting, ii.) Renovation of traditional water bodies/ tanks, iii.) Reuse, 
borewell recharge structures, iv.) Watershed development, and v.) Intensive 
afforestation. The benefits of this campaign are likely to be visible in a long run. This 
campaign was implemented with the convergence of various schemes like 
MNREGA, IWMP, SBM (G), NAP etc. In 2021, Jal Shakti Abhiyan was launched on 
World Water Day i.e. 22nd March with the theme ‘Catch the Rain’ expanded to cover 
all 729 districts of the country. 
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
Recommendation Sl.No. 6 (Para Nos. 2.8 & 2.9)  
The Committee note that Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance (WQMS) 
has been accorded highest priority under Jal Jeevan Mission to provide prescribed 
quality of drinking water to rural households. The Department is providing technical 
and financial support to States/ UTs to strengthen the Water Quality Monitoring & 
Surveillance activities. With a view to encourage safe drinking quality water, the JJM 
envisages capacity building of Panchayats and entrusts them to take up Operation & 
Maintenance (O&M) responsibility of water quality monitoring of all drinking water 
sources in their respective areas. The Committee have been informed that the 
respective GPs/ VWSC/ Pani Samiti, etc. have to identify, train and support five 
women from local community to conduct water quality tests using FTKs/ 
bacteriological vials and report the results etc. The Committee understand that 100 
per cent testing of all sources of water at the Village level was to be done by grass 
root level, workers from GP/ VWSC. However, in reality not many quality test checks 
are done and as a result there is every possibility of certain sources affected with 
bacteriological or chemical contamination being left out. 
  The Committee urge upon the Department to pay more attention on water 
testing aspect and instruct the States to not only impart training to all the identified 
persons at GPs / VWSC level in a time bound period but also ensure particularly in 
water quality-affected habitations that they conduct 100 per cent test checks of all 
water sources. The Department should also instruct all the States to formulate action 

20 
 
 
 
plan for testing all drinking water sources at the village level at least on quarterly 
basis and those affected habitations affected with water quality on a monthly basis. 
The Committee also desire that the information so obtained should be put in the 
public domain at District, Block and Village level through print and visual media, so 
that no individual should suffer due to contamination in drinking water.  
Reply of the Government 
Acknowledging the importance of community participation in water quality 
surveillance at village level, all States/ UTs have been advised to identify and train 5 
persons preferably women in each village from local community viz. ASHA workers, 
health workers, VWSC members, teachers etc. to conduct water quality tests using 
FTKs/ bacteriological vials at village level, at schools and anganwadis. As reported 
by States, about 5.40 lakh women have been trained for water quality testing using 
FTKs. While preparing Annual Action Plan, concerned State/ UT has to mandatorily 
formulate plan to procure/ refill FTKs/ bacteriological vials and water quality testing 
using FTK/ bacteriological vials. State has been advised to ensure the availability of 
FTK at village level. Besides, All States/ UTs have also been advised to take IEC 
activities under WQM&S, which inter alia includes: 
i) awareness generation on water quality issues, water-borne diseases and 
health impacts; 
ii) water safety planning; 
iii) behavioural change communication on- ‘strictly avoiding water from quality-
affected source’; 
iv) audio-visual publicity on ill effects of consuming contaminated water, 
importance of sanitary inspection, process of getting private water quality 
sources tested, etc.; 
v) wall writings promoting tap water as - ‘it is free from contamination’ and; 
vi) slogans, group meetings, street plays, PRA activities, exhibits, etc. on 
water quality 
  Progress made in this regard is being monitored and highlighted for 
compliance in all review meetings, held from time to time with States/ UTs. In 
consultation with various stakeholders, the Department prepared ‘Jal Jeevan Mission 
– Drinking Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance Framework’ for guidance to 
States/ UT’s officials and local village level functionaries to expand the water quality 
testing and reporting, surveillance of water sources, sanitary surveys, setting up of 
laboratories, etc. Further, to capture the data and make reporting easy and 
transparent, an online ‘Water Quality Management Information System’ has been 
developed and operationalized to be used for sample collection, testing and 
reporting. Further, sensor based IoT systems has been piloted to capture real time 
data which inter alia includes parameters related to water quality, and it has been put 
on the ‘JJM dashboard’, which is in public domain. To enable States/ UTs to carry 
out these activities, they can utilize upto 2% of their annual JJM allocation, which is 
regularly reviewed in various meetings.    
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
Recommendation Sl.No. 10 (Para No. 2.14)  
As regards NABL Accreditation of the Water Quality testing laboratories in 
rural areas, the Committee find that at present there are 70 NABL accredited water 
quality testing labs in the country, showing an increase of 20 more laboratories as 
compared to the last year. This reflects the dismal pace at which the water testing 
laboratories are getting NABL accreditation, despite the Committee emphasizing the 

21 
 
 
 
need for having more and more NABL accredited laboratories within a specific time-
frame. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Department should prepare a 
time-bound action Plan for getting all Laboratories NABL accredited at the earliest. 
They also recommend that these testing laboratories are well be equipped with 
necessary infrastructure and State of art testing equipment and requisite trained 
manpower. 
Reply of the Government 
  Strengthening of water quality testing laboratories by setting-up/ upgradation 
of State district/ sub-division/ block/ mobile laboratories is an integral component of 
Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance (WQMS) under JJM. Upto 2% of the 
allocation to States/ UTs is made available for utilization on WQMS which inter alia 
includes activities like setting up/upgradation of Labs, procurement of equipment, 
instruments, chemicals, glassware, consumables, hiring of outsourced human 
resources, NABL accreditation, etc. All States/UTs have been advised that in every 
State/UT, there has to be a State/UT level laboratory and in bigger States/UTs, 
State/UT level laboratories should be set up in different regions so that all nearby 
sources are tested regularly. Further, all districts must have a district-level laboratory 
and setting up of the same should be accorded highest priority.  For effective 
monitoring, concerned State has to mandatorily formulate plan for strengthening of 
existing laboratories and NABL accreditation/ recognition of labs along with other 
WQMS activities under Annual Action Plan. Further, in order to facilitate States/ UTs 
to get NABL accreditation/ recognition expeditiously, matter of speeding up of 
accreditation/ recognition procedure and its simplification has been taken up with 
NABL. This aspect is being highlighted for compliance in all review meetings, which 
are held regularly with States/UTs. Further, the drinking water quality laboratories in 
the States/UTs have also been opened up to public so as they can get their water 
samples tested at nominal rate and ascertain the quality of water being supplied in 
their homes. States/UTs were asked to map all these laboratories on ‘Water quality 
management information system’ where testing can be done. In this context, 
States/UTs reviewed the functioning of thee laboratories and based on the updated 
data, latest numbers have been reported. The Department has worked with NABL for 
expediting accreditation of State/ UT and district level laboratories and recognition of 
sub-division and block level laboratories.  States/ UTs have also been advised to 
ensure appropriate and effective IEC activities and training should be taken on 
priority to bring high level of awareness on various aspects of safe drinking water 
sources, including the critical role of improved sanitation and hygiene for public 
health. As on 18.05.2021, despite having various difficulties due to Covid pandemic, 
concerted efforts have resulted in increasing the number of NABL accredited water 
quality testing laboratories in the country to 120. Besides, accreditation process for 
some more laboratories is at advanced stage.  
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
Recommendation Sl. No. 11 (Para No. 2.15)  
The Committee note that the Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation has 
launched a 100-days campaign to ensure safe drinking water supply for cooking 
purpose and tap water for hand washing in toilets in all schools, anganwadi centres 
and Ashramshalas (tribal schools) across the country. The Department have also 
made an appeal to the States/ Union territories to make it a 'Jan Andolan' (people's 
movement) in their respective regions as children are more susceptible to water 
borne diseases, more so, when there is also a need for repeated washing of hands 

22 
 
 
 
as a precautionary measure during the Covid-19 pandemic. The situation is much 
more complex in areas where water sources are found to be contaminated with 
Arsenic, Fluoride and other heavy metals and prolonged consumption of such water 
leads to degenerating diseases like arsenicosis, fluorosis besides some other 
serious health hazards. The Committee are pleased to observe that the response to 
the 100-days campaign was overwhelming and States like Andhra Pradesh, Goa, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Punjab have been able to 
provide cent per cent potable piped water facility in their Anganwadi Centres and 
Schools. However, lot more is need to be done, in this regard, as States like Assam, 
Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, West Bengal, Odisha and Madhya Pradesh 
etc. are lagging behind, and need to be persuaded to emulate the States which have 
achieved cent per cent results in providing basic needs of drinking water and 
sanitation facilities to all their schools and Anganwadi centres. Considering the 
health hazards in the children on account of lack of potable drinking water, the 
Committee urge the Department to take up the matter with those States which are 
lagging behind in providing drinking water and toilet facilities in their Schools and 
Anganwadi centres. The Committee also desire that the Department should take 
measures for setting up water purification plants/ RO plants in all schools and 
anganwadis on urgent basis so that present generation do not suffer due to 
contamination of drinking water.  
Reply of the Government 
  Under the mission, provision of piped water supply to schools and and 
anganwadi centres has been accorded highest priority. The progress is being 
regularly reviewed by the Department with the State and in the recent Annual Action 
Plan 2021-22 meetings held with States, the States/ UTs have been again advised to 
cover the remaining school and anganwadi centres in next few months. Further, 
States have been advised to take requisite measures for setting up of water 
purification plants/RO plants as an interim measure wherever provisioning of piped 
drinking water from existing infrastructure is not possible. So far, as reported by 
States/ UTs 6.31 lakh schools and 5.70 lakh anganwadi centres have been provided 
with piped water supply.  
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 12 (Para No. 2.16)  
The Committee are concerned to note that there is continuous declining trend 
in fund allocation to Swachh Bharat Mission-Gramin (SBM-G) at RE stage during the 
fiscal years 2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020-21. The Committee feel that reduction in 
allocation of funds at RE stage would not only adversely affect the progress in 
implementation of the flagship schemes but also push the targets set by the 
Government for meeting the basic human needs of the people in rural areas. During 
the previous financial year 2020-21, the allocation of funds at BE stage was Rs. 
9994.10 crore which was reduced to Rs. 6000 crore at RE stage while the actual 
utilization was only Rs. 4368 crore (as on 19.02.2021). The Committee are of the 
view that under-utilization of funds indicate lack of financial prudence and fiscal 
discipline while seeking budget allocation under the scheme or there is lack of proper 
budgetary planning, implementation and monitoring. As a result, in the process the 
targeted beneficiaries are deprived of the benefits of the programmes. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should make concerted 
efforts in close coordination and cooperation with States and implementing agencies 

23 
 
 
 
so as to fully utilise the allocated budget and obviate the scope for reduction of 
budget at RE stage. They also urge the Department to ensure that the laid down 
operational guidelines are followed in letter and spirit by all stakeholders. The 
Department may also devise a time bound framework for cent per cent utilization of 
allocated funds and fix responsibilities for lapses at any level.  
Reply of the Government 
  Under SBM (G), AIPs have to be prepared by the States/UTs at the 
commencement of each financial year. The AIPs prepared by the States/UTs are 
discussed with the States by National Scheme Sanctioning Committee (NSSC) for 
approval. Funds under the programme are tentatively allocated to the States keeping 
in view their approved AIP demands and budget allocation for the programme so that 
funds can be utilized by the States as per their requirements. However, since 
SBM(G) is a demand driven programme, the utilization of the funds under the 
programme largely depends on generating demand for sanitation assets at the 
ground level and inculcating positive behaviour among people so that sustainable 
usage of such sanitation assets can be ensured by the States. The Department of 
Drinking Water & Sanitation will hold regular reviews with the States/UTs towards 
utilization of funds under SBM (G). 
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
Recommendation Sl. No. 13 (Para No. 2.17)  
The Committee note that under the extant operational guidelines framed for 
Swachh Bharat Mission-Gramin (SBM-G) scheme, there is a provision of financial 
incentive of Rs. 12,000/- for construction of Individual Household latrines in rural 
areas. The incentive is given to BPL households and identified Above Poverty Line 
households after they construct and use toilets. The Committee note that the 
financial assistance given for construction of IHHLs in the urban areas is Rs. 
20,000/- while it is Rs. 12,000/- only in rural areas. The Committee are surprised to 
note that is given to the fact that the cost of construction materials/labour etc. are 
almost the same in rural as well as urban areas, rather more costly in far-flung rural 
and hilly areas compared to the urban areas due to higher transportation cost 
involved, there is an imperative need to provide uniform financial incentive for 
construction of toilets both in rural and urban areas. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Department should consider this matter seriously and take steps to 
bring in parity in the quantum of financial assistance being extended to beneficiaries 
for construction of toilets in both urban and rural areas and apprise the Committee of 
the steps taken in this regard. 
  
  
Reply of the Government 
  As per SBM (Urban) guidelines, Central government incentive for the 
construction of household toilets is Rs. 4,000 per household toilet for each identified 
beneficiary household, in states and UTs. States will contribute a minimum of Rs 
2,667 per IHHL towards individual toilets. For UTs without legislature, Central share 
will be 100% (Rs 4,000 per IHHL) and UT share of Rs.1,333 will also be borne by the 
Centre. For UTs with legislature, Central share will be Rs.4,000 per IHHL and UT 
share will be Rs.1,333 per IHHL. However, for North eastern and Hilly states, the 
Central government incentive will be Rs.10,800 per unit. For North Eastern and 
Himalayan states, the Central share will be Rs 10,800 per IHHL, and State share will 
be Rs 1,200 per IHHL. Under SBM (Grameen), incentive of Rs. 12,000/- per IHHL is 
provided in the ratio of 90:10 between Centre and States for NE States, Himalayan 

24 
 
 
 
States and UT of J & K, 100% share from Centre for remaining UTs and 60:40 
between Centre and State for remaining States. Hence, minimum Centre share for 
IHHL under SBM(G) is Rs. 7,200/-. The States/UTs have the flexibility to provide 
additional share from their own funds. In line with the theories of behaviour change, 
the States/UTs are to also encourage the beneficiaries to provide their own share to 
promote ownership and usage of the toilets. 
  
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
Recommendation Sl. No. 14 (Para Nos. 2.18 & 2.19)  
The Committee appreciate the fact that the country has achieved 100 % Open 
Defecation Free (ODF) status in October, 2019 as a tribute to Father of Nation, 
Mahatma Gandhi on his 150th birth anniversary. More than 10 crore toilets have 
been constructed under the Swachh Bharat Mission. In February, 2020, the 
Government had launched SBM (G) Phase II with the focus on ODF sustainability 
and Solid Liquid Waste Management (SLWM) in rural areas in order to create ODF 
plus villages by 2024-25. However, during examination of Demands for Grants of the 
Department, the Committee have brought to light the following deficiencies in 
implementation of SBMG and ODF Mission. These are (i) pendency of construction 
of toilets in ODF villages; (ii) non-receipt of incentives by the targeted beneficiaries; 
(iii) non-availability of water supply in the constructed toilets; (iv) disconnection of 
water supply due to non payment of electricity bills by villagers; (v) assessment of 
left-over beneficiaries; (vi) use of toilets for other purposes like storing of cow-
dung/cake or husk or timber; (vii) non construction of toilets inspite of withdrawal of 
incentive amount in connivance with Government officials; (viii) false reporting to the 
District Authorities by the Sarpances / Gram Pradhans / Gram Sevaks for declaring a 
particular village as ODF and (ix) appointment of nodal officer to attend complaints in 
this regard. The representatives of the Department, however, were candid in their 
admission and state that they are seized of the deficiencies and problems in 
implementation of the scheme and a status report have been sought from the State 
Governments concerned and also assured the Committee to fill the gaps/lacunae in 
the functioning of SBM (G) Phase II. The Committee observe that Swachh Bharat 
Mission is such a  huge programme in the field of sanitation in rural India, and 
therefore, there is every possibility that some deficiencies may creep in at the 
implementation stage of the programme. In this context, Hon’ble Prime Minister on 
2nd October, 2019, the day on which the country have achieved 100 % ODF in the 
country has observed as under:- 
“But now the question is – whatever we have achieved is that enough? The 
answer is simple and clear. What we have achieved is just one stage, only 
one level. Our journey towards clean India continues unabated.”  
   Keeping in view the deficiencies enunciated above, the Committee urge upon 
the Department to ask C&AG to undertake Performance Audit of the SBM (G) 
Phase-I with a view to arrive at clear picture of the various deficiencies noticed in the 
implementation of the scheme at the State level/District Level/Block Level/Village             
Level so that remedial measures can be taken for effective implementation of 
SBM(G) Phase-II.  
Reply of the Government 
  Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation vide letter no. H-11013/1/2021-
SBM-DDWS dated 21.05.2021 has requested the Audit and Accounts Department to 
take necessary action on the recommendation of the Committee to undertake 
Performance Audit of the SBM (G) Phase-I.  

25 
 
 
 
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
Recommendation Sl. No. 15 (Para No. 2.20)  
The Committee note that under Phase-II of SBM (G), in the ODF plus villages 
having more than 100 households, the Department would endeavour to provide at 
least one CSCs which may cater to the sanitation needs of floating/migrant 
population. The Gram Panchayat will decide upon a suitable location for construction 
of CSC which may be easily accessible to all and priority shall be given to the 
location of poorest of poor in the village with predominant SC/ST habitations. The 
Committee have been informed that financial assistance of Rs. 3 lakh per CSCs is 
provided to Gram Panchayats, in which 70 % will be borne under SBM (G) Phase II 
and 30 % will be borne by Gram Panchayat from the grant allocated by 15th Finance 
Commission. As per data submitted by the Department, the Committee note that 
during the year 2020-21, big States like Uttar Pradesh (43830), Rajasthan (7886), 
Maharashtra (6449), Madhya Pradesh (5657), Bihar (5218) and Gujarat (1821) have 
encouragingly done very well in the construction of Community Sanitary Complexes 
(CSCs), whereas others like Punjab (01), Uttrakhand (106), Telangana (128), Tamil 
Nadu (197), Kerala (227), Himachal Pradesh (261), Karnataka (355), Jharkhand 
(609) and West Bengal (801) were lagging behind and have constructed fewer 
number of CSCs. The data shows that the progress of construction of Community 
Sanitary Complexes (CSCs) is not very encouraging throughout the country. The 
Committee urge upon the Department to examine the reasons for such a poor 
performance of States in construction of the Community Sanitary Complexes. 
Further, the responsibility for maintenance of CSCs rests with the concerned Gram 
Panchayats for which GPs adopt various models to ensure operation & maintenance 
of CSCs. The Committee recommend that the Department should take concrete 
steps and devise a time bound action plan for construction of desired number of 
CSCs in rural areas and also incentivizing the GPs for maintenance of such CSCs. 
Further, the Committee also note that Community Sanitary Complexes (CSCs) are 
being constructed in the corner of the villages, as a result of which the same are not 
being used. They, therefore, recommend that Government should urge upon the 
States to identify proper location in GPs which are not far away from the village and 
are easily accessible for use by all the people. They also recommend that as a pilot 
project, all CSCs should be geo-tagged for real time monitoring of water supply and 
usage of the same by the rural masses. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the action taken in this regard within six months of presentation of this Report to 
Parliament.  
Reply of the Government 
  Under SBM(G) it has to be endeavoured that all the rural households have 
individual household latrines.  Hence, on achieving the 100% households having 
individual latrines, many villages may not have the need to a Community Sanitary 
Complex (CSC).  However, in some villages it would still be required to construct 
CSC to cater to the sanitation needs of the households who do not have space to 
construct individual toilets or that of floating/migrant population, or at places where 
large congregation of people usually takes place, etc. Therefore, the CSCs are to be 
constructed when there is need for the same and its O&M is ensured. Hence, the 
provisions regarding construction of CSCs in the SBM(G) Phase-II guidelines have 
also been amended vide letter No. No. S-11011/2/2020-SBM-DDWS dated 
23.11.2020 dispensing with the requirement that the ODF plus villages having more 
than 100 households have to construct at least one CSC.  The Guidelines also 

26 
 
 
 
provide that the GPs will decide upon a suitable location for construction of CSC that 
is easily accessible to all, having adequate water availability and ensure its O&M. 
Detailed advisories have been issued by the Department regarding various O&M 
models that may be deployed by the GPs for the  O&M of CSCs. The States/UTs 
have also been directed to geotag all CSCs constructed/to be constructed under the 
programme. 
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
Recommendation Sl. No. 16 (Para No. 2.21)  
Sanitation also include solid waste management and accordingly Gram 
Panchayats (GPs) are being provided aid and advise in this regard. Due to rapid 
urbanization of rural areas in the country, the problem of solid waste management 
has become herculean task and lack of sanitation facilities severely impact 
environment, ecology, human beings on one hand and health of and livestock on the 
other hand. The Committee note that across the country 18,753 GPs in 2018-19 and 
8,583 GPs in 2019-20 have created infrastructure for Solid & Liquid Waste 
Management (SLWM). The overall creation of solid / liquid waste management 
infrastructures have disappointingly shown a declining trend. The Committee note 
that States/ UTssuch as Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Goa, Ladakh, 
Lakshadweep and Puducherry have shown very little interest in creating SLWM 
infrastructure during the preceding three years, whereas States like Andhra Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, Meghalaya, Gujarat, Chhattisgarh, Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal 
Pradesh and Mizoram have performed very well in creating infrastructure for Solid & 
Liquid Waste management at Gram Panchayat level. It may be seen that 
Government has not fixed any annual targets for States/ UTs in respect of provision 
of sanitation facilities / infrastructure on the plea that SBM (G) is a demand driven 
scheme. The Committee find such a plea untenable and therefore desire that the 
Government should review their policy and fix annual targets under SLWM so that 
the mission is implemented and completed in a time bound manner in all Gram 
Panchayats.  
Reply of the Government 
Under Phase-I of SBM(G), the focus was mainly on achievement of ODF 
villages by 2nd October, 2019. Having achieved the objectives of ODF status in rural 
areas, Phase-II of SBM(G) has been approved by Government of India to be 
implemented during the period from 2020-21 to 2024-25 with focus on sustainability 
of ODF gains made and SLWM in rural areas. Like Phase-I, the focus under SBM(G) 
Phase-II is on inculcating positive behaviour among people towards regular use and 
maintenance of toilets and adoption of proper waste management practices resulting 
in generation of demands from the people for creation of SLWM assets/mechanism 
in their villages. However, provision has been made in the operational guidelines of 
SBM(G) Phase-II that the States/UTs have to prepare their Project Implementation 
Plan (PIP) for entire programme period and AIP at the commencement of each 
financial year as part of the Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP).   Based on 
the same, Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation is finalizing annual targets 
with all States and UTs towards ensuring that all GPs benefit from SLWM 
interventions 
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
 
 

27 
 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 17 (Para No. 2.22)  
 
The Committee note that various activities/works are involved in the 
construction of SLWM assets like construction of compost pits, storage units, biogas 
plants, material recovery centres for solid waste management, construction of soak 
pits, waste stabilization ponds and construction of Faecal Sludge Management 
plants for grey water management. All these activities have a huge potential for 
creation of job opportunities for both skilled and unskilled work-force. The 
Committee, therefore, urge upon the Department to create awareness amongst the 
rural youth about the potential job opportunities that will arise on account of solid 
waste management activities as part of long-term sustainability of the scheme. They 
also recommend that suitable training and skill development programme be 
undertaken for imparting training to the rural youth under the scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Under SBM(G) Phase-II, 5% of the programme funds have been earmarked 
for Information, Education and Communication (IEC) and Capacity Building activities 
out of which 3% is to be utilized at State level. The States have been advised to take 
up awareness generation activities in respect of waste management among rural 
population and capacity building of the ground level functionaries, motivators, SHGs, 
etc., in respect of SLWM activities. For this, the States have been suggested to rope 
in State Institute of Rural Development (SIRDs) and other technical resource 
agencies/ partners for imparting training on SLWM and ODF sustainability. SHGs 
and Youth groups in many places have assumed the responsibility of operation and 
maintenance of Community Sanitation Complexes, management of solid and liquid 
waste management arrangement e.g. management of grey water, management of 
Plastic Waste Management Units and Fecal Sludge Treatment Plants, etc.  The 
capacity building component implemented by States and Districts include training of 
SHGs and youth groups in management of Solid and Liquid waste management 
services. Further, encouraging entrepreneurship and business models for various 
SLWM activities are integral part of the program rollout in SBM(G) Phase II. It is 
hoped that such business development models in rural India will also actively lead to 
employment generation at local level; provisions to this effect have also been made 
in the SBM Phase II guidelines. 
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
Recommendation Sl. No. 18 (Para No. 2.23)  
 
The practice of rural populace dumping their household solid/liquid waste at 
one site leading to huge piling up of garbage is a common sight in the country. The 
Committee feel that such ‘mountains’ of garbage not only poses serious health 
hazards due to the emanation of foul smell but also lead to plethora of diseases. 
These garbages have huge adverse effects on the quality of lives of rural 
households. The Committee note that in urban areas, there is an institutional 
mechanism for lifting and disposal of solid waste by the Municipalities/Local Bodies 
at the designated place / land fill, and such mechanism/ system is not place in rural 
areas. The Committee, therefore, recommend that, a mechanism / system on the 
lines of urban areas municipalities may be devised in rural areas as well by the local 
GPs by hiring vehicles for collecting garbage / solid waste and dumping them at a 
designated place so that villages remain clean and healthy. 

28 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In rural areas, nature of waste generation and its management is different 
than that of towns/cities. As in most of the rural areas the households are scattered 
and quantity of waste generation is relatively less, therefore, under SBM(G) Phase-II 
the focus has been given on decentralized waste management at village/GP level 
itself through household or community compost pits, bio gas plants etc. In case of 
waste management through community compost pits, the programme envisages 
arrangements for collection segregation and composting/storage of wastes in the 
villages. For this provision of financial assistance has been made for purchasing 
tricycle/battery vehicles for collection of wastes, construction of storage units, 
community compost pits at village level and Plastic Waste Management Units at 
block level. The States have also been advised to adopt business models/ forward 
market linkage to make the projects self-sustaining. 
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
Recommendation Sl. No. 19 (Para No. 2.24)  
The Committee notice that substantial amounts of unspent balances were 
accrued under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) at the end of the financial years 2018-19 
and 2019-20, to the tune of Rs. 2,436.37 crore and Rs. 6,431.85 crore respectively. 
Similarly, under Swachh Bharat Mission-Gramin (SBM-G), there are consistent 
unspent balances to the tune of Rs. 10,683.89 crore and Rs. 10,475.26 crore at the 
end of the financial years 2018-19 and 2019-20 respectively. The Committee are 
concerned to note that the problem of unspent balances is more prominent under 
JJM in certain States like West Bengal, Rajasthan & Uttar Pradesh and similarly 
under SBM (G) in States like Odisha, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh & 
Rajasthan. The Committee find the response of the Department in this regard 
unsatisfactory and repetitive in nature wherein general reasons such as non-timely 
release of States’ shares have been cited and few changes in the funding pattern 
have also been intimated. However, the Committee are constrained to note that 
despite efforts made by the Department, there are huge unspent balances under Jal 
Jeevan Mission and Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) which are only increasing over 
the years. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should 
vigorously pursue with State Governments and all other stake holders for optimum 
utilization of allocated funds. For this purpose, the Department should have strict 
monitoring mechanism and sound financial management in place to ensure not only 
full utilization of the allocations but also for achieving the targets fixed under each 
Scheme.  
Reply of the Government 
 
JJM-Under Jal Jeevan Mission, the unspent balance of Rs. 6,431.85 Crore for FY 
2019-20 was a major concern and the Department made vigorous efforts for transfer 
of Central share by State Finance Departments and timely utilization of Central as 
well as State share. Due to these concerted efforts and despite of disruptions due to 
COVID 19 including lockdowns, implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission on the ground 
accelerated and more fund utilized. As a result, unspent balance on 31.3.2021 has 
reduced to Rs. 4,826.95 Crore. Public Financial Management System (PFMS) has 
been put in place for monitoring the expenditure under JJM. States/ UTs are advised 
to transfer the Central fund along with matching State share to the implementing 
agency within 15 days of the Central release. Further, the ‘escrow account’ receiving 

29 
 
 
 
funds from Centre under JJM will on-board with PFMS platform. This will ensure 
better monitoring of utilization of Central as well as matching State/ UT share.  
SBM-Under SBM(G) Phase-II, various measures have been taken to ensure 
financial prudence and transparency such as (i) the States/UTs have been directed 
to maintain a  Single Nodal Account at State level for making all the payments under 
the programme to avoid parking of funds at lower level and to bring transparency in 
monitoring of unspent balance, (ii) the funds will be released in four installments 
(instead of two installments as done earlier) to reduce parking of funds, (iii) the 
Department is in the process of on-boarding all the States/UTs on Public Financial 
Management System (PFMS) of Govt. of India and making payment through 
REAT/DBT modules of PFMS so that real time monitoring of utilization of funds can 
be done.  Physical progresss is also now being monitored through a Mobile App 
developed for capturing the progress of all the sanitation activities being undertaken 
in villages under SBM(G) Phase-II. 
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.17 of Chapter –I of the Report) 
 
 
 
  

30 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
Recommendation Sl. No. 7 (Para Nos. 2.10 &2.11)  
The Committee note with concern that as on 15th February, 2021, 48,969 rural 
habitations in the country are affected with water contamination, out of which 3,112 
habitations are affected due to Arsenic contamination, 2,972 with Fluoride, 31,142 
with Iron, 866 with Nitrate contamination, 300 with Heavy Metals and 10,575 
habitations with high Salinity in water.  
The Committee further note that under National Water Quality Sub-Mission 
(NWQSM) was launched in March, 2017 as a part of erstwhile National Rural 
Drinking Water Programme (now subsumed under JJM) to provide safe drinking 
water to identified 27,544 Arsenic / fluoride affected rural habitations by March, 2021. 
As on 15 February, 2021, barring 78 habitations rest of the habitations have been 
covered under the scheme. However, the Department is silent with regard to action 
taken for providing clean drinking water to habitation affected with other 
contaminants like Iron and Salinity which constituted bulk of the water quality 
affected habitations. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department 
should also focus their attention on these habitations. The Committee understand 
that to tackle the problem of contamination of drinking water sources, the 
Government has undertaken a massive awareness drive/ campaign from time to 
time, to enlighten rural masses about the impact of consuming unsafe water on 
health which is laudable. The Committee, however, are of the considered view that 
though the piped water supply is the only solution to tackle water quality problems, 
till such time piped water supply reaches every rural household/habitation, alternate 
arrangement should be made to supply clean water by installing Community Water 
Purification Plants (CWPPs) in each Gram Panchayat/ Habitation in the country. The 
Committee have been informed that 32,277 CWPPs have been set up in the country 
so far by various States. The Committee is quite sceptical as to whether these 
CWPPs are adequate enough to cater to the requirements of all quality affected 
habitations. The Committee, recommend that Department in consultation with States 
assess the total requirements of CWPPs and draw an action plan to set up adequate 
CWPPs in all the habitations.  
Reply of the Government 
  Jal Jeevan Mission aims at providing potable water to every rural household 
through tap water connection by 2024 with a special focus on water quality-affected 
areas. However, planning and implementation of piped water supply scheme in 
water quality-affected habitations based on a safe water source takes time, purely as 
an interim measure, provisions have been made to set up Community Water 
Purification Plants (CWPPs) to provide 8-10 lpcd potable water to meet drinking and 
cooking need of every household, in these habitations. States are being repeatedly 
requested to install CWPPs in all the remaining habitations on priority. During annual 
planning exercise, States are being impressed upon to provide potable water in all 
these quality-affected habitations during this year itself.  
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 

32 
 
 
 
Comment of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.8 of Chapter –I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 8 (Para No. 2.12)  
The Committee note with concern that the Ganga Canal flowing from Punjab 
to Rajasthan contains harmful and untreated chemical reportedly released by the 
industries located in Punjab. Due to consumption of this water, rural villages located 
in Ganganagar and adjoining areas are facing serious health problems. This is a 
grave issue having direct bearing on the health and well being of rural villagers who 
are using this water for consumption and number of Cancer cases are reportedly 
increasingly day-by-day. The Committee while expressing their grave concern over 
the matter, urge upon the Department to take up the matter with the State 
Government for installing water treatment plants on priority basis in the Ganganagar 
district of Rajasthan and adjoining areas, so as to ensure supply of clean and 
potable drinking water under the Mission  
Reply of the Government 
 JJM- The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. State of 
Rajasthan has been requested to take immediate action in the matter.  
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
Comment of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter –I of the Report) 
Recommendation Sl. No. 9 (Para No. 2.13)  
Under the JJM scheme, the Department is assisting and facilitating States/ 
UTs in setting up, upgrading & improving the functioning and strengthening of 
drinking water quality testing laboratories by providing policy guidelines, technical 
and financial support. The Committee find that during the examination of Demands 
for Grants (2020-21), the then Secretary, Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation 
had informed that there were 2,232 water testing laboratories in the rural areas, out 
of which 28 were State Level Laboratories, 732 District Laboratories, 244 Block level 
Laboratories and 1146 Sub-Divisional Laboratories. However, the Committee from 
the written reply submitted by the Department in connection with examination of the 
Demands for Grants (2021-22), note the figures relating to water testing laboratories 
as 2,032 in total, out of which 28 are State level laboratories, 675 District 
laboratories, 93 block level laboratories and 1,143 Sub-Divisional Laboratories. The 
Committee in their Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of Department of 
Drinking Water & Sanitation had already emphasized the need for having more and 
more water testing laboratories in the water contaminated rural areas. However, the 
Committee are perturbed to note that instead of showing progressive increase in the 
number of laboratories been set up, the number of laboratories have actually been 
reduced this year as compared to the previous year. The Committee feel that Water 
Quality Testing Laboratories are a crucial link in the success of JJM, as they play 
important role in ascertaining and ensuring that the water being utilized at the rural 
level do not contain any harmful ingredients which are detrimental to the health and 
well-being of the rural population. Therefore, the Committee recommend the 
Department to open sufficient number of water testing laboratories and also apprise 

33 
 
 
 
the Committee about the reasons for reduction in the number of water testing 
laboratories functioning during the on-going financial year.  
Reply of the Government 
Strengthening of water quality testing laboratories by setting-up/ upgradation 
of State district/ sub-division/ block/ mobile laboratories is an integral component of 
Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance (WQMS) under JJM. Upto 2% of the 
allocation to States/ UTs is made available for utilization on WQMS which inter alia 
includes activities like setting up/ upgradation of Labs, procurement of equipment, 
instruments, chemicals, glassware, consumables, hiring of outsourced human 
resources, NABL accreditation, etc. All States/UTs have been advised that in every 
State/UT, there has to be a State/UT level laboratory and in bigger States/UTs, 
State/UT level laboratories should be set up in different regions so that all nearby 
sources are tested regularly. Further, all districts must have a district-level laboratory 
and setting up of the same should be accorded highest priority.  For effective 
monitoring, concerned State has to mandatorily formulate plan for strengthening of 
existing laboratories and NABL accreditation/ recognition of labs along with other 
WQMS activities under Annual Action Plan. Further, in order to facilitate States/UTs 
to get NABL accreditation/ recognition expeditiously, matter of speeding up of 
accreditation/recognition procedure and its simplification has been taken up with 
NABL. This aspect is being highlighted for compliance in all review meetings, which 
are held regularly with States/ UTs. Further, the drinking water quality laboratories in 
the States/UTs have also been opened up to public so as they can get their water 
samples tested at nominal rate and ascertain the quality of water being supplied in 
their homes. States/UTs were asked to map all these laboratories on ‘Water quality 
management information system’ where testing can be done. In this context, 
States/UTs reviewed the functioning of these laboratories and based on updated 
data, latest numbers have been reported. The Department has worked with NABL for 
expediting accreditation of State/UT and district level laboratories and recognition of 
sub-division and block level laboratories. States/UTs have been advised to ensure 
appropriate and effective IEC activities and training should be taken on priority to 
bring high level of awareness on various aspects of safe drinking water sources, 
including the critical role of improved sanitation and hygiene for public health. 
 (O.M. No.11013(12)/2/2021-Coordination/Parl.  dated:28.05.2021) 
Comment of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter –I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
  

34 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY 
OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                       Dr. SANJAY JAISWAL,  
December, 2021         Chairperson, 
Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)       Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  

35 
 
 
 
Annexure-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES  (2021-22) HELD ON THURSDAY, 21 OCTOBER, 2021 
  
The Committee sat from 1130 hours to 1200 hours in Committee Room No. 
'3', ‘A’ Block, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
           Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Vijay Baghel 
3. Shri Bhagirath Choudhary 
4. Dr. K. Jayakumar 
5. Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav 
6. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
7. Shri P. Ravindhranath 
8. Smt.  Agatha K. Sangma 
 9. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
10. Shri Chandan Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
11.      Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
12.      Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
13.      Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
14. Shri Subhash Chandra Singh      
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan  - Director 
2. Shri R. C. Sharma   - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting and 
offered his greetings to  them on their nomination /re-nomination to the Committee 
for the year 2021-22.    
 
3. xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx 
 
4. The Committee then took up for consideration draft Reports on the Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Tenth and Eleventh Reports of the Committee  on “Demands for Grants (2021-22)" 
of the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation) and Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation, respectively.  
After some deliberation, the Committee adopted both the draft Reports without any 
changes / amendments.   The Committee also  authorized the Chairperson to 
present the Reports to both  Houses of Parliament in the next Session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
 
  
 

36 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ELEVENTH 
REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations                  
19 
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 & 19 
            Total - 16  
     Percentage -84.21% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in  view of the Government’s replies 
  
Sl. Nos. NIL                            Total - NIL 
            Percentage- 0%  
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government      have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Sl. Nos. 7, 8 & 9 
       
Total - 03 
    Percentage 15.79 - %  
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited  
 
Sl.  Nos. NIL          
 
Total - NIL 
           Percentage - 0% 
 
 
 