STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
                                (2020-2021) 
 
 
 
                              SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI 
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER & SANITATION)  
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2020-21) 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)   
 
 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
February, 2021/ Magha,1942 (Saka) 
 
9 

 
NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
 
(2020-21) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI 
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER & SANITATION) 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2020-21) 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on       09 .02.2021 
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on       09.02.2021 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2021/ Magha,1942 (Saka) 

WRC NO. 64 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2021 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 

CONTENTS 
 
 
     
Page  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21) …………………………………  (iii)  
 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I -      Report        1 
  
       
CHAPTER II - Observations / Recommendations which have been 
  accepted by the Government ………………………………  8 
             
CHAPTER III - Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
  not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ..  19 
  
CHAPTER IV    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which  
 replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
 the Committee  ……. …………………………………………  20 
 
CHAPTER V    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
 Replies of the Government are still awaited ……………….  23 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
I      Minutes of the First Sitting of the Standing Committee    24 
 held on 06 November, 2020 
 
II    Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the   25 
 Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
 Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 

(iii) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2020-21)   
COMPOSITION 
 
 
 Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal                   - Chairperson 
 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Vijay Baghel  
3.  Shri Bhagirath Chaudhary  
4.  Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan  
5.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan  
6.  Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary  
7.  Shri Guman Singh Damor  
8.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit  
9.  Dr. K. Jayakumar  
10.  Shri Kaushal Kishore  
11.  Shri M. Dhanush Kumar  
12.  Shri P. Raveendranath Kumar  
13.  Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone  
14.  Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav  
15.  Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
16.  Shri Sanjay Kaka Patil  
17.  Vacant*  
18.  Smt. Nusrat Jahan Ruhi  
19.  Ms. Agatha K. Sangma  
20.  Shri D.K. Suresh  
21.  Shri A. Narayana Swamy  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22.  Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder  
23.  Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur  
24.  Shri N. R. Elango  
25.  Mir Mohammad Fayaz  
26.  Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
27.  Shri A. Mohammedjan  
28.  Shri Arun Singh  
29.  Shri Subhash Chandra Singh  
30.  Shri Rewati Raman Singh  
31.  Shri Pradeep Tamta  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora   OSD (LSS) 
2. Shri M. K. Madhusudhan   Director 
3. Shri R. C. Sharma    Additional Director 
4. Shri Satish Kumar    Assistant Committee Officer 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*Shri Dipsinh Rathod ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 28.12.2020.

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2020-21) having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Ninth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fourth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on “Demands for Grants (2020-21)” relating to the 
Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation).  
 
2. The Fourth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on 
the table of Rajya Sabha on  05 March, 2020.  The Action Taken replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 08 
June, 2020. 
 
3. The draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 06 November, 2020. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
     New Delhi Dr. SANJAY JAISWAL 
     03  February,  2021 Chairperson 
     14 Magha, 1942 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2020-21) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Fourth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of 
Drinking Water & Sanitation) for the year 2020-2021. 
 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 05.03.2020 and was 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report contained 14 
Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government.  These have 
been examined and categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Serial Nos.2, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 
Total:10 
Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government: 
 
Serial No. NIL 
Total:NIL 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Serial Nos.1, 3, 4 and 7 
Total:04 
Chapter-IV  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial No. NIL 
Total:00 
Chapter-V 
 
4. The Committee desire that replies to recommendations made in the 
Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit 
comments.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Analysis of Demands 
 
[Recommendation Serial No. 1 (Para No. 2.1)] 
6. While scrutiny of Analysis of Demands, the Committee had recommended 
as under:- 
 “The Committee notice that the Department of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation has been entrusted with the responsibility of implementing two 
major Centrally Sponsored Scheme, i.e., Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) 
erstwhile National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) and 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) through which support is extended to the 
State Governments in the endeavor to provide safe and adequate piped 
drinking water to every household in rural areas within the targeted period 
and also provide rural sanitation infrastructure. Hence, the budgetary 
planning of the Department spins around these two Schemes. The scrutiny 
of Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Department reveals that there is a 
substantial reduction in the allocation at RE stage for SBM (G) in the year 
2019-20 and also to exhibit failure of the Department to fully utilize even 
the reduced allocations in the last two years. The Committee also find that 
during the current fiscal 2020-21, the allocation of Rs. 21,518 crore to the 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation is approximately 7.50% 
higher than the BE and 17.20% higher than the RE of the previous year, 
i.e., 2019-20. They further observed that as against the demand of Rs. 
21,518 crore, Rs. 9,994.10 crore has been allocated for SBM (G) and for 
JJM, an allocation of Rs. 11,500 crore has been made. Besides, Rs. 
12,000 crore has been proposed through Extra Budgetary Resources 
(EBR) for JJM during the fiscal year 2020-21. However, the Committee are 
particularly concerned to note that the allocations of JJM for the current 
fiscal year are inadequate, the total budget is short by Rs. 11,253 crore as 
against requirement of Rs. 34,753 crore approved by the Cabinet for the 
implementation of JJM in the fiscal year 2020-21. The Committee are of 
the view that reduction/ insufficient fund allocation by the Government 
would eventually result in reduction in the targets of Schemes of the 
Department. The Committee therefore, strongly recommend the 
Department to take up this matter with NITI Aayog/ Ministry of Finance 
along with appropriate justifications to ensure allocation of additional funds 
for the current financial year so that future development plans are not 
hampered and the targets fixed are achieved in time.” 
 
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
“JJM: In financial year 2019-20, under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM), an 
amount of Rs. 10,000.66 Crore was allocated and almost entire amount 
was utilized by this Department. The matter of allocation was taken up with 

the Ministry of Finance and for 2020-21, Rs. 23,500 Crore has been 
allocated to JJM, out of which Rs. 11,500 Crore is Gross Budgetary 
Support (GBS) and Rs. 12,000 Crore has been provided as Extra 
Budgetary Resource (EBR). 
SBM-G: Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) [SBMG] is a demand driven 
scheme.  However, in the present scenario, the allocation of Rs.9994.10 for 
this Scheme made during 2020-21 appears to be adequate.” 
 
 
 
8. The Committee were informed by the Department that they have taken 
up the issue of allocation of funds under JJM with the Ministry of Finance 
and Rs. 23,500 has been allocated to the scheme for 2020-21. As regards 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) scheme it has been stated that the 
allocation of Rs.9994.10 appears to be adequate. It seems from the 
Department’s reply that concerted efforts have not been made by the 
Department to impress upon the Ministry of Finance/Niti Aayog for making 
higher allocations to JJM. The Committee, are of the considered view that 
allocation of Rs 23,500 made under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) ,as against Rs. 
34,753 crore approved by the Cabinet for the scheme for  fiscal year 2020-
21, is meagre and insufficient , given the fact that there are huge number of 
rural households which are yet to be covered under the scheme. The 
Committee express apprehension  that the targets set under the scheme 
might be  recalibrated/reduced  for want of sufficient funds. The  Committee, 
therefore, urgeupon the Department to make all out efforts for getting 
additional allocation of funds for the scheme at the RE stage, so as to 
enable achieve the desired  outcomes under the scheme, i.e. providing 
Functional Household Tap Connection (FHTC) to every household i.e. Har 
Ghar Nal Se Jal by 2024 . 
 
B. Coverage of Piped Water Supply 
[Recommendation Serial No. 3 (Para No. 2.3)] 
9. With regard to coverage of Piped Water Supply to the rural households, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Government has restructured and subsumed the ongoing 
National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) in Jal Jeevan Mission 
(JJM) to provide Functional Household Tap Connection (FHTC) to every 
household, i.e., HarGharNal Se Jal by 2024. The Committee are unhappy 
to note that at present, only 3.27 crore, i.e., 18.33% out of 17.87 crore rural 
households in the country have access to piped water connections. There 
are only six State/ UTs, namely Sikkim, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, 
Haryana, Punjab and Puducherry are providing more that 50% PWS 
connections to their rural households. While the big states like West Bengal 
(1.31%), Uttar Pradesh (1.33%), Bihar (1.88%), Assam (2.21%), Orissa 
(3.94%), Jharkhand (5.75%) and Arunachal Pradesh (9.09%) are providing 
below 10% Piped Water connections to their households. This is indeed a 

matter of concern and directly connected to the quality of lives in the rural 
areas. In view of the abysmal performance, the Committee strongly 
recommends that all necessary efforts should be made for expeditious 
increase in the PWS and effective mechanism/ strategies should also be 
put in place to monitor the relevant works accomplished within a defined 
time frame and apprise the Committee of the action taken. The Committee 
also urge upon the Department to get the veracity and actual physical 
status of existing coverage of 3.27 crore rural households reported by the 
State/ UTs so as to ensure that there are no gaps in attainment of the 
targets of full coverage set under the scheme.” 
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
  “For expeditious implementation of the Mission, following provisions 
have been made: 
i.) Every State/ UT have been advised to identify villages having 
already  piped water supply infrastructure and retrofit/ augment the 
PWS to provide to connections to remaining households on priority 
basis. Thus, ‘low hanging fruits’ under JJM are to be prioritized for 
implementation by the States/ UTs. 
ii.) Each State/ UT is given a definite target in terms of FHTCs, at the 
stage of finalizing the Annual Action Plan, in proportion to the 
remaining households to be provided with connections. 
iii.) Sates/ UTs have also been advised to prioritize the water quality-
affected area, Sansad Aadarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) Villages, 
SCs/ STs majority villages, villages in drought and desert prone 
areas, etc. for saturating with FHTCs, which will be monitored in 
consonance with the approved Annual Action Plan. 
iv.) To instill a sense of competition among States, good performance, 
in terms of physical and financial progress, is incentivized in the 
form of additional fund. 
v.) Guidelines also allows the delegation of power to District Water & 
Sanitation Mission (DWSM) to approve Single Village Scheme 
(SVS) which further avoids delays in approval. 
 Every State/ UT was requested by this Department to revalidate 
their baseline data of household tap connections and all States have 
done the same.” 
11. From the  action taken reply furnished by the   Department , the 
Committee note  that the Department has merely highlighted  the various 
measures/ provisions  enumerated in the JJM guidelines and did not give 
specific reply to  the issue raised by the Committee in their 
recommendation,  i.e.,  the need for  having a time bound programme for 

providing PWS connections to all the rural households in the country. The 
Committee, reiterate that Department should come out with a time bound 
programme so as to ensure that every rural household get  PWS 
connections and also desire that a robust mechanism be put in place with a 
view  to ensure strict monitoring of performance of all States/UTs , for 
providing piped water connections to rural households and, the low 
performing States should be asked to evolve a special strategy for 
providing PWS connections expeditiously. They would like to be apprised of 
the action taken in this regard within three months of presentation of this 
report to Parliament.  
 
C. Role of elected Representatives 
 
[Recommendation Serial No. 4 (Para No. 2.4)] 
12. With regard to consideration of role of elected Representatives i.e. Member 
of Parliament, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note that National Infrastructure Pipeline (NIP) has been 
launched on 31stDecember, 2019. With an aim to strengthen and bolster 
the NIP, which would ultimately augment and aid potable drinking water 
supply projects covering both, rural and urban areas. The States have 
started submitting Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) to be included under 
NIP. In this context, the Committee are of the view that based on the past 
experience regarding preparation of DPRs of any Projects, there have 
been numerous issue that arise due to not properly taking into account the 
areas specific needs with which the local elected Representatives, i.e., 
Members of Parliament are expected to be well conversant. Considering 
this aspect in view, the Committee urge the Department to take that all 
necessary steps to have inputs from local MPs at the DPRs preparation 
stage for better implementation of the Scheme. The Committee would be 
apprised of the measures taken in this regard.” 
13. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
  “The National Infrastructure Pipeline (NIP) is a set of projects 
prepared by States who are seeking financial assistance/ loan for these 
projects, which is to be paid by them. These projects are prepared by 
respective State Governments, based on their laid down procedure for 
appraisal of such projects and will be implemented by them.” 
 
14. The Committee do not accept the contention of the Department that 
National Infrastructure Projects (NIP) is a set of projects prepared by States 
who seek financial assistance/loan for these  projects, which is to be paid 
by them and that these projects are prepared by respective State 
Governments based on their laid down procedure and will be implemented 
by them. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Department that they 
should impress upon the respective State Governments/UTs, if necessary 
issue a directive to suitably amend their procedures, so as to make it 
mandatory to incorporate the views of the Members of Parliament/local 
representatives while preparing DPRs of any project/work. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the follow up action taken in this regard within 
three months of presentation of this report 

D. Need for NABL Accredited Laboratories 
[Recommendation Serial No. 7(Para No. 2.8)] 
15. With regard to need for NABL Accredited Laboratories, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
  “Further, the Committee are dismayed to note that only 50 out of 
total 2232 Water Quality Testing Laboratories in rural areas are NABL 
(National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories) 
accredited. Getting accreditation from NABL would not only endorse the 
testing results provided by these Laboratories but will also impact 
credibility to the efforts of the Department in ensuring the supply of quality 
water to the rural areas. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend 
the Department to prepare time-bound Plan of all such Laboratories for 
getting accreditation by NABL at the earliest. To have an appropriate 
assessment of the efficacy of working of the water testing Laboratories, 
the Committee also recommend that an independent Survey/ Third Party 
Audit should be undertaken so that necessary corrective measure could 
be taken by the department.” 
 
16. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
 “All States/ UTs have been advised to get drinking water quality 
testing laboratories NABL accredited. Every State/ UT is to give NABL 
accreditation plan while finalizing WQMS component of the Annual 
Action Plan (AAP) of JJM, which will be monitored and reviewed by the 
Department. 
 States/ UTs can utilize upto 2% of the allocation to States/ UTs for 
Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance (WQM&S) activities which 
inter-alia includes expenses incurred for NABL accreditation process 
(consultant fee, audit cost, application fee and annual fee). Also, the 
Department is regularly organizing conferences, review meetings, etc. in 
which accreditation of labs is emphasized.”  
 
17. The Committee express their unhappiness over  the evasive reply 
furnished by the Department , wherein they have merely reiterated the fact 
that State/UTs have been advised to utilize 2% of funds earmarked for Water 
Quality Monitoring and Surveillance (WQM&S) activities which includes 
expenses incurred for NABL accreditation process. There is no mention in 
the  reply as  to  the measures/ steps taken or proposed to be taken for 
getting NABL accreditation of the water testing laboratories in a time bound 
manner . Further the reply is also silent about conducting independent 
survey/third party audit of the water testing Laboratories. The  Committee, 
therefore, reiterate that NABL accreditation of all labs be taken up in a time 
bound manner, so as to ensure providing  safe drinking water to rural areas 
across the country and also a mechanism be put in place, at the earliest to 
conduct Independent Survey/Third Party Audit of the water testing 
laboratories.  
 

E. Unspent balances with Implementing Agencies 
[Recommendation Serial No. 13 (Para No. 2.14 & 2.15)] 
18. With regard to utilization of unspent balances left with the Implementing 
Agencies, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee are disturbed to note that during the year 2017-18 
and 2018-19, substantial unspent balance of Rs. 2963.21 crore and Rs. 
4237.73 crore under JJM and Rs. 5677.84 and Rs. 9075.88 crore under 
SBM(G) were left with the implementing agencies in both scheme being 
implemented by the Department. The Committee also surprisingly note that 
the unspent balance for the current fiscal year, i.e. 2019-20 is not available 
with the Department which shows lack of sufficient monitoring of the 
releases made by them. The Committee feel that instead of ensuring that 
the amount is spent for the purpose it has been sanctioned in the budget, 
there is unplanned release of the funds for the implementing Agencies at 
the fag end of the fiscal year causing accrual of huge unspent balances. 
This demonstrates a completely impractical approach lacking 
administrative acumen and need to be taken care of during the fiscal year 
2020-21.  
 Keeping huge unspent balance in mind, the Committee strongly feel 
that large corpus of unutilized funds reflects a dismal picture of financial 
management by the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation and 
observe that merely seeking funds from the Government does not serve 
the real purpose of upliftment and development of rural populace of the 
country until and unless the funds are put to effective utilization for the 
welfare of rural inhabitants. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that Department should tighten up its grip over all Agencies involved in 
implementation of Scheme as also have frequent/ regular inter-actions with 
the concerned State Governments particularly those having huge unspent 
balances (i.e.,Assam, Bihar, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and West Bengal) 
and ensure that the unspent balance is spent on execution of projects in an 
efficient manner.” 
19. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
JJM: It is informed that department holds regular review meetings 
with all States/ UTs on programme implementation including expenditure 
related issues. States are sensitized on pace of implementation and 
expediting utilization of fund for the Mission. Further, in the beginning of 
2020-21, in the month of April, review meetings were conducted wherein 
issue of unspent balance was especially reviewed with States/ UTs who 
have unspent balance beyond 10% of the fund released in the previous 
year. The Annual Action Plan for the implementation of JJM in 2020-21 is 
being firmed up by every State/ UT based on a detailed consultative 
process wherein Department emphasizes the need for implementation with 
speed and on scale and ensure optimal utilization of fund. Accordingly, 
every state is finalizing month-wise, quarter-wise physical and financial 
plan. Department has also assigned States/UTs to Director/ Deputy 

Secretary rank officers, who are  designated as ‘Area Officers’, to 
continuously monitor and review the implementation of the mission in the 
respective State/UT, including fund utilization. Further, to ensure better 
financial prudence under JJM various steps, as mentioned under para 2.2 
above, are to be ensured by States. 
SBM-G: Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation has been 
consistently following up with the States/UTs to avoid any parking of funds 
under SBM-G. The States/UTs have been emphasized to map all the bank 
account(s) of the implementing agencies in PFMS and make all 
transactions under the programme through it so that the expenditure and 
unspent balances position of the States can be monitored on real time 
basis. Going forward, for release of funds to the States/UTs from 2020-21 
onwards, following provisions have been made in the Operational 
Guidelines of Phase-II of the programme: 
(i) Funds will be released to States/UTs based on their performance and 
ability to achieve programme results.  
(ii) The State will operate a single nodal account which is to be mapped 
in PFMS mandatorily and all the transactions to be done through 
PFMS. 
(iii) The releases will be made in two equal instalments as is being done 
currently.  However, for ‘Just-in-time’ release, each installment will be 
released in two tranches. The 2nd tranche of each installment will be 
released only after utilization of 80% of the available funds.” 
20. The Committee take note of the various measures taken/being taken 
by the Department to lessen the quantum of unspent balances in both the 
schemes, i.e., JJM and SBM (Grameen). While appreciating the efforts made 
by the Department to mitigate the problem of unspent balances and real 
time monitoring of the accounts under SBM (G), the Committee however, 
are concerned to note that the Department have not furnished the position 
of unspent balances for the financial year 2019-2020 again. The Committee, 
therefore, urge upon the Department to scrupulously maintain up-to-date 
data of unspent balances, year-wise, and provide the same to the 
Committee so as to enable them to have a real picture of the optimum 
utilization of funds by the States/UTs. The Department should also step up 
efforts to liquidate the unspent balances accrued so far and ensure that 
there is no accumulation of unspent balances in future. 
 

 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.2) 
The Committee note that the financial performance of JJM has also not 
been encouraging. For the fiscal year 2019-20, Rs.10,000.66 Crore was allocated 
and the Department has been able to release a sum of Rs. 6,914.45 Crore upto 
10.02.2020 to States/ UTs. The Committee further note that out of the Central 
share released so far, States/ UTs have utilized only Rs. 3,381.61 crore, till 
10.02.2020. The Committee feel that such inadequacy in utilization reflects that 
the desired level of financial prudence in expenditure has not been adhered to by 
the Department. The Committee are of considered opinion that keeping in view of 
the poor track record of the Department in utilizing the allocation, the Ministry of 
Finance have been reducing the allocation at RE stage. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that from the fiscal year 2020-21 onwards, the 
Department should ensure fullest utilization of funds allocated to them by not only 
keeping a tab on the progress of release-cum-expenditure but also ensuring 
timely compliance with all the necessary Guidelines for the optimum utilization of 
the funds. A road map of the said purpose may be drawn by the Department 
under intimation to the Committee.  
Reply of the Government 
As stated above, the almost entire amount of Rs. 10,000 Crore allocated 
under JJM for  2019-20 has been utilized by the Department.It is further 
submitted that the Jal Jeevan Mission was launched in the month of August, 
2019 and the Union Minister, Jal Shakti wrote to all Chief Ministers detailing the 
modalities of the Mission and requested them to start implementingJal Jeevan 
Mission. Further, a National level State Ministers’ conference chaired by Minister, 
Jal Shakti was also held on 26/8/2019 to discuss the modalities of the Mission. 
Thereafter, five Regional Workshops with all stakeholders viz, State 
Governments, Development partners, professionals in water sector, Voluntary 
organizations working in water, etc. were held at Chandigarh, Bangalore, Puri, 
Ahmadabad & Guwahati wherein all issues related to water in general and 
drinking water in particular were discussed in detail. Accordingly, Operational 
Guidelines for the implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission was firmed up and 
released by Hon’ble Prime Minister on 25thDecember, 2019. States have been 
asked to plan and implement Jal Jeevan Mission as per the operational 
guidelines. 
 Further, to ensure prudent financial management, optimum fund 
utilization and to avoid parking of funds, following has to be ensured by the 
States: 
i.) Fund under JJM will be released in two installments, each comprising of 
two tranches wherein subsequent tranches will be released only when 

80% of the available fund is utilizedby the States/ UTs.  
ii.) Every State/ UT is to prepare Annual Action Plan indicating month-wise 
and quarter-wise physicla progress in terms of Functional Household 
Tap Connections (FHTCs) and commensurate expenditure plan which 
will be monitored by the Department and releases will be made based 
on the approved physical and expenditure progress plan. 
iii.) From 1/4/2020, all States/ UTs have to use Public Financial Management 
System(PFMS) for fund utilization, which will enable Department to 
effectively monitor fund utilisation. 
iv.) A provision has been made in IMIS to capture the data regarding release 
of Central and State matching share to the Implementing Agency/ 
Department by the State Government and to track month-wise 
expenditure in Central and State share. This will enable Department to 
track release of Central fund to Implementing Agency/ Department as 
well as State matching share as it has been observed that in many 
States there is delay in releases to implementing agency resulting in 
slow pace of programme implementation and fund utilization. 
v.) It is pertinent to mention here thatCOVID-19 pandemic and associated 
lock down has slowed down the pace of implementation in the field 
and fund utilization by States/ UTs. 
[O.M. No.11013(12)/4/2020-Coordination Dated:08.06.2020] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.5 & 2.6) 
 The Committee are unhappy to note that 51,952 rural habitations in 
different Districts of the country are still affected with water contamination. In a 
nutshell, 10,175 habitations are affected with arsenic contamination, 7,161 with 
Fluoride, 17,934 with Iron, 1,394 with Nitrate contamination, 2,063 with Heavy 
Metals and 13,225 habitations are affected with Salinity. The Committee observe 
that to tackle the problem of contamination of drinking water sources, the 
Government has undertaken a massive awareness drive/ campaign from time to 
time informing rural masses about the impact of consuming unsafe water on 
health. Further, contaminated hand pumps are being coloured to make a 
distinction and films are also screened to create awareness amongst people 
about the ill effects of consumption of contaminated water. The Committee are of 
the considered view that remedial measures to address the serious problem of 
quality of water are to be taken by the Department by giving it the desired level of 
urgency and seriousness, as continued use of unsafe drinking water is a serious 
health hazard to millions of people residing in the water quality affected areas. 

The Committee are also of the view that the piped water supply is the only 
solution to tackle water quality problems and therefore, a time bound Plan is 
needed to be put in operation in contamination affected areas to achieve this 
target. However, till the piped water supply reaches each household/ habitation, 
arrangement should be made to provide alternate supply of clean water by way of 
installing Reverse Osmosis (RO) system or Community Water Purification Plants 
(CWPPs) in each Gram Panchayats/ Habitations in the country. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should address all these 
water quality related issues on priority basis and in a well chalked out schedule 
and apprise the Committee on the concrete steps taken in this regard. 
 Moreover, the Committee also urge the Government for launching a 
nationwide awareness programme to educate rural masses about the hazards of 
contaminated water on the model of AIDS, Polio campaigns, etc. Such a 
programme should involve all stakeholders, i.e., Centre, State, Local Authorities, 
Civil Society, NGOs, etc., active in thefield. They desire to be apprised of 
measures taken in this regard.” 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under Jal Jeevan Mission, providing potable water to every rural household is 
a priority. All States/ UTs have been advised to follow Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS) IS 10500: 2012 and its subsequent amendments for providing 
safe drinking water. Further, following steps have been taken for the same: 
i.) All States/ UTs have been advised to provide safe drinking water to 
habitations having contamination issues in a time-bound manner. In 
case permanent arrangements through FHTCs is going to take time, 
purely as a temporary measure, States are to provide 8-10 liters per 
capita day (lpcd) of safe water for meeting drinking and cooking 
requirement through Community Water Purification Plants (CWPP).  
ii.) As stated above, during consultations with the States for finalizing their 
Annual Action Plan, special focus is given to providing potable water in 
water-quality affected habitations before 31.12.2020 either through 
FHTCs or through CWPPs until potable water is ensured through 
FHTCs. 
iii.) To ensure additional fund to address needs of States having water-quality 
issues, while allocating funds among States/ UTs, 10% weightage is 
given to rural population affected by water-quality.  
iv.) Further, States may also use fund up to 2% of annual allocation for Water 
Quality Monitoring and Surveillance (WQM&S) related activities which 
inter-alia includes setting up, upgradation and maintenance of drinking 
water quality testing laboratories at various levels, procuring chemicals 

and consumables for laboratories, IEC activities, etc. as per 
guidelines.  
v.) Apart from monitoring the water quality through laboratories by 
implementation agencies, emphasis is on surveillance of water quality 
by communities. Accordingly, States have been advised to enable the 
communities to take up surveillance of water quality by training atleast 
five persons in every village and train them for quality testing through 
Field Test Kits (FTKs). 
vi.)  JJM envisages engagement of ‘Implementation Support Agencies 
(ISAs)’ which can be NGOs/ Village Organizations (VOs)/ Women 
SHGs/ Community Based Organizations (CBOs)/ Trusts/ Foundations 
by District Water and Sanitation Mission (DWSM) who may be used to 
build awareness on various aspects of water such as water quality, 
water-borne diseases, etc. 
 Further, JJM prescribes several activities under Information, Education 
and Communication (IEC), for awareness generation among all the stakeholders 
at all levels on water quality issues, water-borne diseases and health impacts, 
water safety planning, etc. It is also advised to use IEC tools like inter-personal 
communication, audio-visual publicity, wall writings, slogans, group meetings, 
street plays, PRA activities, exhibits, etc. for generating awareness on various 
water quality issues. 
 To give a push to address water quality issues, a national conference on 
providing potable drinking water to quality-affected areas with all stakeholders 
including Health and Public Health Engineering (PHE)/ Rural Water Supply 
(RWS) Department officials from States, civil society, international agencies, 
community medicine practitioners, public health representatives, etc., was 
organized on 7th February,2020. In the conference, following were discussed and 
shared for wider dissemination to: 
i.)  enable states to present their approach, planning and strategy for 
providing potable drinking water in quality-affected areas in a time-bound 
manner; 
ii.)  facilitate discussions on water quality related issues; 
iii.) facilitate cross-learning and sharing of best practices from States/ UTs for 
improving community-based water quality surveillance mechanisms; 
iv.) share overview of available technological interventions for Arsenic and 
Fluoride removal; and 
v.)  enable states to expedite provision of potable drinking water through 
FHTCs in quality-affected areas. 
[O.M. No.11013(12)/4/2020-Coordination Dated:08.06.2020] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.7) 
 The Committee note that the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
supports the setting up and strengthening of District level and sub-Divisional 

water quality Testing Laboratories in the States. The Committee further note that 
28 State level Laboratories, 732 District Laboratories, 244 Block level 
Laboratories, 1146 Sub-Divisional Laboratories and 83 mobile testing 
Laboratories have been set up by the Government and about lakhs of drinking 
water sources are reported to be tested in these Laboratories. The Committee, 
however, find that even where water testing Laboratories have been established, 
they suffer from shortage of technical manpower, qualified personnel and 
equipment. The Committee are concerned to note that setting up of water quality 
testing Laboratory and making them fully functional has not been accorded due 
priority which is a pre-requisite for providing quality water to the rural population. 
Since the quality of drinking water has a direct Impact on the health of 
individuals, the Committee urge the Department to take necessary steps on 
urgent basis to provide adequate technical manpower as well as all modern 
equipment to the water testing Laboratories with latest WHO parameters and 
also explore the possibilities of private sector participation in setting up of more 
Laboratories in water affected habitations throughout the country.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
Monitoring of quality of drinking water sources/ supplied through WQ 
testing laboratories, is emphasized under JJM. States have been advised to 
strengthen/ upgrade the laboratories for which following provisions exists under 
JJM: 
i.)  States/ UTs can utilize upto 2% of the allocation to States/ UTs for Water 
Quality Monitoring and Surveillance (WQM&S) activities which inter-alia 
includes strengthening of water quality testing laboratories by setting-up/ 
upgradation of State/ district/ sub-division/ block/ mobile laboratories 
includes procurement of equipments, instruments, chemicals/ reagents , 
glassware, consumables, hiring of outsourced human resources, hiring of 
vehicles for transportation of water samples collected from the field to the 
laboratory, NABL accreditation process fee, construction cost of State 
Level Laboratory, rental charges of various level laboratories and 
procurement of FTKs, refills, bacterial detection kits, etc. 
ii.) Department has issued a ‘Uniform Drinking Water Quality Monitoring 
Protocol’ which is an advisory for guiding and supporting the States/ UTs 
in water quality testing, monitoring and surveillance activities effectively.  
iii.)  The possibilities of Public-Private Partnership in Water Quality Monitoring & 
Surveillance were examined and accordingly following provisions have 
been made under JJM:  
 The States/ UTs are advised to explore Public-Private Partnership 
wherein the PHED/ RWS Department may collaborate with NABL/ 
ISO/ other suitably accredited private firms as Support Organization 
(SO) and utilize their strengths. 

 States/ UTs may also designate any NABL/ ISO/ other suitably 
accredited Public or Private water quality testing laboratories/ firms 
on turnkey basis. 
 States have been advised to encourage & promote rural 
entrepreneurship and enterprises for water quality testing at local 
level, for a cluster of villages or block(s). 
 Advised to explore possibility of engaging laboratories established in 
educational institutes on nominal payment basis. 
 During Annual Action Plan discussions, these issues are discussed 
prominently and States are impressed upon to bring these labs to standards so as 
they are accredited by NABL. 
[O.M. No.11013(12)/4/2020-Coordination Dated:08.06.2020] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.9) 
The Committee appreciate the fact that the Government has launched Jal 
Shakti Abhiyan in two phases to conserve water on a Mission mode in which all 
Officers concerned, Ground Water Experts and Scientists from the Government of 
India have worked with the State/District officials in all 256 water-stressed Districts 
if the country to promote water conservation and water resource management by 
focusing on accelerated implementation of five target interventions, viz., (i) Water 
Conservation and Rainwater Harvesting, (ii) Renovation of Traditional and other 
Water Bodies/Tanks, (iii) Re-use and Bore-well recharge structures, (iv) 
Watershed Development, and (v) Intensive Afforestation. The Committee have 
been appraised that from this Abhiyan, massive awareness has been generated 
and various stakeholders, viz., Government Departments, Agencies, NGOs, 
Officials, Panchayats, individuals, etc., have started taking steps for water 
conservation got ensuring success of the Abhiyan. The Committee feel that this is 
a commendable initiative and should be persevered with in a phased manner in 
future also not only in 256 water-stressed districts of the country but also in the 
entire length and breadth of the Nation as water conservation and proper ground 
water management is key to successful implementation of JJM mission. 
Reply of the Government 
 
This Department in consultation with three departments of GoI namely 
Rural Development, Land Resources and Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation issued a joint advisory for States/ UTs on 24/4/2020, 
requesting to converge various programmes of GoI namely MNREGS, PMKSY, 
15th finance Commission grants, SBM(G), for water conservation and rain water 
harvesting during monsoon this year. This convergence is aimed to bring in 
significant impact in the area of water conservation and water management. The 
letter dated 24.04.2020 is placed at Appendix-I. 
[O.M. No.11013(12)/4/2020-Coordination Dated:08.06.2020] 

 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.10) 
 The Committee feel that revival and rejuvenation of Old Water Bodies/ 
Wells and recharge of Bore wells in the rural areas are extremely necessary to 
attain seamless water supply in the drought prone rural Districts of the Country. 
The rejuvenation of traditional/old Water Bodies which have been the source of 
water in the drought prone rural areas since time immemorial will be perhaps a 
pragmatic approach rather than digging up new sources of water in the far-flung 
remote areas of the country as this would not only keep a check on the budgetary 
resources but also give a head start in finding locations for water sources. 
Keeping in view the importance of the matter, the Committee are of firm opinion 
that a streamlined and strategic approach is required to produce the desired 
result. The Committee also feel that besides creating new water sources, the 
human assets and funds under MGNREGA, could be more effectively utilized if 
the recharging work of already existing traditional Water Bodies would add up in 
the availability of water resources in the rural areas. Moreover, under the National 
Resource Management (NRM) works that can be taken up under MGNREGA, the 
Department of Rural Development (DoRD) to ensure the rejuvenation of Water 
Bodies. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to take up the matter in 
the right earnest by consulting DoRD and also encourage/incentivize Gram 
Panchayats for revival and restoration of traditional Water Bodies on priority basis. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The joint advisory dated 24.04.2020 issued in consultation with departments of 
GoI namely, Rural Development, Land Resources and Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation especially emphasize revival of traditional 
water bodies. States have been advised to do the following for renovation of the 
same: 
i.) Take up a comprehensive census of traditional water bodies (irrigation 
tanks, old stepwells, Baolis, old ponds and other water bodies, etc.) and 
record details of their present status. 
ii.) Encroachments, if any, in the water bodies’ boundaries or spread area may 
be removed. 
iii.) Thereafter, renovation of these traditional water bodies be done by desilting, 
constructing/ strengthening inlets/ outlets, treating the catchment areas, etc. 
The advisory also details the potential of convergence in water conversation 
work with various GoI programmes including MNREGS. 
[O.M. No.11013(12)/4/2020-Coordination Dated:08.06.2020] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.11) 
The Committee lauds the fact that the Department has achieved 100 % 
sanitation coverage under SBM (G) within the stipulated time period of five years 
and has also constructed more than 10 crore toilets which is a commendable task 
and had not been even thought of in the past. The Committee feel that the 
practice of open defecation in rural areas of the country was due to combination of 

factors, the most prominent of them being the traditional behavioral pattern and 
mores amongst the people about the associated health hazards. Noting the fact 
that Sanitation is mainly a mindset issue based on socio-cultural practices and 
habit, the Committee feel that India being a country with varying geographic, 
cultural and social characteristics, interventions to change mindsets and habits 
cannot be the same everywhere. The Committee are of the considered view that 
with a view to bringing about behavioral change in the rural population, media 
should be effectively used to communicate the message of adverse socio-
hygienic impact of open defecation and also the benefits of sanitation with special 
emphasis on not only constructing the toilets but also to using them. For this 
purpose, Mass Media (Radio, TV, Newspapers), Digital Media, Print Media 
(Hoardings, Posters etc.) and Documentary Films, Melas, Rallies, etc., apart from 
involving Self Help Groups (SHGs), Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) 
and PRIs could be effectively utilized. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Department to make efforts to ensure that the toilets constructed under SBM (G) 
are actually used and are not left unused or dysfunctional. The Committee further 
desire that the Department should undertake an exercise of physical verification of 
toilets constructed and also of their usage and in this exercise, apart from other 
means, the mobile applications could also be used. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Adequate emphasis on awareness generation through use of mass media, 
mid media and interpersonal communication was given under Swachh Bharat 
Mission (Grameen) [SBM(G)] for achieving ODF status in rural areas. Further, the 
Government has approved Phase-II of SBM(G) to be implemented from 2020-21 
to 2024-25 with the focus on ODF sustainability and Solid and Liquid Waste 
Management (SLWM) in rural areas. Information, Education and Communication 
coupled with capacity building will continue to be one of the major components of 
the programme in order to ensure that the ODF status achieved under the 
programme is sustained and the people adopt a positive behaviour towards 
maintaining hygiene and managing solid and liquid wastes. 
In order to ensure the construction of Individual Household Latrines 
(IHHLs), all the IHHLs constructed so far under the programme have been geo-
tagged and will continue for the newly constructed IHHLs under SBM(G) Phase-II 
as well.  Further, to ensure construction and usage of toilets, the Department of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation as part of the Swachh Bharat Mission Support 
Operation(SBMSO) has undertaken National Annual Rural Sanitation Survey 
(NARSS) through an independent verification agency (IVA). Till date three rounds 
of NARSS have been undertaken.  As per the result of 3rd round of NARSS 
conducted between December, 2019 and March, 2020, 95.2% of households 
having access to toilets use them and 90.1% of ODF declared/verified villages 
were found to have sustained its ODF status.  In addition, the Swachh 
Survekshan Grameen (SSG) is also being carried out annually which also capture 
the data regarding access and usage of toilets in public places.  Both the above 
surveys have been done using computer assisted personal interview (CAPI) tool. 
[O.M. No.11013(12)/4/2020-Coordination Dated:08.06.2020] 

Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.12) 
The Committee note that mere provision of toilets and water to the 
households will not be able to fulfil the goals of attaining the 'Swachhta' 
envisioned under the Swachh Bharat Mission in the rural areas. More basic 
infrastructure collateral with the needs of toilets and water like the proper drainage 
system for the disposal of waste/used waters are also essentially required in rural 
villages. The rural habitations are replete with unplanned disposal of waste water 
from the households which are more often than not found to be spread in the 
villages causing numerous diseases. Even if the household is neat while the 
surroundings are full of dirty water infested with pollutants, the idea of cleanliness 
thought to be achieved under the Scheme gets defeated.  Moreover, the 
percolation of such dirty water pollutes the ground water also. The Committee feel 
that there is an utmost necessity of proper drainage mechanism in the rural 
villages so that disposed waste water does not malign the existing habitations with 
insurmountable complications.  Therefore, the Department is urged to look at this 
problem scientifically and logically devise such mechanism which would include 
the construction of proper drain facilities in the rural households.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With the focus on sustainability of ODF status of the rural areas and to 
improve the overall cleanliness of villages through Solid and Liquid Waste 
Management arrangements, the Government has approved Phase-II of Swachh 
Bharat Mission (Grameen) [SBMG] to be implemented from 2020-21 to 2024-25.  
Grey water management is one of the key components under SBMG Phase-II 
which is envisaged to be taken up through community soak pits/leach pits, and 
grey water treatment systems like waste stabilization ponds, etc. where the 
quantity of wastewater generation is large.  Under the programme, drainage 
channels for conveyance of grey water from the household to disposal/treatment 
point is to be taken up by the Gram Panchayats from Finance Commission grants 
to Rural Local Bodies, and/or in convergence with MGNREGS, other schemes of 
Centre/State Governments, and any other source of funding of the State/GP. 
[O.M. No.11013(12)/4/2020-Coordination Dated:08.06.2020] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.13) 
 The Committee are acquainted of a much prevalent practice, wherein the 
local popular needs and demands are not considered before the finalization and 
implementation of Yojanas/ Scheme in the specific area, thus, leaving much to be 
desired as regards the applicability and success of any Scheme in that specific 
area. Each rural areas have their own specific problem covering with water 
supply/ sanitation. The bottlenecks associated with the implementation of any 
Scheme can only understood fully after having knowledge of local issues. Taking 
note of the practical consequences of the situation, the Committee feel that for 
any Scheme to be successfully implemented for rural populace, the local 
situational requirements and sentiments need to be taken into account and, thus 
the Committee recommend that the concerned Gram Sabhas Gram Panchayats 

be essentially involved before finalization of any Project for the specific rural area 
and their inputs are judiciously taken into account in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 
JJM: Under JJM, the Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. Village 
Water & Sanitation Committee (VWSC)/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. are 
responsible to plan, implement, manage, operate and maintain in-village water 
supply infrastructure. Every village is to prepare a Village Action Plan (VAP) 
encompassing source strengthening/ development, water supply, grey water 
management aiming at treatment and reuse of grey-water and O&M 
arrangements. The Gram Sabha decides the type of water supply scheme to be 
provided in the village, based on techno-economic analysis.  Further, to facilitate 
and build the capacity of the VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc., provision to 
engage Implementation Support Agencies (ISAs) i.e. Self Help Groups (SHGs), 
Non-Government Organizations (NGOs), Voluntary Organizations (VOs), etc. 
have also been made under the JJM. This ‘Bottom-up approach’ ensures 
involvement of the Gram Panchayat and local community in implementation of 
JJM, as per their felt needs. 
 
SBM-G: Guidelines for implementation of Phase-II of SBMG provides for 
involvement of Gram Panchayats (GPs) in planning, implementation and 
monitoring of the programme activities to be undertaken at village/GP level.  GPs 
are to prepare a Village Action Plan for sanitation activities and discuss in the 
Gram Sabha for all of its villages before commencement of each year, will 
implement the activities by themselves or through appropriate agencies, and 
monitor the outcome of the programme through its functionaries. Flexibility has 
been provided under the programme to decide the implementation mechanism 
and technologies based on the local conditions and needs. 
[O.M. No.11013(12)/4/2020-Coordination Dated:08.06.2020] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.14 & 2.15) 
 The Committee are disturbed to note that during the year 2017-18 and 
2018-19, substantial unspent balance of Rs. 2963.21 crore and Rs. 4237.73 crore 
under JJM and Rs. 5677.84 and Rs. 9075.88 crore under SBM(G) were left with 
the implementing agencies in both scheme being implemented by the 
Department. The Committee also surprisingly note that the unspent balance for 
the current fiscal year, i.e. 2019-20 is not available with the Department which 
shows lack of sufficient monitoring of the releases made by them. The Committee 
feel that instead of ensuring that the amount is spent for the purpose it has been 
sanctioned in the budget, there is unplanned release of the funds for the 
implementing Agencies at the fag end of the fiscal year causing accrual of huge 
unspent balances. This demonstrates a completely impractical approach lacking 
administrative acumen and need to be taken care of during the fiscal year 2020-
21.  
Keeping huge unspent balance in mind, the Committee strongly feel that 
large corpus of unutilized funds reflects a dismal picture of financial management 
by the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation and observe that merely 
seeking funds from the Government does not serve the real purpose of upliftment 

and development of rural populace of the country until and unless the funds are 
put to effective utilization for the welfare of rural inhabitants. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that Department should tighten up its grip over all 
Agencies involved in implementation of Scheme as also have frequent/ regular 
inter-actions with the concerned State Governments particularly those having 
huge unspent balances (i.e., Assam, Bihar, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and West 
Bengal) and ensure that the unspent balance is spent on execution of projects in 
an efficient manner.  
Reply of the Government 
 
JJM :It is informed that department holds regular review meetings with all States/ 
UTs on programme implementation including expenditure related issues. States 
are sensitized on pace of implementation and expediting utilization of fund for the 
Mission. Further, in the beginning of 2020-21, in the month of April, review 
meetings were conducted wherein issue of unspent balance was especially 
reviewed with States/ UTs who have unspent balance beyond 10% of the fund 
released in the previous year. The Annual Action Plan for the implementation of 
JJM in 2020-21 is being firmed up by every State/ UT based on a detailed 
consultative process wherein Department emphasizes the need for 
implementation with speed and on scale and ensure optimal utilization of fund. 
Accordingly, every state is finalizing month-wise, quarter-wise physical and 
financial plan. Department has also assigned States/UTs to Director/ Deputy 
Secretary rank officers, who are  designated as ‘Area Officers’, to continuously 
monitor and review the implementation of the mission in the respective State/UT, 
including fund utilization. Further, to ensure better financial prudence under JJM 
various steps, as mentioned under para 2.2 above, are to be ensured by States. 
SBM-G:Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation has been consistently 
following up with the States/UTs to avoid any parking of funds under SBM-G. The 
States/UTs have been emphasized to map all the bank account(s) of the 
implementing agencies in PFMS and make all transactions under the programme 
through it so that the expenditure and unspent balances position of the States can 
be monitored on real time basis. Going forward, for release of funds to the 
States/UTs from 2020-21 onwards, following provisions have been made in the 
Operational Guidelines of Phase-II of the programme: 
(i) Funds will be released to States/UTs based on their performance and 
ability to achieve programme results.  
(ii) The State will operate a single nodal account which is to be mapped in 
PFMS mandatorily and all the transactions to be done through PFMS. 
(iii) The releases will be made in two equal instalments as is being done 
currently.  However, for ‘Just-in-time’ release, each installment will be 
released in two tranches. The 2nd tranche of each installment will be 
released only after utilization of 80% of the available funds. 
[O.M. No.11013(12)/4/2020-Coordination Dated:08.06.2020] 

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.16 & 2.17) 
The Committee note that an Integrated Management Information System 
(IMIS) has been set up by the Department, which is online monitoring system 
under both the flagship Schemes of the Government. The IMIS allows a bird's eye 
view to both the Union and State Governments for monitoring progress of the 
Schemes. The Committee are happy to note that with a view to ensuring the 
authenticity of data provided by the States online, it has been kept on public 
domain and is open to checking, verification and comments by all. During the 
course of examination, the Committee observed that there is no proper system of 
conducting physical verification and monitoring of actual infrastructure work 
executed by the States and also to monitor the utilization of funds. Although the 
Department has been holding review meetings and video conferences to monitor 
utilization, the Committee feel that the system is not very effective to bring the 
desired results. The Committee desire that the monitoring system should be 
strengthened and a mechanism should be developed for ensuring transparency 
and accountability and fixation of responsibility in case of delay or non-
implementation of Projects/Plans in the rural areas.   
The Committee also observed that non-submission of Plans or slow pace 
of expenditure were the major reasons for non-utilization of funds by the States. In 
this regard, appointment of Nodal Officers of the Central Government at different 
levels in the States can help in monitoring the flow of expenditure and 
implementation of Schemes. The Committee, therefore, desire that Nodal Officers 
should be appointed by the Union Government at different levels for not only 
conducting concurrent physical verification of the status of the implementation of 
various Programmes but also to keep a close watch over the utilization of the 
funds by the States. Such Nodal Officers should be mandated to have effective 
coordination with the State Governments and to directly report all the 
developments to the Union Government. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the measures taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
JJM: A robust Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) has been 
developed to monitor physical progress in terms of Functional Household Tap 
Connections (FHTCs) and financial progress/ fund utilization. An Online dash 
board has also been created for real time monitoring. Besides this, geo-tagging of 
all the assets created under JJM is also made mandatory under JJM. A provision 
has been made in the Operational Guidelines for the implementation of Jal 
Jeevan Mission that third party inspection of work executed by the implementing 
agencies is to be done by the States/ UTs, before making any payment under 
JJM. Further, provision has been made to take up functionality assessment of 
schemes/ FHTCs. Further, Department has also assigned States/UTs to Director/ 
Deputy Secretary rank officers, who are  designated as ‘Area Officers’, to 
continuously monitor and review the implementation of the mission in the 

respective State/UT. Similarly, all the States/ UTs have been requested to appoint 
Nodal Officers/ Missions Directors who will be coordinating with respective Area 
officer. Further, to ensure financial discipline, steps/ measures as mentioned 
above have been taken. 
SBM-G:In order to ensure authenticity of data reported by the States on online 
Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) of SBM(G), besides continuing 
the geo-tagging of IHHLs, the community assets that will be created under Phase-
II of the programme are to be geo-tagged. Regular review meetings/video 
conferences are conducted to review the physical and financial progress in the 
implementation of scheme in all the States, and to suggest corrective measures 
wherever required to achieve physical and financial objectives.  Further, to 
conduct the physical verification and monitoring of the assets created under the 
programme, the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation has been 
undertaking annual surveys viz. National Annual Rural Sanitation Survey 
(NARSS) under Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation (SBMSO) of World 
Bank, and Swachh Survekshan Grameen (SSG) through Independent Verification 
Agencies (IVA).  Similar surveys through IVA will be undertaken during Phase-II of 
the programme.   
For monitoring the utilization of funds under the programme, Department of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation has been consistently following up with the 
States/UTs to avoid any parking of funds under SBM-G. The States/UTs have 
been emphasized to map all the bank account(s) of the implementing agencies in 
PFMS and make all transactions under the programme through it so that the 
expenditure and unspent balances position of the States can be monitored on real 
time basis. Going forward, for release of funds to the States/UTs from 2020-21 
onwards, following provisions have been made in the Operational Guidelines of 
Phase-II of the programme: 
(i) Funds will be released to States/UTs based on their performance and 
ability to achieve programme results.  
(ii) The State will operate a single nodal account which is to be mapped in 
PFMS mandatorily and all the transactions to be done through PFMS. 
(iii) The releases will be made in two equal instalments as is being done 
currently.  However, for ‘Just-in-time’ release, each installment will be 
released in two tranches. The 2nd tranche of each installment will be 
released only after utilization of 80% of the available funds. 
[O.M. No.11013(12)/4/2020-Coordination Dated:08.06.2020] 

 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
NIL 

 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.1) 
 The Committee notice that the Department of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation has been entrusted with the responsibility of implementing two major 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme, i.e., Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) erstwhile National 
Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) and Swachh Bharat Mission 
(Gramin) through which support is extended to the State Governments in the 
endeavor to provide safe and adequate piped drinking water to every household 
in rural areas within the targeted period and also provide rural sanitation 
infrastructure. Hence, the budgetary planning of the Department spins around 
these two Schemes. The scrutiny of Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the 
Department reveals that there is a substantial reduction in the allocation at RE 
stage for SBM(G) in the year 2019-20 and also to exhibit failure of the Department 
of fully utilize even the reduced allocations in the last two years. The Committee 
also find that during the current fiscal 2020-21, the allocation of Rs. 21,518 crore 
to the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation is approximately 7.50% higher 
than the BE and 17.20% higher than the RE of the previous year, i.e., 2019-20. 
They further observed that as against the demand of Rs. 21,518 crore, Rs. 
9,994.10 crore has been allocated for SBM (G) and for JJM, an allocation of Rs. 
11,500 crore has been made. Besides, Rs. 12,000 crore has been proposed 
through Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) for JJM during the fiscal year 2020-21. 
However, the Committee are particularly concerned to note that the allocations of 
JJM for the current fiscal year are inadequate, the total budget is short by Rs. 
11,253 crore as against requirement of Rs. 34,753 crore approved by the Cabinet 
for the implementation of JJM in the fiscal year 2020-21. The committee are of the 
view that reduction/ insufficient fund allocation by the Government would 
eventually result in reduction in the targets of Schemes of the Department. The 
Committee therefore, strongly recommend that Department to take up this matter 
with NITI Aayog/ Ministry of Finance along with appropriate justifications to ensure 
allocation of additional funds for the current financial year so that future 
development plans are not hampered and the targets fixed are achieved in time.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
JJM: In financial year 2019-20, under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM), an amount of Rs. 
10,000.66 Crore was allocated and almost entire amount was utilized by this 
Department. The matter of allocation was taken up with the Ministry of Finance 
and for 2020-21, Rs. 23,500 Crore has been allocated to JJM, out of which Rs. 
11,500 Crore is Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) and Rs. 12,000 Crore has been 
provided as Extra Budgetary Resource (EBR). 

SBM-G: Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) [SBMG] is a demand driven scheme.  
However, in the present scenario, the allocation of Rs.9994.10 for this Scheme 
made during 2020-21 appears to be adequate.    
[O.M. No.11013(12)/4/2020-Coordination Dated:08.06.2020] 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.3) 
  The Government has restructured and subsumed the ongoing National 
Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) in Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) to 
provide Functional Household Tap Connection (FHTC) to every household, i.e., 
Har Ghar Nal Se Jal by 2024. The Committee are unhappy to note that at present, 
only 3.27 crore, i.e., 18.33% out of 17.87 crore rural households in the country 
have access to piped water connections. There are only six State/ UTs, namely 
Sikkim, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab and Puducherry are 
providing more that 50% PWS connections to their rural households. While the big 
states like West Bengal (1.31%), Uttar Pradesh (1.33%), Bihar (1.88%), Assam 
(2.21%), Orissa (3.94%), Jharkhand (5.75%) and Arunachal Pradesh (9.09%) are 
providing below 10% Piped Water connections to their households. This is indeed 
a matter of concern and directly connected to the quality of lives in the rural areas. 
In view of the abysmal performance, the Committee strongly recommends that all 
necessary efforts should be made for expeditious increase in the PWS and 
effective mechanism/ strategies should also be put in place to monitor the relevant 
works accomplished within a defined time frame and apprise the Committee of the 
action taken. The Committee also urge upon the Department to get the veracity 
and actual physical status of existing coverage of 3.27 crore rural households 
reported by the State/ UTs so as to ensure that there are no gaps in attainment of 
the targets of full coverage set under the scheme.  
Reply of the Government 
 
For expeditious implementation of the Mission, following provisions have been 
made: 
i.) Every State/ UT have been advised to identify villages having 
already having  piped water supply infrastructure and retrofit/ 
augment the PWS to provide to connections to remaining 
households on priority basis. Thus, ‘low hanging fruits’ under JJM 
are to be prioritized for implementation by the States/ UTs. 
ii.) Each State/ UT is given a definite target in terms of FHTCs, at the 
stage of finalizing the Annual Action Plan, in proportion to the 
remaining households to be provided with connections. 
iii.) Sates/ UTs have also been advised to prioritize the water quality-
affected area, Sansad Aadarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) Villages, SCs/ 

STs majority villages, villages in drought and desert prone areas, etc. 
for saturating with FHTCs, which will be monitored in consonance with 
the approved Annual Action Plan. 
iv.) To instill a sense of competition among States, good performance, in 
terms of physical and financial progress, is incentivized in the form of 
additional fund. 
v.) Guidelines also allows the delegation of power to District Water & 
Sanitation Mission (DWSM) to approve Single Village Scheme (SVS) 
which further avoids delays in approval. 
 Every State/ UT was requested by this Department to revalidate their 
baseline data of household tap connections and all States have done the same. 
[O.M. No.11013(12)/4/2020-Coordination Dated:08.06.2020] 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.4) 
 The Committee note that National Infrastructure Pipeline (NIP) has been 
launched on 31stDecember, 2019. With an aim to strengthen and bolster the NIP, 
which would ultimately augment and aid potable drinking water supply projects 
covering both, rural and urban areas. The States have started submitting Detailed 
Project Reports (DPRs) to be included under NIP. In this context, the Committee 
are of the view that based on the past experience regarding preparation of DPRs 
of any Projects, there have been numerous issue that arise due to not properly 
taking into account the areas specific needs with which the local elected 
Representatives, i.e., Members of Parliament are expected to be well conversant. 
Considering this aspect in view, the Committee urge the Department to take that 
all necessary steps to have inputs from local MPs at the DPRs preparation stage 
for better implementation of the Scheme. The Committee would be apprised of the 
measures taken in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 The National Infrastructure Pipeline (NIP) is a set of projects prepared by 
States who are seeking financial assistance/ loan for these projects, which is to be 
paid by them. These projects are prepared by respective State Governments, 
based on their laid down procedure for appraisal of such projects and will be 
implemented by them. 
[O.M. No.11013(12)/4/2020-Coordination Dated:08.06.2020] 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.8) 

 Further, the Committee are dismayed to note that only 50 out of total 
2232 Water Quality Testing Laboratories in rural areas are NABL (National 
Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories) accredited. Getting 
accreditation from NABL would not only endorse the testing results provided by 
these Laboratories but will also impact credibility to the efforts of the Department 
in ensuring the supply of quality water to the rural areas. Therefore, the 
Committee strongly recommend the Department to prepare time-bound Plan of 
all such Laboratories for getting accreditation by NABL at the earliest. To have 
an appropriate assessment of the efficacy of working of the water testing 
Laboratories, the Committee also recommend that an independent Survey/Third 
Party Audit should be undertaken so that necessary corrective measure could be 
taken by the department.” 
  
Reply of the Government 
 All States/ UTs have been advised to get drinking water quality testing 
laboratories NABL accredited. Every State/ UT is to give NABL accreditation plan 
while finalizing WQMS component of the Annual Action Plan (AAP) of JJM, 
which will be monitored and reviewed by the Department. States/ UTs can utilize 
upto 2% of the allocation to States/ UTs for Water Quality Monitoring and 
Surveillance (WQM&S) activities which inter-alia includes expenses incurred for 
NABL accreditation process (consultant fee, audit cost, application fee and 
annual fee). Also, the Department is regularly organizing conferences, review 
meetings, etc. in which accreditation of labs is emphasized.  
[O.M. No.11013(12)/4/2020-Coordination Dated:08.06.2020] 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI Dr. SANJAY JAISWAL, 
03 February, 2021 Chairperson, 
14 Magha, 1942 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water 
Resources 
 

 
APPENDIX – I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES  
(2020-21) HELD ON FRIDAY, 6 NOVEMBER, 2020 
  
The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1430 hours in Committee Room No. 'C', Parliament 
House Annexe,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
                         Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kaushal Kishore 
3. Shri M. Dhanush Kumar 
4. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
5. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod  
              
RAJYA SABHA 
 
6 Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
7 Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
8 Shri Arun Singh  
9 Shri Subhash Chandra Singh 
10 Shri Pradeep Tamta  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora  - OSD (LSS) 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan  - Director 
3. Shri R. C. Sharma  - Additional Director 
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting and congratulated them 
on their nomination /re-nomination to the Committee for the year 2020-21.    
 
2. ***  ***  ***  ***  ***  ***
 *** 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration four draft Reports namely draft Reports on 
the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the First 
and Third Reports of the Committee  on “Demands for Grants (2019-20) and (2020-21)" of the 
Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation) 
and draft Reports on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Second and Fourth Reports of the Committee on “Demands for Grants (2019-20) 

and (2020-21)" of the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation). After some 
deliberation, the Committee adopted all the draft Reports unanimously and without any changes / 
amendments.   The Committee authorized the Chairperson to present the above four Reports to 
both the Houses of Parliament in the next Session of Parliament. 
 
4. ***  ***  ***  ***  *** *** 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
*** Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately. 

APPENDIX - II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations                     14  
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 Para Nos. 2, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14   
  Total - 10  
Percentage -71.40% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in  view of the Government’s replies 
 Para Nos. NIL             
Total - NIL  
        
Percentage- 0%  
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have  not been accepted by the Committee 
 Para Nos. 1, 3, 4 and 7            
 
Total – 04 
 Percentage 28.60 - %  
                                         
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is  still awaited  
 Para Nos. NIL                                                   
 
Total NIL 
                  
Percentage - 0% 
 
 