12 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2020-21) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI  
 DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT & GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
 
Flood Management in the Country including International Water Treaties in the 
field of Water Resource Management with particular reference to 
Treaty/Agreement entered into with China, Pakistan And Bhutan 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2021 /Sravana,1943 (Saka) 
 
  


TWELFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2020-21) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI  
DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT & GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
Flood Management in the Country including International Water Treaties in the 
field of Water Resource Management with particular reference to 
Treaty/Agreement entered into with China, Pakistan And Bhutan 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 05.08.2021 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 05.08.2021 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2021 /Sravana,1943 (Saka) 
 
 
  


W. R. C.  No.67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price :  Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        © 2021 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  (Sixteenth 
Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
  

CONTENTS 
  Page Nos. 
Composition of the Committee (2020-21) (iii) 
Introduction  (iv) 
REPORT  
PART I 
 
 
I. BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
(i) Causes of Floods 
(ii) Effect of  Climate change on Floods 
 
1 
3 
4 
 
II Flood Management in the Country 
 
(i) Structural Measures 
(ii) Non-structural Measures  
(iii) Constitutional provisions on flood management: 
(iv) Flood Plain Zoning 
(v) Scientific Assessment of Flood Prone Area  
 
7 
 
7 
7 
9 
11 
12 
III Floods in Assam 
(i) Floods caused by Brahmaputra River 
(ii) North East Water Management Authority (NEWMA)  
 
13 
 
13 
17 
 
IV Floods in Kerala 
 
19 
V Flood Forecasting  
 
23 
VI Flood Management Programme 26 
VII Interlinking of Rivers (ILR) 
 
 
30 
VIII Integrated Reservoir Operation for Flood Management 
 
(i) Reservoir Operation 
(ii) Integrated Reservoir Operation for Flood Management 
(iii) Flood Cushion 
(iv) Crisis Management Plan 
 
32 
 
33 
35 
36 
37 
IX Flash Floods, Cloud Burst and Glacial Outburst and Landslides 
(i) Need for Unified Single Nodal Agency for coordination among 
different Departments 
40 
41 
X Relief and Rehabilitation  43 
XI International Water Treaties in the field of Water Resource Management and 
Flood Control 
(i) Cooperation with Pakistan 
(ii) Cooperation with China 
(iii) Cooperation with Bhutan 
 
45 
 
45 
49 
51 

  PART II 
 
 
 Observations/Recommendations 53 
 APPENDICES  
(i) Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting (2019-20)  of the Committee held on 06.08.2020 76 
(ii) Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting (2019-20)  of the Committee held on 17.08.2020 79 
(iii) Minutes of the Second Sitting (2020-21)  of the Committee held on 17.11.2020 83 
(iv) Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting (2020-21)  of the Committee held on 3.8.2021 86 
(v) Annexure I - Statement showing State-wise data regarding damages due to 
floods/heavy rain for the year 2018 and all India averaged data over the period 
1953 to 2018  
89 
(vi) Annexure II - Statement showing Damage Due to Floods/Heavy Rains during 
1953 to 2018 
90 
(vii) Annexure-III-  Statement showing State-Wise Works Approved, Works Completed 
and Funds Released under Flood Management Programme ( FMP )  since start of 
XI Plan (Rs in Cr) 
91 
 

COMPOSITON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2020-21) 
  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  -  Chairperson   
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Vijay Baghel 
3. ShriBhagirathChaudhary 
4. Vacant ^ 
5. ShriNihal Chand Chauhan 
6. Shri Chandra PrakashChoudhary 
7. ShriGuman Singh Damor 
8. Dr.HeenaVijaykumarGavit 
9. Dr. K. Jayakumar 
10. Vacant^^ 
11. ShriM. Dhanush Kumar 
12. Shri P. Raveendranath Kumar 
13. Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone 
14. ShriKuruvaGorantlaMadhav 
15. ShriHasmukhbhaiSomabhai Patel 
16. Shri Sanjay Kaka Patil 
17. Shri Sunil Kumar^^^ 
18. Ms.NusratJahanRuhi 
19. Ms. Agatha K. Sangma 
20. Shri D. K. Suresh 
21. Vacant ^^ 
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. SardarBalwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. ShriHarshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
24. Shri N. R. Elango 
25. Vacant* 
26. Dr.KirodiLalMeena 
27. Vacant ** 
28. ShriArun Singh 
29. ShriSubhash Chandra Singh 
30. ShriRewati Raman Singh 
31. ShriPradeepTamta 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Manoj K. Arora  - OSD (LSS) 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan - Director 
3. Shri R.C. Sharma  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Gaurav Jain  - Assistant Committee Officer 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
 ^  Vacancy caused on account of demise of ShriNand Kumar Singh Chauhanw.e.f. 02.03.2021 
^^ ShriKausal Kishore &Shri A. NarayanaSwamyceased to be the Member of this Committee w.e.f. 08.07.2021 after 
 induction as Minister. 
^^^ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f 05.04.2021 vice ShriDipsinhRathod 
* Vacancy caused due to retirement of Mir Mohammad Fayazw.e.f. 10.02.2021.  
** Vacancy caused on account of demise of Shri A. Mohammedjanw.e.f. 23.03.2021. 
 (iii)

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2020-21) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Twelfth 
Report on “Flood Management In the Country including International Water Treaties in 
the field of Water Resource Management with particular reference to Treaty/Agreement 
entered Into with China, Pakistan And Bhutan".  
2. The Committee (2019 -20) had taken up the subject “Flood Management in the 
Country and evolving a Decision Support System for release of Water from the Dams” for 
examination. As the Report could not be finalized during the tenure of the Committee, 
therefore, this subject was again selected by the Committee (2020 -21) under a different 
nomenclature, i.e. “Flood Management In the Country including International Water 
Treaties in the field of Water Resource Management with particular reference to 
Treaty/Agreement entered Into withChina, Pakistan And Bhutan" for a detailed 
examination and Report. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Jal Shakti – Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation, Ministry of External Affairs and representatives of the Governments of 
Assam and Kerala on 06 August 2020, 17 August 2020 and 17 November 2020 
respectively.  
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
03.08.2021. 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of 
Jal Shakti – Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation, Ministry of External Affairs, Representatives of the Governments of Assam 
and Kerala for providing the requisite written information as also for depositions made in 
connection with the detailed examination of the subject.  
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their sense of deep appreciation for 
the assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to 
the Committee.  
 
NEW DELHI;     Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
03 August , 2021    Chairperson, 
12 Sravana, 1943 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Water Resources 
(iv) 

REPORT 
 
PART I 
 
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 
1.1 According to the World Meteorological Organization “flood” is definedas: 
(i) Rise, usually brief, in the water level in a stream to a peak from which the water 
level recedes at a slower rate. 
(ii) Relatively high flow as measured by stage height or discharge. 
(iii) Rising tide. 
“Flooding” signifying the impact of flood is defined as the overflowing by water of the 
normal confines of a stream or other body of water, or accumulation of water by drainage 
over areas that are not normally submerged. Since various rivers/streams have different 
carrying capacities, no specific parameter/ criterion based on quantum of excess water 
flows has been laid down for defining flood.  
 
1.2 Floods are natural calamity that India faces almost every year, in varying degrees of 
magnitude. The frequent occurrence of floods can be attributed to various factors, including 
wide variations in rainfall both in time and space with frequent departures from the normal 
pattern, inadequate carrying capacities of rivers, river bank erosion and silting of river beds, 
landslides, poor natural drainage in flood prone areas, glacial lake outbursts, etc. India 
suffers huge economic loss annually besides the precious human lives due to floods. From 
the time immemorial man has adapted to the furies of nature. As a matter of fact, the floods 
can’t be controlled completely but man has made continued efforts to devise means to 
control the floods and mitigate their impacts. The devastation caused due to floods in the 
past has drawn attention of the planners of the country towards comprehensive flood 
management plans, policies and implementation thereof. The detail of annual damages due 
to floods is available from year 1953 onwards. The maximum area affected due to flood in 
any one of the years under consideration is taken as the area liable to flood in that State. 
Considering all such figures for all the States for the period from 1953 to 1978, 
RashtriyaBarhAyog (National Commission on Floods) has assessed the total area liable to 
flood in the country as 40 Mha. About 80% of this, i.e., 32 Mha area could be provided with 
reasonable degree of protection. The severity of the problem can be seen from the above 
figures that this area constitutes about 1/8th of total geographical area of the country. 
1.3 For monitoring the floods in the country through its flood forecasting network, the 
Central Water Commission has categorized various flood situations into three different 

2 
 
categories, namely Above Normal, Severe and Extreme depending upon the river water 
level with reference to warning level, danger level, and highest flood level. 
 
 Above Normal Flood: If the water level of the river at flood forecasting site touches 
or crosses its Warning level, but remains below the Danger Level of the site then the 
flood situation is called the “Above Normal” situation.  
 Severe Flood: If the water level of the river at the forecasting site touches or 
crosses Danger Level but below the Highest Flood Level of the forecasting site then 
the flood situation is called “Severe Flood” situation.  
 Extreme Flood:The flood situation is said to be “Extreme” when the water level of 
the river touches or crosses the “Highest Flood Level” recorded at any forecasting 
site so far. 
 
1.4 On being asked about when and under what circumstances, flood in an area is 
declared as a 'National Calamity, the Department of Water Resources, River Development 
& Ganga Rejuvenation (DoWR, RD & GR) in its written reply stated as follows: 
 
 “Under the existing Scheme of State Disaster Response Fund/National Response 
Fund of Ministry of Home Affairs, there is no such provision to declare any disaster 
including flood as a “National Calamity”. However, in the event of disaster of a 
‘severe nature’, financial assistance towards the notified natural disasters including 
flood is met from the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) which is further 
supplemented from the cess-based fund of National Disaster Response Fund 
(NDRF) in accordance with the established procedure, which includes an 
assessment based on the visit of an Inter-Ministerial Central Team”. 
1.5 When asked whether the Department is contemplating to formulate a National Policy 
on Flood Control and Management, in the light of frequent and recurrent floods in the 
country, the Department in its written reply stated as follows: 
 
"Central Government had formulated the National Water Policy in 1987, which was 
subsequently reviewed and revised in the year 2002 and 2012. The main objective of 
the National Water Policy is to take cognizance of the existing situation in water 
sector, to propose a framework for creation of a system of laws and institutions and a 
plan of action with a unified national perspective in planning, management and use of 
water resources. Effective management of flood & drought has always been a part of 
National Water Policy. The National Water Policy has been sent to all States/Union 
Territories(UTs) for appropriate action. As per available information, 16 States/UT 
have formulated and adopted their State Water Policies.  
 
With a goal to address the present challenges in water sector, revision of National 
Water Policy 2012 has been envisaged by the Department of Water Resources, River 

3 
 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (DoWR,RD and GR), Ministry of Jal Shakti. A 
drafting committee has been constituted on 5th November, 2019 to revise the 
National Water Policy. The process of revision of National Water Policy involves 
consultations with various stakeholders including States/UTs". 
 
1.6 According to the DoWR,RD and GR, damages due to heavy rain and floods are 
compiled by Central Water Commission(CWC) after receipt of confirmation from respective 
States. The State-wise details of losses due to floods are compiled by Central Water 
Commission (CWC) based on the data provided by the States. The State-wise data for the 
year 2018 and all India averaged data over the period 1953 to 2018 is at givenAnnexure 
I& II.Data in respect of 2019 is stated to be reconciled with the concerned State 
Governments and is likely to be published thereafter. 
 
Causes of Floods 
 
1.7 The DoWR,RD and GR have informed the Committee that India faces floods almost 
every year, in varying degrees of magnitude. The frequent occurrence of floods can be 
attributed to various factors, including wide variations in rainfall both in time and space with 
frequent departures from the normal pattern. The main causes of floods are as under: 
 
i) High intensity rainfall in short duration 
ii) Poor or inadequate drainage/channel   capacity 
iii) High Silt Load in rivers 
iv) Encroachment of Riverine Areas. 
v) Deforestation/Watershed Degradation  
vi) Loss/destruction of wetlands 
vii) Unplanned reservoir regulation 
viii) Snowmelt and glacial lake out bursts 
 
1.8 Elaborating on the challenges faced by the different regions of the country due to 
floods, the Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR during the oral evidence held on 17.8.2020 stated 
as follows: 
 
“Today, the Southern States or the Central States have different kinds of problems. 
Assam, Bihar and UP have different kinds of problems. Assam, UP and Bihar are 
three States where there are not many dams. The water which comes either from 
Nepal or from our own territories, is uncontrolled whereas the Krishna Basin or any 
such basin are highly dammed basins; and water is basically unregulated”. 
 
1.9 When asked as to what extent the role the encroachment of river beds- closed river 
mouths, low carrying capacity of Flood Spill Channels (FSC), and failure of flood control 
structures contribute to  causing floods, the Department replied as under: 

4 
 
"The role played by various factors as indicated above in causing flood is described 
below. 
Encroachment of river-beds: The flood plain of a river is essentially its domain and 
any intrusion into or developmental activity therein obstructs the river’s ‘right of way’ 
leading to flooding. Generally flood embankments are constructed to check the spills of 
flood waters to nearby areas and there is provision for natural meandering of rivers by 
locating flood embankments to an appropriate distance from the river banks. However, 
generally areas between the embankments and river banks are encroached by the local 
people and these people are most vulnerable to floods. 
Closed river mouths: The rivers on their courses are joined by various streams and 
tributaries so that catchment areas are drained out suitably. When due to rapid 
urbanization, deposition of silt and other factors, mouths of such streams and tributaries 
get clogged, drainage congestion problem in that area leads to flooding . 
Low carrying capacity of Flood Spill Channels (FSC): Diversion of flood waters 
through flood spill channels involves transfer of a part of the flood discharge to another 
basin or to the same basin downstream of the problem area or to a depression where it 
could be stored for subsequent release. This measure can be used to manage unusual 
floods around cities as in the case of flood spill channel near Srinagar and also in the 
lower reaches of a river near the sea as in the case of Krishna Godavari drainage 
scheme. But in due course of time, discharging capacities of such flood spill channel 
may get reduced due to issues like encroachment, siltation etc, which causes floods in 
nearby areas. 
Failure of flood control structures: As stated above flood embankments are 
constructed to check the spills of flood waters to nearby areas. However, due to various 
reason viz., meandering of rivers, shifting of main flow channel and consequent erosion, 
offset between river banks and embankments get reduced and embankment itself 
becomes vulnerable to floods. Further due to neglect of repair and maintenance issues 
embankment also sometimes becomes weaker. Due to these factors embankments 
gets breached or overtopped resulting in floods in nearby areas". 
 
 
Effect of  Climate change on Floods  
 
1.10 When asked as to whether any study has been undertaken to assess the impact of 
climate change on floods, the Department in their written reply stated as follows: 
 
“Climate change is a global environmental challenge and there are studies projecting 
varied impacts on different sectors including agriculture and water resources. 
According to India’s Second Biennial Update Report (BUR) submitted to the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the overall impact of 
climate change on water resources is anticipated in terms of rise in extreme events, 
thereby increasing the flood and drought frequency, intensity of rainfall and spatial 
variability. 
 

5 
 
The Government is implementing National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) 
which comprises of missions in specific areas of solar energy, energy efficiency, 
water, agriculture, Himalayan eco-system, sustainable habitat, green India and 
strategic knowledge on climate change. The NAPCC provides the overarching 
framework for all climate actions. The Government is also implementing the scheme, 
“National Adaptation Fund for Climate Change” to support adaptation measures of 
States/UTs in areas that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate 
Change.  
 
National Water Mission (NWM) under DoWR, RD & GR is one of the eight Missions 
established under NAPCC. The main objective of National NWM is “Conservation of 
water, minimizing wastage and ensuring its more equitable distribution both across 
and within States through integrated water resources development and 
management”. NWM is facilitating preparation of State Specific Action Plan (SSAP) 
for water sector for managing the impact of climate change”. 
 
 
 
Eight numbers of research studies on impact of climate change on water resources 
are going on sponsored through Indian National Committee on Climate 
Change(INCCC) under National Water Mission. The details are as under:- 
 
S, 
No. 
Name of the Scheme State/Institute 
1 Impact Assessment of Climate Change on 
Hydro- meteorological processes and Water 
Resources of Mahanadi River Basin 
IISC Bangalore (Lead Instt.) 
IIT Bhubhaneshwar 
2 Climate change impact studies for 
Rajasthan Area of inland drainage and 
Mahi basin 
MNIT Jaipur (Lead Instt.) 
CU Ajmer Rajasthan 
IIT Delhi 
3 Impact of Climate Change on Water 
Resources of Tapi Basin 
SVNIT Surat (Lead Instt.) 
MNIT Jaipur 
MANIT Bhopal 
4 Effects of Climate Change and land 
use/land 
cover changes on spatial and temporal 
water availability in Subarnarekha Basin 
IIT Kharagpur 
5 Impact of Climate Change on Water 
Resources of Sabarmati Basin 
IIT Gandhinagar (Lead Instt.) 
SVNIT Surat 
6 Impact of Climate Change on Water 
Resources in River Basins from Tadri to 
Kanyakumari 
IIT Mumbai (Lead Instt.) 
NIT Surathkal 
CWRDM Kozhikode 
 
 

6 
 
7 Statistical Downscaling for Hydro-climatic 
Projections with CMIP5 Simulations to 
Assess Impact of Climate Change 
IIT Mumbai (Lead Instt.) 
IIT Guwahati 
IISc Bangalore 
IIT Gandhinagar 
IIT Kanpur 
8 Dynamic Downscaling to study Climate 
Change I on Water Resources in India 
IIT Delhi (Lead Instt.) 
IIT Madras 
Anna University 
BHU Varanasi 
IIT – Indian Institue of Technology, MNIT–Malviya National Institute of Technology, MANIT – Maulana Azad 
National Institute of Technology,  SVNIT – Sardar Vallabhbhai  National Institute of Technology, NIT - 
National Institute of Technology, CWRDM - Centre for Water Resources Development and Management, 
IISC – Indian Institute of Science, BHU – Banaras Hindu University 
 
It has been often stated that due to climate change on account of global warming the 
rainfall pattern has been altered over the years with lesser number of rainy days but 
heavier rainfall”. 
 
 
  

7 
 
Chapter II   
Flood Management in the Country 
 
Flood Management in the Country 
 
2.1 Explaining the steps taken for flood management in the country, the DoWR,RD and 
GR in a written note have stated that different measures have been adopted to reduce the 
flood losses and protect the flood plains. Depending upon the nature of work, Flood 
protection and flood management measures are broadly classified as under: 
 
(a) Structural Measures 
(b) Non-Structural Measures 
 
 
Structural Measures 
 
2.2 The structural measures for flood control which bring relief to the flood prone areas 
by reducing flood flows and thereby the flood levels are: 
(a) an artificially created reservoir behind a dam across a river  
(b) a natural depression suitably improved and regulated, if necessary 
(c) by diversion of a part of the peak flow to another river or basin, where such 
diversion  would not cause appreciable damage. 
(d)   by constructing a parallel channel by-passing a particular town/reach of the river 
prone to flooding. 
 
2.3 The structural methods of flood protection, which do not reduce the flood flow but 
reduce spilling, are:  
(a) embankments which artificially raise the effective river bank and thereby prevent 
spilling and  
(b) Channel and drainage improvement works, which artificially reduce the flood 
water level so as to keep the same, confined within the river banks and thus 
prevent spilling. 
 
 
Non-structural Measures  
 
2.4 The administrative methods endeavour to mitigate the flood damages by:  
(a) Facilitating timely evacuation of the people and shifting of their movable 
property to safer grounds by having advance warning of incoming flood through 
setting up a flood forecasting system.  
(b) Discouraging creation of valuable assets/settlement of the people in the areas 
subject to frequent flooding i.e. enforcing flood plain zoning regulation.   
 
 
2.5 The details of various flood management measures taken up till XII Plan by the 
Government is as under: 
 

8 
 
S. No. Flood Management Measures Extent 
1 Embankment 37072.659 km 
2 Drainage channel/channel improvement 39726.700 km 
3 Village raised/protected 7713 nos 
4 Town/Village protection works 2906 nos 
5 Raised Platforms 65 nos 
 
It has been stated that the above measures have resulted in protecting area of 
about 20.54 mha till XII Plan.  
 
2.6 When asked about the reasons for recurrence of floods every year despite having 
structural and non-structural measures in place, the DoWR,RD and GR in a written reply 
stated as under: 
“Providing absolute protection to all flood prone areas against all magnitude of floods 
is neither practically possible nor economically viable. Hence, a pragmatic approach 
in flood management is to provide a reasonable degree of protection against flood 
damages at economic cost through a combination of structural and non-structural 
measures. 
Further, Integrated flood management calls for a paradigm shift from the traditional, 
fragmented and localized approach, and encourages the use of the resources of a 
river basin as a whole. Therefore, there is a need for an approach backed by latest 
technologies and implemented in a most effective manner. In order to have integrated 
basin development including flood management in a holistic manner, setting up of 
River Basin Organisations (RBOs) needs to be expedited. The River Basin 
Organizations shall have the mandate to implement flood control measures 
encompassing immediate, short-term and long-term solutions in an effective manner 
apart from overall water resources development of the basin”. 
 
2.7 On being asked about the monitoring mechanism in the Department for ensuring 
that the flood control structures of the States are properly maintained and inspected by the 
concerned authorities at regular intervals, the Department in their written reply stated as 
under: 
“Extensive and regular monitoring of the projects being executed under Flood 
Management Programme (FMP) Scheme is carried out by the Central Water 
Commission (CWC), Ganga Flood Control Commission (GFCC) and Brahmaputra 
Board (BB) in their respective jurisdiction. The main objective of monitoring is to 
ensure the achievement of physical and financial targets for timely completion of 
projects, identification of the inputs required, analysis of the reasons for any 
shortfalls/bottlenecks and suggest remedial measures etc., with a view to complete 

9 
 
them in a time bound manner. The above central organizations also play an active 
role at formulation stage of the Detailed Project Reports(DPRs) for flood 
management works by the State Governments in their respective jurisdiction and 
provide necessary guidance in preparation/ submission of the funding proposals in 
time for appraisal and release of central assistance”.  
 
2.8 To  a query regarding whether any Inter-Ministerial Study group has been formed to 
study the problem of floods as also to control/mitigate the floods, the Department replied as 
follows: 
“In order to formulate the strategy for flood management works in the entire country 
and river management activities and works in the border areas for period 2020-2023, 
a Committee has been constituted by National Institution for Transforming India 
(NITI)Aayog under the chairmanship of Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog. Officials from 
various Departments/ Ministries of Government of India, Experts from the field and 
Principal Secretaries from States of Jammu & Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West 
Bengal, Punjab, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura, Madhya Pradesh and Kerala 
have been included as the members of this Committee”. 
 
 
2.9 The DoWR,RD and GR have further informed the Standing Committee that the 
aforesaid Committee was constituted in October, 2019. It has met twice since its 
constitution in February, 2020 and May, 2020.Further, in pursuance to decision taken in the 
second meeting of Committee of NITI Aayog held on 27.05.2020, a Sub-Committee was 
constituted under the chairmanship of Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR, Ministry of Jal Shakti  
to assist the Committee in formulation of the proposal /strategy of flood management in 
respect of three broad areas, viz., structural measures, non structural measure and the 
scheme for financial assistance to states for taking up flood management works and river 
management activities/ works in border areas. Report of Sub-Committee has been 
submitted to the aforesaid Committee of NITI Ayog in July-2020 
 
 
Constitutional provisions on flood management: 
2.10 As per constitutional provisions, the subject of flood management including erosion 
control falls within the purview of the States. The flood management and anti-erosion 
schemes are planned, investigated and implemented by the State Governments with own 
resources as per priority within the State. The Union Government only renders assistance 
to States which is technical, advisory, catalytic and promotional in nature.The subject of 
flood control has not been specifically mentioned in any of the three legislative lists 
included in the Constitution of India. However, drainage and embankments are mentioned 
in Entry 17 of List II (State List) and is mentioned as under: 
 

10 
 
“Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and 
embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provision of entry 56 of 
List I (Union List).”  
 
Entry 56 of List I (Union List) reads as follows: 
“Regulation and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent to 
which such regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared by 
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.” 
2.11 On being asked whether non-inclusion of the subject ‘Flood control’ in the Union or 
Concurrent list limits the role of the Union government in proper control/supervision of the 
floods and their management, the Department in its written reply stated: 
“In order to achieve long-term solution to the floods, the flood management has to be  
considered as part of integrated river basin management plan. Therefore, including the 
subject ”Flood Control” in the Union or Concurrent list may not serve the desired 
purpose as management of floods is only one of the component of entire river basin 
plan.  
 Ministry of Jal Shakti has been propagating the concept of River Basin 
Organizations(RBO) for overseeing the planning and development of water resources of 
a river basin as a whole. It is expected that once the RBOs are formed, the effective 
management of floods can be appropriately undertaken”.    
 
2.12 To a specific query as to whether inclusion of ‘Flood control’ in the Concurrent list 
would have leveraged the Union Government to deal the problem of   floods and its 
management in a holistic manner, the Department in its written submission stated as 
follows: 
 
“As stated above, ‘Flood Control’ has to be seen as part of overall development of water 
resources of river basin as the water available in the flood season is generally 
conserved for meeting the demands for rest of the year. Therefore, unless the subject, 
“Development of Water Resources” is brought under the Concurrent/Union List, the 
Union Government would not get the desired leverage to deal with problems of floods 
and its management.” 
 
2.13 When asked whether any proposal has been mooted by the Department for bringing 
the subject of ‘Flood control’, under concurrent list of the constitution, the Department 
replied as under: 
 
“As indicated above, in order to have an effective role by the Union Government in 
flood management, the subject “Water Resources Development” may have to be 
brought under the Concurrent list. However, as the subject has wider implications, the 
Department has not mooted any proposal for bringing the subject under concurrent 
list of the constitution”. 

11 
 
2.14 The Ministry have further informed the Committee that in order to achieve the goal 
of integrated river basin management, suitable legislative measures within the existing 
provisions of constitution have to be evoked. In this direction Ministry of Jal Shakti has 
initiated the formulation of River Management Bill under the provision of entry 56 of List I 
(Union List). Another legislation in the form of Dam Safety Bill, 2019 which will enable 
Union Government to play effective role in taking measures for prevention of flood related 
disaster has been taken up by Ministry of Jal Shakti and has already been passed in Lok 
Sabha in year 2019. The existing Disaster Management Act, 2005 also empowers Union 
Government to issue necessary directions to the State Government/Authorities to take 
appropriate measures for prevention of any impending disaster. 
 
Flood Plain Zoning 
 
2.15 According to the DoWR,RD and GR,Flood-Plain Zoning is a concept central to flood 
plain management. This concept recognises the basic fact that the flood plain of a river is 
essentially its domain and any intrusion into or developmental activity therein must 
recognise the river’s ‘right of way’. Flood-plain zoning measures aim at demarcating zones 
or areas likely to be affected by floods of different magnitudes or frequencies and 
probability levels, and specify the types of permissible developments in these zones, so 
that whenever floods actually occur, the damage can be minimised, if not avoided. 
Although, this approach is generally endorsed by all in principle, scant attention is given to 
it in actual practice, leading to increased flood damages. 
2.16 When asked about the work undertaken in all flood prone States relating to flood 
plain zoning, the Department in its written reply stated as follows: 
“Ministry of Jal Shakti has continuously impressed upon the states the need to adopt 
flood plain zoning approach. A model draft bill for flood plain zoning legislation was 
also circulated by the Union Government to all the States. This bill envisages zoning 
of flood plain of a river according to flood frequencies and defines the type of use of 
flood plain. The states of Manipur, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand, erstwhile State of 
Jammu & Kashmir had enacted legislation however, delineation and demarcation of 
flood plains is yet to be undertaken. 
 Major flood prone States viz Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Assam, 
Odisha etc have not taken initiative to enact flood plain zoning bill. The States 
expressed their inability to enact the Act mainly on account of reasons like high 
population density, practical difficulties in relocation and rehabilitation, scarcity of land 
resources in urban areas, etc”. 
 
2.17 On being asked whether the rules for River Regulation Zones have been notified 
and implemented, the Department in its written submission stated as follows: 

12 
 
“For regulating activities in flood plains of river Ganga and its tributaries, a Special 
Committee was constituted by Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation under the chairmanship of Chairman, Central Water 
Commission in August, 2017 to identify and demarcate the flood plains of river Ganga 
in segment B of Phase- I (Haridwar to Unnaoj) on one in twenty-five years' cycle or 
appropriately and to identify various zones of activities therein.  
  The Committee in its Report (September, 2019) identified the flood plains in 
aforesaid stretch of river Ganga and categorized the flood plains in two zones viz. No 
Development Zone and Restricted/ Regulatory Zone. Prohibited and regulatory 
activities for both these zones have also been specified in the report.Government of 
Uttar Pradesh has initiated the work of identification of flood plain zones as per 
recommendations of the Committee.  
  Government of Uttarakhand has also demarcated the flood plains in 
Uttarkashi and Haridwar District and specified the activities prohibited and permitted 
in the demarcated area. State of Jharkhand has informed that demarcation of flood 
plain zones will be carried out during 2024-2025, after obtaining requisite data”. 
 
Scientific Assessment of Flood Prone Area  
 
 
2.18 On being asked whether new technologies are being used to carry out scientific 
assessment of the flood prone areas using latest satellite imagery data and considering 
frequency of flooding, duration and depth of inundation etc, the Department in its written 
submission stated as follows: 
 
“An Expert Committee for scientific assessment of Flood Prone Area (FPA) in the 
country has been constituted under the chairmanship of Chairman, (Central Water 
Commission) CWC with members drawn from India Meteorological Department 
(IMD), Survey of India, Ganga Flood Control Commission (GFCC), Brahmaputra 
Board, National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), National Remote Sensing 
Centre  (NRSC), Planning Commission (NITI Ayog), Department of Space, Ministry of 
Agriculture, IIT Guwahati, IIT Roorkee, DoWR, etc. 
  The Expert Committee in its 2nd meeting held in June 2013 had decided to 
define the flood prone area as the area affected by flood having a return period of 10 
years. It further classified flood prone areas into three categories:  Severe - 
inundation area computed corresponding to Highest Flood Level(HFL) with respect to 
1 in 3 year flood frequency/ return period; Moderate - inundation area corresponding 
to 1 in 7 year flood and Normal - inundation area corresponding to 1 in 10 year flood. 
  Using the latest technology available today, the inundated area of India as a 
whole has been delineated by analyzing the Satellite Imageries available viz. Landsat 
(1984-2019), Microwave & Multispectral of Sentinel-1&2 (2014-2019) on Google Earth 
Engine Application Program Interface. Delineation of flood prone area corresponding 
to 10, 7 & 3 year return period floods has also been carried out and presented in the 
5th meeting of Expert Committee held on March, 2020. Refinement of the study 
carried out by CWC is underway in consultation with NRSC”. 

13 
 
Chapter III  
Floods in Assam 
 
Floods caused by Brahmaputra River 
3.1 When asked about the main reasons for devastating floods every year by 
Brahmaputra river, the Department in its written submission stated as follows: 
“The topographical and the geographical location of North East Region is unique with 
the hydro-meteorological situation making it one of the highest rainfall zones in the 
World. The State of Assam, the Gateway of North East India, is criss-crossed by 
number of major rivers originating from lower Himalayan ranges and debouching into 
the plains causing flash floods in the flood plains of Assam and neighbouring states. 
The main factors, which combine to create serious flood and erosion problems in 
Assam and its neighbouring states, are Heavy Rainfall, Physiographic Condition, High 
Silt Load, Encroachment of Riverine Areas, Steep Slope, Inadequate Drainage, 
Deforestation/Watershed Degradation, Obstruction at tributaries’ confluence with 
River Brahmaputra and Loss/destruction of wetlands”. 
3.2 On being asked about the remedial measures Department propose to take to 
prevent flood fury in Brahmaputra river basins including Assam, the Department replied as 
under: 
“To address the problem of flood in north-eastern states and the issue of flood 
storage needs in Brahmaputra basin, a committee consisting of representatives from 
CWC, Central Electricity Authority (CEA), NHPC, National Water Development 
Agency(NWDA), Brahmaputra Board and Govt of Arunachal Pradesh, was constituted 
by MoWR (Now Ministry of Jal Shakti) in 2013. In its report, the committee concluded 
that the flood or high discharge in Brahmaputra basin is basically due to very high 
rainfall in the Indian catchment of the basin, and suggested that in order to mitigate 
the flood peaks in Brahmaputra, flood storage are required in the basin. However, 
due to natural topography of the basin, these flood storages can be provided in Siang, 
Subansiri, Lohit and Dibang sub basins only. Based on its study, the Committee 
estimated that a flood storage of about 9.2Billion Cubic Meters(BCM) in Siang, 1.91 
BCM in Subansiri, 1.61 BCM in Lohit and 0.56 BCM in Dibang sub basin will be 
required, which may reduce the water level in Brahmaputra at Guwahati during floods 
by 1.2m to 1.5 m, depending upon the rainfall condition in intermediate catchment.  
  Long term solution to the flood problem lies in creation of storage reservoirs 
on rivers and their tributaries with dedicated/specific flood cushion by reducing the 
flood peaks and levels, integrated reservoir operation, interlinking of rivers etc. Short 
term solutions in form of embankments, anti erosion measures, etc to manage floods 
and erosion problem are necessary to safeguard the flood prone areas, properties 
and population”. 

14 
 
3.3 To a query about the status of manpower (both technical and non-technical) in 
Brahmaputra Board and the adverse effect on its functioning due to shortage of manpower, 
the Department stated as follows:  
“Due to retirement of officers and employees of Brahmaputra Board in bulk with effect 
from 2016, without corresponding fresh recruitment, the current manpower in 
Brahmaputra Board (both technical &non technical) is inadequate. Currently in 
Brahmaputra Board, out of 161 technical sanctioned posts, 61 are vacant whereas, 
out of 254 non technical Posts 168 are vacant. 
 
  The shortage of manpower does affect the functioning of Brahmaputra 
Board. However, the same is overcome to certain extent by entrusting additional 
charge to officials of some other organisations of the Department stationed in North 
East region”.  
 
3.4 When asked about the problems/hindrances being faced by the Department in 
containing the recurring floods in Assam and NE region, the Department in its written 
submission stated as under: 
“The flood management schemes are planned, formulated and implemented by the 
concerned State Government from their own resources as per their priority. The 
Union Government supplements the efforts of the States by providing technical 
guidance and promotional financial assistance for management of floods in critical 
areas. Most of the embankments were constructed on main stem of river 
Brahmaputra and its tributaries way back in 1960s, 70s. These embankments need 
raising & strengthening as well as bank protection measures in form of revetment or 
Reinforced cement concrete (RCC) porcupines requiring huge capital investment. 
  Lack of cooperation among States in respect of inter-state projects, lack of 
budgetary support by State Governments for maintenance of flood management 
measures, difficulty in implementation of flood plain zoning and regulations are some 
of the problem faced in checking the recurring floods in Assam and North East(NE) 
region.  
 
3.5 The State Government of Assam in their presentation before the Committee has inter 
alia stated the following facts: 
(i) RashtriyaBarhAyog identified 31.05 Lakh Ha i.e. 39.58% of total land area of the 
State as flood prone. It comprises 10.2 % of the total flood prone area of the 
country. Average of 0.8 million ha in Assam flooded annually since 1953. During 
major floods, area affected can be almost 50% of Assam’s total area of 7.8 
million ha. A minimum of 2000 villages are exposed to extensive flood 
inundation every year. Since 1954, Total area eroded is 4,27,000 Ha. (about 
7%) and rate of erosion has been 8,000Ha./Year. The Brahmaputra river area 
has almost doubled in the last century. 
 
 

15 
 
(ii) Most of the flood and bank protection structures were constructed as short term 
measures are very old and have become weak.  The Highest Flood Level (HFL) 
of the rivers in the flood plain are increasing due to continuous deposition of silt.  
River witnesses Chronic flooding and river bank erosion. Substantial 
displacement of population has occurred due to river bank erosion.  Flood and 
Erosion is particularly destructive today on account of the fact that the 
Brahmaputra Valley is densely populated.  Measures taken so far did not yield 
desired result on account of the extremely shallow river bed of the river & heavy 
sediment carried by the river in the monsoon.  Water storage reservoirs on the 
North Bank tributaries of the Brahmaputra are urgently needed. High population 
density in the flood plain indicates need for sufficient and adequate flood 
management works. 
 
3.6 Elaborating on the challenges faced by Assam due to constuction of Hydro Projects 
in Arunachal Pradesh, the representative of State Government of Assam during the course 
of oral evidence stated as follows: 
 
“Sir, I would like to highlight just one point and that is about storage reservoirs. It is a 
complex problem; it requires interaction between the Government of India, 
Government of Assam and Government of Arunachal Pradesh. There are certain 
things which the Government of Assam wants, there are certain things which the 
Government of Arunachal Pradesh wants and where the Government of India can 
play an honest broker. That is one and, of course, it requires significant amount of 
resources.  
Basically, it is too important a subject to be left to the Ministry of Power of the 
Government of India alone. This is something which has to be looked at as a 
multipurpose project as various entities are looking at what is to be done and if only 
return on investment is to be looked at in terms of what will be the cost of generation 
of power and how cheaply I can do it, then naturally you will never consider building a 
storage dam. But if that was the consideration to do it, then, perhaps, Bhakra or 
Damodhar Dams would never have been built. So, my request is that to the Northeast 
and to Assam, something similar is required and that is something which will be a 
game changer for the people of Assam and the Northeast”. 
 
3.7 When asked about the impact of run-of-the-river Hydro Electric Projects located in 
Arunachal Pradesh on the floods in Assam, the Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenationin a written reply stated as follows: 
“Some of the dams constructed for hydroelectric generation like Ranganadi, Pare,  
Doyang,  Kopili,  Umiam,  Serlui,  Tuirial, etc. located upstream of Assam in 
Arunachal Pradesh and other states release water on account of heavy inflows in 
rivers due to high precipitation in upper catchment of their rivers which resulted in 
some damages in downstream areas in Assam. As most of these projects are run-off-
the river projects, there is no scope of absorbing the flood peaks. However, with 

16 
 
proper operation, coordination and regulation of reservoirs there is some possibility of 
achieving flood moderation up to a certain extent.    
Recently, exercising the powers delegated section 10 of the Disaster Management 
Act, 2005, Secretary, Department of Water Resources, RD & GR, Ministry of Jal 
Shakti has issued necessary directions to all authorities to inform downstream 
authorities whenever a decision is taken by them to release water from the reservoirs/ 
dams within its limits. The said decision should be communicated sufficiently in 
advance by the concerned State/ UT Government/ Authorities/ Dam Authorities in 
order to allow mitigating measures to be set up by the downstream authorities against 
any impending flood situation, which could be caused due to the release of water 
from the dams/reservoirs”.  
 
3.8 Furter elaborating on the impact of hydro  projects in Arunachal Pradesh on the 
floods in Assam, the representative of the Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation during evidence stated as under: 
 
"Sir, many a times it also arises that China will divert water from its territory and we 
will have water security problem in Brahmaputra river. As you know, the area of 
Galling in Arunachal Pradesh, which is on the border, the area below it, there is a lot 
of rain. Now it is a matter that even if there is not much water from it, we still get a lot 
of rain. But, as I mentioned earlier, we do not have any storage structure of our own. 
We hear about China that they have built a diversion structure, so they have not built 
dams on it as far as we get information. You might know that some of his projects 
were first thought of. You are right that all the power projects built so far are almost 
run-of-the-river power projects. They are not storage projects. Large storage projects 
are nonexistent. The first was that there would be three Siang projects in Upper 
Phase - Upper Siang, Middle Siang and Lower Siang. Later, a large storage dam was 
thought to be built on Upper Siang. That would be beneficial during floods in Assam. 
There have been many meetings regarding that. Whenever multipurpose projects or 
dams are built anywhere, there are some submergence there. Submergenceare not 
very large there. There is a city Yingkiong, which is the headquarters of Upper Siang 
district. Yingkiong has a population of only about eight to ten thousand people. There 
is an issue of rehabilitating those 8-10 thousand people. Their number is less, but 
there is a little more sensitivity. As you understand, Arunachal Pradesh is basically a 
tribal state. Most recently, about ten days ago, the Honorable Minister went there and 
I too. Along with other things, it also happened to the honorable Chief Minister of 
Arunachal Pradesh and the honorable ministers of that region, that we should give 
them a better package and if we make them a better city than the present one. It will 
be good if you do it. There is a big issue of rehabilitation of the people there. If that is 
resolved and if the project of Upper Siang is made then it will be very good. The 
projects that we have, will be better than this because it will also reduce the 
generation cost of power and the biggest benefit will be that the flood situation in 
Assam will be overcome every year". 

17 
 
3.9 The Government of Assam in their power point presentation to the Committee have 
submitted the following issues/suggestions for consideration of the Committee: 
 
 
(i) Fresh Funding under Flood Management and Border Area Programme 
(FMBAP) needs to be provided by Government of India (GoI).  
(ii) State Govt. has given suggestions on guidelines of the new Flood 
Management and Border Areas Programme (FMBAP) schemes which GoI is 
considering to restart. This needs to be accorded priority. 
(iii) Central Share of Funding of FMP should be on 90-10 pattern.  
(iv) Assam should be given priority in FMP Projects. 
(v) River erosion in Assam had a crippling affect on the economy of the State. 
Erosion should be included in admissible list of calamities for assistance under 
National Disaster Response Force (NDRF)/ State Disaster Response Fund 
(SDRF). 
(vi) Embankments of Brahmaputra and Barak are old & weak. Used extensively as 
roads in the remote areas of the State. Need to be strengthened & converted 
as “Road Cum Embankment”.   
(vii) To protect Majuli island and for communication, peripheral embankment 
system of Majuli Island should be improved.  
(viii) At the request of State Govt to Hon’ble PM, GoI is considering setting up a 
basin level organization for integrated management of flood & erosion in the 
North East.   
(ix) Assam, has given its suggestion on the draft North East Water Management 
Authority (NEWMA) Bill. The same may be placed in Parliament after 
incorporating suggestion given by Assam. 
 
North East Water Management Authority (NEWMA)  
 
3.10 The DoWR,RD and GD has informed the Committee that for integrated 
management of Water Resources for whole of NE region, Sikkim and Brahmaputra basin of 
West Bengal, setting up of a multi disciplinary body viz. Noth East Water Management 
Authorty is under active consideration. The salient features of the proposed North East 
Water Management Authority (NEWMA) which is to be set up by legislation (Bill) are- 
(a) Brahmaputra and Barak river basin shall be managed as a single system and in an 
ecologically sustainable manner as a common pool community resource held, by the 
basin States, under public trust doctrine to achieve food security, livelihood support, 
and ensure equitable and sustainable development. 
(b) Basin States shall in their respective territories develop, manage and regulate the 
waters of an inter-state river basin in an equitable and sustainable manner, provided 

18 
 
that the determination of optimum utilisation of waters and adequate river flows shall 
be as per the river basin Master Plan. 
(c) Demand management of water shall be given priority, which economises on water 
use, maximises value from water and bringing in maximum efficiency in use of water 
resources. 
(d) NEWMA will have two tier arrangements comprising of Governing Council (GC) 
under the chairmanship of Hon'ble Minister Jal Shakti and Co-chairmanship of Vice 
Chairman, NITI Aayog and an Executive Board under the chairmanship of Chief 
Executive Officer (CEO) of the authority. 
The draft Bill has been prepared in consultative mode with all stake holders 
at the highest level and was circulated to all concerned States and related central 
Ministries, NITI Aayog, etc. A conference of Hon'ble Chief Ministers and Ministers of 
North East Region (NER) States was also held under the chairmanship of Hon'ble 
Minister Jal Shakti in March 2020. Draft Bill along with draft Cabinet note is currently 
being examined by Ministry of Law and Justice. Efforts are being made to introduce 
the Bill in the Parliament at the earliest. 
 
  

19 
 
Chapter IV 
 Floods in Kerala 
 
 
Floods in Kerala 
 
4.1 When asked about the problems being faced by the Department in flood control and 
forecasting in the State of Kerala, the DoWR, RD and GR replied as under: 
“Kerala is situated along the Western Ghats with most of the towns and cities located 
on the foothills. The state has several small intra-state rivers with very small 
catchment areas, almost all of them flowing west toward Arabian Sea. Also, the steep 
slopes of rivers involved, leave a very small response time to issue a forecast for any 
station with respect to any base station upstream. The rivers are flashy in nature and 
swell up pretty quickly, and hence, effective level based conventional forecast is very 
difficult to make. Presently CWC is issuing the flood forecasts by adopting rainfall-
runoff mathematical modelling in respect of 5 stations (3 level and 2 inflow) in State 
of Kerala”. 
 
 
4.2 On being asked whether any efforts were made to prevent the floods in Kerala in 
2018 and what steps have been taken to combat the menace of floods in the Kerala State 
post 2018, the Department in a written reply stated as under: 
"During the year 2018, CWC was not having any flood forecasting station in Kerala 
as there was no request from Government of Kerala to start flood forecasting activity 
in their State. Thereafter, 5 stations were identified by Government of Kerala and 
flood forecasting activity in Kerala started from 2019 onwards. Subsequent to 2018 
floods, CWC also studied the reservoir releases and made some recommendations 
to the Government of Kerala to follow in case of excess rainfall. This report was 
shared with all stake holders in Kerala. To prevent faulty reservoir operations, State 
Government has been advised to formulate rule curves for major reservoirs based on 
probability of various inflows over a long time series. CWC has rendered technical 
assistance to Government of Kerala in preparation of rule curves for 3 major 
reservoirs (Kakki, Idukki, and Idamalayar)". 
 
4.3 Apprising the Committee about the challenges faced by Kerala in flood control, the 
representative of State Government of Kerala during the oral evidence stated as follows: 
 
“In Kerala, we hardly store 7 per cent of the water. Our reservoirs are very limited. We 
can store only 7 per cent of water. An hon. Member asked a question as to what is 
the problem with new dams. Around 95 per cent of our dams were constructed 
between 1960 to 1980. After the Forest Conservation Act and the Wildlife Protection 
Act came into force, we have a lot of hurdles to get clearance for the dams. There is 
also a strong environmental lobby in Kerala which is also against creating more dams. 
We do not have much space like other States. Ours is a very narrow State. Most of 

20 
 
the potential reservoir sites are inside the forest area which comprise around 28 per 
cent of the State’s area. So, a large reservoir, which will actually store the water, is 
coming in the forest area. So, it needs forest clearance. Even during the Cauvery 
water dispute, we got the allocation for Attappady Irrigation Project but we have not 
yet got clearance from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. After 
around 20 years fight, we got the allocation. The Supreme Court has also sanctioned 
that project but the project has not yet got clearance from the Ministry. That is one 
problem we are facing”. 
 
4.4 The witness further added: 
 
“In other reservoirs, the catchment area is very big, so you will get a lead time, you 
will know that within five days or seven days how much flood will come. As far as 
reservoirs in Kerala are concerned, our lead time is limited to three to five hours. No 
flood forecasting will work for Kerala. The problem that we face in our State is that still 
we do not have 14 days qualitative prediction. When we look into IMD’s prediction for 
the next five days, we can take it with 75 per cent confidence. But our problem is, if 
IMD is saying that heavy rain is going to come and five days before if I am releasing 
big quantity of water into the river, I do not have time. At that time, the quantity will be 
more and the river may be flooded without rain.  
  So, we have devised a strategy that we analysed the data of 40 years 
because we constructed Idukki and Idamala reservoirs were constructed 40 years 
ago. We sat with experts and analysed on which month we are getting more water 
and more rain. We are always creating a space there so that we can have moderate 
releases from the dams. That helps us because we are not allowing water to cross 
that particular ruler. My permitted level in my dam is this much, I can store up to this 
level. But when I reach this level, I will increase my power generation or I will open my 
spillway and see that the water level does not cross that particular level so that there 
is enough space. For example, if you are hit by a car running at 5 km. per hour speed, 
there will not be any problem. But if a car running at 200 km. per hour speed, that will 
cause you problem. We are adopting the same principle here and we are releasing 
water in moderate quantities”. 
 
4.5 As regards, the coordination between the Government of Kerala and Tamil Nadu, 
the represenative of Government of Kerala apprised the Committee as follows: 
 
“The hon. Member raised a question regarding Tamil Nadu. The authorities of Tamil 
Nadu are extending a lot of support. But this time, as far as Mullaperiyar project is 
concerned, we requested Tamil Nadu that they have to take more water in 
Mullaperiyar river and they have taken. They have cooperated with us. But this rule is 
important to see that we are adopting the same principle in Kerala. As far as the 
Parambikulam-Aliyar Project is concerned, we created a WhatsApp Group. All Tamil 
Nadu Engineers from Parambikulam-Aliyar Project Group came and because of the 
coordination with them, we avoided a flood situation Chalakudy also. They fully 
cooperated with us; whatever suggestions we have given in a professional manner, 

21 
 
they respected them and they also have given us suggestions to us. We actually 
deliberated on them”. 
 
4.6 The State Government of Kerala in its written submission informed the Committee of 
the following facts: 
(i) The very important matter of concern for Kerala is that, there is sharp elevation 
difference between the hills and the sea in the geographical structure of the State with 
a high mountainous Western Ghat at Anamudi, which is at an elevation of 2695m from 
Mean Sea Level(MSL).  Most of the areas in the elevation range from 1600m to 
2500m.  This elevation falls very rapidly in a narrow width between the Ghats and the 
sea.  This sharp elevation difference along with the high intensity rainfall during the 
monsoon months is the main reason for the acute flood problem faced by the State.  
(ii) Except in rare cases, the river channels are sufficiently deep in hilly tracts and the 
midlands, and they reach usually the river banks containing the flood without 
breaching. But in the low lands, the banks are very low and the river section can not 
contain the high floods, which resulted in overflowing the spate to the adjacent lands 
and get them inundated. The large scale changes in land-use pattern due to rapid 
development and high population density, reclamation of low lands which used to 
provide cushioning effect to the flood waters and the obstructions caused to the natural 
drainages etc have negatively influenced to worsen the flood impacts. State has only 
two major reservoirs viz. Idukki and Idamalayar, which are having more than 1000 
Million Cubic Metre (MCM) live storage capacity, where we can provide some 
moderate flood cushion balancing the necessity for our lean months demands of 
drinking water, irrigation, electricity generation, saline water ingression mitigation and 
industrial uses. 
(iii) There is spatial variability of rainfall across the State with certain places receiving more 
than average rainfall of 3000 mm and others less than 1000 mm. The temporal and 
spatial water availability of the State is widely varying too as Kerala is now facing floods 
in monsoon and acute water shortages during lean months. For lean season 
demands, Kerala  depends on the combined live storage of 5072 MCM under 35 
reservoirs under various agencies, which hardly store 6.5% of the annual run-off.  
(i) The studies conducted by the Central Water Commission and the IIT Madras 
emphatically concluded that the opening of dams has little role in the extreme floods in 
2018 that occurred in the State of Kerala, but it was due to the unprecedented, 
extraordinary and extremely heavy rainfall which occurred within 3 days that had 
caused the deluge. 
(ii) During the monsoon the sea coast of Kerala is affected with severe sea attack due to 
high tides. Due to this severe sea attack the areas near the coastline experiences 
flooding.  But in order to carry out reformation/rehabilitation of coastal protection works, 
there is significant limitations of funds under State Plan. Though a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme namely “Flood Management and Border Areas Programme (FMBAP)” exists, 
the State is unable to access the same owing to mandatory clearances required from 
the State Coastal Zone Management Authority. Though the State had approached its 
authority, it was informed that the clearance could not be issued unless EIA 

22 
 
(Environmental Impact Assessment) for one whole year is carried out. It was requested 
to the authority for exempting the State from insisting the norms at least for the works 
related to reformation of already existing sea-walls, if carried out, so as to settle some 
of the issues in vulnerable reaches. The authority informed that the same would not be 
possible. 
(iii) Regarding the Inter-State dams, situated in Kerala and operated by Tamil Nadu, viz. 
the Mullaperiyar Dam (MPD) and three dams in the Parambikulam-Aliyar Project 
(PAP) system, there is still lack of coordination between the two State Governments 
resulting in delay in finalization of rule curves of two major reservoirs which is essential 
for ensuring the safe operation of these two reservoirs.  
 
 
  

23 
 
Chapter V 
 Flood Forecasting 
Flood Forecasting  
 
5.1 The Department of WR, RD & GR has informed the Committee that the work of 
flood forecasting and warning in India is entrusted with the Central Water Commission 
(CWC). Flood Forecasting and flood warning in India was commenced in a small way in the 
year 1958 with the establishment of a unit in the Central Water Commission (CWC), New 
Delhi, for flood forecasting for the river Yamuna at Delhi. Presently, there are around 1600 
Hydro-meteorological sites being operated by CWC across the country covering 20 river 
basins for gauge, discharge, sediment & water quality observations. Many of these stations 
are used as flood monitoring stations for formulating flood forecasts.  
 
State-wise Existing Flood Forecasting Stations 
Sl. No. Name of State/ UT Number of flood forecasting Stations 
Level Inflow Total 
1 Andhra Pradesh 10 9 19 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 3 0 3 
3 Assam 30 0 30 
4 Bihar 40 3 43 
5 Chhattisgarh 1 2 3 
6 Gujarat 6 7 13 
7 Haryana 1 1 2 
8 Himachal Pradesh 1 0 1 
9 Jammu & Kashmir 3 0 3 
10 Jharkhand 2 15 17 
11 Karnataka 1 14 15 
12 Kerala 3 2 5 
13 Madhya Pradesh 2 10 12 
14 Maharashtra 8 13 21 
15 Odisha 12 7 19 
16 Rajasthan 2 11 13 
17 Sikkim 3 5 8 
18 Tamil Nadu 4 11 15 
19 Telangana 5 7 12 
20 Tripura 2 0 2 
21 Uttar Pradesh 39 5 44 
22 Uttarakhand 4 2 6 
23 West Bengal  12 4 16 
24 Daman & Diu 1 0 1 
25 NCT of Delhi 2 0 2 
Total 197* 128 325* 
 
 
* As per information submitted by the Department, now CWC operates 198 Level Forecast Stations 
thereby increasing the total tally to 326. 

24 
 
5.2 The activity of flood forecasting comprises of Level Forecasting and Inflow 
Forecasting. The level forecasts help the user agencies in deciding mitigating measures 
like evacuation of people and shifting people and their movable property to safer locations. 
The Inflow Forecasting is used by various dam authorities in optimum operation of 
reservoirs for safe passage of flood downstream as well as to ensure adequate storage in 
the reservoirs for meeting demand during non-monsoon period. Presently, Flood forecasts 
are issued by CWC at 326 stations (128 Inflow Forecast Stations + 198 Level Forecast 
Stations) as per Standard Operating Procedure. Annually, about 7000 flood forecasts are 
issued by CWC during floods.  
 
 
5.3 When asked about the sufficiency of Flood forecasting Stations to cover the whole 
country for the purpose of issuing flood forecasting warning, the Department replied as 
under: 
“Presently, CWC has operationalised 326 Flood Forecast Stations. Out of which 198 
stations are Level Forecast Stations in various villages and towns along the banks of 
various rivers and 128 are inflow forecast stations for various Dams/reservoirs/ 
Barrages etc. These stations are spread over 25 States/UT and 20 major river 
basins.While level forecast has almost reached the saturation levels with scope of 
covering some more stations in those states which are uncovered; there is scope of 
increasing the inflow forecast as CWC network is covering only 128 reservoirs in the 
country”. 
 
5.4 On being asked about the technology being used for gauging water flows, the 
Department stated as under: 
 
“The manual Hydro-meteorological Stations are being modernised with automated 
Data Acquisition System and Data transmission through Satellite (telemetry) from 
1999 onwards. As on date 941 stations have been installed. Another 153 stations 
are in advanced stage of installation. Manual observations are continued in all these 
stations also as a redundancy in case of any failure of equipment at times of flood”. 
 
5.5 When asked about the reasons for not setting up Inflow Forecasting Stations by the 
CWC in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu Kashmir, 
the Department in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“Inflow Forecasting is done for Dams/ Reservoirs/ Barrages for providing advance 
information about the flow into these structures. Flood Forecasting is done based on 
the request from various State Government/Project Authorities. No request has been 
received from the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Himachal Pradesh and 
Jammu & Kashmir. Further, there is no major storage structure across the important 
rivers in these States except for some Barrages and small storage structures”. 
 
5.6 On being  asked whether there was lack of coordination between the local 
administration and CWC in providing timely information thereby causing enormous 

25 
 
hardship to the masses during the deluge, the Department in a written reply submitted as 
follows: 
 
“CWC is providing all flood related information to concerned States including Daily 
Flood Bulletins, Flood Forecast, Daily Situation Reports cum Advisories. Before 
commencement of flood season, regional level stake holder consultations are done 
and contact details of concerned nodal officers are updated and exchanged. Separate 
social media groups are created for passing flood information from respective 
Divisional Flood Control Room (DFCR) of CWC to the concerned Stakeholders 
including State Government Departments, Project Authorities as well as local SDRF 
and NDRF battalions. Hence, it is ensured that all flood related information reaches 
the concerned Stakeholders immediately as soon as forecasts are formulated”.  
 
  

26 
 
Chapter VI 
Flood Management Programme 
 
6.1 During the XI Plan, Government of India had launched "Flood Management 
Programme for providing central assistance to the State Government for undertaking works 
relating to river management, flood control, anti-erosion, drainage development, flood 
proofing, restoration of damged flood management works and anti-sea erosion works.  
 
6.2 When asked about the number of works approved and their cost under Flood 
Management Programme since the launch of its programme, the Department in its written 
submission stated as follows:  
 
“A total of 522 projects with an estimated cost of Rs 13238.37 Cr have been approved 
for central assistance since XI Plan (XI Plan - 420 projects with an estimated cost of 
Rs 7857.08 Cr and XII Plan - 102 projects with an estimated cost of Rs. 5381.29 Cr).  
As per available information, so far 414 schemes have been completed; 64 schemes 
foreclosed (1 no. shifted to RMBA) and 44 schemes are ongoing.  The details are at 
Annexure-III”. 
 
6.3 When asked about the total area that has been protected against floods under the 
projects/schemes, the Department in a written reply stated as under:   
 
"The completed 414 projects have provided flood protection to an area of about 
4.987 mha. This protected area also includes restoration of earlier protected area by 
means of works like Raising & strengthening (R&S) of embankments etc. A 
population of about 51.97 million has also been benefited with these 414 completed 
schemes".  
 
6.4 On being further asked about the problems/obstacles being faced by the 
Government in implementation of these Programmes, the DoWR, RD & GR replied as 
under: 
“It has been experienced that flood management projects undertaken by the State 
Governments get unduly delayed. The main reasons attributed to delays as 
highlighted by the States pertains to acquisition of land, encroachment of land, 
inadequate budgetary provision at Central and State level, difficult access to remote 
sites, contractual issues, limited working season,  etc”. 
 
Flood Management and Border Areas Programme (FMBAP) 
 
6.5 The Department of WR, RD & GR has stated that a comprehensive scheme titled 
“Flood Management and Border Areas Programme (FMBAP)” with an outlay of Rs 3342.00 
Cr (FMP-Rs 2642 Cr & RMBA-Rs 700 Cr)  for period 2017-2020 with merged components 
from the existing Flood Management Programme (FMP) and River Management Activities 

27 
 
& Works related to Border Areas (RMBA) schemes during XII Five Year Plan  was 
approved by the Union Cabinet and it aims at completion of the on-going projects already 
approved under FMP. The details of these  components are as under: 
 
(i) Flood Management Program (FMP): The Ministry had approved Flood 
Management Program (FMP) with an outlay of Rs 8,000 Cr in XI Plan which was 
continued with outlay of Rs 10,000 Cr during XII Plan also. A Central Assistance 
of Rs 4873.07 Cr was released during XI &XII Plan( XI-Rs 3566.00 Cr and XII-
Rs 1307.07 Cr).  
(ii) River Management Activities & Works related to Border Areas (RMBA) 
Component:This was started as a Central Sector Scheme with an outlay of Rs 
820 Cr in XI plan for taking up non-structural measures such as Hydrological 
Observation and Flood Forecasting works on common border rivers, payment to 
neighboring countries (China) for supplying Hydro-observation(HO) data on 
common rivers, investigation of WR projects in neighbouring countries and 
activities of GFCC was funded through this scheme. In addition to above 
activities, 100% Central Assistance was also provided for taking up structural 
measures such as Anti Erosion/Flood Management schemes on rivers on 
international borders and Union Territories. The scheme with an outlay of Rs 740 
Cr was also continued during XII Plan. A Central Assistance (as grant in aid) of 
Rs563.61 Cr was released during XI &XII Plan( XI plan-Rs. 340.41 Cr and XII 
Plan-Rs223.2 Cr). 
 
6.6 The Department apprised the Committee that the Flood Management Programme 
(FMP) was implemented during XI Plan with an outlay of Rs. 8000 crore. Under the 
Programme, central assistance was provided to State Governments for taking up works 
related to river management, flood control, anti-erosion, drainage development, flood 
proofing, restoration of damaged flood management works and anti-sea erosion. The 
pattern of funding was 90 % (Centre):10 % (State) for Special Category States and 75 % 
(Centre): 25 % (State) for General/ Non-Special Category States.  During XI Plan, 420 
projects with a total estimated cost of Rs.7857.08 crore were approved under FMP. Central 
assistance to the States/UTs to the tune of Rs. 3566.00 crore was released during this plan 
period. During XII Plan, the Government of India approved continuation of “Flood 
Management Programme” with an outlay of Rs.10000 crore.  The funding pattern under the 
Scheme for the special category States covering the North Eastern States, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Uttarakhand was revised to 70% (Centre) :30% (State) 
and for General States – 50% (Centre) : 50% (State). During XII Plan, 102 works with a 
total estimated cost of Rs.5381.28 crore were approved under FMP. Central assistance to 
the States/UTs to the tune of Rs. 1307.07 crore was released during this plan period.Thus 
total release during XI & XII Plan was Rs 4873.07 Cr under FMP.  

28 
 
 
6.7 When asked about the funding pattern between the Centre and States regarding the 
Flood Management Programme, the Secretary during the course of oral evidence held on 
6.8.2020  replied as follows: 
 
“But more than funding pattern, for your kind information, the total money, which we 
get, in India, do not pay more than ten percent of the amount spent for flood control. 
You are from Bihar, you will know how much you get. Our year-round budget has 
been 500 - 600 crores in the last three years. One is the funding pattern and the other 
is total quantum of funds. Now, only 500-600 crores will be available to the states. 
This is a much bigger problem. States do not have objections at 60: 40 or 90: 10. 
They say give us more money, take new projects which we are unable to take. 
Currently there is restriction that new projects will not be taken this year. This year 
was to be taken, but only after the full report of the Finance Commission can be 
taken. 
 
6.8 During the sitting held on 17.8.2020, the Secretary further stated as follows: 
 
“My next point is this. There was a lot of discussion that took place about funding, 
revenue generation and funding pattern. Again, pardon me for saying so, as Sir has 
said, outlay is one. In my opinion, I would be a little frank that outlay does not mean 
so much unless it is backed by the budget provision. So, we may have an outlay Rs. 
8,000 crore; we may have an outlay of Rs. 10,000 crore in the next five year plan, but 
what is the budget, which is made available to me. As I told you, budget for flood 
control has been about Rs. 500 crore to Rs. 600 crore for the last three-four years 
every year. So, basically, what we provide is the technical support to the States for 
formulating the project, appraising the project. As far funds are concerned, most of 
the States – as Assam also said – they have also gone to external funding and 
external borrowing etc. It is because our budget provision for flood control is very, 
very limited. Sir, you would remember, when you discussed about the budget 
provisions, our total budget provision this year also is less than Rs. 9,000 crore for all 
the schemes put together, which includes about Rs. 1,000 crore salaries and 
establishment expenses. So, Rs. 8,000 crore would be the total budget provision 
whether it is for irrigation, miner irrigation, surface, lift, flood control, Ganga and other 
rivers – everything put together. But anyway, some of the problems, which were there 
as far as the funding pattern was concerned and non-inclusion of some of the rivers 
apart from Kosi and Gandak in Bihar and other things, are being taken care of in the 
new guidelines, which are almost finalised. The Sub-Committee, which was formed, 
has given its report, and Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog is looking at it. May be, shortly, 
the new guidelines would be there, which would take care of those problems relating 
to funding pattern etc. 
  Sir, as far as funding of projects is concerned, either we have budget 
provision or we have extra budgetary resources. Now, as far as flood management is 
concerned, there is no extra budgetary resources as far as our Ministry is concerned. 
State Governments may be borrowing. But yes, you are right, Sir. It was discussed 

29 
 
earlier also. For example, Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY), 
major/medium irrigation projects. We have borrowed from National Bank for 
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD); and this year, I would be required to 
pay. Out of Rs. 8,000 crore which is left with me, I would have to pay about Rs. 2,800 
crore towards the interest and the principal payment for the amount, which has been 
borrowed in the past. So, that means, the actual money, which is to be available in 
the budget, would be Rs. 8000 crore minus Rs. 2,800 crore. But yes, we can get 
budgetary resources from outside, which would be in addition to what the budget 
provision is there”. 
 
 
6.9 On drawing the attention of the Department to the demands of the States to 
increase the Centre's share under  FMP scheme to 90 % which was reduced  to 50% under 
XIIth Plan the Department in a written reply stated as follows: 
 
"The funding pattern of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) is decided by 
Ministry of Finance, GoI as a policy matter and central assistance to States is given 
following the directions of Ministry of Finance. The State of Assam being a North East 
State and therefore funding pattern during XII Plan for FMP Schemes in State of 
Assam was 70% (Central) : 30% (State). Further, Ministry of Jal shakti has proposed 
to NITI Aayog Committee  for adopting funding pattern in general category States to 
be 60 % (Centre): 40 % (State) and for projects of 8 North Eastern States, J&K, 
Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand, to be 90 % (Centre): 10 % (State)".   
 
 
6.10 The Department have further apprised the Committee that currently the Ministry of 
Jal Shakti has no proposal under consideration to set up a dedicated fund for Flood 
Management Programme (FMP) on the lines of Clean Ganga Fund. 
 
 
  

30 
 
Chapter VII 
Interlinking of Rivers (ILR) 
 
7.1 To a query whether there is any proposal under consideration in the Ministry on 
inter-basin transfer of water, the Department in a written reply apprised the Committee as 
follows: 
“Government of India has taken up the Interlinking of Rivers project in a consultative 
manner and has accorded top priority. The National Perspective Plan (NPP) was 
prepared by the then Ministry of Irrigation (now Ministry of Jal Shakti) in August 1980 
for water resources development through inter basin transfer of water, for transferring 
water from water surplus basins to water-deficit basins. Under the NPP, the National 
Water Development Agency (NWDA) has identified 30 links (16 under Peninsular 
Component and 14 under Himalayan Component) for preparation of Feasibility 
Reports (FRs). The Pre-feasibility reports of all the 30 links have been completed and 
circulated to concerned States.  
 
Under the NPP, four priority links have also been identified for preparation of Detailed 
Project Reports (DPR) under the Peninsular Rivers Development Component viz; 
Ken-Betwa link project (KBLP), Damanganga-Pinjal link project, Par-Tapi-Narmada 
link project and Godavari-Cauvery link project. Based on the concurrence of the 
concerned States, DPRs of KBLP, Damanganga-Pinjal link project and Par-Tapi-
Narmada link project have been completed and sent to concerned States. 
 
The implementation of interlinking of riversas per National Perspective Plan would 
give benefits of 25 million ha of irrigation from surface waters, 10 million ha by 
increased use of ground waters, raising the ultimate irrigation potential from 140 
million ha to 175 million ha and generation of 34 million Kilo Watt (KW) of power, 
apart from the incidental benefits of flood control, drought mitigation, navigation, 
water supply, fisheries, salinity and pollution control etc”. 
 
7.2 On being further asked about the execution of any project for  Inter Linking of River 
as well as the major problems being faced by the Department in implementation of the ILR 
Projects, the Department in its written submission stated as follows: 
“Four priority links for preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) under   Peninsular 
Rivers Component have been identified viz; Ken-Betwa Link, Damanganga-Pinjal 
Link, Par-Tapi-Narmada link and Godavari-Cauvery link.  Based on the concurrence 
of the concerned States, Detailed Project Reports of Ken-Betwa link project (Phase-
I,II& Comprehensive report), Damanganga-Pinjal link and Par-Tapi-Narmada link have 
been completed. The techno-economic clearance and various statutory clearances of 
the Ken-Betwa link project phase-I have been accorded except Stage-II forest 
clearance and Central Environment Committee (CEC) clearance of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court.  The techno-economic clearance to the Damanganga-Pinjal link project has 
also been accorded subject to statutory clearances. The DPR of Par-Tapi-Narmada 
link is under technical appraisal in Central Water Commission. The draft MoA/MoU for 

31 
 
implementation of Ken-Betwa, Damanganga-Pinjal and Par-Tapi-Narmada link 
projects have been sent to party States which are under discussion presently.   
Major problems being faced in implementation of ILR projects  
 Achieving a consensus among the States concerned for water sharing and 
implementation. 
 Some concerns have been expressed about the requirement of power to lift 
waters as proposed in link proposals. 
 States have an apprehension that the link proposals may have adverse effects on 
the existing irrigation and power requirements. 
 Submergence of land and Relief and Rehabilitation (R&R) issues”. 
 
 
7.3 When asked whether any steps have been taken for bringing  comprehensive 
legislation for optimum development of inter-State rivers and river valleys as envisaged 
under the National Water Policy – 2012, the Department stated as under: 
 
“The Ministry after holding detailed deliberations has come out with draft River Basin 
Management Bill, 2018. The draft River Basin Management Bill proposes optimum 
development of inter-State rivers by facilitating inter-State coordination ensuring 
scientific planning of land and water resources taking basin/sub-basin as unit with 
unified perspectives of water in all its forms (including soil moisture, ground and 
surface water) and ensuring comprehensive and balanced development of both 
catchment and command areas. The draft Bill proposes to establish 13 River Basin 
Authorities for various river basins of the country. It is expected that enactment of the 
proposed legislation would result in optimum integrated development and 
management of inter-State River waters with basin approach and will result in change 
of environment from the one of conflicts to that of cooperation. This draft Bill has been 
circulated to the State Governments and other stake holders for their comments and 
suggestions and has also been placed in public domain for eliciting comments/ 
suggestions from the general public at large. The draft Bill is currently under 
consultation stage”. 
 
  

32 
 
Chapter VIII 
Integrated Reservoir Operation for Flood Management 
 
Release of water from Dams 
 
8.1 The Committee note that in last few years, dam releases has become an issue as 
far as flooding in downstream reaches is concerned. The Department of Water Resources, 
River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation have cited the following instances of flooding 
occurred in the recent past due to sudden release of water from dams in one State has 
wreaked havoc in other States: 
 
2019 
i) Releases from Koyna Dam and other small dams in Maharashtra as well as 
Almatti Dam in Karnataka creating flood like situation in Telangana and Andhra 
Pradesh 
ii) Releases from Chambal basin dams in Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan and 
Betwa Basin dams in Madhya Pradesh and UP creating flood like situation in 
UP, Bihar and West Bengal in Ganga 
iii) Releases from Bhakra Beas Management Board (BBMB) Projects in HP and 
Punjab creating flood like situation in Punjab. 
 
2018  
i) Releases from Dams creating flood like situation in Kerala. 
 
2016  
i) Releases from Bansagar Dam in Madhya Pradesh and Rihand dam in Uttar 
Pradesh creating flood like situation in Patna in Bihar and its downstream areas”. 
 
 
8.2 When asked how strictly the rules regarding release of water from dams are 
followed and who is the final authority to decide release of water from dams, the 
Department in its reply stated as under: 
 
"To prevent faulty reservoir operations, State Governments have been advised to 
formulate rule curves for major reservoirs based on probability of various inflows over 
a long time series. CWC has rendered technical assistance to Government of Kerala 
in preparation of rule curves for 3 major reservoirs (Kakki, Idukki, and Idamalayar). 
Damodar Valley Reservoir Regulation Committee has prepared rules levels for 
various reservoirs of Damodar valley system under guidance of CWC. Preparation of 
the Rule Curves for Ukai reservoir (Gujarat) has also been carried out by CWC. 
Agencies like State Govts/Project Authorities are responsible for managing the 
reservoir operations and are final authority to decide release of Water from the Dams. 
In some cases, the regulation of reservoir(s) is done through Committees such 
Damodar Valley Reservoir Regulation Committee, Bansagar Reservoir Regulation 
Committee, etc. Similarly, Bhakra Beas Management Board operates Bhakra and 
Pong reservoirs through a Committee comprising of BBMB officials and member from 
co-basin States". 
 

33 
 
8.3 Elaborating on the matter, the DoWR,RD and GR  has stated that in past some 
instances have been reported whereby dams constructed for hydroelectric power 
generation and other purposes such as irrigation located in upstream States released water 
on account of heavy inflows in rivers due to high precipitation in upper catchment of their 
rivers. This resulted in damages in downstream areas located in other State. However, with 
proper operation, coordination and regulation of reservoirs some flood moderation could 
have been achieved and damages to downstream areas could have been controlled to a 
certain extent.    
8.4 Recently, exercising the powers delegated section 10 of the Disaster Management 
Act, 2005, Secretary, Department of Water Resources, RD & GR, Ministry of Jal Shakti has 
issued necessary directions to all authorities to inform downstream authorities whenever a 
decision is taken by them to release water from the reservoirs/ dams within its limits. The 
said decision should be communicated sufficiently in advance by the concerned State/ UT 
Government/ Authorities/ Dam Authorities in order to allow mitigating measures to be set 
up by the downstream authorities against any impending flood situation, which could be 
caused due to the release of water from the dams/reservoirs.  
 
Reservoir Operation 
 
8.5 According to the Department of WR, RD & GR, the flow in the river changes 
seasonally and from year to year, due to temporal and spatial variation in precipitation. 
Thus, the water available abundantly during monsoon season becomes scarce during the 
non-monsoon season, when it is most needed. The traditional method followed commonly 
for meeting the needs of water during the scarce period is construction of storage reservoir 
on the river course. The excess water during the monsoon season is stored in such 
reservoirs for eventual use in lean period. Construction of storages will also help in control 
of flood, as well as generation of electricity power. To meet the objective set forth in 
planning a reservoir or a group of reservoirs and to achieve maximum benefits out of the 
storage created, it is imperative to evolve guidelines for operation of reservoirs. Without 
proper regulation schedules, the reservoir may not meet the full objective for which it was 
planned and may also pose danger to the structure itself and to the people.Control of flood 
is better achieved if the reservoir level is kept low in the early stages of the monsoon 
season. However, at a later stage, if the anticipated inflows do not realize, the reservoir 
may not get filled up to Full Reservoir Level (FRL) even upto end of monsoon. On the 
contrary, if the reservoir is kept at high levels initially to avoid the risk of reservoir remaining 
unfilled at later stage, there may be problem of accommodating high floods occurring at 
later stage.  
 
8.6 It has also been stated by the Department that flood moderation is one of the 
important functions of a reservoir. Operation of a flood moderation reservoir aims to 

34 
 
moderate the flood flows, by temporarily retaining the flood water and making controlled 
releases within the safe carrying capacity of the downstream channels, in order to minimise 
flood damages. Flood moderation storage in a reservoir is seldom provided for complete 
protection against extremely large floods, such as the Standard Project Flood. However, 
storage capacity is usually sufficient to reduce flood levels resulting from such an event to 
moderate levels and to prevent any major flood disasters. Flood storage is usually sufficient 
for storing the entire runoff from minor and moderate flood events. Reservoirs are usually 
not constructed solely for flood moderation purpose alone. Often flood moderation is 
combined with conservational purposes. In such case, either a fixed amount of storage 
space on the top of the reservoir is reserved for flood moderation purpose and storage 
below is used for conservational purposes or storage capacity available is shared for both 
conservational and flood control purposes. In the situation when it is at the top of 
conservation level, the flood cushion can be created by making additional releases from the 
reservoir in anticipation of flood, before the flood actually strikes. Such a release is called 
pre-release or reservoir evacuation. Pre-release makes storage space available in the 
reservoir to absorb part or whole volume of incoming flood. Pre-release can be effective 
even if the reservoir is at levels lower than the full conservation level, when the flood 
impinges the reservoir. In such a situation the storage space created due to pre-release is 
in addition to the storage space available between Maximum Water Level (water level upto 
which reservoir level may be allowed to rise safely in the event of occurrence of flood) and 
the current reservoir level.  
 
8.7 The Department has further stated that forecast of inflows into the reservoir plays a 
vital role in these operational decisions and for increasing the flood moderation efficiency 
without reducing conservational benefits. It is however, very important to determine the 
correct amount of pre-release to be made at any instant of time. Incorrect release decisions 
may lead to inefficient flood moderation and chances of reservoir remaining unfilled upto 
the conservation level by the end of monsoon. The pre-release decision will depend upon 
the forecast values of inflow, amount of storage space available in the reservoir, safety 
considerations of dam, spillway capacity, downstream flooding conditions, and downstream 
carrying capacity of river channel. Since most of these parameters change with time, the 
process of estimation of pre-release is a dynamic one. In such situations, computer based 
real time operation models serve the purpose of an efficient tool for taking operation 
decisions.For reservoirs in series with intermediate inflows and storage serving solely for 
flood control downstream, it is optimal to regulate floods by filling the upper reservoirs first 
and emptying the lower reservoirs first. The operation of reservoirs in parallel requires 
simulation with optimization approach. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
Integrated Reservoir Operation for Flood Management 
 
8.8 Elaborating on the system for regulation of water reservoirs in the country and 
formulation of necessary regulations/guidelines for the operation and maintenance, the 
Department in a written reply stated as under:  
 
“The responsibility of Operation & Maintenance (O&M)/ regulation of water in 
reservoirs and safety of the dams primarily rests with dam owners who are invariably 
States Govt./UTs./PSUs etc. The practice of dam safety including O&M can vary 
from State to State and from organisation to organisation, the Central Water 
Commission has been working towards evolving standard practices of dam safety 
and has recommended its implementation by all States and dam owning 
organisations. 
  CWC has published Guidelines for Preparing Operation and Maintenance 
Manual for Dams which contain various aspects of project operation including normal 
operation and emergency operation. These serve as guidance for dam owners on 
various protocols and responsibilities for managing water releases during a year 
including flood seasons. Details for preparation of operational rule curve (both for 
reservoir filling and release) are also part of the guidelines. However, the role of 
Central Water Commission is restricted to advisory capacity only, with little scope for 
proactive intervention in reservoir operation and regulation.The Dam owners are 
impressed upon to implement these guidelines in National Committee on Dam Safety 
(NCDS) meetings and through other communications. In order to promote the 
concept of safe and efficient Dam operations including flood moderation suitable 
provisions have been kept in the Dam Safety Bill, 2019. The Bill provides for 
surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of the specified dam. The Bill 
also has exclusive provision regarding coordinated reservoir operations of cascading 
dams”.  
 
8.9 When enquired about the difficulties being faced in operating the reservoir in an 
integrated manner with reservoir located in other State, the Department in its written 
submission stated as follows: 
“Many a times, in a large river basin, all the reservoirs in the basin or a sub-basin do 
not fall under the same State. Every State tends to operate the reservoirs under their 
jurisdiction as per their preferences and the needs. This may, at times, not be a 
prudent way of operation of reservoirs. Also, sometimes the reservoir is located in 
one State and the benefits are spread across multiple States. In such cases also, the 
States which are not in charge of operating the reservoir, may have problems in 
realizing the envisaged benefits. Dam owners are advised to follow SoP for release 
of water from their reservoirs and issue advance warnings for the downstream areas 
through various communications. However, the conflicting objectives and lack of 
coordination between various States is a challenge in optimal operation of reservoirs. 

36 
 
Dam Safety Bill, 2019 provides for surveillance, inspection, operation and 
maintenance of the specified dam for prevention of dam failure related disasters and 
to provide for institutional mechanism to ensure their safe functioning and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Bill has exclusive provision regarding 
coordinated reservoir operations of cascading dams”.  
 
8.10 On being asked about the steps taken to overcome these difficulties and how far 
these have been successful, the Department stated as under:  
 
“In some cases, the integrated operation of reservoirs is carried out through 
Committees such Damodar Valley Reservoir Regulation Committee, 
BansagarReservoir Regulation Committee, etc.  The dams are operated based upon 
the decisions of such Committees. Bhakra Beas Management Board operates 
Bhakra and Pong reservoir through a committee comprising of BBMB officials and 
member from co-basin States.However, these are very limited examples. The 
Integrated Operation of Reservoirs, in true sense,  can only be achieved with 
formation of River Basin Authorities for each river basin of the country”. 
 
 
 
Flood Cushion 
 
8.11 The Committee have been informed that the Working Group on Flood Management 
and Region Specific Issues set up under XII Plan recommendedthat as a policy, minimum 
flood cushion of 10% of the live storage capacity should be provided in all new dams and if 
affordable, with respect to other purposes, providing even a flood cushion upto20% could 
be considered. 
 
8.12 When asked about the progress made in the implementation of the recommendation 
of the working Group on  the Flood cushion, the Department replied: 
 
“Dams in our country are not dedicated for single purpose of flood moderation whose 
requirement is conflicting in nature to conservational purposes. Most of the large 
dams in the country are multipurpose with competing demands. Even in the 
reservoirs having no dedicated flood cushion, incidental benefits of flood moderation 
can be derived by providing dynamic flood cushion. To meet the objective set forth in 
planning a reservoir or a group of reservoirs and to achieve maximum benefits out of 
the storage created, it is imperative to evolve guidelines for operation of reservoirs. 
Without proper regulation schedules, the reservoir may not meet the full objective for 
which it was planned and may also pose danger to the structure itself and to the 
people. 
In order to achieve above objectives, it is necessary that Rule curve/ level for all 
reservoirs should be prepared & updated accounting change in rainfall trend and 
changing demand over the years due to rapid increase of population, 

37 
 
urbanisationand industrialisation. Rule curves of major reservoirs, where flood 
cushion is not in-built, need to be reviewed to have some dynamic flood cushion for 
major part of the flood season. 
Dams are generally owned and operated by State Governments or Public Utilities 
who have the tendency to fill the reservoir at earliest opportunity which defeats the 
purpose of utilizing a part of their storage capacity as flood cushion for absorbing any 
impending flood peak.  In order to promote the concept of safe and efficient Dam 
operations including flood moderation suitable provisions have been kept in the Dam 
Safety Bill, 2019. The Bill provides for surveillance, inspection, operation and 
maintenance of the specified dam. The Bill also has exclusive provision regarding 
coordinated reservoir operations of cascading dams”. 
 
8.13 When asked as to whether there is any proposal for making some kind of 
arrangement in the country to store/conserve excessive water during monsoon season so 
that it may be used during situations of water crisis, the Department in its written reply 
stated: 
 
“Central Water Commission monitors live storage of 123 important reservoirs of the 
country on weekly basis and issues a weekly bulletin. The weekly bulletin contains 
current storage position vis-à-vis storage status on the corresponding day of the 
previous year and average of last 10 years on the corresponding day. The total live 
storage capacity of these 123 reservoirs is 171.090 BCM which is about 66.36% of 
the live storage capacity of 257.812 BCM in the country.Water storage status of 123 
important reservoirs being monitored by CWC is used as an important input for crop 
planning strategy”. 
 
 
Crisis Management Plan 
 
8.14 The Department of WR, RD & GR has informed the Committee that the Crisis 
Management Plan of Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation (DoWR, RD&GR) for flood management includes the provision on Integrated 
Reservoir Operation (IRO) for flood management. The plan for implementation of IRO for 
flood management included in CMP involves entry of data by reservoir owners in the State 
in Water Management Information System (WIMS) software provided under the National 
Hydrology Project. The data from reservoirs alongwith hydro-meteorological data available 
with CWC as well as those received from IMD including rainfall forecast will be used for 
running mathematical models for formulating inflow forecast atleast 72 hours in advance at 
the reservoirs identified in various basins. Based on the inflow forecast provided and the 
availability of flood cushion in the reservoir, release advisories will be issued by Flood 
Crisis management Team (FCMT) to be formed in various basins. The FCMT will be 
headed by the Chief Engineer of the respective basin organisation of CWC with members 
from all co-basin States and the Superintending Engineer of CWC basin organisation will 

38 
 
be the Member –Secretary. The FCMT will meet frequently during Flood Crisis and advise 
the Project authorities within the system of reservoirs regarding the quantum of release so 
that flood inundation in the downstream areas shall be minimized.  
 
 
8.15 The Department has further stated that however, there is no mandate to the project 
authorities to follow the release advisory of FCMT as the release of water from project is in 
the purview of State Governments. In order to operationalise the concept, mandate in the 
form of an executive order or a parliamentary act may be needed. This can be brought as 
an executive order under DM Act 2005 or as a part of the proposed Dam Safety Bill which 
has since been passed by Lok Sabha and is to be passed by the Rajya Sabha. 
 
 
8.16 The Dam Safety Bill was passed by Lok Sabha on 02.08.2019 and is pending in 
Rajya Sabha. The Bill inter alia provides for surveillance, inspection, operation and 
maintenance of the specified dam for prevention of dam failure related disasters and to 
provide for institutional mechanism to ensure their safe functioning and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.The Bill has exclusive provision regarding 
coordinated reservoir operations of cascading dams.  
8.17 The Chapter VIII of the Bill deals with matter related to Emergency Action Plan and 
Disaster management. It has explicit provisions for establishment of well designed hydro-
meteorological network and an inflow forecasting system; emergency flood warning 
system; install such scientific and technical instruments which are invented or adopted from 
time to time for the purpose of ensuring the dam safety and the life and property of people 
downstream; make available the information relating to maximum anticipated inflows and 
outflows including flood warning and an adverse impact of the same, if any, on persons and 
property towards the upstream or downstream of the dam, to the concerned district 
authorities and also make available the information in public domain render necessary 
assistance to the Authority in establishment and running of the early warning system for the 
exchange of real time hydrological and meteorological data and information related to the 
operation of reservoirs. 
8.18 The Chapter IV of the Bill deals with Constitution, functions and meetings of State 
Committee on Dam Safety. The State Committee on Dam safety shall have representation 
of Chief Engineer or equivalent level officer from upstream State in cases where reservoir 
area of any of the specified dam of the State extend to another State; and downstream 
State in cases where flood release of any of the specified dam of the State flows to a 
neighboring State. 
 
8.19 When asked to explain how the proposed Dam Safety Bill can be helpful in evolving 
an effective Decision Support System for release of Water from the Dams, the Department 
in its written reply stated as follows: 
 

39 
 
“The practice of dam safety including O&M can vary from State to State and from 
Organisation to Organisation. Dam Safety Bill provides uniform dam safety procedure 
for surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of the specified dam for 
prevention of dam failure related disasters and to provide institutional mechanism to 
ensure their safe functioning and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.The Bill has provision to constitute the National Committee on Dam Safety, 
whose functions include evolving policies and recommending regulations regarding 
dam safety standards which consists the representation of officers from centre as 
well as state which will act a forum for exchange of views. The Bill has also provision 
to constitute National Dam Safety Authority, whose functions include implementing 
policies of the National Committee, providing technical assistance to State Dam 
Safety Organisations (SDSOs), and resolving matters between SDSOs of states or 
between a SDSO and any dam owner in that state. 
Dam Safety Bill 2019 have suitable provisions related to O&M, Emergency Action 
Plan (EAP), Dam Safety Evaluation and other important provisions which can be 
helpful in evolving an effective Decision Support System for release of Water from 
the Dams”. 
  

40 
 
Chapter IX 
Flash Floods, Cloud Burst and Glacial Outburst and Landslides 
9.1 The Department of WR, RD & GR has apprised the Committee that apart from 
riverine floods experienced during monsoon in the country, in recent past several extreme 
hydro-metrological events have been witnessed which have resulted in abnormal flood like 
situations. These extreme events could be categorized as (i) Gushing out of water from 
Artificial blockade of river channel due to moraine deposit triggered by landslides, etc. (ii) 
Outburst of glacial lakes and/ or water bodies located in higher reaches of Himalayan 
region, and (iii) Flash Floods due to extreme precipitation occurring in short duration.These 
incidents have either been triggered due to phenomena which were largely unpredictable or 
their prediction were not covered under various established protocols. As a result, sudden 
release of water or accumulation of large volumes of water caused disastrous 
consequences to cities/ towns/ settlements in the vicinity. 
9.2 The Department has informed the Committee that following are some of incidents 
which occurred during last few years with significantly damaging consequences and/ or 
potentially damaging consequences are given below: 
(i) Blockade of waterway of river Parechu due to landslide in Chinese territory on 
28.6.2004 and 8.7.2004 resulting in creation of artificial lake on upstream and 
accumulation of huge volumes of water 
(ii) Flooding phenomenon of Kedarnath, Uttarakhand during 16-18th June 2013 
(iii) Blockade of waterway of river BhoteKosi, a tributary of Sun Kosi in Nepal due to 
landslide on 2.8.2014 resulting in creation of artificial lake on upstream and 
accumulation of huge volumes of water 
(iv) Flooding phenomenon of Jhelum & Chenab basin in J&K during September 3-7, 
2014 
(v) Landslide on the Phutkal River in Zanskar Valley in Kargil district in Jammu and 
Kashmir during December 2014 
(vi) Landslide Dam (LSD) on Kanka river, a tributary of Teesta in North Sikkim during 
August 2016 
(vii) Landslide Dam (LSD) in Great Bend Area on river YarlungTsangpo in China during 
16-19 October, 2018 
(viii) Recent Chamoli incident on 7th February 2021 
9.3 The Department has stated that various activities for mitigating the effects of such 
extreme situations can broadly be summarized as : 
(i) Analysis of situation using various analytical tools which could generate 
actionable inputs in form of volume of inundation or accumulated water, rate of 

41 
 
its release due to various scenarios of breaching or translation of sudden down 
pour  
(ii) Pooling of information including remote sensing data about terrain of impacted 
area including digital elevation/ terrain models,  
(iii) Determination of the potential impacted area by using various technology inputs  
(iv) Preparation of inundation maps  
(v) Notification of emergency  
(vi) Disaster Management and Evacuation.  
9.4 The Department has further stated that it has been observed over the past few 
decades that the retreat of glaciers has created many precarious moraine dammed glacial 
lakes at the snout of glaciers in the Himalayan region. Breaching of such glacial lakes may 
lead to instantaneous discharge of water causing flash flood in downstream areas. 
Recognizing the hazard potential of such lakes to the population and assets located in their 
downstream, CWC has been monitoring the Water spread areasof lakes of size more than 
50 hectares located on high altitudeusing the satellite data from NRSC. Based on the 
current inventory, 415 glacial lakes & water bodies with a water spread area more than 50 
ha are monitored. Another 62 glacial lakes & water bodies with water spread area in the 
range 44 to 50 ha have also been taken up for monitoring, thereby making a total of 477 
glacial lakes & water bodies under monitoring. 
9.5 According to the Department, studies for analyzing the situation arising out of 
artificial blockade of river flow due to landslide dams pose great challenges, especially on 
account of non-availability of accurate information on many significant parameters which 
are either deduced or assumed. For an effective disaster management planning, it is 
essential to have an estimate of lake volume behind landslide dam, dam break flood due to 
possible breaching of such dam, attenuation and translation pattern of dam break flood. 
Need for Unified Single Nodal Agency for coordination among different Depatments 
9.6 On being asked about the steps taken by the Department to ensure the setting up of 
a single nodal agency/command control to coordinate the activities of different departments 
to take a unified and cohesive approach during the flood crisis, the Department stated as 
follows: 
“While the primary responsibility of disaster management rests with the States, the 
Central Government supports the efforts of State Governments by providing logistical 
and financial support. 
On behalf of the Central Government, Disaster Management (DM) Division in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs co-ordinates with disaster affected State Government(s), 
concerned line ministries/departments, National Disaster Management Authority 
(NDMA), National Disaster Response Force (NDRF), National Institute of Disaster 
Management (NIDM) and the Directorate General of Fire Services, Home Guards 
and Civil Defence, and Armed Forces for effective disaster risk reduction. The 

42 
 
Division is responsible for legislation, policy, capacity building, prevention, mitigation, 
response and long-term rehabilitation. In pursuance of Section 8 of the Disaster 
Management Act, 2005 National Executive Committee has been constituted to act as 
the coordinating and monitoring body for disaster management. It is chaired by the 
Union Home Secretary and comprises of Secretary level officers from the Ministries 
and departments having control of agriculture, atomic energy, defence, drinking 
water supply, environment and forests, finance (expenditure), health, power, rural 
development, science and technology, space, telecommunications, urban 
development and water resources. The Chief of Integrated Defence Staff of the 
Chiefs of Staff Committee, ex-officio, is also its member. Thus, the mechanism to 
undertake a unified/cohesive approach during the crisis already exists under Ministry 
of Home Affairs”. 
 
9.7 When asked about the single factor which is considered to be most intractable and 
challenging in the efforts to mitigate the problem of flood menace till date, the Department 
stated as follows: 
 
“Floods are attributed to various factors like wide variation in rainfall both in time and 
space with frequent departure from normal pattern, inadequate carrying capacities of 
rivers, river bank erosion, silting of river beds, landslides, poor natural drainage, 
snow melts and glacial lake out bursts. The problem of floods gets further 
compounded due to interstate/International extent of various rivers. Hence, attributing 
a single factor as a challenge for mitigating the problem of flood menace is difficult”.    
 
  

43 
 
Chapter X 
Relief and Rehabilitation  
 
Relief and Rehabilitation of people affected by flood  
 
10.1 On being asked about the steps taken by the Department in coordination with the 
Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Home Affairs to ensure timely relief & 
rehabilitation to the persons affected by flood, the Department replied as under: 
“In the event of disaster of a ‘severe nature’, financial assistance towards the notified 
natural disasters including flood is met from the State Disaster Response Fund 
(SDRF) already placed at State’s disposal in accordance with Government of India’s 
approved items and norms. Additional assistance is extended from National Disaster 
Response Fund (NDRF) in accordance with the established procedure, which 
includes an assessment based on the visit of an Inter-Ministerial Central Team”. 
 
 
10.2 When asked whether the Department compiles data pertaining to losses caused due 
to flood erosion and sand /debris deposition in agricultural farmlands in the country in terms 
of acreage, financial and number of farmers affected (State-wise), the Department of WR, 
RD & GR stated: 
 
“The State-wise details of losses due to floods are compiled by Central Water 
Commission (CWC) based on the data provided by the States.  
The State-wise data for the year 2018 and all India averaged data over the period 
1953 to 2018 is at Annexure I and Annexure II”. 
 
10.3 On being asked about the formulation of any scheme by the Department to 
rehabilitate those farmlands which were damaged and became uncultivable due to flood 
erosion and sand / debris, the Department it its written submission stated as follows:  
 
“No such scheme to rehabilitate those farmlands which were damaged and became 
uncultivable due to flood erosion and sand / debris has been formulated by the 
Department”. 
 
10.4 In response to a query regarding efforts made for convergence among various 
Ministries to mitigate the problems being faced by farmers affected by floods including 
compensation to farmers in various parts of the country, the Department stated as follows: 
 
“There is no such dedicated plan/scheme for flood mitigation in NDMA. So far, 
financial assistance for the compensation to the farmers is given by Ministry of Home 
Affairs(MHA) from NDRF & SDRF funds”. 
 
 

44 
 
10.5 When asked as to whether any insurance policies are available for insurance of 
human and animal lives and private properties against damage by floods, the Department 
in its written submission stated as under:  
“Government of India has launched Pradhan Mantri FasalBimaYojana(PMFBY)/ 
Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS) to cover losses to 
the crop due to various risks including floods. Under Pradhan Mantri Suraksha 
BimaYojana(PMSBY) risk coverage of Rs.2 lakh for accidental death and full 
disability and Rs. 1 lakh for partial disability is provided. PashuDhanBima Yojana 
provides  insurance cover to the cattle that are owned by farmers, co-operative 
societies, dairy farms and others in case of death of Cattle due to various specified 
reasons including Natural Accidents like Flood, Famine, Earthquake, etc”. 
 
  

45 
 
 
Chapter XI 
International Water Treaties in the field of Water Resource Management                             
and Flood Control 
A. COOPERATION WITH PAKISTAN 
11.1 The Department of WR, RD & GR has informed the Committee that the Indus basin 
extends over an area of 11,65,500 km2 and lies mainly in India and Pakistan with small 
area in Tibet and Afghanistan. Within India, the Indus basin lies in Jammu and 
Kashmir(J&K), Himachal Pradesh (HP), Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan. The Indus system 
of rivers comprises of main Indus River, its five major left bank tributaries i.e. Jhelum, 
Chenab, Ravi, Beas and Sutlej (all passing through India) and a right bank tributary namely 
Kabul river which enters Pakistan through Afghanistan and does not pass through India. 
The mean annual flow of the Indus system of rivers is about 168 Million Acre-Feet (MAF) 
including flow from Kabul river. (1 MAF = 1233 MCM = 43.56 TMC) Three rivers namely 
Ravi, Beas and Sutlej together are known as Eastern Rivers while the rivers Chenab, 
Jhelum and Indus together are called Western rivers. Out of these six rivers, the Beas 
River flows within in the territory of India and the remaining rivers cross to Pakistan 
downstream at different places.  
 
Indus Waters Treaty  
11.2 According to the DoWR, RD & GR, the Indus Waters Treaty was a result from a 
dispute between India and Pakistan on sharing of the waters of Indus basin which was 
geographically divided at independence. The Treaty was signed on 19th September 1960 in 
Karachi after eight years of negotiations under the aegis of the World Bank. The Treaty 
contains a preamble, twelve Articles and eight (A-H) lengthy Annexures. The Salient 
Provisions of the Treaty are as under  
1.  All the waters of the Eastern Rivers - Sutlej, Beas, and Ravi with average annual 
flow of around 33 Million Acre Feet (MAF) is allocated to India for unrestricted use 
while the waters of Western rivers - Indus, Jhelum, and Chenab with average annual 
flow of around 135 MAF is allocated largely to Pakistan.  
2.  However, India is permitted to use the waters of the Western Rivers for Domestic 
Use, Non-consumptive use, Agricultural use as specified in Annexure C, and 
generation of hydro-electric power. This right to generate hydroelectricity from 
Western rivers is unrestricted subject to the conditions for design and operation as 
specified in Annexure D of the Treaty. India can also create storages upto 3.6 MAF 
on Western rivers.  

46 
 
3.  Any issue, when arises, is first discussed at Permanent Indus Commission for its 
resolution. If the Commission is unable to resolve the same, the matter of technical 
nature can be referred to a Neutral Expert by either Party. If the issue is of legal 
nature, the same can be referred to a Court of Arbitration either jointly by both the 
Parties or by a Neutral Expert.  
4.  There is no provision in the Treaty to stop construction of a project till issues are 
resolved. Only Court of Arbitration can impose such restrictions.  
5.  The territorial disputes cannot be raised by either Commissioner. Also, there is no 
option for unilateral exit or modification in the Treaty for either country.  
6.  This Treaty is bilateral and World Bank only has a limited procedural role limited to 
appointment of Neutral Expert or Court of Arbitration on request of the Parties. 
Permanent Indus Commission 
11.3 Under Article VIII of the Treaty, a Permanent Indus Commission (PIC) has been 
created as an institutional mechanism for implementing the Treaty. PIC comprises of a 
Commissioner for Indus Waters from each side. Unless otherwise decided by either 
Government for a particular matter, each Commissioner is the representative of his 
Government for all matters arising out of the Treaty. The Commission is required to meet 
regularly at least once a year, alternately in India and Pakistan, and at other times on 
request. So far, 115 meetings of the Commission have been held since signing of the 
Treaty in 1960. The last meeting of the Commission was held in August 2018 at Lahore. 
The next meeting, scheduled in March 2020 has been postponed in view of pandemic. The 
Commission is also required to undertake periodical inspections of the Rivers for 
ascertaining the facts connected with the various developments and works on the Rivers. 
So far 119 tours on either side had been undertaken. The Commission submits its Annual 
Report to the respective Governments before 30 June every year.  
11.4 On the question of utilization of waters of the Indus, Jhelum and Chinab Rivers, the 
representative of the Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation during the course of oral evidence held on 17.11.2020 stated as follows:  
"Sir, we have Major Dams on these three rivers. Like Ranjit Sagar Dam is built around 
Pathankot on Ravi. Vyas has Pong Dam and Sutlej has Bhakra Nangal Dam. We also 
transfer water from Beas riverto Satluj through tunnel and canal, which is Beas Satluj 
Link (BSL) Project. Similarly, we are also transferring water from Ravi to Vyas. 
Through these three projects we are able to use major water. Little by little, the flood 
season has downstream of these reservoirs, some additional water, which we cannot 
use, it flows towards Pakistan. Apart from this, some more of our projects are still in 
the planning stage, as soon as they come, there is a Ujhproject on Ravi's tributary. 
There is a project called Shahpurkandi Dam Project, which is on Ravi itself and is 

47 
 
downstream of this Ranjit Sagar Dam. There is a third project, which we have 
envisaged, the Ravi-Vyas link second, because our one link is already on Madhopur. 
These three projects, if they come, then the rest of the water is going, we will tap 
majority. A common claim that our water is going towards Pakistan, it is not so. Right 
now we are able to use major water of these three rivers". 
11.5 He further stated as follows: 
“Sir, what you said, I would like to supplement a bit. As people feel that we have 
taken very little water in that 1960 treaty, much water went to Pakistan. There is 
topography and other things to use water, currently 40 percent of our country is in the 
North-East, but in the North East we do not use that water and that water floods 
Assam and others. The topography there is such, whether it is Jammu and Kashmir, 
Parts of Himachal Pradesh that it is not possible for us to use more water than this. 
Technically, it is also not feasible. That is one thing. 
  Second, the effect that the best water utilization of any river system is seen in 
India is that of the Indus system. We use more than 95% of these three rivers. In 
today's day, we are not able to do interlinking of river. There are at least two 
examples of successful interlinking, which he has mentioned. We also bring Vyas 
water in Sutlej and Ravi water. On a rainy day, there will be a little more water 
anywhere; some of that water goes to Pakistan. 
  Secondly, our problem is that our canals, which are in Punjab and Rajasthan, 
are built much earlier, they are very old. The way they should be maintained and they 
should not be able to carry as much water as they should carry. One place is Harike 
Barrage. Two big canals take off of Harike barrage, one is called Rajasthan feeder 
and the other is Sirhind feeder. As of the capacity of both of them, in today's day we 
are not able to utilize even a third of its capacity. Due to this, we have to release that 
water from the barrage of Harike and finally that water goes towards Pakistan. To 
lining them both, a project is being funded by the Government of India. If that will be 
done, then we will be able to use a little more water from the Existing System itself. 
As he said that one on one, Shahpur Kandi already work is going on. The project was 
closed for four years, but has been revived in the year 2018. Now we are going to 
take cabinet approval of Ujh multipurpose project, so due to this, some more water 
will be used. We are able to make good use of this system of water, which is our 
share of water. Yes, it is necessary that we have not been able to make more of the 
three rivers on which we should build more hydro electric projects, because 
hydroelectric projects will also have to have viability. Today, the way in which 
resettlement, rehabilitation and the rest of the cost has increased, it is seen 
everywhere that there is technical feasibility, but there is no commercial viability, if we 
generate energy for 8-10 rupees. Then what will we do with that? These are some 
problems, otherwise we are using a lot of water in this system”. 
11.6 The Department in its written reply has informed the Committee that no storage on 
Western rivers has been created by India so far.Further, the estimated power potential from 
Western rivers is about 20000 MW. Twenty Nine run- of-the-river (RoR) hydroelectric 

48 
 
projects of more than 1 MW aggregating to 3482 MW have been constructed on Western 
rivers in the State and Central sector. 
11.7 It has further been stated that Indus Waters Treaty 1960 provides India, the right to 
develop Irrigated Cropped Area (ICA) of 9,12,477 acres through waters of Western rivers 
without creating any storage. Further ICA of 4,31,000 acres can be added after creation of 
conservation storage and release of a specified quantum of water into the river annually 
from the same, in accordance with the Treaty, thereby taking the potential ICA from 
Western rivers to 13,43,477 acres. As per the latest data for the crop year 2019-20, the ICA 
developed by India on Western rivers is 7,59,859 acres. 
 
Regular Hydrological Data Exchange under Indus Treaty 
11.8 The Department have further apprised the Committee that Article VI (1) of the Indus 
Treaty provides for regular exchange of specified data relating to flow of the rivers, 
extractions / releases from reservoirs and withdrawal from all canals, including link canals. 
This data is transmitted monthly by each Party not later than three months after the end of 
the month to which they relate. It also provides for supply of such data at less frequent 
intervals on request by either Party for operational purposes. It also provides for supply of 
any hydrological data to the extent that these are available. This data is being exchanged 
regularly between both the Parties.  
 
Flood Information  
11.9 Except for the Beas river which flows entirely in India, all other rivers of Indus 
system flowing through India, namely Indus main, Jhelum, Chenab and Sutlej cross to 
Pakistan located downstream. Article IV (8) of the Treaty provides that “The use of the 
natural channels of the Rivers for the discharge of flood or other excess waters shall be 
free and not subject to limitation by either Party, and neither Party shall have any claim 
against the other in respect of any damage caused by such use. Each Party agrees to 
communicate to the other Party, as far in advance as practicable, any information it may 
have in regard to such extraordinary discharges of water from reservoirs and flood flows as 
may affect the other Party.” Thus, the Treaty puts an obligation on India to supply the 
advance information in regard to such extraordinary discharges of water from reservoirs 
and flood flows as may affect Pakistan. During the flood season. the river flows and 
discharges from the reservoirs are monitored by this wing in coordination with Central 
Water Commission, Bhakra Beas Management Board and Government of Punjab. This 
information on extraordinary discharges of water from reservoirs and flood flows is supplied 
to Pakistan under Article IV(8) of the Treaty as and when such situation arises. 
 
 

49 
 
B. COOPERATION WITH CHINA 
Memorandum of Understandingon Brahmaputra and Sutlej Rivers with China 
11.10 The Committee have been informed by the Department of WR, RD & GR that 
recurrent floods in Brahmaputra Basin wreak havoc frequently and a major flood in the year 
2000 led to loss of many lives, infrastructure and other properties in India. A need was thus 
felt for trans-border cooperation for early warning system. Accordingly, a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) was signed between India and China in January, 2002 for sharing of 
hydrological information of the Yaluzangbu/Brahmaputra River in flood season by China to 
India for the three stations on Yaluzangbu/Brahmaputra river viz Nugesha, Yangcun and 
Nuxia located in Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR). The main purpose of the MoU is flood 
control and disaster mitigation in downstream areas, mainly in Arunachal Pradesh, Assam 
and further down. The hydrological data include Water Level, Rainfall and Discharge. The 
period of data in this MoU was 1st June-15th October every year. The MoU was renewed in 
June, 2008, May, 2013 and June 2018 for another five years. 
11.11 Another umbrella MoU on Brahmaputra was signed between India and China in 
October 2013, which inter alia increased the originally envisaged duration of data from 1st 
June- 15th October to 15th May-15th October. This umbrella MoU of 2013 further opens up 
other areas of co-operation in water sector and has no expiry period. In the year 2005, 
there was a breach of Parichu Lake in TAR which led to severe flooding of Sutlej river in 
India. This led to loss of lives and properties in Himachal Pradesh and further down in 
India. Thus, a need for trans-border cooperation for early warning system was also felt for 
Sutlej River (called LangqenZangbo in China). Thus, a Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) with People’s Republic of China was signed on April, 2005 with provision of 
hydrological information of the River Sutlej/LangqenZangbo in Flood Season by China to 
India. Under this MoU, Chinese side provides hydrological information of Tsada station 
located on River Sutlej/LangqenZangbo. The MoU has a validity of five years. The MoU 
was renewed in 2010 and November, 2015 for another five years.  
Implementation Plans 
11.12 The signing of MoU on Brahmaputra and Sutlej rivers with China is followed by the 
signing of Implementation Plans (IP). The IP gives the modalities regarding technical 
details of provision of hydrological information, data transmission method, cost settlement 
etc. The IP also provides details of the stations, frequency, type, duration and format of 
transmission of data to be supplied.  
 
 

50 
 
Expert Level Mechanism (ELM) 
11.13 The Department of WR, RD & GR has stated that during the visit of Hon’ble 
President of the People’s Republic of China in November, 2006, it was mutually agreed 
upon to set up an Expert Level Mechanism (ELM). ELM between India and China was thus 
established to discuss interaction and co-operation upon provision of hydrological data in 
flood season, emergency management and other issues regarding trans-border rivers as 
agreed between them. The ELM meetings are being held annually, alternately in India and 
China.  ELM meetings inter alia discuss the following: 
i. Discussions on transmission of data and data utilisation Report by Indian side. 
ii. Unforeseen flood related events in Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) and their 
impacts on Indian side. 
iii. Any other mutually agreed item in the agenda which may include presentations by 
both the sides on flood related matters, hydropower development, opening of new 
station in TAR, technical exchanges etc  
iv. Site visits to water resources projects/works in the respective countries. 
 
11.14 As regards sharing of hydrological data with China, the representative of 
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation during the 
oral evidence held on 17.11.2020 apprised the Committee as follows: 
"Sir, this is the MoU. China is such a country with which we do not have much 
cooperation at the moment, but atleast it is of data sharing and that is also on 
payment basis. Normally like where we are taking data, Nepal is not charging 
anything from us but China is charging for supplying this data to us. In Brahmaputra, 
we get data of three stations during flood season, that is, from 15th May to 15th 
October, we get data on water level, flow, and rainfall. 
  Sir, MoU with China belongs to the Brahmaputra and Sutlej river. Yes, the 
work of data sharing is happening continuously. Both agreements are for five-five 
years and are being renewed continuously". 
 
11.15 When asked whether there is regular sharing of hydrological data by China with 
regard to rivers of Brahmaputra and Sutlej, the Department replied as under:  
“Except for the year 2017 (when no data was supplied) data is being supplied by 
Chinese side for both the rivers viz, Brahamputra and Sutlej as per the MoUs. 
Hydrological data (Water Level, Rainfall and Discharge) of Brahmaputra River for the 
three stations in Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) viz. Nugesha, Yangcun and Nuxia 
was supplied regularly during the period from 15th May to 15th October during the year 
2020, twice a day (0800 hrs and 2000 hrs Chinese Time). Similarly, Hydrological data 
(Water Level, Rainfall and Discharge) of Sutlej River for the lone station in TAR i.e., 
Tsada was supplied regularly during the period from 1st June to 15th October for the 
year 2020, twice a day (0800 hrs and 2000 hrs Chinese Time)” 
 

51 
 
11.16 On being asked whether China has any proposal to build dams on Brahmaputra 
river, the Ministry of External Affairs in their written reply stated as follows:  
 
“The ‘Outline of the 12th Five Year Plan for National Economic and Social 
Development of the People’s Republic of China’ endorsed in March 2011 indicated 
that three hydropower projects on the main stream of Brahmaputra River in Tibet 
Autonomous Region were approved for implementation by the Chinese authorities. A 
hydropower project at Zangmu was declared fully operational by Chinese authorities 
in October 2015.Government carefully monitors all developments on the Brahmaputra 
River. As a lower riparian State with considerable established user rights to the 
waters of the trans-border rivers, Government has consistently conveyed its views 
and concerns to the Chinese authorities and has urged them to ensure that the 
interests of downstream States are not harmed by any activities in upstream areas. 
  The Chinese side has conveyed to us on several occasions that they are 
only undertaking run-of-the-river hydropower projects which do not involve diversion 
of the waters of the Brahmaputra.Various issues relating to trans-border rivers are 
discussed with China under the ambit of an institutionalized Expert Level Mechanism 
which was established in 2006, as well as through diplomatic channels. We intend to 
remain engaged with China on the issue of trans-border rivers to safeguard our 
interests”. 
 
C. COOPERATION WITH BHUTAN 
Flood Forecasting Mechanism 
 
11.17 The Ministry of External Affairs, Govt. of India had sponsored a “Comprehensive 
Scheme of hydro-meteorological and Flood forecasting network on rivers common to India 
and Bhutan” in the year 1955 for the purpose of flood warning measures in Bhutan. Under 
the scheme 19 nos. of rain gauge and 8 nos. of wireless stations were set up under the 
control of MEA. The stations were subsequently handed over to Royal Govt. of Bhutan. The 
network now consists of 32 hydro-meteorological/ meteorological stations maintained by 
the Royal Government of Bhutan with funding from India. The data received from these 
stations are utilised in India by the Central Water Commission for formulating flood 
forecasts. A Joint Experts Team (JET) comprising of senior officials of India and Bhutan, 
reviews and monitors the assigned work of this Scheme as well as the release of funds to 
RGoB.  
11.18 A Joint Group of Experts (JGE) on Flood Management has also been constituted for 
matters related to floods created by the rivers originating from Bhutan and coming to India. 
The JGE deliberates the probable causes and effects of the recurring floods and erosion in 
the southern foothills of Bhutan and adjoining plains in India and recommends to both the 
Governments appropriate and mutually acceptable remedial measures.  
 

52 
 
Technical Assistance  
11.19 The Central Water Commission has established Bhutan Investigation Division (BID) 
at Phuentsholing, Bhutan for providing technical assistance for various matters including 
development of hydropower potential in Bhutan. BID has been involved in providing 
technical assistance for setting up of Gauge and Discharge sites and Wireless stations for 
Flood forecasting, Survey, Investigation & construction of mini/micro hydel schemes, river 
training works. 
 
 
 
 
*** 
  

53 
 
 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
NEED FOR OVERARCHING APEX  BODY FOR FLOOD CONTROL AND 
MANAGEMENT 
 
2.1 The Commitee is of the view that each wing of the Government at national, 
state and sub-state levels view floods as a situation to be dealt with as and when it 
happens.  Under the existing scheme of things, given the constitutional and 
administrative compartmentalization, flood management appears to be everyone’s 
business and therefore it reduces to nobody’s business.  The Committee strongly 
desires to break this thinking pattern in the administrative structures and 
recommends that the Ministry of Jal Shakti take up the onus of flood management in 
the country as an overarching responsibility.  The committee recommends that in 
view of the loss of life and property caused throughout the year in almost every part 
of the country, the Union  Government must take up responsibility for coordinating 
the national efforts for flood control and mitigation with all stakeholders.  The 
committee therefore, recommends setting up of a permanent institutional structure  
in the form of National Integrated Flood Management Group (NIFMG) under the 
chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Jal Shakti immediately.  Concerned Ministers of 
the State Governments  should be the members of this group and the group should 
meet at least once a year.  This group should take up the overall responsibility of 
coordination as well as building synergies  between all agencies responsible for 
management of floods and their consequences on life and property.  The committee 
recommend that the first meeting of this group should be held within three  months 
of the presentation of this report to the Parliament. 
2.2 While taking an overarching responsibility in flood management, the NIFMG 
should also take up prevention and mitigation strategies of localized flooding events 
including the issues of hyper construction and water logging in urban areas as well 
as issues like localized landslides leading to flooding etc.  NIFMG should also get a 

54 
 
strategy prepared for identification of localized areas that are prone to localized 
flooding which leads to loss of life and property especially in urban areas. 
2.3 NIFMG should exercise supervision over all aspects of flood management in 
the country including those issues, which fall in the domain of State/local 
governments as well as which are of international linkages.  Given the scale of loss 
of life and property caused by the floods, which show an increasing trend, NIFMG 
should present an annual report on this issue to Parliament.  
The above are  the Committee's  pivotal and most important 
recommendations.  Rest of the Observations/recommendations of the Committee are 
given in the succeeding paragraphs.  
(Recommendation Sl.No.1) 
FLOOD SCENARIO IN THE COUNTRY 
 
2.4 India faces floods almost every year, in varying degrees of magnitude. The 
frequent occurrence of floods can be attributed to various factors like wide variation 
in rainfall both in time and space with frequent departure from normal pattern, 
inadequate carrying capacities of rivers, river bank erosion, silting of river beds, 
landslides, poor natural drainage, snow melts and glacial lake outbursts. The 
problem of floods gets further compounded due to interstate/International extent of 
various rivers. As per RashtriyaBarhAyog (National Commission on Floods) the total 
area liable to flood in the country is 40 Million ha (Mha). The total damage to crops, 
houses and public utilities from the year 1953 to 2018 has been estimated to be 
about Rs. 400097 crore which is a colossal amount. The total human lives lost during 
this period has been assessed to be around 109374 and around 6109628 cattle have 
also been perished.   The high losses and damages caused by floods every year is 
indicative of poor planning, failure of the flood control policy / measures, inadequate 
preparedness and ineffective disaster management. Since floods wreak havoc every 
year, bringing untold miserly to people apart from causing economic sufferings, the 
need of the hour is that both the central and the state governments should work out 

55 
 
a lasting solution that goes beyond piecemeal measures such as the building of 
embankments. An integrated River basin management plan is the need of the hour 
which requires collective involvement of all major flood prone Indian states and also 
the neighbouring countries where the trans-border rivers originate so as to find a 
lasting solution to theproblem. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.2) 
 
FLOOD CONTROL PLANNING 
 
2.5 Floods are a recurrent phenomenon in several parts of the country causing 
loss of lives, damage to public property and infrastructure and bring immense 
misery to the common people. It also impacts economic activities to a great extent. 
Owing to climate change on account of global warming, the rainfall pattern has been 
altered over the years with lesser number of rainy days but heavier rainfall which has 
also aggravated this challenge. The Committee feel that it is high time that our 
planners need to rework their flood control strategies. From the very beginning, 
floods have been an integral part of regeneration cycle of nature that brings silt, 
vegetation, sediment, and fish into the water systems of a region. With the passage 
of time, engineering solutions like embankments, barrages etc. to control them have 
been evolved. However, these solutions have obstructed the free flow of rivers. As a 
result, the silt, which would spread over huge field to form the flood plains becomes 
restricted to a much smaller area resulting in the river bed being elevated. Over the 
period, local population have also encroached the floodplains restricting the 
drainage system and wrecking water bodies as well. The Committee are of the view 
that it is a high time to adopt a holistic approach to tackle problem of floods which 
should involve a multi-pronged strategy such as regenerating and conserving the 
natural vegetation and soil covers in catchment areas to arrest soil erosion, 
encouraging those agricultural methods which make best use of floods, invigorate 
dry springs; recharging of the ground water table and ensure better percolation of 
rainwater. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.3) 

56 
 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SUBJECT 'FLOOD 
MANAGEMENT' 
 
2.6 The Committee observe that the subject of Flood control as such is not 
mentioned in any of the three legislative lists under Schedule VII of the 
Constitution. However, since “drainage and embankments” is shown at entry 
17 of List II (State List),it is presumed that flood control falls under the 
jurisdiction of the respective State Governments, barring “regulation and 
development of inter-state rivers and river valleys,” which is mentioned in 
entry 56 of List I (Union List).  The Department of water Resources have 
informed the Committee that as per constitutional provisions, the subject of flood 
management including erosion control falls within the purview of the States. The 
flood management and anti-erosion schemes are planned, investigated and 
implemented by the State Governments with their own resources as per priority 
within the State. The Union Government only renders assistance to States which is 
technical, advisory, catalytic and promotional in nature. The Committee are of the 
view that since most of the rivers are inter-state flowing across  statesvery often  the 
flood control measures taken by one State may have Inter-State ramifications. The 
Inter-State nature of the rivers makes it difficult to implement long term solutions for 
flood mitigation as the solutions sometimes lie in a different State and benefits to 
other State. Further, the Committee also note that there is no specific National Policy 
on Flood Control and Management,though the National Water Policy talks about 
management of flood & drought. 
2.7 The Committee,  therefore, are of the considered opinion that , ‘Flood Control’ 
needs to be viewed holistically and as a part of the overall development of river 
basin water resources. 'Water' as a subject is much broader than rivers, irrigation, 
floods and drought and all the elements of the water cycle, i.e., evapo-transpiration, 
precipitation, runoff, river, lakes, soil moisture, and ground water, sea, etc., are 
interdependent and constitute a hydrological unit.  With an everi ncreasing 
population and rising water needs of a fast-developing nation coupled with adverse 
effects of climate change, the availability and supply of utilizable water in 

57 
 
futurewould be under great pressure with the likelihood of worsening water disputes 
among different States and different water user categories. Access to clean drinking 
water and other domestic needs in many areas still remain an issue. Furthermore, 
the issues concerning water governance have not been properly addressed. 
Mismanagement of water resources has contributed to a critical situation in many 
parts of the country. It is obvious that concerted action requires not only at regional 
but also at national and international level and in this respect, the Union Government 
has to play a leading role. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should make concerted efforts for arriving at a national consensus to 
place “Flood control and Management” under concurrent list and at the same time 
also formulate an overarching national legal structure for efficient, equitable and 
conservation of water resources. The Committee are aware of the practical 
difficulties in brining 'Water' under the concurrent list, but these have  be resolved 
for the overall national interst of  integrated development of water resources". 
(RecommendationSl.No. 4) 
 
2.8 The Committee recommend that pending the resolution of jurisdictional 
issues relating to flood control and management, there is a need for greater use of 
provisions made in entry 56 of Union List pertaining to regulation and development 
of inter-State riversby the Central Government. These efforts have to be 
supplemented by expeditious passing of the Dam Safety Bill and the River basin 
Management Bill by the parliament and also make best use of the existing Disaster 
Management Act, 2005 which empowers Union Government to issue necessary 
directions to the State Government/Authorities to take appropriate measures for 
prevention of any impending disaster. The Committee therefore recommend that the 
Ministry of Jal shakthimust make concerted efforts for expeditious passage of the 
Dam Safety Bill and the River Basin Management Bill for optimum utilization and 
efficient management of water resources and also mitigation of  floods. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.5) 
 
 

58 
 
FLOOD PLAIN ZONING 
 
2.9 The Committee note that despite its benefits, floodplain zoning has not 
been earmarked / demarcated in India.In this regard, a model draft bill for flood 
plain zoning legislation was also circulated by the Union Government to all the 
States. However, only the States of Manipur, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand and 
erstwhile State of Jammu & Kashmir had enacted legislation, though delineation and 
demarcation of flood plains is yet to be undertaken. Further, Major flood prone 
States viz Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Assam, Odisha etc have not taken 
initiative to enact any legislation with regard to Flood Plain Zoning.  
2.10 The Committee believe that one of the prime reasons for extensive damage 
caused due to floods is ever increasingly human habitations and encroachment of 
the flood plains. The Committee express their displeasure over the fact that though 
Bihar is one of the most flood prone states in the country witnessing huge losses in 
terms of human lives, cattle and properties worth crore of rupees every year, the 
Model legislation on Flood Plain Zoning is yet to be enacted by the State. The 
Committee are of the view that while floods are natural, destruction caused by floods 
is by and large man-made due to unbridled human intervention in the nature’s 
ecosystem in the name of development.Deforestation in the catchment area, 
constructions on the river banks and in the floodplains area, encroachment on 
wetlands, changing cropping pattern and a short sighted quick-fix solutions to 
control floods play a major role in causing devastation due to the floods.  
 
2.11 However, at the same time, the Committee are aware of the various challenges 
faced in implementing the Flood Plain Zoning policy especially evolving a suitable 
compensatory mechanism and finding alternative land site to rehabilitate those 
who have been displaced especially in densely populated States like Bihar, 
Uttar Pradesh etc. The Committee are therefore of the opinion that the Model 
Bill must be suitably modified taking into account the socio-political and 
economic realities of the regions in which it is to be implemented. Further, the 

59 
 
Ministry of Jal Shakti should also consider providing financial assistance to 
those States that are willing to implement floodplain zoning. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.6) 
RIVER REGULATION ZONES FOR ALL BASINS 
2.12 The Committee are pleased to note that a Special Committee constituted in 
August, 2017 under the chairmanship of the Chairman, Central Water Commission to 
identify and demarcate the flood plains of river Ganga for the purpose of regulating 
activities in flood plains of river Ganga in segment B of Phase- I (Haridwar to Unnao), 
in its Report submitted in September, 2019had  identified the flood plains in 
aforesaid stretch of river Ganga and categorized the flood plains in two zones viz. No 
Development Zone and Restricted/ Regulatory Zone. Prohibited and regulatory 
activities for both these zones have also been specified in the report and in 
pursuance thereof Government of Uttar Pradesh has initiated the work of 
identification of flood plain zones as per recommendations of the Committee.While 
appreciating the steps taken by the Government, the Committee recommend that 
similar studies should be commissioned for other river basins of the country 
especially Brahmaputra basin keeping in view, its high proneness to floodingso as 
to identify and demarcate the flood plains in the Bramaputra river basin.The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Government within 
three months of presentation of this Report to parliament. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.7) 
FLOOD CUSHION 
 
2.13 The Committee note that the Working Group on Flood Management and 
Region Specific Issues, set up under XII Plan had recommended that as a policy 
minimum flood cushion of 10% of the live storage capacity should be provided in all 
new dams and if affordable, with respect to other purposes, providing even a flood 
cushion upto 20% could be considered. The Department of Water Resources has 
informed the Committee that in order to promote the concept of safe and efficient 
dam operations including flood moderation, suitable provisions have been kept in 
the Dam Safety Bill, 2019, which  provides for surveillance, inspection, operation and 

60 
 
maintenance of the specified dam. The Bill also has exclusive provision regarding 
coordinated reservoir operations of cascading dams. The Committee urge upon the 
Government that pending passing of theDam Safety Bill by the Parliament,necessary 
instructions /directives be issued to all the State Govts / dam authorities to provide  
sufficient flood cushion in all  the newly constructed water-storage projects/dams 
and those which are under construction, so as to absorb any impending flood waters 
for enabling  better flood management. Flood control in highly flood- prone areas 
should be given top priority even if it requires foregoing some of the irrigation or 
power generation benefits.  
(Recommendation Sl.No.8) 
 
 
INTERLINKING OF RIVERS 
 
2.14 The Committee note that a National Perspective Plan (NPP) was prepared by 
the then Ministry of Irrigation (now Ministry of Jal Shakti) in 1980 for transferring 
water from water surplus basins to water-deficit basins. Under the NPP, the National 
Water Development Agency (NWDA) has identified 30 links (16 under Peninsular 
Component and 14 under Himalayan Component) for preparation of Feasibility 
Reports (FRs). The Pre-feasibility reports of all the 30 links have been completed and 
circulated to concerned States.  The Department informed the Committee that  there 
would be huge benefits on account of implementation of interlinking of rivers as per 
National Perspective Plan in terms of irrigation, power generation, apart from the 
incidental benefits of flood control, drought mitigation, navigation, water supply, 
fisheries, salinity and pollution control etc.  The Committee are unhappy to note that 
although National Perspective Plan (NPP) was formulated way back in 1980, no 
Project for Inter Linking of Rivers (ILR) has reached the execution stage so far. The 
Committee understand that evolving consensus among the States is the biggest 
obstacle in  the implementation of this ambitious Programme. However, considering 
the huge losses caused by floods every year and huge benefits accruing out of the 
interlinking of rivers, the Committee urge the Department to make concerted efforts 

61 
 
to convince the States and arrive at a national consensus so that the project of ILR 
becomes a reality. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.9) 
FLOODS IN ASSAM 
 
2.15 The Committee express their deep anguish over the damage of property worth crore 
of rupees and loss of lives every year by the devastating floods in Assam and North 
Eastern region every year. It renders a large population homeless, besides destruction to 
standing crops in several hectares of agricultural land causing a huge setback to the 
economy of the State of Assam. The Committee observe that the main factors which 
create serious flood and erosion problems in Assam and its neighbouring states, are 
heavy rainfall, physiographic condition, high silt load, encroachment of riverine 
areas, steep slope, inadequate drainage, deforestation, watershed degradation, 
obstruction at tributaries’ confluence with River Brahmaputra and loss of 
wetlands.The Committee note that the fury of floods in Assam and North-Eastern 
region in the long term can be tackled by building storage reservoirs on rivers and 
their tributaries with adequate provisioning for flood cushion, integrated reservoir 
operation, interlinking of rivers etc. However, these measures have many constraints 
such as topographic, geological, geographical, environmental, submergence, 
interstate & international issues.  
 
 
2.16 Taking cognizance of the aforesaid facts, the Committee believe that 
preparing and operating these long-term initiatives in a stand-alone manner may be 
difficult for individual States. Therefore, for integrated use of water resources, there 
is a need to move from the conventional, fragmented and localized approach to a 
comprehensive river basin approach. In order to provide coordinated river basin 
development including comprehensive flood control, it is necessary to set up River 
Basin Organizations (RBOs), which would effectively provide immediate, short-term 
and long-term solutions in addition to the overall development of river basin.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry take concrete measures on priority 

62 
 
basis to enact the River Basin Management Authority for holistic management of 
water resources of each river basin. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.10) 
 
2.17 The Committee note from the submission made by the Government of Assam 
that 39.58% of total land area of the State is flood prone, and that most of the flood 
and bank protection structures are very old and have become weak.  Further, due to 
persistent silt accumulation, Highest Flood Level (HFL) of rivers in the floodplain are 
risingbecause of the extremely shallow river bed of the river and the heavy sediment 
brought in the monsoon by the river, the measures taken by the Government to 
mitigate the effects of floods have so far not yielded desired results.In order to 
provide relief to the State of Assam, Government may consider implementation of 
long termmeasures / solutions such as increasing the water holding capacity of 
Brahmaputra and its tributaries by dredging after consulting all the stakeholders and 
developing the water highway in Brahmaputra river which may in turn boost the 
economy of the State.  Further, with a view to equip Assam in tackling the floods 
effectively and help in mitigating the impact of flood in the long run, the Committee 
urge the Government of India to take measures such as develop a flood forecasting 
model for monitoring release and real-time flow of waters in the river, set up modern 
weather stations in upstream catchment of all Dams in North Eastern region,install 
sirens on river banks from Dam site so as to alert downstream population in the 
event of floods,  judicious release of water from the Damsto ensure natural low water 
level of the river, periodic desiltation and flushing of reservoirsand afforestation and 
rejuvenation of wetlands.  
(Recommendation Sl.No.11) 
 
2.18 The Committee express their concern over the problem of flooding on account 
of hydropower projects located in Arunachal Pradesh as any extra water released 
from these dams uphill  lead to enormous inundation of Brahmaputra valley. Since 
these projects are only meant for power generation, they don’t have infrastructure 
for water storage or flood management. Further due to apparent lack of coordination 
among viz. Ministry of Power and Ministry of Jal Shakti,power projects in Arunachal 

63 
 
Pradesh has been constructed without any plan to combat flooding in 
theneighbouringflood-prone state of Assam.  The Committee urge upon the Ministry 
of Jal Shakti to take up this matter with Ministry of Power and Government of 
Arunachal Pradesh so as to find a mutual and amicable solution to this problem.   
(Recommendation Sl.No.12) 
 
2.19 The Committee have learnt from the Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation that a large storage dam was planned to be 
built over Upper Siang which would help in mitigating the flood situation in Assam 
occurring every year. However, at the same time, concerns are being expressed that  
would submerge Yingkiongtown which is the headquarters of Upper Siang district 
and also pose the issue of rehabilitation of the inhabitants of the town. The 
Committee are of the view that before undertaking any ambitious project such as 
construction of large storage dam, howsoever it may be useful, a proper study to 
assess the impact on the environmental and ecology as well as flow of the river need 
to be conducted. Further, the issues of displacement of local population, their 
sensibilities and relief rehabilitation have to be suitably addressed in a transparent 
and justified manner.   The Committee therefore urge the Ministry to take confidence 
of all stakeholders and address their concerns before embarking on such a big 
project. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.13) 
 
2.20 The Committee note with concern that river erosion in Assam is a big 
perennial problem causing significant economic loss besides displacement of 
population. The Committee are of the view that it is high time that Government 
should consider inclusion of river erosion in the admissible list of calamities for 
availing assistance under National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF)/ State Disaster 
Response Fund (SDRF).The Committee also recommend the Ministry to take 
requisite steps to protect the Majuli island by strengthening / improving the 
peripheral embankment system of the Island.  
(Recommendation Sl.No.14) 

64 
 
NORTH EAST WATER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY (NEWMA) BILL 
2.21 The Committee welcome the initiative of the Government for bringing forward 
a legislation for setting up an apex body i.e.North East Water Management Authority 
(NEWMA) for facilitating integrated management of water resources for whole of 
North East Region including Sikkim and Brahmaputra Basin area of West Bengal, is 
under consideration of the Union Government. The Committee express the hope that 
the proposed apex body will ensure integrated development of all water bodies and 
river-based projects in the region and take care of conservation of the natural 
resources. The Committee recommend that the Department should take steps for 
expeditious finalization of the Bill and its enactment by the Parliament within a time-
bound period.  
(Recommendation Sl.No.15) 
NEED TO STRENGTHEN BRAHMAPUTRA BOARD 
 
2.22 The Committee note that Brahmaputra Board was set up to address the twin 
problems of floods in north-eastern states and storage of flood water in 
Brahmaputra basin. The Committee,however, express its concern over the lack of 
manpower in Brahmaputra Board. The Committee note that as against the 
sanctioned strength of 161 technical posts, almost 38% posts are lying vacant,and in 
respect of non-technical Posts, out of 254, 66% posts are lying vacant. The huge 
shortage of manpower adversely affects the proper functioning of the Board. 
Keeping in view the paramount importance of Brahmaputra Board for management 
of floods and erosion in North-East region, the Committee recommend the 
Department to fill up all the vacant posts on priority basis so as to augment the 
manpower in the Board for enabling its smooth functioning. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.16) 
FLOODS IN KERALA 
 
2.23 The Committee note that the typical topography of Kerala along with  high intensity 
rainfall during the monsoon months are the key reasons for the severe flood crisis in the 
State. The rapid urbanization and high population density have led to drastic changes in 

65 
 
land-use pattern, and low lands reclamation that used to provide cushioning effect to the 
flood waters and the obstructions caused to the natural drainages etc have worsened the 
impact caused by floods. The Committee note that the most of the dams in Kerala were 
constructed between the years 1960 and 1980 and were primarily meant for meeting the 
needs of irrigation, industrial, power generation and drinking water. The capacity of 
reservoirs in Kerala is stated to be very limited and these can store only 7 per cent of 
available water. The State could not commission any new reservoir/dam projects since 
1980s due to the stringent Environment and Forest Laws and the resistance from the 
Environmental Groups. The Attappady Irrigation Project despite getting approval from the 
Supreme Court has not yet got clearance from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change. The Committee recommend that keeping in view the recurring floods in 
the State of Kerala, the Ministry of Jal Shakti should take up this issue with the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change and impress upon them to grant clearances 
without delay so that the Attappady Irrigation Project could be commissioned at the 
earliest. Besides, the State Government of Kerala should actively engage with the 
environmentalist groups so as to understand their apprehensions and take into 
consideration their views and suggestions so that the contentious issue of construction of 
new dams may be amicably resolved to the satisfaction of all stake holders.  
(Recommendation Sl.No.17) 
 
2.24 The Committee have been informed that Kerala is unable to avail the benefits of 
“Flood Management and Border Areas Programme (FMBAP)”, a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme owing to non-issuance of mandatory clearances by the State Coastal Zone 
Management Authority on the ground that the clearance could not be issued unless EIA 
(Environmental Impact Assessment) for one whole year is carried out. The Committee urge 
the Department to take up the matter with concerned authorities to look into this matter on 
priority with positive note.  
(Recommendation Sl.No.18) 
2.25 The Committee are pleased to note the close monitoring and communication 
mechanism formed between Kerala and Tamil Nadu helped in preventing floods in the 
Chalakudy basin during the monsoon season. However, the Committee are perturbed to 
observe that the rule curves of Mullaperiyar Dam (MPD) and three dams in the 

66 
 
Parambikulam-Aliyar Project (PAP) system are yet to be finalized between the State 
Governments of Kerala and Tamil Nadu. The Committee feel that this issue needs to be 
sorted out as early as possible for ensuring the safe operation of these reservoirs. The 
Committee urge upon the Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation to mediate in the matter and play the role of an honest broker in resolving this 
contentious issue between the two State Governments by pro-actively engaging all 
stakeholders. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Government in this regard.  
(Recommendation Sl.No.19) 
NEED TO EXPAND THE SCOPE OF FLOOD FORECASTING STATIONS 
2.26 The Committee note that Central Water Commission (CWC) is the nodal 
agency for carrying out the work relating to flood forecasting and warning in India. 
Presently, there are 326 Flood forecast stations of which 128 are Inflow Forecast 
Stations 198 are Level Forecast Stations. The Committee find that presently only 128 
reservoirs in the country are covered by Inflow Forecast Stations. Since the 
significance and importance of the inflow forecasting for efficient real time reservoir 
operation is a proven fact, there is anurgent need to strengthen impact-based 
warning at micro level.  The Committee therefore, recommend the Department to 
take necessary steps to enhance the number of inflow forecast network and also 
strengthen impact-based warning at micro level.     
(Recommendation Sl.No.20) 
 
2.27 The Committee are dismayed to learn that Inflow Forecasting Stations have 
not been set up by the CWC in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Himachal 
Pradesh and Jammu &Kashmir on the ground that no request from the State 
Government/Project Authorities has been received in CWC for setting up the same. 
In this connection, the Committee would like to remind the Department that in the 
year 2018 when severe floods occurred in Kerala, CWC was not having any flood 
forecasting station in the State as no request was made by the Government of Kerala 
to start flood forecasting activity at that point of time. The Committee are therefore of 
the opinion that the system of setting up flood forecasting station only on the 

67 
 
request from the concerned State Governments needs to be reviewed in the 
backdrop of increasing incidents of extreme climatic conditions, heavy and 
unseasonal rainfall and cloudbursts etc. The Committee therefore recommend that 
instead of waiting for requests from States, the Department should set up flood 
forecasting stations at the designated places.  Further it should identify the risk of 
deluge to the concerned region and share the information with the States concerned 
so as to obviate the risk of unpreparedness on account of lack of flood forecasting. 
(Recommendation Sl.No. 21) 
 
FUNDING UNDER FLOOD MANAGEMENT PROGRAMMES 
 
2.28 The Committee note that during XI Plan, the Flood Management Programme 
(FMP) was implemented with an outlay of Rs. 8000 crore and the pattern of funding 
was 90 % (Centre):10 % (State) for Special Category States and 75 % (Centre): 25 % 
(State) for General/ Non-Special Category States. However, during XII Plan, though 
the Programme continued, the funding pattern was revised to 70% (Centre):30 (State) 
for the special category States viz. North Eastern States, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu 
& Kashmir and Uttarakhand and for General States it was revised to – 50% (Centre) : 
50% (State).  The Committee expresstheir concern over slashing the Central share of 
funding under these Programmes during XII Plan.Given the precarious state of 
financing of States particularly poor States like Bihar who shares international 
border with Nepal and other major flood prone States are not in a position to provide 
adequate budgetary support for flood management works. The Secretary, DoWR, RD 
& GR during the oral evidence admitted that annual budget of the Ministry for flood 
management works is only Rs. 500 crore which is awfully low in comparison to the 
requirement of funds for flood control works/schemes. He further, stated that more 
than funding pattern, non-allocation of sufficient funds for the scheme is the major 
roadblock for undertaking flood management works.  
 
2.29 Keeping in view the large scale destruction caused by the floods every year 
and also the delicate financial position of the States, the Committee urge the 
Department to vigorously persue with the Ministry of Finance to provide adequate 

68 
 
budgetary support for flood Management Programme.  The Committee also 
recommend that the Department should impress upon the Niti Aayog to revise the 
existing fund sharing pattern between Union and States under the Flood 
management schemes with a view to increase Centre's share. Further, to augment 
the funding for flood management programme, the Committee urge the Department 
to explore the possibility of setting up a dedicated fund on the lines of Clean Ganga 
Fund for NamamiGangeProgramme whereby a trust may be set up for seeking 
contributions from corporate entities as well as individuals. Besides, to incentivize 
the corporates, the donation to dedicated FMP Fund may be exempted from Income 
Tax under relevant sections and contribution to FMP Fund may also qualify under 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) provisions of the Company Act. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.22) 
 
2.30 The Committee have been informed that in order to formulate the strategy for 
flood management works in the entire country and river management activities and 
works in the border areas for period 2020-2023, a Committee has been constituted by 
NITI Aayog under the chairmanship of Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog. Officials from 
various Departments/Ministries of Government of India, experts from the field and 
Principal Secretaries from States of Jammu & Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West 
Bengal, Punjab, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura, Madhya Pradesh and Kerala 
have been included as the members of this Committee. As a part of this exercise, a 
Sub-Committee was constituted under the chairmanship of Secretary, DoWR, RD & 
GR, Ministry of Jal Shakti to assist the Committee in formulation of the 
proposal/strategy of flood management in respect of three broad areas, viz., 
structural measures, non structural measure and the scheme for financial assistance 
to states for taking up flood management works and river management 
activities/works in border areas. It has been informed that the Sub-Committee has 
submitted it Report to the aforesaid Committee of NITI Ayog in July-2020. The 
Committee urge the Government to complete the exercise of formulation of the 
strategy for flood management works in the entire country and river management 
activities and works in the border areas, within a definite time period so that a 

69 
 
comprehensive and well-defined policy for integrated Flood Management in the 
country is put in place.  
(Recommendation Sl.No.23) 
INTEGRATED RESERVOIR OPERATION FOR FLOOD MANAGEMENT 
 
2.31 The Committee take note of the following major instances where release of 
water from dams has caused flood like situation in other States: (i) Flood like 
situation in Patna in Bihar and its downstream areas in the year 2016 after releases 
from Bansagar Dam in Madhya Pradesh and Rihand dam in Uttar Pradesh (ii) 
Releases from Koyna Dam and other small dams in Maharashtra and Almatti Dam in 
Karnataka in the year 2019inundated Telangana and Andhra Pradesh (iii) Releases 
from dams at Chambal basin in Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan and dams at Betwa 
Basin dams in Madhya Pradesh and UP caused flood like situation in UP, Bihar and 
West Bengal and (iv) Releases from Bhakra Beas Management Board (BBMB) 
Projects in HP and Punjab creating flood like situation in Punjab.The Committee note 
that most of the Indian rivers are inter-state flowing through more than one State. 
Many River Valley Projects have been developed on these rivers by the State 
Governments within their jurisdiction and they are being operated as a single entity 
in most of the cases. However, it is not possible for each State to operate the 
reservoir in an integrated manner with reservoir located in other States without 
having institutional mechanism for the same. Many a times, sudden release of water 
from dams in one State has created inundation in other State resulting in loss of 
lives in addition to large scale economic losses to population and infrastructure.  
 
 
2.32 The Committee express concern over the fact that though dam owners are 
advised to follow Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) for release of water from their 
reservoirs and issue advance warnings for the downstream areas, the conflicting 
objectives and lack of coordination between various States pose a challenge in 
optimal operation of reservoirs. To obiviate this problem, the Committee recommend 
that setting up of River Basin Authority for each river basin of the country may be 

70 
 
expedited in order to ensure integrated operation of reservoirs. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard.  
(Recommendation Sl.No.24) 
CRISIS MANAGEMENT PLAN 
 
2.33 The Committee note with concern that although the Flood Crisis Management 
Teams (FCMTs) which are formed for various river basins issue advisories based on 
the inflow forecast and the availability of flood cushion in the reservoir, the project 
authorities are not bound to follow the advisories of FCMT as the decision for 
release of water from the project falls under the purview of State Governments. The 
Department have sought the intervention of the Committee in the matter for finding a  
remedy to the problem through an executive order issued under Disaster 
Management (DM) Act 2005 or through a legislation such as proposed Dam Safety 
Bill which has since been passed by Lok Sabha and is to be passed by the Rajya 
Sabha. The Committee recommend the Government to take expeditious steps for 
enactment of the legislation for Dam safety and pending enactment of this 
legislation, an executive order in this regard may be issued under DM Act, 2005 as 
early as possible.  
(Recommendation Sl.No.25) 
GUIDELINES FOR REGULATION OF WATER RESERVOIRS IN THE COUNTRY 
 
 
2.34 The Committee have been informed that CWC publishes guidelines for 
preparing Operation and Maintenance Manual for dams which contain various 
aspects of project operation including normal operation and also operation during 
emergency. Details for preparation of operational rule curve (both for reservoir filling 
and release) are also part of the guidelines. However, it is the dam owners (States 
Govts./UTs./Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) etc.) who are responsible for 
Operation & Maintenance (O&M) and regulation of water in reservoirs and the role of 
Central Water Commission is just advisory with little room for proactive intervention 
in reservoir operation and regulation. The Department in its submission has stated 
that the Dam Safety Bill, 2019 has exclusive provision regarding coordinated 

71 
 
reservoir operations of cascading dams which will address the problem of regulation 
of waters in reservoirs.  The Committee recommend that till such time the Dam 
Safety Bill is passed by the Parliament, the Department should take proactive steps 
in consultation with all State Governments / Project authorities so as to prevent 
faulty reservoir operations and encourage seamlessexchange of information 
amongst State Governments for safe release of water from reservoir. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.26) 
 
MEASURES TO COMBAT  GLACIAL LAKE OUTBURST FLOOD (GLOF) 
2.35 Flood forecasting by CWC assist the authorities concerned to a large extent in 
framing a relief and mitigation response to riverine floods by providing advanced 
information. However, disasters such as flash floods, GLOF, and landslides, which 
are expected to become more common in the future due to climate change, 
constitute a threat in terms of assessing and forecasting their perilous impact in a 
prompt way. The Committee note with concern that, of late, Climate change has had 
a great impact on glacier movement in the Indian Himalayan region. In general, 
glaciers have been rapidly melting and retreating resulting in formation of a number 
of moraine dammed glacial lakes, posing numerous threats particularly to the 
population and infrastructure located nearby due to their outbursts.   Recognizing 
and spotting of dangerous glacial lakes is very important so that all the stakeholders 
i.e.planners, scientists, academics, and the general public may evolve, adopt and 
carry out suitable mitigation steps such as monitoring, early warning, evacuationand 
relief and rehabilitation. The Committee therefore recommend that the Ministry make 
concerted efforts to set up and widen the network of high altitude meteorological 
and discharge stations equipped with modern technology including Synthetic-
Aperture Radar imagery to automatically detect changes in water bodies, including 
new lake formations, covering glaciers, glacial lakes and watersheds in the Indian 
Himalayan region. Besides, it should also work in close collaboration with other 
agencies involved in glacial management and analyzing the mountain hazardous by 
sharing data with them.  
(Recommendation Sl.No.27) 

72 
 
 
 
LOSSES DUE TO EROSION DURING FLOODS 
 
2.36 The Committee note with concern that the Department has not furnished 
specific information pertaining to losses caused due to soil erosion during floods 
and sand /debris deposition in agricultural farmlands in terms of acreage, and 
number of farmers affected. Further, the Committee have learnt from the reply of the 
Department that there does not exist any scheme to make those farmlands cultivable 
which were damaged and became uncultivable due to erosion during floods and 
deposition of sand/debris. The Committee are appalled at the conditions of the 
hapless farmers whose standing crops are destroyed and their agriculturallands 
submerged due to the floods and lack of financial assistance from the Government 
to make their agricultural lands cultivable. The Committee urge the Department of 
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation to compile data 
regarding the losses caused by erosion during floods and deposition of sand/debris 
in the agriculture lands in terms of acreage number of farmers affected and financial 
losses and also formulate a scheme to extend all kinds of assistance including 
financial to these farmersfor making their uncultivable land cultivable in 
coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.28) 
 
INDUS WATER TREATY BETWEEN INDIA AND PAKISTAN  
 
2.37 The Committee note that the Indus Water Treaty was signed between India 
and Pakistan for sharing of waters of Indus basin in 1960 after eight years of 
negotiations under the aegis of the World Bank. Total quantity of waters of the 
Eastern Rivers viz. Sutlej, Beas, and Ravi is allocated to India for unrestricted use 
while the waters of Western rivers i.e. Indus, Jhelum, and Chenab is allocated largely 
to Pakistan. However, India is permitted to use the water of the western rivers for 
domestic use, non-consumptive use, agricultural and generation of hydro-electric 
power. The Committee are pleased to learn that important projects like Ranjit Sagar 
Dam, Pong Dam and Bhakhra Nangal Dam have been built on these rivers which help 
India to make major use of waters of the rivers flowing to Pakistan as per the Indus 

73 
 
Water Treaty. However, the Committee are concerned that the canals in Punjab and 
Rajasthan have become very old and are also not properly maintained resulting in 
lowering their water carrying capacity. Further, the canals like Rajasthan feeder and 
Sarhind feeder are working below their capacity  (only 1/3 of their full capacity) 
resulting in release of water from Harike Barrage to Pakistan. The Committee, 
therefore, urge upon the Government that projects like Ujh and Shahpur Kandi may 
be completed expeditiously so as to exploit full potential of the western rivers for 
irrigation and other purposes. Further, the Committee recommend that the canal 
system in Rajasthan and Punjab may be repaired strengthened and properly 
maintained in order to increase their water carrying capacity.  
(Recommendation Sl.No.29) 
 
2.38 The Committee are constrained to note that though India as per the Indus 
Water Treaty has the right to create water capacity storageupto 3.6 Million Acre-Feet 
(MAF) on Western rivers, however, no storage capacity has been created so far by 
India. Further, out of estimated power potential of about 20000 MW (Mega Watt), 
which could be harnessed from Western rivers power projects, only capacity of 3482 
MW have been constructed so far on Western rivers. Besides, the Treaty provides 
India, the right to develop Irrigated Cropped Area (ICA) of 13,43,477 acres (9,12,477 
acres without creating any storage and 4,31,000 acres after creation of conservation 
storage and release of a specified quantum of water into the river annually) through 
waters of Western rivers. However, as per the latest data for the crop year 2019-20, 
the ICA developed by India on Western rivers is 7,59,859 acres.Keeping in view the 
aforestated position, the Committee recommend that Government of India should 
examine the feasibility of making maximum use of the provisions of the Indus Water 
Treaty, in terms of full utilization of all accessible water of the eastern rivers and 
maximum utilization of the irrigation and hydropower potential of western rivers 
including permissible water storage as per the provisions of the treaty. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.30) 
 

74 
 
2.39 The Committee observe that although Indus Water Treaty has stood the test of 
time, they are of the view that the Treaty was framed on the basis of knowledge and 
technology existing at the time of its agreement in 1960s. The perspective of both 
the nations at that time was confined to river management and usage of water 
through construction of dams, barrages, canals and hydro-power generation. 
Present day pressing issues such as climate change, global warming and 
environmental impact assessment etc.were not taken into account by the Treaty. In 
view of this, there is a need to re-negotiate the Treaty so as to establish some kind of 
institutional structure or legislative framework to address the impact of climate 
change on water availability in the Indus basin and other challenges which are not 
covered under the Treaty. Hence, the Committee urge the Government of India to 
take necessary diplomatic measures to renegotiate the Indus Water Treaty with 
Pakistan. 
(Recommendation Sl.No.31) 
 
INDO-CHINA WATER RELATIONS 
 
2.40 From the submission made by the Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, the Committee note that presently there is no 
water treaty with China. However, Memoranda of Understandings (MoUs) on 
Brahmaputra and Sutlej rivers have been signed by the two nations, which will be in 
force for five years and are renewed regularly. Besides, an Expert Level Mechanism 
(ELM) between both the nations has also been set up for ensuring co-operation with 
regard to provision of hydrological data by China during flood season, emergency 
management and other issues regarding trans-border rivers as agreed upon by the 
two countries. The Committee express their satisfaction over the fact that China 
is sharing hydrological data with regard to rivers of Brahmaputra and Sutlej, though 
on payment basis. The only aberration is the year 2017 when no data was supplied 
by it.  
 

75 
 
2.41 Further, the Committee have been apprised by the Ministry of External 
Affairs that three hydropower projects on the main stream of Brahmaputra River in 
Tibet Autonomous Region have been approved by the Chinese authorities and a  
hydropower project at Zangmu was declared fully operational by Chinese authorities 
in October 2015.  It has also been stated that the Government of India is carefully 
monitoring all the developments on the Brahmaputra River and has consistently 
conveyed its views and concerns to the Chinese authorities in order to ensure that 
the interests of downstream States like India are not harmed by any activities 
undertaken in upstream areas. China has conveyed to India on several occasions 
that they are undertaking run-of-the-river hydropower projects which do not involve 
diversion of the waters of the Brahmaputra. The Committee express apprehension 
that  though ‘run of the river’ projects undertaken by China per se may not lead 
to diversion of waters, but there is every possibility that  water can  be stored in  
pondages and  released for running the turbines , which  may   lead to  certain 
diurnal variation in downstream flow and  as a consequence have an  impact on 
water flows in Brahmaputra river and thus  affect india’s endeavours to tap the 
region’s water resources.The Committee recommend that India should constantly  
monitor the Chinese actions so as to ensure that they  do not pursue any major  
interventions on Brahmaputra river  which would  adversely affect our national 
interests . 
(Recommendation Sl.No.32) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;        Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
03  August, 2021       Chairperson, 
12 Sravana, 1943 (Saka)                          Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 

76 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES HELD ON THURSDAY, 6 AUGUST, 2020 
  
The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1545 hours in Committee Room 'C', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
                         Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA  
 
 
2. Shri Vijay Baghel 
3. Shri Bhagirath Chaudhary 
4. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan 
5. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
6. Dr. K. Jayakumar 
7. Shri Kaushal Kishore 
8. Shri Hasmukhbhai  Somabhai  Patel 
9. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
11. Shri Arun Singh 
12. Shri Subhash Chandra Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Manoj  K. Arora   - OSD (LSS) 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan  - Director 
 
WITNESSES 
I.   Ministry of Jal Shakti- Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga  Rejuvenation 
 
1. Shri U.P Singh, Secretary (WR, RD & GR) 
2. Shri R. K. Jain, Chairman (CWC) 
3. Smt. Debashree Mukherjee, Additional Secretary (WR, RD & GR) 
4. Shri Atul Jain, Commissioner (WR, RD & GR) 
5. Shri Sharad Chandra, Director (CWC) 
 

77 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee and apprised  the Members of the  agenda of the Sitting i.e., briefing by the 
representatives of the Ministry of Jal Shakti –(Department of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation) on the subject “Flood Management in the country 
and evolving Decision Support System for release of water from Dams” and consideration 
and adoption of draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Committee(17th Lok Sabha) on 
“Demands for Grants (2019-20)” of the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation). 
 
[The representatives of the Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation were, then, ushered in] 
 
3. The Chairperson  then welcomed the representatives of the Department of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, to the sitting and  drew their 
attention to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker regarding the confidentiality of 
the proceedings of the Committee. Thereafter,   the representatives of the Department 
made a power point presentation on the subject, inter alia highlighting the various 
measures/steps taken by the Department to combat the menace of floods in the country. 
Then  the Members, one by one,  sought clarifications and raised queries on the issues  
pertaining to the subject. The important issues/ topics raised during the discussion on the 
subject, amongst others, included the following: 
 
(i) Integrated River Basin Management. 
(ii) Issues regarding fund sharing  pattern between the Centre and State on the 
scheme -Flood management  programme(FMP) 
(iii) The Concept of Flood Plain Zoning and issue of  not enacting the Model Bill 
on Flood Plain Zoning by several  States 
(iv) Need for integrated operation of reservoirs and  role of dams in mitigating the 
devastating floods.  
(v) Limitations of embankments in controlling impacts of floods. 
(vi) Dredging of Rivers. 
(vii) Need for Inflow Marking of the cross border river waters coming from Nepal 
(viii) Need for national Strategies to combat floods in hilly areas.   
(ix) Interlinking of Rivers. 
4. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives for making   presentation on the 
various aspects of the subject and replying to the  queries raised by the Members. He then 

78 
 
asked the  Secretary, to furnish written replies to those points/queries raised by the 
Members which could not be readily replied and/or  on which detailed statistical replies are 
required ,within a  week’s  time . 
 
[The witnesses, then, withdrew] 
 
5. XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX
 XX  
 
6. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has 
been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
*** 
  

79 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES HELD ON MONDAY, 17 AUGUST, 2020 
  
The Committee sat from 1130 hours to 1345 hours in Committee Room 'C', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
                         Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA  
 
 
2. Shri Vijay Baghel 
3. Shri Bhagirath Chaudhary 
4. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
5. Dr. K. Jayakumar 
6. Shri Kaushal Kishore 
7. Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav 
8. Shri HasmukhbhaiSomabhaiPatel 
9. Shri DipsinhShankarsinh Rathod 
10. Shri Prajwal Revanna 
11. Shri D. K. Suresh 
 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
13. Shri Arun Singh 
14. Shri Subhash Chandra Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora   - OSD (LSS) 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudan  - Director 
3. Shri R. C. Sharma   - Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES 
I.   Ministry of Jal Shakti- Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga  Rejuvenation 
 
1. Shri U.P Singh, Secretary (WR, RD & GR) 
2. Shri R. K. Jain, Chairman ,CWC 
3. Smt. Debashree Mukherjee, Additional Secretary (WR, RD & GR) 
4. Shri Atul Jain, Commissioner (WR, RD & GR) 

80 
 
5. Shri Sharad Chandra, Director ,CWC 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF ASSAM 
1. Shri Syedain Abbasi, Additional Chief Secretary 
2. Shri Dibakar Bhattacharjee, OSD to Hon'ble Minister, WRD, Govt. of Assam 
3. Shri Borsing Rongpi, Chief Engineer 
 
 GOVERNMENT OF KERALA 
1. Shri Sanjay Garg, IAS, Resident Commissioner & Principal Secretary 
2. Shri Biju B., Chief Engineer 
3. Shri Bibin Joseph, Director 
4. Shri James Wilsom, Member of the Expert Advisory Group Reservoir 
Operation 
 
 GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR 
Shri P.K. Jha, Superintending Engineer 
 
2. At the outset,  Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them of the agenda of the Sitting i.e.,  Evidence of the  
representatives of  Ministry of Jal Shakti ( Department of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation) and State Governments of Assam, Kerala and Bihar 
in connection with the examination of the subject “Flood Management in the country and 
evolving Decision Support System for release of water from Dams with special reference to 
the measures taken for flood control in the States of Bihar, Assam and Kerala”, and 
consideration and adoption of draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/ recommendations contained in the First Report of the Committee(17th Lok 
Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2019-20)” of the Ministry of Jal Shakti– Department of 
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation.  
 
[The representatives of the Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation, State Governments of Assam, Kerala and Bihar  were, then, 
ushered in] 
 
3. The Chairperson then welcomed the  representatives of the Department of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation and the State Governments of 
Assam, Kerala and Bihar, to the Sitting and   drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker regarding the confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee 
.Thereafter,  the representative of the State Government of Bihar apprised the Committee 
about the flood control measures taken by the State and the constraints and challenges 
faced by the State in Flood Management particularly on account of flood waters flowing 
from Cross border rivers flowing from Nepal. Thereafter, the representatives of the State 

81 
 
Governments of Assam and Kerala made a power point presentation highlighting  the  flood 
situation  in their respective States, steps taken by them to control the impact of floods and  
various problems faced by them in flood control.  
 
4. Then the Members, one by one, sought clarifications and raised queries on the 
issues  pertaining to the subject. The important issues/ topics raised during the discussion 
on the subject, amongst others, included the following: 
. 
(i) Massive destruction in the State of Bihar due to uncontrolled inflow of waters 
coming from  rivers in Nepal. 
(ii) Breach of embankments and  rise in flood prone area despite increase in the 
length of embankment. 
(iii) Non-Identification of several  flood prone districts by the Ministry of Jal Shakti 
in the State of Bihar. 
(iv) Non-inclusion of any new project from Bihar in the Flood Management 
Programme (FMP)  
(v) Need to extend river management activities relating to bordering areas to all 
the rivers of bordering districts in Bihar in addition to Gandak and Kosi . 
(vi) Need to explore alternative ways of funding to finance flood controlling 
measures. 
(vii) Inadequacy of manpower in Brahmaputra Board.  
(viii) Need for construction of reservoirs on the upstream side of Assam to control 
the fury of floods. 
(ix) Issue of funding as well as  fund sharing pattern between Centre and States 
with regard to Flood management Programme 
(x) Cooperation between State Government of Kerala and Tamil Nadui in inter-
reservoir /dam management.  
(xi) The issue of interlinking of rivers.  
(xii) Non- construction of  new dams for flood control in the State of Kerala.  
(xiii) The issue of Hydro Electric Projects located in Arunachal Pradesh causing 
floods in Assam. 
5. The Chairperson, then, thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Jal Shakti and 
the representatives of the State Governments of Assam, Kerala and Bihar for making   
presentation on the various aspects of the subject and replying to the queries raised by the 
Members. The Chairperson asked the Secretary, Department of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation to furnish written replies to those queries raised by the 
Members which could not be replied  readily by them, within a  fortnight. 
 
 
[The witnesses, then, withdrew] 

82 
 
 
6. XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX
 XX  
 
7. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has 
been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
*** 
  

83 
 
 
 MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES HELD ON TUESDAY, 17 NOVEMBER, 2020 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1630 hours in Committee Room 'D', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
                         Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan 
3. Shri Guman Singh Damor 
4. Dr. K. Jayakumar 
5. Shri M. Dhanush Kumar 
6. Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav 
7. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
8. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
9. Shri Subhash Chandra Singh 
10. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Manoj  K. Arora   - OSD (LSS) 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan  - Director 
3. Shri R. C. Sharma   - Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES 
I.   Ministry of Jal Shakti- Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga  Rejuvenation 
 
1. Shri U.P Singh, Secretary (WR, RD & GR)  
2. Smt. Debashree Mukhrjee, Additional Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR 
3. Shri R.K. Sinha, Member, CWC 
4. Shri Atul Jain, Commissioner (FM) 
5. Shri P. K. Saxena, Commissioner (Indus) 

84 
 
6. Shri T. S. Mehra, Commissioner (B & B) 
7. Shri Rakesh Toteja, Senior Joint commissioner 
 
Ministry of External Affairs 
1. Shri Arun K. Chatterjee, Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Arindam Bagchi, Joint Secretary (North) 
3. Shri Anil Kumar Rai, Joint Secretary (Parliament and Coordination) 
4. Shri J.P. Singh, Joint Secretary (PAI) 
5. Shri Satish Kumar Sivan, Director (EA) 
6. Shri Amit A. Shukla, Director (North) 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee and apprised  them  that  the Sitting has been convened to  take oral evidence 
of  the representatives of the Ministries of Jal Shakti –(Department of Water Resources, 
River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation) and External Affairs , on the subject “Flood 
Management in the Country including international water treaties in the field of water 
resource management/flood control with particular reference to treaty/agreement  entered 
into with Nepal, China, Pakistan and Bhutan”.  
 
[The representatives of the Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation and the Ministry of External Affairs were, then, ushered in] 
 
3. The Chairperson then welcomed the representatives of the Department of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation and Ministry of External Affairs, to 
the sitting and drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker 
regarding the confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee. Thereafter, the 
representatives of the Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation, made a power point presentation inter alia, highlighting the issues relating to 
trans-boundary rivers contributing to the problem of floods in the  country and sharing of  
waters of trans border rivers. Then the Members, sought clarifications and raised queries 
on the various issues pertaining to the subject. Thereafter, the representatives of the 
Ministry of External Affairs, made a brief presentation on the subject highlighting the steps 
taken by the Government of India at the diplomatic level with Nepal, Pakistan, China and 
Bhutan in finding a solution to the problem of floods and sharing of waters of trans border 
rivers. The important issues/ topics raised during the discussion on the subject, amongst 
others, included the following: 
 
(i) Funding of upstream embankments by the Ministry of Jal Shakti  located in 
Nepal region 
(ii) Providing of financial assistance by Govt of India to the Government of Bihar 
for maintenance of Kosi and Gandak Barrages.  
(iii) Delay in execution of Pancheshwar Multi-Purpose Project.  

85 
 
(iv) Differences of opinion between Governments of India and Nepal regarding 
the interpretation of Mahakali treaty.  
(v) Issue of sharing of cost and benefits with regard to Pancheshwar multi-
purpose project between Governments of India and Nepal. 
(vi) Reasons for delay in completion of  survey for Saptakoshi Sunkoshi project  
(vii) Need for enhanced cooperation between India and Nepal in speedy 
execution of the Projects.  
(viii) Indus Water Treaty and steps taken by the Government of India to make full 
use of water allotted to India as per the treaty.  
(ix) Issues of improper maintenance of canals in Punjab and Rajasthan resulting 
in additional flow of water to Pakistan from Harike Barrage.  
(x) Issue of real time data sharing with China in containing floods.  
(xi) Issue of having Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs) with China rather 
than water treaty. 
4. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives for making presentation on the 
various aspects of the subject and replying to the queries raised by the Members. He then 
asked the  Secretary, to furnish written replies to those points/queries raised by the 
Members, which could not be readily replied and/or  on which detailed statistical replies are 
required, within a  fortnight time. 
 
[The witnesses, then, withdrew] 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has 
been kept. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
*** 
  

86 
 
Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Water 
Resources held on Tuesday, 3 August 2021 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1645 hours in Committee Room 
No. '139', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
                         Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Vijay Baghel 
3. Shri Bhagirath Chaudhary 
4. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
5. Shri Guman Singh Damor 
6. Dr.Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
7. Dr. K. Jayakumar 
8. Shri P. Raveendranath Kumar 
9. Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav 
10. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
11. Shri Sanjay Kaka Patil 
12. Shri Sunil Kumar 
13. Ms. Agatha K. Sangma 
14. Shri D.K. Suresh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
16. Dr.KirodiLal Meena 
17. Shri Subhash Chandra Singh 
  

87 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI-DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES,  
RIVER DEVELOPMENT & GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
1. Shri Pankaj Kumar Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Ranjan MishraDG, NMCG 
3. Shri Rozy Aggarwal Exe-Director, NMCG 
4. Shri D. P. Mathuria Exe-Director, NMCG 
5. Shri Ashok Kumar Exe-Director, NMCG 
6. Shri Binod Kumar Director, NMCG 
CENTRAL GROUND WATER BOARD (CGWB) 
 
7. Shri Nanadkumaran P. Chairman, CGWB 
CENTRAL WATER COMMISSION (CWC) 
 
8. Shri S. K. Haldar Chairman, CWC 
CENTRAL POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD (CPCB) 
 
9. Shri Naresh Pal Gangwar JS, MoEF & Chairman, CPCB 
10. Dr. Prashant Gargava Member Secretary, CPCB 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora  - OSD (LSS) 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan  - Director 
3. Shri R.C. Sharma   - Additional Director 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to – (i) take further evidence on the subject-“Conservation, 
Development, Management and Abatement of pollution in river Ganga and its 
tributaries under Namami Gange programme with particular reference to project 
deliverables and timelines as well as performance of State Governments" with 
special reference to implementation of the Programme in the States of Bihar, UP 
and West Bengal; and (ii) consideration and adoption of the draft Report on 
"Flood Management in the Country including International Water treaties in the 
field of Water Resource Management with particular reference to 
Treaty/Agreement Entered into with China, Pakistan And Bhutan". 

88 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Report and 
adopted the same with slight modification in Recommendation no.1 (Para 2.1).  
The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Report on their 
behalf to both the Houses of Parliament, during the current Session.  
 
[The  representatives of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation were then 
ushered in] 
 
 
 
5. XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX
 XX  
 
6. XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX
 XX 
 
7. XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX
 XX 
 
 
*** 
 
  

89 
 
Annexure I 
Statement showing State-wise data regarding damages due to floods/heavy rain for the year 
2018 and all India averaged data over the period 1953 to 2018  
 
 
  
           Tenative        Populati        Total    Area       Damage damages    on      Human   affected Damage to Crops Damage to Houses Cattle lost to public crops,house, Sl. No. Name of State affected lives lost  in in       utilities & public             utilities                               Mha Million Area Value in Nos. Value in Nos. Nos. Value in Rs in Rs.Crore    mha Rs Crore Rs Crore Crore           1 2 3  4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 ANDHRA PRADESH 0.170  1.910 0.170 237.480 51849 243.910 1259 22 3205.781 3687.171              2 ARUNACHAL PRADESH 0.743  NR 0.743 462.915 1647 589.949 47 33 860.963 1913.827              3 ASSAM 0.043  1.322 0.031 23.490 102737 84.010 122 53 2373.480 2480.980              4 BIHAR 0.034  0.150 0.001 5.137 1074 0.413 0.000 1.000 0.010 5.560              5 CHATTISGARH 0.005  0.194 0.004 12.246 10831 4.140 183 135 25.304 41.689              6 GOA  NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR              7 GUJARAT 2.378  18.600 0.054 47.820 2635 2.068 212 57 68.160 118.048              8 HARYANA 0.079  0.000 0.079 88.446 54 0.580 0 3 0.000 89.026              9 HIMACHAL PRADESH 0.006  6.865 0.411 12.570 6023 43.030 1285 343 10.300 65.900              10 JAMMU & KASHMIR  NR NR NR NR 17 NR 38 6 NR NR              11 JHARKHAND 0.000  0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 5 0.200 0.200              12 KARNATAKA 0.328  0.350 0.232 2220.700 14955 367.510 1207 215 2032.570 4620.780              13 KERALA 3.150  5.412 0.087 168.480 324386 998.131 47953 450 2154.149 3320.760              14 MADHYA PRAADESH  Nil Nil Nil Nil 315 1.670 36 31 Nil 1.670              15 MAHARASHTRA  NR NR NR NR NR NR 65 68 NR NR              16 MANIPUR 0.005  0.127 0.005 NR 17846 NR 400 9 NR NR              17 MEGHALAYA 0.000  0.000 0.000 0.038 0 0.029 0 0 0.000 0.066              18 MIZORAM  NR NR 0.000 NR 987 NR 3 11 NR NR              19 NAGALAND 0.002  0.261 0.002 NR 5209 NR 794 13 NR NR              20 ODISHA 0.033  0.624 0.026 29.020 43360 23.980 164 21 246.840 299.840              21 PUNJAB 0.057  NR 0.057 120.410 1477 4.110 29 26 0.000 124.520              22 RAJASTHAN 0.002  0.017 0.002 2.200 2159 2.160 341 26 27.368 31.728              23 SIKKIM  NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR              24 TAMILNADU 0.191  0.560 0.191  220000  1040 52  3500.000              25 TRIPURA 0.004  0.250 0.025 24.282 40897 115.945 3905 22 805.950 946.178              26 UTTAR PRADESH 0.445  0.592 0.383 230.364 28063 13.724 149 105 303.336 547.423              27 UTTARAKHAND 0.001  NR 0.001 NR 2062 NR 895 101 NR NR              28 WEST BENGAL 0.043  0.157 0.011 22.410 34755 13.268 17 31 18.328 54.006              29 A & N ISLAND  Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 0.000              30 CHANDIGARH  Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 0.000              31 D & N HAVELI 0.000  0.000 0.000 0.000 0 0.000 0 0 0.000 0.000              32 DAMAN & DIU 0.000  0.000 0.000 0.000 0 0.000 0 0 0.000 0.000              33 DELHI  NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR              34 LAKSHADWEEP  Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 0.000              35 PUDUCHCHERRY  Nil 0.007 0.000 0.180 76 0.030 135 Nil 0.180 0.600               TOTAL 7.718  37.398 2.515 3708.187 913414 2508.656 60279 1839 12132.919 18349.763                 NOTE-  NR= NOT REPORTED        

90 
 
Annexure II 
 
      INDIA      
  STATEMENT SHOWING DAMAGE DUE TO FLOODS / HEAVY RAINS DURING 1953TO 2018  
            
Sl. Year Area Population Damage to Crops Damage to Houses  Human live 
Damage to Total damages 
Cattle Lost Public 
 
No. 
 
affected affected Area Value 
 
Value Crops, Houses &    Lost Utilities in   in in in in  in   Public utilities in       
  m.ha. million m. ha. Rs.Crore Nos. Rs.Crore Nos. Nos. Rs.Crore Rs.Crore 
           (col.6+8+11) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
1 1953 2.290 24.280 0.930 42.080 264924 7.420 47034 37 2.900 52.400 
2 1954 7.490 12.920 2.610 40.520 199984 6.561 22552 279 10.150 57.231 
3 1955 9.440 25.270 5.310 77.800 1666789 20.945 72010 865 3.980 102.725 
4 1956 9.240 14.570 1.110 44.440 725776 8.047 16108 462 1.140 53.627 
5 1957 4.860 6.760 0.450 14.120 318149 4.979 7433 352 4.270 23.369 
6 1958 6.260 10.980 1.400 38.280 382251 3.896 18439 389 1.790 43.966 
7 1959 5.770 14.520 1.540 56.760 648821 9.418 72691 619 20.020 86.198 
8 1960 7.530 8.350 2.270 42.550 609884 14.309 13908 510 6.310 63.169 
9 1961 6.560 9.260 1.970 24.040 533465 0.889 15916 1374 6.440 31.369 
10 1962 6.120 15.460 3.390 83.180 513785 10.655 37633 348 1.050 94.885 
11 1963 3.490 10.930 2.050 30.170 420554 3.701 4572 432 2.740 36.611 
12 1964 4.900 13.780 2.490 56.870 255558 4.588 4956 690 5.149 66.607 
13 1965 1.460 3.610 0.270 5.870 112957 0.195 7286 79 1.070 7.135 
14 1966 4.740 14.400 2.160 80.150 217269 2.544 9071 180 5.736 88.430 
15 1967 7.120 20.460 3.270 133.310 567995 14.264 5827 355 7.857 155.431 
16 1968 7.150 21.170 2.620 144.610 682704 41.112 130305 3497 25.373 211.095 
17 1969 6.200 33.220 2.910 281.900 1268660 54.423 270328 1408 68.112 404.435 
18 1970 8.460 31.830 4.910 162.780 1434030 48.606 19198 1076 76.441 287.827 
19 1971 13.250 59.740 6.240 423.130 2428031 80.241 12866 994 129.113 632.484 
20 1972 4.100 26.690 2.450 98.560 897301 12.460 58231 544 47.174 158.194 
21 1973 11.790 64.080 3.730 428.030 869797 52.482 261016 1349 88.489 569.001 
22 1974 6.700 29.450 3.330 411.640 746709 72.434 16846 387 84.942 569.016 
23 1975 6.170 31.360 3.850 271.490 803705 34.097 17345 686 166.050 471.637 
24 1976 11.910 50.460 6.040 595.030 1745501 92.160 80062 1373 201.495 888.685 
25 1977 11.460 49.430 6.840 720.610 1661625 152.290 556326 11316 328.948 1201.848 
26 1978 17.500 70.450 9.960 911.090 3507542 167.574 239174 3396 376.100 1454.764 
27 1979 3.990 19.520 2.170 169.970 1328712 210.606 618248 3637 233.627 614.203 
28 1980 11.460 54.120 5.550 366.370 2533142 170.851 59173 1913 303.283 840.504 
29 1981 6.120 32.490 3.270 524.560 912557 159.630 82248 1376 512.314 1196.504 
30 1982 8.870 56.010 5.000 589.400 2397365 383.869 246750 1573 671.607 1644.876 
31 1983 9.020 61.030 3.290 1285.850 2393722 332.327 153095 2378 873.429 2491.606 
32 1984 10.710 54.550 5.190 906.090 1763603 181.308 141314 1661 818.164 1905.562 
33 1985 8.380 59.590 4.650 1425.370 2449878 583.855 43008 1804 2050.043 4059.268 
34 1986 8.810 55.500 4.580 1231.580 2049277 534.410 60450 1200 1982.535 3748.525 
35 1987 8.890 48.340 4.940 1154.640 2919380 464.490 128638 1835 950.590 2569.720 
36 1988 16.290 59.550 10.150 2510.900 2276533 741.600 150996 4252 1377.800 4630.300 
37 1989 8.060 34.150 3.010 956.740 782340 149.820 75176 1718 1298.770 2405.330 
38 1990 9.303 40.259 3.179 695.610 1019930 213.733 134154 1855 455.266 1708.920 
39 1991 6.357 33.889 2.698 579.015 1134410 180.421 41090 1187 728.893 1488.329 
40 1992 2.645 19.256 1.748 1027.578 687489 306.284 78669 1533 2010.670 3344.532 
41 1993 11.439 30.409 3.206 1308.627 1926049 528.324 211193 2864 1445.534 3282.485 
42 1994 4.805 27.548 3.963 888.622 914664 165.206 52315 2078 740.762 1794.590 
43 1995 5.245 35.932 3.245 1714.787 2001898 1307.894 62438 1814 679.627 3702.308 
44 1996 8.049 44.729 3.827 1124.491 726799 176.589 73208 1803 861.393 3005.743 
45 1997 4.569 29.663 2.258 692.743 505128 152.504 27754 1402 1985.934 2831.181 
46 1998 10.845 47.435 7.495 2594.167 1932874 1108.783 107098 2889 5157.771 8860.721 
47 1999 7.765 27.993 1.753 1850.873 1613260 1299.057 91289 745 462.830 3612.760 
48 2000 5.382 45.013 3.580 4246.622 2628855 680.943 123252 2606 3936.979 8864.544 
49 2001 6.175 26.463 3.964 688.481 716187 816.474 32704 1444 5604.461 7109.416 
50 2002 7.090 26.323 2.194 913.092 762492 599.368 21533 1001 1062.083 2574.543 
51 2003 6.120 43.201 4.268 7307.230 775379 756.481 15161 2166 3262.154 11325.866
52 2004 5.314 43.725 2.888 778.694 1664388 879.601 134106 1813 1656.090 3314.385
53 2005 12.562 22.925 12.299 2370.923 715749 380.531 119674 1455 4688.219 7439.672
54 2006 1.096 25.224 1.822 2850.668 1497428 3636.848 266945 1431 13303.926 19790.922
55 2007 7.145 41.402 8.795 3121.532 3280233 2113.108 89337 3389 8049.037 13283.677
56 2008 3.427 29.910 3.186 3401.563 1566809 1141.891 101780 2876 5046.481 9589.935
57 2009 3.844 29.537 3.592 4232.609 123562810809.795 63383 1513 17509.353 32551.758
58 2010 2.624 18.297 4.994 5887.380 293830 875.952 39706 1582 12757.253 19520.586
59 2011 1.895 15.973 2.718 1393.847 1152518 410.475 35982 1761 6053.570 7857.892
60 2012 2.141 14.689 1.950 1534.108 174526 240.572 31558 933 9169.968 10944.648
61 2013 7.546 25.927 7.484 6378.078 699525 2032.830 163958 2180 38937.843 47348.751
62 2014 12.775 26.505 8.007 7255.151 311325 581.978 60196 1968 7710.948 15548.077
63 2015 4.478 33.203 3.374 17043.948 3959191 8046.969 45597 1420 32200.182 57291.098
64 2016 7.065 26.555 6.658 4052.723 278240 114.676 22367 1420 1507.926 5675.325
65 2017 6.076 47.342 4.972 8951.978 1252914 9384.018 26673 2063 12329.849 30665.845
66 2018 7.718 37.399 2.515 3708.187 913414 2508.656 60279 1839 12132.920 21849.972
 TOTAL 474.054 2125.006258.533 114933.808 8163140756283.018 6109628 109374 224192.922 400097.019
 AVG 7.183 32.197 3.917 1741.421 1236840 852.773 92570 1657 3396.862 6062.076
 MAX 17.500 70.450 12.299 17043.948 395919110809.795 618248 11316 38937.843 57291.098
 (YEAR) 1978 1978 2005 2015 2015 2009 1979 1977 2013 2015
            
 

91 
 
Annexure-III
Statement showingState-Wise Works Approved, Works Completed and Funds Released under Flood Management 
Programme( FMP )  since start of XI Plan (Rs in Cr) 
Sl. 
No. 
State XI Plan  XII Plan  Total (XI + XII Plan)  2017-18 2018-19 2019-20   
Total 
funds 
released Works 
Approved  
Funds 
Released 
( XI 
Plan)  
Works 
Approved  
Funds  
Released 
( XII 
Plan)  
Works 
Approved  
Work
s  
compl
eted   
Work
s  
shifte
d/fore
closed 
Works 
ongoin
g  
 
Funds 
Released 
( XI + 
XII Plan) 
Funds 
released  
Funds 
released  
Funds 
released  
Nos. Estimate
d Cost  
Nos. Estimat
ed Cost  
Nos. Estimat
ed Cost  
1 Arunachal 
Pradesh 21 224.69 81.69 0 0.00 87.91 21 224.69 21 0  0 169.60 21.18    190.78 
2 Assam 100 996.14 748.86 41 1386.97  64.89 141 2383.11 105 30  6 813.75 245.49 142.118 85.03 1286.39 
3 Bihar 43 1370.42 723.18 4 447.63 184.64 47 1818.05 42 1  4 907.82  
16.583   924.41 
4 Chhattisgarh 3 31.13 15.57 0 0.00 3.75 3 31.13 3 0  0 19.32  
   19.32 
5 Goa 2 22.73 9.98 0 0.00 2.00 2 22.73 2 0  0 11.98  
   11.98 
6 Gujarat 2 19.79 2.00 0 0.00 0.00 2 19.79 2 0  0 2.00  
   2.00 
7 Haryana 1 173.75 46.91 0 0.00 0.00 1 173.75 1 0  0 46.91  
   46.91 
8 Himachal 
Pradesh 3 225.32 165.98 4 1139.62  221.87 7 1364.94 5 1  1 387.85 87.50 162.6 176.41 814.36 
9 Jammu & 
Kashmir 28 408.22 252.57 15 562.47 169.95 43 970.69 19 3  21 422.52 110.40 52.1984 92.81 677.93 
10 Jharkhand 3 39.30 18.44 0 0.00 4.27 3 39.30 3   0 22.71  
   22.71 
11 Karnataka 3 59.46 23.80 0 0.00 0.00 3 59.46 2 1  0 23.80  
   23.80 
12 Kerala 4 279.74 63.68 0 0.00 55.22 4 279.74 2 2  0 118.90 19.05    137.95 
13 Manipur 22 109.34 66.34 0 0.00 24.36 22 109.34 22   0 90.70  
   90.70 
14 Meghalaya 0 0.00 3.81 0 0.00 0.00 0 0.00 0   0 3.81  
   3.81 
15 Mizoram 2 9.13 14.48 0 0.00 1.93 2 9.13 1 1  0 16.41 0.47    16.88 
16 Nagaland 11 49.35 28.96 6 74.52 54.17 17 123.87 14   0 83.12  
10.841   93.96 
17 Orissa 67 169.00 101.12 1 62.32 0.00 68 231.32 66 2  3 101.12  
   101.12 
18 Puducherry*  1 139.67 7.50 0 0.00 0.00 1 139.67 0 1  0 7.50  
   7.50 
19 Punjab 5 153.40 40.43 0 0.00 0.00 5 153.40 4 1  0 40.43  
   40.43 
20 Sikkim 28 104.92 83.69 17 261.40 8.15 45 366.32 28 17  0 91.84  
   91.84 
21 Tamilnadu 5 635.54 59.82 0 0.00 0.00 5 635.54 5   0 59.82  
   59.82 
22 Tripura 11 26.57 23.62 0 0.00 0.00 11 26.57 11   0 23.62  
   23.62 
23 Uttar Pradesh 26 667.57 290.69 3 291.70 111.22 29 959.27 24 2  3 401.91 13.55 15.575 39.15 470.18 
24 Uttarakhand 12 119.82 49.63 10 715.72 153.98 22 835.54 16 2  4 203.61  
4.634 35.58 243.82 
25 West Bengal  17 1822.08 643.26 1 438.94 158.75 18 2261.02 16   2 802.01 65.03 23.652 117.12 1007.81  
  Total 420 7857.08 3566.00 102 5381.28 1307.07 522 13238.36 
414 64 44 
4873.07 562.67 428.20 546.09 6409.96 
 
 
 