LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

FIRST REPORT
(LIABILITY OF THE STATE IN TORT)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA @ MINISTRY OF LAW


CHAIRMAN
LAW COMMISSION,
New Delhi,
May 11, 1956.
‘My pear Muyister,

T have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the first Report of
the Law Commission on the Liability of the State in Tort.

2. The Commission was invited to consider the question by the
Law Ministry in consequence of a communication received by the
Ministry from the President of India.

3. The consideration of the subject was initiated by Sri Satya-
narayana Rao, the senior Member of the section of the Commission
dealing with Statute Law Revision who prepared a detailed study
of the question 2nd formulated certain proposals. After a prelimi-
nary discussion the matter was referred to a Committee of Sri Rao,
Sri Pathak and Sri Joshi who after consideration approved in the
main the proposals formulated by Sri Rao, The draft Report. pre-
pared by the Committee was circulated to all the members of the
Commission and their views were invited thereon. These views
with the draft report were discussed at meetings of the Statute
Revision Section of the Commission held on the 11th February 1956
and the 1110 March 1956. Important suggestions made by members
et these meetings were accepted and it was left to the Chairman
and Sri Satyanarayana Rao to fnelly settle the report in the light
of the discussion at these meetings,

4, The Commission wish to acknowledge the services rendered by
Sri Basu, the Joint Secretary, in connection with the preparation of
the report.

Yours sincerely,

(8d) M. C. Setabved,
Shri C. C. Biswas,

1 Minister of Law
& Minority Affairs,
NEW DELHI.

1216 M of Law—r


Chapter

I. InvRopuctoRY =. . : न पु न पु . . .

IL. Existing Law 1m INDIA . See,
ution and the Charter Acts—Decision in the
Peninsular Case—The twa divergent views—Decision in Hartb-
करी Case—The correct view.

TIT, Law as ENGLanp

‘The doctrine that the King can done wrong—The method adopted
for xecompensing wrong—The Crown Pricendings Act 1947—Tts
provisions-—Principle of vicarious liabliliry of smaster—Defence
ef common enployment—Breach of commen law. dutics—stat~
प्राण: powers and dutes—Pablic Duties—Discre tio vary powers
—vther provisi

TY, Law ए AMERICA .
Federal To-t Claims
decision per contra—'

1946—Decision in Texas Case—Recent
‘he restcieted 30098 of Gi ental liability.

¥, Law IN AusTRaLia . . . मु पु : : . पु

Commomyealth of Austrzlia Constitution A; Distinction between

. ministerial ard discretionary duties—Scope for judicial inter-
pretatian—Law elasiic and wacertain

जा, Law IN FRANCE पु . . पु पु पु न . :
Dichavomy of courts—Evolution of ths Law from oaz of absolute
imounity of Stace, to one of absoluze ligbitity<Che doctrine
that “The State is um ho.est man”—State’s liabilly except in

cases of personal fault of officer.

दी, RULE oF Starurory CoxsrRcction . . . .
‘The rule that “the Crown is not bound by a Stacute unless expressly
mentioned oc by necessary implication — Application in Australia
and Canada—Position in the U. 8. A. and India—Position in
Esglaat—Views of noted authory—Nead to clarify position in

India by amending the Gencral Clauses Act.

“WIT, CONCLUSIONS AND PROPOSALS. .

The functions of a modern welfare State like India—Liberalisation
of the law in other countries in favour of citizen—The task of
drawing the line—Proposals under the General Law—Duties of
care imposed by Statute—Miscellaneows—General Provisions—
Exceptions—Definitions, etc,

APPENDICES

Aprenprx I—List of Cases in which the State’s liability was negatived.
AprENDIX IL.—-Provisions in Federal Tort Claims Act of America

APPENDIX TI].—Provisions of the Judiciary Acts of Australia +
APPENDIX T'V.—Public Statutory Corporations in India . . .
Apprwora V.—List of Acts containing “Protection Clauses”. ,
-APPENDIX VI_—-General principles relating to liability in tort. .

Paces

18

821

21—23

28—29

29-31

31-95

36-43

Ads
A6—s1
52-33

34
55—38
59-62


REPORT OF THE LAW COMMISSION
ON
LIABILITY OF THE STATE IN TORT

CHAPTER I—Intropuctory

On the initiative of the President of India, the Law
Ministry took up for consideration the question whether
legislation on the lines of the Crown Proceedings Act, 1947
«af the United Kingdom in respect of claims against the
Union and the States based on tort is needed and, if so, to
what extent. After the constitution of the Law Commis-
sion, the Law Ministry referred the matter to the Commis-
sion for consideration and report.

2. The law regarding the liability of the Union and the
States in respect of contracts, property etc., is not in doubt.
But the law relating to the liability of the Union and the
States for tortious acts is in a state of uncertainty. It
becomes necessary, therefore, to examine the existing law
with a view to determine the extent of the liability of the
Union and the States for tortious acts.

CHAPTER II —Existive Law in Inpra

3. At the present moment, the liability of the Union and
the States to be sued is regulated by Article 300 of the
Constitution, It provides:

“The Government of India may sue or be sued by
the name of the Union of India and the Government of
a State may sue or be sued by the name of the State
and may, subject to any provisions which may be made
by Act ot Parliament or of the Legislature of such State
enacted by virtue of powers conferred by this Constitu-
tian, sue or be sued in relation to their respective affairs
in the like cases as the Dominion of India and the
corresponding Provinces or the corresponding Indian
States might have sued or been sued if this Constitution
had not been enacted.”

It would be noticed that under this Article, the liability of
the Union and the States is the same as that of the Dominion
and the Provinces of India before the Constitution came
into force. But this, however, is subject to legislation by
the Parliament or the Legislatures of the States. What
then was the liability of the Dominion and the Provinces
before the Constitution? To answer this question we are
driven back to the provisions of the Government of India
Act, 1858, by which the Crown assumed sovereignty over
the territories in India which till then were under the

‘Keferance


3

cutions, in the same manner and form respectively as
if the said property were hereby continued to the said
Company to their own use”.

Under these provisions uot only the contractual obligations
put ail liabilities then existing and all liabilities to be in-
curred thereafter by the Company were chargeable on the
Tevenuss and could be enforeed by suit as if the assets
belonged to the Company. ‘There is no provision in any of
the Charter Acts exzending the immunity which the
Crown in England enjoyed in respect of torts to the
Company as it was a corporation having an independent
existence and bearing no relationship of servant or agent
to the Crown. It is clear from a judgment of Sir Erskine
Perry in Dhackjee Dadejee v. The East Indian Company®
that’ before the Charter Act, 1833, no distinction was
made between acts committed by the Company in its
political capacity and acts done by it in the exercise
of its commercial activities. The learned Judge referred
to the prior statutes at page 330 and observed that
those statutes clearly provided for actions to be brought
against the Company for torts and trespass of their
servanis committed in India and that the Charter of the
Supreme Court established at Calcutta in 1774 expressly
referred to the action of trespass against the Company
without the slightest reference to any distinction between
the political and commercial activities of the corporation.
If that was the true legal position, it is clear that before
1833, section 10 of the Charter Act of 1833 made available
and preserved the right to institute a suit against the Com-
pany, not only in respect of the then existing liabilities but
also in respect of future liabilities. There is, therefore, no
justification for drawing a distinction, as was done in later ~
decisions, between sovereign and non-sovereign powers of
the East India Company while interpreting Section 65 of
the Act of 1858. In the case decided by Sir Erskine Perry?,
the trespass was committed by a Superintendent of Police
under a warrant issued by the Governor-in-Council, Under
various Acts, the Governors-in-Council of Calcutta,
के,

and Bombay enjoyed immunity from suit in courts

The claim was, therefcre, made. for damages for

against the East India Company, While it was agreed that
a corporation could be able for trespass committed
by its servants or agents, Perry J., dismissed the suit on
the ground that the Company could not be made liable for
acts not authorised by it or ratified by it or for acts over
which the Company had no ¢ontrol. Further, the act com-
plained of was done under the authority of the Governor
and was one unconnected with the business of the company.
Under Section 10 of the Charter Act 1833, the Compeny
could be made liable only in respect of liabilities incurred
by it and not by a superior authority like the Governor
over whose acts it had no control. It is, however, signif-
cant that throughout the judgment no reference is made to

3, 2 Marlev'a Digest, 307 (329-30).


4

the question of immunity of the Crown in England being
extended to the Company. Notwithstanding the changes
introduced by the Charter Act 1833, the Company still
remained an independent corporation having no sovereign
character. The decision in the above case is important
because it was given before the Act of 1856 and under the
Jaw then obtaining.

5, After the Act of 1838, there came the decision of Sir
Barnes Peacock, C. J.. and Jackson and Wells JJ., in the
2. & (0, Case* and much of the conflict of judicial opinion in
later decisions has arisen from certain expressions used in
the judgment in that case. The actual decision in the case
was that the Secretary of State for India in Council was
liable for damages oceasioned by the negligence of servants
of the Government if the negligence was such as would
render an ordinary employer liable. The learned Judges
pointed out that the East India Company was not sovereign
though it exercised sovereign functions and, therefore, was
not entitled to the immunity of the Sovereign. Though
ceriain sovereign powers were delegated to the Company,
the servants of the Company were not public servants. The
learned Chief Justice stated as follows:

“But where an act is done or a contract is entered
into, in the exercise of powers usually called sovereign
powers by which we mean powers which cannot be
lawfully exercised except by a sovereign or private in-
dividual delegated by a sovereign to exercise them, no
action will lie”.+

The meaning of the expression “lawfully exercised except
by a sovereign” was elucidated by the learned Chief Justice
by a reference to certain decided cases. All these cases
dealt with “Acts of State”, which were not subject to muni-
cipal jurisdiction. The judgment considered all the relevant
provisions of the Charter Acts and the Government of India
Act, 1858. It reached the conclusion that the Com-
pany was not sovereign and did not enjoy the immunity of
the Crown and that prior to the Charter Act of 1833 no such
immunity was allowed or recognised in respect of any acts
done in the exercise of its powers except in respect of “Acts
of State”. Nor did the Charter Act draw a distinction be-
tween sovereign and non-sovereign functions of the Com-
pany.

6. In Moment’s case the decision in the Peninsular
case* was accepted. That was a case of trespass and was
concerned more with the question whether a Jocal legis+
lature had power to take away the right of action confer-
red by Section 65 of the Act of 1858. The observations of
their Lordships were, however, directed to the particular

3, $ Bom. H.C.R. App. I.
4, 4 Bom. H.C.R,, App, J, at p. td.
5 goCal 3ग्र (PC)


o
facts before them and the judgment did not in any ménriér
approve the dictum of Sir Barnes Peacock, C.J., in the
P & 0. case’, In Venkatarao’s case® their Lordships of the
Judicial Committee considered Section 32 of the Govern-
ment of India Act, 1915, the language of which was similar
to Section 65 and expressed the view that the section re-
lated to parties and procedure and had not the effect of
limiting or barring the right of action otherwise available
to an individual against the Government. We do not,
therefore, derive any clear guidance from these two deci-
sions of the Judicial Committee,

7. Two divergent views were expressed by the courts
after the decision in the Peninsular case* The most im-
‘portant decision is that of the Madras High Court in Hari
Bhanji’s case’ decided by two eminent Judges of that Court,
Sir Charles Turner, C, J. and Muthuswami Aiyar, J. The
facts of that case, shortly, were that during the course of
transit of salt from Bombay to Madras ports, the rate of
«duty payable on salt was enhanced and the merchant was
called upon to pay the difference at the port of destination.
The amount was paid under protest and the suit was insti-
tuted to recover the amount. The principal question which
arose was the jurisdiction of the court to entertain the suit.
The Caleutta High Court in an earlier decision in Nobin-
-chandra’s case* had taken the view that in respect of acts
done in the exercise of its sovereign functions by the East
India Company, no suit could be entertained against the
‘Company. This position was examined by the learned
Judges of the Madras High Court and two questions govern-
ing the nfaintainability of suits by a subject against the
savereign were considered. The first related to the per-
sonal status of the defendant ie. whether the defendant
‘was a sovereign, who could not be sued in his own courts.
The second related to the character of the act in respect of
which the relief was sought. The first question did not
present much difficulty as the immunity enjoyed by the
Crown in England did not extend to the East India Com-
pany, all the Charter Acts having recognised the right and
liability of the Company to sue and to be sued. The second
question regarding the nature of the act complained of was.
more difficult. It was held that the immunity of the East
India Company extended only to what are known as “Acts
of State” strictly so-called, and the distinction based on
sovereign and non-sovereign functions of the East India
‘Company was not well-founded. The cases before the Act
of 1858 and the later cases were considered by the High
Court.? It was conceded that the immunity might also
-extend to certain acts done for the public safety though

*, 64 LA, 55, 00 appeal from 57 Mad. 85.

है, 5 Mad. 273.

5, ६ Cal. TL

2, The decisions are summarised ia Ilbert, Government af India, at
‘pages 196 & 202,


6

cheve acts would not be Acts of State. The decisions in the
, Tanjore case” and Nabob of Arcot v. The East India Com-
‘pany may be taken as instances of “Acis of State”. It is
significant that in neither of these cases was the decision
byot upon a distinction between the exercise of sovereign
and non-sovereign powers.

8. In the case of Forrester v. Secretary of State of India!®
where the act complained of could be done only in the
exercise of sovereign power and not by a private citizen,
the Privy Council upheld the jurisdiction of the court to
entertain the suit. It was not an act done in relation to an
independent sovereign but was a resumption of a jagir
belonging to a private subject. It was, therefore,.an act.
directed by the Executive against a subject within its terri-
tory and was not an “Act of State’. The importance of
this decision is that the Judicial Committee did not consider
that the exercise of sovereign power against a subject
could not be questioned ia a court of law. The levy of
customs duty is undoubtedly a sovereign function; yet
the Madras Judges in Hari Bhanji’s case™ held that as it was.
an act, the justification for which was sought under the
municipal law, the munjcipal courts had undoubted juris-
diction. That decision is noteworthy as laying down a test.
which can be applied with certainty. The question was.
recently considered in an exhaustive judgment by Chagla
C. J., and Tendolkar J., who after reviewing.all the deci-
sions held that the Madras case laid down the law correct-
19.1 This view was approved by Mukherjea J. (as he then
was), when the matter went up on appeal to the Supreme
Court.) Mukherjea J., accepted the definition of “Act of.
State” given in Eshugbay v. The Government of Nigeria’.
The other learned Judges of the Supreme Court did not
express any opinion on this point.

9. The other line of cases proceeded on the basis of a
distinction between sovereign and non-sovereign functions.
Seshagiri Iyer J., in Secretary of State v. Cockra: ria added
a further test that if the State derived benefit from the
exercise of sovereign powers, it would be liable. The deci-
sions which have followed this line of reasoning are sum-
marised in Appendix I. No attempt has, however, been
made in *hese cases to draw a clear line of distinction bet-
Ween sovereign and non-sovereign functions.

10. In our view, the law was correctly laid down in Harz
Bhanji’s case.

11. We have not considered it necessary to examine the
liability of Part B States with reference to the law obtain-
ing in the former Indian States, as we are concerned

307 MLA, 476.

41, 4 Brown’s Chancery cases, 181.

4, [, A, Supp. Vol., Page 55.

33, 5 Mad, 273.

4, ALR, (1949) Bom, 277+

1, ALR, (1950) S.C, 222 : (1950) S.C.R. 627 at 696.
991 A.C, 662 at 675.



q
with the proposals for legislation relating to the whole of
the territory of India.
CHAPTER II.—Tue Law iw Encianp Faw in
32. In England, from very early times the King could not agiand.

be sued in his own courts and the maxim that the “King can
do no wrong” was invoked to negative the right of a subject
tu sue the King for redress of wrongs’. The rigour of the
immunity, however, was relaxdl by making a petition of
right available lo a subject for redress only in respect of
certain wrongs relating to contract or property. In
the beginning even the procedure by way of Petition of
Right was cumbersome until it was modified by the FPeti-
tions of Right Act, 1860. But this Act did not alter the
law relating to torts. The injustice of applying the rule of
immunity wes, however, realised very soon by the Crown
and compensation was paid in proper cases by settling the
matter with the injured person. But this was as a matter
of grace and nol as of right. When the officer or servant
who committed the tort was known and was impleaded as
defendant in an action, the Crown stood by him and met his
liability. In very many cases, however, it was not pos-
sible 10 fix the lability upon a particular servant or officer
of the Crown. The device, therefore, of impleading as
defendant any officer of the Crown and defending the action
in his name was adopted. But this practice was condemned
by the House of Lords in Adams v. Naylor’? which was
followed later in Royster v. Cavey. These decisions gave
the immediate provocation to revive the Bill of 1927 relat-
ing to Crown Proceedings and finally led to the passing of
the Crown Proceedings Act, 1947.

13. There was another method by which the person
injured could get the remedy not only against the servant
but also against certain public authorities, or public cor-
porations. Owing to the increase in governmental activities
in a welfare state, the government departments were
separated and were given the position of statutory corpora-
tions with the right and liability to sue and to be sued.
There are now as many as 31 departments. Some of them
are parts of the Crown, some are incorporated either by
statute or by Crown and some, though not incorporated,
have been given the power to own property or to enter into
contracts and to sue and be sued in respect of the same.
The Ministry of Fuel and Power Act, 1945, Sec. 5(1), Min-
istry of Civil Aviation Act, 1945, Sec. 6(1), Ministry of
Defence Act, 1946, Sec. 5(v) (i), Merchant Shipping ‘Act,
1894, Sec. 460(1), Post Offices Act, 1908, Section 45(1) give
some examples of departments which could be sued, but
there is no specific provision in the Acts except two, ie.
Merchant Shipping Act and Ministry of Transport
Act [Section 26(1)], for lability for torts of the

२, Vide Canterbury 0, Aut, General, 1 phillips, 306 at 27.
जि हक Phillips, 306 at page 327.
9, (1047) K.B. 204.



8

servants and agenis of the department. Notwithstanding
the absence of un express provision making the corpora-
tions liable for torts, it was held that the very corporate
existence carried with it the right to sue and the liability
to be sued. This was the view of Phillimore J., in Grahams
case* followed in Ministry of Works v. Henderson® and
the view of Philimore J., though there was difference
of opinion, prevailed. The question was debated
whether the immunity ofthe Crown would not extend
to such departments and corporations. In the recent
case of Tamlin v. Hannaford’ the question arose whether
the Rent Restriction Acts would apply to houses owned
by the railway authorities. Though the Transport Com-
mission is 9 publie authority and ‘exists for public pur-
poses, it was held that it was in no sense a department of
the Government and its powers did not fall within the
province of Government. On this ground it was decided
that the immunity of the Crown did not extend to the
Transport Commission and that it was bound by the Rent
Restriction Acts.

14. In Mersey Docks Harbour Board v. Gibbs** Blackburn
J., held that in the absence of anything showing a contrary
intention in the statutes which create such corporations, the
true rule of construction is that the legislature intended
that the liability of the corporation thus substituted for
individuals should, to the extent of the corporate funds,
be co-extensive with that imposed by the general law on
the owners of similar works. It followed, therefore, that
these corporations could be made liable for the torts com-
mitted by their servants. But the liability did not extend
to the departments of government which were not corpo-
rations. It may be possible that notwithstanding their
corporate existence they may yet be considered to be
agents, or servants of the Crown. Prof. W. Friedman
examined the legal status of the incorporated public com-
panies in a learned article in 22 Australien Lew Journal,
page 7. He divided public corporations into two categories:
industrial and commercial public corporations such as
the National Coal Board, Electricity Authority, Transport
Commission and Airways Corporation and Social Service
Corporations such as the Town Development Corporations
Regional Hospital Boards, the Central Land Board and
the Agricultural Land Commission. The first category of
corporations, it would be seen, are merely substitutes for
private enterprise and are designed to run an industrial
or public utility service according to economic or commer-
cial principles but in the interests of the public. They are,
therefore, undoubtedly liable for torts committed by their
servants and the immunity of the Crown does not extend
to them. There is no reason to place social service corpo-
rations on a different footing. The learned author conclud-

2 (4900) 2 KB. 782, a AC. 328

*2. (1947) I K.B., g1 see also (1941) A.C, 3195 a a je

= Goan t KR oy se (1947) 328; 19; Can Bar. Rev. 543.

4, (1866) L.R. 1 HL,, 93.



9

ed that the very corporate existence carried with it the
liability to sue and to be sued and that there was no rela-
tionship of master and servant or principal and_ agent
between the corporations and departments of the Govern-
ment, The liability of the Hospital authorities was origi-
nally negatived but after they were taken over by the
Stale, if was held recently that the hospital authorities
were liable for torts committed by the negligence of the
staff (Cassidy v. Ministry of Health®). The test of
control to determine the relationship of master and servant
is now changed to that of organisational liability. To 8
large extent, therefore, liability for torts committed by
servants, where incorporated departments were substituted
for private enterprise, was transferred to such authorities
and the rigour of the immunity rule was in practical work-
ing modified by the device of incorporation. After the
Crown Proceedings Act, the position of public corporations
in relation to the Crown raises the question whether they
are servants of the Crown within the meaning of Sec. 2 (6)
ol the Act. The question has not yet been finally settled by
the courts in England.

15, The Crawn Proceedings Act altered the law relating Sor Raines

to the civil liability of the Crown in many respects. We
are concerned here only with the question of the extent"
to which the Crown was made liable under the Crown
Proceedings Act for torts. The relevant provisions relating
to this topie are sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 38, 39
and 46.
These provisions may be classified under three heads:
(1) liability of the Crown under common law;
(2) liability for breach of statutory duties and
powers;
(3) exceptions under the Act exonerating the Crown
frorn liability.

16. The doctrine that the “The King can do no wrong”
which is a relic of the old feudal system and on which the
immunity of the Crown was based, was not entirely abro-
gated by the Act. Under the Act the extent of the liability
of the Crown in tort is the same as that of a private person
of full age and capacity. The Bill of 1927 used the expres-
sion “act, neglect or default” while the word “tort” is used
in section 201) of the Act. The alteration of the language
js, no doubt, deliberate. Act, neglect or default would
apply to tort as understood under common law and to
breaches of statutory duties as well. Section 2(1) (a), (b)
and (2) refer to the liability for tort under common law.
Some of the principles of common law were modified by
statutes, Whether the statutory modifications are also
attracted by referring to common law in Section 2(1}
of the Act, may be a question that would arise in the con-
struction of the Act. But as Section 2(1) opens with the

™_ (1951) 2 10.8, 343.


Bee. (1),

10

words “that the Crown shall be subject to all those liabi-
lities in tort to which if it were a private person of full
age and capacity it would be subject”, there may not be
room for argument that the statutory modifications will
not be attracted, the Hability of the Crown being equated
to that of a private person. For example, the Fatal
Accidents Act, which gives a cause of action in case of
death does not bind the Crown but expressly modifies. the
common law rule that an action dies with the person.
Under that Act, a private person would be liable to the
dependants of the deceased who was wronged and there
js mo reason to exclude the liability of the Crown in such
an event.

17. There is no scientifie definition cf “tort” and it is
not possible to give one. The learned authors Clark
& Lindsell on Torts (Eleventh Edition) prefer the definition
given by Winfield, viz.

“Tortious liability arises from the breach of a duty
primarily fixed by the law, such duty is towards
persons generally and its breach is redressible by an
action for unliquidated damages*".

18. The common law duties for the breach of which
the Crown is liable under this Act may he considered
under three heads: —

The first relating 10 the liability of the master for the
tarts committed by servants or agents or what is
customarily treated as the vicarious liability of
the master.

The second relating to the liability of the master tu
his servants or agents in his capacity as an
employer.

The third relating 40 the duties which arise at common
Jaw by reason of the ownership, occupation, posses-
sion or control of property.

39. The proviso to See. 2(1) adds a qualification to the
vicarious liability of the Crown for the torts committed
by its servants [clause (a)], namely, that the act or omis-
sion should give rise to a cause of action against the servant
or agent or his estate apart from the provisions of this Act.
In other words, if the servant himseif could not be sued in
respect of the tort committed by him, the Crown would
not be liable. It was probably intended to exclude the
liability when the servant has the defence of an “Act of
State” open to him or in the extreme case which arises
in England when the tortfeasor is the husband of the
person wronged, as the wile could not sue the husband
under the English law for torts committed by him against
her. This latter restriction does not arise in India
and, therefore, need not trouble us. If the defence of

~**, Glatk & Lindscil on Torts, Eleventh Edition, p, 1.-


i

“Act of State” is open to the servant, the wrong doeg jnot
become a tort and the Proviso was, accordingly, criti हक
by a learned author (Mr, Street) as unnecessary.

20. The question that arises in limine is to consider who
a “servant” is, Sec, 38(2) of the Act defines an “officer”
in relation to the Crown as including any servant or agent
of His Majesty and accordingly (but without prejudice
to the generality of the foregoing provision) includes a
Minister of the Crown. “Agent” is defined in Sec. 38 (2).
Sec. 2(6) defines “officer” for the purpose of Sec. 2. This
definition has been severely criticised on the ground that
it excludes very many officers who hold office under com-
mon law such as the police who are appointed by the local
authorities in England. It is unnecessary to consider these
difficulties as under the Indian Constitution the question
of definition of an officer or servant or agent of the Union
and the States does not present any such difficulties. The
definition of “Agent” includes an independent contractor.
But Sec. 40(2) (d) makes it clear that the Crown is under
no greater liability in respect of the acts or omissions of an
independent contractor employed by the Crown than those
to which the Crown would be subject in respect of such
acts or omissions if it were a private person. The excep-
tional cases in which a private person is liable even for
torts of an independent contractor are enumerated in all
the text-books*?, .

21. The principles governing the liability of the master
for torts committed by servants are discussed in Clark &
Lindsell, Sec. 19, page 118 and those principles govern
the Crown also as the Crown is placed*in the position of
a master. No distinction should, however, be made based
on the nature of the functions whether sovereign or non-

* sovereign and whether they could be such asa private
person could or could not exercise. The language of the
Crown Proceedings Act is not quite clear on this point.

22. The defence of common employment was negatived
by the Law Reform (Personal Injuries) Act, 1948 and any
provision in a contract excluding or limiting the liability
of an employer for personal injuries caused to an employee
by the negligenee of persons in common employment with
him is void. By implication, Sec. 2(1) (a) of the Crown
Proceedings Act would also apply to torts committed by a
servant against his co-employee as he would be in the posi-
tion of a stranger. Sec. 4 of the Act expressly mentions
the Law Reform (Married Women and Tortfeasors) Act,
1935 as binding on the Crown but does not mention the
Fatal Accidents Act, The Law Reform (Personal Injuries)
Act, 1948 itself provides that it is binding on the Crown
(8. 4). Section 10{1) creates an exception in respect of the
Armed Forces and enacts an absolute doctrine of common
employment. Sec. 10(2} creates another exception.

#7, Cack & Lindsell on Tort (Eleventh Edition), 9, 737.

Vicarious
hability of
the master

Principles
governing
master’s
liability.

Defence
of common
employment


12
ahe Crown 2% The liability of the Crown as master to its servants

indite Inti iS, again, restricted to the common law liability. A

lity ६0 sere Master's duty to take reasonable care and to provide

yants. ‘adequate plant and appliance jis discussed in Wilson
Ciyde Coal Co, v. English®. These duties are:

(1) ta employ competent servants;

(2) to provide and maintain adequate plent and
appliances for the work to be carried out;

(3) to provide and maintain a safe place of work;

{4) to provide and enforce a safe system of work.
Bee, 2(1). The provision in See. 2(1) (b) does not attract the
duties imposed by statute on a private employer as it is
restricted to common law liability. The State in the present
day is, perhaps, the biggest employer of workmen in various
industries. The State also provides public utility services,
runs transport and in respect of such operations, the Facto-
ries Acts, and the Employers’ Liability Acts, impose various
duties on persons carrying on such operations. These are
not included within the liability imposed on the State
under clause (b) of Sec. 241). They are provided for
separately. To what extent the Crown is liable for the

statutory duties thus imposed by law will be considered
presently,

24, Clause (c) provides for the breach of common law
duties in respect of property. Liability may arise in diffe-
rent ways: Liability to invitees or licensees injured in
dangerous premises and liability for nuisance for the
escape of noxious things, are some of the instances. Sec.
40(4) provides that no liability shall rest upon the Crown
until the Crown or some person acting for the Crown has
in fact taken possession or control of any such property,
or entered into occupation of such property. This is because
the liability attaches by reason of the fact that the property
is in the occupation or possession of the Crown. Sec, 2(b)
and (c) impose liability on the Crown only in respect of its.
breach of duty but no liability in respect of tort of a
servant.

Statutory 25. Before considering Sections 2(2) and 2(3) of

duties and = the Crown Proceedings Act, which relate to the liability

powers, of the Crown with regard to statutory duties and powers,
it is necessary to bear in mind the nature of the liability
that arises in this connection. It is unnecessary to refer
to the decisions which deal with this matter elaborately
and it will be sufficient to refer to two decisions which
have settled the law in England.

Statutory 26. Breach of statutory duties, which gives rise to
duties. liability analogous to torts is treated as a Sroup of
torts which are sui generis. Lord Wright deals with the

23, (1935) 3.0. 57.


13

mature of the action and the basis of it”. He says at page
3268: * मं
“I think the authorities such as Caswell’s case**
Lewis v. Denye’t and Spark’s’ case®* show clearly
that a claim for damages for breach of a statutory
duty intended to protect a person in the position of
the particular plaintiff is a specie common law right
which is not to be confused in essence with a claim
for negligence. The statutory right has its origin in
the statute, but the particular remedy of an action
for damages is given by the common law in order to
make effective. for the benefit of the injured plaintiff
his right to the performance by the defendant of the
defendant's statutory duty. It is an effective sanction.
It is not a claim in negligence in the strict or ordinary
sense; as I ‘said in Caswetl’s ease® Ido not think
that an action jor breach of a statutory duty such as
that in question is completely or accurately described
as an action in negligence. It is a common law action
based on the purpose of the statute to protect the
workmen, and belongs to the category often described
as that of cases of striet or absolute liability. At the
same time it resembles actions in negligence in that
the claim is based on a breach of a duty to take care
for the safety ci the workman’. But whatever the
resemblances, it is essential to keep in mind the funda-
mental differences of the two classes of claim.”

जी would be seen that whether the bresch is ofa statu-
tory duty or of a common law duty, there is a common
law action for damages. The source of the obligation or
the duty is, no doubt, different. If there is breach of a
statulory duty, it may be presumed that there is
negligence. In the case of a common law duty, the duty
itself has to be established before its violation is proved
giving rise to a claim for damages. It follows, therefore,
whether there is a breach of statutory duty or not, there
may be a common law action for negligence.

27. In the case of statutory powers, Lord Greene, M.R.,
‘in Fisher v. Ruislip U.D.C™ exhaustively reviewed the
seases and enunciated at page 592 the following principles:
“The duty of undertakers in respect of the safety Statutory
of works executed under statutory powers has been Po*em®
- considered on many occasions. Statutes conferring
such powers do not as a rule, in terms, impose a duty
on the undertakers to exercise care in the construc~
tion or Maintenance of the works. No such duty was
imposed by the Civil Defence Act, 1939 in respect of
shelters constructed under its powers. Nevertheless,
it is clearly established that undertakers entrusted with

31. (1949) ALC. 155. 7
3०, £1940) A.C. 152.

3, (1940) A.C, 921.

32, (1943) KB. 223,

-1216 MofL—2



id

statutory powers are not in general entitled, in exer-
cising them, to disregard the safety of other's. The
nature cf the power must, of course, be examined:
before it can be said that a duty to take care exists,
and if so, how fer the duty extends in any given:
circumstances. If the legislature authorises the cons-
truction of works which are in their nature likely to
be a source of danger and which no precaution can
render safe, it cannot be said that the undertakers must.
either refrain from constructing the works or be struck.
with Liability for accidents which may happen to third!
persons. So to hold would make nonsense cf the
statute. If, on the other hand, the legislature authoris-
es the construction and maintenance of a work which
will be safe or dangerous to the public according as.
reasonable care is or is not taken in its construction or
maintenance, as the case may be, the fact that no duty
to take such care is expressly imposed by the statute-
carinot be relied on as showing that no such duty exists.
It is not to be expected that the legislature will go out
of its way to impose express obligations or restrictionss
in respect of matters which every reasonably minded
citizen would take for granted.”

Except, therefore, where the legislature authorised the
construction of a work which by its very nature is likely
ta be a source of danger, the common law obligation of
taking reasonable care is cast upon the authority exercising
a power. Whether a statutory authority or statutory
power is exercised one cannot escape liability if one fails
to take reasonable care to avoid injury and thus be guilty
of negligence. These principles should govern equally
whether the authority exercising the power is the govern-
ment, a local authority, cr a private person.

‘Public 28. There are, of course, public duties of a State, suchi
dutjes, as, a duty to provide education but such duties do not give
Tise to a cause cf action as the very foundation of an action
for tort is that the right of a private person is infringed
by breach of a certain duty. No rights would be created
in favour of a private person in respect of public duties.

Incidentally, we may mention that in Italy a distinc»
tion is recognised between right (diritto) and legitimate
interest (interesse legitino), In the case of public duties
a subject may have an interest but no right, whereas in
the case of duties owed to particular persons or‘class of’
persons a right is involved. The violation of a public duty
does not cause an injury to any person by infringing any
right of his and does not constitute a tort. “this
background, sub-sectiona (2) and (3) of Section 2 of the
Crown Proceedings Act may now be considered:

33, (1945) K.B. 584.


15

29. In order to exclude from the purview of the Act
public duties and Governmental functions, sub-section (2)
of Section 2 limits the responsibilities of the Crown for
breach of a statutory duty only if such statutory duty is
also binding upon persons other than the Crown and its
officers; in other words, it is a duty imposed both upon the
Crown and its officers and other persons as well, 2.9.
under the Factories Act. But there are other Acts which
impose a statutory duty upon private persons but which
do not bind the Crown. And the Crown in such cases
naturally relies upon the presumption that an Act of Parlia-
ment is not binding unless the Crown is expressly mention-
ed or is bound by necessary implication. The propriety
of the continuance of this rule in a modern State is doubted
by some jurists but the Crown Proceedings Act [Section
40(2) (£)] preserves the presumption, for it says:

“That except as therein otherwise expressly pro-
vided, nothing in this Act shall affect any rules of
evidence or any presumption relating to the extent to
which the Crown is bound by any Act of Parliament.”

Most of the legislation imposing liability upon a
private employer is excluded by this rule and the Crown
is not liable for breach of such statutory duties. When
the Crown enters the field of industry and engages
labour, there is no reason or justification for putting itself
in a different category from that of an ordinary employer.
The Crown must set the example of following the prin-
ciple of equality before the law and should not stand
apart from the subjects.

30, Sub-section 3 imposes liability upon the Crown in
Tespect of functions conferred or duties imposed upon an
officer of the Crown by any rule of common law or by
statute as if the Crown itself had issued instructions law-
fully to the officer to discharge the duty or exercise the
functions. The reason for this provision is the decision in
Stanbury v. Exeter Corporation™ which held that a cor-
Poration was not liable for the negligence of a veterinary
inspector appointed by them to exercise the functions
imposed by the statute and the directions issued by the
Board of Agriculture. Darling J., pointed out that the
local authority which appointed the Inspector would be
liable if he acted negligently purporting to exercise the
corporate powers and not if he acted in the discharge of
some obligation imposed upon him by a statute. The rela-
tionship between the local authority and the officer in
respect of such a duty would not be that of master and
servant as it had no control over the servant when he
discharges the statutory obligations. On the analogy of
that decision, it is possible to argue that where a statute
er common Jaw imposes a function upon an officer of the
Crown rather than upon the Crown itself, the liability of

+4, (1905) 3 KB, B38,

See, 2(2)

Sec, 23)


Sec, 3

Sec, 4.

Secs. 5, 6
&7

Sec. 9:
_ Post
Packets.

16

the Crown would be limited to the appointment of a com-
petent officer and the Crown would not be liable for torts
committed by him in the discharge or purported discharge
of a function. This principle was applied in Australia in
Enver v. The King™. The peace officer im that case was
not the agent or servant of the appointing authority, for,
in the preservation of peace his authority is original
and is exerciged in his own discretion by virtue of his
office, His powers under the law being definite he is not
held out by the authority who appointed him as having
any greater authority than was lawfully गांड, Itis to
meet such a situation that the provision in Sec. 2(3) is
made, In view of Sec. 11, it may be possible to. argue by
virtue of the fiction imposed by this sub-clause that the
Crown must be deemed to have issued instructions law-
fully and since such instructions could only be issued by
virtue of the prerogative of the Crown, the. C:
not be Hable at all. But it ig a matter for jud:
pretation and it is difficult to venture a definite opinion
at this stage. .

31. Though it is not strictly a case of liability in tort
[some text-book writers. however, e.g., Salmond (Eleventh
Edition, page 716) include them in .orts] Sec. 3.of the Act
makes the Crown lable for the infringement by a servant
or agent of the Crown of a patent, a registered trade mark
and a copyright including. any. copyright and design
vested under the Patents & Designs Acts, 1907 to 1946.
The infringement, however, must have keen. committed
with the authority of the Crown.

32. Under Sec. 4 the law as to indemnity, contribution
between joint and several tortfeasors and contributor
negligence is made applicable to the Crown. Part’ i
of the Law Reform (Married Women and Tortfeasors) Act,
1935 which relates to proceedings for contribution between
joint and several tortfeasors, and the Law Reform (Contri-
butory Negligence) Act, 1945 which amends the law relat-
ing to contributory negligence, are made binding on the
Crown under this section.

33, Sections 5, 6 and 7 deal with the liability in respect
of the Crown’s ships;‘rules 38 10 the apportionment of loss
and the liability of the Crown in respect of docks and
harbours, ete. .

34. Under Section 9, the liability of the Crown in res-
pect of postal packets is restricted to loss of or damage to
a registered inland postal packet not being a telegram
so far-as the loss or damage is due to any wrongful act
done or neglect or default committed by a person employ-
ed as a servant or agent. of the Crown while performing
or purporting to perform his functions as such in rela-
tion to the receipt, carriage, delivery or other dealing

*, 3 U.L.R. 969. .

4, See alsa Field v, Noct, 62 C.L.R., 660 where the principle was applied,



avi

with that packet. The proviso to sub-sec. 2 of the Act lays
down limits of the liability in respect of registered postal
packets and also lays down the wholesome presumption
that until the contrary is shown on behalf of the Crown,
the loss of or damage 1o the packet must be presumed to
be due to a wrongful act or neglect or default of a servant
or agent of the Crown. There are also other limitations
imposed in respect of this liability by this section.

35. Section 10 relates to the armed forces. The liability
of both the Crown and a member of the armed forces for
eausing death or personal injury to another member is
excluded if at the time of the injury the person was on
duty or though not on duty was on any land, premises,
ship, aircraft or vehicle for the time being used for the
purpose of the armed forces of the Crown, subject, how-
ever, to the condition that the Minister of Pensions certi-
fies that his suffering has been or will be treated as attri-
butable to service for the purpose of entitlement to award
of pension under the Royal Warrant, Order in Council, or
Order of His Majesty relating to the disablement or death
of members of the force of which he is a member. Sub-
Sec. 2 of that section excludes the liability of the Crown
for death or personal injury to anything suffered by a
member of tbe armed forces of the Crown by reason of
the nature and condition of any such land, premises, ship,
aircraft or vehicle or negligence of the nature and condi-
tion of any equipment or buildings used for the purpose
of those forces, provided the Minister of Pensions certifies
that the suffering was attributable to service for the pur-
pose of entitlement of pension as provided above. It will
be noticed that the section is restricted only to death or
personal injury and does not extend to other wrongs. If
the tort was such that it did not cause either personal in-
jury or death it would seem that the Crown would be
liable; for example, in the case of defamation a member
of the armed forces as well as the Crown would be liable.
The reason for excluding liability in the above cases
seems to be that sufficient provision to repair the injury
or the loess occasioned by death is made under the
Pensions Act to be determined by the Minister of Pensions.
Why the officer should also escape from liability in such
cases is not clear but it may be that the compensation
paid under the Pensions Act is treated as adequate.

36. Sec. 2(5) exempts the Crown from liability for
judicial acts and also executions of judicial process.

37. Section 2(4} substitutes the Crown for a Govern-
ment department or officer of the Crown in cases in which
the liability of such department or officer was negatived
or limited by any enactment. In other words, in respect
of torts committed by a department or officer the liability
of the Crown is exactly the same as the liability of the
department or officer before the Crown Proceedings Act,

Sec. 10.
Armed
Forces.

Se: 2 f 2 (5):
and Judicial
process,
Sec. 2(4).


18

Discretionary 1947, The Act is silent regarding discretionary powers,

powers. probably for the reason that under common law a public
officer is not liable in the absence of negligence causing
additional damage in the exercise of discretion*’.

38, Section 11(1) of the Act provides that nothing
in the Part I of the Act shall extinguish or abridge the
prerogative and statutory powers of the Crown. Power
jis conferred on the Admiralty or the Secretary of State
by sub-section 2 of Section 11 to issue a certificate to the
effect that the act was properly done in the exercise of
the prerogative of the Crown, But as regards statutory
powers conferred on the Crown if the Section is intended
to save the Crown from all liability in respect of acts
done either by it or its servants and agents, it goes too
far. Even slatutory power may imply a duty towards
particular individuals and not to the public generally. In
such an event why the Crown should be immune  alto-
gether from liability for torts committed in the exercise
of statutory powers by its servants and agents is rather
difficult to see. Sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 2
are very restricted in their scope regarding the liability
of the Crown for the breach of statutory duties or for the
exercise of a statutory power. A large field seems to
have been excluded by virtue of the provision in Section
11 of the Act, Section 11(1), however, refers to “powers
conferred on the Crown” as distinguished from “functions
conferred or imposed upon an officer of the Crown”,
which is dealt with in Section 2( Be The number of sta-
tutes which confers powers on the Crown as such (as
distinguished from its officers) is very small. One learned
author thinks that the reason for enacting Section 11 is
obscure and it seems to make little change in the law.

Sec. 40 (a): 39. Section 40(e) provides that the Crown in its

Highways. capacity as a highway authority shall not be subject fo

any greater liability than that to which a local authority

is subjected in that capacity. .
CHAPTER IV.—Txe Law in tHe U.S.A.

40. Even in a republican country like the United States
of America, the doctrine of immunity of the State from
liability for torts has been imported for reasons which
are differently explained, but, as in England, exceptions
were sought te be introduced by permitting the State to
be sued through the procedure of private biils. That
procedure was, however, found to be unsatisfactory and

Federal Tort the Federal Tort Claims Act was enacted in 1946 ta do

‘Claims away partially with the immunity. The Federal Tort
Claims Act, however; is far more restricted in its scope
than the English Act. The liability of the State under
common jaw is stated in the Act in these terms:

“district court. ,,...-. . shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to hear, determine, and render judgment

मम, Eas Suffoyk Rivert Catchenent Board एन Kent, (1941) A.C. 74

Bec. 7101),



19

on any claim against the United States, for money

wonly, accruing on and after January 1, 1945, on
account of damage to or loss of property or on
account of personal injury or death caused by the
negligent or wrongful act or omission of any emp-
loyee of the Government while acting within the
scope of his office or employment, under circum-
stances where the United States, if a private person,
would be liable to the claimant for such damage, loss,
injury, or death in accordance with the law of the
place where the act or omission occurred”,

It is also provided that:

“the United States shall be liable ............ in
the same manner and to the same extent as a private
individual under like circumstances except that the
United States shall not be liable for interest prior to
judgment, or for punitive damages”.

41. So far as statutory duties and discretionary powers
and duties are concerned, it is laid down in one of the
exceptions that the “State” shall not be liable in respect
-of:

“any claim based upon an act or omission of any
employee of the Government, exercising due care, in
the execution of a statute or regulation, whether or
not such statute or regulation be valid, or based upon
the exercise or performance or the failure to exercise
or perform a discretionary function or duty on the
part of a Federal Agency or an employee of the Goy-
ernment whether or not the discretion involved be
abused”, °

“Employee of the Government” and “Federal Agency”
are defined in the Act.

42. It would be seen from the foregoing provisions
that the liability of the State under common law is rest-
Ticted to torts to property and injury to a person or death.
Exception (h}) (vide Appendix II) excludes intentional
torts, such as, assault, battery, false imprisonment, false
arrest, malicious prosecution, abuse of process, libel,
slander, misrepresentation, deceit, or interference with
contract rights. So far as statutory duties are concerned,
the United States is not liable for any tort committed in
the discharge of such duties so long as the duties are
performed with due care. [Ih respect of discretionary
functions and duties conferred on a Federal Agency or
-an employee of the Government, the State is not liable
even if the discretion is abused or even if there is negli-
gence.

43. In the case of common law duties, the lability is
restricted by adopting the formula that the “United
‘States shall be liable in the same manner and to the same
extent as a private individual under like circumstances”,


20

This definition of liability is shrouded in uncertainty. It.
ig not clear whether by this formula it was intended. to.
attract not only the common law principles by which a
private individual’s liability for tort is determined but
also brings in the nature of the act or function (i.e)
whether il is governmental or non-governmental. This
vague expression has given rise to conflicting decisions of
the Supreme Court even within the short period that has.
elapsed from the date when the Act came into force. In
Feres v. United States,’ the Supreme Court expressed
the view that the Aet did not create new causes of action
which were not recognised before. The case related to
claims by members in the armed forces injured through
the negligence of other military personnel. The decision.
in that case was that as no private individual has power
to conscript or mobilise a private army, the State could
not be made libel. The interpretation so placed reminds
one of the dictum of Sir Bames Peacock.-C. J. in the
peninsular case. This interpretation revives the old
distinction between governmental and- non-governmental
functions of the State and the rule that it should be liable
only in the latter case. In each case the question has to-
be raised and answered whether the activity out of which
the tort arose was such as a private individual could have
indulged in and if the answer is in the affirmative, the:
Government should be made liable, otherwise not.

44. This interpretation was followed and applied in the
later case Dalehite v. United State** The Court had’ to
consider in that case the claims preferred under the Act
in connection with the disastrous explosion of ammonium
nitrate fertiliser in Texas city which resulted in damage
unparalleled in history. The action was rested on the
main ground that there was negligence on the part of
the government and its servants. Reed J., who delivered
the opinion of the majority of the Court examined the
scope of the Act and held that under the provisions of
the Act, the liability of the United States was restricted to
ordinary common law torts and did not extend to the
liability arising from governmental acts. In support of
his view the learned Judge relied on the Committee re-
ports which preceded the enactment of the law. The ex-
ception relating to statutory duties was intended, ac-
cording to the Committee, to preclude any possibility that
the bill might be construed to authorise a suit for damages
against the government arising out of an authorised
activity such as flood control or irrigation project, where
negligence on the part of the government agent was
shown and the only ground for the suit was the conten-
tion that the same conduct by a private individual would
be tortious, or that the statute or regulation authorising:

७, 340 U.S. 135.
48 346 US. 15.


al

the project was invalid. It was also designed to preclude *
application of the bill _to a claim against a regulatory
agency, such as the Federal Trade Commission or the
Securities and Exchange Commission, based upon the
alleged abuse of discretionary authority by an officer or
employee whether or not negligence was alleged to have
been involved. The learned Judge stressed on the language
of the Act which imposed the liability on the United
States to the “same extent as a private individual would
Be liable under like circumstances”. This, he said, was a
definite pointer negativing complete relinquishment of
sovereign immunity. The exception relating to statutory
duties, according to the learned Judge, was intended to
protect the government from claims arising out of acts
however negligently done which affect the governmental
functions. The question of the liability of the State for
negligence of the Coast Guards in the discharge of fire-
fighting duties, which is a discretionary function, was
also considered. It was ruled by the majority that the
Federal Tort Claims Act— 5
“did not change the normal rule that an alleged
failure or carelessness of public. firemen does not
create private actionable rights. Our analysis of the
question was determined by what was said in the
Feres case. The Act, as was there stated, limited
United States’ liability to ‘the same manner and to
the same extent as a private individual under like -
circumstances’. Here, as there, there is no analogous :
liability; in fact, if anything is doctrinally sanctified
in the law of torts it is the immunity of communities
and other public bodies for injuries due to fighting
2”,

Jackson J., who delivered the judgment of the minority,
however, took the opposite view. He graphically describ-
ed the situation under modern conditions in justification
of his view that the State should be liable. He said at
page 51:

“Because of reliance on the reservation of gov-
ernmentel immunity for acts of discretion, the Court
avoids direct pronouncement on the duty owing by
the Government under these circumstances but does
sound overtones and undertones with which we dis-
agree. We who would hold the Government liable
here cannot avoid consideration of the basic criteria:
by which courts determine liability in the conditions:
of modern life. This is a day of synthetic living,
when to an ever-increasing extent our population is
dependent upon mass producers for its food and
drink, its cures and complexions, its apparel. and
gadgets. These no longer are natural or ‘simple
products but complex ones whose composition and
qualities are often secret.. Such a dependent society
Must exact greater care than in more simple days
and must require from manufacturers or _producera.


22

Increased integrity and caution as the only protection
of its safety and well-being. Purchasers cannot try
out drugs to determine whether they kill or cure.
Consumers cannot test the yongster’s cowboy suit or
the wife’s sweater to see if they are apt to burst’ into
fatal flames. Carriers, by land or by sea, cannot
experiment with the combustibility of goods in
transit. Where experiment or research is necessary
to determine the presence or the degree of danger,
the product must not be tried out on the public, nor
must the public be expected to possess the facilities
or the technical knowledge to learn for itself of in-
herent but latent dangers. The claim that a hazard
was not foreseen is not available to one who did not
use foresight appropriate to his enterprise.”

And, lastly, he concludes at page 60:

“But many acts of government officials deal only
with the housekeeping side of federal activities. The
Government, as landowner, as manufacturer, as ship-
per, as warehouseman, as shipowner and operator, is
carrying on activities indistinguishable from those
performed by private persons. In this area, there is
no good reason to stretch the legislative text to im-
munize the Government or its officers from responsi-
bility for their acts, if done without appropriate care
for the safety of others, Many official decisions even
in this area may involve a nice balancing of various
considerations, but this is the same kjnd of balancing
which citizens do at their peril and we think it is
not within the exception of the statute”.

45. In a recent decision, however, (indian Towing
Co, ४. U.S.A.“), the Supreme Court did not accept the in-
terpretation placed by the abeve two decisions on the
provisions of the Act. The claim was for damages alleged
to have been caused by the negligence of the Coast Guard
in the operation of a lighthouse light. The same conten-
tions as in the earlier decisions were again raised and the
implication of the expression “in the same manner. and
to the same extent as private individual under like cir-
cumstances” had to be canvassed. It was contended on
behalf of the State that this expression excluded its liabi-
lity in the performance of activities which a private per-
son could not perform. In other words, the liability of
the State for governmental functions was excluded. It
was pointed out that the words used were net “under the
same circumstances” but “under like circumstances”, Ac-
cording to the majority view, this expression imposed the
-duty of exercising care upon the State which undertakes
to warn the public of danger. At page 65 it was observed:

“Furthermore, the Government in effect reads
the statute as imposing liability in the same manner

“4, (4955) 350 U.S. 61.


as

as if it were a municipal corporation and not as if it
‘were a private person, and it would thus push the
courts inte the “non-governmental” “governmental”
quagmire that has long plagued the law of munici-
pal corporations. A comparative study of the cases
in the forty eight States will disclose an irreconcilable
conflict. More than that, the decisions in each of the
States are disharmonious and disclose the inevitable
chaos when courts try to apply a rule of law that is
inherently unsound. The fact of the matter is that
the theory whereby municipalities are made amen-
able to liability is an endeavour, however, awkward
and contradictory, to escape from the basic historical
doctrine of sovereign immunity. The Federal Tort
Claims Act cuts the ground from under that doctrine;
it is not self-defeating by covertly embedding the
easuistries of municipal liability for torts.”

The question was put whether if the United States were
to permit the operation of private lighthouses, the basis
of differentiation urged on behalf of the Government
would be gone and it could be made liable if negligence
had been established. The Government, it is stated “is
not partly public or partly private, depending upon the
governmental pedigree of the type of a particular activity
or the manner in which the Government conducts it. On
the other hand, it is hard to think of any governmental
activity on the “operational level” our present concern.
which is “uniquely governmental” in the sense that its
kind has not at one time or another been, or could not
-conceivably be, privately performed”.

In this case, Reed, J., was in the minority and he deli-
vered the minority judgment. The minority stuck to their
view expressed in the earlier decisions. But it is  signi-
ficant that even thé minority judges realised that there is
uncertainty and ambiguity in the expressions used in the

45

46. This discussion is necessary to show that to adopt
the formula of the Federal Tort Claims Act,. however
attractive it may be, is to introduce an uncertainty in the
law and is calculated to revive the old controversy be-
tween “governmental” and “non-governmental” functions,
which the decisions in India, already summarised, intro-
duced into the law on the basis of the dictum of Sir
Barnes Peacock, C.J., in the Peninsular case ...........,

47. There are also other decisions like Seigmon v.
U.S.“ which reiterated the view that the Federal Tort
“Claims Act was not intended to create a new cause of
action. This case related to a claim by a prisoner who
was injured by another while in prison. It was held that
as before the Act, the prisoner in such a situation had no

*. (1993) 110 F.R. 906, 1


24

right of action against an individual] gaoler, he had none
after the Act. But it is somewhat interesting to find that
in England in. Ellis v. Home Office*® the contrary view was
taken on similar facts though the suit was ultimately
dismissed as negligence was not established.

46. The foregoing discussion will shaw that the liabi-
lity of the State under the Federal Tort Claims Act is
very much restricted and that the exceptions have nar-
rowed down the liability. For convenience of reference
the relevant sections of the Federal Tort Claims Act are
reproduced in Appendix IL

CHAPTER V.—Tie Law in AUSTRALIA

49. Under See. 78 of the Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution Act, Parliament was enabled to make laws.
conferring rights to proceed against the Commonwealth or
a State in respect of matters within the limits of the judi-
cial power. Under the Judiciary Acts, 1903 tc 1915, Ser. 64,
it was provided that in a suit to which the Commonwealth
or a State is a party, the rights of parties shall as nearly
as possible be the same and judgment may be given and
cause evolved on either side as in a suit between a subject.
and a subject. Sec. 56 of the said Act enables the citizen
to bring a suit whether in contract or in tort against the-
Commonwealth in the High Court or the Supreme Court
of the State in which the claim arose. These provisions
were considered in Baume v. Commonwengith* and it was.
held that the Act gave the subject the same rights of action.
against the Government as against a subject in matters.
of tort as well as contract, and that the Commonwealth
was therefore responsible and an action was maintainable
fer tortious acts of its seryants in every case in which
the gist of the cause of action was infringement of a legal‘
right. If the act complained of is not justified.by law and’
the person doing it is not exercising en independent
diseretion conferred on him by statute but is performing:
a ministerial duty, the State is not liable. The party,
therefore, making a claim against a State has to establish
his legal right and the infringement thereof and would
be entitled to a decree for damages if the act complained
of is not justified by law and wes not done in the course
of the exercise of an independent discretion conferred.
upon a person by statute. In other words, to make the
State Hable the servant must have performed a
ministerial duty and not a discretionary duty. The
formula adopted in Australia that the rights of parties
shall, as nearly as possible, be the same asin a suit
between a subject and a subject, is simpler, especially in
view of _ the interpretation that it has received in
Australia. It gives a wide scope for judicial interpretation,.
and it is difficult to say to what extent the State’s liability,.

4, (1953) 2 All England Reports, 349.
#, 4 CLR. 74.



25

‘without distinction between sovereign and non-sovereign
-functions, would be recognised under the Australian
formula. It is not safe to leave the law in such an elastic
sand uncertain state.

CHAPTER VI—Tue Law in France

50. It is common knowledge that under the French
.system of administration, there is a dichotomy of courts,
unlike in England and America—one set of courts dealing
with the disputes between the State and the citizen known
asthe Administrative Courts and the other set dealing
with the disputes between a citizen and a citizen. The
Council of State (Council detat) is atthe apex of the
hierarchy of administrative courts just as the Court of
Cassation is at the head of the civil courts. The Council
of State has both judicial and administrative functions,
sections of that body dealing with the two matters being
different. Its administrative functions are mostly consul-
tative. In case of conflict of jurisdiction between the two
categories of courts, there is a Court of Conflict to resolve
the dispute and the personnel of this body is partly drawn
from the Council of State and partly from the Court of
Cassation.

51. The development of the law relating to the liability
of the State for the claims of the citizen against the State
‘was through the Council of State. It is somewhat
curious that while French Law started with the absolute
immunity of the officer and the State in respect of. tortious
acts, through a process of evolution it has established
absolute liability of the State and partial liability of
the officer. The maxim that “A King can do no wrong”
is replaced by the maxim that “the State is an honest
man”, It is unnecessary to follow the vicissitudes
through which the evolution had to pass buta great
change was effected in 1870 by a decree and the celebrated
Pelletier case in 1873. A distinction was drawn between
personal fault (faute personneUe) and service-connected,
fault (faute de service). In respect of the former, the
officer alone was liable to be sued in the civil court while
in respect of the latter, the State alone was liable in the
administrative courts, But the meaning of “personal
fault” was developed by jurists. A public officer was
liable if there was wilful malice or gross negligence on
his part. To this a further qualification was added by
Haurion that he should not be acting within the scope
of his official functions. It may, therefore, be stated that
in the droit administratif of to-day a public officer is liable
personally only when he has acted wilfully, maliciously,
with gross negligence ar outside the scope of his official
functions. If he acts within the scope, he is not liable,
for, he committed no personal fault but a service-con-
nected fault for which the administration alone is liable.


26

Tt was felt that the strict rule of personal liability migh ht
impede effective administration, for, if an officer knew that.
his exercise of judgment in doubtful cases might expose:
him to a suit for damages, he might be disinclined to act in
all such cases. If he was a man with low pay and slender
resources, it would be inequitable to saddle him with
liability.

52. The State’s responsibility for the injuries of a
private citizen inflicted by the administration is treated.
logically as an extension of the principle that when.
Private property is acquired by the State from a citizen.
the latter should be paid just compensation by the State,
On that analogy, if for the benefit of (the members of)
the State a person is injured, all the other persons should
make good the injury. Gradually the basis of liability
was shifted from that of fault to one of risk as under the
Workmen’s Compensation Acts. It enabled administrative
law to view the basis of such liability in a new light.

“The Council of State”, says Schwartz on ‘Admi-.
nistrative Law'* “has for many years assumed.
that one of the fundamental principles of French
public law derived from the equalitarian ideal.
that inspired the men of the French Revolution.
was that which provided for an equal distribution
among the citizenry of the costs of government in the
absence of a legislative disposition to the contrary.
If a particular citizen is damaged by the operation of
an administrative service, even if there is no fault, the
principle of equality in sharing the expense of govern-
ment is violated. The victim of the administrative
act that caused the damage is in effect asked to
assume a burden not imposed on other citizens, a bur--
den thrust upon him, by the operation of a public:
service that functions for the benefit of the community
asawhole, In such cases, it has been asked by
French jurists, is not the State, even though it has not
committed a fault, under an obligation to vindicate
the principle of equality before the costs of govern-
ment by removing the additional burden that has.
fallen upon the one injured and, by assuming it itself,.
distributing it among the entire body of the citizenry?
Such indeed, is the master principle that tends more
and more to govern the jurisprudence of the French
Council. of State. The law of State liability is aimed’
at restoring the equality that has been upset at the
expense of a particular individual. In the absence of
fault on the part of the administration, stated the
Government Commissioner in his conclusions in an
important case before the Council of State, the basis
of State Hability is to be found in Article 13 of the
Declaration of the Rights of Man. That article laid
down the principle of the equality of citizens before:

४, P. 292.


21

the costs of government. It is, in actuality, not per-

missible for a public activity even though it be legal, -

to cause certain individuals damage that they alone
must bear; that would be to make them carry more
than their share of the costs of the State, All public
activity is intended to benefit the community as ७
whole. It must, therefore, be paid for by the entire
community. Consequently, individual damage caused
by such activity which, by upsetting the balance
sought by the Declaration of Rights, destroys the
equality of the citizenry before the costs of govern-
ment, should lead to reparation. Such reparation,
which by means of the tax system, is actually made
by the whole body politic restores the equality thus
destroyed.”

CHAPTER VII—Rue or Statutory ConsTRUCTION

53, The rule of construction that the Crown is not
bound by a statute unless expressly mentioned therein or
by necessary implication also requires examination as it
was referred to by the Law Ministry in the present
context. There are very many rules of English law found-
ed on the prerogative rights of the Crown, and, as pointed
out in 7 Halsbury’s Laws of England, 3rd Edition, at page
222 et seq., this rule of construction was also considered as
one of the incidents fowing from the pre-eminent position

Crowa
when bound”
by a statute.

which the Crown m England occupies. The basis of the:

prerogative rights and powers of the Crown is common
Jaw. The Crown's pre-eminence ‘still survives in England
except in so far as it is, for the time being, curtailed by
statute. The question is whether there is any necessity or
justification for the application of this rule of construction
in India after it became a Republic.

54. The Australian Constitution was enacted by the
British Parliament, Section 61 of the Constitution Act vests
the executive power in the Queen and is exercisable by the
Governor-General as the Queen's representative. The
residuary prerogative rights and powers which continue to

be vested in the Sovereign in England are still exercisable~

under that Constitution by the Crown until that power is.
curtailed by statute. The same applies to Canada.

55. The Constitution of the United States of America
and of India were established by the people themselves in
whom the sovereign power vested. Under our Constitu-
tion there is no roam for any right or power outside the:
Constitutign exercisable by a specially pre-eminent autho-

rity. There is no room for invoking prerogative rights or”

rs as am incident of sovereignty. The executive

powe:
power of the Union is vested in the President (Article:

53) and the extent of it is specified in Article 73. It
extends to the matters with respect to which Parliament

has power tc make law and the powers under treaties and-

agreements. The executive power cf the Stete is vested-


28

in the Governor (Article 154) and extends to the matiers
in respect of which the State Legislature has power to make
laws (Article 162). The proviso to Article 162 provides
that in respect of matters in the Coneurrent list, the
power of the State must yield to the power of the Union.
The residuary executive power not covered by Lists 17 and
Ill of the Seventh Schedule and items 1 to 96 of list 1, is
vested in the Union (vide item 97 of List I and Article
248). The entire field of the executive power is distributed
between the States or the Union. There is'no room for
‘invoking any power outside the Constitution and to place
the Union or the States in a pre-eminent position.

56. It has now been held by the Supreme Court** that
the executive power of the State or the Union may be
exercised even though there is no enactment relating to
such power for the reason that the executive power is
related under the Constitution to “metters” in the legisla-
tive lists and does not require a-statute conferring or
regulating the power to enable the State or the Union to
exercise the power.

57. The principle of construction adopted in England
that the Crown is not bound by a statute unless expressly
mentioned or by necessary implication was explained in
Attorney General v. Donaldson:

“Prima facie the law made by the Crown with
assent of the Lords and Commons is made for subjects
and not for the Crown”.

In Bacon's abridgment, the reason is given differently
and perhaps it is more satisfactory. It is stated that where
the statute is general and thereby any prerogative right,
title or interest is divested or taken away from the King,
the King shall not be bound unless the statute is made by
express terms to extend ta him. The principle is that
there should be no -encroachment upon the prero-
gative right or power of the Crown unless the Crown
consented 10 it, for, a right or power cannot be taken away
without the consent of the Crown even by a statute. When
there is no question of any prerogative power or right as
under our Constitution there is no reason to adopt the
principle. Even in England the rule has been criticised by
jurists like Glanville Williems and Street as an “archaic
survival ef an ancient law”. The application of the rule
does not present any difficulty so long as the statute
expressly exempts the Crown but the other part of the rule
based on “necessary implication” is of difficult application:
One test suggested was that-if a statute was for the public
good, it should be presumed to’bind the Crown. This test
was given the go-bye by the Privy Council and was shifted,
-to the ascertainment of the intention of the Legislature.

"| Ramfaya Kapoor y, Staie of Panjab, ALB. (15553 S.C. 549.
48) (1842) 10M, & W., 117 at 124. .


ag

But ne objective test was laid down by any of the decisions
as to how the intentions of the Legislature is to be ascer--
taincd. The principle was applied to India by the Privy
Council in the Bombay Municipat Corporation case’. The
Judicial Committee negatived the test of public good on
the ground that every slalute is for the public good but
empiasised the other test of ascertaining the intention of
the Legislature.

58, The question was examined in Englend in Attorney
General vy. Hancock'’. There it was laid down after
examination of the authorities trat if an Act diminishes
the Crown’s property, interest, prerogative or Tights, the
Crown would not be affected uni; expressly mentioned.
In a recent decision, U.S. v. Mine Workers of America®
Frankfurter J., said:

“At best this cannon, like other generalities about
statutory construction, ts not a rule of law. Whatever
persuasion it may have in ecastruing a particular
statute it derives from the particular statute and. the
terms of the enactment in its total environment.”

As Street puts it, in the United States the Courts laid
emphasis on the legislative objects and the presumption
for excepting Government privileges is invoked only to
resolve douls. This test is more satisfactory.

Tt is needless to discuss the development of this rule
and the criticism against it as it is to be found in Street’s
“Governmental Liability’, Chapter VI, page 143 and in
Glanville Williams’ “Crown Proceedings”, page 49. At
page 53, Glanville Williams summarises the position thus:

“The rule originated in the Middle Ages, when it
perhaps had some justification. Its survival, however,
is due to little but the vis inerite. The chief objection
to the rule is its difficulty of application. One might
suppose that if there were any statute that ought to
bind the Crovwm by necessary implication, it would
be a statute passed for the safety of the subjects; yet
as we have seen, it does not always do so; and the
circumstances in which it does not do so cannot be
catalogued.”

Glanville Williams, therefore, suggests that the law could
be made clear by adopting the rule that the Crown is
bound by every statute in the absence of express words
to the contrary:

“Such a change in the law would make no
difference to the decision of the preliminary question of
legislative policy whether the Crown should be bound
by a statute or not. At the moment if the draftsman

73 Indlan Appeals 271.
38, (1040) 1 K.B. 427.
३. (1946) 67 Suprere Court Reports, 67.

1216 M of L~3


30

of a bill is instructed that the Crown is not to be
bound, he simply says nothing on the subject of the
bill. Under the rule here suggested, he would insert
express provision exempting the Crown. The change
of the rule would not prevent the Crown from being
expressly exempted from a statute if its framers so
wished to.”

The rule suggested by the learned author is undoubtedly
just and reasonable and would avoid the difficulty of
invoking the principle of “necessary implication” which is
always an uncertain rule.

Professor W. Friedman examined the question in
chapter 12 of his book “Law & Social Change” and opined
that this rule of interpretation should na longer be applied.
His conclusion is: —

“The rule that the Crown is not bound by statutes
except when specially mentioned or hy necessary
implication is socially and politically objectionable,
nor is it legally compelling. It is the exception to the
rule which should be developed by courts, not the
rule itself. The application of the rule should be
limited to such cases where an averwhelming public
interest demands that the Crown should be exempt.”

After the Constitution the Calcutta High Court declined
to apply this rule of construction (Corporation of Calcutta
v. The Director of Rationing)’.

59. If simplification is to be achieved, it is_suggested,
that a provision may be made in the General Clauses Act
stating the rule in the terms suggested by Glanville
Williams and that in respect of Acts passed after a
particular date the rule should apply. But then the
difficulty would arise regarding Acts passed before the
Constitution when the British sovereignty existed and Acts
passed after the Constitution before the appointed date.
It should be possible, though it may be a difficult task, to
examine which of those Acts bind the State and ihen to
initiate suitable legislation.

CHAPTER VIlI—Conciusions anp Proposats

60. In the context of a welfare State it is necessary
to establish a just relation between the rights of the
individual and the responsibilities of the State. While the
responsibilities of the State have increased, the increase in
its activities has led to a greater impact on the citizen.
For the establishment of a just economic order industries
are nationalised. Public utilities are taken over by the
State. The State has launched huge irrigation and flood
control schemes. The production of electricity has

30, A.T.R. (1955) Calcutta, 282.


Ei

practically become a Government concern. The State has
established and intends to establish big factories and
manage them. The State carries on works departmentally.
The doctrine of Taissez faire—which leaves every one to
look after himself to his best advantage has yielded place
to the ideal of a welfare State—which implies that the
State takes care of those who are unable to help themselves.

हु. Some of the activities are entrusted to public
corporations to run the business on sound economic and
business lines efficiently. Public Corporations like the
Air Corporations, Damodar Valley Corporation, etc. (vide
Appendix IV for a list) are such examples. For all these
it employs labour on a large scale. There is no convincing
reason why the Government should not place itself in the
same position as a private employer subject to the same
rights and duties as are imposed by statute.

62, When the Constitution was framed, the question to
what extent, if any. the Union and the States should be
made liable for the tortious acts of their servants or agents
was left for futurc legislation. The point for consideration,
therefore, is on what lincs the legislation should proceed.
This. indeed, is a difficult question ta decide, as it
involves the question of demareating the line up to which
the State should be made liable for the tortious acts. It
involves, undoubtedly, a nice balancing of considerations so
as not to unduly restrict the sphere of the activities of the
State and at the same time to afford sufficient protection
to the citizen. Even conservative countries like England
realise that the lew should progress in favour of the
subject in the context of a welfare State and should
not remain stagnant. Even under the law obtaining
before the Crown Proceedings Act in England, when the
immunity of the Crown extended to the departments of
State and the injured party had no remedy at all in respect
of claims founded on tort, the State mitigated the hardship
by paying compensation though this was as a matter of
grace and not as of right.

63. The tendency in England, therefore, is towards
relaxation of the immunities of the Crown in favour of
the subject. But it has not gone far enough.

64, The liberalisation of the law in England and other
countries should not be ignored in framing the law in this
behalf. Our country also must formulate the law suitably
having regard to the changed conditions and the provisions
of our Constitution, In America, as has been seen, the
Jiability is very restricted. In Australia, which was
the first to give the lead in reducing the immunity of the
Crown, a simpler formula that the “rights of the parties
shall as nearly as possible be the same ...... as in a
suit between subject and subject” was adopted. This was
judicially interpreted to exclude liability for discretionary
duties. "The Crown Proceedings Act is more liberal than


ocosals

$2

the legislation in the United States but in respec. of
.statutory duties and powers, the scupe is very restricted.
Though the State is the biggest employer, industrialist
and factory owner, the legislation which imposes certain
duties on the employer has not been adopted in its
entirety. In other words, the whole of the industrial
jon except the Factories Act was excluded on the
e that the Crown is not bound by any. statute

unless it is expressly mentioned cr is bound by necessary
implication. The «Act is silent regarding diserctionary

powers and du but that may be an the principle that
the officer w commitied the tort was ast Hable at
common law in the absence of additional damage caused
by negligence in the exercise of discretion.

65. It would, therefore, not be advisable to adopt the
legislatiun in this respect in England, Americ: or Australia,
It is necessary that the law should, as far as possible, be
made certain and definite instead of leaving it to courts te
develop the law according to the view of the judges. The
citizen must be in a position to know the law definitely.

The old distinction between sovereign and non-sovereign
functions or governmental and non-governmental functions
should no longer be invoked to determine the Liability of
the State. As Professor Friedman*’ observes:

“It is now increasingly necessary to abandon the
lingering fiction of a legally indivisible State, and of
a feudal conception of the Crown, and to substitute
for it the principle of legal liability where the State,
either directly or through incorporated publie autho-
rities, engages in activities of a commercial, industrial
or managerial character. The proper test is not an
impracticable distinction between governmental and
non-governmental functions, but the nature and form
of the activity in question.”

This was also what was docided in Haribhanji’s cases?
We would recommend that legislative sanction be given to
the rule laid down in that case.

66. The following shall be the principles on which
legislation should proceed:—

I, Under the general lew:

Under the general law of torts i.¢., the English Common
Law as imported into India on the principle of justice,
equity and good conscience, with statutory modifications

न, Lew and Social Change, page 273,

*2, LL.R. 5] Mad. 273, See a'so in this connection the observations of
Mukerjea, 1.. ५०७ he then was), Saghir dimmed V. The State of U
(4955) 1 S.C.R, 707, at page 737:


33

of that law now in force in India (vide the Principles of
General Law, Appendix VI)—

(i) The State as employer should be liable for the
torts committed by its employees and agents while
acting within the scope of their office or, employment.

(i) The State as employer should be liable in
respect of brcach of those duties which a person owes
to his employees or agents under the general law by
reason of being their employer.

(iii) The State should be Hable for torts committed
by an independent contractor only in cases referred
to in Appendix VI.

(iv) The State also should be liable for torts
where a corporation owned or controlled by the State
would be liable.

(vz) The 8256 should be liable in respect of breach
of duties attached under the general law to the owner-
ship, occupation, possession or control of immoveable
property from the moment the State occupies or takes
possession or assumes control of the property.

(vi) The State should be subject te the general
law liability for injury caused by dangerous things
(chattels).

In respect of (i) to (vi) the State should be entitled to
raise the same defences, which a citizen would be entitled
to raise under general law.

Ul. In respect of duties of care imposed by statute:

(i) If a statute authorises the doing of an act which
is in itself injurious, the State should not be liable.

(ii) The State should be Liable, without proof of
negligence, for breach of a statutory duty imposed on
it or its employees which causes damage

(iit) The State should be liable if in the discharge
of statutory duties imposed upon it or its employees,
the employees act negligently or maliciously, whether
ov not discretion is involved in the exercise of such

uty.

(iv) The State should be liable if in the exercise
of the powers conferred upon it or its employees the
power is so exercised as to cause nuisance or trespass
or the power is exercised negligently or maliciously
causing damage.

N.B.—Appendix V shows some of the Acts which
contain protection clauses. But under the General
Clauses Act a thing is deemed ta be done in good faith
‘even if it is done negligently. Therefore, by suitable
legislation the protection should be made not to extend


34
to negligent acts however honestly done and for this:
purpose the relevant clauses in such enactments should.
be examined,

(v) The State should be subject to the same duties
and should have the same rights as a private employer
under a statute, whether it is specifically binding on
the State ar not.

(vi) Tf an Act negatives or limits the compensation
payable to a citizen who suffered damage, coming
within the scope of the Act, the liability of the State
should be the same as under that Act and the injured
person should be entitled only to the remedy. if any,
provided under the Act.

ellaneous:

Patents, Designs and Copyrights: The provisions of
Sec. 3 of the Crown Proceedings Act may be adopted.

IV. General Provisions:

4i) Indemnity end contribution; To enable the
State to claim indemnity or contribution, a provision
on the lines of Sec. 4 of the Crown Proceedings Act
may be adopted.

(ii) Contributory negligence: In England, the Law
Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act, 1945 was.
enacted amending the law relating to contributory
negligence and in view of the provisions of the Crown
Proceedings Act the said Act also binds the Crown, In
India, the trend of judicial opinion is in favour of
holding that the rule in Merryweether v. Nixan®* does
not apply and that there is no legal impediment to one
tortfeasor recovering compensation from another. But
the law should not be left in an uncertain state and
there should be legislation on the lines of the English
Act.

(iii) Appropriate provision should be made while:
revising the Civil Procedure Code to make it obligatory
to implead as party to a suit in which a claim for
damages against the State is made, the employee,
agent or independent contractor for whose act the
Siate is sought to be made liable. Any claim based
on indemnity or contributior »y the State may also
be settled in such proceeding as all the parties will
be before the court.

प्‌, Exceptions:

G) Acts of State: The defence of “Act of State”
should be made available to the State for any act,
neglect or default of its servants or agents. “Act of”

के, (1799) 8. T.R. 186.


3a

State” means an act of the sovereign power directed
against another sovereign power or the subjects of
another sovereign power not owning temporary
allegiance, in pursuance of sovereign rights.

Ui) Judicial acts and execution of judicial process:
The State shall not be liable for acts done by judicial
officers and persons executing warrants and orders of
judicial officers in all cases where protection is given
to such officers and persons by Sec. ६ of the Judicial
Officers Protection Act, 1850. 1

(iti) Acts done in the erercise of political functions
of the State such as acts relating to:

(a) Foreign Affairs (entry 10, List I, Seventh
Schedule of the Constitution);

(5) Diplomatic, Consular and trade represen-
tation {entry 11};

(ce) United Nations Organisation {entry 12);

(व) Participation in international conferences,
associations and other bodies and implementing of
decisions made thereat (entry 13);

(e) entering into treaties and agreements with
foreign countries and implementing of treaties,
agreements and conventions with foreign countries
(entry 14);

(1) war and peace (entry 15);
(9) foreign jurisdiction (entry 16);

(h) anything done by the President, Governor
or Rajpramukh in the exercise of the following
functions:

Power of summoning, proroguing and dissolv-
ing the Legislature, vetoing of laws and anything
done by the President in the exercise of the powers
to issue Proclamations under the Constitution;

(i) Acts done under the Trading with the
Enemy Act, 1947;

(7) Acts done or omitted to be done under a
Proclamation of Emergency when the security of
the State is threatened.

(iv) Acts done in relation to the Defence Forces:

(a) Combatant activities of the Armed Forces
during the time of war;

{b) Acts done in the exercise of the pow:
vested in the Union for the purpose of training
or maintaining the effielency of the Defence Forces;


36

The statutes relating to these already provid.
for payment of compensation and the machinery
for determining the compensation: See Manceu-
vres, Field Firing and Artillery €ractice Act, 1948:
Seaward Artillery Practice Act, 1949;

(2) The lability of the State for personal
injury or death caused by a member of the Armed
Forces to another member while on duty shall
be restricted in the same manner as in England
(See. 10 of the Crown Proceedings Act}.

4u) Miscellaneous:

(०) any claim arising out of defamation, mali-
cious prosecution and malicious arrest,

(5) any claim arising out of the operation of
quarantine law,

(०) existing immunity under the Indian Tele-
graph Act, 1885 and Indian Post Offices Act, 1898,

(d) foreign torts. (The English provision may
be adopted.)

VI. Definitions:

1. “Agent” shall have the sare meaning as under the
Contract Act, 1872.

2. “Employee” of the Government inciudes every person
who is a member of the defence service or of a civil
service of the Union or of an all-India Service or holds
any post connected with the defence or any civil post
under the Union and every person who is a member of the
civil service of a State or holds a civil post in a State, and
any other person acting on behalf of or under the control
and direction of the Union or State with or without
remuneration.

3. “Independent contractor” is a person who enters
into a contract to do a work for the State without being
eontralied by the State as to the manner of execution of
the work.

4, “State” includes the Union. of India.

VII, Rule of construction regarding statutes binding on the
Union and States:

_We have discussed this question in paragraph 53, ante,
and we recommend that a provision be inserted in the
General Clauses Act as follows:


oY

“tn the absence of express words to the contrary,
every stalute shall be binding on the Union or the
State, as the case may be.”

(Signed) M, 0. SETALVAD (Chairman),
M. C. CHAGLA,
K. N. WANCHOO,

- N. DAS,

. SATYANARAYANA RAO,

SEN GUPTA,

K. T. CHARI,

. NARASA RAJU,

M. SIKRI,

. 8, PATHAK,

N. JOSHI, Members.

हद हज एव पद एफ

K. SRINIVASAN,

DURGA DAS BASU,
Joint Secretaries.

New DEH;
The 11th May, 1956.


APPENDIX 1
The State was held not liable for torts arising out of:
(1) Commandeering goods during war.
(2) Making or repairing a military road.
(3) Administration of Justice.
(4) Improper arrest, negligence or trespass by
police officers.
(3) Removal of an agent by a labour supply
association under an ordinance,
(6) Wrongful refusal to issue a licence to sell
ganja under excise law.
(7) Negligence of officers of the court of wards
in the administration of estate in their charge.
(89) Negligence of officers in the discharge of
statutory duties.
(9) Lass of movable property in the custody of
government.
(10) Payment of money to a person other than the
rightful owner by government servants,
(11) Negligent acts of servants of the Government.
The Crown was not liable for negligent or tortious
acts of its officers done in the course of their official
duties imposed by statute except where it could be
proved that the impugned act was authorised by the
Crown or that it had profited by its performance.
{12} Removal of a child by the negligence of the
authorities of a Hospital maintained out of the revenues.
of the State.
(13) Negligence of the Chief constable who seized
hay under statutory authority.
'. 54 Calcutta, 969.

. 39 Madras, 351
. g Lucknow, 7

g Rangoon, 375-_ .
a7 Mi = (reviews all the decisions
English and Indian}.

Kal, 11.

36 Calcutta Weekly Notes, 605.

. 17 Caleutta Weekly Notes, 957.

. (1950) All, ५6.

. (19472 Calcutta, 141; (1950) All, 206, (1934); Cal, 7 128337
Calcutta Weekly Notes, 957.

11. 38 Cal. 7975 $1, C.W.N., 534.

22. AIR. (1939) Mad., 663.

13, 28 Bom., 314.

BY oar ७३०३9:

4

38


APPENDIX If
WeperaL Tort CLrarms Act (AMERICA)

Sub-chapter Administrative adjustment of tort claims
against the United States.

921. Settlement of claims of $ 1,000 or less; conclusiveness;
appropriations:

(a) Subject tc the limitation of this chapter, authority
is conferred upon the head of each Federal Agency or his
designee for ihe purpose, acting on behalf of the United
States, to consider, ascertain, adjust, determine, and settle
any claim against the United States for money only,
accruing on and after January 1, 1945 on account of damage
to or loss of property or on account of personal injury or
death, where the total amount of the claim does not exceed
$1,000, caused by the negligent or wrongful act or omission
of any empioyee of the Government while acting within
the scope ot his office or employment, under circumstances
where the United States, if a private person, would be
liable to the claimant for such damage, loss, injury, or
death, in accordance with the law of the place where the
act or omission oeeurred.

(b) Subject to the provisions of sub-chapter II of this
chapter, any such award or determination shall be final
and conclusive on all officers of the Government, except
when procured by means of fraud, notwithstanding any
other provision of law to the contrary.

(९) Any award made to any clairnant pursuant to this
section, and any award, compromise, or settlement of any
claim cognizable under this chapter made by the Attorney
General pursuant to section 934 of this title, shall be paid
by the head of the Federal agency concerned out of appro-
priations that may be made therefor, which appropriation
are hereby authorised.

(०) The acceptance by the claimant of any such award,
compromise, or settlement shall be final and conclusive on
the claimant, and shall constitute a complete release by
the claimant of any claim against the United States and
against the employee of the Government whose act or
omission gave rise to the claim, by reason of the same
subject matter.

922. Reports to Congress.

The head of each Federal agency shall annually make
a report to the Congress of all claims paid by such Federal

39


agency under Such report shail include
the name of mant, a stalement of the amount
claimed and the amount awarded, and a brief description
of the claim.

tort claims against the United
States,
931. Jurisdiction; liability of United States; judgment;
election by claimani; amount of suit; administrative
disposition as evidence:

Sub-chapter I1—Siuits ०

(a) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the United
‘States district court for the district wherein the plaintiff
18 resident or wherein the act or omission complained of
cecurred, including the United States, district courts for
the territories and possessions of the United States, sitting
without a jury, shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear,
determine, and render judgment on any claim against the
United States, for moncy only, accruing on and aiter
January 1, 1945, on account of damage to or loss of property
or on account of personal injury or death caused by the
negligent or wrongful act or omission of any employee of
the Government while acting within the scope of his office
or employment, under cireumstances where the United
“States, if a private person, would be liable to the claimant
for such damage, loss, injury, cr death in accordance
with the law of the niace where the act or omission
occurred. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the
United States shall be liable in respect of such claims to
the same claimants, in the same manner and to the same
extent as a private individual under like circumstances
‘except that the United States shall not be liable for interest
prior to judgment, or for punitive damages. Costs shall
‘be allowed in all courts to the successful claimant to the
same extent as if the United States were a private litigant,
except that such costs shall not include attorney’s fees.

(b) The judgment in such an action shall constitute
a complete bar to any action by the claimant, by reason
of the same subject matter, against the employee of the
Government whose act or omission gave rise to the claim.
No suit shall be instituted pursuant 10 this section upon
a claim presented to any Federal Agency persuant to sub-
chapter I of, this chapter. unless such Federal agency has
made final disposition of the claim: Provided, that the
claimant may, upon fifteen days’ notice given in writing,
withdraw the claim from consideration of the Federal
agency and commence suit thereon pursuant to this section:
Provided further, that as to any claim so disposed of or
so withdrawn, no suit shall be instituted pursuant to this
section for any sum in excess of the amount of the claim
presented to the Federal agency, except where the
increased amount of the claim is shown to be based upon
newly discovered evidence not reasonably discoverable at
the time of presentation of the claim to the Federal agency


41

or apon evidence ef intervening facts, relating to the
amount of the ¢laim. Disposition of amy claim made
pursuant iw dl suk er shal! not be competent
evidence of liabilily or amount of damages in proceedings
om such pursuant to this section.

932. Procedure:

In aetions under this sub-chapter, the forras of process,
writs, pleadings, and motions, end the practice and proce-
dure, shai! be in accordance with the rules prornilgated
by the Supreme Court pursuant to sections 723b and 723¢
of this title same provisions for counter-clsim
and sot-off, est upon judgments, and for payment
of judgments. si we applicable as in cases brought in
the United Stales district courts under sections 41(20),
25061), (2), 261, 254, 257, 258, 287, 289, 292, 761-765 of
this title.

933. Review:
(6) Final judgments in the district courts in cases under
this sub-chapter shal! be subject to review by appeal—

(1) in the circuit’ courts of appeals in the same
manner and to the same extent as other judgments of
the district courts; or

{2) in the Court of Claims of the United States:
Provided, that the notice of appeal filed in the district
court under rule 73 of the Rules of Civil Procedure
fcllowing section 1280 of this title shall have affixed
thereto the written consent on behalf of ali the appel-
16६४ that the appeal be taken to the Court of Claims
of the United States. Such appeals to the Court of
Claims of the United States shall be taken within three
months after che entry of the judgment of the district
court, and shall be governed by the rules relating to
appeals from a district court to a circuit court of
appeals adopted by the Supreme Court pursuant to
sections 723b and 72832 of this title. In such appeals the
Court of the Ciaims of the United States shall have
the same powers and duties as those conferred on a
circuit court of appeal in respect to appeals under
section 226 of this title.

(8) Sections 346 and 347 of this title, shall apply to
eases under this part in the circuit court of appeals and
in the Court of Claims of the United States to the same
extent as to cases in a cireuit court of appeals therein
referred to.

934, Compromise and settlement of suits.

With a view to doing substantial justice, the Attorney
General is authorised to arbitrate, compromise, or settle-
any claim cognizable under this sub-chapter, after the:


42

institution of any suit thereon, with the approval of the
Court in which such suit is pending.

Sub-cheapter HI—Miscellaneous provisions.
41. Definitions:
As used in this chapter, the term—

(a) “Federal agency’ includes the executive
departments and independent establishments of the
United States, and corporations whose primary function
is to act as, and while acting as, instrumentalities or
agencies of ihe United States, whether cr not authorized
to sue and be sued in their own names: Provided, that
this shall not be construed to include any contractor
with the United States.

(०) “Employee of the Gevernment’ includes
officers or employees of any Federal agency, members
af the military or naval forces of the United States,
and persons acting on behalf of a Federal agency in
any official capacity, temporarily or permanently in
the service of the United States, whether with or
without compensation,

(०) “Acting within the scope of his cffice or
employment”, in the case of a member of the military
or naval forces of the United States, means acting in
line of duty,

942, Statute of limitations:

Every claim against the United States cognizable under
this chapter shall be for ever barred, unless within one
year after such claim acerued or within one year after
August 2, 1946 whichever is later, it is presented in writing
to the Federal agency out of whose activities it arises, if
such claim is for.a sum not exceeding $1,000; or unless
within one year after such elaim accrued or within one
year after August 2, 1946, whichever is later, an action
is begun pursuant to sub-chapter II of this chapler. In
the event that a claim for a sum not exceeding $1,000 is
presented to a Federal agency as aforesaid, the time to
institute a suit pursuan* to sub-chapter II of this chapter
shall be extended for a period of six months from the date
of mailing of notice to the claimant by such Federal agency
as to the final disposition of the claim or fram the date
of withdrawal of the claim from such Federal agency
pursuant to section 931 of this title, if it would otherwise
expire before the end of such period.

943, Claims exempted fram operation of chapter:

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to—

(a) Any claim based upon an act or omission of
an employee of the Government exercising due care,


43

in the execution of a statute or relation, whether or
not such statute or regulation be valid, or based upon
the exercise or perfarmance or the failure to exercise
or perform a discretionary funetion or duty on the
part of a Federal agency or an employee of the
Government whether or not the diseretion involved be

abused.

(b) Any claim arising out of the loss, miscarriage,
or negligent transmission of letters or postai matter.

(c) Any claim arising in respect of the assessment
or collection of any tax or customs duty, or the deten-
tion of any goods er merchandise by any officer of
customs or excise or any other law-enforcement officer.

(d) Any claim for which a remedy is provided by
sections 741—752 or 781—790 of Title 46. relating to
elaims ar suits in admiralty against the United States.

(९) Any claim arising out of an 8९ or emission
of any employee of the Government in administering
the provisions of sections 1—38 of Appendix to Title 50.
(Trading with Eneray Acts).

(f) Any claim for damages caused by the imposi-
tion or establishment of a quarantine by the United
States.

(g) Any claim arising from injury to vessels, or
to the cargo, crew, or passengers of vessels, while
passing through the looks of the Panama Canal or
while in Canal Zone waters.

{h) Any claim arising out of assault, battery, false
imprisonment, false arrest, malicious prosecution, abuse
of process, libel, slander, misrepresentation, deceit, or
interference with contract rights,

(. Any claim for damages caused by the fiscal
operations of the Treasury or by the regulation of the
monetary system.

(7) Any claim arising out of the combatant
activities of the military or naval forces, or the Coast
Guard, during time of war.

(k) Any claim arising in a foreign country.

(7) Any claim arising from the activity of the
Tennessee Valley Authority.

944. Attorney’s fees; penalties:

The court rendering a judgment for the plaintiff pur-
suant to sub-chapter II of this chapter, or the head of the
Federal agency or his designee making an award pursuant
‘to sub-chapter I of this chapter, or the Attorney General
making a disposition pursuant to section 934 of this title,


44

the case may be, may, as a part cf the judgment, award
or settlement, determine and allow reasonable attorney’s
tees, which if the recevery is $500 or more shall not excecd
30 per centum of the umount recovered under sub-chapter I
of this chapter, or 20 per centum of the amount recovered
under sut-chapter Il of this chapter, to be paid out of but
not in addicion to the amount of judgment, award, or
settlement recovered, in the attorneys representing the
claimant. Any attorney who charges, demands, receives
or zollecis for setvices rendered in cannectian with such
claim any gmount in exeess of that allawed under this
section, Jf recovery be had, shall be guiliy ef misdemeanor,
and shell, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of
not more than $2,000 or imprisonment for not more tham
one year, or both,

845. Exclusiveness of chapter.

946. Laws unaffected,


APPENDIX ता

Junicrary Acts 1903—1950 (AusTRALIA)

Part IX.—Suits by and against the Commonwealth and
the States.

56. Any person making any claim against the Common- Suits
wealth whether in contract or in tort, may in respect of the Com-
the claim bring a suit against the Commonwealth in the monwealth.
High Court or in the Supreme Court of the State in which

the claim arose.

57. Any State making any claim, against the Common- suits.
wealth whether in contract or in tort, may in respect of Past का
the claim bring a suit against the Commonwealth in the the Common-

High Court. wealth,

58 Any person making any claim against a State, suits
whether in contract or in tort, in respect of a matter in against a
which the High Court has original jurisdiction or can have Stace in of
original jurisdiction conferred on it, may in respect of the federal
claim bring a suit against the State in the Supreme Court jurisdic-
of the State, or (if the High Court has original jurisdiction ton.
in the matter) in the High Court.

59. Any State making any claim against another State Suits
may in respect of the claim bring a suit against that State between
in the High Court. States.

60. In a suit against a State brought in the High Court, Injunction
the High Court may grant an injunction against the State against one 5
and against all officers of the State and persons acting State & ive
under the authority of the State, and may enforce the .

injunction against all such officers and persons.

61. Suits on behalf of the Commonwealth may be Suits by
brought in the name of the Commonwealth by the Common-
Attorney-General or by any person appointed by him in "कि
that behalf.

62. Suits on behalf of a State may be brought in the Suits by a
name of the State by the Attorney-General of the State, State.
or by any person appointed by him in that behalf.

63. Where the Commonwealth or a State is a party to Service of
a suit, all process in the suit required to be served upon process when
that party shall be served upon the Attorney-General of Comm on-
the Commonwealth or of the State, as the case may be, Sane
or upon some person appointed by him to receive service. party.
1216 Mof Lag


Ri his of
parties.

No execu-
tion
against
Common-
wealth = or
a Static,

Performance
by = Com-
men wealth
or State,

Execution

by Cammon-
weath ro
State,

46

64. In any suit to which the Commonwealth or a State
is a party, the rights of parties shall as nearly as possible
be the same, and judgment may be given and costs awarded
om either side, as in a suit between subject and subject.

65. No execution or attachment, or process in the nature
thereof, shall be issued against the property or revenues
of the Commonwealth or a State in any such suit; but
when any judgment is given against the Commonwealth
or a State, the Registrar shall give to the party in whose
favour the judgment is given a certificate in the form of
the Schedule to this Act, or to a like effect.

66. On receipt of the Certificate of s judgment against
the Commonwealth or a State the Treasurer of the
Commonwealth or of the State as the case may be shali
satisfy the judgment out of moneys legally available.

67. When in any such suit a judgment is given in favour
of the Commonwealth or of a State and against any person,
the Commonwealth or the State, as the case may be, may
enforce the judgment against that person by process of
extent, or by such execution, attachment, or other process
as could be had in a suit between subject and subject.


APPENDIX IV
Pusiic CORPORATIONS CREATED BY STATUTES IN INDIA
1, Reserve Bank of India Act II of 1934.
2, Coffee Market Expansion Act VII of 1942,
3. Cocoanut Committee Act X of 1944.
4.

Rubber (Production and Marketing) Act XXIV of
1947.

. Central Silk Board Act LXI of 1948.
6. Damodar Valley Corporation Act XIV of 1948.
7. Industrial Finance Corporation Act XV of 1948.

8. Rehabilitation Finance Administration Act XII of
1948.

9. Electricity (Supply) Act LIV of 1948.

10. Road Transport Corporation Act LXIV of 1950.
11. Delhi Road Transport Act XIII of 1950.

12. State Financial Corporation Act LXIII of 1951.
13. Air Corporations Act XXVII of 1953.

14. Tea Act XXIX of 1953.

15, State Bank of India Act XXIII of 1955.

wn

47


APPENDIX V

Protection CLAUSES IN INDIAN ACTS GIVING IMMUNITY TO

12.

13.
14.
15.

16,
17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
24.
25,

THE STATE.

+ The Bengal Alluvion and Diluvion Act IX of 1847,

Section 9.

. Judicial Officers Protection Act XVIII of 1850, Section
1.

. Shore-nuisances (Bombay and Kolaba) Act XI of

1853, Section 5.

. Police Act V of 1861, Section 43.
. Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act X of 1876, Section
6.

. Chota Nagpur Encumbered Estates Act VI of 1876,

Section 22.

|. Treasure Trove Act VI of 1878, Section 17.
. Sea Customs Act VIII of 1878, Sections 181 (९). and
187, .

. Indian Telegraph Act XIII of 1885, Section 9.
. Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act XI of 1890,

Section 17.

. Indian Railways Act DX of 1890, Sections 82(1) and

82 (A).
The Charitable Endowments Act VI of 1890, Section
14.

Epidemic Diseases Act III of 1897, Section 4.
Livestock Importation Act [X of 1898, Section 5.

Indian Post Office Act VI of 1898, Sections 6, 27 (0)
and 48.

Glanders and Farcy Act XIII of 1899, Section 16.

Ancient Monuments Preservation Act VII of 1904,
Section 24.

Coinage Act III of 1906, Section 22.

Indian Ports Act XV of 1908, Section 18.
Indian Electricity Act IX of 1910, Section 82.
Indian Lunacy Act IV of 1912, Section 97.

Identification of Prisoners Act XXXIIT of 1920,
Section 9.

Income-tax Act XI of 1922, Section 67.
Naval Armament Act VI of 1923, Section 14.
Cotton Transport Act III of 1923, Section 9.

48


26.

27,
28.
29.

30.

31.
32.

33.

34,
35.
36.
37.

38.

39.
40.
41.

42.
43.

45.
46.
Al,

48.

49,
50.

51.

92.

49
Cantonments (House-Accommodation) Act, VI of
1923, Section 38.
Coal Grading Board Act XXX of 1925, Section 11.
Provident Funds Act XIX of 1925, Section 7.

Cotton Ginning and Pressing Factories Act XII of
1925, Section 15.

Cotton Industry (Statistics) Act XX of 1926, Section
9,

Indian Forest Act XVI of 1927, Section 74.

Tea District Emigrant Labour Act XXII of 1932,
Section 39,

Murshidabad Estate Administration Act XXIII of
1933, Section 25.

Indian Air Craft Act XXII of 1934, Section 18.
Dock Labourers Act XIX of 1934, Section 12.
Drugs Act XXIII of 1940, Section 37.

Delhi Restriction of Uses of Land Act XII of 1941,
Section 15.

War Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Act XXIII of
1943, Section 18, sub-section (1).

Central Excises and Salt Act I of 1944, Section 41.
Foreigners Act XXXI of 1946, Section 15.

Foreign Exchange Regulation Act VII of 1947, Section
26.

Industrial Disputes Act XIV of 1947, Section 37.

Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development)
Act LIII of 1948, Section 14.

. Resettlement of Displaced Persons (Land Acquisi-

tion) Act LX of 1948, Section 13.

Electricity (Supply) Act LIV of 1948, Section 82.
Factories Act LXIII of 1948, Section 117.

Delhi and Ajmer and Merwara Land Development
Act LXVI of 1948, Section 33, sub-sections (1) and
(2). :

Abducted Persons (Recovery and Restoration) Act
LXV of 1949, Section 9.

Banking Companies Act X of 1949, Section 54.
Seaward Artillery Practice Act VIII of 1949, sub-
sections (1) and (2) of Section 8.

Delhi Hotels (Control of Accommodation} Act
XXIV of 1949, sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 11.
Payment of Taxes (Transfer of Property) Act XXII
of 1949, Section 7.

. Administration of Evacuee Property Act XXXI of

1950, Section 47.


54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60,
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.

59.

70.

72.

50
Displaced Persons (Claims) Act XLIV of 1950, Section
i.

Government Premises (Eviction) Act XXVIL of 1950,
Section 7.

Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act X of 1950,
Section 6.

Drugs (Control) Act XXVI of 1950, Section 18,
Preventive Detention Act IV of 1950, Section 15.

Press (Objectionable Matter) Act LVI of 1951,
Section 33.

Displaced Persons (Debt Adjustment) Act LXX of
1951, Section 55.

Evacuee Interest (Separation) Act [XIV of 1951,
Section 22.

Mines Act XXXV of 1952, Section 87.

Inflammable Substances Act XX of 1952, Section 6.
Commissions of Enquiry Act LX of 1952, Section 9.
The Requisitioning- and Acquisition of Immovable
Property Act XXX of 1952, Section 19(1). .

Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks)
Act XXXVI of 1952, Section 16.

Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act XXXVIII of 1952,
Section 82.

Employees Provident Funds Act XIX of 1952, Section
18.

Essential Commodities Act 1955, Section 15.

The Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise
Duties) Act XIV of 1955, sub-sections (1) and (2) of
Section 20.

. The Prize Competitions Act XLII of 1955, Section 19.

Spirituous Preparations (Inter-State Trade and Com-
merce) Control Act XXXIX of 1955, Section 15.


APPENDIX VI

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TORTIOWS LIABILITY AS REFERRED TO IN
THE PROPOSALS.

A. Liability of master to third parties for torts committed
by servant:

(2) A master is liable for—

(a) all acts done by a servant which are autho-
rised by the master;

(b) all acts done by the servant in the execu-
tion of his authority, including an excessive or
improper cr mistaken execution thereof;

(c) all the necessary and natural consequences of
the authorised acts;

(2) all acts which are ratified by the master.

(2) A master is liable for all acts done by a servant
in the course of his employment or within the scope of
his employment, ineluding acts done improperly, negli-
gently or fraudulently, whether the master is benefited by
such acts or not; and acts done in violation of express
prohibitions issued by the master; but not for acts which
the master himself could not have lawfully done even
though they have been done by the servant in good faith
for the master’s interest.

B. Liability of an employer for torts committed by an
independent contractor, his servants or agents:

Except in the cases mentioned below the employer of
an independent contractor is not liable for torts committed
by the contractor or his servanis or agents,

The employer of af independent contractor shall be
liable for torts committed by the contractor or his servants
or agents in doing the act contracted for, as if they were
committed by the employer himself or by his own servant
or agent, in any of the following cases:

(a) where the employer assumes control as to the
manner of performance of the work;

(8) where the wrongful act is specifically autho-
tised or ratified by the employer;

(९) where the work contracted with the indepen-
dent contractor is itsel? unlawful;

(व) where the work contracted to be done, though
lewful in itself, is of such a nature that it is likely, in
the ordinary course of events, to cause injury to

‘ 61


52

another, unless care is taken or that the law imposes
upon the employer an absolute duty to ensure the
safety of others in the doing of the work;

(e} where the employer is under a legal obligation
to do the work himself.

C. Liability of principel for torts of his agents:
A principal is liable for—

(a) torts comm tted by his agent in executing the
specific orders of the principal or resulting in such
necessary or natural consequences of the acts done in
execution of such specific orders;

(०) torts committed by the agent within the scope
of his authority including fraud;

६०) torts arising from acts which are ratified
the principal after they are done, with full knowledge
of all the facts or assuming, without enquiry, to take
the risk of whatever has heen done by the agent, pro-
vided the act was done by the agent on behalf of the
principal

D. Liability of master to servant:

(a) A master is liable to a servant for any injury
eaused by the failure of the master te take reasonable
care—

(1) te provide adequate plant or plants for the
work and to maintain them in proper condition;

(९) to provide and maintain a reasonably safe
place of work;

(3) to provide a system of work which is reason-
ably safe:

(4) to provide competent staff.

E, Common taw duties attaching to ownership, occupation,
possession, ar control of property:

A person who is the owner or cceupier of land has got
various duties not to harm others which may be classed
under four general heads: —

(1) Not to commit trespass, which may be com-
mitted not only by physically entering into the neigh-
bour’s land, but by directly causing any physical object
or material from his own land to cross the boundary
over his neighbour's land. पु

(2) Not to commit nuisance, that is to say, inter-
ference with the neighbour's enjoyment of property,
by a wrongful use of own property.


33

(3) Not to injure any person towards whom the
#wner or occupier of property owes the duty of observ-
ing care by the failure to take such care the other
hag suffered injury to his person or property.

(4) Apart from the liability for negligence for
failure to take reasonable care, where there is a duty
to take care, there are certain other cases of absolute
liability, where the owner or occupier of property hag
a duty to ensure safety to others and in such cases the
pwner or occupier is liable for the injury caused,
whether or not, he has failed to take reasonable care.
The principal classes of such cases are:— ~

(a) lability for the escape of deleterious thing
from property or premises in one’s possession,

(0) liability for trespass by one’s cattle or by
dangerous or mischievous animals straying on the
highway or otherwise injuring others,

(०) liability for fire on one's premises,

(6) lability for dangerous premises to persons
who enter therein,

F. Absolute liability for inherently dangerous things:

(a) A person in the possession of an inherently danger-
ous thing is liable to the same extent as the owner or
occupier of dangerous premises.

(0) If a person delivers an inherently dangerous thing
to another without warning him of its dangerous character,
he is liable for injury caused by the chattel not only to the
deliveree but also any third person.

(९) If a person places an inherently dangerous chattel
in a situation easily accessible to a third person who sustains
damage 1707 it, he is liable for the damage.

G. Things not inherently dangerous:

(i) Even though a chattel is not inherently dangerous,
a person is liable if he supplied the chattel to another with
knowledge that it is likely to cause damage, but without
giving warning of its dangerous or defective condition
or fraudulently representing it to be safe and damage is
caused by it ta any person who ought to have been in his
contemplation as likely to sue it.

(ii) A manufacturer or repairer of goods and persons
in like position who disposes of the goods in such a form
as to show that he intends them to reach the ultimate
consumer or user in the form in which the goods left him,
with no reasonable possibility of intermediate examination
and with the knowledge that the absence of reasonable
eare in the preparation or putting up of the products will
result in injury to the consumer’s life or property, will be
liable for such injury caused to the ultimate consumer or
user owing to the failure to take such care.

GIPND-—DME—1216 M of Law - 15-4-57—500