LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

TENTH REPORT

(LAW OF ACQUISITION AND REQUISITIONING OF LAND)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA MINISTRY OF LAW


REPORT
ON THE LAW OF

ACQUISITION AND REQUISITIONING OF LAND


‘

a

7h

CHAIRMAN,
Law Commission,
New Delhi, 26th September, 1958
Shri Ashok Kumar Sen,
Minister of Law,
Government of India,
New Dethi.
My dear Minister,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Tenth
Report of the Law Commission on the Law of Acquisition
and Requisitioning of Land.

2. At the seventh meeting of the Statute Revision Section
held on the 3rd May 1956, the Commission decided to take
tp the revision of the Land Acquisition Act and entrusted
the task to a Committee consisting of Shri P. Satyanarayana
Rao and Shri V. K. T. Chari,

3. The consideration of the subject was initiated by Shri
P. Satyanarayana Rao, the senior Member of the section of
the Commission dealing with Statute Law Revision who for-
mulated a scheme for the revision of the Act. The Principles
underlying the scheme of revision were discussed at a meet-
ing of the Statute Revision Section held on the 22nd Septem-
ber, 1956. A draft Report prepared by Shri Rao on the
basis of the scheme was circulated to all the Members of the
Commission and their views were invited thereon. The
draft Report was discussed at a Meeting of the Commission
held on the 29th March, 1958. Important suggestions made
by Members at this Meeting were accepted and it was left
to the Chairman to finally settle the Report in the light of the
discussion.

4. The Commission Wishes to acknowledge the services
rendered by its Joint Seeretaries Shri K. Srinivasan and Shri
D. Basu in connection with the preparation of the Revort,

Yours sincere’y,
M. C. SETAL¥VAD


REPORT ON THE LAW OF ACQUISITION AND REQUISITIONING OF LAND

PARAGRAPHS

1
2-19

56—149

od
a
App. I
App. IV
App. ¥

CONTENTS

Introduction . पु . .
History of the legislation:
(@) Acquisition 6k,
8) Requisition 5 7 fo!
Other laws . + . : . . :
Need for consolidation . oe . .
Legislative power under the Constitution
Constitutional limitations on the exercise of the power
Scheme for revision and consolidation . . .
Important aspects discussed
2) Public purpose .
(5) Principles for determining compensation
‘Two important suggestions considere
(a) “Potential value’ . . . . .
(6) Solatium .
Examination of the provisions of the existing Acts, indicating
the changes propos
. Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
B. Requisitioning & Acquisition of Immovable Property
Act, 1952. .

APPENDICES

Proposals as inserted in the body of the existing Act
Comparative Tal
Table A. ophowing the provisions in the existing Act and
6 corresponding provisions in Appel
Tabte B.-—Showing the provisions in Appendix! and the
sponding provisions in the existing Act,
State Land Acquisition Amendment Acts.
Part I.—List of Acts
Sec, L—Part A States . . . . .
It.—Part B States . . . . :
XU.—Part C States . . . . .
Sec. IV.—Native States . . . .
Part T.—Brief summary of the Acts :
Sec. 1—Part A States fore Ist November, 1956)
‘Sec. U.—Part B States (before 156 November, 1956) .
Sec. 71. --931 पु
IV.—Native States .
Other Acts contain’ a8 Provisions for acquisition
६ L-—List of Acts :
Sec, L—Central Acts. . . . .
Soc. IL—State Act . . .
Part TL. —Brief summary of the Acts
L—Central Acts. . पु .
Sec. [I—State Acts
State Requisitioning and Acqui
Part I—List of Acts +
Sec. 1—Principal Acts . . . .
Sec. TL—Continuance Acts. . + .
Part IL—Bricf summary of the Acts
५ L—Principal Acts foe,
Sec. I—Continuance Acts. . . . +
Part OL—Tabular Statement 5D)

jon Acts—- *

Paces

1-6

9
9
9-10

10—16

16-29
20—22

22—~26
26-28
2845
45—50

S189

90-93
94--97

98
98
99
“99

100-113
113--124
124-125
125—131

132

133-134
134139
133—145
145—147
147

148—172

37:2--274
175—186


at

ne

REPORT ON THE LAND ACQUISITION ACT

1. The power of the sovereign to take private property
for public use (called in America Eminent Domain—an
expression believed to have been first used by Grotius)
and the consequent rights of the owner to compensation.
are well-established. In justification of the power, two
maxims are often cited: salus populi est suprema lex
(regard for the public welfare is the highest law) and
necessitas publica major est quam privata (public neces-
sity is greater than private necessity). A critical exami-
nation of the various stages of evolution of this power
and its ethical basis will serve no useful purpose as the
power has become firmly established in all civilized coun-
tries. In England, the source of the power is Parlia-
ment. The earliest consolidating enactment was the Land
Clauses Consolidation Act, 1845. This has ta a large

_ extent been altered by later statutes.

2. The first piece of legislation in India in respect of
acquisition of property was the Bengal Regulation I of
1824. It applied “throughout the whole of the provinces
immediately subject to the Presidency of Fort William.”
It provided rules for enabling the officers of Government
to obtain, at a fair valuation, land or other immovable
property required for roads, canals or other public pur-
poses. By Act I of 1850, some of the provisions of this
Regulation were extended to the town of Calcutta with
the object of “confirming the title to lands in Calcutta
taken for public purposes”. In the middle of the nine-
teenth century, when the railways were being developed,
it was felt that legislation was needed for acquiring lands
for them. Act XLII of 1850 declared that Railways
were public works within the meaning of the Regulation
and thus enabled the provisions of Regulation I of 1824
to be used for acquiring lands for the construction of
Railways.

Tatroductior

History of
the Legisla-
Gon in India
(a) Acquisi-
tion.


2

3. In Bombay, the Building Act XXVIII of 1889 was
the first piece of legislation whereby the machinery for
acquisition of land “for the purposes of widening or alter-
ing any existing public road, street, or other thorough-
fare or drain or for making any new public read, street
or other thoroughfare within the islands of Bombay and
Colaba” was provided. This Act was extenged by Act
XVII of 1850 to taking lands for railway purposes within
the Presidency.

4. In Madras, Act KX of 1852 was passed for the purpose
of facilitating the acquisition of land for public purposes
in the Presidency of Fort St. George. The Act of 1852
adopted, with modification, the first seven sections of the
Bengal Regulation I of 1824. Act XLII of 1850 was at the
same time extended to the Presidency. Both these Acts
were extended by Act I of 1854 to the towri of Madras.

5. The first enactment on this subject for the whole of
British India wag Act V1 of 1857. It repealed all previous
enactments relating to acquisition and its object, as stated
in its preamble, was to make better provision for the
acquisition of land needed for public purposes within the
territories in the possession and under the governance of
the East India Company and for the determination of the
amount of compensation to be paid for the same. Under
this Act, the Collector was empowered to fix the amount
of compensation by agreement, if possible; but if there
was no such agreement, the dispute had to be referred to
arbitators whose decision was to be final and could not
be impeached, except on the grounds of corruption or
misconduct of the arbitrators. ‘This Act was emended
by Acts 11 of 1861 and XXII of 1863. A few years’ ex-
perience of the working of the Act revealed that the
method of settlement of compensation by arbitration was
unsatisfactory as the arbitrators were found to be in-
competent and sometimes, even corrupt. There was no
machinery provided to get their decision revised as
there was no appeal provided under the Act against the
award of the arbitrators. The legislature had to intervene
and Act X of 1870 was passed. This Act, for the first time,
provided for a reference to a civil court for the determina-
tion of the amount of compensation when the Collector
could not settle it by agreement. 1 laid down a detailed


3

procedure for the acquisition of Jand and also provided
definite rules for the determination of compensation. In
1885, a separate Act (XVIII of 1885) was passed with the
object of making provision for the grant of compensation
to the owners of mines situated under the land sought to
be acquired by the Government, where such mines were
not required by the Government but the owners were pre-
vented from working them. This measure, though styled
Land Aquisition (Mines) Act, had, in fact, nothing to do
with acquisition. It was purely a law of compensation.

6. The Act of 1870 was found to be defective in various
respects and eventually the Land Acquisition Act, 1894
{Act I of 1894) was passed. This Act was later amended
by Acts IV and X of 1914, XVII of 1919, XXXVIIL of 1920,
XIX of 1921, XXXVIII of 1923, XVI of 1933 and I of
1938. It may be noticed here that the amending Act of
1923 introduced, for the first time, an important change, in
that it gave an opportunity to the persons interested in
the lands proposed to be acquired to state their objections
to the acquisition and to be heard by the authority con-
cerned in support of their objections.

7. The Land Acquisition Act, 1894, applied originally Existing
only to British India. The Native States passed their law
own Acts, for example, the Hyderabad Land Acquisition
Act, 1309 Fasli [Act IX of 1309F (1899)], the Mysore Land
Acquisition Act, 1894, the Travancore Land Acquisition
Act, 1089 [XI of 1089 (1914)].

8. Under the Government of India Act, 1919 and the
Government of India Act, 1935 (item 9 of List II of the
Seventh Schedule), the Provinces had power to legislate
with respect to compulsory acquisition of land. In
exercise of this power, some of the Provinces amended in
certain respects, the provisions of the Act of 1894. After
the Indian Independence Act, 1947, by the Indian Indepen-
dence (Adaptation of Central Acts and Ordinances) Order,
1948, sub-section (2) of section 1 of Land Acquisition Act
was amended by substituting the words “all the Provinces
of India” for the words “the whole of British India”, After
the Constitution, under the Adaptation Order of 1950, for
the words “the Provinces of India” the words “the whole
of India except Part B States” were substituted. The
Part B States Laws Act, 1951 (III of 1951), did not extend
the Land Acquisition Act to Part B States. Under the


4

Adaptation of Laws No. 2 Order, 1956, which wag pro-
mulgated after the States Re-organisation Act, 1956, for
the words “except Part B States” the words “all the terri
tories which immediately before the lst November, 1956
were comprised in Part B States” were substituted, The
Part B States had, however, laws of their own with regard
to land acquisition. .The Land Acquisition Act of 1894
does not apply to Jammu and Kashmir. The laws relat-
ing to Land Acquisition which are now in force in the
various States of India may, therefore, be classified as
under:

(1) The Land Acquisition Act of 1894 as amended
from time to time by the Provinces and the
States by virtue of the power vested in them
under the Government of India Acts and the
Constitution;

(2) The Acts passed by the Native States;
(3) The Acts passed by some of the Part B States.

9. A detailed statement of these laws and a Summary
of the changes introduced by the amending Acts passed by
the States are to be found in Appendix IIT to this Report.

10, Besides the aforesaid Acts which directly deal with
the acquisition of land, there are other Acts of the Union
and the States in which provision is made for such acqui-
sition. An examination of these Central and State
Acts, pased before and after the Constitution and sum-
marised in Appendix IV (which may not be an exhaustive
list) of this report discloses that different procedures for
the acquisition of land have been adepted in the legisla-
tion of the States and the procedure varies even in the
same State, depending upon the purposes for which the
acquisition is made. There is no uniformity either in the
principles for the determination of the compensation or in
the tribunals constituted for determining it. Some of the
Acts have adopted the principles and procedure coritained
in the Act of 1894 while others have deviated from them.
The main points on which there are deviations may be
summarised as follows:

(1) The connotation of the expression ‘public pur-
pose’ has been enlarged so as to bring within
the ambit of the Land Acquisition Act purposes
for which a State may wish to acquire land.


5

(2) The relevant date for the determination of the
market-value of the land has been altered to the
date of either the declaration under Section 6 or
the date of a special notice, the issue of which
is provided by the Acts.

(3) The principles for determining compensation
laid down in sections 23 and 24 of the Land
Acquisition Act have been materially altered.

(4) Some of the Acts authorise the appointment of
a special Tribunal for the determination of the
compensation and for its apportionment in cases
of dispute. The qualifications of the members
constituting the Tribunal also vary.

(5) In most cases, an appeal from the adjudication
of the Tribunal is provided and usually it lies ‘0
the High Court.

11, As one of the objects for which the Law Commis-
sion is constituted is to make laws uniform throughout the
country as far as possible, the question for consideration is
whether it is possible, having regard to the provisions of
the Constitution, to apply the provisions of the Land
Acquisition Act to cases governed by Acts specified in Ap-
pendix TV. Parliament is, under item 42 of List III, entitled
to enact a law relating to acquisition and requisitioning
of property. Article 254 of the Constitution lays down the
principles for resolving inconsistency between laws made
by Parliament and laws made by the State Legislatures
in respect of matters specified in the Concurrent List. The
proviso to Article 254(2) empowers Parliament to enact
a law at any time with respect to the same
matter, including a law adding to, amending, vary-
ing or repealing the law so made by the Legisla-
ture of a State. The essential condition for the application
of the proviso to Article 254(2) is that the legislation mace
by Parliament and the State Legislature must relate to
the same matter in the Concurrent List.

12. However, the Acts enumerated in Appendix IV clo
not relate exclusively to acquisition and requisitioning of
property. For example, the Calcutta Municipal Act, 191
is a piece of legislation in respect of a matter which, it may
be urged, is exclusively within the State List though that
Act has incorporated in it, in a modified form, the provi-
sions of the Land Acquisition Act. Applying the doctring


(७) Reguisi-
tion,

6

of pith and substance, it may not be possible to assert that
such a piece of legislation is one with respect to the acqui-
sition of land, though it contains provisions relating’ to its
acquisition. [It is, therefore, a matter of doubt whether
the provisions relating to land acquisition in the Calcutta
Municipal Act, 1951 could pro tanto be replaced by Parlia-
mentary legislation. This would leave matters in a very
unsatisfactory situation, It would result in the position
that if the object of acquisition is different, diferent
principles of valuation of land can be applied and different
tribunals could be approached for the assessment 01 com-
pensation, even though the lands sought to be acquired are
situated in the same State.

13. Tf that be the true legal position, the difficulty can
be solved only by persuading the States to conform, 58 far
as possible, to the Jaw relating to the acquisition of land
enacted by Parliament. Another solution probably lies in
the States requesting. Parliament to legislate for them
under Article, 252 of the Constitution. Whatever be the
method adopted, it is very desirable that there should be
uniformity in the laws relating to acquisition of land
throughout the country.

14. During and after the last war, requisitioning of
property became an imperative necessity. The power to
requisition property was derived under ithe Defence of
India Act of 1939 and the rules framed thereunder. The
Defence of India Act, 1939, came to an end on the 30th
September, 1946. With the termination of the Act, the
power to retain possession of the properties already requi-
sitioned would have automatically lapsed, and in cases
where compensation had yet to be determined, there would
have been no machinery in existence, to determine the
compensation. The legislature had to intervene to teal
with the situation that had thus arisen.

Under the legistative power conferred by section 3 of
the India (Centra] Government and Legislature) Act, 1946
(9 and 10, George IV, Chapter 39), the provinces passed
Ordinances or Acts continuing the powers or requisitioning
and in some cases took powers to acquire the requisitioned
property.

15. Before the Constitution came into force, some of the
States had passed Requisitioning and Acquisition Acts, pre-
sumably under the legislative power claimed to have been


7

conferred upon the provinces under Item 9 of List II of the
Seventh Schedule of the Government of India Act, 1935,
but a difficulty arose by reason of a decision of the Bombay
High Court, which ‘held! that the word ‘acquisition’ in
entry 9 did not include the power of requisitioning and
that, therefore, the provincial legislatures had no power to
enact laws relating to requisitioning of property. The
Governor-General, therefore, had immediately to inter-
vene under section 104 of the Government of India Act,
1953, by issuing a notification® whereby he ‘empowered
the provincial legislatures to enact laws in respect of the
requisitioning of 18075,

16, The need for requisitioning did not, however, cease
and the inadequacy of accommodation fer officers of the
Government, displaced persons and refugees created an
emergency justifying the continuance of the power of
requisitioning. The Centre and the States, therefore, pass-
ed Requisitioning Acts. In view of the distribution of
legislative powers as it then existed under the Constitution,
the Union had to pass a Requisitioning Act of its own for
the requisioning of property for Union purposes and the
State Legislatures had to pass separate Acts for requisition-
ing for State purposes and public purposes other than
Union purposes. .

17. Appendix V to the Report gives details of the Re-
quisitioning and Acquisition Acts now in force in all the
States. These Acts are temporary Acts and most of them
will expire in 1958. A close examination of the provisions
of these Acts would show the absence of uniformity in
their provisions. There are variations in the State Acts
regarding the kinds of property that may be requisitioned,
the principles for determining compensation payable in
respect of the requisitioned property, the tribunal or the
authority to determine such compensation and the power
to acquire land which has been requisitioned.

18. We are of the view that the power of requisitioning
property of a private owner is an extraordinary power and
can justifiably be invoked only when an emergency arises.
That is perhaps the reason why most of the Requisitioning

3, Tan Bug Tain v. Collector of Bombay, ALR. 1946 Bom. 216,

2, Notification No. F, 311-47C & G dated 21st October, 1947,

3, Vide, The Assam Co. itd. v. The State of Assam and others. AUR.
1953 Assam 177 and the preamble ta Bomba: isition Act,
1953 Assam 77 and the. pe o Bombay Land Requisition Act,


(c) Other
Laws.

‘Need for
consotida-
tion.

8

Acts are temporary. Though we have included the provi-
sions relating to requisitioning of property in Part H1 cf
our legislative proposals, we do not suggest that the
provisions in prat II] should be in force permanently or
throughout the country. We have provided that these
provisions will be operative only on the issue of a notsfica-
ticn by the appropriate Government and further shat the
provision may be made applicable to the whole or part of
a State as the circumstances may require. It is relevant,
in this connection, ३0 point out that in other countries also,
the power of requisitioning property is very sparingly used
and that too, only in cases of emergency.

19. Though it is an Act which is closely connected with °
acquisition of land, we do not propose io deal with the
Land Acquisition (Mines) Act, 1885 (XVITI of 1885). The
laws enacted for the abolition of Zamindaris, Jagirs, major
Inams and the like have vested in the respective State
Governments the underground rights in the land. In the
Ryotwari areas, the problem did not arise and could not
arise as the right of the Government to the underground
rights was never disputed. In view of this position, we
would have recommended the repeal of the Act but for
the fact that there may still be in existance some minor
dJagirs and Inams in which the Proprietor has underground.
rights in the Jand. As it has not been possible for us to
make an exhaustive inquiry into this matter, we think
that the Act may he continued on the Statute Book for
some more years.

20. A proposal was made to us to include the Zamin-
daris and Jagirs Abolition Acts of the States in the pro-
posed legislation, Such Acts, it is cbvicug are beyond
the scope of the land acquisitions laws. They proceed on
entirely different principles regarding the assesmen~ and
payment of compensation and the agency to determine it,
and as such do not bear any comparisan with the principles
jaid down in the Land Acquisition Acts. Some of these
Acts have worked themselves out and the process of aboli-
tion has almost been completed. They are also subject to
special constitutional provisions. It is, therefore, not
advisable to include them in our draft legislative proposals.

21. The Union Government and some of the State Gov-
ernments heve advocated the consolidation of the laws
relating to acquisition and requisitioning of property. It
is obvious that there should be uniformity in the matter of
this legislation and the rights and liabilities of citizens of



9

one State should not materially differ from those of anothe:
in respect of acquisition and requisitioning of property.
We have, therefore, in the proposed draft, consolidated the
laws on the subject.

22. Any scheme for revision and consolidation of the
law has to be in conformity with the Constitution. - It is,
therefore, necessary to examine the extent of the legislative
power of the Union and the States in respect of a law for
the acquisition and requisitioning of land. Before 1956,
the legislative power in respect of acquisition and requisi-
tioning of property was distributed between the Union and
the States and the power to lay down the principles of
compensation was included in the Concurrent List (vide
entry 33 of the Union List—List I; and entry 36 of the State
List—List II; and entry 42 of the Concurrent List—List
गा) of the Seventh Schedule. This anamolous position was
put an end to by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, by omitting all these entries in the Union List
and the State List and substituting for entry 42 in the
Concurrent List the words “Acquisition and Requisitioning
of Property”. The Union and the States are now empower-
red to enact laws relating to acquisition and requisitioning
of property.

23. The exercise of this power is subject to the limi-
tations laid down by Article 31 of the Constitution
as amended. Under this Article, there are two
limitations imposed upon the exercise of the
power. First, the compulsory acquisition or  re-
quisitioning of the property should be for a public pur-
Pose; secondly, the law enacted in that behalf should pro-
vide for compensation for the properties so acquired or
requisitioned and should either fix the aomunt of the com-
pensation or specify the principles on which and the
manner in which the compensation is to be determined and
given, No such law, however, can be called in question in
any court’on the ground that the compensation provided
by that law is not adequate. If, therefore, the law com-
plies with these requirements, the compensation will not
be justiciable. The contrary view laid down by the Sup-
reme Court in the State of West Bengal v. Bella Banerjee’
has been superseded by the amendment of the constitution.

24. The determination that a purpose is a ‘public
purpose’ is no longer a matter for the subjective satisfac-
tion of the appropriate Government. The existence of a
publie purpose is a necessary condition to the acquisition

AER. (1954) 5.८. 170. oo — 7

Legislative:
power under
the Consti-
tution,

Constitu-
tional limita-
tions on the
exercise of
the power,


Scheme for
revision and
Consolida-
tion,

Acguisition,
Part I

10

or requisitioning of property and that the existence of such
a purpose must be established objectively has bee settled
by the decision of the Supreme Court in Bella Banerjee’st
case and is still good law.

25. Sub-clause 5(a) of Article 31, however, creates an
exception in that it saves the provisions of any existing
Jaw other than a law to which the provisions of clause 6
of that Article apply. If the Land Acquisition Act, 1894
and other existing laws are allowed to continue in force
without alteration, the provision in these Acts to the
effect that the declaration by the Government that the
land was required for a public purpose shall be ccnclusive
evidence cannot be challenged. The position would, how-
ever, be different if a consolidating Act is now enacted.
The decision of the Government that a land is needed for
a public purpose will not have the finality which it would
have had, if Act I of 1894 and the other acts were left
untouched. But that need not deter us from consolidating
the law. The expression ‘public purpose’ is not restricted
in its meaning by any definition and has been held to be of
very wide import. We have accordingly proposed an in-,
clusive definition of ‘public purpose’ keeping in view the
priniciples laid down by the decisions of courts.

26. The scheme adopted by us for consolidation and
revision of the Land Acquisition and Requisitioning Acts
is as follows :--

Part I—Preliminary (which contains the general
provisions and the definitions).

Part II—~Acquisition.

Part IlJ—Requisitioning and requisition followed by
acquisition.

Part [V—Procedure in court.

Part V—Miscellaneous.

27. The present Central Act has been in force for over
60 years. Experience has shown that inordinate delay
occurs in acquisition proceedings, The main complaint of
the Governments is that they are greatly handicapped in
carrying out large projects in and outside the Development
Plans ag well as other works of public utility, as the
machinery provided and the procedure laid down in the
Act lead to great delays in obtaining possession of the land
sought to be acquired. For the smooth and speedy’ attain-
ment of the ideal of a Welfare State, it is imperative that

1 ALR. (1954) S.C. 170. ड़



it

the Government should be abie to obtain possession of
the lands needed for their projects with the least possible
delay. On the other hand, the complaint from the public
is that there are unconscionable delays in the determina-
tion of compensation and its payment to the owners of
properties. The Finance Ministry has given four instances
in which the carrying out of projects thas , been
delayed because they could not obtain possession of
the land in time and it has been stated that acquisition
proceedings commenced as early as 1948 are still pending.
lt is noteworthy, however, that the State Governments
themselves admit that the delay is largely due to
the tardy manner in which the machinery of the Govern-
ment moves in the matter. They also admit that, if the
land acquisition officers are made to work methodically
and expeditiously, the pace can be quickened. Any pro-
posal fer the reform of the law should, therefore, aim at
overcoming these evils. Most of the delay occurs in the
initial stages of the proceedings between the date of the
notification under section 4 and the declaration «under
section 6. Further delays arise in the making of the award
by the Collector, with the result that as under the existing
Jew, the Government cannot obtain possession until the
award is made and the taking of possession is indefinitely
delayed.

28. The chief remedy suggested by the State Govern-
ments and others is that a time limit should be fixed for
each step required in the acquisition proceedings and,
further, an over-all time limit should also he fixed for thé
completion of the proceedings by the Land Acquisition
Officer. We thave given effect to these suggestions. It
has not been possible ६0 provide for sanction for enforcing
the time limit at each stage where a time limit has been
fixed. We have, therefore, made a provision in sections 18
and 19 of the draft for cancellation of the notification
under section 4(1), if the over-all time limit fixed for the
two stages of the proceedings for acquisition—namely, the
first, from the date of notification under section 4(1}) tc
the date fixed by the Collector for an enquiry inta the case
and the second, from the stage of such enquiry to the
reference to the Court for recording the agreement, if any,
arrived वा between the parties—is not adhered fo. The
result of cancellation of the notification under section 4(1}
will be that the owner will be entitled to get back posses-

sion of the property together with compensation for
Li Lawis7


12

deprivation of possession thereof and damage, if any, done
to the property.

29. Under the existing law, before a reference is made
to the Court, three stages have to be gone through. The
first stage is the notification under section 4 followed by a
preliminary investigation and the hearing of objections to
the proposed acquisition. The second stage is the declara-
tion under section 6 after the Government decides upon
acquisition, The third stage is the survey of the land, that
is, demarcation, measurement and preparation of the plan,
(uniess this has been done during the first stage), followed
by notices to the persons interested, inviting claims and
enquiry by the Collector to enable him to make the award.
Unfortunately, there is a lacuna in the Act in so far as it
does not indicate the course of action which the officer
authorised under sub-section (2) of section 4 should adopt
after completing the investigation. Obviously, the object
of the investigation is to fing out, by operations to be
carried out on the land, the suitability of the land for the
purpose for which it is intended to be acquired. The object
of the hearing of objections by the Collector under section
5A is to decide whether the acquisition is really for a
public purpose and to ascertain, if possible, whether other
Jands in the locality may not be better suited to the
purpose. The persons interested are also entitled at that
stage to point out the inconvenience or the serious conse~
quences that might follow the location of the work in the
particular land specified in the notification under section 4.
The Government, therefore, in reaching a decision, have to
make up their mind on two points:

(1) whether the purpose is public or not; and
(2) the suitability of the land notified for the
purpose.

Thereafter, the procedure beginning from section 5 has to
be followed under the existing law. The most important
point to consider at this stage is, whether the survey and
demarcation and the preparation of the plan should be
directed to precede or follow the declaration under sec-
tion 6 or should be left to the discretion of the officer as at
present. The effect of a Bombay amendment is that the
investigation under sub-section (2) of section 4 can
precede the preliminary notification under section 4. The


13

Government of India have suggested that after the investi-
gation under section 4(2), there should be a further noti-
fication before the declaration under section 6 ig made.
Neither of these courses has commended itself to us. As
we think it essential to enact provisions which will enable
the Government 10 acquire possession as early as possible,
we have sought to empower the Government fo take
possession of the land immediately after the declaration.
To make this possible it is necessary that the survey,
demarcation, and measurement of the land and the pre-
paration of the plan should be completed before the
declaration is made. We have, therefore, adopted the.
fcllowing scheme.

30. After the notification under section 4(1), the
investigation under section 4(2) should be completed and.
there should be a report by the officer to the Collector.
Simultaneously with the investigation by the officer, the
Collector should hear objections to the acquisition and also
prepare his report in that behalf. These two reports
should reach the Government to enable the Government
to fake 8 decision on the question of acquisition. If the
Government decide to acquire the Iand, the demarcation
and other precedures, under section 8, should be completed.
After these are completed, there should be a notification
by the Government declaring that the land is needed for
a public purpose, authorising the Collector to take order
for acquisition (as under section 7) and empowering him
to take possession of the land within a specified period.
The notification should also include a detailed description
of the land by its survey number, and area and should also
state where the plan could be inspected. It should be
possible to complete these proceedings, beginning with the
notification under section 4 and ending with the declara-
tion, within a maximum period of six months; and if the
Government speed up the matter by suitable rules, the
proceedings may even be finished sooner and the Govern-
ment could obtain early possession of the land. We have:
made & separate provision for emergent cases widening the
scope of the provisions of section 17 of the Act. For
temporary possession, the power to requisition may be
resorted to, after issuing a notification under Part गा of
the proposed legislation.

31, Under the existing Jaw, after the declaration for
acquisition, the Collector has to issue a public notice as
well as individual notices {o the persons interested,


14

inviting claims. The Collector then proceeds to make an
inquiry and make an award determining the compensation.
Tf there is any dispute, an application has to be made
under section 8 for a reference to the Court. We feel that
an inquity by the Collector and an award by him are an
unnecessary duplication of procedure. The inquiry by the
Collector is administrative and not judicial}. The so-called
award is only an offer made by him on behalf of the
Government. It binds the’ Government but not the other
party. It is said that the Collector, in determining com-
pensation, often acts on the information furnished by his
subordinate revenue officers and does not independently
weigh the evidence. The offer which he makes as a result
of his inquiry can as well be made by him on the basis
of the information which he has about the value of the
jand. He may get information, if he so desires, from his
subordinates or by local enquiry and there are provisions
in the Act enabling him to gather such information. He
may consult the Government regarding the value of the
Jand, or, if the acquisition is made on behalf of other
persons he may consult them as well. On 'the basis of
such material as is available to him he can make an offer
to the. persons interested and, if possible, may by negotia-
tion fix the amount of compensation. If there is an agree-
ment, it may be recorded and an order passed on that
basis. Parties may agree as regards compensation pay-
able, the area of the land and, if there are more persons
than one interested in the same land, the apportionment
of the. compensation amount proposed to be given to the
parties inter se, In fact, this procedure of settling the com-
pensation by agreement has been adopted by some of the
Requisitioning Acts as well as other Acts, suck as the
Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act,
1947 (Act XXVIII of 1957), and we think this is a better
method than on inquiry by the Collector, which causes
considerable delay in the matter of fixing the compensa-
tion. If no agreement is reached, the Collector can
straightway refer the matter to the Court. Again, where
there is a dispute regarding apportionment, it would not
be necessary, ag at present, for the parties to make appli-
cations under sections 18 and 30; instead, the matters in
dispute could at once be taken to the Court. It may be
said that where the acquisition is in respect og large areas
of land and the claims are numerous, there may be delays

. Ezra V. Secy. of State, 32 cal. 605 P.C, at P. 629.


15

in determining the compensation even by the court, The
solution for this lies in the hands of the Government; and
if it needs expedition, it can appoint as many special
courts as are necessary to deal with the volume of work
and speed up the proceedings for determining compensa-
tion. The power tc appoint special courts is provided in
the proposed legislation (See Appendix I).

32. As regards the payment of compensation, we have
provided that if there is agreement as to all the matters
in issue, the Collector shall at once tender the amount to
the parties. Even if an agreement is not reached, the
Collector hag to tender to the persons concerned the
amount which he considers a fair compensation; and if
they do not receive it, the Collector may deposit the
amount in Court within the period fixed. These provisions
are intended to secure the avoidance of payment of
interest by the Government to the extent of the deposited
amount, if there is eventual delay in the disposal of the
proceedings owing to the objection of the persons entitled
to the compensation. The interests of such persons have
also been safeguarded by providing that their rights
will not be prejudiced by the mere acceptance of the
deposited amount.

33. We have adopted the Central Act as the basis for
consolidation, and very few changes of a radical nature
have been made in the scheme of the Act. We have tried
to bring about uniformity by consolidating the provisions
of the various Acts. Unnecessary provisions of the State
Acts have been omitted. The main alteration which we
have made is that, instead of constituting separate tribunals.
for determining compensation for the requisitioned pro-
perty, a reference to the court as under the Land Acquisi-
tion Act has been substituted. Under the existing law,
the tribunal has to be presided over by a High Court Judge
or a District Judge. We think the better method is to
refer it to the Court itself. Where acquisition follows
requisition, we have provided that after the necessary
notification of the intention to acquire, the procedure under
the Land Acquisition Act should be followed.

34. The power of requisitioning can be exercised, under
the law as it now stands, only for the purposes of the
Union, and in most of the States for the purposes of the
State. There is no power, to requisition the land for the
benefit of a company, or other persons or authorities as in
the case of acquisition of land. We do not see any reason
to enlarge the power and extend it to such cases,

<b} Reqaist-
tioning,


Smportant
aspects dis-
cussed.

(3) Public
‘Purpose.

16

35. We are of the view that the law of requisitioning
should be embodied in a permanent code but should be
brought into force by a notification, only when such action
is deemed necessary. We have, also, provided that no
property could be kept under requisition for a period
longer than 5 years. If before the expiry of that period,
the Government thinks that it is necessary to acquire the
property, they are at liberty to do so and suitable provi-
sion has been made in that behalf. If, however, they
decide net to acquire it, then it would not be proper for
them to continue to keep the property indefinitely in their
possession.

36. We shall next proceed io explain some of the
important features of the proposed legislation.

87. Public purpose ig not defined in the Act. There is
only an inclusive definition which relates io village sites
in districts. In other respects, there is no indication in the
Act of any test for determining whether a purpose is a
public purpose or not, A large number of suggestions
have been received by us urging that we should clearly
and exhaustively define the term ‘public purpose’. In an
ever changing world, the connotation of the expression
‘public purpose’ must necessarily change. If a precise
definition is enacted, it would become rigid and leave no
room for alteration in the light of changing circumstances.
It would leave no room for the courts to adjust the mean-
ing of the expression according to the needs of the times.
As observed by Alfred D. Jahr on Eminent Domain? deal-
ing with ‘public use’—~(an expression used by the
American Constitution):

“Public use has not been defined by the courts for
the reason that to formulate anything altimate,
even though it were possible, would, in a chang-
ing world be unwise, if not futile. The Law
of each age is ultimately what that age thinks
should be the law.”

Later he says:

“We are living in a rapidly changing world. The
atomie sge is upon us with its cataclysmic
effects on the order of soriety. Our fundamental
Jaw is not static. Quite the contrary, it is
dynamic and progressive. It therefore 10९5, as

3, छ. 16.



17

it must, respond to the changing times. It is
impossible to enumerate all the uses which may
be classified as public uses to authorize an
acquisition of private property by eminent
domain. Such a venture would not only be im-
possible, it would be equally futile. The courts
have repeatedly and wisely refused to define
‘public use’ and for cogent reasons. Any defini-
tion would be unworkable, limited, and circum-
scribed. What may become a ‘public use’ in
the future cannot be foretold by mortal man.
All we can do is to venture a prediction, as
certain as day follows night, that there will be
many public uses in the future that we never
dreamed of at the present time:”!

To the same effect are the observations of Das J. (as he
then was) in the State of Bikar v. Kameshwar Singh? :
“With the onward march of civilization our notions

as to the scope of the general interest of the
community are fast changing and widening
with the result that our old and narrower
notions as to the sanctity of the private interest
of the individual can no longer stem the for-
ward flowing tide of time and must necessarily
give way to the broader notions of the general
interest of the community. The emphasis is
unmistakably shifting from the individual to
the community. This modern trend in the social
and political philosophy is well reflected and
given expression to in our Constitution......The
ideal we have set before us in Article is to
evolve a State which must constantly strive to
promote the welfare of the people by securing
and making as effectively as it may be a social
order in which social, economic and political
justice shall inform all the institutions of the
national life. Under Article 39, the State is
enjoined to direct its policy towards securing,
inter alia, that the ownership and control of the
material resources of the community are so
distributed as to subserve the common good and
that the operation of the economic system does
not result in the concentration of wealth and

1 9. 25,

2 ALR.

1952 8.C. 252 at P. 290.


18

means of production to the common detriment.
The words ‘public purpose’ used in Article
31(2) indicate that the Constitution uses those
words ina very large sense. In the never
ending race the law must keep pace with the
realities of the social and political evolution of
the country as reflected in the Constitution, Tf,
therefore, the State is to give effect to these
avowed purposes of our Constitution we must
vegard as a public purpose all that will be caleu-
lated to promote the welfare of the people as
envisaged in these Directive Principles of State
Policy, whatever else that expression may
™mean.”

38. The expression ‘public use’ in the Fifth Amendment
of the American Constitution received a narrow interpre-
tation in the beginning but later pronouncements have
put a more liberal interpretation wpon it.t

It is, in our view, neither possible nor expedient to
attempt an exhaustive definition of public purposes. The
only guiding rule for the determination of its meaning is
that the proposed acquisition or requisition should tend to
promote the welfare of the community as distinct from
the benefit conferred upon an individual. The mere fact
that the immediate use is to benefit a particular individual
would not prevent the purpose being a public one, if in
the result it is conducive to the welfare of the community.
The question is exhaustively discussed in Thambdiran
Padayachi v. State of Madras? by Venkatarama Aiyar J.
All that can, therefore, be attempted in a legislaticn of this
kind is to provide an inclusive definition so as to endow it
with sufficient elasticity to enable the courts to interpret
the meaning of the expression ‘public purpose’ according
to the needs of the situation, and this is what we have
attempted.

39. There is yet another important aspect of ‘public
purpore’, to which reference is necessary, In India, acquisi-
tien may be made either for the benefit of the Union or
‘the State, or for the benefit of public or local authorities,
‘Local authority’ as defined in the General Clauses Act

ant

1 See Willis on Constitutional Law, Pa: 817-920, 1936 Edi
Nicholas on Fminent Domain, Vol. 2, Pages 434 and 445

2 ALR. 1952 Mad. 75.


19

ieeans “a municipal committee, district board, body of
Port commissioners or other authority ............ legally
entitled to or entrusted by the Government with the
control or management of municipal or local fund”.
Public authorities will include State-owned or State-con-
trolled corporations, Besides these, acquisition is also per-
mitted under the existing law for the benefit of companies
and co-operative societies or friendly societies. Acquisition
may also be necessary for the benefit of public charitable
trusts such as hospitals or educational institutions manag-
ed by trusts created for the purpose. There are also town
Planning authorities and town improvement boards in
various States and, perhaps, there will be authorities
constituted for the development of rural areas also.

40. The machinery provided under the existing law in
India for acquisition for the benefit of such authorities is
different from that obtaining in England, The procedure
under our law is that the body for whose benefit the ac-
quisition is necessary, approaches the Government and the
Government sets the law in motion, acquires the lands
under the machinery provided by the Act and transfers
it later to the person or body of persons for whose benefit
the acquisition is intended, atter receiving the compensa-
tion payable together with the expenses incurred for the
acquisition.

Under the prevailing law, in England there is a broad
distinction between what are known as ‘statutory under-
takers’ on the one hand (such as a railway company, or
a watet company or a gas company), and the Government
departments or local or public authorities on the other,
in regard tq the power to acquire and the principles of
compensation applicable. In the former case, the power
to acquire is conferred by a special statute, and the Act
conferring the power of acquisition specifies the land to
be acquired. The principles of compensation applicable
in such a case are contained in section 61 of the Land
Ciauses Act, 1845, which are analogous to those in section
23 of the Indian Act. In the case of Government depart-
jnents or local or public authorities and some of the
statutory undertakers to which the Acquisition of Land
(Authorisation Procedure) Act, 1946 has been extended
by the Town and Country Planning Act, 1947, the acquir-
ing authority possesses the power of acquiring land in
general, but authorization by the Government for the


20

‘exercise of such power is necessary, The appropriate

@ Principles
‘or determin-
ing compen-
sation,

Government authority confirms the proposal for the
acquisition of a particular piece of land after following
the prescribed procedure which gives to the persons
affected an opportunity to be heard with a right of appeal
to the Courts in certain cases.

41. Under the Indian law, however, it is possible to
acquire land even when the authority for whose benefit
it is acquired hag no statutory power of acquisition, pro-
vided the purpose for which the acquisition is intended is
a public purpose. The emphasis, therefore, under the
Indian law is on the public purpose, while under the Eng-
lish law the acquiring authority has the statutory power
to acquire particular land, or having a genere] statutory
power of acquisition, has to seek the authorisation of the
Government to acquire a particular piece of land.

42. The procedure for acquisition of land ‘under the
English law is complicated and involves considerable
delayes. It, therefore, affords no assistance in the solution of
the problems confronting us and the best course, in our
view, is to adhere to the procedure under the Indian Law
which is simpler and, at the same time, endeavour to
provide for its speedy operation.

43. Sections 23 and 24 of the Land Acquisition Act lay
down the principtes for determining the amount of com-
pensation. Section 23 deals with matters to be considered,
while section 24 relates to matters to be excluded, in
determining compensation. The Act, therefore, lays down
the rules for guidance in determining compensation both
in a positive as well ag a negative manner. The most im-
portant provision is the first clause in section 23, which
enjoins that, in determining the amount of compensation
to be awarded for land acquired under the Act, the Court
shall take into consideration the market value of the
land at the date of publication of the notification under
section 4. The two points to be noticed in this sub-clause
are, first, that the basis for determining compensation is
the mairket value of the land, and, secondly, that the
crucial date for the determination of the market value is
the date of publication of the notification under section 4.
The date so fixed is, in our view, appropriate aid needs no
alteration.

44. A considerable volume of case law has, however,
been built up on the interpretation of the expression


21

‘market value’. It is not possible to define the expression
nor is it possible to lay down any uniform set of rules for
the determination of market value of the land, applicable
to all cases. In the nature of things, therefore, it must be
left to the courts to evolve the principles for the deterni-
nation of compensation, in different classes of cases, having
regard to the nature of the property, its situation end
other relevant considerations,

Though the Bill of 1893, which was subsequently
enacted info Act I of 1894, contained a definition of market
value, it was dropped by the Select Committee which
preferred to leave the term undefined. The Commitee
observed : “No material difficulty has arisen in the inter-
pretation of it; the decisions of several High Courts are at
one in giving it the reasonable meaning of the price a
‘willing buyer would give to a willing seller; but the intro-
duction of a specific definition would sow the field for a
fresh harvest of decisions; and no definition could lay down
for universal guidance in the widely divergent conditions
of India any further rule by which that price should be
ascertained.” We agree with this view. Some Judges
have attempted a definition but we feel that no useful
purpose will be served by a critical examination of these
views expressed by them. The principles for determining
the market value have been fully expounded by the Privy
Council in Sri Raja Vyricherla Narayana Gajapatraju
Bodadur Garu v. The Revenue Divisional Officer, Vizaga-
patam* (known as the Chemudu case).

45, The first principle established by the Chemudu cas2!
is that, in the case of compulsory acquisition, “the land is
not to be valued merely by reference to the use to which
it is being put at the time at which its value has to be dete:-
mined, ****but also my reference to the uses to which it is
reasonably capable of being put in the future’. This pro-
position was treated by the Judicial Committee as axioms-
tic. The second principle laid down by this decision is that
when the land hag unusual or unique features or potentiz-
lities, the valuing officer must ascertain, as best as he can
from the materials before him, the price a willing purchaser
would pay for the land with those features or potentiali-
ties, It is further laid down that the value of the poten-
tialities is to be taken into account even where the only

1 TLR. (1939) Mad, 532,



22

possible purchaser for the potentialities is the acquiring
authority. The ‘market value’ is defined by the Judicial
Committee, as the price which a willing vender might
reasonably expect to obtain from a willing purchaser.
The disinclination of the vendor to part with his land and
the urgent necessity of the purchaser to buy must alike
be disregarded and both must be treated as persons deal-
ing in the matter at arm’s length and without compulsion.
The principle of awarding compensation is based on the
right of the owner to be indemnified by the community for
whose benefit he is deprived of the property against ‘his
will.

It is no doubt true that, under Article 31(2) of the Cons-
titution, if once either the amount of compensation or the
principles for determining compensation are enacted by
jaw, the justness of the amount of the compensa-
tion or the principles cannot be canvassed in a
court of jaw. The article does not use the expression
‘just terms’ (Australian Constitution) or ‘just compensa-
tion’ (American Constitution). But it does not follow that
a responsible legislature would ignore the basic pzinciples
underlying the award of compensation and enac: a law
opposed to the principles of equity and natural justice.
The principles for determining compensation adcpted in
the case of the acquisition of large zamindari and jagir
estates would obviously be inapplicable to cases where the
legislature has to deal with owners of land who are not
intermediaries. As far as possible, every one who is
deprived of his property by compulsory acquisition should
be enabled by the compensation awarded to him *o place
himself in substantially the same position in which he was.
before the acquisition. The community which benefits
trom the acquisition must also bear the burden of justly
compensating the owner.

Twi impor 46. On the question of compensation, two important sug-
t eal gestions have been made by some of the State Governments.
ss red. The first is, that in determining the market value of the
दावा land, the actual use to which the land is put at the rele-
vant date should be the basis fer fixing its value and that
its potential value should be altegether excluded from con-
sideration. Secondly, that the provision for a solatium of
15% under section 23(2) of the Act should be omitted.

a


4

23

47. These suggestions are, perhaps, inspired by recent
English legislation, The most important enactment in
England in this behalf is the Acquisition of Land (Assess-
ment of Compensation) Act, 1919, which applies only to
Government Departments and public or jocal authorities.
To some extent, the principles for determining compensa-
tion laid down under that Act have been further modified
by the Town and Country Planning Acts, 1947 and 1954. A
detailed examination of the provisions of these Acts is
unnecessary and it js sufficient for our purposes to notice
the general effect of the law as it stands today. The pro-
visions of the Land Clauses Act, 1845 still apply to some
statulory undertakers. In such cases, the pronciples applic-
able are, first, that where the Act applies unaflected by sub-
sequent legislation, the value to the owner at the date of
the notice to treat is the basis for the assessment of com-
pensation. In this context, the value of Jand includes the
value of the land with all its potentialities'. Secondly,
the fact that the land is peculiarly suitable for some parti-
cular purpose must be taken into account and it is imma-
terial that the purpose is one to which the undertakers
propose to apply it. Thirdly, though there is no specific
provision in the Land Clauses Act, it is customary to add
10% to the value as compensation for the compulsory
nature of the acquisition.

48. The above principles laid down in the Land Clauses
Act, 1845 have been radically altered by section 2 of the
Acquisition of Land (Assessment of Compensation) Act,
1919, in its application to Government Departments and
public and local authorities. Section 2 of the Act lays
down the following six rules:

(1) No allowance shall be made on account of the
acquisition being compulsory.

(2) The value of land shall, subject as hereinafter
provided, be taken to be the amount which the
land if sold in the open market by a willing
seller might be expected to realise; Provided
always that the arbitrator shall be entitled to
consider all returns and assessments of capital -
value for taxation made or acquiesced in by the
claimant.

1 Inthe South Eastern Rly. Co, and London County Council Contract.
South Eastern Rly, Co. r. London County Council (1915) 2 ch. 252, at 258,


24

(3) The special suitability or adaptability of . the
land for any purpose shall not be taken into ac-
count_if-that purpose is a purpose to which it

Gould be applied only in pursuance of statutory
Powers, or for which there is no market apart
from the special needs of a particular purchaser
or the requirements of any Government Depart-
ment or any local or public authority: Provided
that any bona fide offer for the purchase of the
Jand made before the passing of this Act which
may be brought to the notice of the arbitrator
shall be taken into consideration.

(4) Where the value of the land is increased by
reason of the use thereof or of any premises
thereon in a manner which could be restrained
by any court, or is contrary to law, or is detri-
mental to the health of the inmates of the pre-
mises or to the public health, the amount of that
increase shall not be taken into account.

(5) Where the land, is, and but for the compulsory
acquisition, would continue to be, devoted to a
purpose of such a nature that there is no general
demand or market for land for that purpose,
the compensation may, if the official arbitrator
is satisfied that reinstatement in some other
place is bona fide intended, be assessed on the
basis of the reasonable: cost of equivalent re-
instatement.

(8) The provisions of Rule (2) shall not affect the
assessment of compensation for disturbance or
any other matter not directly based on the value
of land.

The Town and Country Planning Act, 1947, introduced
a further principle that if there is a potential development
value, it should be excluded in fixing the compensation and
the land should be valued on the basis of the existing use.
The expression ‘existing use’ has not been defined but it
hag been interpreted as being similar to lawful use and not
synonymous with actual use.

49. The combined effect of these provisions is that under
tule 1 of section 2 of the Acquisition of Land (Assessment
of Compensation) Act, 1919, no allowance would be made


BS

for the compulsory nature of the acquisition; that is, the
solatium of 10% which was allowed by usage in the case of
an acquisition governed by the Land Clauses Act, 1845,
is ruled out. Secondly, the potential value has to be left
out of consideration. In England, therefore, at the present
day, there are two methods of assessment of compensation.
Section 6 of the Land Clauses Act, 1845 still applies, to
statutory undertakers though that class is gradually dimi-
nishing, and the Acts of 1919, 1947 and 1954 apply to other
cases.

50. In an Article? entitled “The Law and Ethies of
Compulsory Acquisition of Land”, Rr. Richard C. Fitz
gerald has critically examined the principles laid down in
section 2 of the English Act of 1919 and severely criticised
them. He points out that it is not the grant of compulsory
powers of acquisition which causes hardships but the exer-
cise of such powers. “The problem is how to confer power
to act to the public advantage without, at the same time,
unreasonably violating private rights. This difficulty can
be avoided to a considerable extent by framing the power
in such a way that there is no room for doubt as to the
precise purposes for which land can be compulsorily acquir-
ed; by giving the dispossessed owner a legal right to
proper compensation and by devising reasonable safe-
guards for the exercise of such power". Commenting on
the first rule in section 2 of the Act of 1919, he points out
that the disallowance of the solatium for the compulsory
nature of the acquisition is unethical and that the social
and economic conditions (when the rule was made in
1919) were entirely different from what they are now.
The reduction cf the amount of compensation by excluding
the value of development rights, that is, the potential
value, has also been commented upon by him as unjust,

BL. The basis of compensation adopted under the Act
of 1919 has, in fact, created dissatisfaction in England.
This is borne out by the Report of the Committee on Ad-
ministrative Tribunals and Enquiries known as the Franks
Committee. In paragraph 278 they observe:

“One final point of great importance neads to be made.
The evidence which we have received shows that much
of the dissatisfaction with the procedures relating te land
arises from the basis of compensation. It is clear that

1 Current Legal Problems, 1952, p. 54 at p. 60.



Conclusion

Solatium’.

26

objections to compulsory purchase would be far fewer if
compensation were always assessed at not less than market
valuet. It is not part of our terms of reference to consider
and make recommendations upon the basis of compensa-
tion. But we cannot emphasise too strongly the extent te
which these financial considerations affect the matters with
which we have to deal. Whatever changes in procedure
are made dissatisfaction is, because of this, bound to re-
main”.

52. In our view, it would not be expedient or proper to
adopt in India, for purposes of determination of compen-
sation, ptinciples which have been severely criticised by
jurists and have caused dissatisfaction among the public in
England. The object of the suggestion to restrict the
market value to the actual use of the land is undoubtedly
to exclude from consideration the potential value of the
Jand. Such a provision is to be found, in our country, in
the U.P. Town Improvement Act (VIII of 1919). ‘The rele-
vant provision in the Act is “market value acccrding to
the use to which the land was put at the date with refer-
ence to which market value is to be determined under that
clause”. We do not see any justification for modifying
the law as laid down in the Chemudu case* and exclude
the potential value from consideration altogether. The
Union and the States have not, in their recent legislation,
excluded it, and in the latest instance of the Coal Bearing
Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957 (Act XX
of 1957), Parliament has adopted section 23(1) of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894, without any modification, for deter-
mining compensation. The following sections of the
Requisition Acts passed by the States may also be persued
in this connection:

The Assam (Requisition and Acquisition) Act, 1948.
section 7(1);

The West Bengal (Requisition and Acquisition) Act,
1948, section 7(1).

53. We are also not in favour of omitting section 23(2)
So as to exclude the solatium of 15% for the compulsory
nature of the aequisition. It ig not enough for a person to
get the market value of the land as compensation in order
to place himself in a position similar to that
would have vceupied, had there heen no acquisivi
may have to spend a considerable further amount for

1 Ttalics Ours.
2 LLR. (1939) Mad. 532 P.C.


27

putting himself in the same position as before. If, for
example, the only property a person possessed was three
acres of arable land and he was deprived of this under the
compulsory power of acquisition, he would no doubt get
the market value of his property; but ‘he would not be in
a position to provide himself with a vocation to which he
had been all along accustomed. He must find suitable land
in or about the locality where he resides which may not be
easily available and he may have to wait and spend more
than the amount of compensation he has obtained. As
pointed out by Fitzgerald, the community has no right to
enrich itself by deliberately taking away the property of
any of its members in such circumstances, without pro-
viding adequate compensation for it. This principle has
been in force in India ever since the Act of 1870 (vide sec-
tion 42), The Select Committee which examined the Bill
of 1893 did not think it necessary to omit the provision but
on the other hand transferred it to section 23. There is
equity behind the rule, as the tratisfer of the land is not
voluntary but compulsory. It may be of interest to notice
that in the United States of America the same principles as
laid down in the Chemudu case! are in vogue and we think
it more equitable to follow the principles accepted in the
United States rather than adopt the recent much criticized
changes in the law in England.

54. The only ground urged in support of the omission
of section 23(2) is that there thas been an abnormal
increase in land values. The policy of fixation of ceilings
on land holdings, the uncertainty regarding the future
trend of legislation and the increase in the cost of cultiva-
tion, have led, on the contrary, to a considerable fall in
the land values in rural areas in recent years. To avoid
the loss of property under such anticipated legislation,
sales and partitions of land have enormously increased. In
urban areas the position may be somewhat different but
the rise in land values generally corresponds to the rise in
the price level and the fall in the value of money. We
think, therefore, that the reasoning on which the pro-
posed omission of section 23(2) is based cannot be supported.

55. Two principles from section 2 of the English Act of
1919, the acceptance of which have also been suggested by
some of the States, have, however, been adopted by us.

1 TLL. (1939) Mad, 532 P.C.
Li wi/67-3


28

The first is, that any increase in the value of the land,
arising from its being put to unlawful use should not be
taken into consideration; and the second is, that an increase
in the rental value of a building which is so over-crowded
as to be detrimental to the health of the inmates should
also be left out of consideration, We have made suitable
amendments to section 24 giving effect to these principles.
Lastly, we have considered a proposal made to change the
date of determining the market value under section 23(1)
to the date of the taking of possession of the land by the

ent. Under the scheme proposed by us, there will
not be much lapse of time between the date of the noti-
fication under section 4 and the taking of possession of the
jand by the Government. We see no reason for accepting
the proposed change.

Examination 56. The other changes proposed by us will appear from
Grice, Gie Our comments on the provisions of the two existing Central
existing Acts, Acts on the subject, viz., the Land Acquisition Act, 1894,
Undicating the and the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable
poser ea Property Act, 1952, which we now proceed to examine in

their serial order.

Aland Ac 57. It has already been pointed out! that section 1, as
Act, 1894 amended by the Adaptation Order made under the States
‘Sec. 1* Reorganisation Act, 1956, stands thus—

“It extends to the whole of India except all the terri-
tories which immediately before the Ist November, 1956
were comprised in Part B States”.

Part B States having ceased to exist, the historical
reasons justifying the enactment of separate laws for those
territories are no longer there and ag such there ig no
reason why Acts of all-India application should not extend
to such territories also, excepting, of course, Jammu and
Kashmir, in respect to which Parliament has no legislative
power in regard to matters in the Concurrent Last.

We have, therefore, recommended that the Act should
extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu
and Kashmir.

*The reference in the margin is to sections of the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894.

4 Para. 8, ante.



29

58. This section has already been repealed. See. 2.

59. Apart from some modifications introduced in the Sec. 3.
‘definition of the existing expressions, scme of the expres-
sions defined in the Requisitioning and Acquisition of
Immovable Property Act, 1952 (XXX of 1952), have also
been incorporated:

(i) There is no material change in the definition of this Appropriate
expression overnment,

ii) There is no material change here also. Collector.

{iii) An alteration has been effected in the definition of Company.
a company, keeping in view the new provisions in the
Companies Act, 1956. The definition has been simplified
so as to make it clear that companies registered under the
previous Company Law are ajso within the purview of the
definition. As regards foreign companies, if their principal
place of business is in India, they would come within the
scope of the definition.

Co-operative Societies have been kept outside the defi-

nition of company. While the purposes for which acquisi-
tion can be made for the benefit of companies are very
limited, in the case of co-operative societies which have
been brought into existence under the Central or the State
Acts, there may be very many objects satisfying the defini-
tion of a public purpose, for which acquisition of land may
have to be made. Acquisitions for a co-operative building
society would be a pertinent example in this connection.
If the purpose for which Jand is required by a co-operative
Society is a public purpose they should be at liberty to
approach the concerned Government for acquirmg the
land.

The existing section 38A of the Land Acquisition Act
treats an industrial concern, as defined by it, to be a com-
pany. We think that these may more appropriately be
included in the definition of company. The definition in
section 38A has, however, been criticised as being very
narrow in its scope and it has been suggested that the
definition should be enlarged. We have accepted this
suggestion. Various industrial and housing schemes have
been launched by the State Governments in the public
seetor and by industrialists in the private sector. We
have, therefore, modified the definition of ‘industrial con-
cern’ in the light of the provisions of the Factories Act
and the Income-tax Act, and incorporated it in the defini-
tion of ‘company’,


Competent
authoriy Requisitioning Act of 1952, with slight verbal changes.

Co-operative
Society

Court,

Land.

पु

30
(7) Thig definition has been taken from the (Central)

(v) This new definition has been added in view of the
inclusive and enlarged definition of public purpose which
bringins within its purview acquisition for a co-operative
society.

(vi) Owing to the large volume of work in recent times
relating to acquisition of land, it has become necessary to
empower courts other than the District Court to deal with
such matters. The powers of the District Judge are very
frequently delegated to the subordinate courts. If power
is given to the State Governments to empower a subor-
dinate Judge or even a Munsif where.the claim for com-
pensation is within his pecuniary limits, to exercise the
powers of the Court under the Act, there will be quicker
disposal of land acquisition proceedings. An appeal from
such a court should lie to the Court to which appeals
ordinarily lie from that court. If the number of cases are
numerous enough to justify such action, it would be open
to the State Governments to establish a court to deal
exclusively with land acquisition matters and this will
result in a speedier disposal of the cases. The proposed
definition follows more or less the definition of ‘Court’
substituted by the West Bengal Land Acquisition (Bengal
Amendment) Act, 1934 (II of 1934).

(vii) In the Land Acquisition Act, “Jand” is defined
thus: “The expression ‘land’ includes benefits to arise out
of land and things attached to the earth or- permanently
fastened to anything attached to the earth.” The Requisi-
tioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952,
uses the word ‘property’ and defines it as meaning
“immovable property of every kind and includes any
rights in or over such property.” The expression ‘immov-
able property’ ig defined in the General Clauses Act (X
of 1897) as including “lend, benefits to arisé out of land
and things attached to the earth or permanently fastened
to anything attached to the earth.” It will be noticed that
the definition of land in the Land Acquisition Act has the
same meaning as that of immovable property in the Gene-
ral Clauses Act. There is also no substantial difference in

-the definition of “land” in the Land Acquisiticn Act and of

‘property’ in the Requisitioning and Acquisition Act of
1952. Hence in order to achieve uniformity, we have
adopted the definition of land in the Land Acquisition Act.
It will apply to acquisition as well as requisition. The


31

Act, it hag to be mentioned, does not contemplate the
acquisition of things attached to the land without the land,
It is the land including the rights which arise out of it
and not merely some subordinate interest which is capable
of being acquired under this Act. It has also to be pointed
out here that when Government acquires land, if acquires
only the sum-total of all private interests subsisting in
them. If the Government has itself an interest in the
land, that interest is outside the acquisition. Of course,
for the determination of compensation payable, an
investigation of the value of this interest of the Govern-
ment in the Jand is necessary but that would not make
it the subject matter of acquisition. Government is not
a person interested in the acquisition?

It should, however, be mentioned that land can be
acquired without acquiring ‘mines, and minerals under-
neath {vide Land Acquisition (Mines) Act, 1885 (XVIII of
1885) 1.

(viii) The definition in the Requisitioning and Acquisi- Landiord.
tion Act, 1952 has been adopted with modifications.

(ix) A new inclusive definition of the expression ‘local Local Autho-
authority’ has been added, in order to bring town-plan- एएि-
ning authorities within its scope.

{x) This expression has been defined both in the Land Person in-
Acquisition Act, 1894, ag well as in the Requisitioning and ‘sed.
Acquisition of Immovable Property Act of 1952. The
expression as defined in the Land Acquisition Act has been
adopted by us with some changes in the light of the defi-
nition given in the latter Act.

The Bihar Government has suggested an amendment
to this definition which would bring within its scope a
person who suffers damage as a result of the acquisition
even where no part of his Iand or right or easement has
been acquired or affected. The Bihar Government has
pointed out that as a result of the Mayurakshi Reservoir
Project in that State, vast areas have been, submerged
under water and the inhabitants thereof have had to shift
to other places. As a result, labourers. and professional
™men working in the submerged areas have lost their occu-
pation. They have not been paid any compensation since
no part of their land or right or easement had been acquir-

4 Collector of Bombay v. Nusservanji, ALR. 1955 §.C. 298,


Premises
Prescribed.

Public pur-
Pose.

Tenant,

Sec. 4,

32

ed or affected and they could not therefore be treated as
coming within the purview of the expression ‘persons
interested’. As this suggestion raises an iriportant ques-
tion of policy, we have not thought it fit to enlarge the
definition so ag to include such cases. We are, however,
of the view that the matter deserves careful consideration
inasmuch as the loss suffered by the persons in the instance
mentioned is the direct result of the acquisition of the land.

(xi), (xii) The definitions of ‘premises’ and ‘prescrib
have been taken from the Requisitioning and Acquisition
Act, 1952.

(xiii} We have adopted an inclusive and enlarged defini-
tion of public purpose as explained in paras 37—39 above.

(xiv) The definition has been taken from the Requisi-
tioning and Acquisition Act of 1952 and modtlified so as to
cover cases where the tenant pays premium only or premi-
um and rent.

We have dealt above with all the expressions defined
in the two Centra] Acts on acquisition and requisitioning
except ‘award’ and ‘persons entitled to act’. ‘Award’ has
not been defined as it is unnecessary to do so under our
revised scheme.

The expression persons “entitled to act’ which is
defined in clause (g) of the section 3 of the Land Acquisi-
tion Act, has been taken out of the definition: section and
is the subject matter of a new section? which adopts the
definition with a few verbal changes.

60. A suggestion that the Collector should. also be
empowered to initiate proceedings for acquisition of land
under this section has been made by some of the State
Governments with a view to avoid delay. This suggestion,
which is reasonable, has been accepted.

It was further suggested that after the words ‘public
purpose’ the words ‘or for a company’ should be added.
But it appears to us that this is unnecessary, and is, per-
haps, inappropriate, in view of Article 31 of the Constitu-
tion. The definition of ‘public purpose’ which we have
adopted enables a company to approach the Government
for acquisition in cases where land is needed by it for

18, 3 of App. L


33

specified purposes. Under the proposed definition, the
acquisition for a company will be acquisition for a public
purpose, if it is for the provision of housing for labour and
amenities connected therewith. The requitement of sec-
tion 4 will be met, if such a purpose exists.

61, We are also of the view that before the law is set
in motion, Government should have at least a rough idea of
the land proposed to be acquired and should be in a posi-
tion to deseribe it in the notification by its survey number
if it is already surveyed, and also give the approximate area
and its boundaries. If the land had not been surveyed
they should at least be able to specify the land by its
boundaries. This is necessary so that the persons interested
should have precise information about the land proposed
to be acquired and the purpose for which it is intended to
be acquired. At present, there is no obligation on Govern-
ment te give particulars in the notification. The objectors
may, if their land is affected by the notification, cbject on
the ground that the purpose is not a public one or that
the locality is not suited for that purpose. If, for example,
in a crowded locality a hospital for infectious diseases is
proposed to be established, it would be open to the objectors
to show the serious consequences that would ensue, if the
intended project ig carried out. If, in such a case, no parti-
culars are furnished in the notification, it would not be
possible for the public affected to formulate their objection.
‘On the other hand, if particulars are given, they may be
able to point out lands better suited for the purpose.

62. We have added an explanation which gives the
meaning of the expression “convenient place”; we have
also added a new sub-section which provides that the
notification itself should specify the period within which
objections, if any, can be made.

63. Sub-section (2) of this section confers powers to enter
upon the land for the purpose of finding out after investi-
gation, the suitability of the same for the purposes for
which it ig proposed to be acquired. This has been retained
without any material alteration. In cases where the acquisi-
tion is made for the benefit of a company or a_ local
authority or any body of persons, it is but reasonable that
an officer of such a company or a local authority or a body
of persons may also be authorised to exercise the powers
under the existing sub-section (2), as is provided in sub-
section (1) of section 38 in the case of a company.


34

- 84. There is a lacuna in the Act in that it does not
provide for a report to be made to the Collector of the
result of the investigation within a specified time. Since
the underlying object is to ascertain whether the land is
suitable for the purpose in view, it is but proper that the
report should be placed before the Collector who would
after considering it, make his recommendation to the
Government. Further, as suggested by some of the State
Governments, a time-limit should be fixed for this report
to be submitted to the Collector. This suggestion has been
accepted?. We have also provided that the Collector should
forward the report with his remarks to the appropriate
Government along with his report under section 6(2}.

65. In his connection, we have considered the amend-
ment introduced by the Bombay Amendment Act, 1945,
introducing Part IA entitled ‘preliminary survey’ consisting
of sections 3A and 3B. The object of the amendment seems
to be to have a preliminary investigation before the issue
of the notification under section 4. We are, however, of the
view that such investigation should be carried out only
after the notification under section 4 is made. It would
be unjust in our opinion to permit the officers of Govern-
ment to enter upon private land without a notification
conferring authority for that purpose. In the Statement
appended to the Bombay Bill, the reason assigned for the
change is that if the lands originally notified, after the
survey authorised under sub-section (2) of section 4 are
found to be unsuitable for the purpose for which they were
Proposed to be acquired, it necessitates a fresh ‘notification
in respect of other lands, This, it is said, results in delaying
the land acquisition proceedings, But, in our view, the
issue of a fresh notification under-section 4 in such cases
need not cause any delay, particularly, as ihe Collector
would be entitled to issue such a notification. A general
authority to enter on any land in the locality would not
be reasonable. It might result in considerable inconve-
nience to the owner of the land if the officers are permitted
to enter and make investigations on the land without prior
intimation. We are, therefore, of the view that it is advis-
able that the present procedure of the issue of a notifica-
tion under section 4 before the exercise of the powers
under sub-section (2) of that section should continue.

1 8. 4(5) of App. 7.


35

86. The Central Government has suggested an alteration
providing that the report of such an investigation, if an
investigation is made under section 4(2)}, should be submit-
ted to the appropriate Government. We have accepted this
suggestion. However, we have not accepted the further
suggestion that there should be a fresh notification giving
particulars of the land after the appropriate Government
hag received the report of the investigation. This is un-
necessary as the final declaration will contain all the
particulars about the land. Further, under the scherie
recommended by us, the notification under section 4 will
itself contain the necessary particulars, After the issue of
aection 4(1) would be required to enable the objectors to
be considered are as to the existence of a public purpose
and the suitability of the land for the purpose. No parti-
culars other than those mentioned in the notification under
section 4(1} would be required to enable the objects to
formulate their objections, The position, however, would
be different when claims for compensation have to te
made. The claimants must then know definitely all the
particulars about the land. Provision for this hag been
made in the relevant section.

61. We have provided that the dispute as to the
sufficiency of the damage should be referred to the court
instead of the collector for decision,

68. We have provided in this section that the period
within which objection can be made should be 21 days and
not 30 days. We have further provided that the Collector
is to submit the case together with his report containing
his recommendations within a time limit which is indicatecl.
We have also provided that the objector should be given a
copy of the report, on his application and at his cast. It
has also been provided’ that the appropriate Government,
after giving an opportunity to the objectors of being heard,
shall make its decision and such decision as to the question
whether the land is needed for the purpose stated in the:
notification shall be final.

69. The provisions regarding the declaration under
section 6 have been modified in several respects. If the
Government decides to proceed with the acquisition, 1९
has to direct the Collector, within six weeks from the date
pf. the receipt of the report from him, to proceed to mark:

18.7, App. 1.

2 5, 8(3), ibid.

Sec. 5.

Sec. SA.

See. 6.


36

and measure the land and make & report of his opera-
tions to Government. Within one month of the receipt the
Collector’s said report, the Government has to make a
declaration that the land is needed for a public purpose and
specify that purpose and also give particulars regarding
the land such as its precise boundaries, survey mamber,
area and the place where the plan could be inspected. It
has been provided that immediately after the declaration,
the Collector should take order for the acquisition of the
jand. The Collector is to take possession of the land
within two months (or within such longer period not
exceeding four months in all ag the appropriate Govern-
ment may allow) from the date of the declaration, after
giving a reasonable notice to the persons interested.

Two new sub-sections' have been added. One of *hem
practice, its working has been reduced to a farce by the
land specified in the notification, such lands as are not
covered shall be deemed to have been excluded from the
proposed acquisition and the motification under section 4
shali be deemed to have been cancelled to that extent.
The other sub-section enables the Government, if it so
decides, to abandon the acquisition proceedings by making
a notification to that effect,

The proviso to section 6(1) has been omitted, ag in
practice, its working has been reduced ta a farce by the
Government making a mere token contribution of one ama
from its revenues to the amount provided by other persons
for whose benefit the land is being acquired. The courts
have held? this to be sufficient compliance with the provigo.
The compensation payable hag necessarily to come out of
public funds, if the acquisition is for the State; but if it
is for the benefit of other persons, the Government would
see that the funds are provided by them. So long as the
test of the existence of public purpose is satisfied, it is
immaterial whether the compensation {s paid out of public
funds either in whole or in part,

Sub-section (3) has been omitted, as it is repugnant to
Article 31(2) of the Constitution. हु

70. The provision contained in section 7 regarding the
taking of order for acquisition finds a place in a modified
form® in the proposed section 8.
TT gub-wes 5), (6) of SB, App.

2 Suryanceayana V. Province of Madras, ALR. 1945 Mi

3 Para 69, ante.

५ 394 (FB).


37

71. As stated earlier, we have proposed that the declara-
tion should be made only after the land is marked out,
measured and planned and the survey is completed.

72. The provisions of section 9 have been reproduced?
with modifications, The notice should be served in such
time as to give at least 15 days to the persons to appear
and state their claims in regard to their respective
interests before the Collector.

73. Section 10 has been retained? with the slight changes,

74. The sections relating to enquiry and award have
been recast, as we have decided to abolish altogether the
procedure of an award by the Collector and have provided,
instead, for a reference to the Court direct in eases of
dispute. As far as possible, the Collector should try to
settle all matters in dispute by negotiation and agreement.
If, however, no agreement can be reached the Collector
has to make a reference to the Court’.

75. Section 14 dealing with the power to summon wit-
nesses etc. has been omitted in view of the fact that we
have adopted the corresponding provision in section 12 of
the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property
Act, 1952, which is more comprehensive.

16. This section has been made sub-section (4) of section
12 of App. I.

77. This section, enabling the Collector to take possession
of the land whereupon it vests absolutely in the Govern-
ment free from all encumbrances, has been retained with
an additional provision’ requiring the Government to notify
the fact of such vesting and enabling such notification to
be used as evidence of the Government’s title.

78. The provisions of section 17 have been amplified and
some of the restrictions contained therein have been
removed. Thus, the restriction under the section confining
the power to take immediate possession to waste and arable
lands has been removed. Likewis2, as there may be other
emergencies of the nature contemplated in sub-section (2),
such as the repairing of breaches in the means, of com-
munication, we have included them specifically’. We have
added a new sub-section to the effect that the Collector
५ ES 10. App. T ~ oO ~ ~
App. L
203). App. 1

App. L.
'([)9), App. L

७००७

1S.

25.
as.
4s.
58.3

73

See. &

See, 9.

See, 10.
Sees. 11-17

Sec. वि.

Sec, 15

See. 16

Sec. 17


38

should, on taking possession, immediately report the same
to the appropriate Government together with the reasons
therefor. Thereupon, the appropriate Government has to
decide, within three months of the receipt of the report,
whether proceedings for acquisition of the land should be
commenced or not. If the Government fails to decide
within four months of the date of taking possession, the
persons interested in the land shail be entitled to resto-
ration of possession of land together with compensation.

79, We have also provided! that, apart from any ques-
tion of emergency, the Collector may, in any case and at
any time after notification under sub-section (1) of section
4, take possession of land, if the persons interested give
their consent and surrender possession by waiving their
right to object to the acquisition.

80. We have further provided? that in any case where
immediate possession has been taken (whether by consent
or otherwise), if the appropriate Government does not
wish to proceed with the acquisition of the land, it shall
pay compensation in accordance with the provisions of
section 37(2) of Appendix I. On the other hand, if the
Government proceeds to acquire the land, then it shall
vest absolutely in the Government free from all encum-
brances, on the publication of a declaration under section
8 of Appendix I. We have also provided for the Payment
of interim compensation, in such cases of acquisition, to
the extent of about 60 per cent of the amount which the
person concerned would, in the opinion of the Collector,
be entitled to claim in respect of the land. If, however,
the amount offered is not accepted, the Collector shall
deposit the same in court.

81. The provisions of sub-section (3) of section 17 have
been made into a new section? and it has been provided
that even in those cases where payment is to be made
for damage substained by sudden dispossession, if there is
any dispute as to the sufficiency of the amount, the Callec-
tor shall refer the same to the court.

82, Sub-section (4) of section 17 has been omitted as
it is unnecessary under the procedure recommended by
us. Under the existing set-up, in urgent cases, possession
could be taken only after a notice under section 960),
“1.31, App. L गा 7

28. 33, App. 1.
3S, 34, App. 7.



39

and hence there was the need for a provision like sub-
section (4). But under the scheme proposed by us, posses-
sion can be taken by the Government, even before the issue
of a notification under section 4.

83. Section 18 has been omitted in view of the suggested
scheme of a reference to the Court.!

84. Section 19 hag been adopted? with verbal changes
and with the omission of clause (०) of sub-section (1).
To sub-section (2), we have added that in making a
reference to the Court, the Collector shall furnish any
other information available to him relating to the dispute.

85. This section has been retained with the addition
that notice shall also be served upon the person or
authority for whom the acquisition is being made, when
such person or body is not the Union or the State Ctov-
ernment.

86. We have not thought it necessary to retain this
section.

87. This section has been adopted without any material
change,

88. Matters relating to the principles upon which the
compensation is to be determined have already been dis-
cussed at length’. It is, therefore, sufficient to point out
that section 23 has been retained in its present form‘ with
the addition, in sub-section (1), of a new clause (number-
ed seventhly) providing that, where the owner of the land
in good faith had taken active steps and incurred expendi-
ture for securing a more profitable use of the land, the
expenditure so incurred shall be taken into considera-
tion by the court.

89. This section has also been retained with some addi-
tions. In clause seventhly, we have made a modification
Providing that while improvements are not ordinarily to
be taken into consideration by the Court, it shall take
them into account where the improvements were neces-
sary for the maintenance of the building in a proper state
of repair. We have also added a new clause (numbered
eighty, providing that the Court shall disregard any
increase in the market value by reason of the building
being put to a use in a manner which could be restrained

8. 12(3),
20, bi

1
28.
3 Paras 43—35, ante.
4 5. 21, App. L.

ibid,
id.

Sec. 18,

Sec. 19.

Sec, 20.

See. 21.

See, 22.

Sec, 23.

See, 24


See. 25.

Secs, 26-27.

86०. 28.

Sec. 29.

40

by a Court or which is either contrary to law or detri-
mental to the health of the inmates or the public. It may
be mentioned that many of the City and Town Improve-
ment Acts, in the various States, contain similar provi-
sions,

90. The principles contained in section 25 have been
made applicable to the claim before the court. We have
also provided! for the contingency of the person interested
omitting to make a claim before the Collector without
sufficient cause. In such cases, the amount awarded by
the court is not to exceed the amount fixed by the
Collector.

gl. These Sections have been consolidated? with verbal
changes, and with the addition of a sub-section requiving
the Court to specify the market value of the specified
items, separately.

92, The rate of interest payable on excess compensation
has been reduced to 5 per cent from 6 per cent. In this
connection, we have provided in a new section that. the
interest payable b ythe Collector under section 14 shal
also be included in the final order,

93. We have modified section 29 by providing that the
court shall apportion the amount according to the interests
of each person and specify the amount due to each
person in the final order. We have also provided that it
will be open to each person to execute the final
order to the extent of the amount due to him without the
consent or concurrence of the other persons interested in
the compensation awarded.

94. We have added a new section* to provide that tie
final order of the court shall be executable as if it were a
decree of the civil court and the provisions of the Coie
of Civil Procedure relating to execution shall apply to the
same, But execution shall not issue against the Govern-
ment or any officer of Government, unless the order
remains unsatisfied for a period of 3 months from its date.

95. Ancther provision‘ has been added to the effect
that when there ig no person competent to alienate the

5. $2(4), ibid.
हु. 58, ibid.
5. 59. ibid
3. 53, ibid,

bene


41

jand acquired, the Collector shall, within 4 months of the
official order of the Court, deposit. in Court the amcunt
directed to be paid as compensation.

96. We have considered it unnecessary to retain this
section in view of the scheme adopted by us.

97. Sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 31 have been
retained with the following changes.

We have provided that the Collector shall tender
payment of the compensation within one month from the
date of his order, and also give notice to the person interest-
ed, after making the deposit in Court.

The first two provisos to sub-section (2) of section 31
have been omitted and, instead, a new section’ has been
introduced providing that a person's rights will not be
prejudicially affected merely by reason of the fact that
he chooses to receive or withdraw from the court the
amount deposited without protest.

The third proviso to sub-section (2) has been made into
a new section?.

We have also added a mew section® providing that
in case an agreement is reached before the Collector, the
amount fixed by agreement shall be paid by the Collector
to the persons interested within one month from the date
of the order recording such agreement. We have also
provided that in case of default of such payment, the
order of the Collector may be executed as if it were a
decree of the civil court, and interest at the rate of 5 per
cent shall be paid on the amount fixed,

In a new sectiont, we have provided that where the
Collector does not take possession of the land within the
period specified in sub-section (4) of section 8 of Appendix
1, for the purpose of calculation of interest, the date on
which the said period expires should be treated as the
day on which possession of the land was taken by the
Collector.

98. Sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 31 have been
incorporated in a new section’ with an addition in sub-
section (4) which will make it possible for the Collector
to enter into any arrangement with the person interested in
the land such as the grant of some other land in exchange
for the land that has been acquired.

1 5. 38, ibid, _

2 5. 73, ibid.

28.15, ibid.

4 5. 16, ibid.
5 8. 17, ibid.

Sec. 30,

Sec. 31,


See, 32,

sec. 33,

ec, 34,

42

99. Two new sectionst have been introduced, embody-
ing provisions of a far-reaching character to secure
completion of the proceedings before the Collector within
a specified time. First, we have provided that all proceed-
ings under the Act from the date of the notification under
S. 4 to the date of the firs, hearing before the Ccllector
shall be completed within a period of 8 months. The
Government may, however, extend this period by four
months. Secondly, we have provided that the Collector
shall complete all proceedings under section 12 of Ap-
pendix I within 4 months of the date fixed for the first
hearing under sub-section (2) of section 10. The cther
section introduced by us provides that in case the Col-
lector does not complete the proceedings within the
periods specified, the notification under sub-section (1) of
section 4 shall stand cancelled, and the persons interested
may apply to the Court for an order against the Collector
for restoration of possession (if possession has already
peen taken by the Collector) and also for payment of such
damages as the court may determine, Such an order of
the court may be executed as if it were a decree.

100. Section 32, dealing with the investment of money
deposited in respect of land belonging to persons in-
competent to alienate, has been retained, with the addi-
tion of a new sub-section which provides that the money
required to be invested in the purchase of securities re-
ferred to in the section may, notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-section (1), be paid by the Court to such
person or persons, if, before such investment of money,
the person or persons become absolutely entitled thereto.

101, Section 33, which deals with the investment of
money deposited in other cases, has also been retained
with the addition of a new sub-section to the effect that
the Court may pay any such money to the person entitled
to it if the cause for which the money was deposited has
ceased to exist provided there is no other legal impedi-
ment to such payment,

102. Section 34 has been replaced by a new section?
directing the Collector to pay interests on the sum fixed
by him at the rate of 5 per cent from the date of taking
possession to the date on which the amount is deposited
in Court or to the date on which it is paid to the person
entitied to receive it.

1 855. 18-919, ibid.
28.14, ibid.


43

- 108. Sections 35-87 which deal with temporary oecupa- Sees, 35-37

tion of land have been omitted as the powers conferred

by them are very limited and as such power of temporary
acquisition has not frequently been availed of. Moreover,
temporary possession can always be obtained by bring-

ing into force the provisions of the Act relating to re
quisitioning.

104, Section 38 is unnecessary in view of the provisions ssc, 33,

of section 4(4) and the enlarged and inclusive definition

of ‘public purpose’ in Appendix I, and has, therefore, been
omitted.

105. ‘Phis section deals with industrial concerns. We Se. 38५,
have provided for them in the definition section itself,
The section has, therefore, been omitted,

106. Section 39 has been retained with the modification Sec. 39.
that where land is to be acquired for any company, no
notification under sub-section (1) of section 4 shall be
issued except by or with the previous consent of the
appropriate Government.

107. The substance of clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section Sce. 40.
(1) of section 40, dealing with the erection of dwelling
houses for workmen has now been emboditd in the
definition section?. The rest of the section has been
retained with verbal changes.

108. Sections 41—43 have been retained without any Secs. 41-43,
material change.

109. A new section® has been added to the effect that
where land is to be acquired for any person (not being a
company) or authority, the provisions relating to acquisi-
tion of land far companies shall apply.

110. Section 44 has been omitted as we consider it to Sez. 44.
be unnecessary.

Ill. Section 45 dealing with service of notices has Sc. 45.
been omitted, as we have adopted the corresponding
section in the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immov-
able Property Act, 1952,

112. Section 46 dealing with penalties has been retained Sev. 46.
with the change that the maximum limit of imprison-
merit has been enhanced to six months and of fine to
five hundred rupees, .

2 8. 2(c)(vii), एव,

2 8. 2(m)(vii), ibid.

3 8, 30, ibid.
LtLaw/67-.4


Sec. 47.

Sec. 48.

Sec, 49,

Sec, 50.

Sec. 51.

44

113. We have added a new sub-section to section 47,
providing that the power conferred by the section shall
not be in derogation of the power to take possession of
requisitioned land under section 40(2) of Appendix I.

114, Section 48 has been retained with some modifica-
tions. Sub-section (3) does not apply to cases where the
Collector has not taken possession and, therefore, serves
no purpose and has been omitted. We have also provid~
ed that where there is a dispute as to the amount of com-
pensation under this section, the Collector shall refer the
same to the Court for decision.

115. This section, dealing with the acquisition of a
part of a house or a building, has been retained without
any material change,

. 116. This section has also been retained with verbal
changes making it applicable to cases of acquisition for
‘other person’. We have also provided that in proceed-
ings under thig Act for fixing or determining compensa-
tion, the local authority or company or other person
concerned may appear and represent the case kefore the
Collector, or appear and adduce evidence before the
Court, as the case may be. The proviso to sub-section (2),
disentitling the local authority or company from demand-
ing a reference, has been omitted.

117. Section 51 has been retained without any change.

118. Following section 52A of the Land Acquisition
(Punjab Amendment) Act, 1948, we have added a new
section? to protect the amount of compensation: awarded
or awardable from attachment or sale in execution of a
decree or order of any civil court, when the land acquired
is not liable to attachment or sale.

119, We hava also added a new section’ providing
that in proceedings under this Act a certified copy of a
registered document may be accepted as evidetice of the
transaction recorded in the document without the produc-
tion or proof of the original,

120. We have adopted section 18 of the Requisitioning
and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952, which
gives complete immunity in respect of any act done in

1 Vide 5. 36, ihid.
2 8, 70, ibid.
३ 8. 7, ibid.


45

good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of that
Act In view of this, the provision contained in section
52 of the Land Acquisition Act can have application only
to acts done in abuse of the provisions of the Act which
do not deserve any protection. Section 52 has, therefore,
been omitted,

121. Section 58 hag been retained with verbal changes. sc, 53.

122. We have added a new section! laying dewn the
procedure to be followed in cases of referenceg other than
those under sub-section (3) of section 12 or sub-section (1)
of section 45 of Appendix I.

123. Section 54 has been split into two parts’. We Se. 54
have added two new sub-sections' io provide (a) thet
no second appeal except in cases which raise questions
as to the title to property for revision shall lie from a
decree of the district court on appeal under sub-section
(1), unless the amount or value of the subject matter in
dispute exceeds two thousand rupees; and (b) that not-
withstanding anything contained in the section, no appeal
shall lie from any order (whether final or not) passed
by the Court on 8 reference under sections 5, 34 and 67(1)
of Appendix I,

124 A new sectiont has been added to enable the
court determine any question of title for the purpose of
deciding any reference under the Act,

125. The rule-making provisions in section 55 of the Sec. 55.
Land Acquisition Act have been modified and combined’, B peruse
with the corresponding provisions im section 22 of the Acuisition
Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property फ्री कि
Act, 1952. Per

952,

126, Part Hil of Appendix I relates to requisitioning Requisition-
and acquisition of land. The scheme of our proposals on “*®
this subject hag been fully explained in paragraphs 33 to
35. We shall now explain them in detail with reference
to the sections of the existing Act*,

127. Section 1 hag been omitted, as it is redundant, See. 1

1 ६, 57, tbid.
2 8. 6O(1), (3),
ub-sections (2), (4), ibid.
48.61, ibid.
35.80, ibid.
The references in the margin, hereafter, ate to sections of the
Requisitioning and Acquisition a€ Iumovable Property Act, 1952.



See, 2,

Secs, 3--6.

See. 8.

46

128. As already mentioned earlier’, all the expressions
defined in section 2 have been incorporated in the propos-
ed legislation except that we have omitted the definition
of the term “award”,

129, Sections 39 and 48 in Appendix I give effect to
the views which we have expressed in para 35 above.

180. Sections 3 to 6 dealing with the power of requisi-
tion, the power to take possession, the rights over the
requisitioned property and release from requisitioning
have all been retained? with some changes. These
changes provide an opportunity to the person affected
to be heard before an order of requisition is made and
excepts properties in the possession of tenants for six
monthg and more from requisition. The power to requisi-
tion cam be exercised only for a public purpose which is
a Union or a State purpose. There is no provision in
the existing law for requisitioning land on behalf of other
persons or authorities as under the Land Acquisition
Act and we do mot consider it necessary to provide for
such eases. A further change is the limit set on the value
of repairs which a landlord may be required to carry out.

131. Section 7, dealing with the power to acquire
requisitioned property, has been retained with some
modifications. An addition has been made to the existing
sub-section (2) by providing that the notice mentioned
therein shali be deemed to be a declaration in respect of
the requisitioning land under section 8 of Appendix I.
Sub-sections (3), (4) and (5) have been omitted. These
sub-sections place restrictions on the power to acquire by
confining it to certain specified cases mentioned therein.
But some of the State Acts do not contain such restrictions
and we do not see any reason why the power to acquire
should be so restricted.

132. Section 8, dealing with the principles and method
of determining compensation, has been retained with
certain modifications :

Sub-clauses (c), (d}, (e), (f) and (g) of sub-section
(1) and the reference to arbitration provided in
clause (b) thereof have been omitted in view
of the scheme suggested by us under which
there is to be a reference to the Court in all
matters,

"1 Para 59, ante.
2 Ss.40—-43, App. 1.



47

In sub-section (2), dealing with compensation pay-
able for requisitioning, a new provision has
been added providing for compensation for
any damage caused by the exercise of the
powers conferred in section 46 of Appendix I.

Sub-section (3), dealing with compensation payable
in case of acquisition following requisition has
been omitted for the obvious reason that under
the proposed scheme this will come within the
scope of Part I as will appear from section 49
of Appendix I,

133. Sections 9 and 11 have been omitted as we
consider them unnecessary. We have recommended the
abolition of the arbitration procedure,

184. Section 10 dealing with appeals from orders of
requisitioning has been retained without any substantial
change.

135. As stated earlier’, the powers conferred upon the
arbitrator by section 12 have been given to the Collector
and the competent authority.

136. Section 13 has been retained with the addition
that the persons required to furnish information shall
be legally bound to do so within the meaning of sections
176 and 177 of the Indian Penal Code.

137. Section 14 has been retained and a new proviso
has been added subjecting the power of entry and ins-
pection to the condition that it camnot be exercised with-
out a minimum notice of at least 24 hours except with the
consent of the occupier and that it can not be exercised
after sunset. and before sun-rise.

138. At present all the Requisitioning Acts (Central as
well as States) are merely temporary enactments toe he
in force for certain specified periods. In view of the
temporary nature of the legislation, it has not been
deemed necessary to limit the period for which a property
can remain under requisition. But as we are recommend-
img the enactment of a law which can remain in force
for an indefinite period, we think, it is reasonable to pro-
vide that a property can not be kept under requisition

1 Para 74, ante.

See. 9 & 11.

Sec. 10.

Sec. 12.

Sec. 13.

Sec, 14.


Sec, 15.

Sec. 16.

66८17.

See, 18,

48

for an indefinite length of time. We have, therefore,
recommended! that no order of requisitioning shall con-
tinue in force for a period of more than 5 years, unless
proceedings for acquisition of the same are commenced
before the expiry of the said five years. This provision,
in our view, will have the advantage of enabling the
Governments to resort to requisition under the provisions
of this Act whenever necessary and at the same time
safeguard the rights of the citizen by providing that the
requisitioning will not continue for a longer period of
time than five years, during which period the Govern-
ment should be in a position to decide whether the land
should be released or acquired. We have also recommend-
ed that no further order of requisition shall be made in
respect of the same property.

139. Section 15, dealing with service of notice, has
been retained with certain modifications. As, in our view
the publication of a notice or order of a general mature
in the Official Gazette may not be adequate, we have
suggested that it should also be published in the news-
papers in the language of the district in which the land
is situate and also that copies of such notices should be
affixed in prominent places on or near the land. Like-
wise, in clause (c) of sub-section (1), we have provided
that a notice or order affecting an individual person (not
being a corporation or firm) shall be served in the manner
provided by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, for the
service of summons or by sending it by registered post
to the person named therein at his last known residence,
address or place of business.

140, Section 16 has been retained without ony material
change. .

141. Section 17, dealing with delegation of powers of
requisitioning, has been retained with the addition of a
new sub-section to enable the State Government to dele-
gate its powers. Further, the State Government has been
required to place such notifications before the State Legis-
lature as the Union Government is now required to place
the notifications issued by it before Parliament,

142. Section 18, dealing with the protection of action
done in good faith, has been incorporated in the proposed
legislation without any material change.

1S. 48, App. 1.


49

148. Section 19, ousting the jurisdiction of the Civil
Court in respect of matters to be determined by the com-
petent authority, has been retained with the addition that
the Civil Court shall have no jurisdiction also in respect
of matters to be determined under this Act by the appro-
priate Government or the Collector. The provision that
no injunction shall be granted by any Court or authority
in certain cases mentioned in this section has, however
been omitted, ag it is considered redundant.

144, We have retained the penalty provisions of both
the Requisitioning and the Land Acquisition Acts.

145. The provision in section 20 of the Requisitioning
and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act has been
modified to provide for imprisonment for a term of six
months or a fine up to 500 rupees or both}.

Section 46 of the Land Acquisition Act has also been
retained with a similar modification to provide for
punishment in the cases of persons who wilfully destroy,
damage or displace trenches etc?,

We have further provided that as regards the two
offences mentioned above, no Court shall take cognisance
of them, except on a report in writing of the facts consti-
tuting such offences made by an officer authorised in this
behalf by the appropriate Government*,

146. This section has been retained with consequential
changes.

147. The rule-making provisions in section 22 of the
Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property
Act, 1952 and section 55 of the Land Acquisition Act 1894
have been combined by us*, omitting provisions relating
to any refrence to arbitration.

148. These sectiong have been omitted as we consider
them unnecessary,

149. As indicated already, we have embodied, in
Appendix 1, our proposals consolidating the Land Acquisi-
tion Act, 1894, and the Requisitioning and Acquisition of
Immovable Property Act, 1952.

1S. 78, App. 1.
3. 8, 19, ibid.
3 9. 80, ibid.

Sec. 19,

Ser. 20.

Seo. 21.

०. 22.

Seu. 23-25.


50

Appendix II contains two comparative Tables:—Table
A shows the sections in the existing Acts with the cor-
responding sections in Appendix I, while Table B shows
the sections in Appendix I and the corresponding sections
in the existing Acts.

Appendix III contains a list of the Land Acquisition
Acts now in force in the various States with the altera-
tions made by them and a brief Summary of such
alterations,

Appendix IV contains a list of other Aets (Central and
State) which confer power to Acquire land, with a summary
of such Acts,

Appendix V gives a list of the requisitioning Acts in
force in the various States with a summary of their pre-
visions and also a tabular statement showing the differ-
ences in the several Acts.

0४, C. SETALVAD,
(Chairman) .

M. 0, CHAGLA,

KN. WANCHOO,

2, SATYANARAYANA RAO,

प्र, 0, SEN GUPTA*

v.K. T. CHARL?

D, NARASA RAJU,*

8. M, SIKRI,*

GS PATHAK"

G. N. JOSHI,

N. A. PALKHIVALA,

K. SRINIVASAN
DURGA DAS BASU,
Joint Secretaries,
New Dewan;
The 26% September, 1958.

“Being unable to come to Delhi to sign the Report, these Members have
authorised the Chairman to sign the report on their behalf.


APPENDIX I

Proposals as inserted in the body of the existing Act.
(This is not to be treated as a draft Bill).

(Corresponding sections of the existing Act are noted in

the margin, and additions te the provisions of the

existing Act are underlined in the text, wherever
possible.)

THE ACQUISITION AND BEQUISITIONING OF LAND
ACT, 1!
PART I—PRELIMINARY
(1) This Act may be called the Acquisition and Re-
questioning of Land Act, 19—————.

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State
of Jammu and Kashmiv.

(3) It shall come into force on

Im this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,

(8) ...... “appropriate Government” means, in
relation to acquisition or requisitioning of Jand
for the purposes of the Union, the Central
Government, and in relation to acquisition or
Tequisitioning of land for purposes other than
those of the Union, the State Government;

() ...७०---०००- “Collector”. .... see includes
..any officer specially appointed by the
appropriate Government to perform the func-
tions of a Collector under this Act;

(C) veeseees “company” means—

(1) a company formed and registered under the
Companies Act, 1956; _

(ii) a company formed and registered under any
previous company jaw for the time being in
force in any part of India other than the State
of Jammu_and Kashmir; ~

SY

Section 1
Short title,
extent and

‘Commes
ment.
(S.LLA.A.]

Section 2.
efinitions.
‘Appropriate
jovernment”

IS. o

“Collector”

ra

“Company”
B36 Oy

1 of 1956,


21 of 1860.

1S. 38.
Bey

[New]

“Compe
Pcs
yr a
RA)

52

(ili) a company formed and registered under any
other law for the time being in force im the
State of Jammu and Kashmir;

(iv) a company— .
(a) incorporated under any Jaw relating to lew relating 10
companies for the time being in force in

any foreign country, foreign country, and

(b) having its principal place of business in
India; हु

(v) a company _Sneorporated incorporated by an Indian law
relating to a particular compat to a partic! company;

(vi) a society registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860, _or_under__any "BS Act, 1860, or under any law
‘corresponding to that Act for the time being
in force m eny part of India;

(vii) an_industrial_ concern ordinarily employing tex ten

or more workmen in a nore workmen in a manufacturing process
carried on with the aid of power, or twenty
‘or more workmen in 8 Manufacturing process

ee SAIS cid oF power: apa
carried on without the aid of power; and .-.-

{viii} a corporation created by or under any lav law
for the time being inforce in any part of
India not being a corporation owned or con-
trolled by the State;

(0) “competent authority” means any person of
autbority authorised by the appropriate Govern-
ment, by notification in the Official Gazette, to
perform the functions of the competent autho-
rity under Part IT for such area as may be
specified in the notification;

(8) ...... “eo-operative society” means a registered
society within the meaning of the ४ Co-operative
Societies Act, 1912, or any society registered
undér any Jaw corresponding ‘@ any law corresponding to that Act for the

time being in force in any part of Unclay force in any part of India;

9) .... “court? means a principal civil court of
original jurisdiction, and includes__any other
civil court empowered by the State Govern-
ment |). | 10 perform the functions of the court


53

under this Act within the pecuniary and local
limits of its jurisdiction;

{g) ..eeee “Jamd” includes benefits to arise out of “Lang”
land, and things attached to the earth or perraa- ee
nently fastened to anything attached to the 7
earth;

(h) “Jandlord” means any person who for the time “Landlord”
being is receiving, or is entitled to receive, or ३०१
has received the rent of or premium for any
premises, whether on his own account, or on
account or on behalf or for the benefit, of any
other person or as a trustee, guardian or receiver
for any other person, or who would so receive
the rent or be entitled to receive the rent or
premium if the premises were let to a tenant;

(i) “local authority” includes 8 town planning wy oes
authority; authority”

(j) the expression. “person interested” includes all ‘Person
persons claiming, or entitled to claim’, an Be
interest in compensation payable on account of 1
the acquisition or requisitioning of land under
this Act; and a person shall be deemed to be
interested in land if he is interested in an ease-
ment affecting the land;

(k) “premises” means any building or part cf a “Premises”
building and includes— Bee

(i) the garden, grounds and out-houses, if any,
appertaining to such building or part of a
building;

(i) any fittings affixed to such building or part: of
building for the more beneficial enjoyment.
thereof;

(1) “prescribed” means preseribed by rules made २६०४ हैं
under this Act; 1S. 2),

(m) ..... . “public purpose” includes— “Public

वि purpose”
(i) the provision of village sites in districts in Is HO
hi ४ AAS
which the appropriate Government shall have
declared by notification in the Official Gazette

1866 Sec., 2 (0) R. A.


54

that it is customary fer the Government to
make such provision;

(ii) the provision of land for planned develop-
ment from public funds and subseqent
disposal thereof in whole or in part by lease,
assignment or outright sale with the object
of securing further development as plaaned;

- (iil) the provision of land for town or rurel plan-
ning under any law relating to such planning;

(iv) the provision of land—

(1) for carrying out amy housing scheme or
health scheme sponsored by the Union
Government or any State Government or a
local authority, or

(2) for clearing slum areas, or

(3) for relieving congestion, or

(4) for housing poor, landless, or displaced
persons, cr persons residing in areas affected
by floods:

(v) the provision of—

{1) residence for any person holding an. office
of profit under the Central Government or
accredited 38 a diplomatic consular or
trade representative of a foreign Govern-
ment.

(2) building for locating a public office;

(vi) the provision of land for corporations owned
or controlled by the State, or other nationalis-
ed_industries or concerns;

(vil) the provision of land for any local authority
and subsequent disposal thereof in whole or
in part by lease, assignment or outright sale
with the object of securing further de the object of securing further develop-
ment;

(viii) the provision of land for a company!— tovision of land for a company!—

(a) for_the erection of dwelling houses for
workmen employed by the company or for
the provision of amenities directly connected
therewith; or

ICE See.40q(a) and (), LAA.


55

{b) where the land is needed for the construc-
fion of some work and such work is likely

to prove substantially {o prove substantially useful to the public;

i

{ix) the provision of land for _a___ co-operative
society—

(a) for _the erection of dwelling houses for work-
men_employed by the co-operative society,
or for the provision of amenities directly
connected therewith; or

(9) where the land is needed for the construc-
tion of some work and such work is likely
40 prove substantially use jo prove substantially useful to the pubic;
or

(०) where the land is needed by a building co-
operative society for the construction | of
houses;

(x) the provision of land for_any charitable trust; land for any charitable trust;

_Explonation.-“Charitable trust” includes _a tm. trust” includes a_ trust
established or to be established for the relief
of the poor, education, medical “Telief__or “or
advancement of any other object_of general general
public utility;

{n) wee “tenan’” means any person by whorn or
on whose account premium or rent is paid or
payable, or both are paid or payable, _ ayable, for any
premises and includes such sub-tenants and
other persons 83 have derived title under the
tenant under any law for the time being in
force.

For the purposes of this Act, of this Act, the following persons
‘shall be deemed to be persons “entitled to act” as and to
the extent hereinafter provided (that is to say}—

(a) trustees for other persons beneficially interested
shall be deemed to be the persons entitled to act
with reference 10 any such case, and that to the
same extent as the persons beneficially interest-
ed could have acted.........-+- :

* * * * * * *

(9) the guardian of minors and the committees
or managers of lunatics or idiots shall be deem-
ed respectively to be the persons so entitled ta

“Tenant”
18. 201),
RAJ

Section 3.
“Entitled
& 3 @

LAAY


56

act, to the same extent as the minors, lunatics,
or idiots themselves, if free from disability,
could have acted;

Provided that—

(9) no person shall be deemed to be “entitled to
act” whose interest in the subject-matter is
shown to the satisfaction of the Collector or
court to be adverse to the interest of the person
interested for whom he would otherwise be
entitled to act;

Gi) in every such case the person interested may
appear by a next friend, or in default of his
appearance by a mext friend, the Collector or
court, as the case may be, Shall appoint a proper
person to act on his behalf in the conduct of
the proceedings; ~~

5 of 1908 (9) the provisions of Order XXXII_of the First
Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
shall, mutatis mutandis, apply in the case of
persons interested appearing before a Collector
or court by a next friend, or by a person appoint~
ed_under clause (ii) of this proviso in Froceed-
ings under this Act, and

(iv) no person “entitled to act” shall be competent
to receive the compensation-money payable to
the person for whom he is entitled to act unless
he would have been competent to alienate the
land and receive and give a good discharge for
the purchase-money on a voluntary sale.

PART TI-~—-ACQUISITION

Carter [—PRELEMINARY INVESTIGATION AND Dect. INVESTIGATION AND DECLARATION.

Preliminary investigation

Section 4, वि

Publication. (1) Whenever it appears to the appropriate Govern-
of prelim” ment or the Collector that any land is needed or 45 likely
feationand to be needed for any public purpose, a notification stating
veers of the purpose for which the land is nceded or likely to be which the land is needed or likely to be
thereupon, needed and describing the land by its survey number, if
8 iy any, and also by its boundaries and its approximate area



57

shall be published in the Official Gazette, and the Collector
shall cause—

(a) public notice of the substance of such notifica-
tion to be given at convenient places in the
locality in which the Jand is situated, and

(9) a copy of such Notification to be served on the
owner, and, where the owner is not the occupier,
also on the occupier, of the land.

Explanation—The expression “convenient plac
includes, in the case of land situate in a e in a village, the offic?
of the Village Panchayat within whose of the Village Panchayat within whose jurisdiction the
land lies. हु

(2) The notification under sub-section (0) shall also
specify the date, (such date not being less than twenty-
one days from the publication of the notification) on or
before which, and the manner in which, objections to the
proposed acquisition can be made. under section 6.

(3) On the publication of such notification it shall be
lawful for any officer, either generally or specially autho-
rised by such Government or by the Collector in this behalf,

and for his servants or workmen,—
(i) to enter upon and survey and take levels of the

land;
© (ii) to dig or bore into the sub-soil;
* . * * * *

(iii) to set out the boundaries of the land proposed.
to be taken and the intended line of the work
Gif any) proposed to be made thereon;

(iv) to mark such levels, boundaries, and line by
placing marks and cutting trenches;

(v) where otherwise the survey cannot be com-
pleted and levels taken and the boundaries ancl
line marked, to cut down and clear away any
part of any standing crop, fence or jungle; enc

(vi) to do all other acts necessary to ascertair:

. whether the land ig suitable for such purpose: such purpose:
Provided that no person shall enter into any - building

or upon any enclosed court or garden attached toa
: dwelling house (umless with the consent of the occupier

[New]

Pak


58

thereof) without previously giving such occupier at least
seven days’ notice in writing of his intention to do so.

BS. (4) Where the acquisition is for acquisition is for a person or authority,
an officer _of such person or authority may be ali officer of such person or authorit may be authorised
by_the appropriate Goverfiment or the Collector to
exercise the powers conferred by sub-section (3).

[New] (5) The officer authorised under sub-section (3) or
sub-section (4) shall complete hig investig (4) shall complete hig investigation and submit
his report to the Collector within a period of three months
for within such longer period, not exceeding six months
in all, as the appropriate Governn all, as the appropriate Government may allow) from the
date of the publication of the notification under sub-section
(1), and the Collector shall forward the report with his
remarks to the appropriate Govemment along with his
report under sub-section (2) of section 6. ~

Section 5. The officer ... authorised under sub-section (3) or sub-
Fayment {or section (4) af section 4 shall. at the time of such entry,
1 $, 5, LAA] pay or tender payment or tender payment for all necessary damage to be
done as eforesaid, and in case of dispute as to the suffi-
ciency of the amount so paid or tendered, he shall at once

refer the dispute to the court for its decision,

Objections
Section 6, (1) Any person .......... may, on or before the date
Hearing of specified in the notification in the notification under sub-section (1) of
wren, section 4 in this behalf, object to the acquisition of the
LAA] Jand so notified.

IS. 54 (2), (2) Every objection under sub-section (1) shali be
carlier part, made to the Collector in writing setting out the grounds
thereof, and the Collector shall give the objecior an
opportunity of being heard either in person or by pleader
and shall, after hearing all such objections and after mak-
ing such further inquiry, if any, as he thinks necessary,
submit the case for the decision of the appropriate Crovern-
“ment, before the expiry of six weeks from mene oerore the expiry of six weeks from the last date for
filing objections or before the expiry of two wecks from
the date on which he receives the réport und he date on which he receives the report under sub- he receivés the report under sub-section
(5) _of ‘section 4, whichever is later, together with the
record of the proceedings held by hi proceedings held by him and a report con-
taining his recommendations on the objections..........

{New] (3) ‘The Collector shall, on the application of the
objector and at his cost, furnish him with a copy oF his
report.



59

__On receipt of the report of the Collector under sub-
section (2) of section ction (2) of section 6, the appropriate Government, after the appropriate Government, after
giving an opportunity to the objectors of being heard an opportunity to the objectors of being heard
fare पक by plesder, shall decide whether the in person or by pleader, shall decide whether the
land 15 needed for & public purpose, The decision of the
appropriate Government +. Shall be final as
to the question whether the land is needed for the purpose
stated in the stated in the notification under sub-section (1) of section 4 under sub-section (1) of section 4

Declaration
.. If the appropriate Government is satisfied,

(a)_that_the land is needed for a public purpose;
and

(b) that it is suitable for the purpose for which it
is intended to be acquired;

.-it shall, within six weeks from the date

‘he report of the Collector under sub-section

(2) of section 6, direct the Collector to proceed under

sub-section (2).

* * * * * * *

Section 7.
Deuistoa on
objections:
[S. 5AQ@),
latter part
LAA]

Section 8.
Declaration
that land is
required for
a public
purpose.

(2) The Collector shall, thereupon, within two months [हु

from the date on which he receives such from the date on which he receives such direction —

(a) cause the land (unless it has been already
marked out under section 4) to be marked cut;

09) .......... '..also cause it to be measured, and, if
no plan has been made thereof, a plan to be
made of the same; and

{c) report to the appropriate Government the result
of his operations under this sub-section.

(3)_The appropriate Government shall then, within one
month from the receipt of the report of the Collector
‘under sub-section (2), make a declaration that the land (2), make a declaration that the land
18 needed for a public purpose. The declaration shall be
published in the Official Gazette and shall specify—

(i) the land, with its precise boundaries, and survey
number, (if any) its approximate area, and....
the place where_a plan of the land may be
inspected; and

(ii) the public purpose for which the 1970 is needed
LiLaw/67—5

(Ss. 6),
main para,
part,
LAA]

(8. 2),
LAA)


6B.

&
ee

INew]

[New]

Section 9,
Nesing of

[S. IG latter «+--+

60

(4) .... The Collector ghall thereupon take order for

two months or within such longer period, not exceeding
fur months in all, (a8 the appropriate Gov in all, (as the appropriate Government may
allow from the date of the declaration, taken possession of
the land after giving reasonable notice to the persons
interested in the land.

(5) Land not included in the declaration under this
section but included in the notification under sub-section
(i) of section 4 shall, as from the date of the declaration,
stand released from the notification; and the notification
shail be deemed to be cancelled to that extent. =

(6) If the appropriate Government decides to abandon
the acquisition of the Jand, it shall issue a notification to
that effect and cancel the notification issued under sub-
section (1) of section 4 हु

CHAPTER एप
TAKING POSSESSION, AND OTHER PROCEEDINGS BY COLLECTOR
(1) When the Collector takes possession of the land

specified in the declaration issued under section 8, it shall
vest absolutely in the Centra! Government or the

1,
Coier the acquisition of the land_and shall, within a period of
1

part, A.A} State Government, as the case may be, free from all

(New]

Section 10,
to

interested,
Sp. 1),
8.9. @,
Be
LAA]

encumbrances.

(2) ‘The fact of such taking possession and vesting shall
be forthwith notified by such Government in the Official
Gazette, and such notification shall be evidence of the
title of such Government to the land. _

(1) When a declaration under section 8 is published,
the Collector shall....cause public notice to be given ....
stating that-..... claims to compensation for all interests
in such गाते shall be made to him. :

(2) Such notice shall state the particulars ng the land
acquired, and shall require all persons interested in the
land to appear personally or by agent before the Collector
at a time and piace therein mentioned (such time not
being earlier than fifteen days after the date of publication
of the notice), and to state the nature of their respective
interests in the land, . the amount and particulars of
their elaims to compensation for such interests, the basis
on which the compensation so claimed is computed.......-



61

their objections, if any, to the area_as specified in the
declaration, and such other matters as may he prescribed. he prescribed,
(3) The statements shall be made in writing in the
prescribed form and shall be signed by the party or his
agent.
(4) The Collector shall also serve notice to the same

effect on the occupier (if any) of such land and on all L

such persons known or believed to be interested there-
in, or to be entitled to act for persons so interested, as
reside or have agents authorised to receive service on
their behalf, within the revenue district in which the land
is situate. Such notice shall be served at least fifteen
days before the date on which the persons concerned are
to_appear and state their respective interests before the
Collector.

(5) In case any person so interested resides elsewhere,
and has no such agent, the notice shall be sent to him by
registered post in a letter addressed to him at his last
known residence, address or place of business......

(1) The Collector may also by notice require any such
person to make or deliver to him, at a time and place
mentioned (such time not being earlier than fifteen days
after the date of the service of the notice, a statement
containing, so far as may be practicable, the name of every
other person possessing any interest in the land or any
part thereof as proprietor, sub-proprietor, mortgagee,
temant or otherwise, and of the nature of such interest,
and of the rents and profits (if any) received or receivable
on account thereof for three years next preceding the date
of the statement.

(2) Every person required to make or deliver a state-
ment under this section or section 10 shall be deemed to
be legally bound to do so within the meaning of sections
175 and 176 of the Indian Penal Code

Fixation of Area and Value

(1) On the day 50 fixed, or on any other day to which
the proceedings may be adjourned, and after consultation
with the appropriate Government, and, if the acquisition
is made for purposes other than those of the Government,
also with the person or authority for which the acquisi-
tion ig made, and after calling-for such information frora
the claimants as he thinks necessary, the Collector shall—

{a) fix, by agreement with all the persons referred
to in clause (b) the true area of the land, the

IS 42),

(S. 904),
LAA]

Section 11,
Power to

require and
enforce the
making of
statements

as to names
and interests

LAA

45 of 1400

Section 12
Proceedings
by Colfec-

LAA}


PNew}

[New]

62

compensation. ...to be allowed for the land 2 land and
the person Entitled to receive the same;

(०) also ascertain whether all the persons known
or believed to be interested in the land, of
whom, or of whose claims, he has information
whether or not they have respectively appear-
ed before him, are agreed as to the _apportion-
ment of the said compensation among them-
selves,

(2) If an agree an agreement is arrived at under clause (a) or
(b) of sub-section Ab) of sub-section (1) on any of the matters mentioned
in that clause, the Collector shali record such agreement
Obtain the signattires of the parties and make : Signatures of the parties and make an cocoa जग पक the parties and make an order in in
copy Of each Orie ath ee et His_hand. “A with such reement, under his hand. A
CoM On Tite ey ned fee of cost to any of such order shall be furnished free of cost to any
person interested in the land who applies for the person interested in the land who applies for the same.

(3) In_so far as an agreement is not arrived at under
Serr an Ae) of sub-section () on. any of (a) and (9) of sub-section (1) on any of the matters
Mentioned in that clause, the Collector shall—

(3) refer such matter or matters for the determina-
tion of the court and informa the parics of the of the court and inform the tion of the court and inform the partics of
Same immediately;

(b) fix, on the basis of the true ares of the land as
determined by him, the compensation which in determined by him, the compensation which in
his opinion should be allowed for the land; and

(0) fix the manner of apportionment of the said
compensation among the claimants, where _where such
apportionment is needed.

(4) In fixing the amount of compensation. the Collec
tor shall be guided by the provisions contained in sections
21 and 22.

(1) On making an order under sub-section (3) of sec-
tion 12, the Collector shall, subject to the Brovisions_of
sub-section (2), within one month from the date of the
order, tender payment of the compensation fixed by him
to the persons interested entitled thereto
and....pay it to them......

(2) Tf they shall not consent to receive it, or if there
be no person competent to alienate the Jand, or if there
be any dispute as to the title-to receive the compensation


63

or as to the apportionment of it, the Collector shall
deposit the amount of the compensation in the court, and
give notice of such deposit to the persons interested such deposit to the persons interested en-
titled to the amount.

* * *

On the sum fixed by the Collector under clause (9) of under clause (b) of
sub-section sub-section (3) of section 12, as reduced by the amount, } reduced by the amount, if
any, paid or deposited under clause (c) of secti clause (c) of section 33, the
Collector shall pay....interest..at the rate of five per
centum per annum from the date of....taking possession
of the land to the date on which the sum is deposited in
court, or, if thesum is not so deposited, then to the date on the date on
which it is paid by the Collector to the person entitled to the person entitled to
receive the same,

(1) If there is agreement on all the matters referred to
in clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) of section 12.
the amount fixed by the agreement shall be paid by the
Collector to the persons interested in accordance there- @ollector fo the persons interested im accordance there-
with within one month with within one month from the date of the order re- the date of the order re-
corded under sub-section (2) of section 12,

(2) In default of such payment, the order of the Collec- the order of the Collec-
tor may be executed as if it were a decree of a civil court
of the lowest grade which would be competent to try a would be competent to try a
suit for the recovery of the land.

(3) Interest on the amount referred to in sub-section
00) shall be paid by the Collector at the rate of 1५8 per the Collector at the rate of five per
centum per annum from the date of taking possession of
the land to the date of payment under sub-section (1) or
realisation by execution under sub-section (2), _ execution under sub-section (2), as the
case may be, and shall be deemed. to be included _in_ his
onder. 7

___Where the Collector does not, within the period speci-
fied in sub-section (4) of section 8, take } (4) of section 8, take possession of the
land, the date on which the said period expires shall, for
the purposes of sections 14 and 15, be deemed to be the
date on which possession of the land is taken by the
Collector.

(1) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1) of
section 15, the Collector may, with the sanction of the
appropriate Government, instead of awarding a money
compensation in respect of any land, make any arrange-
ment with a person having a limited interest in such land,

Section 14,

Interest on

amount fixed
by Collector,
[5' 34, L.A.

Al

Section 15.
Payment in
case of
agreement.
[New]

Section” 16.
Interest in
cases where
possession
net taken
within
specified
time.
[New]
Section 17.
Compensa-
tion in
fg;

५ 31 (3),
Bea9


64

either by the grant of other lands in exchange, the remis-
sion of land revenue on other lands held under the same
title, or in such other way as may be equitable having
regard to the interests of the parties concerned.

neta (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be construed tv
हैं interfere with or limit the power of the Collector to enter
into any arrangement with any person interested in the
land and competent to contract in respect thereof, includ-
ing, in particular, an arrangement for the grant of other

lands in exchange.

1224 रात ) AN the proceedings that are necessary to be taken
‘of proceed under this Act from the date of the issue of the notification
Re under sub-section (1) of section 4 to the date fixed for

the first hearing under sub-section (2) of section 10 shall
be completed “within a period of eight_ mont eight months, unless
the appropriate Government, for reasons to be recorded
in writing, extends the time by a further period not ex-
ceeding four months.

(2) The Collector shall complete all proceedings under
section 12 (including the making of any order under sub-
section (2) or a reference under sub-section (3) of that
tion) within four months from the date fixed for the

६ hearing under sub-section (2) of section 10.

fi

Section 19. If, within the period specified in sub-section (1) or
When notif. sub-section (2) of section 18, the proceedings 2: proceedings are not com-
section pleted, the notification under sub-section (1) of section 4
deemed fo shall stand cancelled, and the persons interested in the
[New] land shall, if possession of the Jand has beer been taken by

the Collector, be entitled to apply to the court for an order

against the Collector for :—

: हि (a) restoration of possession in accordance with
“ their respective interests, and
(9) payment of such compensation as the court
may determine.

Reference to court
Section 20, (1) In making a reference under sub-section (3) of

Collector's
Satement to S2ction 12, the Collector shall state for the information of

the court, the court, in writing-.....
Bs, rs (a) the situation and extent of the land, with

particulars of any trees, buildings or standing
crops thereon, attaching a plan of the land


65

<b) the names of the persons who, he has reason
to believe, are interested in such land; and

(0) ress the amount of compensa-
tion fixed by him under sub-section (3) of sec-
tion 12 and the basis on which it was arrived at.

(2) To the said statement shall also be attached a

schedule givng ... particulars of the notices served upon,
‘and of the statements in writing made or delivered by,
the parties interested respectively, and any other informa-
tion available with the Collector relating to the matters

referred to the court,

CHAPTER III
PRINCIPLES FOR THE DETERMINATION Or COMPENSATION

(1) In determining the amount of compensation to be 5००७:
awarded for land acquired under this Act, the court shall
take into consideration—

first, the market-value of the land at the date
of the publication of the notification under
sub-section (1) of section 4;

secondly, the damage sustained by the person

~~ “Gnterested, by reason of the taking of any
standing crops or trees which may be on the
land at the time of the Collector’s taking posses-
sion thereof;

thirdly, the damage (if any), sustained by the person
interested, at the time of the Collector’s taking
possession of the land, by reason of severing
such land from his other land;

fourthly, the damage (if any), sustained by the
person interested, at the time of the Collector's
taking possession of the land, by reason of the
acquisition injuriously affecting his other pro-
perty, movable or immovable, in any other
manner, or his earnings;

fifthly, if, in consequence of the acquisition of the
land by the Collector, the person interested is
compelled to change his residence ur place or
business, the reasonable expenses (if any) in-
cidental to such change;........... .



66

sixthly, the damage (if any) bona fide resuiting
from diminution of the Profits of the land bet-
ween the time of the publication of the noti-
fication under sub-section (i) of section 4 and
the time of the Collector's taking possession of
the land; and

seventhly, if it be shown that before the date of
“the publication of the notification ui the publication of the notification under sub-
section (1) of section 4 the owner of the land

"bad in good faith taken active ad in good faith taken active steps and incurr-

ed_expenditure to secure a more prot expenditure to secure a more Profitable use
of the same, the expenditure so incurred.

(2) In addition to the market value of the land as
above provided, the court shall in every case award a sum
of fifteen per centum on such market-value, in considera-
tion of the compulsory nature of the acquisition,

Secti 2: i is —
Section 55 But the court shall not take into consideration.

be neglected first, the degree of urgency which has led to the
in determi-  aequisiti

ning com acquisition;

rae secondly, any disinclination of the person interested
LAAL to part with the land acquired;

thirdly, any damage sustained by him which, if
caused by a private person, would not render
such person liable to a suit;

fourthly, any damage which is likely to be caused to
~~the land acquired, after the date of the publica-
tion of the declaration under section 8, by or
in consequence of the use to which it will be
put;

fifthly, any inerease to the value of the land acquired
likely to accrue from the use to which it will
be put when acquired;

sixthly, any increase to the value of the other land
of the person interested likely to acerue from
the use to which the land acquired will be
putj......

seventhly, any outlay or improvements on, or
disposal of the land acquired, commenced made
or effected without the sanction of the Collector
after the date of the publication of the notifi-
cation under sub-section (1) of section 4, unless,


467

in the case of improvements, such improvements
were necessary jor the maintenance of any
building in a proper state of rep: of repair; or

eighthly, where the market-value of the land acquir-
“ed is increased by reason of the use thereof in a
manner which could be restrained by any court

or is contrary to law or is or is contrary to law or is detrimental to the
health of the inmates of the premises or to public

CHAPTER IV
INvESTMENT Or Moneys DEPOSITED

(1) If any money is deposited in court under section

55, or where any money is dey where any money is deposited in court under sub-

section (2) of section 13 and it appears that the land in

respect whereof the same was awarded belonged to a per-

son who had no power to alienate the same, the court
shall—

{a) order the money to be invested in the purchase

of other lands to be held under the lke title La.

and conditions of ownership as the land im res-
pect of which such money shall have been
deposited was held, or
(b) if such purchase cannot be effected forthwith,
then in such Government or other approved
securities as the court shall think fit;
and shall direct the payment of the interest or other pro-
ceeds arising from such investment to the person or per-
song who would for the time being have been entitled to
the possession of the said land, and such moneys shall
remain so deposited and invested until the same he ap-
plied-—
(i) in the purchase of such other lands as aforesaid;
or

(ii) in payment to any person or persons becoming
absolutely entitled thereto;

(2) Where, by virtue of the provisions of clause (b) of the provisions of clause (b) of
sub-section (1), any money is required to be invested in
the purchase of securities referred to therein, and, before referred to therein, and, before
the money. is so invested, any person or persons become
absolutely entitled thereto, the court may, not withstand-
ing anything contained in sub-section (0), pay such money
to. such person or persons. ~

[New]


68

4S. 3202) (3) In all cases of moneys deposited to which this sec-

LAA] tion applies, the court shall order the costs of the following
matters, including therein all reasonable charges und ex-
penses incident thereto, to be paid by the Collector,
namely—

(a) the costs of such investments as aforesaid;

(b) the costs of the orders for the payment of the
interest or other proceeds, of the securities upon
which such moneys are for the time being invest-
ed, and for the payment out of court of the
principal of such moneys, and of all proceedings
relating thereto, except such as may be occasion-
ed by litigation between adverse claimants.

Section 24, (1) When any money shall have been deposited. in

Tovestment court under this Act for any cause other than that men-

Geposited in tioned in section 23, the court may, on the application of

es any party interested or claiming an interest in such

LAA money, order the same to be invested in such Govern-
ment or other approved securities as it may think proper.
and may direct the interest or other proceeds of any such
investment to be accumulated and paid in such manner
as it may consider will give the parties interested therein
the same benefit therefrom as they might have had from
the land in respect whereof such money shall have been
deposited or as near thereto as may be.

[New] (2) The court may pay any such money or transfer the
securities in which it is invested to the person entitled

thereto if the cause for which the money was | deposited
has ceased to has ceased to exist and if there be no other legal and if there be no other legal objection

to such payment or transfer. transfer,
CHAPTER V

ACQUISITION OF LAND FOR COMPANIES AND OTHER
PERSONS AND AUTHORITIES

Where land is to be acquired for any company—

{a) no notification under sub-section (1) of section 4
shall be issued except by, or with the previous
consent of, the appropriate Governmen onsent of, the appropriate Government; and

(b) the provisions of sections 8 to 20, or of Chapter IV

0. or Chapter VI of this Part, or of Part VI of this Part, or of Part 1V, shall

AAJ - - not be put in force....except with the previous

consent of the appropriate Governn:ent, and



69

unless the company shall have executed ihe
agreement hereinatter mentioned.

(1) Such consent shall not be given unless the appro-
priate Government be satisfied, either on the report of
the Collector under sub-section (2) of section 6 or by any
enquiry held by such officer and at such time and place as
the appropriate Government shall appoint, that the purpose
of the acquisition is a public purpose af the category speci-
fied in item (viii) of clause (m) of section 2.

(2) Such officer may summon and enforce the attendance
of witnesses and compel production of documents by the
same means and, as far as possible, in the same manner as
is provided by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in the case
of a civil court.

{If the appropriate Government is satisfied.......... that
the purpose of the proposed acquisition is a public purpose
of the category specified in item (viii) of clause (m) of
section 2, it shall, before issuing 8 declaration under section
8, require the company to enter into an agreement with the
appropriate Government, providing to the satisfaction of
the appropriate Government for the following matters,
“namely :-—

(1) the payment to the appropriate Government of
the cost of acquisition;

(2) the transfer, on such payment, of the land to the
company;

(3) the terms on which the land shall be held by
the company;

(4) where the acquisition is for the purpose of erect-
ing dwelling houses or the provision of amenities
connected therewith, the time within which, the
conditions on which and the manner in which the
dwelling houses or amenities shall be erected or
provided; and

(5) where the acquisition is for the construction of
any other work, the time within which und the
conditions on which the work shall be executed
and maintained, and the terms on which the
public shall be entitled to use the work.

Eevery such agreement shall, as soon as may be after its
execution, be published in the Official Gazette and shall
thereupon (50 far as regards the terms on which the public

$ of 1908,

Section 27
Agreement
wilh
appropriate
Govern-

Section 28,
Publication
of agrec-
ment,

LAAI


70

shall be entitled to use the work) have the same effort as
if it had formed part of this act.
Section 29, The provisions of sections 25 te 28, both inclusive, shall
tions notte Ot apply to the acquisition of land for any Railway or
apply where other-company, for the purposes of which, under any agree-
ment bound ment with such company,............ the Central Govern-

AY agreement ment or any State Government is bound to provide land.

land for
companies.
5. 43,
LAAT
Sion 2 The provisions of sections 25 to 28 shall, mutatis mutan-
of "and dis, apply where land is to be acquired for any person (not
persons "being a company), or authority. _.
ut citi
tNew) CHAPTER VI
‘TAXENG POSSESSION WITH CONSENT OR IN
URGENT CASES,

Section HW The Collector may, at any time after the issue of a

cosecion aotification under sub-section (1) of section 4, take posses-

Wa consent sion of the land so notified, if the persons interested in the
land express in writing their willingness to surrender
possession of the land and waive their right to object to the
acquisition of the land. 7 रा

Sccrlon 32 () Whenever, owing to any sudden chang? in the
powers in Channel of any...... river or other unforeseen emergency,

cases of it becomes necessary—

A
15. :7(%, (a) for any Railway Administration to acaadre the
par Paras immediate possession cf any land for the main
tenance of their traffic or for the purpose of
making thereon a riverside or a ghat station, or
of providing convenient connection with ur acesss
to any such station; or
[New] (b) for the Government to acquire immediate posses-
sion of any land for the purpose of maintaining
road communications or traffic over roads or re-
pairing breaches in channels, river bunds or
tanks or maintaining irrigation or water supply
or drainage;
the Collector: may, even before a notification under sub-
section (1) of section 4 has been issued...... enter upon
and take possession of such land............ हु



71

Provided that the Collector shall not take possession of
any building or part of a building under this section with-
out giving the occupier thereof at least forty-eight hours’
notice of his intention so to do, or such longer notice ag may
be reasonably sufficient to enable such occupier to remove
his movable property from such building without unneces-
sary inconvenience,

(2) 2) The collector _shall_immediately report to the collector shall immediately report to the
appropriate Government the fact of such appropriate Government the fact of such taking possession
and the reasons the The appropriate Government

n two months of the receipt of Such report, shall then, within two months of the receipt of such report,
notify in the Official Gazette whether the acquisition of the acquisition of
the land under the provisions of provistons of this Act should or should
not be proceeded with, ==——Ss—~—CSS

(3) If within four months of the date on which four months of the date on which pusses-
sion of sion of the land is taken by the Collector, the appropriate land is taken by the Ccllector, the appropriate
Government does not notify in the poveiment does not notify in the Official Gazette whether
the acquisition of the land under the कल जात et ok the land under the provisions of_this of this
Act should or should not t be proceeded with, standing a5ything contined री हि कक Ghee notwith-
standing anything contained in sub-section (2), interested may apply to the coust for an onlet waned oe Persons
interested may apply to the court for an order against the
Collector for—

(a) restoration restoration of possession in acc possession in accordance with their
respective interests, and

(७) payment of such compensation as the 121 compensation as the court may
determine.

Where possession of any land is ae bessession of any land is taken under section 31 under section 31.
or section 32, the following provisions shail & scion 32, the following provisions shall apply :— —

(a) if the appropriate Government withdraws from the appropriate Government withdraws from
the acquisition of the he acquisition of the land, compensation shall be
paid jin accordance with the provisions of sub: with the provisions of sub-
section (2) section Section (2) of section 37;_

(b)_if the acquisition of the Jand is ae cauisition of the land is proceeded with with,

the land shall vest Ge ane shall vest absolutely in the appropriat: in the appropriate
rel

Government free from all encumbrances Sovernment free from all encumbranees on th?
Pp pucwcaton of 2 declaration in respect of thi of a declaration in respect of the
Tan ler section 8; and ~

{c) the Collector athe Collector shall, at the time of at the time of taking posses-
sion, pay won Pay _or offer 10 each person intereste: offer_to each person interested, as
interim compensation for the mterim compensation for the acquisition of the
land, an amount not exceeding sixty per centurn
of the amount which, on 1 3 preliminary estimat: ) preliminary estimate,
the person concerned would, in a the opinion of the
Collector, be entitled to claim for the easctor, be entitled to claim for the acquisition

8.172),
PARA

iNew} -

(New]

Section 33,
Special pro~
garding tard
ing lark
taken pos- -
session of
under this
chapter
ENew]


72

of the land; and if the amount so oleres and if the amount so offered is not
accepted, the Collecto Collector shall deposit it in the
court,

Where possession of any land is taken under section 32,°

Section 34,
Payment ot the Collector shall, at the time of taking possession, pay or
hon’ for offer to the persons interested compensation for the stand-
ron and ing crops and trees, if any, on such land and for any other’
[S.17@), damage sustained by them caused by such sudden dis-
2 possession and not except in section 22; and, in case of
dispute _as_to the e sufficiency of the amount so । of the amount so paid or

offered, he shall at once refer | Shall at once refer the dispute to the court for’

deci:

CHAPTER VII
GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO ACQUISITION

Section 33, When_a person interested in any land and competent to
Gain foc contract in respect thereof, at any stage of the proceedings
compensa. for the acquisition of land, states in writing before the
[New] Gollector or before the court, as the case may be, ‘be, that he
gives up his claim | his claim to ) compensation in respect in respect of the 1990,
he shalt be deemed to have received and given a valid
discharge of such compensation for the land_as would

otherwise have been paid,
Seti (1) Where the provisions of this Act are put in force
of dand ac for the purpose of acquiring land at the cost of any fund
(गण autho. controlled or managed by & local authority or of any com-
rity or com- pany or other person, the charges of and incidental . to

Pany of other such atquisition shall be defrayed from or by such fund

हर Fa or company or other person,

a (2) In any proceeding held under this Act in such cases,
the local authority or company or other person concerned
may.....for the purpose of fixing or determining the amount
or compensation—

(a) appear and represent its case before the Collee-
tor, or

(b) appear anc and adduce evidence before the court, as
‘the case may be. ~ To

Serie (1) ....The appropriate Government shall be at liberty
Cracqus 10 withdraw from the acquisition of any Jand before a

tion on declaration under_section 8 has been issued, and shall, in
but compen- every such case, cancel the notification issued under sub-
sation te © section (1) of section 4 in respect of the land _
whea, | not (2) Whenever the appropriate Government withdraws

completed. © al
[S. 48,L.A.4.] from any such acquisition, the Collector shall determine



73

the amount of compensation due for the damage suffered
by the owner in consequence of the notice or of any pre-
ceedings thereunder, and shall pay such amount to the
person interested, together with all costs reasonably
incurred by him in the prosecution of the proceedings
under this Act relating to the said land.

(3) In case of dispute as to the amount of such com-
pensation, the Collector shall refer the same to the court
for decision. हि

Where a person receives or withdraws any amount paid

Section 38,
Acceptance

or deposited as compensation for the acquisition of land of money
under this Act, his rights shall not be prejudiced merely “i#hout pro-

test not to

by reason of the fact that he received or withdrew the bar rights.

amount without protest.
PART II—REQUISITIONING, AND REQUISITIONING
FOLLOWED BY ACQUISITION

The provisions of this Part shall apply only if the sec.

[New]

39,

appropriate Government issues a notification in the Official Applications

of Part HI,

Gazette applying this Part to the whole or part of its [New]

territory.

(1) Where the competent authority is of opinion that Section 40,

any land is needed or likely to be needed for any public Power to re

Purpose, being a purpose of the Union or of a State, and land.

land.
that the land should be requisitioned, the competent (S.3, R.A]

authority—
(a) shall call upon the owner or any other person
who may be in possession of the land by notice
in writing (specifying therein the purpose of
the requisition) to show cause, within fifteen
days of the date of the service of such notice on
him, why the land should not be requisitioned;
and

(b) may, by order, direct that neither the owmer of
the land nor any other person shall, without
permission of the competent authority, dispose
of, or structurally alter, the land or let it out to
a tenant until the expiry of such period, not
exceeding two months as may be specified in
the order.

(2) Hf, after considering the cause, if any, shown by
any person interested in the land or in possession thereof,
and after giving an opportunity of being heard either in
person or by pleader, the competent authority is satisfied
that it is mecessary or expedient so to do, it may, by order



Section 41,
Power to

take posses-
sion of ro-
quisitioned

Jand,
18. 4, RAJ

Section 42,

cots over
requisitioned

land,
(8. 5, R.A]

74

in writing, requisition the land and may make such fur
ther orders as appear to it to be necessary.or expedient in
connection with the requisitioning: .

" Provided that no land or part thereof—

{a) which is bona fide used by the owner thereof or
a beneficiary under_a private trust_as the resi-
dence of himself or his family, or

(b) which is exclusively used either for religious

worship by the public or as a school, hospital,

public brary or an orphanage or for the pur-
pose of accommodation of persons connected
with the management of such place of worship
or such school, hospital, library or orphanage,
or,

(c} whieh js in the oevupetion ¢ is in the occupation of a tenant who has
actually resided there for a continuons period

“of six months or more before the date of the

notice under sub-section (1), shall be requisition-

ed:

Provided further that where the requisitioned land
consists cf premises which are being used as a residence
by a tenant for not less than two months immediately
preceding the date of the service of notice under sub-sec-
tion (1), the competent authority shall provide such tenant
with alternative accommodation which, in its opinion, is
suitable.

(1) Where any land has been requisitioned under sec-
tion 40, the competent authority may, by notice in writing,
order the owner as well as any other person who may be
in possession of the land to surrender or deliver possession
thereof to the competent authority or any person duly
authorised by it in this behalf within thirty days of the
service of the notice.

(2) If any person refuses or fails to comply with any
order made under sub-section (1), the competent eutho-
rity may take possession of the land and may, for that
purpose, use such force ag may be necessary.

(0) All land requisitioned under section 40 shail be
used for such purposes as may be mentioned in the notice
of requisition.

(2) Where any premises are requisitioned under sec-
tion 40, the competent authority may order the landlord



75

to-execute such repairs, the cost of which does not exceed
one-sixth of the annual Tental value, as may be necessary
and are usually made by landlords in that locality and as
may be specified in the notice, within such reasonable time
as may be mentioned therein, and if the landlord fails to
éxecute ‘any repairs in pusuance of such order, the com-
petent authority may cause the repairs specified in the
order to be executed at the expense of the landlord and
the cost of thereof, mot exceeding one-sixth of the annual
rental value, may, without prejudice to any other mode of
recovery, be deducted from the compensation payable to
the landlord.

(1) The appropriate Government may, at any time,
release from requisition any land requisitioned under this

Part and shall, as far as possible, restore the Jand_ in as im

good a condition as it wag when possession thereof was
taken subject only to the changes caused by reasonable
wear and tear and irresistible force:

Provided that where the purposes for which any
requisitioned land was being used ceasz to exist, the
appropriate Government shall, unless the land is acquired
under section 49, release that land, as soon as may be,
from requisition,

(2) Where any land is to be released from requisition
the competent authority may, after such inquiry, if any,
as it may in any case consider necessary to make or cause
to be made, specify by order in writing the person to whom
possession of the land shall be given and such possession
shall, as far as practicable, be given to the person from
whom possession was taken at the time of the requisition
or to the successors-in-interest of such person,

(3) The delivery of possession of the land to the person
specified in an order under sub-section (2) shall be a full
discharge of the appropriate Government from all liability
in respect of the land, but shall not prejudice any rights
in respect of the land which any other person may be
entitled by due process of law to enforce against the
Person to whom possession of the land is given,

(4) Where any person to whom possession of any
requisitioned land is to be given is not found and has no
agent. or other person empowered to accept delivery on his
behalf, the competent authority shall cause a notice declar-
ing that the land is released from requisition to affixed
LiLaw/67-- 6

Section 43,
Release from
requisition-

ing.
[8, 6, R.A.)


76

on some conspicuous part of the land and shall also publish
the notice in the Official Gazette.

(5) When a motice referred to in sub-section (4) is
published in the Official Gazette, the land specified in such
notice shall cease to be subject to requisition on and from
the date of such publication and shall be deemed to have
been delivered to the person entitled to possession thereof,
and the appropriate Government shall not be liable for
any compensation or other claim in respect of the land
for any period after the said date. ~

(6) Where any land requisitioned under this Part or
any material part thereof is wholly destroyed or rendered
substantially and permanently it for the purpose for
which it was requisitioned by reason of fire, earthquake,
tempest, flood, or violence of any army or of a mob or
other irresistible force, the requisition shall, at the option
of the appropriate Government, be void:

Provided that the benefit of this sub-section shall not
be available to the appropriate Government where the
injury to such land is caused by any wrongful act or
default of that Government.

Section 44, No person interested in any land requisitioned......

Easement ynder this Part shall, without the previous written consent

not to be of the competent authority or except for the purposes of

IS. 16, १.8.) effecting repairs or complying with a municipal require-
ment, wilfully disturb any convenience or casement
attached to such land or remove, destroy or render
unserviceable anything provided for permanent use there-
with or discontinue or cause to be discontinued eny supply
or service provided for the land.

Section 45, (1) Where any land is requisitioned...... under this
abiinciples |, Part, there shall be paid compensation the amount of

of _deter- which shall be determined in the manner and in accordance

पटक with the principles hereinafter set out, that is to say,
for requisi- .
Honing, " (४) where the amount of compensation can be fixed

by agreement between the competent authority
and the persons interested, it shall be paid in
accordance with such agreement,

(b) where no such agreement can be reached, the
competent authority shall refer the matter to
the court for decision.



77

(2) The amount of compensation payable for the re-
quisitioning of any land shall consist of— पर

(a) a recurring payment, in respect of requisition,
of a sum equal to the rent which would have
been payable for the use and occupation of the
land, if it had been taken on lease for that
period; and

(b) such sum or sums, if any, as may be found
necessary to compensate the person interested
for all or any of the following matters,
namely :—

(i) pecuniary loss due to requisitioning;

(ii) expenses on account of vacating the requisi-
tioned premises;

(iii) expenses on account of re-occupying ihe pre-
mises upon release from requisition;......

(iv) damage (other than normal wear and tear)
cause to the land during the period of requi-
sition, including the expenses that may have
to be incurred for restoring the land to the

condition in which it was at the time of requi-
sition; and

(vy) compensation for any damage caused by acts
done in exercise of the powers conferred by
section 47. _

(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of requisition

Section 46,

made by the competent authority under sub-section (2) Appeals from

of section 40 or an order under sub-section (2) of section
42 may, within twenty one days from the date of service

of the order, prefer an appeal to the appropriate Govern-
ment: रा

Provided that the appropriate Government may enter-
tain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of
twenty-one days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in
time.

(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the
appropriate Government may, after calling for a report
from the competent authority and giving an opportunity

orders of re-
quisitioning
[S. 10, R.A]


78

to the parties of being heard and after making such
further inquiry, if any, as may be necessary, pass such
order ag it thinks ft and the order of the appropriate
Government shall be final.

(3) Before hearing the appeal the appropriate Govern-
ment shall furnish the appellant with a copy of the report
referred _to in_sub-esction (2), on his application and at hts

cost.

(4) Where an appeal is preferred under sub-section (1),
the apptopriate Government may stay the enforcement
of the order of the competent authority for such period
and on such conditions as it thinks fit.

Section 47, The competent authority, or any officer empowered in
Bowers tg this behalf by the competent authority by general or
inspect, and special order, may -....- for the purposes of determining
mark boun- whether, and if so, in what manner, an order under this
IS. 14,R.A.] Part should be made in relation to any land or with a
View to securing compliance with an order made under
this Part, exercise any of the powers referred to in sub-
section (3) of section 4: ~ ~
Provided that no person shall enter any land_under
this section— ~~
(a) (unless with the consent of the occupier thereof)
without giving such occupier at least twenty-four
‘hours’ notice of his intention to do so, or

(9) after_sunset and before sunrise.

Section 48, (1) No order of_requisitioning under this Part shall
Duration ० continue in force beyond a period ein force beyond a period of five years from the
wisition Fete on which possession of the requisitioned lard is taken

IN lew] gate On Wale oe ee
under section 41, and thereafter no further order of

requisition shall made in respect requisition shall made in respect of t the same land. |

(2) Where proceedings for the acquisition of the land
are, before the expiry of the said period, initiated ender
the the proviso to sub-section (1, to sub-section (1) of section 49, the order of
requisitioning may, notwithstanding anything in this
section, continue in force beyond the said per.od until—

(a) the land, is as a result of _such proceedings,
acquired by a notice under the said sub-section,
or

(०) the proceedings for acquisition are dropped, as
the case may b may be.



79

(0) Where any land is subject to requisition, the Section 49,
appropriate Government may, if it is of opinion that it is pons to

mecessary to acquire the land for a public purpose, at any requisitioned
time acquire such land by publishing in the Official 187),
Gazette a notice to the effect that the appropriate Govern- B.A)

ment has decided to acquire the Jand in pursuance of this
section.

Provided that before issuing such notice, the appro-
priate Government shall call upon the owner of, or any
other person who, in the opinion of the appropriate Govern-
ment, may be interested in such land to show cause why
the land should not be acquired; and after considering the
cause, if any, shown by any person interested in the land
and after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard
the appropriate Government may pass such orders as it
deemg fit.

(2) When a notice as aforesaid is published in the {S. 72),
Official Gazette,—

(a) the requisitioned land shall, on and fram the
date on which the notice is so published, vest
absolutely in the appropriate Government free
from all encumbrances and the period of requisi-
tioning of such land shall end;

all, for the purposes of this Act,

Where any land subject to requisition is acquired under Section 50,
section 49, the provisions of this Act relating to acquisition aioe
of Jand shall, so far _as may be amd in so far as they acquisition
are not inconsistent with the provisions contained in this een land,
Part, apply in tespect of such acquisition, subject to such !Newl
modifications as may be necessary, includ! art’

jing, in particular,
the following: —
<a) referent: i tions 21 and 22 to the notifica-

construed as references to the n

under sction 49; and

mstrued as references to
0 notice 75 published

the date on which पं



30

PART IV—PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED BY

THE COURT
References under section 12
Section 51 The court shall, on receipt of the reference by the
ice of re
natice. Collector under sub-section (3) of section 12, cause a notice

ew specifying the day on which the court wili proceed to
determine the reference, and directing their appearance
before the court on that day, to be served on the following
persons, namely: —

(8) the Collector;
(9) all persons interested in the reference;...... and

(०) if the acquisition is not made for the Central
Government or any State Goverment,
person or authority for whom it is made.
Section 57,

Restriction (1) When a person interested has made a claim toe eom-
on amount pensation, pursuant to a notice given under section 10, the
to be award- amount awarded to him by the court shall not exceed
18. 250 the amount so claimed or be less than the amo-nt fixed by

the Collector under sub-section (3) of section 12.

(2) When a person interested has refused to make such
LALA. glaim.......... ‘the amount awarded to_him by the court
shall in no case exceed the amount fixed by the Collector.

LAA]
18. 25(2),

8,80), (3) When a person interested has omitted for a sufficient
cause established to the satisfaction of the court, to make
such claim, the amount awarded to him by the court shall
not be less than, and may exceed, the amount fixed by the
Collector. ~~

Pa (4) When a person interested has omitted without sufi-

cient cause so established te make such claii
awarded to him by the court shall in no cas
amount fixed by the Collector.

Section 53, (1) If the amount of compensation as determined by the
js. 28, court is in excess of the sum which the Collector fixed as
LAA] compensation, the final order of the court may direct that
the Collector shall pay interest on such excess at the mate
of five per centum per annum from the date on which he
took possession of the land to the date of payment of such

the amount
exceed the

[New] (2) Interest payable by the Collector under section 14

shall also be included in the final order.



81

(1) Where there are several persons interested in the
amount of compensation, the court shali apportion the

amount according to the interest of each such person, and t

shall specify in the final order the amount due to each.

(2) Each such person shall be entitled to obtained exe-
eution of the final order to the extent of the amount due
to_him, without the consent or concurrence of the other
persons. ~

Where there is no person competent to alienate the
1970 acquired, the Collector shall, within four months
from the final order of the court, deposit in court the
amount directed by the order to be paid as compensation.

Reference under section 45

The provisions of sections 51, 54 and 55 shall, so far
as may be and subject to necessary modifications, apply
in respect of a reference under clause (b) of sub-section
(1) of section 45 as they apply im respect of a reference
under sub-section (3) of section 12

Other References
Where any matter is referred to the court for decision

under any provision of this Act other than sub-section Px

(3) of section 12 "or clause (b) of sub-section 1) of sec-
tion 45, the following provisiong shall tion 45, the following provisions shall apply—

(8) the officer making the reference shall—
(i) state for the information of the court in

writing the points on which the decision of
the court is sought and the views of the offi-
cer thereon, with reasons therefor; and

(ti) attach 3 summary of all material available

_with him which may be useful to the court
in the determination of the reference

(b) the court shall, on receipt of the reference,
cause a notice specifying the day on which the
court will proceed to determine the reference
and directing their appearance b appearance before the court
on_that day, to be served on the following,

namely: —

(i) the officer making the reference:

(ii) all persons interested in the reference; and

Section 54
pportion-

ment of

compensa-

Section 55,
Deposit of
amount
awarded
where there
is no person
competent
to alienate
{New]

Section 56,
References
about
compensa~
tion for
requisition-
ing.

[New]

Section 57,
jure
in_ other

references
woder the

[New]


82

(iii) where the reference has arisen out of any

Proceeding for the acquisition of land for
any person or authority, that ‘person or

authority.
General provisions
Section 58,
Form of (1) Every final order of the court final order of the court under this Act shall

et be in writing signed by the Judge, and shail specify the

points for decision, and the decision thereon, together
with the grounds of the decision,

{S. 26[2] (2) Every such order shall be deemed to be a deerée
LAAT and the statement of the grounds of every such order a
judgment within the meaning of clause (2) of | section 2

and clause (9) of section 2, respectively, cf the Code of
5 of 1968 Civil Procedure, 1908.

8.2 mah (3) Every such order shall also state the amount of
_— costs incurred in the proceedings before the court, and

by what persons and in what proportions they are to be
paid.
8. 272), (4) When, in proceedings held on a reference made

LAA] by an officer, the order of such officer is not upheld, the
costs shall ordinarily be paid by such officer, unless the
court shall be of opinion that the claim of the party was
so extravagant or that he wag so negligent in putting his
claim before such officer that some deduction from his
costs should be made or that he should pay a part of the
officer’s costs,

+ [New] (5) Where the final order determines the arnount of
compensation under section 21, the court shall, wherever

practicable, state therein separately the market value of
the following items, namely—

(i) land, exclusive of things attached to the earth
or permanently fastened to anything attached
to the earth;

(ii) buildings;

(iii) structures other than buildings;

Gv) trees; and

Section 59. (v) other items.
xecution et
of | final Every final order of the court under this Act shall be

fe} executable as if it were a decree of the court, and the



83

provisions of the Code of Civil Proredure, 1998, relating 5 of 190%
to execution shall, as far as may be, apply to it:

Provided that execution shall not be issued on any
such order against the Government or any officer thereof
unless it remains unsatisfied for a period of three months
computed from the date of such order.

(1) Subject to the provisions cf the Code of Civil Aortion
Procedure, 1908, applicable to appeals from original proceedings
decrees, an appeal shall. che front from the final order of the tefore court,

...to the court rai, LAA
authorised to hear appeals from the decisions of that 5 of 1908

(2) From amy decree of a district court passed on an
appeal under sub-section (i) an appeal shall He to the
High Court if, but only if, the anount ot value of the
subject-matter in dispute in appeal exceeds two thousand
Tupees or the case involves any question of tifle to land.

S. $4,

@).. -From any decree of the High Court passed Ge ee
on_an appesl under sub-section (1) an appeal shall lie to LAA
the Supreme Court subject to tne provisions contained
im section 110 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and 5 of 1908
in Order XLV of the First Schedule thereto

(4) Notwithstanding any thing contained in this sec- [New]
tion, no appeal shall lie from any order (whether a final
order or not) passed by the court on a reference under
section 5, section 34, or the second proviso to s tion
(93 of section 68, Oo

__The court may, for the purpose of deciding any refe- Section 61,
rence under this Act, dei Determina-

INewE

@ any question of title ton
questions of
Every proceeding before the court under this Act shall Ul.
take place in open court, and all persons entitled to prac- a 62.
tise in any civil court in the Btate stall be entitled to (एल Oma

Procredings

appear, plead and act (as the case may be) in such 000- court, [S. 22
ceeding, LAAL

feet e eee ००55५ The provisions of the Code of Civil Pro- sectian 63,
Code of Civil

cedure, 1908, shall, save in so far as they are inconsistent
y are procedure,
with, anything contain:

_contai et, apply to all proceed- to appl ly ts
procesdings

ings before the court under this Act. be foe we

LAA
5 of 1908]


Ba

PART V—MISCELLANEOUS

The Collector or the competent authority,.........--+-
while holding any inquiry or............ proceeding under
this Act, shall have all the powers of a civil court, while
trying a suit, under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in
respect of the follow!ng matters, namely:—-

(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of
any person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document;
(c) reception of evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record from any
court or office; हे
(९) issuing commissions for examination vf wit-
nesses.
Section 65, ‘The appropriate Government, the Collector or_the
obtain ine Competent authority, or any officer authorised to perform
formation, any functions under this Act, may, with a view to carry-
[S.13R.A] / ~
ing out the purposes of this Act, by order require any
person to furnish such officer, as may be specified in fhe
order, such information in his possession as may be speci-
fied relating to any land which is acquired or requisition-
पे... or intended to be acquired or requisitioned...
under this Act, and such person shail be deemed to be Jegal-
ly bound to do so within the meaning of sections 176 and
177 of the Indian Penal Code.

Section 6 (1) Subject to the provisions of this sections and any

notices and rules that may be made under this Act, the mode of ser-
5815 uy, Vice of notices and orders issued or made under this Act
RAI shall, except as otherwise provided in this Act, be as

follow: ~ ~

45 of 1868

(a) ..---- a notice or order of a general nature on
affecting a class of persons shall be published—

(i) in the Official Gazette, or in newspapers in
the language of the district in ich the land
concerned is situa po

(i) by_affixin,

ch notice or order in

prominent places on or near the land
concerned;
(9) ....-: a notice or order affecting an individual

corporation or firm shall be served in the man-
ner provided for the service of summons im


85

Rule 2 of Order XXIX or Rule 3 of Order
XXX, as the case may be, in the First Schedule
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; and

(€) vee. a notice or order affecting an individual
person (not being a corporation or firm), shall
be served in the manner provided for the ser-
vice of summons by the Code of Civil Proce-
dure, 1908, or by sending it by registered post

in a letter addressed to the person named there
known residence, address or place

(2) Where the ownership of the land is in dispute or
where the persons interested in the land are not readily
traceable and the notice or order camot be served with:
out undue delay, the notice or order may be served by
publishing it in the Official Gazette, and, where possible
by affixing a copy thereof on any consp‘cuous part of the
Jand to which it relates.

(2) If the Collector, or the competent authority or any
person authorised for the purpose by either of them, i
opposed or impeded in taking possession under this Ac
of any land, he shall, if a Magistrate, enforce the sur.
vender of the land to himself, and if not a Magistrate, he
shall apply to a Magistrate or (within the towns ० ४
Calcutta, Madras and Bombay) to the Commissicner 0४
Police, and such Magistrate or Commissioner (as the case
may be) shall enforce the surrender of the land to the
Collector, or compet: authority or such person, as the
case may be. ns ——

(1) The provisions of this Act shall not be put in
foree for the purpose of acquiring a part only of any
house, manufactory or other building, if the owner desires
that the whole of such house, manufactory or building ("49

shall be acquired:

Provided that the owner may, at any time before steps
for the fixation of compensation for th2 acquisition are
fjaken, by notice in writing, withdraw or modify his
expressed desire that the whole of such house, manu-

factory or building shall be so acquired:

5 of 1908

5 of 1908

(S. 1502).
R.A}

Section 67
Magistrats
to enforce
surrender.

Section 68.
‘Acquisition
of part of
house or
building.

LAA.


Section 69,
Exemption
from stamp
duty and
fees.

(8.51.
LAA]

Section 70
Protection
of compen-
sation,

[New]

86

Provided also that, if any question shall arise as to
whether any land proposed to be taken under this Act
does or does not form part of a house, manufactory or
pbuilding within the meaning of this section, the Collector
shall refer the determination of such question to the court
and shall not take possession of such land until after the
question has been determined.

In deciding on such a reference the court sha] have
regard to the question whether the land proposed. to be
taken is reasonably required for the full and unimpaired
use of the house, manufactory or building.

(2) If, in the case of any claim under clause_thirdly
of sub-section (1) of section 21, by a person ‘interested, on.
account of the severing of the land to be acquired from
his other land, the appropriate Government is of opinion
that the claim is unreasonable or excessive, it may, at
any time before steps for the fixation of the compe: compensation
for the acquisition are taken, order the acquisition of the

whole of the land of which the land first sought to be
acquired forms a part.

(3) In the case...... provided for in_ sub-section
no fresh declaration or other proceedings under :
8 to 11 (both inclusive), shall be necessary; but the Col-
lector, shall, without delay, furnish a copy of the order of
the appropriate Government to the person interested, and
the Collector, shall thereafter proceed to fix the com-
pensation under section 12.

No order or agreement made under this Act shall be
chargeable with stamp duty, and no person claiming
under any such order or agreement shall be liable to pay
any fee for a copy of the same.

Where any compensation is _awarded or awardable

under this Act in respect of the acq
which is not liable under the law or the time being in
force to attachment or sale in execution of a decree or
“civil court, then the following provisions

(a) such compensation, before or after it is actually
paid to the person entitled to receive the same,



87

shall be exempt from seizure or attachment by

process of any court—

yr any demand
such compensa-

(ii) in_satisfaction of a decree or order of any
court; and” पु _

(४) notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
any law for the time being in force, neither the
official assignee nor the official receiver appoint-
ed under any law relating to insolvency shall
be entitled to proceed against or to have any
claim on any such compensation.

a registered document (including a copy given under sec-

tion 57 of the Indian Registration Act, 1908) may be
accepted as evidence of the transaction recorded in the
document, without necessity of production or proof of the
original.

(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall
lie against any person for anything...... in good faith
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or
any order made thereunder,

(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act no suit
or other legal proceeding shall lie against the appropriate
Government, the Collector or the competent author'ty for
any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in

pursuance of this Act or any order made thereunder.

Nothing contained in tl Act shall affect the
liability of any person, who may receive or withdraw the
whole or any part of any compensation paid or deposited

under this Act, to pay the same to the person lawfully
entitled thereto.

Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no
civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter
which the appropriate Government, the competent autho-
rity or the Collector is ernpowered by or under this Act
to determime........

1 Cf. scetion 520 as inserted by the Lard Acquisition (Punjab Amend-
ment) Act, 1948

Section 71,
Proof by
certified
copies

New]
16 of 1908

Section 72,
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.
9. 18, RAY

Section 73
Liability of
person re~
ceiving com:
pensation
not affected.
[S. 302).
3rd Prov,
LAA]
Section 74,
Bar of Juris-
diction of
Civil courts
IS. 19 R.A.)


88

Seation 75. The competent authority, and every officer empowered
oficers dee PY the appropriate Government, the Collector or the
mand to be competent authority, while exercising any power or per-
vants, forming any duty under this Act, shall be deemed to be a
iS: 21.R.A] public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the

45 of 1860. ‘
Indian Penal Code,

Section 76, (1) The Central Government may, by notificalion in

Delegation the Official Gazette, direct that the powers exercisable by

by Govern- it under Part III shall, in such cireurstances and under

(S17 0). such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the motifica-

RA] tion, be exercisable also by an officer subordinate to that
Government or by the State Government or by ar: officer
subordinate to the State Government,

ENew] (2) The State Government may, by notification in the
Official’ Gazette, direct that the powers exercisable by it

der Part Il shall, in such cireumstances and under such

conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification,

be exercisable also by an_ Officer subordinate to that
Government.

Fae (3) All notifications issued under this section by the
Central Government or by the State

mmment shall be
laid, ag soon as may be, before Parliarnent or before the
State Legislature, as the case may be,

Section 78, = Whoever...... wilfully fills up, destroys, damages or

Penalty for 4. i
destroying. displaces any trench or mark made under section 4 shall

wee ele, be punishable with imprisonment for_
LAA, which may extend to six months or ..... fine wh
1

extend to five hi

Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act, or
Section 78, @ny rule made thereunder, or any order made or direc-
Penalty for tion given under this Act, or obstructs the lawful exercise
violation of of any power conferred by or under this Act, shall be

Act ele, or
obstruction punishable with imprisonment for a term which may

Otpowers extend to six months, or fine which may extend to five

18. 20,R-A] hundred rupees, or both.

Section 79, No court shall take cognizance of an offence
Coanizance, tion 77 or 78 except on a report in writing of
[New] Stituting such offence made by an officer authorised in
behalf by the appropriate Government.



89

() The Central Government may, by notification in Section 80.
the Official Gazette, make rules consistent with this Act mage rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act and for the gui- 8350).
dance of officers in all matters connected with its enforce. (§ 22 61
ment... ... RA]
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the genera- 230)
lity of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for "
all or any of the following matters, namely: —
(a) the procedure to be followed by the Collector
or by the competent authority in proces
inquiries under this Act; ~~

* * * = * * +

(9) the manner of service of notices and orders;
(c) the manner in which a tender may be made by
the Collector under section 13;
(व) amy other matter which has te be, or may be, [$, 55 (2%
prescribed. LAAT
(3) The power to make. .tules under sub-section
(1) shall be subject to the condition of the rules being
made....., after previous publication.
(4) AU rules made under the provisions of this Act S230"
shall be laid, as soon as may be, before Parliament.
Repeal and savings mer a

ot Drafted. a



APPENDIX IT

Tale A

Showing the provisions in the existing Acts and the cor-
responding provisions, if any, contained in the pro-
posals in Appendix I.

Corresponding provisions,

Existing provision if any, in Appendix I.
Land Acquisition Act,

Section 1 . . . : . पु . Section 1
Section 2 (repealed) See -.- न
Sotion 3 eee
Clase (व) 6 ewes Seeetion 264)
Clause (5). 6 wwe Section 209)
Clause (c) - . पु पु . : . Section 2(4)
Clause (4). 5 we Section 2(/#)
Clause (e) . पु पु पु : . . Section 2(2), part
Clause (ee). we Settion 2 (a)
Clause (fF). 6 ee. Section 2¢m)
Clause (g) - . + . + . . Section 3
Section (1) eee Section 41)
Section 42)... + ee Seetion 4)
Section 5 . पु पु न पु पु न Section 5
Section 5861) . . पु . पु . Section 601)
Section 5A(2), carlier part. . . —. Section 6(2)
Section 5A(2), latter part . . . . Section 7
Section 5AG) . . पु पु . - Omitted
Section 6(1),main para, part. =. =. sSSection 86)
Section 6(1), Prov. . पु . . . Omitted
Section 62). ee Section 8(3), part
Section 63). =. - eee Omitted
Section 7 : : पु . . . . Section 8(4), earlier part
ब्लोग 8... + -+ +. -+ - $ऋछांण 8(2)
Section 9)... -+ + + + -+ Section 1001)
Section 9(2, part © see Section 1002)
Section 9(2), part. =... Section 1003)
section 93). . 6... Seetion 10(4)
Section 9(4) व 9 9७9 ee Section 105)
Section 10. . . . . Section 11
section 11.9. . - . . Section 126)

90


91
Section 12. . . . . + « Omitted
Section 13. . पु . मु . + Omitted
Section 14. : . : पु . . Omitted (866 section 12, R.A.)
Section 14... 4५ -+ +> -+ + - Section 124)
Section 16, earlier part. =. =. =... Section 8(4), fater part
Section 16, latter part. : . पु « Section 9(1)

» Omitted

Section 17(1)
Section 32(1) main para, opening lines

Ssction 17(2), main para, part |

Section 17(2), main para, part . . Sections 32(1), main para, Clause (a)
and last portion.
Section 17(2), Prov. - . . . . Section 32(1), Prov.
Section 17(3) + . पु + . « Section 34
Section 17(4) 9 + - Omitted
Section 18. न पं . . » Omitted
Section 19. : : . . . « Section 20
Section 200 | + . : . . . Section 41
Section 21... woe पु पु पु . Omitted
Section 22. पु पु . . . . Section 62
Section 23. . . . . . . Section 21
Section 24, . पु . : +, Section 22
Section 250) . . . पु . . Section 52(1)
Section 25(2), part - न पु . . Section 52(2)
Section 252), part. =. =. Section 52(4)
Ssction 25(3) se eee Section 5203)
Szetion 2661) . . . + . « Section 58(1)
Szction 26(2) . . . . . + Section 58(2)
Soction 27(1) . . : + पु » Section 5863)
Section 27(2) - : पु पु पु » Section 58(4)
Section 28. . . . पु . » Section 536)
Section 29. . : : पु पु . Section 54
Section 30. . पु पु . . + Omitted
Ssetion 31(1) . न पु . . « Section 131)
Section 31(2), mainparta. = =... Seotion 1302)
Section 31(2), Ist Prov. पु पु . . Omitted
Section 31(2) 2nd Prov. . . . . « Omitted
Section 31(2), 3rd Prov. . पु पं : + Section 73
Section 31(3) . oe . . + Section 17(1)
Section 31(4) . . पु . + Section 17(2)
Section 3201). बज... . Seetion 236)
Section 32(2) . . . + पु » Section 23(3)
Section 33 . . न पु पु . Section 2401)
Szction 34 . + . . . + Section 14
Section 35. . प्‌ . + . « Omitted
Section 36... . . पु . . « Omitted
Section 37 पु पु पु पु . » Omitted
Section 38(1) ee ye. Seetion 4(4)
Ssction 38(2) 9७३ -+- /-+. - Onnitted
Section 38-4 eee Setion 2(e), part
Section 39. . . . . . « Section 25
Section 40(1) + . पु . . « Section 26(1), part
LiLaw/67—7



Section 40(2)
Section 40(3)

Section 41

Section 42

Section 43

‘Beclion 44

Section 45

Section 46

Section 47

Section 48

Section 49

Section 50

Section 51

Section 52

Section 530 - .
Section 54, earlier half
Section 54, latter half
Section 550) . .
Section 5502) .
Section 55(3) .

Seetion 4
Section’2
Ciause (a) .
Clause (6) .
Clause (०) .
Clause (4).
Clause (2).
Clause (/).
Clause (2).
Clause (h) .
Section 3
Section 4
Section 5
Section 6
Section 70)
Soction 72). .
Section 8(1)
Section 8(2) .
Section 8(3)
Section 9
Section 10
Section U1
Section 2
Section 13
Section 14.
Section 15(1) .

92

Section 26(1), part
Section 26(2)
Section 27
Section 28
Seclion 29
Omitted

Omitted (See S. 15 R.A.)
Section 77

Section 67

Section 37

Scction 68

Section 36

Section 69
Omitted

Section 63

Section 60(1)
Section 60(3)
Section 80(1), part
Section 80(3)
Omitted

Requisitioning Act

Omitted (See $.1.1..5.4.)

‘Omitted
Section 2()
Section 200)
Omitted [Sve S, 2(6), LAA.
Section 2(4)
Section 200)
Omitted
Section 2()
Section 40
Section 41
Section 42
Section 43
Section 49(1)
Section 49(2)
Section 45(1)
Section 45(2)
Omitted
Omitted
Section 46
Omitted
Section 64
Section 65
Section 47
Section 66(1}


Scction 15(2} .
Section 16
Section 1701 .
Section 1702) ,
Section 18.
Soction 19
Section 20.
Section 21
Section 22).
Section 2202) .
Section 22(3) .
Section 23
Section 24
Section 25

Section 66(2)
Section 44
Section 760)
Section 7603)
Section 72
Section 74
Section 78
Section 75
Scction 80 (ty, part
Section R02)
Section 8004)
Omitted
Omitted.
Omitted



Tass B

Showing the provisions in the proposals in Appendix I and the corresponding
Provisions, if any, in the existing Acts,

‘Section 1
Section 2(a)
121 .
(०), part
(गे, part
(©), part
@)
e)
cep)
(e)
i).
Oo.
wa.
ky
(0
(m)
@.
Section 3

Section 41).

Oy
8).
@ .
(5)
Section 5
Section 6(1)
(2) .
(3)
Section 7
Section 8(1)
Q)
3), part
(3), part

Section 8(4), carlier
(4), latter part

6).
©.
Section 961)
Q.
Section 10(1)
@ .
@ .

part

94

Section 1, LAA.

Section 3(ee), L.A.A.

Section 3(e), L.A.A.

Section 3(e), L.A.A.

Section 38-A, L.A.A.

New

Section 2(6), R.A.

New

Section 3(d), L.A.A.

Section 3(a), L.A.A.

Section 2(c), R.A.

New

Section 308), LAA,

Section 2(¢), R.A.

Section 2(f), R.A.

Section 300, LAA.

Section 2(A), R.A.

Section 3(g), L.A.A.

Scction 4(1), LAA.

New

Section 4(2), LAA.

Section 38(1), LAA,

New

Section 5, LAA.

Section SA(1), L.A.A.

Section SA(Q), earlier part, LAA.
New

Section SA(2), latter part, LALA.
Section 6(1), main para, part, LALA,
Section 8, LAA.

Section 6(1), main para, part, L.A.A,
Section 6(2), LAA.

Section 7, LAA.

Section 16, earlier part, L.A.A.
New

New

Section 16, latter part, LAA.
New

Section 960), LAA.

Section 9(2), part LAA.
Section 9(2), part, L.A-A,


(ay न
CC) -. .«. - - - - -:
Section 11 मु : .
Section 120) oe .
Section 1202) fo. .
gy. + . . . + पु
CO -. ० >> ->|
Section 131) .
Section 1312)
Section 14
Section [5
Section 16
Section 17(1)
Section 17(2) .
Section 18 _ . .
Section 19 पु . +
Section 20 . पु पु
Section 21... ‘ . . .
Section 23(1)
(2)
७)
Section 24(1)
Section 24(2) 8
Section 25 पु पु . पु पु
Section 260), part पु पु पु
Section 2600, कु्का |"
Section 2601) oe
Section 27 - . पु . . पु
Section 28. पु . . . +
Section 29. . .
Section 300. . . + . -
Section 31. + . . पु
Section 3201) main para, opening lincs
Section 32(1), main part, CL (@) and
portion.

Section 3201), main para, Ch (बी.
Section 341}, Prov. "तर -॥*"

Section 32(2) + . . न पु
Section 32(3) पु . पु . .
Section 3300. न

Section 34... . .

Section 39. . . . .
Section 36. : . . :
Section 37. पु . . . .
Section 38. . + . .
Section 39. पु . + - +
Section 400. roe पु . .
Section 44. > . पु . .

Section 420. 6 ee -

95

Section 9(3), LAA.
Section 9{4},  L.A.A.
Section 10, LAA.
Section 11, LAA.
New

New

Section 15, L.A.A.
Section 3101), LAA.
Section 31(2), main para,
Section 34, LAA.
New

New

Section 313), LAA.
Section 31(4), LAA.
New

New

Section 19, LAA.
Section 23, LAA.A,
Sestion 24, L.A.A.
Section 32(1), L.AA,
New

Section 32(2), LAA.
Section 33, LAA.
Mew

Section 39, L.A.A.
Section 4001), L.A.A.
Section 40(2), LAA.
Section 40(3), L.A.A.
Section 41, LAA.
Section 42, LAA,
Section 43, LAA.
New

New

LAA

| Section 1702), main para, part, LA.A
last. Section 17(2), main part,

New

Section 1712), Prov, LALA.
New

New

New

Section 17(2), Prov, LAA.
New

Section 50, LAA.

Section 48, LAA.

New

New

Section 3, R.A.

Section 4, R.A.

Section 5, R.A.

LAA


Section 43...
Section 44... पु
Section 4501)
Section 452)
Section 46
Section 47
Section 48
Section 490)

(2) .
Section 500.
Section 51
Section 52(1)

(2)

Q@)

Mm. .
Section 5361)
Section 53(2)
Section 54
Section 55
Section 56
Section 57.
Section 58(1)

Qo. .
Bo. 2.
@ . पु .

6) 2...
Section 59. न
Section 600)

2) - -

(3)

a.
Section 61
Section 62
Section 63
Section 64
Section 65...
Section 6601) .

@) . . -
Section 6 . .
Scction 68. .
Section 69
Section 70
Section 71
Section 72
Section 73
Section 74
Section 75.
Section 76(1)

0) -

3) -

96

Section 6, R.A.

Section 16, R.A,

Section 8(1), R.A.

Section 8(2), R.A.

Section 10, R.A.

Section 14. R.A.

New

Seetion 7(1), R.A.

Section 7(2), R.A

New

Section 20, L.A.A,

ection 25(1), LALA.
Section 25(2). part, LALA.
Section 25(3), A.A.
Section 25(2). part, LAA.
Section 28, 1.A.A.

New

Section 29. f.A.A

New
New

New

Section 26(1), LAA
Section 26(2) LAA.
Section 27(1). LAA.
Section 27(2). L.A.A.

Section 54. earlier half, LAA.
New

Section 54, latter half, LALA.
New

New

Section 22, LAA.

Section $3, LAA.

Section 12, RA.

ion 13, RA.

Section 15(1), R.A.

Section 15(2), RA.

Section 47, LAA.

Section 59. LAA.

Section 51, LAA.

New

New

Section 18, R.A

Section 31(2), 3rd Prov., LAA.
Section 19, R.A.

Scction 21, R.A.

Section 170), R.A.

New

Section 17(2), R.A.



Section 77
Section 78
Section 79

Section 8001), part .

(1) part

(2)

@)

७)
Section 81

a7

Section 46, LAA,
Section 20, R.A.
New

Section 5501), LAA.
Section 220), R.A.
Section 22(2), R.A.
Section $5(2), LAA.
Section 22(3), RA.
New


Assam. .
Bengal. .
Bihar. -
Bembay - .

Madhya Pradesh
Provinces).

Madras

Panjab

APPENDIX HI

State Land Acquisition Amending Acts
PART I_LIST OF ACTS.

SECTION L-—Part A STATES

The Assam Land Acquisition (Dibrugazh) Act, 1953
(Assam Act XXIU of 1953).

+ The Land Acquisition (Bengal Amendment) Act,
1934 (Bengal Act II of 1934)

« The Land Acquisition (Bihar Amendment} Act,
1951 (Bihar Act XVII of 1951).
The Land Acquisition (Bihar Amendment) Act, 1956
{Bihar Act XXI of 1956).
The Land Acquisition (Bihar Second Amendment)
Act, 1956 (Bihar Act XXXLV of 1956).

- The Land Acquisition’ (Bombay Amendment) Act,
1938 (XVILI of 1938).
The Land Acquisition (Bombay Amendment) Act,
1945 (XX. of 1945)
The Land Acquisition (Bombay Amendment) Act
1948 (IV of 1948),
Land Acquisition (Bombay Amendment) Act,
1950 (XXVII of 1950).
8 Land Acquisition (Bombay Amendment) Aci,
1953 (KXXV of 1953).

(Central C.P. and Berar Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act,

1939 (XXVIL of 1939)
c. Berar Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act
1949 CVIE of 1949)
CP. and Berar Land Acquisition (Second Amendment)
‘Act, 1949 (XXVIII of 1949),

The Land Acquisition (Madras Amendment) Act,
1948 (XXI of 1948),

The Lan ict isition (Madras Amendment) Act,
1953 (जा of 1953).

« Land Acquisition (East Punjab Amendment) Act
1948 (XV of 1948).

Uttar Pradesh (United Provinces) The Land Acquisition (U. P, Amendment) Act,

Persu
Rajasthan

Saurashtra

1954 (XXII of 1954).

Secion IL.—-Part B Starrs
The Pepsu Land Acquisition Act, 1953 (Vo oof
1953).
The Rajasthan Land Acquisition’ Act, 1953
(XXIV of 1953),
. The Land Acquisition Act, 1984 (Adaptation and

Application) Ordinance, 1948 (XXT cf 1948) as
amended by Saurashtra Act XLIIE of 1953

98


99

Section IL.—-Part C States

Re-settlement of Displaced Persons (Land Acquisition) Act, 1948 (LX of 1948)
Central Act (Amended by A.L.O, 1950}.

(Applies to Delhi and Ajmer)
Section 1V—NATIVE STATES

Cochin. . . : « The Land Acquisition Act, 1070 (1 of 1070) as amended
by Acts EV of 1074, 1 of 1109, 1 of 1111, XXX of
1112, and proclamation ५ of 1112.

Hydsrabad =. 0. |, The Hyderabad Land Acquisition Act, 1309 F (IX
of 1309 Fasii) (1899).
The Hyderabad Land Acquisition (Amendment)
Regulation 1358 F (LIX of 1358 Fasii) (1948).

Mysore. . . . . The Mysore Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (VU of 1894),
as amended by Acts XE of 1916, Lof 1927, VIL of
1932, TEL of 1941.

Travancore. . . » The Land Acquisition Act, 1089 (X1 of 1089), ४६
amended by Acts V of 1096, 1 of 1099,


PART II—BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE ACTS.
Secrion L— Parr A Srarss (Before 187 November, 1956).
The Assam Land Acquisition (Dibrugarh) Act, 1953

(XXNT of 1953)

The Assam Act (XXIII of 1953) provides for the speedy
acquisition of Land for the construction of suitable works
to protect the Dibrugarh sub-division from floods. After
notification in the gazette and also service of notice, the
collector shall proceed io take possession. Regarding
compensation, it may be divided into twa:

Firstly, for land excluding buildings, etc. the amount
ig not to exceed 20 iimes the annual land revenue. In the
determination of the same, the following factors shall be
taken into consideration :—.

(i) value of land at the date af acquisition;

Gi) Likelihood of a possible svil erasion prejudicially
affecting the value;

(iii) damage sustained by reason of the taking of the
standing crops or trees at the time of taking
possession.

Secondly, for building or structure, a sum equal io the
sale proceeds of the material plus 15 per cent thereof shall
be the compensation. (The owner may take eway the
material, if he so chooses, in lieu of the compensation).

Within seven days from the making of the award by
the Collecior, the person aggrieved may require the Col-
lector, te refer the matter for the determination of the
Court. पु

The Land Acquisition (Bengal Amendment) Act, 1934
UII of 1934)

The Bengal Act (II of 1934) amends the Land Acquisi-
tion Act, 1894 only io the extent of redefining the expres-
sion “Court” by the substitution of the following provision
for clause (d) of section 3 of the Land Acquisition Act,
1894:

“(d) the expression ‘Court? means a principal Civil
Court of original jurisdiction, and includes

100


101

the Court of any Additional Judge, Subordinate
Judge or Munsif whom the Provincial Govern-
ment may appoint, by name or by virtue of his
office, to perform, concurrently with any
such principal Civil Court, all or any of the
functions of the Court under this Act within any
specified local limits and, in the case of a
Munsif, up to the limits of the pecuniary
jurisdiction with which he is vested under sec-
tion 19 of the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil
Courts Act, 1887”.

The Land Acquisition (Bihar Amendment) Act, 1951
(XVII of 1951) as amended by Acts XXI of 1956
and XXXIV of 1956

The Bihar Act (XVII of 1951) amends sections 17 and 35
by adding the following proviso to sub-sectian (1) of the
said sections.

“Explanotion.—This sub-section shall apply to any
waste or arable land, notwithstanding the
existence thereon forest, orchard or trees or
temporary structure such as huts, pandals or
sheds”.

Further under sub-section (1) of section 17, power is
given to take possession on the expiration of fifteen days
from the publication of the declaration under Scc. 6 instead
of the notice mentioned in section 9(1). As a consequen-
tial change, in sub-section (2) also, the reference would
be to ‘declaration’ and not ‘notice’.

Norz.—tIn effecting the amendment in sub-section (1)
of section 17 stated above, it is laid down as follows:

(1) in sub-section (1) for the words, brackets and
figures “notice mentioned in clause 9, sub-sec-
tion (1)”, the words and figures “declaration
mentioned in section 6” shall be substituted;
(Bihar Code, Vol. IV First Edition 1955;
p. 823).

It may be pointed out that in sub-section (1) of section
17, the group of words sought to be replaced are “notice
mentioned in section 9, sub-section 1”. It may be a clerical
or drafting error, as the same is found in the Bihar Gazette
(6th June, 1951) also.


102

The Bihar Act (XXI of 1956) effects the following
changes in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894:

The taking possession of any waste or arable land is
made possible even after the stage of notification under
section 4 with the consent of the person interested or after
the direction mentioned im the newly inserted sub-section
(5). Similar provision is made in section 17(2) also.
This has been done by the insertion of the following pro-
vision in sub-sectiong (1) and (2) of section 17:

“declaration mentioned in section 6 or, with the
consent in writing of the person interested, the
publication of the notification under section 4,
or, where a direction has been made under sub-
section (5), at any time after such direction is
made”.

Sub-section {4) is modified in such a manner that in
case of land to which sub-sections (1) and (2) apply, sec-
tion 5A shall not apply if the State Government so directs
or if possession has been taken with the consent of the
person interested. The following is substituted for the
existing sub-section.

“(4) In the case of any land to which, in the opinion
of the appropriate Government the provisions of
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) are applica-
ble, the provisions of section 5A shall not apply
where the State Government so directs or
where possession of the land has been taken
with the consent of the person interested;”

A new sub-section (5) is also introduced:

“(5) Where the description of any particular land,
which in the opinion of the appropriate Gov-
ernment is needed for any public purposes or
for a company and to which the provisions of
sub-section (1} or sub-section (2) are applica-
ble, is available, it may direct that the provi-
sions of section 4 shall not apply to the land.”

Section 34 dealing with the payment of interest is re-
placed by the following new section:

"34. Payment of interest — (1) When the amount of
such compensation is not paid or deposited on


103

or before taking possession of the land, the Col-
lector shall pay or deposit interest thereon at
the rate of six per centum per annum from the
time of so taking possession until the amount
shall have been paid or deposited.

(2:

जे

Such interest shall be paid or deposited on or
before the 30th June, every year; and when the
amount of compensation is paid or deposited,
any interest that may have fallen due subse-
quently shail be paid or deposited along with
such amount;

Provided that, in the case of acquisition of any
cultivable land, the Collector shall pay or deposit,
in lieu of interest, the money value of the crops,
if any, which would have been grown on the
land, if the Collector had not taken possession
thereof, after deducting therefrom the cost of
cultivation.

(83) In determining the money value of the crops
which would have been grown on the land
referred to in the proviso to sub-section (2), the
Collector shall take into consideration the crops
grown on the lands of similar class and with
similar advantages in the vicinity and the
market value of such crops”.

Regarding temporary occupation under section 35(1),
the following proviso to section 35(1) enables the Collec-
tor to act even without any direction from the appropriate.
Government :

“Provided that, whenever it appears to the Col-
lector that, on account of apprehended damage
to life or property by erosion, the temporary
occupation and use of such land are urgently
needed for the purpose of rehabilitating displac-
ed persons or needed by any Railway Adminis-
tration for the maintenance of their traffic or for
the purpose of making thereon a river-side or
ghat station, or of providing connection with or
access to any such station, the Collector may,
without any direction of the appropriate Govern-
ment procure the occupation and use of the same
for such term as he shall think fit, not exceeding


104

three years from the commencement of such
occupation.”

The Bihar Act (XXXIV of 1956) effects the following
changes in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.

In the definition section, the following proviso is added
to clause (९) defining the expression “Collector”.

“Provided that for purposes of sections 4, 5A and
6, the expression “Collector” shall mean the
Colleetor or Additional Collector of a District
ar a Deputy Commissioner or Additional Deputy
Commissioner”.

Again, in clause (f) of the definition section, ‘public
purpdse’ is defined so as to include provision for sanitary
improvements, the laying ott of village ‘sites or townships
ete. The substituted clause reads thus:

(ii) for clause (7), the following clause shall
substituted, namely :--
“(f) the expression “public purpose” includes
provision for or in connection with—

(0 sanitary improvements of any kind, in-
eluding reclamation;

61) the laying out of village sites or town-
ships, or the extension, planned develop-
ment of improvement of existing village
sites or townships; and”

be

In sections 4, 38, 89 and की the power conferred upon
the appropriate government has been conferred upon the
Collector also by virtue of this amendment.

The amendment lays down that the preliminary notifi-
cation in section 4(1) shall be published “in the offices of
the Collector, Sub-divisional Officer, the village in which
the land is situated and in the office of the Gram Pan-
chayat, if any, constituted under the Bihar Panchayat Raj
Act, 1947 (Bihar Act VII of 1948), and the police-station
within whose jurisdiction the village lies and also in
Official Gazette”.

Jn section (5A) dealing with the hearing of objections,
sub-section (2) is substituted by the following sub-sections:

“(2) Every objection under sub-section (1) shall be
made in writing to the Collector who shall give
the objector an opportunity of being heard


105

either in person or by pleader and shall, after
hearing all such objections and making such
further inquiry, if any, as he thinks necessary,
decide the objections.

Provided that the appropriate Government may,
either of its own motion or on the application
of any person interested in the land, call for the
record of the proceedings held by the Collector
and pass such order as it may think fit.

(2A) The decision of the Collector under sub-section
(2) shall, subject to any order of the appropriate
Government, be final.”

Again, in the declaration scction (i.e, section 6 of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894), sub-section (1) is substituted
by the following sub-section:

“(1) Subject to the provisions of Part VII of this
Act, where the appropriate Government is satis-
fied after considering the Collector's report, if
any, under the proviso to sub-section (2) of
section 5A, or the Collector is satisfied after
hearing the objections, if any, under section 5A,
thal any particular land is needed for a public
purpose, or for a company, a declaration shall
be made by the appropriate Government or the
Collector as the case may be, to that effect in
writing:

Provided that no such declaration shall be made
unless the compensation to be awarded for such
property is to be paid by a company, or wholly
or partly out of the Consolidated Fund of the:
State or some fund controlled or managed by a.
10९४1 authority”.

After the existing section 12, a new section 125 pro-
viding for the correction of the award has been inserted
by the amending Act (XXXIV of 1956):

“12A. Correction of award-—(1) The Collector may,.
at any time but not later than six months from
the date of the award, or where a reference has
been made under section 18, before the making
of such reference, correct any clerical or arith-
meticai mistakes in the award either on his own


106

motion or on the application of any person
interested.

(2) The Collector shall give immediate notice of any
correction made in the award to all persons
interested.

(3) Where any excess amount is proved to have been
paid to any person as a result of the correction
made under sub-section (1), such person shall
be liable to refund the excess, and if he defaults
or refuses to pay, the same may be realised as
an arrear of land revenue.”

The power given in section 17(1) is extended to any
land other than waste or arable land, if acquired for
sanitary improvements by means of a new sub-section
(1A):

“(1A) The power to take possession under sub-
section (1) may also be exercised in the case of
any land, other than waste or arable land, where
the land is acquired for or in connection with
sanitary improvements of any kind or planned
development.”

Section 39, amended as indicated earlier, is renumbered
ag sub-section (1) thereof and the following new  sub-
section is added:

“(2) In cases of acquisition of land for societies
registered under the Societies Registration Act,
1860 (XX] of 1860), sub-section (1) shall have
effect ag if for the words, figures and brackets
‘sections 6 to 37 (both inclusive)’, the words and
figures ‘section 6 and 7’ were substituted.”

The Land Acquisition (Bombay Amendment) Act, 1938
(XVIII of 1938) as amended by Acts XX of 1945, IV of 1948,
XXVII of 1950 and XXXV of 1953

The Bombay Act (XVIII of 1938) amends sections 28
and 34 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 by reducing the
rate of interest payable on compensation from six per cen-
tum per annum to four per centum.

The Bombay Act (XX of 1945) amends the Larid Acqui-
sition Act, 1894 by the insertion of a new Part I-A enabling
an officer of the Government to do all the things con-
templated in Section 4(2) even before the notification


107

under section 4 and the payment of compensation for any
damage done 88 provided in section 5 of the Land Acquisi-
tion Act, 1894. Also consequential changes are made in
sections 45 and 46 dealing with service of notice and
penalty in case of wilful obstruction.

The Bombay Act (IV of 1948) is intended to be in
force only for a period of ten years. It brings within the
scope of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 the acquisition
of land for the purpose of housing schemes. In sections
11 and 23(1) firstly, this amendment provides for the
addition of “at the relevant date” after date of notification
under s.4(1). The important change, however, is the
omission of the 15% solatium provision in s.23(2), Further,
it expressly states that s.23 shall not apply to any building.

The Bombay Act (XXVII of 1950) provides for the
inclusion of a new clause after clause (a) of section 3 to
the effect that “arable land” includes garden land.

The Bombay Act XXXV of 1953 amends the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894. The following are the more
important changes:

It provides that the expression “Court” shall include the
Court of Civil Judge (Senior Division) 10 which the princi-
pal Civil Court may transfer any proceedings under the
Act. In the definition of ‘Public purpose’ it provides for
the acquisition of land for purposes of the development of
areas from public revenues etc., and the subsequent dis-
posal thereof by lease, assignment or sale with a view to
securing further development.

It also provides that the Collector shall not make the
award under section 11 without the prior approval of the
State Government or any officer’ which the State Govern-
ment may appoint in this behalf. It also adds a new
section 12A which would enable the correction of clerical
or arithmetical error in an award within a period of six
months by the Collector either on his own initiative or on
an application from the person interested. Also it seeks
io enable the Collector to recover any overpayment made
by him as if it were an arrear of Jand revenue. A new
section 15A is added which empowers the State Govern-
iment, before an award is made by the Collector under
section 11, to call for and examine the record of any
vrder passed by the Collector or of any enquiry or pro-
Lilaw/67—8


108

ceedings of the Collector for the purpose of satisfying
itself about the legality of the order or the regularity of
the proceedings. Ij may even annul or reverse the order,
if necessary.

In section 17 dealing with cases of urgency, an addition
has been made to cover damage to roads, rivers, channels
or tanks by some unforeseen events. In the Part dealing
with the temporary occupation of land, three new sub-
sections are added after sub-section (1) of section 35. This
would enable the State Government, before issuing a
direction under sub-section (1) to require the Collector to
submit a plan of the land and also an estimate of the
compensation payable. The Collector then shall cause
publie notice of the substance of such requisition. There-
upon any officer authorised by the Collector may exercise
the powers conferred under section 4(2). Such officer
shall pay compensation at the time of his entry for all
damage to be done and the decision of the Collector on
this point shall be final.

.P. and Berar Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1939
(XXVII of 1939} as amended by Acts VII of 1949 and
XXVIII of 1949

The C.P. and Berar Act (XXVII of 1939) modifies
sections 28 and 34 of the L.A. Act by providing that the
rate of interest payable under these sections sha:] not be
less than 3 per centum and more than 6 per centum. Thus
it allows any interest between 3 and 6 per centum.

The C.P. and Berar Act (VII of 1949) provides for an
exception to the expression “Court” defined in section
3(a) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 by the insertion of
a new sub-section (3) in section 18 of the Land Acquisi-
tion Act, 1894 as follows:

“Any order made by the Collector on an application
under this section shall be subject to revision
by the High Court, as if the Collector were a
Court subordinate to the High Court within
the meaning of section 115 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908”.

Nore:—It may be pertinent to point out that it
would suffice if the insertion of sub-section (3) in section


109

18 has been suggested without any need to insert the
words “except in sub-section (3) of section 18” after the
word “Court” in section 3(d). Still the result would have
been the same.

The C.P. and Berar Act (XXVIII of 1949) effects the
following amendment:

In sub-section (2) section 17 Jof the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894, after the words “any
such station”, the following words shall be
inserted, namely :—

‘or whenever owing to a like emergency it
becomes necessary for the State Government
to acquire the immediate possession of any
land for the purpose of maintaing traffic
over 8 public road”.

The Land Acquisition (Madras Amendment) Act, 1948
(जड़ा of 1943) as amended by Act XI] of 1953.

The Madras Act (XXI of 1948) provides that sub-
section (1) of section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894
which governs the taking possession of any waste or
arable iand shall apply to waste or arable land notwith-
standing the existence thereon of scattered trees or
temporary structures like pandals, huts, sheds ete. Fur-
ther, it seeks to provide for immediate taking possession
under section 17 (2) in the following cases as well:

“(b) whenever in the opinion of the Collector it
becomes necessary to acquire the immediate
possession of any land—

4) for the purpose of any library or educational
institution, or
Gi) for the construction, extension or inoprove-
ment of—
{A) any building or other structure in any
village for the common use of the inha-
bitants of such village, or

(8) any godown for any sociely registered or
deemed to be registered under the Mad-
ras Co-operative Societies Act, 1932, or

(C) any dwelling house for the poor, or


110

(D) any irrigation tank, irrigation or drainage
channel, or any well, or
(E) any road”.

The Madras Act (XII of 1953} modifies sections 28 and
34 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 by redueing the rate
of interest to four per cent and adding the following
proviso:

“Provided that where such possession is taken
before the commencement of the Land Acquisi-
tion (Madras Amendment) Act, 1953, the fore-
going shall have effect as if for the rate of 4
per centum per annum specified therein the
rate of 6 per centum per annum had been sub-
stituted.”

Land Acquisition (East Punjab Amendmeni) Act, 1948
(XV of 1948)

The East Punjab Act (XV of 1948) secks to protect the
compensation amount from attachment etc. by inserting
a new section 52-A in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 to
the following effect:

.“52-A. No compensation awarded or awardable
under this Act—

{a) before it is actually paid to the person entitl-
ed to receive the same or;

(b) bofore or after it is actually paid to the per-
son entitled to receive the same in respect of
any land which is not liable under the law
for the time being in force to attachment or
sale in execution of a decree or order of any
court,

shall be Hable .to seizure, attachment, or
sequestration by process of any Court, at the
instance of a creditor, for any demand against
the person entitled to compensatior:, or in satis-
faction of a decree or order of any court, and,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
any law for the time being in . force, neither
the official assignee nor any receiver appointed
under any law shall be entitled to proceed
against or to have any claim on any such com-
pensation.”


itl

The Land Acquisition (U. P. Amendment) Act, 1954
(XXII of 1954)

The U.P. Act (XXII of 1954) amends the Land Acquisi-
tion Act, 1894 in so far as it applies to acquisitions of
land except for the purposes of the Union. The following
are the important changes effected.

The expression ‘public purpose’ ig made to include
Provision for er in connection with:

(1) sanitary improvements of any kind including
the reclamation;

(2) the laying out of village sites, townships or the
extension plan development or improvement of
existing village sites or townships;

(3) the settlement of land for agriculture with the
weaker section of the people.

Again, in the definition clause, a new clause (h) defin-
ing “Land Reforms Commissioner” as one appointed by
the Government has been added.

In section (4), sub-section (1) and (2) of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894, the U-P. Act seeks to empower the
Collector in addition to the appropriate Government in
the matter of issuing the notification and authorizing an
officer to enter upon and do the other acts mentioned in
sec. 4(2).

In sub-section (1) of section 5A, the period of thirty
days within which objection to acquisition is to be made
is reduced to twenty-one days. Another amendment to
sec. 12 requires the Collector to send a copy of the award
to the Land Reforms Commissioner. A new section 12A
is added : i

“12-A. The Collector may, at any time but not later
than six months ftom the date of the award, or
where a reference has been made under section
18, before the making of the reference, correct
any clerical or arithmetical mistakes in the
award either on his own motion er on the appli-
cation of any person interested.

(2) The Collector shall give immediate notice of
any correction made in the award to all persons
interested.


(3)

112

Where any excess amount is proved to have
been paid to any person as a result of the cor-
rections made in sub-section (1), such person
shall be liable to refund the excess, and if he
defaults or refuses to pay, the same may be
realised as an arrear of land revenue”.

Section 17 is amended by the insertion cf the following
new sub-section (1-A):

“CL.

A) The power to take possession under  sub-
section (1) may also be exercised in the case of
any land other than waste or araole land, where
the land is acquired for or in connection with
sanitary improvements of any kind or planned
development”.

To section 18, two new sub-sections are added:

“@)

(4)

Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-
section (1) the Land Reforms Commissioner
may, where he considers the amount of com-
pensation allowed by the award under section
11 to be excessive, require the collector that the
matter be referred by him to the Court for
determination of the amount of compensation.
Explenation—tin any case of land under Chapter
VII the requisition under this sub-section may
be made at the request of the Company on its
undertaking to pay all the costs consequent
upon such requisition.

The requisition shall state the grounds on
which objection to the award is taken and shall
be made within six months from the date of
the award.”

Section 23 is amended by the addition cf the following
explanation to clause (1):

“Explanation—In judging the market value

aforesaid, in any case where land is acquired for
or in connection with sanitary iraprovements of
any kind or planned development, due regard
shall be had to the insanitary aad unhygienic
conditions of the land on the date aforesaid.”

Another important change effected is the omission of
the solatium provision in section 23(2). But, however, it
is provided that this omission shall not affect acquisitions


113

made in pursuance of notification under section 4 of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894 issued prior to the commence-
ment of this Act (ie, the U.P. Act).

Section 25 is amended by the deletion of the words,
“or be less than the amount awarded by the Collector
under section 11”. Thig would mean that the Court may
award compensation which is even lesser than the
amount awarded by the Collector under section 11.

In Part VII dealing with acquisition for companies.
section 39 is amended by the insertion of the following
new sub-section.

“(2) In cases of acquisition of land for a_ society
registered under the Societies Registration Act,
1860, sub-section (1) shall have effect as if for
the words and figures “sections 6 to 37 both
inclusive” the words and figures “sections 6
and 7” had been substituted.”
Secrion Il-—-Part B Srates (Berore 150 Novemser, 1956).
The Pepsu Land Acquisition Act, 1953 (V of 1953)

The Pepsu Act (V of 1953) extends the Land Acquisi-
tion Act, 1894 to the State of Pepsu with certain modifica-
tions indicated in the schedule after repealing the Patiala
Land Acquisition Act, 1895BK and the Pepsu Act, 2006BK
while at the same time providing for the validation of
acquisition, awards and agreements under the Act of
2006BK, made prior to the commencement of the 1953
Act.

In the definition section, clause (ee) defining the
expression “appropriate Government” is omitted and
instead, the expression “appropriate Government” is
replaced by the words “State Government” throughout
the Act.

Section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 is amend-
ed by the substitution of the following clause for the
existing clause first:

“first the market value of the jand at ihe date of
the publication of the notification under sub-
section (1) of section 4 or where more than
three years have elapsed between the date of
publication of the notification under the said
sub-section and the date of taking possession
of such land (whether such possession is taken


114

before or after the date of the award determin-
ing the compensation), the market value of the
land immediately before the date of the
award.”

The Rajasthan Land Acquisition Act, 1953 (XXIV of 1953)

The Rajasthan Act (XXIV of 1953), as amended, has
made several additions to the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.

In the definition section, clause (ee) defining “appro-
priate Government” is omitted and the word “Govern-
ment” is substituted for the expression “appropriate
Government” wherever it occurs in the Act. In the defi-
nition of ‘public purpose’, the following addition has been
made:

“also includes planned development of lands from
public funds and subsequent disposal thereof in
whole or in part by lease or sale or in such other
manner as may be directed by the Government
with the object of securing further development
as planned;”

In clause (g) of section 3 defining persons ‘entitled to
act’, reference to married woman is omitted.

The following additions have been made to the defini-
tion section:

(h) the expression “Code” means the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908);

G) the expression “local authority” includes an
improvement or development trust constituted
under any law for the time being in force in
the whole or any part of pre-reorganisation State
of Rajasthan.

Existing section 5 is renumbered as sub-section (3) of
section 4 and the following new section is inserted as
section 5.

“5. (1) The Collector or a Revenue Officer specially
empowered by the Government in this behalf
shall forward to the Government with his re-
marks a report on the result of the survey, if
any, and other operations described in and
taken under sub-section (2) of section 4.


115

(2) After considering the report, if any, submitted
under sub-section (1) or, if no such report has
been received, at any time after the issue of the
notification under sub-section (1) of section 4,
the Government shall publish a further noti-
fication in the Rajasthan Gazette, giving suffi-
cient description of the land already notified
under the said sub-section (1) of section 4 to
enable it to be identified and stating the pur-
pose for which it is or is likely to be needed, its
approximate area and situation and, where a
plan has been made of the Jand, the place where
such plan may be inspected, and the Collector
shall cause public notice to be given’ of the
substance of the said further notification at
convenient places on or near the Iand to be
acquired,”

In section 6 dealing with declaration, the following
new sub-section has been added:

“(4) Upen the publication of a declaration under
sub-section (1), the notification under sub-
section (1) of section 4 shall, so far as it does
not include the particular land covered by the
said declaration, be deemed to be cancelled
except to the extent, if any, that the Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Rajasthan
Gazette in which the said declaration is publish-
ed, direct otherwise.”

In section 11, additions are made laying down the time
limit within which the Collector shall make an award and
also providing for costs in some cases. As regards the time
limit, it is stated that the Collector shall, except for reasons
beyond his control, make an award within a period of six
months commencing from the time fixed under sub-sec-
tion (2) of section 9. The new provisions relating to costs
are as under:

“(iv) the costs which, in his opinion, should be
allowed to any person who is found to be en-
titled to compensation and who is not entitled
to compensation and who is not entitled to
receive the additional sum of ten per centum
mentioned in sub-section (2) of section 23, as
having been actually and reasonably incurred


116

by such person in preparing his claim and put-
ting his case before the Collector:

(2) The Collector may disallow, wholly or in part,
costs incurred by any person if he considers that the
claim made by such person for compensation is extra-
vagant.”

After section 12, a new section 12A has been inserted
enabling the Collector to correct clerical and arithmetical
mistakes in the award.

“124. Clerical and arithmetical mistakes is the
award, may, at any time not later than six
months from the date of the award, be correct-
ed by the Collector either on his own initiative
or on the application of the parties. If the
amendment of the award discloses any over-
payment the Collector shall issue a notice to
the persons to whom over-payment was wrongly
made either immediately after the amend-
ment of the award or after expiry of the time
allowed to make a reference to the Court against
the amendment of the award, that if the amount
over-paid is not credited to Government within
a month after the receipt of the notice, such
amount shall be recovered as arrears of land
revenue.”

In section 17, sub-seclion (2) dealing with taking
immediate possession in certain emergencies, the power
has been extended for the purpose of maintaining road
communication or irrigation or water supply service by
the following addition:

“Or whenever owing 10 a like emergency or owing
to breaches or other unforeseen’ damage occur-
ring to roads, rivers, channels or tanks it be-
comes necessary for the Government to acquire
the immediate possession of any land for the
purpose of maintaining road communication or
irrigation or water supply service, as the case
may be.”

The following new sub-sections have been added after
sub-section (4) of section 17

“(5) Sub-sections (1) and (3) shall apply also in the
case of any area which is stated in a certificate
by a District Magistrate to be unhealthy


117 '

(6) Before granting any such certificate, the Dis-
trict Magistrate shall cause notice to be served
as promptly as may be on the persons referred
to in sub-section (3) of section 9 and shall hear
without any avoidable delay any objections
which may be urged by them.

(7) When proceedings have been taken under this
section for the acquisition of any land, and any
person sustains damage in consequence of being
suddenly dispossessed of such land, compensa-
tion shall be paid to such person for such dis-
possession.”

The following new section 17-A_ providing for the
transfer of land to local authority has been inserted.

“I7A, When any land is acquired for the purpose of
a local authority, the Collector shall, in every
case referred to in section 16 or 17, make over
charge of the land, upon payment of the cost
of acquisition to that authority and the Jand
shall thereupon vest in the local authority sub-
ject to its liability to pay any further costs
which may be incurred on account of its
acquisition.”

In section 18, provision has been made to make it
possible for the Government department on whose behalf
acquisition is being made to ask for a reference to the
Court where it hag not accepted the award.

The following new sub-section (3) has also been
introduced :--

#(3) Any order made by the Collector on an appli-
cation made under this section shall be subject
to revision by the High Court as if the Collec-
tors were a Court subordinate to the High Court
within the meaning of section 115 of the Code.”

A new section 224 has been inserted to enable the
Government department to make cross-objection to the
Court when the person interested under section 18(1)
raises any objection which the Collector refers to the
Court.

“994, Whenever in pursuance of section 18(1) any
person interested has raised any objection which


118

has been referred by the Collector for the
determination of the Court, the Government
department in whose behalf acquisition is being
made shall have the right of making cross-
objection to the Court.”
Tn section 23, sub-section (1) in clause firsily, the rele-
vant date of determination of market value is the date cf
declaration under section 6.

In sub-section (2), the solatium ig redueed to ten per
cent. Sub-section (2) as modified and the new subsection
i8) inserted are given below.

“(2) In addition 10 the market value of the land as
above provided the Court shall, in every case
except where a certificate has been granted
under sub-section (5) of section 17, award a
sum of ten per centum on such market value in
consideration of the compulsory nature of the
acquisition:

Provided that the sum of ten per quantum shall not
be awarded when any land has been acquirecd
for the purpose of an improvement or develop-
tment trust unless such land consists of—

(8) building in the actual occupation of the owner
or his tenant or occupied free of rent by a
relative of the owner and Jand appurtenant
thereto, or

(0) gardens not let out but used by the owner.

13) For the purposes of clause first of sub-seetion
(1) of this section,—

da) the market value of the land shall be the
market value according to the use to which
the land was put at the date with reference
to which the market value is to be determin-
ed under the clause, and for the purpose of
the market value the Court shali take into
consideration transfers of land  sitnilarly
situated in similar use and shall not admit evi-
dence that any price actually paid for similar
Jand in similar use contains any element of
the potential value of the land transferred
for any more lucrative use, and if on the
material date the land is subject to any res-


(b)

(०)

(a)

{e)

@®

(g)

119

trictions under anv law for the time being
in force, the market value shall be assessed
taking into account these restrictions,

if it be shown that before such date the owner
of the land had taken active steps and in-
curred expenditure to secure & more profitable
use of the same, further compensation based
on his actual 1055 may be paid to him,

if the market value is specially high in con-
sequence of the land being put to use which is
unlawiul or contrary to public policy, that use
shall be disregarded and the market value
shall be deemed to be the market value of the
land if put to ordinary use,

if the market value has been increased by
means of any improvement made by the
owner or his predecessor-in-interest within
one year before the aforesaid date, such in-
erease shall be disregarded unless it be prov-
ed ihat the improvement so made was made
in good faith and not in contemplation of
proceedings for the acquisition of the land
being taken under this Act,

if the market value has been increased or
decreased owing to the land falling within or
near to the alignment of a projected public
street, so much of the increase or decrease as
may be due to such cause shall be disregarded,

if the market value of any building is specially
high in consequence of the building being so
overcrowded as to be dangerous to the health
of the inmates, such overcrowding shall be
disregarded and the market value shall be
deemed to be the market value of the building
if oceupied by such number of persons only
as could be accommodated in jt without risk
of danger from overcrowding, and

when the owner of the land or building thas,
within two years preceding the aforesaid da .
made a return of the rent of the land or build.
ing to the Government or any local authority,
the rent of the Iand or building shall not in
amy case be deemed to be greater than the



120

rent shown in the latest return so made, save
as the Court may otherwise direct, and the
market value may be determined on the basis
of such rent:

Provided that where any addition to or improve-
ment of, the land or building has been made
after the date of such latest return and pre-
vious to the date with reference to which the
market value is to be determined the court
shall take into consideration any increase in
the letting value of the land or building due
to such addition or improvement.”

The following new section 24A has been imserted.

“244. In determining the amount of compensation to be
awarded for any land acquired under this Act, the Court
shall have regard also to the following provisions,
namely :—

(i) when any interest in any land acquired under
this Act has been acquired after the date of the
publication of the declaration under section 6,
no separate estimate of the value of such
interest shall be made 50 as to increase the
amount of compensation to be paid for such
land;

(ii) if, in the opinion of the Court, any building
which is used or is intended or is likely to be
used for human habitation is not . reasonably
capable of being made fit for human habitation,
the amount of compensation for such building
shall not exeeed the value of the materials of
the building.”

In Section 25 dealing with Rules ag to compensation, in
sub-section (1), there is omission of the words “be less
than the amount awarded by the Collector”; and sa the
Court can allow even lesser compensation. Besides, sub-
section (3) has also been omitted.

In sections 28 and 34, the rate of interest has been
reduced to 4 per cent.

The following new sub-section has been introduced at
the end of section 31.


v2t

“31. (5) When a person interested in any land and
competent to contract in respect thereof has, at
any stage of the proceedings for the acquisition
of land stated in writing before the Collector,
or, if the proceedings are pending in a Court,
before that Court, that he gives up his elaim
to compensation in respect of the Jand, ‘he shall
be deemed to have received and given a valid
dischare for such compensation for the land as
would otherwise have been payable te him.”

In Part VI dealing with “Temporary occupation of
Land,” two new sub-sectiong (2) and (3) have been intro-
duced in section 35 and the existing sub-section renum-
bered as (4) and (5).

“35.(2) Before issuing a direction under sub-section
() the Government may require a Collector to
submit—

(a) a plan of the land which is needed for occupa-
tion and use,

a report stating whether it is desirable to
occupy the latid, and

(b)

(2) an estimate of the compensation that would
be payable under sub-section (4) and upon
the issue of such a requisition the Collector
shall cause public notice of the substance of
requisition to be given at convenient places
in the locality in which the land is situated.
After the issue of such notice it shali be lawful
for any officer either generally or specially
authorised by the Collector in this behalf, and
for his servants and workmen,

to enter upon and survey and take levels of any
land in such locality; to dig or bore into the
sub-soil;

to do ali other acts necessary to ascertain
whether the land is adapted for such
purpose;

to set out the boundaries of the land proposed
to be taken and the intended line of the
work, if any, proposed to be made therein;


(3)

122

to make such levels, boundaries and line by
placing marks and cutting trenches; and
where otherwise the survey cannot be com-
pleted and the levels taken or the boundaries
and line marked, to cut down and clear
away any or part of the standing crop,
fence or jungle.

The officer authorised under sub-section (2)
shall, at the time of his entry, pay or tender
payment for all necessary damage to be done as
aforesaid and in the case of dispute as to the
sufficiency of the amount, so paid or tendered,
he shall at once refer the dispute to the decision
of the Collector or other Chief Revenue Officer
of the District and such decision shall be final.”

In section 37, where the difference as to the condition
of the land has been referred to the decision of the court,
it is provided that provisions of Part III would apply
mutatis mutandis,

By the insertion of a new section 48A, it is provided
that where the acquisition is not completed with:n a year
compensation is to be paid for the damage suffered due
to delay, A new section 48B provides that in certain cases,
sections 48 and 48A would not apply.

“48A. (1) If within a period of one year from the

(2)

date of the publication of the declaration under
section 6 in respect of any Jand, the Collector
has not made an award under section 11 with
respect to such land, the owner of the land shall,
unless he has been to a Material extent respon-
sible for the delay, be entitled to receive com-
pensation for the damage suffered by him in
consequence of the delay.

The provision of Part III of this Act shall apply,
so far as may be, to the determination of the
compensation payable under this section.”

“48B. No compensation shall be payable in pursuance

of section 48 or scction 48A, when proceedings
for the acquisition of land have been abandoned
on the execution of an agreement with, or the
acceptance of a payment to, the owner of the
Jand.”


123

The following sub-section is inserted at the end of sub-
Section (3) of section 49.

“(4) For the purposes of sub-section (1) land which
is held with and attached to a house and is
reasonably required for the enjoyment and use
of the house shall be deemed to be part of the
house.”

A new section dealing with interpretation has been
added as the last section.
“56. The provisions of the General Clauses Act, 1897
(X of 1897), shall mutatis mutandis apply so far
as may be, to this Act in the same manner as
they apply to a Central Act.”

The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (Adaptation and Applica-
tion Ordinance, 1948 as amended by Saurashtra Act XLII
of 1953)

The Saurashtra Act has made the following changes in
the Land Acquisition Act of 1894.

In the definition section in clause (c), the reference to
Deputy Commissioner is omitted. In clause (e), the refer-
ence is to the Indian Companies Act 1913 as amended from
time to time instead of the Indian Companies Act of 1882.
It provides that the expression “Court” would include the
Court of Civil Judge (Senior Division) to which the princi-
pal Civil Court may transfer any proceedings under the
Act. In the definition of ‘public purpose’ it provides for
the acquisition of land for purposes of the development of
areas from public revenues etc., and the subsequent dis-
posal thereof by lease, assignment or sale with a view to
securing further development.

It also provides that the Collector shall not make the
Award under Section 11 without the prior approval of the
State Government or any officer which the State Govern-
ment may appcint in this behalf. It also adds a new
Section 12A which would enable the correction of clerical
or arithmetical error in an Award within a period of six
months by the Collector either on his own initiative or
on an application from the person interested. Also it seeks
to enable the Collector to recover any over-payment made
by him as if it were an arrear of land revenue. A new
Section 15A is added which empowers the State Govern-
ment, before an Award is made by the Collector under
Section 11, to call for and examine the record of any order
passed by the Collector or of any enquiry or proceedings
L1Law/67—9


124

of the Collector for the purpose of satisfying -tself about
the legality of the order or the regularity of the proceed-
ings. It may even annul or reverse the order, if necessary.

In section 17, dealing with cases of urgency, an addition
has been made to cover damage to roads, rivers, channels
or tanks by some unforeseen events.

In the Part dealing with the temporary occupation of
land, three new sub-sections are added after sub-section
(1) of section 35, This would enable the State Govern-
ment, before issuing a direction under sub-section (1) to
require the Collector to submit a plan of the land and
also an estimate of the compensation payable. The Collec-
tor then shall cause public notice af the substance of such
requisition, Thereupon any officer authorised by the
Collector may exercise the powers conferred under section
4(2). Such officer shall pay compensation at the time of
his entry for all demages to be done and the Cecision of
the Collector on this point shall be final.

In section 47 the reference to Calcutta, Madras and
Bombay is omitted.

In Section 54 relating to appeals the following words
are deleted: “and from any decree of the High Court
passed on such appeal as aforesaid an appeal shall lie to
His Majesty in Council subject to the provisions contained
in section 110 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1938 and ia™
Order XLV thereof.” °

Lastly, it provides for the substitution of the words
“Government of Saurashtra” for the words “Central Gov-
ernment”, “appropriate Government”, or “Crown”,
wherever they may occur.

Secrion Wi—Parr C Sravres
The Resettlement of Displaced Persons (Land Accuisition)
Act, 1948 (LX of 1948, as amended by A.L.O. 1950) (Central
Act)

The Act extends only to Ajmer and Delhi. The object
of this Act is to provide immediate accommodation to
displaced persons and for that end to speedily obtain
possession of the land. The Act to a large extent departs
from the procedure laid down in the LA. Act, 1894,
Immediately after the notification for acquisitior. of the
Jand is served and published, the land vests absolutely in
the State Government free from all encumbrances and
thereafter possession of the land may be taken. ‘The pro-


125

cedure for enquiry into the objection follows thereafter.
If the objection is upheld the Iand is released from aequi-
sition and is revested in the owner together with the
encumbrances which were previously extinguished.

¥f the objections are over-ruled, the compensation will
have to be determined either by agreement or arbitration.
If it wags not possible to settle amicably, the arbitrator to
whom the dispute has to be referred, should be a
person qualified for appointment as a judge of a High
Court, He is assisted in the determination by two experts,
One nominated by the State Government, and the other by
the person 10 be compensated. An appeal against the
decision of the arbitrator lies to the High Court.

Market value of the land has to be fixed as on the date
of the preliminary notification on 1.9.39 with an addition
of 40 per cent whichever is less.

The Act is a complete code in itself and contains pro-
visions on other matters analogous to those of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894.

Secrion [V—Native Staves

The Land Acquisition Act, 1070 (II of 1070) as amended by
Acts IV of 1074, 7 of 1109, 7 of 11, XXX of 1112, and Pro-
clamation V of 1112.

The Cochin Act (II of 1070), amended as above has
effected the least possible change in the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894.

In section 3(c), instead of the expression “Collector”,
the expression Peishkar (who takes the Place of the Col-
lector) ig defined. Clause (ee) im section 3 defining
appropriate government is omitted but the expression
“Diwan” is substituted for the expression ‘appropriate
Government” wherever it oceurs in the Act.

In sub-section (2) of section 10, the corresponding
sections (161 and 162) of the Cochin Penal Code are sub-
stituted for sections 175 and 176 of the Indian Penal Code.

In the section dealing with reference to the Court at
the instance of the person interested who does not accept
the award of the Collector, an addition has been made


126

in the Cochin Act enabling the Diwan to ask fcr a refer-
ence, if he desires. The addition at the end of sub-section
{1) of the relevant section reads thus:

“The Diwan likewise may, if he has not accepted
the award, require that the matter be referred
to the Court by the Peishkar.”

An important Proviso is added to clause first of section
23(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 which reads as

follows:

“Provided that the valuation should be such that the
value of the land plus the value of improve-
ments thereon must not exceed the market
value of the property in question and provided
further that the value to be awarded should be
the prevailing market rate irrespective of the
price paid for previous acquisition”;

In the section corresponding to section 27 of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894, the existing sub-section qd) is
reproduced as sub-section (2), while the existing sub-
section (2) of the Indian Act of 1894 is missing. The
reason for the omission, if it is deliberate is not apparent.
The omitted sub-section reads thus:

“When the award of the Collector is not upheld, the
costs shall ordinarily be paid by the Collector,
unless the Court shall be of opinion that the
claim of the applicant was so extravagant or
that he was so negligent in putting his case
before the Collector that some deduction from
his costs should be made or that he should pay a
part of the Collector’s costs.”

Again, in section 31 dealing with the payment of com-
pensation or deposit in Court, in sub-section (2) after the
three provisos, a new sub-section has been introduced
which reads as follows:

“When the Diwan requires the Peishkar to make
a reference under section 17, it shall be com-
petent to him to demand security from the
person claiming the amount awarded and to
withhold payment until such security is furnish-
ed.”


127

Section §3 of the Cochin Act which corresponds to
section 54 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 provides for
an appeal to the Chief Court from an award.

The Hyderabad Land Acquisition Act, 1309F (1X of 1309F)
[1899] as amended by the Hyderabad Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Regulation 1358F (LIX of 1358F) [1948]

The Hyderabad Act (IX of 1309F) as amended by the
Regulation (LIX of 1358 7) has effected the following
changes in the Land Acquisition Act of 1894.

In the definition section, instead of Collector, the expres-
sion ‘Taluqdar’ (who takes the place and discharges the
functions of the Collector) is defined.

The expressions “Court” and “company” have been
slightly differently defined in the light of their applicabili-
ty to Hyderabad.

Clauses {ee), (f) and (g) defining “appropriate Gov-
ernment”, “public purpose” and persons “entitled to act”
have been omitted, Consequently, the reference to persons
entitled in sub-section (3) of section 5A ia also omitted.

Sub-section (2) of section 10 making it obligatory on
the part of persons to make or deliver certain statements
required under section 9, 10 has been omitted.

Likewise section 10 conferring power to summon and
enforce attendance of witnesses and production of docu-
ments has been omitted.

Section 18 has been modified by fixing a uniform period
of two months from the dste of receipt of notice of award
within which application can be made requiring the Callec-
tor (Taluqdar) to make the reference to court instead of
the six weeks period from different dates mentioned in
clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (2) of section 18 of the
Indian Act.

Section 22 requiring the proceedings to be in open court
does not find a place in the Hyderabad Act.

In the section corresponding to section 24 of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894, the clause fourthiy found in the
Indian Act is omitted in the Hyderabad Act. Besides, in
clause fifthly and sixthly of the Indian Act, in factors to
be disregarded, reference made only to the “increase to
the value" because of the use to which the acquired land


128

“will be put to; but the Hyderabad Act requires that both
the “decrease and increase” should be disregarded. The
provisions. are as follows:
“fourthly, any decrease or increase in the value of
the land likely to accrue from the use te which
it will be put when acquired;”

“fifthly, any decrease or increase in the vilue of the
other land of the person interested likely to
accrue from the use to which the land acquired
will be put;”

Sub-section (2) of section 26 of the Land Acquisition
Act which says that “every such award shall be deemed
to he a decree and the statement of the grounds of every
such award a judgment” within the meaning of the Code
of Civil Procedure is omitted in the Hyderabad Land
Acquisition Act.

In section 38-A dealing with acquisition for companies,
a minor change has been effected by increasing the number
of workmen in an industrial concern from one hundred
to two hundred,

In the last Part containing miscellaneous provisions,
section 45 dealing with service of notice and section 46
providing for penalty in case of obstruction have been
omitted in the Hyderabad Act.

In section 52 of the Land Acquisition Act, 189-4 a minor
change has been made by increasing the period of previous
notice from one month to three months in case of suits
under the Act.

Lastly, in the section corresponding to section 54 of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894 provision is made for appeal to
the High Court.

The Mysore Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (VII of 1894) as
amended by Acts XI of 1916, I of 1927, VII of 1932 and
8111 # +२ ६७७ या of 194t
‘The Mysore Act (VII of 1894), amended as shown above,
is almost a verbatim reproduction of the Land acquisition
Act, 1894 excepting for the changes indicated below :-—

In section 3(c), the expression “Deputy Commissioner”
is defined instead of the expression “Collector”. Likewise
3{ee) defining “appropriate Government” is omitted but
the words “Government of Mysore” are used wherever the


129

‘expression “appropriate Government” ig used in the Act,
and in 3(f), it is said,
“the expression ‘public purpose’ includes the pro-
vision of village sites;”

Sub-section (2) of section 26 which states that every
award shall be deemed to be a decree is omitted.

So also, section 38-A, dealing with Industrial concern,
has been omitted.

Section 54 provides for an appeal to the High Court
from an award.

The Land Acquisition Act, 1089 (XI of 1089) as vmended
by Acts V of 1096, 7 of 1099.

The Travancore Act (XI of 1089), as amended, has
effected the following changes in the L.A. Act, 1894.

In the definition section, instead of the expression
“Collector”, the expression “division peishkar” has been
defined, The expression “local authority” is defined as “any
Municipal Council or other authority legally entitled to,
or entrusted by the Government with the control or
management of any municipal or local fund”.

Clauses (d), (e), (ee) and (f) defining the expression
“Court”, “company”, “appropriate Government” and “pub-
lic purpose” have been omitted and wherever the expres-
sion “appropriate government” occurs in the Act, it is
teplaced by the word “Government”. Again, the reference
to “married women” in the clause dealing with persons
“entitled to act” has been omitted.

Section 5-A dealing with the hearing of objections has
been omitted.

The reference to company in the declaration section (8)
and the proviso thereof to sub-section (1) has been omitted.

In section 9 dealing with notice to persons interested,
the following new sub-section is added as the fifth one.

“(5) The notice shall also be published in the Gazette,
and shall be deemed to be sufficient notice to all
persons interested in the land as beiween the
Government and such persons.”


130

After the existing section 15, the following new section
(dealing with the making of award where there is agree-
ment) has been introduced :

“15. Award in case of agreement as to the amount of
compensation.—Ii the Division Peishker and all
the persons interested agree as to the amount of
compensation to be allowed, the Division Peish-
kar shall, with the previous sanctior. of the
Government, make an award under his hand for
the same.

Award to be filed and to be evidence. Such
award shall be filed in the Division Peishkar's
office and shall be conclusive evidence, as bet-
ween the Government and all persons interested
of the value of the land and the amount of com-
pensation allowed for the same.”

Sub-section (2) of section 17 (dealing with emergency
cases where it becomes necessary for the Railway Adminis-
tration to take immediate possession) along with the pro-
viso has been omitted. Again, sub-section (4) making
section 5A not applicable to certain cases has been omitted
since, as mentioned already, section 5A does not find a
place in the Travancore Act.

In clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (2) of section 18,
the six weeks’ periog is increased to a two-months’ period.

Section 22 providing for the proceedings to be in open
court has been omitted.

In section 23, in clause firstly of sub-section (1), the
‘Teavaneore Act provides that the market value shall be
as at the date of declaration under section 6 and not as at
the date of publication of notification under section 4(1).

In section 26, sub-section (2) providing that the award
shall be deemed to be a decree has been omitted.

In section 27, sub-section (2) providing for payment of
costs by the collector where his award is not upheld has
been omitted.

In section 31 providing for the payment of compensa-
tion or deposit in court, a new proviso has been added at
the end to the effect that “no such arrangement shall be
made without the previous sanction of the Government”.

Sections 35 to 44 have been omitted, That is, the Part
dealing with Temporary Occupation of Land and the Part


131

dealing with Acquisition of Land for Companies have
been omitted.

In section 35-A of the Travancore Act which corres-
ponds to section 50 of the L.A. Act, 1894, provision is made
for acquisition of land at the cost of local authority only
and not for any company (since the Part dealing with
Companies has been omitted). Further, instead of the
existing proviso, a new sub-section (3) has been added
enabling the local authority objecting to the award of the
Peishkar to ask for a reference to court. The new sub-
section reads as follows :

“(3) Any such local authority which objects to the
award of a Division Peishkar in regard either to
the area of the Jand or to the amount of com-
pensation may ask for a reference to the Dis-
trict Court within whose jurisdiction the land
is situate in the manner and within the time
specified in section 18; and thereupon the provi-
sions of sections 19 to 23 and 25, in so far as
they may, shall apply.”

Section 51 exempting award and agreement from stamp
duty has been omitted.

In section 52 which lays down the requirement of
month’s previous notice before commencing any proceed-
ing or prosecution against any person under the Act, an
addition has been made barring suit or other proceedings
“after the expiration of six months from the accrual of
the cause of action”.

In section 38 of the Travancore Act which corresponds
to section 54 of the L.A. Act, 1894 it is laid down that an
appeal shall lie to the High Court from the award.

immediately after this, following new section has
been inserted : पु

“39. Provisions of Limitation Act and Code of Civil
Procedure made applicable——The provisions of
the Limitation Act and the Code of Civil Proce-
dure in respect of regular appeals in ordinary
suits shall, so far as may be, apply to proceed-
ings before the High Court under this Act.”


APPENDIX IV
Other Acts contdining provisions for acquisition
PART I—LIST OF ACTS
Secron I—Cenrrat Acts
1. The Indian Telegraphs Act, 1885 (XIII of 1885).
2. The Indian Tramways Act, 1885 (XI of 1836).
3. The Indian Railways Act, 1890 (IX of 1890}.
4. The Indian Works of Defenee Act, 1903 (VII of 1903).
5. The Indian Electricity Act, 1910 (IX of 1810).
6. The Indian Forest Act, 1927 (XVI of 1927).
पृ, The Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948 (XIV
of 1948).
8 The Delhi Road Transport Authority Act, 1950
(RIE of 1950).
9. The Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950 (LXIV
of 1950).
10. Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act,
. 1956 (KCVI of 1956).
11. The Territorial Councils Act, 1956 (CIE of 1956).
12. The Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and -Develop-
ment) Act, 1957 (XX of 1957), as amended by Act
LI of 1957.
13. The Delhi Development Act, 1957 (LXI of 1957).

132


Secrion 1]—State Acts
Part A

1. The Calcutta Improvement Act, 1911 (5 of 1911).
2. The Bengal Municipal Act, 1932 (15 of 1932).
3. The Caleutta Mumicipal Act, 1951 (33 of 1951).

4. The Bihar and Orissa Municipal Act, 1922 (7 of
1922).

5. The Darbhanga Improvement Act, 1934 (4 of 1934).

6. The Bihar Restriction of Uses of Land Act, 1948 (33
of 1948),

7. The Bihar Town Planning and Improvement Trust
Act, 1951 (35 of 1951).

Bombay

8. The Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations
Act, 1949 (59 of 1949),

Central Provinces

9. The C.P. & Berar Municipalities Act, 1922 (2 of
1922). .

10. The Nagpur Improvement Trust Act, 1936 (36 of

1936).

Madras
11, The Madras City Municipal Act, 1919 (4 of 1919).
12. The Madras District Municipalities Act, 1920 (5 of

1920).

13. The Madras Town Planning Act, 1920 (7 of 1920).
14, The Madras District Local Boards Act, 1920 (14 of

1920).

15, The Madras City Improvement Trust Act, 1950

(37 of 1950).

16. The Madras Lignite (Acquisition of Land) Act,

1953 (11 of 1953).

133


134
Orissa
17, The Orissa Municipal Act, 1950 (23 of 1950) .
Punjab

18. The Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922 (4 of
1922),

United Provinces
19. The U.P. Town Improvement Act, 1919 (8 of 1919).
20. The Kanpur Urban Area (Development) Act, 1945

(6 of 1945),
21, The U.P. Roadside Land Control act, 1945 (10 of
1945).
Port B
Hyderabad

22. The Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act, 1950
(38 of 1950).

23. The Hyderabad City Improvement Act, 1951 (35,
of 1951),

Mysore

24. The City of Mysore Improvement Act, 1903 (3 of
1903).
25. The City of Bangalore Improvement Act, 1945 (5 of
1945).
Part C
Dethi

26. The Delhi Restriction of Uses of Land Act, [941
(12 of 1941),

PART Il-BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE ACTS
Section I—Cerntrar Acts

1. The Indian Telegraphs Act, 1885 (XIIT of 1.885).

The power to acquire under this Act is vested in the
Central Government and is restricted to the user of the
land and not the land itself. If there is a dispute in
respect of payment of compensation for such user or in
respect of apportionment of compensation, the dispute has
to be referred to the District Judge and his decision is
final. This Act has nothing to do with the Land Acquisi-
tion Act, 1894. The relevant sections of the Act are
sections 10 and 11.


135

2. The Indian Tramways Act, 1886 (XI of 1886).

The promoter of a tramway scheme has to obtain
authorisation from the Government. The authorisation
order itself has to provide that the land needed may be
acquired for the promoter under the provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1870 (now 1894) in the same manner
and on the same conditions as it might be acquired for the
purposes of the tramway if a company were the promoter.
(vide sections 4 to 7). This Act, therefore, makes recourse
to the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act cbligatory,
when land has to be acquired.

3. The Indian Railways Act; 1890 (IX of 1890).

if land belonging to another is needed for a railway
administration, the acquisition has to be mad. under the
provisions of the Land Acquisition Act. Section 9 of the
Act confers power on a railway administration to enter
upon another person’s land for the purposes mentioned in
the section, but compensation has to be paid by the railway
administration for the damage, if any, caused thereby. In
case of dispute the question has to be determined in accor-
dance with the provisions of sections 11 to 15 (both
inclusive), 18 to 34 (both inclusive) and sections 53 and 54
of the Land Acquisition Act. Sections 51 and 52 of the
Act are also made applicable (vide section 4).

To a large extent, therefore, the provisions of the Land

Acquisition Act, 1894 apply to cases covered by the Indian
Railways Act.

4. The Indian Works of Defence Act, 1903 (VII of 1903).

This Act contains provisions analogous to those of the”
Land Acquisition Act, 1894,

5. The Indian Electricity Act, 1910 (IX of 1910).

Under section 57(2) of the Act, the State Government
may on the application of any person not being a company
desirous of obtaining any land for the purposes of his wnder-
taking direct that he may acquire such land under the
provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 in the same
manner and on the same conditions as it might be acquired
if the person were a company.

The word “work” occurring in section 40 sub-section (1)

clause (०) and section 41 sub-section. (5) of the Land Acqui-
sition Act, 1894 is given an extended meaning as including


136

electrical energy supplied or to be supplied by means of the
work to be constructed [vide section 57 sub-section (1)|.
The undertaking is treated under the above provision as 8
“company” for the purposes of the Land Acquisition Act
and the purposes for which acquisition may be mate are
enlarged.

6. The Indion Forest Act, 1927 (XVI of 1927).

The land required for any purposes of the Act is treated
as a public purpose within the meaning of secticn 4 of the
Land Acquisition Act (vide section 84).

7. The Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948 (XIV of

1948).

The act created a statutory corporation for the develop-
ment of Damodar Valley.

Under section 50 of the Act, any land required by the
Corporation for carrying out its function under the Act shall
be deemed to be a public purpose and such jand shall
be acquired for the Corporation as if the provisions of Part
VII (Acquisition of Land for Companies) of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894) were applicable to it and
the Corporation. The procedure for obtaining agreement
clause (e) of section 3 of the said Act.

Under section 40 of the Land Acquisition Act, the

purposes for which land could be acquired for s company
are very restricted. Section 50 of the Damodar Valley Act
enlarges the purposes but limits them to the purposes of
the Corporation. The procedure for obtaining agreement
as in the case of companies is extended to it, perhaps for the
reason, that though it is a State controlied Corporation its
funds are separate from the State funds. Under the scheme
adopted by us, such a corporation would not be a “com-
pany” within the definition proposed but the purpose would
be a public purpose if the intended acquisition is for the
purposes of the corporation as under section 50 akove refer-
Ted to. We have applied the agreement procedure to such
cases by a separate section. There is, therefore, no need
to treat such corporation as “company’s” as under the
Damodar Valley Corporation Act.

8. The Delhi Road Transport Authority Ac’, 1950

(XIII of 1950).

In section 45 of the Act, if land is required for any of
the purposes of the Act, such purpose shall be deemed to
be a public purpose and the acquisition could be made under


137

the Land Acquisition Act as if the provisions of Part VII
of the Land Acquisition Act were applicable to it-and the
authority were a Company within the meaning of clause
(ए) of section 34 of the Act.

9. The Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950
(LXIV of 1950).

Since it deals with acquisition of undertakings which
will include even movables, the principles are different
and the Act has, therefore, not been taken into considera-
tion.

10. Slum. Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956
(XCVI of 1956).

This Act extends ta all Union territories except the
Union territories of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and
the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindive Islands.

The object of the Act is for making provisions for the
improvement and clearance of slum areas in urban terri-
tories,

Chapter V of the Act provides for the acquisition of
lands. If the Central Government is satisfied that it is
neeessary for the improvements of slum areas or to re-
develop any clearance areas that land should be acquired,
it may publish a notification to that effect in the Official
Gazette after hearing the objections, it any, of the owner
or amy person interested in the land. When a notice as
aforesaid is published in the Official Gazette, the land vests
absolutely as and from the date on which the notice is so
published, in the Central Government free from all encum-
brances. Every person interested in any land acquired
under this Act is entitled to receive compensation from the
Central Government to be determined in the manner laid
down in the Act. The principle for determining the com.
pensation adopted by this Act is that it should b. amount
equal to sixty times the net average monthly income,
actually derived from such land during the period of five
consecutive years immediately preceding the date of pub-
lication of the notice which has to be calculated ina
manner and in accordance with the principles laid down in
the Schedule. The final determination regarding the
amount of net average monthly income lies witl: the admi-
nistrator, If there is a dispute regarding apportionment of
the compensation or regarding title to receive it. ifie matter



138

is to be referred to the District Judge who has to decide
it. .

11. The Territorial Councils Act 1956 (CII of 1956).

Section 61 of the Act provides that when the land is
required for the use of the Territorial Council, the Central
Government may, at the request of the Council, proceed
to acquire it under provisions of the law relating to acquisi-
tion of land on payment, by the Council, of cornpensation
for the land as well as the charges incurred by the Govern-
ment in connection with the proceedings, and after such
payment the land vests in the Council absolutely.

12. The Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Develop-
ment) Act, 1957 (XX of 1957) as amended by Li of
1957,

This Act authorises the Central Government to acquire
land by issuing a notification under section 7 of the Act
within one month of the issue of the notification. Any
person interested in the land, may object to “his. The
competent authority hears objections, submits the case to
the Central Government along with the reports containing
recommendations on the objections, If the Central Gov-
emment is satisfied, a declaration under section 9 for the
acquisition of land is published in the Official Gazette. On
publication of this declaration, the land vests absolutely in
the Central Government and they are entitled to take
possession of the land to the extent to which the compensa-
tion for the land is to be determined under section 5 sub-
section (13) which affects section 9 of the Land Acquisition
Act.

The method of determining compensation ta persons
‘interested, can be fixed by agreement and if that is
not possible there is a Tribunal consisting of a person who
is or has been qualified to be judge of a High Court. There
ig also provision for payment of compensation and allied
matters. The act was amended by the Amending Act LI
of 1957. In emergent cases under the Amending Act, it is
open to the Central Government to exclude application of
section 8 and make a declaration under section 9.

18. The Delhi Development Act, 1957 (LXI of 1957).

Chapter W (sections 15 to 23) of this Act contains the
provisions for acquisition and disposal of land if the land
is acquired for the Delhi Development Authority. Under


139

section 15 of the Act, the Delhi Development Authority is
empowered to issue a notification in the Official Gazette
specifying for the particular purpose for which the land is
required” and calling upon the owner of the Jand and any
other person who, in the opinion of the authorities. may be
interested in the land to show cause why the land should
not be acquired. The Authority decides all the objections
and makes an Order. Immediately after the notification is
issued, if is provided in the Act that the land shalt vest
absolutely in the Authority free from all encumbrances.
The fixation of compensation is by agreement in the first
instance, and if no such agreement is possible, the yaatter is
referred to the Collector for determination of the amount
af compensation for the land aequired. The principles that
shouJd guide the Collector determining the cornpensation
are contained in section 16, sub-section (5) of the Act.
Against the decision of the Collector determining the
amount of compensation, the aggrieved party is entitled to
appeal to the District Judge of Delhi whose decision on
appeal is final. The question of apportionment of compen-
sation is also to be referred to the District Judye. There
are also other provisions in the Act which relate to the
payment of compensation, investment of the amount of
compensation and 50 on.

Section [I—Stare Acts.
1. The Calcutta Improvement Act, 1911 (5 ० 191).

Chapter IV of the Act provides for the acquisition and
disposal of land. The provisions of the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894 are made applicable by this Act for acquisition
of land for the purposes of the Act but with important rodi-
fications. Section 70 provides for the constitution of a
Tribunal for the determination of the dispute relating to
compensation and its decision is treated as an award under
the Land Acquisition Act,.1894. The award made by the
Tribunal is enforceable by the Small Causes Court as if it
were a decree of that court. An appeal] against the decision
of the Tribunal is provided and it lies to the High Court.
The Act also restricts the right of appeal to definite grounds.
Sections 17, 23 and 24 of the Land Acquisition Act are modi-
fied under the provisions of the Aet. A new section [44
is introduced which adds ta the provisions of section 24.
The Act, therefore, while purporting to apply the provisions
of the Land Acquisition Act, makes two important depar-
lures from it firstly, in the agency it provides for the
6? 10


i40

determination of compensation and secondly, in the princi-
ples that govern the determination of compensation,
2. The Bengal Municipal Act, 1932 (15 of 1932).
Section 98 provides that the Provincial Government may

acquire land, at the request of the Commissioners, under
the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.

3. The Caleutte Municipal Act, 1951 (83 of 1951).

Chapter 32 of the Act, sections 517 to 528 relate to
acquisition and disposal of land and buildings. The Cor-
poration is authorised to acquire land or building whether
situate in Calcutta or not (i) for the purpose of opening
out any congested or unhealthy area or of otherwise improv-
ing any portion of Caleutta, (ii) for the purpose of erecting
sanitary dwellings for the purpose of executing any cther
scheme for providing any amenity for persons residing in
Calcutta. There are also other provisions enlarging the
purpose for which acquisition may be made. Under section
524 of the Act in which the Corporation is authorised by
this Act to acquire, acquisition may be made under the
provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 but subject,
however, to the following amendments. The amendment
is that the market value of any land or building to be
acquired shall be deemed, for the purpose of clause first
of sub-section (1) of section 23 of the said Land Acquisition
Act, 1894 to be the market value according to the disposi-
tion of such land or building at the date of the publication
of the declaration relating thereto under section 6 of the
said Land Acquisition Act, 1894. Three proviscs are added
to this: —

(i) if, within a period of two years from the date of
the publication of such declaration in respect of
any land or building, the Collector has not made
an award under section 11 of the said Land
Acquisition Act, 1894, with respect to such land
or building, the owner of the land or building
shall be entitled to receive compensation for the
damage suffered by him in consequence of the
delay;

(ii) if the market value is specially high in conse-
quence of the property being put to a use which
is unlawful or contrary to public policy,
that use shall be disregarded and the market
value shall be deemed to be the market


पका

value of the land or building if put ta ordinary
uses;

(iii) if the market value has been increased by means
of any improvement made by the owner or his
predecessor in interest within one year before
the aforesaid declaration was published, such
increase shall be disregarded, unless it be proved
that the improvement was made bona fide and
not in contemplation of proceedings for the
acquisition of the land or building being taken
under the said Land Acquisition Act, 1894.

On payment of compensation by the Corporation, the
title of the property will vest with the Corporation.

4. The Bihar and Orissa Municipal Act, 1922 (7 of 1922}.

Section 63 provides that the State Government may
acquire land, at ihe request of the Commissioners under
the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.

5. The Darbhanga Improvement Act, 1934 (4 of 1934).

With few modifications, it applies the Provincial Land
Acquisition Act, 1894,

6. The Bihar Restriction of Uses of Land Act, 1948 (23
of 1948).

The relevant provisions of the Act relating to aequisi-
tion ‘of property are analogous to those contained in the
U.P, Roadside Land Control Act, 1945 (Act 10 of 1945) with
subsequent additions dealt with in that Act,

7. The Bihar Town Planning .and Improvemeni Trust
Act, 1951 (35 of 1951).

The provisions are similar to the Calcutta Improvement
Act, 1911 already dealt with.

8. The Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act,
1949 (59 of 1949).

Section 77 provides that the Commissioner shall acquire
any immovable property on behalf of the Government by
agreement on such terms and at such rates or prices or
at rates or prices not exceeding such maxima as shall be
approved by the standing committee either generally for
any class of cases or specially in any particular case. When
ever the Commissioner is authorised to agree to pay the


Jad

whole or any portion of the expenses of acquiring !.mmov-
able property, he shall do so on such terms and at such
rates or prices or at rates or prices nop exceeding such
maxinia as shall be approved by the standing committee as
aforesaid.

The Commissioner may on behalf of the Corporation
acquire by agreement any easement affecting any ‘mmov-
able property vested in the Corporation and the 2{sresaici
provisions shall apply to such acquisition,

Section 78 provides that whenever the Coramissioner i»
unable to aequire immovable property by agreement, the
Government may, subject to the other provisions of the
Act, order proceedings for acquisition as if it were vequired
for a public purpose within the meaning of the Land
Aequisition Act, 1894.

9. The C. P. and Berar aay eipatities Act, 1924 (2 of

1922).

The Act applies the provisions of the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894 with material alterations, particularly with res-
pect to the principles of compensation in section 23

10. The Nagpur Improvement Trust Act, 1938 (36 of
1986) .

It adopts the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 with modifica-
tions. It provides for the constitution of a Tribunal for
determination of compensation and also amends stetions
11, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23 and 24 of the Act. The modiifica-
tions are contained in a Schedule attached tc the Act.

11. The Madras City Municipal Act, 1919 (4 of 799).

Section 76 provides that any immovable property may
be acquired under the provisions of the L. A. Act, 1894 and
on payment of compensation awarded under the said Act.

12. Madras District Municipalities Act, 1920 (5 of 1920).

Section 67 provides that any immovable property may
be acquired under the provisions of the Land Acquisition
Act and on payment of the compensation awardat under
the said Act.

13. The Madras Town Planning Act, 1920 (7 oF 7990).

Acquisition for Town planning is deemed 1. © for a
public purpose for which land may be acquired ander the
provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, ‘Tis Madras
Town Planning Act, 1920 applies the provisions of the Land
Acquisition Act, particularly the provisions coding 10
the principles of enmpensation.



143
14, The Madras District Local Boards Aci, 1920 (14 of
1920).

Section 66 provides that any immovable property which
any District Board is authorised by this Act to acquire
may be acquired under the provisions of the Land Acquisi-
tion Act, 1894 and on payment of the compensation
awarded under the said Act.

15. The Madras City Improvement Trust Act, 1950 (37

of 1950).

Tt applies the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act,
1894 with modifications. It constitutes a Tribunal for the
determination of the dispute relating 1o compensation,
and the various modifications in the sections, particularly
m the principles relating ६० compensation, are contained
in a Sehedule attached to the Act.

16. The Madras Ligitite (Acquisition of Land), Act, 1953

(11 of 1953).

This Act also applies the Land Acquisition Act, 1894
with modifications. Important modifications have been
made in section 23.

17, The Orissa Municipal Act, 1950 (23 of 1950).

Section 304 provides. that the acquisition shall be made
under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.

18, The Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922 (4 of 1922).

It applies the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act
but with modifications, A Tribunal is constiiated for the
purpose of determining the amount of compensation if there
ig some dispute and further modifications in the Act are
rontained in a Schedule attached to the Act.

19. The UP. Town Improvement Act, 1919 (8 of 1919).

The Act empowers the Trust to acquire land «mder the
provisions of the Land Acquisition Act with the previous
sanction of the State Government. It also provides for the
constitution of a Tribunal for determining the dispute rela-
ting to compensation, and the Schedule attached to this
Act indicates the modifications effected in the Land Acqui-
sition Act, 1894.

20. The Kanpur Urban Area (Development)

(6 of 1945).

‘Fhe Board constituted under the Aet may, with the pre-
vious sanction of the Government, acquire land under the
provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 as modified by
this Act,

४, 1945



ida

21. The U. P. Roadside Land Control Act, 1945 (10 of
1945).

It also applies the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act
but with modifications contained in the Schedule. The
modification chiefly is in the principles of determining
compensation.

22. The Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act, 1950 (36
of 1950).

Section 69 provides that the Commissioner shall acquire
any immovable property on behalf of the Government by
agreement on such terms and at such rates or prices or at
rates or prices not exceeding such maxima as shail be
approved by the standing committee either generally for
any class of cases or specially in any particular case. When-
ever the Commissioner is authorised to agree to pay the
whole or any portion of the expenses of acquiring immov-
able property, he shall do so on such terms and at such rates
or prices or at rates or prices not exceeding such maxima
as shall be approved by the standing committee as afore-
said.

‘The Commissioner may, on behalf of the Corporation,
acquire by agreement any easement affecting any immov-
able property vested in the Corporation and the aforesaid
provisions shall apply to such acquisition.

Section 70 provides that whenever the Commissioner is
unable to acquire immovable property by agreement, the
Government may, subject to other provisions of this Act,
order proceedings for acquisition as if it were required for
public purpose within the meaning of the Land Acquisition
Act, 1309 Fasli.

23. The Hyderabad City Improvement Act, 1951 (35 of

1951).

Acquisition for the purpose of this Act is declared to
be for a public purpose within the meaning of the Hydera-
bad Land Acquisition Act, 13809 Fasli. Presumably, the
provisions of that Act are made applicable,

24, The City of Mysore Improvement Act, 1903 (3 of
1903).

It contains a complete Code for the determination of
compensation. It applies the provisions of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 but also contains further provisions.


145

25, The City of Bangalore Improvement Act, 1945 (5 of
1945).
lt applies the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act,
1894.
26. The Delhi Restriction of Uses of Land Act, 1941 (12
43 of 1941).
It also modifies the provisions of the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894,


Andhrs L
Angier 2
iy a
Boma: $
Madhya 5.
Bharut.

6,

Mitdras 7.
8

Orise a
Pepsu 10,
Paniah iw
Rajastbaa 12.
13.

. Andhra Requisitioning of Buildings Act

APPENDIX V
State Requisitioning and Acquisition Acts
PART I--LIST OF ACTS
Secrron 1—Praoncipan Acts

5 (11 of

1954) .

५ Assam Land (Requisition and Accuisition) Act

1948 (25 of 1948), as amended ty 20 of 1950, 34 of
1950, and 33 of 1953.

4. Bihar Premises Requisition (Temporary Pravi-

sions) Act, 1949 (15 cf 1950). as amended by 22 of
1951, 4 of 1953 and, 36 of 1954,

Bombay Land Requisiiien Act, 1948 (33 ai 1948), as
amended by 2 of 1950, 39 of 1950, 40 of 1951, 5 of
1932, 5 of 1983, 17 of 1955 and 52 of 1985

. M. B. Requisitioning of Immovable Property Act,

1954 (35 of 1954),

. €. 9. avd Berar Accommodation (Requisition) Act,

1948 (63 of 1948). as amended by M. 7, Accomme-
dation (Requisition) Amendment Act, 1951 (29 of
3951) .

. The Madras Requisitioning and Acquisition oi

Immovable Property Act, 1956 {42 of 1956).

. Madras Essential Articles Contrel and Requisilion-

ing (Temporary Powers) Act, 1949 (23 of 1949).
re-enacted by 6 of 1956.

. Orissa Requisitioning and Acquisition of Tmmov-

able Property Act, 1952 (29 of 1952).

Pepsu Requisitioning of Immovable Property Act,
2006BK (1 of 2006),

Punjab Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immar-
able Property Act, 1953 (11 of 1953). as amended by
24 of 1954.

Rajasthan Requisitioning af Land (lmpr.seracet of
Agriculture) Act, 1951 (29 of 1951).

Rajasthan Premises (Reyuisition anc. Eviction}
Ordinanec, 1949 (11 of 1949}, as amended by Ac*
18 of 1952.

148


147

TC. Requisitioning and Acquisitivu: of Properis Trawancors
Act, 1958 (1 of 1956). enim
» ULP, ¢Temporary) Accommodation Requisition 7 vee Pra-

1947 (25 of 1947), as amended by 12 of 1950,
1952 and 15 of 1954.

SV. P. Requisitioning and Acquisition of Imimoyuble Vidhys

Property Act, 1953 (4 of 1953). Practest

. W. B. Laad (Requisition and Acquisition) Act, 1948 wes. Beiz:

(2 of 1948), as amended by 7 of 1951, 9 of 1954 and
25 of 1956.

. The W. B. Premises Requisition and Control (Teri-

porary Provisions) Act, 1947 (5 of 1947), as amended
by 4 of 1949, 15 of 1950, 10 of 1953 and 7 of 1954.

| The Waste Lands (Requisitioning and Utilization:

Act, 1952 (4 of 1952), as amended by 29 of 1954.
Section Il.—Conrivuance Acrs

- The Madhya Pradesh Requisitioned Lend (Conti- Madbys

nuance of Powers) Act, 1951 (9 of 1951). Pradesh

. The West Bengal Requisitioned Land (Continuance West Bere

of Powers) Act, 1951 (8 of 1951), as amended by 10
of 1954, 36 of 1954.


PART Il--SUMMARY
Section J—Principa, Acts

1. Andhra Requisitioning of Buildings Act, 1954,
(XI of 1954),

Section 4 enables the competent authority to requisi-
tion any building for a public purpose. Among other
things, it provides that where a building which is to be
requisitioned is in the occupation of a tenant or licencee,
he shall be paid compensation equal to the amount of rent
payable by him for the building for a period of 4 months
plus reasonable expenses incurred on account of vacating
the building and reoceupying another, or in Heu of such
compensation 2 months notice to vacate the building.
However, the liability to pay compensation or give notice
would not arise if the competent authority allots to the
tenant or licencee another building for his occupation.

Section 5 provides for a show cause notice with 15 days
time limit before a requisition order can be made by the
competent authority,

Section 7(a) provides that in no case can the period of
requisition exceed 5 years,

Section 9 provides for the fixation of fair rent for the
requisitioned building, if no agreement can be reached
between the landlord and the competent authority regard-
ing the rent payable. The landlord or the cornpetent
authority or the licencee may apply to the court of District
Munsif having jurisdiction for fixing the fair rent for the
period of requisition. The fair rent shall be assessed in
the following manner. It would consist of (1) the rent
payable for the use and occupation of the building if taken
on lease, (2) amount necessary to compensate the land-
lord for (a) the pecuniary loss, (b) expenses due to vacat-
ing and reoceupying, and (९) damages caused to the build-
ing during the period of requisition, including the expenses
that may be necessary to restore the building to the con-
dition in which it was at the time of requisition. Sub-
section (3) provides for an appeal to the sub-court or to
the district court within a period of 15 days against the

148


149

order passed by the District Munsifs court fixing the fair
rent. The decision on such appeal shall be final and shell
not be liable to review or revision,

Section 11 provides for appeals from orders cr requisi-
tion. Persons aggrieved by order of requisition may,
within 15 days, prefer an appeal to the State Government
and. the order of the State Government on such appeal
shall be final.

2, The Assam Land (Requisition and Acquisition) Act,

1948, (XXV of 1948)

The above Act was amended by Acts XK of 1950,
XXXIV of 1950 and XXXII of 1958.

It seeks to provide for requisition and speedy arquisi-
tion of premises and land for certain purposes.

(1) For maintainmg supplies and scrvites essent.al
to the life of the community.

(2) For providing proper facilities for accommotia-
tion, transport, communication, irrigation or
drainage.

(8) For providing land individually or in groups to
landless, flood-affected or displaced persons,
(4) To a society registered under the Indian Cio-
operative Societies Act, 1912 or a company in-
corporated under the Companies Act, 1918
formed for the benefit and rehabilitation of

landless, flood-affected or displaced persons.

Section 3 provides that the Government may, by
order in writing, requisition any land except those used
for purpose of religious worship or charitable purposes or
the building wherein the owner has actually resided for
a continuous period of one year immediately preceding the
order of requisition.

Within a period of 30 days, the person interested may
appeal to the Government and the decision of the Govern-
ment in such appeal shall be final.

Section 4 provides that the Government may, if it
appears necessary, acquire the requisitioned Jand by
publication of a notice in the Official Gazetie and taat
the Government shall be empowered to apply to such
Jand any of the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act of
1894 with the rules framed thereunder.


150

Section 7 lays down the principles for the determination
af compensation. Sub-seetion (1) lays down that subject to
sub-section (1A) whenever iand is acquired under section 4,
compensation shall be paid as determined by the Collector
jn accordance with the principles set out in sub-section (1)
of section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act of 1894. The
market value referred to in sub-section (1) of section 23 of
the said Act shall be the market value of such land on the
date of publication of notice.

Subsection (1A) provides that in case of land included
in any grant or settlement made for special cultivation, if
it is lying fellow or uncultivated or is not utilized for the
purpose for which a grant was mac: or for incidental
purposes, then compensation payable for acquisition af
such land tegether with trecs thereon shall be an amount
equal to ten times the annual revenue which on date of
publication of notice would have been payable, if such land.
is or had been assessable to revenue at full cates; if any
amount was originally paid to the Government by the
araniee as price or premium for the Jand, an additional
amount equal to the amount originally paid by the grantee
shall also be payable.

When compensation, has thus been determined under
I and 1A, the Collector shall make an award in accordance
with the principles laid down in section 11 of the Land
Acquisition Act of 1894 which shall not include the amount
referred to in sub-section (2) of section 23 of the said Act.

Where laud is requisitioned under section 3, compen-
sation shall be determined as follows:

(1) if there is agreement, the sum agreed would be
paid as compensation, or
(2) in the absence of agreement, the compensation
would be
{a) for requisition of land and
4b) for damage done during the neviod of
requisition other than that caused by sxtural
causes,

When a person is aggrieved by the award under
sub-section, (2) of saction 7 or when there is disagrocment
us to compensation under sub-section (3) of section 7, sec~
tion 8 provides that the matter shall be referred to a
decision of the court and that the provisions of tha Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 shall mutatis mutandis apply
in respect of any reference made to the court under sub-
section (I)



151

3. The Bihar Premises Requisition (temporery provisions)
Act, 1949 (XV of 1950), as amended by Acts XXIU of
1951, IV of 1958 and XXXVI of 1954.

Section 3 confers the power to requisition any premises
for a public purpose. It also provides for an opportunity
0 show cause against such order. It exempl3 premises used
jor religious, charitable or educational purposes.
order passed by the State Government reguisitioning any
premises shall be final,

Section 11 lays down the procedure for fixie  com-
pensation. The compensation shall be the agreed sum or
in the absence of agreement the State Gavernment shall
appoint a District Judge as arbitrator. Also
expert knowledge may be nominated by ihe Go
as well as ihe party to be compensated tu assist Lhe
arbitrator to whom both of them shall te as te what
would be fair compensation. In making the award, the
arbitrator shall be guided by the provisions of sub-section
(1) of section 28 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. An
appeal shall lie to the High Court against the order of tie
arbitrator, Excepting those provided under this Axt,
nothing in any law relating to arbitration shall apply.
Compensation should also be paid for any damage done
during the period of requisition other than normal wear
and tear. If agreement cannot be reached even in respect
of this, the matter shall be referred to the arbitrator.

Section 12 enumerates the matters to be taken into con-
sideration in fixing compensation by agreement. They shall
be the rent payable, reasonable expenses incurred duc to
change of residence and the damage or loss ct incorie
sustained by the person concerned between the ate of
service of order and the date of taking possession

4. Bombay Land Requisition Act, 1948 (XXXIIT of 1948) , as
amended by Acts II of 1950, XXXIX ० 190 XL of -
1951, V of 1952, V of 1953, XVII of 1955 aud LU of
1955.

Section 5 confers the power on the State Government
to requisition any lang for the purpose of the State or any
other public purpose. It exempts buildines which have
been in the actual occupation of the landlord or the tenant
for a continuous period of 6 months preceding
of order.

Section 7 lays down that, notwithstanding onything
contained in the Requisitioned Land (Contit of
Powers) Act, 1947, the State Government may 1. That
eny land which was requisilioned under that Act Dyan

having
etament

date



152

tinue to be subject to requisition under this Act for any
purpose of the State or any other public purpose. Further,
it provides that compensation in respect of such land conti-
nued subject to requisition shall be determined and paid in
aecordance with the provisions of this Act, excepting those
agreements and awards made in respect of land esrlier.

Section 8 lays down that an officer authorised by the
State Government shalf hold an inquiry and determine the
amount of compensation which according to him would he
just. In arriving at the compensation, it is provided that
he shall be guided by the provisions of sub-section (1) of
section 23 and section 24 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
The same officer shall decide any dispute as to the appor-
tionment of compensation.

Sub-section (8) provides that an appeal shall lie within
a period of 60 days against the decision of the offiea:: to the
High Court in Greater Bombay and to the Distric!: Court
elsewhere, except in cases where the total amount of cem-
pensation does not exceed an amount prescribed in this
behalf by the State Government. There shall be no further
appeal against this,

Section 9(c) provides that in the absence of application
for compensation within the time specified, the officer may
determine ex parte the amount of compensaticn and
apportionment.

5. The Madhya Bherat Requisitioning of Imnwvable
Property Act, 1954 (KXXV of 1954).

Section 3 provides that where the competent at.thority
is of the opinion that property is needed for publie purpose
other than the purpose of the Union, it may requisition the
property after the usual show cause notice with 15 days
time limit to object. Properties bonefide used by the
owner as his residence or property exclusively used for
religious worship or as school or hosp‘tal, library or »rphan-
age etc., have been exempted from requisition. Also, wherc
the requisitioned property consists of premises used as
residence by a tenant for at least 2 months preceding the
date of notice, the competent authority shall provide
alternative accommodation.

Section 7 provides for the principles and the method of
determining compensation. Compensation shall be the
amount fixed by egreement, or, in the absence of agrzement,
Government shall appoint as arbitrator a petson qualified
for appointment as a Judge of a High Court. The Govern-


153

ment as well as the person to be compensated may nomi-
nate assessors to assist the arbitrator before whom they
shall state what in their respective opinion would be fair
amount of compensation. The arbitrator shall make his
award determining the compensation which in his opinion
ig just and also apportion, where necessary, according to
the principles laid down. Nothing in the Arbitration Act,
of 1940 shall apply to this case.

Compensation payable for requisitioning of any property
shall consist of (a} a recurring payment equal to rent pay-
able for the use and occupation of property for that period
and (b) the sums necessary fo compensate the person
interested for (i) pecuniary loss due to requisitioning (ii)
expenses for vacating and reoccupying the premises ard
(iii) damages caused to the property during the period of
requisition, including expenses incurred for restoring the
property to its original condition,

Section 9 provides for appeals from orders of requisition,
Any person aggrieved by the order of the competent
authority may, within 21 days, prefer an appeal to the
Commissioner of the Division who, after giving an oppor-
tunity to be heard, shall decide and such decision shall be
final,

Section 10 provides for appeals from awards in respect
of compensation, Any person aggrieved by the award of
the arbitrator may, within 30 days, prefer an appeal to the
High Court.

6. The Central Provinces and Berar Accommodation
(Requisition) Act, 1948 (75177 of 1848) as amended by
Act XEIX of 1951.

This Act enables the State Government to requisition.
any accommodation for the purpose of
(i) providing residence for any person holding an
office of profit,
(ii) loeating any public office of the State Govern-
ment or local authority.
Section 4 lays down the principles in accordance with

which payment of compensation is to be determined in
respect of accommedation requisitioned under section 3.

(7) Where there is agreement as to compensation,
the amount agreed to shall be paid.


154

(1) In the absence of agreement, Government shall
appoint a District Judge (or Additional District
Judge or Civil Judge having jurisdiction over the
area) as arbitrator.

Gili) At the commencement of the proceedings before
the arbitrator, the Government as well as. the
person to be compensated shall stats as to what.
in their opinion is fair amount of compensation.

(iv) In making the award, the arbitrator shall be
guided by sub-section (1) of section 23 ef the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894 in so far as it can bs
made applicable and shall also have regard ७
reasonable expenses, if any, incurred by th.
occupier in vacating the accommedation [where
such occupier is not entitled to compensation
mentioned in sub-section (2A) below].

(v) An appeal shall lie to the High Court against the
award.

(vi) Except where it is expressly provided here or
under rules made thereunder, nothing in any law
relating to arbitration shall apply to arbitrations
under this section.

Where the accommodation requisitioned is held hy a
tenant, compensation shall be paid as follows:—

(1) In the case of month to month tenuney, conpen-
sation equal to a month's rent.

(ii) In the case of year to year tenancy or 2
term (not exceeding one year) tenaney, er
sation equal to two months’ rent.

Gi) Tn cases of tenancy for a fixed period ex
an year, compensation equal to three
rent,

7. The Madras Requisitioning and Acquisition of Iranov-
able Property Act. 1956 (XLII of 1956).
Its provisions are similar to those of the Centr | Act,
1952.

8, The Madras Essential Articles Control and Regi 2cion-
ing (Temporary Powers) Act, 1949 (XXIX v7 1948),
re-enacted by VI of 1956.

Section 4 provides that the State Government
the purpose of maintaining, increasing and
supplies of any essential article or for the equitable tisiri-

ping


155

bution of the same, by order in writing requisition any
property. Property used for the purpose of religious wor-
ship has been exempted. It is further provided that build-
ings solely used for residential purposes shall not ordinarily
be requisitioned,

The State Government may acquire the requisitioned
property by publishing a notice in the gazette to that effect.

Section 5 deals with the procedure and principles of
payment of compensation for the requisitioned or acquired
property.

Compensation shall be the amount fixed by agreement,
or in the absence of agreement, the State Government shall
appoint as arbitrator the District Judge or Subordinate
Judge having jurisdiction over the area in which the pro-
perty is situate. District Judge for this purpose includes a
judge of the Madras City Civil Court. Before the arbitrator
the Government as well as the person to be compensated
shall state what im their respective opinions is a fair amount
of compensation. The arbitrator in making his award shall
be guided by the provisions of sub-section (1) of scetion
23 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 so far as it can be
made applicable. He shall also have regard to the fact
whether the acquisition is of a permanent or temporary
character. It is also provided that where the requisitioned
property is subsequently acquired, the arbitrator shall take
into consideration the market value of the property at
the date of the requisition and not at the date of its sub-
sequent acquisition. It is also provided that an appeal
shall lie to the High Court against the award of the. arbi-
trator where the value of the subject-matter in dispute is
Rs. 2000/- and above. Nothing in any law relating to
arbitration shall apply to arbitrations under this section.
9, The Orissa Requisitioning and Acquisition. of Iminov-

able Property Act, 1952 (XXIX of 1952)
This Act provides for the requisitioning and acquisition

of immovable property for purposes of the State of
Orissa.

Section 3 lays down that if, in the opinion of the compe-
tent authority, property is meeded or likely to be needed
for any public purpose (being a purpose of the State of
Orissa) he may serve a show cause notice with fifteen days
time limit that such property is to be requisitioned. If,

LiLaw/67—U


156

after representation, requisitioning is deemed necessary
the competent authority may do so by an order in writing.

However, exemption is gramted in the following cases:

(1) where it is used by the owner as the residence
of himself or of his family,

(2) where it is used for purposes of veligious wor-
ship or as school, hospital or public library or
orphanage etc.

Section 7 states that where it is found necessary, the
State Government may by notification in the gazette
acquire the property so requisitioned for a public purpose
in the following circumstances:

(a) where works (buildings, structures ete.) have
been constructed on the property at the ex-
pense of the Government and the Government
decides to preserve the same for the purposes
of Government, or

(b) where the cost of restoring the property to its
original conditions that existed at the time of re-
quisition would be excessive and the owner de-
clines to accept release from requisition with-
out compensation for such restoration to original
condition.

The decision of the Govemmment in respect of (a) and
(9) above shall be final and shall not be calied in ques-
tion in a court of law. .

Section 8 provides for the principles and the method
of determination of compensation. The principles are as
follows: —

(a) Where there is agreement, the amount agreed
to would be the compensation.

(b) In case of disagreement, the Government shall
appoint a person who is or has been, or is quali-
fied to be a District Judge as the Arbitra‘or.

(c) The Government may also nominate a person
who has got expert knowledge as to the nature
of the property to assist the Arb‘trator and
likewise the person to be compensated may
also nominate an assessor.

{d) At the commencement of the proceedings be-
fore the Arbitrator, the Government as well as
the person to be compensated may state as to
what in their opinion is the fair amount of
compensation.


157

(९) After hearing, the Arbitrator shall make an
award determining the amount of compensation
which appears to him to be just and in making
the award, he shall be guided, in so far as it
is possible, by the provisions of sub-sections (2)
and (3) below.

(f) The Arbitrator shall decide the persons entitled
to receive compensation as well as the appor-
tionment.

{g) Nothing in the Arbitration Act, 1940 shall ap-
ply to arbitration under this section,

Compensation to be paid to requisitioned property
shall consist of—

(a) a recurring payment for the pericd of requisi-
tion of a sum equal to the rent payable for the
use and occupation of the property, and

(b) such sums as may be necessary to compensate
the person interested in respect of the follow-
ing:

G)} pecuniary loss due to requisition;

(ii) expenses for vacating the premises;

(iii) expenses for re-occupying after release;

(iv) any damage other than normal wear and
tear caused during the period of requisition,
including expenses incurred to restore the
property te the condition in which it was
at the time of requisition.

Compensation payable for the acquisition of property
under section 7 shall be—~

(a) the price which the requisitioned property
would have fetched in the open market had it
remained in the same condition as it was at the
time of requisition and sold on the date of the
acquisition, or

(b) twice the price which the requisitioned pro-
perty would have fetched in the open market,
if it had been sold on the date of requisition,
whichever is less.

Section 10 enables the person aggrieved by en order of
requisition under sub-section (2) of section 3 to appeal to
the State Government within 21 days from the date of the
service of the order.


158

After calling for report from the competent authority
and giving apportunity to the party of being heard, the
Government may pass orders which shall be final.

Section 11 enables the person aggrieved by an award of
the Arbitrator under section 8 to prefer an appeal to the
High Court within 30 days of the award.

10, Pepsu, Requisitioning of Immouable Property Act,
2006 BK (I of 2006).

Section 3 provides that the Government may requisi-
tion any immovable property, if in its opinion it is meces-
sary or expedient ५0 do so. Property used for religious
worship and property situated in a camtonment within
the meaning of any law relating thereto shalt not be re-
quisitioned,

Section 4 provides for the acquisition of the requisi-
tioned property by the Government by means of a notice
published in the Official Gazette to that effect.

Section 6 provides for the principles of compensation.
Where immovable property is requisitioned or acquired
compensation shall be paid as follows:

Compensation shall be the amount fixed by agreement
or in the absence of agreement the Government shall
appoint as arbitrator a person qualified under Article 217
(2) of the Constitution for appointment as a Judge of the
High Court. The Government as well as the person to be
compensated may nominate assessors to assist the arbitra-
tor before whom the parties would state what in their
opinion would be fair amount of compensation. The arbi-
trator in making the award shall have regard to the pro-
visions of the law relating to the acquisition of land in
force for the time being. in the State so far as it can be
made applicable. It is also provided that an appeal shall
lie to the High Court against an award of the arbitrator
except where the amount does mot exceed the amount
prescribed by the Government. Nothing in any law relat-
ing to arbitration shall apply to this case.

UW. The Punjab Requisitioning and Acquisition of
Immovable Property Act, 1953 (XI of 1953), as
amended by Act XXIV of 1954

Section 3 confers power on the competent authority
to requisition any property needed for any public purpose,
being a purpose of the State, after giving a show cause
snotive with 15 days time limit. It exempts property used


159

by the owner as residence or used for religious worship
or as school, or hospital etc. Where the property has been
used by a tenant as residence for at least 2 months prior
to this date, then the competent authority shall not take
possession without providing alternative accommodation.

Section 7 enables the State Government to acquire the
requisitioned property for a public purpose by publishing
a notice to that effect in the gazette and after giving op-
portunity of being heard against such acquisition. Such
acquisition shall be in respect of the following only:

1. Where during the period of requisition, any
works have been constructed at the expense of
State Government and the Government decides
that it should be secured and preserved for the
purpose of Government,

2. Where the cost of restoring the property to the
original condition would be excessive and the
owner declines to accept release from requisi-
tion without restoration to original condition.

Decision of the State Government in this respect shall
be final.

Section 8 lays down the principles and the method of
determining compensation. The compensation shall be the
amount fixed by agreement, or in the absence of agree-
ment, the State Government shall appoint a person having
the qualifications of a Judge of a High Court as an erbitra-
tor. The Government as well as the person concerned
may nominate persons having expert knowledge to assist
the arbitrator before whom they shall state what would
constitute fair amount of compensation. The arbitrator
shall determine what appears to him to be just compensa-
tion and also decide the apportionment. In arriving at the
compensation, he shall be guided by the following:

In case of requisitioning (a) a recurring payment for
the period of requisition of a sum equal to rent payable
for the use and occupation of the property, (b) the
amount necessary to compensate the person interested
for pecuniary loss, the expenses for vacating and re-
occupying, and for damages caused during the period of
requisition, including expenses necessary to restore the
property to the original condition,

The compensation for acquisition of the requisitioned
property shall be:


160

(1) the price which the requisitioned property
would have fetched in the open market if it had
remained in the same condition as it was at the
time of requisitioning and sold on the date of
acquisition, or

(2) twice the price which the requisitioned pro-
perty would have fetched in the market if it
had been sold on the date of requisition, which-
ever is less, .

Section 10 provides that the person aggrieved by an
order of requisitioning made by the competent authority
may, within 21 days, prefer an appeal to the State Gov-
ernment whose decision shall be final.

Section 11 provides that the person aggrieved by the
award of the arbitrator may, within 30 days, prefer an ap-
peal to the High Court.

12, The Rajasthan Requisitioning of Land (Improvement
of Agriculture) Act, 1951 (XXIX of 1951)

It provides for the requisitioning of land for certain
public purposes,

On the application by the competent authority that
land is needed or likely to be needed for public purpose
under section 3, the Government shall hold an enquiry
under section 4 and, if satisfied may by order in writing
requisition such land,

Section 6 provides for the payment of compensation
which shall be determined by an officer authorized in this
behalf by the Government.

In determining the same, the Officer shall be guided
by the provisions contained in the Schedule which are
to the following effect:

(1) Matters to be taken into consideration in fixing
the amount of compensation are the same as
those mentioned in section 23 og the Land Ac-
quisition Act. However, the provision for the
15 per cent solatium provided in the 1894 Act
is deleted. है

(2) For the purposes of market value specified in
para 1 above, the following is laid down:

(a) market value shall be according to the use
to which the land was being put at the date with
reference to which the market value is to


161

be determined; however, the element of potential
value, if any, contained in the price actually
paid for similar use transferred for any more
lucrative use shall not be admitted;

(b) If, before the said date, the owner had taken
active steps and incurred expenditure to secure
a more profitable use of the same, compensation
based on his actual loss may be paid to him;

(०) market value which is high due to a use
which is unlawful or contrary to public policy
shall be disregarded in the assessment;

(व) any increase in market value due to im-
provement made within two years before the
said date shall be disregarded if it was aot done
in good faith;

(e) increase or decrease in market value due to
the land falling within or near to the _ align-
ment of a projected public street shall be
disregarded;

(f) the high market value caused by the build-
ing being so overcrowded as to be dangerous
to the health of inmates shall be disregarded.
and only such value which the building
would be worth if occupied by such number
of persons as the building would safely ac-
commodate would be taken into considera-
tion;

(g) for the purpose of determination of market
value, the rent of the land or building shall
not be deemed to be greater than the rent
shown in the latest retum made to the Gov-
ernment or local authority, provided due
consideration will be given to any improve-
ments effected after such latest return.

: (3) As regards matters that shall not be taken into
consideration in determining the amount of
compensation for the requisitioned land, the
provisions are the same as those in Section 24

‘or the Land Acquisition Act of 1894.


162

(4) Besides the above, in the determination of com-
pensation the following provisions shall also
be taken into aceount—

(i) any interest, in land requisitioned, acquired
after the date of the order under section 4
shall not entitle to any separate estimate of
the value of such interest so as to increase
the quantum of compensation;

(ii) if any building is in a defective state . from
sanitary poing of view or otherwise, the com-
pensation for the same shall nct'excced the
value of the building after restoration to
good condition minus the cost of restoring the
same to such good condition;

(ili) if a building used or likely to be used for
human habitation is not reasonably capable
of being made fit for human habitation, com-
pensation shall not exceed the value of
material of the building minus the cost of
demolishing the building,

Under sub-clause (4) of section 6, an appeal shall lie
against the decision of the officer regarding compensation.
as determined above to the District Judge within whose
jurisdiction the requisitioned Jand lies and such appeal
shall be made within a period of 60 days,

Section 8 provides for the payment ०६ compensation
for damage, if any, caused to the land otherwise than by

reasonable use thereof or by irresistible foree—such com-
pensation to be determined by the officer mentioned above,

of 30 days and it shall be final.

13, The Rajasthan Premises (Requisition and Eviction)
Ordinance, 1949 (XI of 1949), as amended by the
Rajasthan Premises (Requisition and Eviction) Ordi-
nance (Amendment) Aci, 1952 (XVIII of 1952).

Section 3 lays down that where it appears necessary to
the competent authority that any premises is needed or
likely to be needed for a public purpose he may make an
order requisitioning the same. However, where the land-
lord is using the premises for his residence, alternative
accommodation may be provided. Further, premises used


163

for purposes of religious worship or as school hospital etc.
are exempted from such requisition.

Section 5 of the Ordinance provides that a person ag-
grieved by an order of requisition may, within seven days
from the date of communication of the order, appeal to
the authority appointed in this behalf by the Govern-
ment.

Section 7 of the Ordinance dealing with compensation
was substituted by section 3 of the Rajasthan Amendment
Act, 18 of 1952 which lays down the following principles:

{a) in case of agreement, compensation shall be
the agreed sum;

(0) in the absence of agreement, ‘he Government
shall fix a figure which will ensure to the land
lord a 5 per cent return on the value of the
premises assessed at the actual cost of construc-
tion of the premises with an adjustment to
existing levels of construction cose and with
due regard to the age and condition of the pre-
mises at the time of requisition;

(0) the amount of compensation fixed as in (b)
above shall be inclusive of all local rates, taxes,
duties etc. imposed on the owner thereof;

(d) if the landlord is dissatisfied with the amount
fixed under clause (b), the Government shall.
in consultation with the Chief Justice of Rajas-
than, appoint as arbitrator, a person (qualified
for appointment as Distriet Judge) to decide
whether the compensation has been correctly
fixed in accordance with the principles laid
down in clauses (0), (०) and (१);

(e) in suitable cases Government may nominate a
person having expert knowledge to assist the
arbitrator, likewise the person to be eompen-
sated may also nominate an agsessor.

14, The Travancore Cochin Requisitioning and Acquisition
of Property Act, 1955 (I of 1956).

This Act provides for requisitioning and acquisition of
property for public purposes—property covering both
movable and immevable property of every kind, including
any rights in and over such property.

Section 3 lays down that if the Government is of the
opinion that property is needed or likely to be needed for
amy public purpose, the same may be requisitioned after


164

giving notice in writing to show cause why it should not
be requisitioned and if the Government is satisfied that it
is necessary to do so after inquiry and hearing of the
representations made by the person interested, it may
requisition the same by an order in writing.

However, property used by owner as his residence or
of his family and those exclusively used for religious wor-
ship or as school, college, hospital, dispensary, library or
crphanage or other similar charitable institutions or for
the purposes of persons connected therewith would be
exempted from such requisitioning; in casc of the premises
being occupied by a tenant, Governmeni shall be under an
obligation to provide an alternative accommodation.

Section 7 deals with the power to acquire requisitioned
property. Any property subject to requisition may be
acquired for public purpose, if necessary, by publishing a
notice in the gazette to that effect and after giving an
opportunity to the persons interested to make their objec-
tions,

Such acquisition cen be done omly in the following
ecireumstances: —

. (8) where any works (buildings, structures,
- improvements etc.) have been constructed on the
property during the period of requisition at the
expense of Government and it is decided to keep
the value and the right to use of such works for
the purposes of the Government;

(8) where the cost of restoring the property to its
original condition at the time of its requisition
would be excessive and the owner declines to
accept the release without payment of compensa-
tion for such restoration to original condition.

The decision of the Government in respect of (a) and
(b) above shall be final and shall not be called in question
in any court.

Section 8 lays down the p:
determining compensation.

Where immovable property is requisitioned or
acquired—

(a) if any agreement can be reached, the amount of
compensation shall be the agreed sum;

(0) in the absence of agreement Government shall
appoint a person (having the qualifications of a
High Court Judge) as arbitrator;

ciples and the method of



165

(ec) if necessary, person having expert know: edge
may be nominated by the Government to assist
the arbitrator; likewise, the person to be compen-
sated may also nominate an assessor;

(d) at the commencement of the proceedings, the
Government and the person to be compensated
may state as to what in their opinion would be
fair amount of compensation;

{e) after the hearing, the arbitrator shall make an
award fixing the compensation which appears to
him to be just and having regard to sub-sections
(2) and (3) below;

(£) apportionment shall be made by the arbitrator if
there is any dispute;

(8) provisions in the Arbitration Act, 1940 shall not
apply to arbitration under this section.

Amount of compensation for requisitioning immov-
able property shall be:

(a) a recurring payment for such pericd of a sum
equal to the rent payable for the use and oecupa-
tion of the same; and

(b) the sum necessary to compensate for

{i) pecuniary loss due to requisitioning;

(ii) expenses for vacating and reoccupying;

(iii) damages (other than normal wear and tear)
cause@ to such property and expenses for res-
toration of the property to its original cordi-
tion,

Compensation for acquisition of immovable property
under section 7 would be the price which the requisi-
tioned property would have fetched in the open market had
it remained in the same condition as it was at the time of
requisitioning, and been sold on the date of acquisition.

Section $ provides that the compensation payable under
the award shall carry interest at 6 per cent from ihe date
en which it becomes payable in the award.

Section 10 lays down that an appeal against the award
under section 8 may be preferred to the High Court within
a period of 60 days.

Section 12 lays down the principles governing compen-
sation where movable property is requisitioned or acquired.


166

In ease of requisitioning, rules for payment of com-
pensation shall provide for the payment of rent or other
return which the property would normally fetch if allowed
to be used,

In case of acquisition, the rules shall provide for the
payment of compensation at the market rate prevailing on
the date of acquisition.

15. The U.P. (Temporary) Accommodation Requisition Act,
1947 (XXV of 1947), as amended by Acts XTII of 1950,
XXII of 1952 and XV of 1954.

Section 3 enables the District Magistrate to requisition
any accommodation, if it is necessary to do so in hig opi-
nion. Buildings used exclusively for religious worship have
been exempted. Further, buildings in actual occupation of
a person shall not be requisitioned, unless the District
Magistrate is of the opinion that suitable alternative accom-
modation exists or has been provided to him.

Section 5 provides for the District Magistrate to pay
compensation for the requisitioned accommodation if an
agreement can be arrived at.

In the absence of agreement, section: 6 provides that
compensation shall be paid as determined by the court on a
reference made to it by the District Magistrate. The court,
in deciding the reference shall be guided by the prov.sions
of sub-section (1) of section 23 of the Land Acquisitio:a Act
of 1894. The court shall also take into consideration the
reasonable expenses incurred in getting accommodation.
The decision of the court shall have the force of a decree.

Section 7 provides that, notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in any enactment for the time being in force, no
appeal or revision shall lie against the decision of the court
under section 6.
i6. The Vindhya Pradesh Requisitioning and Acquisition of

Immovable Property Act, 1953 (IV of 1953).

Section 3 provides that where property is needed for
any public purpose, being a purpose of the State the com-
petent authority may requisition the same after the usual
show cause notice with 15 days time limit to objec*. Proper-
ties bonafide used by the owner as his residence or used for
religious worship or school, hospital, library, orphanage etc,
have been exempted, Further, if the requisitioned preperty
was being used as a residence by a tenant for not less than
2 months immediately preceding the date, the competent
authority shall provide alternative accommodation.



167

Section 7 confers the power to acquire requisitioned
property whenever the State Government is. of the opinion
that it is necessary to do so for a public purpose, by pub-
lighing a notice in the Official Gazette and after giving an
opportunity of being heard. Such acquisition is confined
only to two cases, firstly, where any works have been con-
structed on the property and the Government decides that
it should be secured for the purpose of the State Govern-
ment and secondly, where the cost of restoring the pro-
perty to its original condition would be excessive and the
owner refuses to accept release without compensation for
such restoration.

Section 8 lays down the principles and methods of deter-
mining compensation. It shall be the amount fixed by
agreement or in the absence of agreement the State Gov-
ernment, shall appoint as arbitrator a person qualified to be
a judge of a High Court. The party as well as the Govern-
ment may nominate persons te assist the arbitrator before
whom the party shall state as to what in their opinion
would be fair amount of compensation. Nothing in the
Arbitration Act shall apply to this case,

The compensation payable for requisitioned property
shall consist of recurring payment equal to the rent. pay-
able for the use and occupation of the property and the
sums necessary to compensate for (1) pecuniary loss, (2)
expenses for vacating and reoccupying and (3) damages
caused to the property during the period of requisition,
including expenses incurred for restoring the property to
the original condition.

It is also provided that where property hag remained
under requisition for more than 3 years, the rent payable
as compensation for requisition, whether fixed at the
tequest of the owner or otherwise, may be revised and
the periodical compensation redetermined.

Compensation payable for acquisition of the requisition-
ed property shall be :--

(a) the price which the requisitioned property
would have fetched in the open market if it had
remained in the same condition as it was and
been sold on the date of acquisition, or

(0) twice the price which the requisitioned property
would have fetched in the open market, if it had

been sold on the date of requisition,
whichever is less,


168

Section 10 provides for appeals from orders of requisi-
tion. Any person aggrieved by the order of the competent
authority may, within 30 days, appeal to the State Govern-
ment who shall decide after hearing the parties and further
inquiry and such decision shall be final.

Section 11 provides for appeals from awards in respect
of compensation. Any person aggrieved by an award of
the arbitrator may, within 30 days of the award, prefer an
appeal to the Judicial Commissioner.

17, The West Bengal Land (Requisition and Acquisition)
Act, 1948 (II of 1948), as amended by VII of 1951, VIII
of 1954 and XXV of 1956.

Under Section 3, the power to requisition is given to
the State Government, or any person authorised, for
two purposes (1) for maintaining supplies and services
essential to the life of the community, or (2) for transport,
communication, irrigation or drainage. Land used for
religious worship has been exempted from the purview
of requisition.

The land requisitioned under section 3 may be acquired
by notification in the Official Gazette io the effect that it
is required for public purpose.

Sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 7 deal with compen-
sation to be paid for acquisition while sub-sections (3) and
(4) deal with compensation in case of requisition.

Compensation for land acquired under section 4 is to
be determined by the Collector according to the principles
Jaid down in section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act of 1894
and the market value is as on the date of publication of
notice mentioned in section 4. After determination, the
Collector shall make an award as under section 11 of the
Land Acquisition Act of 1894 and the amount specified in
sub-section (2) of section 23 of that Act shall not be
included in this award. However the award shal] include
interest at 6 per cent on the compensation amount from
the date of notification to the date of payment, according
to sections 31 to 33 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894,

In case of compensation for requisition, it will include
(a) compensation for requisition made, and

(b) compensation for any damages done during the
period or requisition.


169

‘The principles governing the determination of compen-
sation are as follows:—

(1) Where there is agreement, then the sum agreed
would be the compensation.

(2) Where the person is not traced or does not
appear, that sum which appears to the Collector
to be reasonable under the circumstances of the
case would be the compensation.

(3) In case of disagreement, the sum to be deter-
mined by the court on a reference made by the
Collector under section 8 would be the compen-
sation.

If the party is aggrieved about the award of compensa-
tion for acquisition, or in cases of requisition if the party
does not consider the sum awarded as reasonable or is
disagreed as to the amount, section 8 enjoins the Collector
to refer the matter to the decision of the Court.

Tn respect of reference made to the Court, the principles
set out in sub-section (1) and in clause (a) of sub-section
{2) of section 7 of this Act would apply.

18. The West Bengal Premises Requisition and Control
(Temporary Provisions) Act, 1947 (V of 1947), as
gmended by Acts IV of 1949, XV of 1950, X of 1953 and
VIE of 1954,

With the exception of premises used for religious wor-
ship, any premises may be requisitioned by the State
Government for any public purpose by an order in writing
and such order shall be final.

Section 11 lays down the procedure for fixing compen-
sation. पु

Compensation shall be paid as follows:—

{a) If agreement is reached, the sum agreed.

{b) In the absence of agreement, the Government
shall appoint a District Judge or an Additional
District Judge as an arbitrator,

(९) The Government may also nominate a person
having expert knowledge ag to the nature of the
premises as an assessor; likewise, the person to
be compensated may also nominate an assessor.

(व) At the commencement of proceedings before the
Avbitrator, the Government as well as the person


170

to be compensated may state what in their
is fair amount of compensation,

(8) The Arbitrator shall be guided by the provisions
contained in section 12 below.

(f) An appeal shalt lie to the High Court against the
Arbitrator’s award.

(8) Except for what is expressly provided herein
or under this Act, nothing relating to arbitration
shall apply to the arbitration mentioned here.

Tf, apart from natural wear and tear or other
natural causes, any damage is done cormpensation shall be
paid for that as well; here also in case of disagreement,
atbitrator will decide the point.

Section 12 deals with matters to be considered white
fixing compensation, The following factors will be taken
inte consideration: —

{1) Rent payable in respect of the premises.

(2) Reasonable expenses incidental to change of
residence or business, if any, caused,

(3) Damage or loss of income sustained between date
of service of order under section 3 and date of
taking possession,

19. The Waste Land (Requisitioning and Utilization) Act,
1952 (IV of 1952), as amended by Act XXIX of 1954

This Act is intended to requisition waste land for certain
public purposes with a view to better utilization thereof
and other connected matters,

Under section 3, the Collector may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, require persons interested ta show
cause as to why the land in question should not be requisi-
tioned.

Seciion 4 enables the interested persons to petition to
the Collector in response to the above notification within
the specified time. They are also given the opportunity of
being heard. I¢ after inquiry and hearing, the Collector
considers it necessary, he may issue the requisition order.

Section 6 provides for the arrangements to be made for
bettor utilization of the requisitioned waste land. In
respect of the said land anything ancillary or incidental to
the full utilization may be done.


172

The sum payable under this section is not less than the
compensation amount payable by the Collector under
section 8.

Section 8 governs all matters relating to compensation.

Every person interested shall be entitled to compensa-
tion for so long as his interest subsists and not heyond the
date of release under section 10. It shall be determined
as follows:

As soon as may be, after taking of possession under
section 5, the Collector shall determine.

(a) if it is occupied by tenant or lessee

(i) the emnual rent and cesses payable by the
tenant for lessee for the land, and

(ii) the average net annual income derived from
the land during three years immediately pre
ceding the said date or if there is no such
income, during the said period, 3 per cent of
the market value of the interest of the tenant
or lessee in tha land on the date of notification
under section 3;

(b) if occupied by proprietor, the average annual
income derived during three years immediately
proceeding the date and where no such income is
derived, a sum equivalent to 3 per cent of market
vaine of such land on the date of notification.

(९) if occupied by any person other than tenant of
lessee or proprietor, interested in the land, the
average net annual compensation derived from
such land by the person in occupation during
three years preceding the date and where no
such income was derived a sum equivalent to 3
per cent of market value of such land on the
date of notification,

The Collector shall order payment of compensation on
each anniversary of the date of taking possession under
section 5 for the duration referred earlier by the State
Government to the respective persons mentioned in (a),
(9) and (०) above,

Section 10 lays down that in no case shall the period of
requisition of waste land exceed 20 year period. Subject to
this, the Collector may keep the land under requisition for


132

such period as to enable the person entrusted with the task
of better utilization to recover any capital or recurring
expenditure incurred by him and also for reasonable
margin of profit.

Section 11 enables the parties aggrieved by requisition
order under section 4, or eviction order under section 7 or
compensation order under section 8 to appeal to the pres-
etibed authority whose order on appeal shall be final and
cannot be challenged in a court of law.

Section Ii—ConTuvance Acts
1, The Medhya Pradesh Requisitioned Land (Continuance
of Powers) Act, 1951 (IX of 1951)

In respect of lands requisitioned under the Defence of
India Act, 1939 (since expired), thea Requisitioned Land
(Continuance of Powers) Ordinance, 1956 and the Requisi-
tioned Land (Continuance of Powers) Act, 1947 provided
for the continuance of such powers of requisition. With the
expiry of the 1947 Act, the present Act of 1951 was passed
to enable to keep the requisitioned land under requisition.

According to section 5, any requisitioned land which
continues to be subject to requisition under this Act may
be acquired by publication of notice in the Gazette in the
foliowing cases:

(a) where any works (buildings, structures ete.} have
been constructed on the said land at the expense
of the Government and the Government decides
to preserve the value and the right to use of such
works for Government purposes; or

{b) where the cost of restoring the land to the
original condition that existed at the time of
Tequisitioning would be excessive ard the owner
declines to accept release from requisition with-
aut compensation from Government for which
restoration to original conditor,

The decision of the Government in respect of (a) and
(b) above shall be final and cannot be challenged in a court
of Jaw.

Section 6 provides for compensation for continued
requisition as well as for acquisition of requisitioned land.

Compensation in respect of the continued subjection of
requisitioned land to requisition shall be determined in
aecordance with section 19 of the Defenes of India Act,
1938 and rules made thereunder.


173

“Compensation for acquisition of requisitioned land
wauild be

(a) a sum sufficient to purchase at the market value
prevailing on the date of notice under section 5
a piece of land equal in area to and situated
within a distance of three miles from the acquired
land, and suitable for the same use as that to
which the acquired land was being put imme-
diately before the date of its requisition, or

(b) a sum equivalent to twice the market value of
the acquired land on the date of requisition,
whichever is less,

Such amount shall be determined and paid according to
the procedure laid down in section 19 of the Defence of
India Act, 1939 and rules made thereunder.

2. The West Bengal Requisitioned Land (Continuance of
Powers) Act, 1951 (VIII of 1951), as amended by Acts
X of 1954 and XXXVI of 1954.

This is an Act to provide for the continuance of powers
exercisable under the Defence of India Act, 1939 (since
expired) in respect of Jand requisitioned thereunder,

In respect of immovable property subject to requisition
effected under rules made under the Defence of India Act,
1939 and other ordinance ete. notwithstanding the expiry
of the period of operation of the said Act, all requisitioned
land will continue to be subject to requisition.

Section 5 as amended by the 1954 Acts provides as
follows :—

(1) If the requisition land is decided to be acquired
for public purpose, he State Government may do
so by publication of notice in the Official Gazette
after giving opportunity to the party to prefer
objections to such acquisition and of being heard,
This may be done in the following  circum-
stances :—

(a) where works buildings, structures ete.) have
been constructed on the requisitioned land at
the expense of the Government and the
Government decides to preserve the value and


174

the right to use of such work for Government
purposes, or

(b) where the cost of restoring the land to the
conditions prevailing at the time of requisition
will be excessive and the owner refuses to
aecept release from requisition without com-
pensation for such restoration to original
condition.

Decision in respect of (a) and (9) above of the State
Government shall be final and cannot be challenged in a
court of law.

Section 6 lays down that in case of continued subjection
to requisition, compensation shall be according to section
19 of the Defence of India Act, 1939 and the rules made
thereunder,

In case of acquisition of such land, it was provided in
1951 Act as follows :—

The amount of compensation shall be

(i) such sum as would be sufficient to buy at market
rate prevailing on date of notice under section 5
a piece of land equal in area to, and situated
within the distance of three miles from the
acquired land and suitable for the same use to
which the acquired land was being put imme-
diately before the date of requisition, or

(ii) a sum equivalent to twice the market value of
the land on the date of requisition,

whichever amount is less.

This is to be determined according to section 19 of the
Defence of India Act, 1939.

The above principles embodied in section 6 of the 1951
Act were substituted by the following provision contained
in Act X of 1954,

The amount of compensation would be—

(1) the price which the requisitioned land would
have fetched in the open market, if it had
remained in the same condition as it was on the
date of requisitioning and had been sold on the
date of acquisition, or

(2) twice the price which the requisitioned land
would have fetched in the open market, if it
had been sold on the date of requisition,

whichever amount is less,


175

PART Ili—TABULAR STATEMENT

Central Act

State Acts

I—Power To REQUISITION

The Requisitioning and Acquisition of
Immovable Property Act, 1952 (XXX of
1952),

Section 3. (4) Where the competent
authority is of opinion that any property is
needed or likely to be needed for any public
purpose, being a purpose of the Union and
that the property should be requisitioned,
the competent authority—

(a) shall call upon the owner or any
other person who may be in pos~
session of the property by notice
in writing (specifying thercin the
Purpose of the requisition) to
show cause within fifteen days
of the date of the service of such
notice on him, why the property
should not be requisitioned; and

(6) may, by order, direct that neither
the owner of the property nor any
other person shall, without per-
mission of the competent authority,
dispose of or structurally alter
the property or let it out to a tenant
until the expiry of such period,
not exceeding two months, as may
be specified in the order.

(2) If, after considering the cause if
any, shown by any person interested in the
Property or in posscssion thereof, the compe-
tent authority is satisfied that it is necessary
or expedient so to do, it may, by order in
writing, requisition the property and may
make such further orders as appear to it to
be necessary, expedient in connection.
with the requisitioning:

Provided that no property or part there-
of— .

(a) which is bonafide used by the owner
thereof as the residence of himself
or his family; or .

(0) which is exclusively used cither for
religious worship by the pul
as 4 school, hospital, public library
‘or an-orphanage or for the purpose
of accommodation of person con-
nected with the management of such
place of worship or such school
hospital, library or orphanage shall
be requisitioned :

1, The Andhra Requisitioning of Buildings
Act, 1954 (17 of 1954): Section4 enables
the competent authority to requisition any
buidling for public purpose with the
obligation on the part of the authority to
pay 4month’srent and reasonable expenses,
for vacating and reoccupying as compen-
sation, or 2 months notice instead where the
building is in the occupation of a tenant
or licensee, The usual show cause notice
with 15 days time limit to object is also
provided Requisition can in no case
exceed 5 years.

2. The Assam Land (Requisition & Acquisi-
tion Act, 1948 (XXAV of 1948) as amended:
This seeks to provide for requisition and
speedy acquisition for maintaining service
essential to the community and transport
irrigation, ete. Excepting Tand used for
religious or charitable puiposc and build-
ing occupied by the owner foratleast onc
year prior to the order, Government my
requisition for the purposes specified.

3. The Bihar Premises Requisition (Tempo-
rary Provisions) Act, 1949 (XV of 1950)
as amended: Section 3 provides or requi-
sition of any premises for public purpose
with the usual show cause notice etc.
Premises used for religious, charitable and
educational purposes areexempted, The
requisitioning order passed by the Stare
Government shall be final.

4, The Bombay Land Requisition Act, \948
(XXX of 1948) as amended: Section 5,
confers the power on the State Government
to requisition any land for State or public
Purpose. Ttexemptsbuilding in the actual
occupalion of the landiord or tenant for a
period of 6 months prior to the date of
order, Section 7 cnables the Government
to continue to keep under requisition any
land requsitioned under the Continuance
ot Powers Act, 1947,

5. The Madhya Bharat Requisitioning of
Immovable Properties Act, 1954 (XXXV"
of 1954) : Same as Centra] Act,

6.The C. P. & Berar Accommodation
(Requisition) Act, 1948 (7.67 of 1948);
This Act enables the State Government to
requisition any accommodation for provid-
ing residence to persons holding office of
profit or for locating public cffice, etc.



Central Act

State Acts

Provided further that where the requisi-
tioned, property consists of premises which
are being used is a residence by a tenant for
not less than two months fiately pre-
coding the date of the service of notice under
sub-section (3), competent authority
hall pravide such tenant with altenative
accommodation which, in its opinion, is
suital

7. The Madras Requisitioning and Acguisi-
Tnmevaile Property Act, 1956

(XLII of 1956) : Same as Cestral Act.

The Madras Essential Article Coutret
& Requisition Temp jorary Power) Act
1949) XNEX of 1949), re-enacted by (VI
of 1956): Section 4 enables the State
Government to requisition any property
for the purpose of maintaining supplies-
of any essential article etc. Property
used for religious worship and for
residencial purposes has been exempt

9, The Orissa Requisitioning and Acquisi-
tion of Immosable Property Act, 1952
(CXXIX of 1952) : Same as Central Act.

10. Pepse Requisitioning of Iounovable Pro-
perty Act, 2006 BK. (1 of 2006), If in
its opinion it is necessary or expedent
to do so the State Govt. may requist-
tion any immovable property excepting
those used for religiovs worship and
those situated the cantonment area.

11. The Punjab Requisitioning and Acquisi-

tion A dmmovable Proper'y _ ct, 1953
(AT 0f 1953) as - amended’: Same us
Central Act.

12, The Rajasthan Requisitioning of Land
(improvement of. ulture) Act, 1951
(LXLX of 1951): On application by the
competent authority the Government
after holding an inquiry and on being
satisfied may requisition land for public
purpose.

13, The than Premises (Re: Wer cond
1102० C Ordinance, 1949 (XT of 1945)
asamended by Act 18 of 195:
Competent authority may requisition any
premises (except those used for religi

ous worship, school, ४0) for public
Purpose.

14, The 2. ८. Requiss uisition
of Property Act, 1955 a of 19:
as Central

The U.P. Temporary Accormmods

Requisition Act, 1947 (XX of 1947) as
emended: ¥ in his opinion it is necessary
to do so the District Magistrate may
requisition any accommodation except-
ing those used for religious worship or
those in actual occupation of the person.

16. The V. P. Requisitioning and
of immovable Property Act 18980 of
1953) : Same as Central



177

Central Act

State Acts

17. Tae West Rergal Land Requisition &
Acquisition) Act, 1948 (H of 1948) as
amended : For maintaining . sypplics

essential to the life of the community or
for transport etc, the State Gavernment
or other 0 authorised in this
behalf e may requisition any land except
ing those used for religious worship.

18. The W. B. Premises Requisition und
Control (Temporary Provisions) Act, 1947
(V of 1947) as amended : With the excep-
tion of premises used for religious wor.
sbip any premises may be recuisitioned
by State Govetnment for any public
purpose and such order shall

19. Tie Waste Land {Reguisitioning and
Utilisation) Act, 1952 UV of 1952)
amended; The Collector after usual
show cause notice, inquiry and hearing
may requisition my waste land for cer-
tain public purposes with a view ta
better utilisation thereof

Continuance Acts

The M. P. Requisitioned. Land (Conti-
nuance of Powers) Act, 1951 (EX of
1951) This Act was passed 19 enable to
keep the Jand reguisitioned under the
Defence at lands Act, 1939 under
continued requisition.

The West Bengal Requisiticned Land
Continuance of Powers) Act 1951 (WHI,
of 1951) as amended : This was passed
for the continuance of rs _exercis-
able under the Defence of India Act
1939in respect of Jand requisitioned
thereunder.

TH. Power To Acourre REQUISITIONED PROPERTY

The Requisitioning and Acquisition of
able Property Act, 1952 (XXX of 1962).

Section V.i—Where any property is
aubject to requisition the Central Govern
ment may, if it is of opinion that it is neces-
sary to acquire the property for a public
bearer BF any time seat uire such ‘property

shing in the jal Gazette a notice
to the effect that the Central Government!
has decided to acquire the property in pur
suance of this Section :

Provided that before issuing such
notice, the Central Government snail call
upon the owner of, or any other person
‘who, in the opinion of the Centra! Govern-
ment, may be interested in such property
to show cause why the property should not
be acquired; and after considering the cause,

1. The Andhra Pradesh Requisitioning of
Buildiug Act, 1954, (XT of 1954}: No

Provision for subsequent acquisition.

The Assam Lond Requisition & Acquisition
Act, 1948 (XX of 1948) + if neces-
sary the Government may acquire the
requisitioned Jand by notification in the
Official Gazette and apply the provi-
sions of the L. A. Act,

The Bihar Premises Requisition (Te
rary Provisions) Act, 1949 (XV of 1!

as amended: No provision for subse-
quent acquisition.

4, The Bombay Land Requisition Act, 1948
CEXMIN of 1948) as amended- No
provision for subsequent acrjuisition,

2



178

‘Central Act

State Acts

if any shows by any Person interested the
PFO) and after givi an
eonortunity of being heard, octet
Government may pass such orders ag it
deems fit. है
pat When a notice as aforesaid
hed in the Official Gazette the requis

tioned | Property shall on and from the
beginning of the day on which the notice
is published, vest absolutely in the Central
Government free from all encumbrances and
the period of requisition of such property
shall end.

bi (3) No property shall be acquired under
this sestion except in the following circums-
tances, namely :--

(@) where any works have, during the

of requisition, been constructed on,

in or over, the property wholly or
Partially at the expense of the Central Gov-
etament and the Government decides that
the valve of, or the right to use, such works
should be secured or preserved for the pur-
poses cf Government ; or

(®) where the cost of restoring the pro-
perty to its condition at the time of its re-
quisition would, in the determination of the
Central Government, be excessive and the
owner declines to accept release from
requisition of the property without payment
of compensation for so restoring the
property.

(4) Any decision or determination of the
Central Government under sub-section (3)
shall be final and shall not be called in
question in any court.

is

5) For the purposes of clause (9) of
sub-section (3) “works” inclides buildings,
structures and improvements of every
description.

5. The Madhya Bharat Reguisitioning, of
Argmovable pr roperty Act, 1954 (XXXV of
acquisition.

6. The C. P. & Berar Accommodation
(Requisition) Act, 1948 (LXTI of 1948):
No provision for subsequent acquisition.

The Madras Requisttioning and Acqusi-
tion of Immovable Property Act, 1956
(XLH of 1956) ; Same as Certral Act.

8. The Madras Essential Article Control &
Requisition (Temporary Powers) Act, 1949
(XXEX of 1949) re-enacted by (VI of
1956) : The Government may acquire
requisitioned property by notification
in the Official Gazette,

lo provision for subsequent

१8

9. The Orissa Requisitioning and Acquisition
of Immovable Property Act, $952 (XXIX
of 1952) : Same as Central Act.

Pepsu Requisitioning of Immovable Pro-
perty Act, 2006 Bk. (1 vf 2006) The
Government may acquire requisitioned
Property by notification in the Official
Gazette tu that effect.
ll. The Punjab Requisitioning and Acquisi-~
tion of Immovable Property Act. 1953
(Xf of 1953) as amended : Same as
Central Act.
12. The Rajasthan Requisitioning of Land
Umprovement_ of Agriculture) Act, 1951
XXIX of 1951) : 7४० provision for
subsequent acquisition.
13, The Rajasthan Premises (Requisition and
Eviction) Ordinance, 1949 (XI of 1949) as
amended by the 4८718 of 1952 : No
provision for subsequent acquisition.
The T. C. Requisitioning and Acquisition
of Property Act, 1985 (1 of 1956) : Same
as Central Act.

14,

18. The U. P. (Temporary Accommodation

Requisition Act, 1947 (XXV of 1947) as

amended’: No provision for subsequent
acquisition.

16. The V.P. Requisitioning and Acquisition
Immovable Property Act, 1953 UV of
1953) : Same as Centrat Act.

The West Bengal Land Requisition &
Acquisition) Act, 1948 (77 of 1948) as.
amended : The 16: ed Jand may
be acquired by notification in the Official
Gazette to that effect if required for

17,

public purpose.



179

Centra! Act

‘State Acts

18. The W. B. Premises Requisition ond
Control (Temporary Provisions) Act, 1947
(77 of 1947) : No provision for subse-
quent acquisition.

19. The Waste Land (Requisition and Utilisa-
tion) Act, 1952 UV af 1952) as amend-
ed: No provision for subsequent ac-
quisition.

Continuaitce Acts

1... पक M. P. Requisitioning Land (Continu-
ance of Powers) Act, 1951 (7.0 of 1951}:
Same as Central Act.

2. The West Bengal Requisitoned Land

(Continuance of Powers) Act, 1951 (VAIS
है है 1951) as amended : Same 2s Central
ct,

UI.—ComFensation

The -Requisitioning and Acquisition of
17 शा Property Act, 1952 (¥XX of
$2) :

Sectlon 8. Sub-section (1).—Where any.
property is requisitioned of acquired
un this Act, there shall be paid

ensation the amount of which shall

be determined in the manner and in

accor 18706 with the principles
after set out, that is to say,—

herein-

(a) where the amount of compensation

can be by Py agreement, it shall be

- paid in accordance with such agree~
ment >

16) where No such agreement can be
reached, the Central Government
shall appoint as arbitrator a person
who is, or has been, or is qualified
for appointment 2s a Judge of a High
Court ;

fe) the Central Government may, in any

perticolar case, nominate a person

ving expert knowledge as to the

nature of the property requisitioned.

or acquired to assist the arbitrator

and where such nomination is made,

the person to be compensated may

also nominate an assessor for the

same purpose ;

1d) at the commencement of the pro-

ceedings before the arbitrator, the

‘Central Government and the person

10 be compensated shall state what

in their respective opinion is a fair
amount of compensation ;

(e) the arbitretor shall, after hearing

~ the dispute make an award deter-

mining the amount of compensation

which appezrs to him to be just and

specifying the persen or perscns

to whom such compensation shall be

paid; and is making the award

1. The Andhra Requisitioning of Buildings,
Act, 1954 (XT of 1954) : In the absence
of agreement, the court shall fix the fair
rent which shali be the same as in sub-
section (2) of section 8 of the Central Act.

2. The Assam Land (Requisition & Acquisi-
tion) Act, 1948 CYXV of 1948) as amend.
ed : The compensation amount shall be
determined by the Collector according 10
the principles in section 23(1) of the Land
Acquisitien Act, 1894, the toarked value
being as on the date of publication of
notice under section 4{1). In the absence
of agreement, the ution amount
would be for the requisilicn and eny

8९ done during such peried and it
shall not include the 15% specified in
section 232) of the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894.

3. The Bihar Premises Reguisition (Tempe-
rary Provisions) Act, 1949 (XV of 1950) us
amended : Excepting that a District Judge
shall be the erbitretor, the provisions
relating to compensation ate the same 8५
these in the Centra? Act, 1952 relating to
requisition, 18 is also provided that the
arbitratcr shall haveregard ta the [90५
visions in section 23(1) cf the LA. Act,

1394,

4. The Bombay Land Requisition Act. 1948
(XAXHT of 1948) as amended ; Compen-
sation sha]] be determined by the cfiicer
authorised by the’ State Government
accerding to the provisions of section
2361) and 26 of the L.A. Act, 1894 in
so fer as they can be mads epplicable.

5. The M.B. Requisiticnirg cf Immovable
Property Act, 1984 (अजहर of 1954) :
Same as the Central Act exceptine fcr the
ccmmissicn of sub-section (3) cf section
8 of the Central Act, since the State Act

5 net provide fer subscquent ac qui-
sition. .



180

Central Act

State Acts

he shall have regard to the citcums-
tances ofeach case and the provi-
sions of sub-section (2) and (3), so
far as they are aprlcah he 5

where there is any dispute as to the
Person or persons who are entitled
to the compensation, the arbitretar
shall decide such dispute and if the
arbitrator finds that more persons
than one are entitled to compensa-
tion, he shall apportion the amount
thereof amongst such persons ;

wa

{g) wothing in the Arbitration
1940 (X of 1940) shall apply
arbitration under this section.

Sub-Section (2).--The amount of — con
pensation payable for the requisitioning
of any property shall consist of

(a) 8 recucring Payment in respect of
the period of requisition, of a sum
equal to the rent which would have
been payable for the use and 0०९

. tion of the property, if it hac
taken on lease for that period ; and

Act,
te

4b} such sum or sums, if any, as may
be found necessary 10 compensate
the person interested for all or any
of the following matters, namely +

(0 pecuniary less due to requisi-
tioning ;
4H) expenses on account of vacating

the requisitioned premiscs ;

(010 expenses on account of re
occupying the pretiises upon
release from requisition ; and

(iv) damages (other than normal

wear and tear caused to. the

property duzing the period or
requisition, including the ex-
penses 1 t may have to be
ured for restoring ‘the

Property to the condition in

which it was at the time of

requisition,

Subssection (3).—The compensation pay-
able for the acquisition of any property
under section 7 shalt be—

(a) the price which the property would
have fetched in the open market;
if it, had remained in the sume
condition as it was at the time
of requisitioning and been sold
on the date of acquisition, or

(8) twice the price which the requi-
sitioned property would have fetched

6. The C. P. & Berar Accommodation (Requit-
sition) Act, 1948 (LAI of 1948) : ih
is provided that a District Jutige shall be
an arbitratos and he shall have regard
to provisions of section 23(1) of the E.A.
Act, 1894 in so far as itcan be made
zpplicable. है

Where the requisitioned accemmodaticn
is held by a tenant, the compensation:
Payable to the tenant shall 061 months
tent in case of month to month tenancy,
2 month’s rent in Case of tcnancy for a
fixed period not exceeding one year and
3 month's rent in case of tenancy ६२०
ceeiding one year.

7. In Madras Requisitioning and Acquisition

of Immovable Property Act, 1956 (3117
of 1956) : Same us the Central Act,

8. The Madras Essential Articles Control &
Requisitioning (Temporary Powers) Act,
1949 (XXLYX of 1949), revenacted by OS
of 1956); A District Judge shall be the
arbitrator and the arbitrator sball be
guided by section 23(1) of L.A. Act,
1894 in so far as it can be made appiica-
dle. In case of subsequent 2cquisition
the market value of the property shall
beasonthe date of x con andl
Not at the subsequent acquisition.

The Orissa Requisitioning and Acquistion
of Immovable Property Act, 1952 (XXIX
x 1952) Excepting that the District
fudge is an arbitrator the provisions arc
eractly similar to those of the Central
10, Pepsu Requisitioning of Immovable
Property Ac, 2006 Bk (fof 2006) : The
arbitrator, with qualifications tobe 2
judge of a High Court, in making his
award shall be guided by the provisions
of the law relating to acquisition in
foree for the time being in the State in
50 far as it can be made applicable.

The Purjab Requisitioning and A. gui
tion of Immovable Property Act, 1953. Ut
of 1953): The provisions are oecly
similar to those of Central Act of 195:
‘A new sub-section is added enabling the
Payment of compensation cither in
money orin kind when property is
acquired in conneotion with the capitel
of the State of Punjab.

The Rajasthan Requisitioning of Lond
Umprovement of Agriculture) Act, 1951
(जड़ of 1951) : The provisions relating
to compensation as laid down inthe
schedule are the same as 10050 in sub-
section (1) of section 23 and sition 24

12.



L8t

Central Act

State Acts

in the open market if it had been
sold on the date ‘of requisition,
whichever is tess.

of the L.A. Act, 1894. Seme provisions
regarding the increase in merket value
due to unlawful uses or overcrowdin; हे
of the building ete. (which are discusses
indetail in the summary of the Act
in Appendix ५) have also been added.

13. The Rajasthan Premises (Rewutsition aud
Eviction) Ordinance, 1949 (1 of 1949) ax
amended by the Act (XVII of 1932); The
arbitrator who shall be a District Judge
and appointed in consultation with the
Chief Justice of Rajasthan shall determine
the amount of compensation, which shall
be a sum which will ensure to the lanc~
lord a return of 5% per annum on the
value of the premises which shall be
assessed at the actual cost of construction
‘or the estimated cost as the case may be
with any adjustment to current level of
construction cost and with due regard
to the age and condition of the premi-
ses at the time of requisition.

14. The T. C. Requisitioning aat Acquisition
of Property Act, 1955 U of 1956). The
provisions are the same as those in the
Central Act, 1952 excepting for the omis-
sion of clause (b) of sub-section (3) of
section 8.

15. The U.P, (Temporary Accommodation)
Requisition Act, 1947 (XXV of 1947) as
amended : In the absence of agreement
‘between the District Magistrate and the
owner of the accommodation, the court
to हि a3 reference has been made by
the District Magistrate shall determine
the compensation having regard to pro-
visions of section 230) of the L.A. Act,
1894 in so far as it can be made appli-
cable which shall also include the
reasonable expenses incurred by the
owner in vacating the premises,

16, The V.P. Requisitioning and Acquisition
of Immovable Property Act, 1953 017 of
1959) : The provisions ‘are exactly
similar to those of the Central Act, 1952.
It is also provided that in cases of re-
quisition for more than 3 the
amount of compensation shall be revised
and redetermined periodically.

17. The W. B. Land (Requisition & Acquisi-
sion) Act, 1948 (7 of 1948) as amended:
In cases of requisition, the amount of
compensation shall be in respect of
requisition and any damage done during
the period of requisition.

In case of acquisition, the compensation,

shall be determined in accordance with
the principles of section 23(D of the L.A.


182

State Acts

Act of 1894 and it shall not include 15%
ified in sub-section (2) thereof.
18. The W.B. Premises Requisition and
Control (Temporary Provisions) Act, 1947
(77 of 1947) : Excepting that a District
Judge is to be the arbitrator, the provi-
sions are similar to those in the Central
Act, 1952 in so far as it relates to requi-
sition.

The Waste Land (Requisitioning and
Utilisation) Act, 1952 UV of 1952) as
amended : In respect of requisition of
waste land, detailed provisions relating to
compensation are laid down in the Act.

Waste Lands (Requisition and
Utilisation) Act, 1952, a summary of
which is given in Appendix ५].

Continuance Acts

19.

1. The M. 9, Requisitioning Land (Conti-
nuance of Powers) Act, 1951 (IX of 1951)
Compensation in respect of requisi-
tion shall be determined in accordance
with the provision of section 19 of the
Defence of India Act, 1939.

Inrespect of subsequent acquisition com-
pensation payable shall be the sum suffi-
cient to purchase at prevailing market
rate as on date of notice a piece of land
equal in area to and situated within the
distance of 3 miles from the acquired
land and suitable for the same use or a
sum equal to twice the market value of
the acquired Jand on the date of the re-
quisition, whichever is less.

The West Bengal Requisition Land
(Continuance of Powers) Act, 1951 VIL
of 1951) as amended : Compensation in

of requisition shall be determined
according to the principles laid down in
seefion 19 of the Defence of India Act,
respect of acquisition the compensation
payable shall be the amount which the
requisitioned land would have fetched in
the open market had it remained in the
same condition as it was sold on the
date of isition or twice the price
which the requisitioned land would have
fetched in open market if it had been
sold on the date of requisition, which-
ever is Jess.

IV.—APPEAL FROM ORDERS OF REQUISITIONING

The Requisitioning and Acquisition of Im-
moval Property Act, 1952 (XXX
of 1952).

Section 1041) on aggrieved b:
an order of zequbitign mado by the come
petent authority under sub-section (2) of
section 3 may, within twenty-one days
from the date of service of the order,
Prefer an appeal to the Central Govern-
ment :

1. There is no provision regarding appeais
in the following Acts +

The Bombay Land Requisition Act, 1948
(XNXHT of 1948) as amended. The CP.
& Berar Accommodation (Requisition)
Act, 1948 (LXIH of 1948). The Madras
Essential Articles Control & Requisition
(Temporary Powers) Act, 1949 (XXIX of
1949), re-enacted by (VI of 1956),



183

Central Act

State Acts

Provided that the Central Government may
entertain the appeal after the expiry of the
said period of twenty one days, if it is
satisfied that the appellant i was prevented
by sufficient cause from filing the appeal
in time,

(2) On receipt of an appeal under —sub-

section (1) the Central Government may,
after calling for a report from the compe-
tent authority and giving an opportunity
to the parties of being heard and after
making such further inquiry, if any, as
may be necessary, pass such orders as it
thinks fit and the order of the Central
Government shall be final.

Pepsu Requisitioning of Immovable Property
Act, 2006 Bk. (1 of 2006).

The Rajasthan Requisitioning of Land (im-
provement of Agriculture) “ Act, 1951
(XXIX of 1951).

The U. P. (Temporary Accommodation)
Requisition Act, 1947 (XXV of 1947) as
amended.

The W. को, Land (Requisition & Acquisition)
Act, 1948 (77 of 1948) as amended.

The W. B. Premises Requisition and Control
(Temporary Provisions) Act, 1947 (V of
1947).

The M. P. Requisitioned Land (Continuance
of Powers) Act, 1951 (1X of 1951).

The W.B. Requisitioned Land (Continuance
Powers Act, 1951 (WHI of 1951) as amended.
11. Provisions similar to those of the Central
Act are contained in the following Acts :--

The Madras Requisitioning and Acquisition
of Immovable Property 45,956 (XLH
of 1956).

The Orissa Requisitioning and Acquisition
of Iminovable Property Act, 1952 (XXIX
of 1952).

The Punjab Requisit
Immovable Property
1953) as amended.
The V. P, Requisitioning and Acquisition of
Inanovabe Property Act, 1953 (IV of
1953).

ing and Acquisition of
Act, 1953... (XT of

वा. MISCELLANEOUS

The Andhra Requisitioning cf Building
Act, 1954 (XE of 1954) : Persons
aggrieved by the order may prefer an
appeal to the State Government whose
decision shall be final.

The Assam Land (Requisition and Acquisi-

tion) Act, 1941 (XXV of 1948) as
amended ; Persons aggrieved by the order
may appeal to the Government whose
decision shall be final.

The Bihar Premises Requisition (Temporary
Provisions) Act, 1949 (XV of 1950) as
amended ; There is no appeal against the
order of requisition passed by the State
Government.

The M. B. Requisitioning of Immovable
Property Act, 1954 (XXXV of 1954) :
Just asin the Central Act, an appeal
lies against the order of requisition
but it is to the Commissioner of | the
‘Division whose decision shall te final.



184

Central Act |

Stale Acts

The Rajasthan Premises’ (Reenisition &
Eviction) Ordinance, 1949 (Xi of 1949)
amended by Act 18 of 1952: An appeal
lies to the authority appointed by the
Government.

The T. C. Requisittoning and Acquisition of
Property Act, 1955 U of 1956) | There is
a provision empowering the Government
to delegate any power conferred on them
by this Act to an officer or authority sub-
ordinate to the Government. So in case
the power to requisition is exercised by any
officer or authority subordinate to the
Government appeal shali lic from the
order of requisitioning to the Government.

The Waste Lands  Requisitioning and
Utilisation Act, 1952 (IV of 1952) as
amended ; Against an order of requisition-
ing an appeal lies 10 the prescribed
authority whose decision shall be final and
cannot be challenged in the court of law.

५. APPEAL FROM AWARDS OF COMPENSATION

‘isition

The Requisitioning and At
1952

Yamovable Property Act,
of 1952) :

Section U.—Any person aggrieved by an
award of the arbitrator made under section
8 may, within thirty days from the date of
such award, prefer an appeal to the High
Court within whose jurisdiction the re-
quisitioned or acquired property is situate

Provided that the High Court may entertain
the appeal after the expiry of the said
period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that
the appellant was ‘prevented by sufficient
cause from filing the appeal in time.

of 1. Provisions similar tothose of the Central
(4XX — act are contained in the following Acts >

The M. B, Requisition of | Inprovable
Property Act, 1954 (XXXV of 1554).

The Madras Requisitioning & Acouisttion of
Immovable Property act, 19% CKLIT of
1956).
The Orissa Requisitioning & Acquisition of
Fmmavable Property Act, 1952 (XXIX of
1952).

The Punjab Requisitioning & Acquisition of
Immovable Property Act, “1953 (Xf of
1953) as amended.

The T. C. Requisitioning  & Acquisition
of Property Act, 1955 (I of 1956).

वा. _ In the follawing Acts apps al lies to the
High Court against the awar

The Bihar Premises Requisition (Temporary:
Provisions) Act, 1949 (XV of 1950) as
amended.

The 6. P. & Berar Accommodation (Requisi-
tion) Act, 1948 (17 of 1948).

The Popsa Requisitioning of Inewvable
Property Act, 2006 Bk. (4 af 2006).

The Madras Essential Articles Control &
Reguisition (Temporary Powers) Act, 1949
COTY # j

).

1949), re-enacted by (VI of



Central Act

185

State Acts

The W. B. Premises Requisition & Controt
(Temporary Provisions) Act, 1947 (V of
1947).

वा. Miscetanrous

The Andhra Requisitioning of Buildings
Act, 1954 (XI of 1954): Against the
decision of the District Munsif fixing the
fair rent, an appeal lies to the sub-court
or to the district court and such decision.
shall be final and not liable to review
or revision.

The Assam Land (Requisition and Acquisitions
Act, 1948 (XX of 1948) : When a person
is uggricved by the award, the matter shal!
be referred to the court and the pravi-
sions of the L.A. Act, 1894 would

apply.

The Bombay Land Requisitioning Act, 1948
(XXXII Of 1948) as amended! : Against the
award of the officer authorised in this behill
by the Government, an appeal shall lic
within 60 days to the High Court in Greater
Bombay and to the District Court elsewhe:
except where the total amount of compensa-
tion does nat exceed the amount prescribed
by the Government and there shall be no
further appeal.

The Rajasthan Requisitioning of Land Um-
provement of Agriculture" Aet, 1951
(35158 of 1951) : An appeal against the
Gecision of the officer regarding compensa-
tion lies to the District Judge. As regards
compensation for damage caused to the
Jand, the decision of the officer (subject (0
an appeal to the Government) shall he
final.

The Rajasthan Premises (Requisition and
Eviction) Ordinance, 1949 (XT of 1949) as
amended hy Act XVUL of 1952 : There is
no provision regarding appeal,

The M, P. Requisitioned Lend (Continuance
of Powers) Act, 1951 (LX of 1952) :
There isno provision regarding appeat.

The W. B. Requisitioned Land (Continuance
of Powers) Act, 1951 (VHT of 1951) ex amend
ed : Theresis no provision regarding appeal.



186

Central Act State Acts

The U, P. (Temporary Accommodation) Re
quisition Act, 1947 (XXV of 1947) as
ynended : mpensation is to be deter-
mined by the court on a reference made to
it by the District Magistrate and it is pro.
vided that no appeal or revision shall lic
egainst such decision.

The V.P, Requisitioning aud Acquisition of
Immovable “Property Act, 1953 UV of
1953) appeal against the award lies
to the Judicial Commissioner.

The W. B. Land (Requisition and Acquisi~
tion) Act, 1948 (11 of 1948) es amended -
it is provided that if the party is ag-
grieved by the award af compensation by
the Collector, the matter shall be referred
to the decision of the Court,

The Waste Lands (Requisitioning and Us}-
fisationy Act, 1952 {iF of 1952) as
amended Persons aggrieved by the
compensation order may appeal to the
prescribed authority wi ion shall
be final and cannot be challenged in a
court of law,

“LiLaw/67—20-] 1-67—GIPF.