सयमब TA

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

HUNDREDTH REPORT
ON

LITIGATION BY AND AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT :
SOME RECOMMENDATIONS FOR REFORM

May 1984


Justice K.K. Mathew D.O. No. F.2(3)/84-LC.
Dated, the 8th May, 1984.

My dear Minister.

lam forwarding herewith the Hundredth Report of the Law
Commission on ‘Litigation by and against the Government : Some
recommendations for reform”.

As has been explained in Chapter | of the Report, the subject
owes its origin to the discussion that took place within the Law
Commission on a few topics included in the Questionnaire issued by
the Law Commission some time ago.

The Commission is indebted to Shri P.M. Bakshi, Part-time

Member, and Shri A.K. Srinivasamurthy, Member-Secretary, for
theirgvaluableyassistance in the{preparation of the Report.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(K.K. MATHEW)
Shri Jagannath Kaushal,
Minister of Law, Justice
and!Company Affairs,
New Delhi.

Encl. : 100th Report.


1, Introduction . .
3. Litigation Ombudsman—Proposal For :
4, Limitation in Suits by the Government”

5, Gonelusjon and Summary of Recommendations

2. Section 80, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and Cognate Provisions

"CONTENTS

Page
+ . . 1
. . 2
. . . 6
. 9
+ . 10


CHAPTER 1
AUNTRODUCTORY

4.1. ‘This Report deals with certain areas of the 189 relating to litigation by Scope and genesis.
uid against the Government. Without purporting to embark upon a comprehen-
sive survey of the enure ticld of such iaw, (015 Report will confine itself to certain
aspecis of the subject wach cau for urgent aitenuon. The recommendations
made in thns Report owe their origin, is part, io the discussions that took place
. within the Law Commission on a few o1 tie topics that were included in the‘
Questionnaire issued by the Comussion some time ago, dealing with certain
matters concerning we structuie and functioning of the higher courts.‘

Q. 19 of chat Questionnaire read as under:—
“Are over-zealous departments of the Government responsible for
increase in the court’s calender ?”

Chis question has provoked some thinking relating to Government litiga-
ion, there are also a few other aspects of Government litigation, deserving of
serious attention.
“LZ A prcity large buik of litigation in the courts, including, in particular, Departments’
writ petitions before the Supreme Court and the High Courts, consists of cases *PPFoach.
to which the Government is a party, The hardship that is caused to parties in
such litigation, and also the delay expcricaged in its disposal, are largely due
to some defects in the law and in the administrative apparatus. This was thé
impression which the Commission has formed.’ Some of the replies received on
the questionnaire issued by the Commission (referred to above) also confirm
this impression." It would scem that over-zealous Government Departments, or
oilicers Who are not propcriy oriented or guided, often miss the point of the matter,
thereby unknowingly contributing to a sizeable mass of litigation against the
Government which could have been avoided.' It is to remedy this situation that
the’ Commission has considered it proper to deal with certain specific aspects *
of such litigation which (as stated above). seem to need urgent attention.

1.3. The succeeding Chapters of this Report focus dttention upon the Contents of the
following specific topics relevant to litigation by or against the Government:— Present Report.

(1) Section 80 Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (notice required for suit
against Government or public officers) and cognate provisions con-
tained in other enactments.’

(2) Litigation Ombudsman—need for."
(3) Limitation in suits by the Government.’

1.4, It may be mentioned at this place that several aspects of litigation Eerlier Reporte,
against the Government have been dealt with in carlier Reports of the Commis- हि
sion. These include, in particular, the Reports of the Commission relating to the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, ihe law of limitation, Governmental privilege
in evidence, statutory prov:sions reguiring. notice to be given of intention to file
a suit against the Government, public officers or public authorities (apart from
section 80 Code of Civil Procedure, 1908), and the like. It is not necessary for
the present purpose to give an exhaustive enumeration of these Reports. The
present Report has sought to focus upon some important aspects of litigation
by and against the Government, in view of their urgent and pressing importance

+ in the context of court congestion, justice to the citizen and the concept of the
welfare State. पु ह

1. Questionnaire issued by the !.aw Commission of India, particularly Q. No. 19.
2, See also the observation in 10.10, Jerry V Union of India, ALR 1974 SC 130, 135, 136 para 25.
3. E.g, Law Commission collection of coments, page 19/4 (requiring notice of intention to suo Government).
4. Seo cases cited in Chapter 2, infra, parayraphs 2. 5 to. 13

5. Chapter 2, infra.

6. Chapter 3, infra.

7. Chapter 4, infra.



Notice under sec.

CHAPTER 2
SECTION 80 CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908 AND COGNATE
PROVISIONS

2.1. We tirst address ourselves to the statutory provisions requiring a pros-

tion 80 (1), Code pective plaintiff to give a notice of suit before commencing Utigauion against the
Proce- Government or public officers, By virtue of section 8U(L) of tne Code ot Civil

of Civil
dare.

Relaxation made
in section 80(2)

effect of,

Section
effect of.

80(3)

Procedure, 1908, a prospective plaintiti must give ४० months’ prior written
notice of any suit which he intends to tile against the Government, or against
any public oiticer for an act purporting to be done by the latter in bis omeial
Capacity. If such a notice is not given, or the notice (even if given) 1s erroneous
or defective, the suit must be dimissed. This 15 the gist of the provision con-
tained in section 80(1) of the Code. By the amendment made in this section in
19/6, some relaxation of thé provisions of the section has, no doubt, been made,
by inserting sub-sections (2) and (3), which will be adverted to presenuy.’ But
these amendments touch only the fringe of the section, The hardship caused by
the secton—a section which has been held to be mandatory and “to admit of
no exceptions or implications’— continues substantially unabated. The hard-
ship results not so much from the existence of a Statutory provision requiring
prior notice of litigation, as from the fact that the apparently harmless
section has, in practice, been the source of innumerable controversies. and has
atlorded an opportunity for the raising of technical objections by the Govern-
ment on almost every conceivable ground. The frequency with which such
objections are raised will be apparent from illustrative cases, discussed later
in this Chapter.*

2.2, The Law Commission of India had, in successive Reports on the Code
of Civil Procedure 1908, recommended total repeal of section 80 of the €ode,
but the amending Act of 1976 merely made certain modifications in the section.
We have already sjated above’ that the relaxations introduced in the section by
sub-sections (2) and (3) touch the fringe of the problem. By sub-section (2) it is,
in effect, provided that the cases of urgency, a suit may be entertained by the

court without notice required under sub-section (1), However, what the
sub-section gives by one hand, it takes away by another hand, For, it also lays
down that if notice has then not been given, interim relief (say, by way of an
interim injunction) shall not be granted by the court in such a suit.

Not only this, the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 80 goes further
and enacts that if (in a suit filed without notice) the court takes the view that
there was no urgency, it shall return the plaint to the plaintiff for Presentation
after the plaintiff has given the requisite notice. It appears to us that this sort

of provision is bound to create considerable delay, expense, and trouble. A

litigant, bona fide believing the case to be one of urgency, institutes a suit with-

out the notice required by section 80(1). The court does not agree with him
that the matter is urgent. So the court returns the plaint. The litigant must now
give a notice as required by the section, go to the court again, pay further fees
to counsel, incur other incidental expenses again and then Present the plaint
again, All this time, he would be denied the interim relief that was desired by
him. What is more, the litigant would be spending his time going to and coming
back from the court, without securing the substantive redress that he sought for
his grievance, and without being able to secure even a firm date for an effective
hearing of the controversy. Sub-section (2) of section 80 of the Code thus,
when read with the proviso, is hardly an improvement on the pre-1976 position.

2.3. Take, next, the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 80, also intro-
duced by the amendment of 1976. In effect, it provides that if a notice has been
given, then the suit shall not be dismissed by reason merely of an error or
defect in the notice if the relief and the cause of action are set out in
as given, the name of the plaintiff can be ascertained by the Government, Here
again the apparently simple provision, no doubt inspired by good intentions
can still lead to controversies in practice, For, the litigant may bona fide believe
that he has, in his notice, set out Properly all that is Tequired by the law, but
the court may not agree with him. He must then take the risk of the suit being

n the notice ©

1. Paragraphs 2:2 and 2: 3, infra.
2. Paragraphs 2-5 to 2.10, infra.
3. Paragraph 2:1, eupra.

oe co


dismissed for want of notice. Apart from that, the sub-section leaves it open

to tae defendant (the Government or the pubtic ollicer) to take the plea that

ie renel and the cause of action were not accurately set out. The manner in
~ waich the provision is framed, that is to ‘say, the great scope that it leaves for

controversies, cuts down even the small benefits that the sub-section intends
10 conter, Above all, it leaves open the scope for technical defences being put
sorth by over-zealous Departments of the Government.

The real objection to such provisions making a notice mandatory is True approach.
iat they divert the attention of the court and the parties from the essential .
issues I controversy, and force them to spend their time on merely secondary

issues. Lhe cause of justice is. thus defeated and procedural provisions, which

should really help justice, become obstacles in its achievement, Procedural pro-

visions should be so framed as to facilitate justice, and not to hinder it, Unless

uiere exist adequate countervailing factors to justify such provisions which bar

ब suit, they ought not to find a place in the law.

2.5. In this context, it is relevant to mention that experience of the practical Recent case law.
working of section 80 shows that it creates more problems than it solves, In
~ iact, une section solves no problems at all. This was emphasised by the Law
Commission in its earlier Reports on the Code. ? Lest it should, be thought
uit पार amendments of 1976 have improved the Position, let us record here
that a perusal of the case law of recent years does not show any substantial
uuprovement, By way of illustration, we refer in the next few Paragraphs to a
10७ reported decisions of the last few years on the section.

2.6, Thus, in a Madras ०४५७१ the objection was raised, by the Government ¥

‘hat in a suit against the Central Government relating to railway, the notice spot, .defeets a
should have been served personally on the officer concerned, The contention, of its service, Madras
course, did not succeed, the court finding that it was enough to leave the notice and Kerala cases.
at the ollice of the General Manager of the Railway in the hands of a responsible
Senior oilicer. The defence put forth was hyper-technical, to put it at the
lowest. A case from Kerala‘ shows that State authorities still persist in raising in

a litigation, pleas which are purely technical. In fact, the plea of the State in the
Kerala case was not only technical, but also totally misconceived, The plaintiff

damages in tort, for injuries sustained bythe plaintiff on account of the negli-
gence of the employee in driving the jeep. However, the plaintiff had not given
to the employee the requisite statutory notice under section 80, Code of Civit
| Procedure, 1908, This failure of the Plaintiff to comply with the mandatory
requirement of the procedural law was relied upon a defence, not by the

employee, but by the State, even though the notice to the State had been duly

given. The State took the plea that the wit Was not maintainable, because notice

had not been given to the employee. Fortunately, the High ‘Court “rejected

the plea, The facts of the case are not material, though it should be added that

the plaintiff succeeded on the merits also, It is surprising that a defence of want

of notice should have been raised by a party (the State), which itself had due

u‘ notice of the suit and whose liability was, in any case, distinct from that of the
other defendant. That the plea of want of notice was ultimately rejected was a

stroke of good fortune. But one is pained by the harshness caused by the res-

« trictive provision in section 80, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. This Provision
has, in practice, found to be productive of serious injustice. The Provision has

been adversely commented upon, more than once, by the courts. Its continued

[+ for its repeal made by the Law Commission of India in successive reports °
| Code of Civil Procedure 1,908, not only causes injustice (as stated 4 ove). we

is also responsible for considerable expenditure of judicial time and la
by increasing delay in the disposal of civil cases, 4 Tebour, ‘there.

1, Law Commission of India, 27th Report,

2, Law Commission of India, 54th Report.

: 3. Union of India ७. U.N. Small Industries Corpn, Ltd. ALR. 1981 Mad. 316, 317, (1981) 2 MEI. 189.
4. NS, Jayanandan v. Stote, ALR, 1983. Ker, 46 (February),

' 5. See, for example State of Punjab v. Geetha Iron & Brass Works, ALR. 1978 S.C. 1608; (1978) 1 ४0८ 66,



A Rajasthan 2.7, The same hyper-technical approach by the Government is illustrated
0880. by the detence taken (though unsuccesstully) by tne State ot Kajasthan in a
Rajasthan case.’ In that case, the plainutt had given a combined notice under
section 106 of the Transter of Property Act, 1882 (notice to a lessce to quit)
and section 80, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The contention of the State was
that such a combined notice cannot be given. Fortunately, the contention did
mot succeed. But it. is paintul to have to reter to such cases and to point out
that the detence taken was a totally untenable one. Neither section 106 nor
section 80 provides anywhere that the notice under the provision in question
must contain nothing else. Nor does there exist, in the statutory or decisional
law of India, any provision that it two statutory provisions require or contemplate
intimation of two different matters, the person bound to give much intimation
must embody cach matter in a separate document. In fact, an carlier Bombay
case had specifically held that the notices could be combined.’ Nor is there any
principle of justice, enquity and good conscience that necessitates a pedantic
approach. [hat the defence did not ultimately succeed in the Rajasthan case is
poor consolation to the litigant who must have spent sutticient time, energy and

money in combating the defence. It is also a poor justification for the wastage |

of judicial time. In the Rajasthan case, the Goyernment Advocate was unable
to point out how Government was prejudiced bya combined notice.

Mention of wrong 2.8, In a Deihj case,‘ in the notice given to the railway authorities, the main

partionlars. station was mentioned, instead of the city booking olace: An objection was
raised that this defect invalidated the notice. Fortunately, the objection was over-
ruled. Simuarly, in a Patna case,’ the notice under section 80 mentioned a wrong
number of the railway receipt, though the correct number was mentioned in the
plaint. On this score, an attempt was made to invalidate the notice. However, the
attempt failed.

“Injustice caused by 2.9. In all these cases, the abjection under section 80 was wrongly taken,
section 80. Even where the objection under section 80 is correctly taken, some injustice may
arise, ‘This is illustrated by a Madras case.’ The claim was made against the

. Railway by both the consignor. and the consignee of goods. The consignor had

given notice under section 80, but the consignee had not, The High Court held
that the plaint was liable to be rejected owing to failure of the consignee to give
notice under section 80, and that the gonsignor (even though he had given
notice) could not proceed with the suit, since the claim was not severable, We

. are not discussing here the question whether the court could have taken a
different view on the particular’ point at issue. For the present purpose, we may
assume that the conclusion reached by the court is in accordance with the terms
of section, But the point to make is, that although the letter of the law was
implemented, the plaintiffs must have left the court with an acute sense of in-
justice in their hearts. In this sense, the section, even where it is correctly
applied, is bound to lead to a feeling of injustice. Besides this, rejection of the
plaint for‘ mere want of notice would mean that even a meritorious case yields
no fruits. For all that one knows, the substantive claim might have been justified
on the merits, and yet the section entails its dismissal.

Defects in the 2.10. The judicial decisions noted above relate to defects in the form of

contents. of the the notice given under section 80 of the Code, or in the mode of its service. The

notice under eection | aw Reports also furnish instances of defects in the contents of the notice. In

80. this context, we may refer to an Allahabad case wherein the controversy related
to the meaning of the expression “cause of action” as occurring in section 80.
Though the High Court observed that the notice under section 80 was not to
be construed in a pedantic manner and that the courts ought not to be hyper-
technical in that regard, the suit was ultimately dismissed, as the reason why
the order of dismissal was illegal, was not set out in the notice.

1. Rawat Hardeo Singli, v. State of Rajasthan, S.1.R. 1981 Raj. 280, 282, 283.

2. Rayabai v. State of Maharashtra, ATR 1973 Bom. 59.

3. Vijay Automobiles, Delhi v. Union of India, A.B. 1981 Delhi 51.

4. Bishwanath Prasad v. E. Rly. ALR. 1978 Pat. 223.

5. Doom Dooma Tea Co. v. Union of India, (1989) 1 MLI 85, 90 (reviews case law).
6. Gamaruddin v. Union of India, AUR 1982 All 169, 170, 171.

-

हि
of a


5

2.11. The injustice resulting from section 80 becomes manifest when one _Seetion 8¢ mandex
bears in mind that it is not possible io grant ex parte interim relief in the form हे
of injunction on the ground of urgency, by invoking the inherent powers of the
court.

Notice under seetion SU is का eondition preecdent, even for a suit for injuneyon.

2.12. lt is uot our intention to present here anything like a digest of recent Attitade of Govern!
cases on section 80 of the Code of Civil Proceduré. Nor is it necessary to do so, Ment officers.
The iliustwative cases, taken above from the law reports, give a fairly accurate
idea of the general approach. There must be many other cases wherein similar
vbjections might have been taken, successfully or otherwise, The — general
approach on the part of Government in regard to the process of litigation seems
to be this. “If there exists, on the statute book, a provision whereunder a defence
about non-maintainabiiity of the suit can be conceivably taken, then take it,
whether or not the facts of the case substantiate the defence, and whether or
not the justice of the case demands that the defence should be resorted to.”

One cannot perhaps blame the ofticers of Government for raising such defences, .
because they might bc tabouring under the impression that if they do not take
every conceivable detence, they might be regarded as “negligent” in the  dis-
charge of their otficial dutics. What needs 10 be pointed out is that the existance
of a provision of the nature contained in section 80 gives rise to the urge to
resort to such defences in almost every case.,The case law summarised above
shows that the umendment made in 1976 has not made any improvement in
this regard, 7

2.13, What surprises one is the fact that the Government thinks it PLOPEL Objects of notioes
to resort to such defences, when, by the institution of the suit, the object of
giving notice to Government ly been satisfied. The only object of
section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 is to give an intimation to the
Government of intended iitigation, so that Government may consider the posi-
tion and, if so advised, redress the wrong.’ Once the suit is instituted, this object
(of giving an intimaiion to the Government) is automatically achieved. After
this, the Government should consider the Jegal position, rather than lay stress
on the technical non-compliance with the law, The fact that the section creates
a defence does not necessarly mean that the defence must be resorted to, in
every case . But i: appears that this has been the general- pproach adopted by
the Government. The real object of the section—of giving prior intimation
of proposed legal proceedings so that Government (if so odvised) may make
amendments—is hardly, if every, achieved since the notice, even in those cases
where it has, in fact, been given, does not receive prompt attention. In fact, this
real object has got obscured and the emphasis has shifted to the negative attitude
of using the section only as a shield.

2.14 The futility of the present provision in section 80 has been very Observations ता
emphatically pointed out in a judgment of the Supreme Court. It states that the Supreme court,
. the notice under section 80 is intended to alert the State to negotiate a just हर

settlement or at least have the courtesy to tell the potential outsider why the

claim is being resisted. The Court further points out that the section has: become

a ritual, bacause the admintstration is often unresponsive and hardly lives up to

Parliament's intention in continuing ‘section 80 in spite of the Central Law

Commission's recommendation, Incidentally, it may be of interest to mention that

the recommendation of the Law Commission to repeal section 80, as made in

its Report on the Code of Civil Procedure (54th Report), was expressly referred

to (with approval) in a judgment of the Supremen Court' in 1974,

2.15. In view of all that has been Stated above, we very strongly recommend Repeal of fon

the repeal of section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908, 80¢ O.P.0, re:
लि _ commended,
1. State of Tripura v. Sajal Kanti Sengupta, ALR. 1982 Ganbati 76. »
2, See paragraph 2:14, infra. हर

3. State of Puntab v. Geetha Iron & Brass Works, A.1.R. 1978 8.0. 1608 (1978) 1 8.0.0. 68.
4. JR. Jerry रन Union of India, A.LR, 1974 8.0. 130, 135, 186, para 26.


6

Repeal of Other 2.16. For the same Teasons, we also recommend appeal of other statutory

Ntatutory requirine provisions requiring notice of suit against public authorities. These provisions
notice of duit recom-1 Conveniently collected in an earlier Report of the Law Cominission."
mended.

Impact on writ 2.17 Before concluding our discussion of stalulory provisions as to notice
petition. of suit, we would like to siate that at present the existence of such provisions,

in many cases, induce prospective litigants having a legal grievance against
the Government to resort to writ petitions, for which no statutory notice is
required. The deletion of such Provisions, is therefore not only justitiable on
the merits (for the reasons discussed in the preceding paragraphs), but would
also indirectly help reduce the number of writ petitions in the higher courts.

. CHAPTER 3
LITIGATION OMBUDSMAN—PROPOSAL: FOR

[5 3.1, We now turn to certain other aspects of litigation eoncerning the
Government. lt is a noticeable feature of the pattern of litigation in the last few
years that parties think it proper to approach the higher courts (i) not only for
redress regarding governmental acis which constitute an infringement of legal
rights; (ii) but also for redress regarding governmental acts which, while they
may or may not amount to infringement of a legal right, constitute instances of
“maladministration”, Official acts belonging to the fatter category lie on the
outer confines of “illegality”, Some of these acts may not be legal wrongs, and
may be found to be bordering rather on “impropriety”, outsiue the region of
“illegal acts”. But all such acts, whether they represent wrongs for which legal
redress can be claimed or whether they represent admunistrative impro-
prieties for which the courts should not be approached for redress, often find
their way to the courts. Official apathy, Oppression, unimaginativeness, lethargy
or misunderstanding—these and similar factors are responsible for the parties
seeking redress in courts, Sometimes, one Suspects, the parties venture out and
seek relief in courts, even though they may be fully aware that the issue is not a
justiciable one. In doing so, their object is more to give vent to their sense of
injustice, than to obtain legal relicf as such.

The background.

. i 3.2. Taking due note of this background, we are of the opinion that there
mele हक हि is need for evolving some mechanism whereby the pressure on the courts, occa-
niem. stoned by the present state of affairs,’ could be relieved and grievances of

citizens which are of a legal nature could be redressed quickly and cheaply.
Such a mechanism would advance the cause of Justice, and also check the influx
of cases into the higher courts,

Of the two categories of official ucts regarding which a grievance js made
sn courts,’ the first category constitutes a large number, speaking _ statistically,
With the passage of time, such acts—i.e. acts where the misconduct complained
of is an instance of justiciable illegality—will come more and more before the
courts, either through proceedings taken by individuals in the shape of writ
petitions before the higher courts, or in the form of proceedings initiateg by
publicsspirited bodies under the category of “public interest litigation.” .//

3.3. In our view, there is need for evolving a device that will take of the
first category of cases mentioned above.‘ It is common experience ‘hat once
litigation commences, there is considerable expense of time, money and labour in
all quarters. As far as possible, the administrative apparatus should be so geared
that the possibility of unnecessary litigation against the Government in: avoided.
It is with this end in view that we envisage the creation of an office of Litigation
1 ombudsman. He will be a functionary to whom Prospective litigant may (not
must)° have recourse for the redress of their grievances of a justiciable character,

Litigation Ombuds
man proposal for.

_ ८४ अ्कन--+ ->
Commission of Tndis, “6th Report (Notice of suit required under cortain statutory pro-visions).
1. Law Commi

Paragraph 3+ 1. supra.
डर Paregraph +1 upre .
१ 3-1, supra.
41 Site



7

3.4, We further envisage the enactmen: of a law to implement the recommen- Trent atures of
dation made above’ regarding creation of the ollice of Litigation Ombudsmen, पका mended.
broad scheme that we have in mind is set out in the following propositions, which
seek to indicate the salient features of she scheme as envisaged by us.

The office, and its organisation

(i) The oliice of ation Ombudsman should be created by each State

Government for the State and by the Central Government for such of the Minis~
tries of that Government as may be specified by that Government,

(ii) The Litigation Ombudsmen should be a person who igs a retired Judge
of the High Court in the case of state or a retired Judge of the Supreme Court in
the case of the Centre.

(iii) His appointment should be made, at the Centre, in consultation with
the Chief Justice of India and in the States, in consultation with the Chief Justice
of the High Court.

(iv) His appointment should be made for a term of three year and he should
noi be removable from his office except in the manner laid down in the Constitu-
tion for the removel of a High Court Judge or of a Supreme Court Judge, as the

case may be, ea

(v) Where necessary, he should be assisted by such number of deputies as
may be required.

The Procedure

(vi) It should be open to any member of the public who proposes to take
out writ proceedings against the Government, to address a letter to the Litigation
Ombudsman at the centre or in the State (as may be appropriata) setting out his
grievance and requesting appropriate relief in specific terms as far as possible,
No formal application for the purpose should be required. [In the succeeding sub-
paragraphs, we are describing the member of the public as “applicant”, only for
the sake of convenience.]

(vii) The Litigation Ombudsman should, «after due examination of the
matter, inform the applicant, in writing of his recommendation in the matter, with
a copy to the Ministry or Department concerned.

(viii) The reply of the Litigation Ombudsman to the applicant should be
communicated to the latter, within two months of the receipt of the application.
Where it is not possible to do so by reason non-availability, or delay in the
receipt, of necessary information from the Ministry or Department concerned, a
communication to that effect should be sent cut to the applicant within the
“period of two months.

Grouzds of recommendation to be made by Litigation Ombudsman

(ix) The grounds on which the Litigation Ombudsman may make a recom-
mondarion should be vide enough. He should have power to make a recommenda-
on with respect to any decision, act or omission of the Government or its officer,
if he is 5: ed that the decision, act or omission: —

(a) was contrary to Jaw; or
(b) was unreasonable, unjust, oppressive, or improperly discriminatory, or
. Was In pursuance of a rule of law or a provision of any enactment ora

practice which itself is unreasonable, unjust, oppressive, or improperly
discriminatory, wherein the circumstances legal redress could have been
claimed.

(c) was based wholly or partly on a mistake of law; or

(9) was wrong in law; or

(९) involved the exercise of a discretionary power for an improper purpose.
or on irrelevant grounds, or by taking irrelevant considerations imo
account, or omitted to give reasons where teasons should have been
given for the decision,

1, Paragraph 3:3. supra. तू ््ः


(x) The Litigation Ombudsman, in his discretion, may refuse to investigate
or may Cease to investigate, a grievance:—
(a) if it is trivial, frivolous or vexatious or is not made in good faith, or

(0) if the facts alleged show no legal cause of action and no impropriety of
the nature mentioned above.

Administrative Matters

(xi) All Ministries and Departments of the Government should be bound to
co-operative with the Litigation Ombudsman by rendering him such assistance
and supplying him such information as he may require for the proper discharge
of his duties.

(xii) The Annual Report of the Litigation Ombudsman shall be placed before
Parliament or State Legislatures, as the case may be.

(xiii) The Annual Report of the Ministry or Department concerned — shall
state the action taken on the proceding year’s Report of the Litigation Ombudsman.
Exemption from the Scheme .

(xiv) The scheme set out above will not apply to Stote. where an Ombuds-
man appointed under a State enactment for the time being in force in functioning.

Reason to Ombuds- 3.5. We should, at this stage, repeat that it is not our intention that there

man not compul- should be any sort of legal compulsion against a citizen (who wishes to sue the

sory. Government) to make an application to the proposed Litigation Ombudsman, as
a pre-requisite to the initiation of legal proceedings against the Government, The
object of the recommendation is only to provide to the citizen a forum from
which he may, if so advised, first seek relief. here should be nothing mandatory
in the scheme, for the citizen.

As for the Government, it will be able to have, within its apparatus, a
functionary who may be expected to furnish prompt, competent and honest
advice on matters likely. to lead to litigation. If carried out in its proper spirit,
and not in a pedantic and bureaucratic manner, the recommendation would, we
hope, advance the cause of substantive justice, improve the image of the Govern-
ment and, to some extent, reduce congestion in the courts.

Approach to be 3.6. Although the majority of matters which will reach the Litigation Ombuds-
adopted by the liti-fman—or, at least, a large number of them—may be expected to raise justiciable
1] } Ombudsman issues, some of them might raise matters which border on impropriety, rather
beneficial impact on than constitute an illegality for which relief can be claimed in the courts.?

court, congestion.

. In some cases, citizens, or groups of citizens, approach the higher courts for
ventilation of their grievances even though the justiciability of the issue is doubt-
ful. Such approach to courts is perhaps regarded as unavoidable because the
citizens consider it to be the only effective way of expressing their . feelings in
a formal and public manner before an institution where the matter is bound to
receive some hearing, even if ultimately that institution may not be able to look
into the grievance. According to our recommendation, such type of cases will be
outside the province of the Litigation Ombudsman as proposed. Of course, such
other administrative machinery as the Government may consider proper can still
be constituted, wherever necessary,

States having 3.7. We are aware that in some of the States in India Lokayuktas have been
Lokayuktas. already appointed under enactments passed by the State Legislature. Our recom-
mendation for the appointment of a Litigation Ombudsman is not intended to
apply to such States. In general, cases of maladministration would be taken care
of by the Lokayuktas so appointed. Of course, the Lokayukta is often viewed as
a functionary primarily concerned with corruption, but the office can be easily
moulded to look into cases of the nature that are to be assigned to the Litigation

1 1. Paragraph 3:7. infra.
2. See also paragraph 3:2, supra.


Ombudsman as proposed by us. In fact, the concept of Ombudsman, as evolved
in Western countries, is wide enough to cover maladministration in all its Specie न
Tf necessary, the States concerned can amend the relevant State enactment a
the purpose. The creation of a separate office of Litigation Ombudsman in suet
States, functioning side by side with the local Lokayukta, might create some over
lapping in practice and some confusion to the citizen. It is in order to aver such
overlapping and confusion, that we would, at least for the present, exclude suc!

States from the ambit of our recommendation relating to Litigation Ombudsman.

3.8. We further recommend that appropriate legislation should be enacted Legislation recome
by Parliament to implement the recommendations made in this Chapter. As
1 regards Parliament’s competence to enact such a law, we may state that such
legislation would fall, in part, within the entries in the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution relating to “Civil procedure” and “administration of justice”, and,
in part, within the entries relating to the substantive subjects to which the parti-
cular litigation may relate.

CHAPTER 4

LIMITATION IN SUITS BY THE GOVERNMENT

4.1. The law of limitation in India, allows to the Government, in regard to he ‘er fautte oy
suits instituted by it, a period of thirty years, irrespective of the nature of the the-Government.
cause of action’ This is provided in article 112 of the Limitation Act, 1963,
which applies to all suits instituted by the Government—Central or State, with

an exception of minor importance not material for the present purpose. न

The period allowed to Government is much longer than that allowed in
respect of suits by private parties. Suits by. private parties are governed by vary-
ing periods, depending upon the nature of the cause of action and other relevant
circumstances, For: most suits relating to causes of action not concerned with
immoveable property, the period available to private parties is three years. In
contrast, the Government is allowed a uniformly long period of thirty years,
under article 112 mentioned above. पु

4.2. The disparity between the law as applicable to the.Government and Disparity juoz
the Jaw as applicable to private parties is usually sought to be justified on the tive of
ground that Government is a vast apparatus, with matters being required to be

handled at different levels in different departments, and more time is, therefore, .
required for preparing the material for any litigation that may become necessary.

This reasoning, assuming that it is sound, misses the other aspect of the
matter, namely, the hardship caused to the prospective defendant. *

The present position is often productive of hardship, inasmuch as the
private party who is likely to be used by the Government must keep and preserve
his documents for a long time to come. The present discriminatory provision totally
disregards the considerations that underline the law of limitation and constitute
its rationale. The rationale ‘of the low of limitation is that after a long lapse of
time, the evidence that the defendant might have in his Possession may get lost,
that witnesses may die or their memory may suffer and that valuable evidence may
perish. Further, the pursuit of stale demands is,-in itself, an act likely to 86
productive of oppression. In. the face of these considerations, which apply as
much to claims of the Government as to claims of private parties, there should
exist very strong counter-balancing factors in order to justify the legislature in
allowing a very long period in favour of Government. We think that, on the

balance, a case for such special treatment favouring Government has not been
made out. : हक वर cee Tae i)

___ 4.3. The Law Commission has given a comprehensive Ri [१ On the Limita- Barller Report of
tion Act, 1963, but at that time attention was focussed upon the need for revision the Law Com.
of the Act in the light of conflict of decisions and the like—the usual material for

1. Coostitution Seventh Schedule, Concurrent List entries 13 and 114.
2. Article 112, Limitation Act, 1963.
मे, Law Commission of India 89th Report (Limitation Act 1963), Paragraphs 39+ 51, 39: 52,


10

Recommendation.

Conclusion,

law revision. The point now being emphasised has arisen as a result of the
thinking within the Commission on the subject of litigation by Government, and
has accordingly been dealt with in this Report.

4.4, On an examination of the subject in the context of working of the
courts and quick disposal of cases, we have considered it proper to go into this
aspect more specifically,

Our recommendation js that no special treatment should be accorded to
the Government in the matter of the period of limitation and that articles 112
of the Limitation Act, 1963 should be deleted so as to abolish the special treat-
ment afforded to Government and to remove the distinction at present made in
regard to suits by the Government and suits by other persons and entities. In our
opinion, a long period of limitation available to the Government is, in many
cases, likely to induce an attitude of indifference and apathy. In the mind of the
private person, the apprehension that the claim of the Government against him
can be litigated in the civil court after a long period has clapsed, is productive
of a sense of insecurity and anxiety. This state of affairs is out of harmony with
the concept of a Government committed to the welfare of the people.

-

CHAPTER 5
CONCLUSION AND SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

5.1. By way of conclusion, we may state that the subject of litigation against
Government is a vast one, of which only a few aspects have been touched upon
in this Report.’ These aspects have been chosen in view of their pressing relevance
to the cause of justice. :

Incidentally, one of our recommendations—that for the creation of an
office of Litigation Ombudsman should, we think, have the effect of relieving
congestion in the higher courts and may, therefore, be considered as a measure
of urgency. But we give equal importance to the other recommendations made in
this Report. Not reforming the law on the matters on which these recommenda-
tions contemplate a reform would, we think, amount to perpetuating injustice.

Summary of recom: 5.2, For convenience, we summarise below the recommendations made in

mendations

this Report: — .

(i) Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, which requires prior
notice of intention to sue the Government or a public officer for an act
done by the latter in his official capacity, should be repealed.

ii) Cognate provisions contained in other special enactments should also be
repealed.* पु

(iii) There should be appointed at the Centre and in the States, a Litigation
Ombudsman on the lines indicated in the Report, with the functions
set out therein. Briefly, the scheme envisaged is that it should be open
to a citizen to approach the Litigation Ombudsman and seek redress of
a justiciable grievance against the Government. The citizen need not
resort to litigation—litigation which could well have been avoided if
the official machinery had been more energetic, more sympathetic and
more imaginative. There should, however, be no legal obligation to
resort to this procedure before instituting legal proceedings.‘ 7

1, See also paragraph 1-4, supra.
2, Paragraph 2: 15, supra,
3. Paragraph 2:16, supra.
4, @hapter 3, supra, particularly paragraph 3-4.

|


ee ag

‘se

(iv) The Limitation Act, 1963, should be amended by deleting the provision
(article 112) allowing to the Government a periud of thirty years for
all suits.’

K. K. MATHEW
Chairman

J.P. CHATURVEDI
Member

DR. M. B. RAO
Member

P. M. BAKSHT °
Part-Time Member

VEPA P, SARATHI
Part-Time Member

A. K. SRINIVASAMURTHY
Member-Secretary

Dated : 8th May, 1984,

1, Paragraph 4:4, supra.
84-1/J(N)174MofLI&CA—625—-19-11-84—GIPS,