LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

HUNDRED - FIRST REPORT
ON

FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND EXPRESSION UNDER ARTICLE
19 OF THE CONSTITUTION:
RECOMMENDATION TO EXTEND IT TO INDIAN CORPORATIONS

May, 1984


JUSTICE K. K. MATHEW
हैं No. F, 2(13)/83-LC
Dated the 28th May, 1984,

My dear Minister,

I am forwarding herewith the One Hundred and First Report of the Law
Commission on “Freedom of Speech and Expression under Article 19 of the
Constitution : Recommendation to extend it to Indian Corporation”.

The subject was taken up by the Law Commission on its own.. The need
for taking up the subject is explained in Para I of the Report.

The Commission is indebted to Shri P. M. Bakshi, Part-time Member and
Shri A. K. Srinivasamurthy, Member-Secretary, for their valuable assistance in.
the preparation of the Report.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,
Sd/— .
(K. K. Mathew)

Shri Jagannath Kaushal,

Minister of Law, Justice and

Company Affairs,

New Delhi.

Encl: One Hundred and First Report.


CONTENTS

Pages
Quarrer 1 ‘Tatroductory, wee -+« + -+ -+ 1
Caarren 2 History व मम मम 4
Caarrer 3 The Present Position . . . . . . . . . 5
CHAPTER 4 ‘The need for Constitutional Amendment - . . . . . . 7
Cuaprer 5 Position in England, U.S. Canada and some Commenwealth
Countries . . . . . . . पु जब 9
Cuarren 6  Commentsreceived onthe WorkingPaper . ww पा

Carrer 7 Recommendation for Con titutional Amendment =. मु पु मु 18


CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY

1.1 The Law Commission of India has taken, up for consideration the The scope.
question whether the fundamental right of freedom of speech and expression as
guaranteed by the Constitution should be made available to companies, corpora-
tions and other. artificial persons, and if so, subject to what conditions. The need
for taking up the subject, and some of the dimensions of the inquiry, will be
presently indicated.

1.2 In the Indian Constitution, article 19 (1) guarantees to citizens six The background.
freedoms in all. Of these, the first is the right to freedom of speech and expression
in article 19(1) (a). This right is subject to the power of the State to make a
law imposing reasonable restrictions on the Tight in the jnterest of the various
considerations set out in article 19(2). We are not, in the present inquiry, con-
cerned with the scope and ambit of the restrictions that can be imposed by law
on the freedom of speech and expression. What we propose to deal with is a
restriction made explicit in’ the Constitution itself, namely, that the provisions
of the article 19 can be availed of only by citizens. As will be apparent from a
brief resume of the judicial decisions on the subject that will follow’ in subsequent _
paragraphs of this Report, the use of the word “citizen” in article 19 has had
the effect of leaving corporate bodies out of the scope of the article, The result
is, that one important segment of the nation does not have any constitutional
protection in respect of speech and expression. Institutions and organisations, being
impersonal in character, cannot quality for “citizenship”. The protection of articic
19 is, thus, not available to them, and js confined to natural persons, on a reading
of the judicial pronouncements. In any case, the position in this regard is
nebulous’.

1.3 This, in our opinion, creates a serious anomaly. There are numerousClassi

organisations and institutions that need the freedom of speech and expression, institutions freetft®
They fall into several broad categories. There are, in the rst place, commercialof speech.
organisations (for example, companies owning newspapers), whose primary object
is to disseminate or publish news with a motive of profit. Secondly, there are
entities connected, with the publication of views (e.g. companies owning magazines),
again with a profit motive, Thirdly, there are organisations (such as, companies
producing or distributing films), which are engaged in certain activities wherein,
though the dissemination of news or the propagation of views may not be
the direct objective of those activities, yet views are propagated in circumstances .
to which questions of freedom of expression become very crucial. The depiction
of life in all its reality and in all its variety, through visual or audio-visual media,
is done so intensively in the activities of these organisations, that questions of
freedom of expression prossess real significance for them®, The three categories
of entities enumerated above have been selected from the commercial field.
Besides these and as a fourth category one should mention non-commercial
Corporations, which are engaged in activities either directly involving the dissemi-
nation of news or propagation of views, or occasionally involving such operations.
Fifthly, there are corporate bodies (e.g. Universities and jnstitutions having
University status); whose activities may occasionally involve questions of freedom
of speech and expression, particularly where the universities actively organise
lectures and seminars or bring out publications as a part of their activities, In
this connection, it may be of interest to mention that Bar Councils are. by
statute, now empowered to organise seminars and bring out publications‘,

1.4 The enumeration of organisations and institutions in the preceding para-he anomaly.
graph is only by way of illustration. None can make’ an exhaustive catalogue. .
If that were possible, problems of the nature that have now arisen could not
arise, The point to make is, that there is a vast veriety of organisations and

1, Chapter 3, infra. ad

35 Paragraphs 3-1 to 3-5 and also Chapter 4, infray
3, Seo paragraphs 4-2 to 4-7, infra.
& Section 6, Advocates Act, 1961 (as amended in 1973).



Anomaly.

bine

we 4
Sold
mbt

Importance of or-
ganisations.

Press Commisafon
Report.

ce

institutions in legal language, “artificial” or “juristic persons” whose activities
might lead to their involvement in situations where freedom of speech and ex-
pression and its constitutional protection could become of great practical import-
ance. To elaborate the point, the following issues would be of importance :

(i) whether the law should place any restrictions on these organisations jn
regard to their activities as depicting life in all its vast panoply and,

(ii) If so, the limits to which the law itself should conform, while imposing
such restrictions. An answer to question (ii) posed above directly
involves a consideration of the scope of article 19 of the Constitution.

1.5 The anomaly to which the present position, represented by the limited
scope’ of article 19(1) of the Constitution, can give rise, may be illustrated by
taking a hypothetical case. Suppose a State passes a law regulating the performance
of dramatic plays and imposing prior restrictions on such performnce, say, by
requiring the previous permission’ of the Superintendent of Police before any
play can be enacted in public. A literary society (even if it has acquired a corpo-
rate status) or a co-operative society (such as an author’s co-operative guild)
cannot, at present, challenge the constitutionality of the law, because such a
society is not a “citizen”. Not being a citizen, such a society cannot claim the
protection of article 19. In other ‘words, the State can make any kind of law
curbing speech and expression vis-a-vis such societies. The anomaly is grave
enough to justify an examination of the constitutional position. The anomaly may
not have’ been so far keenly felt in paractice, partly because the members of
such organisations and institutions can institute appropriate proceedings. The
absence of a constitutional right of the organisation has not therefore been always
noticed, But the deficiency is a real one.

In many cases, their own freedom would also come to be violated by the
attempted enforcement, of legislation of the nature posed in the hypothetical jllus-
tration given above. Since the members themselves enjoy the fundamental right,
the fact that the organisation as such has no right, often goes unnoticed. But this
can hardly be regarded as a satisfactory position. There is no logical reason for
denying the right in question to the organisations and institutions. Their status
and activities have an importance of their own, as will be elabofated in the next
paragraph and also in a later Chapter’.

1.6 There is a vital difference between individuals and organisations. Indi-
viduals may come and go. Their views may vary. Their keenness to defend their
freedom and to assert their rights may not be the same as that of the organisation
viewed as a whole. Their resources, time and energy, their status and stature,
their moral weight and social eminence, may be of a much lower quality than that
of the organisation. Hence, enforceability of a right at the instance of members of
an organisation is no substitute for enforcement at the instance of the organisation.
Apart from all these considerations, a constitutional provision dealing with funda-
mental freedoms cannot afford to neglect practical realities for long. Such a
neglect is likely to lead, in course of time, to distorted interpretations, to the
emergence of legal fictions and to similar other developments that are no substitute *
for a clearly-worded and straight-forward provision.

These are the principal reasons that have weighed with us in undertaking the
present inquiry, aimed at considering the question whether article 19(1)(a) of
the Constitution should not be extended to non-natural persons, subject to certain
conditions.

1.7 Added to the above considerations is the fact that the second Press
Commission, in its Report forwarded to the Government, has drawn attention to °
the need for a suitable amendment of the Constitution on the subject under
consideration’, After a discussion of the present position, the Press Commission

__ *Baragraph 1-2, supra.

* Paragraph 1-4 and Chapter 4, infra.

3 Second Press Commision, Report (1981), Vol. 1, pages 32—34, paragraphs 3—14.


made the following recommendation on the subject :—

“14, To sum up, a company is not a citizen and therefore, cannot claim the
fundamental rights enumerated under Article 19. Since many. newspapers
are published by companies, and a company is not entitled to the fundamental
right under Article 19, being not a citizen, we recommend that all Indian
companies, engaged in the business of communication and whose share-
holders are citizens should be deemed to be ‘citizen’ for the purpose of
the relevant clauses of article 19.”

Not only does the recommendation quoted above deserve careful consideration,
but also it may be desirable’ to carry further the same approach, when formulating
in the concrete a constitutional amendment on the subjert. We reserve for a
later chapter consideration of the points of detail that arise in this context.

1.8 We should state that in view of the importance of the matter atSubject taken ts
issue and the unsatisfactory nature of the present position, and especially in the®o-motu.
light of the observations made by the Second Press Commission’, we have
considered it appropriate to take up the matter of our own.

1.9 It should be also made clear that the present discussin is confined totnguiry confined
the question whether the right conferred by article 19(1)(a) freedom of speechfreedom of speech
and expression should. be extended to corporate bodies. The question whether and other expression.
the other freedoms guaranteed by article 19 (1) should also be similarly extended, “
is not being dealt with in the present inquiry. There have been no suggestions
made in that regard. Material on the other freedoms guaranteed by article 19
does not, also, bear that concreteness and magnitude as to compel us to take up,
of our own, a consideration of those freedoms.

1.10 Before concluding this Chapter, it may be mentioned that the Commis-Working Paper
sion had circulated, for comments, a Working Paper on the subject matter ofcizeulated * by tl
this Report’. है Sheed mission.

The comments received on the Working Paper will be dealt with in a later
Chapter!. The Commnssion is grateful 10 all those who have sent in their comments
on the Working Paper.

1, See paragraph 4-11, infra.

3,’Para 1-7, supra.

2, Working Paper on Freedom of Spocch and Expression under, article 19 of the Constitution : proposal to extend it to corporations
and other entities. .

4, Chapter 6, infra.



CHAPTER 2
HISTORY

Drafting 19. history 2.1 For the purposes of this Report, we have tried to examine the question
is ° why, at the time of framing of the Tndian Constitution, article 19 was decided
to be confined to citizens. It appears that the Sub-Committee on Fundamental
Rights first considered, on March 25, 1947, the rights to freedom of expression,
association, assembly, and other rights as contained in the drafts of Dr. Munshi
and Dr. Ambedkar. Dr, Munshi’s draft’ proposed that every citizen should have,
within the limits of the Union and in ‘accordance with the law of the Union,
several personal rights safeguarded to him. These included the rights of freedom
of expression of opinion, of free association and combination, of assembling
peacefully and without arms, of secrecy of correspondence, and of free movement
and trade. According to this draft, freedom of the press was also to be guaranteed,
subject only to such restrictions imposed by the law of the Union as might be
necessary in the interests of public order or morality’.

Dr. Ambedkar’s draft proposed that “no Jaw shall be made abridging’ the
freedom of speech, of the press, of association, and of assembly, except for
considerations of public order and morality’™*,

Report of the Sub- 2.2 The Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights, in its draft report, formu-

Committee. on Fun-lated five specific rights of the citizens, viz, (i) the right to freedom of speech

damental rights. and expression, (ii) the right to assemble peaceably and without arms, (iii) the
right to form associations or unions, (iv) the right to the secrecy of correspondence;
and (v) the right to freedom of movement throughout the Union, to reside and
settle in any part of the Union, to acquire property, and to follow any occupation,
trade, business or profession’,

The freedom of the press which had been Proposed as a separate right
by Dr. K. M. Munshi‘, has not ultimately found a place in the Constitution as a
separate right. Thus, the provisions in question have come tp be confined to
citizen only. . :

Drafting history 2.3 The position regarding article 14 of the Constitution (equal protection

of article 24... of the laws), 18 different in this respect, The principle of guaranteeing to every
person equality before the law and the equal protection of the laws was first
included in the drafts submitted to the Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights
by Dr. Munshi and Dr, Ambedgar’.

After’ considering the drafts for two days (March 24 and 29, 1947), the
Sub-Committee adopted Dr. Munshi’s draft, modified as follows :—

“All persons within the Union shall be equal béfore the law, No Person
shall be denied the equal protection of the laws within the territories of the
Union. There shall be no discrimination against any person, on grounds
of religion, race, caste, language or sex*?.

The decision of the Sub-Committee was that all persons in India (and not merely
citizens), should be equal before the law.

Se
1, Munshi's draft, article V (1) and (2) ; Select Documents IT, 4(8) (6),'page 75.
2, Shiva Rao, The Framing of the Constitution of India (1968), page 211.
3, Ambedkar’s draft article TI (1) (12) and (7). Select Documents, If, 4 (11) (व), pages 86-87.
4, Shiva Rao, The Framing of the Constitution of India (1968), page 211.
5, Select Doouments II, 4 (iii) and (iv), pages 119-120, 130.
6, Paragraph 2-1, supra. Munshi’s draft, article TIT (1) and (10).
7, Ambedkar’s draft article II (1) (3). Sclect Documents II, 4 (ii), pp. 74-5, 86.
5. Minvtes, March 24, 1047, Select Documents II, 4 (iif), pp. 116-8.
3, Shiva Reo, The Framing of India’s Constitution (1961), page 179.


CHAPTER 3

THE PRESENT POSITION

3.1 The present position as to thé applications of article 19 of the Constitution

to jarious categories of persons may be stated in the form of proposit’ons, as
under :—

+ (1) Article 19 of the Constitution being confined to citizens, foreigners
cannot claim any right thereunder’.

Q)A corporation cannot claim citizenship’, and cannot ‘therefore claim
any right’ under article 19, as it stands at present,

(3) This is so, even though the corporation is a company whose shareholders
are citizens of India‘. (In a recent judgment, the position has been
described as “‘nebulous”)*.

(4) But the shareholders of a company can challenge the constitutional
validity of & law on the ground of infringement of article 19, if their
own rights are infringed’, and in such a proceeding the company may be
joined as a party’.

3.2 Chronologically, the first important case to be noticed on the point at
issue is of 1957. The Supreme Court had, in that case’, hinted at the difficulty that
might arise, out of the fact that corporations are not “citizens”. In 1959, the
Supreme Court observed that a non-citizen running a newspaper is not entitled
to the fundamental tight of freedom of speech and expression and, therefore,
cannot claim the benefit of liberty of the press’.

Thereafter, there are two decisions of the Supreme Court reported in 1964,
relevant to the subject. The first was a ruling of a bench of nine judges which
(by majority), held that the provisions of the Citizenship Act were conclusive
on the question that a corporation or a company could not be a citizen of India”.
In the second case of 1964, it was unanimously decided by a bench of five judges
of the Supreme Court that article 19 guaranteed the rights in question only to
citizens as such, and that an association (sueh as a company) could not lay
a claim to the fundamental rights guaranteed by article 19, solely on the bas's of
the fact that it was an aggregation of citizens”.

3.3 In 1970, the Supreme Court” held that the jurisdiction of tha Court to
grant relief cannot be denied when the rights of the individual shareholder are
impaired by State action, if the state action impairs the rights of the company as
well, The test for determining whether the shareholders’ rights is impaired is not
formal; it is essentially qualitative; if the Stale action impairs the rights of the
shareholders as well as of the company, the court will not, concentrating merely
upon the technical operation of the action, deny itself jurisdiction to grant relief.

However, it should be pointed out that Shah, J. in the above decision, definitely
said that the Supreme Court rulings of 1964% had no relevance to the questier

Present position un-
der article 19 of the
Constitution.

Chronological sur-
vey of case law—
cases upto 1965.

Decision of 1970.

3, Anwar v. State of J & K. A.LR. 1971 8.0, 337, 388.
३, (a) Barium Chemicals v. Company Law Board, A.T.R. 1967 $.C. 295.
(0) Tata Engineering Co. v. State of Bihar S.1.R. 1965 S.C. 40, 48 : (1964) 6 SCR 85. -
(०) STC. v. C.7.0. (1964) 4 SCR 99 : ATR 1963 SC 1811.
3, Amritsar Municipality v. State of Punjab, A.LR. 1965 8.C. 1100, 1106.
3. (a) Barium Chemicals v. Company Law Board, A.I.R. 1967 8.C. 295, 305.
(0) Tata Engineering Co. v. State of Bikar, A.T.R. 1965 8.C. 40, 48 : (1964) 68.C.R. 85.
5, Paragraph3 -6, infra.
*. B.C. Cooper v. Union of India, (1970) 3 S.C.R. 580, ALR. 1970 8.0. 564.
1, Bennet Coleman v: Union of India, AIR 1973 S.C. 106 ; 1973 (2) 8.
5, RMD. Chamarbaugwalla v. The Union of India. (1957) $.C-R. 930.
3, M.8.M. Sharma, v. Shri Krishna Sinha, (1959) Suppl. TS.C-R, 806.
2, 8... v. Commercial Tax Officer, 8.C.R. 806 (1964) 4 S.C.R. 99. .
4, Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co. Lid. v. State of Bihar (1964) 6 S.C.R. 85: &.1.8. 1965 8,040, 48.
2, R.O, Cooper v. Union of India, (1970) 3 8.C.R. 530.
+ 3, Paragraph 3-2, supra,



at issue. abet titioner had sought to challenge an infringement of his own rights,
and not an i ement of rights of the bank (of which he was a shareholder and
a director, and with which he had accounts current and in fixed deposit),
Decision of 1973. 3.4 In 1973, the majority of the Supreme Court’ held that although a
company is not a citizen, the citizen-shareholders can enforce their right of free
speech, as the company is only a medium for expressing their views. .

The materia} dicta are as under :-—

“The rights of shareholders with regard to Article 19 (1) (a) are protected
and manifested by the newspapers owned and controlled by the shareholders
through the medium of the corporation. In the present case, the individual
tights of freedom of speech and expression of editors, directors and share-
holders are all exercised through the newspapers through which they speak.
The press reaches the public through the newspapers. The shareholders speak
through their editors. The fact that the companies are. the petitioners does not
prevent this court from giving relief to the shareholders, cditors, printers
who have asked for protection of their fundamental rights by reason of the
effect of the law and of the action upon their rights. The locus standi of the
shareholder petitioners is beyond challenge after ruling of this Court in the
Bank Nationalisation case.”

of the 3.5 However, with respect to the last part of the passage quoted above from

78. the judgment of the Supreme Court (Bank Nationalisation Case), we should point

out that the judgment was concerned with wrongs done to members as members

. of companies. It did not deal with the question how far the fact that the members

were acting through newspaper organisation made a difference in the position of

the organisation. We are haking this comment in-order to emphasise the fact that

the position on the point at issue has, if anything, become less certain now than

before, in view of the various judicial pronouncements, the important amongst
which have been summarised senatim above.’ .

Supreme Court 36. At this stage, it may be, appropriate to refer to a regent Supreme Court

judgement of 1983. judgment? which relates to the question how far article 19 applies to corporations,
A ture regulating deposits accepted by companies was challenged in the above
case. The challenge to the above rule was mainly based on alleged violation of
article 19 (1) (g) of the Constitution and the writ petition in this case was filed
by the company, The Attorney General objected to the maintainability of the
petition, His contention was that-an incorporated company, not being a “citizen”,
cannot complain of a breach of article 19 (1) (g), and that the situation was
not improved by joining, as a co-petitioner, either a share-holder or a director of
the company. The objection of the Attorney General did not succeed. Desai J.,
after reviewing the case law on the subject of the position of corporations with
reference to article 19, and after commenting that the law was in a “nebulous
state”, made the following observations* :—

“Thus, apart from the law being in a nebulous state, the trend is in the
direction of holding, that in the matter of fundamental freedoms guaranteed
by article 19, the rights of a shareholder and the company which the share-
holders have formed are rather co-extensive and the denial to one, of the
fundamental freedom, would be denial to the other. It is time to put an end
to this controversy, but in the present state of law we dre of the opinion
that the petitions should not be thrown out at the, threshold. We reach this
conclusion for the additional reasons that apart from the complaint of
denial of fundamental right to carry on trade or business, numerous other
contentions have been yaised which the High Court had to examine in a
petition under article 226. And there is a grievance of denial of equality
before law as guaranteed by article 14. We accordingly overrule the prelimi-
nary objection and proceed to examine the contentions on merits.”

1, Bennet Coleman vy. Union of India, (1973) 2 8.C.R. 757 ; A.T.R. 1973 8.0. 106.
3, See Delhi Cloth Mills v. The Union of India, A.I.R., 1983 8.C. 973 (October).
3, Delhi Cloth Mille v. The Union of India, A.I.R. 1983 8.0. 937, 943, paragraph 12 (October).


CHAPTER 4
THE NEED FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT

4.1 It does not need much elaboration to show that if tight of freedom of Need for
speech and expression is to be effectively enjoyed, it should be available to corpo- *mendment.
rations, institutions and other entities which are not natural persons. The present
position limiting this freedom to natural persons has the effect of excluding a
pretty large number of entities through whom the natural persons operate. These
entities are (as we shall show in the next few paragraphs) as much in need of a
constitutional protection for the freedom of speech and expression, as natural
persons. Not to recognise this is, if we may say so, to diseregard realities.

4.2 In the modern era, the expression of views, the commbnication of The  individal’s
ideas and the transmission and ‘distribution of news take place more often through life es lived through
agencies organised as bodies or associations of individuals, tather than by the the organisation.
individuals directly. If these organisations and entities are to be left out of the

needed constitutional protection, the indirect effect would be to leave out of that

protection the individuals also, because the activities in regard to which the

constitutional protection is needed are themselves often carried on through orga-

nisations and entities, In modern times, a part of the individual's life is Iived

through such organisations and this part of his life as much deserves recognition

as the life lived exclusively on an individual level. In this sense also, the indirect

effect of the present position is to leave out of protection the individuals them-

selves. पु

4.3 Secondly, one should remember that organisations and entities themselves Reality of organisa-
have a real existence of their own. Their personality may, in law, be artificial. tion.
But the fact that an activity is conducted in an organised manner through an .
entity definitely adds a new dimension to the activity jn question.

4.4 In this context, we would like to stress the distinct importance of a Company as a diss
company as an entity. Take the legal aspect. It is well recognised that a company tinct entity the legal
is a separate entity from the shareholders, and that the rights of the’ company are .
distinct from those of the shareholders. It is only those rights which a company
has, that could be enforced by it’. In fact, the whole object of the law of corpo-
rations is to bring into existence a legal being and teput life, as it were, into the
group itself, .

4.5 Then, there is the social reality of a corporation. The Supreme Court of Sovial character of
India pointed out long age as under-— corporations. 1

“We should bear in mind that a corporation which is engaged in production
of commodities vitally essential to the community, has a social character of
its own and it must not be regarded as the concern primarily or only of
those who invest their money on it.”

The same view was also expressed at the International Seminar on Current °
Problems of Corporate Law, Management and Practice (held in New Delhi),
where it was observed that an enterprise is a citizen and like a citizen it is
esteemed and judged by its actions in relation to the community of which it is a
member, as well as by its economic performance’.

4.6 It should also be mentioned that to the public, the corporation has an Fublie image
५ पर t 4
image distinct from its members. of ain orporations

members.
4.7 As Professor De Wool of Belgium! has put it, “the company has Threefold capacity.
threefold reality economic, human. and public each with its own internal logic.”

1, Salmen v. Salmen & Co. (1897) A.C. 22 (HLL).

3, Charanjit Lal v. Union of India, A.I.R, 1951 8. 1, 59. वि

a on National Terlile Workers Union v. P.R. Ramakrishnan, A.T.R. 1983 S.C, 75, 82, para 5
(Jon.—Feb. 1983). oe

4. Professor De Wool, quoted by Desai J. in Panchmala
(1076) 46 Company Cases, 712, 719 (Guj.).

1 Steel Ltd. v. Universal Steel Traders,


Present —_position- 4.8 Having taken into consideration all aspe cts of the matter, we have come

anomalous. to the conclusion that to limit the fundamental right of freedom of speech and
expression to natural persons (as is the position at present) leads to serious
anomalies. It has the effect of excluding a pretty large number of entities who
deserve the protection in question as much as natural persons, As we have tried
to show, such bodies and associations have come to acquire a role of their
own and to leave them out of protection of article 19(1)(a) amounts to denying
the benefit to a fairly sizeable proportion of humanity within the country, whose
claim to a constitutionally favourable climate for its self-expression cannot be

. seriously disputed, . .

Importance of free- 4.9 Apart from all these considerations, there is the fundamental object of

dom of expression. freedom of speech and expression. It is for the pursuit of truth that such freedom
is given. It is.only when there is free expression of ideas that truth reveals itself.
Without a relentless pursuit of truth, the great things of heart and intellect might
be lost to us. The object of protecting freedom of speech and expression is to
ensure that! the life of the mind, as lived by members of society, is given full
expression. When the matter is viewed in this I’ght, the case for making a distinction
between, ‘natural’ and ‘artificial’ persons becomes very weak and the case for
conferring the protection on all entities becomes almost unanswerable. It should
also be borne in mind that the life of the mind is not exclusively lived on an
individual level. It is as much lived through the entities that carry on social
activities. हे है

Need to remedy the 4.10 It is, thus, obvious that the present situation must be remedied and

Present situation. remedied urgently, if the freedom of speech and expression is to be implemented
in its true spirit and if the Constitution is to meet the needs of society, its structure
and working, its ethos and aspirations. This object can be achieved only by
amending the Constitution. We shall presently indicate, in concrete terms‘, our
recommendation in that behalf.

Report of the Second 4.11 Before we make our concrete recommendation on the subject, let us

Press Commission. repeat here that the Second Press Commission’, in its Report forwarded recently
to Government, has made a special recommendation to the effect that for the
purpose of the freedom of speech and expression, all Indian companies engaged
in the business of communication, of which the shareholders are (Indian) citizens,
should be deemed to be gitizens of India. The Press Commission naturally did
not suggest a draft on th subject, or deal with matters of detail. Moreover, - it
was not directly concerned with corporations not engaged in the business’ of com-
munication. Its principal object was 10 draw attention to the Tacuna in article
19(1)(a), in so far as that provision confines itself no natural persons. The Press
Commission had to point out that on the language of the article, artificial persons,
such as companies, were left out of the protection of article (19(1)(a). On
an examination of the Supreme Court decisions on the subject, the Commission
did not consider the present position satisfactory, since the decis‘ons of the Supreme
Court appeared to leave the matter still uncertain. As we have stated above’,
not only should the approach suggested by the Press Commission be adgoted,
but it should even be carried further, when framing a concrete amendment, by
extending the protection to all companies and corporations so long as they have
an Indian character. We shall revert to this aspect later‘.

1, Chapter 7, infra.
2, Paragraph 1 -6, supra.

3, Paragraph 1-6, supra,

4, See Paragraph 6:6, to 7-3; infra.


CHAPTER 5
POSITION IN ENGLAND, U.S.A, CANADA AND SOME OF COMMON-
"WEALTH COUNTRIES -

5.1 It would be of interest to note the position on the subject under considera- Introductory.
tion in selected other countries. Of course, in embarking upon a comparative
suivey, two broad propositions must be emphasised at the outset. In the first
place, many countries do not have, in their Constitutions (whether written or ~
unwritten), the concept of fundamental rights, so that the topic of freedom of
speech and expression, as also the topics of other freedoms, must, in regard to
those countries, be approached only as a part of a discussion of the. rules of
ordinary law.

Secondly, some of the foreign countries do not’ have a codified law, even
in regard to ordinary rights. Hence, a discussion of the precise extent and coverage
of a particular freedom, as recognised even in orlinary law, must, in regard to
those countries, be derived from the substance of the relevant judicial decisions,
if any, on the subject. This aspect is also vital to the present study, because it
is elementary that a statement of the legal. position as derived from case law
cannot be so precise as a statement based on the text of a statute. Since there
would be no formal and authoritative formulation of the relevant rules, questions
such as the meaning of the expression “citizen” or of the expression “person”
(or other analogous statutory expressions) cannot be déalt with where the law
is not codified,

5.2 Both these prefatory observations apply to England which, as yet, has Position in England.
no written guarantee of fundamental rights, nor a codified law dealing with the
freedom of expression even as an ordinary right.) Therefore, the question whether
a corporation (or any other entity) can claim the freedom of speech and expres-
sion must in the context of English law, be dealt with only by a statement of
rules of ordinary law—and that too, primarily on a study of the judicial decisions.
English books on constitutional law (or on the law of torts) do not generally
devote thuch space to a discussion of the very narrow point with which we ‘are
at the moment concerned, namely, whether a corporation (or other entity) can
claim the freedom of speech and expression like a natural person. However, from
the fact that occasionally, in England, a corporation has been proceeded ag inst
for some crime (such as libel or blasphemy) or for some tort, constituted by
the publication of allegedly offending matter and the proceeding has failed by
reason of some rule of the ordinary law which recognises some privilege, one
can deduce that a corporation in England possesses the same right to freedom of
speech and expression as a natural person.

Perhaps, it may be worthwhile elaborating the statement just now made.
The chain of reasoning may be thus expressed. In England, a person is entitled
to speak or write as he pleases, so long as he does not commit a breach of a
specific rule of law punishing particular type of speeth or writing or rendering
it actionable.

It is a general principle of English cofstitutional law that a subject is free
to do everything which is not specifically-rendered illegal by a rule of law’, This
applies in the sphere of expression, as it applies in other spheres*.

———— -  -

1, Generally, see Margaret Demeriux, “Delineation of Right to Freedom of Expression (Winter
1980) Public Law 359.

3, See Halsbury 4th Ed. Vol. 8 (Constitutional Law) pages 548.

3, As to freedom of expression, sce De Smith, Constitutional and Administrative Law (2nd Ed.)
pages 482--496. : *


10

Tilustrative case.

Reoeut suggestion
made in England.

United States.

If a particular speech or writing does not fall within such specific prohibi-
tory rule, a prosecution or civil proceeding (against the speaker or the writer)
based on the speech or writing, would fall. Now, such prosecutions or proceedings .
against corporations have actually failed in the past, because the prosecutor or
plantiff could not prove that the writing or speech in question fell within the four
corners of the prohibitory rule. Since the defendant in these cases was a corpora-
tion, this result could have been arrived at, only if the law recognises that a
corporation, like a natural person, has the freedom to speak or write any matter
that does not violate a specific prohibitory rule of law. By this chain of reasoning,
one can conclude that in this Sphere a corporation has the same right as a natural
person.

5.3 In this context, it is particularly relevant to mention a very well known
case decided by the House of Lords’, which is the leading case on the subject of
blasphemous libel. We are not concerned here with details of the legal propositions
canvassed in that case as to the precise scope of blasphemy. What is of immediate
relevance is the fact that the defendant in that case was a company limited by
guarantee,

>

The defendant corporation in this case was a legatee under a will. The plain-
tiff challenged the validity of the bequest, on the ground that the object for which
the defendant was established, were unlawful. The spread of secularism was the
dominant object of the defendant company (as stated’in its memorandum of
association). The specific question that was debated at length, and examined with
great learning by the House of Lords, was, whether denial of Christianity was,
in itself, blasphemous, The House held that it was not, unless the preaching was
accompanied with something vile, indecent or ribaldrous. The actual discussion
is fairly elaborate, but only the gist thereof has been mentioned above.

Christianity, it was held, was not a part of English Common law. The pro-
ceedings failed because the plaintiff could not prove that the objects of the defen-
dant corporation were, in law, blasphemous. Accordingly, the relief sought was
not granted, and legality of objects of the defendant corporation was upheld.
This conclusion could have been arrived at only on the assumption that if a
particular preaching is not prohibited by a specific rule of law, then a corporation
can engage itself in it, by virtue of the general freedom of expression available
under the ordinary law. In other words, there was an implicit recognition by
the House of Lords of the principle that a corporation can make or publish any-
statement which does not violate a spec'fic prohibitory rule of law. In effeet, this
approach equates natural and artificial persons for the purpose of the right in
question.

5.4 It may also be stated, as a matter of information, that a recent English
book’, which argues for the enactment of a bill of rights has, in an Appendix,
given a draft of a Bill of Rights for England (as suggested by the author) and,
of the various,clauses of the Bill so suggested, one deals with the freedom of
speech and expression, It proposes that the right should be available to all “per-
sons”. No distinction has been suggested between natural and artificial persons
as such. The relevant clause, as proposed, reads as under :—

“Every person shall have the right to freedom of speech subject to limita-
tions either strictly necessary in public interest or reasonably desirable in
the interests of other persons”.

5.5 We now turn to the United States. The position in the United States
cegarding the civil rights available to corporations is somewhat complicated, and
the threads seem to be a bit entangled. On the specific subject of freedom of ex-
pression, one might begin with the following question from Willis* :

“Corporations as persons are protected as much as natural ‘persons by the
constitutional gurantee of freedoms of speech and of the press, as is shown by

1, Bowman v. Secular Society (1917) A.C. 406 (House of Lords).

3, Jnoonelli, Enacting « Bill of Rights (1080), Appendix, page 201, clause 2).
२, Willis, Constitutional Lew of the United States (1986), pages 856-857.


MW

the cases Where the courts hold that the constitutional gurantee does not
apply because of exceptions to the rule.”.

5.6 The Supreme Court of the U.S.A.’ had, in a fairly recent case from Corporation's rights
Massachussets, occasion to deal with a MasSachussets statute which made it ain SA Fieat
crime for banks and_business corporations to spend money to influence a vote “™™"™°™™"
on referendum, unless the laws “materially affected” the interests of the corpora-
tion concerned. The Supreme Court held the statute to be void, as violating the
First Amendment. In this case, two banks and three companies wanted to publicise
their view that the Massachussets Constitution should not be amended to permit
graduated personal income tax. The Massachussets statute in question would have
had the effect of prohibiting corporate spending dn such publicity. The banks and
companies argued that the statute violated the First Amendment. The conten-
tion was upheld by the Supreme Court. The Majority judgement of the Supreme
Court was delivered by Powell J. whose exposition of the law will be set out
Tater’,

Burger C.J., concurring, said, “the First Amendment does not belong to
any definable categories of person or,entities, it belongs to all who exercise the
efreedom.”' The dictum of the Chief Pustice unmistakably equates all non-natural
persons with natural persons, for the purpose of the First Amendment.

5.7 In this context, it may be also mentioned that some of the leading Ameri- Leading oases.
can cases relevant to the freedom of expression and liability for publication
involved corporations*-".

5.8 It has been stated that" freedom of speech and press are available to Freedom of speech
all", These two freedoms are also accorded to aliens resident in U.S.". Associations available to all enti-
of individuals, such as labour unions and corporations, are entitled to enjoy this ties in U.S.A.
constitutional right as well as individuals, since the inherent worth of speech, हु
in terms of its capacity for informing the public, does not depend upon the
indentity of the source, whether corporation, association or union or individual*. -

5.9 In the recent decision of the United States Supreme Court relating to Vaiority sient view in

corporations in Massachussets", Powell J. (who delivered the majority judgement ),¥irst Bonk

made certain important observations, rejecting the argument that the protection of Boston V. Bellotti,

of the first Amendment should be confined to corporations that are mainly engaged

in the business of communication, The relevant observation are as under :— .
°

“In the realm of protected speech, the legislature is constitutionally dis-
qualified from dictating the subjects about which persons may speak and
the speakers who may address a public issue. Police Dept. of Chicago v.
Mosley, 408 U.S. 92, 96, 33 L, Ed. 2d 212 S. Ct 2286 (1972).” है

1, Mutual Filia Corp, v. Industival Commission of Ohio (1914) 216 Fed. 138; Samo, (1915), 2368.
230 (not press) ; United States v. Toledo Newspaper Co. (1915) 220 Fed. 468 ; Same, (1916) 237 Fed. 986
(Contempt) ; Mutual Film Corpn. v. City of Chicago (1915) 224 Fed. 101 (films) ; Dainer v. Star Chronicle
Pub Go. (1910) 230 MO. 613, 132 8.W. 1143 (libel) ; Kelly v. Independent Pub. Co. (1912) 45 Mont. 127,
122 Pac, 735 (libel) ; Williams Printing Co. v. Saunders (1912), 113 Va. 156, 73 8.E. 472, of, 48 Harv.

Rev. 507.
«8, Firat Natioal Bank v. Bellotti (1978) 8. Ct. 1407, 55 L. Ed. 707, 435 U.S. 766 ; re-hearing 57 L.
Bd, 2a. 1150,
3, "Paragraph 5-9, infra.
4, For detailed discussion, see Archibald Com, ‘Freedom of Expression in the Burger Court”
(1980) 94Hervard Law Rev. page 1-93 ; and Archibald Cox¢¥reedom of Expression (1981) pages 78-83.

5, NV. Times Co. v. U.S. (1971) 20 L. Ed. 2d 820.

+, N.Y. Times Col v. Sullivan (1964) 376 U.S. 254.

3, Richmond Newspapers Inc. v. Virginia, (1980) 62 L. Ed. 2d. 132. दि

3, See Note, “Corporations and the Constitution” (July 1981) 90 Yale J.J. 1893-1860.

१, Griz v. Robert Welch Inc. (1974) 418 U.S. 323.

3०. Old Dominion Branch v. Austin, (1974) 418 U.S. 264.

मे, Vol. 16A, Am. Jur. 2d “Constitutional Law”, pages 330-321, ection 501.

2, Murdeck v. Pennsylvania, 87 L. Ed. 1292. .

29, Bridges v. Wizon, 89 L. Ed. 2103.

34, Bowe v. Secretary of the Commonwealth, 320 Mass 230, 69 N.E. 2d 115 (Labour Unions).
38, First National Bank v. Bellotti (-1978) 55 1.. Ed. 2d 707 (rehearing denied 57 L. Ed. 24 1150}.

1, Paragraph 5-6, eupra.



12

°
Rejecting the argument that a legislature may direct business corporations to

‘stick to business’ when addressing the public, Powell J. further observed : “Such -

# power, in government to channel the expression of views is unacceptable under
the first Amendment. Especially where, as here, the legislature’s suppression of
speech suggests an attempt to give one side of a debatable public question an
advantage in expressing its views to the people, the First Amendment js plainly
offended.

Powell 318 view

5.10 Powell J. in the above mentioned case’, rejected the argument that the
(majority)

freedom in question is confined to activities “integrally related to corporate busi-
ness operations”. He pointed out that this would mcan that corporate activities
that are widely viewed as educational and socially constructive could then be
-prohibited. Certain very crucial sentences from the observations made by him
in a footnote are quoted below :—

“Corporations no longer would be able safely to support—by contributions
or public service advertising—educational, charitable, cultural, or even human
rights causes. Similarly, informational advertising on such subjects of national
interest as inflation and worldwide energy problem could be prohibited.
Many of these causes and subjects could be viewed as ‘social’, ‘political’ or
‘ideological’.

Burger O.J.'s view 5.11 It would be of special interest to mention here that Burger C.J. who
gone iudge- delivered separate but concurring judgement in the above case’, expressed his
disagreement with the ruling of the lower court (which was reversed by the

Supreme Court), in these words :—

“A disquieting aspect of Massachussets position is that it may carry the

risk of impinging on the First Amendment rights of those who employ the

corporate form—as most do—to carry on the business of mass communica-

tions, particularly the large media conglomerates. This is so because of the

difficulty and perhaps impossibility, of distinguishing, either as-a matter of

fact or constitutional law, media corporations from corporations such as the
* appellants in this case.”

Other views. 5.12 It may also be mentioned that while certain judges (such as Black J.
and Douglas J.) have expressed a different view on the subject, even they have
admitted that history had gone the-other way’.

‘A summing up by 5.13 One knowledgeable writer on the American Constitution’ offers the
Pritchett. following comments :—

* “Considering the importance of groups in a liberal democratic society, it
would be a dubious and even illiberal policy to gurantee rights to individuals
while denying them to organised groups.”

In this connection, the defence of group rights in one of the American cases
decided in 1951 is also of interest’,

Comments on the 5.14 A significant literature already exists in the United States as regards
oase First National the Supreme Court decision in First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti discussed
Bank V. + above’. Some commentators have defended the decision as an appropriate doctri-
nal development, The most notéworthy of such cémments is the one in the
Harvard Law Review’. In some of the comments, a concern has been expressed

- _
1, First National Bank of Bosten v. Bellotti (1978) 56 1.. Ed. 2d 707, 727, and footnote.

2, First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, (1978) 55 1. Fd, 2d 707, 725.

2, Wheeling Steel Corpn. v. Steel Corpn. v. Glander, (1949) 337 US 562,

4, Pritohett, the American Constitution (T.M.R. Edition 1977). page 524, fn. 20.
3, Joint Anti-Pascists Refugee Committee v. McGranth, (1951) 341 US 123...

4, Para 5-6, supra,

१, “Phe Supreme Court, 1977 Term” (1979) 92 Harvard Law Rev. 57, 163-164,


about the impact of this decision on the role of the individual in politics, Some
commentators have expressed anxiety about the effect of the decision on the rights
of minority shareholders.’ Some have criticised the decision in respect of the
theoretical basis, arguing. that the decision denies First Amendment interest in
preventing one-sided political dialogue. Finally, some have expressed the view
that corporate rights should be recognised when it would be appropriate to extend
those rights to unincorporated associations also, the argument being that it is a
mistake to conceive corporations as entitled as having rights distinct from those
of members,‘ The arguments has also been put forth that such decisions hinder
efforts to achieve liberal democracy, characterised both by vigorous participation
and by vigorous individual rights.‘ a

However, by and large, the decision, in so far as it recognises corporate free-
dom of speech, has been welcgmed.

It may be mentioned that the first amendment protection has been regularly
extended by the Supreme Court of U.S.A. in a number of decisions to corpora-
ions even prior to the Bellotti case, These earlier rulings relate to—

(a) libel laws;s

(b) special taxation;’

(०) obscenity laws;? and

(१) restrictions upon various forms of business advertising’,

5.15 Cases relating to freedom of expression claimed by organisation other Orgentsstions other
than those connected with newspapers are also available in U.S.A. Thus, the #2 ewspapers.
denial by the Chattanooga municipal board of an application made by the pro-
motors of theatrical productions for the use of a municipal theatre in presenting
the rock musical “Hair” constitutes a prior restraint on the freedom of expression
under a system lacking in the constitutionally required minimum of safeguards”.

This decision is regarded by some as resting on right to public forum", Similarly,
in a case involving a corporation”, it was held that a particular restriction by way
of prior restraint was not valid as presenting as “exceptional” case”.

5.16 The question how for (apart from the freedom df speech and freedom Other freedoms in
of the press), other freedoms can be claimed by corporations in the U.S. is also U-S-A—position re-
a very interesting one. It is not necessary to go into details. But following salient Sue corpora
propositions, culled, in part, from the American Jurisprudence and taken, in part,
from some other sources, may be of some interest".

(a) For the purpose of property rights claimed under the Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendment, a corporation is a “person”®,

(b) For the purpose of the-equal protection clause of,the Fourteenth Amend-
ment also, a corporation is a “penson””, .

—— eee
2, Hart & Shore, “Coporate spending on State and 1,008] Referendums” (1979) Vol, 29 Case Western
7, 808.

Reserve Law

3, Note “Political contributions...... ” (1979) Vol. 4 Journal of Corporation Law 460. ©

3, See 7 hilosophy of Language and free expression” (1980) Vol. 55 New York University Law
Review 157, 189, 190.
ke 4 शा “The Constitutional Rights of Corporations Revisited” (1979) Vol. 67, Georgia Law
journal 1347.

#, For ani exhaustive analysis seo Archibald Cox, “Freedom of expression in the Burger Gourt”
(1980) 94 Harvard Law Rev. 9. 1-98.
१, New York Times co. v. Sullivan, (1964) 376 U.S. 254.
¥. Grosjean v. American Publishing Co. (1986) 207 U.S. 283,
5, Bantam Book Ino. v. Sullivan, (1963) 372 U.S. 48, 92 Ed. 2d, 584.
*, Linmark flassociates v. Township of Willingboro, (1977) 431 U.8. 85.
30, South-eastern Promoters Lid. v. Conard, (1975) 43 L, Ed. 2d 448 ; 420 U.S. 546.
41, Lawrence Tribe, American Constitutional Law (1978), paragraphs 12-21, as referredtin by
Arshibald Cox, Freedom of Expression (1981), page 58, fn. 205.
48. Bantam Book Inc. v. Sulliean, (1963) 372 U.S. 48 ; 9 L. Ed. 2d. 584.
9, OF Willis cited in paragraph 5-5, eupra. .
¥. Vol. 18 Am. Jur. 2d (Corporations), pages 670-571, Section 21.
2, Vol, 18 Am. Jur. 24, Section 21.
™, Vol. 18 Aw. Jur. 2d, Seotion 21,
SHL{BWD)1TIMOLLIAOA


Position
in other
tions,

Canadian

(c) For the purpose of the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimi-
rn

nation, a corporation is not a “person”.
(d) How far, for the purpose of the other liberties guaranteed by the Four-

teenth Amendment, a corporation is or is not a. “‘person”, depends on
the nature of the right asserted. .

(९०) For the purpose of that part of the Fourteenth Amendment which pro-
vides that the privileges and immunities of “citizens” shall not be restrict-
ed, a corporation is not to be regarded as a citizen’.

generally 5.17 Municipal law’, it is stated, occasionally contains express constitutional
Constitt- provisions regarding the political activity of aliens. For example, Article 25 of the
Nicaraguan Constitution states® that aliens are prohib:ted from intervening, directly
or indirectly, in the country’s affairs. Violation of this prohibition renders the
alien concerned liable to prosecution and expulsion, Such cxpress constitutonal
provisions are, however, rare. It is more common for constitutions, bysimplica-
tion, to allow for the restriction of political activity by aliens. While freedom
of opinion and speech are usually guaranteed to ail persons, only citizens are
guaranteed quality before the Jaw’. Thus, the way is left open for discrimination
between citizens and aliens as regards the exercise of these freedoms. As for
collective freedoms, such as freedom of association and assembly, these are usually
guaranteed only to citizens. Thus, Constitutions are careful not to preclude the -
restriction of the exercise of such freedom of aliens’.

Bill of 5.18 It may be of interest to note that the provisions in the Canadian Bill

Rights of 1966. of Rights’ of 1966 were so worded as to allow the applicability’ of the rights

envisaged by that Bill to citizens as well as to non-citizens, At least, that could
be the prima facie construction, since the relevant provisions avoided the use of
limiting words like “citizens”. Part I, section 1 and 2 of the Bill (so far as is
material), were the following terms :

“PART I
BILL OF RIGHTS.

1, It is hereby recognised and declared that in Canada there have existed
and shall continue to exist without discrimination by reason of race, national
origin, colour, religion or sex, the following human rights and fundamental free-
doms, namely :— .

(a) the right of the individual to life, liberty, security of the person and
enjoyment of property, and the right not to be deprived thereof except
by due process of law;

(0) the right of ४] He individual to equality before the law and the equal
protection of the law; .
(c) freedom of religion;

(d) freedom of speech;
(e) freedom of assembly and association; and
(f) freedom of the press.

2. Every law of Canada shall, unless it is expressly declared by an-act of
the Parliament of Canada that it shall operate notwithstanding the Canadian Bill

4, Vol.

3, Based on case law.

|. 18 Am. Jur. 2d, Section 21,

3, Vol. 18 Am. Jur. 2d, Section 21. हर
4, A.C. Evans, “Tho Political Status of Aliens in International Law, Municipal Law and European

Communit:
20, 24.25.

xy Law” (Jan. 1981) Vol. 30, Part I, the International and Comparative Law Quarterly, pages

5, A.J, Peasloe, Constitutions of Nations, (1968) Vol. 4, page 959.
५. A.C. Evans, “The Political Status of Alions in Tnternational Law” etc. (Jan. 1981), Vol. 20, Part

. page 20, 24-25.

1, A.C, Evans, “Tho Political Status of Aliens in International Law ete.” )Jan 1981) Vol. 30k Part
1 LC.LO. 9. 20. 24-25.

3, Prsumblo, ant Part T, soction 1 aai 2, Canrdian Bill of Rights, 1960 (8-9 Eliz 2 Ch. 44).

2, Bos

the ६38६, १७३ Tievopolsky, Canvtiva Bill of Rizhts (1968), page 229 (Appendix 1).


15

of Rights, be so construed and applied as not to abrogate, abridge or infringe or
to authorise the abrogation, abridgment or infringement of any of the rights of
freedoms herein recognised or declared.”

5.19 The new Constitution of Canada contains the following provisionsNew Constitution
on the subject.* of Canada.

“Constitution Aj:t, 1981

Part 4, Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedom.
Whereas Canada is founded upon principles that recognize the supremacy of God
and the rule of law:

Guarantee of Rights and Freedoms :

1. The Canadian Charier of Rights and Freedoms guarantees the rights
and freedoms set out in it subject only to such reasonable limits pres-
cribed by law as can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic
society. हु

Fundamental Freedoms :

2. Everyone has the following fundamental freedoms :
(a) freedom of conscience and religion;

(0) freedom of thought, belief, opinion and express on, including free-
dom of the press and other media of communication;

(c) freedom of peaceful assembly; and
(0) freedom of association.”

5.20 We were also interested to find that in one of the countries of the’ commonwealth
“New Commonwealth”, namely Antigua, the Constitution guarantees the freedom eee ne ene
of expression in terms which avoid the use of expressions necessarily confined to.
natural persons. Section 10 of the Antigua Constitution’ reads as follows’ :—

न
“(1) Except with his own consent, io persoi: shall be hindered in the enjoy-
ment of his freedom of expression, and for the purpose of this section
the said freedom includes the freedom to hold opinions and to receive
and impart ideas and information without interference, and freedom

from interference with his correspondence and other means of communi-
cation.

(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be
held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this section to the
extent that the Jaw in question makes provision—

(a) that is reasonably required—

(i) in the interest of defence, public safety, public order, public
morality or public health; .

(ii) for the purpose of protecting the reputations, rights and free-
doms of other persons, or the private lives of persons con-
cerned in legal proceedings, preventing the disclosure of, in-
formation received in confidence, maintaining the authority

1 Constitution Act 1981, Part I, Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, sections 1-2.

2, See MeWhinney, Cananda and the Constitution 1979-1982 (1983), Appendix E., page 173.

3, Antigua Constitution Order 1967.
[S.1. 1967 No, 2251

‘, Seo Margaret Dz Merieux, “Delincation of the Rights to Freedom of Expression” (1980) Vublic
Law 359, 360.


16

3, Attorney General v. Antigua Times Lid. (1975) 3 All E.R. 81 (P.C.).

and independence of the courts or regulating telepony, tele-
graphy, posts, wireless broadcasting, television or other means
of communication, public exhibitions or public entertainments;

or

(b) that imposes restrictions upon public officers.”

Apart from the above section of the Constitution of Antigua, another sec-
tion—section 15—of its Constitution came up for construction before the Privy
Council.’ Section 15, dealing with compulsory acquisition of property, uses the
expression “person” and the specific point at issue was whether this expression
would include a body corporate. The Privy Council held that it was so included.
It may be mentioned that the interpretation section of the Constitution of Antigua
(like the Indian Constitution) expressly made the Interpretation Act applicable
for the interpretation of the Constitution. Similar constitutional precedents are
found in other countries of the new Commonwealth,*

2, For other prooedents, see Halsbury, 4th Ed., Vol. 6, pages 476--483, paragraphs 1023--1026


CHAPTER 6
COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING PAPERS

6.1 As stated earlier, the Law Commission had invited, from interested Comments required
persons and bodies, comments on the Working Paper prepared by the Commission Pane; ?? “Hine
on the subject. A request was made to forward the comments to the Commission
by the 31st December, 1983. The Commission has taken into consideration all
comments received upto the date of signing this Report.

6.2 Leaving aside one reply of a confidential character, the Gommission has Analysis of
received ten replies in all, on the Working Paper. Of these, five replies broadly °™™e"t®-
agree?’ with the idea that the constitution should be amended on the lines indicated
in this Report. Two replies do not agree with it.’ Two replies have no comments
to offer. One reply sought time for forwarding comments, but no comments were
received from that source even after the expiry of two months after, the last date
fixed by the Commission.

6.3 The five replies that have expressed agreement that there is need to Replies expressing

extend the benefit of article 19(1) (a) to Corporation are from— teed हटकर न कक न्कैसन

(i) one High Court,‘ of article 19.
(ii) two State Governments,
(iii) the Law Commission of one State,’ and
(iv) one High Court Judge.’

The reply sent on behalf of the State Law Commission, it should be added,
is subject to confirmation by meeting of the State Law Commission and is further
subject to the comment that the share-holding in a corporation should be cent per
cent or wholly Indian.

Comments taking the view that article 19(1)(a) of the Coristitution should
not be extended to Corporations have been received from:—

(i) one State Government;* and
(ii) one High Court Judge.*

6.5. In some of the comments received on our Working Paper, the view has Some points mado
been expressed”, that since individuals can take appropriate proceedings for en- है the comments as
forcing their own freedom of speech and expression, there is no need to amend ment.
the Constitution for the purpose. In this context, we would like to point out—
as had already been done in our Working Paper—that even granting that indivi-
dual editors and similar functionaries concerned with media can pursue the ap-
propriate remedy, there is still need for specifically recognising the rights of
Corporation as such. This point has already been made at length in an earlier
Chapter" of this Report, and need not be discussed again at this stage. This is in
addition to the fact that there is need to settle the law as to the position of
Corporations”. . -

6.6. It also appears to be; convenient to make it clear, at this stage, that Scope of the amond-
the recommendation that we are going to make is not confined to corporations ऐप,
engaged primarily in the field of mass media. The recommendation covers
(subject to certain criteria concerned with share-holding or membership), all
corporations, irrespective of their principal field of activity, The position will be
clear from our concrete recommendation™, In fact, that was also the proposal
put forth in the Working Paper. The point has-been referred to in क्षा earlier
Chapter of this Report also". So long as the character of the company or corpora-
tion is Indian, it should enjoy the protection®.

1 PB h 1-9, supra. 2, Paragraph 6-8, infra. 3, Paragraph 6-4, infra.
«Law Gommission File No. F. 2(13)/88-L0. 8. No. 3. 5, Law Commissio(13)/83-LC. $.N, No. 7
5. Law Commission File No. ए. 2(13)/83-LC. 8. No. 9 (State Law Commission of M.P.).

1, Eaw Commission File No. F. 2(13)/83-1.0. 8. No. 10. 3, Law Commission File No. F, 2(13)/83-L.C. 8. No. 1
*! Law Commission File No. F, 2(13)/83L.C. 8. No. 10. \

20 EG, Law Commission il No. F. 2(13)/89;0,8, No. 10 (A High Court Judge), 2 2.8 है .
|. Chapter 4, aupra. 14, Seo paragraph 3-6, eupra. . Paragraph 7-5, infra. ™4, Paragraph 4-11,

5, Soe parogrephs 7-1(b), 7-2 ond 7-5, infra’ in pra

व Ww


‘Two important

CHAPTER 7
RECOMMENDATION FOR CONSTITU

JONAL AMENDMEN

considerations on the, 7.1 On giving some thought to the lines on which the Constitution should

points at issue.

Companies.

Corporate bodies
other than Compa-

nies.

Unin corporated
bodies.

be amended on the points at issue, we have come to the conclusion that any
amendment has to be formulated, keeping in mind two broad considerations:—

(a) The protection under article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution should be
made available also to entities that are not “natural persons” but have
a corporate status, In drawing up the list of such entities, notice could
be legitimately taken of the varicties of organisations which we have
described.*

(b) At the same time, it should be ensured that the corporations have an
“Indian” character, just as natural persons (who arc, at present entitled
to the protection of article (19), are required to be citizens of India for
claiming the protection. Extension of the right to non-citizens is not
the subject of the present inquiry. .

It is needless to state that the consideration. at (b) above quali!
consideration at (a) above, and sets certain limits on it. One can call
the character of “Indianness”. The manner in which these limits can be incor-
porated while extending the right to non-natural persons, is a point which re-
quires some discussion; we deal with that point in the next few paragraphs.

7:2. First, we take the case of companies proper. The requirement of
“Indianness” can (in the generality of cases) be brought out by prescribing that
all share-holders of the Company should be Indian citizens. However, it can
happen that the share-holders themselves are not natural persons, but are artifi-
cial persons (or even the Government). Such cases have also to be covered.
Accordingly, the amendment, while ensuring (as far as practicabic) the Indian-
tiess of the entity that holds the share in the company in suitable language, speci-
fically covers this refinement’.

We may mention that in the Working Paper, circulated by us, we had put
forth the test of 80 per cent Indian share-holding, but we are now of the view
that it should be 100 per cent

7.3 Besides companies, it may be proper to extend the constitutional pro-
tection in question to corporate bodies which are not companies. As examples of
such bodies, one may cite local authorities and universities, and also statutory
bodies established by, or under specific Central or State Acts. The protection in
question would also be needed by them. In all these cases. again, care has been
taken, in framing the proposed amendment, to ensure their “Indianness”, by insert-
ing suitable conditions in that regard. The amendment which we are recommend-
ing keeps this in mind’. .

7.4 As regards entities such as registered societies, for whom corporate status
does not exist in law‘, the amendment recommended by us will not apply. We
had, in our Working .Paper, included unincorporated bodies and associations
(with members who are Indian citizens) as entities to whom the right should be
extended. However, we have now come to the conciusion that since they do not,

strictly speaking, have a legal personality, they need not be covered by the article
under consideration’.

1, Paragraph 1-3, supra.

2 Paragraph 7-4, infra. Proposed article 19, Explanation (a).

3, Paragraph 7-4, infra. Proposed article 19, Exlanation (6).

4. S00 (a) Board of Prustees Ayurvedi and Tibbia College v. State of Delhi! A... 1968 8.C. 458
(0) Kalra Education Society v. Amalgamated Society of Rly. Servants, A.LR. 1966 8.C. 1301.
sr 8.0, Mittal v. The Union of India, A.I.R. 1983 8.0, 1, para 67.

5 sph 7-5, infra.

18


19

7.5. We therefore recommend that article 19 of the Constitution be Recommendation.
amended by adding the following Explanation: —

Explanation to be added fo article 19 of the Constitution

“Explanation, For the purpose of this articles in so far as it relates to the
freedom of speech and expression, the following shall he deemed to be citizens
of India:— :

(a) alt companies incorporated in India in which the entire share capital
is held:—

(i) by citizens of India; or
(ii) by the Government; or

(iii) by any such corporation as is specified in clause (b) of this
Explanation; or '

(iv) by a company incorporated in India in which the entire share
capital is held by citizens of India or by the Government or by
any such corporation as is specified in clause (b) of this Explana-
tion, or by some or all of them taken together, or

(५) by some or all of them taken together:

(b) all corporations, other than companies, being corporations established
by or under any law of the time being in force in India’.

K. K. MATHEW
Chairman

J.P, CHATURVEDI
Member

DR. M.B. RAO
Member

P. M. BAKSHI
Part-Time Member

VEPA P. SARATHI
Part-Time Member

A. K, SRINIVASAMURTHY
Member-Secretary

Dated 28-5-1984 |

3, Paragraph 7-2, supra.
३, Paragraph'7 -3(a),"eupra.

84-L/B(D)173MofLI&CA—625—"-12-84—GIPS