LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

102ND REPORT

ON

SECTION 122(1) OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973:
IMPRISONMENT FOR BREACH OF BOND FOR KEEPING
THE PEACE WITH SURETIES

APRIL, 1984.


JUSTICE K.K. MATHEW
No. F. 2(16)/83-LC

Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi-110001.

Dated, the 2nd July, 1984

My dear Minister,

I am forwarding herewith the 102nd Report of the Law Commission on
“Section 122(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973: Imprisonment for
breach of bond for keeping the peace with sureties”.

The subject was taken up by the Law Commission on its own. The need
for taking up the subject is explained in Para I of the Report.

The Commission is indebted to Shri P. M. Bakshi, Part-time Member and
Shri A. K. Srinivasamurthy, Member-Secretary, for their valuable assistance in
i the preparation of the Report.

. With regards,

Yours sincerely,

(K. K. Mathew)

Shri Jagannath Kaushal,
Minister of Law, Justice,
and Company Affairs,
New Delhi.

Encl. 102nd Report.



CONTENTS

CHAPTER 1—INTRODUCTORY

CHAPTER 2—THE PRESENT LAW,
AND
COMMENTS ON THE WORKING PAPER

CHAPTER 3—RECOMMENDATIONS



CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTORY |

1.1. This Report deals with an anomally that exists at present in regard to
the law relating to imprisonment of persons who have executed a bond with
sureties for keeping the peace under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
The anomally arises with reference to the punishment of persons who commit a
default in complying with the bond. Because of the practical importance of the
subject, the Commission has taken it up of its own, and without bringing in the
question of reforms in other provisions of the Code.

1.2. The problem has mainly reference to section 122(1)(b) of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973. That section relates' to the action to be taken
against a person who has given a bond with sureties for keeping the peace under
section 117 of the Code? The precise question to be considered is, what is to
happen if the bond is violated? So far as a person who has executed a bond
without sureties is concerned, section 122 (1) (b) makes a clear provision for sending
the defaulter to prison. However, in the case where the bond is accompanied
by sureties, the clause makes no such provision.

1.3. This creates an anomaly, because the more serious case is left uncover-
ed by the law, while the less serious case has been provided for. “Probably, the
assumption underlying the present legislative position is that in case of a bond
with sureties, monetary penalties can be recovered from the sureties, and thus
some kind of sanction already exists. But this does not explain why the case
should| be left uncovered so far as imprisonment of. the defaulter is concerned.
After all, the primary liability is that of the defaulter. It is he against whom
an apprehension exists that he may commit a breach of the peace. It is he on
whom the law primarily operates: and it is he who binds himself. Sureties are
envisaged as persons with secondary liability. The principal liability should be of
the defaulter. So viewed, the present law is not satisfactory and needs attention.

1.4. It may be mentioned that the Commission, when it took up the subject
for consideration, prepared and circulated to interested persons and bodies a
Working Paper’ on the subject.

The comments received on the Working Paper will be referred to at the
appropriate place. The Commission is grateful to those who have responded
to the Working Paper.

1, For the text of section 122, see para 2.3, infra.
2. For the text of section 117, see para 2.2, infra,
3. Working Paper issued on 23rd January, 1984.

4. Paragraph 2, 6, infra.

Reasons for
taking up
Subject.

The problem in
brief

The anomaly.

Working Paper,



CHAPTER 2

THE PRESENT LAW, AND COMMENTS ON THE WORKING PAPER

provisions 2.1. For understanding the matter in greater depth, it is necessary to examine
the Code: the scheme of the sections of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 that are

‘The
of
section 107(1). ५ पि .

; (1). relevant tu the topic under discussion,

Section 107(1) of the Code reads as under:—

“107(1) When an Executive Magistrate receives information that i
person is likely to commit a breach of the peace or disturb the public tran-
quility or to do any wrongful act that may probably occasion a breach of
the peace or disturb the public tranquility and is of opinion that there is
sufficient ground for proceeding, he may, in the manner hereafter provided.
require such person to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute
a bond with or without sureties, for keeping the peace for such period not
exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit.”

Breach of the bond, if ultimately executed, is dealt with in section 122. to be
considered presently.’

In section 107(1) of the Code, the words “with or without sureties” were दर
added by Act 45 of 1978, which amended the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. ना
However, similar amendment was not made (by the Act of 1978) in section
122(1)(b) of the Code. This point will be adverted to later, in greater detail. ’

Inquiry after issug 2.2. After issue of the notice under section 107, an inquiry is held for deter-
Order under ssc. mining whether the allegations on the basis of which the notice was issued are
tion 117. substantiated by evidence. Section 117 of the Code provides for the action to

be taken on such inquiry.

It reads— ‘

“117. If, upon such inquiry, it is proved that it is necessary for keeping
the peace or maintaining good behaviour as the case may be, that the per- .
son in respect of whom the inquiry is made should execute a bond, with or
without sureties, the Magistrate shall make an order accordingly.

(The proviso to the section is not material).”

We may skip over the four sections of the Code that follow section 117,
since they are material for the present purpose.

! Section 122(1) of 2.3. The final order to furnish security may result in two situations, which
the Code : iz are dealt with in section 122(1) of the Code, quoted below:—
ch of bond. . .

“122(1) (a} If any person ordered to give security under section 106 or

i section 117 does not give such security on or before the date on which the
period for which such security is to be given commences, he shall, except

1. Para 2.3, infra.



in the case next hereinafter. mentioned, be committed to prison, or, if he
is already in prison. be detained in prison until such period expires or until

within such period he gives the security to the Court or magistrate who made
the order requiring it.

(by If any person, after having executed a bond without sureties for
keeping the peace in pursuance of. an order of a Magistrate under section
117, is proved, to the satisfaction of such Magistrate or his successor-in-office,
to have committed a breach of the bond, such Magistrate or successor-in-
office may, after recording the grounds of such proof, Order that the person
be arrested and detained in prison until the expiry of the period of the bond
and such order shall be without prejudice to any other punishment or for-
feiture to which the said person may be liable in accordance with law.”
(Rest of the section is not material for the present purpose).

It is obvious that scctions 107 and 122 are inter-connected with each other,
and matters covered by section 107, which represents the initial stage of the pro-
ceedings, should be covered by section 122, which represents the final. stage. Un-
fortunately, however, section 122(1) falls short of that. While section 107 con-
templates a bond with or without sureties, section 122(1)(b) addresses itself only
to a bond executed without sureties. In this manner, there arises an anomaly. A
Person who, under section 107, has been required to execute a bond without sure-
ties can, if there is a default, be imprisoned under section 122(1), but not a per-
son who has executed a bond with sureties.

2.4. 11 appears that the anomaly referred to above' has arisen as a result of The a Z
the accidents of legislation. Briefly, the history of the legislative provisions on how it basapsen, =
the subject, so far as is material, is as under:—

6) In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, (the predecessor of the present
Code) section 107 (corresponding to present section 107) provided for a bond
“with or without sureties”.. But when the Bill to replace the earlier Code (ie.
the Bill which led to the enactment of the present Code of 1973) was discussed
in Parliament, the words “with or without sureties” were deleted from section 107
by a Lok Sabha Amendment. The amendment of the Lok Sabha also inserted,
in section 122(1), an additional clause (09, not contained in the earlier Code.

sureties, the only sanction would be recovery of a penalty from the defaulter (so
far as monetary sanctions are concerned).? This may not always be effective,
and hence imprisonment was provided for. In any case, the scheme as it was
enacted in 1973 was not illogical. Sections 107 and 122, as they ultimately emerg-
ed at that time, were in harmony with each other. Both the sections contemplated i
bonds without sureties only. कु :

|
Presumably, clause (b) was considered necessary since, where there are no |

(ii) The illogicality really came in 1978. In that year, section 107(1) was
amended, and the words “with or without sureties” were re-introduced in that i
sub-section. But no amendment was made in section 122(1)(b) to cover the t
case of bonds executed with sureties under section 107(1) as so amended. It is i
from this date that the position has become illogical. Of the ficld covered by oS
section 107, only a part is now covered by section 122. The rest is left uncovered.

1. Paragraphs 2,1, to 2.3, supra.
2. For the text of section 122, see paragraph 2.3, supra,
3. For the law between 1973 and 1978, see Bashir v. State of Rajasthan, (1977) Cr. L. J.
(NOC) 198 (Raj).
2-9 Mof LS & CA/NDI84



(ii) As a result, under the present position, —

(a) default in complying with a bond for keeping the peace executed
under section 107(1) can be punished with imprisonment of the defaulter
under section 122(1) (b); but

(b) default in complying with a bond for keeping the peace, if accom-
panied with sureties, cannot bé punished with such imprisonment, and only
monetary penalties can be recovered from the sureties’.

Need for rectifying 2.5. This does not appear to be a very satisfactory position, Ex-hypothesi जि
7 ः where, in proceedings by way of preventive action, a person is called upon to
furnish (besides his own bond), sureties also, the case is more serious than the
case where only his personal bond is required. To put it differently, the need
for preventive action againt breach of peace is assumed to be stronger in cases
where sureties are insisted upon, than in cases where sureties are not insisted

upon.

On this logic, the law, where it provides for sureties, should lay down more 4
severe sanctions for default. For obvious reasons, it is necessary that the dis-
crepancy between section 10701) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (as it stands
after the amendment of 1978) and section 122(1)(b) of the Code (not amended |
in 1978) should be rectified, by making an appropriate amendment in the latter i
provision. The precise amendment will be suggested in a later Chapter of this
Report?

Comments te- 2.6. As already stated’, the Law Commission had circulated a Working

wee bate, Paper on the subject under consideration, namely, whether section 122 of the
Code’ of Criminal Procedure, 1973 should be amended so as to include therein
the case where a bond js taken with sureties. A request was made to interested
persons and bodies to send in their comments ‘by the 19th March, 1984. All
comments received upto the date of signing this Report have been taken into
account by the Commission before finalising its recommendation.

In all, six comments have been received on the Working Paper. Two of
them have been received from High Courts.‘ The other four’ are from the State
Governments of Haryana, Meghalaya, Rajasthan and U.P. All the six comments .
are in entire agreement with the need for amending the law on the lines envisag-
ed in the Working Paper and in this Report.

1. Paragraphs 2.1 and 2.3, supra.

2. Paragraph 3.1, infra.

3. Paragraph 1.4, supra.

4, Law Commission File No. F. 2(16)83-L.C. S. No. 3 and 5.

5. Law Commission File No. F. 2(16)83-L.C. $. No. 6, 4 and 6, and later comments
received under letters dated 9th apr jt and 12th April, 1984 from the Governments of

Meghalaya and Rajasthan respect



CHAPTER 3
RECOMMENDATIONS

3.1, In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section E Recommendation
(0) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (the relevant portion. has been al- 1a Gone
ready quoted)! should be amended, by substituting, for the words “without sure- of inal Pro-
ties”, the words “with or without sureties”. cedure, 1973.

"3.2, Consequential changes, if any, needed in other provisions of the Code, Consequential
including the Forms appended to the Code, can be taken up at the drafting Changes.
stage. .

1. Paragraph 2.3, supra.
2. Cf paragraph 2.5, supra.

K. K. MATHEW os o oe oe Chairman

J.P.CHATURVEDI.. .... «Member |

DRM.B.RAQ  .. .. 2...) Member ह |
ह P.M. BAKSHI a oe a oe Part-Time Member |

VEPA P. SARATHI .. न -. Part-Time Member

A. K. SRINIVASAMURTHY .: न Member-Secretary

Dated April, 1984.
MGIPCBE—S 6—9 M of LJ & CA/ND/84—27-2-85—625



ERRATA

6)... Onthe cover page and the first opening page of the Teport, the words and figures “April, 1984” should
be read as “July, 19847,

(ii) On the Jast page below the signatures, the words and figures “Dated April, 1984” should 8: read 85
“Dated the 2nd July, 19847,

(ii) In line 2 of para 2 of the forwarding letter, the figure “I” should be substituted by the figure “1.1”.
(iv) Im para 1.1, in line 4, one alphabet “1” in the word “anomally” should bz deleted.

(v) In para 2.2, in the last sentence, the word “not” should be inserted after thz words “since ‘hey are” and
before the word “material”. :