103rd REPORT

ON

UNFAIR TERMS IN CONTRACT

May, 1984.


Justice K.K. Mathew
D.O, No. 7, 2(15)/83-L.C.

Dated : 28th July, 1984.

My dear Minister,

I am forwarding herewith the One hundred and Third Report of the Law

Commission on “Unfair Terms in Contract”. The subject was taken up by the
Law Commission on,its own.

The Commission is indebted to Shri Vepa P. Sarathi, Part-time Member,
and Shri A. K. Srinivasamurthy, Member-Secretary, for their valuable assistance
in the preparation of. the Report,

With regards,

Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
हू. हू, MATHEW

Shri Jagannath Kaushal,
Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs,
NEW DELHI.

Encl : 1030 Report,

84-L/B(N)350MofLJ&CA—!


Cnarrer
Cuaprer
Cuarrer
Cuarrer
Cuarrer

CHAPTER

2

3

4

3

6

CONTENTS

Standard form contracts and their nature
The problem arising from such contracts

Inadequacy of the Present Indian Statute Law

Experience in other Countries.

Suggestions and Commonis received on the working paper

Recommendation of the Commission . .


CHAPTER 1
STANDARD FORM CONTRACTS AND THEIR NATURE

Origin of Standard 1.1 In an industrial society, whether advanced er developing, the individual
Contracts craftsman, catering to the tastes of individual customers, slowly fades out, giving
place to mass production of standardised products. Such standardisation leads
to standardised dealings with customers, that is, to standardised contracts with
customers. They are found in all areas where operations are on a large scale.
In the case of such large scale organisations, which enter into innumerable
contracts with individuals, it is very difficult for them to draw up a separate
contract with each individual. For example, the Life Insurance Corporation of
India has to issue thousands of covers every day. Similarly, the Railway
Administration has to enter into several contracts of carriage. Therefore, they
have standardised printed forms of contracts, with blank spaces to be filled in
by each individual; and when the form is filled in and signed, a completed
contract comes into existence between the organisation and the individual. The
advantages of such contracts are economy andaccrtainty. As Kessler puts it,' “in
so far as the reduction of costs of production and distribution thus achieved is
reflected in reduced prices, society as a whole ultimately benefits from the use

of standard contracts”:

1.2 These standardised contracts are really pretended contracts that have
only the name of contract. They are called contracts of adhesion from the French
term (contracts d’adhesion) because, in these, a single will is exclusively pre-
dominant, acting as a unilateral will, which dictates its terms not to an individual
but, to an indeterminate collectivity. The standard térms and conditions prepared
by one party are offered to the other on a “take-it-or-leave-it” basis. The main
terms are put in large print, but the qualifications are buried in small print.
The individual’s participation consists of a mere adherence, often unknowing,
to the document drafted unilaterally and insisted upon by the powerful enter-
prise : the conditions imposed by the document upon the customer, are not open
to discussion, nor are they subject to negotiation between the parties, but the
contract has to be accepted or rejected as a whole. The contracts are produced
by the printing press. The pen of the individual signing on the dotted line does
not really represent his substantial agreement with the terms in it, but creates
a fiction that he has agreed to such terms. The characteristics, usually and
traditionally associated with a contract, such as freedom to contract and consensus,
are absent from these so-called contracts. ,

Their true nature

CHAPTER 2
THE PROBLEM ARISING FROM SUCH CONTRACTS

Possibility of mis- 2.1 Apart from the fact that the abstract legal theory of a contract as

use of standard forms 5 sereement arrived at through discussion and negotiation is completely given
the go-by, these contracts turn out to be a case of the big business enterprises
legislating in a substantially authoritarian manner. Such large-scale business
concerns get expert advice and introduce terms, in the printed forms, which
are most favourable to themselves. They contain many wide exclusion and

१1943) Columbia Law Review 629 : Contracts of adhesign—some thoughts about freedom of

contract. 1



_ Mlustrative
(Carriers)

cases

exemption clauses favourable to the large enterprise, The ciauses are introduced,
not always with the idea of imposing harsh terms as a resuli of supérior bargain-
ing power, but because, (a) as the executive of one commierc:ai enterprise
remarked, ‘we trust our lawyers to get us out of a jam, Dut we don't trust them
not to get us into one’; (b) when liquidated dumages clauses are uscd, the
enterprise feels it is a genuine atiempt to pre-estimate damages ; i¢) there is a
desire to avoid proceedings in court; and (d) because every une else does it.
‘These favourable terms are often in smail print which the indi
That is because, it is a laborious and profitless task te discov

never reads,

६ these terms
8, since he
has to accept the giant organisation’s offer, whether he ijkes Ute terms or not.
They are there for him to take or leave. Because oi the mouupclistic or near
monopolistic posiiion of b:g business, and even if there is 10 monopoly, all
similar commercial enterprises introduce similar exclus.on clauses in their
standard form contracts, and because the individual hus no option io go else-
where, the individual customer has no choice or freedom in the maiter but has
to uccept whatever terms are offered since he cannot negotiate them. And this
gives an opportunity to the organisation to exploit the helplessness of the indivi-
dual and impose on him clauses which may, and often do, go to the extent of
exempting the organisation from all liability under the contract.

are, The cndividual cannot bargain for a change in any oo tee ६

2.2 By way of illustration of the problem outlined above, a few cases
telating to carriers may be cited. .

The Madras High Court! has held, (i) a common carrier is a person who
professes himself ready to carry goods for everybody. He is considered to be
in the position of an insurer with regard to the goods entrusted to him and so
his liability is higher. (ii) But when it is expressly stipulated between the parties
that a carrier is not a common carrier that conclusively shows that the carrier
is not liable as a common carrier. And even assuming that the carrier would
be deemed to be a common carrier or held liable as such, it was open to such
a carrier to contract himself out of the liability as common carrier or fix the _
limit of liability,

2.3 The Assam High Court’ has held: the liability of the internal carrier
by air, which is not governed by the Indian Carriage by Air Act, 1934, or by
the Carriers Act, 1865, is governed by the English Commort Law and not by
the Indian Contract Act, Under the English Common Law, the carrier's liability

sis not that of a bailee only but that of an insurer of goods, so that the carrier

is bound to account for loss or damage caused to the goods delivered to it for
carriage, provided the loss or damage was not due to an act of God or King’s
enemies or to some inherent vice in the thing itself. The Common Law, how-
ever, allows the carrier almost an equal freedom to limit its liability by any
contract with the consignor, In such a case, its liability would depend upon the
terms of the contract or the conditions under which the carrier accepted delivery
of the goods for carriage. The terms could be very far-reaching and indeed the
party could claim exemption even if the loss was caused on account of negli-
gence or misconduct of its servants or even if the loss or damage was caused
by any other circumstances whatsoever, in consideration of a higher or lower
amount of freight charged. Howsoever amazing a contract of this kind may

1, Indian Airlines Corporation v. Jothaji Maniram AIR 1959 Madras 285,
2, Rukmanand v. Airways (India) Lid. AIR 1960 . Assam 71.


appear to be. yet that seems*to be’ the state of law as recognised by the Common
Law of England and adopted by Courts in India, The clause in a contract of
carriage by air giving complete immunity to the carrier from liability could not
be impuyned on che ground that it was hit by section 23, Contract Act, because,
according to the High Court, the Contract Act had no application to the case
nor could it be said to be oppesed to public’ policy.

2.4 The Calcutta High Court' had to deal with a case of a passenger
travelling by air inside India. The plane crashed causing death of the passenger, ”
and his widow: sued for damages. The air ticket exempted the carrier from
Hiabi}ty on account ef negligence of the carrier or of the pilot or of other staff.
There was evidence that the conditions exempting the carrier were duly brought
to the notice of the passenger and that he had every opportunity to know them.
The High Court held: The Privy Council? held that the obligation imposed by
Jaw on common carriers in India is not founded upon contract, but on the
exercise of public employment for reward, that is, by the Common Law of
England governing rights and Hab‘lities ‘of such Common carriers. It is not
affected by the Indian Contract Act of 1872. Therefore, na question of testing
the validity of the exemption clause with reference to section 23 of the Indian
Contract Act at all arises. It is a case, where the carrier said that he was
prepared to take the passenger by ‘air provided the passenger exempted him
from liability duc to negligence, The exemption clause in the contract was good
and valid and was a complete bar to the plaintiffs claim. The Indian Carriage
by Air Act, 1934. was not made applicable because the requisite notification
applying the Act had not heen issued.

2.5 The Rajasthan High Court? has held : Wherever, on the face of the
goods ticket. words to the effect “For conditions see the back” are printed, the
person concerned is as a matter of law, held to be bound by the conditions
subiect to which the ticket is issued, whether he takes care to read the conditions
if printed on the back or to ascertain them if it is stated on the back of the
ticket where they ure to be found. Where, on the other hand, the words printed
‘on the face of the ticket do not indicate that the ticket is issued subject to certain
conditions but there are merely words to the effect “see back” then it is a ques-
tion of fact whether or not the carrier did that, which was reasonably sufficient
to give notice of the conditions to the person concerned. If, however, the condi-
tions are printed on the back of the ticket but there are no words at all on the
face of it to draw the attention of the person concerned to them, then it has been
held that he is not bound by the conditions. In the present case, on the face
of the ticket, there was a declaration to the effect that the consignor was fully
aware of and accepted the conditions of carriage given on the back of the
corisignment receipt. Any prudent consignor would read the ticket to see that
his goods and the transport charges payable were correctly entered in it, and
in doing so, he would read the above declaration, or if did not know English.
he would have the ticket read by someone else knowing English who would
come to know that it was subject to the conditions printed on the back. The man
must be taken’ to know that, which he has the means of knowing, whether he
has ava'led himself of all these means or not, If he does not, he must bear
the consequences of his carelessness.

1, Indian Airlies Corporation v. Madhuri Chaudhury ATR 1965 Cal 252.
2, Irrawadi Plotilla Co. v. Bugwan” Dass (1981) LR 18 TA‘I21.
3. Singhal Transport v. Jasaram ATR 1968 Raj 89.



Problem, 2.6 ‘The crucial question from our point of view is this: assuming that he

. knew the conditions, if he wanted to change them, could he negotiate and,do
so? If he cannot, what does it matter, and how are the Courts to come to his
rescue ?

CHAPTER 3
INADEQUACY OF THE PRESENT INDIAN STATUTE LAW

Section 23 Contract 3.1 As early as 1909, Shankaran Nair, J. in his dissenting judgment

At ‘eld not applica- expressed the opinion that section 23 of the Contract Act hits such exemption
clauses; but this view has been rejected by the High Courts in later decisions,
already referred to? .

Tilustrative cases 3.2 There are a few cases where the Courts have valiantly tried to come to

1716 / weaegiee thé rescue of the weaker party, But the legal basis of such decisions is elusive.

weaker party For example, the Madras High Court’ held that a clause in a contract for the
supply of jaggery by the appellant to the Railway Administration of the respon-
dent, which empowered the administration to cancel the contract at any stage,
was void and unconscionable. The judgment of the High Court was confirmed
by the Supreme Court‘ on a different ground. The Supreme Court did not
pronounce on the validity of the clause in the contract.

In another case of the Madras High Court’, the laundry receipt of the
appellant contained the condition that in the event of loss of or damage to the
article given for washing, the customer would be entitled to claim only 50 per
cent of the market price or value of the article. The respondent’s new saree was
lost. The court gave relief to the customer, holding that the condition would
place a premium upon dishonesty inasmuch as it would enable the cleaner to
purchase new garments at 50 per cent of the price and that would not be in
public interest.

So also, in a case from Karnataka* a condition that only 8 times the cost
of cleaning the garment would be payable in case of loss was held to be un-
reasonable, In a case of a contract for supply of kerosene, by the defendant to
the plaintiff, the contract reserved a right to the defendant to cancel the plain-
tiff’s dealership at any time without assigning any reason. On cancellation by
the defendant, the plaintiff filed a suit agd the suit was decreed on the ground
that the term was an unfair term of the contract.’ In another case from Madras?
the petitioner won a prize in a raffle on a ticket purchased by him but could
not collect the prize money within three months, due to the negligence of his
bankers. The respondent claimed that the money lapsed to the State under a
tule which was made part of the contract. The High Court held that if the
terms of a contract are so unconscionable and if one of the terms is in terrorem
and without any consideration known to law. it would be against public policy

Co. (1909) TLR 32 Mad 95.

3, Shaith Mohd. Ravather b. 2.1.
® Paragraph 2-3 and 2-4, supra.

3, Hl. Thathaih. v. Union of India, ATR 1957 Mad 82.

5, ATR 1966 SC 1724.

5, Lily White». R. Munuswamy. ATR 1966 Mad 13.

3, H Siddalingappa v. $. Natrasia ATR 1970 Hys. 154

2, International Oil Co. v. Indian. Oil Company, AYR 1969 Mad 4.
8. Ramult v. Director, Tamil Nadu Raffles. (1972) 2 MLI 237.


Inadequacy of the
Contract Act to meet ,

the situation.

Section 16(3).

Section 23.

Section 28.

Section 74.

and the party affected can approach the court for relief. But the Court did not
Jay down any test as to when a term would be unconscionable and opposed to
public policy. For some reason, courts in India are reluctant to extend the heads
of public policy, feeling themselves bound by English decisions. It must, at
the same time, be admitted that a free extension of the heads of public policy
according to the individual notions of the judges is equally fraught with danger.
What, then is the remedy of the consumer, or has he no remedy at all? The
decisions, where relief was given to the consumer are based on the observations
in judgements of the English Courts, but do not seem to be based on any legal
principle of Indian law. The decisions rest on (a) unconscionable nature of the
term ; (b) unfairness of the term ; (c) the term not being in public interest ; and
(d) the. term being opposed to public policy,

3.3 The entire basis of a contract, that it was freely and voluntarily entered
into by parties with equal bargaining power, completely falls to the ground
when it is practically impossible for one of the parties not to‘accept the offered
terms, In order to render freedom of contract a reality and particularly of one
whose bargaining power is less than that of the other party to the contract,
various measures like labour legislation, money-lending laws and rent Acts have
been enacted, but there is no general provision in the Contract Act itself under
which courts can give relief to the weaker party. The existing sections in the
Contract Act do not seem to be capable of meeting the mischief.

3.4. Section 16(3) of the Contract Act provides that, where a person who
is in a position to dominate the will of another, enters into a contract with him,
and the transaction appears, on the face of it or on the evidence adduced to be
unconscionable, the burden of providing that such contract was not induced by
undue influence shall lie upon the person in a position to dominate the will of
the other. But this sub-section has been interpreted’ as meaning that both the
elements of dominant position and the unconscionable nature of the contract
will have to be established, before the contract can be said to be brought about
by undue influence. This decision, though given so long ago, has not been de-
parted from, with the result that section 16(3) is not of much relevance in the
present context.

3.5. Section 23 of the Contract Act which provides that the consideration
or object of an agreement is lawful, unless the court regards it as immoral, or
opposed to public policy, is not of much use in meeting the present situation,
because courts have held that the heads of public policy cannot be extended to
a new ground in general, with certain exceptions, and that the term of a contract
exempting one party from all liability is not opposed to public policy.

3.6. Section 28, of the Contract Act which deals with the time for enforce-
ment of rights under a contract, is concerned with a special situation, and the
Law Commission has dealt with this aspect in a separate report.

3.7. Section 74 only deals with a quantum of damages and has no
bearing upon the validity of a contract which exempts the liability of one of the
parties. The only other section which requires consideration is section 151, which

1, Poosathurai v. Kannappa Chettair (1919) 1.L.R. 43 Mad. 546 (P.C).
3, Law Commission of India, 97 th Report.
84-L/B(N)350Mof LI&CA—2


Net Result.

How the problem is
deult with in the U.K.

certainly imposes liability upon the bailee for loss or damage to the goods
delivered to him, but Courts have consistently taken the view that the obligation
under this section can be contracted out.

3.8. The net result is that the Indian Contract Act, as it stands today, can-
not come to the protection of the consumer when dealing with big business.
Further, the ad-hoc solutions given by courts in response to their innate sense of
justice without reference to a proper yardstick in the form of a specific provision
of statute law or known legal principle of law only produce uncertainty and
ambiguity

CHAPTER 4
EXPERIENCE IN OTHER COUNTRIES

4.1. In the United Kingdom various legal principles based upon the funda-
mental concept enunciated by Denning LJ’ that ‘there is the vigilance of the
common law which while allowing freedom of contract watches to see that it is
not abused’, have been utilized. These principles are (a) that there should be
reasonable notice to the other party of the conditions; (b) that the notice should
be contemporaneous with the contract; (c) that there should be no fundamental
breach of the contract; (d) that the contract would be strictly construed as
against the bigger organisation and in favour of the weaker party and (e) that
the terms of a contract should not be unreasonable on the face of it. Courts
have resorted to what are known as contra proferentem rule, the ‘four corner’,
tule, the Gibaud rule, and the important stratagem of the doctrine of fundamental

breach. The contra proferentem rule amounts to this; that a person who, relying
on an exclusion clause, seeks to avoid a liability, can do so only by reference to

words which clearly and unequivocally apply to the circumstances of the case.
Under this rule, if one party to the contract is not only under a duty of care,
but is also subject to some form of strict liability, a clause excluding liability
will cover only the latter, unless the language manifestly covers both types of
obligations. In the Gibaud case’, the plaintiff left his bicycle at the defendants’
station and received a ticket containing a clause exempting the defendants from
liability, The bicycle was not put in the cloak-room, but was left in the booking

hall from where it was stolen. The Court of Appeal held : The defendants were
protected. If the contract had been to keep the bicycle necessarily in the cloak-

room, the defendants would be outside the ‘four corners’ of the contract and not
be protected by the exemption clause, which would only protect them while
performing the contractual obligation, and not the obligation as bailee. As re-
gards the doctrine of fundamental breach, it was propounded by Denning L.J." as
follows :

‘It is now settled that exempting clauses of this kind, no matter how widely
they are expressed, only avail the party when he is carrying out his contract
in its essential respects. He is not allowed to use them as a cover for mis-
conduct or indifference or to enable him to turn a blind eye to his obligations.
They do not avail him when he is guilty of a breach which goes to the root
of the contract. It is necessary to look at the contract apart from the exampt-
ing clauses and see what are the terms, express or implied, which impose an
obligation on the party. If he has been guilty of a breach of those in a
respect which goes to the very root of the contract, he cannot rely on the
exempting clauses.”

1. John Lee & son, v. Raihoay Executive, (1949) 2 All Eng. Rep. 581.
3, Gibaud v. Great Eastern Railway (1921) 2 KB 426.
3, Karsales v. Wallis (1956) 2 All E.R. 866.


But this view has received a severe blow jn the House of Lords.’ It has
been said by Lord Reid that there is no indication, ‘that the courts are to consider
whether the fair iy all the circumstances or is harsh and unconscion-

xemption §

able or wherher if was techy ee by the customer... .it appears to me that
its solution should be left to Parliament’ (emphasis supplied); and Lord.

. .
Wilberforce explained that if fundamenta) oy total breach means a departure from
the contract, the question will arise how great a departure, and if it means supply
of a different thing, the question will be how dillerent. The Hon'ble Mr. Justice
Scarman had stated*, .
“:... for example, in the law of coftract it is necessary to consider whether
the law should be based upon the principle of freedom of contract or on,
some other principle, e.g., that the law will enforce only those bargains that.
are fair—a principle which would, in the interests of good faith in mutial
dealings, impose some restrictions upon contractual freedom. A particular
illustration of the need to reach a conclusion on this social question is to be
found in the law reform problem that arises over the, rights to vendors and
hire-purchase-finance companies to contract out of their common law and
statutery liabilities. It is well-known that hire-purchase finance companies,
warehousemen, and suppliers of goods and services, often make use of
standard forms of contract whigh contain clauses exempting or limiting
suppliers’ liability... .”

Vufaie | Contract 4.2. The principles on which English Courts have acted have been criticised?

Terms Ack 1977 fe —
and ite मम OS ‘ollows:

. “First, since they all rest on the admission that the clauses in question are

permissible in purpose and content, they invite the draftsman to recur to
the attack. Give him time, and he will make the grade. Second, since they
do not face the issue, they fail to-accumulate either experience or authority
in, the needed direction; that of marking out for any given type of transac-
tion what the minimum decencies are which a court will insist upon as
essential to an enforceable, bargain of a given type, or as being inherent in
a bargain of that type. Third, since they purport to construe and do not
really construe, nor are intended to, but are instead tools of intentional and
creative misconstruction, they seriously embarrass later efforts at true
construction, later efforts to get at the true meaning of those wholly legiti-
mate contracts and clauses which call for their meaning to be got at instead
of avoided, The net effect is unnecessary confusion and unpredictability.
together with inadequate remedy; and evil persisting that calls for
remedy ....-.”. . पु .

‘Thus, all these attempts have not been found to be of much use and therefore,
in 1977, the British Parliament passed the Unfair Contract Terms Act‘, The Act
probides a statutory definition of the term ‘negligence’ which is applicable both
to tort and breach of contract cases. Under the Act, negligence means, (a) breach
of any obligation, arising from .the express oF implied terms of a contract, to

3. Suiese Atlantique Societe वा Agreement Maritime $A v. M.V. Rolterdamasche. Kalen Centrale
(1966) 2 All BR 61.
2, Law Reformythe

p. 29.
8, Prof. Llewellyn, 52 Har, L. Rev. 700.

4, The Unfair Contract ‘Terms ‘Act, 1977.

Lindsay Memorial Lectures delivered at the University of Keele, Nov. 1967,


take reasonable care or exercise reasonable skill in the performance of — the
contract (b) breach of any common law duty to take reasonable care or exercise
reasonable skill (but not any stricter duty); or (c) breach of the common duty
of care imposed by the Occupier’s Liability Act, 1957. The Act also provides
that any clause in a contract which excludes or restricts liability for death or .
personal injury resulting ‘rom negligence shall be absolutely void. In regard to
other types of loss, not being death or physical injury, any restriction or exclud-
ing clause shall also be void unless it satisfies the requirement of reasonableness.
The reasonableness would depend upon the unfairness of the terms in the light
of the circumstances which ought to have been either known to or be in the
contemplation of the parties. The Act also provides that a person who deals
with the consumer on standard terms will not be allowed to claim the protection
of any clause restricting or excluding liability if he himself commits breach.
Nor can he claim a substantially different performance from that which the
consumer or customer réasonably expected from the contract as equivalent to
performance.

How the problem is 4.3. The position in United States is stated in section 575 of the Restate-
dealt with in the U.S. है :
: ment of Law of Contracts thus': (1) px bargain for exemption from liability for
the consequences of a wilful breach of duty is illegal, and a bargain for exemp-

tion from liability or the consequences of negligence is illegal if

(a) the parties are employer and employee and the bargain relates to
negligent injury of the employee in the course of employment, or

(b) One of the parties is charged with a duty of public service, and the
bargain relates to negligence in the performance of any part of its
duty-to the public, for which it has received or been promised compen-
sation.

(2) A bargain by a common carrier or other person charged with the duty
of public service limiting to a reasonable agreed valuation of the amount of
damages recoverable for injury to property by a non-wilful breach of duty is
lawful. *

Zaiorm Comme 4.47 Sectidn 2.302 of the Uniform Commercial Code of the United States
. ood 4. 8..302. also provides’, PE the-Court’as'a matter of law finds the contract or any clause
* of the contract to have been unconscionable at the time it was made, the court
may refuse to enforce the contract or it may enforce the remainder of the
contract without the unconscionable clause or it may so limit the applicatien of ©
any unconscionable clause as to aviod any unconscionable result,

(ii) When it is claimed or appears to the court that the contract or’any
clause thereof may be’ unconscionable, the parties shall be afforded a reasonable
opportunity to present evidence as to its commercial setting, purpose and effect,
to aid the court in making the determination.

How the, probe problem is 4.5, In Israel, under the Standard Contracts Law’, there is a provision for
deal ‘in Israel. administrative control of such standard forms. of contract. There is an adminis-
trative board consisting of representatives of Industry and Commerce. This!
Board decides upon the validity of exemption clauses. which are to be included

1, Section 575, Restatatement, Contracts,
2, Section 2-302, Uniform Commercial Code
2 66 ColemtisL ex Review, 1340; (1965) 14 Tho International & Comparative Law Quarterly,

1410 .
t


in standard forms. In doing so, the Board takes into account the prejudice to a
consumer and unfair advantage to the supplier. The Board is empoweréd to

receive evidence and if it approves a particular clause, the court cannot invali-
date it for a particular period,

Control not feasible. 4.6. Such an administrative control may not be feasible in our society.
_ CHAPTER 5
SUGGESTIONS AND COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING PAPER
5.1. In response to the Law Commission’s invitation to the public for com-

ments on the proposal to insert a provision in the Indian Contract Act, 1872,—
on the lines suggested in Chapter 6—the following comments have been received".

Suggestions invited.

5.2. The Register, High Court (Appéllate Side) Bombay, the Legal Remem-
brancer and Secretary, Government of Haryana, one High Court, one judge of
a High Court, and the Law Department, Government of Orissa have agreed with
the proposal. Four High Courts have no comments to offer. One judge of a High
Court has stated that the word ‘unconscionable’ has acquired a definite meaning
in the law of contracts. The Law and Judiciary’ Department, Government of
Maharashtra has, while agreeing with the’ proposal, suggested a more elaborate
provision on the lines of the English law.

Suggestions received.

Commission's views 5.3. We have taken note of the abave suggestions, for which we are thankful.
We, however, felt it-is better to go step by step and so have not thought of an
elaborate enactment on the lines of the English law. The Commission has also-
noticed the amendments. suggested in the Monopolies Restrictive Trade Practices
(Amendment) Bill, (No. 37 of 1983) introduced in the Rajya Sabha on December
22, 1983. Those amendments relate to Unfair Trade Practices and the proposed
amendments are to be introduced as sections 36A to 36D in the Monopolies
Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969. The scope. of these amendments is different
from the recommendation we are making. .

CHAPTER 6
RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMISSION

The recommendaion. 6.1. The only step that can be taken in our country to remedy the evil is
. . to enact @ provision in the Indian Contract Act, 1872, which will combine the
advantages of the English Unfair. Terms Act* and Section 2.302 of the Uniform
Commercial Code of the United States*.
+ Provisions of the re- 6.2. The Law Commission therefore recommends the amendment of the
commande enact- Indian Contract Act, 1872, by inserting the following new Chapter and section: —
हु V “CHAPTER IV-A’ रु हु
Section 674 : (1) Where the Court, on the tertns ofthe contract or on the
evidence adduced by the parties, comes to, the conclusion that the contract
- or any part of it is unconscionable, it may refuse to enforce the contract or
the part that it holds to be unconscionable. —/

3. Law Commission Fite No. F. 2(15)/83-LO. (४. Nos. 3(R) ro 12(R).
2, Paragraph 4-2, supra.
2 Paragraph 4:4., supra.


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of this section, a
‘act or part of it is deemed to be uncunscionable if it exempts any
ty thereto from-—(a) the liability tor; wilful breach ef the contract, or
) the consequences of negligence”. \/

(kK. K. MATHEW)
Chairman

(J.P. CHATURVEDI)
Member

(DR. M. B. RAO)
Member

(P.M. BAKSHI)
Part-time Member

(VEPA P. SARATHI)
Part-Time Member

1

{A.K. SRINIVASAMURTBY )
Member-Secretary

“DIC Y)
eo

* Dated:

. B4-L! 809) 350MofLI&CA—625 —9-3-85—GIPS