LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTH REPORT

. ON
THE JUDICIAL OFFICERS’
PROTECTION ACT, 1850

10th October, 1984

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA है
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs


Corrigenda to the 104th Report on the “Judicial Officers
Protection Act, 1850”

1. In the contents page against chapter 4 for the title “Preliminary matters”
the title “Short Title and Extent” should be substituted.

2. In the 4th line of para 1.4 on page 1, the footnote figures “2-2” should
be substituted by the figures “2-3”.

3. On page 3, in footnote 2, the alphabet “s” should be added to the word
“Chapter”.

4. On page 6 in para 6.1 in line 5 above and at the end of the word
“adopted” the figure “4” should be inserted for the figure “3” and at
the end of the word “expresses” the figure “4a” should be inserted for the
figure “4”. .

5. In the footnote on page 6 a new footnote “4, See Paragraph 5.2, supra”
should be added, and the figure for the footnote “4”, the figure “4a”
should be substituted.

6. On Page 8, in sub-paragraph of para 8.5 in line 5 in item 3 the alpha-
bet “‘s” should be inserted reading the word “Section” as “Sections”.

जग

. In appendix 1 on page 11 the figure “77” should be substituted by the
figure “78” in the heading.


Justice K.K. Mathew :
D. 0, No. F. 2(8)/84-LC

New Dethi
Dated, the 10th October, 1984,

My dear Minister,

I am forwarding herewith the One Hundred and Fourth
Report of the Law Commission on “The Judicial Officers’ Protection
Act, 1850”. The subject was taken up by the Law Commission on
its own.

The Commission is indebted to Shri’ P. M. Bakshi, Part-time
Member, and Shri A. K. Srinivasamurthy Member-Secretary, for
their valuable assistance in the Preparation of the Report.

With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-

(K.K, Mathew)

Shri Jagannath Kaushal,

Minister of Law, Justice

and Company Affairs,

New Dethi.

Encl:— 104th Report


CHAPTE &

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTORY +

HISTORY पु पु . . . .
THE PRESENT LAW,

PRELIMINARY MATTERS

PERSONS ENTITLED TO PROTECTION AS JUDGES

PROCEEDINGS FOR WHICH PROTECTION IS AVAILABLE .

MINISTERIAL ACTS . . . . .
“GOOD FATTH”. AND OTHER EXPRESSIONS
COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING PAPER

MAIN RECOMMENDATION . .

APPENDICES

Appendix {. Sections 76-78, Indian Penal Code. . . पु

Appendix 2. English law as to the protection of Judges . : . पर

6)

Page


CHAPTER |
INTRODUCTORY

1.1. Reviston of the Judicial Officers’ Protection Act, 1850, has been taken Need for |
up by the Law Commission of its own, as a part of its function of simplifying fhe Act. et
the law. The manner in which the Act is expressed has become out of date,
particularly as a result of subsequent legislative and other developments that
have taken place in India, The Act therefore needs revision badly. The Act
was passed more than a century ago. Since then, no comprehensive review of its
provisions has been undertaken. The points that arise out of the Act are impor-

tant enough tc require serious consideration.

t of the Act is two fold. It seeks to confer pro- Principle of

1.2. Stated broadly, the obj
the Act.

tection un persons performing judicial functions, and it is also designed to pro-
tect persons executing decrees and orders passed by the judiciary in exercise of
its functions. The first seems to be the principal objective of the Act; the second
objective, of protecting the executive officers, may be regarded an ancillary to
the first.

1.3. The Act lays down no new principle. Most common law countries The principle
confer substantial protection on their judges, even in respect of acts beyond their and the details.
jurisdiction, provided such acts be done honestly and on reasonable and probable
cause. However, though the principle is not controversial, several matters of
detail arisc and it is desirable to consider the provisions of the Act at some length.

Before discussing the provisions of the Act in detail, it may be convenient 10
give its history in brief.

1.4. The Law Commission had. for ascertaining opinion on the subject, pre- Working
pared and circulated’ a Working Paper, inviting comments from interested per- paper.
sons and bodies. The comments received on the Working Paper will be referred

to, at the appropriate place.*-*

CHAPTER 2

HISTORY
2.1. Prior to 1850. in India, there was no comprehensive legislation relating Position of
age sca s . sas . . rie’ Provincial
to judicial immunity, A British statute, dealing with a very limited area of the Magistrates

subj i se under
ubject, provided as follows’: necro.

“And, whereas it is reasonable to render Provincial Magistrates, as well as
natives as British subjects, more safe in execution of their office; be it enact-
ed, that no action for wrong or injury shall lie in the Supreme Court, against
any person whatsoever exercising a judicial office in the Country Courts,
for any judgment. decree or order of the said Court, nor against any person
for any act done or in virtue of the Order of the said Court.”

sLaw Commission of India, Working Paper on the Judicial Officers Protection Act, 1855.

2Chapter 9 infra.
2All com received upto the date of signing this Report have been taken into account.

sSection 24, Statute 21 Geo 3 05. 70.



2

View of Privy
Council as

to object of
British
statute.

Privy Council
Construction
of Statute
referred to
above.

Position
prior to
1850.

Scope of
the Act
ef 1850.

Scheme of
the Act,
and three
major

is of
study.

2.2, Ihe object of that section of the British statute’ was to protect persons
vsercising ६ judicial office for things done within their jurisdiction, though erro-
nevusly or irregularly done, leaving them for things done wholly without jurisdic
tion, It was so held by the Privy Council?

2.3. The Privy Council turther laid down* that the statute referred to above
protecting Provincial Migistrates in India from actions for any wrong or in-
jury done by them in the exercise of their judicial offices) did not confer unlimited
protection cn Magistrate. It placed them on the same footing as English courts
of simitar jurisdiction, The Privy Council saw no reason why Indian judges should
be “more ot less protected than English judges of general and limited jurisdic-
tion under the like circumstances.”

ccording to the Privy Council, to give them (Indian judges) an exemption
from liability when acting bonafide but without jurisdiction would be to place
them on @ better footing than the English judges, and would leave the injured
individual wholly without remedy. The Privy Council further observed:

“For, English Judges, when they act wholly without jurisdiction, whether
they may suppose they had it or not, have no privilege; and the justice of
the peace, whether acting as such, or in their judicial character, in case of
summary conviction, have no other privileges than that of having notice
of action, a limitation of time for bringing it, a restriction as to the venue,
with

2.4. [hus, prior to the passing of the Act of 1850, the protection for judges
in India existed only for acts within jurisdiction, as held by the Privy Council.
As will be pointed out later, the Act of 1850 has expanded the protection avail-
able to judges.

CuapTER 3
PRESENT LAW

3.1. The Act of 1850 makes more definite provision as to the protection of
judges than the earlier law’. In the first place, it covers all julicial officers, by
enumerating taem specifically. Secondly, it protects the judicial officers from
suits, not only for acts done or ordered to be done by them in the discharge of
their duties within the limits of their jurisdiction, but also for acts done beyond
Vie limits of their jurisdiction, provided that, in the latter case, the officer, at the
time of doing tne act or ordering it to be done, in good faith believed himself
to have such jurisdiction, Thirdly, the Act also protects persons acting in put
suance of the orders of a judicial officer, if acting in good faith, even if the judicial
officer had no jurisdiction to pass the particular order.

3.2. The scheme of the Act is simple enough, Because of the legislative
practice in those days, the Act does not commence with the usual clause dealing
with its short title and territorial extent. The Act consists of only one section,
and its structure is not complicated.

section 24, Statute 2i Geo 3 Ch. 70.
2Calder v. Halket,(1840) 2 Moo Ind. App. 293 13 ER. 12; 3 Moo. P.C. 28; (1835-1842) All
ER Rup. 306.

*Galder 2 Halket, (1840) 3 Moo P.C. 28; 13 E.R. 2 Moo. Ind. App. 293; (1835-1842) All ER.

‘For the earlier law, see Chapter 2, supra.


However, there is a possibility of detailed study in regard to (i) the persons
who receive the protection of the Act,’ (ii) tha kind of proceedings for which
such protection is available.’ and ‘iii) the exteat of the protection so available.”

3.3. Section 1 of the Act may be quoted in full : Section 1.

“I. Non-liability to suit of officers acting judicially, for official acts done in
good faith, and of Officers executing warrants and orders. No judge, Magistrate,
Justice of the Peace, Collector or other person acting judicially shall be liable to
be sued in any Civil Court for any act done or ordered to be done by him in
the discharge of his judicial duty, whether or not within the limits of his juris-
diction :

Provicied that he at the time, in good faith, believed himself to have jurisdic-
tion to do or order the act complained of: and no officer of any Court or other
person, bound to execute the lawful warrants orders of any such Judge, Magis-
trate, Instice ef the Peace, Collector or other person acting judiciaily, shall be
liable to be sued in any Civil Court, for the execution of any warrant or order,
which he would “be bound to execute, if within the jurisdiction of the person
issuing the same”.

3.4. Each of the three matters mentioned above! in our analysis of section 1 Importance
has an importance of its own. The first, which relates to the persons entitled to लक
protection, is important. because of the recent increase in the number of authori- Section 1.
ties performing quasi-judicial functions. The second-—the kind of proceedings
enjoying protection-—is important. because of certain emerging concepts of ad-
ministrative law, The third—the extent of protection—is also important, be-
cause of its concern with the state of mind and other elements which are the
essential criteria for availability of the immunity granted by the Act,

CHAPTER 4

SHORT TITLE AND EXTENT

4.1. Coming to the changes needed in the Act, we begin our examination Short

of the Act with the short title “The Judicial Officers Protection Act, 1850”. In lille to be
cur opinion, this needs to be revised. The expression “Judicial officers” is not

quite aprropriate. By a layman, it may be taken as denoting only persons be-

longing 10 the lower judicial cadre of the State, but the Act is not confined to

them. It extends to all persons who act judicially—broadly speaking, “Tudges”.”

It would be more appropriate to bring that idea in the forefront. The short

title of the Act should therefore be revised as “The Judges Protection Act.

1850".

We are separately” recommending adoption of the definition of “Judge” as
given in the Indian Penal Code.’

4.2. The next topic to be considered relates to the territorial extent of the Territorial
Act. At present, there is no provision in the Act defining its territorial extent, पिला:

3Chapter_ 5, infra.
*Chapter 6-7, infra.

*Chapter 8, infra.

‘Paragraph 3.2, supra.

‘Cf. section 19, Indian Penal Code.
"See, Paragraph 5.2, infra.
*ection 19, Indian Penal Code.


4 .

Need for
change.

{t appears that before independence, the Act was in force in all the Provinces
of (British) India, except the Scheduled Districts.’ Subsequently, (ie. after inde-
pendence), the Act was extended to the merged states’, and Union Territories*
However. the Act has not so far been extended by Parliamentary Legislation to
the area of Part B States, though, presumably, substantially similar legislation
may be in force in most of those areas.

4.3. There seems no reason why the Act should not be extended to the whole
of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, We see no constitutional diffi-
culty in doing so. The pith and substance of the Act seems to fall within the
subject of “Actionable wrongs”, which is specifically included in the Concurrent
list in the Constitution.’ Even if the Act is regarded as touching the subject of
“administration of Justice”, that also is a matter which now falls within the Con-
current List’ There should, therefore, be no objection to extending the Act
to the areas of former Part B States, In such matters, uniformity is desirable
and should be sought for. if there isno constitutional difficulty.

4.4, Accordingly, we propose that the Act should be extended to the whole
of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir,

CHAPTER 5
PERSONS ENTITLED TO PROTECTION AS JUDGES

5.1. Turning, now, to the actual provisions of the Act, we find that the per-
sons en whom protection is conferred by the Act are enumerated in section 1
as “judge, magistrate, justice of the peace, Collector or other persons acting judi-
cially”, Underlying the enumeration of all the persons in the section is the
central concept of “acting judicially”. We find that the same idea is expressed
briefly, but more comprehensively, in section 77 of the Indian Penal Code,’ which
confers on judges protection from criminal liability in respect of certain judicial
acts.

5.2. The expression “Judge”, and also the connected expressicn “court of
Justice”, are appropriately defined in the Indian Penal Code.’ By Section 19. of

the Penal Code (omitting the illustrations), the word “Judge” has been — given —

the following meaning:
“19, The word “Judge” denotes not only every person who is officially de-
signed as a Judge, but also every person who is empowered by law to give,
in any legal proceeding, civil or. criminal,-a definitive judgment, or a judg-
ment which, if not appealed against, would be definitive, or a judgment which
if confirmed by some other authority, would be definitive, or who is one
of ¢ body or persons, which body of persons is empowered by law to give
such a judgment”.

’$ection 3, Laws, (Local Extent) Act, 1874 (15 of 1874).

Merged States (Laws) Act, 1949 (59 of 1949).

Union Territories (Laws) Act, 1950 (30 of 1950).

4Constitution, Seventh Schedule; Concurrent List, entry 8.

5 Constitution, Seventh Schedule, Concurrent List, entry 1A.

‘See Appendix 1. a
7$ections 19-20, Indian Penal Code.



3.3. Section 20 of the Indian Penal Code ‘omitting the illustration) defines Section 20,
८ £ Testi Indian Penal
a Court of Justice. as under: —~ Code.

120, The words “Court of Justice” denoie a Judge who is empowered
by Taw to act judicially alone or a body of J

law to act judicially as a body, when such Juc

es wh
eer body is acrin

5.4. 1! the definitions of the expressions “Judge” and “Court of Justice” (as Possible दि
given in the Penal Code) are incorporated in the Act under discussion’, it would redraft of
be possible to improve the drafting of this part of section | of ihe Act, by adopt- Section |
ing the language of section 77 of the Penal Code. Section 77 is the substantive
provision conferring on judges, protection in regard to criminal liability.?

On this basis, this part of section 1 of the Act under consideration can be
revised as unde

“No Judge shall be liable to be sued in any Civil Court for anything
which ws done by him, when acting judicially in the- exercise of any power
which is given to him by law, or which in good faith he believes to he given
to him by law.”

5.5. Betore proceeding to consider the other issues arising out of section Authorities
| of the Act, (that is to say, the issues which relate to the nature of the protected swage than
acts ard various other conditions of judicial immunity), some words may be”
in order about quasi-judicial authorities. According to doctrines of constitutional
and administrative law, these authorities are regarded as bound by the rules of
natural justice, and consequentially amenable to judicial control exercised by
High Courts under article 226 of the Constitution. The eatent of permissible
judicial control is, of course, a question primarily relatable to that article. For the
Present purpose. the precise issue to be considered is this: to what extent is judi-
cial immunity from liability (conferred by the Act under consideration) available
to such quasi-judicial authorities?

5.6.
authorities |
tribunals wh
function of finding facts and applying the law, in a formal man:
following the procedure prescribed for a civil court.’

1९ question passed above assumes practical importance. because these Range of
ve a very wide range. At the one end of the scale are statutory *uthorities.
operate almost like courts. These tribunals are vested with the
er and after

Ai the ctker end of the scale are administrative authorities who, though they
are bound to act quasi-judicially and to follow the rules of natural justice, do
not perform any judicial function as such.

In between the two, there is a vast variety of authorities. Where there is
no judicial immunity (because the authorities concerned are not “courts”) nor
is statutory protection given by a special provision, the presiding officers of such
authorities would presumably be liable in the same circumstances as other pu-
tely executive officess.'

ACE, Paragraph 8.5, infra.
*See Appendix I.
3८/ Wade, Administrative Law (1977), pages 641-642,

Cf. Wade, Administrative Law (1977), page 642.
2-13 Mof LJ & CA/NDI84


Section 1
earlier half
and proviso.

j

sea!

tnis part’ of section 1, deal-
d to : 1 WOuld meet the ends of
one hand, it wouid cover sll those whose function is to give a
ent”. At the same time. the proposed re-draft will not be un-
duly wide. as authorities not entitled to give a definitive judgement would be
excluded.

soposed redreti of

Incidentally we find* that in the coniest of the law of contempt, the matter
has been discussed academically in England, and it has been pointed out that
two rival tesis could be thought of, namely, (i) the source of authority “test”, and
(i) the “fenciion™ test. The test which we are proposing is principally based on
the functions vested in the authority concerned.

CHAPTER 6
PROCEEDINGS FOR WHICH PROTECTION IS AVAILABLE

6.1, The substantive provis'on is section 1 feartier half and the Proviso) of
the Act «nder consideration, which deals with the nature of the protecticn given
to the persons concerned, can now be taken up. It appears that it would be an
improvement if, for that purpose «iso, the simpler provision i: section 77, Indian
Pena’ Code, is adopted.’ Section 77 expresses’ (in mvc’ briefer languase) all
that this part of section 1 of the Act under consideration tries to express,

6.2. 1: may be desirable to analyse a few aspects of the Act of 1850 which
is under consideration. Under the Act of 1850; the protection applied to acts done
within jurisdiction, irrespective of questions of good faith; but the protection does
hot apply to scts done without jurisdiction, if the act is not done in good faith.
This will be apparent from the conditions for claiming the protection, analysed
in the next paragraph. :

The pretection afforded to a judicial officer under the Act requires that (ij
he was acting judicially, (ii) that he made the order in discharge of his judicia
duties, and (iii) that er the action was within the limits of his jurisdiction or
(if it was without jurisdiction) that, ia good faith, he believed himself to have juris-
diction to do or order the act complained of. This is fairly clear on a reading’ of
secticn 4.

4.3. The adoption of section 77, Indian Penal Code, which we have Suggest-
ed above, ‘-’ will not make a substantial difference in this regard. But it will
certainly state the law in a simpler and neater form. कक

6.4. It may be mentioned that the Act under consideration requires that the
act must liave been done in discharge of “judicial” duty. Although a large num-
ber of rulings on the expression “judicial” exist in this context,? they are mostly
focussed on the facts of each case, and do not necessitate any textual amend-
ment.

7866 paragraph 5.2, supra.
*Of. Sections 19-20, Indian Penal Code.

‘Lowe & Rowlings, “Tribunals and the Laws Protecting Administration of Justice”
(Autumn 1982) Public Law 418, 438, 439.

‘See Appendix 1.

‘See Paragraph 3.3, supra. for the text of section I.
*Paragcaphs 5.2, and 6.1, supra.

3866 also patagcaph 3.3, supra.

‘Iyer, Torts (1975), page 46, Chapter 2, para 16.



risdiction” #5 used in the Act under consideration Meaning ct
ticular) act impugned, but means SOHC"
ist officer to act in the matter! Where a’ Sub-

ciders the arrest of a person for the offence of mischiet

of tho offence, the Sub-divisional Officer is acting in

an executive capacity and is liable to psy damages for false imprisonment to the

person as arrested.

et the jus

CHAPTER 7
MINISTERIAL ACTS

7.1. So far, we have considered that part of section 1 of the Ast under dis- Section १
cussion which relates to the immunity of judges. The latter part of the section and Minis:
confers protection on an officer of court and “other person” who executes any
warrant or order issued by the judge, which that officer or other person would be
‘bound to cxecute if within the jurisdiction of the person receiving the same.

Here also, it appears preferable 10 adopt the similar language of section 78 of the
Indian Penal (00९. That Section is concerned with the protection against cri-
minal liability for ministerial acts done in pursuance of the orders of a judge (as

detined in that Code).

7.2. On this basis, the latter rart of section’ 1 could be revised as under:-- possible
redraft of
“Nothing which 15 done in pursuance of, or which 1s warranted, by the judge- दा i

ment cr order of a court of justice, if done whilst such judgement or order
remains in force, shall render a person liable to be sued in any civil court,
notwithstanding that the court may have had no jurisdiction to pass such
judgement or order, prov son doing the act in good faith believes
that tue court had such ju

CHAPTER 8

“GOOD FAITH” AND OTHER EXPRESSIONS

8.1. One important point that must also receive attention in connection with Section 1-
i j i thet} ५ कह .. 4. . Good faith.
section | of the Act is the question whether the belief of the person acting judici-
ally ‘in good faith’ must be based on reasonable inquiry. In other words, does
the expression “good faith” here postulate due care and attention? The point
was dicussed in detail in a Calcutta case.’ On the facts of the belief was held
to be both iionest and reasonable. At the same time, it was pointed out that
there may be some difficulty as to the exact meaning of the expression “in good
faith” as appsaring in section i. A question, it was said, may arise if it was
necessary to see whether there existed a reasonable cause for the belief of the
Magistrate, or whether it was sufficient if he himself thought that there was sufti-

cient cause.‘

1Anowar Hussain v. Ajay Kumar, A.LR. 1965 S.C. 1651, approving A.LR. 1959 Assam 28.

*Appendix 1.
Rohini Kumar v. Niaz Mohammed, AAR. 1944 Cal. 4, 10 (Pal J.),
48०७ also Collector of Sea Customs v. Chidambaram. (1876) I.L.R. 1 Mad. 89.


8

Suggestion
to adopt
definition
of “good
faith” in
Penal Code.

Definition
of “act”.

Uniformity.

Proposal for
adopting
definitions
given in
indian Penal
Code.

8.2. The difficulty pointed out in the Calcutta case mentioned above! would
disappear if the definition of “good faith” as given in the Penal Code? is adopted
for the purpose of the interpretation of the Act under consideration also. Section
52 of the Penal Code reads as under :--

“52. Nothing is said to be done or believed in “good faith” which is done
or believea without due care and attention.”

It is desirable that for the purposes of the Act under consideration also,
reckless belief should confer no immunity, It may be mentioned that a judge
acting without jurisdiction recklessly enjoys no immunity from criminal liabi-
lity?

8.3. There is another useful definition contained in the Indian Penal Code—
definition of the expression “act”--which is worth adopting’. That expression is
used in the Act under consideration but is not defined by the Act.

In the Jadian Penal Code, two sections are relevant as defining its scope.
Section 22 of the Indian Penal Code provides as under: —

“32. In every part of this Code except where a contrary intention appears
from the context, words which refer to acts done extend also to illegal omis-
sions.”

Section 33 ef the same Code provides as under: —

The word ‘act’ denotes as well as a series of acts as a single act; the word
sion’ denotes as well as series of omissions as a single omission.”

8.4. The definitions contained in the Penal Code are useful. Moreover, some
uniformity is desirable in such matters, as regards civil and criminal liability,
unless a distinction is justified on some matter of principle.

2.5, On this logic, there is a case for inserting, in the Act under considera-
mn, 3 provision to the effect that words and expressions defined in the Indian
Penai Code and used but not defined in the Act have the meanings respectively
signed to them in the Indian Penal Code.

re)

So far as we could ascertaia, there are four expzessions defined in the Penal
Code, which would be usefu! for the purposes of the Act under consideration-—

(0 Section 19—Judg:’ (define! with reference to ‘Court of Justice’).
(2) Section 2C-—Cour: of Justice’ (used in the definition of ‘Judge’).§
(3) Section 32-33—~act’”

(4) Section 52—‘gooc faith’?

it would be useful if they are adopted into the Act under consideration,

"Paragraph 8.1, supra.
*Section 52, LP.C.

sSection 77, LP.C. (See Appendix 1).
‘Sections 32-33, LP.C.

sParagraph 5.2, supra.

sParagraph 5.3, supra.

*Paragraph 8.3, supra.

"Paragraph 8.2, supra.


CHAPTER 9

COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING PAPER

9.1. In response’ to the Working Paper circulated on the subject by the Law

Comments
received on

Commission. three comments have been received.’ Of these replies, one is from the Working
a High Court, which has no comments to offer? The second is from a High Court, Paper.

which agrees with the proposal put forth in the Working Paper.‘ The third is also
from a High Court, which not only agrees with the. proposal, but aiso adds that
the proposal will’ go a long way towards giving protection to judicial officers.

9.2, The proposals have thus been welcomed.

CuapTER 10
MAIN RECOMMENDATIONS

10.1. The main recommendations made in this Report may, for the sake of
convenience, be summarised as under:---

(1) The short title of the Judicial Officers Protection Act should be re-
vised to read as “The Judges Protection Act, 18507,

(2) The Act should be extended to the whole of India. except the State
of Jammu and Kashr

mir”

(3) The prevision in :ae Act for the pretecticn cf Judges should be re-

vised’ as under:~

“No Judge shail be liable to be sued in any Civil Court for anything

which is done by him when acting judicially, in the exercise of any power

which is given to him by law, or which in good faith he believes to be
given to him by lew,’

(4) As regards ministerial action taken in pursuance of Judicial acts,
the relevant provision of the Act should be revised so as to read as under: —

“Nothing which is done in pursuance of, or which is warranted by,
the judgment or order of a court cf justice, if done whilst such judgment
or order remains in ferce, shall render a person liable to be sued in any
civil court, notwithstanding that the court may have had no jurisdiction
to pass such judgment or order, provided the person doing the act in good
faith believes that the court had such jurisdiction.”

(5) A new provision should be inserted in the Act ६6 the effect that words
and expressions defined in the Indian Panel Code end used but not defined
in the Act, have the meenings respectively asigned to them by the Code.”

tLaw Commission File No. F.2(8) 84-L.C. S.Ne. 2, 3 and 4.

2All comments received upto 18th August, 1984 have been taken into account.
8Law Commission File No. F.2(8)/84 L.C. S.No. 2.

‘Law Commission File No. F.2(8)/84 L.C. No. 3.

SLaw Commission File No. F.2(8)/84 L.C. S.No. 4.

*Paragraph 4.1, supra.

"Paragraph 4.4, supra.

*Paragraphs 5.4 and 6.1, supra.

*Paragraph 7.1, supra.

‘Paragraph 8.5, supra.

Main Recom-
mendations.


0

10.2. The Judicial Officers’ Protection Act, 1850 should be revised on the Act ig be

lines recommended in this Chapter.

(J.P. CHATURVEDD
Member

(DM, BAKSHD
Part-time Membe:

(K.K. MATHEW)
CHAIRMAN

(DR. M. 8, RAO)
Member

(VEPA P. SARATHD
Part-time Member

‘AK. SRINTVASAMURTHY)

Member-Secretary

DATED : 10th October, 1984.


.
. a t
“ APPENDI*
”
. Sections 75-77, INDIAN Pesan Cor:
; रे Sections 76 to 78 at the Indian Penal Cody react thn .

“Sections 76.-—Nothing is an offence which is done by « person who Gs er who hy

feason of a mistake of fact und not by reason of a mistake ef Saw in gord Sah believes
himself to be. bound by law to do &,

ue in thocction_77-<Nothing is an offence which is done by a Judge when acting judicially
’ in ate enetcive of any power which ix. or which in_ good fark he # ००४७५ to be. given to
im law, ~

313 “Section 78,--Nothing which is done in pursuance of. or which ix warranted by the
judgement or order of, a court of Justice. if done whilst such judeemen ता order tomains
in force, is an offence, notwithsianding the Court may dy fa Urisdiaion ta pass
such judgement or order, provided the rerson doing ‘the ac. in cond faith helieve, iba:
the Court had such jurisdiction.”

APPENDIX 2
N ENoLsit 1.49 AS To THE PROTECTION oF JUDGES
English 'aw as to the protection of Judges has had an interes ition i
f in Eneland, ॥ व Br {by case Taw) made hetweer sup 41९4 in

in this context, For example, the view taken in ihe 19th century,
- ‘was an unsuccessful action against Mr. Justice Blackburn. was that’ - Century as to

Superior
“This is a principle of our taw that no actinn Mord Le amit at induc of une Courts,
of the superior courts’, for a judicial act though it be alleged १0 have done maticiously
re and corruptly.”

In the eave of inferior courts, which held the Presiding feri

officers liable where a wrong was committed in excess | fiction.’ For example, ji Cont.

~~ were in such cases—ie, in matters beyond their juriciction held perssrally liable: for for Courts,
damages for false imprisonment and assault even where they had acted in good faith:

and officers executing their judgements were similarly liable!.

In 1848, the Justices Protection Act. was gassed, protecting justices aciin,: within

— their furisdiction, unless the plaintiff proved malice and want at reasonable and probable
cause’. This statute, to some extent, brought the Position of the justices nearer to the
Position of the Judges of the superior courts.

: As to acts of Justices without jurisdiction. however, the staiute of 1848 gave no pro-
है. tection*,
a -
4 Until 1975, the position in England appears 10 have been as under’: -- Position
oh tne 197s,
d fa) No action lies against any judge of a superior (सदा in respect of anything done
- or said by him in the exercise of his duties. no matter how malicious er wrongful’, or
(prebabty) even if he is acting outside his jurisdiction. .
eB (b) Judges of other courts ‘inferior ००0) are liable for acts outside jurisdiction,
“ The wathorities stated (so far, ef course, only in retution 20 judge. of inferior courts), that
५९ a judge was liable for exceeding his jurisdiction’. .
’

\Fray र. Blackbura, (1863) B & 5 $76, 578. 122ER 217 (Crompton J).

- *Emphasis added,
*See O'Connor v. Issac, (1956) 1 All E.R. 513.
‘Wade, Administrative Law (1977), pages 640-641.

*Section 1, Justices’ Protection Act,1848. See now section 44, Protection of. Justices, Act,1979.
"Section 2, Justices’ Protection Act, 1848.
2808 (a) L.A. She. idan, “Protection of Justices” (1961) 14 Modern Law Rev. 267,

(०) D. Thompsun “‘Jucic‘al Immunity and the Protection of Justices” ( 1958) 21 MAL-R°

"Anderson v. Corrie (1895) 1 Q.B. 668 (C.A.)

*Calder y. Halket, (1840) 3 Moo, P.C. 28; 13 E.R. 12 (०.0); (1835-1842) All E.R. . 306
, ) Palme Crone, sei KB. 804; joe v. G.P, Mount Pleasant Post O fice, 09663 All.
\ कु



(०) By virtue of the Justices Protection Act, 194
done outside his jurisdiction and (ii) for acts done wi
out maliciously or without reasonable and probable cause.
and want of teasonabie and probable cause is on

a magistrate is liable (i) for acts
the jurisdiction which are carried
of providing malice

In 1975, there came an important judgement of the Court af Agpeal. The distinction
between superior and inferior courts seems to have been over-ruled by that decision of the
Court of Appeal, 1975, According to the judgement of Lord Denning M.R. in that case’

“Every judge of the courts of this land—from the highest to the lowest’—should be
proiected to the same degree, and liable to the same degree. What he does
may be outside his jurisdiction—in fact or in law—but so jong onestly believes
it to be within his jurisdiction, he should not be liable.”

According to this view, every judge, whether of a superior court or of an inferior court
(including a Magistrate), is immune in respect of judicial acs dene in an honest belief
that the acts are within ‘his jurisdiction, Although the judgements of members of the Court
of Appeal give different reasons for the conclusion reached the Court of Appeal seems
to have been unanimous on the question of treating all judges alike. There seemed no
logic in leaning more heavily on magistrates or circuit judges, Duckly LJ, was satisfied that
the authorities established that there was no distinction made in principie!-,

This seems to be the better view, although some writers are cautious enough to state
that inferior Judges are liable for all’ acts done in excess of jurisdiction’,

At the same time, it should be mentioned that by section 45 of the Justices of Peace
Act, 1979, an action is allowed against Justices for an act done without jurisdiction, where
the conviction or order of the Justices has been quashed by the High Court

See O'Connor v. Issac (1956) 1 All E.R. 513-527.

4Sirross v. Moore (1975) Q.B.D. 118: (1974) 3 All E.R. 776, 785 (C.A.).
*Emphasis added.

4Sirros v. Moore, (1975) Q.B.D. 118; (1974) 3 All E.R. 776, 787, 788 (C.A.).
*Braziev, “Judicial Immunity” (1976) Public Law 397, 408.

*E.g. Salmond Torts (1981), page 387.

MGIPCBE—S IV-—13 M of LJ & CA/ND/84—16-8-85—625,

.

Decision of
1975.

Act of
1979.

Me

ya