LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTH REPORT
ON
QUALITY CONTROL AND
INSPECTION OF
CONSUMER GOODS

October, 1984

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs


ERRATA

Index-i Chapter 4 4 amendments amendment
D.O. Letter 2. D.O.No.F.2(U)/84-L.C.  D.O.No.F.2(1)/
84-L.C.
~do- 7 Quaity Quality
I 1 2.1. 2 provide provides
Il 1 Foot note 2A Al03rd 103rd
it 3 3.1 4 te-Port Report
iil 3 3.1 6 section sections
I 3 3.5 3 leave leaves
Til 4 3.6 2 and 3 section sections
Til 4 3.8 5 section sections
4 Foot note 18 F. No.18 F.No.14
IV 5 4.1 il my may
IV 5 4.2 1 above shows above case
shows
Vv 10 5.12 11 raise raises
VI 12 6.10 10 carriers carries
14 Appendix 2 BILLS BILL
15 last line advisory Advisory

17 MofLJ&CA/84


JUSTICE K.K. MATHEW

D. 0. NO. F. 2(U)/84-L.C.
New DELnt,
DaTED, THE 27TH OcToBER, 1984.

My dear Minister,

Lam forwarding herewith the One Hundred and Fifth Report
of the Law Commission on “Quality Control and Inspection of Con-
sumer Goods”. The subject was taken up by the Law Commission
on its own.

The Commission is indebted to Dr. M. 8. Rao. Member, and
Shri A. K. Srinivasamurthy, Member-Secretary. for their valuable
assistance in the preparation of the Report.

With regards,

Yours sincerly,
(Sd.)
K. K. MATHEW

Shri Jagannath Kaushal.

Minister of Law, Justice
and Company Affairs,

New DELHI.

Endl: 105th Report


CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER

APPENDIX

INDEX

Introduction

Existing law on the subject

Further developments in U. K. law

The position in India - The need for amendments
Comments received on the Working Paper
Further consideration and recommendations

Draft Bill

@

5—6
6—10
11--13

14


CHAPTER |
INTRODUCTION

1.1. Consumer protection, of late, is increasingly receiving attention both,
in the Press and Government in our country. It appears that the Government of
India have set up Consumer Protection Council of India under the Chairman-
ship of the Minister in the Ministry of Civil Supplies. Addressing the first meet-
ing of the Consumer Prote: in New Delhi, the Minister appears to
have referred to the inci tion of manufacturing processes and
with the tremendous expansion of markets, the control of the consumer in the
modern economic structure left him a prey to innumerable disadvantages. It
would appear that the Delhi Administration have decided to set up a technical
laboratory where foodstutis and other consumable goods purchased by the con-
sumers could be tested about their quality.

1.2. A letter,’ inter-alia, stating that representations had been received poin-
ting out that difficulties are experienced by persons who had purchased defective
electrical goods and thereafter found themselves helpless: has been received in
the Commission. The Correspondent suggested that the Law Commission may
consider the advisability of recommending the amendments to the law on the
lines of the U.K. Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act, 1973 and the Unfair
Contract Terms Act, 1977. But there is no reference to the Law Commission
from the Government on the subject. However, as the question of consumer
protection is engaging the attention of the Government as well as the public
and in view of its importance, the Law Commission has taken up the subject
for consideration.

1.3. We may at this juncture state that the question of amending the Indian
Contract Act to provide relief against unfair terms in standard forms of contracts,
on the model of U.K. Unfair Contract Terms Act, 1977, has been the subject
matter of a separate report’* In this report, it is proposed to go into the ques-
tion as to how best to safeguard consumer interests in respect of purchase of
costly electrical gadgets etc. without the consumer being driven to initiate costly
and, possibly, long drawn out litigation.

CHAPTER II
EXISTING LAW ON THE SUBJECT

2.1. The conditions and warranties governing the sale of goods are contained
in sections 11 to 17 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930. Section 11 provide that unless
a different intention appears from the terms of the contract, stipulation as to time
is not deemed to be the essence of a contract. Section 12 defines the terms ‘con-
dition’ and ‘warranty’: section 13 when a condition may be treated as a warranty;
section 14 of the implied condition to title, quiet possession etc.; section 15 as
to sale by description; section 16 as to implied conditions as to quality of fitness
and section 17 as to sale by sample.

Financial Express (27.11.1983)
*Law Commission File No. F.2(1)84-LC, S.No. 2
24A103rd Report cf the Law Commission.


2.2. The normal principle of law is summed up in the maxim ‘caveat
emptor’ and is based on the presumption that the buyer is relying on his own
skill and judgment when he effects a purchase. There are. however, recognised
exceptions to the above rule. First. “where a manufacturer or dealer contracts
to supply an article which he manufactures or produces. or in what he deals. to
be applied to particular purpose. so that the buyer necessarily trusts to the judg-
ment or skill of the manufacturer or dealer there is in that case an implied term
or warranty that it shall be reasonably fit for the purpose to which it is to be
applied. In such a case the buyer trusts to the manufacturer or dealer, and relies
upon his judgment and not upon his own”.*,

2.3. The second crception is that where ods are bought by description
from a seller who deals in goods of that description. there is an implied term
that the goods shall be of merchantable quality. Both the common law rule as
well as the exceptions are incorporated in section 16 of the Sale of Goods Act.
1930. which is based upon section J4 of the English Act.

24. The first exception would apply in a case where the deseription of the
goods required is given by the buyer and they point to the fact that they are
required for a particular purpose. In such a case, it would be a fair inference
that the goods are being ordered for that particular purpose. It was held that
where a person who had no special knowledge or skill with regard to hot-water
bottles. went to a chemist who sold such articles and asked for a ‘hot-water-
bottle’, the court might justly infer that the goods were bought and sold for the
purpose of being used as a hot-water-bottle.‘ Similarly, a retail dealer in woollen
goods who sells underpants must know that they are required for the particular
purpose of being worn next to the skin.

2.5. But the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 16 of the Act provides,
inter-alia, that if the contract for sale is for a specified article under its patent
or other trade name, there is in that case an implied condition as to its fitness
for any particular purpose. It was, however, held that although a person may
order an article under a patent or trade name. yet if at the same time the buyer
makes ft clear to the seller that he is relying on the seller’s skill and judgment
to ensure that the article shall be fit for a particular purpose, the proviso has
no application.’

2.6. This leads us to the second exception to the common law rule of ‘caveat
emptor’, namely, that the goods should be of merchantable quality where goods
are bought from a seller who deals in the goods of that description. whether he
is the manufacturer or producer or not. It applies specially for latent defects which
could not be noticed on inspection of the goods. Where the plaintiff had his hair
dyed by the defendant at his hair dressing establishment with a product recom-
mended by the defendant as a good hair dye and he contracted dermatitis as a
direct result of the use of the hair dye, the defendant was held liable in damages.’

2.7. Further, section 15. inter-alia, provides that there is an implied condition
that the goods correspond with the description. The Indian law is largely based
on the U.K. Sale of Goods Act.

Yones Vs. Just, (1868)L.R. 3 QB 197

‘Preist Vs. Last, (1903) 2 KB 148.

°Grant Vs. Ausiralian Knitting Mills Ltd, AIR 1936 PC 34.

“Baldry Vs. Marshal. (1925) | KB 260.

TWatson Vs. Buckley, Osborne, Garrett & Co. Ltd. (1940) 1 &॥ E.R. 174.


CHAPTER TIT

FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS IN U. K. LAW

३.1. In the U.K., law on Sale of Goods has been amended largely on the
recommendations of the Law Commission of England. The Law Commission of
England had made three reports on exemption clauses in contracts. The first re-
207," a joint report of the English and Scottish Law Commission, contains a
number of recommendations in relation to the sale of goods, amendments to
section 12 to 15 and 55 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1893. dealing with implied
terms in the contract of sale and to the regulation of the clause excluding or
limiting the effect of those terms. On the basis of the first report. the Supply
of Goods (Implied Terms) Act, 1973 was enacted. The main object of the 1973
Act was severely to limit the sellers’ right to exclude these implied terms. The
Act also implied those conditions. suitably adjusted, to contracts of hire pur-
chase. and these provisions have now been re-enacted. with minor amendments.
by the Consumer Credit Act. 1974. The 1973 Act also improves obligations on
the supplier of goods on redemption of trading stamps that are to the same
general effect as the implied conditions under a contract of sale or hire purchase.
The legislation was consolidated by the Sale of Goods Act. 1979."

3.2. The second report" is concerned with provisions excluding or restricting
any Icgal duty or obligation owed by one person to another and which does not
fall within the ambit of Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act, 1973. While the
first report is a joint report of the Law Commission of England and the Scottish
Law Commission. in the second two Law Commissions have reached a wide mea-
sure of agreement on the main issues but have divergent conclusions on two
matters of fundamental importance, largely based on the local laws.' We are,
however. not concerned with them in this report.

3.3. The second report, among other things, considered the purported ex-
clusion of liability for ‘negligence’ and of liability for breaches of contracts other
than contracts for the supply of goods. The Unfair Trade Practices Act, 1977.
is largely based on the second report of the Commission. The second report deals
with the contracts for supply of goods otherwise than by sale or hire-purchase
of goods: like contract of hire of goods, contract for work and materials; re-
garding the condition of title, compliance with the description, merchantability
and fitness and to ensure that the consumer obtains benefits in respect of these
conditions despite any attempt to contract out of them.

3.4. The third report’ made by the Law Commission of England deals with
the subjects which are not dealt with by the first two reports. It deals with the
terms to be implied in other contracts of supply, like contracts analogous to
sale: such as contracts of barter and of work and materials.

3.5. As pointed out" earlier, the subject of unfair terms in standard form
of contract is receiving our separate attention. Therein we deal with attempts
to impose undue terms in contracts. That leave us with the first and third reports
of the English Law Commission.

‘U.K. Law Commission No. 24. Sct. Law Commission No, 12.

“The Law of Consumer Protection and Fair Trading by Brian W Harvey, 2nd Edition,
0.84-85.

"U.K. Law Commission No, 69 Scot. Law Commission No. 39,

U.K. Ibid paras 4 & 5

जार, Law Com, No, 95

‘Chapter 1. supra.



3.6. In the first report. the English Law Commission dealt with the amend-
ments to section 12 to 15 and 55 of the U.K. Sale of Goods Act. We have corres-
ponding provisions in section 12 to 17 in the Indian Sale of Goods Act, 1930.
Section 12 of the U.K. Act deals with implied undertaking as to title etc. That
section was recommended to be amended to provide that the exclusion or vari-
ation of the conditions of warranties should only be possible where it is clear
that the seller is purporting to sell a limited title. In other words, the seller
is not permitted to exclude the warranties of quiet possession, free from any
charges or encumbrances in favour of the third parties. Section 13 dealing with
sales by description is recommended to be amended to make it clear that the
sale of goods in super-markets. where goods are exposed for self-selection by the
buyer, is also to be treated as sale by description within the meaning of section
13 of the Act.

3.7, Section 14 dealing with implied conditions as to quality or fitness and
section 15 dealing with sale by sample are sought to be amended to provide
that the conditions implied therein continued to be applicable to goods which
are supplied under a contract of sale even if such goods are themselves not
the subject-matter of the sale: the condition of fitness for purpose should no
longer be confined to sales where the goods are of a description which deals
with the sellers business to supply. but should be extended to cover all sales in
which the seller is acting in the course of the business. The provision about
reliance on the sellers’ skill and judgment involved in the contract of sale is
replaced by a provision whereby the condition for fitness will be implied unless
the circumstances are such as to show that the buyer did not rely or that it was
unreasonable for him to rely on the scller’s skill and judgment. Section 15 is
sought to be amended to make it clear that the definition of merchantable quality
applies not only to sale of goods in the course of business but also to sales by
samples. Section 55 is sought to be amended to negative the right to exclude
implied terms and conditions in a contract of sale. As stated earlier, these recom-
mendations are given effect to by the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act,
1973,

3.8. The Unfair Contract Terms Act, 1977, which is primarily concerned
with making nugatory exemption clauses negativing liability in negligence by
one contracting party to another also contains provisions to restate the posi-
tion with regard to attempts to exclude or modify the implied conditions contained
in section 12 to 15 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1893 (now the 1979 Act) (and the
parallel legislation for contracts of hire purchase).

3.9. 11 would appear that all these attempts to amend the law about the
implied conditions e.g. merchantable quality etc. did not fully clarify the posi-
tion and the public concern about sale of faulty goods is highlighted in the
introduction of a Private Member’s Bill in November, 1978, the Supply of Goods
(Amendment) Bill. This Bill was later withdrawn and instead the Lord Chan-
cellor referred the matter to the Law Commission who were asked to consider:

(a) whether the undertakings as to the quality and fitness of goods implied
under the law relating to sale of goods, hire purchase and other con-
tracts for the supply of goods require amendment:

(b) the circumstances in which a person, to whom goods are supplied under
a contract of sale, hire-purchase or other contract for the supply of
goods, is entitled. where there has been a breach by the supplier of a
term implied by statute to

"See Brian W Harvey, (note 9 supra) at p. 98.


(i) reject the goods and treat the contract as repudiated;

(ii) claim against the supplier a diminution in or extinction of the
price;

(iii) claim damages against the supplier;

(c) the circumstances in which by reason of the Sale of Goods Act (1979)
a buyer loses the right to reject the goods.

3.10. The Law Commission recommended in its 95th Report on “Implied
Terms in Contracts for the supply of goods” that there should be legislation
imposing clear terms as to title correspondence with description, merchantability
and fitness for purpose in all contracts for the transfer of goods (other than those
contracts primarily dealing with Sale of Goods and Hire Purchase Agreements).
The draft Bill annexed to the Report makes it clear that the statutory term
should apply not only to contracts of hire and barter but also to contracts for
work and materials, the implied terms applying in respect of the materials.

3.11. No legislative action on the Law Commission's proposals appears to
have yet been taken and the problem is still under consideration.

CHAPTER IV
THE POSITION IN INDIA—THE NEED FOR AMENDMENT

4.1. We may to begin with refer to the decision in Raghava Menon Vs.
Kuttappan Nair." There the plaintiff purchased a wrist-watch from the defendant.
The watch did not give satisfactory service inspite of the fact that the seller had
tried to set it right a number of times. The buyer sued the seller for the replace-
ment of the watch or the refund of the price. It was held that the seller was
bound to replace the watch or, in the alternative, to pay back its price. It was
observed that:

“the plaintiff is a layman and he approaches a fairly reputed firm like the
defendant dealing in watches and purchases a watch from them, not for
any special purpose, but for the common purpose of knowing the correct
time. In such a case, section 16(1) of the Sales of Goods Act my apply,
because the buyer makes known to the seller, by implication, the purpose
for which he purchases the watch and also relies on the seller’s skill or
judgment.””

4.2, The above shows that where a buyer seeks to enforce his remedy in a
court of law and is able to establish that the commodity is not of merchandis-
able quality or that spurious parts have been added, he might successfully enforce
his rights against the seller.

4.3, But times have changed. In our country, due to developmental acti-
vities, a wide variety of goods are manufactured. People are beginning to enjoy
the fruits of industrial advance made in this country. In these days of production
and sale of sophisticated clectrical gadgets, a purchaser of these articles may not
be able to establish that parts are defective or that there has been substitution
of genuine parts by substandard or imitation parts. It is to this aspect of the
matter that we address ourselves to in the report.

See Brian W. Harvey, (note 9 Supra) at p. 98.
“AIR 1962 Kerala 318.
MIbid at p. 320

2-17 M of LJ & CA/84


4.4. We have given careful consideration whether the Indian Sale of Goods
Act should also be amended suitably on the lines of U.K. Supply of Goods
(Implied Terms) Act, 1973 as subsequently amended in 1979. We had earlier
noticed how the existing provisions were interpreted by the courts. Even in UK.,
in spite of the amendments to law, a learned commentator expresses the view
that the consumer is still not adequately protected from avoidable and common
problems in consumer sales."*

4.5. It would, therefore, appear that mere amendment to Sale of Goods Act
will not solve the problem of consumer protection. Our ma‘n aim is to suggest
Preventive steps rather than suggesting amendments to the law. on the lines
of amendments made to U.K. Sale of Goods Act. Besides, it does not appear
that many consumers have sought to enforce the remedies even under the existing
Provisions of law. In such a situation it seems to us that the best way is to sug-
gest a method where a consumer can ensure that the goods he purchases are
tested as to the quality and standard at the time of purchase, if necessary
on payment of a small fee, rather than Suggest elaborate amendments to existing
law on sale of goods, which, as earlier noted, are a matter of opinion, whether
they have served their purpose, even in U.K.

CHAPTER 5
COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING PAPER

1. The Law Commission had,” before formulating its conclusions, pre-
pared a Working Paper setting forth the Present position and inviting the views
of interested persons and bodies on the subject, on certain tentative Proposals.
A large number of comments have been received on the Working Paper. The
Commission is grateful to those who have taken the trouble of expressing their
views on the Working Paper.

Professor Manubhai Shah, Managing Trustee, Consumer Education and
Research Centre, Ahmedabad who met the Member-Secretary of the Commission,
has made certain valuable suggestions regarding legislation for the protection
of the consumer. The Commission appreciates his keen interest in the subject.
The points made by him will be referred to later in this Chapter, at the appro-
priate place.”

The Commission was also happy to have a meeting with the Secretary to
the Government of India in the concerned Department, where the Government’s
points of view could be ascertained in detail. A gist of the points made by him
will be given in this Chapter at the appropriate place.”

We now proceed to give in the succeeding paragraphs, a gist of the views
expressed in the various comments.

"See Brian W Harvey, (note 9 supra) at 9. 98,

‘Law Commission of India, Working Paper on Quality Control and Inspection of
Consumer Goods, April, 1984. ty Pection ०

“Paragraph 5.12, infra.
“Paragraph 5.13, infra.

All comments received upto the date of signing this Report have been taken into
account,


5.2. By and large, the comments received on the Working Paper” favour the
proposals put forth in the Working Paper, the only exception being one State
Government.*

One of the comments, while agreeing with the main proposals, does not
favour the creation of an Advisory Council.”

Some of the comments suggest the enactment of legislation much wider in
scope than had been proposed in the Working Paper.”

A few comments suggest the incorporation of more stringent sanctions than
those that were proposed in the Working Paper.”

The points made in the various comments are dealt with in this Chapter,
at the appropriate place.

5.3. As already stated,* the vast majority of comments received on the
Working Paper issued by the Commission favour the proposals that were put
forth in the Working Paper, which were substantially the same as the recom-
mendations that are going to be made in this Report.

These include—
(a) Three State Governments;” (West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh and Sikkim):
(b) two High Courts;”

(c) One lawyers’ association (the Incorporated Law Society of Calcutta,”
though it has suggested certain changes;

(9) One trade association, namely, the All India Motor & Transport Con-
gress, New Delhi.”

5.4. One State Government (Government of Haryana) has expressed its dis-
agreement with the proposals that had been put forth in the Working Paper®.
It has stated that the proposed legislation, instead of rendering justice cheap and
speedy, would make it more expensive and cumbersome, as the consumer shall
have to supply the samples of costly goods for examination and then make him-
self available to the Public Analyst for cross-examination at his own expense.
On the first aspect, we may state that without supply of purchased goods for
examination by the Public Analyst, it would not be possible to establish that
sub-standard or spurious goods were supplied to the consumer. As regards the
second aspect of the State Government’s comments, namely, that the consumer
has to make himself available for cross-examination at his own expense, it may
be pointed out that the proposal of the Commission does not envisage cross-
examination of the purchaser by the Public Analyst. All that is sought to be

paragraph 5.3, infra.
‘Paragraph 5.4, infra.

Paragraph 5.5, infra.

“Paragraphs 5.6, 5.7 and 5.9, infra.

"$e infra.

“Paragraph 5.2, supra.

*Law Commission File No. F.2(1)84LC 5. No. 7, 9 and 10.
आ 8७ Commission File No. F.2(1)84-LC 8. No. 16 and 17.
"Law Commission File No. F.2(1)/84-LC 5. No. 11.
Law Commission File No. F.2(1)/84-LC 5. No. 5.

Law Commission File No. F.2(1)/84-LC S. No. 17.

3-17 M of LI & CA/84


provided is that the purchaser who has purchased the goods, if he so doubts
its quality, could take it to the Public Analyst and (on paying a reasonable fee)
can get a report on the quality of the goods purchased. We do not think that this
can be regarded as too burdensome.

5.5. One High Court™ has suggested that the provision relating to consti-
tution of advisory council (as envisaged in the proposal of the Commission)
would defeat ity parpose, and cause delay.

We have given careful consideration to this aspect. It is possible that con-
sultation with the Advisory Board may cause some delay in implementation of
the regulatory measures envisaged by proposed legislation. But we believe that
that would not be too big a price to pay for the other benefits expected to accrue
from such consultation. In legislation which may affect various sections of the
community, it appears to be wise to provide for consultation with the interests
likely to be affected.

5.6. Some of the comments on the Working Paper have made a plea for
giving a wider scope to the proposals. For example, the All India Motor &
Transport Congress, New Delhi, has suggested that the proposals should cover
automobile parts also, in order to protect the consumer from exploitation by
unscrupulous manufacturers who supply spurious and sub-standard automobile
parts." One State Government (Government of Andhra Pradesh) has also sug-
gested that the proposals should be more comprehensive.*

One High Court also favours a wider coverage of consumer goods, parti-
cularly, automobiles and automobile spares, and points out that defects in such
products may have disastrous consequences on human life or safety.”

5.7. Some suggestions have been made for higher or additional sanctions.
For example, the Government of Andhra Pradesh favours rigid quality control
and test checking of the products at the stage of manufacture itself.*

Professor Manubhai Shah, in his meeting with the Member-Secretary, has
Suggested that there should be a system of recalling of goods, to ensure that
either the manufacturer himself recalls goods not fit for consumption or a govern-
mental agency is empowered to do it.”

5.8. In regard to the comments which suggest a wider coverage, we may
observe straightaway that the scope of the present report is limited to the pro-
tection of the consumer in respect of certain types of electrical appliances which
are costly and which are purchased only once in a way. One of the reasons in
so limiting the proposal has been our consciousness that infrastructural facilities
of the nature and magnitude that would be needed if the coverage is made very
wide do not, at present, exist in the country. In particular, public analysts may
not be available in sufficient number for testing the quality of all goods within
a reasonable time and at reasonable fees. Without such facilities on an adequate
scale, consumer protection in the area dealt with in this Report would not be a
reality.

“Law Commission File No. F.2(1)/84-LC 5. No. 17.
“Law Commission File No, F.2(1)/84-LC S. No. 5.

‘Law Commission File No. F.2(1)/84-LC $. No. 9.
“Law Commission File No. F.2(1)/84-LC 5. No. 16.
Law Commission File No. F.2(1)/84-LC 5. No. 9.
"See paragraph 5.12, item (2) infra.


5.9. One High Court, in its comment” on the Working Paper, has stated that
the proposal should cover not only consumer goods, but also consumer services
like dry cleaning, accommodation in public auditoria and the like. While we
appreciate the suggestion that consumer services also may have to be regulated,
the proposal of the Commission is only with reference to consumer protection
of costly electrical appliances. Any legislation that may be required in regard to
regulation of consumer services will naturally have to run on different lines.

5.10. The Government of West Bengal has suggested that there should be
penal provisions which could be put into operation if the specified articles do
not conform to the prescribed standards. An emphasis on prosecution has also
been placed by the Government of Andhra Pradesh."-"

उन. After careful consideration, the Commission does not favour the in-
clusion of penal provisions in the legislation recommended in the present Re-
Port. Proposals of the nature put forth here are primarily intended to give effec-
tive relief to the consumer. No doubt, penal provisions for large scale violations
of consumer laws may not necessarily be ruled out. But the insertion of such
a liability will be a question involving a consideration of several aspects, in-
cluding the gravity of the deviation, the requisite mental element and the aspect
of enforcement. Jt will also necessitate a consideration of the question whether
the provisions of the general criminal law-and also of certain special Acts which
impose criminal liability—are not, for all practical purposes, sufficient.

5.12. It may at this stage be mentioned that Professor Manubhai Shah,
Managing Trustee. Consumer Education and Research Centre, Ahmedabad, visi-
ted the Law Commission and had an informal discussion with the Member-
Secretary on the subject of Consumer Protection. A gist of the general obser-
vations made in this behalf by Professor Shah is given below :—

(1) Standard.—tIn case of inherently dangerous goods, the system of com-
pulsory certification should be introduced.

(2) Recalling —A system of recalling of goods should be introduced. Steps
should be taken to ensure that either the manufacturer himself recalls
the goods which are not fit for consumption, or a Governmental agency
does it.

(3) Standards.—The role of the Indian Standards Institution should not be
confined to putting its marks on the products. It may also be empower-
ed to issue compulsory certificates. It may further be entrusted with
supervisory role in such matters.

.

(4) Remedy.—Government should establish a forum which could be app-
roached by the consumers to obtain proper remedies for the goods which
are deterimental to the general health of the public.

(5) Testing any product.—A system should be devised whereby, either on
a complaint being made by a Member of the public or otherwise, any
product could be tested by the mannfacturer.

(6) Cost of testing —It may also be necessary to provide for cases of lia-
bility to bear the cost, that is to say, who should bear the cost of test-

“Law Commission File No. F.2(1)/84-LC 5. No. 16.
अजय 4७ Commission File No. F.2(1)/84-LC S. No. 7 & 9.


ing the products, the manufacturer or the consumer? There is every
likelihood of the goods getting damaged during testing, in either of the
two ways :—

(i) the process of testing itself requires the breaking of the product/
goods.

(ii) the breaking of the goods in the process of testing owing to negli-
gence or mishandling.

Suitable provision should be made in this behalf to ensure liability.

We have made a note of these suggestions made by Professor Shah. The
suggestions at (1) to (4) are outside the range of this Report, whose scope is
linked as already pointed out. The suggestion at (5) also raise practical problems
of administrative machinery and the like.

The point raised at (6) above should, we think, be taken care of by rules.
However, practical difficulties experienced in the working of the proposed legis-
lation could, and should be tackled by appropriate amendment.

5.13. We may finally refer to the views expressed by the Secretary, Ministry
of Food and Civil Supplies, Department of Civil Supplies, in reply to the
Working Paper issued by the Commission. Shri M. Subramanian, Secretary, De-
partment of Civil Supplies, appeared before the Commission on 4th September,
1984, and informed us that Government has under consideration proposals to
amend the Indian Standards Institution (Certification of Marks) Act, 1952 and
the Standards of Weights and Measures Enforcement Act, by a Bill which was
introduced in the last session of Parliament. According to Shri Subramanian,
Government seeks to empower itself to prescribe certain standards in respect of.
consumer goods and it is envisaged that a suitable enforcement machinery be
set up by simplifying the procedures in the Courts to give quick relief to the
consumers. During the course of the discussion, he appreciated the suggestion of
the Commission in the Working Paper to provide a right to the consumer to
obtain test report of the specified products from a Public Analyst. He in-
formed us that Government would duly consider incorporating the Commission’s
recommendations in the proposed legislation which the Government contem-
plated to undertake in the forthcoming session of Parliament. He also informed
that the Government is contemplating to set up a statutory All India Consumers
Protection Council. He also mentioned that the Delhi Administration and the
Government of Madhya Pradesh have initiated legislation on consumer protec-
tion.

5.14, We have noted these developments as intimated to us. We should,
in this context, record that, as stated earlier, the object of the present proposal
is to give relief to consumers in respect of certain costly electrical appliances.
Whether, having regard to the information and the resources available, the scope
of quality control should be enlarged to cover all consumer goods, are wider
questions which are outside this Report.

5.15. Having considered the views expressed on the Working Paper, we
proceed to set out our detailed recommendations in the next Chapter.

“Law Commission File No. F.2(1)/84-LC, S. No. 12.


CHAPTER VI

FURTHER CONSIDERATION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1. It may not be oui of place to mention that the Law Commisison in its
Eighth Report considered the revision of Sale of Goods Act, 1930. While consi-
dering whether any amendment to section 16 of the Act is necessary, the Com-
mission left it to the Union and State Governments whether as a matter of policy,
they should undertake {egislation, having regard to the observations made by the
Commission therein." No amendment to that section has been undertaken so far.
We shall deal with the Commission's recommendations later on this report.

6.2. At the same time. we feel that the existing law is inadequate and needs
to be strengthened to meet a situation where a purchaser intends to ensure about
the quality of goods at the time of purchase. Jt would seem that a law providing
not only for certain minimum standards of quality of the goods but also machinery
to ensure such standards. is necessary in our country. [t should provide for a
machinery to get the quality of the goods tested by any interested purchaser,

6.3. As pointed out by the Law Commission® earlier, there are some Acts
which lay down or provide for the making of rules to prescribe standards of
quality, such as the Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marketing) Act, 1937
and the Drugs Act, 1940. There are subsequent enactments also, e.g. The Preven-
tion of Food Adultcration Act and the Export (Quality Control and Inspec-
tion) Act. 1963. These provide that articles should conform to certain minimum
standards. They also provide a penalty if they do not conform to those stand-
ards. The Drugs Act prohibits the sale of goods which are not of the standard
quality. The Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963, inter-alia em-
powers the Government to notify commodities which shall be subject to quality
control or inspection or both prior to exports. The State is also empowered to
lay down standards to which exported goods have to conform.

6.4. Standards are jaid down by the Indian Standards Institution, set up
under the I.S.J. (Classification of Marks) Act, 1952. As pointed out earlier, a
large variety of consumer goods are produced now in our country and large
number of middie class families purchase them. Some of them, like T.V., Refri-
gerator, etc. are purchased only once in a way. It is necessary that Parliament
enact a law that these electrical gadgets etc. sold in the market conform to
minimum standards prescribed under a Parliamentary Act.

6.5. It may be pointed out that Parliament is empowered to make a law
with regard to industries, the control of which has been declared by Parliament
by law to be expedient in the public interest. It is thus possible for Parliament
to control the quality of products of the industries mentioned in the Schedule
to Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. Just as Parliament made
law seeking to ensure the quality of goods meant for export, we recommend that
Parliament may enact a law for conforming to quality laid down under the Act
in respect of internal trade also. There can be no doubt that Parliament is com-
petent to enact such a law. Such a law would be a reasonable restriction on the
tight to carry on a business in the public interest.

6.6. The Export (Quality, Control and Inspection) Act, 1963 inter-alia,
Provides that the Export Inspection Council cstablished under the Act, shall

“Law Commission of India, Eighth Report, Page 8.
“Law Commission, of India Bighth Report, Para 18.

4—17 M of LJ & CA/84

वा


12

advise the Government regarding measures for the enforcement of quality con-
trol and inspection की relation to commodities intended for export. Under that
Act. the Government may. by notification, establish agencies for quality control
or inspection. or both. An agency so appointed by the Government may hold
or cause to be held such examination as it thinks fit relating to quality control
hold

or inspection. or both. An agency so appointed by the Government
or cause to be held such examination as it thinks fit relating to quality control
or inspection of notified commodities either at the time of export or earlier in
such testing houses or by such surveyors or samplers as are approved by the
Central Government in that behalf. Under that Act the Central Government after
consulting the Export Inspecion Council notify commodities which shall be sub-
ject to quality control or inspection and establish standard specifications for any
notified commodity.

6.7. The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act. 1954. empowers the Central
Government or the State Government to appoint Public Analysts for such areas.
as may be assigned. Under that Act, Government also may appoint Food Tnspec-
tors who shall have the powers to take samples of any article of food from any
persons selling such articles and to send such samples for analysis to the Public
Analyst for the respective area with a view to ensure that the articles of food
are not adulterated.

6.8. It would appear to us. on a careful consideration, that similar machinery
should be set up by the Government under a Parliamentary enactment. whereby
analysts appointed under the Act. would have power to examine any clectrical
gadget or other consumer goods notified under the Act. and sold in the market,
to ensure that they conform to the quality laid down under the Act. This exami-
nation may be on the application of the purchaser and on payment of a small
fee. We recommend enactment of a law by Parliament in this regard.

6.9. We are of the considered opinion that such a law would go a long way
in checking the malpractices prevalent in the production/sale of goods with sub-
standard /spurious parts.

6.10. As stated earlicr."* the Law Commission has dealt with amendments to
Sale of Goods Act. 1980. While considering section 16 (implied conditions as
to quality or fitness), the Commission referred to its discussions with Deputy
Director, IST who suggested an amendment to section 16, inter-alia, to provide
that when Government lays down any standard for any purpose. the products
sold should conform to that standard. The Commission observed : ---

“What is necessary to achieve the object in view is a provision which will
imply in such cases a condition or warranty regarding the quality of the
goods, to the effect that the goods sold are of the quality which the standard
or other mark carriers with it. In the absence of an express or implied con-
dition or warranty regarding the quality of the goods. the purchaser would
not be able to claim a right to repudiate the contract or claim damages for
breach of the warranty. He may be liable for the penaltics provided under
the Acts. The enactment of a statutory condition or warranty may affect
a large class of merchants and middlemen, It is a matter of policy to be
decided by the Union and the State Governments whether they should under-
take such legislation. In the circumstances we do not propose to make any
recommendation on the question raised by the Deputy Director.”

“Law Commission of Ind th Report.


6.11. But times have changed. Jt would appear that with the increasing tempo
in production of wide variety of goods and of the abuses in marketing them, a
law to ensure quality of goods for sale. is called for.

6.12. As a result of the discussions contained in the preceding Chapters,
we recommend enactment of a law:

(i) to ensure that the quality of goods sold are according to the standards
laid down under the proposed law

(i) for the constitution of advisory councils with reference 10 particular
classes of goods or particular industries.

7 (iii) for the appointment of public analysts for such areas as may be assi-
gned. with power to examine any notified goods and sold in the market,
to ensure that they conform to the quality laid down under the Act.

6.13. To give a conerete shape to our recommendations, we annex a draft
Bill.

(K. K. MATHEW)
Chairman

(J. P. CHATURVEDI)
Member

(DR. M. B. RAO)
Member

पु (7, M. BAKSHI)
. Part-time Member

(VEPA P. SARATHI)
Part-time Member

(A. K. SRINIVASAMURTHY)
i Member-Secretary

DATED

13


7 aw PF

APPENDIX
DRAFT BILLS
(CONSUMER GOODS TESTING OF QUALITY)
CONTENTS
Cuarree 1. PRELIMINARY -

Shor; title, extent and commenccem ni.

Jnterpre:ation.
Goods to which the Act applies.

CHAPIER 2 --TestiNG OF (0005 DEL!VERED UNDER SALE

Testing of quality.

Conten‘s of application, and fees.

Testing and repor: by Pui Analyst.

Use of report in evideace. “
Cuaprir 3 MISCELLANEOUS

Appointment of Public Analysts. 4

(to be drafted)

Advisory Councils.
(10 be drafted)

Rules.
(to be drafted)


15

THE CONSUMER GOODS
(TESTING OF QUALITY) BILL 198

A
BILL

to make provision for the testing of (he quality of ceriain goods,
in the interests of consumers.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the year of
the Republic of India as follows :-

CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY

198 1. (1) This Act may be called the Consumer Goods (Testing of Quality) Act Shot! title, exten!
गो ment.

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — Interpretation.
(a) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(b) “Public Analysts” means a Public Analyst appointed under this Act;

(©) “specified goods” means goods to which this Act applies for the time
being; and
(d) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act, but defined in

the Sale of Goods Act, 1900, have the meanings respectively assigned to
them in that Act.

3. (1) This Act applies in the first instance to all electrical appliances, the Goods to which
manufacture of which is subject to the Provisions of the Industries (Development this Act applies.
and Regulation) Act, 1951, for the time being.

(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette
and subject to the provisions of this section, declare that the Provisions of this
Act shall apply also to such goods as may be mentioned in the notification.

(3) No notification shall be issued under this section in respect of any goods
unless a law regulating the production of such goods is within the legislative
competence of Parliament.

(4) The issue of a notification under this section shall be subject to the
condition of previous publication. and the provisions of the General Clauses
Act, 1897, shall apply in relation to such notification as they apply in relation
to rules which are subject to the condition of previous publication, the minimum
Period of pre-publication for this purpose being three months.

(5) No such notification shali be issued except on the recommendation of
the advisory Council constituted under section 9.


‘Testing of goods.

Contents of the
application. and
fees.

Testing and report
by Public Analyst.

Use of report in
evidence.

CHAPTER 2

TESTING OF GOODS

4. (1) Where. in an agreement for the sale of goods to which this section
applies,---

(a) there is an express term as to the quality of the goods to be delivered
thereunder. being a term which adopts any standard laid down by or
under any enactment for the time being in force. or

(0) & condition or warranty as to such quality is implicd by or under any
enactment for the Gime being in force.

then the purchaser to whom the goods have been delivered under such agres
ment may make an application in writing to the Public Analyst for testing the
goods with reference to such term. condition or warranty. as the case may be.

(2) This section applies to every agreement for the sale of specilied goods
at retail.

5. (1) Every application under section 4 shall specify. in reasonable detail,---

(a) the names and addresses of the purchaser and the seller:

(०) the goods purchased, and the price pai
(c) the date of purchase:

(d) the term, condition or warranty which may be applicable, and in what
respects it has been violated.

(2) The application shall further state that a copy thereof has been delivered
or posted to the seller on a date to be mentioned in the application.

(3) The application shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee.

6. (1) On receipt of the application mentioned in section 4 and on being
satisfied that the application is in all respects in accordance with the provisions
of this Act. the Public Analyst shall test the goods for ascertaining whether the
goods are in accordance with the term. condition or warranty specified in
section 4.

(2) For the purpose of holding such test, the Public Analyst shall take, from
the purchaser, a sample of the goods after giving at least one week’s notice to
the purchaser and the seller of his proposal to take such sample, and such
notice shall specify the date. time and place fixed for taking the sample.

(3) On completion of the test. the Public Analyst shall record his report
under his signature, copies whereof shall be posted by him to the purchaser as
well as to the seller.

(4) The Public Analyst may decline to give a report and direct refund of
the fees to the applicant, if for reasons to be recorded. it is impracticable to
conduct a test of quality in the circumstances of the case.

(5) The Public Analyst shall record his report within two months of the
application. except where prevented by unavoidable cause from doing so.

7. The report of the Public Analyst recorded under section 6 shall be
admissible in evidence of the matters to which it relates in any suit between the


17

purchaser and the seller arising out of the ugreement for sale to which the
report relates, without summoning the Public Analyst in court: but nothing in
this scetion shall affect the right of any party to any such proceeding to examine
or cross-examine the Public Analyst in court.

CHAPTER 3
MISCELLANEOUS

8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette. Appoint of Public
appoint as Public Analysts for the purposes of this Act. such number of persons Analysts.
as may be needed.

(2) Such Public Analysts may be appointed for particular classes of goods or
particular industries. as may be considered appropriate.

9. (1) The Central Government shall. by notification in the Official Gazette, Advis.
constitute Advisory Councils for performing the functions to be performed under Counc: ts.
this Act by such Councils.

(2) Separate Advisory Councils may be constituted with reference to par-
ticular classes of goods or particular industries as may be considered appropriate.

(3) Each Advisory Council shall consist of the following persons, to be
appointed by the Central Government :
(ay Chairman, who shall be a person with experience or expertise in busi-
ness or industry:

(b) two members representing business or industry: and

(c) two members representing consumers.

(4) No person shall be appointed as a Chairman who is actively engaged
in business or industry.

(5) The procedure to be followed by Advisory Councils and administrative

matters concerning them shall be such as may be prescribed.

10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, कि

make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1)
and in particular. such rules may provide for the following matters, namely :—

(a) the fees to be charged under sub-section (3) of section 5:

(0) the procedure to be followed by, and administrative matters concern-
ing. Advisory Councils constituted under section 10; and

(c) such other matters as are required or allowed to be prescribed.

(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be
laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while
it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if. before the expiry of the
session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the
rule should not be made. the rule shall thereafter have cffect only in such modified
from or be of no effect. as the case may be: so however that any such modifi-
cation or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre-
viously done under that rule.

MGIPCBE--SIV-—17 M of LI&CA/84—-6-9-85—625 Bks.