ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTH पड़ा कमाए
on

SECTION 1034, MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1939;

है "कप ur Ghai ooo 3 उर्जा पाए LS ON TRSUL ONCE

NOVEMBER, 198h.


Justice K.K. Mathew D.O.No, F.207)/84H10.

bated, the (th vr. 19684.

My dear Minister,

I am forwarding herewith the One Hundred and
Sixth Report of the Law Commission on "SECTICN 107A,
MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1939: EFFECT OF TRANSFER CF A
MOTOR VEHICLE ON INSURANCE." The subject was taken
up by the Law Commission on its own.

The Commission is indebted to Shri P.M.Bakshi,
Part-time Member, and Shri A.K.Srinivasamurthy ,
Member-Secretary, for their valuable assistance in
the preparation of the Report.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,

KK We

( K.K. Mathew)
ef 7

Shri Jaganneth Kaushal,
Hon'ble Minister of Law
and Justice,

New Delhi.

gncls 106


CHAMTET 4

Chablis 3

CARTER )+

CRAPIER 5

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTORY
210 PRSSENT Law
2190 be Pb GRU

Coll wars HECEIVED ON 111
VOMKTRG babii

1 EC OMHENDAT ION


CHAPIER I

TiRODUCTORY

Juaation 1.1, this Report deals with a point which is of direct

or relevance tu the cause of social Justice. Briefly, the

Fation, issue to ve dealt with is this: when the ownership of a
motor vehicle 48 transferred, does the transferee also
become vested with oimership of the benefits under the

policy of insurance relating to the motor vehicle or if

not does the law sluct ju need of reform?
Importa- 1.2, the matter is of some practical importance, and
the of the subject needs to be considered at some length, because
subject,

the present law does not achieve full justice. ‘he

threade ot cuuliovers, thive suuvhow got entang}ed¢ and

if one is to have o cleur pleture of the law on the

subject, one has to bear in mind several aspects relevant

to the transfer of a motor vehicle,’ By reason of the

complicated nature of the legal position, the interests

of social justice have suffered seriousiy, in the context

of effective tour ry of coupensation for accidents

caused by wotor vehic lens

In view of the fimportance of the matter, the Law

Commission has taken up the subject of its own.
Vorking 1.3. The Law Comission had prepared and circulated on the
rer subject a Working Paper for inviting the opinion of interested
mite persons and bodies. Points made in the comments on the Work-
88407: है 9

ing Paper will be referred to, in due course. At this Btage,

it may be mentioned that comments have been received fron

the following :-

a

1« Chapter 2, infra.

2. Chapter 3, infra,

3. See Farupraph 2.14 infra,

4, Law Commission of India, Working Paper on section 103!

Holor Vehicle Act, 19393 effect of transfer of a
motor velicle: on dnsuranced21tst 1079 1987),

5. All comments received upto (@tst-Hay+984) the
Signing of tis Report have been covered.



te

ta.

20

3e

4,

5s

-t 2 te

(8) भा आओ of India in the appropriate

111131 8019५

(b) The Controller of Insurance, Govermaent

Ja
of India, Department of Insurance,

(c) three State Governments,
2
(०6) five High Courts, and

3
(e) one lawyer's association

(Incorporated Law «* Society/Calcutta)

4
Comments received will be dealt with later,

Law Commission File No.F.2(7)84-L.C,. 8.0.3
(11101 8019 of Shipping and Lfransport,
Transport Wing).

Law Commission File NoeF.2(7)/84 L.Cc.
letter of lle Controller of Insurance dated
28th Auzunt, 1984.

Law Commission File No.2(7)/84-L.C. S.No.
6, 8 and 9

Law Covtalusion File NosF.2(7)/84-L,C. S.No.
3, 4, 10 uni 11 and Law ‘Commission's File
No.F.2(1)84-LC., S.No.t4,

Law Commission File No.F.2(7)/@4-L.C., S.No.
Be

Chepler 4&4, infra.

ene 3/=


fhree
stages.’

“3 3 tt
CHAPTER 2
THE PRESENT LAW
Bele There are three important chronological stages
relevant to the issue now being considered. The most
convenient course would be to state the present law with

reference to each of tiese three stages.

2.2, {he first stage is the transfer of the owmership
of the motor vehicle from the previous owner to the
subsequent owner. his utege is primarily governed by
the sale of Goods Act. As 8 patter of the law governing
the sale of goodsy ownership of the motor vehicle mey pass

to the purchaser at the specified time. However, the mere

dust Uren reg ur कक oe elma 6 bively achieved for
4
purposes of the pelieral luv Qous pot selve the question now

under consideration, which relates to the transfer of insura-

nee. Transfer of property in the vehiole doea not, in itself,
carry 8 transfer of insurance in favour of the purchaser of
the vehicle.

2ade ‘he sesond vi 2 45 represented by transfer of the
registration certificate of the vehicle in favour of the
transferee. This stuge is important from the point of view
of the administrative provisions ef the Motor Vehicles Acts
But, here again, the transfer of registration does not, in
itself, transfer the benefit of insurance of the vehicle to
the transferee. The mere fact that the registration of the
yehiole was transferred to the transferee may not, in itself,
justify the conolusion that the policy also stood transferred
to the transferee. This, at least, is the view or the Madhya

2
Pradesh and the Rajasthan High Court} diasenting from the

00... 55४

1« Paragraph 1.1, SUpras
26 कली argilal v. Pandit Sitacharan Dubey, Dubey, 4-1.R.

Sos TP. 64.

3. Hokor Omnens | iusaranre se v. Khetpal Singh,
7761 1093 tte. 83 Way).


Mffect of
‘transfer
regis-

on,
: डिक 31)

“tA

1
Calcutta view on the subject,

2.4, Construuing section 31 of the Motor Vehicles

Act, 1939, the Grissa Uiph court has held as under :-

(8) the proviciona of the Act have nothing to do
with tue ownership of a motor vehicle, they
brovide only for regulation of the use of

the motor vehicles in public places.

(b) the certificate of registration 48 not a docu-
weul cL title, bot 4४ 4s a piece of evidence

j to show the owner of the vehicle, who is liablu
to pay texes and to perform the duties and
oblinations under the Act. There is nothing
du tins २७५ tu dudivate bhat dt is the regis-
tered owner who siiall be liable to pay compen-
sation.

2.5५ Conversely, a change of registration under

gection 31 of the Motor Vehicles Act 1s not a condition

precedont to ite transfer of ownership of the vehicle.

Section 31 weic!, imposes, both on the transferor and

on the transtsie., the cbligation to notliy the

transfer, Nou-compliance with 1t would not, however,

invalidate the transfer as such, which has already

taken place.

2.6. The third chronological stage relevant to

the issue under discussion is the formal transfer of

the insurance benefit to the transferee, It is only

when such a transfer is effected that the transferee

of the motor vehicle gets the benefit of insurance,

Consequentially, for any injury caused by any accidaut

1 Vv. Hashi Rashi Banerjee, A.I.R. 1956

1.
2. v. Premlata Choudhury, A.I.R. 1980 Orissa

31606 ASTER. 1973 Orissa 166.

+०५००००१/-


dn the course of the driving of the vehiole by the
transierec or his servent, the injured person cannot
make any claim against the insurer before the insurance
policy is formally transferred aa above,’

26s 4७ puoitéua seiscs becausa the majority of
Iigh Courts have taken the view that upon the transfer
of ownership of a vehicle, the insurance policy cones
to an end, and, in the absence of a stipulation to

‘the contrary, the benefit of the policy ३8 not availa~
ble to the transferee without an express agreement

with the insurance cuupany., Of the numerous rulings tak=-
ing this view, some are referred to in the footnotes,
2.8. The Andhra Fradesh ligh Court is the only one
that takes a different view on the subject.

4s Prdental Fire i general Insurance Coe Fire & General Insurance Co, v. Vimal Rai,
. ¢ an

etele o
2 United 8 India F fipe § General Insurance Cos va & Gent [28 ९०५ ४५.
*  Shekoeas Rote 498 Rae Te
Br National Insun ional Insurance Co. Ve 28883: Rajan Rajan,

५18, 1082 Ker. 354, 597, eo

Ae Gyersilad arsilel v. हक Sitwcharan Dubey Sitacharan Dube
SER, 1969 NP. Thy ,

5. (a) Ms Bhoopathy ath Ws Mbp Videvelakehmt,
mi vs आर) मन न रन प्‌
(0) तमिल अत Rea 174 लक गिल Lede 182)

(०७) Rati Hatlonat jspranes. Co. v. Thirunalal Amal,
» 1932 Had. 83.

th India. dngurance Co» Co, ve Lakshmi,
BTR. 4971 Vad. Sh7 6

Prk Fonda Fonda vs Prenatate Choudhurys
viet. 1980 Orissa 102.

7. (a) Automobiles Transport (Rajasthan) Pts Lide Transpo Rajasthan) Pvt, 1
ve Dewalal, Awe . yy
b) Paduwdevi ve Gurbakeh Singh Singh, A.I.R. 1973
हे tage 347 is appavently not good law now.

0०) Hotor Oynens _—jneurence co (28 CO. Ves Bhetpal Skanh Singh,
(०) #5४.5+४5 1983 Raj.83 (May) (review cases).
See also paragraphs 2.9. to 2.13, infra.

(a)

6.

(10 8110: (818:
8. vs Hngshies Cama,

rey

#०००००००/-


“~t B te

2.9, -& Is not us 4£ the Hotor Vehicles Act ts totally
Sllent on the subject. In 1963, the Act wes amended by
inserting, fn the Act, section 103A which ia intended to
deal with the procedure to be followed for the transfer
of an insurance certificate and the policy of insurance.
The gist of the section may thus stated 3०

(4) The transferor of a motor vehicle mist apply in
the prescribed form to the insurer for the transier of
the certificate of fisurance and of the policy, in
favour of the transferee.

(44) Within fifteen days, the insurer must intimate
to the transferor ani the transferee the refusal, if

any, to the transier the certifieate/the policy.

(441) Jf no sact iatimation of refusal is given to
both such persons vithin fifteen days, the certificate
of insurance and the policy described in the certificate
shall be deemed to have been transferred, in favour of
the person to whom the motor vehicle 48 transferred,

with effect trom Lic date of the transfer.

(av) On refusal by the insurer, the insurer is bound
to refund to the transferee the amount, if any, which,
under the term of the policy, he would have had to
refund to tie उक्त हक tee. big transferor, for the
unexpired terw of the policy.

2.10. However, section 103A of the Motor Vehicles
Act summarised ००४४, is not comprehensive enough on
the subject of effect of transfer of vehicle on the

Policy. For exsiile, it leaves out cases where no

Ve Paragraph 2.9, supra,


“7 1.

intimation of transfer 1s given to the insurer. The
hardship resulting from the present state of the iaw

ds apparent from the state of the case aw. It has

been specifically pointed out in a Kerala ००३०, to

which we shall have occasion to revert later.

2.11. It has been specifically held in Karnataka

that the insurer can raise the objection that the policy
of insurance lupsey on the transfer of a vehicle without
notifying the insurer in the preseribed form under
section 103A of the liotor Vehicles hote

2012. It would, then, seem, that according to the

view of most Iligh Courts, the policy of insurance is effe-
etively transferred to the transferee of a motor vehicle
only on compliance with the formalities prescribed by
section 103A of the liwtur Vehicles Aces

2613. this is also the English law, as stated by
Goodard J, and confirmed by the Court of Appecds In fact,

in one ot the decisions of the House of Lords reported in

14931, ded दि moe Jaed hh Lf thugs
"ho me this policy depois upon the hypothesis
thut there is, in fact, an insured car. When
once the car, which is subject of this policy,
48 sold, the owmer's rights in respect of it
cease and the policy so far as the car is
concerned is at an end.

1, Chapter Parayraphs 2.14 and 2.15,infrae

2. since Cos Ltd, v. Thekkeyil Rajan,

3s frase

4a LJ ek General Insurance Ce. Co,Ltd, ve

Chermanima, A.T.li. ie .
5 For the gist of section 103A, see paragraph 2.9,

supra,
6. Fet .G 1 Accident Life Assurance Corpne rance Cor’
eters , 1५587 8 711 Ea oor] 458 Lew Times ».)

Te 8 भरा की आह की 56- तमिल Automobiles ets Insurance Co,

1931) ALL E.R, Rep, 606 1.

8००००००३/-०


ना Bo

2.74, dhs gosfttdou os slated ubeve may be technically
correct in law, but it causes serious practical anoma~
lies, and even injustice. ‘Take the case of ; the trans-
feree of the motor vehicle. Until the formalities
Preacribed by section 103A of the Motor Vehicles act

are coupleted, the transferee has no protection in the

nature of insnruuce, tiie prewiun towards the polley may
have been paid in 1511 Ly the trousferor (for the
relevant period), but its benefit does not travel to the
transferee. Vested with the ownership of the vehicle,
and acquiring use of the vehicle and control over it,

the transferee becomes subject to all the risks that

such ownership, use and control usually involve. This
Ancludes the risk of an accident, for which the transfe-
ree must pay compensation if someone 43 injured or
killed, And yet, the transferee can recover nothing

from the insurer, even though the policy covers third
party liability, and is a subsisting one. This is
@nomalous.

2.15. ‘The etomalies caused by the present position
regarding tim: effect of triasfer of a motor vehicle with-
out transier of the policy become apparent when one takes
actual cases, In a Puijab case, the transferor, who

had transferred the wotor vehicle, did not make any
application for transfer of the insurance certificate.
The transferee applied for transfer of the certificate
on the 31st January, 1070, but, before that date, an
accident took place on the 24th January of the same year.

The accident took place after the transfer of owmership,

but before the transfer of insurance. It was held that

>०००००००१/-


the transferee was not entitled to indemnity from the
insurance company in respect of the accident. Thus,
the transferee, even thiaieh he may incur liability towards

third parties, does not vet the benefit of the policy.

this seems higbly anomalous, It is true that
the transferee has not paid the premium, and therefore
Cuuot fuel a rieved, Lut 1६ is to be remembered that

at leust sung poison (the transferor) has paid the pre-

miua, 4८ ds qvila likely that the parties

ute

would have tote the prewtum into account in fixing the
consideretion.

2.16, Frou the point of view of the victim of an acci~
dent caused Ly o motor vehicle, again the present posit-
fon causes serious hardship. Under the Motor Vehicles
Act, the victtu can 5171. ८00 the Meability arising from
such accident, 3100 only egaisst to driver of the vehicle,
but also against the dusuver who has accepted third rarly
risk, But this beneficial schame may come tof frustrated
if the eccidont occurs after the transfer of tha ower-

© Jictiow of the Lortice

ship of
litdes presvidics ty) 0 tious vith of the Hotor Vehicles
Act, his has been nei-Legd ३0 & Hejasthan casa, to

which we shell refer later.

Qaphs 3.2, cin 3.3 infnae


7 10 + Guaprer 3_

NEED 707 REFORM
उप In the light of the last Chapter, the present
position dees not appear to be satisfactory. It caures

fadnatice ent GOurWstea bu whe transferor, as well as che
2

transferee und, = wosl uc uth, « Lo the victim of a

motor vehicle accident wo seeks compensation against

the insurer.

3.2. In fact, the present position has not failed to
provoke comments for law reform from the High Courts.’

The latest hint on the subject comes from the Rajasthan
High Court. In the Rajasthan case, it was held (follow
ing a long line of decisions of various High Courts),

that 4f, after the transfer of a motor vehicle to a

third person, the insur= company is sought to be made
liable to a third party in terms of sections 95(5) and

96 of the Hoter Vehicles Act, 1939, the mere fact that
the registration of the vehicle had been transferred was
not enough; it must be shown that the fact of transfer
was conveyed to the inser ४108 company and accepted by

it. This is becuse ths contract of insurance is a contra~
ot of personal indemnity, which cowes to an end when the
vehicle is transferred to another person or when the
Ansured person dies oi becomes bankrupt. For this reason,
the benefit of the policy of insurance could not after
the transfer of the wotor vehicle, Le pursued against the

insurance company. Ia view of the almost unanimous trend

So supra,

2. Lutoovilt 2५1०

3.

A.L.R. 1983, Raj. 83, 90, para 25 (May).

See further paragraph 3.3, infra.



4
of judicial authority, the High Court had to come to
this conclyston. However, this conclusion was

arrived @} very peluctontiy,

Bren th dvddowie, cusuiwatlon made by tr. Justice

Dwarka tae niet Justice, in his judg-

ment in the Rajasthan case referred to abuvey are

pertinent as to the need for reform of the law t-

je by the injured against the
W032 एज छा fails and hence the same
missed vs auudust the Insurance
comuoy.e It nust Le seid that I have to
come to the aforesaid conclusion with mugh
regret, as in spite of the existence of the
elatutory provisions for compulsory insurance,
ersons injured in motor accidents are left
eeta of obtaining comven~
ay fault of their own, The
oud with reason
b wes ty chou
jurtuoe uf being
gence, they would
tion for the injury
received or their dependants would get
reasouable couvensation, if a person is
killed in such an accident, knowing little
bout the pitfalls."

Behn Esvlter, the Kerala पिछला Court had, while
Holdin, tick 5 t 1044 of the Motor Vehicles
Act, Vind did teeatheoTly transfer the Insu-
rance solicy to tue transferee of the motor

veliicle, wade th. followdiy, observations for an

amendment of the law t+

te Chapter 2, supra,

2. Kotor Owners’ ST 15-89: 66] oe Co, Lt ve Khetpal
Singh, 8.7. 1983 Ta J. 83, 90 ye

3. Oy Ltd. ve Thekd

. y Paragraph 12% (Decei

»०००५००12/०


wt 120 te

"Lt romaine to be poduted out that section
1054 dos 0 the whole way. No doubt,
uader thet soulieu, there is a fictional
transfer of the certificate of insurance

and the policy described in the certificate
taken by fhe transferor of हे vehicle to the
ausferee thereof, rovied. that

the insurer gives intimation Or Serene teas
to transfer the certificate of insurance

and the policy mentioned therein to the
transferee within 15 days of receipt of the
application for transfer of the same in favour
of the transferee, the same shall be deemed
to have been transferred to the transferee
with effect from the date of the transfer

of the motor vehicle. tat

Tpgurance po Fey sae 7 a
81.80 does not provide for coverage by the
dnsurer or 3rd party risk arising out of an
accident that happens within the within the ote days stated days stated
dint the section = the Instvrer can very well in

8 en event refuse to transfer the certi~

of insurance and the policy ani avoid
dita

४५ oes cn to observe as under ३०

such eventuelities a3 are mentioned above.
Ferhaps the same could be achieved by pro~
viding for a statutory fictional transfer
of the certificate of insurance and
volley rcaljoned therein automatically with
il a cf the vehicle, with the
provision that till the insurer
repudiates the insurance and cancels the
same with notice to the concerned authori-
tics wider the Motor Vehicles Act, the

28 poliey shall be in force and that
ot Lapse on mere
icle in respect of
hoo been ईडी एल

७»००००००15/-


1
fut votldus Leper circulated on the subject,
Bet isekta |. वे विकार as to reforia of the law,
as एव कु
किए एज 1 bo the एज alfernative, it
was proposed that where transfer of a
motor vahicte in favour of the transferee
fey हक | by the competent authority
ond fod hotevtion certificate, the
dnsurance policy (or policies, if there be
wore trim one) shall atand transferred to the
Propoocrer हा] किक the need of a fresh
‘ bens fos k ost uid
1५ «5 लव, ue othes formulity. lt can
so be expressly provided that the
transfer of a veliicle does not cause
pol to lapse. The provisions
1 clica tTW3\ of the hetor Vehicles
(ioc. “एज, of course, need
ताप fe bate पाए कक. for tie puny. .
{hb Gootlia, to tha second alternative,
the proposal was that on the very
tr. > of ownership of a motor vehicle,
the policy of insurance shall stand
transferred to the transferee. This would
Ineors that even the transfer of resistration
ee न

1, Yerking Paper circulated 31st hay, 1984,


ioout tots pequired. it was stated

ju the .orhing Taper that this mizht

possibly raise some questions of proof.

ub Gt vault be a sdiiipler course than

‘ hoses

. 1. 4 वो vious on tue sung ok,

with speooitic vererce ce to the question whether [11.0७
Was Mood Pa cere i it: fobor Velbicles Act, 1939, on the
lines indicated above, and if so, which of the two

alteroutives put fo-rth above should be adopted.

18 give below the pist of the coments
1

received on the working baper.

NBs At the outset, mor be stated that eleven Judges
of one Hash Corb decor ao comments to ofvere bowe Judges
3

of another igh Court hove alse no conments to cffers

4
fab, (licrnative (a) put forth in the Vorking !eper
1 115 व्पवरा। 1.५ the Governnent of ४4001 (though

5
the beter weortoles dovs not apply in Sikkim), and
6

by tis व एव tuciety, Calcutta, The latter

hes कि | + | । 10351. tue provision suowld be

an वह fe

"Woon lin बह isltration of the trauster of owner-
hip of a voto vendcle, the existiny policy of
10 वा: fa resecuk imereol suiall be deemed to

wour of the

lee been Uransferced to or in 3

1. Ss i

can oat vil rel 0 Sella De
3. ae "पाकर", baker ae ee (४): 10५18 «
4, laragrapa 4.1(a), 85७9७

Se Law Coumission File No.F.2(7)/84-LC S.to.6.

6. Law Commission tile No. Fe2(7)/84-LD. S.No.5.


of the moter vehicle with

1 the dure of transfer of the

he Guicrolter or vance, । पु
th हज evo” lasavance, Goverunent of dudia

ef saiouee), also favours the rirst

alternatives, He has raised the point that the police
wi) issue sumsons only to the registered owner, and
2

therefore, alternative at (a) is preferable.

4७5. ALternetive (0) pul forth in the Working Paper

Of fhe Law Comudssion lias been

voursc! by the covernnent
+
of india (Ministry ol Shipping and १1 ७01500710), and

5

allernative has
6
been favoured by हवन igi Comtsa also, Tne Judves

also by lwo otate woverumenis. ‘in

of oue Sigh Cowt who have favoured alternative (७)

view thor this alternative would be

Pee tpi aed
Move pack vey have iurther mede the sugsestion

provided, as a requirement for

tho 11. ६६०५
evety taonsfer G) Uormaship of a motor vehicle, that
"the bLeansferor oad transteree (should) intiwaLle the

dnsurer avout suc: transfer as 41 section 31, deeming

such fuckios os ojylieatlou for the transfer of

dnstacince. ue. awe ese sed the opinion thal if

these provistons aro enacted, the Lacuna poluted out

11] probably be effectively

in the | la dec

Pitted

1. Seumissfon bhie uu. 2 (7384-1५ Jonmmeni of
tha Concrolles of tusurance, dated 23th August, 1

26 Seo further paragraph 5.4. infra.

3. ph 4.1(b), suvra.

4 ion File No F.2(7)/84-10.5.10.7

5. low vo Sioa Pile No. F,2(7)/B4-Lo 3.ilos.9 and

6, beaten vee vd 1५ नए S.Nos.3,4,10%

7. Lee व0,0५2(71/84-५2 Seiloede

8. न कह, secs to be to National :

sey 7 «11० 1982 Kor. 3546

Vo,
11.


t 4.6, The State Government of Naharashtra, tn its coment
ment on the Working Paper issuad by the Law Commission, has made
shtra.n suggestion that the tye-nsferor nust make to the insurer
"का एक for te vce of the certifieate of ditsurauce
cit tha p dies, 1 the tusurer's refusal, the
trousferee should not vvive the velilele in a public pluce
ws thou telling ont ७ i. sa Pnsur.uices. The State Goverment

Swtier gu ts pemaiivation of the failure to make an

application for trausfer of certificate of insurance and
poliey, and ave suggests minimum sentence by amending
saction 195 o! the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. We have find
oursalves wmable to apree with the sugvestion. It would
hardly meat the demands of social justlee and wondd not
achieve the objectives underlying the proposal for # reform

as put forth in the Working Paper. Such a cumbersome

jt wee os is envSsaged in the comment would leave

hha risuosblally as they are. In practice, it is

bowid to १ a verfou: tactual controversies as to when

the applloalion tur ti . fer ६ as envisagel) was made,

vicn the letter of refusal was

when dt uss rertecd,
received by the transferee. We see no need for keeping

the law encmmbered with such controversies.

४1.1, 0५ Letter of the

Hudiebeaay ter ytd Pah cy agen

rhnent, Maharashtra,

1984,

Ho, LAC 1084/65::6( 772) dated “1st Septem


ie
(6 कल] छ

jy DATO

5.1. Havleg taken into account the present state of the law.
end the hardship caused bhereby, and having considered = the
varjous shades of view expressed in the commentg received
on the Working Paper, the Law Commission 193 come to the
conclusion that =
Gy) a amendrent of the law is badly needed; and
(७). the amenduens chould proceed on the basis that
on the traisiter of ownership of a motor vehicle,
the policy of insurance shall stand transferred
to the (1 usferee from the date of transfer of
gutter shh,
ta elder words, tie Commission favours the second
alberuative oub vi bi: tuo alteruatives - (७) and (b) ~ witch
vere pat forth In the Working Paper. A point concurning -

toiee whll be dealt with in the detailed recommendition.

6
Ba, Tue छत Vvavovred by us ~ automatie transfer

of Ansurunce benefit ou tratistur of the vehicle ~ apcars
to be badly needed, iu order to eliminate the serious

anomalies that arise wuier the present law.

1. Chapter 2, guura.
2.  Chopter 3, gupra.
3. Chapter 4, gupra.
4a Porarraols 4,100), supra

ool Du, _



~ WR |

if the other alteri itive «feu, wilting for transfer of

Tegistration ~ 15 adopted, tnere will result colsldurable

delay in the effecti ve transfer of insurance benefits,

Pt would teaser toat deriur the inter-regaua ee. daring

' ’
४. ६ ०७1 182 >«

हक राजे Urnaster

ation).

(a) the vehicle wold have been traisferrad
(physically and legally) to the transferee,

who (or vines employees) might be operating its

fh) cad ४०६,  victin of an acclient caused by
bes tic: cf the vehtole by the traisferee,

oud entiliad in 3:17 to be eompausuted, catunot
enforce tho Mabiiity ogainst the insurer,

since Uo insurer eq take the plea that the
transferze of the vehicle does not automatically

become entitled to the benefit of the insurance;

{c) the transferee of the vehicle hinself would
reuain ‘ncovered by insurance agalust the
risks 'suclly covered by polictes of ingtratce

of motor vehicles;

(a) the transferor may, in theory, be entitled
to the boeetit of the insurance, but, as
teyards timy Tf is ouly a right of acadeniec
Juterosi, because, having parted with the
ownerslity of the vehicle, he does not need

any protection,


Simpler
scheme
preferres,

The
quect£on
of (तह छा
ia

PUMTONS ५

४8 19 s8
9.35. For wll these reasons, we prefer the
Siupler scheme of autemitic transfer of insucance
riphts on trausfer of ownership of the vehicle,
As already stated, a point concerning notice will
be devlt wilt, in the detailed recommendation that

5111 Se dy oy due courses

nent received on the Working

ter from the Controller of Insurance, the point

cen redecd that the alternative (a) of the

101 ह | 26 Poper should be preferred, as the police
W411 slways issue summons to the owner of the
vehicls aire istered, and therefore the benefit

of insurance should be transferred to the transferee

only fron the date of registration, ४९ do not,

«व पक thir that this, in itself, can constitute

loartion of the sucoml

benefit of irsurence on

tawncter of cunership), the issue of sumsons at
the instance of the police is a matter concerned

with crimine] proceedings, and can arise only if

lbere js 1. ce of on offence, either under the
shee Top, seer the Motor Vehicles AcL. If a
PEUSGU, oft i ving, ivonsferred ownership of the

vehicle, still continues to operate the vehicle

amd pols tuvetyved in an accident attracting criminal
licbility, he has himself to blame, In any case,
the policy of insurance has nothing to do with his
criminal Liability , and questions as to its
effective date of transfer have therefore no

direct relev.nce to criminal proceedings or investi~

gation into cffences.

1, See Paragraph 5,8, infra,
24 Paragraph 4.4, supra (Controller of Insurance),

3. 1:

raph 4,1 (a), supra.



Para
5.4,
contd,

Guestions
of
proof,

Ags tecerds the fivil liubilitr to
pay cOmpensulion for harm caused by an
accident, after transfer of ownership and
control of the owner, a person cannot be held
liable for en accident caused by the car if he
( or his employee) was not driving the vehicle

at the tine of the driving.

5.5, Hefure coming to a firm conclusion
4
on the subject us {ndicated above, we have

ive ga

2 thought to the question of proof,
feotoet, fe the Working paper, we had made
pis cifle rference to this aspect ~ without,
of course, expressing any final view on the
poinl, However, Locking to the enthusiasm shown
in favour of adopting this particular alternative
in the coments received én the Working Paper,
so 11110 th t ne gerious practical difficulties
sheuld arise on this score, The views
expressed in the comments regard this alternative
es the more practicabie. Apart from the
tis, toc साया पट] ७८४3 have tried to explore

vosodil. titffcutties of proof, and we have
come to the conclusion that there should be
none. Incidentally, the transferee of ownership
would normally be in possession of the vehicle,
ent thet iiself is prima facie evidence of

5
een cehtipe

4, Paragr-ph 5.3, supra,
2. Paragraph 4.1(b), supra,
5

3, Chapter 4, supra.

4, Law Commission File No, F,2(7)/84-L.c.
S.No.4,

5. Section 110, Indian Evidence Act, 1872,


0905
8 ज>पधरतितु |
Jity of
beselesa
claims,

a S411 there be many beseleug
who (he Ipsuranee benefit, ir
the Wooe transfer of ownership is to
Hove the effect ef transfer of the benefit
(48 propas ed)? e do not think 80,

ifost claims B8eainst the insurer, in
prectice, are for re-imbursement in

respect of

(4) total loss of the
vehicle (e.g, by thert
or fire); ता

(ii) dumage caused to the
vehicle by accident
caused by unother
vehicles; 67

(iii) third party claims,

A person whd has not acquired
bhyslc 1 possession of the vehicle as a

vee जय के hardly, if ever, make

such a claim. In general, he would put

ina claim for total loss of, or partial

demees. be the vehicle, only if he had
Povey tease or the vehicle,
Ofeitucty, before be cluims re~imbursement

for third party claims, he will have to

subst ntiate that he ( or his employee) was

actu 2119 aperating the vehicle, These
choult be enough to rule out

botany


seme! 152... We do nob slog 71 1: 16 necessary that intimation

weer

itor ” sfer a

Lent hoa of transfer to the 101... should be « condition
rerdent 0178 (११४ eet 3

rent मी Precedent, In Practice, such an Antimation will be
rights. Riven in most Cases, since the transferee would like

to ensure that the renewal notice Comes to his address,
Bub we do not think that such an intimation should be
On presrdent for tronsferring, to the

tron 16786, the benefit oe Toqircace, a

१8 adverting
to this asparh,y bee ues yo eo ih recsived en the
“orkine Laser 4 sued by us poker gieke a su gestion.

AT feb ne peed recommend is, that 4f netice of

tyonester GP tty. not been given by the

1011 veoddete t

transferor car fis tye + ree bufore the institution
OP a sh feed ans policy of insurance, the court

Wb boot ot cooull In ewording costs in

sach south,

> have started above, we

ee. manda 5.8. Tu the Licht of
६101 to revise
१९० १८४) 16 sertton 13.4, Motor Vehicles Act, 1939,
op Vehicles 2
and for showld be peetead oo ibe tines indicated in thts chapter,
iConsaqidential
changes, The gist of एक oe t
3

Tecommen? thet

eve dn mind regarding section 1934

14 ag under:
f-) tren the transfer of ownership 4a

fhe poliey of

,

Lboreof को st

bee ९०६

to Lhe transferee with

६0 का. 2६३
sfer

effect from the dite of such tre

of owmership.

Duoh copsertlobis) chauges as my be necessary in
7 the act, ond in the rules issued

the otter oral

mried ont.

under th

5.7, supre.
rendnuent.


> 23 -

(७) If notice of transfer of the motor vehicle
has not been given by the transferor or the
transferee, before the institution by the
trengferes of 2 suit against the faourer
based on the policy of insurance, the court
ney tale that fact into account in awarding

cobs da such a suit.


DATED: 3८ cu

(K.K._ MATHEW)
CHATRMAN

(7.४.

(or, 1.3, RAO)
tach belt

BaKSUI)
10850

(Vela ४. SARATHI)
FARE-TIMS MEMBER

Mevee,

Pr bs

AVL ५४०७1 एप )
मे लि 11100 0 ९4

1१६५

\ i t .
CUATUAVEDT) bl ue Loner!

tee