CMs HUN

AND SEVENTH

REFOR?

Lid OF CITIZENSHIP

DECEMBER ,


“JUSTICE K.K. MATHEW DeO.Noe Fe 2(11)/84-IC
ह CHAIRMAN
Law COMMISSION
GOVERNMINT OF INDIA

Dated, the 3rd December, 1984.

My dar Minister,

Iam forwarding herewith the One Hundred and Seventh
Report of the law Comission on "Lal OF CITIZENSHIP". The
subject was taken up by the Law Conmission on its ow.

The Comission is indebted to Shri Vepa P. Sarathi,
Part-time Member, and Shri AK. Srinivasamurthy, Member-Secre tary,
for their valuable assistance in the preparation of the Report.

_ With regurds,

Yours sincerely,
sa/-
(K.Re MATH)

Shri Jagannath Kaushal,
Hon'ble Minister of Law and Justice

NEW DELI 44

Encl: 107th Report,



KEE RE

Page No. ge te
Chapter I - Law of OAtizenship 1
Chapter {7 - The Problems “6
Chapter ITT - Comments 12
Chapter IV » Recommendations 14

of the Law Sommissien.


pee,

RE,
28 क 80 290 1051

BAL OF ©

lel. The law velating to Indian Citizenship is set
out in Articles 5 to 11, 41 Part ID of the Constitution
of India and in the Citizenship Act 57 of 1955.
article 5 deals with the citizenship of persons who
stayed in the territory allotted to Indla after
partition of the comtry in 1947 into india and
Pekistan, Such persons became Indian cltizeng
provided they hed thelr domicile in India by birth

or descait, or, 47 they had been domiciled in India
and were ordinarily resident in India for not less
than five years imnediately before the commencement
of the Constitution, Article $ deals with persons
who were residing in the territory allotted to Pakistan,
at the time of partition, but who wished to acquire
an Indian domicile and become cltizens of India.
Article 7 deals with persons who, after March 1,1947,
had left India, that 48 the territory allotted to
India on partition, for the territory allotted to
Paki gtan. Such persons were not deamed to be oj पते 26833
of India. ‘the proviso to the article deals with

the possibliity that some of these 987 8078 might have
jeft for Pakistan because of the violence and
diacrder जीत दो preceded and followed the partition,
put atnee thon desited to return to India. If such
persons raturned to India under a permit for
vegattlemant or permanent return, they are deemed

to ba Indlan citizens, Article 8 confers Indian

woe Ole


-~2

cit@eeneiip on Indias residing abroad if they
complied with the provisions of thet articia,

Articia O providas that a parson shall rot pe a
citizen of India 4f he hae voluntarily acaulred

the cltizehshzp of any foreten state. The Supreme
Couret held that article 9 applies only to eases of
acquisition of citizenship of » citizenship of a
foreigm state pricr to the commencement of the
Constitution, because of the phraca ' has voluntarily
acquired’ in the Article. This has ief to the anomaly
that tha acquisition of foreign eltizenship aftar
January 26, 1950, did not involve the loss of Indian
citizenship, Parliament, however, 19 3.9(1) of the
Citizenship Act, 1955, dealt with the situation by
providing that any citizen of Indla who by naturalie
zation, registration or otherwise ‘volunterily acquires
of_as stsby time between the 26tu Joauery 2950,
and_the commencement of the Act voluatarily scculred,
the citizenship of another country shall, vpon such
acquisition or, as the case may be, such commencament,
cease to be a citizen of India, That is to say, if

& person acquired foreign cltizenship after January 86,
1850, and before the commencement of the Citizenship
A&ot (ecenber 30, 1955) than such person wold cease
to be an Lidien eltizen only on and from Decomber 20,
1985.

serevoad/~


ce

to provives that any parson whe js a

santinue to be such citizen,

subject to roowblaion of any law made by Parliament.
and article 24 p¢ives power to Parliament te Jegislata
on the acovisition and teratuation of citizenship, and
other matters relating to dttzeusiip, sven 0 9 the
extent of modifying or overriding articles 5 to 9,

243. the Cltizenghlp Act, 1955, was passed in
exercina of tha power conferred on Ferlioment oy
article 11, It deals with the acquisition and
termination of citizenship on of after Jonuary 26,

3950, 086 Act provides for 5 modes of becoming an
Indien citizen ~ (1) Gttizenship by birth (8.3);

(2) Githzensbip by descent (5.4); (3) Citizenship

vy registration (8.5); (4) Citizenship by natural+
lization (3.6); ond (5) Cltiaenship by incorpora-

tion of territory as part of India (S.7).

1.4. Gaction 8 of the Act deals with renunciation
of clitzenship; Section 9 with termination of

citizenship and Seetion 30 with deprivation of ©
altizengship.

Bactiops.12 1S. Section 12 déale with Commonweal th ef th zon-
pd 12s ny ship and Snetlon 38 with the right of tha Gentral
ack, Covarnment to confer the rights of an Indian

citizen on citizens of any other camtry.

Yactions 12. i.% Saction 13 provides for certifying that a
re pevson ig a aitizen of India in casa of doubt and

iingng sections 14 to 19 deal with proced~

won) हारी, wlacallenvous matters.


mt 4 ke

CHARTER IT

झा PRoeL Ns
Probl TE te 21० The Law Commission has euo mote exanined the
Sine
eltizenshi lew relating to citizenship and has noticed the follo~

wing problema in working the Citizenship Act $

(1) How, to make the provisions of rv3, Sche
JIL of the Citizenship Rules, 1956, effective?

(2) What 48 the scope of 1७9 of the
Citizenship Rules?

(3) Whether thereakould be a time limit for
disposal of applications under s.9(2), Citizenship Acti

पा आओ Rees the first problen relating to ro'3, ScheIIT

of the Citizenship Rules, erises in the following

MATINEE »

Bae oe ctions 2ods Sections 9(1) and (2) of the Citizenship
Citizenship Act Act, 1955, are as follows ४

Section 9(1) - Any citizen of India who by
naturalization, registrotion or otherwise
voluntarily acquires, or has at any tine
between the 26th January, 1950 and the comme
neement of fhia:Act voluntarily acquired the!
ehtizenship of another country shall, upon
sneh acquisition or, a3 the case may be, 80
commencement, cease to be a citizen of road
Provided that nothing in the sub-section
shall apply to a citizen of India, who,durid
any war in which India may be engaged, youu
tarily acquires the citizenship of enother
countay, until the Central Covernmant
otherwise direcks-

{eo} Tf any question arises as to whether,

कक er how any person has ecquired the

ey al


euship of another country, 1h shall be

eruined by such authority, in such manner
aid usving regard to such rules of avidenee, ox
“iy be preweribed in this behalf,
26496 Rule 30 of the Citizenship Rules provides tha
ictus (1) Af any question arlees aa to whether, when or 1:

eny per3ea haa acquired the citizenship of another

country, the authority to determine euch question
asball, for the purposes of a. 9(2) be the Central
Government; and (2) the Central Government shall, tn
determining any such question, have due regard to ton
wules cf evidence specified in Suhedule III;

2658 Rule 3 of Schedule III provides 3 The fact

that a citizen of India haa obtained on eny date 8 pase

pert from Government of any other country shall be
conclusive proof of his having volunferily acquired
the citizenship of that coumtry before that date.
2666 १४ acope of 569{2) and re3y SchsIII has bean
| the aubject matter of several decisions. Some of them

teok the view that the idea of ‘conclusive proof' in a
matter of mbstantive lew and not a rule of avidence,
emi heice, 25270 Sch III was beyond the scope of 5.9{2}
and beace ultra virea, Others heve taken the view
that 03, SchoIIZ only providee forfrule of evidence
and i+ (viva vires 8,9(2), This conflict wes resolved
by 9 majority ef 3 to 2 by the Suprema Court in

Saveur of the latter view that ro3, Sch III, 48 intra
VES es

vi Assuming that v.63, Sch. ill of the Citizenship

waldo

Act ondy provides for a rule of evidence, the validity

Aah AIR 4957 AP 1047; Sharafat vs
so ah ;

28022 1802 AIR 1956 Ra) 47
bess FUR 1969 Pom 192 and Md,Ugiren
4961 Mad

vse] ve Undon, AIR 1962 SC 41052


wt 95. te
of the rule is a doubtful and the majority decilBion,
of the Supreme Court may not be correct.

Article 5 of the Constitution provides: Aq the commen~
cement of the Constitution, every person «ho hag his
domicle in the <erritory ef India and ~

fo) who was born in the territery of India: er

(६) edther of whose parents was born in the territery

ef India; or

(c) who hes heen ordinarily resident in the territory

of India fer not less than five vears immediately
preceding such commencement,
shall be a citizen of India.

The relevent pertion of Article 9 of the Constitution
provides t No pergon shall be a citizen of India by virtue
of article 5 ५५००० if he has yoluntarily acquired the
citizenship of any foreign State. (Emphasis supplicd).

Therefore. when 5,9(2) of the Citizenship Act deals with
the question of acquisition of the citizenship of another
country, Lt contexpletes yoluntary acquisition aa provided.
for in Article 9 ef the Constitution, If this 438 go, undos
re30 of the Citizenship Rules, the Central Government is |
euthority to decide whether a person han voluntarily eequira
the citizauship cf another country, and the Central Gover:us
Sheil do so in accerdance with the rules of evidence spect:
fin Seoh,ifl, Jn the case of a person who has ubtained a pass
port of any other country, since r,3, 3ch.III is a mile of
evidenca, the Ceurrtral Government will have to automatically
desdde thel rvch parson has. voluntarily acquired the ०4४4 2.६
shir :

15 Upden, AIR 1952 SC 1052

a
at

veoeeT/~


Heenshly 2
wtizensnt,
ict

piry and ccased te be a citizen of
Teta saetes avi. G 1018 leads to the followinn

an whether a person dit

ques

५ is a question of Encl, bev

arding his stele of mini. be.

७, LIT, dees not allow eny inquiry inte te

slate of wind of ihe persen who bas acquired e
pessport from another country. The rule is thus
repugnant to 55 9(2) Citizenship AcL, which

contemplates an enquiry, and hence vold.

2.8 The second problem relating to r.9,
Citizenship Rules, has erisen because of a decision

of the Calcutta High court?

2.9 section § of the Citizenship Act provide:
for the acquisitaon of citizenship by registratlon,

50०0-8४ 1) (०) provides that subject to the

previsious of the section and such conditions
and regbrictions छ8 may be preseribed, tine

a

utherity may, on application piade in

presser’
thio bets, regiater as a citizen ef India any

en whe tc net already such citizen by virtue of

tine sitien or by virtue of any of the ather

the Act and belongs to any ef tae

PROV oa oh

followin calegories + (a) persens of indies ord
wine ante oxdinarily resident in Indie and have been

dent Lox 6 months Lamediately before poked)

gh app ieation for 7 stration.

O, ALK 1965 Cal 160,



Sand Geof the Citlsenship

ov ides *

Yhe authority Leo regdoter a per

citizen of India under s.5(1j(a) or ६

shall ba tne Coliector, and in any

tae Central eso:

0 under these ru

> - Ihe Collector shall, vefore regist

son under ६६१६१) (a), satisfy nimse ti

that tae person ~

(a) ls of Indian orlpin and has been act

resident in India for 4 months immedietuly

preceding the date of application;

(>) has close connections in India;

(०) bas ar intention to make India |

permanent home;

(3) tas signed en eli of allegiance

specified in the Sacond Schedule te the Act

ie) is of good character and is olherw
a fit and proper person to be registered
as citizen of India.

2.71 On the question whether a summary dismissal

es om application under s.5(1)(e) without making.
any eaquiry was in contravention of ३००, Lt wee hel
that it was not, because, the Collector may inform

7A£ Ln such manner as he thinks fit, thdt fs,

ny confidential enquiries, or aet on bis can

3 knowledge. The Celewtta iligh Court obsejw
doo nailner the Act nor the ules require him t


~ Ons

Muke wi enyniry in case he rejects the application,
since the action of the Collector is an executive
end politicai act, and the Collector 48 not bound
to register an applicant as a citizen even if all
the conditions of 7५9 are satisfied, and that he 1.
not bound to assign any reason for the grant of

refusal of the application,

. eee 2.12 The third problem relating to quick disposut
‘Froblem

of applications under s.9(2), arises in the followics

circumstences :

“Bgeision + 2.13 - In a case from Allehabad”, the petitioner
of the

8008 who came to India was ordered to be arrested and
) Cour

ict

1

deported under the Foreigners Act, while his
application to the Central Government under s, 9(2)
that he be declared a citizen of India was pending.
The Court observed that eny ection could be taken
avalnst the petitioner only after the question of

his citizenship was determined by the Central
Government. . the peint to be noted however is that

ह in that care the petitioner applied under 8, 9(2),
Citizenship Act, in 1958, and the matter was not
disposed of even ४4311 1954, when the matter was
contidered by the High Court. According to the Hish
Court oo nebion could be taken against hin because dis
aopiication was pending before the Centrel Goverment.

Ii it was ultimately decided that he was a forelgner,

ihe result would be that an undesirable foreigner %
.¢ in India for more than seven years and this

aetes Lae Peretgners Act, an ineffective statute,

ve UF, AIK 1955 #1] 191



Comments

~10 =

PLER TIT

3.1 in response to the working paper issued by us,

we have received the following comments:

‘ 1
(1) ‘he Advocates Association has commented that

the first problem need not be dealt with by the ह
Commission in view of the fact that that decision

ef the Supreme coust has been the law for the last

22 years. AS regards the second problem the
Association agrees with the suggestion of the
Commission; and as regards the third, the Associstion
doubted whether @ mere fixation of time limit would be

sufficient,

3
(2) One gentleman has pointed out that some persons,
liviny, in foreign countries, take up foreign citizenship
for professional purposes and that such an action

t elm citizenship on the.. minor children,

thri
He suggested that Indian citizenship should be

aviomelicnlly cestored to such persons and the
chidaven or thet the Government of India should
recomuice dual citizenship for such persons.

Yhere 15 at present a provision for a miner to
कफ 19७ cov Indieu citizenship when he becomes a mojer.

the person who has acquired foreign

ecg on ene enna

mission File No.2(11)/84-LC.5,No.9(R).
's case AIR 1962 SC 1052.



4
is) ‘tn aavecate hag polnted that in Rembay,

tie appideetion under 3५ 541)(&}, Citizenship fot.

ds te be iilled before the Chier Metropoliten

Magistrate, that the application is then for
to the Cll Office, then to the Passport Section
jn the Bombay Secretariat and finally to the bene
Office or Fereign Office et New Delni. He pein:
out thot thia processing of the application gauces

enormous delay in the disposal of the application.

Fade The Commission has given £1 consideration

ty the views expressed for which it records

its appreciution, After giving adequate

concidevatton the Commission has made the sugres Lane

set out lu the next Chapter.

8 NOe2(11)/H4H-LCSeNOee (RS.



! decirien in Lghar Ahmed 's case,

Problem

Baits. hug been apereved in the lat decish £ the

pens ts. bug been apereved in the later decision of the
Supreme court that role 2, Sch, III is intra vires,
The Supreme Court in the later decision has
however taken the view that, in spite of r.7,
the obtaining of a foreign passport does not
operate as conclusive proof thet the applicant
has ecquired foreign citizenship. In view of
this coharent conflict on the scope and effect

ef the rule (not a section of the Act), the

- Commission feels that the matters should be left
to the Supreme Court of India to resolve the
conflict, The Commission is therefore not making

ar agtion with respect to the matter.

Froblem hee 4s regords problems (2) & (3) considerec

rei
ommission makes the following

gpgortund rtuyity by it, the ©
undier

ectionsie

Problem (2): The Commission considers

tara

ould be an enquiry with adequate

thet there si

opportunity to the applicant under 5.5(1)(a)

Chiusenship Act before his application is rejected
by the Collector under r, 9, Cit*zenship Rules.

oblem (3): The Commission consigers

hhevk a eossencble time Limit of six months shoulc
be fixed in the Citizenship Act for disposal of

the avriication wider s. 9(2), so that quick section
enn de taken cpadnst undesirable foreigners.

० Union cf Uma HAIN 1902 इट Th

wn ve Union of Indja AIR 1965 SC,



~ 1306

(K.K. MATHEW)
CHAIRMAN

(J.P.CHATURVEDI )
MEMBER

(P.M. RAKGHT)
PART-TIME MEMBER

Prk

K SRINT VASANURTHY)
ABR SECRETARY

ped for

> 4
an mp DOK ४ Pn

maven, Dred Aedawder, (784 .