LAW COMiiISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTH

REPORT

ON

PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs


JUSTICE K. K. MATHEW .
9.0. No. F. 2(2)/84—-LC

हु NEW DELHI,
Dated, the 12th December, 1984. .

My dear Minister,

I am forwarding herewith the One Hundred and Eighth Re-
port of the Law Commission on “PROMISSORY EST 8#श 5
The subject was taken up by the Law Commission on its own.

The Commission is indebted to Shri Vepa. P. Sarathi, Part-
Time Member, and Shri A. K. Srinivasamurthy, Member-Secretary,
for their valuable assistance in the preparation of the Report.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,

(Sd.)
K. K. MATHEW

Shri Jagannath Kaushal,

Hon’ble Minister of Law & Justi¢e.
New DELHI.

Enel : 108th Report.


CHaPTER 1
CHAPTER 2
CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4
CHAPTER 5

CHAPTER 6

CONTENTS

Introduction—Consideration & Promissory Estoppel

Evolution of the Docirine in India.

‘The Law in the United Kingdom and the United States.

Th: Probiems,
Comments Received.

Recommendations.

PAGE
1

19
20
21


ERRATA in advanced printed copy of 108th Report of the Law Commission of India«

1.1
1.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.3
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.7
2.7
2.7
2.12
2.12
2.13
2.14
2.15
2.17
(Proposition (C))
2.17
2.17Gi)
2.11iii)
2. 174i)
2. 1700
2.1700
2.17(0
5. 2,176)
Bottom

2.17(vi)
- 2.17
2.18(1)
2.183)
2.18(4)
2.18(4)
3.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
6.2

Page

NOOCoCMmaonnnra + + + ७ ७० ० ४७०७० ४-४

13
14
14
14
14
4
15
15
15

16
17
18
18
18
18
18
19

21

For

desir of the promior
conduct

remain

Decreed that suit
s. 155

undersand

that the Government
appelant

obesrved

fo rrent

right o fthe
stature

therefore

person

Lorls

Latter

from 1 Oct, 3,:
thei

withdawn

promise

alow

and public

that change

such change

charge?

it is enjoined by law’.
judgment

case

more

light

-cise the legislative
acts its officers
enters an

hise

defference
asa

or promises
power
representatidns
could

Read

desire of the promisor
contract

remained

decreed the suit

$. 115

understand

that all Government
appellant

observed

for rent

tights of the

statute

therefor

persons.

Lords

Letter

from Oct. 3,

their

withdrawn
promisee

allow

and to public

that a change

such a change
change?

‘it is ‘enjoined by law’
judgments

caset

1, Laker Airways vs. Di
(1977)2 All E.R: 182
mere

term
-ise of the legislative.
acts of its officers :
enters into an

his

difference

asa

or the promises
powers

representation

would


PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL
.CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION—CONSIDERATION & PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL

4.1. Under 8. 2(h) of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, a ‘contract’ is an agtee- Considera‘ion
ment enicrceable by law. Under s. 2(e), every promise is an agreement. But,
unless the agreement is supported by ‘consideration’, the agreement would be
void excep! in the three instances mentioned in 8. 25, Therefore, unless a promise
is supported by ‘consideration’ it will not, ordinarily, be enforceable by law. Sec-
tion 2(d) defines ‘consideration’ as follows:—

“When, at the desire of the promisor, the promisee or any other person has

done or abstained from doing, or does or abstains from doing, or promises

to do, or abstain from doing, something, such act or abstinence or promise
- is called a consideration for the promise.

Hence, when a person makes a promise, unless the promisee does, has done or
promises to do something, at the desir of the promior, the promise would be
without consideration and the promise cannot be enforced in a court of law.

1.2. Suppose a person promises a subscription to a charitable institution Premissory
with the knowledge that a building will be constructed with the money received Estoppel.
from the subscribers, but does not desire the institution to do so; the institution
however, on the faith of the promise. incurs expenditure in putting एए 8 structure.

If the promisor does not honour his promise, the institution may not be able
_ to sue him successfully for the amount promised, because. the promise is not
supported by consideration.

Take the case of the Government making an announcement relating to some
relief such as a sales-tax holiday if something is done by the citizen such as
- opening a new factory in a specified area. On the faith of the announcement, a
citizen may do the necessary ‘thing and thus change his position. The Govern- ©
ment thereafter changes its policy. Even if it is assumed. that the citizen acted
at the desire. of the Government there connot be a conduct enforceable against
the Government, because. contracts, which can be enforced against the Govern-
ment, should be in a particular form.’

On the question whether the person promising the subscription to the insti-
tution or the Government, in-the-second example, could be held to the promise
\and representation respectively, that is, whether the court could compel them

honour their representation, one view is that the court could 36.50 on the

of the doctrine of Promissory Estoppel. The doctrine has been expressed.
by a Bench of two Judges of the Supreme Court of India’ as follows:—

“Where one party has by his words or conduct: made to the other a clear
and. unequivocal promise which is intended to create legal relations or effect,
a legal relationship to arise in the future, knowing’ or intending-that it would
be acted upon by the other party to whom the promise ‘is made and it is
in fact so acted upon by the other party, the promise would be binding on
the party making it and he would: not be entitled to go back upon it, if it

1Art. 299 of the Constitution, of India. .
* MP Sugar Mills v, State of U.P., ALR. 1979 S.C. 621 (Bhagwati and “Tuizapurker JJ).
. .


Report ON PROMIssORY ESTOPPEL

would be incquitable to allow him to do so having regard to the dealings
which have taken place between the parties, and this would be so irrespective
whether there is’ any pre-existing relationship between the parties or not.”*

13. Apart from the fact that the above decision, holding that the doctrine
can be invoked against the Government in all cases, has been expressly dissented
from by another Bench of two Judges of the Supreme Court,’ there are observa-
tions in the first case which are contrary 10 the views expressed in earlier larger
Benches of the Supreme Court and to the law in the U.K. and the US. from
which the countries inspiration has been drawn for propounding the doctrine.

The law, thus being in a state of uncertainty, the Law Commission has,
suo motu, undertaken a study of the doctrine in order to define precisely its scope
and ambit.

CHAPTER 2
EVOLUTION OF THE DOCTRINE IN INDIA

2.1, In order to understand the precise scope of the doctrine of proinissory
estoppel, it is necessary to trace its. evolution in our country. Such a study will
help one to understand the judicial process by which the doctrine has been en-
larged or contracted and to formulate a precise rule.

2.2 In this case,’ C contracted fo buy a certain number of gunny bags from
the appellant, and 107,500 bags remain undelivered as C was unable
to pay for them. When C represented that arrangements had been made for
the payment for 87,500 bags, delivery orders were given to C for delivery against
payment. C’s representative took a -letter. from C to the appeliant requesting the ~
appellant to direct delivery of the bags to the representative of the respondent
who went along with C’s representative. 'The .officer in charge of the appellant
did so, The reason was that the resfondent had agreed to advance the necessary. .
money to C. The appellant delivered 50,000 bags to the representativé of the
respondent but refused to deliver the rest, Hecause, C had failed to pay the price.
Thereupon, the respondent sued the appellant for delivery of the remaining
bags alleging that they had advanded thd money to C on the appellant’s re-
presentation that the goods will be delivered. ‘The High Court decreed that suit
holding that as the delivery in favoug of the respondent had been assented to by. -
the appellant, the appellant was estopped from denying that the appellant held ©
the goods, answering to the descripti ‘i in delivery orders, at the disposal of
the person to whom the orders were (given, fe is, the representative of the res-
pondent. In answer to the contention|that np ebtoppel could arise in thé case, be-
cause, s. 155, Evidence Act, was not applicabld, the Court observed:*

‘Estoppels’ in the sense in which the tern} isiused in English legal phraseology,
are matter of infinite variety, and ‘are by;noi means confined to subjects which.
are dealt with in Chapter VIII ofthe Eyidence Act. A man may be estopp-
ed not only from giving particular eviddncd, but from doing acts, or relying
upon any particular arguments of oot mtidn which the rules of equity and
good conscience prevent him from using as against his opponent.

1M.P. Sugar Mills v. State of U-P., A.LR, 1979 ‘SC. 621, P. 631.

*M [x Jit. Ram Shiv Kumar v. State of Haryana, हरि, 1980 SC. 1283. (Murtaza
Fazal Ali and Kailasam JJ).

(1880) ILR 5 Cal. 669.

(1880) ILR 5 Cal. 669 at P. 678.


EVOLuTION 07 THE DoctTRINE IN INDIA

The law relating to estoppel, as stated above, appears to be too widely stated
in the following observation of the Supreme Court:*

We doubt whether the Court while determining whether the conduct of a

particular person amounts to an estoppel, could travel beyond the provisions

of s. 115 of the Evidence Act and rely upon what is sometimes called ‘equi-
table estoppel’.

But assuming that the law, as stated by the Calcutta High Court, is correct,

the point to be noted is that it was a case between private parties.

2.3. The facts in this case? ate : The appellant’s predécessor was a lessee from hmed Yar
the Government of certain revenue yielding lands. He constructed a canal which Secretary
passed through Government lands spending more than Rs. 8 lakhs. Government ® State.
permitted the construction. because. considerable area of land would be rendered
fit for cultivation and there would be an increase in Government revenue. The
canal also passed through the lands of private parties who also agreed to the
construction on certain terms as to compensation. After the period of the cur-
rent settlement had expired the Government gave by way of Inam, a large tract
of land to the appellant’s predecessor in recognition of his loyalty and good ser-
vice. One of the terms of the grant was that the Government could take over the
management of the canal for better administration. Government. however, passed
orders taking over permanently the canal lands, and denied any proprietary right
in the appellant to the canal lands,} The. privy Council held.*

mh

Taking all.the circumstances’ into consideration, having regard to the perma-
nent character of the proposed work, the indefinite amount of the probable
expense of construction and’ the fact that the Government encouraged the
undertakers to acquire the necessary land where the line of the canal passed
through property in private ownership, and also bearing in mind the view
of the Government at the time, as appears from Government records, that
the work might be constructed and maintained more economically by the
Khans than by Government, and that it would be better to leave the settlement
of the country in the hands of native Chiefs, it seems to be pretty clear that
the Government must have ‘intended the Khans to undersand, and in fact
must have led them to expect, that the Government land required for the
canal woud be made: over to them in proprietary right. If the Govern-
ment had intended that at the ternjination of the period of the then current
settlement the Government land required and used for the canal should re-
vert to the Government, it is; difficyIt to suppose that the Government would
have omitted to say*so... of to make..a provision for securing the transfer
to them of the land acquired by the undertakers from private owners.

For arriving at this conclusion the Privy Council. relied on the following rule laid

down in Ramsden v. Dyson :*
———

If a man, under a verbal agreement with a landlord for & certain interest in
land, or, what amounts to the same thing under an expectation, created of
encouraged by the landlord fhat hé shall have a certain interest, takes pos-
session of such land, with ‘the consent of the landlord, and upon the
faith of such promise or expectation, with the. knowledge of the landlord and
without objection by him, lays out:money upon the land, a court of equity
will compel the landlord to give effect to such promise or expectation.

'Maddnappa Vv. Chandramma, A.LR. 1965 S.C. 1812.
21901) 28 TA 211.

STbid ऐ, 218.

4(1866) LR 1 HL 129, 170.


REPORT ON PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL

The Privy Council also held' that, upon the expiration of the period of the settle-
ment for which the lease of the bar-barini lands had been granted, Government
made a grant to the appellant’s predecessor at a moderate assessment of a tract
of land in full proprietary right and in the deed of settlement, Government sti-
pulated that they had the right when necessary in the management of the canal.
This however did not give the Government a right to seize and confiscate ‘the
canal,

On the facts of the case. the appellant, under the Transfer of Property Act,
1882, would be entitled to a perpetual lease of the canal lands from the Gov-
emment. But, perhaps, because the Act was not in force at the time of the tran-
saction, Lord Macnaghten applied the Ramsden rule to give relief to the appel-
lant. But the rule is the rule of Proprietary Estoppel and not of Promissory Es-
toppel. And Proprietary Estoppel had always a special status in the English
Law.

2.4. In this case,’ the appelant surrendered its own lands in favour of the
Government in consideration of a ‘lease of government lands im favour of the
appellant on a nominal rent. After taking possession, the appellant spent enor-
mous sums in making constructions. Twenty seven years later, the respondent
filed a suit claiming a large amount as arrears of rent and for a declaration that
the lease, if any, was determined. The High Court modified the decree of the
trial court in favour of the respondent. The High Court allowed the parties to
redefine their rights, namely, the appellant's right to a leasehold and the respon-
dent’s right to a reasonable rent. In the course of the judgment, Sir Lawrence
Jenkins CJ referred to the Ramsdek rule and obesrved that the ‘Crown comes
within the range of this equity’.

A perusal of the judgment, however, shows that the learned Chief Justice did
not give any relief to the appellant by. applying the rule. . गा

The learned Chief Justice noted that ' patties were the Municipality and
the Government, both interested i stoke welfare, and that the controversy
-between them should. not be allowed to; bécome ‘acute’, and that the suit
was really not for eviction of the:appéllant tut was only fo rrent and for ascertain-
ing the right o fthe parties. In fadt, the ldegree of the High Court was that
the Municipality should hold the lanfi on भी dgreed rent and that if the Munici-
pality did not cooperate, there woul be a decree for eviction in favour of the
respondent 5 .

. This judgment can, by no stretch of a paglaation. be understood as applying
even the rule of proprietary estoppel Jet alone the ddctrme of promissory estoppel.
i i

2.5. The facts which gave rise to this : that in 1865 the Government
of Bombay called upon the predecefsor irl title of the Municipal Corporation
of Bombay to remove old markets foom a tertain site and vacate it and on the
application of the Municipal oF ssionet the Government passed a resolu- -
tion approving and authorising the grant pafother site to the Municipality.
The Municipal Corporation gave up} 16 ste lon which ‘the old markets were
situated and spent a sum of Rs. 17 lakhs |n erecting and maintaining markets
on the new site. In 1940 the Collectdr of Bpmbay assessed the new site to land
revenue and the Municipal Corporatfon ‘thtrewpon’ filed a suit for a declara-
tion that it was entitled to hold the! land for ever without’ payment of any
assessment. The majority of the Judges of thé Supreme Court held Yhat the

4(1901) 28 TA 211, 99. 219, 220,
१1905) ILR 29 Bom. 580.
SAIR 1951 SC 469.


EVOLUTION OF THE DOCTRINE IN INDIA

Government was not, under the circumstances of the case, entitled to assess
land revenue because the Municipal Corporation had taken possession of the
land in terms of the Government resolution and has continued in such posses-
sicn openly. intedly, and of right for over seventy years and thereby

d mited title ii had been prescribing for during the period, that is to
say, the right to hold the land in perpetuity free of rent. Only Chandrasekhara
Tye J. wile esneurring with the majority. rested his decision on promissory
estoppel that the Government could nc! be allowed to go back on its repre-
sentation. He seems to have misunderstood the reference to the Ramsden rule
in the earlier case. He evidently thought that if in the earlier case, the Ramsden
rule was applied it could be applied with greater force in the latter case. In
doing so. he mistakenly called it ‘promissory estoppel.’

2.6. In «iis case’ the Government of India promulgated an Export Pro- Union of
mo‘ion Scheme for providing incentives to exporters of woollen goods. The Indie Ys ghan
respondent exported goods of a certain value and claimed import entitlement Agencies.
equal to the full value of exports as notificd in the scheme, but the Textile
Commissioner reduced the import entitlement. The Supreme Court held in
favour 61 the respondent on the ground that the Textile Commisisoner and the
Union of India did not act in exercise of the powcr under cl. 10 of the scheme
under which the Textile Commissioner may assess the value of the goods ex-
ported and issue an entitlement certificate on the basis of such assessed value,
and that on the contrary, the Textilc Commissioner reduced the import entitle-
ment without giving an adequate opportunity to the respondent to present its
case, The Court also observed :

We hold that the claim of the respondent is appropriately founded upon
the equity which arises in their favour as a result of the representation
made on behalf of the Union of India in the Export Promotion Scheme.
and the action taken by the respondent acting upon that representation
under the belief that the Government would carry out the representation
made by it.

Having held in favour of the respondent on the ground that the provisions
of the Scheme had not been followed by the appellants, any reference to pro-
missory estoppel for using against the Government was totally uncalled for
and the observation must be treated as obiter pure and simple.

2.7. The facts of this casc* are: In 1956 the appellant set up its factory Century
in an industrial area. At that time no octroi was payable with respect to the SPF 4 v.
goods imported into the industrial area. In 1960. Government constituted a ए|
municipality which included the industrial area. In 1962. the Government Municipa-
anteed to exclude the area bret the District Municipality objected, agreeing
however, to exempt the existing factories from paymeg‘ of octroi for 7 years.
In the 1965 the Dt. Municipality became the Ulhasnegar Municipality which
decided to levy octrai duty in 1968, and the appellant objected. Holding
in favour of the appellait. the Supreme Court held:

There ic undoubtedly a clear distinction betwecn a representation of an
existing fact and a representation that something will be done in future.
The former may. if it amounts to a representation as to some fact alleged
at the time to be actually in existence, raise an estoppel, if another person
alters his position zelying upon the representation. A representation that

TAIR 1968 SC 718.
?A.LR. 1971 S.C, 1021.
of LI & CA/ND/84



Gaioh

KEPORT ON PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL

something will be done in the future may result in a contract, if another
person to whom it is addressed acts upto it. A representation that some-
thing will be done in future is not a representation that it is true when
made. But between a representation of a fact which is untrue and a re-
presentation, express or implied—to do something in future, there is no
clear antithesis. A representation that something will be done in future
may involve an existing intention to act in future in the manner represent-
ed. If the representation is acted upon by another person it may, unless
the stature governing the person making the representation provides other-
wise, result in an agreement enforceable at law; if the statute requires that
the agreement shall be in a certain form, no contract may result from the
representation and acting therefore but the law is not powerless to raise in
appropriate cases an equity against him to compel performance of the obli-
gation arising out of his representation.

Public bodies are as much bound as private individuals to carry out
representations of facts and promises made by them, relying on which other
person have not altered their position to their prejudice. The obligation against
an individual out of his representation amounting to a promise may be en-
forced ex contractu by a person who acts upon the promise: when the law
fequires that a contract enforceable at law against a public body shall be
in certain form or be executed in the manner prescribed by the statute. the
obligation, if the contract be not in that form may be enforced against it in
appropriate cases in equity.

The Court also observed :

If our nascent democracy is to thrive, different standards of conduct for the
people and the public bodies cannot ordinarily be permitted. A public body
is in our judgment, not exempt from liability to carry out its obligation aris-
ing out of representations made by it relying upon which a citizen has al-
tered his position to his prejudice.

Three points have to be noted with respect to this case. First, the applica-
tion of the principle of promissory estoppel in this case is obviously wrong. All
the learned Judges who had referred: to this principle, including Bhagwati and
Tulzapurkar JJ., are agreed that there cam be no promissory estoppel against
the legislative power. Taxation, whether by. the legislature or its delegate,
is an exercise of the legislative power and octroi is nothing but tax. Secondly
the reference to a ‘nascent.democracy’ by Shah J. is again unfortunate. A demo-
cracy in a developing country cannot be ineffective and the Government or a
municipality, which is only an extension of the government, can be effective only
if they are free to formulate and reformulate their policies and augment their
revenues. Thirdly, there is absolutely no equity in favour of the appellant. When
the industrial area was included in the municipality, octroi became automatically
payable with respect to the goods imported into the area. It was only by way
of concession that the municipality agreed to exempt. . If later on the concession
was withdrawn, no grievance can be made of it. It is not as if the appellant was
invited into the area with a promise of favourable treatment.

2.8. In this case,’ the appellant was the highest bidder at an auction for
dealing in liquor. He alleged that at the time of the auction, the Dy. Commis-
sioner announced that no Sales-Tax would be liable to be paid on the sales of
liquor, but: despite the announcement (assurance) Government has levied and’
was taking steps to levy sales-tax on such sales; The Court held:

ScunargG"e=TnnF Tuyen SEE MOREE

1A.LR. 1971 S.C. 2399,


EVOLUTION OF THE DOCTORINE IN INDIA

The power to impose a tax is undoubtedly a legislative power. That power
can be exercised by the legislature directly or, subject to certain conditions,
the legislature may delegate the power to-some other authority. But the exer-
cise of that power, whether by the legislature or by its delegate is an exercise of
a legislative power ... Unless the executive is specifically empowered by law
to give an exemption, it cannot say that it will not enforce the law as against
a particular person. No court can give a direction to a Government to re-
frain from enforcing a provision of law.

Referring to the Bombay Corporation case, the Court incidently observed that
it was case of relationship between landlord and tenant.

2.9. In this case,’ the respondent was a 100% shareholder of the appellant. Turner Mori.
The appellant undertook to discharge the income-tax liability of the respondent, fie & दि
and kept back dividends due on respondent’s shares for being utilized as working 107 बह
capital. The appellant in fact paid the income-tax assessed on the respondent. rust Ld.
While the appellant’ was keeping the respondent informed of the various steps
it was taking and collecting any refunds ordered and keeping them, at no time
did it make any demand on the respondent to re-imburse the tax paid. When the
respondent transferred its shares, the appellant sued. respondent for the amount
of tax liability discharged by it and claimed a lien on the respondent’s shares.

The respondent pleaded as one of its defences, that the appellant was estopped.
The Court, upholding the plea of promissory estoppel, observed :

Estoppel is a rule of equity. That rule has gained new dimensions in recent
years. A new class of estoppel i.c. promissory estoppel has come to be
recognised by courts in this country, as well as in England. The full impli-
cation of ‘promissory estoppel’ is yet to be spelled out ... The principle
stated in the High Trees case* is that, when one party has, by his words or
conduct, made to the other a promise or assurance which was intended to affect
* the legal relations between them and to be acted on accordingly, then, once
the other party has taken him at his-word and acted on it, the party who gave
the assurance or promise cannot afterwards be allowed to revert to the pre-
vious relationship as if no such promise or assurance has been made by hitn,
but he must accept their legal relations subject to the qualification which he
himself has so introduced even though it is not supported in point of law
by any consideration, but only by his word. But that principle does not create
any cause of action which did not exist before so that, where a promise is
made which is not supported by consideration, the promise cannot bring an
action on the basis of the promise... The rule Jaid down in these decisions
undoubtedly advances the cause of justice and hence we have no hesitation
in accepting it.
This case, it may be noted is between parties. .
2.10, In this case,’ the Commisisoner HR&CE sanctioned the leasing of
Dewaswom land to the petitioner and a lease was executed for 99 years. The peti-
tioner was given a permit for clear fellilg with respect to a part of the land. But
the Government, under s. 99, HR&CE Act, cancelled the sanction of the lease.
One of the contentions raised by petitioner was that by the permit for clear-
felling there was a representation by the Government that the sanction was valid,
that the petitioner acted on the representation to his detriment by investing large
amounts for developing the property. The High Court however held:

JA.LR. 1972 S.C. 1311.
219471) K.B. 130.
FAIR 1972 Ker. 39.


‘ees
me

REPORT ON PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL

The Government was not estopped from exercising its statutory power under
s. 99, first for the reason that there was no representation by the Govern-
ment. that the sanction for the lease was valid—the grant of a clear-felling
permit under the MPPF Act by no means implied that the lease granted by
the Devaswom is valid: secondly, because the petitioner did not act to his
detriment on the faith of the representation; ‘and thirdly, because the power
under s. 99, is one conferred on the Government to be exercised for the
public good or at any rate for the benefit of persons other than the Govern-
ment.

Referring to the Anglo Afghan and Ulhasnagar cases, the High Court observed:
These cases have no application to the facts of this case as they did not
consider or decide the result of an impact of a representation on a discre-
tionary statutory power to be cxercised for the public good or for. the bene-
fit of a person other than the person or body exercising the power ... There
cannot be ai estoppel in respect of the exercise of a discretionary statutory
power which is to be exercised for the public good or for the benefit of some
one other than the person against whom the estoppel is asserted.

2.11. The validity of the Kerala Private Forests (Vesting and Assignment)
Act, 1971, was challenged in this case’ by owners or lessees of large tracts of
forest lands. One of the contentions was that the respondent Company establish-
ed itself in Kerala for production of rayon cloth pulp from raw material supplied
by Government, that the Government was unable to supply the raw material and
by an agreement undertook not to legislate for the acquisition of private forests
for a period of 60 years if the company putchased forest lands for the supply of
raw materials, that the respondent did purchase a large tract and therefore, the
agreement not to legislate should operate ag equitable estoppel against the Gov-
ernment. The Court held:

We do not see how an agreement.of the Government can preclude legislation.
on the subject. The High Court has rightly pointed out that the surrender
by the Government of its legislative powers to be used for public cannot
avail the company or operate against the Government as equitable estoppel.

2.12. The respondent, before purchasing a certain property, was informed
by the Asstt. Custodian that the praperty was not evacuee property. But later
on the property was declared evacuee property. Rejecting the plea of estoppel,
the Court’ held:

We are of opinion that the view taken by the House of Lorls* is the correct ,
one and not the one taken by Lord Denning:
The view taken by Lord Denning was as follows:

The Crown cannot escape by saying that estoppels do not bind the Crown,
for that doctrine has long been exploded ... I come therefore to the most
difficult question in the case. Is the Minister of Pensions bound by the War
Office latter? I think he is. , :

The views of the House of Lords are expressed thus:

Lorp Simonps: Mr. Lords, I know of no such principle in our law nor was
any authority for it cited. The illegality of an act is the same whether or not

JA.LR. 1973 S.C. 2734.

7A.LR. 1974 S.C. 2325,

SHowell v. Falmounth Boat Construction Co. (1951) A.C. 837.
‘Robertson v. Minister of Pensions (0940 1 KR 2m,


EVOLUTION OF THE DOCTRINE IN INDIA

the actor has been misled by an assumption of authority on the part of a
government cfficer however high or low in the hierarchy. I do not doubt
that in criminal proceedings it would be a material factor that the actor had
been thus misled if knowledge was a necessary element of the offence, and in
auy case it would have a bearing on the sentence to be imposed. But that_is
not the question. The question is whether the character of an act done in the
face of a statutory prohibition is affected by the fact that it has been induced
by a misleading assumption of authority. In my opinion the answer is clear-
ly No. Such an answer may make more difficult the task. of a citizen who
is anxious io walk the narrow way, but that does not justify a different
answer being given. .

Lorp NorManp: As I understand’ this statement, the respondents were in
the opinion of the Lord Justice, entitled to say that the Crown was barred
by representations made by Mr. Thompson and acted on by them from alle-
ging against them a breach of the statutory Order and further that the res-
pondents were equally entitled to say in a question with the appellant that
there hac been no breach. But it is certain that neither a minister nor any
subordinate officer of the Crown can by any conduct or representation bar
the Crown from enforcing a statutory prohibition or entitle the subject to
imaintain that there has been no breach of it.

2.13. The appellant was appointed as Vigilance Commissioner which was a No: Rama-
temporary post. There was an agreement between the parties that the appellant's nathe of
term was to be for 5 years from 1 Oct, 3, 1968, or till he attained 60years, which- Kerala.
ever was earlier. The post was abolished in Feb. 1970. One of the contentions
taised by the appeliant was that the respondent was precluded from altering the
terms of the agreement by promissory estoppel. Rejecting the contention, the
Court held’ that appellant knew the post was temporary and that the courts ex-
clude the operation of doctrine of estoppel, when it is found that the authority
against whom estoppel is pleaded has owed a duty to the public against whom
the estoppel cannot fairly operate, and relied on the following passage:?

As a general rule the doctrine of estoppel will not be applied against the
State in its governmental, public or sovereign capacity. An exception how-
ever ariscs where it is necessary to prevent fraud or manifest injustice.

2.14, in 1973, the Union of India formulated a scheme for providing =e

tives to registered exporters of walnuts with a view to offset the losses which & a
exporters would otherwise incur and to augment the foreign exchange earnings ¥ :
of the country. Under the scheme cash assistance was to be given to such ex-

Porters upto September 30. 1975. The cash assistance scheme was withdrawn

in September 1973, after notice to all concerned and after taking into conside-

ration thei: representations. Alleging that they had invested considerable sums

67 money for expanding their business, the petitioners contended that the Gov-

ernment was estopped from going back. on their representation. Rejecting the
- contention, the High Court held;° .

It is well known that the sovereign authority like the State has to look after
the interest of millions of people and in the present socio-economic set up
of the country, it cannot be bound down by an assurance for all times to
come where the interest of the public comes into conflict with the assurance
once given ... In such cases (when the State performs governmental, public
or sovereign functions) the doctrine would not apply when it clashes with the

JA.LR. 1973 S.C. 2641 at 2649.
*American Jurisprudence 2nd p. 783, para. 123,
5A.LR. 1976 J & K 41 at 45-48, i


REPORT ON PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL

interest of the public at large, except when it is necessary to prevent fraud
or manifest injustice ... If the Government after a review of its policy deci-
sion finds that modification or alteration is required in the earlier policy in
the interest of the public at large, the Government cannot be debarred from
reviewing that policy ... Ours‘is not a country with unlimited financial re-
sources and the courls of law cannot ignore the fact. The utilisation of the
meagre financial resources by the Government therefore, has to be left to the
judgment of the Government which is the best judge ‘of the needs of its
people. The courts will only bind the Government by its promises to pre-
vent manifest injustice or fraud and will not make the Government a slave
of its policy for all times to come when the Government acts in its Govern-
mental, pubiic or sovereign capacity. In its commercial activity the posi-
tion would, of course, be different. In the present set up of the country, when
‘finances are required for starting and completing various projects in the inte-
rest of the public at large, the Government cannot be held bound by a repre-
sentation made by it, when the need for continuance of the representation is
no longe1 there. The Government must be given a free hand to determine
the, priorities when on the one hand there are the hungry millions for the
larger benefit of whom the money is required by the State, and on the other
hand are the affluent few who wish to bind the Government by its promise
to make additional profits ... The petitioners do not run the risk of incurring
any losses except of course the loss of additional profits.

2.15. In 1969, auctions were held in U.P. for grant of licences to sell country
liquor. At the time of the auction no announcement was made that the exemp-

tion from sales-tax in respect of sales of country liquor granted under a notifi-
cation issued in 1959 under s. 4 of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948, would or would
not be withd awn. The respondent in one of the appeals was one of the highest
bidders, When the 1959-notification was, withdrawn. with the result that his sales
‘became subject to the imposition of sales, tax, he contended that the 1959-notifi-

cation operated as estoppel. Rejecting the contention, the Court observed :'

It is now well settled by a catena of decisions that there can be no question
of estoppel against the government in the exercise of its legislative, sovereign
or executive powers.

The Court also relied on the following passage :*

It is too late in the day to urge that the government is just another private
litigant, for the purpose of charging it with liability, when it takes over a
business theretofore conducted by private enterprise or engages in competi-
tion with private ventures. Whatever the form in which the government
functions, anyone entering into an arrangement. with the government takes
the risk of having accurately ascertained that he who purports to act for
the government stays within the bounds of his authority ... And this is so
even though, as here, the agent himself may have been, unaware of the
limitations upon his authority ... ‘Men must turn square corners when they
deal with the government’ does not reflect a callous outlook. It merely ex-
presses the duty of all courts to observe the conditions defined by Congress
for charging the public treasury.

2.16. The fishery rights in a Jalkar were settled with the appellant for the

year 1974-75. Since the appellant defaulted in the payment of jamma, the set-
tlement for 1975-76 was made with the respondent, but before he could take

JA.LR. 1976 S.C. 2237 at 2241.
*Federal Crop Insurance Corp. v. Merri isan) 332 US 380.


EVOLUTION OF THE DOCTRINE IN INDIA

possession, the State changed its mind in favour of the appellant. A writ petition
by the respondent was allowed by the High Court. Allowing the appeal, the |
Supreme Court held:' .

It is well settled that there cannot be any estoppel against the Government
in exercise of its sovereign legislative and executive functions.

2.17. On October 10, 1968, the respondent released a news item that all new MP. Sugar
industrial units in the State would be given exemption from sales tax under $. Mills y
4A, U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948, for a period of 3 years from the date of commence- U.P,
ment of production, On October 11, the appellant wrote to the Director of Indus-
tries stating that in view of the Sales Tax Holiday announced, it would set up
a hydrogenation plant and asked for confirmation regarding the exemption. On
October 14, the Director replied confirming the news item. On December 12, the
appellant’s representative met the Chief Secretary of the Government and adviser
to the Governor and informed him of the various steps being taken for setting up
the plant and the Chief Secretary assured him that the appellant would be
entitled to the sales tax holiday. (The State was under President’s rule from
Februry 26, 1968 to February 28, 1969. and the new elected Government assumed
office on February 27, 1969.) On December 13, the appellant wrote to the Chief
Secretary a letter recording the oral assurance given by the Chief Secretary with a
Tequest for confirmation. On December 22, the Chief Secretary replied that the
respondent would consider the request for exemption on the submission of a
formal application. By that time, the appellant had in fact submitted such an
application. The financial institutions which were approached by the appellant
for financial assistance were not satisfied with the letter of December 22, as it mere-
ly stated that the respondent would consider the request for exemption and so,
on January 22, 1969, the appellant again wrote to the Chief Secretary for a formal
order of exemption. On January 23, the Chief Secretary gave the necessary as-
surance regarding the exemption. The appellant thereupon went ahead with the
setting up of the factory, and on April 25, wrote to the Chief Secretary informing
him that the U.P. Finance-Corporation had sanctioned financial assistance in
view of the assurance given by him. On May 16, the Deputy Secretary to the
Government, Industries, wrote to the appellant requesting it to send its representa-
tive to a meeting fixed by the Chief Minister to discuss the question of exemption.
The appellant replied that exemption had already been granted to it but would
however send its representative to the meeting. The appellant’s representative
attended the meeting and reiterated that exemption had already been granted to
the apvellant. Thereafter, the appellant’ proceeded with the work of setting up the
factory. On January 20, 1970, the appellant was informed by the respondent that
the respondent had taken a policy decision that new vanaspati units which go
into production by September 30, would be given partial exemption from
sales tax. On June 25, 1970, the appellant wrote to the respondent that
it would avail itself of the concession rates. The appellant’s factory went ‘into —pro-
duction on July 2. On August 12, another news item appeared ‘that the respondent
had decided to rescind even the partial concession. The appellant filed a writ
petition for a direction to the respondent to exempt the sales of vanaspathi manu-
factuted by the appellant for a period of 3 years.

The Supreme Court held’ that the respondent was bound to exempt the ap-
pellant from payment of sales tax in respect of sales of vanaspati for a period of
3 yeas from the date of commencement of production and was not entitled to

tA.LR. 1977 S.C. 2149 at 2154.
2A.LR. 1979 S.C. 621. 1


REPORT ON PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL

recover such tax from the appellant subject to certain directions regarding th
refund of the tax already collected and deposited by the appellant.

For arriving at this decision the Court relied on the doctrine of promissor:
estoppel after review of the Indian, English and the US laws on the scope of thi
doctrine. In doing so, the Court laid down the following propositions :

(a) It is true that to allow promissory estoppel to found a cause of actior
would seriously dilute the principle which requires consideration to suppor
a contractual obligation, but that is no reason why the new principle, whict
is a child of equity brought into the world with a view to promoting honesty
and good faith and bringing law closer to justice, should be held in fetters
and not allowed to operate in all its activist magnitude, so that it may fulfi.
the purpose for which it was conceived and born ... We do not see any reason
why promissory estoppel should not be allowed to found a cause of action
where, in order to satisfy the equity, it is necessary to do so.

(0) The law may therefore, now be taken to be settled that when the
Government makes a promise knowing or intending that it would be acted
upon by the promise and, in fact, the promise, acting in reliance on it, alters
his position, the Government would be held bound by the promise and the
promise would be enforceable against the Government at the instance of the
promisee, notwithstanding that there is no consideration for the promise
and the promise is not recorded in the form of a formal contract as required
under Art. 299 of the Constitution. It is elementary that in a republic
governed by the rule of Jaw, no one, howsoever high or low, is above the law.
Everyone is subject to the law as fully and completely as any other and the
Government is no exception. No distinction can be made between the
exercise Of a sovereign or governmental function and trading or business
activity of the Government, so far as the doctrine of promissory estoppel is
concerned.

(c) We do not think that it is necessary, jin order to attract the appli-
cability of the doctrine of promissory estoppel, that the promise, acting in
reliance on the promise, should suffer any detriment.

As regards the first proposition, Bhagwati J., in the instant case and Shah J., in
the two cases decided by him, on which Bhagwati J. placed strong reliance, per-
mitted promissory estoppel to be used as a catise of action, Bhagwati J. relied
on a judgment of the Court of Appeal' for his conclusion that promissory es-
toppel can be the basis of a cause of action. He noticed that Spancer Bower
and Turner* have explained that degision @n the basis that it is an application
of proprietary estoppel. But Bhagwati J. relied on Lord Scarman’s observation
that the ‘distinction (between promisqory estoppel and proprietary estoppel) may
indeed be valuable to those who have to teach or. explain the law, but I do not
think that, in solving the particular problem raised in a particular case, putting
the law into categories is of the slightest assistance and said that the decision was .
not based on any distinctive feature of proprietary estoppel but proceeded on the
assumption that there was no distinction Between promissory and proprietary
estoppel so far as the problem before them ‘was concerned. (emphasis supplied).
And that is exactly the point to be noted,. If it was a clear case of promissory
estoppel and not proprietary’ estoppel, would the leared Law Lords have given
relief on the basis of estoppel as a cause of-action? In fact, Lord Denning with
whom Lord Scarman agreed had stated' ‘there are estoppels and estopnels.
Some do give rise to a cause of action. Some don’t...... in the species of es- *

Crabb v. Arun Distt. Council, (1975) 3 Alt E.R, 866.
"Treatise or the law relating to Estpppel


EVOLUTION, OF, ४४ DUCTRING AN INDIA...

toppel called’ ‘proprietary estoppel’ ‘it does give rise to a cause of action’. How-
ever there is mucn to be said in nis tavour wnen Bhagwati J. asks,
But on what principle, one ‘may ask, is the distinction to be sustained bet-
ween promissory estoppel and proprictary estoppel in the matter of cn-
forcement by action? If proprietary estoppel can furnish a cause of action,
why should promissory estoppel not?

The Law Commission of india‘ recommended as {ollows.

Great injustice is done sometimes ‘waere-a -promise 1s Made which tle -pro--
1 missor knows will be acted upon and which :is-in fact acied upon and tnen.

it is held that such promise is unenforceable on the. ground of went. ot.

consideration... :, We recommend that-an exception: be added -to section 25. .

Ihe exception recommended: was:

5, 25(4}. It is a promise, express or implied, which the promisor knew. or

should reasonably have known, would be relied upon by the promisee, where

the promisee has altered. his position to his detriment in reliance on the pro-
The effect of this recommendation is to dlow promissury’ estoppel as a cause
of action, though it is not clear whetlier the result was foreseen. “That recom-
mendation has not been so fat acéepted.

As regards the second proposition laid’ down by the learned Judge, we feei
he has gone too far for the following reasons: .

0) The learned author’ on whom'Bhagawati J. relied has himself stated thus:

One can easily see why courts aad other Judicatory tribunals should not
be estopped in the performance of the judicial function, and one can
teadily see why major governmental policies must be kept within the’ con-
trol of Congress and of the principal policy making officers and why such
policies cannot feasibly be subjected to significant alteration by j ally
enforced estoppel. But we cannot readily see why the government its
business and property dealings ‘should: not be subject’ to the same. rules
of fairness that courts apply to others engaging in such dealings. :

The author was only arguing for similar treatment in. business and property
dealings and not with. respect to governmental functions, This is made clear
when he says: न i .

The movement is towards the idea that the government units in their pro-
.prietary capacity may be treated like any other party for purposes of es-
toppel and that even in the governmental capacity estoppel may be: applied
when the accommodation of: the needs. of justice to needs of effective gov-
emment so required.

(i) It is true that a republit is algo govemed by law, but a democratic :or
republican cozstitution cannot’ be derfed: tle méans “for: preserving, itself;
and such means are Revenue. It is for the government to determine. its priotiy
ties between the hungry millions and the affluent few. In: this ‘very vital aspecty
there is absolutely no parallel or comparison between an individual and the gov-
ernment. As Sri Seervai puts it*

‘Thirteenth Report pp. 7 and 77, (1958). vs

# KC Davis, Administrative Law Text (3rd ed.) 1972) pp. 343
Constitutional Law of India. 3rd éd. p. 608: ~

of LI & CAIND/84

357;


REPORT ON ‘PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL ©

‘Fhe reference (By Shah J.)-to standards of conduct im-a nascent democracy-

overlooks the fact that public auinonties are, and private parues are. not,

charged with protecting the public interest; and the protection of the public in-

terest must, to that extent, require different standards to be applied to pei-
__.vate persons and public authorities,

(iii) When a government changes its policy, it is not right for the. court
‘o assume dishonesty or immorality, and throw the burden on the government
to satisly the court that government has acted fairly under compulsion of ¢xe-
cutive neceasity. The burden should be on the party invoking estoppel against
‘the Government to show fraud or manifest injustice. Govertiment acts as
honestly is laying down a legal proposition and. later on changes its view. If
it is argued that it is a different Bench of the Court that generally changes the
law, it is also true that change in government policy is often due to a change in
the government, In the instant case the original policy of tax holiday was under
President’s Rule and the withdrawal of the concession was by an elected gov-
ernment. Even otherwise, the same government can and must change its policy
if experience shows that such a change is necessary in the public interest. And
whether such change is required in the public interest only the government can de-
cide and not a Court. Democratic process, requires changes of policy not emly by
successive governments but also by the same government. If a government can-
not change its policy when there is a change in government it is incomprehen-
sible when it can do so. Judicial enforcement by invoking estoppet against the
government will be nothing but trespassing into the legitimate field of activity of
another limb of the government and would be nothirg short of interfering with
the democratic process. .

Gv). Bhagwati J. has excluded the legislature from the operation of the
doctrine. The reason can only be because there is an irrebuttable presumption
that the legislature acts in public jnterest because it knows the public needs.
Does not a similar presumption apply in thie case of the executive? The utmost
one can say is that it may be a case of rebuttatile presumption if the person
who invokes the doctrine against the government establishes fraud or manifest
injustice. —~ .
~ (v)In the Gwalior Rayon case, the Court has exempted the legislature
from the doctrine asd Bhagwati J. accept. In N. Ramanatha’s case, the
Court has held that estoppel cannot be pledded against an authority which owes
a duty to the public. In Ramkamarls case the Court held ‘that there can be
no‘ question of estoppel against the govermment in the exercice of its legislative,
executive and soveriegn functions. In the:case of such unanimous. views ca-
pecially of larger Benches of five Jugges jedicial comity requires that a Bench

of, two Judges should not have follqwed the Totgements in the Anglo-Afghan
case and the Century Spg. and Mfg. fe ces. 1086 are Judgements of three
wey ber Boge ype! by Shah J. in the first case
was merely obiter. Bhagwati J. i Ramanatha saying .that the

me Bat: then are not all governmental

petitioner knew that the post was
with Ramanatha where it is’

policies subject to charge? He ala J
stated, ‘where u government 00% a duty! t tie .public to act differéntly, pro-
missory estoppel cannot 86 invdked! to @ government, from dding ‘so,
but interpreted ‘duty to public’ to sel course. of conduct enjoined by law:
No law: imposed-a duty on the go fo abolish’ a post in. Remanatha.
And what is more government always oweg a 6४7 to the public and not, only
when it. is enjoined by law. The reasons why Ramkumar did not refer to
Anglo-Afghan, Century Spg. and Turner , Marrison cases,’ are, the reference
to promissory estoppel in the finst: was obiter; the second was wrong because
it dealt with legislative power, and the. fhind was between private’ parties.



EVOLUTION OF THE BOCTRINE IN INDIA

Bhagwait J. relies on Malhotra for saying that that decision shows that es-
toppel can be invoked against the government. But Malhotra says.

The doctrine of estoppel in its application to the State has undergone
some radical thinking since the judgment in the Anglo-Afghan and Cen-
tury Spg. cases.

As already stated the reference to promissory estoppel by Shah J. in Anglo-
Afghan is obiter and the same Judge’s reliance on the doctrine in Century Spg.
case is clearly wrong even according to Bhagwati J.’s view because, the muni-
cipality’s decision to impose octroi duty is the exercise of legislative power.

(vi) Lastly, many legal eyebrows in the U.K. and the U.S. are bound to
be lifted at this proposition, because, in those countries there has never been
any controversy arising from a government changing its policy.

In an interesting English case in 1972, the plaintiffs were granted an air
. transport licence by the Civil Aviation Authority for low cost passenger ser-
vice to run what was called a ‘Skytrain’, for 10 years from 1973. The plaintiffs
spent large sums of money as operation costs, but in 1975. there was a change
of policy due to a change in the government, and the licence was cancelled in .
1975. The challenge to the cancellation was successful on the ground that the
newpolicy was ultra vires the powers of the Secretary of State. But on the
question of estoppel the following views were expressed:

Lord Denning: The underlying principle is that the Crown cannot be
estopped from exercising its powers, whether given ins a statute or by
Common law, when it is doirig so in the proper exercise of its duty to act
for the public good, even though, this may work some injustice or tfair-
ness to a private individual...... Tt can however be estopped when it i
not properly exercising its powers: but is misusing them; and it docs mie- .
use them if it exercises them in circumstances which work ‘injustice or
unfairness to the individual without any countervailing benefit for the
public. .

In the present case, if the Secretary of State did have a prerogative to with-
draw the resignation, and properly exercised the prerogative, then there would
be no case for estoppel. He would be- exercising the prerogative for the publie |
good and would be entitled to do it, even though it did work injustice to some
individuals.

Lord Roskill pointed out that when a party comes into power, it gene-
rally makes.a change in policy an election issue and observed

The doctrine of estoppel cannot be allowed to hinder the formation of
government policy—or one might add the constitutional result of a general
election

Whatever representations the Secretary of State in office between 1972
and 1974 may have made to the plaintiffs he made them pursuant to his
public duty and in good faith. If in 1976 his successor was of the opinion
that the public interest required him to go back on those representations.
he was in duty bound to 80 back on them. The fact that Laker Airways
suffered loss as a result of the change is unfortunate; they have been the
victims of a change of government policy. This often happens. Estoppel
cannot be allowed to hinder; the formation of government policy.

ब्वफ्फाओल


REPORT ON PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL

In the U.S. academic discussion has centered round two cases.! Neither of
these cases had anything to do with changes in governmental policy. In the first
case, the U.S. Supreme Court had categorically stated that even in business mat-
ters there is a difference between government and private individuals.

In both these countries, which continue to be a source for our law, the con-
troversy is how far government is bound by the representations of its officials.

As regards the third proposition of Bhagwati J. we feel that here also the
learned Judge has gone a bit too far in not requiring detriment to be established.
After all the principle is one of equity and no question of equity can ever arise
unless somegne is hurt. That is, unless the person to whom the representation
is made would be unjustly harmed if the rule of equity is not invoked.

On this question of detriment to the person to whom the representation
is made, there are two views. One view is that the more ‘acting upon’ the repre-
sentation by the person to whom the representation is made is itself ‘detriment’
suffered by such person. The other view is that the person who acted upon
the’ representation, would suffer some injustice, if the person who made the
representation is allowed to resile from what he stated. The two views are lucidly
explained by Dixon J. as follows :

The principle upon which estoppel in pais is founded is that the law should
not permit an unjust departure by a party from an assumption of fact which
he has caused another party to adopt or accept for the purpose of their legal
relations. This is, of course, a very general statement. But it is the basis of the
tules governing estoppel. Those rules work out the more precise grounds upon
which the law holds a party disentitled to depart from an assumption in the
assertion of rights agajnst another. One condition appears always to be indis-
pensable. That other must have so acted or abstained from acting upon the
footing of the state of affairs assumed that he would suffer a detriment if the
opposite party were afterwards allowed to set up rights against him inconsistent
with the assumption. In stating this essential condition, particularly where the
estoppel flows from representation, it is often said simply that the party asserting
‘the estoppel must have been induced to act to his detriment. Although sub-
stantially such a statement is correct and leads to no misunderstanding, it
10065 not bring out clearly the basal purpose of the doctrine. That purpose is
to avoid or prevent a detriment to the party asserting the estoppel by compelling
the opposite party to adhere to the assumption upon which the former acted or
abstained from acting. This means that the real detriment or harm from which
the law seeks to give protection is that which would flow from the change of
position if the assumption were deserted that led to it. So long as the assump-
tion is adhered to. the party who altered his situation upon the faith of it cannot
complain. His complaint is that when afterwards the other party makes a diffe-
rent state of affairs the basis of an assertion of right against him then, if it is
allowed, his own original change of position will operate as a detriment. His
action or inaction must be such that, if the ‘assumption upon which he proceeded
were shown to be wrong, and an inconsistent state of affairs were accepted as
the foundation of the rights and duties of himself and the opposite party. the
consequence would be to make his original act or failure to act a source of pre-
judice.”

Spencer Bower and Turner® have examined these two views critically and
stated :

'Federal Crop. Ins. Corp. ४. Merrill 332 US 380 and US (1951) 341 US 41.
2Grundt v. Great Boulder Ptv. Gold Mines Ltd: (1938) 59 C.LR. 641.
‘The Law Relating to Estoppel by Reprfsentati¢n Gea ed, pp. 391-394).


EVOLUTION OF THE DOCTRINE IN INDIA

Notwithstanding general agreement by high authority that there must be
an alteration in the position of the promisee in reliance on the promise, it
has been seriously argued that it is not necessary that such an alteration of
Position should amount to “detriment”. Lord Denning is the principal pro-
tagonist for this proposition...If the meaning of “detriment”, where that light
is used in the estoppel cases, be subjected to precise examination in the light
of the discussion of it from the pen of Dixon J., it is clear that detriment
means injustice to the promisee which wouid result if the promisor were
allowed to recede from his promise. This definition will be found to resolve
the difficulties between the two schools of thought in many of the actual
CASES... But all this notwithstanding, there may possibly remain some cases
in which it will be impossible to maintain that any detriment resulted, and
yet it can still be said that the promisee has ‘acted on” the promise. It is
difficult perhaps to imagine such cases which would qualify in all other re-
quirements as promissory estoppel cases...But if and when a case arises
to be determined by a Court of the highest authority in which it is found
as a fact that the promisee, while “acting on” the promise has not done
so to his detriment within the extended meaning which Dixon J. gives to
the term, it will become necessary to decide whether “acting on” without
“detriment” is sufficient. It is here submitted that in promissory estoppel,
as in orthodox estoppel, detriment in Dixon J.’s sense, will be found essen-
tial; for to go further must go perilously close to the enforcement of a simple
gratuitous promise.”

We are inclined to accept the views of the learned authors and to require
‘detriment’—as explained above—as a necessary element of the doctrine of Pro-
missory Estoppel. In fact the M. P. Sugar Mills case is the wrong case in which
Justice Bhagwati has taken up arms. In this case there was a change of govern-
ment, the representation of the Chief Secretary was beyond his authority, because
an exemption from sales tax could be granted only under s. 4A of the Act; and
the petitioner had not and would not suffer any loss. When sales tax is imposed
it will be passed on to the consumer and no monetary loss at all would be inflicted
oa the petitioner.

2.18 On the establishing of a mandi the concerned Municipal Committee yi: Ram V. State |
decided that purchasers of the plots for sale in the mandi would not be required of Haryana L
to pay octroi duty on goods imported within the mandi. This was in 1918 and
the state of affairs continued till 1965. During that time though the Municipal
Committee had changed its mind the Government approved the Committee’s
original action of exempting the purchasers of plots from octroi duty. In 1965,
on the request of the Municipal Committee, the Government withdrew its approval
of the earlier action and the Municipal Committee started levying octroi duty.

A challenge to this action of the Municipal Committee and the Government
‘failed in the High Court. Dismissing the appeal, the Supreme’ Court held :*

So far as the recommendation of the Municipal Committee to the Govern-
ment to levy octroi duty is concerned, though it is contrary to the represen-
tation it made to the buyers of the sites in the mandi, the Municipality is
not estopped as the representation made by it was beyond the scope of its
authority. The levy of tax being for a public purpose i.e. for augmenting the
revenues of the Municipality as laid down in Ramkumar's case, (AIR 1976
SC/2237) the plea of estoppel is not available. The order of the Govern-
ment directing the levy of octroi in pursuance of the resolutions of the
Municipality cannot also be challenged as it is in the exercise of its statutory
duty.

YA.LR. 1980 S.C. 1285.


REPORT ON PROMISSORY ESTOPFEL

In the course of the judgement the learned Judges laid down the following pro-
positions regarding promissory estoppel:

(1) The plea of promissory estoppel is not available against the exer-
cise the legislative functions of the State:

(2) The doctrine cannot be invoked for preventing the Government
from discharging its functions under the law.

(3) When the officer of the Government acts outside the scope of his
authority, the plea of promissory estoppel is not available. The doctrine
of ultra vires will come into operation and the Government cannot be
held bound by the unauthorised acts its officers.

(4 When the officer acts within the scope of his authority under a
scheme and enters an agreement and makes a_ representation and a
person acting on the representation puts himself in a disadvantageous
position, the Court is entitled to require the officer to act according to
the scheme and the agreement or representation. The officer cannot arbit-
rarily act on his mere whim and ignore his promise on some undefined
and undisclosed grounds of necessity or change the conditions to the
prejudice of the person who had acted upon such representation and put
himself in a disadvantageous position. The Court can enforce compliance
by a public authority or the obligation laid on him if he arbitrarily or on
hise mere whim ignores the promises made by him on behalf of the Govern-
ment.

(5) The officer would be justified in changing the terms of the agree-
ment to the prejudice of the other panty on special considerations such as
difficult foreign exchange or other matters which have a bearing on the
general interest of the State. ©

CHAPTER 3

THE LAW IN THE UNITED KINGDOM AND THE UNITED STATES

ate हे 3.1. The law in the United Kingdom is stated succinctly in text books' as
follows:

SNELL: Promissory estoppel: Where by his words or conduct one party
to a transaction makes to the other a promise or assurance which is intend-
ed to affect the legal relations between them, and the other party acts upon
it, altering his position to his detriment, the party making the promise or
assurance will not be permitted té act inconsistently with it. .

Like estoppel at common law, promissory estoppel may provide a defence,
but it can create no cause of action.

The defference between it and proprietary estoppel is that the effect
of promissory estoppel may be गाए temporary whereas that of proprietary
estoppel is not only permanent but is also capable of operating positively
so as to confer a right of action.

Hansury : Promissory estoppel : Where, by words or conduct a person
makes an unambiguous representation as to his future conduct, intending the re-

'Gnell, Principles of Equity, 26th ed. (1966) pps 625 to 631. Hanbury, Modern Equity,
lth ed. (1981) pp. 735 to 739.


‘EVOLUTION OF THE DOCTRINE IN INDIA

presentation to be relied on and to affect the legal relations between the
parties, and the representee alters his position in reliance on it, the represem
tor will be unable to act inconsistently with the representation if by so doing
the representee would be prejudiced.

Prom:ssory estoppel contains a number of features which distinguish it from
estoppel by representation of fact. First, in that the representation may be
one of intention and not one of fact; which raises the question whether it is
inconsistent with the House of Lords decision in Jordan v. Money.! But the
doctrine is now well established. Secondly, the requirement of detriment to the
representee is less stringent in the case of promissory estoppel. Financial loss or
other detriment is of course sufficient; but it seems that it is not necessary to show
more than that the representee committed himself to a particular course of action
as a result of the representation. Thirdly, the effect of the estoppel may not be
permanent. The representor may escape from the burden of the equity if he can
ensure that the representee will not be prejudiced. But, consistently with estoppel
by representation, promissory estoppel does not create a cause of action; it
Operates to give a negative protection. It is a shield and not a sword.

Proprietary estoppel: This doctrine is applicable where one party knowingly
encourages another to act, or acquiesces in the other’s actions, to his detriment
and in infringement of the first party’s rights. A doctrine, based on eucourage-
ment and acquiescence, under which a court of equity will adjust the rights of
the parties so as to do substantial justice between them.

3.2. In the United States the law is stated as follows: Yotted

Restatement :? A promise which the promisor should reasonably ex-
pect to induce action or forbearance of a definite and substantial chasacter
on the part of the promisee, and which does induce such ation ar for-
bearance, is binding if injustice cag be avoided oaly by enfoscement of the
promise.

American’ Jurisprudence : There is considerable dispute as to the ap-
plication of estoppel with respect to the State. While it is said that equi-
table estoppel will be invoked against the State when justified by the facts,
clearly the doctrine of estoppel should not be lightly invoked against the
State. Generally State is not subj¢ct to an estoppel to.the same extent as
is an individual, or a private corporaton. Otherwise it might be rendered
helpless to assert its powers in. government. Therefore, as a general rule
the doctrine of estoppel will not be applied against the State in its govern-
mental, public or soverign capacity. An exception, however, arises in the
application of estoppel to the State when it is necessary to prevent fraud
or manifest injustice.

CHAPTER 4

THE PROBLEMS
4.1. We ate now in a position. to stale the problems arising out of the earlier Probfpaw!
discussion. They are
(a) Should promissory estoppel be adlowed to be used 3588 cause of action?

(b) Could the doctrine be used against the government and if so when?
and

(c) Should the promisee suffer detriment before he can invoke the doctrine?

11854) 5 H.L.C. 185.
*Article 90, American Law Institute's Restatement of the law of Contracts.
8Vol. 28, 9. 783, para. 123


OFS
iG

REPORT.ON PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL

These problems arise because,' in all systems of civilised administration, citi-
zens expect the concerned departments and agencies to act in conformity with
the procedure they have established for themselves or promises they have
made. Departure from that procedure or promise, be it a mere rule of practice,
frustrates legitimate expectations, and the citizens turn to the courts for re-
dress against arbitrary action. The courts will then have to decide whether the
procedure or promise in question is enforceable against the body that has adopt-
ed or made it. To what extent can the private law principle that persons could
be held to representations made by them and acted upon by others to their de-
triment, be applied against such bodies?. One view is that a public body en-
trusted with powers and duties for public purposes cannot divest themselves of
these powers and duties by entering into contracts or making representations
incompatible with the discharge of the power and duties. If a deparimental
official makes a representation which is relied on by a private party to his in-
jury, the department can still go back on the representations because that may
be necessary in the public interest. ...... Another view is that the department can be
held to the representation, unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the court
that a departure will be justified by overriding considerations of public interest.

4.2 Our views are as follows:

(a) In view of the recommendation already made in the Thirteenth
Report ot the Law Commission, promissory estoppel may be allowed to
be used as cause of action.

(b) The doctrine can be used against the government in its business
and property activities. The position in this area is not similar to that of
tortious liability where the distinction unfortunately is perpetuated by the
courts themselves. To invoke the doctrine of promissory estoppel against
the government in its governmental activities would be making the gov-
ernment and its agencies (public bodies) ineffective, and, therefore, it is
that we are recognising this dichotomy in this field.

(c) On this aspect we are of the view that there should be detriment
in the sense explained by Mr. Justice Dixon above, that is, the person to
whom the representation or promise ‘ is made, is likely to suffer some
damage or loss if the person ‘making the representation or promise is
allowed to go back on his representation or promise.

CHAPTER 5
COMMENTS RECEIVED

5.1. The Law Commission has issued a working paper on the aforesaid
aspects and the following comments were received. The commission is grateful

for the response.

5.2. The High Courts’ had no comments to offer’. The Law Departments
of three State Governments’ agreed with the proposed amendments. The In-
corporated Law Society of Calcutta! had suggested the incorporation of cl.
(कै in the proposed sub. sec. (3) of sec. 25A that where the promisor is the
Government, the promise should have been made by an authorised officer of
the Government. The Society also indicated that a sub. sec. (4) may be added
that the doctrine of promissory estoppel shall not be available in any other case
except those provided for. When the Government is the promisor, the
promise is deemed to be made by a competent officer on behalf of the Gov-

(1983) K.L-T. 1083, 1089 (Govindan v. Cochin Shipyard).
*Law Commission File No. 2(2)/84-L.C. SI. No. 3(R).
2Law Commission File No. 2(2)/84-L.C. 1, No. 700).
‘Law Commission File No. 2(2)/84-L.C.S1. No. 5(R).


Law Commi-
ssion,

Promissory
estoppel.

RECOMMENDATIONS

ernment. Hence, the Law Commission is not recommending that such a
provision should be made.

5.3. The Law Commission has given full consideration to the views ¢x-
pressed. The Law Commission accordingly makes recommendations set out
in Chapter 6.

CHAPTER 6

RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1 It is suggested that since the doctrine of promissory estoppel is a
beneficial doctrine based on equity, exclusion of its operation may be allowed
only where absolutely necessary. The proper course would be to hold the
government bound by its promise which has been acted upon by the other
party (promisee) subject to certain narrowly drawn exceptions. We ate not
Tecommending the test of ‘sovereign’ and ‘non-sovereign’ functions, because,
it is not an easy test to apply. Our recommendation is that a new section may
be inserted in the Indian Contract Act after 5. 25 as suggested below.

Suggested Section 25A, Contract Act

6.2. 25A. (1) Where

(a) a person has, by his words or conduct made to another person,
an unequivocal promise which is intended to create legal relations or to
affect a legal relationship to arise in the future; and

(b) such person knows or intends that the promise would be acted
upon by the person to whom it is made : and

(©) the promise is, in fact, so acted upon by the other person, by
altering his position, then, notwithstanding that the promise is without
considetation, it shall be binding on the person making it. if, having
regard to the dealings which have taken place between the parties, it
would be unjust not to hold kim to be so bound. _

(2) The provisions of this section apply whether or not there is a pre-
existing relationship between the parties.

(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply:—

(a) Where the events that have subsequently happened show that it
would be unjust to hold the promisor tobe bound by the promise; or,

(0) Where the promisor is the Government and the public interest
would suffer if the Government is held to be bound by the promise; or,

(c) Where the promisor is the Government, and enforcing the pro-
mise would be inconsistent with an obligation or liability imposed on
the Government by law.

Explanation (1).—Where a question arises whether public interest could
suffer within the meaning of Clause (0), the court shall have regard to the
amount of harm likely to be caused to the promisee if the promise is not en-
forced and the extent of injury to be caused to the public interest if the pro-
mise is enforced, and shall decide the matter on a balance of the two consi-

derations. ५ ,

Explanation (2).—In this seqtion ‘Government’ includes all-public bodies


(K.K. MATHEW)
CHAIRMAN

G2. CHATURVEDI)
MEMBER

@R. MB. RAO)
MEMBER

(P.M. BAKSHI)
PART-TIME MEMBER

(VEPA P. SARATHD
PART-TIME MEMBER

(AK. SRINIVASAMURTHY)
MEMBER-SEGRETARY

DATED : 12th December, 1984.

Peme—s 10-20 M of LI & CA/ND/84