Pa eo LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

|? ONE HUNDRED AND NINTH REPORT

ON

br OBSCENE AND INDECENT

pe ADVERTISEMENTS AND DISPLAYS:
; १

|... SEOTIONS 28298, INDIAN PENAL CODE = io



D.O. No. F. 2(12)/84-LC
CHAIRMAN
Law Commission
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Justice K. K. Matnew

Dated the 8th January, 1985.

My dear Minister,

{am forwarding herewith the One Hundred and Ninth Report of the Law
Commission on “OBSCENE AND INDECENT ADVERTISEMENTS AND
DISPLAYS: SECTIONS 292-293, INDIAN PENAL CODE”. The subject was
taken up by the Law Commission on its own.

The Commission is indebted to Shri P, M. Bakshi, Part-time Member, and
Shri A. K. Srinivasamurthy, Member-Secretary, for their valuable assistance in
the preparation of the Report.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,
Sd./-
(K. K. Matuew)

Shri. Ashok Kumar Sen,
Hon’ble Minister of Law and Justice,
New Deu.

Encl: 1090 Report


CONTENTS

a CHAPTER
1. INTRODUCTORY
2. THE PRESENT LAW IN INDIA
3. THE LAW IN ENGLAND
4.

wo

CHANGE NEEDED IN SECTION 292, INDIAN
PENAL CODE पु पु

INDECENCY AND OBSCENITY : NEED 10 IN-
SERT SECTION 293A.

COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING
PAPER .

RECOMMENDATIONS

PaGs

10
12


CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTORY

4.1, The question dealt with in this Report is this. Is there any need
for reforming the law relating to indecent advertisements and displays in India
An examination of the question has been taken up by the Law Commission
of its own, in view of the feeling occasionally expressed that indecent advertise
ments of various types find display in the streets or are published in newspapers,
periodicals and other media, and that these could harm the morals of society,
apart from their being derogatory to the honour and dignity of the fair sex.

ope and
ignificance.

1.2. There does exist, in the Indian statute book, a variety of provisions Utility of a
intended to check the evil referred to above. Some of the provisions are of a study of the
genéral character, while a few are of a specialised nature.! Whether or not !aw on the
these provisions, taken in their totality, are adequate for checking indecent S¢biect.
advertisements, will be a matter of opinion. But an examination of these
provisions could at least help in clarifying one’s thoughts on the subject and
in enabling a serious student of the problems to acquire a better familiarity
with the terrain covered by the present law.

1.3, Accordingly, we propose to deal, in brief, with the present Jaw, and Methodology.

then to examine if any improvements are needed therein. | The subject of ५
indecency has received some attention in England very recently, where an Act”

has been passed on the subject of indecent displays. ‘It will be useful to have

a look at the recent developments in England also—though it must be pointed 1
out that focus in the recent English Act is not on the whole gamut of

indecent advertisements, but rather on certain outrageously explicit displays that

might, by reason of their taking place at public places (particularly, the market

place), “shock and disgust” the people.*

1.4. It may be mentioned that in order to elicit opinion on the subject, we Working
had prepared a Working Paper and circulated it to interested persons and bodies, Paper,
inviting their comments. A few comments have been received on the Working
Paper, which will be discussed in a later chapter.‘

See Chapter 2, infra.

Indecent Displays (Control) Act, 1981, (Ch. 42) (Eng).
See paragraph 3.7 to 3.12, infra.

Chapter 6, infra.

Pena


General and
special provi-
sions as to

offensive ad-
vertisements.

General provi-
sion (section
292, IPC).

Sale, ete. of
‘obscene books
ate,

CHAPTER 2
THE PRE!

2.1. The punishment of offensive advertisements is, under the present law
in India, permissible under a number of statutory provisions. These can be
broadly classified into—

(i) General provisions; and
(ii) Special provisions.

'T LAW IN INDIA AS TO OFFENSIVE ADVERTISEMENTS

By “general” provisions. we have in mind the provision in the Indian
Penal Code relating to obscenity (section 292).' ‘This section applics to a
variety of matters and is comprehensive cnough to cover ail obscene publi-
cations, In contrast, special provisions are confincd to special types of
writings or other obscene matter.

2.2. The general provision on the subject is, as stated above, contained
in section 292 of the Indian Penal Code. It reads as under :-—

“292. (1) For the purposes of sub-section (2), a book, pamphlet, paper,
writing, drawing, painting, representation, figure or any other object, shall be
deemed to be obscene if it is lascivicus or appeals to the pturiest interest or
if its effect, or (whee it comprises two or more distinct items) the effect of
any one of its items is, if taken as a whole, such as to tend to deprave and
corrupt persons who are likely, having regard to थी relevant circumstances, to
read, see or hear the matter contained or embodied in it.

(2) Whoever—

(a) sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly exhibits or in any manner puts
jnto circulation, or for purposes of sale, hire, distribution, public
exhibition or circulation, makes, produces or has in his possession
any obscene book, pamphlet, paper, drawing, painting, representation
or figure or any other obscene object whatsoever, or

(b) imports, exports or conveys any obscene object for any of the
purposes aforesaid, or knowing or having reason to believe that such
object will be sold, let to hire, distributed or publicly exhibited or
in any manner put into circulation, or

(c) takes part in or receives profits from any business in the course of
which he knows or has reason to believe that any such obscene
objects are, for any of the purposes aforesaid, made, produced,
purchased, kept, imported, exported, conveyed, publicly exhibited or
jn any manner put into circulation, or

(d) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that any person
is engaged or is ready to engage in any act which is an offence
under this section, or that any such obscene object can be procured
from or through any person, or

(e) offers or attempts to do any act which is an offence under this section,

shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, and with fine which may extend to
two thousand rupees, and, in the event of a second or subsequent conviction,
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five

years, and also with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
Exception—This section does not extend to—
(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation
or figure—

(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for
the public good on the ground that such book, pamphlet, paper,

1. Paragraph 2.2, infra.


3

writing, drawing, painting, representation or figure is in the
interest of science, literature, art or learning or other objects of
general concern, or

(ii) which is kept or used bona fide for religious purposes;

(b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or otherwise repre-
sented on or in—
(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of the Ancient Monu-
ments and Archacological Sites and Remains Act, 1958, or

(ii) any temple, or on any car used for the conveyance of idols or
kept or used for any religious purposes.”

2.3. Section 293, Indian Penal Code, reads as under :-— Section 293—
Sale, ete., of

*293. Whoever sells, lets to hire, distributes, exhibits or circulates to any gpecene blectt
d

person under the age of twenty years any such obscene object as is referre

to in the last preceding section, or offers or attempts so to do, shall be punished

on first conviction with imprisonment of eithcr description for a term which

may extend to three years, and with fine which may extend to two thousand

rupees, and in the event of a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment

of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and also

with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees”.

Section 294—

ebscene acts
and songs.

2.4, Section 294 of the same Code reads :-—

“294. Whoever, to the annoyance of others—
(a) does any obscene act in any public place, or

(b) sings, recites or utters any obscene song, ballad or words, in or near
any public place, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
descripion for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine,
or with both.”

2.5. The special provisions relating to indecency or obscenity are to be Provision in
found in— special laws.

(a) the Drugs Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act,
1954;

(0) the Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act, 1955;

(c) Section 20, Indian Post Office Act, 1898;

(d) Section 11, Customs Act, 1962.

The Act mentioned at (a) above, while it does cover some indecent
advertisements, is confined to advertisements of drugs and remedies connected
with sexual disorders. Its target is not indecency or obscenity, as such.

2.6. The special. statutory provisions mentioned in the preceding paragraph Importance of
are rarely invoked in practice,’ in the context of obscenity. For all practical won 292,
purposes, the provision of a comprehensive character with an all-India operation 7
which can be pressed into service for punishing obscene publications and exhibi-
tions is section 292 of the Indian Penal Code.” A later chapter will,
therefore, concentrate on that section and examine how far the section
needs expansion, so as to make it an effective instrument for checking offensive
advertisements.*

Before doing so, we proceed to examine the English Law on the subject.

1, This also applies to stray local enactments relating to indecent advertisements,

2. Paragraph 2.2, supra.

3. Chapter 4, infra. .
2-519 LAD/ND/84


‘The common
Law.

Indecent Ad-
vertisements
Act, 1889.

Venereat
disease.

Publication:
of obscene
article,

Sanction for
prosecution.

CHAPTER 3

THE LAW IN ENGLAND

3.1. At common law,’ it is an indictable offence, punishable by fine and
imprisonment at the discretion of the court, to say or do or exhibit anything in
public which outrages public decency, whether or not it tends to deprave or
corrupt those who see it. There are, however, restrictions on prosecutions for
this common law offence.

3.2. Under the Indecent Advertisements. Act, 1889, (as supplemented oy
Jater enactments), a person, affixing or inscribing on any building walls, post,
tree etc. anything whatsoever so as to be visible to a person in any street or
footpath or affixing on a public urinal or delivering to any person in street or
footpath or exhibiting to public view in the window of a house or shop any
picture or printed or written matter which is of an indecent or obscene nature
is liable, on summary conviction, to a penalty not exceeding £20 or to
imprisonment for any term not exceeding one mouth, any person who gives or
de fivers to any other person any such pictures or printed or written matter
with the intent that it should be so affixed, inscribed, delivered or exhibited is
liable, on summary conviction, to penalty not exceeding £ 50 or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 3 months.

A constable or other peace officer may arrest without warrant any person
found committing an offence® against the Indecent Advertisements Act, 1889,
wilfully exposing any obscene print, picture etc. in any public place is punishable
under the Vagrancy Act, 1824;* now the Indecent Displays (Control) Act, 1981.

3.3. There are also restrictions on advertisements relating to the treatment
of venereal disease.®

3.4. ‘The general law of obscenity in- England is contained in the Obscene
Publications Act, 1959. A person who—
(i) publishes an obscene article, whether for gain or not; or

(ii) “has” an obscene article for gain (whether gain to himself or gain
to another),°

ig punishable.

‘The meaning of the expression “publishes inter
anyone who distributes or circulates an obscene article.”

test® of obscenity is also laid down.

” is defined, inter alia, as covering
An elaborate

3.5. A prosecution for obscenity in England requires consent of the
Director of Public Prosecutions where the article is a moving picture film not
less than 16 mm. wide and its publication takes place, or is expected to take
place only in the course of a cinematograph exhibition.®

1. Halsbury, 4th Ed. Vol. 11 (Criminal Law), page 587, paragraphs 10-26.
2, Section 3, Indecent Advertisements Act, 1889, as amended and supplemented by section
12), Criminal Law Act, 1948, and section 92(1), Criminal Justice Act, 1967.

Section 6, Indecent Advertisements Act, 1889, as amended by Ssection 2, Indecent
Advertisements (Amendment) Act, 1970.

Halsbury, 4th Ed., Vol. 11 (Criminal Law), paras 118-119.

Section 2, Venereal Disease Act, 1917, Hasbury, 4th E., Vol. or Medicine.

Section 2(1), Obscene Publications Act, 1959.

Section 1(3), Obscene Publications Act, 1959.

Section 2(6), Obscene Publications Act, 1959.

Section 20(3), Obscéne Publications Act, 1959.

4

had

eet aws


>

3.6. Sending unsolicited matter describing human sexual techniques or Sending unsoli:
unsolicited advertisements of such matter is an offence.’ cited matter.

3.7. Recently, there has been enacted in England (in 1981) an Act to The Act of
make “fresh provision” with respect to the public display of indecent matter. 1981.
Its main target is the “public nuisance” aspect of indecent displays e.g. (i)
cinema club posters; (ii) bookshop window displays that people cannot avoid , -
seeing as they walk along the pavement or go into a shop to buy (say)
cigarettes or chocolates; (iii) sex show window displays.?
The Act* makes it an offence to “make”, “cause” or “permit” the pubic
display of any indecent matter. The old statutory offences are repealed.

3.8. The principal provision [section 1(1)] of the Act of 1981 reads as Section 1(1),
under :— हु Indecent Dis-
. . . . . plays etc, Act,
“1(1) Jf any indecent matter is publicly displayed, the person making the 1981.
display and any person causing or permitting the display to be made
shall be guilty of an offence.”
The section does not apply to television broadcasts by the BBC or ITA,
to art galleries or museums, performance of plays, and cinematograph exhibi-
tions in licensed places,

3.9. The expression “matter” includes anything capable of being displayed, Indecent
but does not include an actual human body or part thereof [section 1(5)]. matter.

The expression “indecent” is not defined in the Act of 1981. Rulings
on analogous laws hold that the word should be given its ordinary meaning.*

3.10. The punishment under the English Act of 1981 is— हु
(a) fine not exceeding the statutory maximum, on summary conviction;

(b) imprisonment upto two years or fine or both, on conviction on indict-
ment (section 4).

3.11, The offender against the Act of 1981 cannot be arrested without Arrest under
warrant unless he gives a false name and address, but a constable may seize the 1981 Act,
any article which he has reasonable grounds for believing to be or to contain
indecent matter and to have been used in the commission of an offence under
the Act.

1, Section 4, Unsolicited Goods and Services Act, 1971. See DP.P. y. Beate Uhso
(UK) Lid., (1974) 1 All E.R, 753.

2. Mr. T. Sainsbury, H. C. Debates, Vol. 997, Col. 1167.

3. Indecent Displays (Control) Act, 1971 (Ch. 42) (Eng.). See R.T.H. Stone, “Out of
Sight, out of Mind’ (January 1982) 45 Modem Law Review.

4. R. ५. Stamford, (1972) 2 W.L.R. 1055.



Whether reform
needed.

Scheme of
peer 292,
B.C.

Section 292(1)
and section
292(2) compared.

Possible amend-
ment of seotion
292(2Ka), LP.C.

CHAPTER 4
CHANGE NEEDED IN SECTION 292, INDIAN PENAL CODE

4.1. Having

set out the position under the present

statutory framework

in India, and having noted certain other developments, we have now to examine

the question whehter any changes are needed

to deter a tendency to publish

obscene or indecent advertisements. Prima facie, it would appear that the general
provision in the Indian Penal Code, section 292, punishing’ obscene publications,
is intended to check and (on one view)? can be pressed into service for checking
obscene advertisments without much difficulty. The definition of obscenity, as
eriacted in section 292(1), seems to take in all publications that can be reasonably
objected to on the score of possible evil effects on the morals of listners or readers

of obscene matter.

4.2. However, as will be indicated presently,
ment in certain respects in the law as
address ourselves to a lacuna in existing section 292(2).
this lacuna, it is desirable first to analyse section 292.
section,® the scheme of the section is as follows.
with the substantive penal provision, but with a
The penal provision creating and punishing

[contained in sub-section (1)].

the offence appears in sub-section (2).

contained in

there is scope for improve-
section 292. We first
For understanding
Leaving aside the
The section does not begin
definition of “obscene”

Here also, one can concentrate on

clause (a), the remaining clauses not being material for the present purpose.

4.3. Now, if one goes through the text of sub-sections (1) and (2) of

section 292 carefully, one finds
the two, though it may perhaps be

at in one respect, there is a hiatus between
regarded as only a verbal hiatus.

The

relevant portions of the two sub-sections can be put in two parallel columns

as under :—

Section 292(1) Indian Penal Code
“For the purposesjof sub-section (2),
a book, pamphlet, paper, writing, dra-
wing, painting, representaticn, figure
or any other object, shall be deemed
to be obscene... ”

It will be noticed that the word
section 292(1), but that word does no}

Section 292(2) (a) Indian Penal Code

“Whoever sells, lets to hire, distribu-
tes, publicly exhibits or in any manner
puts into circulation...... any obscene
book, pamphlet, paper, drawing, pain-
ting, representation or figure or any

other obscene object whatsoever...... पु

“writing” is specifically mentioned वी
t appear in section 292(2)(a).

The

latter does not get the full advantage of the definition contained in the former.

Since section 292(2)(a) is the substantive penal provision, it is desirable
that it gets the full advantage of section 292(1), which is the defining provision.

4.4, Of course, it can be argued that the disharmony between section 292(1)
and section 292(2)(a), Indian Penal Code, as revealed by the above analysis,*
can, in practice, be tided over by recourse to the residuary words “any other

obscene object whatsoever”,

which occur in section 292(2)(a).

However,

in order to avoid controversy, it appears desirable that section 292(2)(a) of
the Indian Penal Code should be amended by inserting, after the word “paper”,

the word “writing”. |
advertisements in writing, particularly

‘After this amendment, the section would cover obscene
those in periodicals and posters.

Paragraph 2.2, swpra.
See paragraph 4.4, infra.
Paragraph 2.2, supra.

ayenpr

Paragraph 4.3, supra.


CHAPTER 5
INDECENCY AND OBSENITY : NEEED TO INSERT SECTION 293A

5.1. Prima facie it would ap pear that the law should cover such acts. The Indecent
the scope of the law. The public exhibition of obscene matter is a subject Matter.
falling within section 292, Indian Penal Code. But the section is silent about
matter which is merely indecent, without being obscene. Should the scope of
the penal law be extended to cover such matter? That is the precise question
to be considered.

5.2. Prima faci, it would appear that the law should cover such acts. The Questions
Constitution in article 19(2), permits such legislation and it would seem that, considered.
on the merits, there is a case for punishing public display of indecent matter.

No doubt, a pretty large number of writings, pictures and gestures which are
indecent on the score of their sexually explicit character would also be obscene,
in the sense of, the likelihood of depraving and corrupting the minds of the
audience or the readers. But, at least in theory, one can conceive of indecent
matter that is not obscene. Although the amount of harm caused by its display
or publication may be negligible and its frequency may not be alarming, the
matter requires consideration. It may be mentioned that section 292 of the
Indian Penal Code* does not punish the publication of indecent matter as such.

5.3. Before formulating any concrete proposal on the subject of indecency, Questions to
two points require consideration, namely— be considered,

1

(a) the scope of the expression “indecent”, in general; and

(0) one special question, namely, whether the concept of “indecent” is, in
its content, confined to matters dealing with sex, or whether it can take
within its sweep other matters also.

5.4, As to the first question, legislative precedents do not appear to furnish Legislative
much guidance. The expression “indecent” does not carry any legislative "sage
definition. The expression occurs occasionally in legislative usage, sometimes

singly, at other times in conjunction with words like “obscene” or “lewd”. But

its exact ambit remains undefined.

The fact that the word “indecent” has not been defined and different
people have different standards, was accepted? in the debate on the English Act
of 1980. The Williams Committee in England thought that the word “indecent”
was surrounded with vagueness? and confusion, as to be useless. In fact, when
the Bill leading to the Protection of Children Act, 1978 was debated in
England, the vagueness of “indecent” was used as a justification for requiring
the consent of the Director of Pubic Prosecutions for prosecution under the Act.*

5.5. The William Committee’ in England, while noting the vaguencss of Suggestion of
the expression “indecent”, seems to have. taken the view that if the expression the Williams
had to be defined, then some such formula as “offensive to reasonable people” Committee.

might be considered.

5.6. It may also be of relevance to refer, at this stage, to a decision of An American
the Supreme Court of the United States, where the Court had to consider the "ling.
question of “indecent” speech in the context of regulation of broadcast
matter.6 In that, case, the authority of the Federal Communications
Commission to effect qualitative content control through the regulation of radio

Chapter 2, supra.

T. Benyon, H. ९. Debates, Vol. 997, Col. 1196.

Committee on Obscenity & Film Censorship (1979), Cmd. 7772, para 9.21.

R. v. Khuller, (1973) A.C, 435 (HL).

Committee on Obscenity and Film Censorship, Report, (1979), Cmd. 7772, para 9.21.
F.C.C. v. Pacifica Foundation, (1978), 98 S.Ct. 3026,

7

Seeene


The constitu-
tional question.

Possible
approach
towards
defining
obscenity.

broadcast which that Commission finds “indecent but not obscene”, was
challenged. The case concerned a recorded monologue, broadcast on the
New York radio station in the early afternoon, as part of a discussion of
contemporary attitudes towards language. The title of the monologue was
“Filthy Words” and the broadcast was prefaced by an advice that the record
contained “sensitive language which might be regarded as offensive to some”.
Five weeks later, the Federal Communications Commission received a com-
plaint about the programme from a listener who had heard the broadcast while
driving with his fifteen year old son. The Commission granted the complaint,
though it declined to impose formal sanctions on the Radio Station. The
Commission’s conclusion was, that the seven words which had been broadcast
and objected to, depicted “sexual and excretory activities and organs ina
manner patently offensive by contemporary community standards for the broad-
cast medium”. The words in question were therefore “indecent” and prohibited
by 18 United States Code, section 1464, which forbids the use of “any obscene,
indecent, or profane language by means of a radio communication”. Expressly
stating that the “indecent” speech which it sought to control was not subsumed
by the concept of obscenity, the Commission justified using the broader category
by reference to the “unique qualities” of the broadcast media.

5.7. The action of the Federal Communications Commission was reversed
by a divided panel of the U.S. Court of Appeal for the District of Columbia
Circuit. On appeal, the Supreme Court of the United States (by a majority
of five against four) reversed the judgment of the Court of Appeal.
Mr. Justice Stevens rejected the contention that “indecent” means no more
than obscene in 18 U.S. Code, section 1464. He determined that “prurient
appeal is an glement of the obscene, but the normal definition of “indecent”
merely refers to non-conformance with “accepted standards of morality”. He
conceded that the Supreme Court had previously construed the expression
“indecent” (as occurring in similar statutes) to mean “obscene”. But he
reasoned that the history of section 1464, and the type of media to which it
was addressed (broadcast as opposed to print), warranted a different construction

in its case.

5,8, This determined the question whether the statute in issue authorised
the Commission to regulate the speech at issue. The constitutional question
still remained, namely, would the interpretation placed by the Supreme Court
forbid constitutionally accepted speech? Mr, Justice Stevens isolated two
characteristics of the broadcast media to justify lesser constitutional protection
for the airing of indecent material: (1), the broadcast media are a uniquely
pervasive presence, intruding into the protected enclave of the home; and (2)
proadcasts are uniquely accessible to unsupervised children.

A learned commentor, commenting on the above case,! expressed the view
that while the privacy argument, put forth by Justice Stevens, had some
weakness, the argument of protection of the young children might be stronger.
‘The comment further states that the case must not be read as “permissive”, in
the sense of defining the inner core of the Federal Communications Commission's
power to regulate indecent speech, but must be read rather as “restrictive” and
as marking the outer limit of that power. The comment further points out
that the case authorises “time goning” of broadcast, only when the broadcast
(1) uses language offensive to most people in depicting sexual or excretory
activities, (2) uses that language not incidentally, but repetitively, (3) is at the
time of the day when children are likely to be in the audience, and (4) is likely

to influence children.”

5.9, This ruling of the American Suprenie Court, it must be pointed out,
does not seek to define “indecency”. It upholds the action of Federal Com~
munications Commission in restraining an indecent programme, in the context
of the time at which, and the manner in which, the matter was broadcast. In
fact, the ruling indirectly draws attention to the constitutional aspect, and reminds
us that a restraint on speech and expression—including a restraint on indecent
speech—must still pass the constitutional (९४... ----__+ constitutional test.

1, Supreme Court 1977 Term. (1978) 92 Harv. L.R. 57, 162. .
2. F.C. v. Pacifica Foundation, (1978), 98 S.Ct 3026, 3035, 2040, 3041 note 29 aad



9

It is possible that the ambiguity residing in the expression “indecent”
could, to some extent, be reduced if the magnitude of the vice is defined by
some qualifying words, which would introduce a modicum of precision. We

all make a concrete suggestion later.?

5.10. Another question pertains to sexual content. According to one
view.” indecency is not confined to sexual indecency and includes anything
which an ordinary decent man or woman would find to be shocking. disgusting
and revolting. This view was referred to in the debates on the Bill which
led to the English Act of 1981, but most speakers in the debate regarded
“indecency” as confined to indecency with a sexual content.

5.11. In England, the sending by post of “indecent or obscene” writings
etc. or indecent or obscene article is punishable by statute. It has been held
that in section 11 of the Post Office Act. 1953, the words “indecent or obscene”
convey one idea, namely, “offending against the recognised standards of
Propriety, indecent being at the lower end of the scale and obscene at the
upper end of the scale .... an indecent article is not necessarily obscene
whereas an obscene article must almost certainly be indecent.”* It is
possible that the expression “indecent” (in the Post Office Act) is not confined
to sexual indecency, and extends to other improper matter.‘

5.12, On some consideration, it seems that while most matters of an
“indecent” character would be offensive because of their sexual implications,
there could possibly be other matters which offend decency by non-sexual
descriptions or depictions. It may not therefore, be necessary to confine any
Proposal in this regard to sexual indecency.

5.13. The problem of indecency is mainly to be tackled in regard to
public outrage of indecency constituted by public displays and advertisements.
Legislative proposals on the subject will, of course, have to take note of the
issues discussed in the preceding paragraphs, and take particular care of the
need to confine themselves to matter that offends reasonable persons—they
need not cover everything that may offend a hyper-sensitive person.

5.14, Taking all the above aspects into consideration, one possible course
would be to insert in the Indian Penal Code a specific section to cover
indecency. The following is a possible amendment by way of adding a new
section :—

Section 293A, to be inserted in the Indian Penal Code

(1) The provisions of sections 292 and 293 shall apply to a person who
publicly displays any indecent matter, as they apply to a person who
commits any offence under those sections in relation to obscene
matter falling within those sections.

(2) For the purposes of this section, matter is indecent if it is offensive
to reasonable persons from the point of view of decency.

Paragraph 5.14, infra,
R. V. Khuller, (1973) A.C. 435 (H.-L, (per Lord Reid).
Stanley, (1965) 1 All ER. 1035.

4, Smith & Hogan, Criminal Law (1978), pages 796, 797.

Paes

Sexual
content of
“indecency”,

“Indecent” and.
“obscene” in
Post Office
Act.

Sexual
indecency
whether

necessary.

Indecent
displays.

Indecent ad-
vertisements and
displays:
possible
amendment,


Working
paper.

Comments
received on
the working
Paper.

Comments
favouring the
amendment.

Some points
considered :
whether defi-
nition of
‘obscene’ to be
revised.

a CHAPTER 6

COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING PAPER

6.1. In the Working Paper which the Commission had circulated on the
subject, the points made in the preceding Chapters were incorporated,’ in
order to present the issues in a concrete form and to facilitate a consideration
of the important aspects. Comments of interested persons and bodies were
invited as to the need for—

(1) amendment of section 292(2)(a) of the Indian Penal Code, on
the lines indicated in the Working Paper, which were the same as
(9056 mentioned in this Report,? and

(2) also the insertion of a new section 293A in that Code, as proposed
in the Working Paper—the proposal being the same as has been
mentioned in this Report.>

6.2. Comments have been received on the Working Papert from—
(a) two State Government;
(b) one High Court;*

(c) a social organisation? based at Delhi, and certain gentlemen associated
with that organisation’; and

(d) one individual.*

6.3. (a) The comments received on the Working Paper from the State
Governments, and from one High Court whose comments has been received,!?
favour both the amendments that were put forth in the Working Paper.’*

(b) The comments received from the social organisation mentioned
above and certain gentlemen associated with it, while favouring, in substance,
the amendments put forth’? by the Commission; have made certain additional
suggestions. We shall, later in this Chapter,’* deal with such of the additional

points as are of importance.

(c) Finally, one gentlemen'* has drawn attention to the ned for using
the mass media by stressing the ill-effects of (indecent) advertisements.

6.4. To come, now, to the additional points made in some of the
comments, there is, in the first place, the suggestion that the definition of
“obscene” should be re-framed, so as to provide that matter which is capable
of arousing lustful thought, action or sensation should be regarded as obscene.
There is also a suggestion that the matter should be treated as obscene which
one cannot see in the presence of one’s grown up children.

Law Commission Working Paper, dated 15th September, 1984.
Paragraph 4.4, supra.

Paragraph 5.14, supra.
‘Ail comments received upto 10th November, 1984 have been taken into account.

Law Commission File No. F. 2(12)84, letters dated 17th and 29th October, 1984.
Law Commission File No, F. 2(12)84-LC, letter of 25th October, 1984.

The Neeti Manch, Delhi.

Law Commission File No. F. 2(12)84LC, 5. No. 3 to S. No. 5.

Law Commission File No. F. 2(12)84-LC, 5. No. 6.

10. Law Commission File No. F. 2(12)84-LC, letters of 17th, 25th and 29th October, 1984,
11. Paragraph 6.1, supra.

Law Commission File No. F. 2(12)84-LC, S. No. 3,4, 5.

13. Paragraph 6.4, infra.

14. Law Commission File No. F. 2(12)84LC, $. No. 6. 3
10

1


i

We do not, however, think that the present concept of obscenity as
provided in the Penal Code! needs any substantial change, from the angle
mentioned above. No serious problem of substance has arisen from the present
concept of obscenity, a concept which has evolved as a result of judicial
decisions and takes due note of constitutional requirements. At least, no
defect in the direction of the definition being too liberal has been noticed.
No doubt, various components of the concep: may have to be applied by the
judiciary. And the interpretation placed by one judge may differ from another.
But this is unavoidable.

6.5. There has been made a suggestion that the jury system should be
introduced in the trial of charges for obscenity. The suggestion seems to be
based on the assumption that judges are, at present, taking too liberal a view
of the law, — Reported decisions on section 292, however, do not appear to
-bear out this assumption. Similarly, the suggestion that the punishment for
obscenity should be inore scvers has not appealed to us. In fact, we find
from some of the views forwarded to us that there are several persons—
particularly, womgn—who realise the limitations of the law in dealing with
obscenity and who have sought to emphasise the role of society in creating
a better moral climate in this ficid.

We have very carcfully, gone through all the comments and have come to
the conclusion that so far us the points made therein are concerned, they do
not call for any other reforms in section 292 of the Indian Penal Code.

6.6. It is sometimes suggested—though faiatly—that there should be a
system of censorship of advertisements. We are strongly opposed to any such
course of action, Apart from anything else, the constitutionality of such a
legal provision (in regard to advertisements) would be extremely difficult to
sustain,” in the context of the heads of “decency” or and “morality”, specified
in article 19(2) of the Constitution.

1. Section 292, LP.C.
2. Cf. Usha Uthup v. The State of W.B., A.LLR. 1984 Cal. 268, 275 (September).

Other
suggestions,

The question
of pre-
censorship.


CHAPTER 7

RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1. In the light of the discussion in the preceding chapters, we make the
following recommendations for amending the Indian Penal Code :—

(1) Section 292(2)(a@) of the Code should be amended on the lines
already indicated.' “What we recommend is that section 292(2)(a)
of the Indian Penal Code should be amended by inserting after
the word “paper” the word “writing”.”

(2) The following section should be inserted in the Code :—

Section 293A (as recommended)

(1) “The provisions of sections 292 and 293 shall apply to a person
who publicly displays any indecent matter, as they apply to a person
who commits any offence under these sections in relation to obscene
matter falling within those sections.

(2) For the purpose of this section, matter is indecent if it is offensive
to reasonable person from the point of view of decency.”

1. Paragraph 4.4, supra.


1,

(६. K. MATHEW)
CHAIRMAN

(7. P. CHATURVEDI)
MEMBER

(DR. M. B. RAO)
MEMBER

(P. M. BAKSHI)
PART-TIME MEMBER

(VEPA P. SARATHI)
PART-TIME MEMBER

(A. K. SRINIVASAMURTHY)
MEMBER-SECRETARY

Date : 8th January, 1985.

GIPN—S89(NS)—S19 L. A. D.(ND)/84—21-11-85—625.


ERRATA
Front Page at bo!tom read “JANUARY 1985”.
Page 1, in para 1.3, in line 6, for “that focus” read “that the focus”.
Page 4, in para 3.3, in line 2, for “disease® read “disease*”.
Page 4, in Foot Note 5, for “E” read “Ed”,
Page 4. in Foot Note 5, for “Hasbury” read “Halsbury”.
Page 4, in Foot Note 9, for “section 20(3)" read “section 2(3)”.
Page 5, in para 37, in tine 7, for “pubic” read “public”.

Page 6, in para 4.2, in line 4-5, for “aside the section” read “aside the
Exception to the section”.

Page 7, in line 2, for “OBSENITY: NEEED"” read “OBSCENITY:
NEED”.

Page 7, in para 5.1, in line 1, for “Prima facie it would appear that the law
should cover such acts. The” read “Tt is also necessary to examine in
detai] another question concerning”.

Page 7, in para 5.2, in line 1, for “Prime faci” read ‘Prima facie”.
Page 7, marginal note to para 5.2, for “Questions” read “Question”,
Page 7, in para 5.4, in line 12, for “pubic” read “public”.

Page 7, in para 5.4, in line 12, for “prosecution” read “prosecutions”.
Page 7, in para 5.6, in line 4, for “in that, case,” read “in that case,”.
Page 8, in para 5.8, in line 16, for “goning” read “zoning”.

Page 10, in para 6.3 (०), in line 1, for “ned” read “need”.

Page 12, at marginal note to para 7.1, read “Recommendations”,

om

की अब