LD. 92 XI
2200

LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

ELEVENTH REPORT

(NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT. 1881)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA : MINISTRY OF LAW


CHAIRMAN,
LAW COMMISSION.
New Deltu,
September 26, 1958
Shri Ashok Kumar Sen, ,
Minister of Law,
Government of India,
New Dethi.

My dear Minister,

T have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Eleventh
Report of the Law Commission on the Negotiable Instru-
aments Act.

2. At its first meeting held on the 17th September, 1955,
ithe Commission decided to take up the revision of the Negu-
aiable Instruments Act and entrusted the task to a Com-
Mittee consisting of Shri D. Narasa Raju and Shri S. M. Sikri.

3. It was subsequently decided that Shri P. Satyanarayana
Rao, the senior Member of the Section of the Commission
dealing with Statute Law Revision should assist the Com-
amittee in drawing its Report. The consideration of the sub-
ject was initiated by Shri Rao who formulated a scheme for
#he revision of the Act. The principles underlying the
-scheme were discussed at the meetings of the Statute Revi-
sion Section held on the 22nd September, 1956 and 21st
October, 1956. At the meeting ‘held on the 22nd September,
1956, it was also decided to inelude Shri V. K..T. Chari in
the Committee on the Negotiable Instruments Act in view
of Shri Narasa Raju’s iil health. A draft Report prepared
-on the basis of the scheme was circulated to all Members
and their views invited thereon. These views together with
the draft Report were discussed at the meetings of the Statute
Revision Section held on the 26th January, 1958 and the
29th March, 1958. Some of the suggestions made by Mem-
‘bers at these meetings were accepted and it was left to the
Chairman to finally settle the Report in the light of the
discussion.


4, The Commission wishes to acknowledge the services
tendered by its Joint Secretary, Shri D. Basu, in connection
with the preparation of the Report:

Yours sincerely,

M. C. SETALVAD.


REPORT

‘ON THE
NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT
CONTENTS:
Paragiaphs
13 History of the legislation — - . . . . . .
4 Materials on'which revision is made - ee . .

5—20 Suggestions of Chambers and Bankers’ Associations consi-

21-33 Scheme adopted for revision and major changes proposed =.
34—178 Examination of the provisions of the Act, indicating the changes
required + : + .
APPENDICES
Appendix I Proposals as inserted in the body of the existing Act . .

Appendix I] Comparative Tables—

Table A—Showing the provisions in the existing Act and the
corresponding provisions in Appendix I +

Table B—Showing the provisions in Appendix I and the cor-
responding provisions in the existing Act, the Bilis
of Exchange Act, and the Uniform Negotiable Ins-
truments Law. + . .

Table C--Showing the contents of the sections in Appendix I
with the corresponding s-ctions in the existing Act

Sppendix Iii Suggestions regarding other Acts.  . 6 6

Appendix IV Commercial bodies and associations who were addressed
for suggestions . . . . , . .

Appendix V Commercial bodies and associations who gave their views
in writing : oe we

213
14-19

p-71

72 =136

131-135

136-142

143-150
151

152-155

136


REPORT ON THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
ACT, 1881

1. “Mercantile usage is the raw material, mercantile law History of
is the manufactured article”, said Sir McKenzie Chalmers? lation.
while speaking about the state of the English law before the
Bills of Exchange Act, 1882. This statement brings out
clearly the process of evolution of mercantile law which
includes the law of negotiable instruments. The mercantile
community found in such instruments an easy mode of pay-
ment of money by the endorsement and delivery or by mere
delivery of these instruments. With the expansion of trade
and commerce, negotiable instruments have assumed inter-
national importance.

2. An attempt at the codification of mercantile usages
was made in France as early as 1818 and the French Com-
mercial Code was later adopted as a model by other countries
on the Continent. In England, the movement for codification
was not started till 1880 when Sir McKenzie Chalmers
drafted a bill on the subject. This was enacted as the Bills
of Exchange Act, 1882. In India, an effort in the same
direction was made earlier, in 1867, when the (third) Indian
Law Commission prepared a bill. But, for various reasons
it was kept in cold storage for a number of years. In 1879
Mr. Arthur Phillips, the then Law Secretary and a member
of the Calcutta Bar, redrafted the bill. Criticisms were
invited on it from banks, chambers of commerce and leading
merchants. This bill, after passing through Select Com-
mittees more than once, was again referred to a new Law
Commission in-1879. The recommendations of the Com-
mission were considered by another Select Committee and
eventually the bill, in a modified form, became the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881. .

3. The principal source for codification of this law both
in England and in India was the English common law of

1, Introduction to the First Ed. of Chalmers’ Negotiable Instruments, Act, 9. 9.



Materials

. for revision.

3 ee

contracts as modified by the law merchant. But, curiously,
there has been a considerable divergence, whether intended
or not, between the two Acts though the raw material for
both was the same. The arrangement of the sections in the
English Act is more logical and the principles enunciated
therein are more comprehensive than in the Indian Act.

4, The Indian Negotiable Instruments Act has been on
the Statute Book for over 75 years and except for amend-
ments made now and then, the question of revising the Act
as a whole has never been raised before. In revising the
Act we have considered the provisions of the English Bills
of Exchange Act, the Uniform Negotiable Instruments Law*
of the U.S.A., the decisions under the English and Indian
Acts and the suggestions made by the Chambers of Com-
merce, Bankers’ Associations and members of the public.

5. Immediately after the work was taken up by us a
press note was issued inviting suggestions for reform from
the public. Apart from this, important commercial bodies,
such as the Chambers of Commerce* as well as the State
Governments were addressed individually for their sugges-
tions. Some of these commercial bodies* offered their views
in writing. Besides, Shri G. N. Das, Member (assisted by
Joint Secretary, Shri Basu) had discussions with the represen-
tatives of the Chambers at Calcutta, while Shri P. Satya-
narayana Rao and Shri V. K. Thiruvenkatachari, Members,
had discussions with the representatives of similar Associa-
tions at Madras, on the basis of their memoranda received
earlier. Two Associations of Bombay sent their memoranda
subsequent to the Commission’s visit to that place. The
Bombay Shroffs’ Association sent a deputation to us and we
heard their representatives on certain questions. We desire to
express our thanks for the valuable suggestions made by these
Chambers of Commerce and Associations. The major sug-
gestions made by them will be considered presently; the rest
will be considered in their appropriate places when dealing
with the relevant provisions of the Act.

2.

Vide
3. Vide

the Natiozal Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Law

1, Drafted by
in 1896 and since revised from time to time.

Appendix IV.
Appendix.V,


3

6, It has to be mentioned at the outset that the title
“Negotiable Instruments Act” is somewhat misleading as it
conveys the idea, at first sight, that it is 2 comprehensive
enactment relating to all negotiable instruments whether
recognised as such by law or by usage.or custom. A perusal
of section 13 of the Act shows, however, that the Act is
confined only to three specific types of negotiable instru-
ments, viz., promissory note, bill of exchange and cheque.
The codified law in India relating to negotiable instruments
“thus deals, as in England, only with the aforesaid three
instruments.

7. But an instrument for securing payment of money suggestions
may become negotiable not only by statute but also by that hundis
custom or usage of the mercantile community. The princi- negotiable
pal advantages of a negotiable instrument under the Act are should be
that the property in the instrument and all rights under it included.
pass, by operation of law, to a bona fide transferee for value
by mere delivery or by endorsement and delivery, without
the necessity of the complicated procedure of executing a
deed of assignment and that the rights of the transferee are,
not in any manner affected by any defect in the title of the
transferor. It has been urged before us that the foregoing
and other statutory benefits conferred by the Act should be
extended to two other classes of instruments viz., (1) indige-
nous instruments known as Aundis and (2) instruments other
than promissory notes, bills of exchange and cheques which
are, for the time being, recognised by usage or custom as
negotiable. Since this suggestion was made persistently by
important commercial bodies, it has to be discussed at the
outset in order to clear the ground,

8. Section 1 of the Act now saves usages in respect of Hundis which
all-iostruments in an orienta) Janguage unless an intention is ome) $0
expressed in any such instrument that it would be governed
by the provisions o&the Act. The section clearly indicates
that an instrument, even if it be within the definition of a
promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque will, if written
in an oriental language, be governed by usage, if any, appli-

‘cable to it and not by the provisions of the Act


4

Reference may be made to the case of Jambu Chetty &
another तर. Palaniappa Chettiar, where the Madras High
Court, proceeding on the assumption that the hundi in ques-
tion in that case was either a bill or a note, observed—

“If any local usage relating to bills and notes in aw
oriental language—the operation of which usage
is saved by section 1, though such usage may be
at variance with the Act—be relied upon, such
usage should be alleged and established by the:
party relying upon it.”

The Court thus took the view that if a contrary usage
were established, an instrument in an oriental language, even.
though it conformed to the requirements of a negotiable:
instrument as laid down in the Act, would be governed not
by the provisions of the Act, but by such usage; but that in.
the absence of proof of any such usage, such instrument:
(though in an oriental language) would be governed by the-
provisions of the Act. This view seems to have recently been. *
followed by the Hyderabad High Court’.

Tn Champaklal v. Keshrichand*, Mirza J. of the Bombay
High Court observed—

“Supposing that this hundi were not a Shahjog hundé
and were an ordinary hundi to which the Negoti-
able Instruments Act applied... .”

This observation also suggests the view that an ‘ordinary”
hundi which conforms to the requirements of a negotiable:
instrument under the Act would normally be governed by
its provisions. है

The two decisions in Pannalal ए. HargopaP and Surajmal
v. Kashi Prasad*, also illustrate the above proposition. Both
telated to a hundi of the nature of a bill of exchange which .
required acceptance. In the former case* the Lahore High
Court hel¢ that a usage of oral acceptance in Delhi having:

. v. Ramchander, A.LR. 1955 N.U.C. 2363 (Hyd.).
2 (1925) 50 Bom. 765 (781). -

3. ELR. (1919) 1 Lah. 80.

4. ALR. 1933 Nag. 389.



5
been established by the evidence, such acceptance was valid
in Delhi. In the Nagpur case’, on the other hand, there was
no allegation or proof of any usage in Bombay contrary to
the provisions of section 7 and so it was held that acceptance
must be in writing as required by section 7 of the Act.

9. We are, however, of the opinion that in cases of this
kind, any usage contrary to the provisions of the Act should should not
not be allowed to be established. There is no reason (0 instrument
exclude the applicability of any of the provisions of the Act Hihin ie”
to an instrument (in whatever language it may be written) definition of
which fulfils the requirements of one or other of the instru-
ments dealt with under the Act. Thus, if a hundi, in spite
of the name that is given to it in the document by the parties,
comes within the definition of a promissory note, or a bill of
exchange or a cheque, it should be governed by the provi-
sions of the Act alone, notwithstanding any usage or custom
applicable to it which may be at variance with such provisions.
To this extent, we think, indigenous instruments should be
brought within the scope of this Act. With this end in view
we have proposed a new provision’ in place of the existing
saving clause in section 1. We would also like to point out
that with the increasing emphasis on the use of Indian
language a growing number of negotiable instruments will
come to be made in these languages and it is necessary that
these instruments should be brought within the ambit of the
provisions of the Act. Many of the commercial bodies
consulted by us have expressed agreement with our proposal.

10. As regards hundis which do not conform to the 006० hundis
definition of any of the negotiable instruments dealt with in brought be

a roblem arises. nder th
the Act, a different py re ot athe
iis] .

It is clear that no provision of the Act as it stands can
possibly be applied to such hundis* and that they must be
governed exclusively by usage unless, of course, the provi-
sions of the Act are imported by the agreement of the parties
themselyes,

व. ALR. 1933 Nag. 389.
2. 8. 3 of App. 1.
Champaklal v. Keshrichand, (1925) 50 Bom. 765 (781) ; Raja Komalsingh V~
Rambharosa, ALR. 1943 Nag. 99 (Shahjog hundi).


6

11. It may be recalled that the framers of the Act,
though they did not desire to abolish the local usages suddenly,
cherished the desire that the introduction of the Act which
imported the English law would facilitate the assimilation
of the practice of the local merchants to that of the English
merchants. When the Bill was before the Select Committee
the Chief Justice of Bengal and the Bank of Bengal urged
that the provisions of the Act should be made applicable to *
hundis also in order to bring about uniformity in the law

and to avoid uncertainty, The Government of the Punjab,
however, was for the total exclusion of hundis from the Bill.

A via media was adopted in the Act by providing that usages
might be excluded by expressing in the instrument an inten-
tion to be governed by the provisions of the Act. It was
hoped that in course of time the mercantile community would
realige the necessity of uniform rules governing all instru-
ments and gradually choose to be governed by the provisions
of the Act. In the words of the Select Committee of 1879
on the Negotiable Instruments Bill, “the effect of the Bill
will be to induce the native mercantile community gradually
to discard them for the corresponding rules contained in the
Bill. The desirable uniformity of mercantile usage will thus
be brought about without any risk of causing hardship to
Native bankers and merchants. How long this change will
take, it is of course impossible to prophesy”, But though
over three quarters of a century have passed the practice of
the local mercantile community has belied the expectations
of the Select Committee. The option contained in the saving
clause does not appear to have been availed of and our
businessmen still continue to stick to the bewildering usages

governing these’ instruments. '

12. In pursuance of a suggestion that the use of indi-
genous instruments should be discontinued altogether after the
lapse of a specified period, we sought the views of represen-
tative commercial bodies once again on the specific question
of omitting the saving clause as to local usage on the expiry
of a specified period. If this suggestion had been accepted,
it would have meant that after an appointed date only those
instruments which conform to the requirements of the Negoti-


7
able Instruments Act,—irrespective of the language in which
they are written,—would get the protection of the law and
that no other instrument or any usages relating thereto would
have any legal sanction. हे

The suggestion did not, however, find favour with the
commercial bodies except in those parts of the country where
mercantile transactions are rarely carried on through the
medium of hundis or similar indigenous instruments having
special incidents.

13. Having given our anxious consideration to the ques-
tion, we are of the opinion that hundis and the shroffs who
finance commercial transactions through hundis do a very
useful service over the larger part of the country, particularly
in the villages where the modern banking system has not so
far been extended. Though it would have been a great
advance towards securing uniformity of the law if all negoti-
able instruments could be brought under the codified law, we
cannot afford to prevent the use of the hundis so long as we

1 are not in a position to have an efficient Bank in each village.
As things are, we cannot prevent the operation of the indige-
nous system without causing a serious dislocation of our trade
and commerce. हे

14, The suggestion made by some of the Chambers, how-
ever, was that hundis should be allowed to retain their
peculiar incidents according to usage and that those usages
should be codified by us. It is, however, not easy to define
a hundi or to discover its essential attributes. It would
appear from the text-books' and judicial decisions that no
less than a dozen varieties of hundis are in vogue in this
country. The usages differ so widely as between these species
and from place to place that we can discover only a few
characteristics or incidents which may be attributed to hundis
in general; for instance—

(1) Hundis payable to a specified person or order
are negotiable without endorsement by the
payee’;

1. Cf, Bhashyam & Adiga, Negotiable Instruments Act, 10th Ed, pp. 18 ot 8०५५; Sin
‘Law of Mercantile Usages in India, 1939, pp. 131-141, et pp #0403 Single

2. Rafroopram v. Buddo, (1863) 1 Ind, Jur. (0.S,) 93.


8 a

(2) a holder is entitled to sue on a hundi without '
an endorsement in his favour;

. (3) a hundi accepted by the drawee could be nego-
tiated without endorsement";

? (4) if a hundi is lost, the owner could claim a peth
(duplicate) or parapeth (triplicate) from the
drawer and present it to the drawee for pay-
ment?;

i (5) interest above 6 per centum per annum can be
charged where usage is established®;

(6) even though a hundi is silent as to payment of
interest, the market rate of interest is payable,
according to usage‘.

15. Apart from a few common features such as the
above, each kind of hundi has its own peculiar characteristics
and incidents. Though it is not necessary for our purpose
३0 analyse these features exhaustively we shall refer to the
characteristics of some of those types of hundis which cannot
possibly claim to be one of the three instruments governed
‘by the Act—only to demonstrate the impracticability of any
attempt to codify the usages relating to them.

Thus, a Shah Jog hundi, a most commonly used form of
hundi, has been held to be neither a bill of exchange nor a
promissory note. It is not payable to a specified person or
his order or to bearer. It is payable to a Shah, that is, a
respectable person, a man of worth and substance known in
the bazar though not specified in the instrument. The
drawee, before making payment, has to satisfy himself that
the person demanding payment is a ‘Shah®. It is not usually
presented for acceptance on the due date and may be accepted
orally.

East India Bank v. Khojah Vullie, (1866) 1 Ind. Jur. (N. S. ) 247.
Miulchand v. Suganchand, 1 Bom. 23.
Komal Singh v. Rambharosa, A.LR. 1943 Nag. 99.

- Har Narain v. Bihari Lal, AYR. 1932 Lah. 582.

beer

Charpaklal ¥, Keshrichand, (1926) 50 Bom. 765 ;Keshrichand v, Asha » ATR,
[916 Cal. 888 ; Murli Dhar v. Hukam Chand, ALR, 1932 Lah, 312.


A Nam Jog hundi is payable to the person whose name
is specified in the body of the instrument. It is similar in
form to a Shah Jog hundi except that in place of ‘Shah’ the
name of a particular person as the payee is specified. It has
been held’ that all that the drawer of a nam jog hundi
guarantees is that the drawee will honour and pay the hundi
when it is presented to him on maturity, and if the drawee
fails to do so, then the drawer would repay the amount
thereof provided the hundi is returned to him in an undis-
charged state. Where, however, the drawee is not in a
position to return the hundi in an undischarged state, it is
the drawee who shall be liable in damages to the owner of
the hundi for wrongful conversion, the measure of damages
being the amount of the hundi’.

A Dhani Jog hundi, on the other hand, has been held? to
be an instrument “payable to the person who purchases it,
as distinguished from Shah Jog,—an ephithet........
importing that the person presenting it is worthy and may
be trusted with the cash answering to payable to bearer
(Molesworth)” and the word ‘dhani’ has been held not to
be equivalent to “bearer” in the sense that word is used in
the Negotiable Instruments Act. In the result, a mere bearer
of a Dhani Jog hundi is not, as such, entitled to payment.
It is, accordingly, not a negotiable instrument within the
meaning of the Act*.

A Jokhmi hundi is payable only in the event of arrival
of goods. It is both a contract of insurance and an instru-
‘ment for payment of money. Sargent J., in Jadowji Gopal
श्र, Jetha Shamji* summarised the incidents of this species of
hundi as follows—

5555 a jokhmi hundi is always drawn on or against
‘goods shipped on the vessel mentioned in the Aundi; and,
Jastly, that the price paid for a jokhmi hundi depends on the
rate of exchange, the vessel in which the goods are shipped,
the season, and the nature of the goods. A jokhmi hundi

1. Lallubhai v. Ratanchand, A.LR. 1940 Bom. 82.

2. Jetha Parkha & others v. Ramchandra Vithoba, (1892) 16 Bom. 689, at 699.

3, 1879: 4 Bom. 333 (340).


10 ,
would thus appear to have been designed with a double pur-
pose, viz., to put the drawer of the Aundi in funds, and, at
the same time, to effect an insurance upon the goods them-
selves, by reversing the position of the insurer and insured
from that which obtains in ordinary policies, the insurer being
the buyer of the hundi who pays the insurance money down,
and is entitled to recover it with a premium (together making’
the amount of the Aundi) in case the vessel arrives safely.”

A Jowabi hundi is described by Macpherson on Contracts
at p. 166 as follows:

“A person desirous of making a remittance writes to
the payee and delivers the letter to a banker who
either endorses it on to any of his correspon-
dents near the payee’s place of residence or
negotiates its transfer. On its arrival, the letter
is forwarded to the payee who attends and gives
his receipt in the form of.an answer to the letter,
which is forwarded by the same channel to the
drawer of the order.” है

. A Zikrichit hundi is a letter of protection which is given
to the holder of a hundi by the drawer or any other prior
party to be used by him in case the hundi gets dishonoured.
It is mostly in use amongst Marwari Shroffs.

16, The foregoing account of some of the hundis would
suffice to show that it is not possible to evolve uniform rules
applicable to hundis of the various Kinds for the purpose of
codification. The Bharat Chamber of Commerce, Calcutta,
furnished us with a copy of Rules which have had the
approval of eleven trade associations. But these Rules
relate to one kind of hundis only, namely, Darshani hundis,
and we have not been able to discover whether there are any
agreed Rules governing the other kinds of hundis, or whether
the Rules referred to by the Bharat Chamber are accepted
throughout the country.

Codification not being possible, we must leave such instru-
ments in use as at present. We, therefore, propose to make
it clear* that the Act will be confined in its application to the

पर Vides. 3 of App. 1.



ll

three kinds of instruments, viz., bills of exchange, promissory
notes and cheques, but that it will apply to them irrespective
of the language in which they are written. Instruments
which do not answer the requirements of the Act in respect
of any of these three kinds of instruments will remain outside
the purview of the Act, so that no saving clause is required
to save the usages relating to such instruments.

17, Another major suggestion made by some of the पद es
Chambers is that certain other types of instruments recognis- of negotiable
ed in the mercantile world should also be brought within the instrose ents
ambit of the Act. These documents fall under two cate- in“luded.

gories:

(1) Documents under which money 1s payable, such
as (i) debentures, (ii) bonds issued by com-
panies, (iii) bearer bonds, (iv) bearer scrips,
(v) bearer debentures, (vi) treasury bills, (vii)
postal orders, (viii) share certificates, (ix)
insurance certificates, (x) deposit receipts, and
(xi) pay warrants.

(2) Documents relating to delivery of goods known
as mercantile documents of title to goods, which
are described in s. 137 of the Transfer of Pro-
perty Act.

The second class of documents referred to above are
obviously outside the purview of the Act as they relate to
delivery of goods and not payment of money.

As regards the other class of documents which are nego-
tiable by usage or custom we feel that no specific purpose
would be served by including them in the Act except to give
statutory recognition to the usage or custom, if any, by which
they are negotiable. They will not be subject to the other
provisions of the Act, such as presentment for payment or
acceptance, notice of dishonour, or the liability of parties. It
is also not possible to make a complete and exhaustive list
of such instruments without undertaking an elaborate inquiry.
Some of them are governed by special laws such as the Com-
panies Act and the Insurance Act. We, therefore, feel that
218 M of Law-—2.


Certification
of cheques.

12

it is neither useful nor practicable to bring them within the

Act. t

18. Two suggestions relating to cheques deserve parti~
cular mention, The first is that certification of cheques
should be treated as equivalent to acceptance as in the case
of bills. In the Bank of Baroda case’ the Privy Council
examined this question and held that certification of cheques
as practised in England and also by some banks in India did
not amount to acceptance in the sense in which it was under-
stood in the case of bills. Under the American Uniform
Negotiable Instruments Law (ss. 187 to 189), on the other
hand, certification is treated as equivalent to acceptance, and
the effect of certification is to discharge the drawer and all
indorsers from liability thereon (s. 188). The point for con-
sideration, therefore, is whether we should follow the
American law, or leave the law as settled by the Privy
Council unaltered. Some of the bankers whom we inter-
viewed were not in favour of adopting the American law.
We have been told that certification is not resorted to very
frequently in India and that in cases where an assurance is
needed that funds of the drawer are available with the Bank,
the practice followed, as in Australia, is for the Bank to issue
its own cheques. In the circumstances, we think no altera-
tion of the iaw is required.

19. The second question is—to what extent we should
accord legislative recognition to the practice of marking
cheques “account payee”. It has been found by experience
that a cheque with general or special crossing does not afford
sufficient protection to the true owner. It was at one time
supposed in England that the addition of words “not nego-
tiable” in the crossing would enlarge the protection. But
the Courts have belied this expectation by holding that a
cheque crossed ‘not negotiable’ is stil) transferable*. In the
meanwhile, businessmen were evolving for their own security
a method of crossing cheques “account payee”. The object

1. Bank of Baroda Led., v. The Punjab National Bank Lid.§fA, 1.R. 1944 P. 0.

2, Fisher v. Roberts, (1890) 116 1. L. R. 354 (CA).


13 "

of such crossing is to make it obligatory on the collecting

bank to

credit the amount received from the paying bank to

the payee’s account with the former. But a decision of the
Court of Appeal’, again, introduced a complication. It was
held that notwithstanding such crossing the cheques remained
negotiable as the words “account payee” did not prohibit

teansfer

under section 8 of the Bills of Exchange Act. But

if a cheque crossed “account payee” still remains negotiable,
it unnecessarily enhances the duty of inquiry on the part of
the collecting bank? without a corresponding gain in security
to the parties, for, the law or practice relating to the “account
payee” cheque has not yet been settled. The acceptance of
‘the suggestion that the custom of crossing cheques “account
payee” should be recognised wil! not resuit in any substantial
‘advantage unless such cheques are made aor negotiable by

tthe law.

In that case, the payee only would be entitled to

deliver the cheque for collection. Even if his signature is
forged by somebody, the collecting bank will credit the

amount

in the payee’s account and the forger would derive

no benefit. The risk of the banks would also be minimised,
sand none but a bank having an account in the name of the
payee would then accept such a cheque for collection. We,
thave, therefore, provided* that if a cheque is marked “account
payee” it shall cease to be negotiable and that it shall be the

duty of

the banker collecting the amount under the cheque

‘to credit it only in the account of the payee named in the

cheque.

We have added a provision for the protection of a banker
who bona fide collects the payment of a cheque in which the
‘crossing “account payee” has been obliterated or altered.

20. Having dealt with the main suggestions, we now pro-
ceed to explain the broad features of the revision proposed

‘by us.

1.

National Bank v. 51०, (189) 1 Q, 8, 435.

2 Chatnaers, Bills of Exchange, 12th Ed. p. 254; Byles, Bilis of Bxcnange 21st

Bd, pp. 43,

3. 5. 144 of App. 1.


Scheme

14
21. The Act as it stands is not ‘exhaustive. Where-

dopted 1
revision and. ever the Act is silent, the principles of English law have been

‘iajor changes followed by our courts. We have thought it advisable to-

Ptopose

adopt more of these principles as codified in the Bills of
Exchange Act instead of leaving the Courts to inquire into.
the uncertain rules of the law merchant and to apply them
to particular cases or to determine whether the principle
embodied in any particular provision of the English Act is
applicable to such cases.

A comparative study of the English Bills of Exchange Act
and the American Uniform Negotiable Instruments Law as.
well as the suggestions received from commercial bodies have
also induced us to propose other changes in our Act.

22. The existing scheme of arrangement of the Act is.
confusing* and illogical. A scrutiny of the provisions of the
Act will reveal that some of them are applicable to all the
three instruments—promissory notes, bills of exchange and
cheques, while some are peculiar to bills of exchange, some
to promissory notes and some to cheques. This suggests
that the sections which are of a general nature and applicable
to all the three instruments should be grouped in one part,
while the provisions peculiar to each of these instruments
should be placed in separate parts. Following this natural
division, we have arranged the sections of the Act in four.
parts: Part I containing general provisions; Part II relating to
bills of exchange; Part IIf to promissory notes; and Part IV
to cheques.

Gonltet of 23. While we shall explain our detailed proposals in the
be

course of our examination of the existing provisions of the
Act, we consider it proper to accord a special treatment to
one major topic which has been largely modified and recast
by us, namely, the provisions relating to Conflict of Laws.

24. The first thing that strikes one on this subject is the
Jack of uniformity in the principles embodied in the English:
and the Indian enactments and also as between such principles.

1,

हा Sabie v. Kadir Sahis, (1905), 28 Mad. S44 + Yeerappa v. Vellayan, (1919

M.W.N, 780; Royal Bank of Scotland v. Rahim, (1924) 49 Bom.

2.

Benares Bank Lt., v. Hormusji, (1930) 52 All. 696 (697).


15

cand those followed in other countries. This want of unifor-
mity is regrettable, particularly in view 6f the fact that
negotiable instruments have become the usual medium of the
-ever expanding international trade and commerce. An
attempt to evolve uniform rules in this behalf was indeed
made at the Geneva Convention of 1930. The nations who
‘were parties to that Convention agreed: —

(a) to adopt a uniform law for bills of exchange and

promissory notes;
(09) to settle questions of private international law
” arising in connection with bills and notes; and

(c) to unify the rules concerning stamp duties’.

The Conventions agreed upon* were adopted by Austria,

Belgium, Denmark, Dunkirk, Finland, France, Germany,

- Greece, Italy, Japan, Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,

Sweden and Switzerland. They were not, however, adopted

by England (except on one matter), the United States and
the Commonweaith countries.

As India has not adopted them we are free to incorporate
such rules as are widely acknowledged and are consonant
with the general principles of Private International Law,
justice and equity.

25. The primary reason for disturbing the existing pro-
visions as contained in sections 134—137 of our Act is that
they do not deal with all the questions which ordinarily arise
in this branch of the law. The English Act is no better guide
on this subject because it deals with the entire subject in one
section (section 72) which is no more exhaustive than the
provisions of our Act. Moreover, the English section has
been severely criticised as “ambiguous” and “unintelligible*”.

26. The principal questions which require to be solved
in connection with international dealings in negotiable instru-
ments are—the capacity of parties, the formal and essential
validity of the contract, the liability of the parties including.

1. Vide Cheshire, Private International Law, 4th Ed. p, 247.
2, League of Nations Doc. C. 346 (1), M. 1426), 1930 dD.
3. Cheshire, Private International Law, 4th Ed_,7. 253, pp. 4


16

the formalities regulating presentment for acceptance, pre-
sentment for payment, notice of dishonour for non-accept-
ance and non-payment, noting and protest. Our Act does.
not provide for the first two at all. We shall now examine
the principles relevant to each of these questions.

27. For determining the capacity of the parties the choice
is between lex domicilii (law of domicile) and lex loci con-
tractus (law of the place where the contract took place).

In England, the current opinion is that so far as mer-
cantile contracts are concerned, there is a presumption that
the parties submitted to the law of the place of contract and
that governs the matter unless the presumption is rebutted.”
This view has been accepted by the Madras High Court’.

As pointed out by Cheshire®, under modern conditions of
trade, the domicile of the parties cannot be allowed to govern:
the question of capacity, for, in that case, a foreigner, con-
tracting in another country, would be allowed: to escape
liability on the ground, for instance, that according to the
law of his own country, which may not be known to the other
party, a person does not attain majority even at the age of
21. It can hardly be overlooked that the Geneva Conven-
tion (on Conflict of Laws) which starts with the general rule
based on lex domicilii has to make an exception on the
basis of lex loci contractus. Thus, while the first
clause of Article 2 of the Convention says that the capacity
of a person to bind himself should be determined by his
national law, the second clause of that Article provides that
“a person who lacks capacity according to law specified in
the preceding rule shall nevertheless be bound if his signature
had been given in any territory in which according to law in
force there, he would have the requisite capacity.” We
would prefer to adopt the lex loci contractus instead of any’
such compromise formula which would introduce unneces-.
sary complications.

1. Schmitthoft, Conflict of Laws, 3rd Ed., pp. 117-8; Dicey, Conflict of Laws.

6th Ed, 9. 6

2. F.N.S., Firm v. Md. Husain, A.LR. 1933 Mad. 756.
3. Private Internationa Law, 4th Ed, p. 213.


17

28. But though we elect in favour of the lex loci con-
tractus, we would not prevent the parties from having their
own choice in the matter of the law which would govern their
contract, by an express stipulation in the instrument itself.

We have, accordingly, proposed the simple rule that in
the absence of any contract to the contrary, the capacity of
the parties to an instrument shall be determined by the law
of the country where the contract constituted by the nego-
tiable instrument was made.

29. But this rule, without more, would be incomplete,
for, a negotiable instrument involves a composite contract.
It consists not only of the original contract between the
parties to the instrument but also of “supervening contracts”
(to adopt the expression used by the Bills of Exchange Act)
made by the acceptor or indorser. Each of these contracts
may be entered into at different places and the validity of
+ each must naturally be determined according to the place
where such contract was made’. We have made this clear
in our proposal*.

30. In formulating the foregoing rule, we have followed
the provision in sub-section (1) of section 72 of the English
Act, but as that sub-section shows, the rule should be made
subject to two exceptions:

(3) The first exception is in respect of the requirement
of stamp. The rule recognised by English private inter-
national law in this behalf was that if under the 18७ of the
piace where the contract is made an instrument is void for
want of proper stamp, it should not be recognised as valid in
any other country’. If, however, the want of requisite stamp
makes the instrument only inadmissible in evidence under the
law of the place of contract its validity is not affected as it is
enly a rule of evidence‘. The Bills of Exchange Act has
done away with this distinction and laid down that a bill issued
outside the United Kingdom is not invalid by reason only that

1,- Cf. Palaniappa Chey v. Peria Karuppanchety, 17 Mad. 262,
2. 8. 108@) of App. L. ”

3. Alves v. Hodgson, (1797) 7 T. 1२. 24)

4. Brist. Sequeville, (1850) 5 Ex. 275.


18
it is not stamped in accordance with the law of the place of
issue. Its admissibility or enforceability in the U.K. wiil
depend upon the requirements of English law in that behalf.

Tn India, the Act is silent and the old rule was applied in
Venkatarami v. Seetharama' and Manattil Ali v. Vazhapulli
Varia. Under our stamp law a document is not void but
becomes inadmissible in evidence even in cases where the
defect of stamp is not curable under section 35 of the Stamp
Act. A foreign instrument, when brought into India, has te
be stamped according to our law (vide section 19 of the
Stamp Act). Hence, there is no justification for invoking
the technicality of a foreign law relating to stamp revenue to
invalidate the instrument in India and the liberal rule intro-
duced by the English Act should be adopted by us. It may
be noticed that a similar view was expressed by Whitley
Stokes*.

(b) The other exception recognised by the Proviso (b)
to section 72(1) of the English Act, is already embodied in
section 136 of our Act. It may be mentioned that para-
graph 2 of Article 3 of the Geneva Convention is also to the
same effect. Hence, we do not think it necessary to disturb
the existing provision.

31. Regarding the liability of the parties, section 134 of
our Act makes a distinction between the maker or drawer
of a foreign instrument on the one hand, and the acceptor or
indorser, on the other. The liability, in the case of the maker
or drawer, is determined by the law of the place where the
instrument is made but in the case of an acceptor or indorser
it is determined by the law of the place where the instrument
is made payable. But the liability of the maker of the note
should, according to the true principles of international law,
be governed by the law of the place where it is payable (/ex
loci solutionis). In the case of a drawer the place of draw-
ing is, of course, usually the place of payment. ‘The acceptor
being the principal debtor, his liability is also determined by

1.
2
3.

1. L. 1९, (1930) 53 Mad. 968.
(1941. 1M. 1.. 3. 35 #.
Anglo-Indian Codes, Vol. 1 9. 664.


19 i

tthe place of payment in accordance with the contract of
acceptance. The liability of the indorsers should naturally
follow the liability of the principal debtor.

We have, accordingly, suggested a clear provision that
the liability of all parties to the instrument shall be governed
by the law of the place where such instrument is payable.

32. It follows that the conditions governing liability, such
as what constitutes dishonour and what notice of dishonour
is sufficient, the due date', or the duties of the holder with
respect to presentment for acceptance or payment must be
governed by the law of the place where the money is payable.
This principle is, in substance recognised by section 135 of
our Act, though not fully developed. The corresponding
provision in sub-section (3) of section 72 of the English Act
is ambiguous and has been rightly criticised as verging
“perilously on the unintelligible”?.

We have suggested simpler provisions.

33. All questions relating to payment and satisfaction
including interest should, logically, be governed by the law
-of the place where the instrument is payable*.

As section 72(4) of the Bills of Exchange Act provides,
the rate of exchange at which payment is to be made, being
an incident of payment, should also be governed by the place
of payment, if the instrument is expressed in a foreign
currency. Representations having been made before us that
in the absence of a provision in our Act in this behalf con-
siderable inconvenience is experienced, we have proposed a

. clear provision regarding this matter.

34, Having dealt with the broader questions, we now Examination

+ os A ५ of the provi-
proceed to examine the provisions of the Act seriatim, point- sions of the
* ५ हि «a: 4. Act, indica-
ing out the problems which hrve arisen and indicating, ting the
broadly, our proposals for their solution. Renton

1. Rouquette y. Overmann & Sohan (1874-75)10 0. B. 525 ; 5. 72 (5) 8. E. Act ; Art.
of the Geneva Convention.

2. Cheshire, Private International Law, 4th Ed. p. 253.
3, Foote Private International Law, Sth Ed., pp. 460-1, quoted in Cheshire, 4tb Ed.
Pp. 253-4.


Section t.

See, 3.

Ce
“Indi

lia”.

20
35. The Act has already been extended to the State of
Jammu and Kashmir by the Jammu and Kashmir (Exten-
sion of Laws) Act, 1956 (62 of 1956), and the words
“except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” in section i and
the definition of “India” in section 3 have been omitted by
that Act.

We have substituted the Saving Clause in section 1 by
two new sections: one of them! refers to the provision in
section 31 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, which
has taken the place of section 21 of the Indian Paper Cur-
rency Act, 1871. The other section? seeks to replace the
existing provision regarding instruments in oriental langu-
ages.

In pursuance of our views as explained in paragraphs
9 and 16, ante, we have made it clear that—

(a) The scope of the Act is restricted to ‘negotiable
instruments’ as defined in the Act, that is, pro-
missory notes, bills of exchange and cheques.
It would follow that no provision in the Act
would extend to or affect any usage relating to
any instrument other than these three.

(b) If, however, an instrument conforms to the
definition of a negotiable instrument, it shall be
governed exclusively by the provisions of this.
Act, whatever the language in which it is.
written. In other words, if an instrument is a
‘negotiable instrument’ within the meaning of
this Act, no usage relating to such instrument
shall be permitted to defeat or modify the
provisions of the Act. In any case, language:
will no longer be a test for determining whether
the provisions of the Act are applicable to an
instrument or not.

36. As pointed out above’, the definition of “India” has
already been omitted by the Legislature.

ype

S. 3 of App. L.
Para. 35., ante. ’


3

37. The definition of “banker” has been recently sub- “ Banker’™

stituted by the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Act,
1955 (37 of 1955); but the definition stil! remains unsatis-
factory inasmuch as it does not explain what constitutes
the business of banking so as to make a person engaged
in such business-a “banker”. We have removed this defect
by adopting the definition of ‘banking’ given in s. 5(1) (७)
of the Banking Companies Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), which
follows the definition given in Hart on Banking’ and has so
far been accepted as comprehensive.

38, The definition of “notary public” has been omitted Ne
by section 6 of the Notaries Act, 1952. That Act has
taken away the power to appoint ‘notaries public’ under the
Negotiable Instruments Act and has, instead, provided for
the appointment of ‘notaries, who shall exercise, inter
alia, the functions of a notary under the Negotiable Instru-
ments Act. But the omission of the definition from the
Negotiable Instruments Act, is not happy inasmuch as the
words “notary public” are still used in Chapter IX of the
Negotiable Instruments Act. Some explanation of that ex:
Pression, accordingly, seems necessary. We have, therefore,

(a) inserted a definition of ‘notary’, referring to the
Notaries Act, 1952; and

(b) substituted the word ‘notary’ for the words
‘notary public’ wherever they occur in this Act.

39. Besides modifying the existing definitions, we have
added a number of new definitions which, we believe, would °
be conducive to a better understanding of the Act. Thus,~

(a) Section 59 of the Act refers to an “accommoda. <Accommo-
tion note or bill” but the term “accommodation Son Party”
party” is not defined in the Act. This omission
has been supplicd by adding a definition in
the light of section 28(1) of the Bills of Ex-
change Act.

1. 4th Ed, Vol. 1, pp. 1-2.


“Bearez™,

ना,
“Note”,
“tnstra-
mae’,

“Delivery,”

*[33u2.”

“Maker”

(0)

(८)

(4)

(e)

22
We have added a defimtion of “bearer”, for
reasons which will be explained while dealing
with the definition of “holder”.

For the sake of economy of words, we have,
following the American law, added the defini-
tions of “bill”, “note” and “instrument”, defin-
ing them as bill of exchange, promissory note
and negotiable instrument, respectively.

In order to avoid a repetition of the words
“actual or constructive” wherever the word
“delivery” is used in the Act, we have introduc-
ed a definition of “delivery”, following the
definition given in section 2 of the Bills of Ex-
change Act. हैं

We have considered it necessary to include a
definition of “issue”, for, the word which is
used in several provisions of the Act has a
technical meaning. It is restricted to the first
delivery of an instrument to a holder after the
instrument is drawn up and completed. If a
promissory note, bill, or cheque is executed but
kept without delivery, it does not become
effective. It is in this sense that the word
‘issue’ is defined in section 2 of the Bills of
Exchange Act, 1882, and we have adopted
that definition.

(0 The words “maker” and “drawer” are indiffer-

ently used in the Act. While the maker of
a bill of exchange or cheque is defined as a
“drawer” in section 7, there is no separate de-
finition of the word “maker” to denote the
maker of a promissory note. On the contrary,

४ jn sections 5 and 7 and. the Explanation to

section 44, the word ‘maker’ is used in a gene-
ral sense, referring to instruments other than
promissory notes as well. In section 51, on
the other hand, both the (erms ‘maker’ and
‘drawer’ are used in juxtaposition to each other.


23

This has naturally led to a confusion and two
decisions'-* of the Lahore High Court have
taken contradictory views as to whether the

- word ‘drawer’ includes the maker of a promis-
sory note. To remove this uncertainty, we
have inserted a definition of “maker” so as to
confine it to the executant of a promissory
note, leaving it to the word “drawer” to refer
to the executant of a bill of exchange or
cheque. Consequential changes have also
been made in the various provisions of the Act
to make this clear.

(8) Though sections 87-89 deal with the effects of
material alteration, there is no provision in the
Act to explain what constitutes a ‘material al-
teration’. In general, courts in India have fol-
lowed the English common Jaw and held that
anything which has the effect of altering the
legal relationship between the parties* or the
character of the instrument or the sum pay-
able amounts to a material alteration. Since it
is difficult to exhaust all the circumstances
which might possibly constitute a material al-
teration we prefer to adopt the provision in
section 64 (2) of the Bills of Exchange Act,
which is illustrative and not exhaustive.

(bh) By adding a definition of the word ‘represen-

tative” we have sought to effect an economy of ‘

words in several sections, ¢.g., 75, 94.

40. Besides adding the foregoing new definitions, we
have transferred to the Definition Clause a number of other
definitions which are, at present, interspersed amongst the
substantive provisions of the Act, such as “Promissory
Note”, “Bill of Exchange”, “Cheque” and the like. with modi-
fications which will be explained in their proper places.

“Material
alteration.’ 7

“Representa=
ive,”

1, Shiv Nath v. Bishambar, A. 1. R. 1935 Lah. 153.
2. Sheikh Muhammad v. Abdul, A. 1. 8. 1937 Lah, 259.
3. Subramania v. Porathana, A. 1. R. 1942 Mad. 709.


Sec. 4.

Para 1.

41. As would appear from the second paragraph of
section 5 and section 21, a promissory note may be pay-
able either ‘on demand’ or ‘at a fixed or determinable future
time’. But though the law in India is not different.from that
in England, this is not quite clear from the existing defi-
nition of “promissory note”. We have, accordingly, added
these words to the definition of “promissory note”, and also
added a separate provision’, on the lines of section 11 of
the English Act, to explain what is meant by “at a determin-
able future time”. हु

42. The words “on demand or at a fixed or determinable
future time” have similarly been added to the definition of
“bill of exchange” contained in the first paragraph of sec-
tion 5, for, the existing provision is silent as to the time of
payment of a bill of exchange though a cheque is defined as
a bill of exchange “not expressed to be payable otherwise
than on demand.” The English and American provisions
do not leave it to inference and we prefer to follow these
precedents.

Some of the Chambers of Commerce suggested that sub-
section (4) of section 3 of the Bills of Exchange Act should
be adopted and a provision should be made that an instru-
ment, which is not dated or in which the value or the place
where it is drawn or payable are not mentioned, should be
valid. We do not consider it useful to give effect to this
suggestion, having regard to the conditions prevalent in
India. The date is important in several respects and there
is a presumption under section 118 in favour of execution
on the date given in an instrument. Apart from this it can
hardly be overlooked that, notwithstanding section 3(4) (a)
of the Bills of Exchange Act, in practice* no undated cheque
is paid by a banker in England and such practice has recent-
ly been judicially noticed*. It wouid not be advisable
therefore, to incorporate an express provision to the effect
that dating is not necessary to give validity to the instru-
ment.

1.8.17 of App. 1,
2, Byles on Bills of Exchangs, 2ist Ed., p. 13.
3. Griffiths v. Dalton, (1940) 2 KB. 264,


‘ 25

On the other hand, there is no need to include similar
statements relating to the payment of consideration or the
place of execution or that for payment, for, the definitions
in our Act relating to the several instruments do not require
these matters to be stated in any of the instruments. On
the contrary, so far as consideration is concerned there is, in
section 118(a), a presumption in favour of its payment as
segards every negotiable instrument.

43, Paragraphs 2 to 4 of section 5 deal with certain Paras.2—4.
general conditions, such as ‘certainty’, which are applicable
to था negotiable instruments. Hence, they should logically
come under Chapter II, as proposed by us’.

We have elaborated the provision relating to an uncon-
ditional order or promise to pay, by incorporating the pro-
vision contained in section 3(3) of the Bills of Exchange
Act, which is not inconsistent with the principle embodied
in paragraph 2 of section 5 of our Act.

As regards paragraph 3 of the section dealing with
certainty of the sum payable, we have elaborated it by
adopting the provision in section 9(1) (०) of the English
Act relating to stipulation for payment by instalment with
a default clause. We have also substituted the ambiguous
-words ‘according to the course of exchange’ by the words
“current rate of exchange.’

At the end of the clause relating to ‘certain person’, we
have added the condition of ‘reasonable certainty’ which
occurs in section 7(1) of the Bills of Exchange Act and has
also been applied in India®.

We have also stated, in this context, what would be the
‘effect where the payee is fictitious or non-existent, by adopt-
ng the provisions of section 7(3) of the English Act, which
és founded on good reason’.

1.8. 13 of App. L
2. Venkatarami v. Maharaja, 53 Mad. 968.
3. Cf. Chaimers, Bills of Exchange, 12th Ed., p. 25.


Secs. 6-7
“Cheque”
“drawer”
“drawee”
* acceptor”
“payee”.

Sec. 8.
“Holder **.

26

44, We have shifted the definitions of “cheque”,
“drawer”, “drawee’ and “drawee in case of need”, “accep-
tor”, “acceptor for honour”, and “payee”, to the Definition.
Clause proposed by us, without any change in principle.

In the definition of “payee”, we have added the word
‘undertaken’ since that would be more appropriate when the-
instrument is a promissory note.

45. While similarly transferring the definition of
“holder”, we have made substantial changes, which | re-
quire a fuller explanation.

It may, however, be observed at the outset that the
changes introduced do not seek to alter the law but to
obviate the conflict of judicial opinions and the criticism of
commentators which the existing definition has given rise
to.

The expression “persons entitled in his own name to the
Possession of the instrument and to receive and recover the
amount” is ambiguous. If the expression be literally con-
strued, a bearer would be excluded from the definition as
his name does not appear on the instrument. But if all
that is meant by the expression is that he should be entitled
to possession in his own name and to sue upon it thougk
his name does not appear on it, a bearer may then be with-
in the definition’. As pointed out by a Full Bench of the
Madras High Court? the expression “in his own name” was
introduced only for the purpose’of ruling out the plea that
the holder of an instrument was a benamidar for some
other person. That the beneficial owner cannot claim to
be a holder may now be taken as the prevailing view*. We
have adopted this view in order to put a stop to all contro-
versy on the point, and have expressly excluded the bene-
ficial owner from the definition of “holder”.

46. The principal source of difficulties is the use of the
word “entitled”. This word is of a very wide implication.

TT. Ramanadan Chettiar v, Gunda Ayyar A.1. R, 1928 Mad, 1238 (1243).
2. Subba Narayana v. Ramaswami, (1907) 30 Mad. 88 (F.B.).
3. Harkishore V. Gura Mia, (1930) 58 Cal. 752 ; , Virappav, Mahadebappa, A, 1. 1९.

1934 Bom. 356 ; Bacha Prasad v. Janki, A.1.R. 1957 Pat. 380 FB).


a .
"A person may be entitled to an instrument either as a payee
or indorsee, or, as a bearer if the instrument is one payable
“to bearer. He may be entitled to it also by other modes
-of transfer of the interest in the instrument, such as assign-
sInent as an actiortable claim, in accordance with sections
*130 and 132 of the Transfer of Property Act or legal devo-
fution. It may not be in accordance with the scheme of
ithe Act to recognise persons other than a payee, indorsee
or a bearer as holders, even though they may be entitled to
‘the possession of the instrument and to recover the debt due
~under the instrument. A person may become owner of the
debt and sue for its recovery if there is an assignment of the
debt or if there is legal devolution, but that does not make
him a “holder” within the meaning of the Act. Of course, a
single Judge of the Madras. High Court? and a Bench of the
‘Calcutta High Court? have held that an assignee is a holder
‘within the meaning of section 8, but the contrary view, which
has been consistently maintained by the Allahabad High
Court’, appears to be preferable. In these cases*, the
Allahabad High Court has made it clear that a transferee
by legal devolution is entitled to recover the amount due
on the instrument not because he is the ‘holder’ but because
‘he, as the owner of the debt, is entitled to give a valid dis-
charge even apart from the provisions of section 78 of the’
Negotiable Instruments Act.

The right of negotiation is conferred by the Act only
‘upon a maker, drawer, payee or indorsee (vide 5. 51) - and
in the case of a bearer instrument, upon the bearer. In
the case of an instrument payable to order, section 48 lays
-down that it is negotiable by a ‘holder’ by indorsement and

1. Seshachalam Naidu v. Venkatachalam Chetty (1954) 2 M.L.J, 471.
2. Surathchandra ९. Narayan Chandra, (1934) 61 Cal. 425.
3, Parsotam ५. Bankey Lal, A. 1. R. 1935 All. 1041; Jang Bahadur v. Chandra

A. LR. 1939 All. 279 ; Ramkishore v. Ramprasad A. 1. R. 1952 All. 245 (0.8).
218 M of Law—3


28

delivery thereof. The “holder” in. this context does . noe
mean an assignee.or a person who has acquired rights under
the instrument by legal devolution. An assignee, not being
an: indorsee,..cannot claim any rights under the Act against:
prior. parties and his rights are governed by the provisions.
of the Transfer of Property Act which lay down that the
transferee takes the rights under the assignment subject to
the equities to which the. transferor was subject at the time.
of the transfer. In this connection, it must be remembered
that the Transfer of Property Act expressly saves the mode
of transfer by negotiation though it does not prevent the
assignment of rights under a negotiable instrument gua av
actionable claim.

We, therefore, think that the position should be made
clear, by omitting from the definition of ‘holder’ the words.
“entitled in his own name to the possession thereof” and
expressly enumerating the persons who are entitled to be a.
holder, as in section 2 of the Bills of Exchange Act, viz.,
“the payee or indorsee of an instrument who is in possession
of the instrument or the bearer thereof”.

47. The English Act, however, defines ‘bearer’ as mean-
ing “a person in possession of a bill or note which is payable:
to bearer”. In the case of instruments payable to order, it
is clear that a person cannot be a holder unless he is the
payee or the indorsee thereof and the indorsement is on.
the instrument itself; a person whose name does not appear
on the instrument as indorsee cannot claimi his rights there--
under, But in the case of a bearer instrument, since nego-
tiation is only by delivery and no indorsement is required,
possession alone is material. The English definition of
“beater” does not require that possession should be a law-
ful possession. The possession of a finder or a thief may,
therefore, be a good possession to make him a bearer and,
therefore, a holder. Under the existing provisions of our
Act, such persons are excluded because of the word “entitl-
ed” in the definition of “holder”. Section 58 of the Act
makes it clear that such a person is not entitled to receive
the amount due thereon from the. maker, acceptor, or holder


हद 29

or from any party prior to the holder. He is, therefore, not
entitled to sue and recover the money but, as‘ it very often
happens, a third party dealing with such a person may
presume the latter’s possession to be lawful. acquire rights
under the ‘instrument from him for consideration and thus
become a “holder in due course”. The rights of a third
party who thus becomes a holder are protected by section
48. But suppose a person makes a payment to a finder
or a thief, believing him to be the lawful holder of the
instrument. Such a payment is also protected, because under
section 82(c), if an instrument is payable to bearer or
has been indorsed in blank, the maker, acceptor or indorser
who makes a payment in due course of the amount due
thereof gets, a complete discharge. These provisions, thus,
amply protect under our law a third party dealing with a
person in possession of a bearer instrument but do not give
that person a right to recover the amount due under it in
his own right by suing upon the instrument unless his pos- -
session is lawful.

48. As stated above, the English law is different. But
there is no justification, in our opinion, to clothe any person
in mere possession with a right to sue and enable him to
tecover the amount. We, therefore, propose to adopt an
altered definition of “bearer” as meaning a person who
comes into possession of an instrument payable to bearer
by negotiation, that is, by delivery from the lawful holder.
Finders, thieves, and suck other persons as are enumerated
in section 58 will thus be excluded as they cannot be
“holders” under our Act. The implications of the word
“entitled” in the existing definition of “holder” will thus be
fully covered by the changes proposed by us.

49. We have omitted the words “and to receive or to-
cover the amount due thereon from the parfies thereto” as
the rights of a “holder” have been specified in.a separate

section proposed by us’

t. Sees. 47 of App. 1.


९... 9.
“ Hol

30 .
50. The language of the second paragraph of section 8
is also unsatisfactory. It has been criticised by Chalmers*
thus— ड़ हि
“jt is_a strain upon language to describe the original
; owner of a lost instrument as the holder of. it.
Suppose a cheque payable to bearer is lost, and
the person who finds it negotiates it to some
other person who takes it in good faith and
for value. The latter becomes the holder in
due course of the instrument. There are. then
two holders of the same cheque in this case, ac-
cording to the Act.”

As Bhashyam and Adiga? suggest, this absurdity may
be avoided if we construe the word ‘lost’ as “lost-to ‘the
world” and “not found again”. We have made a verbal
change to this effect and also made it clear that the holder

before such loss or destruction “shail be deemed to conti-
nue to be its holder.

51. In the definition of “holder in due course”, we have

due course”, substituted the word “become overdue” for the words “be-

came payable”, as the latter cannot aptly be applied to the
case of instruments payable on demand. It is well-establish-
ed that in the case of an instrument payable on demands,
limitation for an action on the instriment starts, immediate-
ly after its execution. If that rule were to be applied to
section 9, it would exclude the possibility of a person ‘ever
becoming a holder in due course in the case of instriments
payable on demand, for they become due immediately after
execution’, To overcome this difficulty, we have considered
it advisable to adopt the language of the English Act and
the American Uniform Negotiable Instruments Law, viz.,
“became overdue”. Further, we have added a section [on
the lines of s. 36(3) of the English Act] laying down the
test to be applied in determining when an instrument pay-
able on demand becomes overdue‘.

iL
2
3.

4

Negotiable Instruments in British India, 2nd_Edn., ७. 46.
‘Negotiable Instruments Act, 10th 1510. p. 72.
Ram Sarup v. Hardeo, 50 Ail. 309 312) ;
Dungarmudt v. Sambhu, AA. R. 1२51 Cal. 55.
S.15, App. I.


33

52. For reasons to be explained hereinafter, we have
added an Explanation to the definition of “holder in due
course” to clarify what. is meant by the words “defect in
title” in the definition.

53. It was suggested by ‘the Indian Banks Association Sec. 10.
that the words “without negligence” should be omitted from in का
the definition of “payment in due course”. But we are un- course”.
able to accept this suggestion since we agree with the princi-
ple enunciated in Sahu Lalta Prasad v. Campbell’ that
there shouJd exist an obligation to act without negligence,
while making payment of a negotiable instrument.

54. Since the existing definition of a “foreign instru- Secs. 1112.

ment” in section 12 explains it with reference to the defini- and Fo
tion of “inland instrument” in section 11, we have com- instruments.
bined the two sections for a better understanding of the two
terms.
55. The alterations recommended in section Seo. 13.
हैं legotiable
13 relating to “negotiable instrument”, are — mere- instrumeat’””.
ly formal: sub-section (1) has been taken out
to form a definition of “negotiable instrument”, _ refer-
ring to the three kinds of — instruménts,—bills, notes and
cheques. The first two Explanations to sub-section (1)
have; similarly, been taken out to make two separate defini-
tions of “Instruments payable to bearer” and “payable to
order”.

The third Explanation to sub-section (1), and sub-
section (2) have been included in two separate sections*.

56. The definition of “negotiation” has been shifted to Sait.
the Definition Clause, with only verbal changes. tion”,

57. The definition of “indorsement” has similarly been §°,, eee.
transferred to the Definition Clause, with verbal changes. ment हे
The definition of “indorsee” is at present included in sec-

tion 16(1) and refers exclusively to the indorsee of an

1. (1908) 9८. W. N. 841.
2. Secs. 18 and 25 of App. I.


Sec. 16,

Sec. 17.

Sec.

18.

32

‘indorsement in full’ (otherwise known as special indorse-
ment). In fact, however, the word ‘indorsee’ is used to
denote “not only the person to whom a bill is specially in-
dorsed. but also the bearer of a bill indorsed in blank—
that is, any person, who makes title to a bill through an
indorsement’”. It is in this wider sense, that the word
‘indorsee’ is used even in several other sections of our Act,
e.g., section 87. We have. accordingly, made the definition
of indorsee a part of the definition of indorsement in gene-
ral.

58. That portion of sub-section (1) of section 16 which
deals with indorsement “in blank” and “in full” has been
shifted to the Chapter on Negotiation* because it describes
different kinds of indorsement. The wording has also been
changed in the light of section 34(1)-(2) of the English
Act.

As stated before, the remaining portion of sub-section
(1) has been tacked on to the definition of indorsement.

Sub-section (2) has been made an independent section*
in the Chapter on Negotiation.

39. No change is proposed in section 17.

60. To section 18, we have added a Proviso, in the
light of section 17(1) of the American Uniform Negotiable
Instruments Law, to make it clear that-if the words are
ambiguous and uncertain, reference may be had to figures
to fix the amount.

61. We have added two new sections relating to signa-
tures.

One of them provides that a person may sign in a_ trade
or assumed name and become liable on such instrument.
In the absence of a specific provision corresponding to
section 23(1) of the Bills of Exchange Act, our Courts had
to rely on general principles to come to a similar conclusion‘.

Supe

+ Chalmers, 12th Ed. 9. 9: Halsbury, 3rd Ed,, Vol. 3, p. 146. ,

Sees. 34 of App. I.

. See $. 35 of App. 1.

Zujya Manrohan. A.1. R. 1940 Bom. 164.


33

‘We have thought it better to engraft a specific provision*
as in the English Act.

The other section? deals with the effects of a forged or
anauthorised signature. Though we have no provision
corresponding to section 24 of the English Act, our Courts
thave held* that forgery conveys no title. Several Chambers
shave suggested that we should have a specific provision in
this behalf instead of leaving it to case-law. We have,

5 accordingly, adopted the provisions of section 24 of the Bills
of Exchange Act. Sec. 19,

62. We have replaced section 19 and the first part of
‘section 21 by a comprehensive provision‘, in the light of
section 10 of the Bills of Exchange Act, including the various

" citcumstances in which an instrument is payable on demand.

63. We have also engrafted a new provision® following
section 36(3) of the English Act, to explain when an instru-
ment payable on demand shall be deemed to be overdue,
for reasons already explained.

64. As stated before, we have added another new pro-
~vision® to explain what is meant by “payable at a determin-
able future time”.

65. There is no provision in our Act relating to ante-
~dating and post-dating as in section 13(2) of the English
Act. But notwithstanding the absence of such a provision,
the Privy Council, in the Bank of Baroda case’, held that
post-dated cheques are not invalid. The practice of ante-
dating and post-dating cheques seems to be prevalent in this
country, as in other countries, though there is no statutory
recognition of such practice in India. One of the Chambers
«of Commerce has suggested that we should make a provision

See s. 26 of App. 1.

See $. 27 of App. 1.

See Venkateswarluv. Hymavatamma, A. 1. R. 1944 Mad. 471
See 5. 14 of A
See 8.15 of App.
See s. 17 of App
7. Bank of Baroda Lid., 0. Puriab National Rank Lids, 4.1 1९. 1944 7.0. 58,

WHYS Lpr



Sec. 20,

i.77Se2 s. 19 of App. 1.
2. ‘Wide

है

treating such instruments as valid. We have thought it
necessary: to give statutory recognition to the practice by
inserting a section’ on the lines of section 13(2) of the Bills:
of Exchange Act. But even in England, ante-dating may:
amount to forgery where the object is to defraud'a third
party?. We have, accordingly, improved upon the English:
provision by adding that an ante-dated or post-dated instru-
ment will not be valid where it is done for an illegal or
fraudulent purpose.

66. Substantial changes had to be made in section 20;
relating to inchoate instruments:

(a) The section has been split up into several sub~

५ sections for convenience of reference.

(b) In a recent Bombay case* it was pointed out
that the word ‘holder’ in this section was creat~
ing some difficulty inasmuch as, in this context,
the word only means the person who receives.
the paper and not a “holder” as defined in the-
Act. We have made this clear by ‘verbal:
changes.

(c) Both in the Bills of Exchange Act (s, 20) and
the uniform Negotiable Instruments Law (s. 14):
certain additional conditions are mentioned for-
inferring an authority to complete such instru~
ments, These should be inserted in our Act.
in order to clarify the position. These are—

(i) That the delivery of the inchoate instrument
must be made “in order that it may be con-
verted into a negotiable instrument”. (In the
absence of such words, a person to whom am
inchoate instrument is delivered for some
other purpose, ¢.g., safe custody, may be in.

of Exchange, 1201 Ed., p. 36,

Chalmers, Bills
3, Terachand v. Sikri Bros., A. 1. R. 1953 Bom.


35

a position to utilise the section to his:
advantage.)

(ii) That it must be filled up “within a reasonable
time and strictly in accordance with the
authority given”, but that in case of negotia-
tion to a holder in due course after comple-
tion of the instrument, no such objection:
should lie against the holder in due course..

We have inserted these conditions into the section".

67. There is another material difference between the-
provision in s. 20 of our Act and the corresponding provision.
in s. 20 of the Bilis of Exchange Act. The first paragraph:
of sub-sec. (1) of sec. 20 of the English Act is confined
to the completion of an instrument where there was a blank
paper delivered by the signer so that it might be converted’
into a bill. The delivery of such a paper under the circum-
stances is treated as a prima facie authority to fill it up as:
a complete bill for any amount the stamp will cover. The-
provision in section 20 of our Act substantially corresponds.
to the said sub-section of the English section.

But the provision in the English Act has a second limb-
under which, if a bill is wanting in any material particular,
the person in possession of it has a prima facie authority to:
fill up the omission, It has been suggested to us that this
part of the English provision should also be incorporated’
into our Act, but we are unable to accept that suggestion
for the following reasons. Our Act speaks of the paper:
being either wholly blank or “having written thereon an
incomplete negotiable instrument”, that is, partly blank. The-
definition of indorsement in section 15 of our Act refers to-
signature on a stamped paper intended to be completed as.
a negotiable instrument and the person so signing is treated
as an indorser. Both these provisions under the Indian law
deal with an incomplete instrument and not an instrument
which is otherwise complete except for a material particular. .

1. See S, 20 of App. 1.


gee. 21,
“AL sight”
rete,

36

In England, in a case where a bill payable to a drawer’s
order contained the signature of a person who intended to
become answerable if the acceptor defaulted in payment and
thereafter the drawer indorsed the instrument, the question
arose whether the first indorser would be liable to the second .
or not. It was decided by the House of Lords’ that it was
an instance of a material particular not being filled in though
the instrument was otherwise complete, and, therefore, under
s. 20 of the English Act the drawer had authority to indorse
and as the indorsement by the drawer in point of time was
jater to the earlier indorsement, it should prevail. This was
followed in another case”. A situation in this form may not
directly arise in India under the existing law. The only
question under the Act will be whether it was a wholly
blank or partly blank instrument bearing stamp. If the
person had signed intending to be an indorser, he will be
an indorser; if he signed intending to make himself liable in
any other capacity, he will be liable in that capacity.

Even under the English and the American law, the
person who receives the paper and fills it in is not treated as
a holder in due course. It is only a person who takes an
instrument which is regular and complete on its face who
can be a holder in due course*.

We do not, therefore, see any reason to alter the law on
this point.

68, As stated before’, the earlier part of section 21,
relating to instruments on demand has been incorporated into
a new section®. The latter part of the section, relating to
the expression “after sight” has been retained as it is.

69. Since we have introduced the words “on demand
or at a fixed or determinable future time” in the definitions
of bill of exchange, and promissory note, these words require

Macdonald & Co.v Nash & Co., (1924) A. C. 625.
National Sales Corpa, v. Bernardi, (1931) 2 K. B. 188.
Chalmers, Bills of Exchange, 12th Ed., p.

Vide para. 62, ante-

S. 14 of App. 1.


37

an explanation. We have, accordingly, added a section’ on
the lines of section 11 of the English Act.

70. We have split up tHe contents of section 22, and
removed its first part to the Definition Clause, without any
change.

As regards the second part of the section, dealing with
days of grace, we have amalgamated it with the provisions
of sections 23, 24. and 25 into a new section? to give a com-
prehensive view of all the rules for determining when a bill
or note not payable on demand falls due.

Sec. 22,
“Maturity”.

71. We have received conflicting suggestions relating Days of
to the provision for days of grace. srace.

One view is that no days of grace should be allowed at
all and the reason assigned is that if a person contracts to
pay the amount due under an instrument on demand he
could as well have fixed a time limit to suit his convenience.
This view has the support of Chalmers*. The Geneva Con-
vention of 1930 has also abolished days of grace.

The Bharat Chamber of Commerce, Calcutta, and the
Indian Merchants Chamber, Bombay are, however, against
any alteration and are of the view that days of grace should
be retained as merchants have become accustomed to this.

The Bengal National Chamber of Commerce has, on
the other hand, suggested that this provision should be made
subject to variation by contract, if any, between the parties.

We are of the opinion that any alteration of the existing
provision would Jead to confusion in dealing between the
merchants, and do not, accordingly, recommend any change
Telating to days of grace.

72. No change is considered necessary in sections 23-24, Secs. 23-24.

73. In section 25, we have substituted the words “suc- Sec. 25.

ceeding business day” for “next preceding business day”.
Section 10 of the General Clauses Act (X of

1. S.17 of App. I.
2. 8. 29 of App. I.
3. Chalmers, Negotiable Instruments Act, Introduction to the First Ed., p. 18.


See. 26.

38

1897) provides that where a law require something
to be done in any office on or within a certain
day on which the office happens to be closed,
the Act may be considered as duly done if it is done on the
next day on which the office is open. Section 25 of the Nego-
tiable Instruments Act which lays down a contrary rule for
commercial transactions, causes inconvenience to the business.
people and all the Chambers of Commerce have urged the
change we have proposed. It is to be noted that the Geneva
Convention has also adopted the “succeeding business day”
Tule.

74. We are of the opinion that not much purpose is
being served by the first paragraph of section 26.

Where there is no codified law relating to contract it
may be necessary in an Act relating to negotiable instruments.
to enumerate the general principles of the law of contract
which-are applicable to negotiable instruments. The Bills
of Exchange Act, therefore, enacted provisions dealing with
capacity and authority of parties, consideration and other
matters which are governed by the law of contract. Similar
provisions were reproduced in our Negotiable Instruments:
Act, even though we had our law of contract codified prior
to that Act. In our opinion, it is necessary to include in
our Act provisions relating to matters such as’ what con-
stitutes good consideration or when consideration is illegal
or capacity of parties and so on. It is, however, necessary
to include in this Act such of the provisions as modify the
law under the Contract Act, as for example, s. 39. To
make this provision clear we have proposed’ that the provi-

_ Sions of the Contract Act save in so far as they are not
iticonsistent with the provisions of this Act should apply
to all negotiable instruments. Such a provision, thougl
unnecessary’, is not uncommon in Indian legislation (vide
Transfer of Property Act, s. 4 and Sale of Goods Act. s. 3)

1.
2

$.5 of App. 1.
CF. Subbanarayana v. Ramaswamt, 28 Mad. 244.


39

_., 75. As regards minors, the existing provision puts. forth
a proposition which is directly contradictory to the principle
3810 down.in section 11 of the Contract Act. We.think the
import of the second . paragraph of section 26 would be
better conveyed if modified, as we have done’, in the light of
sub-section (2) of section 22 of the Bills of Exchange Act.

76. The third paragraph of section 26 has been taken
out to form a separate section”, with verbal changes making
it clear that:a corporation’s power to draw, indorse or accept
an. instrument is limited to the extent of its authority recog-
mised by the law for the time being in force relating to
-corporations. Thus, section 47 of the Companies Act, 1956,
prescribes the extent and limits of the power of companies

vregistered under that Act.

77. No change has been proposed in section 27 except
that instead of the words “as. mentioned: in section 26”
explanatory words have been substituted to elucidate the
meaning of the section that anybody who is capable of being
‘bound ‘by a transaction relating to a negotiable instrument
‘may be so bound either by this own act or by the act of
his duly authorised agent. ‘

78. We have introduced a new provision relating to
‘partnérs to make it clear that the partner's authority extends
to bind all the partners of the firm in the case of an instru-
ment made in the name of the firm. If it is not made or
sdrawn in’ the naine of the firm, the other partners cannot
‘be made liable*.

79. We have introduced a separate Chapter‘ on liability
of parties and included all the provisions of the Act relating
‘to liability in that Chapter. A negotiable instrument is a
‘composite contract. There is the original contract under

‘@hich the instrument is made and added to it are the

Sec. 27,

1. 8
2. 9. p. 1.
3. Rangaraju v, Devi Chand, A. 1. 1९. 1945 Mad, 439,
4. Cx Vof App. 7,


Sec. 28,

40

supervening contracts of the acceptor in the. case of a Dbilf
and indorsers in the case of all instruments. The liability
of the original parties -is different from that of the subsidiary
parties under supervening contracts. The liability of the
different parties arises if and when certain conditions: are
fulfilled by the holder. We have first defined the liability
of each of the parties and then stated the conditions under
which such liability arises.

The manner and method of carrying out the conditions.
such as presentment for acceptance in the case of bills,
presentment for payment, notice of dishonour for non-
acceptance and non-payment and the circumstances under
which such presentment either for non-acceptance ur non-
presentment is excused have been relegated to separate
chapters as they are more or less of a procedural character
though quite essential to the accrual of the liability. This is.
made clear in an introductory provision’.

80. The position of a stranger signing an instrument
and his liability a7e nowhere stated in the Act. A presump-
tion is laid down in s. 63 of the Ame-ican Uniform Negotiable

{nstrument Law that such a person should be presumed to-
be an indorser unless a contrary intention is expressed. In

our opinion, this presumption is founded on sound principle
and is conducive to the certainty of the law. We have,
accordingly, inserted a mew section? embodying this pre-
sumption.

81. Section 28 does not specify the manner in which an
agent should indicate that he has signed as an agent so as
to exclude his personal liability. Nor have any definite
tests been laid down by our Courts so far.

In section 26(1) of the English Act it is provided that
where a person signs a bill as drawer, indorser or acceptor,
and adds words to his signature, indicating that he has signed
for or on behalf of a principal, or in a representative charac--
ter, he is not personally liable thereon; but the mere addition.

1,

S. 54[ण App. 1.

2. S. 54 of App. L


41

to. his signature of words describing himself as an agent, or
as filling a representative character, does not exempt him
from personal liability. It is to be gathered from the
instrument whether the covenant to pay is, in essence, given
by the person executing the document on his own behalf or ~
on behalf of some other. We have, accordingly, adopted
the provision in section 26(1) of the’English Act, with some
verbal modifications’.

82. No change is proposed in section 29. Sec, 29.

83. There is no section in the Act which defines the
liability of the bearer who negotiates an instrument. In the
case of an instrument payable to bearer, he can negotiate
it by. mere delivery. He is not an indorser, and therefore
he does not become jiable under the instrument by reason of
the negotiation. As section 58 of the English Act says,
he is only a transferor by delivery and is not liable on the
instrument as his name does not appear on it. His only
liability is that he warrants by his negotiation that he has
the right to transfer the instrument and that at the time of
the transfer he was not aware of any fact which renders it
valueless, and no more. We think it is necessary to engraft
a provision so defining the liability of a bearer who negotiates
an instrument payable to bearer and we have, accordingly,
added a section* on the lines of section 58 of the English
Act.

84. We have taken sections 30—32 and 41 together secs, 30-325
and replaced them by three provisions* dealing with the “"
liability of—(a) drawer and acceptor of a bill, (b) drawer
and drawee of a cheque, and (c) maker of a note, respec-
tively. .

We have redrafted sections 30 and 31 in the light of
section 55(1) (8) of the Bills of Exchange Act. Our Act

1. 8 66 of App. I.
1. २ 8. 68 of App. 1.
3. S. 55, 57, and 58 of App I.


Sees. 3344,

“Sec. 35,

Sec, 36,

42

nowhere says that the drawee is not liable until acceptance
though it is assumed in various sections. We have ‘made
this clear in a new sub-section.

In. section 32 verbal changes have been made in, the
light of section 54(1) of the English Act, relating to the
acceptor’s liability. The provision in section 41 of our
Act, which also relates to the acceptor’s liability, has beer
placed in the same section’, «

85. Since the Provisions in sections 33-34 relate only
to a bill of exchange, they have been placed in Part HI of
App. I, without any change.

86. Sections 34 as well as 91 assume the possibility of
Joint drawees but there is no specific provision in our Act
corresponding to section 6(2) of the Bills of Exchange Act
(or section 128 of the Uniform Negotiable Instruments Law)
to indicate the proper mode of addressing a bill to two ot
more drawees. Since the principle embodied in the English
provision is not inapplicable in India we have incorporated
it in a new section?.

87. Similarly, we have no provision in our Act corres-
ponding to section 5(1) of the English Act to provide that
a bill may be drawn payable to the drawer or the drawee or
to the order of either. Though the words ‘certain person’
in section 5 of our Act are wide enough to include the .
drawer or drawee, we have made this clear by inserting “a
new provision’. है

88. We have redrafted section 35, relating to the liability
of the indorsert in the light of sec. 55(2) of the Bills of
Exchange Act.

89. We have inserted the words “the acceptor and” at
the beginning of section 36, to make it clear that the acceptor

Pepe

5.
5.
5.
5,

56(4) of App. 1.
111 of App. I.
112 of App. 7.
$9 of App. I.


. 43

is liable even though his acegptance may take place subse-
quently to the holder’s getting possession of the instrument’.

90. We have combined sections 37 and 38 into one Sccs. 37-38,
section? since the provisions are complementary in their
nature, dealing with parties who are liable on the instrument
as principal debtors or sureties.

We have also inserted a new section® to indicate which
of the provisions relating to liability are subject to the pro-
visions of “a contract to the contrary” instead of repeating
those words in each of those sections.

91. No change is recommended in section 39. Sec, 39,

The section gives the holder the power to expressly
reserve his rights to charge the other parties when he entezs
into such a contract with the acceptor as would ave the +
effect of discharging the surety under s. 134 or 135 of the
Contract Act. This variation from the law in s. 134 or
135 of the Contract Act is restricted only to the case of a
contract between the holder and the acceptor of a bill of
exchange. It was, however, suggested that this liberty to
reserve the right to charge the other parties and prevent the
discharge of the surety when there is an alteration of the
contract between the principal debtor and the principal
creditor should be extended to other cases also, such as the
holder and the maker of a promissory note. Curiously, in
a decision of the Madras High Court‘ it was held that
section 39, though it is confined to bills of exchange, has not
abrogated the common law principle, namely, that when a
contract between the principal creditor and the principal
debtor which discharges the latter reserves the right of the
creditor against the surety, the surety is not discharged by
the variation of the contract between the principal debtor and
the creditor. This view makes the section otiose. Neither

3. 63 of App. I. मु
3. 60 of App. I.

. §. 61 of App. L.

Bank of Hindusthan v. Govindarajulu, (1933) 57 Mad. 482.

218 M of Law-2

pepe


44

s. 134 nor s. 135 of the Contract Act recognises such a
tight of reservation. 5

In fact, if the law has been correctly laid down in the
Madras decision, there is really no need to extend the pro-
visions of section 39 to other cases. If, on the other hand,
the law in India be different from the English common law,
we see no reason to extend the privilege to other cases as
it would result in great hardship to the surety if the entire
burden were to be thrown upon him either by discharging
the principal debtor or by giving up rights against him in
any other manner. The right of contribution which accrues
under section 140 of the Contract Act to the surety after he
discharges the debt is no consolation to him if he should
be treated as the principal debtor. Under section 134, the
surety is automatically discharged whether there is a reserva-
tion or not. We think, therefore, that there is no justice
or equity in favour of the extension of the scope of section 39
to other cases.

Secs, 40-41. 92. No alteration other than a rearrangement has been

Sec. 42

proposed in sections 40-41. Section 40 has been transferred ©
to the Chapter relating to Discharge’ and section 41 to the
Chapter on Liability*.

93. The provisions of section 42 have been transferred
to the Chapter on Bills of Exchange, without any change’.

Sess. 4345.94. As has been already indicated, sections 4345 have

wae Pn

been included in the Chapter relating to Form and Interpre-
tationt except the two Exceptions to section 43 which have
been included in the Chapter on Liability of Parties*, with
verbal changes.

Exception I to section 43 refers to an accommodation
party but it requires to be supplemented as it does not contain

$78.0) App 1
3 36 4
$. 116
10-12, id
643), ibid.


Sec. 49,

Sec, 50.

Sec. 51.

See. 52,

46

The last two paragraphs of section 46 and sections 47
and 48 deal with the modes of negotiation for different kinds
uf instruments, with some repetition’ We have combined
them into a single section’, The Exception to section 47
has been made a separate section’.

An introductory section® has also been proposed, specify~
ing the different kinds of indorsements.

98. Some drafting changes have been made in section 49,
following section 34(4) of the English 28०0.

99. Section 50 has been recast in order to simplify it.
It consists of two parts. The latter part refers to a restrictive
indorsement but does not explain what constitutes a restric-
tive indorsement. There is no provision in our Act
corresponding to section 35 of the Bills of Exchange Act
or section 36 of the Uniform Negotiable Instruments Law.
We have remedied this lacuna by adopting a new provision®
which combines the principles embodied in the English and
American provisions, just cited.

The earlier part of section 50 gives the effects of or the
tights following from indorsement. In the new section® which
represents that part, we have made it clear that the effect,
which is generally stated, is subject to the provisions relating
to restrictive, conditional and qualified indorsements.

100. Since we have defined ‘holder’ as including payee
and indorsee, we have avoided repetition of these words in
section 51 by using the word ‘holder’ in their place’.

101. The contents of section 52 have been split into two
sections as they deal with two separate matters, viz., con-
ditional® and qualified® indorsements.

Seraysene



ay

As regards a conditional indorsement, we have no pro-
vision in our Act corresponding to section 33 of the Bills
of Exchange Act and section 39 of the Negotiable Instru-
ments Law which make the conditional indorsement operative
only as between indorser and indorsee and give the payer
(acceptor or maker) the liberty to pay the indorsee regard-
less of the condition. There is no such liberty to the payer
in India. As has been pointed out by Bhashyam and
Adiga’, the Indian law is still-based upon the old common
Jaw rule? which has been discarded both in England and the
U.S.A. The. 00 rule operates harshly upon the acceptor
of a conditional indorsement who is not in a position to
discover whether the condition has been fulfilled and yet
eannot dare dishonour the instrument.

There is no reason why we should not adopt the modern
principle as embodied in the English and American law. We
have, accordingly, adopted that principle in two new sub-
sections,

102. Following section 38 of the English Act, we have
introduced two new sections’, which together state the rights
of ‘holder’ and ‘holder in due course’ which have now to
be gathered from different provisions of the Act.

103. There is no provision in our Act, corresponding to
section 37 of the Bills of Exchange Act, giving the ‘effects
of ‘negotiation back before maturity. Under the English
provision, if there is negotiation back of the instrument
before maturity to the maker, drawer or to a prior indorsee
or to the acceptor, such persons are entitled to further
negotiate the instrument. But it would be inequitable to
allow a right to enforce payment under the instrument
against any of the parties who were liable before the instru-
ment was indorsed back. This is avoided by the latter part
of the English section. We have incorporated the two parts

1. Negotiable Instruments Act, 1956, 10th Ed., p. 30:
2. 216 v. Kensington & ors., (1811) 4 Taunt, 30 ; Byles on Bills of Exchange ,
ist Ed.
ue 47 and 52, App. 1.


Sec. 53,

Secs, 54—55.

See. 56.

See. 57,

Seo. 58,

1
2.
3.
4
5.
6.
ye

of the English provision in two sections, one explaining
what is negotiation back’ and the other, the rights of a
person who acqufres an instrument through the process of
negotiation back?.

104. Section 53 has been redrafted® in the light of section
29(3) of the Bills of Exchange Act, to make the meaning
more clear. The English provision expressly states that a
person who is a party to any fraud or illegality affecting
an instrument cannot be a holder in due course.

We have added a new sub-section, on the lines of sub-
section (3) of section 38 of the English Act, to explain the
rights of a holder whose title is defective. What is a
defective title is explained in another provision‘. ड़

105. No alteration has been proposed in sections 54-55.

106. We have recast section 56 to make it clear that
the existing provision is only an exception to the general
tule that a transfer by endorsement must be of the entire
tights in the instrument. In redrafting® the section, we have
followed sub-section (2) of section 32 of the English Act.

107. No change is proposed in section 57.

108. There is no definition of “defective title” thougt
the expression is used in the definition of “holder in due
course”. We have already provided® that a forged instru-
ment conveys no title. If the title is acquired by means of
an offence or fraud or for an unlawful consideration the
title is only defective and the person holding such title may
convey a better title to a holder in due course. This is
provided in section 58. We have retained that section,

subject to verbal changes’.

५. S44, App. 3.
8. 48, be

. 51, id
S. 28, ibid.
8. 32, ibid.

. Para. 61, ante.

S. 2g, App. 1.


न 49

109. The two paragraphs of section 59 deal with two Se. २
different matters. They have, accordingly, been placed
under two separate sections.

What is meant by the words ‘rights of his transferor’ in
the first part is that the holder who acquires an instrument
after dishonour or after maturity, acquires the instrument
‘subject to the equities to which his transferor was subject
at the time of acquisition by such holder’. We have added
these words, by way of abundant caution, to make the mean-
ing clear’.

The second part, which is at present in the nature of a
Proviso is, in fact, a substantive provision as to the rights
of a person who becomes the holder of an accommodation
instrument, after maturity. No change is proposed in this
provision’.

110. No change is proposed in section 60, except to Sec. 60, -
include a reference to a restrictive indorsement which is also
one of the modes of termination of negotiability, as would
appear from another provision, namely, section 50.

111. We have replaced section 61 by a comprehensive Sec. 61,
provision’ and have incorporated therein other rules relating
to presentment for acceptance which are now dispersed over
several sections.

Since presentment for acceptance is a special incident of
bills of exchange, we have included all the provisions relating
to presentment for acceptance in Part वा which deals with
such instruments in particular.

112. Section 61 of the Act makes it obligatory upon the
holder to present a bill for acceptance only in the case of a
bill payable after sight. In that case presentment for
acceptance is absolutely necessary to fix the date for pay-
mgnt. In the case of other bills there is no express provision



in the Act requiring presentment for acceptance before
presenting them for payment: But this omission has been
held to be a drafting defect in several decisions starting with
Veerappa v. Vellayan’, where it has been held that present-
ment for acceptance must precede presentment for payment
in the case of every bill, in order to fix the drawee with
liability. In the Madras Case’, this view was supported by
pointing out that sections 91 to 93 of the Act were applicable
to bills payable on demand as well.

Recently, the Supreme Court had an occasion to examine
the question in Jagjivan v. Ranchhoddas*. Reference was
made in that decision to sections 61 and 64 of the Act and
it was observed that in the case of a bill payable after sight
there are two distinct stages, firstly, when it is presented for
acceptance and later, when it is presented for payment; section
61 deals with the former while section 64 deals with the latter.
The observation of the Bombay High Court in Ram Ravji v.
Pralhaddas* that “presentment for acceptance must always
and in every case precede presentment for payment” was
noticed and the comment made by the learned Judges of the
Supreme Court was that in the case of a bill payable on
demand both stages synchronise and there is only one pre-
sentment which is both for acceptance and payment. Had
the learned Judges stopped there the matter would not have
created any difficulty. But they proceeded to observe:

“But whether the bill is payable after sight or at sight
or on demand, acceptance by the drawee is
necessary before he can be fixed with liability on
it. It is acceptance that establishes privity on
the instrument between the payee and the
drawee and we agree with the learned Judges of
the High Court that unless there is such accept-
ance, no action on the bill is maintainable by
the payee against the drawee”.

1, (1919) M, W.N, 780.
2. #. 1. 8. 1954 5. 0. 554,
3, (1895) 20_8०9७. 133(141).


51

In view of the above observation of the Supreme Court
and the defective provisions of the Act, we are of the opinion
that the law should not be left in a dubious state and effect
must be given to the decision of the Supreme Court, making
it obligatory.in the case of every bill to present it for accept-
ance before it is presented for payment. . The drawee can be
made liable only if he accepts. If the bill is dishonoured by
non-acceptance no question of any presentment for payment
arises: We have, accordingly, inserted a provision' that a
bill must be presented for acceptance before it is presented
for payment.

113. That part of section 61 which deals with the duty
of presentment for acceptance of a bill payable after sight
has been taken out to form a separate provision’ 10 the light
of section 40(1)-(2) of the English Act to make it clear
that if the holder does not either present it for acceptance or
negotiate it within a reasonable time, the drawer and all
indorsers prior to that holder shall be discharged.

114. As regards the persons by whom and to whom pre-
sentiment for acceptance is to be made, we have substituted
a clearer provision*, combining the: relevant provisions in
sections 61 and 75. +

115. As to the place of presentment for acceptance, the
provision in para. 3 of section 61 is not adequate, Elaborate
provisions relating to place of presentment for payment are
contained in sections 69, 70 and 71. We have adopted
similar rules for presentment for acceptance*.

116, We have also thought it necessary to engraft a pro-
vision® on the lines of section 41(1) (0), relating to present-
ment to joint drawees.

117. We have also adopted a detailed sub-section® includ-
ing all the cases where presentment is excused. It woulc

—-. a पा पपमपमझपैप++



52

appear from section 91 that where presentment is excused, 2
bill is deemed to be dishonoured by non-acceptance. As to
the cases where such constructive dishonour takes place, we
have two instances contained in paragraphs 2 and 3 of section
61, but there is no provision enumerating the cases where pre-
sentment is excused. The provisions in sub-section (2) of
section 41 of the English Act being elaborate on this point,
we have adopted them, with the addition of the case specified
in section 39(4) of that Act. The rule relating to delay
being excused has been taken from section 75A which com-
bines the rules in respect of both presentment for acceptance
as well as for payment. There being an enumeration of
cases where presentment,for acceptance is excused, it has
become necessary also to incorporate the provision in section
41(3) as to when presentment is not excused.

118. No change has been proposed in the fourth para-
graph of section 61.

119. There is no specific provision in the Act stating the
effects of the acceptance of a bill after it has become overdue,
although from some of the provisions of the Act it would
appear that such an acceptance is not void.

Section 18(2) of the Bills of Exchange Act as well as
section 138 of the Uniform Negotiable Instruments Law
specifically state that “A bill may be accepted* * * * * *when:
it is overdue or after it has been dishonoured by a previous.
refusal.to accept or by non-payment”.

Clause (2) of section 39 of the Bills of Exchange Act
speaks of the presentment for acceptance of a bill payable
elsewhere than at the residence or place of the business of
the drawee and clause (4) of the same section provides’ as
follows:—

“Where the holder of a bill, drawn payable elsewhere
than at the place of business or the residence of
the drawee has not time with the exercise of
reasonable diligence to present the bill for accept-
ance before presenting it for payment on the day

1 See section 147 of the Negotiable Instruments Law.


53

that it falls due, the delay caused by presenting
the bill for acceptance before presenting it for
payment is excused, and does not discharge the
drawers and indorsers.”

This shows that the drawer and indorsers would be dis-
charged in any other case. This view finds support from
Chalmers' who observes—“A bill should clearly be presented:
for acceptance before maturity. It may be accepted when
overdue. ...... Such acceptance preserves or revives the
liability of the drawer and indorsers only in the case provided
by section 39(4) i.e. domiciled bill arriving late.” The same
view is taken by Halsbury: “the drawee may, however, accept
when the bill is overdue, if he is willing to do so*.” “The
want of presentment, however, will result in the holder losing
his right of recourse against the drawer and indorsers...... >
except in the case of bill drawn payable elsewhere
than at the place of. business or residence of the drawee
where the holder has not time to present for acceptance
before he has to present the bill for payment*.”

There being no provision in our Act which is inconsis- -
tent with the propositions discussed above, we have thought
fit to remove all doubts by adding a new section* providing
that the acceptance of an overdue bill is not void but such
acceptance does not preserve or revive the liability of a

. drawer or indorser who would be discharged by reason of
non-presentment of the bill before maturity.

120. We have transferred the contents of section 62 to Sec.162.-
the new Part on Promissory Notes, with verbal changes®.

121. We have combined the provisions of section 63 S16
with those of section 83, since the latter section states the
consequences of allowing more time than as prescribed in
section 63.

1, Bills of Exchange, 12th Ed., p. 132, -
2. Halsbury, Laws of England, 3rd Ed., Nol.
3, Halsbury, ibid, p. 194, fn. (0.

4. 8. 118, App. 1.

5. S. 140, ibid.



‘Sec. 64.

54

122. While presentment for acceptance relates only to
bills, presentment for payment is a condition common to all
instruments. We have, therefore, separated the provisions
relating to the two kinds of instruments.

The provisions of section 64 have been modified to
explain more clearly where presentment for payment is or is
not necessary’. The Exception has been redrafted in order
to obviate the conflict of jadicial opinion which has arisen as
to its scope’.

Further, we have grouped together, with suitable verbal
changes, the rules relating to presentment for payment in one
section* with different clauses relating to the persons by whom
and to whom presentment is to be made, and the time, hour
and place of presentment, following the plan we have adopted
with respect to presentment for acceptance.

The latter part of the first paragraph of section 64 states
a rule of discharge for non-presentment. We have, accord-
ingly, shifted it to the Chapter on Discharge, with verbal

changes to make it comprehensive‘.

123. We have added a new provision® laying down clearly
what constitutes presentment for payment. Several Chambers
have urged that since usage varies regarding the mode of
presentment, there should be a definite provision in the Act.
Difficulty is often experienced in having to send the original
instrument for presentment. It is risky to send the original
as it may be lost or it may not be returned. We have, there-
fore, suggested that the sending of a copy would be sufficient
but that the inspection of the original may be demanded; and
if, on demand, the holder fails to produce it for inspection
within a reasonable time the presentment shall be deemed to
be invalid.

1. 8. 69, App. I.

2. Ch. Ouch Commercial Bank v. Gur Din, 59 1. C. DA; Ramkeisnoyya v. Kasim, 13
Mad. 172; Manik v. Parkash, 45 ८. W. N. 545.

3. $. 73, App. 1.

4. 5. 79, ibid.

5. 8. 74, ibid.


55

Under paragraph 2 of section 64, personal presentment is
obligatory unless presentment through post is authorised by
agreement or usage. As pointed out by some of the
Chambers of Commerce, the existing provision is somewhat
Testrictive in view of the changed conditions of commercial
intercourse. There is no apparent reason why the use of
postal communication should depend on agreement or usage.
We have left it to the option of the party, who is to make the
presentment, to adopt any effective means convenient to him.

124, Apart from the rearrangement referred to above,
no other change is proposed in respect of sections 65, 66 and
67, except the omission from section 67 of the words “and
non-payment ........ maturity”, which have created some
confusion and are considered by us to be unnecessary.

125, We have combined! sections 68 and 69, because
there is no substantial distinction between the circumstances
contemplated by the two sections and these separate provisions
complicate the matter. It is not clear from what source the
provision in section 68 has been drawn. If an instrument
is payable at a specified place, it follows that it is not payable
‘elsewhere’.

126. We have introduced a new provision? on the lines
of section 45(4)(b) of the Bills of Exchange Act to deal
with the case where no place of payment is specified but the
address of the maker, acceptor or drawee is given in the
instrument. Section 70 of our Act has been modified by us
to deal with the case where even such address is not given in
the instrument’.

127. Verbal alterations have been proposed in section 71
to indigate that it is the residuary provision’ relating to the
place of presentment.

128. We have added an Explanation’ to clarify what is
meant by the words “specified place” in the foregoing group

Secs. 65-67... 1

Sec. 70.

Sec, 71,

S. 73(90), App. 1.
8. 73(6) (ii), ibid.
S. 736) (iii), idid.
S. 73(6)6), ibid.

J
2.
3.
4
5. Expl. S. 73, ibid.


“Secs, 72-74.

Sec. 75.

Sec, 75A.

See. 76.

56

of provisions as there are conflicting decisions regarding the
interpretation of these words!, The question arose parti-
cularly where the name of a town was mentioned without
giving any address within the town. In conformity with the
Tesult of these decisions, we have provided that “specified
place” means a place described with sufficient particularity in
the instrument to enable the person presenting an instrument
to identify the place where the person sought to be charged
with liability is to be found. It is not sufficient merely to
say, for example, “city of Calcutta” but a specified place in
that city should be mentioned.

129. No change, other than verbal, has been proposed
in sections 72 to 74.

130. Section 75 governs both presentment for accept-
ance and presentment for payment. As already stated, we
have split up the provision and assigned the portions relating
to presentment for acceptance to the Chapter on Bills of
Exchange. The portion relating to presentment for pay-
ment has been included in the Chapter on Presentment for
Payment and supplemented by an Explanation on the lines of
section 45(6) of the English Act, to cover the case of present-
™ment to more than one person liable on an instrument.

131. No alteration has been made in section 75A,
except that it had to be repeated in connection with present- .
ment for acceptance and for payment.

132. In section 76, apart from some verbal changes, we
have added some new clauses”.

(a) Where the drawee is a fictitious person, it is
obvious that nobody can be held liable for non-
presentment. The new clause (h) imports this
tule from section 46(2) (0) of the English Act.

(७) There is no provision in our Act corresponding
to section 46(2) of the English Act providing

1, Shatk Md. v. Abdul, A. 1. R. 1937 Lah. 259; Dungarmull v. Shambu, A. 1. R. 1958

3, 8. 75, App.


57

when presentment is not necessary to charge an
indorser. This is now provided in the new
clause (i).

(c) The principle which we find in paragraph 2 of
section 61 of our Act with respect to present-
ment for acceptance should also apply as regards
presentment for payment. We have, therefore,
incorporated the new clause (j), following sec-
tion 46(2)(a) of the English Act.

(d) No less important is the provision in the new
clause (k), namely, that no question of present-
ment for payment should arise where a bill has
been dishonoured for non-acceptance. This
would follow from the principle embodied in
section 43(2) of the English Act, which we have
adopted’, that when a bill is dishonoured by
non-acceptance, an immediate right of recourse
against the drawer and indorser accrues to the
holder, and no presentment for payment is,
accordingly, necessary.

An Explanation has been added at the end of the section
to embody the rule in section 48(2) of the English Act lay-
ing down that the holder’s belief that the instrument would
be dishonoured even if presented does not absolve him from
the duty to present.

133, No change has been made in section 77. See. 77.

134. There is a distinction between discharge of an instru-
ment by payment and discharging of a particular party liable
under an instrument. This distinction is not clearly brought
out by the provisions of our Act, though some indication of
it may be had from section 60. We have re-arranged the
several provisions relating to discharge to make this distinc-
tion ciear.

135. We have grouped together all the provisions relat-
ing to discharge by payment in one section®,—including

3. S. 122(2), App. 1.
2. S. 76, App. 1.


Secs. 79-20

. 58°
existing sections 78, 82(c) and 89, with modifications. The
case of payment of an accommodation instrument has also
been included in a new sub-section.

136. As regards interest payable on instruments, no diffi-
culty is experienced when the instrument provides for pay-
ment of interest and specifies the rate. The contract
between the parties is, however, subject to any law for the
time being in force for the relief of debtors which authorises
the courts to scale down the interest and give relief. to the
debtors. Section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, on the
other hand, gives a discretion to the court regarding interest
from the institution of the suit till the date of decree and
thereafter till payment. When, however, the contract is
silent as regards interest or it refers to interest but does not
mention the rate, the question arises whether any rate of
interest should be allowed dr not. The existing section 80,
which deals with this question, is somewhat unintelligible.
The difficulty is created by the words— notwithstanding any
agreement relating to the contract between any parties to the
instrument” which must necessarily refer to an independent
agreement, as the section starts by saying that the provision
would apply only when no rate of interest is specified in the
instrument. It is also not clear from the section whether it -
is intended to apply only where the parties contemplated
payment of interest under the instrument but did not provide
for the rate of interest or also where the contract is silent on
both matters. To avoid all these difficulties we have com-
bined’ sections 79 and 80 with verbal changes and have pro-
vided for the two liabilities in one section’. The provision
has also been made subject to the law for the time being in
force relating to the relief of debtors and to section 34 of the
Code of Civil Procedure.

The Explanation to section 80 has been omitted because
on principle there is no basis for making any distinction
between the two cases mentioned under sections 79 and 80.
If the indorser’s liability is as a surety, it must be co-extensive
with that of the principal debtor so that there is nothing to

1,82 App. 1. ,


59

distinguish between the two cases specified in sections 79 and
80. We have, accordingly, considered it fit to omit the
Explanation.

137. Except for verbal changes, no alteration has been Sec. 81.
tecommended in section 81.

138. As indicated earlier, the provisions of clauses (a) Sec 81
and (b) of section 82 have been included in a new section’
telating to the discharge of the liability of particular parties.
In that section we have also included some other provisions
relating to the discharge of particular parties, such as that
contained in section 40 and the principle underlying section
90 which has been extended by us to all instruments,—the
principle bemg one of general application, providing for a
merger in the case of a union of the rights of the creditor and
of the debtor. Another rule? engrafted by us in this section
is a corollary trom the provision in section 39 of the Act
telating to a surety. Jt states that when the holder of an
accepted bill enters into a contract with the acceptor of the
nature referred to in section 134 or 135 of the Contract Act,
the other parties liable on the bill would be discharged,
unless the holder expressly reserves his right to charge them,

139. Since section 83 relates solely to bills of exchange, Sec. 83.
it has been transferred to the Chapter relating to bills, and
combined with section 63 to which it is complementary.

140. Similarity, section 84, which relates exclusively to Sec. 84.
cheques, has been transferred to the chapter dealing with such
instruments’, excepting sub-section (2) which has been
omitted as being unnecessary in view of the comprehensive
Provision proposed by us* relating'to reasonable time.

141. Sections 85-85A have been transferred to thie Secs.85-85A.
Chapter on cheques, without any alteration.

1. 5. 78, App. 1. ibid
2. $. 78 @),
3. S. 155 of App. 5
4. 5... 98, ibid

a5 M of Law-?


Sec. 86.

Sec. 87,

Sec, 88,

60

142. In section 86, we have expressly made provision fer
the right of the holder to refuse to take a qualified accept-
ance', by adopting sub-section (1) of section 44 of the Bills
of Exchange Act.

The first paragraph of section 86, stating the consequences
of acquiescence in a qualified acceptance, practically provides
a rule relating to discharge. We have, accordingly, shifted
this paragraph to the Chapter on Discharge”.

No change has been proposed in the Explanation to
section 86.

In connection with a qualified acceptance, we have
adopted a new provision®, following section 52(2) of the
English Act, to make it clear that non-payment for pay-
ment in cases of qualified acceptance does not, in the absence
of an express stipulation to that effect, discharge the acceptor

143, We have redrafted section 87 in the light of section
64(1) of the Bills of Exchange Act, which is more compre-
hensive.

The proviso, which has been added, is based on the deci-
sion in Gourochandra v. Krushnacharana*, which applied the
principle laid down by the Privy Council in Hongkong and
Shanghai Banking Corporation v. Lo Lee Shi*, which was a
case of a material alteration resulting from an accident, to
the case of a material alteration “made vy a meddlesome or
maliciously minded stranger without the consent of the holder
of the instrument and without any fraud or negligence on his
part”. The second part of the Proviso retains the existing
provision that an alteration made to carry out the common
intentica of parties should not affect the liability.

144 Section 88 has beeu amalgamated with section 87,

1,8.
2, $.
3.8.
4. 8.
3.0

124 of App. 1
1. R. 1941 mad. 383 at 9. 385

(1928) A. 2. 181.


61

145. No change is necessary in the provision in section Sec. $9.
89 in so far as it is applicable to instruments other than
cheques’.

The part relating to cheques has been taken out and
added as a Proviso? to existing section 129, after modifying
it in the light of the Proviso to section 79(2) of the English
Act.

146. Section 90, as it stands, is confined to bills of 5०% 90.
exchange. As already stated, there is no reason why the
principle of merger by unity of debtor and creditor embodied
therein should not apply to other instruments. We have,
accordingly, made it a general provision®.

147, Since section 91 relates only to bills of exchange Se. 91.
we have transferred it to Part वा of Appendix I. For the
purpose of simplification, we have split the section into
several sub-sections. We have also added a new provision‘

‘on the lines of section 43(2) of thg English Act as our Courts
have already followed the principle contained therein®.

148. Since dishonour may take place either by non-
acceotance or by non-payment, we have inserted an intro-
ductory section® to that effect.

149. In section 92, the cases of constructive dishonour Sec. 92.
already included in section 75 have been referred to in order
to give a comprehensive view of the law’.

150. Section 93 deals with dishonour by non-acceptance Secs. 93-94,
as well as by non-payment. Hence, the provision had to be
repeated with necessary modifications in two Chapters,
according to our scheme®.

1. 8. 766) of App. I.
2. Prov. to 5. 149, ibid.
3. S. 78(1) (०, App. 1.

4. $. 122(2) , ibid.

19 दा; Ravji v. Prahlad, (1895) 20 Bom. 133; #/॥/४ v. National Bank of India, (1891)
‘al. 146,

6. S. 83, of App. 1.
7. 5. 84, ibid.
8.Ss. 70, 125, App. 1.



Sec. 95.

See. 96,

See. 97.

Sec. 98.

Sees, 99—
1042.

Sec. 105.

As regards notice of dishonour for non-acceptance, we
have adopted the provisions of section 48 of the Bills of
Exchange Act, to explain clearly the effects of failure to give
such notice

That part of section 94 which deals with parties to whom
notice is to be given, has been amalgamated with section 93,
with some verbal changes to make the meaning clear’.

The remaining part of section 94 has been placed under
three sections”, dealing respectively with—(a) the mode of
giving notice; (b) the time and place of giving notice; and
(c) the effect of miscarriage in post. As to the mode of
giving notice we have omitted oral notice in order to impart
more certainty to this important act.

151. No change has been proposed in section 95,

152. Since section 96 also gives a rule relating to the time
for giving notice, it has been combined® with the relevant
part of section 94. e

153. No change is considered necessary in section 97.

154. Clause (f) of section 98, which deals with non-
negotiable instruments, has been omitted, as such instruments
are outside the scope of the Act.

155. There is no substantial change in the Chapter on
Noting and Protest, and the existing law is reproduced subject
to a few verbal alterations. Section 104 of the Act has
deen transposed to the Chapter on Liability‘, as a protest is
obligatory in the case of a foreign bill when it is so required
by the law of the place where it is drawn.

156. Since the enumeration of the purposes in section 405
may not be exhaustive, we have extended the principle’ to
all the purposes of the Act and thus avoided the need for a
separate provision like that in section 84(2).

1. 5 85, ibid,

“9

2. Ss. 86-88, ibid
3. 8702), ibid.

4, 5. 71 0 App. 1.

3.

> ibd.


63

157. We have abolished the present distinction in section Sec. 196.

106 based on the places of business and substituted two
simpler rules'—one relating to service of notice by post and

the other relating to service otherwise than by post, say, by
messenger. The latter mode will, of course, be permissible
only when the two parties reside or carry on business at the
same place. The provisions proposed by us will obviate all -
the controversy arising out of the expression ‘next post’.

158. No change is proposed in section 107. Sec. 107.

159. No alteration has been considered necessary in Secs. 108—
sections 108---113, except that they have been transferred ~~
to the Part on Bills of Exchange and that sections 111 and

112 have been combined into one section’.

A new provision® has been added, following section 65 (5)
of the English Act to make it clear that when a bill payable
after sight is accepted for honour, its maturity shall be
calculated from the date of the noting for non-acceptance,
and not from the date of its acceptance for honour.

160. To section 114 we have added a new sub-section‘ $cc. 114.
on the lines of section 68(6) of the English Act to explain
the rights of the payer for honour which are not fully pro-
vided for in the existing section. On the other hand, we
have made it clear that the payer for honour, according to
the doctrine of subrogation, succeeds not only to the rights
but aiso to the duties of the holder. We have also inserted
a new provision’ corresponding to section 68(2) of the
English Act to resolve the question of precedence where
more than one person offers to pay a bill for the honour of
different parties.

161. No change has been proposed in sections 115-116. See, 1s—

162. Some improvements have been made in section 117, Se. 117
in the light of the corresponding English provision. As is
evident from section 57(1) of the English Act, in case of
dishonour, the holder, indorser and drawer are all entitled to

1. 3. 99 ibid.of App. 1.
% $133 of App. |

3. $. 137, ibid.

4. $. 1361), ia.

5.8. 135, ibid.



62 °
recover not only the amount due on the instrument but also
the interest due thereon; but interest is not mentioned in the
existing clause (६) of our section 117 which relates to the
holder. The word ‘indorsee’ in the first paragraph of the
section is a misprint for ‘indorser’. We have removed these"
defects and also made it clear from which parties the holder,
drawer or indorser shall be entitled to recover. Correspond-
ing changes have been made in clause (c). We have added
a new clause! to provide for the case of the drawer who has
been compelled to pay the amount due on the instrument
which is not mentioned in the section at all.

Clause (e) has been split up into two sub-sections for
the purpose of a better understanding of the provision.

163. There is a difference in the provisions of clauses
(b) and (d) of section 117 of the Act. Under clause (b),
the rate of exchange in the case of a holder who pays the
amount is to be determined at the current rate of exchange
between the place where the person charged resides and the
place at which the instrument was payable. Under clause:
(9), if the person charged and the indorser are at different
places, the rate of exchange between the two places deter-
mines the quantum of liability. The piace where the instru-
ment is payable has no relevance under clause (d). On
principle there should be no difference between the rights of
a holder and of an indorser in this respect.

In our opinion, the problem arises not because of the
residence of the parties being at different places but because
of the fact that the currency in which the amount payable is.
expressed is other than that of the country where the amount
is payable. We can simplify the problem by confining our-
selves to cases where the amount is payable in India,

Now, the amounts payable are of two kinds—(a) the
amount due upon the instrument; and (b) the expenses
incurred on presenting, noting, protesting and the like.

1, 8, 10101) (0) of App. I.


65

(a) As regards the sum due on the instrument, no diffi-
culty arises where the instrument specifies it in Indian
currency. Where it is expressed in a foreign currency, the
payment in India must obviously be made in Indian currency
and here the question of rate of exchange comes in. We
have provided! that in such a case the sum is to be paid in
Indian currency at the current rate of exchange obtaining
between India and the foreign country concerned on the date
on which such sum became payable.

(b) The same principle should be followed as regards
sums paid on account of protesting and the like in a foreign
country except that the rate of exchange to be applied in this
case should be that which was prevalent on the date on which
such expenses were incurred by the holder or indorser, as
the case may be. We have provided accordingly’.

164. No change has been proposed in sections 118—1i20,5¢S118—I20.
We have however inserted a new provision® relating 10
the estoppel of the acceptor of a bill in the light of section
54(2)(a) of the English Act. At present, the primary rule
as to the acceptor’s estoppel ,is contained in the Evidence
Act instead of in the Negotiable Instruments Act. Section
117 of the Evidence Act, 1872 provides—

“No acceptor of a bill of exchange shall be permitted
to deny that the drawer had authority to draw
such a bill or to endorse it

Explanation (1).—The acceptor of a bill of exchange
may deny that the bill was really drawn by the
person by whom it purports to have been
drawn. , . .. . ..-«-« ”

When the Negotiable Instruments Act was enacted subse-
quently, it was presumably considered unnecessary to repeat
the principle in that Act. But since the above rule of
evidence is a special rule relating to negotiable instruments
and Chapter XHI of the Negotiable Instruments Act contains

4, $, 10109) @ Gi) of App. 1.
2. $, 101), ibid,
3. 5. 104, id.



66

various rules of evidence relating to such instruments, put-
Porting to be exhaustive, it would seem proper to transfer
the above rule from the Evidence Act to the Negotiable
Tnstruments Act.

The substance of the said provision in the Evidence Act
is that the acceptor of a bill is prevented from denying the
drawer’s authority to draw the bill or to indorse it but he
may deny that the bill was really drawn by the person by
whom it purports to have been drawn. In other words, he
may show that the drawer was a fictitious person or that the
signature was not genuine. Section 54(2) of the English
Act provides that the acceptor is precluded from denying
to a holder in due course the existence of the drawer, the
genuineness of the signature after acceptance would introduce
to draw the bill. Thus, while under the English law the
acceptor is prevented also from denying the genuineness of
the signature of the drawer, under the Indian law it is other-
wise. We are of the view however that at the time of accept-
ance, the drawer should satisfy himself whether the drawer’s
signature is genuine or not. To permit him to deny the
genuineness of his signature and his capacity and authority
uncertainty into the law and innocent parties would be made
to suffer. The English principle being just and equitable,
should be preferred to the provision in section 117 of the
Evidence Act.

We have, accordingly, adopted a provision’ on the lines
of the English Act and recommended that the provision in
the Evidence Act should be deleted in so far as it relates to
the acceptor.

Secs. 121+ 165. No change has been proposed in sections 121-122,

122, except that a clause has been added to section 122, on the
lines of section 55(2)(c) vi the English Act, to prevent the
indorser from denying the validity of the instrument and his
title to it at the time of the indorsement.

166. As stated earlier, alt provisions exclusively relating
to cheques have been put in a separate Part, and in that

1. 8. 104 of App. 1.


हा

Part we have included the following new provisions, in order
¢o make it comprehensive:
,

(i) When a banker’s authority may be revoked is not
stated in the Act. We have adopted the provi-
sion in section 75 of the English Act and ampli-
fied by adding notice of insolvency as a third
ground?.

(ii) We have introduced a new provision? relating
to cheques marked “account payee”, for the
reasons already explained*, and as a sequel to
this new provision, it has become necessary to
add another provisign* to protect a banker who,
bona fide fails to carry out the “account payee”
direction because of the obliteration or altera-
tion of such crossing on the cheque.

(iii) That crossing is also a material part of the
cheque is not stated in the Act and is not
included in the definition of material alteration.
We have inserted an express provision’, follow-
ing section 78 of the English Act.

(iv) We have made it clear* that a cheque does not
amount to an assignment of part of the funds of
the drawer in the bank to the payee, following
section 53(1) of the Bills of Exchange Act (as
applied to cheques by the second paragraph of
section 73 of that Act).

167. Only a verbal change has been proposed in sections secs, 123—
123—127. But to section 125, we have added a new 12%
clause’, incorporating the rule contained in section 77(6) of
the Bills of Exchange Act, to enable a collecting banker to
specially cross a cheque to himself.

1. S. 142 of App. L
2. $. 144, ibid.
Para. 19, ante.


Sec, 128,

Ses. 129,

Sec. 130.

Sec. 131.

च्ठ
168. In section 128, we have inserted the condition of

good faith and absence of negligence, following the provi-
sions of section 80 of the English Act. .

169, Section 129 of our Act corresponds to section 79{2)
of the English Act, but omits to specify the exceptions which
are contained in the Proviso thereto. The exceptions are
founded on a sound principle, namely, that there should be
no liability where the crossing is not apparent or obliterated
or altered in an unauthorised manner and the banker pays.
in good faith. We have, accordingly, adopted the Proviso,

170. No alteration is proposed in section 130.

171. In view of the recognition of “account payee”
cheques, an exception relating thereto had to be made in
section 1317,

172, Our attention has been drawn to the recent legis-
lation in England relating to cheques (Cheques Act, 1957—
5 and 6 Eliz. 2, c. 36).

The main purpose of the Act seems to be to extend the
legal protection to paying and collecting banks, acting in
good faith, in respect of uncrossed cheques, banker’s drafts.
and like instruments which, prior tp this Act, was confined
to crossed cheques, and practically to exonerate the paying.
banks from the duty of insisting on the endorsement of the
payee (except where the cheque is negotiated), provided that
payment is made bona fide and in me ordinary course of
business.

The implications of these provisions have not yet been
clearly appreciated even by the Banks in England as appears
trom an article in The Law Times, Vol. 224, at p. 207. The
Banks in England have issued instructions to their branches
to move cautiously in this behalf and they have not taker
full advantage of the provisions of the Act.

1, $. 152 of App. 1.


69

The instructions issued by the Banks contain the follow-
ing directions:

Cases in which endorsement will not be required are:—

(a) where the cheques are paid into the account of
the payee;

(b) where they are paid in for the credit of a joint
or partnership account.

Endorsement will still be necessary in the following cases:
{i) cheques cashed or exchanged over the counter;

(ii) negotiated cheques, that is, those tendered for
the credit of an account other than that of the
ostensible payee;

(iii) cheques payable to joint payees, if tendered for
the credit of an account to which all are not
parties; and

(iv) bills of exchange (other than cheques) and’
promissory notes.

Having regard to the conditions in India, it may be
dangerous to enact legislation on the lines of the Cheques
Act, 1957. As the learned writer in the Law Times points
out, “nothing is said in the new Act about the users of
cheques”, It looks solely to the convenience and protection

of the bankers and we are not sure what repercussions it
may have upon the interests of the customers, in a country

like India. Further, there appears to have been no demand. °
that we in India should have a legislation on those lines.

We think it advisable that we should wait until the impli-
cations of the Cheques Act, 1957 are fully known, and until
there is sufficient demand by the banks and the members of
the public in India for such a legislation.

173. No change has been considered necessary in section Sec. 131 A..
131A.


Secs, £32--
133.
‘Secs. 134—
136.
Sec. 137.
‘Ses. 138-
439.

0

174. No change is proposed in sections 132-133, except
that they have been included in the Part dealing with Bills
of Exchange.

175. The provisions relating to conflict of laws and
foreign instruments in sections 134136 have been replaced
by a new section’ framed in the light of the principles arrived
at in paragraphs 27—-33, ante.

176. In section 137, the words “or the State of Jammu
and Kashmir” have already been omitted by the Jammu and
Kashmir (Extension of Laws) Act (62 of 1956).

177. Sections 138-139 have been omitted by the
Notaries Act (LIIE of 1952).

178. In order to give a concrete shape to our proposals,
we have, in Appendix I, put them into the form of draft
sections of the Act. The Appendix is not, however, to be
treated as a draft Bill.

As in our previous Reports, we have omitted all illustra-
tions from the text.

Appendix II contains two comparative Tables: Table A
shows the sections in the existing Act with the corresponding
sections in Appendix I; while Table B shows the sections in
Appendix I with the corresponding sections of our Act as .
well as of the Bills of Exchange Act and the Negotiable
Instruments Law, respectively.

Appendix III contains the suggestions made by us regard-
ing otber Acts.

3.8. 108, ibid.


7

Appendix IV gives a list of cormmercial bodies and associa-
tions who were addressed individually for their suggestions and.
Appendix V specifies such of them as gave their views in writing.

M. C. SETALVAD,
(Chairman).

M. C. CHAGLA,

K. N. WANCHOO,

P. SATYANARAYANA RAO,

N.C. SEN GUPTA,*

V. K. T. CHARI,*

D. NARASA RAIU,*

S. M. SIKRI,*

G. S. PATHAK,*

G. N. JOSHI,

N. A. PALKHIVALA,

K. SRINIVASAN,
DURGA DAS BASU,
Joint Secretaries.

हे New एशफा,

The 26th September, 1958.

*Bsing unable 10 com? to Delhi w sign the Report, these Members have authored:
hairman to sign the Report on their behalf,


APPENDIX I

Proposals as inserted in the body of the existing Act. (This
‘is, however, not to be treated as a Draft Bill).

[Corresponding sections of the existing Act are noted in the
Margin, and additions to the provisions of the existing Act are
‘shown in the text in italics, wherever possible.]

THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 19
PART I—GENERAL
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

‘Sec. 1. Short (1) This Act may be called the Negotiable Instruments Act,
title, extent,

and = cone
mencement, 7
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on the 1st day of
9. -
Sec.2Saving, «+60 Nothing herein contained affects the provisions of '

Para’? part, section 31 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.......

Sec. 3. Ope- ...Every negotiable instrument ‘shall be governed by the prov.-

4 of eo. A 5
ation of th sions of this Act, and no usage or custom at variance with any

pogotiablo such provision shall apply thereto.

(New]

Sec. 4. Def- «In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
nitions,

(ere: (1) “acceptor” means the drawee of a bill who has signed

ff. ? . his assent upon it, or, if there are more parts thereof
than one, upon one of such parts, and delivered the
same, or given notice of such signing to the holder or
to some person on his behalf........ $

7?


(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

73

“acceptor for honour” means a person who, sAcceptor
when a bill has been noted or protested for non- [S. 7, para
acceptance or for better security, accepts it supra “~

protest for honour of the drawer or of any one

of the indorsers...........- ;

an “accommodation party” means a person WhO «rccomo-
has signed an instrument as a maker, drawer, dation par
acceptor or indorser without receiving the value (New)
thereof and for the purpose of lending his name

fo some other person';

ज्न्ल्न्न्न्नन the expressions “at sight’ and “on (61. sight”
presentment” mean on demand; and the expres- ment "alter
sion “after sight” means, in the case of a note, [5, 21].
after presentment for sight, and, in the case of

a bill, after acceptance or noting for non-accept-

ance or protest for non-acceptance;

“banker” means a person carrying on the busi- Banker”
ness of accepting, for the purpose of lending or plified]
investment, of deposits of money from the public,
repayable on demand or otherwise and with-
drawable by cheque, draft, order or otherwise,

and includes any post office savings bank;

“bearer” means a person who by negotiation
comes into possession of an instrument payable ine
to bearer;

(i) “bill” means a bill of exchange; spin"

ii) a “bill of exchange” is an instrument in writ fNew) Exe
ing containing an unconditional order, change”
signed by the drawer, directing a certain if Para.
person to pay on demand or at a fixed
or determinable future time® a certain sum
of money only to, or to the order of, a
certain person or to the bearer of the
instrument;

1, See sec. 2861), 8. E. A.
2. See sec. 2, B. 8. A.
3. See sec. 3(1), 8. 8. A.


74

Steere". (8) a “cheque” is a bill drawn on a specified banker
and not expressed to be payable otherwise than
on demand;

cae". (9) “delivery” means transfer of possession, actual
or constructive, from one person to another’;

“Drawer” (10) & person making a bill or cheque is called the

Reed. on, “drawer” and the person thereby directed to pay

§ 7, para. is called the “drawee”;

“Drawee in (11) when in the bill or in any indorsement thereon

2,0 the name of any person is given, in addition to.

{S. 7, para. the drawee, to be resorted to in case of need,

ai such person is called a “drawee in case of need”;

Say (12) “holder” means the payee or indorsee of an

_ instrument who is in possession of the instru-
ment or the bearer thereof, but does nat include
a beneficial owner claiming through a benami-
dar’;

{New.1 Explanation—When an instrument is lost and not
found again, or is destroyed, its holder at the
time of such loss or destruction shall be deemed
to continue to be its holder, notwithstanding
such loss or destruction;

“Holder in (13) “holder in due course” means any person who,
ite ourse”. for consideration, becomes the possessor of an
° instrument if payable to bearer, or the payee or
indorsee thereof if payable to order, before the
amount mentioned in it became overdue* and
without having sufficient cause to believe that
any defect existed in the title of the person
from whom he derived his title;
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, a
defect is said to exist in the title of a person to
an instrument when he is not entitled to receive
the amount due thereon, by virtue of the provt-
sions of section 28;
1. See sec. . BA.
2, See sec. . 8. &. न
3. See sec, 29(1)(9) 8. E. A.; sec. 52, N. 1. 1..


फ्5

(14) when the maker or drawer or holder of an‘Indor, 0
instrument signs the same, otherwise than as dorset _
such maker or drawer, for the purpose of nego- [$. 15.]
tiation, on the back or face thereof or on a slip
of paper annexed thereto, or so signs for the
same purpose a stamped paper intended to be
completed as a negotiable instrument, he is said
to indorse the same and is called the “indorser”;
and the person in whose favour the indorsement 'S. 380).
ts made is called the “indorsee”..........-

(45) an instrument drawn or made in India, and «tyjana ine
ii strument””
made payable in, or drawn upon any person and“ Foreiga
resident in, India, is an inland instrument, and instrament a
every mstrument not so drawn, made or made Ss
payable is a foreign instrument;
(16) “instrument” means a negotiable instrument; “Instr
me
(New.]
(17) “instrument payable to bearer” means an “Instrument

instrument which is expressed to be so payable (70६. 1०
or on which the only or Jast indorsement is an Sot in De
indorsement in blank

(18) “instrument payable to order” means an instru- “Instrument
ment which is expressed to be so payable or payable ©
which is expressed to be payable to a particular ($13, (>
person, and does not contain words prohibiting
transfer or indicating an intention that it shall
not be transferable;

(19) “issue” means the first delivery of an instrue case”
ment complete in form to a person who takes
it as a holder’;

(20) “maker” means the executant of a promissory » लत
note: [New]
121) “material alteration”, in relation to an instru. Moverial,,
ment, includes any alteration of the date, the (New,

sum payable. the time of payment or the place

of payment, and, where an instrument has

4, See sec. 2, B. ६. A.
218 M of Law-8


“Maturity”.
[S. 22, para.
1)
“Negotiable
instrument” .
8.13 (0
main para.}
“Negotia-

“Notary”.
[New]

“Note”.
(New)

“Payee”.
Is. 7, para.
3}

“Payment in

due course”

Now
(5.4

76

been accepted generally, the addition of a place
of payment without the acceptor’s assent’;

(22) ....“maturity” of a note or bill is the date
at which it falls due;

(23) ..“negotiable instrument” means a promissory
note, bill of exchange or cheque. ...;

(24) when an instrument is transferred in the
manner provided by this Act to any person, so
as to constitute that person the holder thereof,
the instrument is said to be negotiated;

(25) “notary” means a person appointed as such
under the Notaries Act, 19527;

(26) “note” means a promissory note;

(27) “payee” means the person named in the instru-
ment, to whom or to whose order the money is
by the instrument undertaken or directed to be
paid...... ;

(28) “payment in due course” means payment in
accordance with the apparent tenor of the instru-
ment in good faith and without negligence to
any person in possession thereof’ under circum-
stances which do not afford a reasonable ground
for believing that he is not entitled to receive
payment of the amount therein mentioned;

(29) a “promissory note” is an instrument in writing
(not being a bank-note or a currency-note)
containing an unconditional undertaking, signed
by the maker, to pay on demand or at a fixed
or determinable future time’ a certain sum of
money only to, or to the order of, a certain
person, or to the bearer of the instrument:

1. See sec. 64(2), 8. E. A.

2. The definition of ‘notary’ in the existing Act was deleted by the Notaries Act, 1952
3. See sec, 83(1) B. 8. A.; 5. 184 N. 1. 1... (0. 5. A)


7
(30) “representative” means— 1128
(i) in the case of a person who is dead, his legat &
representative;

(ii) in the case of a person who has been adjudi-
cated an insolvent, the official assignee or
official receiver in whom his property has
vested;

(iii) in the case of a company in liquidation, the
liquidator thereof;

and includes a duly authorised agent.


CHAPTER पर
FORM AND INTERPRETATION.

sec. 5. Ap. ‘The provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, shall.
plicability of save in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of

the Contract . "
Act. 1S. 26 this Act, apply to all negotiable instruments.

para. 1, mo-
dified] हि
Sec. 6. In- Where an instrument is made, drawn or negotiated by

capacity Ra minor, the making, drawing or negotiation entitles the
26, Pacey 2; holder to receive payment of the instrument and to enforce

it against any other party thereto except the minor'.

Sec. 7. Core No corporation has power to make, draw, indorse or
poration's accept an instrument except in the manner and to the ex-
हे 26, para. rent authorised by the Jaw for the time being in force relat.

ing to corporations.

Sec, 8. Ag- (1) Every person capable of binding himself or of being:

a autho- hound... .by the making, drawing, acceptance or negotia-

(8, 27) tion of an instrument may so bind himself or be bound by
a duly authorised agent acting in the name of suck
person.

(2) A general authority of an agent to transact busi-.
ness and to receive and discharge debts does not confer
upon him the power of accepting or indorsing instruments-
so as to bind his principal.

(3) An authority to draw instruments does not of itself’
import an authority to indorse.

feo Au- A partner acting in the firm name may, to the extent
anes authorised by the law for the time being in force relating
Rew] 40 partnership, bind the firm by the making, drawing, ac-

ceptance or negotiation of an instrument.

1. See sec, 222), 8. ४. A, हु
78


79

(1) An instrument made, drawn, accepted indorsed or Sec. 10. Ine

transferred without consideration, or for a consideration made with-
con-
which fails, creates no obligation of payment between the sideration.

parties to the transaction.......... ie ant
balf}
(2) wees If any such party has transferred the गे Be a 1

strument with or without indorsement to a holder for consi-
deration, such holder, and every subsequent holder deriving
title from him, may recover the amount due on such instru-
ment from the transferor for consideration or any party to
the instrument at the time of the transfer.

When the consideration for which a person signed an Sec uu
instrument consisted of money, and was originally absent sence or fail-
in part or has subsequently failed in part, the sum which wre of po:

a holder standing in immediate relation to the person so’ ton. is. 44,
signing is entitled to receive from him is proportionatety

ceduced.

Where a part of the consideration for which a person Sec. 12, Par-
signed an instrument, though not consisting of money, jg tal failure of |
ascertainable in money without collateral enquiry, and Rg peste
there has been a failure of that part, the sum which a holder ney. 7
standing in immediate relation to the person so signing is

entitled to receive from him is proportionately reduced.

In an instrument— तु Sec. 13.“Cer>
om”
(a) the sum payable may be “certain” although or dition

it includes future interest or is payable at an tain fee
indicated rate of exchange, or is payable at #04 fictitious -
the current rate of exchange, and although it is Bs para,
to be paid in stated instalments with a provision
that upon default in payment of an instalment
or interest, the whole shall become due;

(0) an undertaking or order to pay may be “uncon-
ditional” ...... although the time for pay- § 5, para,
ment of the amount or any instalment thereof .
is expressed to be on the lapse of a certain
period after the occurrence of a specified event
which, according to the ordinary expectation
of mankind. is certain to happen, although the
time of its happening may be uncertain;


[New] (c) an order to pay out of a particular fund is nor
unconditional; but an unqualified order to pay,
coupled with—

(i) an indication of a particular fund out of
which the drawee is to reimburse himself or
@ particular account to be debited with the
amount, or

(ii) 6 statement of the transaction which gives rise’
to the instrument,
is unconditional’;

[8, 5 para. 4] (4) @ person may be a ‘certain person”,. . although:
he is misnamed or designated by description:
only, provided the person intended can reason-
ably be ascertained from, the instrument*;

(e) where the payee is a fictitious or non-existing

(New)
person, the instrument may be treated as pay~
able to bearer*;
An instrument is payable on demand—
Sec. 14, In- (a) where it is expressed to be payable on demand,.
payable ‘on or at sight, or on presentment‘; or
demand.
atria (b) where no time for payment is specified therein:
{S. 19, or
part]
5. 19, (०) where the instrument is a cheque; or
. 19,
Per para (6) where the instrument is issued, accepted or in--
modified) dorsed after it is overdue, as regards the per-
son so issuing, accepting or indorsing®.
Sec. An instrument payable on demand shall be deemed to:

Sayabhe 0 be overdue when it appears on the face of it to have been
demand in circulation for an unreasonable length of time®.

overdue.

(New)
1. See sec. 303), B. E. A.
2, See sec. 701 B. EA.
3. Sce sec. 7(3), 8, ४. A.
4. See sec. 10(1)(@), B. 8. A.
5. See sec. 1, B. EA.
& SS sce. 369) 8. 8. A.


हा

The expression “after sight” means— Sener
. 8. 21 ia fate
(a) in a note, after presentment for sight, and & half)
(b) in a bill, after acceptance or noting for non-
acceptance or protest for non-acceptance.
An instrument is payable at a determinable future time Sc 17. In-
it i bie— ble at a
where it is expressed to be payabie- है पथ gata
future time,
[New]

(a) at a fixed period after date or sight; or

(9) on, or at a fixed period after, the occurrence of
a specified event which is certain to happen
though the time of happening may be uncer-

tain’.

Where an instrument, either originally or by indorse- Sec. 18: Ef
ment, is expressed to be payable to the order of a specified ing or in
person, and not to him or his order, it is nevertheless pay- dorsing pay.
able to him or his order at his option, ae ep

Expl. (iii)

An instrument is not invalid for the reason only that it Sec. 19. Ef-

is ante-dated or post-dated, provided the ante-dating or post- Sieg ay 7

dating was not done for an illegal or fraudulent purpose*. किक:
(1) Where one person signs and delivers to another a Sec. 20, Inv
paper stamped in accordanve with the law relating to stamp 1717 ”
duty chargeable on instruments and either wholly blank or 5:01
having written thereon an incomplete instrument, in order
that it may be converted or completed into an instruments
he thereby gives prima facie authority to the person who
receives the paper to make or complete, as the case may be
upon it an instrument, for the amount if any specified there-
in, or, where no amount is specified, for any amount, not
exceeding in either case the amount covered by the stamp.
(2) The person so signing shall, subject to the provi-
sions of sub-section (3), be liable upon such instrument, in
the capacity in which he signed the same, to any holder in
due course, for the amount specified in the instrument or

1. See sec, 11, 8. ४. AL
2. See sec, 13(2), B. 8. A. and sec, 12, N. 1. 1...


82
filled up therein:

Provided that no person other than a holder in due
course shall receive from the person so signing the paper
anything in excess of the amount intended by him te be
paid thereunder.

(3) In order that any such instrument when completed
may be enforceable against any person who became a party
thereto prior to its completion, it must be filled up within a
reasonable time and strictly in accordance with the authority
given;

Provided that if any such instrument after completion is
negotiated to a holder in due course, it shall be valid and
effectual for all purposes in his hands, and he may enforce
it as if it had been filed up within a reasonable time and
strictly in accordance with the authority given’.

Sec. 21. New (1) The making, acceptance or indorsement of an in-

gotiable im sirument is completed by delivery. .

when com

(2) As between parties standing in immediate relation,
पं; 46 Pa". delivery to be effectual must be made by the party making,
| 46, para accepting or indorsing the instrument or by a person autho-
rised by him in that behalf.

JS, 46, para. (3) As between such parties and any holder of the

. instrument other than a holder in due course, it may be
shown that the instrument was delivered conditionally or
for a special purpose only, and not for the purpose of
transferring absolutely the property therem.

Sec, 22. Ime For the purposes of this Act—

ate है
parties. (a) the drawer of a bill stands in immediate relation

[S. 44 Ex-
pln} to the acceptor;

(b) the maker of a note, or the drawer of a bill
or cheque stands in immediate relation fo the
payee, and the indorser to his indorsee;

(०) other persons who sign may. by agreement,
stand in immediate relation 1० a holder.

1. See Sec. 208. ९. A.


83
!

Jf the amount undertaken or ordered to be paid is stated See, 23 Dit
differently in figures and in words, the amount stated in figures and
words shall be the amount undertaken or ordered to be fs. 18])

paid:

Provided that if the words are ambiguous or uncer-
tain, reference may be had to the figures to fix
the amount’.

Where an instrument may be construed either as a note Sec. 24, Am-
or bill, the holder may at his election treat it as either, and Biguous in
the instrument shall be thenceforward treated accordingly. (s.17]

An instrument may be made payable to two or more Sec, 25. Pa-

ae + + «a YRS May be
payees jointly, or it may be made payable in the alternative joint.
to one of two, or one or some of several, payees. IS. 13 (2)]

Where a person signs an instrument in a trade or as- Sec. 26. Sie-

sumed name, he is liable thereon to the same extent as if he wade or assu-
. oan वि 2 med name.
had signed it in his own name?. [New]

Subject to the provisions of this Act, where a signature on 27. For-

on an instrument is forged or. placed thereon without the authorised
‘authority of the person whose signature it purports to be, it (New).
is wholly inoperative, and no right to retain the instrument

or to give a discharge therefor or to enforce payment there-

of against any party thereto can be acquired through or

under such signature, unless the party against whom it is

Sought to retain o1 enforce payment of.the instrument is pre-

cluded from setting up the forgery or want of authority:

Provided that nothing in this section shall affect the
ratification of an unauthorised signature not
amounting to a forgery’.

When an instrument has been lost or has been obtained sec. 28. De-
from any maker, drawer, acceptor or holder thereof by tess, tide
means of an offence or fraud, or for an unlawful considera. Sified]
tion, neither the person who finds or so obtains the instru-
ment nor any possessor or indorsee who claims through

1, See sec. 17(1), 1९. 1. 1.. (0, 5. Ad.
2, See sec. 23(1), 8. E. A.
3. See sec, 24, B BA


84

such person is entitled to receive the amount due thereon
trom such maker, drawer, acceptor or holder, unless such
possessor or indorsee is, or some person through whom he
claims was, a holder thereof in due course.

Sec. 29. Ma- The maturity of a note or bill not payable on demand

turity, how

determind. is determined as follows:—

189. 22, para.
श्र (1)

1S. 2] (2)

15. 24] (3

Every such note or bill is at maturity on the
third day after the day on which it is expressed
to be payable.

छा calculating the date at which a note or bill,
made payable a stated number of months after
date or after sight or after a certain event, is
at maturity, the period stated shall be held to
terminate on the day of the month which cor-
responds with the day on’ which the instru-
ment is dated, or presented for acceptance or
sight, or noted for non-acceptance, or protest-
ed for non-acceptance, or the event happens,
or, where the instrument is a ill made payable
a stated number of months after sight and has
been accepted for honour, with the day on
which it was so accepted. If the month in
which the period would terminate has no cor-
responding day, the period shall be held to ter-
minate on the last day of such month.

In calculating the date at which a note or bill
made payable a certain number of days after
date or after sight or after a certain event is at
maturity, the day of the date, or of present-
ment for acceptance or sight, or of protest for
non-acceptance, or on which the event happens,
shall be excluded.

1S. 251 al (4) When the day on which a note or billis at

maturity is a public holiday, the instrament
shall be deemed to be due on the next succeed-
ing business day. -


s he

Explanation: Tne expression “public holiday” includes
Sundays and any other day declared by the Central Gov-
ernment, by notification in the Official Gazette: to be a

public holiday.


CHAPTER Ill

NEGOTIATION
Sec. 30 An instrument is negotiable—
Mode of
ar eee (a) by.. delivery thereof, if payable to bearer;
4 and 8. 47, :
main part] हु
(8. 46, para (b) by indorsement and delivery thereof, if
Sand S. 48] payable to order.

Seo. 31, Per Every sole maker, drawer .... or holder, or all of several
led to nego- joint makers, drawers .. or holders, of an instrument may,
(6. 5] if the negotiability of such instrument has not been restricted

or excluded as mentioned in section 39, indorse and nego-

tiate the same.

Explanation: Nothing in this section enables a maker
or drawer to indorse or negotiate an instrument unless he is
in lawful possession or is holder thereof..... .

Sec. 32. (1) Negotiation by indorsement must be of the entire
Requisites of . ;
indorsement. instrument,

(2) An indorsement .. which purports to transfer to
the indorsee oniy a part of the amount payable, or which
purports to transfer the instrument to two or more indorsees
severally, is not valid as a negotiation of the instrument';
but where such amount has been paid in part, a note to
that effect may be indorsed on the instrument, which may
then be indorsed for the balance.

See. 33 in An indorsement may be either in blank or in full, and
माता may be restrictive or conditional or qualified. हु .
{New

Sec, 34. In- (1) An indorsement in blank specifies no indorsee.
dorsement

in biank and

is. 16 (1),
part]

1, See sec. 32(2), 8. EB. A.


हा

(2) An indorsement in full specifies the person to whom
or to whose order the instrument is to be payable’.

Sec. 35 Pro-

The provisions of this Act relating to a payee shall apply Ystons ber

with the necessary modifications to an indorsee. ply to in-
[S. 1७०]

When an instrument has been indorsed in blank, any Sec. 36. Con-

f
holder may, without signing his own name convert indorsement

the indorsement in blank into an indorsement in full 69 in blank into
writing above the indorser’s signature a direction to pay the ae
amount to or to the order of himself or some other person;

and the holder does not thereby incur the responsibility of

an indorser?

Subject to the provisions hereinafter contained as to Sec, 37. In-
crossed cheques, an instrument indorsed in blank is pay- gtraments
able to the bearer thereof, even though originally payable 0 54]
to order.

It an instrument, after having been indorsed in blank, is sec. 38 In-
indorsed in full, the amount of it cannot be claimed from gorsement i
the indorser in full, except by the person to whom it has ¢4 by indor-

sement in
been indorsed in full, or by one who derives title through gh

5]

such person. 1
(1) An indorsement is restrictive which either— Sec. 39, Rese
trictive — in-

(a) restricts or excludes the further negotiation of dorsement,
the instrument; or

(b) constitutes the indorsee the agent of the indorser i hal ae
eee e ew eens . 4

Provided that the mere absence of words implying power
fo negotiate does not make the indorsement restrictive.

(2) A restrictive indorsement confers upon the indorsee
the right—

{a) to receive payment of the instrument;

(0) to sue any party thereto that his indorser could
have sued, but gives him no power to transfer
his rights as indorsee unless it expressly autho-
rises him to do so.

4, See sec. 34(1), (2), 8. E. A.
3, See sec, 34(4), 8. 8. A.


५२ अर आओ 88
‘ (3) Where a restrictive indorsement authorises further
transfer, all subsequent indorsees take the instrument with
the same rights and subject to the same liabilities as.the first

indorsee under the restrictive indorsement'.

‘See. 40, Cone (1) The indorser of an instrument may, by express

dorsement. words in the indorsement, .... make ‘Ais liability or the

4S Se pare right of the indorsee to receive the amount due thereon de-
pend upon the happening of a specified event, although
such event may never happen.

(2) Such a condition is valid only as between the in-
dorser and the indorsee.

(3) Where an instrument purports to be indorsed con-
ditionally, the condition may be disregarded by the payer,
and payment to the indorsee is valid whether the condition
has been fulfilled or not.

‘Sec. 41.Quae (1) The indorser of an instrument may, by express

dorsement words in the indorsement, exclude bis own liability thereon.

s Ee para,

fs 52, para, (2) Where an indorser so excludes his liability and
afterwards becomes the holder of the instrument, all inter~
mediate indorsers are liable to him.

An instrument delivered on condition that it is not to
take effect except in a certain event is not negotiable (except
Ski in the hands df a holder for consideration without notice
of the condition) unless such event happens.

‘Sec, 42,
Conditional
detivery.

‘Sec. if The legal representative of a deceased person cannot
Negotiation . वि डर
by legal. negotiate, by delivery only, an instrument payable to order

Gee ws and indorsed by the deceased but not delivered.

Bee. inti Where an instrument is negotiated back before maturity
ack before 10 the maker or drawer or a prior indorser or to the acceptor,
maturity, नि taf A .

[New] such party may, subject to the provisions of this Act, reissue

and further negotiable the instrument®. .

1. See secs, 36 and 37, N. 1. L. (U.S. A.) and S. 35, 8. 8. A.
2, See sec. 33, 8. E, A. and sec. 39, N. 1, L. (0. 8. A.),
3. See sec, 37, BEA. part.


89 .
Subject to the provisions contained in this Chapter relat- Sats:
ing to restrictive, conditional and qualified indorsements, negotiation
the person in whose favour an instrument is negotiated Bio half
acquires the property therein with the right of further odified])
negotiation ..............4-

An instrument may be negotiated (except by the maker, Sees 46.
drawer, drawee or acceptor after maturity) until payment इ०पं०ाशंप
or satisfaction thereof by the maker, drawer, drawee ० [s, 60}
acceptor at or after maturity, but not after such payment or
satisfaction, or after it has been restrictively indorsed’.

3, See ४००० 36(1K@), BEA.


Accom-

modation

note or

bill.

प्र 59,
10५50]

CHAPTER IV

RIGHTS OF HOLDER AND HOLDER IN DUE COURSE

A holder may sue on the instrument in his own name,
receive payment in due course thereunder and further
negotiate it in the manner provided by this Act.

A person acquiring an instrument in the circumstances
mentioned in section 44 is not entitled to enforce payment
of such instrument against any intervening party to whom

he was previously liable'.

A holder who has acquired an instrument after dis-
honour, whether by non-acceptance or non-payment, with.
notice thereof, or after maturity, has only, as against the
other parties, the rights thereon of his transferor, and is
subject to the equities to which the transferor was subject
at the time of acquisition by such holder.

sees Any person who, in good faith and for considera-
tion, becomes the holder, after maturity, of a note or bill
made, drawn or accepted without consideration, for the
purpose of enabling some party thereto to raise money
theréon, may recover the amount of the note or bill from any
prior party.

(1) A holder ..... who derives his title through a
holder in due course, and who is not himself a party to any
fraud or illegality affecting the instrument, has all the rights
thereon of that holder in due course as regards the acceptor
and all parties to the instrument prior to that holder*.

(2) Where the title of the holder is defective—

(a) if he negotiates the instrument to a holder in
due course, that holder obtains a good and
complete title to the instrument; and

Ty See see. 37, BELA, part.
3, See sec, 29(3), 8.5.4.


91

(b) if he obtains payment of the instrument, the
person who pays him in due course gets a valid
discharge for the instrument’.

A holder in due course holds the instrument free from Se. a
any defect of title of prior parties, and free from defences holder in
available to prior parties among themselves, and may enforce ee
Payment of the instrument for the full amount thereof against
all parties liable thereon*.

(1) Where an instrument has been lost before it is sec. 33.
overdue, the person who was the holder thereof may apply Holder's
to the maker or drawer to give him another instrument of fuplicate of
the same tenor, giving security to the maker or drawer, if हा
tequired, to indemnify him against all persons whatever in
case the instrument alleged to have been lost shall be found

again.

(2) If the maker or drawer on request as aforesaid
refuses to give such duplicate instrument, he may be com-
pelled to do so. हु

1, See sec, 3963), B.E.A.
2, See sec, 38(2), BEA.

218 M of Law-5


CHAPTER V
LIABILITY OF PARTIES

set of The liability of the original parties to an instrument, and
Chapter. of persons who become parties thereto under supervening

New} है है
contracts, such as acceptors, indorsers and acceptors for
honour, shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act,
be as defined in this Chapter.

Sec. 55. A person placing his signature upon an instrument other-

signing ins wise than as maker, drawer or acceptor, is presumed to be
presumed an indorser, unless he clearly indicates by appropriate words
ee his intention to be bound in some other capacity’.

{New

जा of (1) The drawer of a bill, by drawing it, engages that
drawer or on due presentment it shall be accepted and paid according
शा of to its tenor, and that if it be dishonoured he will compensate
aaa the holder or any indorser who is compelled to pay it*.

pat modi- .

[New (2) The drawee of a bill is not tiable thereon until
acceptance in the manner provided by this Act. ,
. The acceptor before maturity of a bill, by

32, (3)
pa modi- accepting it, engages that he will pay it according to the
tenor of his acceptance ...... and in default of such pay-
ment ...... such .... acceptor is bound to compensate

any party to the bili for any foss or damage sustained by him
and caused by such defauts

(S. 41, (4) The acceptor of a bill already indorsed is not
relieved from liability by reason that such indorsement is
forged, .if he knew or had reason to believe the indorsement
to be forged when he accepted the bill.

पका न. (1) The drawer of a... cheque, by drawing it, engages
drawer or that in case of dishonour by the drawee,..... he will com-
drawee of
cheq: pensate the holder ...,.. a
S. 30, pact] _

1. See sec. 63, N.EL. ((.5.&.) and sec. 56, BEA
2. See sec, $5 (1), BE.
3. See sec. 54(1),

4, See sec. 73, para. 2, read with sec. 55 (1), B.E.A,

92



93

(2) The drawee of a cheque having sufficient funds of{S. 31].
ithe drawer in his hands properly applicable to the payment
“of such cheque shall pay the cheque when duly required so
4o do, and, in default of such payment, shall compensate
the drawer for any loss or damage caused by such default.

.... The maker of a note, by making it, engages that (see, 58 वि
या + व ९; 3 . u
she will pay it at maturity according to its apparent tenor .... a makes of a

and in default of such payment .... the maker ..... is rote
bound to compensate any party to the note .... for any एकता

loss or damage sustained by him and caused by such default’.

«sa. The indorser of an instrument, by indorsing it, Tsoi of
-engages that on due presentment it shall be accepted and indorser of
paid according to its tenor, and that if it be dishonoured, he iroment.
will compensate the holder or subsequent indorser who is डे 3s

“2 part, — mo-
compelled to pay it”. dified}.

(1) The maker of a note, the drawer of a cheque, the Sorat 0 of
drawer of a bi! until acceptance and the acceptor, are ...... पल of
respectively liable thereon as principal debtors ........ IS. 37, part}.

(2) ... The other parties to the instrument are liable हि. 37, part}.

thereon as sureties for the maker, drawer or acceptor, as
the case may be. '

(3) As between the parties so liable as sureties, each 1S. 38, part].
prior party is .... also liable thereon as a principal debtor
in respect of each subsequent party.

The provisions of sub-section (3) of section 56, section $e sion
58, section 59 or sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) of for othe
section 60 do not apply where there is a contract to the contrary. ‘

. art,

contrary. 8. 35, para,
1 part, S. 37,

part, 5. 38.

: part}.

When the holder of an accepted dill enters into any Sec.

. hi : Li
‘contract with the acceptor, which, under section 134 or 135 surety.

of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, would discharge the other IS. 39].
parties, the holder may expressly reserve his right to charge
‘the other parties, and in such case they are not discharged.

62.
ity of

1. See sec. 88(1), BEA.
2. See sec. 55 (2), B.E.A.


94

Sec. 63. ‘The acceptor, and every prior party to an instrument, are’
Habiliy. liable thereon to a holder in due course until the instrument
1S: 36- is duly satisfied.

Tia, of (1) An accommodation party is liable on an instrument’
accom-

jnodation £0 @ holder in due course, notwithstanding that when such
Par ey a holder took the instrument he knew such party to be an:
accommo- accommodation party’.

dated party.

eet (2) An accommodation party to an instrument, if he

has paid the amount thereof, is entitled to recover such
amount from the party accommodated.

1S 43 (3) No party for whose accommodation an instrument
has been made, drawn, accepted or indorsed can, if he has
paid the amount thereof, recover thereon such amount fronr
any person who became a party to such instrument for his
accommodation.

Sec. 65 No party to an instrument who has induced any other

गण of party to make, draw, accept, indorse or transfer the same

inducing | to him for a consideration which he has failed to pay or

make ete perform in full shall recover thereon an amount exceeding

ment, Fx the value of the consideration (if any) which he has actually

ception 111}, paid or performed.

Sec. 66 (1) An agent who signs ......an instrument .......
Tabi or is personally liable thereon unless he adds to his signature
ing asagent. words indicating that he is acting for and on behalf of a@
1S. 28, ear- ae wos +
lier part, | named principal; but the mere addition by a person to his
modified), signature of words describing him as an agent, or as filling a
representative character, does not exempt him from personal’
liability*.
& ® latter (2) An agent is not personally liable to a person who
induces him to sign upon the belief that the principal alon

would be held liable. .

Sec. 67. A legal representative of a deceased person who signs
a of an instrument is liable personally thereon unless he expressly
presentative. limits his liability to the extent of the assets received by hinr

as such.

3. See sec. 28(2), BELA.
> and sec. 20 N.ILL. (U.S.A.)-

2. See sec. 261),



95

‘(L) Where the holder of an instrument payable to Sec. ee or
‘bearer negotiates it by delivery without indorsing it, he is by delivery
«called a “transferor by delivery’ oe
{New]
(2) A transferor by delivery is not liable on the instru-

ment.

(3) A transferor by delivery who negotiates an instru-
anent thereby warrants to his immediate transferee, being a
‘holder for consideration, that the instrument is what it
purports to be, that he has a right to transfer it, and that at
sthe time of transfer he is not aware of any fact which renders
sit valueless!

(1) Subject to the provisions of section 75, an instru- Sec 69. ent.
ment must, in order to make the parties thereto liable to (S. 64 para."
the holder, be presented for payment in accordance with this ” part}

Act.

Exception.—...Presentment for payment is not neces- &. 4s
+ XC., : Mo-
:Sary in order to charge the maker of a note payable on dified}.
demand and not payable at a specified place, or the acceptor
sof a bill.

(2) The provisions of this section are without prejudice (New)
to the provisions relating to presentment for acceptance in
.the case of a bill.

(1) When an instrument is dishonoured by

bee c own eee Sec. 70.
f
“non-payment ........064+ , notice must be given, in the dishonour
manner provided by this Act, that the instrument has been fer none
i when obli-
so dishonoured .... en
93,
pata. 1,
३; rt].
(2) Such notice, however, need not be given to the Bec. 93)
amaker of the dishonoured note .... the acceptor of the P*"**!

-dishonoured bill or the drawee of the dishonoured cheque. .

Foreign bills must be protested for dishonour in the Sec. 71.
manner provided in Chapter 1X of this Part when such pro- for noting

wtest is required by the Jaw of the place where they are drawn ea

1. See sec. 58, BEA.


Definit ion
Sec. 72.

[New]

Sec. 73,

[S. 66],
[S. 74].

(8. 67,

earlier
part},

CHAPTER VI
PRESENTMENT FOR PAYMENT

in this Chapter, “presentment” means presentment for’

1 payment.

(1) An instrument required to be presented for payment:
must be presented in the manner hereinafter provided.

(2) Presentment must be made by the holder or by:
some person authorised to receive payment on his behalf,

(3) Presentment must be made, in the case of a note, tor
the maker, in the case of a bill to the acceptor and in the
case of a cheque to the drawee, or to the representative of:
the maker, acceptor or drawee.

Explanation~—Where there are several persons, not
being partners, liable on the instrument, as makers, acceptors.
or drawees, as the case may be, and no place of payment is:
specified, presentment must be made to them alt.

(4) Presentment must be made at the proper time, as
provided below:—

(i) a note or bill not payable on demand must be
presented .... at maturity;

(ii) subject to the provisions of this Act, an instru-
ment payable on demand must be presented.
.... within a reasonable time after it is received
by the holder;
(iii) a note payable by instalments must be presented.
. on the third day after the date fixed for
payment of each instalment ..... 3

4, See sec. 78 N. I. L. and sec. 45(6), B.E.A.

96


97

(iv). subject to the provisions of section 155, a cheque [5. 72},
must, in order to charge the drawer, be present-
ed ... before the relationship between the

drawer and his banker has been altered to the
prejudice of the drawer; हु

(५) a cheque must, in order to charge any person {s. 73).
except the drawer, be presented within a reason-
able time after delivery thereof by such person.
(5) Presentment ... must be made during the usual'{s. 65}.
hours of business, and, if at a banker’s, within banking
hours.

(6) Presentment must be made at the proper place as
provided below:—~ |

(i) where a place of payment is specified in the instru- (Ss.

ment, it must be presented at that place; moaned 1.

(ii) where no place of payment is specified, but the [New]
address of the maker, acceptor or drawee is

given in the instrument, it must be presented
at such address;

(iii) where no place of payment is specified and no (5. 70}.
address given, the instrument must be present-
ed at the place of business (if known) or the

ordinary residence (if known), of the maker,
acceptor or drawee;

(iv) in any other case, the presentment may be made (8.71, part}.

to the maker, acceptor or drawee in person
wherever he can be found’.

Explanation.—iIn

this sub-section, “specified place” (New)
j means a place described with particulars sufficient to enable

the person presenting the instrument to identify the place
where the person sought to be charged with liability can be
found.

1, See sec. 45(4), 8.8.&.



98

पिया, (7) Delay in presentment .... is excused if the delay
is caused by circumstances beyond the controi of the holder
and not imputable to his default, misconduct or negligence.
When the cause of delay ceases to operate, presentment must
be made within a reasonable time.

Sec. 74. T it 5 a
What conse (1) To constitute a valid presentment, it is not.necessary

titutes valid to present the original instrument to the person liable to
and the pay, but it shall be sufficient if a copy thereof, certified to

mode act. be true by the holder, is delivered to such person, either

so personally or by registered post or by other effective means,
modified). .
{New} (2) Hf, after such delivery, the person liable to pay so
demands, the original instrument shall. be made available
to him for inspection during the hours of business of the
holder, and if the holder fails to do so within a reasonable
time, the presentment shall be deemed to be invalid.
Sec, 75: ree No presentment ... is necessary, and the instrument
sentment. shall be deemed to be dishonoured at the due date for
[s 74)” presentment, in any of the following cases:—
(0. (०, (a) if the maker, acceptor or drawee intentionally
para. 1). + .
7 prevents the presentment of the instrument; or
(0. (०, (b) if, the instrument being payable at his place of
para. 21, business, he closes such place of business on a
business day during the usual business hours; or
(0. @, (c) if, the instrument being payable at some other
Para. 3}. specified place, neither he nor any person
peci
authorised to pay it attends at such place on ¢
business day during the usual business hours;
or ह
(०, @, (9) if, the instrument not being payable at any
para. 4]. . specified place, he cannot after due search be
found; or
0. @2 (e) as against any part sought to be charged there-

with, if he has engaged in writing to pay without
presentment; OT


99

(f) as against any party if, after maturity, with 10.0७)
knowledge that the instrument has not been .

presented, he makes a part payment on account
of the amount due on the instrument, or pro-

mises to pay the amount due thereon in whole
or in part, or otherwise waives his right to take
advantage of any default in presentment; or

(g) as against the drawer, if the drawer could not [Ci (०1.
suffer damage from the want of such present-
ment; or

(h) where the drawee is a fictitous person’; or [New]

(i) as regards an indorser, where the instrument {New]
was made, drawn or accepted for the accommo-
dation of that indorser and he has no reason to
expect that the instrument would be paid if
presented*; or

(j) where, after the exercise of reasonable diligence, (New)
Presentment as required by this Act cannot be
effected*; or

(k) where a bill has been dishonoured for non- (New}
acceptance.

Explanation.—-The fact that the holder has reason to [New]
believe that the instrument will, on presentment, be dis-

honoured does not dispense with the necessity for present-
ment*,

1. See sec. 46(2) (6), BIE.A.

2, See sec, 46(2) (०), B.E.A.

3. See sec. 46 (2) (a), para, 2, B.E.A.
4. See sec. 46(2) (०), para. 2, B.B.A.


(8.
modified).

(8. 82 (०
modified]

[New]

{New}

{S. 89, part},

Sec. 77.
Instrument
to be deli-
vered = on
payment.
{S. 81}.

CHAPTER VII

PAYMENT, DISCHARGED AND INTEREST

(1) ....An instrument is discharged by payment to the

_ holder by or on behalf of the maker of a note, the drawer

of a cheque, the drawer of a bill until acceptance or the
acceptor.

(2) In the case of an instrument payable to bearer or...
indorsed in blank, payment in due course by the maker,
drawer, acceptor or indorser discharges all the parties thereto.

(3) In the case of an instrument made, drawn, accepted
or indorsed for accommodation, payment in due course by:
the party accommodated discharges the instrument’,

(4) Payment to the holder by any other party discharges:
the liability of the party making the payment.

(5) Where an instrument has been materially altered:
but does not appear to have been so altered,............
payment thereof by a person... .liable to pay, and paying
the same according to the apparent tenor thereof at the time
of payment and otherwise in due course, shall discharge such
person... .from all liability thereon; and such payment shall
not be questioned by reason of the instrument having been
altered. ...........05

Any person liable to pay, and called upon by the
holder. . . .to pay, the amount due on an instrument is before
payment entitled to have it shown, and is on payment entitled
to have it delivered up to him, or, if the instrument is lost
or cannot be produced, to be indemnified against any further
claim thereon against him.

1, See sec, $9(3), B.E.A.

100


101
(1) The maker, drawer, acceptor or indorser respec- See. 78

tively of an instrument is discharged from liability thereon— modes of
discharge.

(8) to a holder thereof who cancels such acceptor’s [S. 82(@)].
or indorser’s signature with intent to discharge
him and to all parties claiming under such
holder;

(b) to a holder thereof who otherwise discharges IS- 8200)...
such maker, drawer, acceptor or indorser, and
to all parties deriving title under such holder
after notice of such discharge;

(०) when the person liable thereon as principal |s. 90
debtor becomes the holder thereof at or after ९११००]...
its maturity in his own right. .

(2) When the holder of an accepted bill enters into any {New}.
contract with the acceptor of the nature referred to in section
62, the other parties are discharged, unless the holder has
expressly reserved his right to charge them.

(3) When the holder of an instrument, without the con- jg, 40),,
sent of the indorser, destroys or impairs the indorser’s remedy
against a prior party, the indorser is discharged from liability
to the holder to the same extent as if the instrumem had
been paid at maturity.
(1) The drawer of a bill or cheque, and the indorser of sec. 79
a bill or note, are discharged where there is a default by the Discharge,
holder in presentment of the instrument for payment in fen para
accordance with this Act. U1, part].
(2) The maker of a note payable on demand and at a [5५ A, para,
specified place is discharged in default of presentment as with Exc.]

aforesaid.

If the holder of a bill acquiesces in a qualified acceptance Sircnaree
as defined in section 12. . . . . . . . . - . - > all previous parties of parties
whose consent is not obtained to such acceptance are dis- senting to
chagged as against the holder, unless on notice given by the fualified af
holder they assent to such acceptance, és £?३**

Para, part].


by material
alteration,
8. 87 para.
+ modi-
fied}

[S. 87, para,
z

§. 87, para,

48. 88}.

102

(1) Where an instrument or the acceptance of a bill is
materially altered without the assent of all the parties liable
on it, the instrument or bill is discharged, except as against
the party who has himself made, authorised or assented to
the alteration and subsequent indorsers:

Provided that this section shall not apply where the alte-
ration was made by a stranger without the consent of or any
negligence or fraud on the part of the holder, or where the
alteration was made in order to carry out the common inten-
tion of the original parties’.

(2) ....Any such alteration, if made by an indorsee,
discharges his indorser from भी liability to him in respect of
the consideration for the indorsement.

(3) The provisions of this section are subject to those of
sections 20, 36, 80, 123 and 145.

(4) An acceptor or indorser of an instrument is bound

7 by his acceptance or indorsement notwithstanding any pre-

Sec, 82,
‘Interest
when_ rate
specified
and not
-specified.

{S. 79, mo-
ified},

vious alteration of the instrument.

Subject to the provisions of any law for the time being
in force relating to the relief of debtors, and without pre-
judice to the provisions of section 34 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908—

(a) when interest at a specified rate is expressly
made payable on a note or bill and no date is
fixed from which interest is to be paid, interest
shall be calculated at the rate specified, on the
amount of the principal money due thereon,
from the date of the note, or, in the case of a
bill, from the date on which the amount becomes
payable, until. tender or realisation of such
amount, or until the date of the institution of a
suit to recover such amount...... 3 .



103

(b) when a note or bill is silent as regards interest [S. 80, para
or does not specify the rate of interest, interest died}.
on the amount of the principal money due there-
on shall, notwithstanding any collateral agree-
ment relating to interest between any parties to
the instrument, be allowed and calculated at the
rate of six per centum per annum from the date
of the note, or, in the case of a bill, from the
date on which the amount becomes payable,
unti] tender or realization of the amount due
thereon, or! until... the date of the institution
of a suit to recover such amount......


CHAPTER शा.

Notice oF DisHONOUR

See. 88. Dishonour takes place either by non-acceptance as pro-

iNew vided in Part Il or by non-payment as provided in this
Chapter. है पु

Sec, 84, An instrument is said to be dishonoured by non-

Pishonour payment— वि

Payment. .

{S. 92}. (a) when the maker (in the case of a note), the

ucceptor (in the case of a bill) or the drawee.
(in the case of a cheque) makes default in pay-
ment upon being duly required to pay the same;
or

(b) when the instrument is deemed to be dishonour-
ed under section 75.

See. 85. When an instrument is dishonoured by non-acceptance or

ice
-dishonour by non-payment, the holder or some party thereto who remains

qhom and” jiable thereon, or a person authorised in this behalf by such

Be holder or party, must give notice of dishonour—
part).
° epee (a) to all....parties whom the holder seeks to
- make jointly and severally or severally liable
thereon, and to some one of several parties whom
he seeks to make jointly liable thereon; or

ln (0) to the representative of the person to whom
> ५ हि ति
the notice is required to be given under clause
(4). है

See, 86. Notice of dishonour, in order to be valid and effectual,
which potice must conform to the following rules:—

i Ao state
nour should
be given.
[S. 94, para. tet ~
A, part}. (a) it must be in writing and may be sent by post;

104


105

(b) it may be in any form, but it must inform the
party to whom it is given, either in express terms
or by reasonable intendment, that the instru-
ment has been dishonoured and in what way,
and that he will be held liable thereon.

(1) A notice of dishonour must be given within a reason- Sec, 87.

‘able time after dishonour, at the place of business, or, (in aime and
case the party has no place of business), at the residence, of is. 98 para.
the party for whom it is intended. part]

(2) When the instrument is deposited with an agent for [S: 96}.
presentment, the agent is entitled to the same time to give
notice to his principal as if he were the holder giving notice
of dishonour, and the principal is entitled to a further like
period to give notice of dishonour.

If a notice of dishonour is duly directed and sent by post Sec. 88.
+, 5 . 2. - lotice
and miscarried, such miscarriage does not render the notice miscarried

invalid. रह re
para 2],
Any party receiving notice of dishonour must, in ordet sec. 89,

to render any prior party liable to himself, give notice of eee

dishonour to such party within a reasonable time, unless transmit of
such party otherwise receives due notice as provided in this penggour
Chapter. 8. 95]
When the party to whom notice of dishonour is des- Sec. 90. m
en
patched is dead, but the party despatching the notice is to whom

ignorant of his death, the notice is sufficient. gwen is

No notice of dishonour is necessary— Sec. 91.
° notice of

dishonour
is unneces-

sary.
(a) when it is dispensed with by the party entitled [S- 9).
thereto;
(b) in order to charge the drawer, when he has
countermanded payment;

(०) when the party charged could not suffer damage
for want of notice:


106

(9) when the party entitled to notice cannot after
due search be found; or the party bound to give
notice is, for any other reason, unable, without,
any fauit of his own, to give it.

(९) to charge the drawer, when the acceptor is also
a drawer;

(f) when the party entitled to notice, knowing the
facts, promises unconditionally to pay the
amount due on the instrument.


CHAPTER IX
NoTING AND PROTEST

'(1) When a note or bill has been dishonoured by non- Sind?
‘acceptance or non-payment, the holder may: cause such dis- [S. 99
«honour to be noted by a notary upon the instrument, or

upon a paper attached thereto, or partly upon each.

(2) Such note must be made within a reasonable time
:after dishonour, and must specify, the date of dishonour,
the reason, if any, assigned for such dishonour, or, if the
:instrument has not been expressly dishonoured, the reason
why the holder treats it as dishonoured, and the notary’s
«charges.

(1) When a note or bill has been dishonoured by non- Sec. 93.
see Protest,
vacceptance or non-payment, the holder may, within a reason: [8, 100,
able time. cause such dishonour to be noted and certified by Para. 1]
:a notary. Such cestificate is called a protest.

{2) When the acceptor of a bill has become insolvent. [S. 100,
or his credit has been publicly impeached, before the matu- ¢ara. 2]
rity of the dill, the holder may, within a reasonable time,
cause a notary to demand better security of the acceptor,
and-on its being refused may, within a reasonable time,
‘cause such facts to be noted and certified as aforesaid. Such
wertificate is called a protest for better security.

A protest under section 93 must contain— Sec. 94,
Contents
५५५५५
(a) either the instrument itself, or a literal transcript 101]
of the instrument and of everything written or
printed thereupon;
(b) the name of the person for whom and against

whom the instrument has been protested;

107
“218 M of Law—6


108

(c) a statement that payment or acceptance, or better
security, as the case may be, has been demanded
of such person by the notary; the terms of his
answer, if any, or a statement that he gave no
answer or that he could not be found;

(d) when the note or bill has been dishonoured, the-
place and time of dishonour, and, when better
security has been refused, the place and time of!
refusal;

(e) the subscription of the notary making the pro~
test;

(1) in the event of.an acceptance for honour or of’
a payment for honour, the name of the person
by whom, of the person for whom, and the
manner in which, such acceptance or payment
wes offered and effected.

Explanation—A notary may make the demand men-
tioned in clause (c) of this section either in person or by
his clerk, or, where authorised by agreement or usage, by
registered letter.

When a note or bill is required by law to be protested,
notice of such protest must be given instead of notice of
dishonour, in the same manner and subject to the same con-
ditions; but the notice may be given by the notary who makes.
the protest.

All bills drawn payable at some other place than the
place mentioned as the residence of the drawee, ‘and which
are dishonoured by non-acceptance may, without further"
presentment to the drawee, be protested for non-payment in-
the place specified for payment, unless paid before or at
maturity.

For the purposes of this Act, where a bill or note is:

i- required to be protested within a specified time or before-

some further proceeding is taken, it is sufficient that the bill
has been noted for protest before the expiration of the
specified time or the taking of the: proceeding; and the formal’
protest may be extended at amy time thereafter as of the:
date of the noting.


CHAPTER X

REASONABLE TIME

In determining what is a reasonable time for the pur- sec. 98,
poses of this Act.......... regard shall be had to the nature Reasonable
of the instrument and the usual course of dealing with [S. 105]
tespect to similar instruments; and, in calculating such time,
public holidays shali be excluded.

(1) A notice of dishonour, when sent by post, shall be se. 99.
deemed to be given within a reasonable time if it is posted Reasoy fae le
on the day next after the day of dishonour. इन

dishonour.
[S. 106,

ra, 1.
mrodiGed}

(2) if the holder and the party to whom a notice of dis- (5. 106,
honour is given carry on business or live in the same place, Frodified.)
the notice, when sent otherwise than by post, shall be deemed
to be given with in a reasonable time if it is despatched in
time so as to reach its destination on the day next after the
day of dishonour.

A party receiving notice of dishonour, who seeks 0 Sec. 100.
enforce his right against a prior party, transmits the notice fine tor
within a reasonable time if he transmits it within the same srapsmitting
time after its receipt as he would have had to give. notice [S. 107] *
if he had been the holder.

109


CHAPTER XI ‘
. COMPENSATION

Sec! 101, (1) The compensation payable in case of dishonour of
पक an instrument by any party liable to the holder, drawer or

tion. any izdorser shall be determined by the following rules:—

{S.117@)) (a) the holder is entitled to recover from any party
liable on the instrument the amount due upon
the instrument (principal and interest), together
with expenses properly incurred in presenting,
noting and protesting it; ह

[New] (b) the drawer, who has been compelled to pay the
amount due on a bill is entitled to recover from
the acceptor the amount so paid (principal and
interest), with interest at six per centum per
annum from the date of payment until tender or
realization thereof’;

(8.117),] (९) an indorser who, being liable, has paid the
amount due on the same is entitled to recover
from the acceptor or from the maker or drawer
or from any prior indorser the amount so paid
(principal and interest), with interest at. six per
centum per annum from the date of payment
until tender or realization thereof, together with
all expenses caused by the dishonour and pay-

ment;
S. 1770) (9) the sum mentioned in clause (a), (6) or (०)
and (4), व 5
modified.) shall, in so far as it represents the amount due

on the instrument (principal and interest), be
paid to the holder, drawer or indorser, as the
case may be, in the following manner:—

4i) where such sum is due to him in Indian cur-
rency, the payment shali be made in that
currency;

*4, Sec. 57 (1), BEA.

110


m1

(ii) where such sum is due to him in the currency
of any foreign country, the payment shall be
made in Indian currency at the current rate
of exchange between India and that country
as on the date on which such sum became
payable to him;

(e) the expenses referred to in clause (a) or (c) [New]
shall be paid to the holder or indorser. as the
case may be, in Indian currency, or, where the
expenses were incurred in the currency of any
foreign country, then, in Indian currency at the
current rate of exchange between India and that
country as onthe date on which they were
incurred by the holder or indorser, as the case
‘may be.
(2) The party entitled to compensation may draw a bill
upon the party liable to compensate him, payable at sight or {S107 ©
on demand, for the amount due to him, together with all haif)
expenses pioperly incurred by him. Such bill must be
accompanied by the instrument dishonoured and the protest
thereof, if any.

(3) If a bill drawn under sub-section (2) is dishonoured,
the party dishonouring the same is liable to make compen- {S. 117€),
sation thereof in the same manner as in the case of the #** halt}
original bill.


CHAPTER XII

SprctaL RULES oF EvIDENCE

Presume Until the contrary is proved, the following presumptions
tions as to ode:—

negotiable Shall be mede:

instruments.

{S. 118] (a) that every instrument was made or drawn for

consideration, and that every instrument, when
it has been accepted, indorsed, negotiated or
transferred, was accepted, indorsed, negotiated
or transferred for consideration;

(b) that every instrument, acceptance or indorse-
ment bearing a date was made or drawn on such
date;

(०) that every accepted bill was accepted within a
reasonable time after its date and before its
maturity;

(d) that every transfer of an instrument was made
before its maturity;

(e) that the indorsements appearing upon an instru-
ment were made in the order in which they
appear thereuopn;

(0 that a lost instrument was duly stamped;

(2) that the holder of an instrument is a holder in
due course:

Provided that, where the instrument has been obtain-
ed from the lawful owner, or from any person
in lawful custody thereof, by means of an offence
or fraud, or has been obtained from the maker,

drawer ot acceptor thereof by means of an.

offence or fraud, or for unlawful consideration,
the burden of proving that the holder is a holder
in due course lies upon him.

112

है
tJ
|


113
In a suit upon an instrument which has been dishonoured, Sec. 103.

Presumpti
athe court shall, on proof of the protest, presume the fact of on proof of
-dishonour, unless and until such fact is disapproved. aero

No acceptor of a bill shall, in a suit thereon by a holder sec. 104.
rin due course, be permitted to deny the existence of the bai
drawer, his capacity and authority to draw the bill, and the ines)”

हि we et i}
genuineness of his signature’.

No maker...... or drawer, ...... and no acceptor of Sec. 105.
-@ bill for the honour of the drawer, shail, in a suit on the Estoppel
instrument by a holder in due course, be permitted to deny denying
the validity of the instrument as originally made or drawn. _ validity of

instru-
1S. 120)
No maker of a nore and no acceptor of a bill payable to $26, 106,
order shall, in a suit thereon by a holder in due course, be against
permitted to deny the payee’s capacity, at the date of the note capacity
or bill, to indorse the same. ~ of payee
IS. 12]
No indorser of an instrument shall, in a suit thereon by Sec. 107.
a subsequent holder, be permitted— au
iu
(a) to deny the signature or capacity to contract of oncapacity
any prior party to the instrument; » Of prior

(0) to deny that the instrument was at the time of डि. शशि
his indorsement a valid and subsisting instrument
and that he had then a good title thereto*.

2 “Bee. sec. 54 (2a), BELA.
© See sec. 55 (20), BELA.


CHAPTER XIII

CONFLICT OF LAWS

Sec. 108. Where an instrument made or drawn in one country is
kev goa negotiated, accepted or payable in another, the rights, duties.
of maker, and liabilities of the parties shall, in the absence of a contract
orindorser to the contrary, be determined as follows'\—

of a foreign

instrument,

($. 134, (a) all questions relating to the capacity of the parties

Podified) and the validity of the instrument or of its
acceptance or negotiation, shall be governed by
the law of the place where the contract consti-
tuted by the instrument, acceptance, or negotia-
tion, as the case may be, was made’:

Provided that—

{S. 136] (i) if an instrument is made, drawn, accepted or
indorsed outside India but in accordance with
the law of India, the circumstance that any
agreement evidenced by such instrument 15
invalid according to the law of the country
wherein it was entered into does not invalidate
any subsequent acceptance made thereon
within India;

{New] (ii) @ foreign instrument shall not be invalid or
inadmissible in evidence by reason only of its
not being stamped according to the law of the
place where it was made*;

(b) the law of the place where such instrument is.
payable shall govern—

[s. 134, (i) the liability of all parties to the instrument;
part,
modified]

3 Sec, 72 (1), BEA,

* See sec. 72 (1), proviso (a), B.E.A.



HS

(ii) the duties of the holder with respect to pre-'  *
sentment for acceptance or payment;

(iii) the date of maturity; [New]

(iv) .....- what constitutes dishonour by mon- |S. 135, part)
acceptance or by non-payment;

(v) the necessity for and sufficiency of a protest or (S- 135, part}
notice of dishonour;

(vi) all questions relating to payment and satis- (New)
faction, including the currency in which and
the rate of exchange at which the instrument
is to be paid.
The law of any foreign country...... regarding nego- $e ee
tiably instruments shall be presumed to be the same as that tionas to

हि . foreign
of India unless and until the contrary is proved. ean


PART IE
BILL$ OF EXCHANGE

In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, “pre-

8००. 110,

बनती sentment” means presentment for acceptance.

[New]

Sec, 111 A bill may be addressed to two or more drawees, whether

Several they are partners or not; but an order addressed to two

(New] drawees in the alternative, or, subject to the provisions relat-
ing to drawee in case of need, to two or more drawees in
succession, is not a bilP.

Sec, 112. A bill may be drawn payable to or to the order of, the

favour 7 drawer; or it may be drawn payable to, or to the order of, the

ill may ८१

draw. drawee*.

[New]

Sec. 113. No person except the drawee of a dill, or all or some of

Quiy drawee several drawees, or a person named therein as a drawee in

except an case of need, or an acceptor for honour, can bind himself by

case of

case of, at) acceptance.

honour.

15. 33] हि हे

Sec. 114. (1) The holder of a bill must, if so required by the

Fine or on drawee to whom it is presented for acceptance, allow the

ied a drawee forty-eight hours (exclusive of public holidays) to
consider whether he will accept it.

{S. 83] (2) If such holder allows such drawee more time than
specified in sub-section (1)...... all previous parties not
consenting to such allowance are thereby discharged from
liability to such holder.

er hace Where there are several drawees of a bili who are not

by several partners, each of them can accept it for himself, but none of

not them can accept it for another without his authority.
partners.

8. 34]

1 See sec. 6 (2), B.E.A.
* See sec. 5 (1), BEA.



॥$ ४६

An acceptor of a bill drawn in a fictitious name and pay- See 116.
able to the drawer’s order is not, by reason that such name is ot bill

५1 in
fictitious, relieved from liability to any holder in due course fictitious

claiming under an indorsement by the same hand as the (की

drawer’s signature, and purporting to be made by the
drawer.

A bill, in order to fix the acceptor with liability, must be Sec. 117.

presented for acceptance before it is presented for payment. presentment
for accep>
tance is
necessary.
[New]
The acceptance of an overdue bill is not void; but such Sec. 118.
हे ५8 ate Acceptance
acceptance does not preserve or revive the liability of a of overdue
drawer or indorser who would be discharged by reason of ae

non-presentment of the bill for acceptance before maturity.

(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, when a bill Sec. 19.
payable after sight is negotiated, the holder must either pre- presentment

fe t=
sent it for acceptance or negotiate it within a reasonable ance 2
डे bill payable
time. after sight.
(5. 61
Para. 1,
Part,
modified}
(2) If he does not do so, the drawer and all indorsers
prior to that holder are discharged’.

(1) A bill is duly presented for acceptance when it is $5, 12. |
presented in accordance with the following rule’-— resentment

for accept-
ance an
excuses for
non-present-
ment.

(a) the presentment must be made by or on behalt |S. 61,
pa
of the holder to the drawee or to his repre- Part. 4
i
sentative, in business hours on a business day and $. 75
before the bill is overdue; Party

(b) (i) where a place of presentment for acceptance [S.61, para.
is specified in the bill, it must be presented at
that place;

3 See sec, 40, B.B.A.
* See sec, 41 (1), B.E.A.


us
New] (ii) where no such place of presentment is specified,
” but the address of the drawee is given in the
bill, it must be presented at such address;

{New} (iit) when no such place of presentment is specified
and no address given, the bill must be presented
at the place of business (if known) or ordinary
residence (if known), of. the @rawee;

४९, 7, (iv) in any other case, ihe presentment may be made

pact] to the drawee in person wherever he can be
found;

(New] (c) where a bill is addressed to two or more drawees

who are not partners, presentment must be made
to them all unless one has authority to accept for -
all, in which case presentment may be made to
him only’.

[S. 75A, (2) Delay in presentment...... is excused if the delay
Pat] is caused by.circumstances beyond the control of the holder
and not imputable to his default, misconduct or negligence.
When the cause of delay ceases to operate, presentment must
be made within a reasonable time. .

(3) Presentment in accordance with these rules is
excused, and a bill may be treated as dishonoured by non-
acceptance—

[New} (a) where the drawee is dead or is insolvent or is a

fictitious person or a person not having capacity
1o contract by bilP;

1S. 61, (b) where, at the due date for presentment, the

oat, 4, drawee cannot, after reasonable search, be

modifide] found ar the place at which the bill is to be pre-
sented under sub-clause (i) or (ii) of clause (b)
of sub-section (1);

{New] (c) where the holder of a bill drawn payable else-
where than at\the place of business or residence
of the drawee, has no tune with the exercise of

* See sec. 41(1)(b), B.E.A. _ ~
+ See sec. 41 (2)(a), BEA.


119

reasonable diligence to present the bill for
acceptance before presenting it for payment on
the day it falls due’;

(७) where, after the exercise of reasonable diligence, [New]
such preseniment cannot be effected*;

(९) where although the presentment has been irre- (New]
gular, acceptance has been refused on some
other ground’.

(4) The fact that the holder has reason to believe that
the bill, on presentment, will be dishonoured, does not excuse
presentment’,

Where authorised by agreement or usage,...... presente Sec. 121.

ment through the post office by means of a registered letter is ment by
. ste
sufficient. is. 61,

(1) A billis..... -dishonoured by non-acceptance— See 322.

by non-
acceptance
and its
consegu-

(a) when the drawee, or one of several drawees not °°

being partners, makes default in acceptance para. i,
upon being duly required to accept the bill; part]

(b) where presentment. ..... is excused and the
bill is not accepted; - [S. 91,
para. 1,
(०) where the drawee is incompetent to contract, or Patt
the acceptance is qualified. para, 2]

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, when a bill is (New)
-dishonoured by non-acceptance, an immediate right of
recourse against the drawer and indorsers accrues to the
holder, and no presentment for payment is necessary’.

The holder of a bill may refuse to take a qualified accept-

ance, and if he does not obtain an unqualified acceptance, Seale
-may treat the bill as dishonoured by non-acceptance®. acceptance.
: {New}



[S.86,
Expl.)

[8.86,
main para.
part},

Sec. 124.
Non-prese~
tment for
payment
॥ cases of
qualified

120
Explanation. —An acceptance is qualified—

(a) where it is conditional, declaring the payment to
be dependent on the happening of an event.
therein stated;

(b) where it undertakes the payment of part only
of the sum ordered to be paid;

(०) where, no place of payment being specified on
the order, it undertakes the payment at a speci-
fied place and not otherwise or elsewhere, or
where, the place of payment being specified in
the order, it undertakes the payment at some
other place and not otherwise or elsewhere;

(d) where it undertakes the payment at a time other
than that at which under the dill it would be
legally due;

(6) . where the drawees are not partners and’
the acceptance is not signed by all of them.

When by the terms of a qualified acceptance presentment

for payment is required, the acceptor, in the absence of

express stipulation to that effect, is not discharged by the:

omission to present the bill for payment on the day that it

matures",

(1) When a bill is dishonoured by non-acceptance. .
the holder thereof, or some party thereto who remains liable
thereon, must give notice of dishonour to the drawer and each
indorser, and any drawer or indorser to whom such notice is.
not given is discharged”:

Provided that where a bill is dishonoured by non-
acceptance and notice of dishonour is not given,
the rights of a holder in due course subsequent
to the omission shall not be prejudiced by that
omission*,

1 See sec, 52 (2), BIE.A.
* See sec, 48, B.E.A.


123

(2) Where a bill is dishonoured by non-acceptance and (News
due notice of dishonour is given, it shall not be necessary to
give notice of a subsequent dishonour by non-payment, unless
the bill shall, in the meantime, have been accepted’.

When a bill accepted payable at a specified bank has sec. 126.
been duly presented there for payment and dishonoured Liability

the banker so negligently or improperly keeps, deals with or geo pesli-
delivers back such bill as to cause 1055 to the holder, he must dealing

compensate the holder for such loss. presented
for payme nt
1S. 77]

Subject to the foregoing provisions, the rules governing Sec. 121.
le

the mode of giving notice of dishonour for non-payment giving

notice of
shall, mutatis mutandis, apply in respect of the mode of giv- ohonour.

ing notice of dishonour for non-acceptance. [New]
Where a drawee in case of need is named in a bill, OF Sec. 128.

in any indotsement thereon, the bill is not dishonoured जाए RP",
it has been dishonoured by such drawee. nets]
A drawee in case of need may accept and pay the Bill 4०139
a
without previous protest. पु and
payment
without
rotest.
S. 116]
When a bill has been noted or protested for non-accept- sec. 130.

ance or for better security, any person, not being a party al- Acreptence

ready liable thereon may, with the consent of the holder, by [S- 108).
writing on the bill, accept the same for the honour of any
party thereto.

iri iting Sec. 131.
A person desiring to accept for honour must, by writing re

on the bill under his hand, declare that he accepts under pro- prance for
test the protested bill for the honour of the drawer or of a must be

particular indorser whom he names, or generally for honour. (8. 109]

Where the acceptance does not express for whose honour Sec 132,

ance
it is made, it shall be deemed to be made for the honour not speci
of the drawer. {ying for
honour it

SEAT रा a ~~ ——~" ig made
+ See sec. 48, B.E.A. {S. 10]


122

Shik of An acceptor for honour binds himself, to all parties sub-
acceptor Sequent to the party for whose honour he accepts, to pay
eh via the amount of the bill if the drawee does not; and such party
bara.1} and all prior parties are liable in their respective capacities

to compensate the acceptor for honour for all the loss or

damage sustained by him in consequence of such acceptance:
Provided that—

{S. 111, (a) an acceptor for honour is not liable to the holder

Para. 24 of the bill unless it is presented, or, (in case the
address given by such acceptor on the bill is a
place other than the place where the bill is made
payable), forwarded for presentment, not later
than the day next after the day of its maturity;

{S. 112) (0) an acceptor for honour cannot be charged un-
less the bill has at its maturity been presented
to the drawee for payment, and has been dis-
honoured by him, and noted or protested for
such dishonour.

‘Seo. 13% When a bill has been noted or protested for non-payment,
aymeni

for honour. any person may pay the same for the honour of any party

JS. 113} liable to pay the same, provided that the person so paying
(or his agent in that behalf) has previously declared before
a notary the party for whose honour he pays and that such
declaration has been recorded by such notary.

See. 135. Where two or more persons offer to pay a bill for the

nwo persons honour of different parties, the person whose payment will

offering to discharge most parties to the bill shall have the preference’.

honour.

{New}

Rents sna (1) Any person paying for honour, on paying to the

duties of holder the amount of the bill and the notarial expenses in-

paver for cidental to its dishonour, is entitled to receive both the bill

{New} itself and the protest. If the holder does not on demand
deliver them up, he shall be liable to the payer for ‘honour
in damages*.

T See sec. 68(D,BEA.
* See sec. 68 (6), B.E.A.


ws
(2) Such person. .. is also entitled to all the rights... . [S143

-and is subject to all the duties' of the holder at the time of

such payment, in relation to the party for whose honour he

pays and all parties liable to that party’, and may recover

from all such parties all sums so paid by him with interest

thereon and with all expenses properly incurred in making

such payment.

Where a bill payable after sight is accepted for honour, Sec. 137.
its maturity is calculated from the date of the noting for of orn

non-acceptance, and not from the date of acceptance for Fahey
-honour’. for honour.
[New]

Bills may be drawn in parts, each part being numbered Sec. 138.
:and containing a provision that it shall continue payable only Bills.
:so long as the others remain unpaid. All the parts together {S. 132]
make a set; but the whole set constitutes only one bill, and
is extinguished when one of the parts, if a separate bill,
would be extinguished.

Execption: When a person accepts or indorses different
parts of the bill in favour of different persons, he and the
“subsequent indorsers of each part are liable on such part as if
it were a separate bill.

As between holders in due course of different parts of Sec. ४५
the same set, he who first acquired title to his part is entitled ft

ito the other parts and the money represented by the bill. soquited
to all.
(S. 133]

3 See sec, 68 (5), B.E.A.
4 8०० sec, 65 (5), B.E.A.

228 M of Law--9


PART प्रा
PROMISSORY NOTES

A promissory note, payable at a certain period after sight,.
must be presented to the maker thereof or his representative
(if he can after reasonable search be found) for sight by a-
person entitled to demand payment, within a reasonable time
after it is made and in business hours on a business day. In
default of such presentment, no party thereto is liable thereon,
10 the person making such default.


PART iV
CHEQUES

(1) Where a cheque payable to order purports to be See. it.
indorsed by or on behalf of the payee, the drawee is dis- प्र tof
charged by payment in due course. order or

(S.85(D}

(2) Where a cheque is originally expressed to be pay- {5.35201
able to bearer, the drawee is discharged by payment in due
course to the bearer thereof. notwithstanding any indorse-
ment whether in full or in blank appearing thereon, and not-
withstanding that any such indorsement purports to restrict

or exclude further negotiation.
The duty and authority of a banker to pay a cheque S18, |
F is is —- of banker's
drawn on him by his customer are determined by- auton :
[८

(1) countermand of payment;
(2) notice of the customer's death;

(3) notice of adjudication of the customer as an in-
solvent.

(1) Where a cheque bears across its face an addition of — Sec. 143.
and special
crossing

lefined,

(a) the words “and company” or any abbreviation ca 123)
thereof, between two parallel transvers lines,
either with or without the words “not negotia-
ble”, or

(9) .. two parallel transverse lines simply, either

with or without the words “not negotiable”,

that addition constitutes a crossing, and the cheque is cros-
sed generally’.

1. Sce sec. 75, B.E.A.
2. See sec. 76 (1), B.E.A. . पे


[S. 124]

Sec, 145.
Crossing
by drawer
or after
issue.
{New}

f 125, para:

(5. 125.
para, 2

(8. 125,
para. 3}

[S. 125,
Para. 4]

[New]

Sec. 146.
Crossing
a material
one ofa
cheque.
{New]

126

(2) Where a cheque bears across its face an addition of
the name of a banker, either with or without the words “not
negotiable”, that addition constitutes a crossing, and the
cheque is crossed specially and .. to that banker’.

(1) Where a cheque crossed generally bears across its
face an addition of the words “account payee” between the
two parallel transverse lines constituting the general crossing,
the cheque, besides being crossed generally, is said to be
crossed “account payee”.

(2) When a cheque is crossed “account payee” —

(a) it shall cease to be negotiable; and

(b) it shall be the duty of the banker collecting pay-
ment of the cheque to credit the proceeds there-
of only to the account of the payee named in
the cheque.

(1) A cheque may be crossed generally or specially by
the drawer”.

(2) Where a cheque is uncrossed, the holder may cross
it generally or specially.

(3) Where a che~e is crossed generally, the holder may
cross it specially.

(4) Where a cheque is crossed generally or specially, the
holder may add the words “not negotiable”.

(5) Where a cheque is crossed specially, the banker to
whom it is crossed may again cross it specially to another
banker, his agent, for collection.

(6) Where an uncrossed cheque, or a cheque crossed
generally, is sent to a banker for collection, he may cross it
specially to himself". ‘

A crossing authorised by this Act is a material part of
the cheque; it shall not be lawful for any person to obliterate,
or, except as authorised by this Act, to add to or alter, the
crossing',

» See sec. 76 (2), B.E.A.

«77 (0), BLE.A.

2. 77 (6). 8.8. A.

. 78, B.E.A.


127

(1) Where a cheque is crossed generally, the banker on oe iat of
whom it is drawn shall not pay it otherwise than to a banker. a cheque’

generally
or specia-

(2) Where a cheque is crossed specially, the banker on i 126)
whom it is drawn shall not pay it otherwise than to the
banker to whom it is ¢rossed, or his agent, being a banker,
for collection.

Where a cheque is crossed specially to more than one Sec, 148,
banker, except when crossed to an agent for collection, being Duties of

a banker’, the banker on whom it is drawn shall refuse pay- {crossed
ment thereof. , (5. 127]

Where the banker on whom a cheque is drawn which is Sec. 149,
crossed generally, pays the same otherwise than to a banker, Ciability
or pays a cheque crossed specially otherwise than to the fovea
banke? to whom ir is so crossed, or his agent for collection, cheques
being a banker, he is liable to the true owner of the cheque ed
for any loss he may sustain owing to the cheque having been ranks.
so paid odified)

Provided that where a cheque is presented for payment (S. 89, part)
which does not at the time of presentment appear to be cros-
sed, or to have had a crossing which has been obliterated,
added to or altered otherwise than as authorised by this Act,
the banker paying the cheque in good faith and without
negligence shall not be responsible or incur any liability, nor
shall the’ payment be questioned, by reason of the cheque”
having been crossed, or of the crossing having been obliterat-
ed or having been added to or altered otherwise than as
authorised by this Act, and of payment having been made
otherwise than to a banker or to the banker to whom the -
cheque is or was crossed, or to his agent for collection, being
4 banker, as the casé may be’. .

1. See sec. 79 (1), B.E,A.
2. Cf. sec. 79 (2) proviso, B.E.A.


Sec. 150
Protection
to banker
and drawer
where
cheque is
crossed.
[S. 128.
mod. fied]

Sec. 151.
Cheque
Bearing
words “pot
nzgotiable”.
[S. 130}

Sec, 152.
Protection
to collecting
banker.

[S. 3331

Sec, 153.
Protection
to banker
crediting
cheque
crossed

128

Where the banker, on whom a crossed cheque is drawn,
in good faith and without negligence pays it, if crossed gene-
rally, to a banker, and if crossed specially, to the banker to
whom it is crossed, or his agent for collection, being a
banker’, the banker paying the cheque, and, if the cheque
has come to the hands of the payee, the drawer thereof, shail
respectively be entitled to the same rights and be placed in
the same position in all respects as if payment of the cheque
had been made to the true owner thereof.

Where a person takes a cheque crossed generally or spe-
cially, bearing in either case the words “not negotiable”, he
shall not have, and shall not be capable of giving, a better
title to the cheque than that which the person from whom he
took it had.

Subject to the provisions of this Act relating to cheques
crossed “account payee”, where a banker in good faith and
without negligence receives payment for a customer of a
cheque crossed generally or specially to himself, and the
customer has to title or a defective title thereto”, the banker
shah not .. incur any liability to the true owner of the
cheque by reason only of having received such payment,

Explanation:

A banker receives payment of a crossed cheque for a
customer within the meaning of this section notwithstanding
that he credits his customer’s account with the amount of
the cheque before receiving payment thereof.

Where a cheque is delivered for collection to a banker
which does not at the time of such delivery appear to be
crossed “account payee” or to have had a crossing “account
payee” which has been obliterated or altered, the banker, in
good faith and without negligence collecting pay-

_ment of the cheque and crediting the proceeds

thereof to a customer, shall not incur any liability by reason
of the cheque having been crossed “account payee”, or of

1. See sec. 80, B.B.A
2. Sen sec. 82 BEA.


129

such crossing having been obliterated or altered, and of the
proceeds of the cheque having been credited to a person who
is not the payee thereof.

A cheque, of itself, does not operate as an assignment of See ain
any part of the funds to the credit of the drawer with the not operating
banker’ meat ot

meat of
funds.
[New]

(1) Where a cheque is not presented for payment within ec. 155.

a reasonable time of its issue, and the drawer or person on When

©
whose account it is drawn had the right, at the time when fot duly
presentment ought to have been made, as between himself Prsented |
and’ the banker, to have the cheque paid and suffers actual damaged
damage through the delay, he is discharged to the extent of {S. Bact 3]
such damage, that is to say, to the extent to which such
drawer or person is a creditor of the banker to a larger
amount than he would have been if such cheque had been
paid.

(2) The holder of 4 cheque as to which such drawer or IS. 43)
person is so discharged shall be a creditor, in lieu of such.
drawer or person, of such banker to the extent of such dis-
charge and entitled to recover the amount from him.

Where any draft, that is, an order to pay money, drawn sec. 156,
by one office of a bank upon another office of the same bank at }
for a sum of money payable to order on demand purports
to be indorsed by or on behalf of the payee, the bank is dis-
‘charged by payment in due course.

isi is Cl Sec. 157
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to any draft, pplication

‘as defined in section 156, as if the draft were a cheque. of this
न chapter
1S. 131A}

1. Cf. 5. 530), read with para, 2 of 5.3, BEA.


PART V
MISCELLANEOUS

Sec. 158. The Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, is hereby rev

heer vealed.


APPENDIX II

‘Showing the provisions in the existing Act and the corresponding provisions, if any, in

‘Appendix मै.
Existing provision Corresponding provision, if any
° . in Appendix I
1 2
Section £ ‘Sections 1 and 2 -
Section 2 (Repealed) ote
Section 3 Section 4 (5)
Section 4 Section 4 (29)
Section 5, para. } Section 4 (7) Gi)
Section para. 2 Section 13 (6)
Section para. 3 Section 13 {a}
Section para. 4 Section 13 (6)
Section 6 Section 4 (83
Section 7, para. 1 ‘Section 4 (10)
Section para. 2 Section 4 (11)
Section para. 3 Section 4 (1)
Section para. 4 ‘Section 4 (2)
Section para. 5 Section 4 (27)
Section 8
Section 9
Section 10
Section 11 1 Sect
Section 12 fs Section 4 (23)
Section 13(1}, main para. Section
Expln, (0 Section 4 (18)
Expin. (i) ‘section 4 (17)
Expin. (iii Bection 18
Section 13 (2) Section 25
Section 14 Section 4(24)
Section 15 Section 4 (14), part
Section 16 (1), part Section 34
Section 16 (1) ,, Section 4 (14), part
Section 16 (2) Section 35
Section 17 Section 24
Section 18 Section 23
Section 19, part Section 14 (b)*
Section 19, part Section 14 (०)
Section 20 Section 29

Section 21, earlier half
Section 21; latter half
Section 22, para. 1
Section 22, para. 2
Section 23

Section 24 ,

Section 25

Section 26, para. 1
Section 26, para. 2
Section 26, para. 3
Section 27

Section 16 & s. 4 (4), part
Section 14 & s. 4 (4), part
Section 4 (22)

Section 29 (1)

Section 29 (2)

Section 29 (3)

Section 29 (4)

Section 5

Section 6

‘Section 7

Section 8

Se
$$$


132

Section 28, earlier part
Section 28, latter part
Section 29

Section 30, part

Section 30, part

Section 31

Section 32, part

Section 32, part

Section 32, part

Section 33

Section 34

Section 35, para. 1, part
Section 35, para. 1, part
Section 35, para. 2
Section 36

Section 37, part

Section 115
Section
Section 61, part
Section 14 (d)

Section 60 (1) & (2)

Section 46, para, 2

Section 46, para. 3—-—----__-_----—_

Section 46, para. 4
Section 46, para. 5
Section 47, main part
Section 47, Exc.
Section 48

Section 49

Section 50, earlier half
Section 50, latter half
Section 51

Section 52, para. 1 part
‘Section 52, para.
Section 52, para. 2
Section 53

‘Section 54
‘Section 55
Section 56
Section 57
Section 58

Section 59, main para,
‘Section 59, proviso

60
Section 61, para. 1, part
Section 61, para. 1 part
Section 61, para, 2
Section 61, para. 3, part
Section 61, para. 3 part
Section 61, para. 4
Section 62

section 37, part Section 61, part
Section 38, part Section 60 (3)
Section 38, part Section 61, part
Section go Seetion 62 3 tion 62.
fection 40 ‘Section

Section 41 Section 56 (4)
Section 42 Section 116
Section 43, para. 1, earlier half Section 10 (a)
Section _ para. | flatter half Section 10 (b)
Section Exc. 1 Section 64 (3)
Section Exc. II Section 65
Section 44, para 1 Section 11
Section 44, Expln Section 22
Section Section 12
Section 45A Section 53
Section 46, para. | Section 21 (1)

Sete) 3)



Section 63

Section 64, para. 1 part
Section 64, para. 1 part
Section 64, para. 1, part
Section 64, para. 1
Section 64, para. 1 part
Section 64, para. 2

Section 114 (1)

Section 79 (2)

Section 69 (1), main para,
Section 79 (1)

Section 64, Exception ~—____—_-_——_——-Section 69 121 Exception

Section 65
Section 66
Section 67, earlier pact

Section
Section 73 (4) Gi}
Section 73 (4) (iti)

Section 67 latter pact--——__~— Omitted

Section 68
Section 69
Section 70
Section 71, part-——_

Sectton 73 (6) (i), part
Section 73 (6) 0), part
Section 73 ६6) (iii)

॥ 73 (6) Civ), main para.

Section 71, part —______________——. Section 120 (1) (0) (iv)
Section

Section 72
Section 73
Section 74

73 (4 (iv)
Section 73 (4) (४)
Section 73 (4) (8)

Section 75, part —-_-_____—_——_-—— Section 73 (3), part

Section 75, part —_——.
Section 75, part

‘Sectien 120 (1) (a), part
Section 120 (1) (a), part

Section 75A, part Section 73 (7)
Section 75A, part Section 120 (2)
Section 76 (a), para. 1 Section 75 (a)
Section 76 (a), para. 2 Section 75 (9)
Section 76 (a), para. 3 Section 75 (c)
Section 76 (a), para. 4 Section 75 (व)
Section 76 (0) Section 75 (०)
Section 76 (०) Section 75 6)
Section 76 (d) _—__—-—Seecttion 75 (8)
Section 77 Section 126
Section 78 Section 76 (1)
Section 79 Section 82 (a)
Section 80, para. 1 Section 82 (७)
Section 80, Expla._—____________——.Omitted
Section $1 Section 77
Section 82 (a) Section 78 (1) (a)
Section 82 (०७) Section 78 (1) (b}
Section 82 (०) Section

Section 83 Section 114 (2)
Section 84 (1) Section 155 (1)
Section 84 (24-—________—_—___——_ Omitted
Section 84 (3) Section 155 (2)
Section 85 (1) Section 141 (1)

Section 85 (2 -_______________ Section 141 (2)

Section 854.

Section 86, main pata.—patt
Section main para. part
Section Expin.

Section 87, para, 1

Section para. 2

Section para. 3

Section 88

89, part

Pal

Section 9; para. 1, part
Section 91; para. 1, part
Section, 91, para. 2
Section 92

Section 80
Section 123, Expl. (e)

Section 123, Expl. (a) to (9)
अंश @) to@

149, proviso

Section 78 (1) (0
Section 122 (1) (@)
Section 122 (1) (6)
Section 122 (1} (०)
Section 84



134

1 2
Section 93, para. 1, part Section 70 (1), 125 (1)
Section para. 1, part Section 85, opening lines
Section para. |, part Section 125 (0
Section para 1, part Section 85 (a)
a Section 70 (2)
Section Sh, para I yart है 86“ n_ 94, para. 1, part Sectic R546)
Section para. 1, part Section 87 (1)
Section para 2. Section 88
Section 95 Section
Section 87 (2)
Section
Section 91
Section 92
Section 100, para. 1 : Section 93 (1)
ion 100, para. 2 Section 93 (2)
Sect ‘ion
Sec 102 Section 3

Section para, 2 Section 133, proviso (a)
Section 3 Proviso (6)

Section 150
Section 129 Section 149, main para.
Section 50-—_—_\__—__-———Seeetion154-—
Section 131 Section 152
Section 131A Section 157
Section 132 Section 138
Section 133
Section 134, part Section 108 (6), main para,


Section 134, part
Section 135, part
Section _~’ part
Section 136

Secttion 137

Section 138 (repealed)
Section 139 (repealed)

Section 108 (6) (0
Section 108 (4) (iv)
Section 108 3 .
Section 108 (०) proviso 00
Section 109



APPENDIX IT
Tanz है

Showing the provisions in Appendix 1 to the proposals and the corresponding provisions, if
any, inthe existing Act, the Bills of Exchange Act, 1882, and the Uniform Negotiable
fastruments Law.

Appendix I Existing ‘Act B.E. Act NIL
1 2 3 4

S. 1, para. 2, part =
<——_— ~-New =. a
S. 7, para, 3 $. 17 (1) S. 132
S. 7, para. 4 S. 65 (1) S. 161
New S. 28 (1) S. 29
$.21 $. 100) @ 3.7
5.3 5. 2 $. 191, part
New 8.2 S. 191) part
Nees i BER) & tog #।
5.6 8. 73 S. 185
New s.2 S. 191, part
S. 7, para. 1 . 1
S. 7, para. 2 $. 15 S. 131
5.8 3.2 5. 191, part
5. 9 $. 29 S. 52
S. 15 and $. 32 () 8. 31
5. 16 (1), part
5. 11 & 12 8.40) S$. 129
New =
5. 13 (0), Exp. = 5. 8 3) $. 9
00
Ss. 0. Expln. 35. 8 @ 5. 8
é
S$. 4 (19 New 5.2 S. 191
$. 4 (20) New . न
38. 4 (21) New S. 64 (2) 8. 125
S. 4 (22) S. 22, para. 1 on . :
S. 4 (23) 5. 13 (1) main नल
para,
8.404 5. 14 $. 31 (0) 5. 30
S. 4 (25) New न न
S. 4 (26) New os
$. 4 (27) 5. 7, para. 5 कि ae
$. 4 (28) S. 10 5. 59 (1), para. 2 5. 88
3. 4 29) S.4 5. 83 6) S. 194
S$. 4 G0) New . न
8.5 $. 26, para. 1 $. 22 (1), para. +
8.6 S. 26, para. 2 S. 22 (2) S. 22, part
S. 26, para.3 $. 22 (1), proviso —S. 22, part
S. 27 व S$. 19.
New S. 23 (2) बन
5. 43, para. 1 . S. 28.
earlier half
S. 10 (2) S. 43, para. 1 न ors
latter half



फफ़फ Y yYEnNnYE nYRYANA ७ ए9एएए

s.
=
Ss.
s.

yw wey uny uum एि 90

28

29 (1)
28
29 (4)
30 (a)

30 (6)
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41 (1)

47 (2

8. 21, latter half
lew
$. 13 (1) expla.

S. 46, para. 4
and $7 main,

5.46, para. 5
. 46, para.
2009, 48
5.51

S. 56
lew

S. 16 (1), part
S. 16 (2)
5. 49
S. 54
35. 55
S. 50, latter half
52, para. 1,
part
S. 52, para 1,

part
S. 52, para. 2

"

70)
10 6) @
10 (1) @)
10 (0)

36 (3)

10 (i) @
it

8 6)

13 0)

20

21 (1)

21 2) (a)
21@o

92)"
5

70)
23 (1)
24

yun Y YY फफ्फएाछ Yorn Y yaa ww

29 (2),

S. 38 (2), and

S. 38 (3)

5. 14 (1), part,

38. 14 (4५

S. 14 (2) and
143)

S. 14 (1) (a) and;
()

S.31Q)

5. 31 (3), part
$. 31 (3), part and
5. 32 (3)

5. 16 (1)

* ~

12
14
16, part
16, part
16, part

17 (1)

17 (5) and

S. 130

8 (4) and

(3) पु
18, latter half
23

non MH ponmn
@

55 and
S. 57

we

85, earlier

86 77
85, later part:

von

30, part

30, part

30, part and
41

32

33
34

फ999 ४

35
905)

40, latter half
36 & S. 37
39, earlier,
half

$. 38



“138

1 2 3 4
5. 42 5. 47, exception न .
5. 43 ० 2
3. 44 New 5, 37, part S. 50, part
3. 45 3. 50, earlier, a
halt
8. 46 60 $. 36 (0 5.47
(a) and (6);
$8.47 New S. 38, part S. 51, part
S. 48 New 8. 37, part 3. 50, pact
38.49: . S. 59, main para. = 3. 3 2 and 5. 52)
5. 50 5. 59, proviso ५ .
3.51 (0 5. 29 (3) 5. 57, latter half
5.51 2) New S. 38 (3) कि
8.52 New S$. 38Q) 5. 57, earlier half
3. 53 S.45A 3. 69 ne
5. 54 New . a
3. 55 New 5. 56 5. 63
S. 56 (0 $, 30, part $. 55 (0 S. 61
@ New 3. 53 (1
छ) $. 32, part S. 55 (2) 5. 62
@ 35.41 i on
S, 570) S. 30, part 5. 73, para. 2806. 5. 61 read with
$. 55 6) S. 185
$, 57 (2) 5. 31 5. 74 ae
S. 32, part S. 88 (1) S. 60
3, 59 3. 35, para. 1, $. 55 (2) S. 66, last para
part
S. 60 (1) & (2) 8 3}, pare
. 38, part
8.61

8.29 77

8. 121@
३69 $38 canlicr part, 26(0)" S69, 20, part
5 ». 28, er be re a

@ S. 28: latter part ee ve Pa
8.67 $. 29 S. 26 (1); part 5. 20, part
S. 68 lew : 58 $. 65, part
3. 69 (1) S. 64, para. 1 part. 45, ist line S. 70, part

Toain para.
3. 69 (0) Exc, 5. 64, Exc. 8.87 S. 70, part
$50 Nee 93, 1 part —S. 48, part S. 89, part
|, , 93, para, 1 pal . 48, . 89,

2) 8. 93, para. 2 S. 48, $. 89, part
su” $:104 SO" oP
8.72 New we tee
S. 73 (1) New we eee

(2 S. 64, para. 1, S. 45 (3) part S. 72 (4)
part

@) S. 64, para. 1, S. 45 (0, part 8. 72.(4),

patand and 5. 45 (6) and 35. 78
$. 73 (4) 6) S. 66 S. 45 (01 S. 71, earlier half
) (४)

8.74 3. 45 (2) S. 71, latter half,
part.



139

1 2 3
5. 73 (4) (itt) S. 67, earlier part woe
& & 8.72 8.74 ()
4) 8.73 S. 45 (2) read
with S. 73
fe] 5. 65 S. 45 (3), part
OW 5. 68 & 5. 69 S. 45 (4) (@)
(6) New 3. 45 (4) ®
© Gi) 3. 70 35. 45 (4) (0
(6) (iv) 5. 71, part S. 45 (4) (4)
(6) Expln. New
5, 74 0) 3 Bs, 1०] 34s (8) and
a para. . an
5. 52 (4), part
(¢)) New ve
$. 75
Cl. (@) S. 76 (a), para. t हि
@) S. 76 (a), para 2 a
8 Rae) si
5. 76 (a a
re) S160 S. 46 (2) (©), part
¢ S. 76 (७ 3. 46 (2) (०, part
@) S. 76 (0) tee
® New 3. 46 (2) ५
@ New 3. 46 (2) (४)
0) New S. 46 (2) (a),
para. 1
(2 New .
Explanation New S. 46 0) (@, para
5. 76 (1 . 78 5. 59 (1), part
8 S. 82 (०0) 8.59 e part
) New S. 59 (3)
& New S. 59 (2)
(5) S. 89, part s. of), pro-
5. 77 8.81 S. 52 (4),
3:78 600 (0 5.82 (0) se Orn
i (b) 5. 82 (७) 5. 62
3) (०0 5. 90 S. 61
(2) New ae
st 8 para. 1 $.45 &
(2) S. 64, para. I, § ae
pa read with
$. 80 S. 86, main para, $. 44 (2)
S. 31 (3) S. 87, para. 1 S. 64 (1),
main para.,
(2) S. 87, para. 2
S. 87, para. 3 a
8 S. 88 $. 64 (1), main
al
S. 82 (a) $. 79 S. 93)
8. 80, para. 1 on
S. 83 New 1
3. 84 8.92 3.47 (1)
S. 85, opening 65... 5. 93, para. 1, S. 48, para 1,
part. part.
CA. () $.93, para. 1, S. 48, para. 1
part part

82 (3), part
82 (3), part

3.
६,
$.
$.
$.

19 ७)

and (6)
8. 70, part
S. 70, part

$. 142, part
S. 124, part

S. 124, part
$.17@

5. 83
S. 89, part

S. 89, part

50 M. of Law—i9


140

1 2 3 4
ee
1. (6) S. 94, para. 2, S. 49 (8), (9) भाप. $. 97, part
past. (10). 8. 98 and
5. 86 S. 94, para. 1, 8, 49 6) s.
part
$. 87 (1) 8. 94, para. 1, part S. 49 (12)
@ S$. 96 $. 49 (13)
S, 88 S. 94 para. 2 S. 49 (15)
5 89 $8.95
5. 90 5.9
8.91 5. 98 S$. 50 (2)
8. 92 5. 99 $. 51 (7) and
S. 54 ७)
5, 93 (1) ड. 100, para. 1 5. 51 (2) S. 152 & 5. 154
8. 100, para. 2 $. 51 (5) 8. 159
8. 94 S. 101 8.51 S. 153
8.95 5. 102 Po a
S.96 5,103 3. 51 66) (9 S. 156, part
8.97 S.104A 5. 93 $. 18s latter
5. 98 S$. 105 $. 45 (2) S$. 193
latter half, हे
S. 74Q) and
S. 86 (2).
$. 99 (1) S. 106, para. 1 S. 49 (12) (0 5. 104 and
1८21 S. 106, para. 2 5. 49 (12) (०)
5. 100 S. 107 S. 49 (4)
S. 101 (1) (के S.117@ $. 57 (1), part
5. 101 (1) (8) New S. 57 (1), part
R © S.H7@ ‘S. 57 (1), part
a) @ S. 117 (9) and @) 8.57 @)
WMO New
@ $. 117 (ले, earlier
half
@ 3. 117 ©, latter haif ae ae
5. 102 Ss. 118 S. 13 (1), 30 (1), S. 11, 5. 24 and
30 (2), 32 (5) 45
and 36 (4)
S. 103 S. 119 one oe
3. 104 New 5. 54 (2) S. 6201),
8. 105 S. 120 38. 54 (23 (०) se
$. 106 3. 121 S. 54 0) ©), 5. 62 (2)
$. 55 DD),
and 88 (2)
S. 107 $. 122 S. 55 (2) (७) S. 66, read with
S. 65
S. 108
1. (०), main para. S. 134, part $. 72 0)
Ci. (०), prov. 0) S. 136 wee
९1. (क, prov. (1). New 5. 72 (1), prov. (०)
a ® @ S. 134, part im
Cl. (6) (४) New 5. 72 (3), part
a. 8 (क्क) New S. 72 (5)
CL.) &) 5. 135, part oe
९.1. (6) (७ 5. 135, part 8. 72 (3) part
New 8.72 (9)
S. 137 oe
few we
New 8.60)



141

1 2 3 4
S112. New 8.5) S. 8 (2) and 8(3)
8.113 8. 33 a
8. 114 (0) 3. 68 S. 42, earlier, का... 5, 136

0 3. 83 S. 42, latter ae
Ss. 115 8:34
&. 116 S$. 42
3. 117 New
3. 118 New mn am
$. 119 8. 61, para. 1, 5. 40 8.143 (1) and

part 144,
S. 120 (1 S. 61, para. 1, S41 1) (aye S. 145, opening

O@ part & 5. 75, and 8 lines & (2)

part & 0).
S, 120 () (७) @ S. 61, para. 3, a हि
part
3, 120 00 (0 60. कहर हर
31000 New n
3 120 (1) (७ @) 5. 71 part = om
3. 120 (1) (० New 5.410) (0) 5. 145 0)
S. 120 (2 S. 758 part os ws
$1203) New 5 41 (2}@) 5. 148 (i), part
"8. 120 8) @) S. 61, para. 3, we $. 148 (1), part
rt
$199 New ™* 8. 39 (4) we
S. 120 (3) ७) New S.41 (2) (७ $. 148
‘S. 120 0) ७) New 3.41 2) (0 $. 148 8
S. 120 (4) New $. 41 8) .
8. 121 S. 61, para. 4 5.47 0) (७0 हि
8. 122 (1) (a) S. 91, para. 1, S. 43 (i) (०) 5. 149 0)
part
MO S. 9h, para. 1, 5.43 6) ७) 5. 149 (2)
pai

(3 (० 3. 91, para. 2 ve

७) New PO $8. 43 (2) $. 151
$, 123, main para, New 8.44 S. 142, earlier

part
Expln. Ct. (00०६४). 5. 86, Ex $141 0०७)
Expln. Cl, (e) 0. हैँ: 86 man para, . 5. 141 ¢
144 tee
3. 125 (1) 8. 93, para 1, 5. 89, part
$ 133 (7) New Ss. 89 part
5. 127 New w
8. 128 3. 15 m S, 131, jast
8. 129 8. 116 3. 67 (9 .
130 S. 108 3. 65 (1) 5. 161
$. 131 $. 109 3. 65 (3) $. 1
13 है का. See” 8:10

main para, हे

prov. {a) 8. 177 para, 2 $.67 2) 8-165, part ani

prov, (6) $. 112 3. 67 (0 8. 167

34 8.13 $. 68 (1) (9 ड. क1 to 173
and (4)
3. 135 New S. 68 (2) 8.174
S. 136 (1) New S. 68 (6) S.177
$. 136 (2) 8. 114 $ 68 (5) 8.175,
latter halt
S.137 New S. 65 (5) 166



142

i 2 3 4
S. 138 S. 132 $. 71 (1) 5. 178
71 (2) S. 180
मे $. 181
76) 5. 183
&, 139 S. 133 $. 71 (3) 8. 179
8. 140 S. 62 $. 40 (1) read
with 5. 89
S$. 141 (1) $. 85 (1) S. 60 read with हि
S. 73, para. 2
Q S. 85 (2) oe
8. 142 few 5. 75
S. 143 (1) S. 123 $. 76 (1)
@ S. 124 8.76
8. 144 New see
S. 145 (1) New 776)
Q) S. 125, para. 1. 8.77@
(3) S. 125, para. 2 $. 778)
@) 3. 125, para. 3 $.77@)
65) 5. 125, para. 4 5. 77 (5)
6} New /“एपएफएखण/ 77७)
S. 146 __ _-...औ##--_ --..-& 78
S. 147 3. 126 oe
S. 148 $. 127 S$. 79 (1)
8. 149 main para S. 129 S. 79 (2), main
para.
proviso S. 89, part $. 79 (2), proviso
S. 150 5. 128 S. 80 sae
5. 151 S. 130 5. 81 se
38. 152 5. 131 S. 82
S. 153 New Pa
5. 154 New 5. 53 (A) read oe
with 5. 73,
para. 2
8. 155 (1) 5. 84 (1) 5. 74 (1)
Q S. 84 (3) S. 74 (3)
8. 156 . BSA
3. 157 5.13 8
$. 158 few oo see



APPENDIX II

TABLE C

Showing the contents of the sections in Appendix I with the corresponding section

in the existing Act

‘Section

Appendix [

“Section 1
Section 2.
Section 3
Section 4

Contents

PART 1—GENERAL
CHAPTER I--PRELIMINARY

Short title, extent and commencement
Saving

of the Act on negotiable instruments
Definitions—
(0 Acceptor. . + . .
(2) Acceptor for honour . . . .
(3) Accommodation party .
@*“ At sight” “on presentment”, “after
si

(5) Banker . . . +
(6) Bearer . . . . .
(a) & BL. soe ee
; Le पु . . पु
Delivery . . . .
“ Drawer ” and “ drawee ”* . +
11, rawee in case of 16०0 ” toe
“ Holder पु . .

(13) ४ Holder course "”
(4) “ Tadorsement ” “ indorser " and “ indor-

65) instrument " and ‘Foreign
trument ”

(16) “(७ ty . .
08 “ Instrument payable to bearer”.

18) Jastrument payable to order
(19) * Issue .
20)“ Maker”
(21) ४ Material alteration”
(22) ‘* Maturity

2.3) ४ Negotiable instrument ”
(24) “ Negotiation ”
(25) Notary ”
(27) “ Payee”
(28) “ Payment in due course”.
(29) “ Promissory Note”. .
(३0) “ Representative 7 . . .

Corresponding sectie a
in existing

S, 4. para. 2, part.
New

S. 7, para. 3.
S. 7, para. 4,
New

S. 21
S. 3, amplified
New

$F para. 1
ie ra, 1,
sen

BF para. 1
& है. para. 2
New
8.9.

S. 15

S. 16 (1), pact.
SS. 11 and 12,
Ne

lew
S. 13 (1), Expin. (47)
8. 13 @), Expla. @
New

New

New

S. 22, para. 1
8. 8 (3) main para,

143


144
CHAPTER वा

FORM AND INTERPRETATION

Section
Section
Section

Section
Section

Section

Soasa w

n

3

14

2

Applicability of the Contract Act

partners
Instrument made without consideration

Partial absence or failure of money considera~
Partial failure of consideration not consisting

of money

S. 26, para 1, modi-

S. 26, para, 2 modified.
S. 26, para.

S. 27

New

/ Ws, 43, fare 2
earlier halt.

Certain sum ” “ unconditional ” “certain

person” and fictitous payee .

Instruments payable on demand

en instrument payable on demand overdue

© After sight”

Instrument payable at a determinable future
Effect of drawing or indorsing instrument

aval me dating and post dat
of ante
Tnchoate instrument ving

Negotiable instrument when complete

Immediate parties .

Difference in figures and words
Ambiguous instruments .
Payees may be joint

Signature in trade or assumed name
Forged or unauthorised signature
Defective title . . .
Maturity how determined .

NEGOTIATION
Mode of negotiation. . न

S. 43, para. 1
© ster hall

S. 44, para. 1.

Ss. 45

(80 8. 5, para 3.
S. 5, para 2.

(4) $. 5, para 4,

(e} New
(a) 3. 21, ealier half.

(४) 5. 35, par 8. 2,

lew
S. 21, latter half.
New

$, 13 (1), Expl. (ii):

Ss.

1) 3, 46, para. 1
B¢ ४ Para. 2s
(3) S. 46, para. 3.
Ss. 44, plo.

S. 18

$. 17

S. 13 (2).

New

New

. 58, modified.
Q S. 22, para. 2.

Q@)S. 24
4) S. 25

(० $. 46, para, 4 and



Section
Section

Section
Section
‘Section

Section
Section

Section
Section

Section

Section
Section

Section

Section
Section

145

1 2 3
31 «Persons entitled to negotiate . » + & ||
32 =. Requisites indorsement . . . > 58. 56
33... Kinds of indorsements . . . New
34 =. Indorsement in blenk andin full . + $16) part.
35... Provision for payee to apply to indorsee 8, 16 (2)
36 =. Conversion of indorsement in blank into in-
dorsement in full. + . . 8. 49
37. “Instruments indoresed in blank » & 34
38 . Indorsement in blank followed by indorse-
ment in full + . » & 55
39 Restrictive indorsement . . . « S. 50, latter half
modified.
40 =. Conditional indorsement . . . » $. 52, 1
41. Qualified indorsement . . . . Qs 32, para. 4 part
42 Conditional delivery. . - 5, 47, Exception:
43... ‘Negotiation by legal representatives .  . S.
44 Negotiation back before maturity oot New
45. Effect of negotiation. -  « « + §. 50, earlier half
modified,
46 When negotiability ceases’. . . + S&S 60.
CHAPTER Iv
RIGHTS OF HOLDER AND HOLDER IN DUE COURSE
47. 4 Rightofholder . New
48 . Rights of holder of an instrument negotiated
back to him. New
49 . Instrument acquired after dishonour or when
overdue. + ee 8, 59, main para,
50. Accommodation note or bill . § 59, Proviso.
5! =. Holder claiming through bolder in due
course 6 6 eet ) Nas monies
(2) New
52. « Rights of holder in due course few
53. Holder's right to duplicate of lost instrumeat ASA,
CHAPTER V
LIABILITY OF PARTIES
54°. Scope of chapter . New
35. Stranger signing instrument presumed to be
indorser « New
« Liability of drawer or acceptor of a bill of
exchange . »~ @ 5.30, part, modi-
ed,
New motive
@ 8. 32, part, modified
57 Liability of drawer or drawee of cheque =. 8 S. 30, part
58... Liability of a maker of a promissory note . 32, part, modified.
59. Liability of indorser of any instrument + $. 35, para. 1, part
modified.
60. Extent of liability of perties . 5 ws ६० 47. net
(20 8. 37, part
6) S. 38, past
दवा Provision for contract to the contrary . §. 32, part S, 45 para, |
part 8, 37, part, S. 38
part.
6 , Liability of surety... + -+ $ 39
63. Duration of liability . . . » & 36



146

Section 64 . Liability of accommodation party and positio:
of accomm party . - @) New
8) 87 Excepti
. =
Section 65 . Liability of party inducing another to make etc.
Sectio an instrument + $. 43 Exception IL
n 66 ~~ Liability of person signing as agent . + (1) S. 28, earlier part

(2) S. 28, later
S$ 2५ part,

Section 67 Liability of representative . - s&s

Section 68 . ert transferee . . New

Section 69 Presentment . . . - + @)S. 64, para. 1,
part
Exception 8. 64 Exe,
(2) New

Section 70 . Notice of dishonour for non-payment when
obligatory .. > (0 5. 93, para. 1, part

(2) $.. 93,
Section 71... Necessity for noting and protest . : para

CHAPTER YI

PRESENTMENT FOR PAYMENTS

Section 72 . Definition . « New

Section 73 . Rules governing presentment for payment « (1) New
8 $ ६ para. ह। part
pepe tee

(७) () $3.68—69.
modified.

& New
Wit) S. 70
Gv) S. 71.
Faplanation lew
हे . S. 75A part.
Section 74 . What constitutes valid presentment and tht प्र
mode of presentment. . + (9 S. 64 para. 2.

(2) New

(a) Cl. (a) para, 1,
8 CL. (a) para. 2,
(c) CL. (a) para. 3.
(4) Ci. (9) para 4.
6 CA. (७

Section 75  . When preseutment unnecessary . «



147

Section 76

Section 77
Section 78

Section 79

‘Section 80
Section 81

Section 82

Section 86
‘Section 87

Section 88
Section 89

Section 90
Section 91

‘Section 92
‘Section 93

‘Section 95
Section 96
‘Section 97

CHAPTER VII

PAYMENT, DISCHARGE AND INTEREST

Discharge by payment

Instrument to be delivered on payment
‘Other modes of

« Discharge for non-presentment?

(1) S. 78 modified.
(2) 3. 82(¢) modified.
8) New

(4) New

(5) S. 89, part

“O@Ss 2@
26)

(छ
(०) S. 90, modifies
(2) New
6) S. 40."
(1) 3. 64, para. 1, part.
(2) 3. 64, para. 1, part,
tead wit exCep-

ns.
Discharge of parties not consenting to quali- S. 86, main para. part.

fied of limited accep’
Discharge by material

(1) $. 87, para. 1, modi-
fied.

(2) S. 87, para, 2.
3 S. 87, para, 3

Interest when rate specified and not speci- (a) S. 79, modified

(6) S. 80, para, 1, modi-
ied.

CHAPTER Vit
NOTICE OF DISHONOUR

Dishonour New

- Dishonour by non-payment 2
+ Notice of dishonour by whom and to whom $. 93, . 4, part
be given, @S. 93, pare. 1,

part.
() S94, para. 1,

et.
. Mode in which notice of dishonour should nav para, 1, part

given.
Time and place of notice
Notice miscarried in post.

Party receiving must transmit notice of dis- S. 95.

(1) 5. 94, para. 1, pact
QS. pa rn
para. 2.

honour.

notice, given is dead. 5. 97

When notice of dishonour is unhecessa
CHAPTER Ix
NOTING AND PROTEST

Noting 5. 99
Protest @ Fs 100, para. 1
Contents of protest (2३ for Pee 2
Notice of protest S. 102

for non-payment after dishonour by 5. 10

Non-acceptance.
‘When noting equivalent to protest



148

कर
w

Section 98
Section 99

Section 100

Section 101

Section 102
Section 103
Section 104
Section 105
Section 106

Section 107

Section 108

‘Section 109

CHAPTER X
REASONABLE TIMB
- Reasonable time S. 105
Reasonable time for giving notice of dishonour (1) S. 106, para. 1
modified.

@)S. 106, para, 2
modified

. Reasonable time for transmitting such notice. 5. 107

CHAPTER Xi
COMPENSATION
. Rule as to compensation {1} @)_S. 117(@)
10) (9
5. 117 (6) nnd (४)
ified.
{e) hi
@ §. 117 ©, earlier
(3) 8. 117 (०), latter
CHAPTER जया
SPECIAL RULES OF EVIDENCE
. Presumptions as to negotiable instruments 5. 118
- Presumption on proof of protest . 119
Estoppel agaifist acceptor
Estoppel against denying original validity of S. 120
instru
Estoppel against denying capacity of payee to S. 121
indorsee.
Estoppel against denying signature or capacity S. 122
of prior party.
CHAPTER जा

CONFLACT OF LAWS
Law governing liability of maker, acceptor (० S. 134, part, modi~

‘or indorser of a foreign instrument.
Proviso—(i) S. 136.
(ii) Ne
(०/ @ S. 234, part,.
. mo ‘ifie
New
BP
vy S. 135, part
w) S. 135,
6B पक
. Presumption as to foreign law न S. 137.
’



1 2 3
PART iT
BILLS OF EXCHANGE
Section 110. Presentment New
Section 112. Several drawees New
Section 112. In whose favour a bill may be drawn New
Section 113: Only drawee can be acceptor except incase S. 33
of need or for honour.
Section 114. Time for deliberation by drawee 2 s. g
Ss.
Section 115. Acceptance by | drawees not partners S. 34
Section 116. * Acceptance of bill drawn in fictitious name Ss.
Section 117. When presentment for acceptance is necessary New
Section 118. Acceptance of overdue bill
Section 119. Time for presentment for acceptance of a bill S. 61, para. 1, part
payable after sight. odified.
Section 120. Rules as to presentment for acceptance and (1) (@) S. 61, ह# हु
‘excuses for non-presentment, i nat , 2
(6) 6) S. 61, para. 3,
part.
(ii) New
(ii) New
(iv) $. 71, part
Qe 150, pat
par
Banta, 5
. 61, para,
modiieds कं 2 शा
(ले New;
(४) New
(e) New
(4) New
Section 121. Presentment S. 61
Section 122. Dishonour by non-acceptapce and its comse- (1) ५0 S. 91 para, 1,
quences.
(6) S. 91 para. 1, part.
Sor para’ 2
(2) New
Section 123 Qualified acceptance
Expin, (0) to (४)-
१:
Expin—e) $. 86,
main para. part,
Section 124. Non-presentment for payment in cases of New
Qual acceptance when does not discharge
16 accep’
Section 125 Notice of dishonour for non-acceptance (1) S. 93, para. 1, part
modified.
(2) New
Section 126. Liability of banker for negligently dealing with
bill presented for payment.

Section 127
Section 128
Section 129
Section 130

Section 131
Section 132

Mode of giving notice of dishonour
need



I 2 3
"Section 133 Liability of acceptor for honour 111,
ve Proviso(a) S111,
ws tt.
“Section 134... Payment for honour 113.
‘Section 135... Two or more persons offering to pay for honour New
Section 136 =. Rights and duties of for honour 8 yee
2) S.
‘Section 137 Calculation of maturity in case of a bill ac- New
cepted for honour.
Section 138 Set of bilis S, 132.
Section 139 Holder of first acquired part entitled to all 5. 133
PART HI
PROMISSORY NOTES
‘Section 140 Presentment of promissory note for sight  S. 62
PART IV
CHEQUFS
Section 141 Cheque payable to order or beacer § $ BO
Section 142 Revocation of banker’s authority New G 1४ 123
Section 143 General and special crossing defined
Section 144 Cheque crossed “account payee’
Section 145 Crossing by dcawer or after issue 6) ११५
» para,
3) S. 125, para, 2
5,
Section 146 Cross material of a cheque New
‘Section 147 Payment of ne cheque crossed generally or S. 126
ia!
Section 148 Duties of banker as to crossed cheq: S. 127
Section 149 Liability of a banker paying crossed cheques 129, modified
otherwise than to a banker, Proviso—S. $9, part
“Section 150 Protection ६ to banker and drawer where cheque 8, $28, modified.
is crosi
Section 151 Cheque bearing words “not negotiable”. a
Section 152 Protection to collecting banker $. 131
‘Section 153 Protection to banker crediting cheque cros- New
sed “account payee”,
Section 154 Cheque not operating as assignment of funds New
Section 155 en Cheque not duly presented and drawer (i) S. 84(1)
ama, (2 5. 8443)
Section 156 5.85.
‘Section 157 Application of this‘Chapter to drafts. S. 131A
PART VY
‘MISCELLANEOUS
‘Section 158 Ropes) New



APPENDIX ता
Succestions REGARDING OTHER ACTE
Evidence Act.
S. 117-~-Omit—

(०) The words—

“No acceptor of a bill of exchange shall be yesmitted to deny that the drawer had:
authority to draw such bill or to endorse it,

(७) Explanation (६ [ Para, 164}

Ist


APPENDIX IV

*COMMERCIAL BODIES & ASSOCIATIONS WHOSE SUGGESTIONS WERE.
PARTICULARLY INVITED

4. The Secretary Ahmedabad Maskati Cloth Market Association, Maskati Closb
Market, Railwaypura, Post Box No. 2, Ahmedat

2, The Secretary, Ahmedabad Mill owners’ Asson., Navrangpura, Post Box. No.7
Abmedal

3. The Secretary, All-India Food Preservers’ Association, 93, Apollo Street, Bombay-I.

4, The Secretary, All-India Importers’ Asson., Churchgate House. Veer Nariman Road,
Fort, Bombay.

3. The Searetary All-India Sindwork Merchants Asson., 231, Hornby Road, (4th floor)

jombay.
6. The Speretary, All-India Starch Manufacturers Association, 12, Rampart Row

7. The Secretary, Andhra Chamber of Commerce, 272-273, Angappa Naick St.
|. T. Madras.
8. The Secretary, Association of Merchants & Mfrs. of Textiles Stores & Machinery
Sir Vithaldas Chambers (Top Floor), 16, Apollo Street, Fort, Bombay.
1 9. The Secretary, Automotive Mfrs. Association of India, ‘India Exchange’, Calcutta-1
10. The Secretary, Bengal Glass Mfrs. Asson. 1, Mission Row Extension, Caicutta
11, The Secretary, Bengal National Chamber of Commerce & Industry, ९-11, Missio
Row Extension, Calcutta,
12, The Secretary, Bengal Sugar Merchants’ Association, 161/1, Harrison Road, Cakutta
13. The Secretary, Bharat Chamber of Commerce, State Bank Building, (Burrabazar
Branch), Calcutta~’
14. The Secretary, Bihar Chamber of Commerce, Judges’ Court Road, Post Box No. 71,
atna-!
15. The Secretary, Bihar Industries Asson., Fraser Road, Post Box No. 7, Patna-1.
16. The Secretary, Bombay Bullion Association Ltd., Shaikh Memon Street, Bombay,
17, The Secretary, Bombay, Oilseeds & Oils Exchange Ltd., Jenabai Building, Musjid
Bunder Road, Bombay. 108, !
18. Secretary, mbay Cotton Merchants and Muccadums Association, $/72-73
Cotton Exchange Bldg., Sewree, Post Box No. 15, Bombay.
9, The Secretary, Bombay Piece-Goods Merchants Mahajan, Mulji Jetha Market Halls
Shaikh Memon Street, Bombay.
20. The Secretary, Bombay Shroffs Asson., Ltd., 233, Shroff Bazar, Bombay.
21. The Seeretarys Bombay Sugar Merchants Association Ltd., 104-114, Frere Road
jombay-!

Bombay Yam Merchants’ Asson., & Exchange Ltd., 111, Chawia
Building, ‘Pambakanata, Post Box 110. 3, Bomba ,
23. Ty. Secretary, , Calcutta Biri Tobacco Merchants Asson., 1, Rup Chand Roy
tta~
24. The Secretary, Caicutta Bullion Asson., 68, Cotton Street, Calcutta,
25. The Secretary, Calcutta Jute Exchange Ltd., 5/1, Royal Exchange Place, Calcutta.
26, The Secretary, Calcutta Wheat & Seeds’ Asson., 149, Cotton Street, Calcutta,
27. The Secretary, Calcutta Kirana (Spices) Merchants’ Asson., 29, Armenian Street
alcutta.
‘28. The Secretary, Cycle Manufacturers’ Asson., of India, ‘India Exchange’, Calcutta-1.
52%. The Secretary, Delhi Chamber of Commerce, ‘Diibar Building’ Deshbandhu Gupta
Road, Pabarganj, 4.
152


153

30, The Secretary, Dethi Factory Owners‘ Federation, Scindia House, Curzon Rd.
Post Box No, 130., New Delhf-i.

31. The Secretary, Dethi Hindustani Mercantile Association, 641/1213, Chandni Chowk,
Delhi.

32, The Secretary, Eastern Chamber of Commerce, 15, Clive Row, Calcutta,

33, The Secretary, East India Cotton Association, Ltd., Cotton Exchange, Marwari
Bazar, Bombay.

34, The Secretary, East India Jute & Hessian Exchange, 43, Netaji Subhas Road,

८७४१७.

35, The Secretary, Eastera Zone|Mining Asson., Chaibasa (Singhbhum), Bihar, $.8.109 .

36, The Secretary, Englacering Association of India, ‘India Exchange’, Calcutta-1.

37. The Secretary, Employers’ Association, ‘India Exchange’, Calcutta-1.

38, The Secretary, Fan Makers’ Asson. of India, India Exchange (7th Floor), Calcutta.

39, The Secretary, Federation of Gujrat Mills and Industries, Baroda.

40, The Secretary, Federation of Electricity Undertakings of India, Killick Bldg., Home
St., Bombay.

41. The Secretary, Federation of Wooflen Mfrs. in India, J. K. Bldg., Dougall Road,
Ballard Estate, Bombay.

-42, The Secretary, Federation of Commerce and {ndustries (Hyderabad St.), 352, Sultan
Bazar, Hyderabad-1.

43, The Secretary, Grain Oilseeds Merchants’ Association, Masjid Bunder Road,

jombay.
44, The Secretary, Gujrat Vepari Mahamandal, Gujrat Samachar Bldg., Khanpuc
hmedabad . :

45. The Secretary, Hindustan Chamber of Commerce, 168, Broadway, Gujerathi Mandal
Bldg,, (Ist Floor), Madras.

46, The Secretary, Hindustani Merchants and Commission Agents’ Asson., 342, Kal-
badevi Road, Bombay.

47, The Secretary Hyderabad (Dn.) Chamber of Commerce and Industries, 171, Chaped
Road, Opp. Stanley Girls School, Near Hyderabad State Bank, Hyderabad.

48, The Secretary, Indian Banks Association, Devkaran Nanjec Bldgs., Elphinstone
Circle, Fort, Bombay.

49, The Secretary, Indian Chamber of Commerce, ‘India Exchange’ Calcutta-1.

50. ae Secretary, Indian Chamber of Commerce, ‘Jagadalaya’, Post Box No 200,
00

51, The Secretary, Indian Chamber of Commerce, Mattancheri (Cochin).

52. The Secretary, Indian Chamber of Commerce, Tuticorin (S. India).

53. The Secretary, Indian Chemical Mfrs. Asson., ‘India Exchange’ (7th Floor,
Calcutta-1

54, The Secretary, Indian Chemical Merchants Association, India Exchange (8th Floor,

lcutta-

55, The Secretary, Indo-Afghan Chamber of Commerce, 586, Gandhi Cloth Market,
Chandni Chowk, Delhi-’
36, The Secretary, Indian Colliery Owners’ Association, Post Box No. 70, Dhanbad.

57. The Secretary, Indian Confectionery Mfrs’, Association, ‘India Exchange’ Calcutta-

38. The Secretary, Indian Insurance Com Association, Co-operative Insurance
Bldg., Sir Pherozshah Mehta Road, Fort, Bombay.

59. The Secretary, Indian Insurance Companies Asson., India Exchange, Calcutta-1.

60. The Secretary, Indian Merchants, Chamber, Backbay Reclamation, Churchgate
Street, Fort, Bombay.

61. The Secretary, Indian Mi Federation, 135, Canning Street, Clacutta.

62. The Secretary, Indian National Steamship Ow: Association, Scindia House,
Ballard Estate, Bombay.

63. Secretary, Indian Non-Ferrous Metals Mfrs’ Association, ‘India Exchange

(87 Floor), Calcutta-t

64. The Secretary, Indian Paint Manufacturers’ Association, ‘India Exchange,
(8th Floor), Caicutta-1, . हु


154

65, The Secretary, Indian Paper Mills’ Asson., India Exchange’. (8th Ploor) Calcutta-F..
66. The Secretary, Indian Produce Asson., 402, Upper Chitpore Road, Caleutta,

67. ‘The Secretary, Indian Rope Manufacturecs’ Association, ‘India Exchange’ (8th Floory
loutta-

68, The Secretary, Indian Stock Exchange Ltd., ‘Laxmi Building’ Sir Phirozshah Mehta
Road, Bombay.

69; The Secretary, Indian Soap & Toiletries Makers’ Association, ए-11, Mission Road
Extension, Caloutta-!.

70, The Secretary, Indian Tea Planters’ Asson., Post Box No. 74, Falpaiguri.

71. The Secretary, Indian Sugar Mills’ Asson., India Bxchange’ Cafcutta-1.

72. The Hony, Gen. Secretary, Iron 5 Steel & Hardware, Merchants’, Chamber of
India, ‘Steel Chambers’ 153, Naryan Dhuru Street, Bombay-3.

73. The Secretary, Jaipur Chamber of Commerce, and Industry, Jobci Bazar, Jaipur City.
74. The Secretary, Jute Balers’ Association, 5 Royal Exchange Place. Calcutta.

75, The Secretary, Karnatak Chamber of Commerce, Post Box No. 16, Hubli.

76. The Secretary, Lantern Mfrs. Association, India Exchange (7th Floor) Caleutta-1,
77. The Secretary, Madhya Pradesh Millowners’ Association, 11, South Tukoganj

8. The Secretary, Madhyabharat Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Dharam Mandir
Road, Laskar (Gwalior).

79. The Secretary, Madhya Pradesh Mineral Industry Association, Above Khemka
Motors, Residency Road, Nagpur.

80. The Secretary, Madhura Ramoad Chamber of Commerce, 90-92, East Avanimoola
‘St., Madurai (S. India).

81. The Secretary, Madras Piecogoods Merchants, Association, 103, Godown 508०६

$2. The Secretary, Maharshtra Chamber of Commerce, 12, Rampart Row (३7७ Floor)
Fort Bombay.

83. The Secretary Mahratta Chamber of Commerce, and Industries, Tilzk Road, Poona-z
84. The Secretary, Merchants Chamber of U.P., 15/17 Civil Lines, Kanpur.

85. The Secretary, Merchants’ Chamber of Commerce, 173, Harrison Road, Calcutta-7
86. The Secretary, Mysore Chamber of Commerce, Bangalore City.

37. The Secretary, Nag Vidarbha Chamber of Commerce, Temple Road, Cit
Box No. 33, Nagpur-

98, The poe Native Share & Stock Brokers’ Association, Dalal Strest, Fort,
Bombay.

Station,

89. The Secretary, Northern India Chamber of Commerce, Ambala Cantonment.
90. The Secretary, Oriental Chamber of Commerce, 6, Clive Row, Calcutta.
91, The Secretary, Orissa Chamber of Commerce, Tinkovia Bagicha, Cuttack-1.

92. The Secretary, Pepper & Ginger Merchants’ Association Ltd., 285-87, Narsi Natha
treet, Bombay-9.

}. The Secretary, Plywood Mfrs., Association of India, 7-18 Mission Row Extension
Calcutta.

94. The Secretary Punjab Federation of Industry and Commerce, Amritsar.

95, The Scoretary, Rajasthan Chamber of Commerce and Industcy, Johri Bazar, Jaipur
y.

96. The Secretary, Rajasthan Textile Mills Association, (Premises of Jaipur Spg. and

Wyvg. Mills Ltd.), Jaipur.

97. The Secretary, Rayon Mfrs. Association, Ewart House, Bruce Street, Fort, Bombay-

98. The Secretary, Saurashtra Millowners’ Association, Dharangadhara House, Suren-
dranagar.

The Secretary, Silk & Art Silk Mills Asson., Resham Bhawan, Ltd. 78, Veer Nari-
tas Road, Fe 1081

00. me: Sorary, Silk Merchants’ Association, “DHanuxar Building’, Kalbadevi Road.
y-2,


155

101. The Secretary, Saurashtra Ch. of Commerce, Mahatma Gandhi Road, Lokhan
Bazar, Bhavnagar.
102. The Secretary, Southern India Chamber of Commerce, 28/30, North Beach Road,

103. The Secretary, Southern India Skin & Hide Merchants’ Association, 16, Syd:nham
.4., Periamet, Madras,

104. The Secretary, Southern India Millowners’ Association, Race Course, Coimbatore,

105. ee, Secretary, Stee! Re-rolling Mills Association of India, 20 Strand Road,
Icutta.

106, The Secretary, Surat Chamber of Commerce, ‘Safe Deposit Chambers’, Bhagtalao,
107, The Secretary, Tamil Chamber of Commerce, 310/311, Linghi Chetty St., (Ist Floor)

108. The Secretary, Tea Association of India, India Exchange, (8th Floor) Calcutta-t.
109. The Secretary, Textile Mfrs Association. 4.Queens’ Road, Amritsar,
110, The Secretary, United Chamber of Trade Associations, Katra Rathi, Nai Sarak

111 The Secretary, United Pianters Asson., of Sou.her India, Glenview Post Box
No, 11 Coonoor (Nilgris).

112, The Secretary, U. P. Chamber of Commerce, 15/197 Civil Lines, Kanpur.

113, The Secretary, Utkal Mining & Industrial Association, Gandhi House, 16, Ganesh
venue, Calcutta-13,

114, The Secretary,Vanaspati Mfrs., Association of India. Scindia House, (Sth Floor)
Fort Street, Opp. 0. P. O., Bombay.

115. The Secretary, Vidarbha Chamber of Commerce, Rajasthan Building, Akola.

16, The फर्क Western India Chamber of Commerce, 232-234, Kalbadevi Road,
mbay.

117. The Secretary, Western India Minerals’ Asson., Killick Building, Home Street

118, The Secretary, Western U P. Chamber of Commerce, Pooran Chand Building,
Bombay Bazar, Meerut Cantonment.

119, District Bar Association, Alipur.
120. (९०४5४ Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, 28, Ferozshah Road,
lew i.


APPENDIX V

CHAMBERS OF SOMMERCE AND ASSOCIATIONS WHO HAVE SUBMIT-
MEMORANDU!

1.

०9५२७ ४१२

1

ith
12,

Bharat Chamber of Commerce, Calcutta.

Bengal National Chamber of Commerce, Calcutta.
Indian Chamber of Commerce, Calcutta.
Calcutta Stock Exchange.

Indian Merchants, Chambers, Backbay Reclamation, Bombay.
Madras Centre of Indian Bank Association, Madras.
Andhsa Chamber of Commerce, Madras.

Madras Chambei of Commerce, Madras,

South Indian Chamber of Commerce, Madras.
European Chamber of Commerce, Madras,

Indian Banks Association, Bombay.

District Bat Association, Alipur,

156

GMGIPND— 90/8--218 M of Law—6-8-59-—2,200