LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
ONE HUNDRED AND TENTH REPORT

ON

THE INDIAN SUCCESSION ACT, 1925

FEBRUARY, 1985.


अध्यक्ष

CHAIRMAN

विधि आयोग

LAW COMMISSION
भारत सरकार

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
i New Defhi-11000t.

Whe ag

JUSTICE K. K. MATHEW

Dated the 25th February, 1985

My dear Minister,

1 have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the One Hundred and Tenth
Report of the Law Commission on “THE INDIAN SUCCESSION ACT, 1925."

‘The subject was taken up by the Law Commission on its own, The subject
owes its origin to the discussion that touk place within the Law Commission.
and a Questionnaire was issued some time ago. The reasons for the revision of
the Act are stated in paragraphs 1.4, 1.8. 1.9, and 1.10 of the Report.

the Commission is indebted to Shri P. M. Bakshi, Part-time Member, and
Shri S, Ramaiah, Member-Secretary, for their valuable assistance in the prepa-
ration of the Report.

With regards.
Yours sincerely.
Sd/-
(1. K. MATHEW)
Shri A. K. Sea,
Honourable Minister of Law
and Justice,

Shastri Bhavan, NEW DELHI

Encl: 110th Report.


CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAP

ER

CHAPTER !2.

CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER

CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER

CHAPTER
CHAPTER

CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER

CHAPTER
CHAPTER

CONTENTS:

1—Introductory . . . . .

2—Historical

3—Preliminary (Sections 1 to 3)

4—Conflict of Laws.

$—Domicile (Sections 4 to 19) Lo.

6—~Marriage (Sections 20 to 22)

7—Consanguinity (Sections 23 1028).

8—Intestate—Preliminary (Sections 29 and 30)

I—-Rules in Cases of investates other than Parsees (Sections 31 10 49)
10—Special Rules for Parsee Intestates (Sections 50 to 56)
11.-Tesiamentary Succession Introductory (Sections $7 and 58)
.—Wills and Codicils (Sections $9 to 62) . . .
13—Execution of Unprivileged Wills (Sections 63and 64). 0.
14—Privileged Wills (Sections 65 and 66) en

t5—Attestation, Revocation, Alteration and Revival of Wills (Sections
67 to 73)

16—Construciion of Wills (Sections 74 10 111)
17—.Void Bequests (Sections 112 to 118)

18—Vesting of Legacies (Sections 119 to 121)
19—Onerous Bequests (Sections 122 and 123) . .
20--Contingent Bequests (Sections 124 and 125)
2f—Conditional Bequests (Sections 126 to 137)

22-Bequests with Directions as to Application or Enjoyment (Sec-
tions 138 to 140) : मु

23—Bequest to an Executor (Section 141)

24—Specific Legacies
( ‘Sections 142 to 149)

25~-Demonstrative Legacies (Sections 150 and 151) .
26—Ademption of Legacies (Sections 152 to 166)
in Respect of the Subject of a Bequest

27—~Payment of Liabilit
(Section 167 to 170)

28— Pogues of Things described in General Terms (Sections 171
and 172 Se
29-—Bequests of Annuities (Sections 173 to 176) .

30—L2gacies to Creditors and Portioners (Sections 17710 179)
31—Election (Sections 180 to 190).

32—Gifts in Contemplation of Death
(Section 191)

33—Protection of Property of Deceased (Sections 192 to 210)

34—Representative Title to Property of Deceased on Succession (Sec-
tions 211 to 216)

93
104
t3t
138
140.

144

149

151

154
155

162

165
166
168
170
176

179


CHAPTER 35.—Probate, Letters of Administration and Adminisiration of Assets
of the Deceased (Sections 217 to 236)

CHAPTER 36—1 imited Grants (Sections 23710 260)

CHAPTER 37—Alieration and Revocation of Grants Sections 261 to 263)

CHAPTER 38—Practice in Granting and Revoking Probate, and Letters of Ad-
1] ration (Sections 264 to 302)

CHAPTER 39—Fxccutors of Their Own Wrong (Sections 303 and 3041

CHAPTER 40—Powers of an Executor or Administrator (Sections 305 aud 315)

CHAPTER 41—Duties of an Executor or Administrator (Sections 316 to 331)

CHAPTER 4. Assent to a Legacy by Executor or Administratition (Sections 332
0 .

CHAPTER 43—Payment sod Apportionment of Annuities (Sections 338 10 3401

CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER

CHAPTER,
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER

44—Investment of Funds to Provide for Legacies (Sections 341 10 348), .
45—Produce and toterest of Legacies Sections 349 10 355)
40—-Refund of Legacies (Sections 356 10 367)

47—Liability of an Executar or Administrator for Devastation ($९९-
tions 368 and

48-—Succession Certificate . Sections 370 to 390)
49-—Suevession hy Homicide (Section 390A)
50— Miscellaneous Provisions and Schedules

51—Sunmary of Recommendations

Pages

195

205



CHAPTER |
INTRODUCTORY

1. The Law of Succession

. 4.1. The Indian Succession Act, 1925, has been taken up by the Law Com-Significance of the
mission as a part of its function of revising Central Acts of general application Act and need for
and importance, This Act is the principal legislative measure in India dealing with "9/0"
the substantive law of testamentary succession in regard to persons other than
Muslims and intestate succession in regard to persons other than Hindus and
Muslims. It is also the principal legislative measure dealing with the machinery
of succession in regard to both testamentary and intestate succession in respect
of such persons, As will be explained later’, the Act is a consolidating enactment
in the sense that it has brought in one place provisions scattered in several
Central Acts.

The law of succession—like any other branch of law—~cannot be regarded
in isolation from other fields of law. It is, for example, tacitly supplemented by
the tax laws, which turn the State into a hidden participant in the estates of many
deceased persons in the country. There could be other branches of law which
become relevant in a consideration of succession, even if one confines one’s
attention to the frontiers of one’s own country. And if one look across the fron-
tiers, there will be so many interesting questions involving a foreign element.
Discussion of such questions occasionally Jends colour td this apparently drab
subject.

. 1,2. History of the law of succession itself is a matter interest. Detailed previous revi:
historical discussion of the subject will be found later in this Report’, but we of the Act.
may say a few words about the history of the statutory law relevant to matters
dealt with ia the Act.

1,3. The Indian Succession Act, 1925, has consolidated several pre-existing A consolidating Act
Central Acts passed between 1841 and 1903*. There. has not been Undertake ins
909 wholesale revision of the Act, though occasionally, when need arises, amend
ments have been made in the Act from time to time. In fact, the Act of 1925
was mainly a consolidating one which made no material changes in the previous
laws, so that the previous Act—the Indian Successidn Act of 1865—has now
substantially been in force for more than a hundred years, as was pointed out
by a learned commentator’, Though minor amendments have been made in 1939
and 1962, no comprehensive revision of the Act of 1925 has been undertaken
for the last fifty years,

In fact, the framers of the Act stated thus’ :—

~The subject of this bill is to consolidate the Indian law relating to succes-
sion; the separate existence on the statute book of a number of large and
important enactments renders the present law difficult of ascertainment and
there is therefore every justification for an attempt to consolidate it. The
bill has been prepared by the Statute Law Revisidn Committee as a purely
consolidating measure. No intentional change of the law has therefore been
made.”

1.4. We shall deal later in detail with the justification for revision of the Need for revision
Act®, but at this stage it is appropriate to state that the present social thinking,
the mass of case taw that has accumulated on various provisions of the Act end

1Para 1.3, infra.

*See Chapter 2, infra.

*Chapter 2, infra.

‘The fate Mr. Paruck, in the Preface to the 4th Edition (June 1953).

‘See statement of objects and reasons, ride Gazette of India, dated 4th August, 1923, page 5
para 401. * .

‘Para 1.6, et seq. infra.


Tosticution of suc-
cession

Wider meaning of

“succession”

Recognition of cer+

tain cl aims.

Review of law of

succession,

Importance of pe-
riodica} revisi sn.

2

certain juristic and other developments that have taken place in the ficld of
Family law and in other branches of the law, seem to justily 2 review of the Act.

. numately connected with private
property. This much is vbvious. But it scrves a icty of values cherished by
a free society. Fhese include the re-inforcement of family and _responsibititics.
economic and social plur id encouragement of private philanthropy 10
improve the quality of life ps ula meve fundamental level, the institution
of succession is a proper ri of the seciety lo clemental motives. ranging
from concern for one’s imniediate fumily to a desire to extend one’s personality
far beyond death. In tablished’ patterns of inheritance may be the least
objectionable means of deciding the ownership of property on a person's death.

The institution of succession

At the same Ume, Wansfers of substantial wealth tead 10 conflict with other
busic social values, including equality of opportunity, dispersal of economic
power, reward according to merit. and avoidance of rigid class distinctions.

In formulating or re-formutating the Jaw of succession, all these considera-
tions become relevant.

1.6, Of course, testale and intestate succession are only a part of the wider
process of succession, That process embraces many other methods of transmit-
ting property to one’s successors in situations where death is. or could be.
relevant—such as, the gift mortis causa, life assurance in its various forms, joint
ownership, partnership arrangements and pension and provident fund schemes.
The legal requirements for each method vary. These variations were imposed
in the context of the interests which the law was seeking (0 safeguard when impos-
ing such requirements. Amongst the factors, which are likely to influence the
choice of the machinery to be utilised by the citizen. one that has become pro-
minent in modern times is, of course, taxation.

1.7. Apart trom the choice of the machinery? of succession, there is the
question of the choice of the beneficiaries who will take after death. A major
aspect worth noting is the conflict between the citizen's wish and the law's
demand, It is the wish of the average educated person to choose his own succes-
sors, rither than to have that choice decided for him by an application of the
rule wo! intestacy. But how far this desire should be allowed a freeplay is a
question which. has come up for debate in recent times. [n certain countries, for
example, the claims of heirs are regarded as material, and the decision of the
owner of property is not treated as conclusive. “Family provision” legislation and
various statutory provisions for the protection of the creditors constituted
examples of the 100४ recognition of such claims,

11, Jus

1.8. ॥ would be appropriate 10 mention at this stage certain aspects justity-
ing a review of the law, Phe law of succession is, in part, concerned with the
appatently simple process of giving effect tol a person's wishes in relation to
the disposition of his property in the event of his death, and in part, with the
equally simple question—what should happen to the property where a deceased
person has not expressed his wishes (or not expressed them effectively) in rela-
tion 10 such disposition. However, the mass of rules, principles, statutory pro"
sions and judicial decisions which has accumulated shows that the process is
far from ‘simple’. No less a figure than Coke complained*, “Wills and the con-
struction of thear da more to perplex a man than any other learning. .... “

ication for Review

1.9. As a branch of private law. then, the law of succession is of vital con-
cern to the community. Periodical revision of legislation dealing with this branch
of the Jaw accordingly needs no elaborate explanation. Moreover. there have
taken place certain important: developments which render a review of the Act
necessttry, In the first place, a large number of sections of the Act have yielded

1 Weath, Tares and Kantily Property, Final Report of the American Asembly (December
>-4-19761 ax reproduced in (January 1977) 3. 8. &.1. 86-४7.

Para 1.6. supra
2Roberts \. Roberts (1613) 2 Bulstr. 123, cited by Curzon, Law of Succession (1976), Preface.


3

atich crop gf case Jaw leading io a eonfiict of dacisions or a number of other
dilliculties in many cases. Secondly, the content of some of the legal concepts
which underlie the operative provisions of the Act—for example, domicile —has
undergone change during the last thirty years or so, in legal thinking. It is desir-
able that the provisions of the Act should be re-considered in the light of these
developments

Thirdly, social thinking in regard to some of the uctons which form the
basis of the Act has as undergone changes which should find 2 reflection in the
scheme of the Act. The position of illegitimate children is one example. The Jae
Shri P. L. Paruck, ia his commentary on the Act’, also pointed out the need
for revision of the Act’.

All these factors justify a consideration of the Act section by section, The
changes needed in the Act may not necessarily be radical, but a review is
eminently desirable.

1.10. It may be useful to mention, by way of illustration, some of the con- Concrete reasons for

crete reasons justifying a reviow of the Act. revision—iihustra-
हि tions from  parti-

This would involve some claboration of points already mentioned aboye or ular provisions.
amticipation of suggestions to be made later. Nevertheless. it would be useful.
The concrete reasons are as under: —

fi) As a resalt of changing conditions, notions on various matters relevant Changing social
to the law of sauce » have also undergone change (as stated above), In illustra. actions. :
tion of this, the status of illegitimate children’, and the doctrine of domicile’,
(married women) may be referred to. .

Gi} Several sections of the Aci have been the subject-matter of confficting Conficting — Je-
decisions, There is some obscurity even as to the very applicability’ of the Act cisions,
(Part 1V) to certain areas previously forming part of the erstwhile State of Tra-
vanesre-Cochin. Are Indian Christians in those areas still governed by the Tra-
vancore Christian Succession Regulation 2 of 10927 Or, are they now governed
by the Indian Succession Act, 1925? The law required clarification.

(iii) On certain important matters, changes of substance may be needed in Changes of sub-
the provisions of the Act. For example, the law relating to the disposition by stance—position of
will of the property of Lunatics justifies a second look. In England, a judge has lunatics.
now power to make certain orders to give certain directions for the disposal of
property of mentally incompetent persons. Further’. there is power to execute a
“statutory will” in regard to persons who are mentally incompetent.

Section 17 cf the Administration of Justice Act, 1969 containing the relevant
Jaw, is quoted below :—

~t7. (1) In the Mental Health Act, 1959, fin this Part of this Act referred
to as “the principal Act”) in section 103(1) (powers of the judge as to
patient's property and affairs) the following paragraph shall be inserted
after paragraph (d):—
{dd} the execution’, for the patient, of a will making any provision
(where by way of disposing of property or exercising a power or other-
wise) which could be made by a will executed by the patient if he
were not mentally disordered, so however that in such cases as a
nominated judge may direct the powers conferred by. this paragraph
shall not be exercisable except by the Lord Chancellor or a nominated
judge.”

'P.L. Paruck. Commentary on the Succession Act, 3rd Ed. quoted by Shri 3.L. Joshi in the
Sth Ed. (1966). preface.

2966 also suggestion of Shri A.C. Mukherjee in the preface to his edition of Mita, Succession
ACL

4E.G. section 37, as interpreted fn g0nds of Sarah Ezra, AAR. 1931 Cal. 560.

Sections f--20.

‘This is with reference to section 31.

“Sections 103 and 1034. Mental Health Act, 1959 (England).

Section 17(11 800 (2), Administration of Justice Act, 1969 (Eng. ).

*Commas have been added 10 facilitate understanding,



4

(2) At the end of section 103(3) of the principal Act there shall be inserted
the words “and power of the judge to make or give an order. direction or

authority for the execution of « will for a patient:—-~  ~
GO shall noc be exercisable वा any time when the patient is an infant, and

a) foot be exercised unl
patient ix incapable of making

the judge has reason 19 believe that the
valid will for himself.”

civ} Anctlict important topic requiting consideration is the effec! of marri-
age on a will. As the law stands at present’, a will is automatically revoked by
the marriage of the maker of the will (where he is governed by the relevant sec-
tion) except in the case of a will made in the exercise of the power of appoint-
meat in certain specific ciccumstances. However, some hardship is caused by this
provision, in as much as even a will wich is made in contemplation of marriage
falls within it. In England, it is expressly enacted thata will expressed to be
made in contemplation of marriage shall not be revoked by the solemnisatign of
the marriage contemplated, thus overriding section 18 of the Wills Act, 1837.
which provided to the contrary

Proof of tide on (ए) Sections 211 to 214. which deal with the proel of tite by 3 probate or

Succession. letters of admunisivation or succession certificates, have, in practice. created certain
problems in the case of property passing by survivorship. In particular, the
question h cn whether leticrs of administration can be granted in respect
of shares in joint stock companies standing in the name of the Karta of a
Mitakshara Joint Hird: Family. On the death of the Karta who was the registered
holder cf the shares, the tlle to the shares vis-a-vis the company does not pass
by survivership te the surviving members without letters of administration. This
position has been judicially reached on a construction of the scheme of the Com-
panies Act under which the legal title in the shares is regarded as vested in the
(registered) bolder of the shares*, The practical importance of this question is
enough to justify a re-cansideration of the law on the subject.

Drafting flaws. (i) Drafting flaxs have also been discavered in a few sections of the Act.

For example, an anomaly seems (७ caist’ on a very important point, namely~—
can Hndus, Buddhists. Sikhs, Jains, etc. make a privileged will? This difficulty
has arisen because of the fact that section 65 (privileged wills) does not apply
to persons belonging ta these communities*, as the section is not listed in the
Third Schedule as one cf those sections which apply to Hindus, etc. The defec-
tive draftsmanship of sections 63 to 66 has led to the postition that, at present.
the capacity of soldiers hetonging to the Hindu etc. refigion to make wills has
become extremely doubtful. Section 63. dealing with unprivileged wills, 2xcludes
soldiers from its fold. Section 65, dealing with privileged wills, is inapplicable to
Hindus, etc. by reason of the Third Schedule. The result is tha, Hindu sofdiers
are, in relation to the maki of privileged wills, governed not by sections 65
and 66—these being expressly excluded under the Third Schedule—but by the un-
enacted law of wills as applicable to Hindus. This position Cannot be ragarded as
satisfactory. ॥ 5 therefore necessary 16 extend section 65 to Hindus. ete, by
wumending the Third Schedate’.

{vii} Certain important and far-reaching questions haye also arisen in con-
nection with expressions like “Dharma* used in wills. Under section 89 of the
Succession Act. bequests for “Dharma, Dharmada”, etc. are liable to be regarded
as void by reason of certain judicial decisions; these decisions hotd the field
unless the position is rectified by legislative amendment’.

Meaning of cer-
tain expessions,

This pesitivn, however, is not satisfactory and is substantially contrary to
Indian social netions. By way of illustration of local legislation that has sought
to rectify this deticiency. reference may be madt to the Fxplanation {o section 10

‘Section 69.

28ec177. Law of Property Act, 1925 Halsbury, 3rd Edition, Vo.. 39, page $88, parn 1851.
मम the guuds of Sew Prasad, AAR. 1954 Cal. 444, 446 paragraph 24.

‘This is with reference to section 6S.

‘See the Third Schedule.

sTo_be cansidered under the Third Schedule.

=Paint concerns Section 89


5

of the Bombay Public Trusts Act. 1950, The section (along with the Explanation)
reads as under’ :—

“10. Not-withstanding any Jaw. custom or usage. a public trust shall not
be veid, only on the ground that the persons or objects for the benefit of
whom or which it is created are unascertained or unascertainable.
Explanation—A public (rust created for such objects as dharma, dharmada
or punyakarya, or punyadan shall not be deemed to be void, only on the
ground that the objects for which it is created are unascertainable.”

it appears to be desirable to incorporate such a provision in the Lndias Need for chang

Succession Act in regard to bequests. Section 89 of the Act provides that a will
or bequest “not expressive of any definite intention” is vaid for uncertainty.
Re-enacting, as it does, section 76 of the Succession Act of 1865, this is a pro-
ion sound in principle. But wpplication to certain situations has created
difficulties, and the view in judicial decisions * that a bequest for ‘dharma’ is
void, does not, unfortunately, reflect the sense of the community. lt is urgently
necessary that the Jaw should be amended so as 16 reflect the thinking in Indian
society on the subject. .

(viii) Contain gaps i
specific provision prohibit
murdered’.

(ix) In the case of 1७० or more persons who die in a calamity such as fire,
fidod, carthquake and the like, there is need for a specific provision laying dewn
a presumption as to whose death occurred first. In this. connection, reference may
be made® to section 21, Hindu Succession Act. which provides as follows :—

1 murderer from succeeding to the estate of person

121, Where two persons have died in circumstances when it is uncertain
whether cither of them, and if so, which, survived the other, then, for all
purposes aifecting succession to property, it shall be presumed, until the
contrary is proved. that the younger survived the elder.”,

‘There ix, however, no such presumption in the Indian Succession Act, In
the absence of a statutory provision, the matter would have to be decided pri-
marily with reference to the burden of proof. The Privy Council’ has rejected
the argument that the wife being younger than her husband, survived him when
both of them die together in an earthquake, observing—"it is clear to their Lords-
ships that when two individuals perished in a common calamity and the ques-
tion arises as to who died first, in the absence of evidence on the point there is
no presumption in law that the younger survived the elder”.

1.11. The above is merely a brief mention of selected provisions of the
Succession Act that require revision, or at 1085. re-consideration, A detailed
examination «of the Act would reveal many more areas Of the law where reform
is desirable, or even imperative. It is not necessary to encumber the discussion

the kaw need to be tilled up. There is need for affect of murdere

Detailed examina

tion

other defects.

at the present stage with those details. leaving them to be dealt with under the |

relevant sections.

1.12. ॥ would be convenient to deal with the scheme of the Act briefly at
this stage. The Act is divided into eleven parts, apart from the Schedules. Part I
contains certain preliminary provisions, dealing with the defintions and power of
the State Government to exempt certain classes of persons from the operation
of the ला, Part If deals with the concept of domicile. The concept is of impor-
tance, because the application of the Act td movable property of a person depends

thereon.

‘Section 10, Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950.

*Ranchhordas v, Parvatibai. (.L.R. 23 Bom. 725 (P.C.)

“See the judgement of Subrahmania Ayvar J. in Parthasarathy v. Thirtvengada 1.L.R. 30 Mad.
340,

‘See chapter 48. infrw.
“Section 21. Hindu Succession Act. 1956.
‘Agha Mir Ahmed ९. Mudassir Shah, A.V.R. 1944 P.C. 100.

Scheme
Act.

of

ikely to revea

th


4

we On Wills and certain allied matiery.
ity—again a concept of importance for

Part HI deals with the effect of man
Part EV treats of the concept of consangui
the purposes of intestate su ‘Sion.

With Part V t.zin the provasions actually dealing with the order of intestate
succession, Chapter I of this Part is of a preliminary character. Intestate succes-
sion in the case of persons to whom this Part applies, other than Parsis, is dealt
with in Chapter II, Chapter III contains special miles for Parsi intestates. It
should be mentioned that this Part (Intestate succession) does not apply to Hindus
Mohammedans, Bhoddhists, Sikhs or Jains.

1.13. Testamentary succession is dealt with in Part VI. which is the longest
part cf the Act (23 Chapters), and is to be read with the Third Schedule, The
first five chapters of this Part deal with the formalities requisite for wills of
various classes. Chapters VI, VII and VILE are in the nature of provisions relat-
ing to the construction, operation or effect of wills and the vesting of legacies.
Chapters IX to XXI are concerned with legacies in favour of particular persons.
and connected matters, Chapter XXII deals with the abstract doctrine of “el
tion”. Chapter XXUJ is concerned with gifts in, contemplation of death—gifts
which may be described as 2 kind of transfer ambivalent between a iransfer during
lifetime and a teanster by way of will.

1,14, Substantive matters concerning succession having been dealt with, the
Act new proceeds to lay down procedural rules.

Part VII deals with protection of the property of the deceased. E
ment of representative title to the property of the deceased on
subject matter of Peri VII which, though consisting of only sections (sec-
tions 211 to 216), is of the greatest practical importance. In the scheme of the
Act, representative title can be established by obtaining (i) probate, (ii) letters of
administration or (iii) succession certificate. The first two (probate and letters of
administration are dealt with at length in Part IX, containing B chapters. third
(succession certificate) is dealt with in Part X. It may be stated that these Parts
of the Act are concerned with procedure and are primarily of importance to
lawyers and courts,

uccession — Certi- 1.15, Part X of the Act which deals with succession certificates is important,

sates, both for its theoretical interest and for its practical utility. In the scheme of the
Act, a succession certificate is generally granted to a person entitled to a ‘debt—
an expression which would embrace the major categories of what English Jaw-
yers know as “cheses in action”. The proceedings for obtaining the certificate are
summary. and are intended to facilitate realisation of the debt

1.16. In most cases under the Act, the taking out of letters of administration
on intestacy is not obligatory and it is “enough if a succession certificate
is taken out where a “debt” is to be recovered which was due to
the estate of the deceased. This procedure has proved Popular. The Banks,
insurance Companies and others also insist on the production of a succession
certificate as a matter of safeguard. The certificate has thus become the com-
mon man’s usual document of title in regard to the property which he has in-
herited und which was not in the immediate possession of the deceased, One.
could appropriately describe it as the “poor man’s letters of administration,

‘heoretical interest, 1.17, Apart from the practical न of the certificate, it is of interest to
note that it ts India’s original contribution to the law of administration of de-
cedent’s estates. Such a document is rarely to be found in other legal systems.

Iractical utility.

Thanges needed on 1.18, in view of the manifold importance of a succession certificate, we
everal matters have devoted some attention to an examination in detail of the provisions
relating to the procedure for obtaining it, and we were surprised to find that
there were several points of substance as well as of form, which required atten-
tion, For example, to take an illustration chosen at tandom—a point of sub-
stance that 3 needs to be considered is whether this procedure should be extended
to cases where a debt devolves on a person nat by “succession” ‘as i पु
understood) but by “survivorship”. pe ¥ ssston’ fas technically

1.19. As to point of form, we may- aban in by way of illustrati -—
mention that the criteria by which the juri: “oF a District Count te कप



7

a@ succession certificaie is regulated (sections 370 and 3/1) are expressed in a
language different from that defining the criteria for the jurisdiction to grant
probate (section 372). It would be necessary to consider whether there is any
sound reason for maintaining this disparity between the two provisions.

We propose to consider this and other points of substance and form reélat-
ing to succession Certificates in the appropriate chapter.

1.20, Part XU of the Act contains certain miscellaneous provisions. Lastly.
there are schedules dealing with various matters of detail. Of these Schedules.
the Third Schedule is of vital importance; the application of the provisions of
the Act relating to testamentary succession (Part VI) to Hindus. Buddhists.

Sikhs and Jains has to be ascertained from this Schedule’.

1.21. So much as cegards what is already contained in the Act-—-what may Frivate ema
be called the “positive aspect”. We may now point out a few negative aspects indian. and
of the scope of the Act. In the first place, the Act does not contain the whole Act.
law of succession applicable in India. We have already adverted to this aspeet
earlier’, Secondly, the Act does not contain any express provisions as to rules
of private international law, excepting section 5 (which provides for the applica-
tion of the lex-situs in the case of immovable property and the law of domicile
in the case of movable property) and excepting possibly a few other sections*,

Even section 5 is. as the law stands, at present, of limited applicaticn’.

The question of inserting suitable provision on the subject will be consi-
dered in due course’.

1,22. The Law Commission had circulated, for comments. a Working Comments receive:
हि on the Working Pa

Paper on the Act* to interested persons and bodies. S: ch comments as have per.
been reccived’ on the Working Paper will be dealt with in detail at the appro-
priate place under the relevant section. At this stage. it will suflice to mention
that comments have been received from the following:— हर

(a) Two State Governments’:
(0) Three High Courts’:
(९) Delhi Hindustan Mercantile Association’: and

(d) The Catholic Bishops’ Conterence of India, (Lhe Catholic Bishops”
Conterence of India has forwarded views communicated to it by
others).

Besides these, the Commission has had the advantage of perusing an
interesting article published in the Statesman’, dealing with some of the pro-
posals that had been put forth in the Working Paper".

iSection 57.

*Para 1.1. sapre.
‘See Chapter 4, हरित:
4Sce discussion ब५ to seclien 3, ifiu.

*Scc, for example. Chapter 31, ffra.

*Working Paper on the Indian Succession Act.

‘Law Commission File No. F, 2(6)/84-L.C. Serial No. 6 and S. No. 13,

*Law Conimission File No. F. 2(6)'84-L.C. Serial Nos. 5, 8 and 9 (High Courts).

‘Law Commission File No. F. 2(6)/84-L.C. S. No. 6A. Hindustan Mereantile Assoun
Delhi, letter dated 30th May, 1984. Assounution.

ria, article in (20th June, 1984), The Statesman, page 6.

Shahnaz Ankless
AH commonts received upto the 10th October . 1984, have been dealt with, in the Report.


scope of the Chap
.er,

Origin
sion,

Roman

of succes-

Law.

6

Incidentally, 1 may be mentioned that of the three High Courls that have
responded to the Working Paper, the judges of two Courts have no comments
to offer’. The judges of the third have welcomed the general idea of revising
the Act and the propesals put forth in the Working Paper*.

01 the State Governments, again, ove has no comments to oiler, The
comment of the other relates to section 30, and will be dealt with thereunder’.
The comment of the Delhi Hindustani Mercantile Association raises a fe
points’. The comments contained in the letter of the Cathotic Bishops’ Conterence
of India rekite to numerous sections.

CHAPTER 2
HISTORICAL

1. Origin of succession.

2.1, We propose to give in this chapter a brief historical resume of the
law of succession, including the Indian statutory law relevant to maiters dealt
with in the Act, Such a resume is not of mere academic value. The rationals
of many of the provisions of the Act and their limited applicability* cannot be
properly appreciated without a knowledge of their history

2.2. The origin of succession hus been thus dealt with by Dr. P, N, Sei :---

“The origin of succession, like that of so many other legal ides pro-
bably to be traced to a religious basis. According to many authoritics, it
is derived from primitive animism, the source of the worship of the House-
spirit, always a male. generally an ancestor. The vesting of the succession
in the heir himself originally, like the House-spirit. always a male, was
necessary for the purpose of continuing the family rights and observances
on which, according to primitive belief, the very existence of the family
depended. Property and sacra were indissolubly combined. It was ५ point
of family honour that the spirit of the deceased. and. through him the
Hovse-spivit, was 10 be propitiated by ritual observance. Such observances
were neglected cat the peril of the survivors, for the family was one and
indivisible. the dead members were stl members in a sense, and the heir
was simply a co-proprietor with the deceased. The theory of the unity and
perpetuity of the family is. in fact, the key to the early rules of succession",
The principte of spiritual benefit also 4 characteristic guiding principle
in the Dayabhaga law of succession. Srikrishna Tarkalankar points out that
॥ stranger who throws the bones of the decased into the Ganges, or presents
funeral cakes 19 his departed spirit at the holy shrine of Ga might, on
the ground of supericr spiritual benelit, claim his property cven in preference
to his rekuions,

॥. Wills in Roman Law.

2.3. Much of the law of testamentary succession ha:
lan. and it would be of interest to know the position und
tion has been thus stated? :

its genesis in Roman
r that daw. The posi:

HLaw Commission File No. F. 26184-L.C. Serial No. 5
Law Commission File No. F. 2(6)/84-L.C. Serial No. 8.

SLaw Commission File No. F. 2(6)'84-L.C. Serial No. 6.

‘See Chanter 7. infra (section 301.

‘See section 372 61 (1. आते miscellaneous chapter.

“E.G. section 57

=P.N. Sen, Hindu Jurisprudence, page 161.

ams on Wills and Intestate Succession, page 2.

*Encyelopedia American (1966), Vol. 23, page 646.



9

“Law oj Secversoit.—-Lpon the death of a petson an inheritance (ieredites )
is conceived us the whole of the property, moveables and immoveables, rights.
claims and obligations of the deceased.

“Through succession on intestacy (ab fatesiatv) the inheritnance developed
on those members of ihe family who, at the time of the death of its head.
had been under his paternal powey and through his death become indepen-
dent (swi-juris). 1. the absence of such heirs, relatives tied with the de-
ceased by descent from a common ancestor through males (agnates) received
the inheritance. Paretoriam law admitted, to succession on intestacy, sons
who had been emancipated, then cognates (relatives by blood through males
or females), and the wife, The whole succession on intestacy was liberally
reformed by Justinian, fniestaig succession occurred only when Were was
no valid last will or where there was one, but it became void by later
events (previous death of the heir instiuted छा his refusal to accept the
inheritance ).

“The usual forms of testament here manifold, writen and oral. with more
or less formalities which under praeterial law (seven witnesses for a written
will) and later legislation became simplified, A will had to contain the
institution of an beir (beares) in the opening phrase without which it ७:
not valid. It could contain various other dispasitions, such us legacies
(legata, originally expressed in’ prescribed words, tate: formless fideico-
ssions of slaves. appointments of guardians for the testa-
ildren or wife. disinheritances, and many other wishes to be fulfilled
or by legatces. A tater will made the previous one gull, the testator,
however, could make new dispositions or modify former ones in an addi-
tional document (codicil

2.4, Testamentary succession was extensively developed in Rome. The Development

of

will, if not purely Roman, at least owes to Roman law its complete deveiop- the will a feature
ment,'—a development which, in most countries, was ;,eatly aided, at a later Of Roman Law.

period, by ocelosiatics versed in Roman law, and in England, especially, by the
Judges of the Court of Chancery. The effect has been that, as Sir Henry Maine

“The English 1४७ of testament succession 16 personal has become
a moditicd form of the disposition under which the inheritances of Roman
citizens were administered.”

In the Mosaic law, the will, if it existed a
character, in spite of the
of the whole world. In any case, there was no absolute frecdom of testation
in the Hebrew legal system. The testator could not disinherit his natural children®.
Intestacy was the normal course’. In contrast, the Roman Law developed, refined
and made general the use of the will

all, was of a very rudimentary yysaic
ssertion of Liysebius that Noah made a will disposing Roman Law.

Law and

2.6, the will th Roman daw was conceived as i transfer of the inheritance will in Roman Law,

as a whole. The testaior must dispose of the whole or none: he could not (unless
a soldier) dig partly testate and partly intestate.

The carliest forny ol will which was made publicly in the comita crate in
Roman times‘ looked like the irrevocable abrogation of an heir that is to say, the
debarring of certain heirs who were vot the ordinary heirs, The alternative will.
made before people drawn up for battle, probably had for its object tie disposal
of the testator’s arms. and other objects especially dear to him, But the of
mature Roman taw originated in a maucipatio of his estate by the testator—
probably on his death-hed-tc « person who acted vs a kind of trustee and who
distributed it according (o the instructions of the testator, Such a person was
known as the feonilia टाल

‘Williams on Willy sind Entestate Sugeession, page है, cited in N.D, Basu. Succession Act
(1957), pages 11--13.

“Kagan, Three Great Systems of Jurisprudeace (1955), page 20.
‘Kagan, Thive Great Systems of Jurisprudence (1955), page (53.
‘Chambers Encyclopaedia, Vol. 1, pages 807, “808.


10

Roman law wills ४.7. Ut is certam that wills existed alveudy at the ume of the XL Tables

meationed by Gaius ( 451 B.C.) and it is highly probable’ that the form used was still that

and wills im emer mentioned by Guius as the oldest—the will made publicly in the assembly of

Bencies. the clive Gesianention camitiix colatisy. with the will made before the peopte
drawn up for battle (estamantin in procincteas) as a variant, It may be
however, that the mancipatery will (éestamentun per aes et libram) had alroady
been invented. This began as zn expedient for effecting the purpose of a will
fn an emergency, when the other lorms were impossible, and consisted in the
use of mancipation to convey the estate of the dying man to a kind of irustec
(familia emptor) who then dixributed it in accordance with the testator’s instrue-
tions.

Developments, at 2,8. By the end of the Republict, the Roman will had become revocable
public. “during the testator’s life tim: 0 did not divest him of his estate until death.
But the original influence remained strong enough to ensure that the primary
and essential ctement a7 the will was the institution of an heir or heirs who
should carry on the personality of the testator, Laler, there took place certain
developments, in the course of which possession of the vstate was given to any
one “iystituted” in a testamentary document, if the document wos sealed with
“seven scals” and otherwise in order. even though yraicipation had not taken place.
In Justinian’s times, the commonest form of will was a document sealed with
seven witnesses iad signed by them as the wstator, A codicil coukl be scaled
by five witnesses. Perhaps this sealing by witnesses contains the geri of the
modern requirement of attestation.
| Mancipation. 2.9. The “mancipation” had become a mere formality and the instructions
of the testator, which were now contained in a written document. constituted a
true will, operative only at the death and revocable at any time during the
testator’s lifetime by the making of a new will. In classical times the praetor
had already given effect in most cases to a document sealed by seven witnesses”.
In post-classical times, the mancipation had ceased to be necessary and the com-
monest form of will was the ¢estamantum griperition, needing for its completion
the seals of seven Witnesses and the signatures of the witnesses and of the

lestator
Requirements of 2.10, The first iequirement of any Roman will of historical times was the
Roman Will, appointment of one or more heres. A eres is a universal successor, 1.०... he takes

over the rights and duties of the deceased (in so far as they are transmissible
at ally as a whole. Ou acceptance. the heir becomes owner where the deccasedt
was owner, creditor where he was creditor and debtor where he was debtor.
even though the assets were insufficient to pay the debts. It was thus possible
for an inheritance to be denmese, ic. to invelve the heir in 1055, Until Justinian’s
day this consequence could only be avoided by not uccepting Ute inkeritance.
but Justinian made one of bis most amous reforms by introducing the heneficinm
iventarii, i.c.. the heir who. within « certain time after the acceptance. made an
inventory of the deceased's assets, nced not pay out more than he had received
In addifion to appointing an heir. the testator” might also feave legacies. i.
particular gifts which ie a burden on the heir, Freedom of testation was, how
ever, not complete. u mun being obliged to leave a certain proportion of his
property to his childrea und. in some cases. to ascendants. and brothers and
sisters.

Octavian asa 2.11. (Getvian, whom we know as Augustus, becume the first Roman
beneficiary under Emperor, Caesar. in u codicil to his will, named Octavian as his adopted son
Caesar's Will. and heir, The status which this appointment gave to Octavian, as well as the
bit, opabled him to become a member of the Triumvirate
after Cacsar’s death, and later to muke himself the soie

money which came ४
which came (७ power
ruler of the Empire)‘,

Hi, Wits in other countries during ancient times

2.12. According to Tacitus. the will was not in use among the ancient

Mhe will is, on the other hand. recognised by Sabbinical and

Will in Germany G
and Greece in anci-German tit
eng times,

‘Eneyclopacdia Britannica 1965), Vol. 19, page 453 (HLF. Joilowies),
2Chamber’s Encyclopaedia, Vol. H. pages 807, 308.

Encyclopaedia Britannica (1963), Vol. 18, page 453 (H.F. Jotlowicz).
‘Rene A. Wormser, “Wills that made histroy”’ (1962) 48 AB.AJ. 1148, 4149,


181

Mohammedan Law. At Athens, under the legislation of Solen, a will could be
made only where the testator left no children. Eleven out of the twelve extant
crations of Isacus are on claims to an inheritance. In some cases, Isacus argues
in favour of the validity of the will, in others, he argues against it. (The Romans
were essentially a will making people. An immense space in the Corpus Juris
is Occupied with testamentary will. The whole of part V of the Digest (Books
XXVIW (28)—XXXVI (36) deals with the subject).

Aristotle’s will, we are told’, shows his concern for every relative and
dependant, not the least for the emancipation of his slaves,

2.13, [History furnishes many examples of wills executed by distinguished wills in countries
persons in countries under Roman influence. The Egyptian dynasty of the Ptolemies under Roman in-
was founded by a Greek, one of the generals of Alexander the Great. Polemy X, was fluence.
the last legitimate descendant of the line. Having no legitimate progeny of his own he
left a will in which he bequeathed his kingdom to Rome. Caesar and some other
Roman senators wanted to accept the bequest and to actually annex Egypt, but
the political opposition was strong and the project had to be abandoned*]

2.14, [Nearer to our times, Louis the Pious divided his realm by will Will of Louis the
among his three surviving sons,—Lothair, Charles (“the Bold”) and Louis (‘the Pious.
German”).] Unhappy about the division which their father had made, the three
sons immediately broke into armed conflict at his death, When the dust settled,
the final division of the Empire presaged the permanent separation of France,

Italy and Germany and created a borderland which (including Alsace) was to
become a source of strife for centuries, Louis (“the German”) got what, is
substantially West Germany now: Charles (“the Bold”) got France; and Lothair
received the imperial title. Northern Italy and the Frankish heartland, the Central
Area to the North Sea’, हर

1V. Wills in Hinda and Muslim law

2.15, (In Hindu law, there was, originally, no concept of wills, No synonym
for the word “will” was to be found in the whole of Sanskrit literature. But the Bills amongest Hin-
institution of wills in all its aspects (as applicable to Hindus) was brought into
being by judicial decisions‘ during the British period). In the latter half of the
19th century, the Privy Council could observe’, “It is too late to contend that
~ because the ancient Hindu treatises make no mention of wills, a Hindu cannot
make a testamentary disposition of his property.”

2.16. A Hindu will executed before 1870, could be in writing or oral, and prindy wits, bee
no attestation or other formalities were required’. Even signature was not foreand after 1870,
necessary in law. In 1870, the Hindu Wills Act introduce various formalities
for the execution of wills’, Later legislative developments on the subject are not
material for the present purpose, since the sections of the Indian Succession Act
which lay down the formalities for making wills apply to Hindus", and constitute
the present law on the subject.

2.17. Amongst Muslims, the tradition of making wills goes at least as\
early as the Prophet’. The Indian Succession Act does not apply to wills executed
by Muslims, an the law on the subject has developed on its own lines”,

Muslim Law.

3Encyclopaedia Britannica, Vol. 2, page 393.
*Rene A. Wormser, “Wills That Made History” (1962) 48 A.B.A.J. 1148.
Rene A. Wormser, “Wills that made History"* (1962) 48 A.B.A.J. 1148, 1149.
‘Sarkar, Epochs in Hindu Legal History, pages 371 and 383.
°Beer Partab. v. Rajendra Partab, (1867) 12 M.LA. 1, 37.
"(@) Maneharji v. Narayan, 1, B.H.C.R. 77.
(6) Srintvasa v. Vijayammal, 2 MHER 224.
"Vinayak ४. Govindraj, 6. B.H.C.R. 224.
‘Sections 63-64, read with section 57,
*Sekaene, Muslim Law (1968), page 838,
Tyabji, Muslim Law (1968), page 764,
3५806 also para 2.11.
85-L/B(D)144MofLI&CA~—2



History,

of the

Succession Act.

History
mentary
ction,

of testax
Jurisdi-

ae

V. History of the statutory law of succession in India

2.18. This brings us to the statute law on the subject of succession in gencral
in India, History of the general statutory law on succession may be conveniently
dealt with under the fotiowing periods: —

(1) The period before codification

During the period upto 1865, Hindus and Muslims were governed by their
personal !aw', and persons belonging to other groups were, in general, left to
be governed by the English law’. This had been specifically held in relation to
the right of exercise of testmentary power over lands held in the mofussit. by
a Frenchman having a British domicile’. There were, no doubt, some refined
distinctions as between the Presidency towns and the Mofussil, but these necd
not detain us. not being material for the present purpose.

It may be stated that application of the English law to Parsis, at least in
the Presidency towns, was well-settled.

2.19, With reference to history of the testamentary jurisdiction of the courts
in India, it has been stated® :—

“Testamentary jurisdiction was first given to the Supreme Court by _ these
original charters printed in two Merley’s Digest, p. 549. that in’ Bengal
dated 1774 being the 1150. And it was then given as a brancit «i the eccle-
siastical jurisdiction, as was to be administered according to the ecclesjastical
Jaw as in force in the Diocese of London. In the course of the scries of
events by which the British territories in India grew from a group of trad-
ing settlements into an empire, various branches of jurisdiction which sprang
originally from an ceclesiasiical origin, have come to be applied, by a
number of legislative Acts. to new territories and new classes of persons,
and. administered by law tribunals. And in the process of this development
ecclesiastical jurisdiction has been completely discarded and the Legisiature
has gradually evolved an independent system of its own, largely suggested,
no doubt, by English law. but also differing much from that law, and pur-
porting to bea self contained system. Even in the case of the High Courts,
the successors of the Supreme Court (which alone possessed eccesiastical
jurisdiction) the testamentary jurisdition, which the charters purport to
confer upon them, is not given as a branch of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and
is not made dependent upon the law administered by English courts.
“From an early date the Supreme Court granted probates of Hindu and
Mahomedan Wills. (See Babu Muttra’s case, Morton 75, also reported in
Clark’s Rules and Orders, page 119). The practice varied greatly from time
to time, and it was never perhaps very satisfactorily determined upon what
basis the jurisdiction rested. It was, however, established that such probate
might issue. But the Supreme Court never applied the English rule as to
the necessity for probate to Hindu and Mahomedan Wills, nor do they
attribute to such probates, when granted, the English doctrines as to the
operation of probate. Under the system a Hindu or Mahomedan executor
took no title to properly merely as such by virtue of the probate. In the
case of Mahomedan executors such a title was created for the first time by
the probate and Administration Act” पु

(2) Period before £865—Hindus and Muslims

2.20. In the period before 1865, considerable uncertainty previiled as to
the law applicable to persons belonging to communities other than Hindus and
Muslims. Before 1865, the Hindus and Muslims were governed by their respec-
tive personal laws, in matters of inheritance and succession. The position was.
however, obscure in relation to other persons,—for example, Anglo-Indians,
Parsis, Jews, Armenians, Christians and others. In general, the English law was

‘Act of Settlement, 1781, section 17.

3.5. Jebb v. Lefebre and Careline, English decisions (old series), Vol. 1, page 92.
*Mayor of Lyons v. East India Co., 1 M.1A. 175.

‘Naoroji v. Rogers, 4 Bombay High Court Reports.

‘Kurrutulain ए Nuzhut-ud-Dowla, LL.R. 33 Cal. 117, 128 (Sir Arthur Wilson J.)


13

applied in the Presidency towns, but the position as regards the Moffussil was
no? very elear'.

This obscurity of pOsicion was, in fact, referred to by Sir Henry Maine’,
when he introduced the Bill that led to the Succession Act of 1865. Efforts by
the ‘irst Law Commission to clarify the law failed to yield fruit.

2.21 The law delining the rights and obligations of non-Hiodus and nOn- Obscurity in the
Muslims was thus in an extremely obscure position in the first half of thefirst half of 190
nineteenth Century. In the presidency towns, the Engtish law was applied — to Century.
members of such communities, as stated above’. Outside the presidency towns,
most of the courts in the Motussil came to apply, under the phrase “justice,
equity and good conscience”, in all cases not provided for by the legislature.
the substantive personal Jaw of the particular person.

2.22. In 1935, the First Law Commission‘ recommended that the English First Law Com
law should be declared to be the law applicable to such persons, but this recom- mission,
mendation was not accepted’.

2.23. When the Second Law Commission was established under the Charter Second Law Co-
Act of 1853, it adopted a different approach. It did not fabour the introduction mmission,
of English law, but it considered it desirable to assimilate the law prevalent
throughout the country‘

2.24. A fot of legislative activity was witnessed during the period of the zpj -
Third Law Commission. Amongst the enactments framed by the Third Law कि aw Com
Commission was the Indian Succession Act, 1865, One of the objects of this
Act was to regulate the position relating to inheritance of property’ after death
in regard to persons other than Hindus and Muslims.

The draft of the Indian Succession Bill was submitted by the Third Law
Commission in its First Report’, Originally, it was proposed as “the Indian Civil
Code Chapter 1”—a title which was later altered as the Indian Succession Act
of 1865. It may incidentally be stated that Third Law Commission did its work
in England. Its Members were Sir John Romilly (Master of the Rolls), Sir
William Erle (Chief Justice of the Common Pleas), Sir Edward Ryan, Mr. Robert
Lowe (Lord Sherbrooke), Mr. Justice Willes and Mr. J. M, Macleod (who had
been a Member of the First Law Commission also). हि

2.25. The Act of 1865 dealt with succession, both testamentary and intestate.
However, the Act cxempted Hindus and Muslims from its scope. Its utility lay
in the codification of the law of succession as regards other persons. The dr:
Bill prepared in England by the Third Law Commission, as already stated, was
well received in India. Rankin has described it as a “most valuable and distin-
guised piece of work”.

2.26. Tt was mentioned in the speech of Sir Henry Maine, when he intro- Speech of Sir Henry

duced the Bill which fed to the Act of 1865, that “the rules which the Act in- Maine.

cluded were, for the most part, so extremely simple as to be readily intelligible

to a layman. The Act was to serve as the general law of testale and intestate

succession governing all who were not expressly exempted from its operation.

Europeans, Eurasians, Jews. Armenians and Indiah Christians were made

subject to the Act. Hindus, Mobammedans and Buddhists were excluded from

the purview of the Act. The Governor-General-in-Council was given power to

exclude any Indian races or tribes not falling within these classes. The Act

applied to Parsis in cases of testamentary succession.

1M.P. Jain, Indian Legal History (1972), pages 437, 490, 495, 556.

2Statement of objects and Reasons attached to the Indian Sucession Bill, which became the
Act of 1865.

sPara 2.20, supra. .

‘First Law Commission, ‘Lex Loci’ Report, (3150 October, 1835).

*Rankin, Background to Indian Law (1946), page 37.

"Second Report of the Second Law Commission, Cambridge History of India, Vol. 6, page

*Third Law Commission, First Report, (1854-1855).
*Rankin, Background to Indian (8७ (1946), page 47.


Post-1865 legista-
tion.

Act of 1925

Developments

relating to Parsis.

Parsis. in mofussil

Scope

4

2.27. In between 1865 and 1925, a number of other Acts relating to the
faw of Succession were passed. All these were incorporated in the Act of 1925,
which was a consolidating measure in the true sanse,

(3) The period of consolidation

2.28. The period of consolidation of the statutory law of succession in India
thus begins in 1925. The various enactments consolidated by the Indian Succession
Act, 1925, were :—

(1) The Succession (Property Protection) Aci, 1841 (Act 19 of 1841).

(2) The Indian Succession Act, 1865 (Act 10 of 1865).

(3) The Parsi Intestate Succession Act, 1865, (Act 21 of 1865).

(4) The Hindu Wills Act, 1870 (Act 21 of 1870).

(5) The Married Women’s Property Act, 1874 (Act 3 of 1874), Section 2.

(6) The Probate and Administration Act, 1881 (Act 5 of 1881).

(7) The District Delegates Act. 1881 (Act 6 of 1881),

(8) The Probate and Adm raticn Act, 1889 (Act 6 of 1889).

(9) The Succession Certificate Act, 1889 (Act 7 of 1889).

(10) The Probate and Administration Act, 1890 (Act 2 of 1890),

(11) The Native Christians Administration of Mstates Act. 1908 (Act 7 of
1901).

(12) The Probate and Administration Act, 1903, (Act 8 of 1903).

(4) The Period of reform

2.29, The amendments made from time to time in the Indian Succession Act
of 1925 can be said to represent the period of reforms. This reform has been
rather slow in its pace and therefore not perceptible. This slow pace is, in part,
due to the fact that the law of iniesiate succession applicable to the two important
communities in India—-Hindus and Muslims—falls outside the ambit of the
Indian Succession Act. The slow puce of reform is, in part, also due to the fact
that the practice of executing Wills (a topic which forms the bulk of the subject
matter of the Act), has only recently become widely prevalent in the Mofussil.
However, to some extent, the slow pace of reform must also be attributed to
the fact that no systematic attempt at a review of the Act in all its aspects has
been undertaken since 1925. Such amendments as have been effected in the Act
were due to some urgently felt need to deal with a particular problem or demand
for reform that could not be postponed for a long time. This is understandable.
because matters falling within the Iawyer’s law generally do not find priority on
the legislative agenda.

VI. Parsis

2.30, Developments concerning the law of succession applicable to Parsis
are, however, of interest and may be dealt with in some detail. As early as
1835, the Parsee community’ had represented that they were subjcted to serious
disadvantages in the absence of fixed written laws. The third Law Commission
had, in its report expressed the view that the claim of the Parsees to have a
separate law was not borne out. The Parsees, however, were not satisfied with
this and, ultimately, in 1864 the Parsee Law Commission was appointed. That
Commission made certain recommendations and the Government of India agreed
with them.

2.31. In the case of mofussil Parsees, it was almost impossible to ascertain
with precision the Persee customs, because on many points the Parsees of Surat,
Broach, Poona and Ahmedabad differed from each other and all of them
differed from the Parsees in Bombay.’ The Parsees in the Presidency Towns

J.egal History (1972), page 560.


15

were subject to the English law. The English taw of primogeniture was not
allowed to them through! an Act of 1837. The English statute of distribution
was, however, applied. The Privy Council had already held that in the Supreme
Courts, the Parsees could uot claim the bencfit of the English Ecclesiastical law
as to the matrimonial causes among them. On the whole, the position was
extremely unsatisfactory. The Parsee Law Commission recommended that a
separate law should be enacted for the entire Parsee community in the Presidency
Town as well as in the mofussil, as different systems of law applicable to the
same community led to perplexity. Consequently, a separate Act governing
intestate succession amongst the Parsees was passed. This has now been incor-
porated in scctions 50—56 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925,

CHAPTER 3
PRELIMINARY
I, Title and definitions
3.1. This Chapter will deal with certain preliminary matters. Scope.

3.2. Section 1 deals with the short title of the Act and, in accordance with gooion | short title.
the practice then in force, the word “Indian” occurs as a part of the short title. “4
The practice in modern times is, however, different. We recommend that the word
“Indian” should be omitted from. the short title, in conformity with recent
practice. It may be noted that when revising earlier Acts also recent legislative
practice has been to delete the word “Indian” from the short title.

३.28. In the comments received on the Working Paper, one of the com- ion received
ments forwarded with the letter of the Catholic Bishops Conference of India* pi eres
raises certain issues and points concerning the appl lication of Succession Act to हे
Goa. It has, for example, been stated that in Goa, Christians, Hindus and Muslims
are subject to the same law and if the Succession Act is made applicable to Goa,
it will create unnecessary divisions on communal lines. In this context, we may
mention that a proposal regarding the application of Succession Act to Goa is
not being made in this Report, nor was any such proposal contained in the
Working Paper issued by the Commission on the subject.

3.3. Section 2 contains definitions of certain important expressions used nefinitions in

in the operative provisions of the Act. It would be of interest to classify them section 2.
according to the subjects to which they relate. Two of the definitions—clauses

(3) and (c)—deal with certain functionaries acting under a will. One of the
definitions—clause (bb)—deals with a judicial functionary. Three of the defini-

tions deal with certain fundamental concepts relating to wills—clauses (b), (f)

and (1). Two deal with certain classes of persons—clauses (d) and (e). Two

are territorial—clauses (cc) and (g).

Before discussing the existing definitions, it is necessary to consider certain
points indicating the need for the insertion of new definitions.

वा, New definitions to be inserted

3.4. The persons to whom the Succession Act does not apply, are to be Expressions denot-
ascertained from several provisions of the Act Expressions which have been ing application of
used in various sections in this context have come up for judicial construction. pa Ae and need to
While it is not practicable to codify all the propositions laid down in the judicial
decisions, it seems to be advisable to consider codification of at least some of the
important propositions, so that the Act may be self-contained in respect of the
salient matters concerning its applicability. Some of these points are stated below,

by way of illustration.

1Central Act 9 of 1837. Succession to Parsis Immovable Property Act (9 of 1837)

2Compare the amendment made in the short title of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930, wherein the
word ‘Indian’ has been omitted.

Catholic Bishops Conference of India Letter dt. 3rd October, 1984.

‘Sections 3, 29(1) 58(2) and 217 (The list is merely illustrative).


lo

(1) Hindus—Most sections of the Act now apply to Hindus.

(2) Indian Christians—One of the sections of the Act’ does not apply to
‘Indian Christains’—an expression separately defined*. The expression seems to
have come up for consideration before the Rangoon High Court,’ which held
that the court cannot inquire into the internal convictions of a person, We
have received a comment on the Working Paper through a letter of the Catholic
Bishops’ Conference,‘ in which it is stated that the terms “Indian Christians” and
“native Christians” should be avoided, and simply the expression “Christians”
should be used in the Act. It is stated that Christians should be considered as an
integral community in India. We have given the suggestion very careful considera-
tion, but we find it impracticable to accept it. The adjective “Indian” had to be
used, since certain rules applicable to Christians coming from outside India are
intended not to apply to Indian Christians as defined in the Act, So long as this
scheme is to be mainiained—and this is a matter of substance not of mere
phraseology—some berbal device will necessarily have to be employed to indicate
the line of demarcation. If the formula “Indian Christian” is decided to be
avoided, something similar will have to be substituted in its place, The use of
the expression in question does not, so far as we can see, affect the integral
character of the community, from the social angle.

Recommendanen (3) Parsis—Some of the sections of the Act apply to Parsis. The expression
to insert a defaltion ‘Parsi’ is not defined in the Act. The Parsi Marriage Act,’ defines it as meaning
of ‘Pare’. a ‘Parsis Zeroastrain’. The definition given in that Act is suitable for adoption

for the purposes of the Succession Act also. We, therefore, recommend that it
should be so adopted, by inserting’ « new definition in the Act for the purpose.

(4) Portuguese—It seems to have been held by the Bombay High Court’
that the Portuguese are not governed by the Act.

Recommendation to 3.5. The expression ‘Hindu’ has not been defined at any place in the Indian

insert ay ioa Succession Act. Nice questions have arisen with reference to the meaning of this
expression for the purposes of the Act. For example, the view has been expressed
that the word ‘Hindu’ is a theological term, and denotes a person professing any
form of Brahmanical religion or religion of the Puranas.

This view would exclude non-Aryan natives like Santhals, Kols, Nagas and
Bhils.* * That the term ‘Hindu’ is used as a theological term, was also the view
expressed in a Bombay case.”

Statutory defininten 3.6. In this context, it is proper to refer to several statutory definitions of
of ‘Hindu ‘Hindu’ that have now come into existence.

The following is an extract of section 2 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.

Application of 4 a. “Section 2(1). This Act applies— .
(a) to any person who is a Hindu by-religion in any of its forms or
developments, including a Virashaiva, Lingayat or a follower of the
Brahme, Prarthana or Arya Samaj.
(0) to any person who is a Budhist. Jain or Sikh by religion.

(९०) to any other person domiciled in the territories to which this Act
extends who is not a Muslim, Christian. Parsi or Jew bv religin, unless
it is proved that any such person would not have been governed by
the Hindu Law or by any custom or usage as part of that law in
respect of any of the matters, dealt with herein if this Act had not
been passed.

Section 339.
"Section 2 (ता.

*Ma Khin, Than v. Ma Aken, ATR 1934 Rang. 72.

‘Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India, fetter dated 3rd October, 1984.

*Parsi Marriage & Divorce Act (3 of 1936).

*To be carried out in section 2, by inserting a definition of the expression ‘Parsi’,
*Antas v. Ardesir, (1901) 2 Bombay Law Reporter 431.

*$tokes, Succession Act, page 201, cited by N.D.
Basu, Succession Act (1957), page 31.
*Also Stokes, Anglo-Indian Codes. page 483.
*Dagree v. Pacosti Sen Jao, 1895) L.LR. 19 Bom. 783, 789 (per Starling 3.)



17

Explanation » Une {viiowing persons are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or Sikhs
by religion, as the case may be :-—

{a) any chiid, legitimate or illegitimate. both of whose parents are
Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or Sikhs by religion;

(b) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents is a Hindu,
Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion and who is brought up as a member
of the tribe, community. group or family to which such parent
belongs or belonged:

{c) any person who is a convert or re-convert to the Hindu, Buddhist,
Jaina or Sikh religion.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (1), nothing con-
tained in this Act shall apply to the members of any Scheduled Tribe within
the meaning of clause (25) of Article 366 of the Constitution unless the
Central Government, by notification in the official Gazette, otherwise directs.

(3) The expression ‘Hindu’ in any portion of this Act shall be construed
as if it included a person who, though not a Hindu by religion, is neverthe-
less a person to whom this Act applies by virtue of the provisions contained
in this section”.

10 the same terms is section 2(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act. 1955.

3.7. In our oP inion, it is desirable to adopt the above definition for the Recommendation i
purposes of the Indian Succession Act also, so as to secure uniformity, A person Oren canton
to whom the Hindu Succession Act applies would then be regarded as a “ Hindu

for the purposes of the Indian Succession Act also.

Accordingly, we recommend that a definition of ‘Hindu’ should be inserted’
to the effect, that the expression ‘Hindu’ has (in this Act) the same meaning? as
in the Hindu Succession Act. 1956. .

3.8. The Act does not, at present, define the expression “Child’. For reasons Section 3(0a)-—
which we shall state later,’ it is necessary to add a definition of this expression as of “Child”
follows :— recommended.

“(aay ‘child’ includes—

(a) an adopted child, in the case of any one whose personal law permits
adoption.

(0) “an illegitimate child”.

Ul. Existing detinition

3.9. We now proceed to consider the existing definitions given in section 2. Section 2(a)
“administrator”

Under Section 2(a), “administrator” means ॥ person appointed by competent
authority to administer the estate of a deceased person when there is no executor.
The clause needs no change.

A definiton of “child” may be added, for reasons already stated.
a . ५,, Section 2(5)
3.10. Section 2(b) provides that “codicil” means an instrument made in Section 200)
relation to त will, and explaining, altering or adding to its dispositions. and shall

be deemed to form part of the will.

The definition needs no change.

'To he carried out by amending section 2, by inserting a definition of “Hincs:".

Ja consequence, expressions referring to Buddhists. Sikhs and Jainas along with Hindus,
wherever they occur, may be omitted.

4See para 8.18 infra (section 37).
4566 para 3.8 supra.


18
Section 2(6) “Dis- ३.11, Under section 2(bb), inserted in 1929, “District Judge” means the
trict Judge”. Judge of a principal civil couft of original jurisdiction. The main object of the
definition was to cover the High Court in its ordinary original civil jurisdiction.

1६ has been held’ that “District Judge” (in the Succession Act) includes an
Additional District Judge.

The definition needs no change.

Section 2c) “‘exe- 3.12, Section 2(c) defines “executor” as meaning a person to whom the
प्राण”, execution of the last will of a deceased person is, by the testator’s appointment,
confided.

It needs no ‘change.

Section 2(20) (New 3.13. A definition of the expression “Hindu” should be inserted, on the
SSindu co. be in-lines already recommended.’
sorted,

(4) “Indian 3.14. Under section 2(d), the expression “Indian Christian’ means a native
५ of India who is, or in good faith claims to be of unmixed Asiatic descent and
who professes any form of the Christian religion.

The definition follows that given in an earlier Act’ except that the phrase
‘Indian Christian’ has been used in place of the earlier, phrase ‘Native Christian’.

The expression has been held to include converts to Christianity‘.

The Indian Marriage 300 a ippears to have been the first Central Act to use
the expression “native christian”. terminology was, with one change, continued
in the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872. The Indian Divorce Act, 1869 does
Not use the expression, since it does not make a distinction between native or
Indian Christians and other Christians.

The definition in the present Act requires three ingredients (i) native of
India, (ii) unmixed Asiatic decent and Gi profession of the Christian religion,

Although, at the first sight, the requirement that the person concerned must

be a native of India may recall to one’s mind the days of Breien domination, the
real intention is to emphasise that there must be some link with India and that

mere religion is not enough,

As regards the requirement of unmixed Asiatic descent, the intention was
apparently to demarcate such persons from those who were of Western descent
for example Anglo-Indians. is, a link with India and descent from Asiatic
stock, have some significance.

3.14A, In a comment received by us through the Catholic Bishops Con-
ference,’ a reservation is expressed about the qualification “unmixed Asiatic
descent” which is required for an Indian Christian. The following criticism has
been offered in the comment :—

“Anglo-Indians would not qualify to Indian Christians according to this
definition, There would not be any difficulty if by their not coming under this
section it would be advantageous to them, but it is not advantageous to them.
Further the question of non-Anglo-Indian Christian marrying an Anglo-Indian
girl would give rise to problems. Since the father is not an Anglo-Indian the
children would not be Anglo-Indians. But since they are not of unmixed Asiatic
descent they would not come under the Indian Succession Act. There is no law
apparently under which the children would come, If the special provision for
Anglo-Indians 15 to be retained could not the children follow the status of the

father?”

Xa) Sagar Chaudhury v. Nabin Ch. Chaudhury ATR 1970 Assam 111, 113.
(6) Ganpat v. Mahadeo, ATR 1949 Nag. 408, para 7.
35०७ paragraphs 3.3. and 3.4., supra.
*Native Christians Administration of Estates Act (7 of 1901).
“(@) Dwarka Nath v. Raj Rani, ATR 1932 Oudh 85;

(0) Kamawatl v. Digbijai Singh, ATR 1922 P.C. 14.
*The Indian Marriage Act, 1865 (5 of 1865).

¢ Bishops’ Conference of India, letter dated 3rd October 1984.



19

We find ourselves unable to accept the suggestion. We would like to point
out that Anglo-Indians are not governed by provisions applicable to Indian
Christians but by provisions applicable to other communities, that is to say, the
residuary class from which are excluded the specified communities such as Hindus,
Muslims, Buddhists, Sikhs, Jains, Parsis and Indian Christians. As regards the
question of a non-Anglo-Indian Christian marrying an Anglo-Indian girl, it is
to be pointed out that the problem of determining for legal purposes the religion
of the child of such mixed parentage is a matter outside the purview of the
Succession Act. In the circumstances, we do not think that any amendment is
called for in the Succession Act, on the point in issue.

3.14B. The only improvement which can be possibly considered is as regards
the word “native”. But this will only be a verbal improvement. Some kind of
jink or association with India is of the essence of the concept of Indian Christians,
and unless a better word can be found, it is not possible to change the definition
in clause (d).

3.15, Section 2(e) defines “Minor” as meaning any person subject to the section 2(०)
Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875), who has not attained his majority “Minox”.
within the meaning of that Act, and any other person who has not completed
the age of eighteen years and “minority” is defined as meaning the status of any
such person,

The definition needs no change.

3.16, As already recommended, a definition of the expression “parsi” should Definition of
be inserted. “parsi’' to be added.

3.17. In section 2 (f)y “probate” is defined as meaning the copy of a will Section 2(f)-—
certified under the seal of a court of competent jurisdiction with a grant of “Probate”
administration to the estate of the testator, The form of probate is given in the
Sixth Schedule to the Act. On a comparison of the definition with the form one
finds that “probate” is defined inaccurately. “Probate” does not, in strictness,
mean the copy of a will, but the certificate of the Court, to which a copy of the
will is attached. ,

The distinctive characteristic of probate is that it establishes the validity
of a particular will for all purposes and so as to bind all persons. The grant of
a probate, makes it unnecessary for an executor to have to “prove” the will on
every occasion on which he seeks to rely upon it’. In other words, probate and
letters of administration with a will annexed, while un-revoked, are conclusive
evidence of the due executions and validity of the will.

3.18. We are not, at the moment, concerned with the view that the grant Defect in
of probate is a “decree” of the court—a view expressed by Markby J. in a definition of
Calcutta case’, or with the opposite view that a probate is not a judgment, order bate”.
or decree——-a view taken in a later Calcutta case’ and also in a Patna case®. What
js material for our purpose is the most important element of a probate—a
certificate of proof issued by the proper officer of the court. This element is
missing in the present definition, as contained in Section 2 (f), though it is
indicated very clearly in the Form of Probate’ prescribed by the Act in the Sixth

Schedule.

In this sense, there arises a discrepancy between the definition and the Form,
in so far as the essential feature of ‘proof’ and ‘certificate’ is left out in the

definition.

tpara 3.4, supra.

2Gareth Muller, Machinery of Succession (1977) page 75.

aWhicker v. Hume, (1858) 7 House of Lords Cases 124, 143, 156, 165.
*Komollochun v. Niruttan, (1879) ILR 4 Cal.-360.

*Rajib Panda v. Lakhan Sendh, (1900) ILR 27 Cal. 11.

*Raj Kishor v. Promode Bihari (1943),
TLR 22 Pat. 756, (Section 296 relied on).

+Sixth Schedule, read with section 289.


20

Recommendation 3.19. It appears to us that this discrepancy between the definition in sec-

to amend the defi-tion 2(f) and the Form of Probate as given in the Sixth Schedule should be

nition of “Probate”. removed, With that object in view. we recommend that the definition of “probate”
in Section 2(f) should be revised as 2 “decument issued in respect of 6 will
under the signature of the proper officer of the court, certifying that the original
will was proved on a certain date and attaching a certified copy of the will, with
a grant of administration to the estate of the testator.”

Section 2—other 3.20. No other points need to be. made concerning section 2.

points if any.

IV, Exempted persons

Section 3 penton 3.21. This takes us to section 3, Section 3 gives power to the State Govern-
ment to exempt the members of any race, sect or tribe in the State from the opera-
tion of the specified sections. The power is (० be exercised where the State
Government considers it impossible or inexpedient to apply such provisions to
them. Such persons are called “exempted persons”.

We have no. comments on this section, which appears still to possess some
utility in view of the peculiar social and economic conditions prevailing amongst
certain groups or in certain local areas.

CHAPTER-4+

CONFLICT OF LAWS'
(Section 3 A et seg.)

1, Section S—Placing

Separate हि आई Oa 4.1. At this stage, we would like to interrupt our consideration of the sub-
- परत “conflict or stantive sections of the Act and refer to one matter which is of considerable

pricfical importance, The Act, in s2ction 3, deals with the 11७ applicable to suc-
cession. This provision is included in Part 1I entitled ‘Domicile’, In fact, however.
the section deals with a basic principle of conflict of laws. “Domicile” is mentioned
in the section as only one of the criteria for determining the law applicable.
Essentially, the section deals with the law applicable. To bring out this essential
character of section 5, the section should really appear in a separate Part which
can be placed, say. (after Part 1), es Part TA. That Part could he given the head-
ing “Conflict of Laws” and section 5 included therein’ If any other rules’ of
conflict of laws related to testamentary and intestate succession ure considered
appropriate for being codified, they can also be conveniently included in the
same Part.

IL. Formalities in respect of wills

| Tre aspect Oh 4.2. We may state that apart’ from section 5, there are certain other specific
Pt lew and” for- topics’ relating to the Faw of succession which have an interest from the point
malities in wills, of view of private international law. To cite one example. the question of forema-
ities in relation to the execution of wills has important international aspects. The
formalities prescribed by law for the execution of a will often differ from country
| to country, Cases may conceivably occur where it person in country X executes
| a will which comes up for probate in country Y. When a testator domiciled in
i one country makes a will abroad or dies abroad or disposes of property situated
in more than one country, the question then arises, what would be the set of
rules that apply ? The situation creates some difficulty in the absence of a definite
rufe on the subject in municipal legislation. This is not a mete hypothetical
question. There have been actual situations in which such anomalies have arisen,

‘To be introduced as Pert TA in the Act
"For the concrete recommendation. see para 4.20, infra.
“For an illustration see para 4.4 to 4.8 infra.

“Para 4.1, supra.

‘See ako paragraphs 4.19 and 4.20, infra.


21

Tor example, in one of the leading English cases on the subject’, a will of
movable property made in the English form (outside the UK) by व British subject
who died domiciled in France was held to be invalid, since 1 neglected the forma-
lities prescribed by French law (the law of domicile), ever though it complied
with the requirements of English !aw. In England*, the position has been modified
by statute, but in India, there being no such legislation this would be the position
even today under Section S. .

4,3. In the field of conflict of laws, formalities in relation to wills are
governed by certain connecting factors’. These connecting factors depend on the
judicial or legislative approach to the subject as adopted in the country concer-
tied, Under the Indian Succession Act however, the only connecting factors,
applicable for determining questions as to the formalities of wills are those men-
tioned in section 5, sub-section (1) and (2). The section makes applicable the
law of India in the case of immovable property, and the law of the country of
domicile in the case of movable property. There has, so far, been no elaborate
development of the concept of “proper law” of the “will” in India.

Although section 5 does not, in so many words, specitically enact that it
applies to formalities as to wills, that seems to follow from the wide tanguage of
the section, namely, “succession to the ... property of a person deceased is
regulated ty ...” It has, for example’, been held that the validity of a will which
purported to dispose of immovable property in British India must be tested by
the rules applicable in India as to the execution of wills.

The section seems to cover’ not only the law of intestate succession, but
also the law of wills in all its aspects. namely, their formal validity, essential
validity (including capacity of testators ond validity of dispositions} and questions
of interpretation and legal effect of wills.

4.4. Since section 5 disregards (i) nationality of the testators or his domicile Formal validity
at the time of execution of the testament (known as domicile tempore testamente) anomalies likely 19
and (ii) the law of the place of execution, certain anomalies could arise? in* .
regard to the formal validity of wills.

पा, Legistation in England as to formalities

4.5, To remedy some of these anomalies, in England, the Wills Act, 1861 Wills Act, 1861,

(Lord Kingsdowne’s Act) was passed. It enacted a provision that a will of
personal property made out of the United Kingdom by a British subject should
be admissible to probate, if it satisfied the formalities required by the lex loci
actus or by the law of the testator's domicile tempore testmente or by the law of
the domicile of origin if such domicile was in Her Majesty's Dominions. These
creteria should be a substitute for the traditional test of domicile. If the will was
made within the UK. the only permissible substitute was the lex foci actus.

4.6. Before 1861, # will, according io English law. had to be made in the Position, in England

form prescribed by the law of the testator’s dom‘cile at the time of death, at least "°° .

in relation to movables, Neither the law of his domicile at the time

of the execution of the will, nor that of the place where he made the will, sufficed,

The situation was highly unsatisfactory. \ domiciled Englishman who fell ill

while travelling abroad and wished to make will immediately might have difficully

in finding a lawyer who could assist. him in making « will in the English form,

while it would be easy to usc the local form’.

The Act of 1861 remedied’ the situation to some extent.

4.7 The English Act of 1861, though welcome as an improvement, did not
effect an adequate reform in the Law. In 1963. the Wills Act was passed’ which

1Sremer v. Freeman, (1857) 18 Moore P.C. 306; 14 F.R. 508.

*Paragraphs 4.5 to 4.8 infra.

>Morris in (1946) 62 L.Q.R. 170, 173, 176.

*Bhaurao v. Laxmibai, 0896). TLR 29 Bom. 697, 610.

*Para 4.2, supra.

‘Wolff, Private International Law (1950). page 584, para 559.

*Para 4.5, supra.

*Cf. Fourth Report of the Private International Law Committee (1958) comd. 491


(while

22

repealing the Act of 1861), has made comprehensive provisions by in-

creasing the relevant connecting factors. Nationality and habitual residence are
now added to the factors earlier recognised (by the common law and by the
Wills Act, 1861), namely, domicile and locus actus'~*,

Summary of Eng- 4.8, It may be useful to give, at this stage, some idea of the scheme of the
lish Act of 1963.” Wills Act, 1963. Leaving aside provisions not material for our purpose, the

subject

deait, within the Act sectionwise are as follows :—

Section 1: enacts a general rule as to formal validity of wills. A will shall

be treated as properly executed if its execution conformed to the
“internal law” in force in the territory where it was executed or in
the territory where at the time of its exeeution or at the time of testator’s
death, he was domiciled or habitually resident, or in a state of which,
at either of these times, he was a national.

The phrase “internal Law” is defined as the law which would apply in a
case where no question of the law in force in any other country or place arose.

Tt thus

avoids the possibility of application of the doctrine of reivo/,

Provision is made to determine “internal law” in regard to ७ country

where more than one system is in force.

Section 2(1) : Provides additional rules (i.c., in addition to section 1), to
deal with—

(a) wills executed on board ४ vessel or aircraft,

(०) wills disposing of immovable property (the law in force in the
territory where the property was situated is adopted),

(c) a will, revoking an earlier will, and,

: (d) a will exercising a power of appointment (the law governing the
essential validity of the power is adopted).

The important provisions in this regard are—

(a) a will executed on board a vessel or aircraft of any description, if it

(b

complied with the law of the place with which the vessel or aircraft
may be taken to have been most closely connected having regard to
its registration (if any) and other relevant circumstances, is properly
executed.

a will disposing of immovable property, if it complies with the law
in force in the place where the property was situated, is properly
executed.

(०) a will revoking a will which was executed under the Act if it complied

with the same law as the revoked will did, is properly executed.

Section 2(2) : Provides, in effect, that in regard to a will exercising a power

of appointment, non-compliance with formal requitements contained
in the instrument creating the power would not render the will inopera-
tive.

Section 3: Provides that any requirements of a foreign law (that is, the

foreign law which would become relevant under the tests adopted in
the Act), prescribing special formalities to be observed by “testators
answering a particular description” or prescribing certain qualifications
to be possessed by witnesses to wills, are to be treated as formal
requirements only*.

Section 4: Provides that the construction of a will shail not be altered by

reason of any change in the testator’s domicile after the execution of
the will. This re-enacts section 3 (in part) of the Wills Act, 1861.

Cheshire, Private International Law (1970), page 591.

*The Act of 1963 has been noted on by Morris (1964) 13 LCL.Q. 684; Kahn Fraund 1(964)

3See

27 Modern Law Review 55.
illustrative hypothetical cases, infra. (Para 4.15).


bo
we

Section 5: Relates to Scotland.
Section 6 : Contains provisions for interpretation.

Section 7(1). (2) and (3) ; contain certain provisions not of interest to
India.

Section 7(4) : Makes provisions as to the operation of the Act from the
point of view of time. It provides that the Act shall not apply to a will
of a testator who died before the commencement of the Act, but shall
apply to a will of a testator who dies after such commencement. whether
the will was executed before or after that time.

4.9, So much as regards the scheme of the English Act of 1963. it may be Principle underlying
useful now to state briefly the rationale underlying some of the important pro- Section 1 of
visions. The principle underlying section 1 of the Act, which enumerates several English Act of 1963.
alternative tests for determining the formal validity of wills, is that while only
those documents should be accepted as valid wills, of which it can be said with
reasonable certainty that they were executed by the testator with the intention of
disposing of his assets after his death, a document which fulfils these conditions
ought 10 be accepted as valid and ought not to be excluded because of some
technical imperfections of which the testor might reasonably have been unware.

Accordingly, the Act secks to secure that if the testator complies with the
formal requirements of any system of law which he may reasonably assume to be
applicable, his will should be treated as formally valid. The Act thus increases
the possible systems of law to which reference may be made to establish the
formal validity of wills. Validity by one of them is sufficient.’

4,10, One of the tests given in section 1 of the English Act of 1963 is Habitual residence.
“habitual residence”. Cheshire’s comments? as to the position resulting from the
Act in tegard to habitual residence are interesting :—

“With this old adoption of the test of habitual residence, the frustration
arising from the disparity between the Anglo-Saxon and Continental con-
cepts of domicile will almost be a memory of the past in this limited field.
At any rate, if a testator makes a will according to the law of the country
where he has spent the greater part of his life, there will no longer be any
occasion to counter the plausible argument that his domicile was elsewhere
since he did not intend his residence to be permanent’.

It may be pointed out that under section 1 of the English Act, a will is to
be treated as properly executed if its execution conformed to the law in force
in the place—

(i) where the will was executed,

(ii) where the testator was domiciled,

(iii) where the testator had his habitual residence, or
(iv) of which the testator was a national.

The first of these choices (place of execution) can relate, in time and place,
only to the execution itself, but the other three expressly refer to the relevant
1 place either at the execution of the will or at the testator’s death’.

4.11. The law of the place where the will was made, is given an
extended definition in the case of wills made on board a vessel or aircraft “of Section 2(1Xa),
any description”. Section 2 (1) (a) of the English Act of 1963 allows (in Baglish Act, 1963.
addition to law of the place of execution), another alternative, namely, the
internal law in force in the territory to which the vessel or aircraft may be
taken to have been most closely connected. Normally, this would be the flag

ICf, Sykes & Pryles, Australian Private
International Law (1979), page 449.
2Cheshire, Private International Law (1970), page 592.
3Ch, Ramsay v. Liverpool Royal Infirmary, (1938) A.C. 588.
«J.T. Fasrand, “Foreign Wills and the Witls Act’’ (1963), 103 S.J. 686, 687.


View of Cheshire
as (o vessels.

Principle as to the
law of ship.

Main tests adopted
in the English Act.

Operation of sec:
illustrated.

24

state. In this coniext, the English Act docs not require the vessel or aircraft 10
be in motion when the will is execuied, Hence a nolograph will made on board
a French ship alongside in London docks, or on board a French aircraft grounded
at London airport. might be admissible to probate’.

4.12. Cheshire’ thus explains the position as to vessels:—

“Where a will is made on board a vassel or aircraft whether civil or not,
the identity of the fex loci actus receives special statutory treatment. If at
ihe time Of execution the aircraft is grounded in a particular territory or
the vessel is within territorial waters, the testator may comply with the
internal law of that territory. Alternatively, he may comply with the internal
law of the territory with which, having regard (0 its cegistration and other
relevant circumstances, the vessel or aircraft, whether in course of transit
or Bot, has the closest connexion’, Judged by this test, the lex loci will
normally be the law of the flag, which is represented by the law of the
territory where the ship or aircraft is registered if the flag is common to a
political unit containing a variety of legal systems”.

4.13. Mention may, in this context, be made of the principie that the “local
law” operating on board a ship is the law of the flag flown by the ship’ and that
the law governs transactions on board, including marriages to the same extent
as they would be governed by the fex foci if they took place elsewhere.‘

4.14, By way of a very brief summary of the main tests adopted .in sections
1-2 of the Wills Act, 1963, it may be stated that a wiil of movables or land is
taken as properly exccuted’ if its execution conforms to the internal law in force
in the territory where it was executed, or in the territory where at the time of
fexiecution of the will or at the time of the testator's death the testator was
domiciled, or had his habitual residence or in a State of which at either of these
times he was a national."

In addition, a wilt of immovubles is to be treated as properly executed if
its execution conforms to the internal law in force in the territory where the pro-
perty is situated.

4.15, So much as regards sections 1 and 2 of the English Act of 1963. The

tion 3, 193 Act, Operation of section 3 of the English Act of 1963 could be illustrated by taking

hypothetical cases involving the application of statutory provisions in force in
Netherlands’ and in France.”

(i) Dutch law alfows a holograph will by a Dutchman, bur not outside
Netherlands. It appears that there are similar provisions in Greece, Portugal and
Uruguay". A Dutchman domiciled in England executes such a will, The will
does not acquire any validity by virtue of the Act of 1963, because the English
law (law of domicile) does not altow.a holograph will, and Dutch law (law of
nationality) does not allow it outside Netherlands. This prohibition in Dutch law,
being regarded as a “matter of form”—section 3—would continue to apply.

(४) By German law, a will can be made by a persomabove 16 years, but
only a person above 21 years can make a holograph will. A German above

‘Morris, “The Wills Act, 1963, 13 LC.L.Q. 684, 688.

2Cheshire, Private International Law (1970) p. 59.

"Section 2(1) (a).

36. Cheshire, Private International Law (1970), page 282.

3).D. While | “Marriages at Sea’ 17 L.Q.R. 283, 292.

a) Halsbury, 4th Ed., Vol. 7., page 101.

6) Jackson, Formation and Annulment of Marriage, page 226.

(©) Marriage on the High 52357 (1928-29) 38 Yale L.J. 1129. 1135.

Section 1, Wills Act, 1963.

*Section 2 (1) (5), Wills Act, 1963.

*article 992, Duich Civil Code, referred 10 by Kahn-Fraund in note on the Wills Act, 1963
(1964) 27 Modern Law Rev. 55, $8. 59, . Also see Wolff, Private International Law (1950),
page 589.

1eArticles 969 and 970, French Civil Coe referred by to Kabn-Fraund in note on the Wills Act,
1963 (1964) 27 Modern Law Review 55, 58, 59.

wolff, Private International Law (1950), page 589.


25

16 makes a holegrapb will in ¢ (Freneh law allows hologeaph wills), The
will is valid, because French law (tae Jaw of place of execution) permits it. The
fact that German law prohibits it to persons under 21 becomes immaterial, since
section 3 provides that it is a maiter of form.

4.16. According to section 4 of the English Act of 1963, no will becomes Eff-ct of section 4
invalid by. reason of any subsequent change of the testator’s domicile. ‘This rule of the English Act,
applies not only 10 the formalities of a will, but also to the testalor’s capacity to
make one. It applies not only to British subjects, but also to any testator of what-
ever nationality and whatever domicile. The result of this is that if the testacor,
when making the will, was capable of doing so under the taw of his domicile at
that time, the will remains, valid, even though, under the law of his last demicile,
it would have been void on the ground of his incapacity. In ihe example given
above.' iherefore, the will made by a sixteen year old German testator in Germany
should be regarded as valid. even if the testator dies domiciled in ingland.

4.17, The impression one gains from the Act is that all the choices likely Wide scope of the
10 be hit upon in practice have been put in, on the principle that no will should t.
be invalid for want of form, provided that it complies with some law which the
testator has at least had a temporary connection?

is the scheme of the English Act, whose most important Recommendation—
cflect is the widening of the connecting factors in relation to the formal validity Need for addition
of wills. It appears to us that having regard to the considerations mentioned at Son notte tke
the outset in this Chapter’, the connecting factors that could possibly operate in Eng lish Act of
relation to the formal validity of wills should he made more liberal than at 1963.

present, in order to avoid anomalies of the nature that arose in England in the

last century! and similar other anomalies that could possibly arise. To avoid such

anomalies, the (English) Wills Act, 1963 was passed, As that Act furnishes a

good precedent, we recommend the adoption of its provisions with appropriate ’
adaptations and modifications.

To avoid a possible inconsistency in the legislation, it will, as a consequential
change, be necessary to modify* suitably the test of section 5. We shall make a
recommendation for its amendment at the appropriate place.

4.19. It will be noticed that some of the tests that will become operative Amendment of
under the proposed new provision’ are not mentioned in section 5. That section Section 5 age

provides for Only two criteria (law of domicile of a person at the time of his
death or the law of India). On the addition of the proposed tests, the restrictive
tule contained in section 5 would, to that extent, become inaccurate.

VI, Recommendation as to as to new sections

4.20. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend tho insertion Draft section 10 be

of the following new sections to deal with the rules of conflict of laws as 10 the inserted to deal
with conflict rules as

formal validity of wills : 10 formal validity.

“3A, A will shall be treated as properly executed if its execution conformed General as to fore
to the internal law in force— mal validity.
(a) in the territory where it was executed, or eal 1 Wills Act,

(0) in the territory where, at the time of its execution or of the iesta-
sor’s death, he was domiciled or had his habitual residence, or

(०) in a state of which, at either of those times, he was a nationaF.

"Para 4.14, supre.

sCompare ).T. Farrand, “Foreign Witls and the Wills Act’* (19633 107 5.1. 686, 687.
8See para 4.2, supra. .

sPara 4.6, supra.

See recommendation as to section 5, para 4.19 , infra

"Para 4.14, supra.

See proposed sedtion 3E(I}ta),for a definition of “internal law”.


Additional rules.
[९ 5. 2, Wills Act,
1963)

2 (2) English
8. lis
Act of 1963.

Certain —_require-
ments to be treated
as formal.

Cf. S. 3 English.
Seer see

Construction of
wills.

(Cf, s. 4, Wills Act
963, Prenacting
section 3, Wills Act,

1861]

26

“3B. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 3A, the following
shall be treated as properly executed—

(a) @ will executed on board a vessel or aircraft of any description, if
the execution of the will conformed to the internal law in force in the
territory with which, having regard to its registration (if any) and other
relevant circumstances, the vessel or aircraft may be taken to have been
most closely connected;

*(b) 4 will so far as it disposes of immovable property, if its execution
conformed to the internal law in force in the territory where the pro-
perty was situated;

(०) 4 will so far as it revoked a will which under this Act would be
treated as properly executed Or revoked a provision which under this
Act would be treated 65 comprised in a properly executed will, if the
execution of the later will conformed to any law by reference to which
the revoked will or provision would be so treated;

(0) a will so far as it exercises a power of appointment, if the execution
of the will conformed to the law governing the essential validity! of
the power.

S. 3B. (2) A will so far cs it expresses a power of appointment shall not be
treated as improperly executed by reason only that its execction was not in
accordance with any formal requirements contained in’ the instrument creat-
ing the power.

3-C, Where (whether in pursuance of this Act or not) a law in force outside
India, falls to be applied in relation to a will, any requirement of that law
whereby special formalities are to be observed by testators answering a parti-
cular description or witnesses to the execution of a will are to possess certain
qualifications shall be treated notwithstanding any rule of that law to the
contrary, as a formal recuirement only,

“3D. The construction of a will shall not be altered by reason of any change
in the testator’s domicile after the execution of the will.

“3E, (1) in this Chapter—

(a) “internal law” in relation to any territory or state means the law
which would apply in a case where no question of the law in force in
Gny other territory or state arose;

(b) “state” means a territory or group of territories having its own
law of nationality;

(c) “will” includes a testamentary instruments or act, and “testator”
shall be construed accordingly.

“2) Where, under this Chapter, the internal law in force in eny territory
or state is to. be applied in the case of a will, but there are in force in that
terri or state two or more systems of internal law relating to the formal
ity of wills, the system to be applied shall be ascertained as follows :—

(a) if there is in force throughout the territory or state a rule indicating
which of those systems can properly be cpplied in the case in question,
that ride shall be followed : or

(b) if there is no such rule, the system shall be that with which the
testator was most closely connected at the relevant time, and for this
purpose the relevant time is— .

(i) the time of the testator’s death where the matier is to be deter-
mined by reference to circumstances prevailing at his death, and

(ii) the time of execution of the will, in any other case.

जार expression “essential validity”, though not found in Indian Legislative usage so far, is
goavenient.

+Compate, in the Estate of Grees, (1904) Probate 269.


27

“(3) Un determining for the purposes of this Act whether or not the cxect-
tion of a will conformed to a particular law, regard shill be fad iv the fer-
mal requirements of that law at time of cxecution, but this shall not prevent
account being taken of an alteration of law affecting wills exccuted at that
time if the alieration enables the will io be treated as propeily exec med.”

“(6) This chapter shall not apply to a will of @ tesiaor who diéd b: fore
the comunencement of the Indian Succession ....... woe. CAmendment)
अल 9. ..0०००-०-- and shail apply to a will of a testator who dies efter such
commencement, whether the will was executed before or after sttch coim-
mencement.”

'V. Other aspects of conflict of laws

4.21, There may be other aspects of conflict of laws concerning the validity Other aspects.
of wills, such as capacity to make or revoke testamentary dispos‘tions, the per-
missible types of dispositions, the right to contest them and the legal consequences
of defective execution in general. Legal thinking on these matters is still in the
process of crystalisation, We do not, at present, therefore, recommend any pro-
vision on these subjects.

4.22. It may, finally, be mentioned as a matter of interest, that 50४० List of sections deal-
ing with  interna-

sections of the Succession Act deal with the “international” aspects of succession. (ional aspect of
The following is an illustrative list : succession,

Section S*

(Law regulating succession to deceased person's immovable and movable property
respectively }

Section 218
(10 whom administration may be granted, on intestacy)
Section 219 (g)

(Rules for the grant of administration in respect of property in India, though
the law of domicile is different)

Section 232
(Grant of administration to universal or residuary legatees)
Sections 270-271
(Basis of jurisdiction of the district Judge under the Act)
Section 324

(Application of movable property to the payment of debts, where domicile not
in India)

Section 367
(Transfer of assets from India)

Recommendations for aanendment, wherever needed in these sections, would
be made the appropriate place.

CHAPTER 5
DOMICILE
(Sections 4 to 19)

I. Importance of the concept of domicile, and its meaning.

5.1. The next few sections are concerned with the law applicable to succes- scope.
sion (section 4). The rst important doctrine dealt with in those sections is
that of domicile (Sections S—19).

ICT, paras 4.10, to 4.19, supra, for recommendation for amending section 5.
85-L/B(D)144MofLI&CA—3



2s

Domicile in private 5.2. TE i: portance ihar the concept of domicile possesses ia commca law
international बच | - dictions 5 marily d ९ ० the fact that domicile is a basic concept in private
2. £mational aw as administered in those jurisdictions.’ In Indian law, the compe-
ace of Inia: -ourts to grant divorce* and the jaw applicable to succession to
movables* ae ifustration: of ficlds of privaic international Jaw in respect of

which domicile is paramount by statute.’

We sha: consider later ceriain points of detail which arise out of the sections
dealing with :his subject in th> Succession Act. fhe present place, however, seems
to be appro; ing a few general observations as to domicile, which
is central to ihe core of many legal systems.

5.3. The status of a person, the matrimonial and family relation and many
other important questions are governed by domicile. The principle of domicile
is, in fact, the core of the system‘ of private international law. At the present
day, the plaintiff's domicile ox residence is a basis of jurisdiction in the majority
of countries.

Domicile the essen- 5.4, In the elegant phrasing of Cheshire,‘ “Domicile is to status what local
space is to a tangible thing”.

Domicile in Indian 5.5. That domicile is an important concept is as much true of the Indian

Legislation, Legal system as it is of others. By way of illustration, we may mention certain
enactments in force in India in which domicile has been recognised as sufficient
for courts to assume jurisdiction or as relevant for the purpOses of determining
the applicable law.

For example, the Special Marria; ge Act,’ which extends to the whole of
India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, appli ies also to citizens of India
domiciled in the territories to which the Act extends, if those citizens are in the
State of Jammu and Kashmir, The Hindu Marriage Act,’ which extends to the
whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, applies also to Hindus
domiciled in the tertilories to which the Act extends, who are outside the said
territories,

Further, while the Act applies to Hindus, it also applies to any other person
domiciled in the territories to which the Act extends being a person who is not
a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion,

Tt may be mentioned that as early as 1856, the Indian Legislature recognised
domicile as a basis of jurisdiction’ in regard to certain proceedings concerning
family !aw in Indian Courts.

Indian decisions 5.6. These are examples relevant to the application of Indian law or the
in the field of ‘urisdiction of Indian courts. Correspondingly, Indian courts recognise that
private internatin- certain matters relating to status are governed by the law of the country of
nal law, ‘omécile, For example, in one case” which went upto the Privy Council. deed
of adoption had been executed by a Hindu widow domiciled in Pondicherry
(then in French India), It was held by the Privy Council that the widow’s éapacity
to adopt a son to herself. and the status of the child so adopted as her adoptive
son, are matters to be determined according to French Law (the law of domicile),

3566 Law Commission of India, 6th Report (Recognition of foreign divorces).
2E.G. section 2, Indian Divorce Act, 1869,
Indian Su-czssion Act, 1925.

‘aturory Private International Law (1971), pages 36, 110, 131, 170

1953), Vol. T, pages 429, 432, 434, 453, A.L.L, Restatement Second
jcurnal of Compara.ive Law, pages, 1, 16, 22-2;

12५ Act, 1973, s. 5.

Law (1947) 3rd. Ed. page 147, cited in Levontine, Choice of

53, footnote 130. पु



29

uning the meaning of “domicile”, judicial construction plays Domicile meaning
> and this remains true even of countries where the rules have
« part,

anworth in Whicker v. Hume’ said that domicile meant “home,

ome, and if you do not understand your permanent home, I'm afraid

astrations drawn from foreign writers will very much help you to it”.

generally regarded as a workable description’ But even this is not

accurate. A person may be domiciled in a country which is not, and

jas been, his home, as in the case of married women in countries where

won the subject is not altered by statute. By allowing a married woman to

te her own domicile, one obvious cause of this anomaly goes. Again, a

on may have moie than one “home”, but only one “domicile”, Conversely,

person may be homeless, but never lacking a domicile. English law attaches

excessive importance to the domicile of origin,—such that the domicile of origin

revives to fill the gap left when a domicile of choice as abandoned and before

another is acquired. Further, English law requires a heavy burden of proof before

it admits that a domicile of origin has been thrown off. One must note alsp the

excessive emphasis on animus, (intention), as a factor in the acquisition of a
domicile of choice.

5.8. Domicile is thus “an idea of law’? But, in the words of Morris,’ Complexity.
although “originally a good idea ...--... the once simple concept has been so
overloaded by a multitude of cases that it has been transmitted into something
further and further removed from the practical realities of life’.

We are referring to this aspect in order to explain why, in some of the
succeeding sections, we have made an attempt to see that the provisions of the .
law reflect the practical realities of life.

5.9. While, as stated above, dom is, an important concept both in internal The commen law
legislation and in regard to the recognition of certain foreign legal adjudications, system.
it is a peculiarity of the common law system that the concept of domicile is
underscored by certain rules which almost assume the form of categorical impera-
lives, These are—

(1) Every person has a domicile‘

(2) There is no period during the life of a human being at which he may
not have a domicile. No gaps are recognised by law, in this regard.*

(3) A person can have only one domicile at a time.*

=

Holmes announced that’ domicile “in its very nature is one, and if in any
case two are recognised for different purposes, it is a doubiful anomaly”

5.10, The combined operation of these rules accounts for the tenacity with Tenacity of the law.
which the law clings to the domicile of origin and the rigidity with which some
of the rules are formulated. To some extent, this rigidity is reflected in the attitude
of the Iaw as to the domicile of minors and married women,

Il. Domicile in the scheme of the Act.

5.11. It is in this background that the provisions of sections 5—19 relating Background of sec~
to domicile were framed. These sections would appear to be almost the first tins 519 and
attempt in the common law world to codify a difficult and elusive branch of law. °

1Wicker v. Hume, (1858) 7 H.L.C. 124, 160.
*Bell v. Kenny, (1868) L.R. 1 Sec. & Div. 307, 320 (Lord Westbury).
*Morris, Conflict of Laws (1971), page 13.

“CV. section 7, Succession Act.

5Cf, sections 9 and 13, Succession Act.

“Cf. section 5, Succession Act.

*Williamson v. Osenton, (1914) 232 U.S. 619, 624.

*Sce now Second Restatement on Conflict of Laws, Section 11(2), (1971).


30

In the Indian Succession Act, the concept of domicile ic
in the Part with which we are now concerned (sections 4 to 19).
defined the application of this Part, section 5 enacts the basic r.
“conflicts” law, namely, that succession to immovable property situ
is regulated by the Jaw of India, while succession to movable propt
lated by the law of domicile. Various general modes of acquiring de
dealt with in sections 6 to 13, followed by provisions applicable 10 certa.,
situations or to particular classes of persons—such as determination of ५
in the case of minority, marriage and insanity. Finally, a practical rule is in
rated in section 19, namely, succession to movable property is govern
Indian law, in the absence of proof of domicile elsewhere,

JIL. Section 4,

Section 4 Re- 5.12. By virtue of section 4, Part II of the Act (Sections 4 to 18), which

commendation to relates to domicile, does not apply, to Hindus, Mohammadans, Budhists, Sikhs

extend Part IL ‘Sor Jains, Under the Special Marriage Act.’ however, this part would apply to

हों गा वीक persons whose marriage is solemnised under that Act. A study of the sections

ete.). contained in this Part does not reveal any particularly weighty reason why the
sect'ons contained in this Part should not apply to the persons excluded at
present form their sccpe. In fact, the principle of these sections has been
adopted in various decisions* relating to the persons so excluded—that is to say,
Hindus, Muslims, Bhudhists and others,

Possible _ explana- 5.13. There is an historical explanation of the British concept of domicile,

tion of section and that may perhaps explain why section 4 excludes Hindus etc, The oddities

4 of the British domicile of origin can be understood only against the background
of the historical context in which this concept was developed. |

This was, in the main, in the mid-Victorian age when Britain was the centre
of a world-wide Empire, the different parts of which were heterogeneous in
regard to civ wavs of life and taw, There was then need for a device
allowing British settlers in the various parts of the Empire to remain subject
to their own law ia personal matters and in matters of succession, even when
they spent a long time away from home, there being in most cases no question
of their assimilation to the local conditions, As it has been put, the tenacity
of the domicile of origin “reflects the habits of the Enelish upper classes of the
last century when vounser sons went to the colonies to make a fortune and
retired home afterwards” as well as “a reluctance on the part of the courts
.in mid-Victorian England to admit that a gentleman could never lose all con-
nection with the country of his birth and his ancestral estates”,—4

Case lawas to domi- 5.14. This is perhaps the reason why the sections relating to domicile were

cile of Hindusetc. ™ade applicable only to non-Indians, since, at that time. the need felt was con-
fined to them However, on general principles, what has been enacted in section
4 is. in substance apolicable to Hindus also.—a position resulting broadly from
a decision of the Supreme Court.’ There are decisions. also of High Courts
following this principle. For example, in a Kerala case,* the High Court decided
that the sale proceeds of immovable property in Sheffield (U.K.\ would be
governed bv Enolish law. This noint was not. on appeal. disputed before the
Supreme Court.’ The dispute in the appeal before the Supreme Court was as
regards the law which governed the succession to movable properties and monies
left by the deceased. On this point. the Supreme Court held—“If Krishnan (the
deceased) had acquired a domicile of choice in England, there can be no doubt
that English law would govern the succession to them.”

*Section 21, Special Marriage Act, 1954,

* Viswanathan v. Abdul Wasid, ALR. 1963 5.2. 1.

*Patson, Marriage and Divorce in the conflict of Laws (1974), page 63.
‘nygh, Conflict of Laws, pages 74, 81, 82.

*Vishwanathan y. Abdul Wasid, A.1.R. 1963 5.0. 1.

“Sankaran v. Lakshmi, ALR. 1964 Kerala, 244,

7Sankaran v. Lakshmi, A.1.R. 1974 S.C. 1764, 1767, para 13.



31

5.15. In this position, we recommend that Part II of the Act should be Recommendation to
extended to the persons at present excluded from its scope. This will only clarify delete section 4.
the present position. Jt would not introduce any change of substance. The object
could be achieved by deleting section 4, which, at present reads—

“This Part shalt not apply if the deceased was a Hindu, Muhammadan,
Buddhist, S:kh or Jain .......- ”

1५, The choice of Law : Section 5.
5.16. This iakes us to section 5. The section reads as under :—
“5, (1) Succession to the immovabie property in india of a person 0९९५ used section 5.
shall be regulated by the law of India, wherever such person may have
had his domicile at the time of his death.

oe (2) Succession to the moveuble property of a person deceased is regulated
by the law of the country in which such person had his domicile at the
time of his death,

ILLUSTRATIONS

(i) A, having his domicile in India, dies in France, leaving movable pro-
perty in France, movable property in Engiand, and properiy, both movab:e
and immovable, in India, The succession to the whole is regulated by the
law of India,

(ii) A, an Englishman, having his domicile in France, dies in India, and
leaves property, both movable and immovable, in India, The success.on.
to the movable property is regulated by the rules which govern, in France,
the succession to the movable property of an Englishman dying domiciled
in France, and the succession to the immovable property is regulated by
the law of India.”

5.17. Sub-section (1) of section 5 is based on the principle of private Principle undere
international law, that all rights over immovable property are governed by the ying ate.
law of the country where the property is situated.’ व would appear that in 7४
England, not only succession, but also the execution, attestation and interpretation
of wills disposing of immovable property, and all questions relating thereio, are

governed by the law of the locality where the property is situated,

5.18. Section 5(1) needs no detailed discussion. The effect of section 5(2) Section 50), and
may be analysed. Where a person domiciled in foreign country, but living in 52).
India, leaves property movable and immovable in the foreign country and also
immovable property elsewhere, the various important situations would be then
dealt with according to the rules of Private International Law.’ The position is
as follows :--

(i) Immovable property in India would be distributed according to the

internal law of India, and the foreign domicile is not of any relevance.

(ii) Immovable property in the country of domicile (or in any other country)

js to be distributed according to the law of the lex situs.

(iii) Movable property in India would be distributed in accordance with the

law of domicile.

(iv) Movable property in the country of domicile would, of course, be distri-

buted in accordance with the law of that country.

(v) Movable property in any other country (other than the country of domi-

cile or India) would also presumably be distributed according to the law
of the country of domicile.*

V. Choice as to national law.
5 Question _ whether

5.19. An important question to be considered in connection with section Goceased should be

is this. Should there not be a provision permitting a person to choose the nation attowed to opt for
a . national law.

(1905) E.L.R. 32 Cal. 631, 640.

2Studd v. Cook, 8 Appeal Cases 577.
‘Adapted from Levontin, Choice of Law and Conflict of laws (1976), page 66.

326 Re Ross, (1930) 1 Ch. 377.


sé

law as the law of succession governing his movables ? In this connection, we
note that in the French Code on Conflict of Laws (proposed), the following pro-
vision appeared :

2307—"Unless by his last testament the deceased expressly opted for his
national law, succession shall be governed by the law of his domicile.

However, successions concerning immovables and fonds de commerce, shall
be governed by the law of the situs of the immovable or of the fonds, which
shall also govern their transmission.

Obligations of the heirs regarding the debts of the succession shall be
governed by the law of the domicile of the deceased or (where appropriate
under paragraph one, above), by his national Jaw.

The obligation to contribute to the payment of the debts of the estate is
always in proportion to the value of the share of the assets going to the heir',”

Recommendation 5.20. On principle, it appears to be desirable to create in section 5 an excep-
for creating an tion—for cases where the deceased, by his will, expressly opted for his national
exception in sec: Jaw in relation to movable property, as in the first and third paragraphs of draft
tion for cases article 2307 of the French proposal quoted above’.

#hooses national law व . . .

as regards movable 5.21. This change in section 5 should be carried out even if our recommen-

property. dation’ for the addition of liberal provisions generally in regard to the execution
of wills is not accepted.

5.22. 11 that recommendation is accepted, the change in section 5 proposed
in the present paragraph will be without prejudice to the change resulting from
the proposed provisions, making other tests applicable in relation to the execution
of wills

Recommendation 5.23, We are separately recommending the insertion of several provisions‘
to amend Sec-which seek to render applicable certain tests additional to those mentioned in
ogeested” Hie °F section 5. In view of this recommendation, section 5 will require consequential
provisions as to lawamendment. Accordingly, we recommend the addition, at the end of section 5,

soverning executionof the following new sub-section :—
of wills,

“(3) The provisions of this section shall be subject to those of Part IA.
VI. Domicile of Origin.

Section 6 —Re- 5.24. This takes us to section 6, Section 6 provides that a person can

commendation io have only one domicile for the purpose of the succession to his movable property.

add specific &E3"2"The proposition laid down in the section seems to have been based on an earlier

21. English case’, As enacting a general rule, the section is unobjectionable. How-
ever, the section assumes that a person will have in mind a definite place as
his domicile. Domicile is generally linked with permanent residence. Now the
question that arises in this position is that, if a person has two or more perma-
nent residences—a rare but not inconceivable situation—and the issue of domicile
becomes material for the purpose of the law of succession, how is his domicile
to be determined ?

. 5.25. Though section 6 does not address itself to this aspect, yet it is an
Recommendaveronaspect which cannot be overlooked. Our recommendation in this context would
19, be to provide that where it is difficult to determine the domicile of a Person by

reason of the fact that he has two or more places of permanent residences, the
place where he last permanently resided shall be the place cf his domicile.
Section 19 seems to be the appropriate place® for carrying out this object, and
we recommend that an Explanation should be added to that section for the
purpose.

‘Article 2307, Draft French Code on Conflict of Laws (1970), 18 A.J.C.L. at Page 619.
2Para 5.19, supra.

*Chapter 4, supra.

‘Chapter 4, supra.

*Somerville v. Somerville, 5 Ves. 750, 786.

*Section 19 to be amended.



33

VII. Domicile of child at birth.

Section 7,
5.26. Section 7 reads—

“The domicile of origin of every person of legitimate birth is in the
country in which at the time of his birth his father was domiciled, or,
if he is a posthumous child, in the country in which his father was domiciled
at the time of his father’s death.

ILLUSTRATION

At the time of birth of A, his father was domiciled in England. A’s domicile
of origin is in England, whatever may be the country in which he was born.”

5.27. We have a comment on the latter half of section 7, which provides Section जल
that the domicile of origin of a posthumous child is that of the father at the ही किए,
time of the father's death. The English law on the subject,—at least according
to the general understanding,—is that the domicile of a posthumous child follows
that of the mother. The rule has in substance, been so stated by Cheshire? and
Dicey’,

In fact, Dicey, in an earlier edition’, (1928) gave the following illustration
of the English rule on the subject :—

“D is a person posthumous whose father was domiciled at the time of his
death in England. At the time of D's birth his mother has acquired the
domicile in France, D's domicile of origin is French”.

The illustration given by Dicey in his 1973 edition is\—~

“H and W are married and domiciled in Scotland, H dies and W immedia-
tely acquires a domicile of choice in England. After she has done this she
gives birth to D, who is H’s son. D’s domicile of origin is (semble) English”.

5.28. In our opinion, the English rule on the subject represents a just Demerit of present
approach. The present Indian rule does not accord with reality, and may even section 7.
create an anomaly. The present provisions—i.e. section 7, latter half, when read
with section 9 (which provides that the domicile of origin prevails until a new
domicile has been acquired ),.—would lead to the position that for about eighteen
years, the child would continue to have the father’s domicile, eve. though the
mother with whom he is living might have, after the father’s 06६0, migrated
to another country. To force the child to hold on to the father’s domicile $
such circumstances is to introduce a fiction which goes too far. Tiere *s, therefor:,
need to substitute in section 7, latter half, the mother’s dom’cile in place of
whe father’s.

5.28A. OF course, if section 7, latter half, is amended cs ecommend=d Section 14 consi-
above, it would follow that the domicile of the soshumous ८
virtue of section 14) automstically follow the dev "tl. of tho
minority. In certain very exceptional circumstance:
ficial to the child. say, for example, when the m ead mala fide
makes a change in domicile so as not to benefit the chiid, However, this prob-
lem can be avoided by amending section 14 also’, to the effect that, where
the change of domicile effected by the mother is not “for the welfare of the
minor, the change in the domicile of a minor which may follow from a change
of domicile on the part of the mother is not to be regarded as a_ necessary
consequence of a change of the mother’s domicile.

‘Cheshire, Private International Law (1970), page 17.

*Dicey, Conflict of Laws (1973), page 93, Rule 9 (2), and page 94 (illustration 2),
*Dicey, Conflict of Laws, quoted by Henderson, Succession Act (1928), page 20.
‘Dicey, Conflict of Laws (1973), page 94, Illustration 2.

*To be considered under section 14,


34

§.29. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 7,
Recommendation ight 0! a com
to amend section latter half, as well as section 14,' should be amended as indicated below: —

7 latter haif and ” ही का a
section 14, “7, The domicile of origin of every person of Icgitimate birth is in the

county in which at the time of his birth his father was domiciled; or, if he
is a pesthumous child, in the country in which his sorher was domiciled at
the time of his birifr,

Hlusiration (i) At the time of the birth of A, his father was domiciled in
England, ‘A’s domicile of origin is in England, whatever may be the country
ich he was born.

(ii) H and SY are married and dumiciled in England, H dies and
ty acquires a domicile of choice in India’. After she had done
'$ birth to 5, who is H’s son. S’s domicile of birth is in India®’.

this, she gi
The folowing words should be added at the end of the Exception to section

14;
“or if the parent has changed his domicile mata fide'.”
5.30, This takes us to section 8, which provides that the domicile of

Section 8 -dom
of origin of
mate child.

je Otigin of an illegitimate child is in the country in which at the time of his birth,
i-his mother was domiciled,

eg
The section needs no change.
गा, Acquisition of doricile.

Section 9 - Continu- 5.31. Section 9 provides that the domicile of prevails until a new
ance of domiciledomicile has been acquired, This is a rule of convenience based on the implicit
of origin. postulate that a person must at all times during his life have a domicile,

Section _10— Acqui- 5.32. Connected with section 9 is section 10, which provides that a man

sition of new domi-acquires a new domicile by taking up his fixed habitation in a country which is

cile, not that of his domicile of origin. The emphasis is on the words “fixed habita-
tion”. The general principle in this regard was best put by Lord Westbury, who
observed that the domicile of choice must be a “residence freely chosen and
not prescribed or dictated by any external necessity, such as the duties of office,
the demands of creditors or the relicf from 10587,

Section L0—Expi:+ 5.33. Faithful to this gencral principle, the Explanation to section 10 pro-

nation, vides that a man is not to be deemed to have taken up his fixed habitation in
India, merely by reason of his residing “there” (i.c, in India) in “the Civil,
Miliary, Naval or Air-borne Service of Government, or in the exercise of any
profession or calling”.

5.34. The main paragraph of the section thus deals with a wide area of
acquisition of domicile by choice. A narrow area of the subject is dealt with
by the Explanation. The acquisition of domicile of choice by service personnel
has, in the past, presented many vaxatious problems in the field of law in
Engiand. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, the view has obtained that
the servants of the East India Company could acquire a domicile of choice in
India through residence there. The doctrine was defined by Leach V.C. in the
following terms २-४१

Analysis.

“A residence in Indja for the purpose of following profession there in the
service of the East India Company creates a new domicile”,

Developments in _5.35. But this doctrine, which came to be known as that of “Anglo-India”
England as to ser- domicile, was found to be anomalous, and English courts began to be unwilling
vieemen.

‘To be cartied out under section 14 also.
*Compare section 10.
‘Compare Dicey, Conflict of Laws (1973), page 94, Illustration 2[para $.27 supra).
'T 1 by carried out under section 14 also. See para. 5. 52, infra.
“Urhn 5. ए4॥0 (1869) LR. 1 Scottish Appeals 441, 458 (HLL).
"Munrow ४, Douglas, (1820) 3 Mad. 379.
*Seo Note, “Domicile of Serviceman” (1950) 228 Law Times 4.



35

to recognise the capacity of a British soldier to acquire a domicile of choice.
Thus, in 1884, Cotton LJ. held,' “‘a soldier cr sailor in the service of a sovereign
retains the domicile which he had on eniering the service, wherever he may be
stationed”.

The doctrine of “Angto-Indian domicile” was finally disapproved in 1930
in England?

However, in 19497, it was first recognised in England that a serviceman
could acquire a domicile of choice in the country where he was stationed, The
matter was elaborated in 1957, in a case‘ which related to proof of acquisition
of domicile of choice in the country where a soldier is stationed.

5.36. The position was further clarified in a later case.’ This was an. action Later case.
of divorce on the ground of desertion at the instance of an American serviceman
whose domicile of origin was in the United States, His marriage took place
in England in 1950, and the parties lived in Durham until 1951 when the plain-
tiff was posted abroad, After service in Korea, the petitioner was posted to
France and, in 1957, he visited England with the intention of making his
permanent home in England. He obiained a room in Miteham (England) and
kept his belongings there. 11 was held that the petitioner had ja 1957 formed
an intention to remain in England and that by his residing in England while on
leave, the qualification of (present) residence was satisfied. He had, therefore,
acquired an English domicile by choice. Since a serviceman could normally
acquire a domicile of choice in the country where he was serving, a fortiori, he
can acquire such a domicile at the place where he was on leave.

5.37. We first turn to certain drafting improvements required in the main Section 10—Verbal
paragraph of section 10. change in the main
paragraph.
The expression used in section 10 is “man”. This is a departure from the
expression “person” uscd in most of the other sections in this Chapter. We see
no reason why the wording should differ. Of course, under the General Clauses
Act*, words in the masculine gender include females, and this rule would apply
to section 10 also.. However, it is better to introduce uniformity in the matter
of drafting. Accordingly, we recommend that section 10 should be revised by
substituting “person” for “man”, with consequential changes’,

Tn view of the above reasoning, the main Paragraph of section 10 should
be revised as under :--

“A person acquires a new domicile by taking up his fixed habitation in a
country which is not that of his domicile of origin.”

5.38. To revert to the Explanation to section 10, we may staie that the Explanation to sece
Explanation, though seemingly inconsistent with some of the modern trends, is tion 10,
not ‘really so, if due regard be had to the word “merely.”

However, it may be added, by way of clarification, that if a person, having

gone to another country for the purpose of service etc, intends to remain there,
he may acquire a domicile in that country®.

5.39. Also, we find the Explanation to section 10 incomplete in two res-
pects. First, it leaves out the case of private service and, secondly, it does not complete
cover service elsewhere than in India. The reason for this would appear to be
mainly historical, The Explanation was taken word by word from an English

Explanation —_in-

*Ex parte : Cunningham, (1884) 13 Q.B.D. 418, (See after paragtaph 5.39, infra).
*Peal v. Peal, (1930) 143 Law Times Reports 768. हु
*Douglas v. Douglas, (1949) Probate 363.

‘Cruickshanks v. Cruickshanks, (1957) 1 AN E.R, 889.

*Stone v. Stone. (1959) 1 All E.R. 194,

*Section 13, General Clauses Act, 1897.

*As to the Explanation to section 10, see infra. (Paragraph 5.39).
*Compare section 10, illustration (ii).


36

case! (except for the later additions regarding air force etc.). It was laid down
in the English case that a man is not to be considered as having taken up his
fixed habitation in British India, “merely by reason of his residing there in His
Majesty's Civil or Military Service, or in the exercise of any profession or calling.”
At the present day, there is no need so to confine the Explanation, The Expla-
nation to section 10 should therefore be suitably widened (i) to cover private
service, and fii) to embrace all countries (and not merely India}.

Provision in Que- 5.40. {n this connection, we may refer‘ to the very simple provision in the
a Quebec Civil Code on the subject which declares प्रथा

“A person appointed to fill a temporary or revocable office, retains his former
domicile, unless be manitests a contrary intention.”

Although the word “temporiry” is used in the Quebec provision cited
above, it does 10६ mean that.a pzrson appointed for life acquires a domicile
of choice where he is appointed,

Recommendation 5.41, In view of what is stated above, we recommend that the Explanation to
fo revise the Ex- section 10 shauld be revised as follows :—
Blenation to section

‘planation.—A person is noi deemed to have taken up his fixed habita-
tion in Sadia or in any other country merely by reason of his residing there
in service of any Government, withority er person or in the exercise of any
profession or calling. but if a person, having gone to another country for the
purpose of service or the exzicise of any profession or calling intends to
remain there, he may acquire a domicile in that country’.

Section 10, Itlustra- 5.42. Certain verbal changes are also needed in the illustrations to section 10:
Seas Revommene In ilhusivation (i), the expression “as a barrister” should be replaced by the
fons. words “as an Advocate”, for obvious reasons,

illustrations (vi) and (vii) to the section relate to the case of a person
whose domicile is in the French Settlement of Chandernagore, These two illustra-
tions are now cbsolete, and should be omitted,

We, therefore, recommend that illustration (i) to section 10, should be
amended as indicated above, and illustrations (vi) and (vii) should be deleted.

1X. Aquisition of Domicile

Section 11. 5.43. This takes ७४ to section 11, which provides a special mode of acquiring
domic'le in India. This provision does not seem to do great violence to the
already accepted rules as to the acqui n of a domicile of choice. It does not,
however, make clear that an intention of “permanent” residence does not have
to be looked for.

Acquisition of new 5.44. It miay be stated, as a matter of interest, that according to the New
gomicile—New Zealand Domicile Act,’ “a person acquires a new domicile in a country at 8 parti-
ince cular time if, immediately before that time’, (a) he is not dom‘ciled in the country;
and (b) he is capable of having an independent domicile; and (c) he is in that
country; and (0) he intends to live indefinitely in that country.” A “country”
is defined by section 2 of the Act as meaning (unless the context otherwise
requires) “a territory of a type in which, immediately before the commencement

of this Act, a person could have been domiciled.”

1Re Macrieght, 30 Ch. Div, 165 [See also paragraph 5.35 supra).

*Castel, Private International Law (1960), page 60 and footnote 41.

SArticle 82, Quebec Civil Code.

“Castel, Private International Law (1960), page 60.

*Compare section 10, illustration (ii).

*Section 9, New Zeatand Domicile Act.

*See “Domicile” (20 September ,1977) New Zealand Law Journal 375—379,


37

This is a sound rule’, and has been made because the situations where a
person can be found 10 have irrevocably and positively stated that he means to live
out all his days in a particular country must indeed be few.

5.45. Reverting to section 11 of our Act, a special mode of acquiring Section 11 Dectara-
domicile in India is provided by the section, under which a person may acquire ion petore, pres-
such demicile by making a declaration and depositing it in the prescribed office. 7
Apparently, the provisions of this section are designed only to confer a limited
domicile for the purpose of regulating succession to movable property, and not
for any other purpose. This yiew was taken by a majority of the Chief Court
of Sind’, though the minority view (Tyabji J.) was different.

5.46. Having regard to the setting in which the section is placed and the Recommendation
limited scope of the Act, it is, in our opinion, advisable to give effect to the % amend section
majority view of the Sind Chief Court’ referred to above', by adding suitable है scope. ne
words in section 11, We recommend that the section should be so amended., An
Explanation should be added as under, to section 11 :—

xplanaticn.—The provisions of this section confer a limited domicile only
for the purpose of regulating succession to movable property, and not for
any other purpose.

35.47. Another point arises under section 11 in relation to minors, Under Section 11 Recom-
the section, “any person” may acquire a domicile in India by making and mendaticn to amend
depositing in some office in India appointed by the State Government a spe ified (0 minors. 1
declaration. Though the words used are ‘any person’, it is presumed that this
section does not contemplate a minor or other person under legal disability in
relation to the capacity to contract. To bring out this aspect, it appears to be
desirable to limit the section expressly to a person competent to contract by the
law of the country in which he was domiciled immediately before such declara-
tion,

Accordingly, we recommend that section 11 should be amended by adding,
after the words “any person”, the words “competent to contract by the law
Of the country in which he was immediately before such declaration domiciled,”

5.48. This takes us to section 12, which reads:— Section 12.

“A person who is appointed by the Government of one country to be its
ambassador, counsel or other representative in another country does not
acquire a domicile in the latter country by reason only of residing there in
pursuance of his appointment; nor does. any other person acquire such
domicile by reason only of residing with such first mentioned person, as
part of his family, or as a servant.”

The section deals really with a situation analoguous' to that dealt with in
section 10, Explanation. It needs no change.

5.49. Section 13 provides that a new domicile continues until the former Section 13 Conti-
aomicile has been resumed or another has been acquired, nuance of new do-
+ + 5 icile i micile,

The circumstances in which a domicile is “resumed” are not dealt with in कु
the section. But determination of such a question, if it arises, will depend on
jhe facts to which the principles of section 10—12 would apply.

The section needs no change.
X. Domicile of dependence of minors

5.50. The provision so far discussed are mainly concerned with domicile icile of depen-
independently acquired by a person. In certain cases, the domicile of a person dence He of depen

"Domicile" (20 September, 1977) New Zealand Law Journal 375-379,
*Weston v. Weston, A.1.R. 1945 Sind 152 (Majority view),
. 1945 Sind 152.

"Weston v. Weston, A.l.
‘Para 5.42, supra.
*Para 5.38, supra.


38

follows that of another person. One such case is that of a minor. Section 14,
in the main paragraph, provides as follows as regards minors:

“14. The domicile of a minor follows the domicile of the parent from whom
he derived his domicile of origin”.

According to the Exception to ihe section, the domicile of a minor does
not change with that of his parent, if the minor is married or holds any office or
employment in the service of Government, or has set up, with the consent of
the purent, in any distinct business,

‘1 5.51. There are certain points arising out of sections 7 and 14, in regard
लि 70०७ ५ children whose parents are living apart at tho time of the bieth of the child,
whether or not the parents have been divorced in law. Under secion 7, the
domicile of origin of every person of legitimate birth is the same as the domicile
of the father at the time of birth—teaving aside the very special situation of
a posthumous child, which has been dealt with separately.) Under section 14,
the domicile of origin is fixed by the operation of law. The section gives effect
to the primary rule that the domicile of a legitimate child automatically changes
with any change that occurs in the domicile of the father.. (There are other
situations to which also 14 applies, but they may be kept aside for the present).
Thus, in both the cases-—the domicile of or-gin and the domicile uy dependence—
the domicile of the child is compulsorily linked with that of the father,

Defect of the rule 5.52. This doctrine of the unity of domicile with the father of the child
of unity when may not, however, yield a proper rule in certain situations where the parents are
applied to partiesliving part at the time of the birth of the child.

living apart. . . . .
(a) The parties to the marriage may be separated with or without a decree
of judicial separation, or

(0०) The parties to the marriage may be living apart with or without a decree
of divorce. In alt these cases, if the child has his home with he mother and
no home with the father, the present provisions in sections 7 and 14 would not
reflect the reality of the situation, To necessarily link the domicile of the child
with that of the father is likely to lead to hardship, anomaly and injustice in
50; cases,

Fg ish Act of 5.53. Tn Engtand, the rule has to some extent been altered by the Domicile
197. and Matrimonial Proceedings Act, 1973%, stated in brief, the position in England
under the Act of 1973 is as follows :—

(i) Where both the parents are alive but are living apart, the domicile of,
the child is that of the mother, if the child has his home with her
and no home with his father, or if the child has acquired the domicile
of his mother in this way has not, since ther, had a home with
his father. (Thus, a child having a home with his mother keeps the
mother’s domicile even though he ceases to live with her even if he
had not a home with his father.)*

(ii) A child who has his home with the mother, continues to retain it after
the death of the mother, unless and until he has a home with his father,

(iti) These rules apply to legitimate as well as to adopted children,

5.54. The statutory provision in England as to domicile of a child not

English provision living with his father is as followst;—

as to children,
“Dependent domicile of child not living with his father.

4(1). Sub-section (2) of this section shall have effect with respect to the
dependent domicile of a child as at any time after the coming into force of
this section when his father and mother are alive but living apart. 7

‘Para 5.26, supra,
‘Section 42) (a), 4 (2) (b). 4 (3) and 4.(4). Domicile and Matrimonial Proceedings Act, 1973
read with paragraphs 1(2), 1 (4) and 3 of the First Sched i Sin rege
read with paragra lule to the Children Act, 1975 in regard to
*Cheshire and North, Private Internationa! Law (1979), page 180.
‘Section 4, Domicile and Matrimonial Proceedings Act, 1973,


६ time shell be that of his mother if—

(2) The child's domicile as at ts
» her and kas no home with his father;

(a) he then has his herr:
wr

(09) he has at any time had her domi by Virtue of paragraph (a)
above ard has not since had a home with his father.

(3) As at any time after the coming into force of this section, the domicile
० a child witose mother is dead shall be that which she last had before
she died if ac her death she had her domicile by virtuc of sub-section (2)
above and he has not since had a home with his father.

(4) Nothing in this section prejudices any existing rule of law as to the
cases in which a child’s domicile is regarded as being, by dependence, that
of his mother.”

5.55. The vicw has been expressed? that these provisions apply only for View of Cheshire,
the determination of the dependent domicile of a child, and do not appear to
affect the determination of domicile of his origin. Thus, a child born of parents
who are married but living apart at the time of his birth would acquire the
father's domcile as a domicile of origin, but immediately thereafter acquire a
domicile of dependence with his mother where his home is’.

5.56, One question that might arise—and a question that is of practical Children, of oe

importance because of the increasing rate of divorce in all countries, including
India—is this : what happens to a child whose parents are divorced at the time

of birth? Jn England, the expression ‘living apart’ would cover the situation’.

But in India there s no specific provisions on the point, with the result that

sections 7 and 14 wouid apply to the case, Now, under section 7, the child would f
acquire the domicile of the father, even though, in fact, the child is totally

separated from the father. With reference to the position in England’, it has : 1
been suggested that a child born to parents who have been divorced takes his 1
mo her's domicile at his birth. if the capacity of a father to change the domicile

of his inian: child is a manifestation of parental authority and esponsibility’,

then there is no reason why that doctrine should apply where the father has |
never accepted his responsibility for the child.

5.57. It appears to us that in regard to all these cases, there is need for Need for amend:

a change in the present statutory provisions in sections 7 and 14, In framing commendation,
the revised provision, assistance can, to a large extent, be derived from the
English Act’ of 1973.

tion 14 Sugges-

5.57A, We note that in an article in the Statesman’, a writer (commenting fq, ding do-
on the Law Commission's Working Paper on the subject) has stated that the tnicile off ¢ child, cons
commiss’on, while recommending changes regarding the domicile of married sidered.

women (section 15) and domicile of a posthumus child (sections 7—9), has not re-

commended that “the domic'le of origin of either parent should be that of the

child and that if the child is living with the mother, the latter's country of

origin should be the chiid's.” The € m quoted above from the article

seems to imply that in the writer’s view, the Lew Commission should have so

recommended. Analysing the matter, one finds that two ideas are involved in

ihe above criticism—

(i) The child's domicile should follow that of either parent.

(ii) The child's domicile, when the child is living with the mother, should
follow that of ihe mother.

1Cheshi-e and North, Private International Law (1979), page 130.
*Cheshire and North, Private Iaternationa! Law (1979), page 180.
३566, supra.

‘Dicey and Mo-ris, Conflict of Laws (1973), nage 93.

5Compare Re B(S) fan infant) (1987) 3 All. E.R. 629.

*Section 4, Domici’e and M strimoni:

TShahaaz Angles.
page 6



40

It appears that the first of these two points is meant for the generality of
cases, while the second is meant for the special case where the child is actually
living with the mother,

Rule providing for 5.57B. As to the first situation, we do not think that a rule of law which

two alternatives not is intended to determine, it the first instance, a particular question so as to avoid

practicable controversies on the subject can be appropriately framed so as to Jead to two
alternatives becoming applicable. if both the alternalives yield the same conclu-
sion in a particular case, the suggested rule is not needed. If both the alternatives
yield different results the rule may create confusion. We do not therefore find
the suggestion acceptable. The object of rules fixing domicile is to maintain a
measure of certainty. That object will be defeated if two alternatives become
applicable which would be the case if the domicile of origin of either parent is
to become the child's domicile as is the suggestion,

Whether present 5.57C. 11 may be argued that the present rule giving predominance. to the

rule violates equa-father is violative of the equality of sexes. But that would not be so, in reality.

lity of the sexes. So Jong as members of the family are not separated, the child would, in fact, be
diving with the parents and the present rule would not violate any right of the
mother.

Child living with 5.57D. If the members of the family are separated, what should be the

separated mother. position? This brings us to the second point arising out of the suggestion now
under consideration, namely, that if the child is living with the mother, then
the child’s domicile should follow that of the mother. We do not find anything
wrong in such an approach, Where a matrimonial court has awarded the custody
of the child to the mother, the case for making such a rule is fairly strong.

In fact, the amendment which we are recommending’ in section 14 will
take care of this and similar situations.

Amendment of 5.58, In the light of the above discussion, we recommend the insertion in
section 14 recom-Section 14 of the following new stub-sections?

mended. New Subsections to be added in section 14—

(2) The domicile of a minor at any time after the commeticement Of the
Indian Succession [Amendment Act ..... when his father and mother
are alive but living apart shall be governed by sub-section (3)].

(3) The minor's domicile as at that time shall be that of his mother if—

(a) he then has his home with her and has no home with his father; or

(0) he has at any time had her domicile by virtue of clause (a) above and
has not since had a home with his father.

(4).As at any time after the coming into force of the Indian Succession
(Amendment) Act .-- . the domicile of a minor whose mother is
dead shall be that which she last had before she dies, if at her death
the minor had her domicile by virtue of sub-section (3) and he has
nut si hud a home with his father.

(5

Nothing is sub-section (2) to (4) shall prejudice any existing rule of
law as to the cases in which a minor's domicile is regarding as being,
hy dependence, that of his mother.”

5.59. We may also mention that while discussing an earlier section’, we
ave made a recommendation to amend the Exception to section 14 :—

“or if the parent has mala fide changed his domicile”.

Recommendation h
to amend section
14

XI. Minor Without Parent

Domicile of minor, 5.60. We now Propose to consider a matter on which a specific provision
without parent. is not, at present, contained in the Act, namely, domicile of a minor who has

'Section 14, as proposed to be amended. See paragraph 5.58.
*Present section 14 to be renumbered as section 14(1).
*See discussion as to section 7, para 5.27, supra.



i 41

no parent, but has only a guardian, One writer’, dealing with the subject, has
expressed his views thus :—

“Tt is submitted that no cogent reasons have been advanced why, as in the
case of a parent, a change with the domicile of a guardian should not
also bring about a change in the ward's domicile, unless by vir:ue of the
change of domicile the guardian ceased to be guardian and the relation
of guardian and child thereby disappeared. The discrimination between
parent and guardian for the purposes of the resulting change of the minor's
domicile overlooks the nature of toth domicile and guardianship. H domicile
means the Icgal centre of a person's contacts and activities, could there
be any better domicile in the case of a minor without parents than that of
his oy her guardian? If guardianship is a substitute for the relation of
parent child, which substitute cannot be dispensed with in the interests of
the child, why should the former not have the same range as the latter
in respect of strictly Iegal issues such as those involved by the concept of
domicile ?*

ve se jdera i ft i a Recommendation
5.61. We see considerable force in this reasoning and recommend that a to insert new section

suitable provision on the lines suggested by the writer quoted above’, should be as ‘to minor who
inseried in the Act. has no parent.

The new section could be in ६

SAN. 4 change i: tie dian other than a parent brings

about e chenge in the vd, unless, by virtue of the change

H ef domicile, the guardian ceases to be guardian and the relationship. of
guardian and ward thereby ceases.”

XIL. Marriage

5.62. This takes us to section 15. Section 15 provides that by marriage a Section 15.
woman acquires the domicile of her husband, if she had not the same domicile
before. How far the section should be retained in its present form depends
‘on the view to be taken on section 16, therefore, we proceed to consider’,

5.63. Section 16, in its main paragraph. provides that the wife’s domicile Section 16 wife's
during her marriage follows the domicile of her husband. The Exception to the domicile.
section is in these (erms :

Exception : The wife’s domicile no Jonger follows that of her husband if
they are separated by the sentence of a competent court or if the husband
is undergoing a sentence of transportation.”

5.64, Let us first dispose of a possible query arising out of the last ten Query as to sec-
words of the Exception. The Jast ten words raise the question if a sentence of ‘on 16; Exception.
{ transportation would, in itself, change the (husband’s) domicile. Now this may
| not be always the case, at least if the country of transportation is “he same
political unit-—or “legal district”"— as the country from which the husband is
transported. However, there is a sense in which this part of the Exception
may be useful, If, the husband, after undergoing transportation in X country,
settles down in country Y, the wife should not necessarily be burdened with the
domic'‘le of country Y. This would be a result flowing from the Exception. The
assumption seems to be that a sentence of transportation would snap the emotio-
. nal ties between the parties and that the possibility of the wife resuming her
cohabitation with the husband on the latter’s return from transportation would be
very faint.

5.65. We may now deal with certain other points requiring consideration Unity of spouses.
in connection with the section. The first point arises from the main paragraph,
which is based on the doctrine of unity of the spouses and makes the wife’s
domicile dependent on that of the husband. A strict apolication of the doctrine
of unity of the spouses as to domicile may at times, result in injustice to the wife.

1Sce Sprio, ‘Domicile of Minors without parents’ Vol. 5 International & Comparative Law
Quarterly, 196.

*Para 5.60, supra.
8See discussion as to section 16, infra.


Common law rule.

42

5.66. The common iaw rule is that a married woman's domicile is the same
as that of her husband and that, if his domicile changes, her domicile changes
with it, whether she fixes it or nowt Lord Deining M. R. has described the rule
as “the last barbarous relic of a wife's servitude.”

5.67. In England, the view that domicile ought to be the sole ground for
jurisdiction in divorce seems to have been first advanced by Sir Cresswell in 19637,
but has been considerably modified by statute The Law Commission of India
in its Report on the Recognition of Foreign divorces has recommended a modi-
fication of this rule’, However, we are not, at present, concerned with domicile
in the context of jurisdiction in divorce. Our present concern is with the subject
of domicile as relevant to the Jaw of succession,

Criticism of present 5.68. The doctrine that the domicile of the wife is that of the inesband

law.

Criticism of rule of x
unity of spouseccondemned. Simon P. called it a ‘completely outm

is founded on the duty of the wife to ive with the husband’, This was the rule
of the common law, To the extent that a married woman is under a disability
in the matter of domicile, it is artificial.

Lord Denning’s criticism of this rule as “the last barbarous relic of a wife's
servitude” has, by now, become famous. In fact, the law on the subject has
been substantially altered in England’ and in certain other western countries.”
The current English statutory provision (which came into force on the Ist
January, 1974) reads—

“Aboiition of wife's dependent domicile

1, (1) Subject to sub-section (2) below, the domicile of a married woman
as at any time after the coming into force of this section® shall, instead
of being the same as her husband's by virtue only of marriage, be ascertained
by reference to the same factors as in the case of any other individusl
capable of having an independent domicile,

(2) Where immediately before this section came into force a woman was
married and then had her husband's domicile by dependence, she is to be

treated as retaining that domicile (as a domicile of choice, if it is not also
her domicile of ori

n) unless and until it is changed by acquisition or
revival of another domicile either on or after the coming into force of this
section,

(3) apis section extends to England and Wales, Scotland and Northem
Ivsland.”

This section abolishes the rule of unity of the spouses for the purposes of
jomicile and provides for a married woman’s domicile to be ascertained indepen-
Jently of her husband. °

हु However, a woman already married on January 1, 1974, will retain her
existing domicile (but as one of origin or choice, not of dependence) unless
and until her actions and intentions are such as to change it.

5.69. The rule of unity of spouses’ in this context has been universally

joded legal concept”, In 1952,
land, in its first report, recom-
ied woman separated from her

the Private International Law Committee in Engi:
mended a very limited change, viz. that a marri

7886, 26. Lord Advocate v. Jaffrey, (1921) | A.C. 146 (H.L.) : Ave ¥.
Cook, (1926) A.C. 444 (P.C.) De Renevile ४. De Ronevie (1948) B100(CA) rd fr Alberta v.

*Gray v. Formosa, (1963), Probate 259, 267 (C.A.).

Sorester v. Forester. (1863) 9 T.L.R. 148, 149. See ‘Jurisdiction of ish Di मु
(1951) 2121..1. 19, 198 urisdiction of the English Divorce Court

‘Law Commission of India, 65th Report. Recognition of Foreign Di
15.5 and page 138, Appendix I, clause 13. (Three alternative drafts) Or 73865 95—99, para

"Gray ५. Farmosa, (1963) Probate 259, 267.
‘Section 1, Domicile and Matrimonial Proceedings Act, 1973 (C. 45).
"E.g. (a) New Zealand see para 5.62, s*pra.
(b) U.S.A.
"4st January. 1974.
*Para 5.57, s*pra.
Adams ४. Adams, (1971) Probate 188, 216,


43

husband by order of a compeient court should be treated as a single woman.
Tn 1956, the Morton Commission (Royai Commission on Marriage and Divorce)
made a slightly different proposal, namely, that for the purposes of divorce juris-
diction a married women should be entitled to claim a separate domicile’. The
recommendation of the English Law Commission was to similar effect.

5.70. But the English Act of 1973 goes further and allows a married woman
to acquire a separate domicile as any independent person can. The Act is thus
in accordance with the spirit of sex equality, embodied in article 16(1} of the
(Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which reads :-—

Article 16. (1)Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to
race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry and to found a
family. They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage
and its dissolution.

(2) Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of
the intending spouses.

(3) The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and
is entitied to protection by society and the State.”

3.71. It has been realised that by virtue of the common law rule, it may Anomaly of old
happen that 2 woman becomes “domiciled” in a country which she has never rule.
seen, and to the courts of which she must resort in matters affecting her status
as a married woman.

5.72, In New Zealand, section 5(1) of the (New Zealand) Domicile Act, Law in New
1976, provides as follows’ :— Zeaiand.

“5 (1) Every married person is capable of having an independent domicile;
and the rule of law whereby upon marriage a woman acquires her husband's
domicile and is thereafter during the subsistence of the marriage incapable
of having any other domicile is hereby abolished.

(2) This section applies to the parties to every marriage, wherever and
pursuant to whatever Iaw solemnised, and wherever the domicile of the
parties at the time of the marriage.”

5.73, In the U.S.A. the common law did not at first, recognise the separate U5, .
domicile of the married woman. “Although the wife may be residing in another
place, the domicile of the husbasd is her domicile’ .......... ”. Today, how-
ever, in the United States* the wife may acquire a separate domicile.

5.74, Having regard to currcnt social notions, the need for reform of the Recommendation
law relating to domicile of the wife in the Indian Succession Act cannot be i amend section
denied, After careful consideration, we have come to the conclusion that the law किए paragraph.
om the subject should be reformed and that for that purpose in place of the
main paragraph of section 16, the following sub-sections should be substituted.

“16. (1) For the purposes of this Act, and subject to the provisions of sub-
section (2), any rule of lav whereby a woman on her marriage acquires her
husband’s domicile shall not be taken into account after the conunencement
of the Indian Succession (Amendment) Act........-2.0.0.005,

(2) Where, immediately before the commencement of the Indian Succession
(Amendment) Act.-..-..--. >a woman has married and then had her
busband’s domicile by dependence, she shall be treated as retaining that
domicile (as a domicile of choice, if it is not also her domicile of origin)
unless and until it is changed by acquisition or revival of another domicile
either on or after the commencement of the said Act”
‘Royal Commission on Marriage and Divorce, Report (1956) Cmnd. 9768, Para $25 and Appen-
dex IV, para 6.
*Article 16, Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
section 5(1) (New Zealand) Domicile Act, 1976 quoted by P.R.H. Webb, “The Domicile Act,
1976", (20 September 1977) N.Z.L.5. 374, 375.
‘Anderson ९. Watt, (1891) 138 U.S. 694, 706.
‘Weintraub, Commentary on the Conflict of Law (1971) page 13. refecred to in Peter Hay.
Introduction of United States Law (1976), page 119, footnote 293. .
‘Compare Law Commission of India, 65th Report (Recoguition of Foreign Divorces), Chapter
15 and Appendix ?,
85-L/B(D}14430f LIRCA—4



44

A comment consi- 5.744. We may note that a comment forwarded by the Catholic Bishops

dered. Conference of India agrees that there could be circumstances where it is obviously
desirable that the wife’s domicile should be determined by rules other than the
(present) rigid cule that her domicile follows that of her husband's.

Recommendation 5.75. The amendment recommended’ above would render the Exception to
as to the Exception section 16 unnecessary. But if the section is not amended as recommended
to section 16. above, it will be necessary to deal with one verbal point which arises in connec-
tion with the Exception. The Exception contains words referring to the “sentence
of a competent court”, which are not aj Hae This part of the Exception
should, having regard (0 current usage, really refer to a decree of judicial separa-
tion, Further, there is a reference in the Exception to “transporation” which,
is now inappropriate. India has abolished transportation as a punishment. A
few foreign countries still have the punishment of “exile”. To cover these rare
cases, this part of the Exception should be suitably re-worded, We, therefore,
recommend that (if the main paragraph of section 16 is to be retained in the pre-
sent form), the Exception should be revised, somewhat on the following lines :—

“Exception—The wife’s domicile no longer follows that of her busband if
they are separated by a decree of judicial separation or if the husband is
undergoing a sentence analogous to transportation”.

XIE. Unmarried women and Widows

Section 16A (New) 5.76. It is necessary at this stage to discuss one question concerning the

Widow's domicile. domicile of unmarried women. The sections in the Act deal with married women.
The position of widows, as regards domicile, is not dealt with in any specific
provision of the Act. In England, it is well-settled that a widow retains her late
“husband's domicile (after his death), until she changes it.2=¢

A similar rule should be introduced into our Act, the soundness and practi-
cal utility of such a rule being obvious. The situation is outside sections 9 and
16, though falling partly within section 13. A new section on the subject,, say,
as section 16A, could be inserted, if the present scheme of sections 15-16 is to
be retained.

Divorced women 5.77. A similar rule could be made applicable in relation to divorcee also,
since the same reason applies, in substance, to divorce.

Recommendation 5.78. Accordingly, we recommend that (if the present scheme of sections

rane section 15.16 is retained) section 16A should be inserted in these terms :—

16A. (1) A widow retains, after the death of her husband, her late husband's
last domicile, until she changes it in accordance with the provisions of this
Act. .

(2) A divorced woman retains, after the divorce, her former husband’s
lust domicile until she changes it in accordance with the provisions of this
Act”

XIV. Continuance of domicile of minor

Section 17. 5.79. Section 17 provides that “save as hereinbefore otherwise provided
in this part,” a person cannot, during minority, acquire a new domicile. The
other provisions which the section has in mind are sections 14 to 16. Th sec-
tion needs no change.

XV. Insane persons
Section 18 Analysis. 5.80. Section 18 provides as follows :—

“An insane person cannot acquire a new domicile in any other way than
by his domicile following the domicile of another person.”

1Cathotic Bishop’s Conference of India fetter dated 3rd October, 1984.
*Para 5.74, sppra.

*Re Wallace, (1950) 1 All E.R. 199 and case law discussed in Re Schullard's Estate, (1956)
3 ALE E.R. 898, 902 to 904.

‘See also note by PB. Carter in (1957) B.Y LL. 329, 332.


45

The words “by his domicile following the domicile of another person” in
the section could be thus illustrated —

(a) If the insane person is a minor', his domicile follows that of his parent
from whom he derived his domicile of origin.

(b) If the insane person is a married woman, her domicile follows that of
her husband, under the present law’.

(c) If the insane person is a major unmarried male, his domicile cannot
te changed by his own act: His domicile remains what it was at the
commencement of his insanity’.

A lunatic may not be able to acquire a domicile of choice, because of his
inability to form the necessary animus.

5.81, In England, it seems‘, the domicile of the insance person cannot be Domicile unchange-
changed even by the act of the person having care or custody of the person. able by act of person
Is India, section 18 does not deal specifically with this situation; apparently, the having custody.
English rule on the subject would be followed.

3.82. However, this ition does not appear to be satisfactory and is often Need for change in

likely to lead to anomalies in practice. In our view, the better course would be present rule.

to provide that the domicile of an insane person is the same as that of the

person in whose care and protection he is for the time being, Of course, the

provision to be so inserted will be subject to the other sections of the Act, e.g.

the special provisions for minors. But barring such special cascs, it is the domicile

of the person in whose care and protection the insane person is for the time

being, chat should govern the domicile of the insane person.

5.83. We, therefore, recommend that section 18 should be revised a3 Recommendation
follows :— (० revise section 18.

“18, The domicile of an insane person follows that of the person in whose
care and protection he is for the time being.”

It is not considered appropriate, in this case, to make any exception for
cases where the insane person is married. पु

XVI. Domicile—Uncertainty of

5.84, We have already recommended’ the insertion of a provision to meet section 18 (Nt
cases where domicile cannot be determined’. This may be inserted as section 18A. Section (ew),
The new section could be somewhat on these lines :—

“18A, Where it is difficult to determine the domicile of a person by reason
of the fact that he kas two or more places of permanent residence, the place,
being one of the two or more places aforesaid, where such person last
resided permanently shall be deemed to be the place of his domicile.”

XVII. Applicable law, and proof of foreign law

5.85. Section 19 provides that if a person dies leaving movable property section 19: India
in India, in the absence of proof of any domicile elsewhere, succession to the law whento apply.
property is regulated by the law of India. The section is to be read with sec-
tion 5 (2), under which succession to movable property is governed by the
law of domicile’. The section needs no change.

Section 14.
"Sections 15 and 16.

*Urquhart v. Butterfield, 37 Ch. 0. 357: Par v. Crispin, 1 P & D 611, cited in Paruck, Indian
Succession Act, (1977), page 38.

‘Cheshire, Private International Law (1970), page 179.
*Contrast section 14, Exception.

“See supra.

?Contrast section 14, Exception.

"Para 5.21. supra.


46

Section 194 (New)-— 5.86. At this stage, it would be convenient to deal with one matter which
Presumption as to may necessitate the insertion of a new section in the Act. Under section 5(2),
Sore'gn tay, succession to the movable property of a deceased person is regulated by the

Jaw of the country in which such person had his domicile at the time of his death,
This necessitates proof of foreign law. Ordinarily, foreign law is proved' by the
opinions of experts’, Sometimes, however, it is difficult to get in India experts
in foreign law. It would, therefore, be useful to have a statutory presumption to
the effect that the Jaw of the foreign country, unless proved otherwise, is the
same as the Indian law, While such a provision would create only a tentative
presumption, it would be of great practical use. The object would be to avoid the
inconvenience which might result if competent foreign experts cannot be summon-
ed without delay or expension which might be disproportionate,

Burden of proof 5.87, Even now, the burden of proof rests on the party asserting that

of foreign law. foreign law differs from the Jaw’ of the country. Hence, the proposition suggested
above’ will not introduce a radical change, but will make the statement of the
law self-contained.

In England’, in the absence of proof to the countrary, the position is that the
court must give a decision according to the Jaw of its own country’, There are,
no doubt, one or two anomalous cases where the English court has not assumed
the foreign law to be the same as the English statute law’, But in general, it

understood that foreign Iaw is the same as English law, and the onus of
proving that it is different, and of proving what it is, lies upon the party who
pleads the difference’.

Recommendation 5.88. छा the light of the above discussion, we recommend that a new
as to foreign law. section should be inserted somewhat on the following lines :

“9A, The court may, for the purpose of this Chapter, prestme that the
law of a foreign country is the same as that of India’.

CHAPTER 6

MARRIAGE ; SECTIONS 20 TO 22

Scope of the Chap- 6.1. The Succession Act, though concerned mostly with succession on death,
ter and pile * also contains a few provisions dealing with “succession” to property on marriage.
. The effect of marriage on proprietary rights is dealt with in three sections—sec-
tions 20, 21 and 22, For a proper appreciation of their singnificance, it is

necessary to have a look at the common law,

At common law. apart from death, there was one other event in the life
of a human being which could affect proprietary rights, namely, marriage.
Marriage affected the legal capacity or proprietary tights of women in several
Tespects, by virtuc of rules of the common law that touched subjects so diverse
as torts, contracts, property, bankruptcy and even the criminal law,

Relationship with 6.2. in course of time, these rules of the common law were considered
legislation relating anachronistic and they have been gradually abrogated by reforms effected by

to married women’s an ve} of
property. ‘ statute in, almost all countrics in the common faw fold. In India, such a reform

1Szction 45, Indian Evidence Ast, 1872.
*See Law Commission of India, 69th Report (Evidence Act), Chapter 18, pages 342, 348,
Cross, Evidence (1979), page 634.

‘Para 5.86, supra.

sHalsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 7, page 176, para 31.5,

*Cresington-court ¥. Marinero, (1955) 1 AIL E.R. 676, 679 (Willmer, J.).

34) Ry. Brixton prison Governor, Ex-Parte Colding, (1961) 1 AILE.R. 606.

(b) De Reneville v. De Reneville, (1948) Probate 100; (1948) 1 All E.R. 56, 61 (C.A.).

“The King of Spain v. Machado, (1827) 4 Rules 225, 239. Male y. Roberta, (1800) 3 Esp. 163,



47

was effected by the Married Women’s Property Act’, The sections under consi-
deration also represent a statutory reform of the Jaw on the same subject. The
underlying object being the same, namely, ice provide that marriage, as such,
shall have no effect on proprietary rights, this part of the Succession Act should
therefore be read in conjunction with legislation relating to the property rights
of married women‘.

6.3. In the succession Act, section 20 constitutes the principe! provision. Section 20,
No person shall, by martiage, acquire any interest in the property of the person
whom he or she marries or become incapable of doing any act in respect of
his or her own property which he or she could have done if married,

There are two exceptions to this rule—first, the section 0075 उक्त: apply
to any marriage contracted before the first day of January i866; secondly, it
does not apply to any marriage one or both the parties to which profess at the
time of the marriage the Hindu, Mohammaden, Buddhist, Sikh or Jain religion.

The first mentioned exception is historical, and needs no comment, As to
the second exception, it may be explained that the object of the section is to
abrogate the common law rule (which might otherwise have applied) to the
effect that on marriage the married woman becomes subject to certain incapacities
or that her property comes, to any extent, to be vested in her husband, Since
this rule of the common law was never applicable to Hindus and other persons
mestioned above’, there was no need to extend the provision to them, idence
the second exception,

Further, comments on the section will be offered* in the discussion on
section 21, which deals with connected matters.

6.4. According to section 21, if a person whose domicile is not in India Section 21.
marries in 1019-79 person whose domicile is in India, neither party acquires
by the marriage any rights in respect of any preporty of the other pariy not
comprised in a settlement made previous to the marriage, which he or she would
not acquire thereby if both were domiciled in India at the time of the marriage,

6.5. The significance of section 20 and 21 has been thus explained* by Sections 20-21 sig.
Markby J. — nifance,

“The tex foci of India, like the fex loci of all other countries, is applicable
to the immovable property of foreigners sojourning but not domiciled here,
but not to their movable property. It was not necessary for the legislature,
when laying down the lex loci, to reserve in express terms a principle of
law which is universally recognised. That this general principle was not
intended to be disturbed is clearly shown by section 4 (present section 20)
which resolves in a particular way an old standing dispute as to the appli
cation of the principle. The preponderance of authority had been in favour
of making the domicile of the husband, or at least that of the marriage,
govern the rights of parties where the domiciles of the husband and wife
are different. The Succession Act, where either of the parties hed an Indian
domicile, very reasonably submits all their rights both as to movables and
immovables, to the territorial law of India. To that extent, the jus gentium
or common law of nations, has been set aside or modified.

“From this point of view, it is easy to see why section 4 (section 20) and

section 44 (section 21) are kept apart. The two sections deal with different

subjects, The former declares the general lex loci of India, the second

lays down a special role to govern a particular case. It is not 2 modification

of lex foci, but a declaration of the law in, a particular case,”

In a later case’, Mr. Justice Sale has given the following interpretation of
the provisions in question :

Law Commission of India, 66th Report (Married Women’s Property Act, 1874).
"Married Women's Property Act, 1874,

*For a detailed discussion, see Law Commission of India, 66th Report i :
Prope sailed eport (Married Women’s

‘Para 6,4 to 6.6, infra,
‘Miller v. The Administrator General of Bengal (1874) LL.R. | Cal. 412, 420, 421 (Markby J.)
‘Hill v. The Administrator-Genral of Bengal, (1896) LL.R. 23 Cal. 506, 512.


Application of sec-

No change propo-

ae

“Ta my opinion section 4 (present section 20) and 44 (present section 21)
read together should be understood as laying down a general rule as to
the immediate effect of marriage in respect of movable property belonging
to each or other of the married persons not comprised in ante-nuptial
settlement and not as laying down a rule intended to affect the law of
secession.

6.6. Appiication of these sections could be thus illustrated :

“Tf a man domiciled in England marries an Indian woman possessed of land
and money in India, she acquires his domiclie (section 15), and {in the
absence of section 21) her unsettled movables would, according to the
[8७ of England, immediately become the absolute property of the husband,
while her immovable property would go according to that of India, the
lex loci rei sitae i.e, this Act. To prevent this evil of land and “movable
becoming subject to different rules in such a case, this section was
inwroduced.””

6.7, We have carefully examined the sections in the light of such case law

sed in the section. 45 exisis thereon. We do not ste any need to recommend any amendment in

Position in common
law.

Right to be given
rhe alse

the sections.

6.8, This takes us to section 22 which provides that the property of ४
minor may be settled in contemplation of marriage, subject to the approval of
the minor’s father, or, if the father is dead or absent from India, with the appro-
val of the High Court. The Section is based on an earlier English statute’, which
has now been repealed in England.

6.9. Atcommon law, a court had no power to make a binding settlement on
behalf of an infant. The Infants Settlement Act, 1855 was passed in England
to enable male infants over 20 and female infants over 17 to make a binding
settlement with the consent of the court of chancery. The Act was particularly
needed in view of the fact that when infants were wards, the court could not
sanction marriage without a proper settlement.

This was at a time when the age of majority in England was 21 years. As
the age has now been reduced to 18 years, the Act has been repealed.*

6.10, While section 22 contemplates approval of proposed settlement by
the father, it is totally silent as to the right of the mother in this regard. The
result is that if the father is dead or absent or under a disability, an application
under the section must necessarily be made to the High Court. Having regard
to present day notions, we are of the view that the section should be amended,
so as to provide that if the father is dead or absent from India or under dis-
ability, the mother can approve of the settlement of the minor’s property,

Accordingly, we recommend that section 22(1) should be revised as
under :—

Re-draft of section 22(1)

(1): The property of a minor may be settled in contemplation of marriage,
provided the settlement is made by the minor—

(a) with the approbation of the minor’s father, or

(b) if the father is dead or absent from india or under disability, with the
approbation of the minor’s mother, or

(c) if both the father arid the mother are dead or absent from India or
under disability, with the approbation of the High Court.

हक, ied from Stokes, Succession Act, page 24, as cited in N.D. Basu, Succession Act (1957),
under sections 20-22.

Infants Settlement Act, 1855 (Eng.) (18 & 19) Vc. 43 (Repealed by the Family Law Reform
Act, 1969).

*Family Law Reform Act, 1969,


49

610A, We note that in an article! published in the Statesman which is written Section 22 a sugges.
by way of comment on the Law Commission's Working Paper on the subject, कल) subse
the writer has suggested that in section 22, for the word “father”, the words considered,
“either parent” should be substituted, She adds : “It need no longer be ‘pre-
sumed that ali mothers are incapable of deciding issues like property. They must
be given the same right as fathers to act in this matter.” Hf this suggestion is
accepted’, the relevant portion of section 22 would read as under :—-

“The property of a minor may be settled in contemplation of marriage, pro-
vided “the settlement is made by the minor with the approbation of either
parent of the minor.”

We have considered the suggestion carefully. We must, however, note that
the section is, in a way, linked up with the general law of guardianship of
property of minors, as applicable to those to whom section 22 applies (broadly
speaking, persons other than Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains and Muslims). It
would not be correct to view this part of the section in isolation from that gene-
ral Jaw. The limited amendment that we ourselves are recommending in the
section would take care of hard cases. It would not be feasible to go further,
having regard to the integral link of the section with the law of guardianship as
pointed out above. We should record here that the fact that we are not going
further should not be taken as implying that we regard mothers as fess capable,
than fathers, of looking after the proprietary affairs of their children,

CHAPTER 7
CONSANGUINITY (SECTIONS 23 TO 28)

7.1 Sections 23 to 28 deal with the concept of consanguinity. The scheme Sections 23- 28.

of the sections is logical, The applicability of the provisions of the Part having
been defined in section 23, a definition of “kindred or consanguinity” is given
(section 24), the basis of consanguinity being descent from the same stock or
common ancestor, The connection or relation, arising from such descent could
be either lineal (section 25}, or collateral (section 26). Certain rules as to
the persons who, for the purpose of succession, are similarly related to the
deceased, are similarly enacted in ‘section 27. To facilitate the computation of
degrees of kindred, the First Schelule provides a table, to which legislative authority
is given by section 28.

It is obvious that consanguinity, being based on relationship by blood,
cannot exist as between husband and wife, (६ is, therefore, surprising that any
such argument could have been advanced* before the Madras High Court.

The provisions in these sections are not applicable to Hindus, Mohammedans,
Buddhists, Sikhs, Jains and Parsees (section 23).

7.2. So much by way of introduction, We may now take the sections con- section 23-—Appli-
tained in this Part. Section 23 provides that nothing in this Part shall apply cation of Part.
to any will made or intestacy occurring before the first day of January, 1866,
or to intestate or testamentary succession to the property of any Hindu, Moham-
madan, Buddhist, Sikh, Jain or Parsi,

The section needs no change.
7.3, Section 24 defines kindred or consanguinity as “the connection or rela- section 24 kindred

tion of persons descended from the same stock or common ancestor.” ही may or consanguinity.
be noted that the expression “kindered” occurred in several substantive sections

‘Shahnaz Anklesaria, “Laws which discriminate against women" (20 June ,1984) Statesman
page 6. .
‘This concerns paragraph 6.10,
*Administrator General v. Simpson Joshi (1902) LLL.R. 26 Mad. 532, 534.


Section 25 Lineal
consanguinity.

Section 26 Collate-

50

of the Act, including the various provisions laying down the order of succession
on intestacy.

The section does not. seem to need any change.

7.4. Section 25 defines the expression “lineal consanguinity”. The essence

of such consanguinity is direct descent or ascent. Sub-section (1) of the section
provides that lineal consanguinity one of whom is descended in a direct line’ from
the other, as between men and his father, grandfather and great-grandfather,
and so upwards in the direct ascending line, or between a man and his son,
grandson, great-grandson, great-great-grandson and so onwards in the direct
descending line.

Sub-section (2) provides that every generation constitutes a degree, either

ascending or descending. This is illustrated by sub-section (3), A persons’s
father is related to him in the first degree, and so likewise is his son; his grand-
father and grandson are related to him in the second degree; his great-grand-
father and great-grandson in the third degree, ang so on.

The section needs no change, having created no controversy or difficulty.

7.5. Section 26 (1) defines “collateral consanguinity” as that which subsists

tal consanguinity, between two persons who are descended from the same stock or ancestor, but

Persons held for

(| of succes
Son to be similarly
related to decea-

Section 28 Mods of
computing of deg-
tees of kindred.

aeither of whom is descended in a direct line from the other.

Sub-section (2) of the section deals with the mode of commutation of

degrees.

The section needs no change.

7.6. Section 27 provides as follows :---

“27, For the purpose of succession, there is no distinction
(a) between those who are related to a person deceased through his
father, and those who are related to him through his mother; or

(b) between those who are related to a person deceased by the full
blood, and those who are related to him by the half-blood; or
(c) between those who were actually born in the lifetime of a person
deceased and those who at the time of his death were only conceived
in the womb, but who have been subsequently born alive.”

The section needs no change.

7.7, Section 28 provides as follows — _
“28. Degrees of kindred are computed in the manner set forth in the table
of kindred set out in Schedule I.

ILLUSTRATIONS

(i) The person whose relatives are to be reckoned, and his cousin-german,
or first cousin, are, as shown in the table related in the fourth degree;
there being one degree of ascent to the father, and another to the common
ancestor, and the grandfather; and from him one of descent to the uncle,
and another to the cousin-german, making in all four degrees.

di) A grandson of the brother-and a son of the uncle ic. a great-nephew
and a cousin-german, are in equal degree being each four degrees remov-
ed. !
(iii) A grandson of a cousin-german is in the same degree as the grandson
of a great-uncle, for they are both in the sixth degree of kindred.”

The section needs no change.

~ iContrast section 26—Collateral Consanguinity.


31

CHAPTER 8

INTESTATE SUCCESSION : SECTIONS 20-30
PRELIMINARY न
8.1. Intestate succession is a topic extending over several Sections of the Introductory (sec
Act, but two of the sections—sections 29 and 30 deal with certain preliminary tion 28 and 30)
matters,

Section 28 deals with the applicability of this part of the Act. As certain
problems have arisen on the construction of section 29, it will be necessary
to discuss in some detaii the relevant points'. As to section 30, that section is
really in the nature of a definition of the expression ‘intestate’, though, in form,
it does not purport to be a definition.

8.2. Part V of the Act lays down the rules of succession to the property Section 29—Scope.
of 2 person dying intestate. Section 29, which occurs in Chapter I of this Part,
provides that Part V shali constitute “the law of India in all cases of intestacy”,
except as provided in that section. Chapter 2 of this Part lays down the rules
of succession in cases of intestates other than Parsis, and Chapter 3 lays
down the rules of succession for Parsi intestates.

The scheme of this Part is simple enough, but the very first section (section
29) has created certain problems. The section reads us follows :—

“29, (1) This Part shall not apply to any intestacy occurring before the

first day of January, 1866, or to the property of any Hindu, Mchammadan,

Buddhist, Sikh or Jain.

(2) Save as provided in sub-section (1) or any other law for the time

being in force, the provisions of this Part shall constitute the law of India

in at cases Of intestacy.”

8.3. It is sub-section (2) of section 29 that requires some discussion. On Controversy on

two questions concerned with this sub-section, there is a conflict of judicial 0 _ pois
opinion— sub-section (2),

(a) Whether, by virtue of section 6 of the Part B Statés (Laws) Act, 1950,
the Travancore Christian Succession Regulation IH of 1092 stood
repealed with effect from 1st April, 1951, or whether that Regulation
is saved’ by the words “save as provided in ........... any other
law for the time being in force” which occur in section 29(2); and

(b) Whether customary law of succession is saved? by section 29(2).

8.4. The first questiont requires consideration of the Part B States Laws Travancore Chris
Act, 1950, That Act was enacted to extend certain Central Acts to Part B tian Succession
States, and among the Central Acts extended was the Indian Succession Act, Reputation-Cogsict
1925. Section 6 of the Part B States Laws Act provided that any existing law in its subsisteace .

3 State, “corresponding” to the Central enactments extended to the State, shall

stand repealed. The question on which a conflict of views has arisen is, whether

the Travancore—Christian Succession Regulation (2 of 1092) is a law “corres-

pording” to the Indian Succession Act, 1925, and if so, whether it stands re-

pealed on the enactment of the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1950.

8.5. On this point, the Madras view and the Travancore-Cochin view are Madras caso of
in conflict. In a Madras case, ‘the High Court held that the Travancore Christian 974
Succession Regulation was a law “corresponding” to the Indian Succession
Act, 1925. It also held that the Travancore Succession Regulation of 1092
did not fall within the purview of section 29(2), Succession Act, and would
not be saved by it.

the Travancore Regulation of 10926) was saved by section 29(2) of the Indian °
4Paragraphs 8.3 to 8.10, infra.
3566 paras 8.4 to 8.9, iafra.
*Para 8.11, infra. .
‘Para 8.3, supra.
‘Solomon y. Mathiah (1974) 1, M.L.T.
*Kurien Angusty v. Devassey Aley, A.1.R. 1957 Travancore Cochin 1.

8.6. The erstwhile Travancore Cochin High Court, however, had held* that Trvancore case



Madras view.

Dr. —_ Derrets's
comment.

52

Succession Act, 1925, and (ii) was not repealed by the Part B States Laws Act,
1950, as it could not be considered a law “corresponding” to the Indian Succes-
sion Act, 1925.

The Travancore Cochin High Court has construed the expression “save as
provided in ............ or any other Jaw for the time being in force” in section
29(2), as including an existing State law, i.¢., the Travancore Christian Succes-
sion Regulation, 1092. It found support for this view in two decisions' which
had held that section 29(2) saved the customary law of intestate succession
among certain communities. It also observed that the effect of section 292) of
the Indian Succession Act on the Travancore Regulation was to adopt that Regula-
tion by ‘reference’ and to make it part of the 1925 Act itself. In this view, it
could not be considered a “corresponding law” repealed by section 6 of the
Part B States Laws Act, 1950.

8.7. The Madras High Court has disagreed with the reasoning of the
Travancore Cochin High Court, as well as with the earlier decisions relied
on by it. According to the Madras High Court, section 29(2) was in
pari materia with section 2 of the Indian Succession Act, 1865 on the point
under consideration, Relying on three decisions? on the Act of 1865 which
had held that the section should be deemed to have universal applicaticn, and
that, any saving of any law had to be specifically provided for in the Act, the
Madras High Court ruled out the saving of any customary law by section 29(2).
It placed emphasis on the words “save as provided in any other law” [in section
29(2)]. This, according to the Madras High Court, clearly showed that the Act
which is sought to be saved should itself contain a clear provision to this
effect.

The Madras High Court found additional su; tin section 3 of the Suc-
cession Act. If the idea of saving any customary ae under the Indian Succes-
sion Act, 1925, was in the mind of the legislature, it could-be done under
section 3 of the Act, by which the Government was empowered to notify and
exempt the operation of the Act in respect of any race, sect or tribe, Certain
communities had, in fact, been notified under the section, such as the Christians
in the (erstwhile) Province of Coorg and the Khasis and Syntengs in Assam.

The Madras High Court also found it impossible to accept the view of the
Travancore. Cochja High Court that the Travancore Regulation (of 1092)
was adopted by ‘feference’ by section 29(2). It observed that in such a case the
wording of the section should have been entirely different.

8.8. It is unfortunate that Syrian Christians, whose homes and lands. were
transferred from Kerala to Tamil Nadu by the rerorka anisation that took place
in 1956, should (as to succession) be governed by a Saw different from that of
Syrian Christians (or, indeed, any other Christian) domiciled and having lands
in other talukas of Tamil Nadu. As observed by Dr. Derrett® this kind of
chaos, fruitful for lawyers, is anachronistic,

Position regarding 8.8A. In the Working Paper on the Act, the Law Commission had occasion

‘Travancore
Cochin areas,

nd to point out the anomalous position that now prevails on the question whether

the Indian Succession Act, 1925, applies to the areas that formed part of the
State of Travancore-Cochin-itself a successor to the princely States of Travancore
and Cochin respectively. The conflict of views that exists on the subject makes
the position very awkward and the Commission had drawn attention to the
need for settling the position in this respect. Case law on the subject relates to the
Travancore Christian Succession Regulation; but the same uncertainty would
seem to prevail regarding the Cochin Christian Succession Act also.

२६6) Nabujan v. Paushiomoni, 54 Cal. W.N. , 20.10. 14.
(6) Prem Chand v. Lilawati, A.LR. 1950 H.P. 17.
%(a) De Souza v. Secretary of State for India, (1874) 12 Beng. L.R. 423.
(6) Dagree v. Pacotti San Jao, (1895) I.L.R. 19 Bom. 783.
apenbala Debi v. Siti Kanta Banerjee, (1911) 15 Cal. W.N. 158.
*Derrett, ‘The Personal Law of Syrian Christians in Tamit Nadu’ in (1974)2 M.L.J. (Journal),


33

8.88, Apart from the question of uncertainty in the law, there is the
need to consider the merits of the case. The legislation enacted in the two princely
States on Christian succession fails to give equal rights to women, and its provi-
sions are heavily weighted against women, as contrasted with the provisions of
the Indian Succession Act, 1925, as applicable to Christians dying intestate,
In this situation, Government may well consider whether it should not straight-
away adopt the course of specifically repealing the Travancore and Cochin legis-
lation, and of making it clear that the Indian Act etxends to the areas in
question—of course, with such consequential and transitional provisions
as may be appropriate. The Commission has an apprehension that the present
position, if Chatlen ged in the courts on the scope of conflict with the right to
equality under article 14 of the Conistitution, may not stand scrutiny, Incidentally,
it may be mentioned that the Commission has also come across an article in
&@ women’s magazine’ which has drawn attention to the discrimination against
women arising from the situation mentioned above in Travancore and Cochin’.

8.9. The inconvenience of succession to a single individual taking place
under different laws, according as his lands lie in different territories, has been
pointed out in another learned article’.

8.9A. In a Madras case of 1978, the matter was considered at some length

but, with respect, the judgement does not satisfactorily clarify the position. It 1

was held that the Christian Succession Act of Travancore was a law “correspond-
ing” to the Indian Succession Act, 1925. However, at the same time, it was
heid that the Act did not stand repealed by section 29(2), because by its very
terms, that provision did not cover this particular enactment'.

8.10. Having given our anxious thought to the case law and the comments
thereon as discussed above, we have come to the conclusion that the present
Situation is most unsatisfactory. The applicability of the Act to Indian Christians
in the areas to which the Travancore Regulation‘ applies should not be allowed
to continue (9 be a matter of controversy. We shall, tater in this Chapter’, make
appropriate recommendation on the above point, as to the Tranvancore’ Act
{and also as to the Cochin Act on the subject),

We may mention that the need for abrogating the Travancore Act and the
Cochin Act has been emphasised in a comment on our Working Paper forwarded
by the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India’,

Discriminatory
treatment against
women:

Inconvenience,

Madras case of
978.

Need for amende
meat,

8.11. We should also like to mention that section 29(2) has raised another Customary law

Controversy, namely is the customary law of succession saved by the section ?
Is custom a “law” within the meaning of section 29(2)? Conflicting views
have been expressed on the subject. According to one view’, the expression
“any other law for the time being in force” in section 29(2) would cover
customary law also.

It is, however possible to argue that the expression “law for the time being
in for in section 29 cannot appropriately cover a custom. Since the wry

object of section 29 is to provide what shall be the law of intestate succession |

for the person concerned, an amendment is required, so that no controversy may
arise on the above point also.

4Shri C.A. Achutha Menon’s article in Eve's Weekly (Bombay), 21-27 July, 1984,
“See also M. Stanley Fernandez “Christian Women in Kerala”A.1.R. 1984 Journal (October).
®R.S. Venkatachari in (1974) K.L.T. (Journal) 42-48.

3) ‘D. Chelliah Nadar ५. Lalitubai, ALR. 1978 Mad. 65 (Kailasam C.J. and Balasubramanian
‘Travancore Christian Succession Regulation 2 of 1092 (1916 A.D.).
*Para 8.12, infra.
*Catholic Bishop’s Conference-of India, letter dated 3rd October, 1984,
(a) Nabujan v. Paushinoni, 54 Cal. W.N. 12., D.R. 14 {Customary Law of Garos).
(8) Prem Chand v. Lilawati, A.1.R. 1956 H.P. 17.
*Solomon v. Muthiah, (1974) 1 M.L.J. 53,


Recommendation

as to section 29

and the Travancore
equlation.

Point _regarding

tribal law and
Christianity.

Section 30.

54

8.12. 10 clarify the position on the two points discussed above, ‘ve make the

following recommendations :

(a) The Travancore Christian Succession Regulation 2 of 1092 should
be repealed by an express provision. This course may be adopted if,
as a matter of social policy, it is considered that the Indian Succession
Act should apply to the perses governed by ihe Travancore Regula-
tion, referred to above,

If, on the other hand, it is considered that as a matter of social policy, the
provisions of the Travancore Christian Succession Regulation should
govern succesion to the persons concerned, then there should be inserted
a provision in section 29 of the Indian Succession Act io the effect that
the Travancore Regulation would apply to Christians governed by that
Regulation in respect of intestate succession— .
(i) im the State of Kerala, and

(i) the adjoining areas 10 the State of Tamil Nadu (in the district
of Kanyakumari and Shencoitah taluk).

Besides the above amendment, an Explanation should be added to
section 29(2) of the Indian Succession Act, to the effect that “law”
in this section does not include custom.

(०) What we have mmenided in sub-paragraph (a) above in relation
to the Travancore Act, applies with necessary adaptations, to the
Cochin Christian Succession Act also,

(b.

In: this context, we should mention that it is customary in the Christian
community (in the areas covered by the above recommendation) for fathers
to make a suitable provision for the daughter during their lifetime. The practice
of making such provision must have had its genesis in the consideration that the
rights of the females in the father's property are less favourable than the rights
of males standing in the same degree of relationship. If the Indian Succession
Act, 1925 becomes applicable to the persons in question, it will be just and
fair that provisions made for daughters by the fathers should be taken into
account when the succession opens on intestacy. The reason is, that the conside-
ration in which this custom has its genesis would no longer subsist. It is there-
fore recommended that if the Indian Succession Act, 1925 becomes applicable
to the persons in question, suitable provision should be made to the effect
that from the share to be distributed to a daughter on intestacy, the amount or
value of the property so provided by the father during his lifetime should be
deducted, provided that following conditions are fulfilled :—

(a) the making of such gift is evidenced in writing, whether or not the
writing is stamped or registered; and

Gi) the amount of the gift or provision or its value on each individual
occasion is not less than five hundred rupees.

8.12A. In a comment! on the Working Paper forwarded to the Commission
by the Catholic Bishop’s Conference of India, the query has been raised about
tribals who have their customary law. It is stated that if it is advantageous to
them, they should not lose their benefit, merely by profession of the Christian
rel'gion. This point really does not arise out of any proposal put forth by us. The
cfiect of conversion on the law applicable is outside this Report, and, in fact, is
outside the Act. In any case, if 10 is considered proper to preserve any rule of
tribal law, necessary action can be taken under section 3.

8.13. Th’s takes us to section 30, which provides that a person is deemed
to die intestate in respect of all property of which he has not made a testamen-
tary disposition capable of taking effect. The illustrations to the section spell
out the significance of various ingredients of the section, The section needs no
change.

Catholic Bishop’s Conference of India, letter dated 3rd October, 1984,


35

8.13A. The Government of Nagaland’, in its comment on the Working section 30-a sugges-

Paper of the Law Commission, has stated that the provisions of the proposed tion considered.
legislation will attract the provisions of article 371A of the Constitution and

will not apply automatically 10 the State of Nagaland. The comment suggests

that section 30 should be amended to provide accordingly. We may, in this con-

text, point out that any legislation that may be passed to implement our pro-

posals in this Report will be an amending Act. If the principal Act docs not

apply to a particular State, the textual amendments will naturally remain

inapplicable to that State. Hence there is, in cur opinion, no need to amend

section 30 for the purpose.

CHAPTER 9

a
RS iS
RULES IN CASES OF INTESTATES OTHER THAN P. (SECTIONS
31 TO 49) ; Sc

1, Preliminary .

9.1. Rules of succession in cases of intestates other than Parsis are dealt scope of the provi-

with in sections 31 to 49. The scheme of this group of sections may be briefly sions and general
stated. The first section in this group (section 31) excludes Parsis; and it may scheme. .
also be noted that section 29(1) has already excluded, from the entire Part,
Hindus, Muhammadans, Buddhists, Sikbs and Jains. Devolution of property
of an intestate governed by this Part is in the order, and according to the
tules, contained in the succeeding sections. Section 32 so provides. The rules
differ according as the intestate has left a lineal descendant-section 33(a) and
sections 36 to 49-or has not left a lineal descendant-sections 33(b), 33(c) and
33A. The rules also differ in their content if the intestate has left a widow
(sections 33 and 33A and section 36, portion in parenthesis), as distinguished
from the situation where he has not left a widow (section 36, portion outside
the parenthesis). As between the lineal descendants themselves, the order of
preference is governed by sections 36--41.

The rules apply whether or not there is a widow, but after deducting
her share-section 36. Where there are no lincal descendants, the position is
governed by sections 42 to 48, which apply whether there is or there is not a
widow, but after deducting her share-section 41. What has been stated above
as to the widow applies also in relation to the widower-secticn 35.

The last scction in this group-section 49 is a special rule meant for a-special
situation, namely, that of “advancement”, and dispenses with the need to bring
the “advancement” into the “hotchpot”.

9.2 Coming to a detailed considercation of each section, section 31 defines.
the scope of Chapter 2 of Part 5, by providing that this Chapter shaJl not Setion 31.
apply to Parsis. This was necessary because section 29(2), which is also in
Part 5, would otherwise have the effect of applying the provisions of this
Chapter, inter alia, to Parsis also. .

The scction needs no change.
Il. Order of succession where spouse survives.

9.3. Under section 32, the property of an intestate devolves upon the wife .
or husband or upon those who are the kindred of the deceased, in the order tial 100 32-pre-nup~
and according to the rules contained in the Chapter. The Explanation to the sec- हु
tion deals with the special case of a widow who, by a valid contract made before
her marriage, has been excluded from her distributive share of her husband's
estate. This provision is based on the English doctrine of pre-nuptial settlement,
While two views can be taken as to the souncness of such a provision, we will

aLaw Commission Tile No. 1. 26) 84-1८, ५. No. 13 (Government of Nagaland).
२8०6 the miacginal note to section 49, for these expressions.


56

not recommend a change in the absence of a specific demand or suggestion for
change.

Section 33. 9.4, Where the intestate has left a widow section 33 governs the matter.
The section makes detailed provisions for three possible situations, namely,
(i) wherea lineal descendant also survives, (ii) where no lineal descendant sur-
viwes but persons who are kindred (other than lineal descendants) survive, and
ii) where no kindred survives. The position is brifly as under :

@ In the first situation, the widow gets one-third of the estate, and the
remaining two-third goes to the lineal descendants, in accordance with
detailed rules contained in later sections’.

(ii) For the second situation, section 33A (introduced in 1926) makes
a special provision, giving certain rights to the widow’. Subject to that
special provision, one half of the property belongs to the widow, and
the other half to the kindred, in accordance with rules contained in
later sections.

ii) In the third situation, the whole of the property belongs to the
widow.

Position in England 9.5. With reference to the second situation mentioned above’, namely, the

where lineal descen- situation where lineal descendants do not survive, the change made in the law

dants do not sut-in England should be noticed. Under section 46 of the Intestates’ Estates Act,

vive, 1952, on the death of a husband intestate, if he leaves no surviving issue, parent,
brother or sister of the whole blood or issue of such brother or sister, his
whole estate will pass to the widow’.

Recommendation 9.6. The English provision’ is, in our opinion, worth adopting, as it is more
to amend section in consonance with present day sentiments, We recommend that section 33 should
Biwher no turn. be amended accordingly.

ves.

9.6A. We should mention that an article published in the Statement’, com-
menting on the Law Commission’s Working Paper on the Act, has stated that if
a husband (belonging to the communities $ governed by sections 33 to 49) dies
leaving no lineal descendants, but has kindred, then, at present, only one half
goes to the widow, and the distant relatives take the rest. She suggests that the
widow should get the whole of the property in such cases. We may, in this
Connection, point out that this is precisely what we had proposed in regard to
section 33 in the Working Paper, and it is also what we are recommending in
this Report’. The changes wi hich we are recommending in section 33A are,
of course, in addition to the change recommended in section 33.

9.7. This takes us to section 33A. This is a lengthy section, but it is
enough to quote the first two sub-sections :

“33A. (1) Where the intestate has 16६ a widow but 00 lineal descendants
and the net value of his property does not exceed five thousand Tupees,
the whole of his property shall belong to the widow.

(2) Where the net value of the property exceeds the sum of five thousand
rupees, the widow shall be entitled to five thousand rupees thereof and shail
have a charge upon the whole of such property for such sum of five
thousand rupees, with interest thereon from the date of the death of
the intestate at 4 per cent per annum until payment”. °

Section 33A,

(The rest of the section is concerned with matters of details}.

‘Sections 36 to 40.
*Paragraph 9.7, infra.
‘Paragraph 9.4, (ii), supra.

‘Section 46, Intestates’ Estates Act, 1952 (Eng.).
‘Paragraph 9.5, supra.

‘Shahnaz Anklestia, “Laws which discriminate against women” (20 June, 1984) Statesman,
page 6.

"Section 33, as recommended to be amended.


37

9.8. We are of the opinion that the amount of Rs. 5,000 mentioned in Recommendation
section 33A(1) should’, having regard to the fall in the value of the Tupee, be 334 "0 as to im
increased to Rs. 35,000. We may note that the value of the rupee has certainly crease the amount
fallen seven times since the section was inserted. We recommend that section and the rate of
33A should be amended accordingly. In our Proposal in the Working Paper, we interest.
had suggested an increase upto Rs. 20,000, But, on further consideration, we
have reached the above conclusion. We may mention that? one of the suggestions
forwarded to us by the Catholic Bishops’ Conference would even favour substi-
tution of Rs. 50,000.

The rate cf interest under section 33A should also, in our opinion, be
suitably increased, to, say, 9 per cent, having regard to present conditions.

We recommend that section 33A should be amended, so as to substitute
the above increased figure of Rs. 35,000 for Rs, 5,000 [in both the sub-sections}
and also the increased rate of interest of 9 per cent in [sub-section (2)].

Ill. Where spouse does not survive

9.9. We now proceed to section 34, which reads as under :-— हु
Section 34,

“34, Where the intestate has left no widow, his property shall go to bis

lineal descendants or to those who are of kindred to him, not being lineal

descendants, according to the rules hereinafter contained; and, if he has

left none who are of kindred to him, it shall go to the Government”.

9.10. The first part of the section creates no problems. हु Position of iNegiti-
mate chifd,
As to the second part of the section (under which the Property goes to the
Government) certain observations appear to be in order,

The most usual cases that fall within the latter part of section 34 are
those relating to the estates of illegitimate persons who leave no wife or children,
In strict theory, in such cases the property by escheat to the State. If there
is no widow, no lineal descendants and no Kindred, the Government will, under
section 34, take the whole. At one time, if an illegitimate person died ieaving
no wife or children, the Crown took the whole Property’, but it was customary
for the Crown to fe-grant the property to the persons who, if the deceased
had been legitimate, would have been entitled to it as next-of-kin, It is in re-
gard to such cases that a very early notification of the Government of India‘
is of great relevance.

9.11. We have in mind certain notifications issued on the subject under the Protifcations istued
Government of India Act, 1853—a British statute which applied in India. General,
The “Governor-General” had, under that statute, power to make any grant or
disposition of any property accruing to the Crown by forfeiture, escheat or
otherwise, to or in favour of, any relative or connection of the persons from whom
the same shail have accued*.

It appears that a notification’ was issued under the Indian Succession
Act of 1865, giving effect to the practice of re-granting the property to certain
relatives in cases of illegitimate persons. From the Property to be-re-granted,
expenses of administration as well as certain shares were deducted’,

*Paragcaph 9.7, supra,
*Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India, letter dated 3rd October 1984.
*Secretary of State v. Girdhari Lal, L.L.R. $4 Ail 226,

“See Para 9.11, infra.

‘Government of India Act, 1853 (16 and 17 Vict. ०. 95). section 27.

“Henderson. Testamentary Succession and Administration of Estates in India (1928), page
43.

‘Government of India, Notification dated 31-3-1873; Gazette of India, 5th April, 1873 Part 4
page 334.
*Henderson, Testamsntary Succession and Ad-ninistration of Estates ia India (192), page 43.


38

By a further notification of the Home Department’, the following scale
was fixed as to the Crown’s share*:—~

When residue amounts to Jess than Rs. 5,000—1/8.

When residue not less than Rs. 5000 but less than Rs. 10,000—1/6,
When residue not less than Rs, 10,000 but 1655 than 50,000—-1/3.
When residue not less than Rs. 50,000 but 1655 than 1,10,000—1 /4.
When residue not less than Rs. 1,10,000 and onwards—1/3.

Recommendation 9.12. We have not been able to ascertain whether these arrangements still
to consider suita- continue, However, social justice requires that the need for some such arrange-
ble arrangements, in ments should be considered in the context of section 34.

case of escheat etc,

Section 34, Succes: 9.13. There is also a point of drafting pertaining to section 34, apart
sion Act compared fom the point of substance which has been mentioned above.What we wish
with section 29, to point out is that the corresponding provision in the Hindu Succession Act
Hindu Succession jg more precise than the provision in the Indian Succession Act. The Hindu
Act. Succession Act’ provides that the Government takes the property subject to

all the obligation of the heir.

For ready re‘erence section 29 of that Act is quoted below :—

“29. Failure of heirs. If an intestate has left no heir qualificd to succeed
to his or her property in accordance with the provisions of this Act, such
property shall devolve on the Government; and the Government shall take
the property subject to all the obligations and liabilities, to which an heir
would have been subject.”

This seems to be an improvement on the wording of section 34 in the Suc-

cession Act.
Section 34-Re- 9.14, In view of what is stated above, we recommend that in section 34,
Commendation, for the last six words “it shall .....-..-- the Government”, the words “such

property shall devolve on the Government and the Government shall take the
property subject to all the obligations and liabilities to which an heir would have
been subject”, should be substituted.

Secti 35-Re- 9.15, This takes us to section 35. It provides that where a husband survives

SectloBadation. 115 wiic, he has the same rights in respect of her property, if she dies intestate,
as a widow has in respect of her husband’s property if he dies intestate. The
operation of this section, read with section 33(b), is illustrated by a Madras case’,
where it was held that, in the absence of any next of kin, the husband would
be entitled to the whole of the property of the deceased wife, One important
consequence of the general rule in section 35 is that the special provision. inserted
in 1926 in the form of section 33A to provide especially or the wife’ (wodow)
applies to the husband also. Whether this was intended by the legislature when
it inserted section 33A is arguable. However, on the merits, and having regard
to notions current at the present day, there is no harm if section 33A 50
applies to the surviving husband, by virtue of section 35.

The section docs not seem to need any change, either of subtance or of
form.

9.16. Rules of distribution where there are lineal descendants are provided
for in sections 36 to 40. The broad principle is that the children share equally
per capita (section 37), and (where there are not children) the same principle
applies to grand-children, (section 38). Some is the position where there are no
children or grand-children, but there are great-grandchildren or lineal descendants
in a more remote degree (section 39).

Scheme of Sections
36—40,

3Supplement to the Gazette of India, November, 5, 1898, page 1923.
sHenderson, Testamentary Succession and Administration of Estates in India (1928), page 44.
Section 29, Hindu Succession Act, 1956.

“Ganta Daniyelu v. Yasu, A.1.R. 1925 Mad. 1110, 1111

‘Section 33A, inserted in 1926; see para 9.7, supra.


59

However, a different provision has been made for cases where the intestate
leaves lineal descendants who do not all stand in ihe same degree of kinship
to him. Here, per capita distinction (sections 37 to 39) is replaced by distribu-
tion per stirpes (section 40), i.e. the grandchildren, great-grandchildren or
remoter lineal descendants take equally, between them, their deccasd parents’
(notional) share,

9.17.In our opinion, even in cases governed by sections 37--39, there Section 37-per stir-
should be succession per stirpes, as that would be more in consonance with the pes scheme recom~
general sense of the community, We recommend that section 37 should be revised mended.
as under, to carry out this object :

Revised section 37

“37, Where the intestate has left surviving him a child or children, but no
more remote fineal descendant through a deceased child, the property shall
(a) belong to his surviving child, if there is only one, or
(b) shall be divided among all his surviving children as if section 40
applied to the case.”

9,18. Apart from this point of substance concerning section 37, it may Section 37-Adop-
also be stated that according to judicial construction, an adopted child is not a ted and illegitimate
‘child’ within the meaning' of the section, Nor does the word ‘child’ in. this children.
section, include an illegitimate child?

In our opinion, however, this view does not reflect modern — socio-legal
thinking in the matter of the rights of adopted and illegitimate children, An
amendment in the law is required in order to widen its scope in this respect,
so as to cover both adopted and illegitimate children.

9.19. In this context, it is of interest to note that the expression ‘mother™ section 125 (1), Cr.
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in the provision for maintenance of P.C. 1973-meaning
wives and children), has been held to include an adoptive mother‘. It was ex-of ‘mother’.
pressly held that the fact that the General Clauses Act does not define the
expression ‘mother’ does not necessarily mean that the expression should be
taken in the restrictive sense. An expansion of the scope of section 37 of the
Succession Act would, therefore. be in harmony with general judicial trend.

9.20. To implement the above point, two alternatives are open—(i) the Recommendation
addition of a suitable Explanation to section 37, so as to include adopted and to amend section
illegitimate children within the expression “child”, (ii) or, in the alternatives, 37. oF to insert
inserting a definition of the expression “child” as including adopted and illegi- ‘fniton of “child.
timate children, in section 2 (which is the general defining section). The second
alternative is preferred, as it would scttle the point in regard to all provisions
of the Act.

If the second alternative mentioned above is adopted, the following definition’
may be added in section’ 2 :—

* “Child” includes—

(a) an adopted child, in the case of any one whose personal tow
permits adoption.

(b) an illegitimate child.”

1Ma Khun v. Ahma, .L.R. 12 Rang. 184. Ranhir Singh v. Bhattacharji, 1.L.R. (1940) Alt

सह the Goods of Sarah Ezra, A.L.R. 1931 Cal. 560, 562 (ease of Jews), following Smith v. Massey
(1906) LL.R, 30 Bom. 500.

Section 125 (1) , Cr. P.C. 1973.

sBaban v. Parbatibai (1973) Cr. LJ. 1436, 1437, para 10 te 13 (Bombay).

STo be cartied out under section™2.

“Compare (a) section 3(57), General Clauses Act, 1897 (Delinition of Son’).

(6) Law Commission of India. 6th Report (General Clauses Act), page 17, para 3.24 (propo-
sed definition of ‘daughter’.

85-L/B(D)144MofLI&CA—-S


00

A comment — te- 9.20A. Before proceeding to the next section, we would like to tefer to a
ceived from the comment forwarded to us by the Catholic Bishop’s Conference of India‘, The
Catholic Bishop’s. point relates to our recommendation to the effect that the expression “child”
Gongrence consi Should be defined as including an adopted child in the case of anyone whose
° personal law permits adoption*. It is stated in the comment that amongst Christians
there is no personal law permitting adoption and that the recommendation
would amount to discrimination against the child who is a Christian and, who
is sought to be adopted by a Christian. The suggestion is that “Either Christians
should be allowed to legally adopt children or this amendment should be further
amended”. We would like to point out, however, that the question of permitting
adoption in communities in respect of whom it is not allowed at present is
outside the scope of the Succession Act, with which this Report is concerned.
The Act primarily deals with the devolution and distribution of property on
death. Assuming that the law applicable to any group of persons permits adop-
tion, the Succession Act, wherever it uses the expression “child”, should ensure
that the expression will cover an adopted child. In other words, there should
be maintained a consistency and harmony between the verbal usage in the
Succession Act and the law outside the Succession Act, That is the only object
of the definition of “child” recommended by us, How far the law outside the
Succession Act should permit adoption, and whether that law should be widened,
is a matter which cannot be dealt with in the Succession Act,

Where intestate 9.21, This takes us 10 section 38, which reads—

has left_no_ child,

but grandchild or “38. Where the intestate has not left surviving him any child, but has left
grand-children.

a grandchild or grandchildren and no more remote descendant through a
deceased grandchild, the property shall belong to his surviving grandchild
if there is only one, or sI Fal be equally divided among all his surviving
grand-children™.

Illustrations

(i) A has three children, and no more, John, Mary and Henry. They all
die before the father, John leaving two children, Mary three and Henry.
four. Afterwards A dies intestate, leaving those nine grandchildren and no
descendant of any deceased grandchild. Each of his grandchildren will have
one-ninth.

Gi) But if Henry has died, leaving no child, then the whole is equally
divided between ‘the intestate’s five grandchildren, the children of John
and Mary.”

Section 38-Rights 9.21A. Section 38 thus applies where there are no children, but there are
of issue of pres grandchildren. Comments are Tequired on one point which arises out of the
deceased child. Section. Under the section, lineal descendants of the second degree take equally
per capita. It is a matter for consideration whether this position should continue,
Tt would appear that in England’, where a child predeceases the intestate, but
leaves issue surviving at the date of the intestate, then the issue, if they attain
the age of 18 years or marry under the age of 18 years, take the share in the
residuary estate of the intestate which the parent would have taken it he had
attained a vested interest. In this sense, the issue takes per stirpes in England,

Need for amend- 9.22. It appears to us that on the merits, the English rule on the subject

men’. is better than the Indian section. It should be Pointed out that in the case of
Parsis', even the Inlian Succession Act provides distribution per stirpes (in the
corresponding situation). No doubt, some distinction is, in Tegard to Parsis,
made between cases where the predeceased child was a son and cases where
the predeceased child was a daughter. But that distinction is not material for the
present purpose. Further, even for Indian Christians and others, where’ descen-
dants of varying degrees survive, succession per stirpes is the rule.

*Paragraph 4.8, supra.
2Section 4761) (iii), Administration of Estates Act, 1925.
‘Section 53, Indian Succession Act, 1925.

*Section 40.


61

9:23. Ie may be pointed out that section 38 applies, inzer alia, to Indian Chris-
tians, and presumably they would like to be governed by the rule of distribution
Per Stirpes, rather than by the present rule of distribution (per capita). HE this
assumption is correct, then section 38 should be amended so as to substitute
succession 36 per stirpes instead of the present rule of succession per capita,

9.24, We, therefore, recommend that section 38 should be revised as Recommendation

under :--

Revised section 38

“Where the intestate has not left surviving him any child, but has left Whe
a grandchild or grandchildren and no more remote descendant through a but

as to section 38,

deceased grandchild, the property shall— grand children,

(a) belong to his surviving grandchild, if there is only one, or

(b) shall be divided among all his surviving grand-children, as if
Section 40 applied to the case.”

Hlusirations

(i) A has three children, and no more, John, Mary and Henry. They all
die before the father, John Seaving two children Mary three and Henry
four. Afterwards A dies imestate, leaving those nine grandchildren and no
descendant of any deceased grundchild. Children of John, Mary and Henry
will have one third, and will divide that one third equally amongst them-
selves,

tii) Bur if Henry has died, leaving no child, then the children of Johu
will have one half and the children of Mary will have one half, and the
children cj each divide that one half equally amongst themselves.”

9.25. This takes us to section 39, which reads— Section 39.

“In Sike manner the property shall go to the surviving lineal descendants
who are nearest in degree to the intestate, where they are all in the
degree of great-grandchildren to him, or are all in a more remote degree.”

This section needs no change.

9.26, Section 40 reads as under :-- Section 40.

“40 (1) If the intestate hus jeft lineal descendants who do not stand in the
same degree of kindred to him, and the persons through whom the more
remote are descendants from him from him are dead, the property shall be
divided into such a number of equal shares as may correspond with the num.
ber of the lineal descendants of the intestate who either stood in the nearest
degree kindred to him, died before him, leaving lineal descendants who sur-
vived him.”

(2) One of such shares shall be allotted to each of the lineal descendants
who stood in the nearest degree of kindred 10 the intestate at his decease:
and one of such shares shall be allotted in respect of each of such deceased
lineal descendants; and the share allotted in respect of each of such deceased
lineal descendants shail belong to his surviving child or children or more
“remote lincal descendants. as the case may be; such surviving child or
children or more remote lineal descendants always taking the share which
his or their parent or parents would have been entitled to respectively if
such parent or parents had survived the intestate.”

The section needs no change.

TV. No lineal descendants

9.27.Section 41 provides that rules of distribution where the intestate has Section 41,

feft no lineat descendants shail be those contained in sections 42 to 48, “after
deducting the widow's share, if he has left a widow” Presumably, where a female
intestate has Jeft surviving her husband, the husband's share will also be deducted
by virtue of section 35, and the expression “widow” in section 41 will, accord-


62

ingly, be read as including the widower, husband. Section 41 need not be amended
‘on this point.

Sections 42-46. 9.28. An important social question is raised by sections 42 to 46, which
apply where the intestate has left no lineal descendant, These sections do not
apply to Hindus, Muslims and Parsis, but as regards other persons, they con-
stitute the general Iaw of succession on intestacy’. How. in the first place, the
sections give a perference to the father*, so that if the father is alive, the mother
has no share in the estate of the deceased. This is not in conformity with current
thinking as to the status of women. The law is in need of reform on this
point.

Secondly, where the mother is alive, but there is also brothers or sisters

of the intestate living, the mother has to share with the brother or sister, (as
also with the children of any pre-deceased brother or sister).

as is evident from section 46, it is only when the father is dead, and there
is neither brother nor sister nor child of any brother or sister of the intestate,
that the property belongs to the mother.

English law. 9.29. It would appear that in England, the law on the subject is different’.
Even where brothers and sisters of the intestate are alive, the father and the
mother take the property, They share equally, and if only one of them survives
he or she takes the whole.

Recommendation 9.30. We are of the view that the provision in England is more in con-
tons asimend **sonance with the wishes of a person dying intestate and belonging to the com-

munities to whom sections 43 to 46 apply.
We, therefore, recommend that sections 43—46 should be so amended.

Position amongst 9.31. It may also be noted that amongst Parsis, the position is different

Parsis. in regard to the ‘situation with which we are now concerned, In the first place,
amongst 28195, the father and the mother exclude the brother and sister. Secondly,
the father docs not totally exclude the mother but takes double her share, there
being a general provision’ to the effect that “each male shall take double the
share of each female standing in the same degree of propinquity.”

Section 47. 9.32, Section 47 reads as follows :—

“47, Where the intestate has left neither lineal descendant, nor father, nor
mother, the property shall be divided equally between his brothers’ and
sisters and the child or children of such of them as may have died before
him, such children (if more than one) taking in equal shares only the shares
which their respective parents would have taken if living at the intestate’s
death.” .

Recommendation 9.33. It should be noted that this section does not apply until there is

for amendment (५ feast one brother or sister alive. We are of the view that this should be madej
clear, in order to maintain symmetry‘ with the wording of section 46 and section
48, The object could be achieved by adding, after the words “nor mother”, the
words “but has left a brother or a sister” We recommend that section 47 should
be amended as above.

Revised section 47 will read as follows :—

“47, Where the intestate has left neither lineal descendant, nor father, nor
mother, but fas left a brother or a sister, the property shall be divided
equally between his brothers and sisters and the child or children of such

WSection 29.
*Section 42.
‘Section 46, Administration of Estates Act, 1925 (England).

‘Section 54(d), read with the Second Schedule, Part I ,and section’ 55 read with the Second
Schedule, Part 1.

‘Section 54(d) and section 55,

"Note the words “‘and there is neither brother nor sister.
almost similar words in s. 48.

"in section 46 and



63

of them as may have died before him, such children (if more than onc)
taking in equal shares only the shares which their respective parents would
have taken if living at the intestate’s death.”

9.34, Section 48 reads as follows :— Section 48.

“Where the intestate has left neither lineat descendant nor parents, Nor
brother, nor sister, his property shall be divided equally among those of
his relatives who are in the nearest degree of kindred to him.”

{Illustrations not quoted].

These retatives take per capita, as is shown by illustration’ (iv) to the
section.

9.35, Now, this position (distribution per capita) may be satisiactory as Need for change
4 general rule, but there is one particular situation in regard 10 which some as to succession ; er
discussion is necessary. Where there are no brothers or sisters, but only children S!"Pes-
of brothers and sisters, they also take per capita under the present law. This
seems 10 be unjust. ‘The better course, in our opinion, would be to provide that
the succession should be per stirpes in such cases. The accident of the death of
one issue should not affect the share of his or her descendants.

9.36. The position under present section 48 may be contrasted with the Contrast between
tule applicable’ under section 47 where there are brothers or sisters an:j aiso section 48 and sec
children of brothers or sisters. In such a case, the succession is per stirpes, under 8" 47. .
section 47. There appears to be no justification for having a different rule under
section 48, at least where the persons entitled are the children of brothers and
sisters.

9.37. We, therefore, recommend that section 48 should be amended so as Recommendation

rovi i is to amend section
10 provide for succession per stirpes. a ay ‘ilustration:

Revised Section 48 will read as under— 6७.

“48. Where the intestate has left neither lineal descendant nor parents,

nor brother, nor sister, his property shali be divided equally among those

of his relatives who are in the nearest degree of kindred to him.”

Explantion—Where such relatives are children of brothers or sisters of the

intestate, they shall take stirpes.”

Illustration (iv) to section 48 should be revised accordingly,

9.38. This takes us to section 49, quoted below :— Section 49.

“49. Where a distributive share in the property of a person who has died
intestate is claimed by a child, or any descendant of a child, of such person,
no money or other property which the intestate may, during his life, have
paid, given or settled to, or for the advancement of, the child by whom or
by whose descendant the claim is made shall be taken into account in esti-
mating such distributive share.”

Briefly speaking, the object of this section is to preclude any argument that

money given by way of “advancement” should be brought into the hotchpotch.
9.39, Section 49 does not, in terms, apply 10 Parsis*. Parsis—-position re=
But the Bombay High Court has held’ that the English law would be लि पीएफ:

applicable to parties who were Parsis with regard to the disposal of immovable

property situated in the Island of Bombay. The High Court referred to the opi-

nion of Mr. Roper, (Then Acting Advocate General of Bombay) who, after

examining the authorities on Parsi usages, which he found very indefinite and

inconclusive, said that it would be difficult to assert that there was “any system

1866 section 48, illustration (iv).
*Section 47.

8 Dhunjibhai ५. Navazbai, (1881) 1.L.R. 2 Bom. 75, 82.

*Naoroji v. Rogers (1867) 4 B.H.C.R. 1, 97, 118 (traces history).


No change.

Points of differ-

ences. (males an

females).

64

of law peculiar to Parsis”, subject to the English law, This opinion was laid
before the Indian Law Commission, and later the Parsi community also accepted
it.

In later cases also, the Bombay High Court seems to have allowed the ap-
plication of the common law doctrine of advancement to Parsis in India, Coyajee
J. has observed’, “I may say that as regards the theory of advancement being
made applicable to Parsis it has become such a well-settled law by this time that
several recent decisions on Originating summons have been answered by the
learned judges without finding any necessity to deliver judgements on those
questions.”

9.40, The above discussion does not, of course, lead to any amendment of the
section.

CHAPTER 10
SPECIAL RULES FOR PARSI INTESTATES (SECTION 50 TO 56)

10.1. There are certain special rules for Parsi intestates, contained in sec-
tions 50 to 56.

The scheme of the seven sections devoted to this topic is simple. Certain
general principles relating to intestate succession among Parsis are first set out.
Of special interest is the provision for a relative’s widow who re-marries. The
next two sections—S1 and 52—deal with division of the intestate’s property where
the inteestate leaves children, there being separate provisions for ma! Te intestates
and famale intestates.

10.2. Two important points of difference arise between males and females.
Where the intestate was a male, the share of each son (and the widow if alive)
is double the share of each daughter, but where the intestate was a female, the
children (and the widower if alive), share equally’, Secondly, where the intestate
was a male who left children, the father is entitled to a share equal to half the
share of a son and the mother is entitled to a share equak to half the share of a
daughter. There is no such provision in the case of a female who has left
children. Section 53 provides for the division of share of a predeceased child of
the intestate where that child has left any ‘lineal descendant’.

The situation where the intestate dies without leaving any lineal descendant
but leaving a widow or widower (of the intestate) or widow of a lineal descen-
dant, is first dealt with (section 54). The persons mentioned in the preceding
sentence do not necessarily take the entire estate, but only the specified portion
of the estate. The residue is to be distributed among the relatives specified in
the Second Schedule, Part I. Each male takes double the share of each female
standing in the same degree of propinquity.

Next is dealt with the situation where the intestate has left no widow, wido-
wer or widow of a lineal discendant (section 55). The next of kin set out in
the Second Schedule, Part II, becomes entitled to the property in such case, each
mate taking the share of each female standing in the same degree of propinquity
(section 55).

Where there is no relative entitled to succeed under the section so far referred
to, the property is to be divided equally among those of the intestate’s relatives
who are in the nearest degree of kindred to him (section 56).

‘Dursha Bharucha ¥. Dr. Edi Phiro Bharucha (unreported) suit No. 271 of 1952 (0.8.)
iCoyajee J) quoted in Paruck, Succession Act, (1966), page 52.

*For further comments see para 10, 5, infta.


65

10.3. The provisions as to intestate succession to Parsis, disclose, on an Basic sociotogical
analysis, certain rules which seem to have their foundation in sociological fac- factors.
tors. Thus, a male gets double the share of a female standing in the same
degree of propinquity'!. The provisions also recongise the doctrine of represen-
tation’.
These sections were extensively revised in 1939. The amendments of 1939
were made at the instance of the trustees of the Parsi Panchayat, who had
prepared a draft Bill which was finally approved by the Council of the Parsi
Central Assocjation in 1933°.

10.4. An important aspect to which reference may be made is that the Amendment of 1939,
Amendment Act of 1939, which came into force on 12th June 1939,‘ does not
seem to apply to agricultural land, because, in the Government of India Act,
1935, devolution of agricultural land was exclusively a provincial subject, The
position ‘under the Constitution’ js different; succession to agricultural land
appears to stand on the same footing as succession to any other property’.

After these general observations, a few matters of detail may be dealt
with.

10.5, Section 51 deals with the division of the property of a mule Parsi .
intestate among his widow, children and parents. Clauses (a) and (b) of sub-Setion 5).
section (1) of the section provide that the share of each son shall be double
the share of each daughter on such intestate succession, In cases where the
intestate succession is in respect of the property of a female Parsi, section 52
provides that (1) the widower and each child receive equal shares and (2) where
there is no widower, the children get equal shares, Thus, on the father's death,
the son is entitled to double the share of each daughter of the property but,
on the mother’s death, the children (which, of course, means sons and daughters)
get equal shares. The discrimination made in the firest situation between sons and
daughters does not scem to be reasonable at the present day.

It may be noted that under the Hindu Seccession Act’, the property of an
intestate shall be divided among the heirs specified in that regard, which
{inter-alia) include the surviving sons and daughters, and each heir takes one
share, irrespective of sex. In contrast, the Indian Succession Act appears to be
discriminatory.

10.6. The discrimination found in the Indian Succession Act is opposed to Recommendation
the spirit of article 14 of the Constitution, if not to its letter, | amen section

For the reasons given above, we recommend that section 51 should be so
amended as to provide that the daughter and son should get an equal share of
the ‘property of their deceased father. This would also bring section 51 in line
with the provisions of section 52, wherein children get equal share in the
deceased mother’s property.

10.64. Sections 52 and 53 need no further comments. Sections 52-53,

10.7. In sections 54(d) and 55, it is provided that in cases falling under Recommendation to
these sections, the property shall be so distributed that each male shall take amend sections 5
double the share of each female standing in the same degree of propinquity, १04 5
For the reasons given by us in regard* to Section 51, we recommend that sec-
tion 54(d} and 55 should also be amended so as to remove the disparity in
shares based solely on sex. It is interesting to note that under section 56,
where there is no relative entitled to succeed under the other provisions of this
Chapter, the property shall be divided equally among those of the intestate’s

’Sections 51(1Ma) and (b), $1(2), 53(a), 5469) and 55.

*Sections 53(a), (c) and (9), contrasted with section 51(b).
*Paruck, Succession Act, (1966), page 60.

‘Gazette of India, 20th May, 1939, Part I, page 854...
sConstitution, 7th Schedule, State List, Entry 18.

‘Laxmi Devi v. Surendra Kumar, AIR. 1957 Orissa 1, 4, para 14,
*Section 10, Rule 2, Hindu Succession Act, 1956.

*See recommendation as to section 51 (Paragraph 10.6, supra).


6

‘telatives’ who are in the nearest degree of kindred to him, “Relatives” will un-
deniably include relatives of either sex.

10.8. Section 56 reads as follows :—

“56, Where there is no relative entitled to succeed under the other provi-
sions of this Chapter to the property of which a Parsi has died intestate,
the said property shall be divided equally among those of the intestate’s
relatives who are in the nearest degree of kindred to him.”

Section 56.

In section 56, the word used is ‘relative’, whereas in section 55, the word
used is ‘next-of-kin’, But both the words are synonymous', Although the brother’s
widow mentioned in Part If of Schedule II (which is referred to in section 55)
is not a ‘next-of-kin’, being not “related” to the deceased by blood, she would
succeed under section 55 as the next-of-kin of the intestate.

CHAPTER 11
TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION—INTRODUCTORY (SECTIONS 57 and 58)

11.1. The topic of testamentary succession is introduced by sections 57 and
58, which deal with the application of the provisions of Part VI to various
classes of persons.

Scope.

The structure of sections 57 and 58(1), fatter half, is elaborate. This is
primarily because of the way in which the law has developed historically*.

Section 57. 11.2. Section 57 reads as follows :—

“57, The provisions of this Part which are set out in Schedule JIE shall,
subject to the restrictions and modifications specified therein, apply—~

(a) to all wills and codi made by any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or
Jaina, on or after the first day of September, 1870, within the terri-
tories which at the said date were subject to the Lieutenant-Governor-
of Bengal or within the local limits of the ordinary original civil
jurisdiction of the High Courts of Judicature at Madras and Bombay;
and

(७) to all such wills and codicils made outside those territories and
limits so far as relates to immovable property situated within those
territories or Simits; and

{c) to all wills and codicils made by any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh and
Jaina on or after the first day of January, 1927, to which those provisions
ure not applied by clauses (a) and (0).

“Provided that marriage shall not revoke any such will or codicil.”
Jt may be noted that in course of time, only clause (c) will retain its
importance.

Certain sections of the Act not applicable at present to Hindus etc. may
require a second look from the point of view of the need to apply them to
Hindus. ete, We shall deal with the matter under the relevant sections. _

11.3. Section 58 reads as follows :—

“58. (1) The provisions of this Part shall not apply to testamentary succes-
sion to the property of any Muhammadan nor, save as provided by section
57, to testamentary succession to the property of any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh

Section 58,

*Hiribas ¥. Barjorji, L.L.R. 22 Bom. 909.
+See historical discussion, supra.


67

or Jaina; nor shall they apply to any will made before the first day of
January, 1866.

(2) Save as provided in sub-section (1) or by any other law for the time
being in force, the provisions of this Part shall constitute the law of India
applicable to all cases of testamentary succession.”

The exclusion of Muhammadans in section 58(1), in earlier half, is explained
by the fact that the Muslim law of wills, which is a part of the personal law
of Maslims. had already developed on its own lines when the Act came to be
enacted, and it was not considered expedient to abrogate its doctrines and substi-
tute new ones in their place.

The more important provision is really sub-section (2), which, because of
its peremptory language, has the effect of emphasising the “codifying” nature
of this Part ef the Act.

CHAPTER 12
WILLS AND CODICILS
(SECTIONS 59—62)
1, Introductory

12.1, Wills and codicils, as a general subject, find place in sections 59 to gco, d hist
62. A brief bistory of the ition in England as to testamentary disp Ositions pe ang story
may be helpful, as it throws Interesting light on some of the concepts and expres-
sions employed in Indian legislation also.

12,2. It was by steps that the fee simple in land became freely devisable Association with
by will in England. Bequests of personal property (including lease-holds) have Feligion.
had a longer history, though the true will did not become prevalent in England
until the revival of Roman Law studies in the early Middle Ages. Thereafter,
wills because general in classes of society, largely because of the encouragement
given to them by the Church which wished to ensure that some part of the dead
man’s property should be distributed for the good of his soul.’

12,3, No doubt, it was this association with religion and its consequence Role of the Church.

that the Church was an invariable beneficiary under every will that induced the
common law, from the thirteenth century onwards, to leave all disputes concerning
the validity of wills to the ecclesiastical courts and this jurisdiction led to the
general rule that all wills must be produced before the tribunal of the Ordinary
(generally, the Bishop of the Diocese) and receive the authentication of a grant
of probate before they could be acted upon. The probate jurisdiction remained
exclusively with ecclesiastical courts until it was transfered to the new court of
Probate in 1857.

English law relating to formalities requisite for wills is partly statutory and
partly non-statutory.* Indian law on the subject is statutory, but the concepts
and expressions, largely borrowed as they are from England, are reminiscent of
the ecclesiastical practice that constituted the nucleus of the English rules on
the subject.

वा, Scheme of Section 59—62

12.4. The scheme of sections 59—62 is simple. Section 59 deals with the Scheme.
persons who are capable of making wills. In general, testamentary capacity

‘Stephen, Commentaries on the Laws of England (1950), Vol. 1, Pages 499, 500.
*Stephen, Commentaries on the Laws of England (1980), Vol. I, pages 499, 500.
*Paragraph 12.8, infra.


68

requires a sound mind and attainment of the age of majority’. The age of majority
is not, however, expressly mentioned in section 59°.

Marriage is no disqualification as regards testamentary capacity. Physical
incapacity as such is also not regarded as an incapacity for making a will, if the
persons ‘concerned are able to know what they do by it”.* Here the test-is one of
ability 10 know, and not actual knowledge, in contrast with the provision relating
to “state of mind”, Even an insane person can make a will during an interval
in which he is of soun! mind.* These propositions are laid down in three Explana-
tions to section 59,

But a person in a “state of mind” in which he does not know what he is
doing cannot make a will. And this is so irrespective of the cause that has led
to such a state a mind Here the test is of actual knowledge. By and large, this
Tequigement corresponds to the English notion of a “sound disposing state of
mind”.

Other functions of a 12.5. Though the principal objec t of a will is the disposition of yreperty

testamentary docu- (section 59), there are certain er incidental functions of a testamentary

ment, document, Thus, section 60 provides’ that a father, whatever his age may be,
may by will appoint a (testamentary) guardian for his minor children,

It is elementary that a will must be the result of the free exercise of the
will of its maker,

Certain factors adversely affecting the freedom of will in this context are
dealt with in a separate section’,

Finally, it is provided that a will is liable to be revoked or altered by the
maker at any time when he is competent to dispose of his property by will”
This brings out the ambulatory character of a will.

The sections in the group, taken together, thus codify the position in respect
of certain aspects connected with wills, namely, the will as a dispositive document
taking effect on death (and only on death), the ambulatory character of a will,
and the will as a voluntary and revocable instrument.

Analysis of the 12.6. It may be stated that three sections (69—61) are concerned with
sections. capacity to make a will, including in particular, the relevance or irrelevance of
certain factors connected with the condition or status of the testator, such as—

(a) sound mind”,

(09) age",

(०) physica} incapacity”

(d) married status (in the case of a women", and

(०) free will “.

One section (section 62) deals with the revocable character of a testamentary
disposition,

We may now take up the provisions, section by section,

’Section 59, main paragraph.

*Contrast section 65.

‘Section 59, Explanation [.

‘Section 59, Explanation II. Contrast section 59, Explanation IV.
“Section 59, Explanation वी.

“Section 59, Explanation IV.

*Section 60.

"Section 61.

*Section 62.

seSection 59. main paragraph and Explanations 3 and 4.
uSection 59. main paragraph as qualified by section 60.
1Section 59. Explanation 2.

48Section $9. Explanation 1.

“section 61,


69

Section 39—Capa-
city to dispose of
“$9, Every person of sound mind not being a minor may dispose of his property by will,
property by will.

Explanation 1.—A mxutied woman may dispose of by wili any property

which she could alienate by ber own act during her life.

12.7. Section 59 reads as follows :---

Explanation 2.--Persons who are deaf or dumb or blind are not thereby
incapacitated for making a will if they are able to konw what they do by it.

Explanation 3.—A person who is ordinarily insane may make a will duriag
an interval in which he is of sound mind.

Explanation 4.—No person can make a will while he is in such a state
of mind, whether arising from iacoxication or from illness or from any other
cause, that he does not know what he is doing.”

42.8, The English statutory provision’ on the subject enacts that “it shall English provision.

be lawful for every person to devise, bequeath or dispose of by his will......
all real estate and all personal estate which he shall be entitled to at the time of
his death”. The legal requirements of sound mind and majority are not expressly
menticned in the English section, but are left 10 be governed by ine common law.
In contrast, section 59 of the Succession Act, as already mentioned in the above
analysis,t? makes elaborate provisions spelling out this concept, in various Expla-
nations added to the section.

{n England, prior to the Wills Act, 1837, a person could dispose of Minimum — age in

12:
Jeaseholds or other personal property— England belore

(a) at the age of 14 years, if a male or
(b) at the age of twelve, if a female.
But a person could not devise freeholds before tie age of 21 years.

Ao infant cannot make an irrevocable disposition of interest in real pro-
perty.*
In 1837 the British Parliament fixed a uniform age—2! years-—as the

minimum age for wills of all property. There was made an exception for soldiers
in actual military service or mariners or seamen at sea.

The age of 21 years fixed in 1837 for the general community was reduced
to 18° in 1969 in England.

12,10, The requirement of mental capacity-—soundness of mind--is जाए Mental capacity.
common to wills and non-testamentary dispositions. The earlier theory was that
such a person has no will or no “mind”. But later it was recoguised' that the
only legitimate and rational ground for denying testamentary capacity to persons
of unsound misd is the inability to take into account and give due effect to
the considerations which ought to be present to the mind of a testator in making
his will, and to influence his decision as to the disposal of his property.

Initially it was described as a re quirement of ‘sound mind, memory and
understanding’. As has been observed,* the phrase ‘sound mind’ covers the whole
subject—there must be memory to recall the persons supposed to become fitting
objects of testamentary bounty. And there must be understanding by the testator
to comprehend their relations to himself (the testator) and their claims upon him.

12.11. Reverting to section 59, the first point to be noticed in regard to Section 59—amend-
the section concerns the main paragraph, which provides that a person may ment regarding pro-
dispose of “his” property. There is, at present, no provision in the Act specifically per fhat oe ir

’Section 3, Wills Act, 1937.
*Para (2.4, supra.
‘Cheshire, Modern Law of Real Property (1976), page 920, citing Coke and Littleton,
‘Sections 3 and 7, Wills Act, 1837.

"The Family Law Reform Act, 1969, (England),

“Banks v. Goodfellow, (1870) L.R. 5 0.8. 549. (1861--1873) AILE.R. Rep. 47.
*Banks v. Goodfellow, (1870) L.R. 5 Q.B. 549, (1861-1873) All E.R. Rep. 47.
"Boughten ९, Knight, LR. 3 P & D 64 : (18611873) All E.R. Rep. 40, 41.


70

providing that a person can (by will) dispose of property over which he has a
disposing power though it is not “his” property. It is desirable that seme provision
cavering property over which there is a disposing power exerciabic by will should
be contained in the Indian Succession 400, Such a provision would be useful,
for example, in regard to the interest of a Hindu in coparcenary property, which
is now disposable by wilF. It may not be quite correct to say that such an
interest S “his” property during his iifetame, and it may, therefore, fall outside
section 59,

. To achieve the object mentioned above, we recommend an amendment
revising the first paragraph of section 59 so as to read as under :—

Every person of sound mind, not being a mivor, may, by wilt, dispose of
his property or any property over which he has disposing power which
he can exercise by will’,

commendation 12.12. We may now refer to another point arising out of section 59. This

, amend re concerns the test enacted by the words ‘competent to dispose of his property

‘cation 1 Mere by witl The phraseology is, in one respect, inaccurate. Competence to dispose

mof appoinument Of property is governed by section 59, under which every person of sound mind

guard jan. not being a minor may dispose of his property by will. Disposition of property
thus requires majority. But under section 60, the appointment of a guardian by
will is permissible to a father, ‘whatever his age may be’.

ii stands to reason that if a person can appoint a testameniary guardian at
any age, he should also be competent to cevoke or alter the appoiniment, whatever
his age may be. We, therefore, recommand that the following proviso should
be added to section 59 :--

“Provided that any person, whatever his age may be, may, by will, revoke

or alter any will appointing a guardian or guardians for his child during

minority.’ 1

xplanation. 12.13. Explanation 1 to section 59 is not intended to affect the general
requirements laid down in the body of the section, namely, (i) full age (majority),
and (ii) sound mind*. One would have thought that this is clear enough. However,
in a Calcutta case‘ (decided under the earlier Act), an attempt was made to
persuade the court to read the Explanation apart from the section. i.., to regard
the Explanation as a self-contained provision dispensing with the requirement
of full age (majority). The attempt failed.

ecommendation 42.14. In order to put the position beyond doubt, we recommend that the
amend Section (00 Explanation to section 59, should be revised as follows :--

3 Explanation J.
“Explanation 1A married woman, if otherwise, competeni to make a will,
may by will dispose of any property which she could alienate by her own

act during her life.”

xtion 59, Expla- 12.15, Explanation IT to section 59 provides’ that persons who are deaf,
stion IT. dumb or blind are not to be incapacitated from making a will, if they are able
to know what they do by it. One commentator,’ emphasising the use of the
conjunction “or”, has stated that the Explanation omits the case of a person
whe is deaf and dumb and blind. We do not, however, share this doubt. Such
a person falls in each category. As the language of the section is clear enough,

no change is needed.

TV, Persons mentally incompetent

12.16. At this stage. we May mention one matter जा, which an amendment
: to person men- appears ta he needed. At present, there is no provision in the Succession Act
lly incompetent. whereby the property of ॥ person who is mentally incompetent can be disposed
of by a will to be made by the court or any other authority. Now, a situation

eed for provision

+Compare ion 7, Transfer of Property Act, 1882.

3ection 30, Hindu Succession Act, 1956.
Sin re : Caroline Miranda, A.V.R. 1924 Cal. 644 (Buckland 3.).

अब re ; Caroline Miranda, AVR. 1924 Cal. 644.
*Paruck, Succession Act,Commentary on Section 59.



71

can possibly arise rendering the existence of such a power des'rable. For example,
a person of charitable disposition becomes mentally incompetent and has no
near relatives. In the absence of a will, his estate goes either (by intestacy) to a
very distant relative. or (by escheat) to the State. It would be convenient ifa
part of the estate could be given to charity, There may also arise cases where
justice requires that an earlier will made by a person who subsequently has
become mentally incompetent should be modified or revoked", or a new executor
appointed. The testator, in view of his mental incapacity, cannot do i: now. There
should, then, be some authority vested with such a power,

In such cases, social injustice may result by virtue of the present position.
The matter does not secm to be specifically covered by the law relating to
lunacy*,

12.17, In this context. it may be noted that in England. a judge has power* Power of the judg:
to make certain orders or to give certain directions for the disposal of property in Engtand,
of mentally incompetent persons and to execute a “statutory will” in regard
to persons who are mentally incompetent'-*, if the judge has reason to believe
that the patient does not have testamentary capacity’,

The relevant provision is contained in section 103(1), Mental Health Act,
1959 (inserted by section 170) (dd) of the Administration of Justice Act.
1969), relating to statutory wills. Amongst the powers of the judge as to the
patients’ property and affairs, the following is now mentioned in section 103(1) +—

“(dd) the execution’, for the patient, of a will making any provision (whether
by way of disposing of property or exercising a power or otherwise) which
could be made by a will executed by the patient if he were not mentally
disordered, so, however, that, in such cascs as a nominated judge may
direct, the powers confered by this paragraph shall not be exercisable except
by the Lord Chancellor. or a nominated judge’;

12.18. Section 103(3) of the Mental Health Act, 1959, (as amended in
1969) further provides :—

“any power of the judge to make or give an order, dircction or authority
for the execution of a will for a patient—

(a) shall not be exercisable at any time when the patient is an infant,
and

(b) shall not be exercised unless the judge has reason to believe that
the patient is incapable of making a valid will for himself”.

In a fairly recent English case’, this section (section 103, Mental Health
Act, 1959) was applied and, on the facts of the case, the Court chose to give
notice to legatees under the earlier will. The facts of the ९१5० also illustrate how
there may arise a need for a court to modify a will. if a person who has made
certain testamentary dispositions” shows later (after becoming mentally incompe-
tent), an interest in the surviving members of the family.

12,19. We are of the view that it is desirable to inscrt a new section pg, पे
‘on the subject. As to the placing of the proposed new section, there are two Recommendation
alternatives. It could be placed in the Succession Act (for which we are giving
a draft below)”, or. in the alternative, the appropriate amendment may be made

1८/ Re H.M.F.,(1975) 2 AILE.R. 795.
*Indian Lunacy Act. 1912.

२8586 para 1.10, supra.

‘Sections 103 and 103A, Mental Health Act, 1959 (Eng.).
5Section 17(1) and (21, Administration of Justice Act, 1969 (Eng.).

५5९७ Re. H.M.F. (1976), Ch. 33, (1975) 2 All E.R. 795.

*Commas added to facilitate understanding.

*This means the Jude of the Chancery Division.

* Re. HALE. (Mental Pationt Wills), (1975) 2 AU E.R. 795, 799 (Coulding J.).
Charities in this case.

1 See infra, (Paragraph 12.20).



72

by adding a section in the Indian Lunacy Act, 1912 in the Chapter’ of that
Act dealing with the management of the person and property of lunatics.

Recommended sec- 12.20, If the amendment is to be made in the Succession Act, we recommend

tion re (Succes- that new section 59A may be inserted in that Act on the following lines :
*59A, (1) The court exercising jurisdiction under the indian Lunacy Act,
1912 in relation to the property of a lunatic shall have power to make an
order, direction or authority for the execution, for the lunatic, of a will
making any provision (whether by way of disposing of property or exercising
द power or otherwise) which could be made by a will executed by the
lunatic if he were a person of sound mind.

(2) An order, direction or authority for the execucion of a will for a
lunatic—

(a) shall not be exercisable at any time when the lunatic is a niinor,
and

(b) shall not be exercised unless the judge has reason to believe that
the lunatic is incapable of making a valid will for himsel}.

(3) A will executed in accordance with such order, direction or दाग
shall have the same effect as a will made by the lunatic if he were a person
of sound mind.

(4) Any such order, direction or authority may be revoked or modified by
the court referred to in sub-section (1), which may also issue an order for
revoking or modifying ८ will already made by the lunatic or a will made
under this section for the lunatic,”

Lunacy Act. 12.21. The scheme of the Indian Lunacy Act, as it stands at present, is
that one set of provisions deals with the jurisdiction of the High Court io the
Presidency Towns, while another set deals with the jurisdiction of the District
Court outside the Presidency Town. If that Act is to be amended for the purpose
discussed above?, two sections—say, section 49A and section 71A—would have
to be inserted in that Act to deal with these two areas respectively. The expression
to be used would be “the court” in relation to other areas, having regard to the
phraseology already used in the Lunacy Act.

Recommende 12.22 If, therefore, the amendment is to be made in the Indian Lunacy Act
tion 19४ ied tee 1012, we recommend that a new section may be inserted in that Act on the

Act) (Alternative following lines :
recommendation).

“49A, (1) The court shall have power to make an order, direction or
cuthority for the execution, for the lunatic, of a will making any provision
(whether by way of disposing of property or exercising a power or otherwise)
which could be made by a will executed by the lunatic if he were a person
of sound mind’.

(2) An order, direction or authority for the execution of a will for a
lunatic

(a) shall not be exercisable at any time when the lunatic is a minor,
and

(b) shall not be exercised unless the judge has reason to believe that
the lunatic is incapable of making a velid will for himself.

(3) A will executed in accordance with such order, direction or authority
shall have the same effect as a will made by the lunatic if he were a person
af sound mind,

(4) Any such order, direction, or authority may be revoked or modified
by the court referred to in sub-section (1), which may also issue an order

1To be considered under the Indian Lunacy Act, 1912, (Paragraph 52.22).

»Paragraph 12.19, supra.

‘Similar provision with appropirate adaptations to be made in regard to the District.Court
as section T1A.


73

for revoking or modifying a will already made by the lunatic or a will made
for the lunatic under this section.”

V. Guardian appointed by will

12.23. Section 60 reads—

“A father, whatever his age may be, may by will appoint a guardian or
guardians for his child during minority”.

Section 60-scope,

This section does not apply to Hindus, Buddhists’ *, etc. The section really
belongs to the law of testamentary guardianship. It finds a place in the Act
because it also touches upon the sphere of wills.

12.24, While section 60 has created no problems, we are of the view that Question of mo-
a similar right should be conferred on the mother, at least in the absence of the sight.
father, or, where the father is under disability. It appears to us that an amendment
conferring such 8 right would be in conformity with present day thinking. At
the time when the section was enacted, social opinion, in general, regarded the
father as the only person primarily concerned with the future of the child, That

is hardly the situation now.

12.25, In this connection it may be noted that in English law, either parent English law,
may, by will, appoint a guardian of a minor child. The relevant statutory provisions
(which contain certain other matters of detail also) are quoted below :—*

“4, Power of father and mother to appoint testamentary guardians

(1) The father of a minor may by deed or will appoint any person to be 1
guardian of the minor after his death, :

(2) The mother of a minor may by deed or will appoint any person to be
guardian of the minor after her death.

(3) Any guardian so appointed shall act jointly with the mother or father,
as the case may be, of the minor so long as the mother or father remains
alive unless the mother or father objects to his so acting.

(4) If the mother or father so objects, or if the guardian so appointed
considers that the mother or father is unfit to have the custody of the minor,
the guardian may apply to the court, and the court, may either—

{a) refuse to make any order (in which case the mother or father
shall remain sole guardian); or

(b) make an order that the guardian so appointed—-
(i) shall act jointly with the mother or father; or
(ii) shall be the sole guardian of the minor,

(5) Where guardians are appointed by both parents, the guardians so
appointed shall, after the death of the surviving parent, act jointly.

(6) If, under section 3 of this Act, a guardian has been appointed by the
court to act jointly with a surviving parent, he shall continue to act as
guardian after the death of the surviving parent, but, if the surviving parent
has appointed a guardian, the guardian appointed by the court shalt act
jointly, with the guardian appointed by the surviving parent.” oe

12.25A. We have taken note of the suggestion‘ of one writer (in an article Section 60-sugges-
published in the Statesman), that “either parent” should, under section 60, have or for radical
the right to decide what is best for their child in the event of their death. We Shange considered.
are not inclined, for the present, to go beyond what we have already recommended,

18८6 Third Schedule read with section 5700.

3566 section 9, Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.

*Sections 4(1) and 4(2), Guardianship of Minors Act, 1971 (Eng.).

“Shahnaz Anklesaria, “Laws which discriminate against women” (20 June, 1984) Statesman,
page 6.


74

Recommendation. $2.26. We are not sure whether public opinion in India—even amongst
persons governed by section 60—would welcome such a radical change. However,
we are of the view that the mother’s right should, as a first step', be given recogni-
tion, at least for cases where the father is absent or incompetent to act.

Requirement of 12.27. Apart from this poiut. which is of substantial imporanes, there are

sound mind. « certain matters of detail also requiring attention, It is obvious that under section
60, a person ought not to be allowed to make an appointment of a testamentary
guardian unless he (the person appointing) is of sound mind, it is appropriate
that this requirement should find a place in section 60, on the lines of section 59
which relates to ability to dispose of property by will. We recommend that section
60 should be amended to carry out the above object.

Minority. 12.28. Incidentally, the “minority”, mentioned at the end of the section,
is of the child, and not of the father. Opportunity could also be taken of making
that clear.

Recommendation 12.29. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section

to revise section 60. 60 should be revised as under :—

“60. (1) A father, whatever bis age may be, if of sound mind? may, by
will, appoint a guardian or guardians for his child during the minority of
the child’,

(2) A mother', whatever her age may be, if of sound mind, and if the
father is dead or incapable of acting by reason of mental incapacity, may
by will appoint a guardian or guardians for her child during the minority
of the child’.

VI. Flaws in a will affecting the reality of consent

Analysis of section 12.30. Section 61 reads—
61,

“61, A will or any part of a will, the making of which has been caused
by fraud or coercion, or by such importunity as takes away the free agency
of the testator, is void.”

(illustrations to the section have not been quoted).

The section deals with three vitiating factors in a will—

11) fraud.

+ii) coercion,

(iii) such importunity as takes away the free agency of the testaior.

Section _61-Free 12.31, In order that a will may be valid, a person must not only possess
choice in ee testamentary capacity (age and sound mind), but also ९ cise his genuine free
mentary disposi- (1000 in the making of the will. Lack of free will is the subject matter of

tions.
section 61,

Jn England, it is stated that where a will is accompanied by force, fraud,
fear or undue influence, the will or the affected part which is produced in this
way, is not regarded as the act of the testator, and so probate is refused to

such a will’,

12.32. In the case of fraud. the mind is not overborne, but is misled.
Cases relating to fraud broadly fall into two categories, namely, first, where
the fraud is as to the nature of the relationship existing between the testator
and the beneficiary’, and secondly, where the fraud oreates a false impression
in the mind of the testator about the natural objects of his bounty, thereby
Jeading to the exclusion of those natural objects of bounty or some of them’.

Fraud.

Ep Section 9, Hindu Miniroty and Guardianship Act, 1956.

3866 para 12.27, supra

3866 para 12.28. supra.

4866 para 12.26. supra.

sMellows, The Law of Succession (1977), page 64.

Un Re. Posner, (153) Probate 277; (1953) 1 AM E.R. 1123 (reviews case law).

7Boyes v. Rossborough, (1857) 10 English Reports 1192, 1213.



75

12.33, Fraud is not easy to define and the definition in the Contract Act
is not generally regarded as very satisfactory’,

12.34, So far as the substance of the matter goes, courts have, in general, no change needed
given a wide meaning to that part of the section which deals with ‘importunity’, as to “improtunity”,
and it may not be wise to introduce any rigid definition of that expression, Some
of the judicial decisions have mixed up “coercion” and ‘importunity’, but there
is nothing to which any such mixing up can be attributed. In India, the sole
question to be considered in this context is, whether the testator was “able to
know” what he did by the will. This is precisely what iNustraction Gi) to the
section provides,

12.35. In an Orissa case’, it was contended that the will had been executed Orissa case.
under undue influence. because for some time the testator (father) had been
living in the house of the legatee (daughter). and during that period the wilt
was brought into existence. The High Court, holding that there was no case
of undue influence here, and after considering illustration (viii) to section 61,
observed :--

“Ht is very natural that a father would live with his daughter, The mere
fact that the father resided with the daughter, or he had affection for
her, or that the daughter treated the father with hospitality and cordially,
would not amount to undue influence.”

12.36. In the Contract Act’ “coercion’ is defined as committing or threaten-Coercion in. the
ing to commit any act forbidden by the Indian Penal Code or the unlawful Contract Act.
detaining or threatening to detain any property to the prejudice of any person
whatever, with the intention of causing any person to enter into an agreement,

It is not clear whether that definition will apply also to section 61, Succession
Act.

12.37. As regards ‘importunity’ mentioned in section 61, it must be such Meaning of
as takes away the free agency of the testator. Beyond this, the exact scope, of “importunity’.
that concept is not defined in the section. It would cover that kind of influence
which the Indian Contract Act has described as “undue influence” but it seems
to be wider in its scope than undue influence. While illustration (४) to section
61 (which illustrates the concept of importunity), does not go beyond what
the Contract Act has described “as undue influence”, illustration (vi) to the
section seems to go beyond that concept. According to that ithistration, if a
person, “being in so feeble a state of health as to be unable to resist inportunity’,
is pressed by another person to make a wilt of certain purport, and does so
merely ta purchase peace and in submission to that other person, then the will
is invalid.

2.38. In England, “duress’ is a vitiating factor in regard to wills, The Duress in England
cominon law conception of duress (threat of physical harm), however, was so
limited that injustice could result, since a person could he imposed upon by
subtle methods which lay outside the scope of duress. The Court of Chancery,
therefore, formulated the doctrine of “undue influence”, whereby a transaction
could be set aside in equity on that ground and money paid or property trans-
ferred thereunder could be recovered’.

12.39, In an appeal heard by the Privy Council from the Supreme Court Analysis in Privy
of New South Wales’, Lord Wilberforce and Lord Simen of Glaisdale, in their Council case.
dissenting opinions, analysed the various concepts vitiating consent. The obser-
vations were made in the context of the defence of duress, but the analysis is
of general applicability and reads as follows + —

“The basis of the plaintiff's claim is, thus that though there was apparent

consent there was no true consent to the agreement: that the agreement

was not voluntary.”

Section 16, lidiau Contract Act, 1872.
‘Gajendra Nuit. ५. Cl



76

“This involves consideration of what the law regards as voluntary, or its
opposite; for in life, including the life of commerce and finance, many acts
are done under pressure, sometimes overwhelming pressure, so that one
can say that the actor had no choice but to act. Absence of choice in this
sense does not negate consent in law; for this, the pressure must be one
of a kind which the law does not regard as legitimate. Thus, out of the
various means by which consent may be obtained—advice, persuasion,
influence, inducement, reresentation, commercial prersure—the law has to
come to select some which it will not accept a reason for voluntary action :
fraud, abuse of relation of confidence, undue influence. duress or coercion.
In this the law, under the influence of equity, has developed from the old
common law conception of duress—threat to life and limb and it has arrived
at the modern generalisation expressed by Holmes J.—“subjected to an
improper motive for action’.

Probate — doctrine

of undue influence. 12.40. However, it must be noted that the probato doctrine of undue
influence is more circumscribed than that of equity. In probate law, the undue
influence must “amount to force and coercion, destroying of free agencies—it
soust not be the influence of affection and attachment—it must not be the mere
desire of gratifying the wishes of another; for that would be a very strong ground
in support of a testamentary act”,

Undue influence li
in England and 12.41, It was said in one of the English cases*\—

India,
“The law bearing on this subject is uncontested .... undue influence is
the control of another’s will over a person whose faculties have been
so impaired as to submit to the control of such another person, so that
the party making the will has ceased to be a free agent, and has adopted
the will of the controlling party.
In India, it is needless to say, the wording of section 61 should govern

the matter. हि
आएगा cae. 12.42. Unfortunately, judicial decisions in India on the expression importu-

“undue in fluen *, nity’ do not adhere to the precise language of section 61. Many of the judge-
ments speak also of “undue influence—-an expression which does not occur in
section 61, though it is uscd in this context in English case law. For example, one
comes across decisions which emphasise that ‘undue influence’ must have been
exercised in relation to the will itself‘, or that religious influence may sometimes
amount to undue influence’, or that the burden of proving that the will was executed
under ‘undue influence’ is on the party making that allegation’.

In one reported case’—which, however, was not governed by the Act—
testamentary documents were challenged on the ground of undue influence and
it was stated that there must be evidence to show coercion.

Privy Council case.

12.43. In the leading Privy Council case of Bur Singh v. Uttam Singh’,
the test laid down to ascertain undue influence was as follows :

“In order to set aside a will there must be clear evidence that the undue
influence was in fact exercised, or that the illness of the testator so affected
his mental faculties as to make them unequal to the task of disposing of
his property.”

Reported cases us hich i tan in
toimportunity, 12.44. A few reported cases which illustrate the scope of the section in

regard to importunity may be referred to.
‘Fairbanks ५. Snow, 13 N.E. Reporter 596, 598.
*Williams v. Goude (1828) 1 Hag. Ecc. $77, 581 (Sir John Nicholl).
*Lovetty v. Lovetty, (1857) F and F 581 +
‘Nabagopal v. Sarala, A.1.R.1933 Cal. 574, 577. . . ‘ :
"Shrimati Busini v. Krishan Lal, 51 1.0. 1007 (Cateutta).
“(a) Naresh v. Paresh, A.LLR. 1955 §.C. 363, 364 on appeal from LL.R. (1952) 2 Cal. $6:
(8) Ajit Chandra ए. Aval Chandra, ALR. 1963 ८७1, $51, 552.
‘Sala Mahomed v. Dame Janbai, \.L.R. 22 Bom. 17, 28 (P.C.), (Case outside Succession Act
relating to Khojas).
*Bur Singh ४. Unum Singh, (1911) LR. 38 Cal. 355 (P.C.). है

whe

bee


77

In a Bombay case. on the death of a person issueless, his widow brought
a suit for the possession of his properties. The defendant resisted the claim of
the widow, on the basis of a will in favour of the defendant, From the evidence
on record, the Court came to the conclusion that it was the defendant who got
the will prepared, and he was the largest beneficiary under it. The question for
consideration before the Court was whether the was duiy executed by the
testator, as set up by the defendant, Citing an English case’. the Court said that
the principles of law on which a Court should rely were as follows :--

“fhe first, that the onus proband lies in evety case upon the parly pro-
pounding a will; and he must satisfy the conscience of the Court that the
instrument so propounded is the last will of a free and capable testator.
‘The sccond is that if a party writes or prepares 2 wil under which he
takes a benefit, that is 2 circumstance that ought generally to excite the
suspicion of the Court and calls upon it to be vigilant and zealous in
examining the evidence in support of the instrument in favour of which
it ought not to pronounce unless the suspicion is removed and is judicially
satisfied that the paper propounded does express the true will of the
deceased.”

“Every influence exercised is not undue influenc ”

‘The High Court quoted with approval the observations in a Privy Council
case’, where it was said that the burden of proving undue influence is not
discharged by merely establishing that a person has the power unduly to overbear
the will of the testator. It must be shown that in the particuiar case the power
was exercised, and that it was by means of the exercise of that power that the
will was obtained. The High Court held that “undue influence, in order to
invalidate a will, must amount to coercion or fraud. Its existence must be
established as a fact and it must also appear that it was actually exercised on

the testator.”

On this reasoning, it was held that undue influence was not proved.

12.45, The above discussion of the case law was imended to indicate
the precise scope of the section, no change in the law being intended. No change needed

VIL. Mistake

12.46. At this stage, we would like to discuss one maiter in re gard to which Mistakes in will
the Succession Act is silent, but which appears to be fundamental, The intention
to make a will, described by lawyers as animus testandi, may be lacking, not
only owing to the circumstances mentioned in section 61, but also because of
a mistake on the part of a person executing a document as his will, Thus, when
a person duly executes a document believing it to be his will, whereas, in fact.
it is a document prepared as the will of another person, the document cannot
be admitted to probate‘ as his will. Of course, such a situation might also arise
as a result of fraud. But the same tion arising because of mistake cannot be

ruled out’.

12.47. There is also the situation where a testator exccutes a document Insertion of words
into which words, or wrong words, have been inserted without his knowledge, without knowledge.
or from which words have been omitted without bis knowledge. Here again, in
England’, it has been held that while the court mot include words omitted
by mistake except in certain cases, it cam delete certain words’,

12.48. It is a general principle of kaw that deeds of contracts may be General _ principle
avoided for duress at the instance of the coerced party and if it can be proved of law.

‘Rangavra \. Sheshappa. और. 1927 Bom. 228.

* Tyrrell ६. Paivton, (1894) Probate 151; 70 L.T. 453: 42 W.R. 343.

Craig v. Lamournx. ALR. 1919 P.C. 32.

‘In the Estate of Meyer, (1908) Probate 353.

*See Henry, Summerfield. “Knowledge and Approval” (1956) 106 L.J, 694.

*Re Cory, (1955) | Weekly Law Reporis 725.!Discussed in Lee, “Correcting Testator’s Mistakes :
Probate Jurisdiction’ (1969) Vol. 33, Conveyancer (New Series), page 322.

"See Pulton v. Andrews, 7 H.L. 448; (1874-1880) All E.R. 1240.


78

that the document is कण his. then the document is rendered void by reason of
duress’.

Any deed. contract or wansaction entered into under duress is voidable
by the’ person concerned’,

Provision in Gers 12.49, This brings us io the question of mistake. The German Civil Code*
many. has taken a new and much s‘mplified course on the whole matter, Any kind of
“declaration of intention” voidabte on the ground of fredaniental error, even
if the mistake is unilateral: but it is voideele only, and su ject to the duty of
compensating any party for damage incurred by relying on tie validity of the act.

Our kaw. following the waditonal comenon taw, does not go so far.

Non est factiun, 12.50, In certain cases, a person may deny that a written document is his :
sion est fact. To sustain this plea, he must be able to prove that he was
mistalen as to the very nature and charscier of the document: a mistake merely
as [0 the contents of the document will net be sufficient. If the plea is established,
Ulen any contract embodied in the written document is void. No title to land or
chattels will pass to the transferee, and money paid under the contract will be
recoverable on grounds of total failure of consideration, *~*

Need for amend- (2.51. [? would in our view be a proper course if, when it is discovered

ment regarding mis- that mistakes have occurred in drafting wills, the courts are given a power to

take. vorrect mistakes, At feast where a clerical error is made in the drafting of the
will or where there has been mis-interpretation of the instructions of the testator
by the draftsman, such a power may furher the cause of justice. If the language
is to be made to conform, in substance, to what the testator really intended,
some such power is desirable,

Recommendation 12.52. ‘Lhe situation is really analogous to that described in section 59,

BS ae apmistake: Explanation 4. which (so far as is material) provides that no person can make

(Amendment of a will while he is in such “state of mind” that he does not know what he is doing,

mended), The second illustration to section 59 takes a case where a person executes an
instrument purporting to be his will, but does not understand the nature of the
instrument or the effect of its provisions. The instrument, it says, is not a valid
will, However, the words “state of mind” in section 59, Explonation 4, may not
literally cover the situation now under discussion. The matter could te placed
on a sounder footing by adding, in section 61. after the words “the free agency
of the testator”. the words “or by mistake’”, We recommend that section 61 be
amended accordingly.

VII. Ambulatory character of a will
Section 62. 12.53. Section 62 provides as follows :—

“62..A will is liable to be revoked or altered by the maker of it at any
time when he is competent to dispose of his property by will”, .

As we have alvetdy pointed out, this section brings out the abmulatory
character of a will. The section needs no change.

16णी and doney, tw ता Restituion (978), page 163.

*Burton \. teinsteong, 1975) 2, WAR. 1050,

19.G.B. 55. 119-122, cited an Pollock, Contracts (1950), page 381.
4Goff & Jones, Restitution (1978), page 318.

खरीफ 5 है, ere
pay हज eae

©. 1901, कह (ते in Gini,

Dosim

For the text of Section 61, see

paragraph 12.30, supra.
*See para 12.5, supra.


79

CHAPTER 13
EXECUTION OF UNPRIVILEGED WILLS : SECTIONS 63-64.

I. Persons entitled to execute unprivileged

13.1. For the validity of a will, it is necessary that act only the will must Sections — 63 and
have been made by a person competent to do so’, but also thst the formalities 64 Privileged and
laid down by law must have been complied with. These Sormalities, the MmPrivilcees हे

scheme of the Act, are dealt with separately under “vnprivileged wills” and
“privileged wills”. The category of “priviteged wills’ meant exclusively for
wills executed by certain members of the armed forces in certain situal

Tor oihers, it is obligatory to comply with the provisions prescribed for unpri
leged wills.

The principal formalities in case of unprivileged wills are--21 written state.
ment (of testamentary intentions), signature by the tesiator (section 63) and
attestation by at least two witnesses (section 63): but incorporation of papers
by reference in a will is permitted {section 64).

In the case of privileged wills, many of these formalities are dispensed
with by two sections (sections 65 and 66), to be discusset liver.

13.2. Of the (७० classes of wills—unpriviledged and priviledged wills-un- Section 63—Various
privileged wills are dealt with first, in sections 63 and 64, fon of aia

The requirements for the cxecution of unprivileged wills are elaborately sed wills
stated in these sections. Barring a soldier employed in an expedition or engaged.
in actual warfare or an airman so employed or engaged oy a mariner at sca,
every testator shall, according to the section, execute his will, according to the
requirements set out in the section in its three clauses, The: first requirement
relates to the signature or mark of the testator—cliause (a). he second require-
ment relates to the placing of the signature or mark of the testator--clause (9).
The third requirement is concerned with attestation—clause (c).

Convenience requires that the various aspects of execution of unprivileged
wills should be discussed separately. Before doing so, however, we would like
to deal with a question which touches the scope of the entire section.

41. Persons entitled to make privileged wills.

13.3. The first point relates to soldiers and other persons in the armed Exclusion. of sole
forces. Section 63 expressly excludes from its application “a soldier employed tion 63. rom sec
in an expedition or engaged in actual war or airman so employed or engaged or
2 mariner at sea”. The exclusion of soldiers from the scope of this section is
understandable, because the persons excluded by scction 63 are dealt with in
section 65, which deals with privileged wills. Bur sec'ci 63 does ner apply? to
Hindus’, The position, therefore, is that Hindu soldiers etc. are governed neither
by section 63 nor by section 65. Apparently, in their case. the unenacted Jaw
of wills (as applicable to Hindus) would still be applicable. This is not a very
satisfactory position. The process of ascertaining this unenacted law requires
research that is beyond the capacity of « layman—and even beyond the resources
of some lawyers.

13.4, If this be so, then the present position is not very satisfactory, There Recommendation.
appears to be no reason why, at least at the present day, it should be wecessary, Sonam the, Thied
in the case of wills of Hindu soldiers, etc., to conduct such research, when no include sections
such research is expected in the case of Hindu civilians, or non-Hindu soldiers, 95-66.

We, therefore, recommend that the Third Schedule to the Act should be amended’,
so as to mention therein the sections relating to privileged wills, namely, sections
65 and 66 also, as applicable to Hindus etc. ,

eetions 59 to 61.
*Third Schedule.
*Point concerning section 65 also.

‘To be carried out under the Third Schedule.


80

11 Formalities—signature

Section 63 clause (a) 13.5. We now come to the form s required for ihe execution of wills.
Signature. ‘The first requirement, indicated by clause (a) of section 63, is that the testator
“shall sign or shall aflix his mark to the will, or it shall be signed by some other
person in his presence and by his directions”. It should be noted that while
the formality of signature can—to use a loose but expressive word—be delegated,
the formality of affixing the mark cannot be delegated’, The testator himeslf must

affix his mark.

No particular form 13.6. No particular form of signature or however, required, Thus—
weet ree contrary to the popular belicf—atfixation of a thumb mark is not necessary.
a" and there could even be a pen mark*, A rubber stamp mark by the testator

the hakit of using such a mark’,

would alsa be valid, if the testator is

of 13.7. In England, interesting questions seem to have arisen as to the complete-
ness of the signature. For example, if the testator attempts to sign, but fails
to complete the signature and dies, it can be shown that the person was capable
of executing the document and fully appreciated its contents, and that what he
wrote was intended to he his signature and that the will was duly attested’.

Completeness
signature.

3.8. The provision in section 63, clause (a) lor signature by any other

other person’ person under the directions of the testator 1: teresting question as to
the precise scope of the words “other person”, any of the attesting
witnesses may (where the testator directs him to do so) also sign on behalf of
the testator in his presence “and by his direction”. In India, however, the words
“some other person” in section 63(a) have been interpreted as meaning a
person other than the testator and other than the attesting witnesses®-°. Yn India,
therefore, if the testator himself coves not sign the will, then, besides the “other
person” signing under section 63(:). there must, under section 63(c). be two
witnesses Who should sign the will in the presence of the testator’.

Meaning of “Some 13.8

Recommendation 13.9, This position cieaies unnecessary complications and the double forma~

to amend sec- jity j cally required on saci
tion 690) 80. as to lity is not really required oo any principle,
allow attestation by Accordingly, we recommend that the law should be made simple hy adding

persons signing on an Expkanation (0 section 63(:t) as follows :—
“Explanation—The other person signing for the testator under clause (a)
is competent to attest te will under clause (c).”

Section 63(b)—Pla~ 13.10. The placing of the signature in a will is dealt with in clause (9) of
cing of signature. section 63. It reads :
“(b) The signature or mark of the testator, or the signature of the person
signing for him. shall be so placed that it shall appear that it was intended
thereby 10 give effect to the writing as a will.”

Tbe noted that section 63(b) contains no rigid rules as to the
Act). place where the signature must appear on the will, In England, on the other hand,
statutory provisions on the subject ace more rigid’, The Wills Act, 1837, lays
down that the will must be signed “at the foot or end thercof,

English Law, (1837 13.11. ॥ ७

Section 9 of the Willy Act. 1837*, so far as is material, reads as under before
its recent amendment :— पर

“No will shail be valid unless it shall be in writing, and executed in manner
hereinafter mentioned: (that is to say), it shall be signed at the foot or end
thereof by the testator... ... and such signature shall be made or acknow-
ledged by the testator in the presence of two or more witnesses present at
the same time, and such witnesses shall attest and shall subscribe the will
in the presence of the testator, but no form of attestation shall be necessary”.

* Radhakrishna ¥. Subvaya, |... 40 Mad. 550.
*Ram Nath v. Ram Nagina, A.1.R. 1962 Pat. 481.
Nirmal Chander ४. Sarat. (1898) 1.L.R. 25 Cal. 911.
tin the Goods uf Chateraft, (1948) | AILE.R. 700.
‘4vabai v. Pestonit, 11 Bombay High Court Reports 87.
*Radhokrishna ¥. Subvaya, L-L.R. 40 Mad. $50, $56.
Vn re Hemlota, (1883) LL.B “9 Cal. 226,229. .
*Section 9, Wills Act, 1837, as amplified by section 1, Wills Act, Amendment Act, 1852,
Section 9, Wills Act. [837 (Eng.).



हा

13.12, Section 1 of the Wills Act Amendment Act, 1852, gave a consider. Act of 1852,

able extension to the above words, “at the foot or end thereof. by providing :
“Every such will shall, so far only as regards the position of the signature of
the lestator ..... be deemed 10 be valid within the said enactment. as explained
by this Act, if the signature shall te so placed at or after, or following, or under,
of beside, or opposite, to the end of the will that it shall be apparent on the face
of the will that the testator intended to give effect hy such his signature to the
writing signed as his will”.

‘The section goes on to provide that the enwneration therein of certain circum-
stances by which no such will shall be affected shall not restrict the generality
of the above enactment, but that no signature under the earlier Act (1837) or
this Act (1852) shall be operative to give effect to any disposition or direction
which is underneath the signature or which follows it, nor shall it give effect
to any disposition or direction jnserted after the signature shall be made.

13.12A. In England, by sections 17—28 of the Administration of-Justice Recent English re-
Act, 1982 (Chapter 57), certain amendments have been made in the law of form as fo formali-
wills. These cover the formalities for signing and attestation, effect of marriage ~~
and divorce on wills, effect of bequests to children etc. who pre-decease the
testator, rectification and interpretation of wills, and international wills, Such
of the amendments made as are relevant in the context of Indian law will be
referred to in the discussion in the Report, at the appropriate place. At this stage,
it would be convenient to mention, in brief. certain important points,

Section 9 of the Wills Act, 1837, concerned with the formal requirements
for making wills, has been revised in England by the Administration of Justice
Act, 1982, implementing the recommendations of a Report of the Law Reform
Committee’. The signatures on a will (under the revised section) will not appear
“at the foot or end” of the will, provided the testator intended by his siggatures
to give effect to the will. Further, it is not now necessary that each witness should
sign the will. This requirement of the earlier law is relaxed to allow the witness
either to sign or 10 acknowledge his signature in the testator's presence, Revised
section 9, Wills Act, 1837 reads as under :—

“Signing and attestation of wills.
9. No will shalt be valid unless—

(a) it is in writing, and signed by the testator, or by some other person
in his presence and by his direction; and

(b) ४ ap pears that the testator intended by his signature to give effect
to the will: an

(c) the signature is made or acknowledged by the testator in the presence
of two or more witnesses present at the same time; and

(d) each witness either—
(i) attests and signs the will; or
(ii) acknowledges his signature, in the presence of the testator
(but not necessarily in the presence of any other witness).

but no particular form of attestation shall be necessary”.

13.13. In India, all that is required is that the signature should be so placed Indian Law.
that it shall appear that it was intended thereby to give effect to the writing
as a will? -

In fact, in India, documents are sometimes signed by the parties on the
top. As the section does not lay down any positive rule as to the place where

tLaw Reform Committee, 22nd Report (Making and Revocation of Wills) 1980 cmd. 7902
paras 2.01 to 2.13.

ME Banerjee , Hindu Witls Act, page 6, cited in N.D. Basu’s The Law of Succession (1957)
page 132.

See also Sabitri v. Savi, (1892), 19 C.W.N. 1297,


82

the signature is to be put, that practice may be regarded as sanctioned, ‘The
signature must, of course, have been made with the object of authenticating the
siument,

Farther | ही 13.14. What is paramount is the ‘intention’. it would seem that if the
remplated. testator contemplated a further signature which he never made, the will must
be considered as unsigned. But a signature originally made without such object
may afterwards be adopted by the testator as his final signature: such would be
ihe presumed intention, if the testator acknowledged the instrument to the
attesting. witnesses that the instrument was his will without alluding to any further
act of signing; and under the present Act, which omits the words “‘on the face. of
the will”, extrinsic evidence of such intention would seem to be admissible. A
testator’s signature at the commencement of the will, when the witnesses signed the
same, and the fact of his admission to severat of the witnesses that thg papers
signed by them was his last will and testament, amounts to sufficient ‘acknowledge~
ment’ of his signature to his wil?

Unsigned portion 13.15. The question of the effect of unsigned portion of a will came up in

of a will. England for consideration in 1960. Among the various points which arose for
decision in Re Little? (decreased), one was: “In what circumstances will the
court admit to probate an, unsigned portion of a will as forming part of the signed
portion of the wilt?”

The answer, according to the decided cases‘, would be that the courts will
not allow any document to form part of a will which was not physically or
otherwise connected to the signed portion of the will at the moment of its
signature,

No change needed 13.16. The. above discussion, though not necessitating any amendment of
in section 650) ctause (b) of the section, elucidates several important points.

IV. Attestation,

Section 63(0-4 0०७ 13.17. After signature, ihe next important formality is of attestation, Clause
. {c) Of section 63 deals with attestation of a will in these terms.

7 (०) The will shali be attested by two or more witnesses, each of whom
has seen the testator sign or affix his mark to the will or has seen some
other person sign the will, in the presence and by the direction of the
testator, or has received from the testator a personal acknowledgement
of his signature or mark, or of the signature of such other person; and each
of the witnesses shall sign the will in the presence of the testator, but it
shall not be necessary that more than one witness be present at the sane
time, and no particular form of attestation shall be necessary.”

Reasons in support

of attestation. 13.18. Before entering into a discussion of points of detail concerning clause

(०), we must deal with a basic question concerning the requirement of attestation.
Is the requ:rement of attestation of wills really needed ?

A discussion of the reasons for attestation is appropriate for properly dealing
with the question. The principal reasons advanced in support of the requirement
of attestation are, first, that, thereby forgery is made More difficult, secondly,
that there can be no doubt as to the identity of the testator when there is attes-
tation; and thirdly, that the likelihood of the will being signed under coercion
is reduced, However, the validity of each of these reasons has been questioned.
It is stated’ that if a person is determined to prove a forged will, he can also
forge the signature of a bogus witness.

Even in the case of a genuine will, if the witnesses have disappeared, a
will may still be proved otherwise, so that there may be little difference in

n Act, page 31, cited by N.D. Basu, The Law of Succession(1957), page

*Amarendra v. Kasht, (1900) LL.R. 27 Cal. 169.

sin re Little, (1960) 1 All E.R. 387.

‘See note in (1960) 230 Law Times 33.

“Mellows, The Law of Succession (1977), pages 70—72,


§3

practical effect beiween a will with Iwo genuine witnesses who have disappeard
and a will with signature of two invented witnesses who are totally fictitious.

In regard to the ilentity of the testator, it is stated’ that in a society where
thers is rigid documentation snd recording, such a rule is to longer required.

13.19. Then, as regards the possibility of coercion, it is stated that if a
will is‘made under coercion, there is nothing to prevent that ‘testator from
revoking it as soon as the coercion ceases, untess he had died in the meantime,
While, in certain circumstances, the formal requirements may be useful to prevent
coercion, it is hardly a sound reason by itself to justify the retention of these
formalities.

13.20. There is, no doubt, some force in the arguments against attestation as
summarised above’, Nevertheless, we think chat on a balancing of considerations,
a change dispensing with the attestation of wills might prove to be unwise in
the long run. Attestation at least has the merit of ensuring that-the document
was signed uftcr some reflection, In addition, it may often be useful as securing
Witnesses to the execution of the will, These advantages could well outweigh the
other arguments,

13.2[, The requirement of attestation need not, therefore, be done away
with. Certuin matters of detail concerning attestation may now be considered.
Under section 63, clause (c), attestation must be in the ‘presence’ of the testator.
One of the questions to which (he English case of Chalcraft’ gave rise was whether
the documem had to be duly attested in the ‘presence’ of the deceased, Willmer,
J, recalled that he had been referred to cases which established the proposition
that a testamentary document must be attested not only in the physical, but
also in the menial, presence of the deceased. The testatrix wrote “E, Chal” and
could not go further, apparently because of the influence of a tirug which had
been prescribed.

Willmer J., observed that once the court had been satisfied that the document
was intended to be a testamentary document and had been properly signed, the
court would allow a certain latitude in construing the word Presence”,

The operation of the drug would be inconsistent with the sudden departure
of mental faculties, and the proper inference to draw was that, since the document
Was attested immediately after the deceased wrote what she did write, she was
still mentally ‘present’ in sufficient degree to comply with the requirements of
the Wills Act. 1837, The court accordingly pronounced in- favour of the codicil.

Safeguard against
coercion.

Attestation to bs
retained.

Attestation ip pre-
sence of testator
physical aud men-
tal’ presence.

13.22. While attestation must comply with the detailed provisions in clause Simultaneous pre~
(०), simultaneous presence of both the witnesses is not necessary in India, whether sence not necessary.

the attestation is direct (by actually witnessing the signature) or indirect (by
acknowledgement of signature by the testator). Section 63(c) is Specific on the
point. On the other 1400, the English law is different*--*, in-as-much as both
the witnesses must be present when receiving the acknowledgement.

A iecent English case illustrates the difficulty caused by the stringent
provisions of the law. It was held in that ९95९९ that the testator should sign the
will or acknowledge his signature in the presence of both the witnesses before
either of them has attested and subscribed the document, Thus, the requirement
of oral evidence becomes embedded in the section, causing injustice’,

As stated above, the Indian section is more specific on the point.

‘Mellons, The Law of Succession (1977), pages 70—72.
2Para 13.19, supra.

3In Re. Chateraft, (1948) 1 All E.R. 700.

‘See Wills Act, 1837, section 9 (Para £3.11, supra).

उन Re Colling, (1972) 1 WLR. 1440.

°in Re Colling, (1972 1 Weekly law Reports 1440.

1886 comment in (1975) New L.J, 115,


84

Recommendation (3.23. There is, however, need for clarification on one point concerning
to amend section secjion 63(c). The requirement that the attesting witness must see “some other
S3(¢). person” sign would require amplification, having regard to our conmwnents on

clause (a) of the section.

In our discussion of clause! (a), we have recommended that it should be
made clear that the “other person” signing under clause (a) is competent to
attest the will under clause (०), This clarification, to be made under clause (a),
should naturally be made to govern clause (०) also, in so far as it requires that
the aitesting witness must see “some other person” sign. Accordingly, we re-
commend that below clause (c) of section 63 an Explanation should be inserted
as follows :—

“Explanation.—The provisions of clause (c) are subiect 10 those of clause
(a) and the Explanation thereto”.

V. Incorporation by reference.

Section 64 incorpo- 13.24, This takes us to section 64, which deals with what is known in

ration of papers by England as the incorporation of papers by reference. The section is concerned

reference. with a situation where a testator refers, in a will, to any other document then
actually written, as expressing any part of the will in which it is referred to. From
the wording of the section, it is obvious that the document must be in:existence
at the time of the will, must be referred to in the will and must be clearly identified
in the will. These conditions are necessary, because otherwise, it would be
possible for the testator to make a will in outline, reserving to himself the power
to alter the incorporated document at some future date.

The doctrine of incorporation under section 64 would apply only if the
reference to another document is for the purpose of incorporation’.

The document so incorporated is normally included in the probate, unless
it is unwieldy.

No change of subs- 13.25. Indian case law on the section is scanty. There are, no doubt, cases
tance. relating to secret trusts, but they are concerned with Questions pertaining to the
law of trusts, rather than with the language of section 64.

The subject of secret trusts is dealt with in the case law relating to section
5 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882. This matter, is, strictly speaking, outside the
scope of section 64 of the Succession Act, since the testator intending a secret
trust, does not, in the will, refer to any other document, cither expressly or by

implication.

Recommendation

to amend section 13.26. However, it is necessary that the document must be described in
64,

the will as actually in existence. In’ order that this important requirement may
find a mention in the section, we recommend that in section 64, after the words
“actually in existence”. the words. “and described as actually in existence” should
be inserted.

CHAPTER 14
PRIVILEGED WILLS : SECTION 65-66
1. Privilege : Justification

Scope. 14.1. Sections 65 and 66 deal with “Privileged wills”, that is to say, wills
executed by certain persons who are gllowed to excute wills with formalities
that are less rigid than those prescribed for ordinary wills. Strictly speaking,
the “privilege” is of the persons who are, by the faw, given a right to execute

'Para 13.9, supra.
*Bai Gangabai v. Bhugwan Das, 3.1..R. 29 Bom. 530.


85

a will without undergoing some of the formalities ordinarily required for wills.
Broadly stated, the privileged persons (as the law in India stands at Present)
are members of certain armed forces employed in an expedition or engaged in
actual warfare. and mariners at sea.

The special provisions as to privileged wills (sections 65-66) are primarily
intended to relax the stringent formal requirements for the validity of wills laid
down in the Act for the execution of unptivileged wills (sections 63-64). In
Particulay, there is relaxation of the requirement of—

fa) writing?
(b) Signature, and

(ce) attestation.®

An oral privileged will, however, has only limited validity in point of its
duration, inasmuch as. if the testator, being still alive, has ccased to be entitled
10 make a privileged will, the will “shall be null” at the expiration of one month

after he has so ceased.

14.2, These speci

‘al provisions laid down for armed forces are justified Necessity constitu-
on the ground of necessity. When combat is actually in progress or expected toting a justification,
stact at any moment, it is not possible to undergo elaborate testamentary formali-

ties—or, if the formalities have been already commenced,—to complete them.

Non-completion of formalities is strikingly illustrated by the situation where a

soldier has proceeded to prepare a will but execution of the will in the manner

intended by him cannot be completed, by reason of external factors, even though

the intention to make a will has not been abandoned. This may, for example,

happen where the soldier is killed by enemy action before completing the execu-

tion of the will. The law takes care of the situation by a special provision of :

the nature under consideration. पु ca

Hi, History

14.3. Ut is of interest to note that the Indian statutory provision as to Origin in Roman
privileged wills, though immediately derived from the corresponding English Law,
Statute’, really owe their ultimate origin to the Roman law. The military will
was introduced in Roman Jaw by Emperor Julius Ceaser as a temporary conces-
sion, but it became an established institution in the early Empire’, ॥ Roman law,
2 soldier on active service might make his wilt as he pleased, and as he could, The
wilt might be a written instrument; it might be by an oral declaration in the pre-~
sence of 1४० or three comrades; it might be by tracing characters in his blood on a
scabbard or shield, or with a sword in the dust. Such a will, if the testator
survived, remained valid for a year after honourable discharge from service!

14.4. Thus, emergency gave birth to more liberal rules of Jaw, This aspect English cases.
of the matter has been discussed in a number of English cases, Among the
many of the eatlier English authorities dealing with the point, attention shoutd
be drawn to two decisions of Sir Francis Jenunc, President2-" Yn the first case,
the president indicated that the test which commended itself to him was—had
the solider done something—had he taken some step—at the time when he
made his will, to bring himself within the words of the section? “This brings
us very close to the Roman concept of in expenditions if indeed, not actually,
to the same point that the Romans meant by in expeditione for, when a Roman

‘Section 6661) and section 66(2) (8) and ¢h).
*Section 66(2} (a), (०). (9). (e) and (0).
Section 66(2) (७) and (b).
‘Section 66(2) (hy.
*Lee, Roman Law (1955), page 190.
‘Section 11, Wills Act, 1837 (Pata 14.6. infra).
*Lee, Roman Law (1955), page 190.
‘Lee. Roman Law (1955), page 190,
“In the Good of Hiscock, (1901) Probate 78, 83: (19004903) AI E.R. Rep. 63.
*°Cattward v. Knee (1902) Probate 99 (Order for active service).


Meaning of “actual

service” in essential ingredients of the privilege. The statutory provision in England on the

anilitai
tection. 11,

Act, 1837 and com-

ison with
faa Law,

86

did anything towards fighting ihe enemy, he would have been considered under
the law of his time as being in expeditione’’?

14.5, In saying thai that was the test which commended itself to him as
the correct one, the President indicated that he was not aware that it had ever
actually been laid down by any judicial authority; but, on the other hand, he
did not known of any reported case that was against it. In Gatward v Knee’ he
suggested that he might be “going to a step further” than in the earlier decision;
but he had no doubt that mobilisation—giving co that word the effect which he
undersivod it to conver—might fairly be taken as the commencement of that
which, in Roman law, is expressed by the words in expeditione, Those words,
he said, meant something more than the English words “on an expendition”,
because it was quite clear that when a force begain, in a sense, to engage in
or to enter upon active service, it would be i expeditione, The judgement goes
on: “I thought, when deciding the case cited, and I still think, that it is fair to
ask whether or not the person whose testamentary dispositions are in question
has done anything; but I am of the opinion that if the order for mobilisation
has been received, although the men himself may have done nothing under it,
yet that order so alters his position as practically. to place him in expeditione.
Such an order gocs beyond a mere warning. | do not think a mere warning for
active service would be sufficient; but when a fore is mobilised 1 understand
this to be that it is placed under military orders with a view to some step being
taken forthwith for active service”, That was what had happened in the case of
Wingham,’ in which the document in question was held to be a soldier's will

under the Wills Act.‘

14.6. So much as regards the history of the privilege, and some of the

subject may now be referred to. Section 11 of the Wills Act, 1837, provides
that “any soldier being in actual military service” may dispose of his personal

“estate without the formalities required by the 405 The material words in this

section are the same as those in section 23 of the Statute of Frauds. The
courts in England have, from time to time, experienced considerable difficulty
in construing these words, owing to tht fact that conditions of military service
and .af wee fare generally have changed completely since the words in question
found their way into the Statute Book. [t is now generally accepted that the
words, wher ‘inst inserted into the Statute of Frauds, were intended to confer on
British soldiers the same testamentary rights as had been enjoyed by Roman
soldiers under Roman law.’

In Drununond v, [risli the provisions of the Roman Law as expounded by
subsequent -ommentators, were reviewed at considerable length. It was

observed——

It is quite clear from these passages from the Digest, the Code and the
commentators, generally, that the privilege did not extend to soldiers of
everv description; they must be soldiers expeditionibus occupati, or called
out to defend the city; this last case was of itself an exception. for it could
not strictly be said to be “expeditio.”

Later, the following passage in Swinburne on Wills* was referred to :—

“Concerning the first sort, either they be such as lie safely in some castle,
or place of defence, besicged by the enemy, only in readiness to be
employed in case of invasion or rebellion, and then they do not enjoy these

Yn the Good of Hiscock. (1901) Probate 78. 83: (1900-1903) All E.R. Rep. 63.
*Gattward ५. Knee, 41902) Probate 99.

*Re Wingham. (1948) 1 Ail E.R, 208, 209.

“See D.C. Potter, “Soldier's Wills’* (1949) 12 Modern Law Review 183.

4Re, Wingham, (1948) | All England Reports 208, 209.

*Re, Winghams, (1948) 1 All England Reports 208, 209.

*Druntmond ए. Parish, (1843) 3 Curt, 522, 536, 537, 538, 542, referred to in Re Wingham, (1948)
1 All E.R. 208, 209.

*Swinbuyroe ०० Wills, 7th Ed. (1803), Vol. 1, pages 95-96.



87

military privileges, or else they be such as are in expedition or actual
service of wars, and such are privileged at least during the time of their

expedition. ....-

“Being of opinion from the result of the investigation of the authorities
that the principle of exemption, contained in the 11th section of the Act,
was adopted from the Roman law: ई think it was adopted with the
limitations to which I have adverted, and that. by the insertion of the words

“actual military service.” the privilege, as respects the British soldier, is

confined to those who are on an expedition.”

Some of the authorities ralating to the circumstances in which privileged wills
could be executed in England were reviewed in a recent English case in the
Family Division? The deceased was a soldier in service in Northern Ireland in
1978 at a time of armed and clandestine insurrection against the Government.
His unit was stationed in Northern Ireland as a part of the armed forces which
were deployed there at the request of the civil authorities to assist in the main-
tenance of law and order, While on patrol, the deceased was shot and mortally
wounded by an unknown gunman. En rouie to the hospital, he stated to an
officer and warrat officer of his battalion. “If I don’t make it. make sure Anne
gets all my stuff.” Anne was his fiancee. The deceased died the next day. Under
4 written will made previously, the deceased had left cverything to his mother.
On a Summons taken out by the fiancee applying for the deceased’s oral
declaration to be admitted as his last .will and testament on the basis that it
was a privileged will under section 11 of the Wills Act, 1837, the question arose
whether the deceased had been ‘in actual military service’ at the time of making
the declaration and was, therefore, entitled to make a non-cupative will.

It was held that whether the deceased was in actual military service for the
poses of section 11 of the Act of 1837 depended on the nature of the
activities of the deceased and the unit or force to which he was attached,
and not on the character of the opposing operations, The fact
that there was not a state of war or that the enemy was not a uniform-
ed force engaged in regular warfare or an insurgent force organised on conven-
tional lines, was irrelevant in deciding whether the deceased was in actual military
service. Nor was it relevant whether the deccased’s military service took place
in the context of a foreign expedition or invasion or a local insurrection, On the
facts, the deceased had clearly been in actual military service at the time of
making the declaration and the declaration would, therefore, be admitted as a
valid non-cupative will.

14.7. 10 case decided by the New South Wales Court of Appeal,’ one of New South Wales-

the questions that came up for consideration was whether privilege was available @*

to the deceased testator who was a British subject domiciled, in New South

Wales, and who had. during 1944 and 1945, while employed by the U.S. Anny

in the South-West Pacific as a civilian engineer, made a privileged will. The

question arose having regard to.the fact that he was acting on behalf of the U.S.

Government. Following an early decision on the will of a soldier in the employ

of the East India Company‘ the New South Wales Court of Appeal held that

the privilege was not restricted to members of the forces of her Majesty.

TV. Privileged Witls in India—Applicability to Hiadus.

14.8. It is now time to turn to the text of section 65. quoted below: — seine

“65. Any solder being employed in an exped’tion or engaged in actual
warfare, or an airman so employed or engaged, or any mariner being at
sea, may. if he has completed the age of eighteen years. dispose of his
property by a will made in the manner provided in section 66. Such wills
are called privileged wills.

p r 37377 South Wales Law Report 125; Annual Survey of
3159 1५77 page 273.
‘ie the Case of Donaldson, (1840) 2 Curt. 1.


88

ILLUSTRATIONS
(i) A, a medical officer attached to a regiment, is actually employed in an
expedition. He is a soldier actually employed in an expedition, and can
niake a privileged will.
(1) A is at sea in a merchant-ship of which be is the purser, He is a mari-
ner, and. being at sea, can make a privileged will.

(ii) A. a soldier serving in the field against insurgents in a soldier engaged
in actual warfare, and as such can make a priviledged will.

(iv) A. 2 mariner of a ship, in the course of a voyage, is temporarily on
shore while she is lying in harbour. He is, for the purposes of this section,
मे mariner at sea, and can make a privileged will.

(४) A, an admiral who commands a naval force, but who lives on shore,
and only occassionally gocs on board his ship, is not considered as at sea.
und cannot make a privileged will.

(vi) A, ॥ mariner serving on a military expedition, but not being at sea,
is considered as a soldier, and can make a privileged will”.

‘Non-combatants. 44.9, 40 may be noted that section 65, illustrations (i) und (ii), seem to
imply that non-combatants attached to fighting forces can also execute Privileged
wills and fall in the category of “soldiers” etc.

Recommendation 14.10, We have already discussed certain points’ concerning ivileged

to extend section Wills in comection with section 63, As has been pointed out in that cussion,

65 to Hindus, etc. the defective drafting of sections 63 to 66 has ed to the position that, at
present, the capacity of soldiers professing the Hindu, etc. religion to make wills
has become extremely doubtful. We use the short term “soldirs” to mean “a
soldier employed in an expedition or engaged in actual warfare or an airman
so employed or engaged or a matiner at sea.” Section 63, which deals with
unprivileged wills, excludes soldiers from its fold by its express terms. Section
65, which deals with privileged wills, excludes Hindus, etc, from its fold by
virtue of the Third Schedule. The result is that Hindu soldiers are, as regards
the execution of wills, governed at present neither by sections 65 ang 66
(Privileged Wills) nor by section 63 (unprivileged wills)—but by the unenacted
law of wills as applicable to Hindus.

Case law on section 14.11. Tiere is ao reported case discussing the applicability or non-
65, applicability of the section to soldiers who belong to the exempted categories,
including, in particular, Hindus. There is a Bombay case’ and an Andhra Pradesh
case* under the section, but they’ do not throw any light on the matter under
discussion. However, the Andhra Pradesh case does contain a dictum to the
tflect that section 66 does not apply to Hindus,

nt position is hardly satisfactory,

Tn any case. the pre

I is, therefore. necessary to extend section 65 to Hindus etc, by amending
the Third Schedule.‘

Revocation of pri- 14.12. Reverting (0 section 65, it is to be noted that the revocation of a

vileged wills, privileged will also docs not require elaborate formalities. The Explanation to
section 72 expressly makes it clear that it is not necdssary that at the time
of revocation. the ‘testator should be in a situation which entitles him to make
a privilegea will.

'See discussion relating (० section 63, chapter 12, supra.
+Bhagubai \. Appuji, 1.1.R. 47 Bom. 552; A.LR. 1923 Bom. 260.
*Ratnanimal \. Thilaimmal, AAR. 1957 A.P. 336, 337, para 6.

‘To be considered under the Third Schedule. - -
Section 72, Explanation. mt



89

in England, the point arose and was argued.' in a case where an alteration
had been made in a privileged will by an unattested writing.” The matter was,
however, decided on the basis of’a presumption that the alicration was made at
a time when the testator was in a position entitling him to make such a will.

14.13. Finally, it should be noted that, in England,’ persons below 18 Age of person ma-
¢an make a privileged will, A person making an unprivileged will must be King priviged will
above the age of 18 years, but that requirement does not, in Englands, apply' commended in sec-
10 those entitled to make a privileged will, The question to be considered is tion 65.

whether the same facility should not be available in India. It is true that persons

below the age of eighteen years arc not ordinarily recruited to the armed forces

in India but the possibility of such a recruitment cannot be legally ruled out,

at least in the Navy. On the whole, there is a case for adopting the English rule.

We, therefore. recommend that section 65 should be amended’ for the
purpose so as to allow soldiers etc. who are minors to make privileged wills.

The object could be achieved by substituting. in section 65 for the words
“it he has completed the age of eighteen years” the words “whehter or not he
has completed the age of eighteen years”.

We recommend accordingly.
V. Persons involved in Calamities—proposed new section.

14.14, This disposes of section 65. Before proceeding to the next section, Section 6SA-sugges-
it ix convenient to deal with one matter on which an amendment of the Acted provision for
by inserting a new provision scems to be called for. The point relates to the “lamities.
persons who can make privileged wills. At present, the provisions of the Act
(as to privileged wills) are confined to persons belonging to the armed forces
and mariners at sea. The rest of the citizens must comply with section 63 which
lays down elaborate formalities for making unprivileged wills,

Now, even in the case of civilians. one could conceive of many situations
where it may be extremely difficult to comply with the strict legal formalities
imposed by section 63-—as, for example, in the case of persons affected by
accident, carthquake, tire. flood or other similar calamity. These ate all situations
wherein the persons concerned reasonably believe that death is imminent. They
may wish to make a declaration of their testamentary intentions, in view of the
anticipated imminence of death. But, at present, there is no legally effctive way
of doing so. The law should enable persons so placed to make a will with less.
stringent formalities than those imposed by section 63. What “less stringent”
formalities should be permitted can be formulated on the basis of section 66,
(privileged wills), For example, the provisions of section 66, clauses (a) to
(9) and (h), (at present confined to armed forces) could be made’ ‘applicable
to such persons without much substantial change. Section 66, clauses (e). (f)
and (g) could also be made applicable to them. though with suitable adaptations.

14.15. The Succession Act does not provide for this contingency, presumably Need
because attention has not so far been devoted to it, The matter, however, appears
to bz one for which there is need for a suitable provision.

Kt may be of interest to note that in one respect. the Roman law did
think of this situation as a special one, by providing that while, ordinarily, the
witnesses to a will should all be present together at the same time, it need not be
so where a will is made in the time of pestilence.’ This special treatment given
to wills made in epidemics seems to survive in some civil law countries.’

‘Un the Estate of Newland, (1952) | All England. Reports, 841, 851.

*See Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 39. page 890, para 1355.

‘Section 7 of the Wills Act:-1837, as amanded by the Family Law Reform. Act, 1969.

A ‘section 1, Wiils (Soldiers and Sailors) ‘Act, 1918. as" amended by the-Family- Law Reform
SSection 65 10 be amended.
‘Lee, Roman Law (1955), page 190. . .
+). Gareth Miller, Machinery of Succession (1977), page 157, f.. Dewees



Position in Japan

On ver rae of death

Article 1076,

90

14.16. It would also be of interest to note that the Japanese Civil Code’
has, by 8 number of provisions, provideed for “exceptional forms” of wills,
applicable in special cases where ordinary forms of making a will cannot be
acted on. In Japan, it is permissible to make a will in a special form by virtue of
these provisions. There are seven special forms answering to seven different
special circumstances, It i: unnecessary to enumerate all of them, but by way of
illustration, it may be mentioned that provision exists for the making of a will
in special form by a person “on the verge of death’? or by a person in a place
cut off from communication on account of infectious disease. Ordinarily, Japanese
faw does not require attestation if the will is a holograph. To this general rule,
an exeption is created by the provisions relating to certain special situations, of
which two are quoted below’ :—

1. On the Verge of death. When a person on the verge of death through
sickness or any other cause desires to make a will, he may do so, in the
presence of at lease three witnesses by making an Oral declaration of its
purport to one of them. In such case the person to whom the oral declara-
tion was made must write it down and read it over to the testator and
the other and witnesses and thereupon all the witnesses must sign and
seal the writing after having acknowledged its correctness (Art. 1076, 1).

A will made under the foregoing provision is void unless, within twenty days
from the date of the will, one of the witnesses or a person interested
applies to the Local Court (of the place of domicile of the testator if he
is still alive, or of the place of the commencement of the succession if he is
dead) and have it confirmed (Art. 1976). Confirmation (kaku-nin of
a will is a judgement by which the will is publicly certified to be in due
order and genuine: therefore, the court must not confirm a will unless
it is satisfied that it is in due order and represents the true intention of the
testator (Art. 1076, 3).

In @ place isolated 2. Ina prea cut off from communication on account of an infections

by administrative
measure.

Article 1082.
Article 1083.

Position in coun
tries in Eastern
Europe—Hungary.

disease. A person in a place which by an administrative measure is isolated
from the outer world on account of cholera, or any other officially recognis-
ed infect'ous disease, may make a will in the presence of a police officer
und at least one witness (Article 1077), because in such a place it may
ed infectious disease. may make a will in the presence of a police officer
witnesses. :

In this case the testator need not write the whole document himself, but
the document must be signed and sealed by the testator, the draftsman,
the person required to be present, and the witnesses (Article 1082). If
there is a person who is unable to sign or “seal, the persons present or
the witnesses must make an additional explanatory statement of the fact
in writing (Art. 1083)”.

14.17. We may also refer to the position in Eastern European countries.
While, in some countries in Eastérn Europe, privileged wills are Simited* in
scope, in several other countries, special provisions exist for certain special
situations (apart from the privilege given by the legal system to members of
the armed forces).

Thus,’ in Hungary, oral wills may be made in extraordinary situations in
which the life of the testator is in danger and in which the testator cannot make
a written will, or can make & written will only with considerable difficulty.’ The
oral will is to be mad: by the testator reciting the contents of the last will in

‘Articles 1076 to 1086 Japanese Civil Code Becker, Principles and Practice of the Civil Code
of Japan (1921), pages 756 10 759.

Article 1076, Civil Code of Japan.

in Easter
lov 3k},
riturce in Eastern Eurppe and in the People’s Republic of Chins
1:6 Poland), page 236 (Romania) and 2587 258 (Yugoslavia).



91

the simultaneous presence of two witnesses and, on the same occasion, declaring
that the statement contains his will’

An oral will made under the above provisions losds its force if the
situation of emergency has ceased to exist and the testator was, for a continuous
period of three months, in a position to make a will by an instrument?

14.18. Under the Polish Civil Code,’ in cases where the making of an Poland.
ordinary will would be impossible or very difficult owing to exceptional circum-
stances, i.e. disruption of transport, epidemics, military operations, illness or
accident of the testator, justifying a fear of his death, the testator may make an
oral will in the presence of three witnesses, present at the same time. (If the
testator is ill or wounded, the witnesses need not be present simultaneously).

This will should be committed to writing as soon as possible by one of
the witnesses, who must state the date of the will and the date of committing
the will to writing; the will must then be signed by two out of the three witnesses.
However, failure to write out the will immediately or lack of signature does not
invalidate it. It may be signed fater.

If the last will is not committed to writing, its contents can be established
by sworn and identical statements of the two witnesses out of the three before
whom the testator so declared his testamentary intentions,

14.19. (a) In Romania, members of the Armed forces and civilians Romania and
attached to armed forces may, in exceptional circumstances, make a will with Yugoslavia and
fewer formalities than ordinary wills, i.e. in the presence of the commander or RSFSR. Civil
field officer, assisted by two witnesses, If the testator is sick or wounded, it can be e-
executed in the presence of the doctor of the unit and such wills have temporary
force and lose their validity after six months when the testator returns to the
place where he can make an ordinary will. During epidemics, a will in the
presence of city council assisted by two witnesses is ४०1१. The physical condition
of the testator is irrelevant, and only the place should be under quarantine.

(b) Io Yugoslavia, the law allows oral wills, (though exceptionally‘,)
where an emergency due to war or epidemic is created and the testator is not
in a position (0 make a written will, The validity of such a will is upto 30
days from the end of emergency. The will should be made before two witnesses
and any provision for the benefit of the witnesses or their ascendants or descen-
dants and collaterals upto the 4th degree or spouses of them, shall be null and
void.

(c) In the Civil Code of one of the States forming part of ‘U.S.S.R., there
occur the following provisions*.

Article 540. Notarial Form of a Will.

A will should be drawn up in writing, indicating the place and time of its
compliation, and be personally signed by the testator and notarially certified.

Article 541. Wills equivalent to Notarially Certified Wills.

There shall be equivient to notarially certified wills :

(1) wills of citizens being treated in hospitals, other in-patient medical
institutions, sanatoriums or ‘residing in homes for the aged and disabled, which
are certified by the chief doctors, their medical deputies, or duty doctors of

these hospitals, medical institutions, sanatoriums, as well as directors and chief
doctors of the said homes for the aged and disabled;

’Section 635, Hungarian Civli Code.
*Section 651, 3rd paragraph, Hungarian Civil Code.
*Article $2—84, Polish Civil Code.
‘Romanian Civil Code, Article, 872.
Yugoslavia Civil Code, Article 80 and 31.
ved Sia 19 RSESR, Coil Code (1964) Quoted infHazard, Butler and Magg’s Soviet.
85eL/B{D)144MofL3&CA—7


Section 65A.

Section 66.

92

(2) wills of citizens on sea-going vessels of internal navigation sailing
under the flag of the USSR which are certified by the masters of these vessels;

(3) wills of citizens in prospecting, aretic, and other similar expeditions
which are certified by the heads of these expeditions;

(4) wills of military servicemen and other persons being iweated in military
hospitals, sanatoriums, and other military medical institutions which are certified
by their heads sanatoriums and other military medical institutions;

(5) wills of military sarvicemen and at points where military units, forma~
tions, institutions, and ‘military training institutions are situated where there
are no state notarial offices or other agencies performing notarial activities, also
the wills of workers and employees, members of their families, and family
members of military servicemen, which are certified by the commanders {or
heads}of these units, formations, institutions, and educational institutions;

(6) wills of persons in places of deprivation of freedom which are certi-
fied by the heads of the places of deprivation of freedom.

Article 542 Signing of a Will by Another Person.

If a testator, by virtue of physical defects, iliness, or other reasons, can
not personally sign a will, it may be signed at his request in the presence ofa
notary or other official (Article 541) by another citizen, indicating the reasons
by virtue of which the testator could not sign the will personally.

14,20, On a careful consideration of the pros and cons of the matter, we ace
of the view that a new section, say, as section 65A, should be inserted’ to
deal with the situation now under consideration. It is true that if death occurs
after a long time, it may be difficult to determine factually if there had been
a flood etc. But the balance of convenience justifies the insertion of a specific
provision as mentiond above. Accordingly, we recommend that a new sectson
should be inserted, somewhat on these Hines.

“65A. A person affected by accident, earthquake, fire, flood or other
similar calamity in circumstances wherein he has reasonable apprehension
of immediate death, may make a privileged will”,

Section 66, clauses (९), (1) and (g), may, in consequence, be slightly
amended so as to replace the words “soldier, airmen. or marines” by the words
“the person entitled to make a privileged will.”

Y. The formalities

14 21, We may now resume consideration of the existing sections, Section
66 reads :

“66. (1) Privileged wills may be in writing or may be made by word of
mouth,

(2) The execution of privileged wills shall be governed by the following
roles :-~

(a) The will may be written wholly by the testator, with his own hand,
In such case it need not be signed or attested, .

(0) It may be written wholly or in part by another person and
signed by the testator. In such case it need not be attested.

(०) If the instrument purporting 10 be a will is written wholly or in
part by another person and is not signed by the testator, it shall be
deemed to be his will, if it is shown that it was written by the
testator’s directions or that he recognised it as his will.

‘Para 14.8, supra.


94

(d) If it appears on the face of the instrument that the execution of
it in the manner intended by the testator was not completed, the
instrument shall not, by reason of that circumstance, be invalid, pro-
vided that his non-execution of it can be reasonably ascribed to some
cause other than the abandonment of the testamentary intensions
expressed in the instrument.

(e) If the soldicr, airman, or mariner has written instructions for the
preparation of his will, but has died before it could be prepared and
executed, such instructions shall be considered to constitute his will.
(1) If the soldier, airman or mariner has, in the presence of two
witnesses, given verbal instructions for the preparation of his will,
and they have been reduced into writing in his lifetime, but he has
died before the instrument. could be prepared and executed, such
instructions shall be considered to constitute his will, although they
may not have been reduced into writing in his presence, nor read
over to him.

(g) The soldier, airman or mariner may make a will by word of
mouth by declaring his intentions before two witnesses present at
the same time.

(h) A will made by word of mouth shall be null at the expiration of
one month after the testator, being still alive, has ceased to be en-
titled to make a privileged will.”

14.22, It is unnecessary to discuss at length the contents of this section, Departure from
as the matters dealt with are mostly matters of detail. But it may be useful to English Law,
point out that the provision in sub-section (2) clause (h) (under which an
oral privileged will becomes null at the expiration of one month after the
testator, being btill alive, has ceased to be entitled to make a privileged will),
is one which, though not found in English law, is a salutary one, In fact, some
writers consider that even written privileged wills should cease to be valid one
year after the tastator has ceased to be entitled to make a privileged will,

14.23. It may be mentioned that if the provisions of the Act related tOChanges required
privileged wills are to be extended to parsons affected by calamity as recommend-~+in section 66 to
ed by us, section 66 will also require consequential changes. cover persons

affected by cala-

14.24, We have separately recommended’ the insertion of a new section Section 66(2) to be
to the effect that a person affected by accident, earthquake, fire, flood, or other amended.
similar calamity in circumstances wherein he has a reasonable apprehension of
immediate death, may also make a privileged will, This recommendation, if
accepted, will expand the scope of privileged wills, In consequence, section 66(2)
clauses (९), (f) and (8) should be slightly amended, so as to replace the words
“soldier, airman or mariner” by the words “the persons entitled to make a privileg-

ed will.”

CHAPTER 15

ATTESTATION, REVOCATION (INCLUDING EFFECTS OF SUBSEQUENT
EVENTS), ALTERATION AND REVIVAL OF WILLS. SECTIONS. 67—73.

1. Attestation.

15.1. The attestation, revocation (including effects of subsequent events), Scope.
alteration and revival of wills are matters dealt with in sections 67 to 73—

The rules comprised in section 67 to 73 could be broadly classified

as follows :—
(a) effect of a benefit given by the will to. an attesting witness on its
validity (section 67) or cn competence to prove (section 68);

See para 14.20, supra (recommendation to insert section 65A).


94

(b) eflect of marriage (section 69);

(९) revocation of unprivileged wills (sections 70-71): and their revival
(sections 73);
(d) revocation of privileged wills (section 72).

___ 15.2, Section 67 deals with the effect of a gift given by a will to an attesting
witness or to his spouse. The rule enacted is that the mere fact that the benefici-
ary is a person attesting the will (for a spouse of the attesting witness) does not
affect the validity of the attestation, but the bequest in favour of the person
attesting (or his or her spouse) is void. The same rule applies to a power of
appointment conferred by the will, = -

Section 67—Request
to attesting witness.

Baglish rule. 15.3. This provision broadly corresponds to section 15 of the (English
Wilis Act, 1837'—a provision itself derived from an earlier English statute?

Section 15 of the Wills Act, 1837 reads :—

“If any person shall attest the execution of any will to whom or to whose
wife or husband any beneficial devise, legacy, estate interest, gift, or
appointment, of or affecting any real or personal estate (other than and
except charges and directions for the payment of any debt or debts), shall
be thereby given or made, such devise, legacy, estate, interest, gift or
appointment shall so far only as concerns such persons attesting the execu-
tion of such will, or the wife or husband of such person, or any person
claiming under such person or wife or husband, be utterly null and void
and such person so attesting shall be admitted as a witness to prove the
execution of such will, or to prove the validity or invalidity thereof, not-
withstanding such devise, legacy, estate, interest, gift, or appointment
mentioned in such will.”

Exceptions _car- 15.4. It should, however, be noted that in England, to this general rule,
ved out in Engtish Certain exceptions have been carved out by case law, and (on one particular
iw Oy dil leci- point) by statute.*
ions,
ol 15.5. As regards section 15 of the Wills Act of 1837 (which provides that
Pasig Spouse beneficial gift to the wife or husband of an attesting witness shall abso be void),
the English courts have sought to construe it as narrowly as possible. For
fxample, in one of the English cases’ the testator had left property to a woman
beneficiary. She married one of the attesting witnesses after the execution of the
will, but before the testator’s death, It was held that the gift to her remained
effective and was not avoided by section 15, since the policy of the section
required a consideration only of the position at the time of execution.

त i 15.6. The position in England in this respect as regards exceptions carved
1४ law. out judicially’ has beeen stated* :—

Statements of the “1314. Exceptions to general rule :—

boy by Hals- Where by means of a parol trust a beneficial interest is conferred upon an
. attesting ‘witness who is, at the time of attestation, unaware of the secret trust

in his favour, the gift is valid, The marriage of a donee to an aitesting witness

after attestation does not affect the validity of the gift. A beneficiary's interest

is not rendered void if it could not be predicted that he was a donee at the

time when the will was attested (or possibly at the time of the testator’s

death).” . ere
Secret trusts in 15.7. As to the position where one of the witnesses to the will is to take

England. a benefit under a secret trust, the English cases are not consistent. In an early’

iSection 15, Wills Act, (English) 1837.

*Wills Act, 1751 (English).

Section 1, Wills Act, 1968, see para 15.9, infra.

‘Thorpoe ४. Bestwick, (1881) 6 Q.B.D. 311. See Tiley, “Attesting Witness : Some remaining
problem:”* (£968) 112 Sol. Jour. 994.

‘See atso section 1, Wills Act, 1968,

‘Halsbury, Laws of England, 3rd Edition, Vol. 39, page 870, paragraph 1317.

Re Fleetwood, Sidgreaves v. Brewer, (1880) 15 Ch. D. 594,


95

English case of 1880 it was held that the beneficiary under the secret trust could
not take a gift under the will, but this was not followed in a comparatively more
recent case’. The later decision is more in keeping with the generally liberal
approach adopted in modern times. A beneficiary under a secret trust does not
take under the will”, and is not, therefore, affected by section 15, Wills
Act, 1837,

15.8, The origin of the general rule is of interest. At common law, Ofigin of the

the general rule of evidence was that persons “interested” in the general
outcome of litigation were incompetent to testify, and the courts took
the view that persons taking any benefit under a will were not, therefore, credible
witnesses as required by the Statute of Frauds. The effect was to render the whole
will invalid if at least one of the witnesses received a benefit under the will.
The Wills Act, 1752 qualified the harshness of this view by providing that such
person should be credible witnesses, but that the gifts to such person were
void’. Any creditor of the decased whose debt is charged by the will on any
real or personal property of the deceased is not prejudiced by attesting the will
(s, 16) and (s. 17) makes it permissible for an executor to be an attesting wit-
ness, Since an interested person is competent to testify, the original reason
is gone.

15.9, By the Wills Act, 19687 a further exception is provided for the witls Act, 1968.
purposes of section 15 of the Wills Act, 1837,

Section, 1 Witls Act, 1968 provides as follows :--

“1 (1) For the purpose of section 15 of the Wills Act 1837 (avoidance of
gifts 10 attesting witnesses and their spouses) the attestation of a will by a
person to whom or to whose spouse there is given or made any such dis-
position as is described in that section shall be disregarded if the will is duly
executed without his attestation and without that of any other such person,

(2) This section applies to the will of any persOn dying after the passing
of this Act, whether executed before or after the passing of this Act.”

15.10, It may be noted that USA section 2—505 of the Uniform Probate provision in Unie
Code eliminates the presence and in competency requirements, It provides as form Probate Code.
under :

“s. 2-505, (who may witness),

(a) Any person generally compeent to be a witness may act as a
witness to a will.

(b) No will of any provision thereof is invalid because the will is
signed by an interested witness.”

15.11. This naturally raises the question—why is section 67 needed at all? peson of the
The original reason of the prohibition in section 67 is incompetence to give Prohibition.
evidence on the ground of interest. Interest as such, has, however, long since

ceased to be a disqualification in regard to giving evidence, but the “suspicion or

rather the charge of possible collusion with benefit,”* stiff survives,

15.12, The extension of the ebove prohibition to the wife seems to be Unity of intercis,
based on the assumed unity of interest between husband and wife.‘

15.13, It remains now to consider the propriety of the present provision. (0५ f
While one may agree that the fact that a person may derive some benefit under a seat provision in
will is a ground for scrutinising the validity of the will with more than ordinary India.
care, a rigid rule virtually prohibiting the ‘attesting witnesses from taking under

. F245, 1250, 1251.

2Re Young, Young v. Young, (1951) Ch. 344; (1950) AME
2Miller, Machinery of Succession (1977), page 145, 1.1. 5.

‘Section 1, Wills Act, 1968.

‘Section 2-505, Uniform Probate Cede, Miller, Machinery of Succession (1977) page 146,
SAdhlnistrator General v. Lazar Stenben, (1882) LL.R. 4 Madras 244, 246.

“Administrator General v, Lazer Stenhion, (1882) LL.R. 4 Mad ras 244, 246.



96

the will seems to be rather harsh. The hardship would ba more pronounced in
cases where all the attesting witnesses available with reasonable effort are
beneficiaries under the will.

Judicial decisions. 15.14. Realising the harshness of this provision and of the corresponding
provision in section 19 of the Oudh Talukdars Act, 1869, courts’ in India have
been astute to construe the signature of the beneficiary as a signature made not in
the capacity of an attesting witness, but in some other capacity. That the statutory
rule of law may be a source of hardship in a particular case* has not gone un-
noticed judicially.

Present provision 15,15, The present provision in India is thus harsh and is wrong in principle.

wrong in principle. The position, therefore, seems to be in need of reform. We have already referred to
the reform effected on the subject in England.* To improve upon the present law
in India we have the following alternatives before us :—

(a) (i) It can be provided that a witness to a will may stil! inherit under the
will, if the will has also been witnessed by at least two other disinterest-
ed witnesses.

(ii) Alongwith the above amendment, it should be provided that the section
does not apply in certein exceptional cases. We have in mind those
special cases for which English law makes an exception.

(b) In the alternative, the section could be modified by reversing that part
thereof which invalidates the bequest.

Perhaps, alternative (b) may appear to be too drastic. But alternative (a)
would certainly be fair and unobjectionable.

On a careful consideration, we favour the adoption of alternative (a)
mentioned above.

15.16. Accordingly, we recommend that section 67 should be amended by

Amendment of ४०० ingesting the following exception in the section before the Explanation :—

tion 67 recommen-
ded. 4E. .
“Exception,

For the purposes of this section, the attestation of 4 will by a person to
whom or to whose spouse there is given any such benefit as is described in
this section shall be disregarded— ~

(a) where the means of an oral trust, a beneficial interest is conferred upon
an attesting witness who at the time of attestation is unaware of the
secret trust in his favour; or

(b) where the marriage to an attesting witness of a person taking a bene-
ficial interest under the will takes place after the attestation; or

(c) where at the time of the attestation it could not be predicted that the
attesting witness was a person taking a beneficial interest under the
will; or

(d) where the will has been witnessed by not less than two other witnesses,
to whom no such benefit as is described in this section is given by the
will.”

I. Executor as Witness.
15.17. This takes us to section 68. According to that section, no person,

Section 68—Proof by reason of interest in or of his being an executor if, a will shall be dis-
‘by executor.

1Shiam Sunder v. Jagan Nath, ALR. 1926 Oudh 465, 467, confirmed by the Privy Council in
42 Calcutta Weekly Notes 305.

2 Admn Gen. ४. Lazer, (1882) LL.R. 4 Mad. 244, 246.

sparas 15.4 to 15.8, supra.

“Para 15.6, supra.


97

qualified as a witness to prove the execution of the will or to prove the validity
or invalidity thereof,

The Section needs no change.
गा. Revocation by subsequent events ; Section 69.

15.18, Events subsequent to the execution of a will are sometimes regarded Section 69_Revo-
as affecting the subsistance of the will; the most important of such events is cation by marrisge.
martiage. Section 69 provides that every will shall be revoked by the marriage
of the maker, except in the special case of a will made in exercise of a power Of
appointment. The provision may appeai r to be simple enough, but a few points—
some of principle, others of detail—need to be noticed in this connection.

In the first place, there seems to be need for a saving applicable to wills
made in contemplation of marriage, and so expressed. Where a will is expressed
to be made in contemplation of marriage, it should not stand revoked by the
solemnisation of the contemplated marriage. The object of the rule providing
for revocation is to protect the interests of the new family’ of the testator, against
accidental survival of the old will. Where there is a deliberate decision that the
will shall survive the marriage, the law need not upset that intention.

Secondly, where a marriage is not valid, there should be no revocation of
the will by virtue of the marriage.

Thirdly, “marriage” in this context should include a second (or subsequent)
marriage, and need not be confined to the first marriage.

Indian commentaries on the Succession Act usually make a statement of
the position as to some of the Foints brought out above, without, however,
expressing any opinion as to the irability of amending the section on one or

more of these points.

15.19. There can hardly be any doubt that if a will is expressly made in cOn- Need to provide
templation of marriage, the subsequent marriage should not amount to a against automatic ,
revocation of that will. This principle should find a place in the Act, and should revocation of will
be elaborated as above’. An express provision regarding mutual wills would also °° ™*TI8&°-
be justified, for obvious reasons.

15.19A. Provision has been made in England by the Administration of Marriage and di-
Justice Act, 1982 for the revocation of a will by marriage, except in certain vorce + offect on
cases. This has been achieved by revising section 18 of the Wills Act, 1837, pills ib rand
This implements the recommendations of the Law Reform Committee" on the .

subject.

As to the effect of dissolution or annulment of marriage on_wills, there
was disagreement among the members of the Law Reform Committee which
considered the subject. Now, section 18A, inserted in the Wills Act, 1837 by the
Administration’ of Justice Act, 1982, makes an appropriate provision under
which (except where a contrary intention appears in the will), divorce or
annulment of a marriage or recognition that a marriage is voidable has the
following effects on the wills of the former spouses :—

(i) any appointment of a former spouse as an executor or executris/trustee
is ineffective and a grant of letters of administration with the will
annxed may be necessary (section 18A(1));

(ii) any devise or bequest to the former spouse will lapse and the relevant
property will fall into residue or (if there is no residuary bequest) pass
‘on intestacy [section 18A(1)]. unless it is a life interest, as to which
see (iii) below:
ICS. Mitchell, “Revocation of Testamentary Appointments on Marriage” (1951) 67 L.Q.R. 351.
*Paragraph 15.18, supra.
Law Reform Committee, 22nd Report (Making and Revocation of Wills) 1980 cmd. 7902+
paragraphs 3.10, 3.11 and 3.18.



98

Gii) any interest in remainder (vested or contingent) dependent on the
termination of a spouse’s life interest will be acclerated by the lapse
of the life interest under (ii) above [section 18A(3)].

we

The former spouse, affected by (ii) or (iii) above, may still make a claim
for “reasonable financial provision” under the Inheritance (Provision for Family
and Dependents) Act, 1975 [section 18A(2)].

Marriage—meaning _15.20. According to judicial interpretation, “marriage” means a valid

of, marriage. That is the ordinary legal understanding of the expression and need not
be codified. The same comment applies to a second marriage, which seems to be
included within ‘marriage’.

Conflict of faws 15.21. Sometimes. an interesting question of conflict of laws concerned with

concerned with sub-the subsistence of a will arise under such a provision as is contained in section 69.

sisteace of a will. In an English case, a French woman, while residing in England, executed in
England a will which was valid according to French law. Subsequently, she
married a French man, but continued to reside in England till her death. It was
held that on her marriage, the woman acquired the domicife of her husband
which was French and the will was governed by French law and was not revoked
by her mersiege, since the French law did not provide for automatic revocation
of the will on marriage.

Law of domicile 15.22. That the revocation of a will on marriage is governed by the law of
| applicable. domicile is recognised in another English case? In that case, a foreigner had
i made a will which was valid according to the law of his native country, he after-
wards married in accordance with the law of England, having at that time an
English domicile. It was held that the marriage revoked the will’ There is,
however, one aspect of the English rule (as laid down in the judicial decisions)
which requires some comment. That marriage revokes a will is regarded by English
case law as a part of the domain of matrimonial law, The result is that the
positive rule of the English law on the subject applies only (and always) if the
spouses have an English domicile at the time of marriage.’ Since the validity or
the nullity of will docs sot operate until the testator dies (i.e. until the marziage
itself comes to an end), the English theory has been regarded by. some authors
as inappropriate’ Although Cheshire’ would seem to approve of the rule as
adopted in England, there is much to be said for the opposite view.

fn our opinion, whife revising the section, it is desirable to make a clear
statement of the position as to the law that will apply for determining the effect
of martiage as revoking a will. As to the content of the provision in that regard,
we are of the view that it should be the law which was the law of the domicile
of the testator at the time of death that should govern the matter. This would
be more practicable, for the reasons stated above.
- 15.23. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 69
2, revise section should be revised as under :--

Revised section 69.

evocation of will 69. (1) Every will, nor being a mutual will, shall be revoked by the
lestator’s  mar- marriage of the maker, except a will made in exercise of a power of appoint-
Be. ment, when the property over which the power of appointment is exercised

would not, in default of such appointment, pass to his or her executor or
administrator, or to the person entitled in case of intestacy.

1 1Loustelan v. Loustelan, 81 Law Times 459, cited by Paruck, Succession Act (1966), page

3Re Hartin, (1900) Probate 211 (C.A.).

°Cf, Sykes & Prytes, Austrafian Privatecinternational Law (1979) page 461.
«wolff, Private International Law (1950), page 594.

SWolff, Private International Law (1950), page 594.

Cheshire, Private International Law (5970), page 602.


99

Explanation.—Where a man is invested with power to determine the disposi-
tion of property of which he is not the owner, he is said to have power to
appoint such property.

Exception.—A will expressed to be made in contemplation of a marriage or
indicating an intention that it was so made shall not be revoked by the
solemnisation of the marriage contemplated; and such an intention may be
inferred from any portion of the will showing that marriage was thought of.

(2) Where the law of domicile of the maker of the will at the time of death
has different rule that rule shall prevail, and the proyisions of sub-section (1)
shall not apply to the extent to which there is inconsistency between the two,

IV. Effect of Divorce.

15.24, We may, at this stage, take up the question of the effect of divorce pivorce,

on a will. While, by section 69, a will is deemed to be revoked by the marriage of
the maker, there is no similar provision in relation to divogce of the maker of
the will The matter seems to require examination, particularly because divorce
is now much more common than it was before, Marriage is regarded as relevant
to the continued subsistence of the will, in as much as it introduces in the life of
2 man or woman a new person who is going to be an equal partner in life. On
the same logic,divorce should be regarded as equally relevant, because it removes
from his or her life, a person who was, so far an equal partner in life. Annul-
ment of marriage also stands on a similar footing for this partiular purpose.

15.25. Under the present law, of course, the general rule is that the sub- ९५५७६ ta
sequent divorce of a testator will have no effect on his will, unles$ he has made “a
an express provision for that contingency. Recently, however, the lack of any rules
in this area has been criticised in many countries.’ *

In England, there is no provision for the automatic revocation on a sub-
sequent marriage. So, it is only if the testator cither marries again, or has made
the gifts in his will conditional on widowhood, that the former wife is barred from
taking her interest under the will. The question is : Should the law automatically
revoke gifts to former spouses on the assumption that the majority of testators
would wish to disentitle them, or should the law remain as it is and Jeave it to
testators to expressly revoke such testamentary disposition ?

15.26. There certainly seems to be plenty of evidence that in the majority
of cases the law would best serve the interests of testators by revoking provisions
to former spouses.* Take, for example, the case of a testator who has been divorced
from his former wife twenty years earlier at the time of his death, If he has not
altered his will, the whole estate would (on his death) pass to the former wife,
though this could not he his intention.

Case for reform .

15.27. The present law unrealistically assumes that a divorced testator assumption about
would still wish to benefit his ex-spouse, no matter how long it is since they testator’s intention;
separated. This would surely not be the testator's jntention in the majority of
cases where, in the emotional stress of a divorce, the will is often forgotten. In
the absence of a conscious testamentary dispdsition, and bearing in mind the
increase in the rate of divorce. and the unavoidable emotional turmoil of
such proceedings, the law should step in to reflect more adequately, the wishes of
the vast majority of testators, The present assumption should, therefore, be
reversed and some form of statutory revocation of testamentary gifts on divorce
should be provided.

There will, of course, be exception, and provisions could be made for these.

by permitting evidence of, say a later memorandum or codicil confirming the
will or even of extrinsic evidence of surrounding circumstances. But in most

1०0 execution of a will, see para 15.21, infra.
2G.M. Bates, “Revocation cf Wills on Divorce” (7:h June 1979) 129 N.LJ. $56, 557.
3G.M. Bates, “Revocation of Wills” (7 June, 1979) 129 N.L.J. 556, $57.


100

Altematives oper 15.28. Given that there is a need for law reform in this area, then the next

for reform.

Altematives
reform.

question to consider is, how this should be done.

for 15.28A. There ave basically three ways in which reform of the law might be
effected, all having, in practice, different consequences.’

(1) Providing for an automatic revocation of a will or divorce, in the same
way that a will is generally revoked on marriage.

_ This solution, however, goes too far, since the effect would be to revoke
not only all dispositions in favour of an ex-spouse, but also specific gifts
to all other beneficiaries. Such a result would probably not reflect the testator's
true intentions. Legacies to children, friends or charities, would probably be
intended to survive the divorce, and to strike down the whole will would probably
cause more hardship and injustice than the present law.

(2) Provision that where a testator has subsequently divorced his wife,
then only gifts to her alone in the will shall be void.

The difficulty with this alternative is that problems would arise where the
gift to the wife contains an alternative provision in case the wife predeceases the
testator. The alternative substitutionary gift would also fail, and the subject matter
would then be distributed as on intestacy.

Further, such a provision can deal only with beneficial interests, There is
no reason to belive that a testator would wish to retain an ex-wife, as say, execu-
tor or trustee, any more than as a deserving beneficiary.

This solution can be supported only if it is made clear that the revocation
of gifts to an ex-spouse will not defeat substitutionary gifts.

(3) Provision that where a testator is subsequently divorced, his will shall
be read as if his former spouse had pre-deceased him, This would avoid the
difficulties foreseen in the first two alternatives. No doubt, if the ex-spouse is
also named as an executor, this solution might interfere with the due administra-
tion of the estate, But an alternative administrator can be sought.

It aay be that such a solution could adversely affect (i) secret trusts accepted
by the wife; (ii) devises to beneficiaries given pur autre vie, where the other
life is that of the divorced spouse; and (iii) alternative provisions in the will to
cover a situation where the wife predeceases the testator. Other problems might
arise in the rule of perpetuities, where the divorced spouse is a measuring wife,
and with regard to the acceleration of gifts.

However, it might create less difficulties than other solutions, It may, there-
fore, be preferred.

15.29, In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that the Succes-

Recommendation sion Act should be amended to provide that where after a will the marriage of

to imsert mew sec:

tion 69A.

7 the testator is dissolved or his (or her) marriage has been annulled, the will should
for all purposes, be read as if the former spouse (that is to say, the spouse whose
marriage is dissolved or annulled) had died before the testator, unless the will
expressly provides otherwise. A new section should be added to carry out the
above subject? .

15.30, In this connection, we may refer to the provision in the Uniform

Provision in Uni- ड़
form Probate 004०. Probate Code.

“§.2-508. Revocation by Divorce : No Revocation by other Changes of Circum-
stances.

41G.M. Bates, “Revecation of Wills’’ (7th June ,1979) 129 New, L.J. 556, 557.
Section 69A to be add ed. See para 15,32, infra.

*Section 2—508, Uniform Probate Code reproduced in Martindale Hubble, Law Directory>
Vol. 7, page 430.



101

If, after executing a will, the testator is divorced or his marriage annulled,
the divorce or annulment revokes any disposition or appointment of property
made by the will to the former spouse, any provision conferring a general or
special power of appointment on the former spouse, and any nomination of
the former spouse as executor, trustee, conservator, or guardian, unless the will
expressly provides otherwise. Property prevented from passing to a former spouse
because of revocation by divorce or annulment passes as if the former spouse failed
to survive the descendant, and other provisions conferring some power or office
on the former spouse are interpreted as if the spouse faild to survive the desendant.
If provisions are revoked solely by this section, they are revived by testator’s
remarriage to the former spouse. For purposes of this section, divorce or annul-
ment means any divorce or annulment which would exclude the spouse as a
surv'ving spouse within the meaning of Section 2—802(b). A decree of separation
which does ot terminate the status of husband and wife is not a divorce for
purpose of this section. No change of circumstances other than as described in
this sction shall revoke a will.”

15.31, It may also be mentioned' that in England, the problem was Move for reform

considered by the Royal Commission on Marriage and Divorce,’ which thought in England.

that a substantial proportion of those spouses who have made a will in favour of

the other spouse would not wish that spouse to receive a benefit if that marriage

was subsequently dissolved. A testator may be unable to alter his will after divorce,

because he lacks mental capacity. The Royal Commission, therefore, considered

it desirable that, on the death of a person whose marriage has been dissolved,

his former spouse should not take any benefit under his will unless it is clear

that he desires her to take a benefit notwithstanding the divorce.

They suggested two ways in which this result could be achieved. It could either
be provided that divorce revokes a will just as marriage revokes a will, so that
the testator (unless he makes another will): would be regarded as dying intestate.
The objection to this approach was that it revoked a will whether or not it conferred
any benefit on the former wife, and it might defeat gifts to another person. They
preferred the second possibility, which is similar to the provision in the Uniform
bate Code.’ This would invalidate, on divorce or nullity, a bequest to. or
appointment in favour of the former s| pouse, but would Jeave the will to take effect
in all other aspects. No action has been taken in England on these prbposals,
but some Commonwealth jurisdictions have introduced, or are in the course of
introducing, provisions to deal with the problem.‘

15.32. Having given our careful consideration to the matter, we are of the dation
view that, for reasons already stated,’ there is need for inserting a specific Provi- 19 insert. section
sion as to the effect of divorce on wills. We recommend the insertion of a new 69A.
section (section 69A) somewhat on the following lines :—

“69A. (1) Where, after making a will, the marriage of the testator is dis-
solved or has been annulled, the will shall, for all purposes be read as if
the former spouse (that is to say, the spouse whose marriage is dissolved
or annulled) had died before the testator, unless the will expressly provides
otherwise.

(2) The provisions of this section shall, unless the will expressly provides
Otherwise, Operate—

(a) to revoke all dispositions of beneficial interest in favour of the
former spouse.

(b) to revoke provisions conferring a general or special power of
appointment on the former spouse.

Miller, Machinery of Succession (1977), page 183.
*The Modern Commission (1953) Command, 0678, paras 1187-1191,

430 sae" 2~508, Uniform Probate Code. See Martindale Hubbell, Law Directory, Vol. 7, pages

‘New Zealand and Queensland.
sParas 15.24 to 15.28, supra.


102

(९) to revoke provisions naming the former spouse cs executor or
arustee! and

(d) 16 invalidate the appointment of the former spouse to act as trustee
for a secret trust, established before the testator's divorce or before
ainulment of the marriage, as the case may be, so however Gs not to
affect the subsistance of the trust,

(3) The provisions of this section apply to all wills of persons dying after
the commencement of the Indian Succession (Amendment) Act, 19......

VI. Act of Revocation by Testator,

Section 70- revoca- 15.33. Circumstances in which a will can be revoked by an act of the testator
tion of unprivileged are dealt with in section 70, which reads—
Wilts,

“70. No unprivileged will or codicil, nor any part thereof, shall be revoked
otherwise than by marriage, or by another will or codicil, or by some writing
declaring an intention to revoke the same and executed in the manner in
which an unprivileged will is herein before required to be executed, or by
the burning, tearing or otherwise destroying the same by the testator or
by some person in his presence and by his direction of revoking the same.”

Section 10- Reco 15.34, If, as rcommended by us, the case of divorce or annulment is added?
eee tation for in the Act, corksequential change will be required in section 70 also. by adding,
change regarding after the words “marriage”, the words “or dissolution Or annulment of marriage.”
divorce, We recommend accordingly.

15.35. A question often debated in the context of revocation of wills is

दा not found 3 this—Where a will has been executed and registered, but is not found at the

whether presump-- time of the testator’s death, can a presumption of revocation of the will be
tion of dlvorce can drawn? The answer depends on the facts of each case. Such a presumption is
bedrawn. permissible in England." In India, however, it has to be drawn cautiousty.*

The law on the subject in India needs no amendment,

15.36, Another interesting question concerned with the subsequent birth of

Section 700 (New)-a son to a Hindu testator also requires to be conbidered. Under the present law,

Birth of son. the fact that a son is born to a Hindu testator who has, by will, disposed of his

ancestral property does not, in itself, amount to revocation’ of the will. Having

terard to In dian conditions, and, in particular to the fact that the power of dis-

, Lo position of ancestral Property has now been enlarged,’ it is a matter for considera-
nn tion whether this should continue to be the law.

The question is not whether, after the birth of the son, the will remains opera-
tive as regards ancestral property. The will cannot be operative to defeat the rights
of the son in the ancestral property as at the death of the testator. The son on birth,
acquires an interest in that property." The question to be considered is, whether
the will as a testamentary disposition should retain its operation in such circum-
stances, unless it contains an express provivsion indicating a contrary intention.

: 15.37. Under the present law, the will remains operative in the circumstances
feed law and mentioned above. so that at feast as regards self-acquired property, it takes effect.

for change. If the son born after the will dies before the tastator’s death, then it would take
effect as regards ancestral property also. In favour of changing this position by

1 ‘This amendment is in addition to the amendment of section 69 on certain points, already
fecommended.

i 3966 recommendation to insert section 69A, para 15.32, supra.

*Halsbury, 3rd Ed. Vol. 39, page 897, para 1366 and foot-note (q).

‘Allen ९. Morrison, (1900) A.C. 604 (P.C.).

"Durga Prasad v. Debt Charan (1979) 1 S.C.J. 61, (Ist January, 1979),

‘Bodiv. Venkatasamt Naidu, (1913) LL.R. 38 Mad. 369, 373, following Subba Reddi v. Dorat-
swami, (1996) LL.R. 30 Mad. 629 and Shib Savitrt v. Collector of Meerut. (1906) LL.R. 29 All, 82,

*Section 30, Hindu Succession Act, 1956.

*Bodi v, Venkatasam! Natdu, (1913) LL.R. 38 Mad. 369, 373.



103

amendment, it could be stated that the birth of a son in such cases—coupled
with the fact that the testamentary dispOsition of coparcenary property becomes
void—is an important factor which may ordinarily be presumed to result in @
change of intention on the part of the testator,

ww Where such a situation arises, dispositions made in the will may, in the
majority of cases, be regarded as obsolete, that is to say, they would no longer
be representing the testator’s present wishes. No doubt, the testator would, in
due course, take account of the subsequent event and alter the will. But what is
to happen if he does not expressly do so, or if he delays doing so? There seems
to be need for a specific provision to deal with the problem.

15,38. Having taken all aspects into consideration we recommend that the Recommendation

following section should be inserted as section 708 :-- to insert new sece
tion 704.

“710A, Where, after the execution of the will by a Hindu testator who has,
in the will, purported io deal with co-parcenary property, a son is born to
that testator, the will shall stand revoked as regards all propetry, unlesd
the will contains an express provision indicating a contrary intention”

VIL. Alteration, t

15.39. This takes us to section 71, dealing with the effect of obliteration, Section 71 Obtitera-

iaterlineation or alteration in unprivileged wills. The section reads as under ed cc. ia unpri-

“71. No obliteration, intelineation or other alteration made in any un-
privileged will after the execution thereof shall have any effect, except so
far as the words or meaning of the will have been thereby rendered illegible
or undiscernible, unless such alteration has been executed in like manner as
hereinbefore is required for the execution of the will :

Provided that the will, as so altered, shall be deemed to be duly executed if
the signature of the testator and the subscription of the witnesses is made
in the margin or in some other part of the will opposite or near to such
alteration, or at the foot or end of or opposite to a memorandum referring
to such alteration, and written at the end or some other part of the wid.” हे

The section is based on section 21 of the (English) Wills Act, 1837, It
does not appear to need any change,

VIIL Revocation of Privileged Wills.

15,40. As to the revocation of a privileged will or codicil, section 72 contains Section 72-

: ae (5 v5 1) ae ion 72- Revoca-
certain provisions. In the main paragraph, it provides as under : ter हक Privile.

il

“72. A privileged will or codicil may be revoked by the testator by an un-

privileged will or codicil, or by any act of expressing an intention to revoke

it and accompanied by such formatitics as would be sufficient to give vali-

dity to a privileged will, or by the burning, tearing or otherwise destroying the

same by the testator, or by some person in his presence and by his direction

with the intention of revoking the same.”

The Explanation to the section reads as follows :

“Explanation. In order to constitute the revocation of a privileged will or
codicil by an act accompanied by such formalities as would be sufficient to
give validity to a privileged will it is not necessary that the testator should
at the time of doing that act be in, a situation which entitles him to make a
privileged will”.

15.41. The structure of the section is somewhat complicated and is capable Recommendation
of considerable improvement. It may be useful to simplify the main paragraph to recast section
by splitting it up into clauses. We recommend that the section should be re- 7

structured on the following lines:


104

Revised section 72.

“72. A privileged will or codiel may be recoked by the testator—

(a) by an unprivileged will or codicil, or

(b) by any act expressing an intention to revoke it and accompanied by
such formalities as would be sufficient to give validity to a privileged will, or
(०) by the burning, tearing or othedwisd destroying the same by the

testator, or by some person in his presence and by his direction, with the
intention of revoking the same,

(Explanation as at present.)

IX. Rectification,

Rectification of 15.41A. It may be mentioned that in England, on the subject of

Wills : recent reform rectification of wills, section 20 of the Administration of Justice Act, 1982

in Exgland. has been enacted in accordance with the recommendations of the Law Reform
Committee’, Leaving aside minor matters of detail, the important part is contained
in sub-section (1) and (2) of section 20, quoted below” ;

“20. (1) If a court is satisfied that a will is so expressed that it fails to
carry out the testator’s intentions, in conscquence—

(a) of a clerical error; or

(b) of a failure to understand his intentions, it may order that the
will shall be rectified so as to carry out his intentions,

(2) An application for an order under this section shall not, except with
the permission of the court, be made after the end of the period of six
months from the date on which representation with respect to the estate of
the deceased is first taken out.”

X. Revival of will.

Section 73—Revival 15.42. The revival of an unprivileged will forms the subject-matter of
of unprivileged will. section 73 of the Succession Act, which is in these terms :
“73. (1) No unprivileged will or codicil, nor any part thereof, which has
been revoked in any manner, shall be revived otherwise than by the
re-excution thereof, or by a codicil executed in manner hereinbefore required
and showing an intention to review the same.
(2) When any will or codicil, which has been partly revoked and after-
wards wholly revoked, is revived, such revival shall not extend to so much
thereof as has been revoked before the revocation of the whole thereof,
unless an intention to the contrary is shown by the will or codicil.”

The section needs no amendment.

CHAPTER 16
CONSTRUCTION OF WILLS : SECTIONS 74 TO 111

I. Introduction
Scope of Chapter 16.1. Detailed rules for the construction of wills are contained in sections
and essence of the 74111. The scheme of these sections will be better understood if certain general
process of construc: aspects are borne in mind.

i 4Law Reform Committee, Report on the Interpretation of Wills (1973), cmd. 5301.
| 4ection 20(1) and 20(2), Administration of Justice Act, 1982 (Eng).


105

In the construction of documents recording the voluntary acts of parties to
a legal transaction, three elements generally play an important part. These are—
the intention of the author (or authors) of the instrument, the terms of the
instrument as recording that imention, and the external reality to which that
document is intended to apply. Since a document is supposed to record the in-
tention of its author and to operate on persons or facts outside the instrument
(the external reality), the relevance of all these three is obvious. The document
is the medium through which the author speaks, so as to affect the external reality.

16.2. So long as the three are in harmony with one another, no question Of mony
construction of the document would, in general, arise, The document speaks ior .
itself, and if it is faithful to the intentions of its author, as well as to the external
reality, effect can be easily given to it—assuming, of course, that no special rules
of law or public policy have been infringed by its terms. But where harmony of
the nature referred to above is wanting, a court of law concerned with the docu-
ment is faced with the problem—the problem of seeking that harmony. In its
efforts to do so, the three elements mentioned above play a part. But the relative
importance of each is not the same. In general, the law gives the pride of place
to the first element—intentions of the author, if they can be ascertained with
reasonable certainty. The second element—the text of the document—may, if
necessary, be moderated in the light of the result of such search by the Court
of the intentions of the testator.

Similarly, occasion may arise for moderating that element, if the external
reality so demands, This, then, is the essence of “construction”, namely, to
ascertain the intention of un author and to moderate everything else according
to that intention where the intention can be ascertained with reasonable certainty,
The Gourt creates a “construct” not entirely of its own, but the result of its
search for the intentions of the author.

_ 16.3. The general rule is that a document is to be construed according General rule,
to its ordinary meaning, since the court is to give effect to what the author of
the document has expressed in it.

16.4, Language, however, has its limitations, It is a system of symbols. Imperfections in
No draftsman, whether of legislation or of private documents, can rise above herent in @ tage
the imperfections inherent in language as a medium of thought. In order to 8५०४०
prevent the will of the testator from failing by reason of such imperfections, the
legislature has considered it proper t to insert certain rules for the construction of
wills, to be found in sections 74—111.

The thirty-seven sections relating to the construction of wills may, at the first
sight, appear to be heterogeneous in character, but a common thread can be dis-
cerned as running through most of them, namely, that the intention of the testator
is paramount and that all reasonable efforts should be made to ascertain that
intention and to give it due effect. It is this principle which finds expression in
the very first section in the Chapter—section 74—which provides that “it is not
necessary that any technical words or terms of art be used in a will, but only that
the wording be such that the intentions of the testator can be known therefrom”.
It is, again on this principle that section 75 imposes on the court the duty of
making inquiries to determine questions as to the object or subject of the will.

Again, it is on this principle that section 76(1) provides that where the words
used in a will to designate or describe a legatee or a class of legatees sufficiently
show what is meant, an error in the name or description shall not prevent the

legacy from taking effect.

The specific provisions as to the supplying of omissions in wills (section 77),
the rejection of erroneous particulars in a description of the object (section 78),
the prohibition against rejecting an erroneous words which can be given effcet
to (section 79), and the admission of extrinsic evidence in case of latent’ ambi-
guities (section 80), are all expressive of the legislative policy referred to above,
and make it clear that what matters is the intention of the testator, which must
not be allowed to be thwarted by this or that triviat defect in the expression of that
intention.

IMisprinted as ‘patent’ in the marginal note to section 80.


106

___ It is, finally, for this reason that under section 83 words may be understood
in a restricted or wider sense, where it can be collected from the will that the
testator meant to use them in that sense.

Legislative Policy 16.4. Since the legislative policy is that effect is to be given to the will, sections
of giving effect 84, 85, 87 and 88 contain detailed rules intended to implement that policy, Of

to the will

two possible constructions of a clause, that which gives some effect to the clause
is preferred (section 84); no part of the will is to be rejected 2s destitute of
meaning, if a reasonable construction can be placed upon it (section 85),

Where effect cannot be given to the testator’s intention to the full extent,
effect is to be given to it as far as possible (section 87). Of two or more inconsis-
tent clauses in a will, the last prevails (section 88).

It is only where the will or bequest is not expressive of any definite intention
that is void for uncertainty (section 89).

All this is, in fact, faithful to the very definition of “will”? as given in
the Act: a “will” means the legal declaration of the intentions of testator with
respect to his property which he desires to be carried into effect after his death.

Another principle, now well established, is that a will speaks from the date
of death of the testator (sections 104 and 105—111).

Rules for construing particular kinds of bequests are also needed, either
to solve an app: arent internal inconsistency in testamentary dispositions (section
101) or in order to work out the will in the light of subsequent.events or for
other reasons, Although such fastidiousness on the part of the legislature may
oppeat to be productive of complexity, in practice it leads to smoothness of
working.

Grouping of the 16.5. The rules in the Chapter fall under the following groups :
cules,

Extrinsic evi
cent reform,

(a) Language of wills, section 74.
(0०) Inquiries by the court, section 75.
(c) Misdescriptions, deficiencies and uncertainties, sections 74-89,

(d) Rules implementing the principle that will speaks from the date of
death of the testator; sections BS 104 and 1 OS til.

(९) Rules based on the principle that the will extends to all property over
which the testator has a disposing power—section 95,

(1 Rules for construing a power of appointment conferred by a will—sec-
tion 92,

(8) Rules concerned with the extent of interest intended to be conferred
by a will—sections 91 to 95.

(h) Bequest in the alternative—section 96.
(i) Bequest to a class of persons—section 93 and also section 111.

{j) Construction of certain terms indicative of relationship : sections 99-—
100.

(k) Two bequests to the samé person—section 101.

(0) Residuary legacies—sections 102-103.

(1) Vesting of legacies given in general terms—Section 104.

(n) Lapse of legacies—sections 105—111.

16.54. In England Section 21 of the Administration of Justice Act, 1982,

in msi 11700 implementing ‘the recommendations of the Law Reform Committee,’ provides, in

effect, for the admission of extrinsic evidence (including evidence of the intention

Section 20).
*Law Reform Committee, Report on the Loterpretation of Wills (1973), cmd. 5301.


107

of the testator) to assist in the interpretation of wills. This section applies to a
will in the following cascs enumerated in section 21(1) :--
“(a) in so far as any part of it is meaningless:

(b) in so far as the language used in any part of it is ambiguous on the
face of it;

(०) in so far as evidence, other than evidence of the testa intention,
shows that the language used in any part of it is ambiguous in the
light of surrounding circumstances.”

After these introductory observations, we proceed to a consideration of the

sections proper.

IL. Ascertaing the intention

16.6. Section 74 makes it clear that it is not necessary that any technical gection 74
words or terms of art be used in a will, but only that the wording be such that
the intentions of the testator can be known therefrom.’

No change is necessary in the section,

16.7. Section 75 provides that for the purpose of determining questions as Section 75-—In
to what person or what property is denoted by any words used in a will, a Court quiries by court.
shall inquire into every material fact relating to the persons who claim to be
interested under such will, the property which is claimed as the subject of तां5-
position, the circumstances of the testator and ef his family, and into every fact
a knowledge of which may conduce to the right application of the words which

the testator has used.
The section needs no change. :

का, Mistake, Misdescriptions and omissions—External reality

16.8. One of the great problems of the construction of documents is that Section 78—erro-
of applying its provisions to external reality. The problem mainly arises where neous particulars.
there is disharmony between the terms of the document and the external reality.

In such cases, if the intention of the author of the document can be gathered,
then defects in the expression of that intention are permitted by the law to be

rectified.

16.9, Exsoncous particulars in the description of the subject of bequest do Section 76—-misno-*
not, therefore, matter in themselves. Since the policy of-the law is to give effect mer or misdescrip-
to the substance of the matter, it permits the court to disregard errors, omissions tion,
and misdescriptions in a will,

An error in the name or description is dealt with by section 76, in these

terms :
“76 (1) Where the words used in a will to designate or describe 2 legatee
or a class of legatecs sufficiently show what is meant, an error in the name
of description shall not prevent the legacy from taking effect.

(2) A mistake in the name of a legatee may be corrected ‘by a description
of him, and a mistake in the description of a legatce may be corrected by
the name”.

‘The section needs no change.

ns the omission of material words in a +wvill-—-that Section °77--Omis-
5 sion of material-
words in a will

16.10. Section 77 conce: 0 al
is to say, words material to the full expression of the will, The section provide:
ly words so omitted. The section is rather widely

that the context may suppl हु 1
expressed. It does not, however, apply where, in regard to material particulars,

there is a blank in the will because, in such a case, the bequest would be void for
uncertainty?

* an quoting or summarising the gist of some of the sections, ilustrations have been omitted for

brevity.
Section 81, Illustrations (i) and (iii).

85-1 00144 ?&(/-- ६


108

The section needs no change.

Section — 78—Mis- 16.11. Section 78 provides that if the thing which the testator intended to
description when ‘© bequeath can be sullicienily idemified from the description of it given in the will,
regarded. but some parts of the description do not apply, such parts of the description shall
be rejected as erroneaus. ard the bequest shall take effect. This is on the pinciple
(already explained) that where there is disharmony between the text of a docu-
ment and the external reality and the intention of the author of the document can
be gathered with some reasonable certainty. the disharmony can be rectified, so

as to give effect to the intention rather than to the fault in the description.

Section 79—descrip- 16.12, While, as stated above. section 78 pemits a rejection of parts of the
tion applicable in description where some paris do noi upply. there are limits to such a rejection.
all respects. Section 79 in this regard, provides vs follows :—

“79, If a will mentions severui circumstances as descriptive of the thing
which the testator intends to bequeath, and there is any oroperty of his in
respect of which all those circumstances exist, the bequest ¢hall be conside-ed
as limited to such propesty, and it shall not be lawful (0 reiect any part of
the description as erroneous, because the testator had other property to which
such part of the description does not apply, “Explanaiion—In judging
whether a case falls within the meaning of this section, any words which
would be liable to rejection under section 78 shall be deemed to have been
struck out of the will.”

The section docs not scem to need any change.

80—latent 16.13, Under section 80, extrinsic evidence for the construction of will is

Secti
ambiguity. The section reads us under :

ambiguity. admissible in cases of latent

“80. Where the words of a will are unambiguous, but it is found by extrinsic
evidence that they admit of applications, one only of which can have
been intended by the testator, extrinsic evidence may be taken to show
which of these applications was intended.

The principle here is that if circumstances external to a will create problems,
then it is legitimate to seek a solution to those problems in the external circums-
tances also.

The section needs no change.

Section 81—Patent 16.14, In contrast with the above provision, the Act disatlows extrinsic
ambiguity. dence in case of patent ambiguity or deficiency, This is made clear by section
81, quoted below

“81. Where there is an ambigi
extrinsic evidence as to the inte

ity or deficiency on the face of a will no
ions of the testator shall be admitted.”

The section needs no change.

Section 82—Entire 16.15, The elementary rule that the meaning of a clause is to be cotlected
instrument to be from the entire will is found in these terms in section 82.

looked into. हु ce हि
“82. The meaning of any तकरार in a will is to be collected from the entire

instrument, and alf its parts are to be construed with reference to each

No change appears to he needed in the section.

Construction of words and clauses

16.16. Sometimes, general werds in a will may be understood in a restricted
sense, und restricted words muy be understood in a sense wider than ust The
test is the intention of the testator. Section 83 deals with both these aspects in
these words—

Section 83-—General
words.

“83. General words may be understood in a restricted sense where it may

be collected from the will that the testator meant to use them in a restricted
1868 para 16.8, supra. 7
*Misprinted as ‘patent’ in the marginal note to Sec. 80,


109

sense; and words may be understood in a wider sense than (hat which they
usually bear, where it may be colfected feom the other words of the will that
the testator meant ta use them in such wider sense.”

The rule enacted in the section is reasonable cuough. And though it may
not be casy to apply it in a particular case, there is 10 method of making it more
Precise.

We do not, therefore, recommend any amendment in the section.

16.17. Where a clause ip at will is susceptible of 7७० meapings according 10 Section 84—Two
one of which it has some effect, and according to the other cf which jt can have metnings.
none, the former shall be preferred, under section 84,

The principle here is that effect must be given, as far as possible, to a will.
As Lord Talbot said'—

“Where words are capab'e of a two-fold construction,
deed, and nuch more of a will, it is just and reasona
tion should be received as tends to make it good.”

even in the case of a
2 that such construc-

The section needs no change.

16.18. Section 85 provides as follows :— Section 8$—reason-
nable construction.

“85. No part of a will shall be rejected as destitute of meaning if it is possible

to put a reasonable consivuction upon i

The section is bascd on the Iegislative policy’ of giving effect to the testator’s
intentions—of course, within reasonable limits.

The section needs no change.

16.19, A will—or, for that matier, every Iegal instrament is expected to hear Section 86—Words
internal consistency, Interpretation of words reported in different parts of the will used in different
should therefore be harmonious. Accordingly, section 86 provides that if the same Pats of same will,
words occur in diferent parts of the same will, they shall Fe taken to have been

used everywhere in the same sense, unless a conttary intention appears, हि

The section need not be disturbed.

V. Deficiencies and Vagueness

16.20. Section 87 provic:s that the intention of the testator shall not be.
set aside because it cannot tke effect to the full extent, but efftet is to be Section 87 --Fifect
given to it as far as possible. We have already indicated how* it is the policy testator’s किन ता)
of the Act to give effect to the iesiator’s intention, as far as possible, The same

policy is reflected in section 87,

The section needs no change.

16.21, Inconststency in a will is dealt with by a simple rwe in section है
; ० ¥ " Y pre rie का see * Section 88-- tntro-
in these terms : ductory.

“88. Where two clauses or gifts in a will are irreconciliabls, so that they
cannot possibly stand together, the last shall prevail.”

If it is not possible at all to give effect to two clauses of a will, there can be
only two alternatives :—

(i) disregard both, or
(ii) prefer one of the two.

The legislature has adopted the second alternative. so that af least effect will
be given to one of the clauses of the will. The reason why the fast clause shall

Atkinson v. Hutchinson, 37, W,s. 250, Henderson (1928), page 161.
*See paras 16.2 to 16.4 supra.
3866 discussion as to 5. 84 supra (Para 16.17).


10

prevail is that the last clause may be taken as expressing the considered opinion
of the testator.

We recommend no change in the section.

Section —89—Wills 16.22. Section 89 reads—
void for uncertainty-
. Case law on Dhar- “89. A will of bequesi not expressive of any definite mtention is void for

ma”, uncertainty.”

The section applics to Hindus ete.

One of the most importarit sts Of bequests held to be void for un-
certainty under this section, comprises bequests for “Dharma” (or similar pur-
poses). It was held by the Privy Council' long ago, that, the- word, “Dharma”
15 void for uncertainty, This decision had, naturally, to be followed hy the High
Courts, but, it was not whols-neartedly welcomed in India.

The casliest_ pronouncement on the point is that of Sir Brakine Perry and
S$. M. Yardley®. This was toltowed in Pranjivan Das v. Dev Kuvarbai2 The ques-
tion was elaborately considered by Farran, C.J. and Tyadji,’ J. in a succession
case. In that case, the testator, after giving certain propetties to his two’ wives, left
the residue to his trustees who were to apply the same for “Dharma”, [twas
held that the trust was void for uncertainty,

Judicial decisions 16.23. From time to time, there were judicial expressions of view favouring

in India. a_ different .approach, १7० .Many eminent Hindu Judges. who had occasion to

पर consider this matter’ were of the opinion that the contrary view was the correct
one, However, because the Privy Council was not Prepared to reconsider the
view expressed by it in carlice decision, the decision’ was: held to be binding
on Indian courts.

५ 2... 3. K, Mukherjea in bis, Tarore Law Lectures*~* has called for a re-considera-
tion ofthis. view.

Bitk of 1938. 16.24. It is understood that in order to give effect to the popular view, a

नि Bill to amend the law was. introduced in the Central’ L tive Assembly in
+1938. However, the Bill was dropped,’ as it was thought that the subject fell
under the legislative entry relating to “religious and charitable endowments
which (under the Government of India Act, 1935 which was then-in force) fell
in the Provincial List. - पु

Bombay ‘> pubtié 16.25. In 1950, the ‘erstwhile State’ of Bombay passed the Bombay Public
Trusts Act, 1950, 11055 Act, which not only enacts a general rule that.a public, trust is not void on
. the ground that the purposes of the trust are unascertained 6r unascertainable,
but also specifically provides" that a public trust created for such objects as
“dharma, dharmada, punyakarya or punyadan” shall not be void only on the
ground that the objects for which the trust is created are not ascertained. This
provision is more in consonance with the notions of Indian society than the view

Jaid’ down judicially. .

1Runchordas ४. Parvati (1899) LL.R. 28 Bom. 725 ¢P.C.).

*Advocate-General ¥. Damothar, Perry's Oriental Cases $26.
2 3Pranjivan Das ४. Dev Kuvarhai, 1 BH.C.R. p. 130 (Note),

‘Vundrabun Das ४. Curzon Dex, (1897) 1.1..1९. 21 Bom. 646,

‘Purthasarthy ¥. Theruvengade, (1907) U1..R. 30 Madras 340 (judgements of Subramania Ayyer
J).
*Advacate General y. Jimbai. (19171 LAR. 41 Bom. 281, 282, 283, 284 (Beaman J.).

*Sce the Observations of Mookerjee, J. Bhupti ४. Ram Lal (1910) U.L.R. 37 Cal 13728 (FB)
and of Jailal J, in Briflal ६. Naraindas (1933) 1.1..1९. 14 Lahore 827.

*Runchordas ६. Parvati, (1899) L.R. 26 1.8. 71 (1899) LL.R. 28 Bom. 725 (P.C.).

“a, Mukherjee Hindu Law of Religious and Charitable Trusts (1979) page, 118, para 3.16 and
7. 119 para 3.16A.

*Bill No. 10 of 1938, Gazette of India, Part 5, dated 17.9, 1938, Paruck, Succession Act,
commentary on section 89. ;

208, 10, Explanation, Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950,



118: ..

Section 10 of the Bombay Public Trusis Act. 1950, is quoted below! ;

“10. Notwithstanding any law, custom or परत: rust shall not be,
void only on the ground that the pes S benefit of whont
or which it is created are unascertained or unasceriainable.”

Explanation - A public trust created for such eb as dharma, dbarmada
or punyakarya, or punyadan shali not be deented thé void, oly on the
ground that the objects for which 1६ is created ars unascertained “or uniss-
cerlainable.”.

16,206, Having regard to what is stated above, ic is, in our opinion, desirable Recommendation. .
to add an Explanation to section 89, Succession / on ths same tines as has-te amend section
been done* in the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950, We rccc umend accordingly. 8%

VIL Application of description to external reatity

16.27, Mustrating the general principle shat a will speaks from the moment Section 90.
of death of the testator, section 90 provides tnat the deseriptian contained in a
will of property, the subject of gift, shall, unless a cor imtentian appears by
the will, be deemed to refer to and comprise the property arswe: that descrip-

tion at the death of the testator.

The section needs no change.

16.28. Section 91 provides that unless a cont
will, a ber quest of the estate of the testator be corsirucd (0 inclide any
property which he may have power to appoint by will 10 any object he may think
proper, and shall operate as an exccution of such power; and a bequest of pro-
perty described in a general manner shal] be construed to include any property
to which such description may extend, which he may have power to appoint by
will to any object he may think proper, and shalt op an execution of-such
power, .

No amendments are needed in the section. .

y inention appears by the. Section 91.

16.29, This takes us to section 92, which reads as under :--- Section 92, 4

“92. Where property is bequeathed to or for the benefit of certain obicets as
a specified person may appoint or for the benefit of certain obiects in such
proportions as a specified person may appoint wr the will does not’ provide
for the event of no appointment being made; if the power given by the will
is not exercised, the property belongs to ail tke objects of the power in
equal shares.” .

The section needs no change.

16,30. Certain words and expressions commenly used in wills are ‘dealt section 93,
with in section 93 quoted below :

“93. Where a bequest is made (0 the “heirs” or ‘right heirs’ or ‘relations’ oF
‘nearest relations’ or ‘family’ or ‘kindred’ or ‘nearest of kin’ or ‘next of kin’
of a particular person without any qualifying terms, and the class so desi;
nated forms the direct and independent object of the bzquest, the prongity ,
bequeathed’ shall be distributed as if it had belonged to such person and he
had died intestate in respect of it. leaving assets for she payment of bis
debts independently of such properts

No amendment is needed in this section. The si ince of. the- section
lies in the provision contained in the words “as if it had belonged to such person
and he had diced intestate”, which practically make the heirs of such person the
beneficiaries, rendering further inquiries unnecessary. It applics only-if the class
is the direct object of bequest. Contrast section 97. :

16.31, Continuing the method of spelling out the meanings of words com- Section 94.
monly used in wills, section 94 deals with the case where a nequest is made-to
: - - a noe
+8. 10, Bombay Public Trusts, Act, 1950. ue
*Section 10, Explanation, Bombay Public Trusts Act. 1950 (Para 16.25 supra).


“12

the ‘representatives’, ‘legal representatives’, ‘personal represeniatives’ or ‘executors
or administrators’ of a particular person, If such class so designated iorms the
tlirect and independent object of bequest, the property bequeathed shall be dis-
wibnied as if it had beloaged to such person aud such person had died intestaie
in respect of it.

The section needs no change. The principie is the same as that cxplained
under section 93.

VII, Quantum of Interest

Section 95. 16.32. Under Section 95, where properiy is bequeathed to any person, he
is entitled to the whole interest of the testator therein, unless :t appears from the
will that only a restricted interest was intended for him. With this provision,
section 8 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, may be compared. Previously,
there uscd to be scope for controversy as to whether a particular bequest toa
Hindu female was intended to give her an absolute estate, or whether there was
to be read into the bequest a limitation of terest or the like. But this
controversy could not survive afier it was lud down by the privy Council that
there was no need to read any such ! ation in a will, This interpretation has
been re-aflirmed by the Supreme Court.’

Kania J. in a Bombay case,? made an exhanstive survey of the decided cases
on the subject upto 1943, Section 14 of ihe Hindu Succession Act, 1956, now
provides as under as regards Hindus :—

“14. Property of a female Hinds 1 he her absolute properiv: (1) Any
Property possessed by a female Hindu. whether acquired before or after
the commencement of this Act, shall be held by her as full owner thereof
and not as a limited owner. .

“Explanation :; In this sub-section ‘property’ includes both movable and
immovable property acquired by a femate Hindu by inheritance or devise,
or at a partition, or in lieu of maintenance or arrears of maintenance, or
by gift from any person, whether a relative or not, before, at or after her
marriage, or by her own skill or exertion, or by purchase or by prescription,
or in any other manner whatsoever, and also any such property held by
her as sttidhana immediately before the commencement of this Act,

“(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to any property
acquired by way of gift or under a will or any other instrument or under
a decree or order of a civil court or under an award where the terms of
the gift, will or other instrument or the decree, order or award prescribe a
restricted estate in such property.”

Provisions in. the 16.33, What section 95 of the Succession Act and section 8 of the Transfer
Hindu Succession of Property Act lay down is in substance, also enacted in section 14 of the Hindu
1. Succession Act.’ If a “restricted interest” was intended for a legatee in general
(section 95, Succession Act) or if a “restricted estate” is intended for a female
Hindu (Section 14, Hindu Succession Act), it must “so appear from the will
(section 95, Succession Act) or the terms of the will must “prescribe a restricted
estate” (section 14, Hindu Succession Act). Notwithstanding the verbal differences
in the various provisions, it may be presumed that there is no intention to lay

down substantially different rules.

No shange in sec- 16.34. In this position, section 95 needs no change.
tion 95,
Section 96 16.35, This takes us to section 96, quoted below :

“96. Where property is bequeathed to a person witha bequest in the
alternative to another person or to a class of persons, then, if a contrary
intention does not appear by the will. the I named shall be entit-
led to the legacy if he is alive at the time when it takes effect: but if he

+ Ram Gopal ५. Nand Lal, ALR. 1951 5.6. 139.

2Bui Bhuri Bai 0, Gurmukheui v. Advocate General, AIR 1943 Bom. 377: 45 Bombay Law Re-
porter 669

sPara 16.32, supra.


113

is then dead, the person or class of persons named in the second branch
of the alternative shafl tuke the legacy.”

No amendment is needed in the section. It re-emphasises the principle (sec-
Con 90) that the will speaks as from the death of the testator.

VIE. Bequest to a Class

16.36, According to section 97, where property is Eequexthed to a person, Seton 97-
and words are added which describe a class of persons but do not denote us the
direct objects of a distinct and independent gift is catided to the
whole interest of the testator thercin. unless a contrary intontinn appears by the
will,

८

The section reeds no change. It may be contrasted with sect'on 93.

16.37, Szction 98 reads as under :— Section 98.
“98, Where 8 bequest is made to a chess oF

lion only, no one to whom the words of
ordinary sense applicable shall take the legacy

rons ander

No amendment is needed in the section.
Persons not belonging to the class in the ordini

¢ cntphusis here is on excluding
airy scese of the descriptive words.

TX, Rules of construction

16.28. Section 99 contains nine rules of construction of wills, These are Section 99—Con-
as follows :-- struction of terms.

“99. (a) The word “children” applies only to lineal descendants in the first
degree of the person whose “children” बार spoken of; (Thus, remoter des-
ecndants are exetuded):

(b) the word “grandchildren” applies only to tineat descendants in the
second degree of the person whose “grandchildren” are spoken of;

(०) the words “nephews” and “nieces” apply only to children of brother or
sister;

(d) the words “cousins” or “first cousins” or “cousins-zerman” apply only
to children of brothers or of sisters of the father or mother of the person
whose “cousins” or “first cousins” or “cousins-german” are spoken of:

(९) the words “first cousins once removed” apply only to child-en of cousin-
german, or to cousin-german of 2 parent of the person whose “first cousins
once removed” are spoken of;

(f) the words “second cousins” apply only to grandchildven of brothers or
of sisters of the grandfather or grandmother of th2 persatiy whose “second.
cousins” are spoken of;

(g) the words “issue” and “descendants” apply 10 all Hoes! descendants

whatever of the person whose “issue” or “descendants” are spoken of; (Thus
remote descendants are included——conirast ०), (2):

{h) words expressive of collateral relavonship apply alike to relative of
full and half-blood; and

(i) all words expressive of relationship apply to a child in the womb who
is afterwards born alive.”

16.39. The various rules in section 99 are stated in calegorical terms, but Need for excluding
not much argument is needed to show that they should be apolied only where contrary intention.
there is no different intention disclosed by a will, We ave of the view that this
aspect should be brought out by explicit words to be introduced in the section,

For this reason, it appears to be desirable to insert, at an Appropriate place in
the section, some such words as “in the absence of any intention to the contrary”.’

7966 paragraph 16.46, infra.


114

‘

Section 99(a) mea- 16,40. That the section is subject to a different intention could be illustraed

ning of “child”. from clause (a). While the words’ ‘child’ or ‘childven’ dealt with in clause (a)
primarily mean only “issue in the first generation”, to the exclusion of grand-
children or remote descendants,’ yet the context may show that these words
have been used for ‘descendants’ (or for something else) and so they would
sometimes receive another construction than the ordinary ताल,

Meaning of “Chil- 16.41. The legal construction of the word ‘children’ is nothing more than

dren’ in general. what it is popularly understood to mean, namely, as desiznating the immediate
offspring of u marriage—unless the context otherwise requires or the law other-
wise provides. Generally speaking, the word does not extent to grant-children,?
and the primary meaning to be given to the word is the first generation.’

Extended construc- 16.42, But the word can, in the context, be extended to “grand-children”,

tion. This point is welt illustrated in an English case,’ in which there was a gift to
the ‘children’ of a sister named in the will. At the date of the will, it was known
that the sister in question had no children, but had certain grand-children, The
expression ‘children’ was accordingly construed as meaning ‘grandchildren’.

Later decisions, 16.43, In a later English case,* it is stated that theres is no rule of construc-
tion on this question, and each will must be construed on its particular weeds
(see various cases referred to in this case). It has also held in various other
cases that the word ‘children’ under certain circumstances 199 be extended, and
the word has, in fact, been held to mean, ‘descendants’. The word has also been
interpreted as meaning ‘heirs of the body’!

Principle chat J 16.44. The principle that a document may furnish a dictionary from which

dictionary. San extended meaning of ‘child’ or ‘children’ may be gathered has heen judicially
recognised” in England. In fact, in England, he Fatal Accidents Act. 1846,
sections 2 and 5 (as amended in 1934). expréssly provide that ‘child’ shall
include son and daughter and grand-son and grand daughter and step-son and
step-daughter,”

Where an appointment under a power contained in a will to “any widow
of W born in testator’s lifetime” was in issue, a- widow of W who was in the
womb at the time of the death of testator was held to be entitled.”

This principle is also incorporated in section 99(i).

Section 99(i) Child in 16.45. Some comment is needed on clause (i) of section 99, dealing with

womb—English law. children in the womb. In England, it has been held that a person who is in the
womb on a particular date is included in the description of children born or
living at a particular date, if it is to the child’s own benefit to be so included.

Recommendation | 16.46. Having taken into consideration various aspects relevant to the
as to Sec. 99, main meaning of the expression “child”, we have come to. the conclusion that cases
paragraph. |; | हु ४

where a different intention appears from the will shoutd, for reasons already

2866 cases cited in Stroud, Judicial Dictionary (1971) Vol. 1, pages 454 to 455.
*Bowen v. Lowis, 54 L.J.Q.B. CB; 9 Appeal Cases 890 (Lord Blackburn).
°Norgan ९. Thomas, 51 L.J.Q.B. 556 (Also see paragraph 16.42, infra).
Hardy ९. Mitford, 21 Ren. 280.

sRadeliffa v. Buckley, 10 Ves. 195; Henderson, Testamentary Succession and Administration of
Eststes in India (1925) page 209.

SGibson v. Gibson (1901) 1 Ch. 49.

“In re : Smith Lord ४. Hayward, 35, Ch. D. 658; Henderson, Testamentary Succession and
Administration of Estates in India (1928) p. 209.

था re: Hovd v. Hovd. 27 LJ. Ch. 505.

°(a) Bung v. 99७, 10 HLL. Ca. 171.

(0) Clifford v. Koe, 5 App. Cas. 447.

“Hill v. Crook, 42, Law Journal Chancery, 702 (Per Lord Cairns).
Section 2 and 5, Fatal Accidents Act, 1846 (as amended in 1934).
“Halsbury, 3rd Ed. Vol 39, p. 1075-1076, paragraph 1603.

Re : Starn’s Will Trusts (1962) Chancery 732; (1961) 3 AIT ER 1129.


>

"520 by insert-
2४ «धर tive
न]
amendea

stated,? be expressly excluded front section एफ, His coukd be ut
ing in the section, before the openi Hi die we
Of any intention to thy ce: .
the ‘I’ in the present word ‘hn’,
as above.

We ice:

16.47. Section 99, clause (i Tho
section is confined to the constrt
apply to intestacy. But often it
ata porticular time, Cases where the ८।
of the death of the fa
a longer period of gestation m:
by a learned writer’ with rete;

५ 5 suund.
131 pica:

isu

0
as an wean

months or so
volving
ion made

व

1 1
io cases where the
शत, we supyest

inserted to section 99, creaiig a prestanpei
birth takes place within a particular pet:
315 days.

16.48. Here it may be noied, th; tee Act’ contains ai
presumption as to legitimacy, 1
child being in the womb at a po.
certain conditions, a child born ¢
husband shall be presumed 10 (5
4 presumption as to paternity. and as
directly provide that the child shall be p the worms ota
particular time. (There was no reed to ¢ motters. In the Succession
Act, on the other hand, time is crucial, ard tie is raerefore, need to introduce
a presumption on the subject in the Act.

inal, subject to
sof ihe death of the
snd of the woman. It is
1, 1 docs not evea

We suggest a period of 315 days in this context, as already stated,

16.49. The fact that section 112 of the Evi
conclusive presumption where the birth takes 97:९०
that a child born after that period shoukl be yas Hlegitimate,
It means merely that there is no presumption in such 25 and that the burden
of proof may lie on the person who claims legitimacy, in some cases that burden
may not be so placed, because one cannot overlook the presumption permitted
under section 114 of the Evidence Act.

This is particularly so for the reason that the question of legitimacy is of
grave importance, as it is a mattcr of social sttis and aifects the whole status
of the child. The onus which is governed hy the rules brivily stated sbove in
such a case is founded on the interest of the child and Cie interest ef the State
in matters of legitimacy.’

Tf, having to the common course of natural events and human conduct
(section 114), the child is born within a reasonably possible period, the court
can raise a presumption of legitimacy.” and the burden of proof would then shift.
Tn such a case, the burden of proving illegitimacy would fe on him who so
alleges it.

16.50. In this position it would. in ovr vicw.
period longer than that mentioned in section 112. The
been suggested by us,’ having revard to the ties 95 disclosed in judiciat
decisions and medical evidence referred to th

1Paras 16.39 to 16.44, supra.

361. section 100.

°Dr. Derret, A Critique of Hindu Lave (1970) >:
‘Section 20, Hindu Succession Act. 1956.
*For the draft, see para 16.53, infra.
“Section 112, Indian Evidence Act. 1872.
*Uttamrao v. Sita Ram, AYR 1963 Bombn
°C. Ustamrao v. Sita Ram, AIR 1963, Bom. 145. 167. |
*Paras 16.47 and 16.48, supra.

WU ttamrao v. Sitaram (1962) 64 Bom 1. &. 752.757. Tal ATR [96% Rony 165

४ 165, 167, parieranh 6.
3 4 AAS ८

hh the Section 970) Chitd
1५७ in

womb Recom-
ndation to insert

a presumption,

eet of section 112

he factum of the Estdence Agr

Act provides i practically Period — under sec-
ays does net mean tion 1

nermissibte to snecify a Case Law on pee
dof 315 days has Med of gestation.


116

Ht may be noted that in a Madhya Pradesh’ case, a period of 305 days -was
held to be permissible,

There are other cases where courts have refused to declare against the
legitimacy of the child, where the period that elapsed between the last coitus
and the birth of the child was more than the normal period. In the case of P. v. 7.7
the period was 330 or 333 days, Evidence was led to show what can be the
maximum period in such cases of prolonged gestation.

English cases. 16.51. In certain Engti the period was 346 days’ or 340 days,‘ or
331 days.’ Of course, in these cases, the wite had given evidence thai the child
was legitimate and there had been no adultery.

Ic is obvious that there is a power in the court to take judicial nolice of the
fact that there js a normal gestation period." At the same time, judicial notice
must also be taken of the fact that in an actual case the period may be longer
or shorter than the normal period which is generally given as 270 to 280 days.

Rute of canon 16.514, With reference to the proposal (as put forth in the working paper)

law considered. regarding the child in the womb born within 315 days, the working Paper, for-
warded with the लात of the’ Cuthclic Bishop's Conference of India, states that
canon Jaw presumes children to be legitimate if born within 300 days. The
commont raises the apprehension that the “proposed amendment might give rise
to fraudutent claims”, We do not share this apprehension. The presumption will
be rebuttable one, and will be in conformity with the general trend of the case
law, referred to above.

Reason for taking 16 It was because of the serious disabilities of the illegitimate child that
a liberal view. courts have taken a liberal view of the period. In countries where the rights of
illegitimate children have been widened.’ there may be justification for not taking
the same liberal view of the presumption of legitimacy, Since we have not yet
reached that stage.’ it would be desirable to make the change recommended

above.
Recommendation 16.53. In view of what is stated ahove.” we recommend that the following
as to section 99. explanation should be inserted in section 90 on the subject of a child in the
womb ;

“Explanation : For the purposes of this section, a child is presumed to have
heew in the womb at the time of the death of a person if the child was born
within three hundred ani fifteen days of sich death”.

Section t09 and the 16.54, This takes us to section 100." It provides that in the absence of any

question of legiti- intimation to the countrary in a will, the word “child”, the word “son”, the word

macy. “daughter” or any word which expresses relationship, is to be understood as
denoting only a legitimate relative, or where there is no such levitimate relative, a
person who has acquired, at the date of the will, the reputation of being such
relative.

An analysis of the section shows that it consists of two parts. The restrictive
provision in the first part confines the expressions in question to lesitimate relation-
ship. This. however. is modified by the latter half: where the modifying provision-—
though of a very limited character—covers a person who has, at the time of the
will. acquired the reputation of being “such relative”. The first part is illustrated
by illustrations (i) and (vii).

.Dhedu Sheoram v. Mathanbai, ATR 1966, MP 252 (305 days).
2P.v, P,. 191) 12 1.0. 946 (330 or 333 days).

*Wood v, Wood (1947) 2 80 7२.7. 98, 96,

‘Hadlum v. Hadlunt (1949) Probate 197: (1948) 2 All F.
“Gaskill v. Gaskill, (1921) Probate 425; (1921) Al E.R. 365; 126 Law Times 115.
Preston Jomes ७, Preston Sones, (1951) t AILE.R. 124, 127, 135. 136,
*Lotter of the Catholic Bishop’s Conference of India, dated 3rd Octobe:
*Compare section. 26, Family Law Reform Act, 1969 (Eng.)

Section 100.

“Paras £6.45 to 16,47, supra.

"Jt is applicable only where there is no legitimate relative



117

The second part relating to reputation 1s 21057 छए। by illustration Gii), Civ),
(४) and vi).

The opening words reletng पा ०
tions (iii} and (vill).

Westrated by ilhustra-

Illustration (0 sec-

16.55. The Hhistra |
tion £00,

as will be clear irom the ४०

Hlustraten (3)
Wustraton ( )
Llvestrat ता: i)

razon Gv}

ons to

Ilnustrac ०... (५४) ortimer ६. # ४ 3
{Bustraton (vi) may by compared 5
Mustrat or. (70 and (vill) will be considered later,

16.36. Some discussion is 12२९५:
children in the context of sectien 100, At commen 18!
illegitimate child as such taking a und will or a deed, But there is a
principle of interpretation which, effect sa disability, The principie is
that any gift to children as a chiss, priv fo je means “teaitimate™ children. This
presumption can_be rebutted by proof that the author in:ended to benefit illegiti-
mate children. Such an intention can be proved for example, the testator
names the illegitimate children or expressly inclactes them as a class. The pre-
sumption can also be rsbuited 07 shoe 1 time of execution of the
deed or will it was possible only for ittesitimate chikirea to take under it’.

There is another isa childven in view of the rather

curious rule that a gift to ul 3 born in the future is vod
as against public policy as it has a tenCerey to encourage immorality.’

as fo the position of illegitimate Position in common.

there is no bar to an law of illegitimate
children.

16.57. The law on che subject has ten efor
provision in South Australia, for example, reads 3

“(LY So far ४
total or partial intestacy of
same right and title as if he were le

16.58. Section 100. in so far os it deals rights of illegitimate child- section —190-vari-
ren, raises certain important question. Gf soe bamely, whether the law ous alternatives re-
should discriminate against illegitimate children even by a presumptive rute of the commended.
nature enacted in the section. Our own preicrence would be for reversing the
rule contained in the section, easons to be stated in due course.” However,
in case such a reform 0 15 still scope
for certain modi fications are not found
to be acceptable, some vert
section.

cd in many jurisdictions, The Reforms ia certain
७०७९ :— jurisdiction

जग एड pte ender any will or under the
. bs 0९ child shall have the

16.59, We may now tak” ups
being, that it is to be re The
problem of interpretation. It docs, of cor
we shall discuss later."

proper, assuming’ for the time section 100, _ first
rt of the section raises no serious part.
rise a arestion of noticy, which

that where there is no such Section 100, second
io he understood as denoting part.

786० M. N. Basu, Success
*Sec infra.

SCP. Hill ६. Crook (1873) LR 6 |. 1... 26.
*Paragaraphs 16.62 to 16 6S and 16 66 a7. sec. infra.
SHIN ४. Crook (1873) ! Rew puse * | sts, 265.

॥ Act (19573, commentary on section 100, page 310.

*Re Eve. (1909) 1 Chan 795,
AHills v. Crook, (18751 | 7४ Reporls 6 1-0७ 265.
Section 5511), Adm Bs te wth Australia), quoted in Sac-

ville and Lanteri, “Dist "ds 44 Austalien Law Joumal
55, 58.
*See firnu. (Para 16.65 et. seq. सयीला

Wee infra 27 (Para 16.65 ef seg. infra)



118

व person who has. at the date of the will, acquired the reputation of “being
such tefeise.” ffew the words “behig such relative” are ambiguous, in as much
ats vither they may धाल्या persons having the reputation of being legitimate relatives,
or they may aise mean persons who have the reputation of relatives simplicitor.
The first coa ton is supported by the marginal note to section 100, which
speaks of “relives reputed legitimate.”

Hite s is supported by the general sense of the section
and ii may noted that lustrations (ii) to (iv), to the section, which are
relevant to the latter half of the section, do not require that the reputation must
of हजार ६ 5 ‘ative. The rule of English law also is that where there

are Icgitimate retstives. dhe persons who have acquired the reputation, not neces-
Sarily of icgitimacy, of being the child, son. or daughter, etc, as the case may be,
of the particular person, will take under the description of son, child or daughter,

Recommendation 16 (|. ty the ligat of what is stated above as to the ambi uity arising from
to amen tsection section 100, we recoramend that section 100 should be suitably redrafted so as 10
109. sefer 10 है repusatinn of relationship, but not necessarily a reputation of legitimacy,
The ebject could be achizved by substituting, in place of the words “being such
chav the words * 7९ a child, son or daughter er otherwise standing in the

she
shin in question”,

(This rccommendation is to be carried out only if our alternative recom-
mendation to delete the section’ is not accepted).

: Revised section 100 would then read thus—

“103, In the absence of any intimation to the contrary in a will, the word
“child”, ths word “son”, the word “daughter”, or any word whicl expresses
relationship is to be understood as denoting only a legitimate relative, or,
where there is no such legitimate relative. a person who has acquired; at
the date of the will, the reputation of being व child, son or daughter or
otwrrise sanding in the relationship in question.”

62. We may now deal with illustrations (vii) and (viii) to section 100,
his Slows ;

“¢vii) A mekes a bequest in favour of his child 10 be borne of a woman who
Rever becemes his wife. The bequest is void”,

(viii) A makes a bequest in favour of the child of which a certain woman,

20 mersicd to him is pregnent. The bequest is valid’,

Section 109, illns- 16
trations (vii) and whieh rz
(शी

In-completeness of 16.63. Mlestrations (vii) and (viii) to the section exhibit some incomplete-

sec. 100 iustrations ness, inasmuch as their rationale is not manifest from the language used, It

(vid and(viiid. appears that some facts basic to the Proposition of law are assumed in the
illustration, but they are not stated in so many words, Thus, the seventh illustra-
tion assumes (without. however, stating so) that a bequest to an illegitimate
child. not yet hegotion, is ‘inst public policy. This was the rule in English law,
according to earlier cases.’ We shall discuss the present position on the point
वाल,

‘Then, the eighth illustration assumes that there is an evidence of a countrary
intention, and also that the child is in the womb, For this reason, the bequest is
regarded as valid. However, the illustration does not clearly state these important
facts,

Changeneeded in 6.64. This aspect skould be brought out more clearly, by suitably amending

the Illustrations. the illustrations so as to incorporate the reason on which the view taken in illus-
trat'ons is based, In illustration (vii), the words ‘sirice it would be against public
policy’ should be added at the end—if the illustration is ta be retained at all!
In itustration (जा), the words ‘since there is evidence Of contrary intention’ could
be added at the end.

'Kuekt v. Wilson, 17 Vessoy $23.
ec ffi (Pars 16.65 et. seg.)
1. (a) Paruck, Succession, Act (977), p. 243.

(0 Helsbury, 34th Ed. Vol. 39, page 1074, para 1602, second sub-para.
'Se2 parngraphs 16.65 and 16.66, infra.
See paragraph 16.65, infra



119°

10 section 100 shevid

We may recommend that illustrations (vii) and (viii
be suitably amended as above.

6.65. The more important question, however, is whether
section 19 should be retained at all. It has to be note: in (|
English law, as it developed in the course of the laticr half of the 194 ८
has taken a different approach in the matter of bequests io ilb
of the testator, begotten or both after the date of the will, पा ihe eeriy 55
Cases?, two reasons were usually given for excluding sack chil’

Meu

(i) uncertainty of determining paternity; and
Gi} the bequest being against public policy.

16.65A. A gift to future illegitimate children, expressed by refercace to the
paternity of a particular person, was regarded,.. in England, as failing for want
of certainty, on the ground that in order to ascertain the person:
such a bequest, inquiries might be necessary which the law forbids.
deration, however, has no applicability in India where the law of ¢
not recognise any prohibition against an inquiry into paieinity

mS CONSI-
2 duces

16.66. As regards the aspect of public policy, the जिला tanglish view has
been that while illegitimate children to be begotten after the deata of th
cannot be provided for by will (nor can future illegitimate child:
for by deed), yet, so long as the clause is limited to children i छह when the
document takes effect, it is more, in accordance with the pubic policy Gata
suitable provision should be made for them, than that such a ४००४९

should
be regarded as beyond the scope of the law and that the uniortunate olfsprine
should become a burden on public funds.*

Even in one of the earlier English cases,‘ the position was thus stated :

“As to the rest of the gift to the chidren ‘to be begotten’ very et to छत

* illegitimate child, the begetting of which is a thing contemplated, must fail.
It is against the policy of the law to permit any provision for unbezotten
illegitimate children; but it is not against the policy of the law to permit
a provision or gift to an illegitimate child begotien, but unborn, | apprehend
there:is no doubt that a gift to the child of which a women is cnecine at the
time of the gift, is a valid gift, although that child be an illegitimate child.
It is a valid gift, because there can be no doubt about the object intended
to be benefited.”

16.67, In Occleston’s case,' James L. J, Said :

“I will follow the example of Lord Cairns in that case, and stippose a wilt
to be written out at a full length, expressing the testacors intention and
meaning, and motives or grounds, Assume the will to be thus written :
“Whereas I am living in a connection unhallowed and illicit with A. B. and
there have been, and in the course of nature it is probable there may be
Offspring born of her body,’ the fruit of our inter-course, and I do not think
it right such offspring should be a burden upon the community, and { desire
that, notwithstanding the misfortune of their birth, they shouid not be left
without sufficient means for their maintenance, education, and future wel-
fare. Now, therefore, I do make the following provision for all children born
of her body while she is cohbiting with me.”

Now what is there against morality, or religion, or public policy in sich a
provision?

16.68. In the circumstances, illustration (vii) to section 100 seems to be
anachronstic. On a careful consideration, we see no reason for retaining
it in the Indian Statute book, It is inappropriate in India, whichever, way one

Paragraph 16-62, stpra,

2Cf. Hill v. Crook (1873), L.R.6 HL 265.
‘Loveland, in re. (1906) 1 Ch. 542, 548.

‘Holt ५. Sindrey, (1869), 28 W. CH. 126, 131, 132.
*Occleston v. Fullalove (1874) 9 Ch. 147, 160,
*Emphasis added.

Secuon 100 Mss
मी -orins
cism.

Uneertainty,

Publis poligs ia
oglu,

Oceleston's case,

Need for recon
deration of illustra
tion (vii).



120

views the matter. So far as procf of p: in India has

never fought shy of auy kiod of एच

ierce in ihe approach
ro has been discussed at feugth and in

As १0 the ४5५४७ of pai
in later English cases“, whe;
passages which give convincii

i of view and on wider
110, wheeher already
policy, There is
w sectiva 100,
h provision in

Prope: aopreach.

Illuswation (vit), and we seo ro re:
the law of testamentary suceessic

ustration to
section is, how
ait claiming under a
concerned with section

Wider question of 16.70. This discussion |

policy as to legiti- section 100. The गुण ques:

macy. far the law should, at this ¢:
will by raising an adverse assumption
100 as a whole. Of course, the sc res गज totily them: from so
claiming, but entitles them to do do ouly ai, th uired the repu-
tation of being ‘such relative.” it is a matter for consideration whether, at the
present day, the law ought not to be sio.e Liberal.

219 the stitutory reform

Reform in England 16.71. In this connection, ir

effected in England as

The relevant English provisions read as follows* :—

“15.(1) In any disposition made af er the coming into force of this section—

(a) any reference (whether express or implied) to the child or children
of any person shall, uiless the contrary intention sppears. be construcd
as, or as including, a reference to any illegitimaie caild of that person;
and

(0) any reference (whether express or implied) (1 a person or persons
related in some other manner to खाए person shall, unless the contrary
intention appears, be ९011. ued or as including. a reference to any-
one who weuld be 50 ता व if he. or some oly person through whom
the relationship is deduced. had been born legitimate.

(2) “The foregoing sub-section applics only where the reference in ques-
ton is (0 a person who is wt to be whe of benfiting under
the disposition or for the purpose of 0; ating such a person, to someone
else to or through whom that person is ielated; but that sub-section does
not affect the construction of the word ‘heir’ or ‘heirs’ or of any expression
which is used to create an cnta‘! sd it in seal or personal property.”

Recommendation as 16.72, It seems to us that the time has come when a similar provision

tosection 100 and to should be introduced in India in siba:iucion of the rule in section 100. Testators

insert sec. 100A. will, of cocrse, be free to express a contrary intention. But. in the absence of
expression of such a contrary intention, the law should now take a bold step and
regard illegitimate children as pJnv facie included within the scope of relation-
ship. This would be in consonance with social justice. If a person begets an
ilegitimate child. it would not unrealistic १0 presume that he would
in making a testamentary < benefit his ilcpitima’e children as
well. There will be no interference with his freedom of disposition, as there
will still remain scope for the expression of a contrary intention by him.

But, subject to this safeguard, it would, in our view, be proper, as a matter
of social justice, to reverse the preseat rule which was framed at a time when the

3869 supra.
3868 Oceleston, para 16.67, supra
*Section 15(1 Vand 15(2), Family Law Reform Act, (1969)Chapter).


121

notions of society on the subject under consideration were much more rigid
than they are now.

16.73. Ifthe reasoning put forth above is accepted, present section 100 should

be delete

d and in its place the following inserted :

100(1) In any disposition made after the coming into fosce of the Indian
Succession (Amendment) Act—

(a) any reference (whether express or implicd) to the child or children
of any person shall, unless the contrary inienton appears, be cons-
trued as, or as including, a reference 10 any illegitimate child of that
person: and

(b) any reference (whether express or implied) to a person or persons
related in some other manner to any person shalt, unless the conuury
intention appears, be construed as, or as including, a re!vicnve to any-
one who would be so related if he, or some 0 ४६७१ ६ ॥ whom
the relationship is deduced. had been born fe:

“(2) Sub-section (1) applies only where the reference in question is to a
person Who 's to benefit or to be capable of berielit.rg under the dispos:tion

or, for the purpose of designating such 2 person as

entitled to suceced

10 someone else to or through whom that person is related; but that sub-

section does not affect the construction of the word “heir” or

heirs’ or of any

expression which is used to create a limited interest in property.”

16.74, As a drafting alternative, section 100 should be revised as under :—

“100, In the absence of any intimation to the conirury in a will, the word
‘child’ the word ‘son’, the word ‘daughter’, or any word which expresses
relationship is to be understood, not es denoting only a legitimate relative

but

16.75. We have, in the preceding discussion, made three altern

also as including an illegitimate relative.”

ive re.

commendations' as to section 100. This is because the subject-matter of section 100
is somewhat controversial from. the social point of view, While we ourselves tion 100.

would like to go to the utmost and replace section 100 by a pro

the prese:

a On FeVel ie
nt rule, we appreciate that there would be many who think that Indian

Soceity is not yet prepared for such a change in the law, laudable though the

principle

of such a reform might be. If some such approxch firds favour with

those concerned—that is to say, if the most radical alternative of -replacing
section 100 by the opposite rule cannot be accepted—then certain other improve-
ments that are required in the present section should not be lost sight of.

It is

for these reasons that we have suggested more than one alternative for

consideration.

16.76. Let us now explai

. in brief. the purport of euch al-crnative recom-

mended by us and how it differs from the others, Of the three alternatives, the

first one
to this a
iflustratio

; oe ni
js the mildest? and involves only a verbal improvement. According

[ternative, section 100. main paragraph, and the seventh and eighth
ns to that section, would be amended, primarily to leave scope for a
intention expressed by the testator and to bring out more clearly the

contrary n t eesti
rationale underlying the (४० ilustrations,

a ive is somewhat stronger than the first. but is still a

The second alternative is somew f but is still

oderate one. The substance of section 100 would be शी in tact in its main

aph, the principal change of substance being (by deletion of the seventh
4 stration), abrogation of

the rule that a bequest to an unborn person to be

yosnin the future out of lawful wedlock is void”
i ९ ea fy a
: ive is the most radical one. It would mean not only a
The third ae oontained in the seventh illustration which, after all, is of a
in the rule
की
ot 16.63 to 36.74, UTS
a.
ae 16.63, 16.64 supt
(510 16.61, WPT

gee ares 10

Recommendation as.
to section 100.

Cf. 15 Family Law
Reform Act, 1969
(6. 46).

Alternate draft.

Alternatives — 1९९0-
mmended as to sec-

Merits of each alter-
dative.


limited applicwion 3, but aso nge in the rule in the main paragraph
of the section whic ar fivid ef rights ता iilegilimate chidren
under testamentary dssposi in efiecl, 1 would mean the total removal of
the disebiliues---presumy they imay be—of illegitimate children pro-
Vided in the pressmi ~ sete 1

Constitutionat ques- 1.27. 4 कर के: hog nendaiions relating to the position
tions — converning of illegitimate children wader se: 2 based on sociological considera-
legitimacy. tions relevant to the suo; bot discussed the question whether the

- greund of undue discrimination, hit
er has arisen in the United States—
yal, courts have regarded such
utional requirements of equal protection

presen’ provisias
by articie कब of ie Con
though in a stighly dite:
Provisions as void ay violar:
of the law,

However, for the purposes of ihe we do not propose to
consider that ४९1, Siig ७६ section 100 is ce ly valid, there are,
as stated abe wes Witch on the micrils justity a change in the
present position

Earlier Report on 16.78. We may nofe that che mater received consideration at some length

Workmen's Com-in the Report of the Law Commission on the Workmen's Compensation Act

pensation Act. in ihe co ob dle top expression ‘dependant’, Some of the foreign
precedents and constitutional so cited in that Report.

(forwarded through the letter‘

८ ications whee 16.78A, In a com
ther agen ee the Catholic Bishops is been stated that the pro-
created, posal regarding section 100, com ¢ ii gitimate children as beneficiaries under
a will may creaie compiicacons. The comment says ; “Anybody can make such a
claim on the pretext of being an illegitimate child. On the other hand, should
we put legitimate children on a par with illegitimate (children) 2” We have not
found ourselves in agreement with the approach shown in this comment. We do
not think that claims to willed property on the score of the claimant being an
illegitimate child will ne puc by ”, There would be a natural reluctance
) to put forth such claims, क act noacstiy believed in, We would also point out
that section 100 is confinesi io only ong facet of the topic of illegitimate children's
position —naniely, the cx on of wills, The section, as recommended by

us, introduces only u rebuttable presumption,

i 16.79, This disposes of seziion 100, Section 101 deals with the rule of
Section 101. व : a 5 -
construction that is to be applied where a will purports to make two bequests
to the same person, Under clause (a) of the section, where the same Specific thing
is given to the legate twice in the same will, or in the will and again in a codicil,
the [९2४९९ is entitled to take only once,

Under clause (७). where one and the se will or codicil purports to make
to the same person two bequests of tho same quantity er amount of anything, he
shall be entitled to one such [legacy only. These avo clauses are obviously based
‘on the presumption prima facie a recsonablc onc—that in the circumstances dealt
with in the two clauses, the second bequest is merely a repetitive one and not a
new one, eit Me

Under clause (९), where iegacics of unequal amount are given to the same
person in the same will or in the same codicil, he is entitled to both the legacies.

In the remaining cases, under clause (d) the legatee is entitled to both the
legacies.’ The rule is that Iegacics given by different instruments are prima facie
cumulative.

AParagraphs 16.63 10 16.74, supra.

4a) Levy ९. Lonisiona (1968) 391 U.S. 68.

{b) Gowez v. Perez, (1973) 109 U.S. 535.

“Law Commission of tndia, 62nd Report Workmen's Compensation 1923) (October, 1974),
pages 33,34, paragraphs 24 & 2.8

sLetter of the Catholic ‘Bishops’ Conference of India, dated 3rd October, 1984.

361 Re. Davis, (1957) 3 All E.R. 52, 54 (Vaisey 1.).



{23

16.80. The rules as given in section 101 could have been expressed in a No change in’ S.
better way. However, it appears unnecessary to disturb the language of the 101.
section at this stage.

XII. Residuary Legatee

16.81. One of the more usual types of legacies is a residuary legacy. In Section 102.

brief, it is a legacy whereunder everything that is not otherwise disposed of is
given to the residuary legatce. What amounts to a residuary legacy is a matter
of great practical importance. How a residuary legatee may be constituted by
a will is provided for in section 102. Such a legatee will be constituted by any
words that show an intention on the part of the testator that the person designated
shall take the surplus residue of the property. The basic test is one of the inten-
tion, and no particular words are necessary. The reported cases on the section
have been gone through, and disclose no need for amending the section.

16,82. The rights of a “residuary legatee” (an expression already defined Section 103.
in section 102) are dealt with in section 103, Under a residuary bequest, the
legatee is entitled to all property belonging to the testator at the time of his
death, of which he has not made by testamentary disposition which is capable of
taking effect. This section corresponds to an English statutory provision’ on the
subject. पु

The case where the residue lapses is dealt with later?

16.83. It appears from the case law that there is some obscurity on the property not known
question whether, by virtue of section 103, property whose existence was not to tl Pe testator
known to the testator passes under a residuary bequest. The wide language of
the section justifies an affirmative answer to this query. In fact, such an answer
has been given in a Calcutta case’. But in later decision‘-', it was held that the
wider rule should not be applied in construing the wills of Hindu testators,

16.84. In view of this conflict of decisions, we have considered the question Context as disclos-
whether an amendment by way of clarification is needed, in section 103 in regard ing different conten-
to property not known to the testator. tion.

In dealing with this question one has to bear in mind certain rules of
construction. As is provided’ by section 83, general words in a will may be
utiderstood in a restrictive sense, where the will discloses such an intention. This
is illustrated by an English case also,’ on which section (ii) is based. The pro-

. Visions of the Indian Succession Act relating to the construction of wills—sections
74 to 90, and particularly section 83—would be material in answering the question,
“What passes under a residuary bequest ?”.

16.85. This position, it seems to us cannot be remedied by any specific
statutory provision, The decision in each case will depend on the facts. No No change suggest-
attempt will, therefore, be made to suggest any amendment of section 103 on din section on
the point under discussion (ic. on the question how far property whose existence
is not known to the testator, passes under a residuary bequest}.

जा, Time of vesting of legacies

16.86. Having disposed of rules concerning the property over which a will section 104,
operates, the legislature now turns to the question of time of vesting of legacies.
Section 104 deals with the time of vesting of legacy in cases when there is no
postponement of payment or possession. The case where possession or payment
is postponed, is dealt with lacer*. Section 104 provides that if a legacy is given

‘ection 25, Wills Act, 1837 (Eng.)
aSection 108,
*Fanindra vy. Administrator General, (1905) 6 CWN 321.
‘*Subodh Chandra v. Bhubalik, (1933), LL.R. 60 Cal. 1406.
5Kunthalammal y. Suryaprakasaroya, (LR 33 Mad. 1906, 29 Mad. L.J, 682,
*Section 83, INustration (ii).
*Cook v, Oakley, ¥-P, Williams, 302,
‘Section 119.
85-L{B(D)144MofLJ&CA—9



124

in general terms, without providing for the specific time when it is “to be paid”,
the legatee has a vested interest in it from the day of the death of the testator,
and if he (the legatee) dies without having it, it shall pass to his representatives,

Section applicable 16.87, The underlying principle is that the law favours the vesting of pro-

to all properties. 0009, Although section 104 uses the words “to be paid”—words which are not
appropriate for denoting movable property—there is no doubt that the section
is to be read as applicable to devises of immovable property, as well as to bequests
of movable property’, In this position we have no change to recommend in this
section.

Section 105—lapse 16.88. This takes us to section 105. It provides as follows: —
of legacy.

“105. (1) Hf the legatee does not survive the testator, the legacy cannot
take effect, but shall lapse and form part of the residue of the testator’s
property, unless it appears by the will that the testator intended that it
should go to some other person.

(a) In order to entitle the representative of the legatee to receive the legacy,
it must be provd that he survived the testator.

ILLUSTRATIONS

(i) The testator bequeaths to B “500 rupees which 8 owes me”. B dies
before the testator. The lekacy lapses,

(ii) A bequest is made to A and his children. A dies before the testator,
or happens to be dead when the will is made. The legacy to A and his
children lapses.

(iti) A legacy is given to A, and, in case of his dying before the testator,
to 8. A dies before the testator. The legacy goes to 8.

(iv) A sum of money is bequeathed to A for life, and after his death to B.
A dies in the lifetime of the testator; B survives the testator. The bequest to
B takes effect.

(v) A sum of money is bequeathed to A on his completing his eighteenth
year, and in case he should die before he completes his eighteenth year,
to 8, A completes eighteenth year and then dies in the lifetime of the testator.
The legacy to A Japses, and the bequest to B does not take effect.

(vi) The testator and the legatee perished in the same shipwreck, There
is no evidence to shows, which dies first. The legacy lapses”?
Tiustrations to sec- . . .
tion 105 analysed. 16.89. The six illustrations to the section may now be analysed. IHustra-
tion (i) takes a simple case of lapse of bequest. Illustration (ii) is also a case
of lapse, and rightly assumes that a bequest to “A and his children” is not to be
treated as a separate gift to the children of A, but merely connotes’ the quality of
A's interest. Illustrations (iit) and (iv) are cases where a different intention
appears from the will, so that the thing bequeathed does not go as residue. They
also illustrate the operation of the rule in sub-section.

Itlustration (v) illustrates the first sub-section of section 105, namely, that
if the legatee does not survive the testator, the legacy cannot take effect. The
alternative bequest to B does not take effect in this case, because the gift to B
is conditional on A’s death before completing his enghteenth year a condition
not fufilled on the facts in this case, as put in the illustration.

Illustration (vi) to the section relates to the very interesting situation des-
cribed in juristic writings as “commorientis.”*

16.90. Section 105 states the rule as to lapse of legacy in general terms,

Exceptions, to the : i isi ji ‘uti i
Faceptions 10 the but there are certain other provisions also in the Act, constituting exceptions to

"Stokes. Succession Act, page 73, cited by M.N. Basu, Succession Act, (1957), page 329.
This is the situation of commorientis. See paragraph 16.91, infra.
°For detailed discussion of illustration (rf), See paragraph 16.91, infra.



125

this rule, or qualifying or explaining its operation. For example, according to
section 96, if an alternative bequest is provided for in the event of the legatee
pre-deceasing the testator, the person or class of persons named in the second
branch of the alternative shall take the legacy. Illustration (iv) (० section 105 also
provides that in the case of legacy to a legatee for life with remainder to another
legatee, the legacy would not lapse, if the tenant for life dies before the testator.
The legacy then goes to the other legatee. Section 106 lays down that if a legacy
is given to two persons jointly, and one of them dies before the testator, the
other Iegatee takes the whole, Then, under section 109, in the absence of a
contrary intention in the will, a bequest to a child or other lineal descendant of
the testator does not lapse, if the child or other lineal descendant dies before
the testator, Section 110 provides that where the bequest is to a trustee for the
benefit of another and the trustee dies before the testator, the bequest does
not lapse,

Lastly, under section 116, where a bequest is made to a class of persons,
the thing bequeathed shall go only to such of them as are alive at the testator’s
death. These provisions are all in the nature of qualifications of the general rule
in section 105.

16.91, Illustration (vi) to section 105 possesses the greatest juristic interest, Section 105-illustra-
dealing, as it does, with the situation of ‘commorientes’. It reads as follows : tion, (vi), commori-
entes.
“(vi) The testator and the legatee perished in the same ship-wreck, There
is no evidence to show which dies first, The legacy lapses.”

16.92. It is the situation that requires some comment. The case laW on Presumption regard-
the point may first be briefly stated. In a Bombay case’, the question regarding ing the pounger,
the survivorship of the ‘younger’ to the ‘elder’ came up. Two persons—the uncle surviving the ‘elder’,
aged 60 years and his nephew aged 18 years—had died on the same day. There
was no positive evidence as to who died earlier. The High Court held that the
probabilities were in favour of the younger man surviving the elder.

‘This question also came up before the Oudh Chief Court in 19342 Two
brothers died in a fire. The widow of one of them claimed the entire property
on the ground that her husband, being the younger of the two, must be deemed
to have survived the other, It was held that there was no such presumption in
the absence of direct evidence and that the onus of proof was on her. Since she
failed to prove it, her suits was dismissed.

16.93. This question also came up before the Chief Court of Sind in 1939. |
A woman and her daughter had died together in an earthquake, There was no Sind case.
evidence as to which of them died first, It was held that there was no presumption
in law that older died before the younger.

16.94. The question also came up before the Calcutta High Court in 1944. Calcutta case.
Several persons had died in a common.boat disaster and the question arose who हु
had survived. The High Court held it was a question of fact. There was no
presumption of law in. this respect. The evidence in the case did not establish
the survivor-ship of either the husband or the wife.

16.95. A similar question also arose before the Privy Council in 1944. privy Council Case.
A man and his wife had died together in an earthquake. The wife was younger
than her husband.. The Privy Council held that there was no presumption in law
that the younger had survived the elder.

16.96. So much as regards the cases under the general law. ‘Tt may be Case law under
mentioned that section 21 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1955, provides a pre- Hindu Succession
sumption in this regard. Some questions that arose after the Act was passed im Act.

1Y.N.Kulkarni v. Laxmi Bai, AIR 1922 Bombay, 347.
3341. Nekshi Kaur v. Mt. Jawala Kaur, A.LR. 1934 Oudh 101.
8Smt. Copibai v. Chumhermal Mulchand, A.L.R. 1939 Sind 234,
‘Disendra Kumar v. Kuti Mian, ALR. 1944 Cal. 132.

‘Agha Mir Aluned v. Mudassir ‘Shah, A.L.R, 1944 P.C.100.


American Law.

Section 106-Joint
8४००५

126

1956 may be noted. In all the reported cases '} close relations like husband and
wife (and, in two cases, mother and daughter) had died in circumstances where
no evidence of survivorship was available, In all the cases, the courts relied upon
the presumption enacted in section 21 of the Hindu Succession Act to the effect’
tha it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the younger survived
the elder. As already stated,’ the Report of the Law Commission on the Evidence
Act deals with this point specifically.

16.97. Besides the material mentioned above or referred to in the Report
of the Law Commission on the Evidence Act,’ reference may be made to the
(American) Uniform Simultaneous Death Act.

4 The principal provisions of the Uniform Simultaneous Death Act read as
under :—

“t. No sufficient evidence of survivorship.

Where the title to property or the devolution thereof depends upon priority
of death and there is no sufficient evidence that the persons have died
oberwise than simultaneously, the property of each person shall be disposed
of as if he had survived except as provided otherwise in this Act.”

2, (Survival of Beneficiaries).

If property is so disposed of that the right of a beneficiary to succeed to
any interest therein is conditional upon his surviving another person, and both
persons die, and there is no sufficient evidence that the two have died other-
wise than simultaneously, the beneficiary shall be deemed not to have sur-
vived, If there is no sufficient evidence that two or more beneficiaries have
died otherwise than simultaneously and property has been disposed of in
such a way that at the time of their death each of such beneficiaries would
have been entitled to the property if he had survived the others, the pro-
perty shall be divided into as many equal portions as there were such bene-
ficiaries and these portions shall be distributed respectively to those who
would have taken in the event that each of such beneficiaries had survived.”

XV. Joint legacies and distinct legacies,

16.98. Under section 106, if a legacy is given to two persons jointly and
one of them dies before the testator, the other legatee takes the whole under the
section. This section is understood as dealing with a bequest to two or more
persons as ‘joint tenants’, in contrast with section 107, which is understood as
dealing with a bequ uest as ‘tenants in common.’ These expressions do not occur in
the section, but they are convenient for indicating the two categories contemp-
lated by sections 106-107. Under section 107, if a legacy is given to legatees in
words which show that the testator ‘intended to give them distinct shares of it’,
then, if any legatee dies before the testhor, his share falls into the residue.

16.99. Section 106, has, however, given rise to a considerable amount of

Ge be on joint case Jaw on the above point, and in each case, the court has had to determine,

after some controversy and effort, whether the bequest was intended to be joint
or sveral. It has even been held,’ that if a gift does not, in any way, indicate
an intention to create a tenancy in common, the presumption will be in favour

Vin the matter of Mahabir Singh, AIR 1963 Punjab 66 (Hindu Succession Act).
sJayantilal v. Mehta Chhanalal. A.1.R.1968 Gujarat 212 (Hindu Succession Act).

2D.Fadmaria Setty v. Gyanchandrappa, A.1.R, 1970, Mysore 87 (Hindu Succession Act).
‘Compare section 184, Law of Property Act, 1925 (English).
*Para 16.91, supra.

*Law Cominission of India, 69th Report (Evidence Act)—Ch, 50.
tLaw Commission of India, 69th Report (Indian Evidence Act).

sections 1-2, Uniform Simultaneous Death Act.
*Araokl ५. Dmingo (1910) L.L.R. 34 Mad. 80 (S.B.) (case on section 93 of the 1865 Act) contrast.


127

of a joint tenancy, It was also observed that the same principle is applicable to
wills as to gifts, unless there are special rules justifying a deviation.’

16.100, To illustrate what is stated above, it may be useful to refer to Hlustration from
the facts of a reported Madras case? A person made a registered will, bequeath- ‘ported case.
ing certain properties to his second wife and her only daughter, The daughter
predeceased the testator. After the death of the testator, a second daughter was
bor to the second wife. She was the plaintiff in this case, The defendants were
the sons of the son of the testator by his first wife. The following pedigree will
make the facts clear: :

Wife 0) e: Testator = Wife (2)
Son
(deceased)

1 Daughter (1) Daughter (2)
(Four sons) (Predeceased) (subsequently
(Defendants in born—plaintift

the case) in the case).

Prior to this will, the testator had divided himseif from his sons, and they
were living separately, the properties comprised in the will being the separate
Properties of the testator.

The plainGff, (second daughter torn to second wife) alleged that on the
death of the testator, the second wife had taken possession of all the properties.
She (the second wife) left a will, bequeathing all the properties to the plaintiff.
ae suit was for preventing the defendants from trespassing on the property in

ispute.

The contention of the defendants was that as the first daughter predeceased
the testator, her half share fell into the residue of the testator’s properties and
that the defendants were entitled to the same as their father’s heirs,

The trial court accepted the plaintiff's claim that the mother became the sole
legatee of the entire property on the death of her first daughter. On first appeal,
the subordinate judge, and in sccond appeal the High Court affirmed the findings
of the trial court. Hence the present Letters Patent Appeal.

16.101. The first question considered by the High Court was whether the
tule of English conveyancing that gift to two persons with words of limifation
prima facie constitutes a joint tenancy between them, should be imported into the
construction of a Hindu will. On a review of cases, the court came to the conclu-
sion that the principle of joint tenancy was unknown to Hindu law, except in
the case of joint property of an undivided Hindu family governed by the Mitak-
shara Law which, under that law, passes by survivorship? However, relying on
some cases, the court held that this did not mean that because the principle of
joint tenancy is unknown to Hindu Law outside the coparcanary, there can
never be a bequest to be taken by two persons jointly.‘ Therefore, there could
be a joint gift in favour of two persons, even when the parties are Hindus, But,
in this particular case, on an interpretaton, of the will, the High Court came to the
conclusion that the parties were tenants-in-common.

16.102. Relying on an unreported case, the court held that though section
106 occurs under the chapter headed “of construction of wills”, it is not a rule
of construction of a will, but is a provision for devolution,

Mankamma Kunwar v. Balkishan Das, (1906) LL.R.28 Al 38,
1There is no case law on section 106 in 1970 to 1982, laying down any new point.
aSinnaralv. Ramayee Animal, A.LR. 1969 Mad. 96.
गूब) Me. Reoti Devi, v. Rajandra Paksh Singh, ALR. 1933 P.C.72, 75.

(5) Bhagwan v. Reott Devi, A.LR. 1962 5.2, 787.
4‘Nandl Singh v. Sitaram, (1889) LL.R.16 Cal. 677 P.C.


128

Regarding section 107, a plea was raised that if specific expressions provi-
ding for the Icgatees taking distinct shares were not found in the will, the will
can be interpreted as amounting to a joint gift and section 106 should be applied.
The court refused to accept this argument.

Tn construing the will, the High Court relied on the following principle :

“Equity favours the construction that legatees were to take separate shares
as tenants-in-comumon and hence the court would utilise even a very slight
indication of such an intention, to draw that inference.”

Ultimately, the court came to the conclusion that the legattes were tenants-
in-common. The case was, however, remanded to the trial court for recording
extra evidence on a matter not relevant for the present purpose.

Criticism of section 16.103. Reverting to section 106, it appears to us that the section, and

106 as unrecalistic. some of the judicial decisions thereon,? somehow appear to proceed on an unreali-
stic basis,—unrealistic so far as Indian society is concerned, Indian testators
hardly, if ever, contemplate that if a legacy is given to two persons, and one of
them dicd before the testator, the other should take the whole, Courts in India
lean against joint tenancies." Oridinarily, the intention of an Indian testator in
Tndia would be noi to benefit tke other person in such a situation, but to allow
his share to fall in the residue.

Jn fact, in most of the reported decisions on the subject, courts have ulti-
mately regarded the case us fatling under section 106, and have construed the
words of the will as showing that the testator “intended to give them distinct
share”. But this conclusion has been reached after considerable amount of debate
in each case. In our view, there is no reason why some simple method of reducing
the scope for such controversy should not be devised.

Recommendation 16.104, In view of what we have stated above, we recommend that the pre-
to, amend section sumption should be the other way, namely, if the will does not, in any manner,
107, indicate an iniention that the two persons are to take it jointly the presumption
should be in favour of a tenancy in common, We recommend that the law should
be amended, by adding an Explanation to section 107 somewhat in these terms :

“Explanation—tIf the will does not, in any way indicate an intention that the
legacy is given to two persons jointly, it shall be presumed that the testator
intended to give them distinct shares of it’

16,105. Section 107 reads as under :

“Tf a legacy is given to legatces in words which show that the testator in-
tended to give them distinct shares of it, then, if any legatee dies before the
testator, so much of the legacy as was intended for him shall fall into the
residue of the testator’s property.

ILLUSTRATION

A sum of money is bequeathed (0 A, B and C, to be equally divided among
them. A dies before the testator, B and C will only take so much as they
would have had if A had survived the testator.”

Section 107 is dependent on it being first established that the testator intend-
ed to give two or more legatees distinct shares—in contrast with the case dealt
with in section 106, where a legacy is given to two persons jointly. Whether the
one or the other section applies, depends on the view that the court takes as to
the nature of the legacy i.e. whether it is held to be joint or several.

‘Robertson ४. Fraser, (1871) Ch. A 606.
tArakal v. Demingo, . 34 Mad. 80.
जज, Bahu Rani v. Rajendra, A.1.R. 1933 P.C.72; 60 LA. 75; 64 M.L.J. 365 (P.C.).

4See also Jankibai v. Saha, A.1.R. 1961 M.P. 139, 140.
‘To be added to section 107.



i293

16.106. We have, while discussing section 106, already! made a recom~
mendation for amendment of section 107. No further, comments are needed, but
it may be stated that fairly recent judicial decisions? show that the court more
readily infers a tenancy in common than a joint tenancy.

XVI. Effect of lapse and analogous situations

16.107. According to section 108,? where 2 share which lapses is a part of the Section 108 : Laps
general residue bequeathed by the will, that share shall be treated as undisposed of part of genera
of. The illustration to the section states that the testator bequeathes the residue ‘sklue.
of his estate to A, B and C, to be equally divided between them. A dies before
the testator, his one-third of the residue goes as undisposed of.

Section 103 may be contrasted with section 108, while, under section 103,
a legacy that lapses will form part of the residue and will go to the residual
legatee, section 108 comes into operation when the residve itself lapses by the
death of the residuary legatee before the testator or in any other manner. Where
the residue is undisposed of or lapses, it will go as on intestacy.*

Where there are several residuary legatees, who are given the residue as
tenants is common, the share of any one who dies in the lifetime of the testator
will lapse, and will not augment the remaining parts of the residue, but will, by
virtue of section 108,devolve as undisposed of.

No changes are needed in this section.

16.108. Under section 109, where a bequest has been made to any child section 199-1 a

or other jineal descendant of the testator, and the legatee dies in the lifetime of the to lineal descen bequest
testator, but any lineal descendant of his survives the testator, she bequest shall not dying in lifetime of
lapse, but shall take effect as if thz death of the legatee had happened immedia- t¢st#tor.
tely after the death of the testator, unless a contrary intention appears by the will.
Stated in a simplified form, the proposition intended to be enacted is that there
is no lapse of the bequest if the legatee, being a child or other lineal descendant
of the testator, himself leaves a lincal descendant who survives the testator, The
legal fiction created is that the bequest shall take effect as if the legatee died
immediately after the death of the testator. A notional distribution of the potential
share of the legatee would then be made, This section is an exception to the
general rule of ‘lapse’ in section 105.

The expression “child” in the section includes * children” also.*

16.109. The expression ‘lineal descendant’ occuring in the opening part of Meani ag
section 109 includes mate as well as female lineal descendants,‘ of the testator. Gearing of Tineal
No clarification is needed on this point. With reference to ibe same expression .
used for the second time {in relation to the lineal descendant of the legatee), it
does not extend to any other heir, but it should afso be noted that once the
condition of the existence of a lineal descendant is satisfied, then the benefit
{under the last part of the section), is available to every heir of the legatee,
and is not confined to heirs who are lineal descendants of the legatee.

The above propositions are offered merely by way of elucidation, The 5ए-
tion itself needs no change.

16.109A. By the Administration of Justice Act, 1982, the earlier English Gifts to children :
provision in section 33 of the Wills Act, 1837 has been revised in regard to recent reform in
gifts to children or other issues who leave issue living at the testator’s death, England.

4See discussion as to section 106.

2Sanjeeva Reddy v. Akhilendamnal, 1.1.R. (1968) 1 Mad. 138.
sParuck, Indian Succession Act, (1977), page 262.

*Tolsevdas v. Premjf, 1.L.R. 13 Bom.6t,

Shanti v. Bhagwan, AYR 1984 page 313; Para 10.

“Bhim Nath ४, Smt. Tara, ALR. 1929 P.C, 162.

‘Mohammed y. Aziz-un-Nissa, A.LR. 1935 Oudh 437.


Section 110.

Gifts to spouses :
recent reform in
England,

Section 111—Survi-
vorship in case of
bequest to described
class,

130

The most important provision is in section 33(1) (as revised), reading as
under :—

“33.(1) Where—

(a) a will contains a devise or bequest to a child or remoter descen-
dant of the testator; and

(b) the intended beneficiary dies before the testator, leaving issue; and

(c) issue of the intended beneficiary are living at the testator's death,
then, unless a contrary intention appears by the will, the devise or bequest
shall take effect as a ‘devise or bequest to the issue living at the testator’s
death.”

A similar provision has been made in section 33(2) regarding gifts to a
class which consists of children. Other incidental provisions have also been made,

16.110. We now proceed to section 110, which provides that where a
bequest is mad> to one person for the benefit of another, it does not lapse
by the death (in the testator’s life time): of the person to whom the bequest is
made. The rationale of the section can be easily discerned. The principle is,
that the law looks to the real beneficiary, and not to the nominal owner, who is
merely the medium through which the gift is made. His death therefore (that
is, the death of the nominal owner) should make no difference to the subsistence
of the gift. The section docs not appear to need any change.

16.110A. In England, in regard to gifts to spouses, section 22 of the
Administration of Justice Act, 1982, implementing a recommendation of the
Law Reform Committee,’ introduces a presumption. The object of the section
is to cover cases where, for example, the testator makes a gift of all his pro-
perty “to my wife and after her ‘Path to our children.” This type of bequest,
often found in home-made wills. would normally be interpreted as conferring
only a life interest on the wife, because of the need to preserve the remainder
to the children, Generally , however, this is contrary to the intention of the
testator who really intends to give the property exclusively to his wife, but to
have a say over its ultimate destination Section 22 of the Administration of
Justice Act, 1982 now provides as under :—

“22 Except where a contrary intention is shown, it shall be presumed that
if a testator devises or bequeaths property to his spouse in turns which in
themselves will give absolute interest to the spouse, but by the same
instrument purports to give his issues an interest in the same property, the
gift to the spouse is absolute notwithstanding the purported gift to the
issue.”

16.111. This takes us to section 111. Section 111 reads as under ;—

“111, Where a bequest is made simply to a described class of persons, the
thing bequeathed shall go only to such as are alive at the testator’s death.
Exception—If property is bequeathed to a class of persons described as stand-
ing in a particular degree of kindred to a specified individual, but their
possession of it is deferred until a time later than the death of the testator
by reason of a prior bequest or otherwise, the property shall at that time
go to such of them as are then alive, and to the representatives of any of
them who have died since the death of the testator.

ILLUSTRATIONS

(i) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to the “the children of B” without saying
it is to be distributed among them. B had died previous to the date of the
will, leaving three children C, D, E.

E died after the date of the will, but before the death of A. C and D survive
A. The legacy will belong to C and D, to the exclusion of the representatives
of E.

‘Law Reform Committee, Report on the Interpretation of Wills (1973), cmd. 5301


133

(ii) A lease for years of a house was bequeathed to A for his life, and
after his decease to the children of B. At the death of the testator, B
had two children living, C and D, and he never had any other child.
Afterwards, during the lifetime of A, C died, leaving E, his executor. D has
survived A. D and E are jointly entitled to so much of the leasehold term
as remains unexpired.

(iii) A sum of money was bequeathed to A for her life, and after her
decease, to the children of B. At the death of the testator, B had two
children living, C and D, and, after that event, two children E and F were
born to B. C and E died in the lifetime of A, C having made a will, E having
made no will. A had died leaving D and F surviving her.

“The legacy is to be divided into four equal parts, one of which is to be
paid to the executor of C, one to D, one to the administrator of E and one
to F.” :

(iv) A bequeaths one-third of his lands to B for his life, and after his
decease to the sisters of B. At the death of the testator, B had two sisters
living, C and D, and after that event another sister E was born, C died
during the life of B, D and E have survived B. One-third of A’s land
belong to D, E and the representatives of C, in equal shares,

(v) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to B for life and after his death equally!
among the childden of C. Up to the death of B, C had not had any child.
The bequest after the death of B is void.

(vi) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to “all the children born or to be born’)
of B to be divided among them at the death of 0, At the death of thef
testator, B has two children living, D and E. After the death of the testator,
but in the lifetime of C, two other children, F and G, are born to B. After 1
the death of C, another child is born to B. The legacy belongs to 0, 8, F,
and G, to the exclusion of the after-born child of B.

(vit) A bequeaths a fund to the children of B, to be divided among them
when the eldest shall attain majority. At the testator’s death, B had one
child living, named C. He afterwards had two other children, named D
and E. E died but C and D were living when C attained majority. The
fund belongs to C, 0 and the representatives of 8, to the exclusion of
any child who may be born to B after C’s attaining majority.”

The section needs no change.

CHAPTER 17

Void Bequests: Sections 112 to 118

17.1. Void bequests are dealt with in sections 112—118. Assuming that Scope.

a will is formally valid and has been made by a testator competent to make it
and raises no questions of construction, problems may still arise by reason of the
fact that a particular bequest made by the will is void in law. A bequest may,
for example, be void if the beneficiary contemplated by the description given in
the will does not exist at the time of death or other material time (section 112
read with the Exception and the illustrations to the section). This is a case of
impossibility or failure created by external circumstances. More frequent is the
case where the bequest is void because it violates a statutory mandate laid down
in the Act. On certain grounds of public policy, the law has inserted certain pro-
hibitions concerned with remoteness, perpetuities, accumulations and hasty gifts
to charities. Those are to be found in sections 112 to 118.

17.2. Section 112 reads as under: — Sectign 112-Beques

“112, Where a bequest is made to a person by a particular description and ff to, person by pe par

there is no person in existence at the testator’s death who answers the पुल ae in exis

description, the bequest is void. tence at testator:
jeath.

Exception: —Uf property is bequeathed to a persen described as standing

in a particular degree of kindred to a specified individual, but his possession


tion £13-Beque-

075 death subject
jO prior bequest.

mendation in
ES Commi-
Report on the
ferof Property

132

of it is deferred until a time later than the death of the testator, by reasons
of a prior bequest or otherwise; und if a person answering the description
is alive at the death of the testator, or comes into existence between that
event and such later time, the property shall, at such later time, go to that
person, or, if he is dead, to his representatives™.'

This section needs no change.

e 17.3. This takes us to section 113. It reads as under:
Person not in .
tence at testa- “113. Where a bequest is made to a person not in existence at the time of

the testator's death, subject to a prior bequest contained in the will, the
latter bequest shall be void, unless it comprises the whole of the remajning
interest of the testator in the thing bequeathed.”

The section broadly corresponds to section 13 of the Transfer of Property

Act, Section 13 of the Transfer of property Act, 1882, provides as under: —

13, Where, on a transfer of property, an interest therein created for the
benefit of a person not in existence at the date of the transfer, subject to a
prior interest created by the sume transfer, the interest created for the
benefit of such person shall not take effect, unless it extends to the whole
of the remaining interest of the transferor in the property”.

17.4, The Law Commission in its Report on the Transfer of Property Act,
1882? recommended that section 13 of that Act should be deleted, or, in the
alternative, some changes (set out in the Report) should be made in the section.

This recommendation? was made after a consideration of the difficulty created
by the Privy Council judgment in Sopher’s case‘ and after taking note of the
legislation passed in the erstwhile State of Bombay on the subject, modifying
the effect of Sopher’s case.

17.5, The Law Commission noted that the language of section 113 of the
Indian Succession Act, 1925 had been very restrictively construed by the Privy
Council in Sopher v. Administrator-General of Bengal In that case, a testator
bequeathed the income of his residuary estate to unborn grandchildren who
should be born during his widow’s lifetime, if they should survive their fathers,
and also bequeathed to them the corpus of the residuary estate if they should
attain the age of 18. The Privy Council held that both ‘the gifts failed under
section 113. The gift of income was void because since it was dependent upon
the legatees surviving their father it did not comprise the whole of the testator’s
remainder in trust, and the gift of the corpus failed for the same reason, and for
the additional condition that the legatees must attain their majority. This decision
was regarded as a surprising one by the Indian legal profession.*

Viscount Maugham, in delivering the judgement of the Judicial Committee,
made the following observations’ :—

३३5 that if, under a bequest jn the circumstances mentioned in $९०-
tion 113, there is a possibility of the interest given to a beneficiary being
defeated either by a contingency or by a clause of defeasance, the bene~
ficiary under the later bequest does not receive the interest bequeathed in
the same unfettered form as that in which the testator held it and that the
bequest to him does not therefore comprise the whole of the remaining
interest of the testator in the thing bequeathed.”

It was, therefore, held that the bequest, being not of the whole of the
interest of the testator, was void.

1Compare section 11, Exception.

‘Law Commission of India, 70th Report (Transfer of Property Act) paras 21.8 to 21.13.
२8०७ Para 17.6, infra.

‘Sopher ९. Administrator General of Bengal, (1944) L.R.71 LA. 98 P.C.; AIR 1944 P.D, 67.
‘Sopher v Administrator General of Bengal, (1944) L.R. 71 LA. 98:A.LR. 1944 P.C.67.
‘Framroze v. Tefunina, A.LR. 1948 Bombay 188.

‘Sopher v. Administrator General of Bengal AIR 1944 P.C.67, 70,



133

17.6. This decision created certain problems, noted by the Law Commis- Discussion in earlier
sion in its Report on the Transfer of Property Act.' The following is an extract Report.
from that Report.’

“21.8. Effect of Sopher's case: As has been pointed out by a writer on the

Law of Succession,’ the decision in Sopher’s case‘ upset the view of the legal

profession which, upto then held that if to an unborn person the whole of

the remaining interest was given, that would be sufficient compliance with

the provisions of section 13 and section 113 respectively, and the con-

tingency of attaining majority or surviving a certain person or the condi-

tions attached to the gift or bequest or any provision reserving power to

revoke the trust, did not violate the law. Since this view was held to be

erroneous by the Privy Council in Sopher's case, there was public agitation

and, in fact, a Bill was introduced in the Central Legislative Assembly‘

“proposing to omit section 13 and section 113. The Bill did not become

law, but the Bombay Legislature passed in 1947 an Act to validate dis-

positions made previously on the basis of previous understanding, of the

Law.”

“21.9, The application of section 113 of Succession Act to certain disposi-
tions of property in the erstwhile State of Bombay is restricted by the
Dispositions of property (Bombay) Validation Act, 54 of 1947 (an Act
to vatidate certain dispositions of property in the Province of Bombay)
which came into force on 16th January, 1948, as under :*

“2. This Act shall apply to all trusts made and to all wills and other testa-
mentary dispcsitions of persons who have died, before the first day of
January one Thousand nine hundred and forty-five.

“(a) Where such trusts, wills, or testamentary dispositions relate to
immovable property situated within the Province of Bombay;

(b) Where such trusts, wills, or testamentary dispositions relate to erty
of every description other than immovable property and ate Keolared,
executed or made by a settlor or testator, as the case may be, in the
Province of Bombay, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
in Part {I of the Indian Succession Act, 1925,

“3(1) Validation of certain dispositions—

The following provisions of law shall not apply and shall be decmed never
to have applied to the dispositions of property contained in or made by the
instruments mentioned in section 2, namely, (a) section 13 of the ‘Transfer
of Property Act, 1882, and (b) section 113 of the Indian Succession Act,

1925.”

(2) The dispositions of property contained in or made by the instruments
Mentioned in section 2, the enactments mentioned in the first column of the
Gchedule to this Act shall apply, and be deemed to have always applied,
with the omissions and modification specified in the second column of the

Schedule.

“4. Saving—Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect or prejudice in
any way any right, title or interest accrued to any person under a final decree”
or order of a competent court or acquired by any person for valuable
consideration before the coming into force of this Act.

(Schedule not reproduced ).”

tLaw Commission of India, 70th Report (Transfer of Property Act).

*70th Report, paras 21.8 to 21.13.

»Paruck, Indian Succession Act (1966), page 238.

¢Sopher v. Adntinistrator Gencral of West Bengal, ALR. 1944 P.C67.

STransfer of Property and Succession (An:endment) Bill, 1946 (Gazette of India, Part V, Page
92, dt. 16-2-1946).

*Dispositions of Property (Bombay) Validation Act (Bombay Act $4 of 1947).


Recommendation in
earlier Report (T.P.
Act).

mumendation 2s

134

The Commission further proceeded to observe: —
21.10. Recomunendation to repeal section 13—

We are of the view that having regard to the fact that there is also in
force the rule against perpetuities, it is mot necessary that the rule in
section 13 should be continued on the statute book. This section seems to
have been suggested by the “corresponding section in the Succession Act,
and the Report of the Law Commission relating to the Succession Act,
1865, merely states that it has been provided that the interest to be given
to the unborn child must extent to the whole of the interest. Having regard
to the fact that the object of the law to prevent provisions fettering the
free circulation or postpOning the vesting of property is sufficiently achieved
by section 14, we think that section 13 should be deleted, Even if the
unborn person is allowed to take a limited interest, the subsequent interest
must vest within the period allowed by section 14 and this, in our view, is
enough as a safeguard”,

“21.11. Alternative recommendation—However, if it is decided not to
delete the section, it is, in our view, necessary to make it clear that condi-
tions of the nature involved in Sopher’s case which, while fiot restricting
the quantum of interest of the unborn person, make it defeasible or affect
the certainty of its vesting, are not to be construed as violating section 13.
21.12. Child in the womb—lIt is also necessary—if the section is retained—
to add an Explanation to the effect that a child in the womb, if born alive,
is not deemed to be an unborn person. Such an addition would be merely
codifying the judicial construction.”

17.7, The discussion in the earlier Report ends with the following recom-

mendations: —

“Our recommendation, then, is that—
(a) Section 13 should be deleted;

(b) In the alternative, that is to say, if section 13 is retained, clarification
as suggested above should be made on two points, namely :—

(i) the scope of the expression “extends to the whole of the remain-
ing interest” should be explained; and
(it) the case of child in the womb should be dealt with expressly”.

17.8. We have quoted in extenso the discussion in the earlier Report of

Recomm 113, Suc- he Taw Commission, as the reasoning is equally applicable to section 313 of

cession Act.

Section 114-Rule
against perpetuity.

Recommendations

made in Report on

the Succession Act. In fact, the decision in Sopher’s case’. which was one of the
important background materials considered in the earlier Report, was rendered
on a construction of section 113 of the Succession Act.

In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 113 should

be amended on the ines stated above, if it is not deleted totally.

17.9. This takes us to section 114, Section 114 provides that no bequest

is valid whereby the vesting of the thing bequeathed may be delayed beyond
the lifetime of one or more persons living at the testator’s death and the minority
of some person who shall be in existence at the expiration of that period, and
to whom, if he attains full age. the thing bequeathed is to belong.

17.10. The section corresponds to section 14 of the Transfer of Property

Act. The Law Commission has, in its Report on that Act, recommended? certain

Transfer of Property changes in section 14. Similar amendments should be made in section 114,

Act.

Succession Act also, which is in pari materia with section 14.

The matter was put in that Report in the form of propositions as follows :—

“(L) Proposition I

In applying section 14 (0 an interest in property limited to take effect at
or after the termination of one or more life interest of persons in being

‘Sopher v. Adm. General of Bengal, A.1.R. 1944 P.C. 67.
“Law Commission of India, 70th Report (Transfer of Property Act) paras 22.$0 to 22.65,


135

when the period mentioned in section 14, commences to run or on or after
the termination of lives of persons in being when such period commences
to run, the validity. of the interest shall be determined on the basis of the
facts existing at the termination of such one or more life estates or lives.

Explanation—For the purposes of this proposition, an interest which must para 16.10
terminate not later than the death of one or more persons is a life interest,
even though it may terminate at an earlier time.’ *

(2) Propositien 2

If an intcrest in property would be void under section 14 because it is
contingent upon any person attaining or failing to attain an age in excess
of majority, the contingency shall be reduced to the age of majority, as
regards all persons subject to the same age contingency.

(3) Proposition 3

Propositions j and 2 shall not be construced as invalidating or modifying
the term of any limitation which would have been valid under section 14
apart from those propositions.*

(Note : Propositions 1 and 2 are intended to validate certain gifts that would
be invalid by reason of certain hardships ‘arising from the present law. If,
however, a gift is valid under the present law, then propositions 1 and 2
are not called into operation).

(4) Proposition 4
Propositions 1 to 3 shall apply to:—

(a) transfers taking effect on or after the date on which those proposi-
tions become operative.

(b) appointments made after that date in exercise of a power of .
appointment, including appointments made by an instrument under a
power created before that date.‘

“By way of explanation of paragraph (b) it may be stated that when a
power has been created before the amended law becomes operative, and
the appointment is made after that date, the new law is intended to apply
to the interest created by the exercise of that power”.

17.11. We now proceed to section 115. According to Section 115, if 3 8८४०७ 115.
bequest is made to a class of persons with regard to some of whom it is inopera~ °
tive by reason of the provisions of section 113 or section 114 such bequest

shall be void in regard to those persons only, and not in regard to the whole

class.

The section needs no change.

17.12. According to section 116, where, by reason of any of the rules Secton 116-Bequest
contained in section 113 and 114, any bequest in favour of a person or of a to take effect on
class of persons is void in regard to such person or the whole of such class, failure of prior be-
any bequest contained in the same will and intended to take effect after or upon quest,
failure of such prior bequest is also void.

The section needs no change.
17.13. Section 117 provides as follows: —

“117, (1) Where the terms of a will direct that the income arising from section 117—Effect
any property shall be accumulated either wholly or in part during any of direction for ac-
period longer than a period of eighteen years from the death of the testator, cumulation,

such direction shall, save as hereinafter provided, be void to the extent to

¥70th Report, para 22.56.
*For signifiance of the Explanation, see 70th Report, para 22.57,
*70th Report, para 22.64.

*70th Report , para 22.65.


136

which the period during which the accumulation is directed exceeds the
aforesaid period, and at the end of such period of eighteen years the
Property and income thereof shall be disposed of as if the period during
which the accumulation has been directed 10 be made had elapsed.

(2) This section shall not affect any direction for accumulation for the
purpose of :—
(i) the payment of the debts of the testator or any other person taking
any interest under the will; or
Gi) the provisions of portions for children or remoter issue of the
testator or of any other person taking any interest under the will, or
(ili) the preservation or maintenance of any property bequeathed ;

and such direction may be made accordingly.”
The section needs no change.

Section 118. 17.14, Section 118 imposes certain restrictions in relation to bequests for
religious or charitable uses. If the testator has a nephew or niece or any “nearer
relative”, he cannot bequeath any property to religious or charitable uses,
except by a will (i) executed not less than 12 months before his death, and
(ii) deposited within six months from its execution in some place provided by
taw for the safe custody of the wills of living persons. This section does not apply
to Hindus, etc. The section has suffixed to it certain illustrations.

The illustrations to section 118 have been held to be merely enumerative.’

There is no definition, in the section, of the expression ‘religious’ or of the
expression, ‘charitable’. Accordingly, the expressions will have to be construed
in conformity with such judicial decisions as may be applicable.

The object of imposing this restriction is to prohibit death-bed bequests
‘ to religious or charitable uses by person’ having near relation? Apparently,
the assumption is, that there might be undue pressure in such circumstances.

History of Law in 17.15. At one stage, iti England, there were certain restrictions’ in regard

England to bequests of land to charitable trusts by will. Initially, such bequests were even
prohibited’. In 1925, when the Settled Land Act was passed’, another provi-
sion was substituted on the subject. All such restrictions were, however, repealed
in 1960‘, as anchronistic.?

Section inconsis- 47.16, Prima facie, the section does not appear to be consistent with

teat with social 90- modern social notions, Whether a person should, or should not, prefer charity
to near relatives, is a matter which may better be left to his discretion, rather
than be restricted by rigid statutory provisions, The minimum interval of 12
months required by the section, and the compulsory formality of deposit of the
will in safe custody could also cause hardship, in ‘cases where death comes
suddenly or without a prolonged illness. No doubt, the number of persons
making charitable bequests of a considerable value may not be very large.
Nevertheless, the above difficulties do require serious consideration.

Case for deleting 17.17. Having regard to the above consideration, there is a plausible case
tection 118, and al- for deleting section 118. Taking note of this aspect, we had included, in the
Workinerepess the Working Paper circulated on the subject, a proposal for deleting the "section
and invited views on the subject. However, appreciating that total deletion of
section 118 may be regarded by some persons as too drastic a course, we had

1Commissioner of Income-Tax v. National Mutual Association, LL.R. $7 Bom. 519.
*Paruck, Succession Act, (1977), page 313.

*Mortmain and Charitable Uses Act, 1891 (repealed).

‘Mortmain and Charitable Uses Act, 1891 (repealed).

‘Section 254), Settled Land Act, 1925 (repealed).

"Charities Act, 1960.

’See criticism by Nathan Committee (Committee on Cheritable Trusts) Report (195
63.64 paragraps 262-276, ) Report (1952), pages


137

also put forth, in the Working Paper, an alternative proposal, whereunder, while
the section would be retained, its rigour could be mitigated by making certain

needed amendments. .

17.18. The rigour of the present section could be mitigated (a) by remov- Amendment as en
ing the provision for deposit, and (0) removing the minimum interval, and #lternatve.
(c) by merely substituting a requirement that one of the near relatives must
be an attesting witness, The expression “near relative’ can be suitably defined’
as meaning a nephew or niece or a nearer relative,

17.19. There is one more change, which js worth consideration with re- Section 118-‘neares
ference to section 118, if the section is to be retained. The words ‘nearer ‘elative’.
relative’ occurring in the section have raised a controversy, The Madras High
Court has held? that a widow is not a ‘nearer relative’. A bequest to charity by
4 person who dics two days after the making of the will, leaving a widow, was
accordingly held to be valid, on the ground that this section had no application
to any relationship’ by marriage. In coming to this conclusion, the judges relied
on the word ‘nearer’, which they regarded as conclusive. That word, in their
opinion, postulated a relationship which could be measured by degrees. There
could not be any question of measuring ‘nearness’ (or distance) by comparison
between the wife and other relatives,

A contrary view has, however, becn taken by the Bombay High Court,‘
holding that the widow is included in the term ‘nearer relative’.

We are not concerned with the question as to which is the true construction
of the section as it stands as present. But the Bombay view’ appears to be
preferable in order to protect the interests of the widow. If the section is to be
retained, it appears to be desirable to incorporate that view.

Section 118 thus needs to be amended so as to ensure that a bequest to
charity shalt not be valid if the testator’s spouse is alive, unless the will be
executed in accordance with certain special requirements. The object could be 1
achieved by inserting the following Explanation below the section:—

“Explanation: The spouse of a person shall be deemed to be the nearest
relative Of that person for the purposes of this section.”

17.20, Of the comments received by us on the Working Paper on the y,
subject, only on ome—a suggestion forwarded through the Catholic Bishops’ Micps on the Work:
Conference of India’—has dealt with section 118, and the view expressed is mmendation
that deletion of section 118 would be too radical a course, and that it would
be better to amend the section rather than delete it.

Although our own inclination is for deleting the section, we think that, at
least for the present, it would suffice if section 118 is amended on the lines
already indicated in the preceding discussion.” We recommende that the section
should be so amended.

17.21. The relations contemplated by section 118 are, according to judicial Section 118—the
construction, legitimate relations flowing from lawful wedlook. In a Bombay uetion of légiti
case, where it was so held, Batchelor J. held that the Indian Succession Act ™#-
was based on English Law, and defined relationship flowing from lawful wedlock
only. A bastard, in the eye of the law, was nullius filius*

Mustrations to section {18 will need consequential modifications.

*Administrator General v. Simpson, (1902) I.L.R.26 Mad. 532.

3Contrast section 25(1}, Indian Contract Act, 1872,

‘pinbai v. Pestonjee, 0.5. No. 997 of 1917 (Bombay) referred to in Paruck, Indian Succession
Act, (Sth Bd.), page 259.

spara 17.19, supra.
‘Catholic Bishop's conference of India, New Delhi, letter dated 3rd October, 1984,

*Paragraphs 17.28.and 17.19, supra.
*Erma Agnes Smith v. Thomas Massey, 1.L.R.30 (1906) Bom,500,

*Compare judicial decisions on section 37.


fee 118A-Pro-

ision in regard to
ities as recom~
ded in.

[४०० 119 to 121.

119-Date of
E of legacy

sion postpon-

13S

17.22. There is another point concerning charities which needs to be
considered, The Transfer of Property Act! provides, in effect, that the restrictions
imposed by the Act with respect to (i) the rule against perpetuity, (1) the rule
as to a transfer which is to take effect on failure of prior (invalid) interest, and
(ili) the rule as to direction for accumulation, do not apply in the case of
transfer of property (inter-vivous) for the benefit of the public for certain
specified purposes (broadly, charitable purposes). We may also add that the
Law Commission in its Report on the Act has Suggested some changes. Section
18 of the Transfer of Property Act as recommended (to the revised) is as
follows: —

“18. The restrictions in sections 14, 16 and 17 shall not apply in the case of
a transfer of property for the benefit of the public, in the relief of poverty,
the advancement of religion, education, commerce, health, safety, or any
other object beneficial to mankind,”

17.23, The Succession Act does not make any such concession in the case
of charities. We however, see no reason why such concessions ought not to be
provided in the Succession Act also, Accordingly, we recommend that a new
section—say, as section 118A—should be inserted as follows, to provide that the
corresponding provisions of the Succession Act shall not apply to bequests.

“118A, The restrictions contained in sections 114, 116 and 117 shall not
apply in the case of a bequest for the benefit of the public, for the relief
of proverty or the advancement of religion, education, commerece, health,
safety or any Other object beneficial to mankind.”

CHAPTER 18
VESTING OF LEGACIES (SECTIONS 119 TO 121)

18.1. Certain fundamental rules as to the vesting of legacies are enacted in
sections 119 to 121,

Where a legacy is given in general terms, without specifying the time when
it is to be paid, the legatee has a vested interst in it from the day of death of
the testator. This principle, already enacted in the Chapter* realing with rules
for.the construction of wills, finds re-iteration in section 119, which provides,
in effect, that this rule applies even if the legatee is not entitled to immediate
Possession of the thing bequeathed, unless a contrary intention appears from the
will. The date of vesting when the legacy is contingent upon a specified uncer-
tain event is dealt within section 120, Under section 121, where the bequests
are made to members of a class who attain a particular age, a person who has
Not attained that age cannot have a vested interest in the legacy.

18.2. Section 119 reads:

“119. Where by the terms of a bequest the legatee is not entitled to im-
mediate possession of the thing bequeathed, a tight to receive it at the
proper time shall unless a contrary intention appears by the will, become
vested in the legatee on the testator's death, and shall pass to the legatee’s
representatives i he dies before that time and without having received
the legacy, and in such cases the legacy is from the testator’s death said to
be vesied in interest.

Explanation: An intention that a legacy to any person shall not become
vested in interest in him is not to be inferred merely from a_ provision

~TSection 18, Transfer of Property Act, 1882.
3866 Law Commission of India, 70th Report (Transfer of Property Act),
*Section 104,


139

whereby the payment or possession of the thing bequeathed is postponed,
Or whereby a prior interest therein is bequeathed to some other person,
or whereby the income arising from the fund bequeathed is directed to be
accumulated until the time of payment arrives, or from a provision that,
if a particular event shall happen, the legacy shall go over to another person”.

The section needs no change.

18.3. Section 120 deals with the date of vesting when a legacy is contingent Section 120.
upon a specified uncertain event. The legacy may be dependent cither on the
happening of the event, or on the non-happening of the event. In the former
case, the legacy docs not vest until the event happens. In the latter case, the
legacy does not vest until the event becomes impossible, Until vesting, the
interest of the legatee is called a “contingent”,

18.4, There is an Exception dealing with the case where a fund is be- section 120 Excep-

queathed 10 any person upon his attaining a particular age, and the will also tion.

gives to him absolutely the income to arise from the fund before be reaches that

age, or directs that the income, or so much of it as may be necessary, is to be

applied for his benefit. In such a case, the bequest-is not contingent. This nega-

tive provision in the Exception, of course, really means that the bequest vests

at the time at which it would otherwise vest. Illustrations (xi) and (xiii) to the

section bring out the applicability of the Exception.

It shoulc’ however, be noted that the scope of the Exception is somrewhat
cut down by the provision in section 121, where a bequest is made to members
of a class attaining a particular age.’ It is clear from the illustration to section
121°, that where a bequest is made [0 only such members of the class as shall
have attained a particular age, a person who has not attained that age cannot
have a vested interest in the legacy, (this is the provision in the section), and
this rule applies even where the income of the share to which a particular child
would be eventually entitled, is directed to be applied for his maintenance and
education till he attains a particular age. (This is contained in the illustration
ta section 121).

Thus, section 121 overrides the provision contained in the Exception to
section 120. It appears to be desirable to bring out this aspect, i.e., the overrid-
ing effect of section 121 (as construed in the light of the illustration to that
section) more clearly, by amending the Exception to section 120. Scuh an
amendment seems to be advisable in order to avoid any apparent misconception
that might otherwise be caused by the wide language of the Exception to
section 120.

18.5. Accordingly, we recommend that in section 120, Exception, the Recommendation,
following proviso should be inserted at ihe end: .

“Provided that nothing in this Exception shall affect the provisions of

section 121."

18.6, Section 121 reads:— Section 121-Vesting

“121. Where a bequest is made only to such members of a class as shall Cf interestin bequest

have attained a particular age, a person who has not attained that age can- a class as shall have
not have a vested interest in the legacy. attained particular
Hlastration

A fund is bequeathed to such of the children of A as shall attain the age
of 18, with a direction that, while any child of A shall be under the age
of 18, the income of the share, to which it may be presumed he will be
eventually entitled, shall be applied for his maintenance and education.
No child of A who is under the age of 18 has a vested interest in the
bequest.”

The section needs no change. The relationship of this section to the Excep-
tion to section 120 has been already dealt with?

3Sectoon 121.

*Para 18.6 infra.

sPara 18.4, supra.
85-L/KD)L44MofLI&CA—10


140

CHAPTER 19
ONEROUS BEQUESTS (SECTIONS 122 AND 123)
Scope. 19.1. Onerous bequests form the subject matter of two sections—sections
122 and 123, which are simple and self-explanatory.
Sections. 122-One- 19.2, Section 122 reads as under:—

Tous Bequests.
“122, Where. a bequest imposes an obligation on the legatee, he can take
nothing by it unless he accepts it fully.

ILLUSTRATION

A, having shares in (X), a prosperous joint stock company and also

shares in (Y), a joint stock company in difficulties, in respect of which

shares heavy calls are expected to be made, bequeaths to B all his shares
in joint stock companies; B refuses to accept the shares in (Y). He for-

feits the shates in (X)”.

19.3. The underlying principle is to some extent analogous to the doctrine
of election, If you take a benefit, then you also take the burden. In an onerous be-
quest, the testator bequeaths the property with an obligation annexed to it; in the
case governed by election, the testator confers a benefit on the legatee, depriving him
simultaneously of some other interest belonging to the legatee. In both the cases,
something not beneficial is tagged on to the benefit.

Principle analogous
to election.

oye 19.4, A Calcutta case illustrates! the application of the section. The plaintiff
Application. (appellant) had claimed partition of two houses and certain movable property
in the possession of his step mother and other three half-brothers, It was alleged
by the step-mother and her sons that the property had been gifted to the step
mother by her husband (ic. the appellant's father), The applellant’s father had
stipulated a condition in the gift deed that a maintenance allowance of Rs, 5
must be paid by the donee (step-mother) and she was not aware of this condi-
tion. It was held that the appellant’s father handed over the document and she
accepted it as a gift, without thinking of doing anything contrary to its terms,
and constituted acceptance. It was not necessary that there should be ac-
ceptance of the onerous condition alongwith the acceptance of the gift. Assent
of the donee is presumed until and unless he disclaims.

The section does not seem to need any change.

i 2 —
Section 123-One of 19,5. Section 123 reads:

हक rate and in- “123, Where a will contains 1७० separate and independent bequests to the
tovame at bequests same person, the legatee is at liberty to accept one of them and refuse the
be accepted, and other. although the former may be beneficial and the latter onerous.
other refused.
ILLUSTRATION

A, having a lease for a term of years of a house at a rent which he and

his representatives are bound to pay during the term, and which is higher

than the house can be let for, bequeaths to B the lease and a sum of

money. B refuses to accept the lease. He will not by this refusal forfeit the

money.”

The section needs no change.

CHAPTER 20
CONTINGENT BEQUESTS : SECTIONS 124 AND 125
1. Introductory

Contingent bequest- 20.1, Contingent bequests ure dealt with in sections 124 and 125. A be-

quest may be contingent upon a specified uncertain event, (section 124) or on

ee

\Sarba Mohan ६. Manmohan, A.1.R. 1933 Cal. 488.


141

survivorship (section 125). Where no time is mentioned for the occurrence of
the unecertain event, the material time for such occurrence is the time of pay-
ment or distribution. That is the gist of section 124. Where no time is specified
for the survivorship, the material time, again, is the time of payment or distri-
bution, according to section 125, But that section is expressly made subject to
a contrary intention—a provision which is not found in section 124,

20.2. Of these two sections, section 124, because of its rigidity and because Section 124—

4 iscussi ० seti — Bequest contingent
of certain other defects, needs discussion. The setion reads as under: pen uncertain eves
“124, Where a legacy is given if a specified uncertain event shall happen Specified being

and no time is mentioned in the will for the occurrence of that event, the
legacy cannot take effect, unless such event happens before the period when
the fund bequeathed is payable or distributable.”

ILLUSTRATIONS

“(i) A legacy is bequeathed to A, and, in case of his death, to B. If A
survives the testator, the legacy of B does not take effect. ,

(1) A legacy is bequeathed to A, and in case of his death without children,
to 8. If A survives the testator or dies in his lifetime leaving a child, the
legacy to B dues not take effect.

(iii) A legacy is bequeathed to A when and if he attains the age of 18, and,
in case of his death, to B. A attains the age of 18, The legacy to B does
not take effect.

(iv) A legacy is bequeathed to A for life, and, after his death to B, and
“in case of B’s death without children”, to ९. The words “in case of B’s
death without children” are to be understood as meaning “in case B dies
without children during the lifetime of A.”

(v) A legacy is bequeathed to A for life, and, after his death to 8, and,
“In case of B’s death”, to C. The words “in case of B’s death” are to be
considered as meaning “in case B dies in the lifetime of A.”

20.3. Section 124, as has been pointed out by the Privy Council,’ is based Engtish cases,
on the English case of Edwards V. Edwards*. The English case, has however,
been partly overruled by the House of Lords.* The House of Lords Judgment!
was described by the Privy Council (in another appeal from India) as “one
which emerged through a thicket of technical decisions to a ground of plain and
pre-eminent good sense.”

20.4. Our examination of setion 124 reveals that the section suffers from 5५७०७
certain serious defects, If these defects are 10 be rectified, a modification of the tion 124,
text of the section, as well as of illustrations two and four to the section, will be
needed, Details of the needed amendment will be indicated in the course of the
discussion in the succeeding paragraphs.

in Sece

20.5. Let us first dispose of the second illustration to Section 124. 116 gition 124 second
facts presented in the second illustration are as under: A legacy is bequeathed itlustration.
to A and, in case of his death without children, to B. If A survives the testator
or dies in his lifetime leaving a child, the legacy to B does not take effect, ac-
cording to the illustration. The illustration does not, however, seem to be in
conformity with English Jaw, nor with realities. In fact, even the earlier English
case® on which the main part of the section is based, did not lay down any such
proposition applicable in all cases. Lord Romilly M. R. in that case, taking uf

_. ~

\Bhupendrav. Amarendra, (1916) 1.1... 43 Cal., 432, 440(P.C.)
*Edwards v. Edwards, (1852) 15 Beav., 357; 51 E.R. 576,

30° Mahenv v. Burdert, (1874) L.R., 7 HLL., 388. See para 20.11, infra,
‘Chunilat v. Bai Samrath, (1914) LL.R. 38 Bom. 399, 413 (P.C.).
‘Edwards v. Edwards, (1852) Law Journal (Chancery) 324.



142

the second class of cases, namely, gifts to A for life and if he shall die without
children. then a gift over. observed as follows:—

“In the second of the supposed cases, there is a manifest distinction, There
the event spoken of on which the legacy is to go over is not a certain, but
a contingent event. It is not in case of the death of A but in case of his
death without children ........ In these cases, it has always been held
that if at any time, whether before or ajter the death uf the testator, A died
without leaving a child. the gift over takes effect, and the legacy vests
inB ........--- ~

Second illustration 20.6, In view of these observations in the judgment in the earlier English

partly inaccurate. case, it is surprising that the second illustration to section 124 states that the
gift to 8 does not take effect where A (ithe first holder) “survives the testator”.
A may survive the testator, but may die without Jeaving a child, In such a case,
according to the earlier English case, the gilt over takes effect. The second
illustration is thus different from the English position,

Need for amend- 20.7. In our view, the English rule correctly reflects the testator's intentions
meat of the second in the generality of cases. The second illustration should, therefore, be revised
itlustration. as under:——

“(iy A legacy is bequeathed to A, and in case of his death without
children, to B. If A survives the testator and dies leaving a child, or dies
in his lifetime leaving a child the legacy to B docs not take effect. Bur if
A dies without leaving « child, whether before or after the death of the
testator, the legacy to B takes effect.”

20.8. The tourth illustration to section 124 also requires detailed comment.
Under the illustration as given in the Act,' the words referring to B's death
without children arc to be understood as meaning “in case B dies without
children during the life time of A.”

Section 124—fourth
illustration,

Earlier English 20.9, The section here gives statutory effect to the earlier English case*,

case. now over- In fact, the fourth illustration to the section actually reproduces the fourth rule

7०००. enunciated in that case.* However, this particular rule has, in England, been
overruled by iwo decision‘ of the House of Lords."

है aia 20.10. According to the present English law, where the legacy is given in

Brest Position "" the circumstances specified in section 124, “death” would mean (unless the will
indicates an intention to the contrary), death at any time, and not merely death
in the life time of the prior holder.

s 20.11, In this connection, it may be of interest to note that section 124
Fate development reproduces section 111 of the Indian Succession Act of 1865, which was itself
based (in part) on the English law as then understood. (However, the second
illustration to section 124, taken over from the earlier Act, does not follow even
the earlier English’ law). The law on the subject was altered by two judgments
of the House of Lords pronounced in 1874, which ate very much material to a
consideration of section 124, particularly the fourth illustration. In the House
of Lords, there was an cxecutory bequest whose vesting depended upon the
“death” of the previous holder without issue. The question to be considered was,
whether the contingency of ‘death’ referred 10 death of the previous holder
before the preceding life estate came to an end, or whether it referred to his
death taking place at any time, that is to say, death before or after the life-
time of the holder of the preceding life estate. The earlier English judgement—
Edwards vy, Edwards 4th Rule,—would have supported the first construction,

‘Paragraph 20.2., suprw.
*Edwards v. Edwards, (1852) 15 beav. 357.
M. ‘Law of Executory Bequests’ (#936) 38 Bombay Law Reporter (Journal) |
40'Makeney ९. Burdett, (1874) Law Reports 7 House of Lords 388.
-angram ४. Soutten, (1874) Law Reports 7 House of Lords 408.
*See paragraph 20.11, infra.
*See para 20.5., supra.



but the House of Lords overruled! that part of the earlier judgment and held
that unless the will indicated a contrary intention, the contingency in question
(death without issuc) referred to the death of the previous holder without leav-
ing issue at any time and not necessary to his death before the termination of
the preceding life estate. As a result, the first person 10 whom an_ absolute estate
is given under the will would take it, subject to the defeasance clause in favour
of the executory bequest operating in the manner mentioned above.

Lord Heatherly suggested that the fourth rule enunciated in the earlier
English case would be better stated thus? :—

“The period to which the executory devise will be referred will be the
period of death of the fist taker, unless there are directions in the will
Inconsistent with that supposition”,

20.12. Thus, the forth illusteation incorporates a rule now discarded in
England, Jt has also been pointed out® that Hindu law as it was administered in
India (before the statutory law of succession was extended to Hindus) was pre-
cisely the same as the English rule established by the House of Lords in its
decisions of 1874,

20.13. It is further proper to pvint out that, with reterence to section 111
of the Succession Act of 1865, (i.c. the predecessor of the present section 124)
Wallis C. J. had in a Madras case‘ observed that section was “rather an_unfor-
tunate section” which was enacted to give statutory effect to the decision in
Edwards y, Edwards which was, in part over-ruled after the passing of the
Indian Succession Act by the House of Lords.

20.14. Let us now examine if there is any theoretical reason for adhering
to the old English rule on the point discussed above. Prima face, the old English
role would. oe

(B) The fourth illustration to section 124 should also be revised in con-
formity with the above recommendation, The object could be achieved by re-
framing the last eleven words of the illustration as under:—

“in case B dies without children during or after the lifetime of A.”

20.17. The second illustration to section 124 should also be revised, as
already recommended’, पु

20,18. This takes us to section 125, it reads as uoder:—

“125. Where a bequest is made to such of certain persons as shall be
surviving at some period, but the:exact period is not specified, the legacy
shall go to such of them as are alive at the time of payment or distribution,
unless a contrary intention appears by the will.”

Four illustrations appearing below the section are quoted below :—

“) Property is bequeathed to A ang B to be equally divided between
them, or to the survivor of them, If both A and B survive the testator, she
legacy is equally divided between them. If A dies before the testator. and
B survives the testator, it goes to B.

(1) Property is bequeathed to A for life, and, after his death, to B and C.
to be equally divided between them, or to the survivor.of them. B dies
during the life of A, C survives A, At A’s death the legacy goes to C.

(0) Property is bequeathed to A for life, and after his death to B and C,
or the survivor, with a direction that, if B should not survive the testator, his

1CF paragraph 20.3, supra.
*0'Makeny ¥. Burdett... (1874) L.R.7 HLL, 388, 404.

Xa) Soorjeemoney Dosce v. Denobundoo Mullick, (862) 9 MLA. 123 (९.९...
(8) Bhoobun Mohint, v. Hurvish Chander, (1878) LL.R. 4 Cat. 23.
‘Sounderrajan ¥. Natarajan, (1920) LL, .R. 44 Madras 446.

*Para 20.17., supra.

Observation in
Madras case.

Earlier rule whether
defensible,

Change recemmend-
ed in second illus-
tration 10 section
124.

Section 125—Bequ-
est to such of certain
persons shall be
surviving at some
period not specified.


144

children are to stand in his place. C dies during the life of the testator; B
survives the testator, but dics in the lifetime of A. The legacy goes to the
representatives of B.

(iv) Property is bequeathed to A for life, and after his death, to B and C,
with a direction that, in case either of them dies in the lifetime of A, the
whole shall go to the survivor, B dies in the lifetime of A. Afterwards C
dies in the lifetime of A. The legacy goes to the representative of C”.

‘The section has created no problems and we have no changes to recommend
in the section.

CHAPTER 21
CONDITIONAL BEQUESTS—SECTIONS 126~137
T. Introductory

Conditional 21.1, The power of the testator to dispose of his Property by will implies!

Bequests. that he has power to make a disposition which is (i) absolute or (ii). condi-
tional? The power to impose conditions in regard to dispositions made in a
will, though not enacted in so many words, is implicitly recognised by a number
of sections of the Act.

Conditions _pre- 21.2. The position in this respect is substantially the same in India as in

cedent and subse- England,’ namely, a testator may, by his will, freely attach conditions to his

quent. gifts, provided the conditions do not conflict ‘with certain recognised — restric-
tions and are not inconsistent with the other provisions of the will, Conditions
are either “precedent”, i.e., precedent to the vesting of the bequest on which the
condition is imposed or subsequent, i.e., conditions which divest the estate al-
ready vested. In the later case, again, there may or may not be a bequest to
another person, Conditions must, however, be such that their performance is
not illegal,

Sections 126-137 21.3. Certain aspects of conditional beq
grouped under 126 to 137. The provisions relating to co
id categories. these broad categories: —

ts form the subject matter of section
ional bequests can be grouped under

(a) Conditions which are impossible, or contrary to law or to morality:

Sections 126-127.

Conditions precedert—compliance therewith, and the effect of non-
compliance : sections 128 to 130.

(०) Conditions subsequent with a bequest over-compliance therewith, and
the effect of non-compliance: sections 131—133.

(b

(d) Conditions subsequent with no ulterior bequest : sections 134 to 137,

‘e) Time for performance of condition precedent and condition subse-
quent, section 137.

TI. Void bequests.

Section 126—Be 21.3A. Section 126 reads:—
quest BRON im-
Possible condition. “126. A bequest upon an impossible condition is void,

ILLUSTRATIONS.

(i) An estate is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall walk 100 miles
in an hour, The bequest is void.

"Section 59.
*Cf. section 8, Transfer of Proverty Act, 1882.
5e.g., secti9ns 119-137,

‘Halsbury, 3rd Ed. Vol. 39, page 914, page 1386,


145

(1) A bequeaths 500 rupees wo B on condition that he shall marry A’s
daughter, A’s daughter was dead at the date of the will, The bequest is void.”

The section needs no change.
21.4. Section 127 reads— Section 127—Con-
jon contrary to

“127. A bequest upon a condition, the fulfilment of which would be con-'4¥ or morality.
trary 10 Jaw or to morality, is void,

ILLUSTRATIONS.

(i) A bequeaths 500 rupees to B on condition that he shall murder C, The
bequest is void.
Gi) A bequeaths 5,000 rupees १७० his niece if she will desert her husband,
The bequest is void.”
ion 1127—Con-

The section needs no change. S:
dition contrary to
21.4, Section 127 127 reads— faw or morality,
“127, A bequest upon a condition, the fulfilment of which would be contrary
to law or to morality, is void.
ILLUSTRATIONS.

(i) A bequeaths 500 rupees to 8 on condition that he shal! murder C. The
bequest is void,

Gi) A bequeaths 5000 mupees to his niece if she will desert her husband.
The bequest is void”.

21.5, While section 127 mentions “law and morality”, it does not mention public policy a
“public policy”, It is elementary that transactions infer. vivos are. void if opposed wider concept.
to public policy, and bequests should stand on the same footing, Public policy is
a wider concept than ‘law or morality’, It may cover, for example, interference
with the administration of justice, restraint of marriage and other matters which
may not be embraced by “morality”. Questions have, in particular, arisen as to
the validity of restraints on marriage, inserted in contracts and wills. As to wills,
in a Bombay case,’ the testator had put a condition whereunder if a legatee
married a non-Zoroastrian, the property would pass to another. Chagla C. J.
held that such a condition would not be considered as contrary to “law or
morality” under section 127 of the Indian Succession Act. Discussion of the
aspect of restraint on marriage as violating public policy was held to be irrelc-
vant, having regard to the fact that section 127 concerns itself only with “law
and morality”.
21.6 It may be noted that the Transfer of Property Act’ is more specific ppanster of Pro
on the subject. Under that Act, no transfer can be made for an unlawful object perty Act.
or consideration within the meaning of section 23 of the Indian Contract Act,
1872. Section 23 of the Contract Act, inter-alia, renders void agreements the
consideration or object whereof is opposed to “public policy”.

21,7, In our view, section 127 should be amended by specifically adding Recommendation
‘public policy’, On principle, bequests contrary to public policy should not beto add "Public
regarded as valid. Moreover. as already stated,’ there 18 no reason why the rule policy’
applicable to bequests should be different from the rule applicable to gifts, We.
therefore, recommend that in section 127, after the words ‘or morality’. the
words “or to public policy” should be inserted.

After the proposed amendment, the section will read as under:—-

“127. A bequest upon a condition, the fulfilment of which would be can-
trary to law or to morality or to public policy, is void".

. Secti —
21.8, Section 128 reads:— शिवा oF pro
cedent to vesting

“128. Where a will inposes a condition to be fulfilled before the lepatee of legacy,
can take a vested interest in the thing bequeathed, the condition shall be
considered to have been fulfilled if jt has been substantially complied with.

aan. ४. The Official Trustee of Bombay, ALR. 1948 Bom. 319.

'Khurshed Maneck ४. The Official Trustee of Bombay
*Section 840) (2), Transfer of Property Act, 1882,
*para 21, 5, supra.



Sections 129 to 133,

Section 131~-Be-
quest dependent on

a condition,

146

ILLUSTRATIONS

(i) A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with the
consent of B, C, D and E. A marries with the written consent of B, C is
present at the marriage. 12 sends a present 10 A previous to the marriage. E
has been personally informca by A of his intentions, and has made no objec-
tion. A has fulfilled the condition.

(ii) A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with the
consent of B, C and D. D dies, A marries with the consent of B and C. A
has fulfilled the condition,

Gil} A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with
the consent of B, C and D. A marries in the lifetime of B, C and D, with
the consent of B and C only. A has not fulfilled the condition.

(iv) A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with the
cousent of B, C & D, A obtains the unconditional assent of 3, C and. D, to
his marriage with Afterwards B, C and D capriciously retract their
consent. A marries E. A has fulfilled the condition,

{v) A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with the
consent of 8. C and D. A marries without the consent of B, C and D, but
obtains their consent after the marriage. A has not fulfilled the condition.
(vi) A makes his will whereby he bequeaths a sum of money to B if B
shall marry with the consent of A’s executors. B, marries during the life-
time of A, and A, afterwards expresses his approbation of the marriage.
A dies. The bequest to B takes effect.

(vii) A legacy is bequeathed to A if he executes a certain document with-
in a time specified in the will. The document is executed by A within a
reasonable time, but not wi the time Spec ified in the will. A has not
performed the condition, and is not entitled to receive the legacy.”

The section needs no change.

ITI, Successive bequests.

21.9. The same property may be the subject matter of successive bequests.
Subject to certain conditions, bequest of the same thing to one person, and there-
after to another person, is not prohibited. However, it becomes necessary to
provide rules for working out the exact Operation of such bequests, These rules
are contained in sections 129 to 133. Such rules, are needed in order to deal
with a variety of situations :—for example,

(a) where there is a failure of the prior bequest (sections 129 and 130), or

(b) the subsequent bequest is dependent on a condition (sections 131 -and
132), or

(९०) the subsequent bequest itself is not valid (section 133).

No changes appear to be needed in these sections. But it would be con-
venient to draw attention to a few salient points, though of minor importance.

21.10. Taking, first, section 231 which deals with a bequest dependent on
2 condition, it would appear that if non-satisfaction of the condition (to be
satisfied under the will for retaining a bequest) js ne account of duress or other
circumstances beyond the control of the legatee, then the bequest is not forfeited’.

e following passage from a judgment of Lord Campbell was cited in a
Cileutta case*:—
“Had the Children been included in the arrest, I conceive that their resi-

dence: abroad under continued duress would not have worked: a -forfeiture
and if their residence abroad moy be fairly ascribed to the imprisonment of

‘Tin Couvi vy. Krishna Bhabini, (1894) L.L.R. 20 Cal. 15, 17.
‘Trevelyan, Hindu Wills (2nd Ed.}, pages 125, 126.

*Clavering v. Elfison, 7 HL. Cas., 707, 723.

युक्त Couriv. Krishna Bhabint, (1894) 1.L.R. 20 Cal. 15, 17.



147

their father by Napoleon, the forteiture might he saved on this ground, were
there a necessity to resort to it.”

21.11. As regards section 152, it is based on the rule that conditions sub- Section 132.
sequent which tend to the destruction of an estate already vested should be con-
strued strictly.

21.12. Under section 133. if the ulterior bequest is not valid, the original Section 133. "
bequest is not affected “by it”, ic., by the invalidity of the ulterior bequest. The
principle here is that specific estates which are good in themselves are not in
validated by a subsequent illegal disposition of the residue or remainder,’ and
rir interest is not taken away unless the gift over takes effect.

The first illustration to scction 133 deals with the case of impossibility of
fulfilling the condition on which the ulterior bequest would take effect. The
second illustration deals with the case of illegality of that condition, The third
illustration deals with the case of lapse.’ Invalidity could also arise by reason
of vagueness and uncertainty of the bequest—though these situations are not
illustrated in the iJlustrations‘ to the section,

IV, Bequests ceasing to have effect.

21.13. The testator may make a bequest with a condition that it shall cease Sections 134 and
to have effect in specified cases, without ordering a subsequent disposition 135.

to have effect in specified cases, without ordering a subsequent disposition of

the property. This subject is dealt with in sections 134 and 135,

Section 134 gets rid of the English rule’ under which, in the case of
ty, Certain conditions were void if there is no pitf over, This is
in terrorem.

The sections need no change.

V. Conditions Subsequent

21.14, The conditions super-added on a bequest may be in the form of the Section 136—-Con-
performance of an act by the legatee. In such a case. if no time is specified for ditions in the nature
the performance of the Act, and the legatee takes any step which renders impos- of performance | of
sible or indefinitely postpones the performance of the required act, the legacy“ °Y Teatee
shall go as if the legatee had died without. performing such an act, according to
section 136. The first illustration to the section deals with a case where perfor-
mance of the condition is rendered impossible. The second illustration illustrates
the case where performance of the condition, though not rendered impossible,
is indefinitely postponed. The illustration’ says that if a bequest is made to A,
with a proviso that it shall ccase to have effect if the legatee does not marry B’s
daughter, and the legatee A marries a stranger, then the bequest ceases to have
effect. This illustration raises the interesting question whether such conditions
should take notice of the fact that the legatee has his whole life to perform the
condition. As the section stands, this is not permissible.

21.15. English cases on the subject take a different view, so that if the English Law as
testator has not prescribed a particular period, then the period during which the indefinite post-
condition can be performed, is the entire life time of the donee. ponement.

Under English Jaw, the idefinite postponement of the fulfilment of a condi-
tion does not work as a forfeiture of the estate. Thus, in a case simi

'Khetter ५. Gunganarain. 4 C.W.N. 671, footnote discussing the case law, including Tagore v-
Tagore.
*Dhanlaxmi v. Hariprasad. \.L.R. 45 Bom. 1038, 1044.

sSome commentators regard it as case of remoteness but it may be noted that section 105
is mentioned.

‘Halsbury. 3rd + Vol. 39, page 923, para 1396,
5(a) Evanturel ५. Evanturel, Law Reports 6 Privy Council 11
(89) Baths v. Public Trustee, (1925) 1 Ch. 377.



148

in illustration (ii) to section 136, it was held'+ that in spite of the girl marry-
ing into another family, the performance of the condition was not rendered im-
possible, since she might survive her first husband, and she would not be divested
as the performance of the condition was still possible during her whole life.

Recommendation 21.16, We are of the view that the present English position’ on the subject

to revise section is more just and is in consonance with the general approach of the law which

136. favours the vesting of estates and discourages divesting. We therefore recom-
mend that illustration (ii) to section 136 should be revised in view of what we
have stated above, and the portion in the main section referring to indefinite
postponement be also deleted.

Revised section 136 may read as under: —

“136, Where a bequest is made with a condition super-added that, unless
the legatee shall perform a certain act, the subject-matter of the begest shall
go to another, or the bequest shall cease to have effect, but no time is
specified for the performance of the act; if the legatee takes any step which
renders impossible ....... the performance of the act required, and legacy
shall go as if the legatce had died without performing such act.

ILLUSTRATIONS

(i) A bequest is made to A, with a proviso that, unless he enters the Army,
the legacy shall go cver to B. A takes Holy Orders, and thereby renders
it impossible thet he should fulfil the condition, B is entitled to receive the
legacy.‘

(ii) A bequest is made to A, with a proviso that it shall cease to have any
effect if he does not marry B's daughter. A marries a stranger. Though A
may thereby indefinitely postpone the fulfilment of the condition. he does
not render impossible its fulfilment, The bequest does not cease to have
effect.”

21.17. This takes us to section 137, which provides that where the per-
formance of a condition is to be done within a specified time under the will,
the act must be performed within the specified time, the only exception being
in the case of fraud,

Section 137,

20.18. In relation to fraud, it is to be noticed that in principle the fraud
Requirement 45 ‘© should be of the person who would be benefited by non-performance of the con-
dition. In this connection, if may be noticed that in the Transfer of Property
Act,’ the corresponding provision contains the words “of a person who would
be directly benefited by non-fulfilmgnt of the condition”, These words ought to
appear in section 137 of the Succession Act also’, to improve it in point of
precision.

English law as 21.19. The proviso relating to fraud seems to have been suggested by an

to fraud and OPition expressed in an early English case’, to the effect that if, in that case,

other cases. there had been fraud on the part of the trustees, or, possibly, such laches on
their part as the Court would consider to have been the sole cause of the donee
of the right of pre-emption not having complied strictly with the condition/en-
forced by the will, then the donee is entitled to relief,

Forfeiture _ against 21.19A. Incidentally, it appears that in England, in some cases where a
time limits. in legatee is required to perform a certain act within a certain time, courts have
England. जा . _ 7

\(a) Randal V. Payne, | Bro. ८.0. 55;
(6) Lester ¥. Garland, 15 Ves. 248.
*Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 39, page 930.
*Para 21.15, supra.
‘Illustration (i) as proposed reproduces the existing illustration. It may be that the present
doctrine does not go so far. .
‘Section 34, Transfer of Property Act, 1882.
“See para 20.20, infra.
*Brooke V. Gerrod, 3K & 3 608.


149

jurisdiction to grant relief against forfeiture and the legatee is allowed a reason-
able time within which to perform the condition’.* There was no gift over in
those cases, so that the interests of any alternative legatee were not involved*.

2120. In view of what we have stated avobe,? we recommend that section Recommendation
137 should be amended by adding, after the word “fraud”, the words “of a person 0. amend Section
who would be directly benefited by non-fulfilment of the condition.” .

CHAPTER 22

BEQUESTS WITH DIRECTIONS AS TO APPLICATION OR ENJOYMENT
(Sections 138 to 140)

22.1. Provisions as to bequests with directions as to application or enjoy- scope.
ment of the property bequeathed are to be found in sections 138 to 140, The
principal object of these sections is to define the circumstances in which such
directions can be validly incorporated in the will.

If there is an absolute bequest,’ directions restrictive of application or
enjoyment are void: sections 138 and 139. This is known as the Rule in Lassence
V. Tierney.’ But if there is no absolute bequest, they are valid: section 140, This
general principle underlies the three sections—though, of course, it is not so
simply stated.

22.2, Section 138 provides that where a fund is bequeathed absolutely to OF section 138.
for the benefit of any person, but the will contains a direction that it shall be °
applied or enjoyed in a particular manner, the legatee shall be entitled to receive
the fund as if the will had contained no such direction, Under the illustration, a
sum of money is bequeathed towards purchasing a country residence for A or to
purchase an annuity for A or to place A in any business, A chooses to receive
the legacy in money. He is entitled to do so,

The corresponding section of the Transfer of Property Act is section 11. In
addition, as has been pointed out by one commentator," section 10 of the Transfer
of Property Act also declares to be void a condition in restraint of transfer or
alienation of property. The Succession Act does not contain a similar section, but
the word “enjoyment” in section 138 would include a restraint on alienation.

As to the word “absolutely” in section 138, it qualifies not only the word
“bequeathed”, but also the words “far the benefit of any person”, Hence the
section does not apply to a life interest’

22.3, Section 139 provides that where a testator absolutely bequeaths a fund Section 439
so as to sever it from his own estate, but directs that the mode of enjoyment of गे हु
it by the legatee shall be restricted so as to secure a specified benefit for the legatee,
then, if that benefit cannot be obtained for the legatee, the fund belongs to him
as if the will had contained no such direction.

22.4. There are two illustrations to the section. According to the first illus-
tration, A bequeaths the residue of his property to be divided equally amongst
his daughters, and directs that the shares of the daughters shall he scttled upon

Mlustration.

1Pain? V. Hyde, 4 Beav, 468.
2Simpson V. Vickers. 14 Ves, 341.
3566, for example, Re-Packard V. Waters, (4920) 1 Chancery 596; (1918-1919) AIFE.R.
365.
‘See further Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 39, page 930-31, paras 1406-1407.
spara 21.18. supra.
See marginal note to section 138 and Hancock V. Watson, (1902) A.C. 14 (“absolute
sift”).
tLassence ४. Tierney, (१849) 1 M. & G. 551.
*Paruck Succession Act (1977), page 428. ,
*Kidar Nath . Gaya Nath, A. 1. R. 1930 Calcutta 731.


Scope of Section
139.

Section 140-—
Bequest of fund for
certain —_ purposes,
some of which can-
not be fulfilled.

Recommendation
to amend sections
138--140.

Section 141.

1509

themselves respectively for life, and be paid to their children after their death.
All the daughters die unmarried. The representatives of each daughter are entitled
to the share of the residue.

According ‘0 the second illustration, A directs his trustees to raise a sum of
money for his daughter and he then directs that they (the trustees) shall invest
the fund and pay the income arising from it to her during her life and divide the
principal amongst her children after her death. The daughter dies without having
ever had a child. Her representatives are entitled to this fund.

At the first sight, it thay be difficult to link up the illustration with the main
section, but it appears that in the main section the words “so as ta secure a
specified benefit for the legatee” are taken as including a benefit for the children
of the legatee, In the illustrations. the benefit “cannot be obtained for the legatee”,
because there were no children, The result is that the fund belongs to the legatce
(daughter or daughters). os if the will had contained no reason why their
representatives take the entire interest.

22.5, The section would not apply where there is no intention to confer an
absolute estate on the daughters.’

22.6, Section 140 reads: —

“140. Where a testator 0005 not absolutely bequeath a fund, so as to sever
it from hiis own estate, but gives it for certain purposes, and part of those
purposes cannot ie fulfilled, the fund, or so much of it as has not been
exhausted upon the objects contemplated by the will, remains a part of the
estate of the testator.

ILLUSTRATIONS.

(i) A directs that his trustees shall invest a sum of money in a particular
way, and shall pay the interest to his son for life, and at his death shall divide
the principal among his children. The son dies without having ever had a
child. The fund, after the son’s death, belongs to children. The daughters
have no children, The fund belongs to the estate of the testator.

(ii) A bequeaths the residue of the estate, to be divided equally among his
daughters, with a direction that they are to have the interest only during
their lives, and that they at their decease the fund shall go to their chidren.
‘ths daughters have no children, The fund belongs to the estate of the
testator.”

22.7, We have one recommendation to make with reference to these sections,
which is common to all the sections, The ‘word used in these sections is ‘fund’,
which would seem to suggest only movables. In our opinion, there is no reason?”
why the sections should not apply to immovable as well as to movable. property.
It is desirable to incorporate this change in the sections by substituting, in place
of the word ‘fund’ the word ‘property’ (with necessary consequential changes).
We recommend that sections 138 to 140 should be amended accordingly.

CHAPTER 23
BEQUESTS TO AN EXECUTOR : SECTION 141

23.1, The special topic of bequests to an executor is governed by section 143.

Under section 141, if a legacy is bequeathed to a person who is named an
executor of the will, be shall not take the legacy, unless he proves the wilf or
otherwise manifests an intention to act as executor.

‘Soundarrajan ४. Natarajan, (4928) 1. L. R. 48 Mad. 906. (P.C.) overruling
Mad. 446.
a4nantha V. Nagamuthu, (1881) 1. L. R. 4 Mad. 200. (Hindu Law).
3566 also Mokoondo Lal V. Gonesh, (1876) 1. 1... R. 1 Cal. 104(Hindu Law).



15|

The illustration to the section is us follows ©

“A legacy is given to A, who is named an executor, A orders the funeral
according to the directions contained in the will, and dies a few days after
the testator, without having proved the will. A has manifested an inteotion
10 act as executor”.

2. The rationale of this section is that when bequests are given to indi- Rationale.
viduals in.the character of executors and not as marks of personal regard only,

the implied condition is that the persons named must clothe themsetves with the
character in respect of which the benefits were intended.’ Whether the legacy

is expressed in licu of ‘care and pains’ or not, the donee must, in order to

entitle himself to the legacy “clothe himself with the character of executor’?

2

23.2A. This iy a principle of English law which has been followed in Contrary intention
section 141. There is, however, one important point in respect of which this? English Taw.
section differs frou the English law, and the diiference does not appear to be
justified, In England, it is permissible’ to prove a contrary intention; circumstances
which indicate that the legacy was intended for the executor personally, “and
Not atnexed to the office of the executor, can always be shown’ For example,
a difference either in the nature or in the amount of legucies given to persons
named as executors is itsclf sufficient to show that the gift is not attached to the

office."

in. in English law, tke presumption does nat arise where the gift is
of the residue or of a part of the residuc”

23.3. Unfortunately, section 141 is expressed in preemptory language, and Indian section pre-
not in words that would operate merely as a presumption. The section categori- emptory.
cally assumes that every legacy is given to the executor as given in the character
of executor, thereby disallowing parol evidence to rebut the assumption.’ Hence,
it is not possible (० read, in the section, as it now stands, any proviso to the
effect that it shall operate only if no contrary intention is expressed in the will.”

23.4. For obvious reasons, it is desirable that the section should be subject pecomme -dation to
to an intention to the conrrary, as in English law.” We. therefore, recommend j:nend section 141,
that section 141 showd be amended for the purpose, by adding, at the end,
the words “unless a different intention appears from the will.”

CHAPTER 24
SPECIFIC LEGACLES—SECTIONS 142 TO 149

24.1. Legacies given by a will could be of various types—general", specific,” Types of legacies.
demonstrative," or residuary.* Generak legacies have been briefly adverted

\Brvdges V. Wotton, Vol. 171 Ves. & 8. 135.
SHalsbury, 4th Ed.. page 65, para 1246.

2Harrison V. Rawley, (1798) 4 Ves. 212 (Lord Alvanley
‘Halsbury. 4th छत... Vol. 17, page 638, para 1246.
2Sleney V. Wetney. 1... 1९, (1886) 2 Enquiry 418.

*Re- Appleton, (1885) 29 Ch, Div. 983.

aHalsbury, 4th Ed., Vol. 17, page 638, para 1246.

8Grifith V. Pruen, 11 Simon 202.
*Prosono १. Administrator General (1888) LL.R. 15 Cal, 83.

197-5, Rajam V. Pankajam, A..R. 1944 Mad. 335.
uPara 23.2., supra.

w*Séction 104.

w§ections 142-149.

“Sections 150-151

“Sections 102-103.

MR).



152

to in th Act, in an earlier section.’ Specific legacies are now more particularly
dealt with. The sections concerned with specific legacies, begin with a definition,
but a pretty large part of the sections is really concerned with what are not
Specific legacies. Apparenily, this over-elaboration was considered necessary in
view of two important legal ccnsequences of a legacy being specific, namely,
{i) non-abatement,? and (ii) possibility of ademption.®

Specific legacies are legacies of a specific part of the testator’s property
which is distinguished from all other parts of his property—section 142. Sections
143—146 provide what are not specific legacies. Property specifically bequeathed
must be retained in the form left by the testator and does not abate—sections 147
and 149, The remaining section in the Chapter—section 148—is concerned not
with specific bequests, but with property comprised in a bequest to two or more
persons in succession which is not specifically bequeathed. Ademption of specific
legacies is governed by sections 152—156, contained in a later chapter of the Act.

jection 142 24.2, Section 142 defines ६ ‘specific legacy’ thus—
ipecific legacy. मर .

“Where a testator bequeaths to any person a specified part of his property,
which is distinguished from all other parts of his property, the legacy is said
to be specific”. It may be mentioned that in this definition that words “specified
part” are crucial. In a specific legacy, the identity of the thing bequeathed must
be indicated in some specific way.

As Dixon C.J. put it) :—

“What marks a bequest as specific is that its subject matter is designated
as something that 1 docs, at the time of the will, or shall at the time of
the death of the estator, form an identifiable part of his property and is
350 to speak, distinguished by the intention of the testator as ascertained
from his will to scparate it in his disposition from (he rest of his property
for the purpose of bequesthing it as the distinct subject of a testamentary
disposition.”

In contrast to a specific bequest, a general legacy amounts to a direction
to the executors either to procure the property designated or to pay the legatee
the value of the property.

A demonstrative legacy stands midway between the two, It is one denoted
by words of the will which indicate that a gift is to be made primarily out of a
particular fund or from the proceeds of the sale of particular property, but the
gift is not to fail if the fund goes out of existence or proves inadequate.*

So much by way of general observations. So far as section 142 is concerned,
it does not seem to have presented serious difficulties and does not, therefore,
need change,

मु 24.3. What are nor specific legacies is a matter to which the Act devotes
ction certain ee, a large number ot sections. The intention to distinguish a property must be
there stocks etc, Clear, On this principle, section 143 provides as under:—
2 which invested व a . .
re described. “143. Where a certain sum is bequeathed, the legacy is not specific merely
because the stock, funds or securities in which it is invested are described
in the will.”

ILLUSTRATION

A bequeathes to 8.--
“10,000 rupees of my funded property

‘Section 104.

*Sections 152 -166.

Sections 152- 166.

“Stephen, Commentaries on thelaws of Engiand(39$0), Vol. 1, page 505.

3Me Bride v. Hudson, (1961) 107 Commonwealth Law Reports 604 at 9. 617, High Court
of Australia,
“Paget v. Huish, (1863) 71 English Reports 291, 294,



153

“10,000 rupees of my property now invested in shares of the East Indian

Railway Company”,

“40,000 rupees, ui present secured by mortgage of Rampur Factory:”

No one of these legacics is specific.

‘The ilfustrations make amply clear the purport of the section, and no
change appears to be needed in the section. .

24.4. Another instance of a legacy which is not specific is dealt with, in Section 144,
section 144, which provides that where a bequest is made in general terms of a
certain amount of any kind stock, the legacy is not specific merely because the

testator was, at the date of his will, possessed of stock of the specified kind, to
am equal or greater amount than the amount bequeathed.

ion is as follows:—

The illustration to the se

“A bequeaths to B, 5,000 rupees five pez cent Government securities, A
had at the date of the will five per cent Government securities for 5,000
rupees. The legacy is not specific.”
This section also needs no change.

24.5. This takes us to section 145, which provides as follows: Section 145,

“145, A money legacy is not specific merely because the will directs its
payment to be postponed until some part of the Property of the testator
as been reduced to a certain form, or remitted to a certain place.”

Thus, as per the illustration ta the section, where A bequeaths to B
10,000 rupees and directs that this legacy shall be paid as soon as A’s property
in India shall be realised in England, the legacy is not specific.

The section needs no change.

24.6, Section 146 provides as follows: — Section 146—Re-
siduary bequest with

“Where a will contains a bequest of the residue of the testator’s property enumeration.
along with an cnumeration of some items of property not previously be- .
queathed, the articles enumerated shall not be deemed to be specifically
bequeathed”.

The section needs no change, not having created any problems.

24.7, According to section 147, where property is specifically bequeathed Section 147—pro-

to two or more persons in succession, it shi
the testator left it, although it may be of such a nature that its value is conti- bequeat

be retained in the form in which perty pepecitcally
to two

aually decreasing. The rule is different where property is not Specifically ००5 40१३0, persons io

queathed (Section 148).
The illustrations to the section read as under:—
“{i) A, having lease of a house for a term of years, fifteen of which were
unexpired at the time of his death, has bequeathed the lease to B for his
life, and after B’s death to C. 8 is to enjoy the Property as A left it, although,
if B lives for fifteen years, C can take nothing under the bequest.
(ii) A, having an annuity during the life of B, bequeathes it to C, for his
life, and after C’s death, to D. C is to enjoy the annuity as A left it,
although, if B dies before D, D can take nothing under the bequest”.
The section is clear in its purport and the rule is fair enough, having
regard to the expressed intention of the testator.

{t needs no change.

24.8. Section 148 reads as under;— Section 148,

“148. Where property comprised in a bequest to two or more person in
succession is not specifically bequeathed, it shall, in the absence of any
direction to the contrary, be sold, and the proceeds of the sale shall be


154

invested in such securities as the High Court may by 2ny general rule
authorise or direct, and the fund thus constituted shall be enjoyed by the
successive legates according to the terms of the will.”

ILLUSTRATION

A, having a iease for a term of years, bequeaths all his property to B for
life, and, after B’s death, to (. The lease must ba sold, the proceeds in-
vested as stated in t ection and the annual income arising from the fund
is to be paid to B for life. At B's death, the capital of the fund is to be
paid to 0.7

‘The section needs no change. 1 may be pointed out that the rule is diffe-
rent where there is a specific bequest.’

Section 149—No 24.9. Section 149 provides that if there is a deficiency of assets to pay
abatement of speci- legacics, a specific legacy is not liable to abate with the general legacies. As
fic legacies. already mentioned,? non-liability to abatement is one of the distinguishing

features of specific legacies The section reflects this principle and we have no
change to recommend in the section,

CHAPTER 25
DEMONSTRATIVE LEGACIES: SECTIONS 150-151

25.1. Besides general and specific legacies, there is a third kind of legacy*
Scope. which consists of a pecuniary legacy payable out of a particular fund. Such
legacies are not “adeemed™ by failure of the particular fund, These are known

as “demonstrative” legacies, and are governed by sections 150 and 151.

“Demonstrative legacy” can, in brief, be explained as a lagacy directed to
be paid our of specific property!

Section  150—De- 25.2. Section 150 defines a demonstrative legacy as follows :—

Towed tewaey, “150, Where a testator bequeaths a certain sum of money, or a certain
quantity or any other commodity, and refers to a particular fund or stock
80 as to constitute the same the primary fund or stock out of which pay-
ment is to be made, the legacy is said to be demonstrative.”

By the Explanation to the section the distinction between a specific legacy
and a demonstrative legacy is thus explained :—

(a) Where specified property is given to the legatee, the legacy is specific.*

(b) Where the legacy is directed to be paid out of specified property, it
is demonstrative. There are three illustrations to the section,

“(iy A bequeaths to 8 1,000 rupecs, being part of a debt due to him from
W. He also bequeaths to C, 1,000 rupees to be paid out of the debt due to
him from W. The legacy to B is specific, the legacy to C is demonstrative.

Gi) A bequeaths to B—
“ten bushels of corn which shall growin my field of Green Acre”;

80 Chests of the indigo which shall be made at my factory of Ram-
pur’;

'$ection 147, supra.
*Para 24.1, supra.
2Halsbury, 4th Edition, Vol. 17, page 632, para 1230.

‘Section 153.

“Cf. Section 150, Explanation.

*Letters (a) and (0) have been added for convenience of analysis.


135

“40,000 rupees out of my five per cent promissory notes of the Central
Government”

“An annuity of 500 rupees from my funded property”:
“1,000 rupees out of the sum of 2,000 rupees due to me by ५

an annuity, and directs it to be paid “out of the renis arising from my cluk
of Ramnagar.”

(iii) A bequeaths to B—

"£0,000 rupecs out of my cstate at Ramnagar”. or charges it on his
estate at Ramnagar™;

“10,000 rupees, being my share of the capital embarked in a certain
business.”

Each of these bequests is demonstrative.”

The section has raised no difficulties in its practical application and may be
left as it is.

25.3. According to section 151, where a portion of a fund is specifically section 151- Order
bequeathed and a legacy is directed to be paid out of the same fund, the portion of payment when
specifically bequathed shall first be paid to the legatee, and the demonstrative legacy directed to
legacy shall be paid out of the residue fund and, so far as the residue shall be 1 कहर en

deficient, out of the gencral assets of the testator. fic legacy.

The illustration to the section reads as under :—

“A bequeaths to 8, 1000 rupees, being part of a debt duc to him frem W.
He also bequeaths to C 1,000 rupees to be paid out of the debt due to him
from W. The debt due to A from W is only 1500 rupees; of these 1,500
rupees, 1,000 rupees belongs to 8, and 500 rupees are to he paid to C. C is
also to receive 500 rupees out of ihe general assets of the testator.”

The iflustration makes it clear that a specific legacy takes precedence over a
demonstrative legacy. At the samc time, the demonstrative legacy can, if neces-
sary, claim participation in the residue.

We are making in a subsequent Chapter’, a recommendation to combine
sections 151 and 157.

CHAPTER 26
ADEMPTION : SECTIONS 152 TO 266

I. Infroductory

26.1, The topic of ademption of tegacies is dealt with in sections 152 to
166, Where property specifically bequeathed does not belong to the testator
at the time of his death or has been converted into property of a different kind,
the legacy cannot take effect by reason of withdrawal of its subject-matter
from the operation of the will. This is “ademption”—section 152, The rationale
is disappearance of the property in specie. In contrast, a demonstrative legacy
is not adeemed—section 153. Ademption essentially rests on the presumed
intention of the testator. That at least, is the approach adopted by the Indian
legislature,

The concept of ademption is simple, but certtin detailed provisions contain-
ed in sections 153 to 159 and 162—were considered necessary in order to pro-
vide for various situations in regard to which controversies could possibly arise.

Scope cf Chapter

"HR, 26.14. infra.

tparas.
85.L/B(D)144MofLI&CA~I1


Ademption -
Introductory.

Ademption - tho
concept.

Scheme of the
Sections.

Bsction 152 -Ademp-
tion explained.

156

Similarly, a few provisions—scction 160, 161 and 164 to 166—~deal with cases
in which a specific bequest is not adeemed.

26.2. In general, ademption arises where an asset bequeathed by the will
Ceases to conform to the testator’s power of disposition, or ceases to conform to
the description given in the will, ademption may thus arise by reason of non-
existence of the subject matter bequeathed or by reason of change in its nature.
Non-existence of the asset, in its turn, might arise cither from external factors,
(for example, destruction by the forces of nature), or from acts of the testator
(for example, by sale of the thing bequeathed by the testator between the date
of the will and the date of his death). A change in the nature of the asset may
arise, again, by external factors (for cxample, earthquake) or by acts of the
testator (for example, when the testator converis a golden chain into a cup of
gold). The common thread is withdrawal of the subject-matter from the opera-
tion of the will (S. 152). Sometimes, the change arises by reason of legislative
action. This aspect will be discussed in detail when decling with the definition
of “ademption™’.

26.3. Indian case-law on the subject of ademption is rather scanty. The
theoretical interest of the topic is, however, considerable and one or two sections?
require a detailed discussion. As the sections on the subject are rather large in
number, it will be convenient to refer first to a few general aspects and also
to the scheme of arrangement, so as to facilitate a better understanding of the
inter-relationship between various sections.

The heading of Chapter 17 indicates that the topic dealt with in these
sections is “ademption”. The expression “ademption” is not directly defined.
However, it is indirectly explained in the latter part of section 152, which pro-
vides that (in the circumstances dealt with in the section), the legacy is “adeemed”,
that is to say, it cannot take effect by reason of the subject matier having been
withdrawn from the operation of the will. This explanaion is, in substance, the
same as the definition of “ademption” given in some of the English cases—-such
as, “a failure of a specific bequest owing to the subject of the bequest not being
in existence in specie as a part of the testator’s estate at the time of his death”.

26.4, This general principle is dealt with in section 152, which applies
where there is a “specific” legacy. Section 153 rules out ademption in the case
of “demonstrative” legacies. Sections 154 to 157 and 166 deal with cases where
the testator, having bequeathed the “right to receive a thing”, himself receives
the thing bequeathed, Sections 158-159 and 165-166 relate to a particular kind
of property—“stock”. Sections 160-161 deal with the effect of removal of goods
between the date of the will and the date of the death of the testator, Sections
163-164 deal with the effect of a change in the situation of the goods, Sections
165-166, as already stated, deal with ‘stock’,

The sections proper may now be dealt with.

II. Ademption
26.5. Section 152 reads :
“152. If anything which has been specifically bequeathed does not belong
to the testator at the time of his death, or has been converted into property
of a different kind, the legacy is adeemed; that is, it cannot take effect, by
reason of the subject-matter having been withdrawn from the operation of
the will.

ILLUSTRATION :
(i) A bequeaths to B—
“the diamond ring presented to me by C”;
“my gold chain”;
“a certain bale of wool”;
“a certain piece of cloth”;

See discussion as to section 152, para 26.6., infra.
*For example, section 166.


157

“atl my household goods which shall bc in or about my dwelling-hoyse
in M. Street in Calcutta, at the time of my death”.

A in his lifetime,—
sells or gives away the ring:
converts the chain iato a cup:
converts the wool into cloth;
makes the cloth into a garment;
takes another house into which he removes al! his goods.

Each of these legacies is adeemed.

(1) A bequeaths to B—
“the sum of 1,000 rupees in a certain chest”,
“all the horses in my stable”.

At the death of A, no moncy is found in the chest, and no horses in
the stable. The legacies are adcemed.

(iii) A bequeaths to B certain bales of goods.

“A takes the goods with him on a voyage. The ship and goods are lost
at sea, and A is drowned. The legacy is adeemed.”

26.6. In connection with section 152, it should be noted that the conver- Amendment re
sion of an asset by legislative action falls within section 163, and is outside commended.
section 152. Thus, compulsory changes in the nature of the asset when effected
by an Act of Parliament—for example, by nationalisation or otherwise,-—do
not fall within section 152, We consider it desirable that the case should be
excluded from section 152 by express words, For this purpose, we recommend
that in section 152, after the words “has been converted into property of a
different kind”, the words “by act of parties" should be inserted, .

It is further to be noted that even as regards converted property, the section
leaves no scope for a different intention, We are of the view that it should be
made subject to a proviso', whercunder the will should govern the converted
property as 10 would have governed the original property, if such an intention
can be inferred.

26.7. Section 153 deals with a demonstrative legacy, and its main object is section 153- No

to provide that there is no ademption in the case of a demonstrative legacy, ademption in case of

demonstrative le

The essential distinction between specific legacy and demonstrative legacy gacy.

is one born of the intention of the testator. In the case of the former, the

testator shows an intention that the beneficiary should receive only a specified

thing, while, in the case of the latter, the testator indicates an intention that the

thing shall be taken primarily for the specified fund, but that any balance can

be taken from the residue in the event of deficiency*,

The section does not seem to need any change, It may, however, be noted
that the rule has been judicially construed as subject to a contrary direction in
the will’.

26.8. Section 154 deals with the ademption of a specilic bequest of a right goign 155.
to receive something from a third party. To state in simple terms the proposition है
enacted in the section‘, where the right to receive is bequeathed and the specific
legacy is received by the testaor, the legacy is adeemed*, The relationship of
this particular situation with the general concept of ademption as explained in

‘This is nota draft of the amendment.
2Re-lWehster, Goss Vs Webster, (1937) | AML E.R. 602.
‘Chiunam V. Tadikonda, 1...R. 29 Mad. 155.

‘Cf. section 153.
*For contrast with section 162, see para 26.18. infra.


Sections

155 and

158

section 152, requires brief discussion, Ademption, as explained in section 152,
arises when there is a change either in the legal ownership or in the nature of
the property. This is the general concept. In the situation dealt with in section
154, though there is no physical change of the thing, the legai categorisation of
the thing is changed. What was an actionable claim—“right to receive”-—(a
species of intangible property) is replaced by something tangible. There is no
alteration of the physical nature of the property, but its legal complexion does
change; and it is this altered legal complexion that causes ademption—the pre-
sumption being that the testator did not bequeath, and had no intention of be-
queathing, a thing with such changed legal complexion.

वा, Ademption of part of bequest

26.9. Section 155 and 156 deal with the situation where a part of the thing

156 - Receipt of abequeathed is reccived and may be considered together. They read as follows :

part.

Recoramendation
to amend
155 and sect

Section

section
ion 156-first reading. Section 155 applies where an entire thing is specifically bequeathed

157.

“155, The receipt by the testator of a part of an entire thing specifically
bequeathed shall operate as an ademption of the legacy to the extent of
the sum so received.”

“156. If a portion of an entire fund or stock is specifically bequeathed, the
receipt’ of a portion of the fund or stock shall operate as an ademption only
to the extent of the amount so received; and the residue of the fund or
stock shall be applicable to the discharge of the specific legacy”.

26.10, The two sections seem to overlap, but do not, in fact, overlap.
There is a distinction between the two sections, though it is not apparent at the

and then the testator receives a part of it, while section 156 applics where
the thing bequeathed itself is a quotient of the stock, and the testator receives a

portion of the fund, or stock. This should be made more clear; it is also desir- |

able to introduce symmetry between sections 155 and 156—a symmetry which,
in certain respects, is lacking at present.

Accordingly, we recommend the following re-drafts of sections 155 and 156.
(Revised section 155-156)

“155. If an entire thing is specifically bequeathed, the receipt by the testator
of a part of the thing specifically bequeathed shall operate as an ademption
of the legacy to the extent of the sum so received.”

“156. If a portion of an entire fund of stock is specifically bequeathed, the
receipt by the testator of « portion of the fund or stock shalt operate as
an ademption only to the extent of the amount so cceived; and the residue
of the fund or stock shall be applicable to the discharge of the specific
legacy”.

26.11. Section 157 deals with the order of payment where a portion of a
fund is specifically bequeathed to one legatee and another legacy charged on the
same fund is bequeathed to another legatee, and the testator receives a portion
of that fund and the remainder is insufficient to pay both the legatees. In certain
respects. the same topic is dealt with in section 151, which deals generally
with the order of payment when a legacy is directed to be paid out of the fund
and a portion of that fund is also specifically bequeathed, In other words, com-
petition between a specific legacy and. a demonstrative legacy is a common in-
gredient of both section 151 and section 157, and a specific provision for
cases where the residue of the fund is deficient is also another common ingredient
of the two sections. However, the distinction between the two sections lies in
this, namely, that while section 151 deals with the generality cases section 157
deals with the specific cases where the problem arises because it is the testator
who receives « portion of the fund in his life time. So far as can be gathered
from the terms of the two sections, there is no difference in the actual rute
to be applied. The propotion enac-ed in section 157 is that from the fund in
question, the portion specifically bequeathed is to be paid first to the legatee; the

Ye, the receipt by the testator.


159

residue of that fund is to be applied to the demonstrative legacy, and if there
is a deficiency, the rest of the legacy is to be paid out of the general assets of the

+ testator. The last mentioned provision’ is in conformity with the general principle
that there is no ademption of a demonstrative legacy, and it shall be paid out
of the general assets of the testator where necessary,

26.12. This overlapping between sections 151 and 157 raises the question Recommendation
whether it is at all necessary to have both the sections in the Act. The Jaw should, ' delete section 151,
in our view, be simplified by deleting one of the sections and combining the gist
of the two sections in the other section—omitting, of course, matter which is
repeated in both, Deficiency under section 151 may arise because of initial inade-
quacy of the fund, while deficiency under section 157 may arise out of subsequent
inadequacy of the fund by receipt by the testator himself of a portion thereof.

But the effect is the same. It would therefore be more convenient to omit
section 151, and to deal with the matter in section 157%.

26.13. On the above assumption’, the following redraft of section 157 Redraft of section,
is recommended :-—

“157(1) Where—

(a) a portion of a fund is specifically bequeathed to one  legatee,
and ant

(b) a legacy is directed to be paid out of the same fund to another
legatee,

then—-

@, the portion specifically bequeathed shall first be paid to the legatee,
an

(ii) the demonstrative legacy shall be paid out of the residue (if any),
so far as it will extend, in payment of the demonstrative legacy.

“(2) If the remainder of the fund is insufficient to pay the demonstrative
legacy, so much of the demonstrative legacy as remains unpaid shall be paid
out of the general assets of the testator”.

26.14. The illustration to section 151 may be transferred to section 157 as pilustration to sece

illustration 1, and the present illustration to section 157 may be re-numbered as tion 151 to be trans-
illustration 2. ferred to section
157, afer deleting

IV. Stock section 151,

26.15. Two special provisions relating to legacies of stock are contained sections 158 and
in sections 158 and 159. If stock specifically bequeathed does not exist at the 159.
time of the death of the testator, the legacy is adeemed under section 158.
Where stock specifically bequeathed exists only in part at the time of the death
of the testator, the legacy is adeemed so far as regards that part of the stock
which has ceased to exist. This is provided for in section 159, which, in reality,
carries out the same principle as is the basis of section 158.

The expression “stock” is used in the two sections in a wide sense, as is
shown by the illustrations, and is not confined to stock in a company. The
sections need no change.

26.16. In the case of specific bequests, certain questions arise where the Sections 160 and
goods are described with reference to a certain place. The connection of the 161
goods with that place might have disappeared at the time of death, and the
court has then to decide whether the connection is treated as to be material so
that the specific bequest is adeemed, or whether the connection is, it the circum-
stances of the casc, to be disregarded. To deal with this problem, two general

‘Section 153. a
ASection 151 tobe omitted, if the above recommendation is accepted.

«The assumption is that section 151 shall be deleted.


—

160

rules have becn enacted, in section 160. The first is that if the removat of the
goods from the specific place is due to a temporary cause, or by fraud, or
without the knowledge or sanction of the testator’, then there is no ademption.
This is to be found in section 160,

Secondly, section 161 provides that removal of the thing from the specified
place does not constitute an ademption, where the place is referred to only in
order to complete the description of what the testator meant to bequeath, The
illustrations to the section explain its purport. But the third illustration seems
to stretch the language of the section. It puts the facts us under :

(ili) A bequeaths to B all his goods on board a certain ship, then lying
in the river Hoogli. The goods are removed by A’s direction to a ware-
house, in which they remain at the time of A’s death.”

The illustration then provides that the legacy is not revoked by ademption

Recommendation to 26.17. Now, although it could be said that here the mention of the place
amend section 161, was, in a sense, necessary to complete the description of what the testator meant
to bequeath, a more convincing reason for not allowing adempiion in such a
case is that, by the very nature of the case, the situation mentioned or
the place mentioned could only be temporary. A more accurate way of expressing
section, therefore, to cover such a case, would be to add, at the end of
section 161, some such words as “or where, by its very nature, ite place is such
that the thing bequeathed would remain at that place oily for a cemporary
period.” ‘

We recommend that section 161 should be amended as above.
V. Receipt by testator

Section 162. 26,18. Section 162 provides that where the “thing bequeathed”—which really
means “the thing specifically bequeathed”,—is not the right to receive something
of value from a third person, but the money or other commodity which may
be received from the third person by the testator himself or by his representatives,
the receipt of such sum of money or other commodity by the testator shall not
constitute an ademption; but if he mixes it up with the general mass of his pro-
perty, the legacy is adeemed, This section is to be contrasted with section 154,
whereunder® there is ademption where the thing specifically bequeathed is the
right to receive something of value from the third party, and the testator himself
receives it, The reason why section 154 provides for ademption is that the
thing bequeathed is itself the subject to be extinguished, while the reason why
section 162 prohibits ademption is that the amount received retains its separate
identity. 156 ise |

In practice, it may not always be easy to determine, on the language of the
wiil, whether the case falls under section 154 o¢ section 162, In the absence
of concrete Indian cases raising questions, however, it is not considered to disturb
the two sections on this point.

Recommendation 26.19. However, it should be made clear thut section 162 applies only

to amend section to “specific bequests”, since the expression “thing bequeathed”, in this context’

162. means the thing specifically bequeathed. This is clear from the later reference to
“mixture with the general mass”. We recommend that section 162 should be
amended for the purpose, by substituting, for the words “the thing bequeathed”,
the words “she thing specifically bequeathed.”

VI. Change in the thing bequeathed by operation of law.

Section 163- 26.20. Under section 163, where a thing specifically bequeathed undergoes
ina thing specif: 4 change beiween the date of the will and the testator’s death, and the change
cally bequeathed. takes place by operation of law, or in the course of execution of the provisions
of any legal instrument under which the thing bequeathed was held, the legacy
is not adcemed by reason of such change.

‘Compare Section 154
*Para 26.8.. supra.


16)

26.21. It should be noted that this is not the rule in England, even though Position
some of the commentators in India state that the Indian section is based upon sland.

the English law. In England, ademption takes place even in such circumstances,
unless the statute which brought about the change in the nature of the pro-
perty makes a contrary provision’, The situation has been described as one of
“statutory disappropriation of property rights in favour of the state’.” Often,
however, statutes do make a provision preventing ademption.

in En-

26.22. However, the legislature in India has adopted a different rule, per- ‘Rule in India,

haps on the assumption that since the change in question takes place without
the will of the testator, one can presume that he had not changed his intentions
as to affect the destination of the subject matter.

26.23. At this stage we should refer to a Delhi case relevant to change by Delhi

operation of law. A Hindu executed a will according to which, on his death,
his property was to go to the second wife for her life time and, after the death,
equally to his son’s sons from the first wife and the sons from the second wife.
fhe property was in the N. W. Province (now in Pakistan). After the partition
the family moved to India. On his death the widow claimed and obtained
compensation for the property left in Pakistan on the basis of the will, She
later purchased some property in India from out of the compensation so received,
On the death of the widow, the son’s sons from the first wife claimed half
share in the property so purchased out of the compensation, relying on the will,

1६ was held that the claimants were not entitled to the half share, The
compensation received was in the form of money. By no stretch of imagination
it could be treated as property “situated in Pakistan”. Once the property had
ceased to exist in its original form, the limitation on the rights of enjoyment no
longer applied. It would be too much to say that this compensation money had
to be preserved for ever in whatever form it goes and treated as if it was the
property referred to in the will. The widow could not be treated as being a
trustee under the terms of the will. She had no right to sell at all, being a limited
owner, If by accident, the property is sold either through legislation or through
other circumstances, then there is no obligation on her to live on the income
of that compensation and leave the corpus to the persons entitled to the
residue of the estate. Therefore, the doctrine of conversion could not be invoked
in the present case.

26.24. The High Court further held that there was no direction in the
will that any compensation received in respect of that property would go to the
sons who would otherwise have got the property. This meant that the gift
Bad been adeemed', because it cannot be given effect to. It was observed that
this was unfortunate, because if this situation had at all been in the mind of
the testator, he could have made a direction regarding the same. The testator
could have made a codicil or a new will regarding the compensation. But the
will was silent regarding the compensation and it could not be made operative
qua the compensation. In the circumstances, the suit was dismissed.

26.25. The judgment does not discuss section 163, and attention of the
court was perhaps not drawn to the section.

case.

26.26. We may discuss another aspect of section 163, Where a change in Change by order

the thing bequeathed takes place by an order of the court, it should apparently ofcourt.

be regarded as a change by ‘operation of law’ within section 163. Here again,
the common law was different, as illustrated by English cases‘ where, by an
order in lunacy proceedings, certain shares specifically bequeathed were directed

1Mellows, Law of Succession (1977), pages 523, $24.
'Sea: Re-Viscount Galway's Will, (1950) Ch. 1; (1950) 2 All E.R. 419.
aChaman Lat v. Kundan Lal, A.IR. 1979 Delhi 240, paras 11 to 14(D. K. KapurJ.)(Novem-
ber-December).
‘Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 39 p. 934, Articie 1412, cited.
5(a) Jones v. Green, Law Reports 5 Eq. 555.
(0) Re-Freer, 22 Chancery Division 622.


162

to be sold, and the proceeds were to be invested in other securities. The bequest
of such shares was held to be adecmed. The position in England was later
altered by statute'.

Section lot 20.27. This takes us (0 section 164, which provides that where a thing spe-

Change without cifically bequeathed undergoes a change without a knowledge or sanction of the

tor. ee “testator, there is no ademption. This situation is analogous to that under section
160, whercunder removal of the goods from the place described in the will with-
out knowledge or sanction of the testator does not lead to ademption, No change
is required in this section.

Section 165 - Stock 26.28. Section 165 provides that where stock which has been specifically

replaced after loan. bequeathed is lent to a third party on condition that it shall be replaced, and
it is replaced accordingly, the legacy is not adeemed. This section also docs not
seem to require any change.

Section 166. 26.29, Section 166 reads as follows :

“166. Where stock specifically bequeathed is sold, and an equal quantity
of the same stock is afterwards purchased and belongs to the testator at
his death, the Jegacy is not adcemed”,

This section is based on the dictum of Lord Talbot in an early case*-*,
Lord Talbot said in that case: “If the selling out the stock is an evidence to
presume an alteration of the intention of the testator, surely his buying in again
is as strong an evidence of his intention that the legatee should have it again”.
It should be noted, however, that later it has been held‘ that in England a legacy
is adeemed by the sale of the stock, and will nor he revived by a new purchase
of similar stock by the testator.

There is, perhaps, some thing to be said for both the views. It can, on
the one hand, be said that the testator would not have intended to remove a
benefit already conferred. On the other hand, it can be said that he would not
have sold the stock if he wished to continue the benefit. In this position, it is
better not to change the section, leaving it to the testator to make an express
modification of his will, if he so desires.

CHAPTER 27
PAYMENT OF LIABILITIES IN RESPECT OF THE SUBJECT OF A
BEQUEST: SECTION 167 TO 170

Scope. 27.1. Payment of fiabilities in respect of a bequest is regulated by sections
हु 167 to 170. Two of the sections (167-168) deal with apportionment 85. to
persons who shall bear a particular liability or burden attaching to the subject’

of a bequest, while two are concerned with the approtionment of liability in

point of time.

Section 167- Non- 27.2. Section 167 reads as under :

liability of executor 167. (4) Where property specifically bequeathed is subject at the death of
fic legates. m thetestator to any pledge, lien or incumbrance created by the _ testator
himself or by any person under whom he claims, then, unless a contrary
intention appears by the will, the legatee, if he accepts the bequest, shall
accept it subject to such pledge or incumbrance, and shall (as between him-
self and the testator’s estate) be liable to make good the amount of such

pledge or incumbrance.

1 123, Lunacy Act, 1890.
x. Partridge, cas. Temp. Talb. 226. Paruck, Succession Act, (1977) 9. 459.

"छा comment, see Avelyn v. Ward. 1 Ves. Sen. 420.
*Pattison १. Pattison, 1 My, & K. 12.



(2) A contrary inention shail not be inferred from any direction which
the will may contain for the payment of the testator’s debts generally.

Explanation, A periodical payment in the na‘ure of land-revenue or in
the nature of rent is not stich an incumbrance as is contemplated by this
section.

ILLUSTRATIONS

“4i) A bequeths to B the diamond ring given to him by ९. At A’s death the
ring is held in pawe by D, to whom it has been pledged by A. It is the
duty of A’s executors, if the state of the testator’s assets will allow them,
to allow B to redeem the ring.”

“Gi) A bequeaths to B a zamindari which at A’s death is subject to a
mortgage for 10,000 rupees; and the whole of the principal sum, together
with interest to the amount of 1,000 rupees, is due at 05 death, B, if he
accepts the bequest, uccepts it subject to this charge, and is liable, as be.ween
himself and A’s estate, 10 pay the sum of 11.000 rupees thus due.”

The section needs no change.

27.3. This takes us to section 168, quoted below : Section 168-

w a . mpletion of tes
“168, Where anything is to be done to complete the testator’s title of the ator’s title to thing
thing bequeahed. it is to be done at the cost of the testator’s estate.” bequeathed to te ६

cost of his estat
TLLUSTRATIONS

(i) A, having contracted in general terms for the purchase of a piece of
land at a certain price, bequeaths it to B, and dies before he has paid the
purchase- money, The purchase-moncy must be made good out of A’s
assets.

(ii) A, having contracted for the purchase of a piece of land for a cgxtain
sum of money, one-half of which is to be paid down and the other half
secured by mortgage of the land, bequeaths it to B, and dies before he has
Paid or secured any part of the purchase-money. One-half of the  pur-
chase-money must be paid out of A’s assets’.

The section needs no change.

27.4. Section 169 is as follows :

“169. Where there is a bequest of any interest in immovable property in Section 169.
respect of which payment in the nature of the Jand-revenue or in the nature

of rent has to be made periodically, the estate of the testator shall (as bet-

ween such estate and the legatee) make good such payments or a proportion

of them, as the case may be, upto the day of his death,

ILLUSTRATION

“A bequeaths to B a house, in respect of which 365 rupees are payable
annually by way of rent. A pays his rent at the usual time, and dies 25
days after. A’s estate. will make good 25 rupees in respect of the rent.”

27.5. The principle is that in case of bequests of an immovable property,
the rents and taxes in respect of that property upto the time of the testator's
death, should be paid out of the iestator’s estate, and the taxes ete, atier the
death of the testator should be paid by the legatee. The same rule of apprtionment
is laid down in the Transfer of Property Act, 1882'.

Under the section in the Succession Act, it is the land revenue and rent
that are directed to be apportioned. Under the Transfer of Property Act, the
apportionment applies to rent, annuities, pensions, dividends and. other periodical

payments.

’Section 36, Transfer of Property Act, 1882. है


| for tax,

‘ion 170 calls
)0 shares,

(Defect io the ter~
|minology of section
1170,

164

27.6. These sections are silent as to tux on income, As regards the liability
of the 1687! representative to pay income-tax, the law is that where tax has
already been assessed as payable by a person and he dies, his executor, adminis-
trator or other [egal representative is liable to pay the same out of his estate so
far as the estate is capable of meeting the charge of income-tax’,

The Income Tax Act? casts a liability upon the executor or administrator
to pay the tax which the testator wouid have been liable to pay. This obviously
relates to the liability relative to the period before death. As section 169 has not
so far created any problems, we would leave the section as it is.

27.7. Section 170 deals with liability in respect of call or other payment on
stock in a joint stock company, and is as follows :—~

“In the absence of any direction in the will where there is a speciiic bequest
of stock in a joint stock company, if any call or other payment is due from
the (testator at the time of his death, in respect of the stock, such call or pay-
ment shal, as between the testators estate and the legatees be borne by the
estate; but, if any call or other payment becomes due in respect of such
stock after the testator’s death, the same shall, as between the testator‘s
estate and the fegatee, be borne by the legatce, if he accepts the bequest.”
There are five illustrations to the section, as follows :—

“(i) A bequeaths to B his shares in a certain railway, At A’s death
there was due from him the sum of £00 rupees in respect of each
shase, being the amount of a call which had been duly made, ond the
sum of five rupees in respect of each share, being the amount of in-
terest which had accrued due in respect of the call. These payments
must be bore by A’s estate,

(ii) A has agreed to take 50 shares in an intended joint stock company,
and has contracted to pay up 100 rupees in respect of each share,
which sum must be paid before his title to the shares can be completed.
A bequeaths these shares to B, The estate of A must inake good the
paymenis which were necessary to complete A’s tile,

res in a certain railway. B accepts the

A bequeaths to B his
made in respect of the shares, B must

legacy. After A’: death, «
pay the call.

(iv) A bequeaths to 8 his shares in a joint stock company, B accepts
the bequest. Afterwards the affairs of the company are wound up, and
each share-holder is called upon for contribution. The amount of the
contribution must be borne by the legates.

“(v) Ais the owner of ten shares in a railway company. Ata meeting
held during his lifetime a call is made of fifty rupees per share, pay-
able by three instalments. A. bequeaths his shares to B and dies bet-
ween the day fixed for the payment of the first and the day fixed
for the payment of the second instalment, and without having paid the
first instalment. A’s estate must pay the first instalment, and B, if he
accepts the legacy, must pay the remaining instalments”.

27.8. The terminology of section 170 seems to suffer from a serious dificiency,
inasmuch zs it uses the words “stock in a joint stock company”, and omits to
mention ‘shares’. though illus‘rations (ii) to (iv) to the section do mention
shares, To an ordinary person, the word ‘stock would not include ‘shares’. Prima
facie, it appears desirable that shares should be continued specifically in the section.

The legislative usage in the Companies Ac’ mav be referred to in this
context. Under that Act?, ‘stock’ is the aggregate of fully paid up shares legally
consolidated, portions of which agreogate may be transferred to split up into
fractions of any amount of shares, ‘Share’ means share in the share capital of

Section 159, Income Taxt 1961.
Section 159, Income Tax Act, 1961.
Section 566, Companies Act, 1956.


165

the company and includes stock, except when a distinction between stock and
share is expressed. Where the shi juave been fully paid up. they may be turned
into stock, and notice must be given (0 the Registrar.

The term ‘Joint Stock Company” is defined by the Companies Act’, as ५
company having « permanent paid up or a aominal share cupital of a fixed
amount divided into shares. also of fixed amouni, or held and transferable as stock,
or divided and held partly in the one way and partly in the other, and
formed on the principle of having, for its members the holders of those shares
or that siock. and no other person.

27.9. Reference may also bz made in this connection to a decision of the Decivion of House
House of Lords‘, In that’ case, the testator had bequeathed to his wife ‘leasehold शाप, us to,
° हे पे हि कि ning of ‘stock’,
estates und all such stocks in the public funds, or shares in zny Railway ot which
} may die possessed,’ and, on failure of issue, he gave to his brother the same
jeashold estate, stock, shares, moneys and securities”, The question was whether
the ‘shares’ and ‘stocks’ were (१० different things, in view of ‘he fact that the
testator consciously used both these terms in his will. 1 was held that manifestly,
for every purpose, share and stocks were alike share when paid up, grew into
stack,.and. were put upon a special Register for ihe convenient management of
business, but, in substance, they continued to be the same thingy, and may well
pass by the same words unless there be a clear difference made between them,

27.10. It appears to us that instead of driving the reader to deriving the Recommendstion
meaning of ‘stock’ from the iMusirations under section 170 or to other sources, as to section 170
the Ast should expressly mention the word ‘shares’ in the body of the main
section. The Jayman is more frequendy concerned with ‘share’ than with stock,

We, therefore, recommend that section £70 should be suitably amended, so as to
add an express mention of ‘shares’. The following is a suggested re-draft of the
section for the purpose :

Revised section 170

“170. In the absence of any direction in the will, where there is a specific
bequest of stock in a joint stock company or shares in a company with
limited liabilities,

(a) if any call or oher payment is due from the testator at the time
his death in respect of the stock or shares, such call or payment shall, as
between the testator’s estate and the legatee, be borne by the estate;
but.

(b) if any call or other payment becomes duc in respect of such stock
or shares after the testator’s death, the same shall, as between the testator’s
estate and the legatee, be borne by the legatee, if he accepts the bequest”.

Illustrations as at present.

CHAPTER 28
BEQUESTS OF THINGS

28.1, Bequests of things “described in general terms” form the — subject Scope.
matter of a chapter comprising two sections. The problems that these sections
address themselves to are such as arise out of the generality (or vagueness) of
the description of the thing bequeathed. Because of the implicit vagueness a
certain elasticity of action is provided (section 171) and a bequest of interest
can be construed as bequest of the principal also (section 172).

TSecton $66, Companies Act, 1956.
* frederick F. J. Morrice ५. George FE. Aylmer, (1875) 7 H. 1.. 717,


Section 171- Be-
quest of thing des-
ctibed in genera}
terms.

166

28.2. Section 171 reads—

“I7L. If there is a bequest of something described in generul terms, the
executor must purchase for the legatee what may reasonably de considered
to answer the description.

ILLUSTRATIONS

(i) A bequeaths (0 B a pair of carriage—hoyses or a dimond ring, The
executor must provide the Jegatee with such articles if the state of the assets
will allow it.

(ii) A bequeaths to B “my pair of carriage-horses”. A had no carriage-
horses at the time of his death. The legacy fails.

The section needs no change’.
28.3, Section 172 reads—

*172. Where the interest or produce of a fund is bequeathed to any person,
and the will affords no indication of an intention that the enjoyment of the
bequest should be of Emited duration, the principal, as well as the interest,
shall belong to the legatee.

ILLUSTRATIONS

(i) A bequeaths to B the interest of his 5 per cent promissory notes of the
Central Government. There is no other clause in the will affecting those
securities. B is entitled to A’s 5 per cent, promissory notes of the Central
Government.

(ii) A bequeaths the interest of his 54 per cent promissory notes of the
Central Government to B for his life, and after his death to C. B is entitled
to the interest of the notes during his life, and C is entitled to the notes
upon B’s death.

(iii) A bequeaths to 8 the rents of his tands at X. B is entitled to the
lands”.

28.4. Judicial decisions? take the view that the section applies to immovable

Recommendation
te amend s€ctiOP property’, The view requires support from the third illustration.

In our opinion, it would be useful to alter the language of the section

by making this position more explicit. The word ‘property’ should be added in
the section, since the word ‘fund’ is not quite appropriate for immovable property.
Accordingly, we recommend that section 172 should be revised as under :

“172. Where the interest or produce of a fund or property is bequeathed
to any person and the will affords no indication of an intention that the
enjoyment of the bequest should be of limited duration, the principal of the
fund or the property, as the case may be, as well as the interest or produce,
shall belong to the legatee”.

(Illustrations as at present).

CHAPTER 29
BEQUESTS OF ANNUITIES : SECTIONS 173 TO 196

29.1. Bequests of annuit'es are dealt within scctions 173 to 176. The

provisions are of a miscellaneous character. Incidentally, secton 176 has nothing

\Compare section 104.

%(q) Hemangini v. Nabin Chandra, (1882) LL. R.8Cal. 788.

(8) Administrator General ५. Hughes, (1913) 1. L. R. 40 Cal. 192, 214.
"See also illustration (iii).


167

to do with annuities, but provides that no bequest is adeemed by a subsequent
provision made by the testator for the legatee.

29.2. Sections 173 and 174 can be considered together. Sections 173-174
Section 173 reads—
“173, Where an annuity is created by will, the legatee is entitled to receive Annuity created 124
it for his life only, unless a contrary intention appears by the will, noavith- will payable fer fo
Standing that the annuity is directed to be paid out of the property gene- intention appears by
rally, or that a sum of money is bequeathed to be invested in the purchase wit.
of it,

ILLUSTRATIONS

“(i) A bequeaths to B 500 rupees a year. Bis entitled during his life to
teceive the annual sum of 500 rupees,

(ii) A bequeaths to B the sum of 500 rupees monthly, B is entitled during
his life to receive the sum of 500 rupees every month.

(iti) A bequeaths an annuity of 500 rupees to B for life, and on G's death to C.
B is entitled to an annuity of 500 rupees during his life. C, if he survives
8, is entitled to annuity of 500 rupees from B’s death until his own
death.”

Section 174 reads—

“174, Where the will directs that an annuity shall be provided for any Period of vesting
person out of the proceeds of property, or out of property generally, or where will directs
where money is bequeathed to be invested in the purchase of any annuity पका ato
for any person, on the (estator’s death, the legacy vests in interest in the ceeds of | property
legatee, and he 15 entitled at his option to have an annuity purchased for him or oat property

or to receive the money appropriated for that purpose by the will. Bene 7 (कक ५४ | |
to be invested in
ILLUSTRATIONS purchase of annuity

(i) A by his will directs that his executors shall, out of his property. pur-
chase an annuity of 1000 rupees for B. B’ is entitled at his option to have an
annuity of 1000 rupees for his life purchased for him or to receive such a
sum as will be sufficient for the purchase of such an annuity.

(ii) A bequeaths a fund to B for his life, and directs that after B's death,
it shall be Iaid out in the purchase of an annuity for C. B and C survive
the testator. C dies in B's lifetime. On B's death the fund belongs to the
Tepresentative of C.

29.3. There is an inconsistency! between sections 173 and 174, Under sec- Inconsistency.
tion 173 even if a fund is set apart for the payment thereof, an annuity is to be
taken as for life only (and not as a perpetual one). Under section 174, however,
where a fund is set apart for the payment of the annuity, the annuitant has the
option to claim the capital asset (fund) so set apart and the section (174) is
widely expressed so as to cover even life annuities. Thus, where a fund is set
apart for payment of an annuity, there arises a conflict be‘ween the two sections,
The conflict can be reconciled by excluding, from section 174, cases where the
annuity is for life only or where it otherwise appears that it is not intended to

be perpetual.

29.4. On this basis, we recommend the following changes in the two Recommendation

ions :-- to revise sections
section! 173-174.

(i) Section 173.
The latter half of section 173, beginning with the words ‘notwithstanding
that .........cee ee ", should te replaced by the reverse rule, namely, that in

cases where the annuity is directed to be paid out of a property etc. there will
be a rebuttable presumption that the annuity is perpetual?,

3८1. Paruck, Session Act (1966), page 393.
मठ draft of the revived Section, ‘see below.


168

(1) Section 174.

Section 174 should be qualified by confining it to cases of perpetual annuity.
The revised sections will read as follows :

Revised section 173

“173. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), where an annuity
is created by will, the legatee is entitled to receive it for his life only,
unless a contrary intention appears by the will.

{2) Where the annuity is directed to be paid out of the property generally,
or a sum of money is bequeathed to be invested in the purchase of it, it
shall be prestumed, until the contrary is proved, that the annuiy is perpetual.”

Revised section 174

“174, (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), where the will
directs, that an annuity shall be provided for any person out of the proceeds
of property, or out of property generally or where money is bequeathed
to be invested in the purchase of any annuity for any person, on the testator’s
death, the legacy vests in interest in the legatee, and he is entitled at his
option to have an annuity purchased for him or to receive the money
appropriated for that purpose by the will.

(2) The provisions of subesection (1) shall not apply where the. annuity is
for life only or where it otherwise appears that it is not intended to be per=
petual.””

Section 175 abate- 29.5. Section 175 reads :—

ment of annuity.

“175, Where an annuity is bequeathed, but the assets of the testator aro
not sufficient to pay all the legacies given by the will, the annuity shall abate
in the same proportion as the other pecuniary legacies given by the will.”
The section needs no change.

176: Gift 29.6. Section 176 reads—

Section
oF nally oupied “176 where there is a gift of an annuity and a residuary gift, the whole

Scope of the chapter
and departure from
English law.

of the annuity is to be satisfied before any part of the residue is paid to
the residuary legatee, and, if necessary, the capital of the testator’s estate
shall be applied for that purpose.”

The section also needs no change.

CHAPTER 30
LEGACIES TO CREDITORS AND PORTIONERS (SECTIONS 177 TO 179)

30.1. Legacies to creditors and portioners form the subject mattey of
section 177 to 179. Before discussing the gist of sections 177 to 179, it would
be worthwhile to point out that the provisions of these sections depart from the
English law, and that the departure is deliberate and justified. The rule in
England is that where a bequest is given to a person who is a creditor of the
testator, then, in the absence of an intention to the contrary, the bequest 15
regarded as given in “satisfaction” of the pre-existing debt, that is to say, it is
regarded as an extinguishment of the existing claim, and not as a separate legacy.
This rule of equity is known as “satisfaction of debts by legacies”. Similarly, in
England, where a “portion” or part of a person’s estate agreed to be given
to a child is followed bya legacy to that child, the rule that equity Jeans against
double portions is attracted. In the absence of an intention to the contrary, the
presumption of equity is that the bequest is in satisfaction of the portion agreed
to be given to the child. The presumption is based on the improbability of a parent
intending a double portion for one child to the prejudice of other children,


169

30.2. To make the discussion comprehensive, it should be pointed out Rule of “Satis-
that in England, the equitable rule of “satisfaction”, considered in all its as- faction’’ in Englanc
pects, arises’ in four classes of cascs, namely, (i) satisfaction of debts by lega-
cies’, (ii) satisfaction of legacies by subsequent legacies, (iii) satisfaction of
portions by legacies’, and (iv) satisfaction of legacies by portions or advance-
ments‘,

In India, sections 177 10 179 of the Act make a clean sweep of the doctrine
of “satisfaction” in regard to all the four cases mentioned above. The first case
is dealt with in section 177; the second case is dealt with in section 179;

The third case is dealt with in section 178, and the fourth case is dealt
with in section 179, vide the words “by sctilement or otherwise’ which occur
in that section.

30.3. This departure from English law was deliberatc, as is evident from peparture from sut
the Report of the Law Commission’, The Law Commissioners regarded the ject law deliberat
English rule as objectionable and inapplicable to India, and wished to avoid the
difficult enquiry as to the intentions of the testator which has to be undertaken
according to the English rule,

We are now in a position to discuss the section proper.

30.4. This takes us to section 177. Sect‘ons 177 and 178 may be considered Sections 177. an
together. They read— 178,

“177. Where a debtor bequeaths a legacy to his creditor, and it does not
appear from the will that the lepacy is meant as a satisfaction of the debt,
the creditor shall be enti‘led to the legacy, as well as to amount of the
debt.”

178. Where a parent, who is under obligation by contract to provide a por-
tion for a child. fails to do so, and afterwards bequeaths a legacy to the
child, and does not intimate by his will that the legacy is meant as a satis-
faction of the portion, the child shall be entitled to receive the legacy, as
well as the portion.

ILLUSTRATION

A, by articles entered into in contemplation of his marriage with के, covenant-
ed that he would pay to each of the daughters of the intended marriage a
portion of 20,000 rupees on her marriage. This covenant having been
broken, A bequeaths 20,000 rupees to each of the married daughters of
himself and B. The fegatees are entitled to the benefit of this bequest in
addition to their portions.”

30.5. The sections, so far as they go, are satisfactory and judicial decisions Sections 177 & 17
do not seem to have created any serious problems. There is one situation, how- Need for specifi
ever, about which a specific rule appears to be desirable. There is no provision rule as to bequest t
in the Act as regards beques! to a debtor, though a bequest hy a debtor is debtor.
covered by section 177, It appears that in England. where the Jegatee of a gene-
ral legacy of a share or a residue is a debtor to the estate, he is not entitled
to receive the legacy without first bringing his debt into account; and, _ for
this purpose, it makes no difference whether the debt is alive or is barred by limi-
tation. A similar rule has been judiciallyapplied in Indi In a Calcutta, case’,

A and B were indebted to the estate, and died withour satistving their debt (the

1Pomeroy, Equity Jurisp-adence, paragraph 521, referred to in N.D. Basu, Law of Succession

(1957), pages 551,552.
*Talbor ६
SExp. P
‘Re pollock.
SReport of the Law Coa 63, Gavette of India—Ist July, 1864, page 54.
‘Loke Nath Mullick V.Gdoyachwar, (1881) ILL.R. 7 Cal. 644.

shury, (1714 Pr. Ch, 394,



jecommmendation.

bes 180—Cir-
18065 in which
tion takes place.

cine of appro-
te and reprobate.

170

debts were barred by limitation). Their descendants claimed a share in the estate
of the testator, apparently under # will. {¢ was held that they could not be allowed,
to receive the share without first satisfying the debts due from them to the
estate.

This is really analogous to setting off the debt against the legacy, Justice
and the presumed intention of the testator support such a course.

30.6, It may be worthwhile to codify this judicial interpretation, We re-
commend that for this purpose a new section 177A — should be inserted as
follows :--

“177A, Where a cerditor bequeaths a legacy to his debtor, and it does
not appear from the will that the legacy is to be paid even if the debt is
not repaid by the debtor, the debtor shall not be entitled to the legacy unless
so much of the debt as has become due and payable has been repaid.”

CHAPTER 31
ELECTION ; SECTIONS 180 10 190
1. Principle of election
31.1, The topic of election is deaith with in eleven sections (180 to 190).

A person on whom 9 benctit is conferred by a will must adopt the whole
contents of the instrument, conform (0 all its provisions and renounce every right
inconsistent with it. This in brief, is the gist of the doctrine of election which
forms the basis of this Chapter, The basic section is section 180, the rest being
concerned with particular applications of the «loctrine or qualifications thereof.

31.2. Section 180 formulates the principle in these terms.

“180, Where a person, by his will, professes to dispose of something which
hz has no right to dispose of, the person to whom the thing belongs shall
elect either to confirm such disposition or to dissent from it, and, in the
latter case, he shall give ap any benefits which may have been provided for
him by the will”.

31.3. In Douglas Benzies vy. Upphelby’, Lord Robertson referred to the
principle of election as being the same as the doctrine’ of “approbate and repro-
bate”, and observed :

“In considering the merits of the decision appealed against, it is well to
remember what is the doctrine of approhate and reprobate invoked by the
appellant. Although the name is different, the principle as was laid down
by Lord Eldon in Ker v. Wauchope*, is the same as that of the English law
of election. It is against equity that any one should take against a man’s
will and also under it. This rests on artificial rule, but on plain fair
dealing. If any one has the right by law to take a share of a testator's
estate, which the testator has not given but has otherwise disposed of, that
person takes it against the will and cannot go on to found on the will and
claim its benefits”.

In a Jater case’ Lord Atkinson quoted with approval the pass:ige above cited
from the judgment of Lord Robertson.

1Emphasis adopted.

*Douglas Menzies v.Upphelby. (1908) A.C. 224, 232.
«See also para 31.2. supra

*Ker ९. Wauchope, (1819) 1 Bligh 3

SPitman v. Gram Ewing, (1911) A.C. 217.


171

31.4, The principle that a person cannot both ~ probate and reprobate”
(10 use terms used im Scottish Law)’, finds expression in the law of Wills?
us also in the law of deeds’, The principle is discussed by the Editor of Swanston's

Reports. in a very learned note on the leading English case on the subject’.

31.5. ‘Phe principle is of universal application, and is not peculiar to Eng- Universal
lish aw. As the Privy Council observed jong ago’, it is “common to all law application,
which is based on the rules of 2... the principle that a party shall
not wt the same time affirm and di: ung transaction—aitirm ic as far
as it is for his benefit and disaffirm Is far as it is to his prejudice”.

UW. therefore, a testator has purported to dispose of property which is not
his own, and bas given a benefit to the person to whom that property belongs,
the devisee or legates, accepting the benelit so given to him, niust make good the
testator’s attempted disposition. But. if on the contrary, that person choses 10
enforce his proprietary rights agains’ the testator’s disposition, thea cquity will
sequester the property given to him, for the purpose of making satisfaction out
of it to the person whom he has pointed by the assertion of those rights.
This is he broad position in England, restiting from the principle referred to
above,

With a very important difference (to be Presenuy noticed )* section 180
also carries out ‘the principle referred to above,

11. Juristic basis
31.6. At this stage, an cxamination of the juristic basis of the principle of Juristic basis.
slection is necessary, Historically speaking, there have been three suggestions
ats to the basis of the rufe of election, namely, (५) implied condition, (0) pre-
sumed intention of the testator, and (०) equity.

(a) tn the beginning, the view prevailed that the testator gave his property
to the recipient on the implied condition that the recipient would give his property
to the third party’. This explanation, however, is not accepted now,

(0) Later, ॥ theory was advanced that the doctrine of election was based
on the presumed intention of the testator: but this theory was also rejected by the
House of Lords*,

10) The explanation now accepted is that of equitable basis, Lord Cairns
expressly ubserved? in 1874 that the rule of election was not based either on the
testator’s intention, or on his presumed intention. It is based on considerations
of equity. This view was reiterated in 1920",

31.7, Wis now generally accepted that in order to achieve a dust restde it presest — under-
the circumstances of the case cquity imposes this rule as 4 matter of conscience. standing inEngland,

To quote Vicount Hatdane’s observations in Brown ५. Gregson® ;

“The docirine of clection rests on a different foundation, It is a principle
which the courts apply in the exercise of an equitable Jurisdiction enabling
them to secure a just distribution ia substantial accordance with the general
scheme of the instrument. ॥ is aot merely the language used to which the

ICf. Douglas Ueuzien 5 Epphelhy. (1908) A.C. 224 (Lord Robertson,

$See alsv para 31.5, dnfia.

‘Compare section 35. Transfer of Property Act, 1882.

‘Dillon ५, Parler, | Swan 359. particularly, notes at pages 381, 38d.

*Runganmna \. Atebuma, AM. LAL 1. 10 (PCO.

*See para 31.6, énfra.

| Nos Mordaunt. (1706) 2 Vern. 581.
*Conper \. Conper, (W874) Law Reports 7, H. L. 53: (1874-80) All E.R. Rep. 307.
‘Cooper \. Cooper. A874) 1... Ro 7-H, L. 53: (1874-80) AU. E, Re Rep. 307.
*Arown \. Gregson, (1920) A.C. 860, (1920) &॥ E.R. Rep. 730, 734 (9. ।..).
"Brown +. Gregson. (1920) A.C, 860, (1920) AN E.R. Rey. 730, 734 (प्र, Li.

35-L) BID AAMOfLI&CA--12



172

court Jooks. A testator may. for instance, have obviously failed to realise
that any question could arise.”

“But the court will nonetheless hotd that a beneficiary who is given a share
under the will in assets. the total amount of which “depends on the inclu-
sion of property belonging to the beneficiary himself which the testator
has ineffectively sought to include, ought not to be allowed to have 2 share
in the assets effectively disposed of excepting on terms, He niust co-operate
to the extent reguisite’ to provide the amount necessary for the division
prescribed by the will. either by bringing in his own property, erroneously
contemplated by the testator as forming part of the assets, or by submitting
a diminution of the share to which he is prima Tacie entitled to an extent
equivalent to the valuc of bis own property if withheld by him from the
common stock, Ay was said by Cairns, L.C.. in Cooper ४. Cooper, this
condition arises not as on a “conjecture oF a presumed intention, — but

पु on a rule of equity founded on the highest principles of equity,
and as to which the court does not occupy itself in finding out whether the
rule was present or was not present to the mind of the party making the
will.” .

Whether forfeiture 31.8. This juristic basis—the basis of equity—directly leads to ४ consideration

just and fair.

of certain aspects of the section in owr Act. The precise question to be examined
is, whether considerations of equity? necessitate total forfeiture of the benefit
which the will proposes to give to the unwilling legatee (as is the present Jaw
in India). or whether it is enough if the disappointed legatee is compensated (as
is the law in England). Ln our view, it is enough if the unwilling legatec is permit-
ed to retain what the testator has left to him, on condition of compensating the
disappointed legatee for the loss of the benefit which the testator intended for
the disappointed legatee. The present Engtish law compels the refractory legatec
(the legatee who docs not comply with the will), merely to compensate the
disappointed legatee. The Indian law lays down forfeiture of the legacy proposed
to be given to the legatee who docs not comply with the will; and, in effect, the
balance goes to the residuary legate af the testator. This is clear from illustration
(i) to section 182५,

IH. Emphasis on intention misplaced

31.9. When the matter is viewed in the above light, it becomes a question
for srious consideration whether the law in India, as incorporated in section
180, should not be changed. The present law appears to be unduly harsh. It
places १00 much emphasis on the testator’s intention. The emphasis might have
been derived from the Roman jaw’, but there is no reason why we should now
adhere to that old docirine. Perhaps, the Indian section still sticks to the old
position because, at the time when (in 1865} the statutory provision on
the subject was introduced’ in India for the first time in the [बस
of succession, the position in England was not very definitely settled, that is to
say’, whether there should be compensation or there should be forfeiture, was

‘Emphasis supplied.

*Coaper v. Cooper. LR. TH. 1... 53, 67; (1874-80) 8॥ ६.६, Rep. 307,
*para 31.7, supra

‘Para 31.13. infra.

Theillustrations are wrongly placed under section 102, and should, have been placed under
section 180 or sectin 181

*See Buckland, Equity in Roman Law. pages 95-100 referred 10 by Hanibury. Modern Equity
41957), pages 502, footnote 6. .

“Section 167, Indian Succession Act. 1865.

*See para 30.6, supra.


173

not very clear. Possibly. some misunderstanding of the position was also caused
by Swantston’s nofe to one of the cases which reads :

>॥( 1६ a maxim not of morality but of logic, which compels election between
claims in respect not of the injustice, but of the technical incompatibility
of their contemporaneous assertions.

31.10, dt also appears that some ambiguity is inherent in the expressivt
“election”. which may cither mean a si: ht of choice between two bequests (on the
one hand). or a right to make a choice in favour of retaining His own property,
on terms of compensation, Apparently, in civil law, the refractory donee could
not retain the property belonging to him on terms ‘of compensation 10 the disap-
pointed claimant. He forfeited the benefit, But this does not appear to be a just
course of acl

The present English 1 3 more fair and should be adopted. Compensation
does justice to both the parties and the faw need net compel forfeiture of the bene-
fit given to the refractory donee.

31.11, In the fight of the above discussion, we recommend that section [80
should be revised as under :—

“480. Where a testator, by his will, professes to dispose of some thing which
he has no right to dispose of. the person to whom the thing belongs shall
elect either to confirm such disposition or to dissent from it: and in the
latter case, he shall compensate any person who has, by virtue of such elev-
tion. lost the benefits provided for him by the will, such compensation not
to exceed the benefits which may have been prov ided by the will for the
person so dissenting

V. Effect of election

31.42. According to section 181, an interest relinquished in the circumstances
stated in section 180 shall devolve as if it had not been disposed of by the will
in favour of the legatec, subject. nevertheless, (0. the charge of making good to
the disappointed legatce the amount or value of the gift attempted to be given
to him by the will. The section should be deleted, if section [80 is amended” as
recommended ubove, since there will be no “relinguishment by the Jegatee™.
after such amendment of section 180.

We recommend accordingly.
31.13. Section [82 reads :—

“The provisions of sections 180 and 181 apply whether the testator does or
does not believe that which he professes to dispose of by his will (0 be

his own.

1I.LUSTRA TIONS

(iy The farm of Suitanpur wis the property of C. A bequeathed it to B.
giving a legacy of 1.000 rupees ta C. C has elected to retain his farm of
Sultanpur. which is worth 800 rupees. C forfeits his legacy of 1,000 rupees.
of which 800 rupees goes to B. and the remaining 200 rupees fails into the
residuary bequest. or devolves cording to the rules of intestate succession,
as the case may be.

(ii) A bequeaths an estate to B in case B's elder brother (who is married
and has children) shall leave no issue living at his death. A also bequeaths
to € a jewel. which belongs to 3. B must elect to give up the jewel or to
lose the estate.

Giiy A bequeaths to B 1.000 rupees, and to C an estate which will, under
a settlement. belong to B if his elder brother (who is married and has

‘Para M18. supra.
aSce para 31.11, supra.

Ambiguity of the

expression “elec-
tion”.
Recommendation

io revise section.
180.

Section

Delection
recommended,

Section

181--


174

children) shall leave no issue living at bis death. B must elect to give up
the estate or to lose the legacy.

Gv) A..a person of the age of 18, domiciled in India but owning real pro-
perty in England, to which C is heir at law, bequeaths 2 legacy to C and,
subject thereto, devises and bequeaths to B “all my property whatso-
ever and wheresoever™. and dies under 21. The real’ property in England
does not pass by the will. C may claim his legacy without giving up the real
property in England.” *

(As already pointed out’ the illustrations should really have been placed
under section 180 or 181).

31.14, The reference in section 182 10 section 181 should be deleted, if
section 181 is deleted as recommended. The illustrations to the section will
require change. if our recommendation’ to Substitute compensation for forfeiture
is accepted.

Illustration (iv) has become obsolete in view of present English law as 0
the age of majority, and should be deleted.

On the above basis. the illustrations to section 182 may be revised as
under :

“(iy The farm of Sultanpur was the property of C. A bequeathed it to B,
giving a legacy of 1,000 rupees to C. C has elected to retain his farm of
Sultanpur, which is worth 800 rupees, C must pay B compensation of 800
rupees.

(ii) A bequeaths un estate to B in case B's elder brother (who is married
and has children) shall leave no issue living at his death, A also bequeaths
to C a jewel which belongs to B. B must give up the jewel (thus confirming
the disposition) or (if he elects to retain it) pay compensation to C to the
extent of the value of the jewel, but not exceeding the value of the estate,

(iti) A bequeaths to 8 1,000 rupees, and (० C an estate which will, under
a settlement, belong to B if his elder brother (who is married and has children)
shall leave no issue living at his death. B must give up the estate or (if
he elects to retain it) pay compensation to C to the extent of the value of
the estate, but not exceeding one thousand rupees.

(Present itlustration (iv) to be omitted).

Section 183, 31.15. Section 183 reads as under :—
“183. A bequest for a person's benefit is, for the purpose of election, the
same thing as a bequest made to himself.

ILLUSTRATION

‘The tarm of Sultanpur Khurd being the property of B, A bequeathed it to
C; and bequeathed another farm called Sultanpur Buzurg to his own execu-
lors with a direction that it should be sold and the proceeds applied in pay-
ment of B's debts, B must elect whether he will abide, by the will, or keep
his farm of Sultanpur Khurd in opposition of it”.

The section needs no change, not having created any problems.

Sesion 8¢—person 31-16. Section 184 reads—

directly’ mee ine “184. A person taking no benefit directly under « will, but deriving a benefit
election. under it indirectly. is not put to his election.

ILLUSTRATION

The jands of Sultanpur are settled upon C for life, and after his death upon
D. his only child. A bequeaths the lands of Sultapur to 8, and 1,000 mipees
‘Para 34.8, supra. See
*See para 31.12, supra
3566 para 31.12, supra.


175

to C. C dies intestate shortly after the testator, and without having made any
election, D takes out administration to C, and as administrator elects on
behalf of ("६ estate to take under the will. In that capacity he receives the
legacy of 1,000 rupees and accounts to B for the rents of the lands of Sul-
tanpur which accrued after the death of the testator and before the death of
6. In his inidividual character he retains the lands of Sultanpur in opposition
१0 the will,

This section also may be left as it is.

31.17. Section 185 reads—

“185. A person who in his individual capacity takes a benefit under a will
may. in another character. elect to take in opposition to the will,

ILLUSTRATION

The estate of Sultanpur is settled upon A for fife and after his death, upon
B. A leaves the estate of Sultanpur to D, and 2,000 rupees to B and 1,000
tupees to C, who is 85 only child, B dies intestate, shortly after
the testator, without having made an election, C takes out administration to
B, and as administrator elects to keep the estate of Sultanpur in opposition
to the will, and to relinquish the legacy of 2,000 rupees. C may do this. and
yet claim his legacy of 1.000 rupees under the will.”

‘The section needs no change, being based on the sound principle that the
capacity in which a person takes a benefit is distinct from that in which he opposes
the will.

31.18, Section 186 gives effect to a specific expression of intention by the
vestator. It reads—

“186. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 180 to 185, where a
particular gift is expressed in the will to be in licu of something belonging
to the legatee which is also in terms disposed of by the will, then, if the
legatee claims that thing, he must relinquish the particular, gift, but he is not
bound to relinquish any other benefit given to him by the will.

ILLUSTRATION

Under A’s marriage—settlement, his wife is entitled, if she survives him,
to the enjoyment of the estate of Sultanpur during her life. A by his will
bequeaths to his wife an annuity to 200 rupees during her life, in lieu of
her interest in the estate of Sultanpur which estate he bequeaths to his son.
He also gives his wife a legacy of 1,000 rupees. The widow clects to take
what she is entitled to under the settlement, She is bound to relinquish the
annuity, but not the legacy of 1,000 rupees.”

‘The section needs no change.

31.19. Acceptance of a benefit given by a will constitutes an election by the
legatee to take under the will, if he had knowledge of his right to elect and of those
circumstances which would influence the judgment of a reasonable man in making
an election, or if he waives inquiry into the circumstances. This is the provision
in section 187, illustrated as under :

ILLUSTRATIONS

(1) A is owner of an estate called Sultanpur Khurd, and has a life interest in
another estate called Sultanpur Buzurg to which upon his death his son B
will be absolutely entitled. The will of A gives the estate of Sultanpur Khurd
to B, and the estate of Sultanpur Buzurg to C. B, in ignorance of his own
right to the estate of Sultanpur Buzurg, allows C to take possession of it, and
enters into possession of the estate of Sultanpur Khurd. B has not confirmed
the bequest of Sultanpur Buzurg to C.

(ii) 8, the elder son of A, is the possessor of an estate called Sultanpur.
A bequeaths Sultanpur to C, and to B the residue of A’s property. 8

Section 185.

Section 186,

Section 187,


Section 18%

Section 189.

Section 190-
Postponement
of election in case
of disability,

Scope.

Section 191.

176

having been informed by A’s executors that the residue will amount to
5,000 rupees, allows C to take possession of Sultapur. He afterwards dis-
covers that the residue does net amount to more than 500 rupees. B has
not confirmed the bequest of the estate of Sultanpur to C*.

y that of a choice made with
sturbed,

‘The principle under! the section is obvious!
tui knowledge of the Jucts. The section need not be d

31.20, The next section (section 188) is reaily a rule of evidence, but finds
a place in the Succession Act as a matter of convenience. Ht reads as under ;

“188 (1) Such knowledge or waiver of inquiry shall, in the absence of
evidence to the contrary, be presumed if the legatce has enjoyed for two
years the benefits provided for him by the will without doing any act to ex-
press dissent.

(2) Such knowledge oy waiver of inquiry may be inferred trom any act of
the jegatee which renders it impossible to place the persons interested in the
subject-matter of the bequest in the same condition as if such act had not
been done.

ILLUSTRATION

A_bequeaths to B an estate to which C is entided, and to © a cual-mine, C
takes possession of the mine and exhausts it, He has thereby confirmed the
besquest of the estate to 8.7

The section needs no change. 1 may incidentally be mentioned that the
illustration illustrates the second sui-section.

31.21. This takes us to section 189, Lt provides that ii the legates does not,
within one year after the death of the testator, signifify to the testator’s represen-
taives his intention t confirm or to dissent from the will, the representatives shall,
upon the expiration of that period, require him to make his election, and, if he
does not comply with such requisition within a reasonable time after he 195
received it, he shall be deemed io have elected to confirm the: will.

We have no change to recommend in the section.

31.22. The special case of disability is dealt with (in the context of election)
by section 190 which reads as under :—

“190, In case of disability the election shall be postponed until the disability
ceases. or until the election is made by some competent authority.”

The section hardly needs any further comment.

CHAPTER 32
GIFTS IN CONTEMPLATION OF DEATH (SECTION 191)

in contemplation of death constitute a subject analogous io the
law of succession and are governed by the detailed provisions laid down in
section 191.

32.2. Section 191 reads as under :—

“191 (1) A man may dispose. by gift made in contemplation of death, of
any moveable property which he could dispose of by will.

(2) A gift is said to be made in contemplation of death where a mun,
who is ill and expects to die shorty of his illness, delivers to another the
possession of any moveable property to keep as a gift in case the donor
shall die of that iltness.


177

: and shail not take effect

(32) Such a gift may be resumed by the
it was made: nor if he survives

if he recovers from the illness during whic!
the person to whom it was made.
ILLUSTRATIONS

(i) A, being ill, and in expectation of death. delivers w 8. to be retained
by him in case of A’s death—

“a watch;

va bond granted by C to Az

va bank note :

“a promissory note of the Central Government endorsed in blank:

“a bill of exchange endorsed in blank: certain mortgage-deeds.
“A dies of the illness during which he delivered these articles.
B is entitled [0--

the watch;

the debt secured by C's bond :

the bank-note :

the promissory note of the Central Government :

the bill of exchange :

the money secured by the mortgage-deeds.
(ii) A, being ill, and in expectation of death, delivers 10 B the key of a
trunk or the key of a warehouse in which goods of bulk belonging to A
deposited, with the intention of giving him the controi over the contents of the
irunk or over the deposited goods and desires him to keep them in case of A’s
death. A dies of the illness during which he delivered these articles. B is entitled
to the trunk and its contents or to A’s goods of bulk in the warehouse.
(iii) A, being ill, and in expectation of death, puts aside certain articles
in Separate parcels and marks upon the parcels respectively the names of
B and C. The parcels are not delivered during the life of A. A dies of
the illness during which he sets aside the parcels. B and C are not entided
io the contents of the parcel”.

The illustrations may be thus explained.

Hlustration (i) takes cases where there has been actual delivery in con-
lemplation of death.

Mlustrction (ii) takes cases of constructive delivery.
Nlustration (iii) is a case of no delivery.

32.3. Story in his Equity Jurisprudence points out that a gift of the nature Nature and Origin
provided in section 191 is a sort of amphibious gift between a gift during the
life time and a legacy’.

The origins of the concept of donatio mortis causa are to be found in the
Roman Law. The concept was found to be useful, and was adopted in English
law. Following observations of Lord Cooper? show the original rationale for
the tule.

“Where ७ mun lies in extremity, or being surprised with sickness and not
having an opportunity of making his will, but lest he should die before
he could make it, it gives by his awn hands his goods to his friends about
him. This, if he dies, shall operate as a legacy, but if he recovers, then
does the property revert to him”.

‘Thus, delivery takes the place of a formal will. Incidentally, at present, it
is not necessary that the donor must be in extremis at the time when the gift
mortis cousa is made’.

'Story, Equity Jurisprudence (1919), page 256, Para 606,

+Lord Cooper ia Hedges v. Hedges, (1908) Precedents In Chancery 269: J. Gareth Miller
Machinery of Succession (1977), page 275.

2Notein(1965)81 L.Q.R.21,See paragraph 32.4. (a) infra.


178

English law as to 32.4. Uhree conditions must be satislied for a donation mortis causa, as al
lonations mortise mresent understood in English law:

cause.
(५) the gift must be made in comemplation of death (though not necessarily
in expectation of death by suicide’. *.

(b) the gift must be made upon पाए condition dial it is 19 be absolute and
complete only en the doner’s death, and is to be revocable during
his life. (Death need not, however, occur from te very cause con-
templated by the donor).

(c) the subject-matter of the gift must be delivered io the donee, Delivery
may be before or after the words of gif, and may even be to an
agent’, Delivery of a key to a box or drawer is enough. if the property
is identified*, *.

Delivery ० 32.5. Certain controversies have. arisen in England as to how far the

documeni delivery of a document is enough to constitute a gift of the thing to which the
document relates, particularly shares. However, these are not miterial for the
present purpose. The essence of the requirement is transfer of possession
(delivery by the donor to the donee by way of a conditional gift),

Section 191+ Hi 32.6. It may be noted that section "h does not, at present, apply to

ApplicabilityjoHin- indus etc’. The matter. would us regards Hindus. be governed by uncodified

dus. law. The position is, in this regard, at present, obscure. The case law* on the
subject is scanty and does not throw much light. We propose to consider the
question of extending the section to Hindus and. in that context. to deal with
Hindu Law on the subject

32.7. Traditional Hindu law. १ deals with the situation as one of gift,

Hie ia conte and accordingly requires “giving” (with the requisite intention) and acceptance.

Bien of death,
A donatio mortis causa ot movable property is recognised in Hindu’ law.
West and Buhler" state that “a tather’s promises are looked on as binding, unless
the performance of them would prevent the fulfilment of some still more sacred
duty, But that the courts will not enforce such obligation except subject to the
conditions of the statute Jaw where that is in force.”

In a Bombay case”, A promised lands to his daughter. but never executed
a deed of trans! fer. On his death-bed, he asked his son to give the lands 10
the daughter and the son agreed. After his death, A's will was found to contain
a est of all’ his property to the son and C. It was held that the daughter
sd compel the son to transfer the lands to her, notwithstanding the will.
since A constituted himself a trustee for the daughter in respect of them and
had constituted his son his trustee to transfer the lands to D. ©. had no interest

in’ the lands under the will.

32.8. We may here also notice a Calcutta case’. A Hindu. white on his

Calcutta case.
death-bed. caused certain government papers for the sum of Rs. 30.500 to be

Re Dudman, (1925) Ch. 553.

*Re wilkes v. Halington, (1834) Ch. 104.

*Cain 5. Moun, (1896) 0.8. 283.

‘Moore ६. Darton, (1851) 4 De and 6. 51.

“CF. Re Littingion, (1952) 2 5॥ 7.1२. 184, 191 for comment. see (19521 96 Solicitors
Journal.

‘Barlow in (१956) 19 Modern Law Review 394, 471.

‘Bhaskar १. Saraswati Bai, (1892) 1.1..10. 17 Bom, 486,
*See Thirl Schedule

*See infra

“See (a) Bhaskar ५. Saraswati Bai, 1. 1... R. 17 Bom. 486.
1h) Visalatchmi ४. Subbu, 6. M.H.C.R. 270.

West & Buhler. Hindo Law, 3rd Fd. Vol. 2, page 219. and 747, footnote (a), cited in Bhaskar
5, Saraswati. Bai.. \.L.R. 17 Bomb. 486, 4!

* Bhaskar v. Saraswatibai. (1892) (LR. 17 Bom. 486.

'SKumara Upendra « Nabin Krishna Bose, 3 Beng. L.R.O.€.5.. 113, 122, 123, summarised in
Bhaskar ६. Saraswatibai, \.L-R. 17 Bom.486,



179

given lo his sun in bis presence. saying : “Bring out the Papers and give Wem
to my son”, but he did not make or direct any endorsement thereon. Subsequently,
on being asked to endorse them, he said. “I am very weak, how can I sign so
many papers: When I get a little strength | will sign them, what cause have
you for being ..... ~ Phear J. decided that it was a good donatio mortis causa,
which had not the same signification in India as in England. The decree was
afirmed on appeal. Sir Barnes Peacock, C, J. holding that whe gift, was not
governed by the strict principles of English law, but by the Hindu law, By
English law, there was a valid donatio mortis causa, but assuming it to be a gift
intevivos, it was a valid gift by Hindu law. Sir Barnes Peacock observed : “If
the gift were to be governed by the English law, and treated as a voluntary gift
without condition, and not as a donatio montis cousa, 1 think the relation of
teustee and cestui que trust was created between the donor and the donee”.
He also observed that the donor, if he had lived, or his representatives after his
death, could not. at law, have compeiled the dones to have returned the govern.
¢nent papers,

32.9. On a consideration of the position, it appears to us that there are Recommendation
1४० weighty reasons, one theoretical. the other practical, why section 191 should to extend section
be extended to Hindus etc.— 191 to Hinde ete,

(1) on principle, there seems to be
apply to thet

ison why the section should nat

(2) if the section iy so extended, citizens would he able to 1008९ and
ascertain the kav easily from codified provisions.

We, therefore, recommend that section 191 should be extended 10 Hindus
sic, This will, of course, require amendment of the Third Schedule’,

CHAPTER 33
PROTECTION OF PROPERTY OF DECEASED (SECTIONS 192 10 210)

33.1. Protection of the property of the deceased forms the subject matter Scope.
et sections 192 to 210, which create a machinery for such protection, Under ~
section 192, proceedings for the purpose can be initiated by a person claiming
a rightful succession, either after actual possession has been taken by another
person or when forcible means of seizing possession are apprehended, An
application for the purpose has to be made to the District Judge who, after
inguiry under sections 193-194, has power, under section 194, to determine
summarily the right to possession and shall deliver possession accordingly. The
order of the District Judge is subject to the right of zhe aggtieved party io
bring a suit under section 208, Pending determination of the summary Proceedings.
the District Judge has power to appoint a curator of the property. The rest
of the chapter deals mainly with matter connected with the Curator,

33.2. The basic section in the entire scheme is section 192, which reads—

Section 192--
“192. (1) 11 any person dies leaving property, movable or immevable, any Fight by s Claiming

person claiming aright by succession thereto, or jo any portion thereof, to property of de-
may make application to the District Judge of the district where any Part of ceased may apply
the property is found or situate for relief, either after actual Possession has for relief against
been taken by another person. or when forcible means of seizing possession “Trt! possession,
wre apprehended.

(2) Any agent, relative or near friend, or the Court of Wards in cases
within their cognizance. may in the event of any minor, or any disqualified
or absent person being entitled hy succession to such Property as aforesaid,
make the like application for relief.”

‘To be carriedout under the Third Schedule.


i

|

Recommendation

to amend section succession, but applies alse to testamentary succession
192 are not, however, applicable to u case where the property passes by surviver-
ship—as in the case of a joint Hindu family’.

Section 193. Inquiry
made by judge.

Section 194,

Section 195,

Section 196.
' Powers conferable
_ of curator.

in section 192, by adding the words “testementary or intesiate
“succession”. wherever it occurs in the section. We recommend accordingly.

180

net confined 10 intestate

33.3. The term ‘succession’ in section 192
The provisions of section

It would be useful wo codify judicial interpretation of the word “succession”
“after the word

33.4. Section 193 reads—

“193. The District Judge to whom such application is made shall, in_ the
first place, examine the applicant on oath, and may make such further
inquiry, if any, as he thinks necessary as to whether there is sufficient
ground for believing that the party in possession or taking forcible means
for seizing possession has no lawful title, and that the applicant, or the
person on whose behalf he applies, seally entitled and is likely to be
materially prejudiced if left to the ordinary remedy of a suit, and that the
application is made hona fide.”

33.5. Section 194 reads—

"194. ॥ the rict Judge is satisfied that there is sullicient’ ground for
believing as aforesaid but uot otherwise, he shall summon the party complained
of, and give notice of vacant or disturbed possession by publicution, and,
atler the expiration of a reasonable time, shall determine summarily the
right to possession {subject to a suit as hereinafter provided) and shall
deliver possession accordingly.

“Provided that the Judge shall have the power to appoint. an officer whe
shall take an inventory of effects, and seal or otherwise secure the same.
upon being applied to for the purpose, without delay. whether he shall
have concluded the inquiry necessary for summoning the party complained
of or not.”

The section needs no change.
33.6. Section 195 reads—

“195, Hf it further appears upon such inquiry as aforesaid that danger is
ta be apprehended of the misappropriation or waste of the property before
the summary proceeding canbe determined, and that the delay in obtaining
security from the party in possession or the insufficiency thereof is likely to
expose the party out of possession to considerable risk, provided he is the
lawful owner, the District Judge may appoint one or more curators whose
authority shal! continue according to the terms of his or their respective
appointments, and in no case beyond the determination of the summary
proceeding und the confirmation or delivery of possession in consequence

thercot:

Provided that, in the case of land the Judge may delegate to the Collector,

or to any officer subordinate to the collector. the powers of a curator ;

Provided, further. that every appointment of a curavor in respect of any

property shall be 091५ published”.

The section needs no change.

33.7. Section 196 reads—

“196. The District Judge may «authorise the curator to take possession of
the property either generally, or until security is given by the party in
possession, or until inventories of the property have been made, or for any
other purpose necessary for securing the property from «misappropriation
or waste by the party in possession ;

' Binode Bhariv. Rai Sundari, A.A.R. 1926 Cat. 779.

2Champi Devi. Puran Bat A.1.R. 1934 Lahore 930.

Bua Dittav Sahib Divat, A.1.R 1938 Labore 753.


181

Provided that it shall be in the discretion of the Judge te allow the parly
in possession 10 continue in such possession on giving security or not, and
amy continuance in possession shall be subject to such orders as the Judge
may issue touching inventories. or the securing of deeds, or other effects,”

“Phe section needs no change.

33.8, Section 197 reads— Section ie Pro-
hibition of exercise

“197. (1) Where a certificate has been granted ander शिक्षा X or under ofcertain powers by
the Succession Certificate Act. 1889, or a grant of probate ता letters of curators.

tration has been made, 4 curator appointed under this Part shall not

exercise any authority lawfully belonging to the holder of the certificate or

w the executor or administrator.

(2) All persons who have paid debts or rents to a curator authorised by ॥ payment of debts
Court to receive them shal] be indemnified, and the curator shall be res- etc. to curator.
ponsible for the payment thereof to the person who has obtained the certi-

ficate, probate or letters of administration, as the case may be.”

{he section needs no change.

33.9. Section [98 reads—

“198, (1) ‘The District Judge shall take from the curitor security for the Curator tw give 3८५०५

faithful discharge of his trust. and for rendering satisluctory accounts of ucity and may receive
the same as hereinafter provided. and may authorise him to receive out .

of the property such remuneration. in no case exceeding five per centum

on the moveable property and on the annual profits of the immaveable

property, as the District Judge thinks reasonable.

(2) All surplus money realized by the curator shall be paid imo Court,
and invested in public securities for the benefit of the persons entitled thereto
upon adjudication of the summary proceeding.

(3) Security shall be required from the curator with all reasonable despatch,
and, where it is practicable, shall be taken generally to answer all cases for 1
which the person may be afterwards appointed curator: but no delay in the

taking of security shall prevent the Judge from immediately investing the

curator with the powers of his office.”

The section needs no change.

33.10, Section 199 reads as under :-- Section 199, Repor
oo . from Collector

“£99. (1) Where the estate of the deceased person consists wholly or in where state include

part of land paying revenue to government, in ail matters regarding the revenue paying law.

property of summoning the party in possession, of appointing a curator, or

of nominating individuals to that appointment, the District Judge shall

demand a report from the Collector, and the Collector shall thereupon

furnish the same :

Provided that in cases of urgency the judge may proceed. in the first instance,
without such report.

(2) The Judge shall not be obliged to act in conformity with any such
report, but, in case of his acting otherwise than according to such report,
he shall immediately forward a statement of his reasons to the High Court,
and the High Court. if it is dissatisfied with such reasons, shall direct the
Judge to proceed conformably to the report of the Coltector.

The Section needs no change.

33.11. This takes us to section 200, which in the main paragraph provides Section 200. Sui
that the curator shall be subject to all orders of the Dis Judge rgarding the brcurmtore . Suits
institution or the defence of suits. and all suits may be instituted or defended ~ *
in the name of the curator on behalf of the estate.

Under the proviso. an express authority shall be requisite in the order
of the curators appointment for the collection of debts or rents: but such


182

express authority shall enable the curator to give a full acquittance for any
sums of money received by virtue thereot.

Recommendation to 33.12. The section is dciived from an Act of 1841, The principle underlying

clarify the position the section is simple. \ curator is an officer of the court, and suits instituted

89 to authority of by him are subject to control of the court. The question, however, is whether.
before a suit is instituted by the curator, he must obtain the leave of the court.
The section provides that a suit should be ftstituted or defended in the name of
the curator, But, according to judicial interpretation, it is not necessary’ that
the curator must be specifically authorised by the District Judge to institute or
defend the suit. The position, in this regard, should be codified by adopting the
judicial interpretation. .

The proviso to section 200 requires that if a curator is appointed to collect
debts or rents of property, the order appointing him as curator must confer express
authority to give discharge for the moneys received. The proviso does not relate
to the institution or defence of suits, but to the collection of debts and rents.

Recommendation 33.13. Another matteron which the law could be suitably codified relates

to clarify the posi- 10 the need for a succession certificate when the curator takes proceedings. Jt has

nas to succes- been held? that it is not necessary for the curator to obtain a succession certificate

ion certificate. before instituting a suit to recover the debt. This position also should be made
clear by an amendment of section 200, An Explanation could he added for the
purpose,

. 33.4. In the light of what we have stated above, we recommend that
Suggested ammend: the following Explanations should be added below section 200 :—

“Explanation-1— + tt is noi necessary that the curator must be specifically
authorised by the District Judge to institute or defend the suit.

Explanation 2; It ix not necessary for the curator to obtain a succession
certificate before instituting a suit to recover the debt.”

Section 201, 33.15. Section 201 provides as follows :

“201, Pending the custody of the property by the curator, the District Judge
may make such allowances to parties. having a prima facie right thereto as
पर upon a summary investigation of the rights and circumsiances of the parties
interested he considers necessary, and may, at his discretion, take security
for the repayment thereof with interest, in the event of the party being found,
upon the adjudication of the summary proceeding not to be entitled th ereto.”

The section needs no change.

3.16. Section 202 provides that the curator shall fite monthly accounts in
the abstract, and shall, on the expiry of each period of three months, if his
administration lasts so long, and, upon giving up the possession of the property,;
file a detailed account of his administration to the satisfaction of the District
Judge.

Section 202

The section needs no change.

33.17, Section 203 provides that the accounts of the curator sball be open
to the inspection of all parties interested; and it shall be competent for any such
interested party to appoint a separate person to keep a duplicate account of all
receipts and payments by the curator. If it is found that the accounts of the
curator are in arrear, or that they are erreneous or incomplete, or if the curator
does not produce them whenever he is ordered to do so by the District Judge,
he shall be punishable with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees for every
such default.

Section 203.

The section needs no change.

ISection 9, Succession (Property Protection} Act. 1841 (19 of 1841).
?Lakshmi Chandv, Rani Lal, A.1.R. $931 All. 423.

3७) Babasab y. Narasappa, 1.L.R. 20 Bom. 437.

(0) Benode Behary v. Rai Sundari ,30C.W.N. 500.


183

33.18. Section 204 provides :— Section 204.—~
Bar to appointment

“204. 11 the Judge of any district has appointed a curator, in respect of of second curator
the whole of the property of a deceased person, such appointment shall fr same property.
preclude the Judge of any other district within the same State from appointing
any other curator, but the appointment of a curator in respect of a portion

of the property of the deceased shall not preclude the appointment within ,
the same State of another curator in respect of the residue or any portion
thereof :

Provided that no Judge shall appoint a curator or entertain a summary
proceeding in respect of property which is the subject of a summary pro-
ceeding previously instituted under this Part before unother Judge :

“Provided, further. that if two or more curator are appeimed by different
Judges for several parts of an estate, the High Court may make such order
as it thinks fit for the appointment of one curator of the whole property.”

Fhe section needs no change.

33.19. Section 205 provides that an application under this Part to. the Section 205.
District Judge must be made within six months of the death of the proprietor
whose property is claimed by right in succession.

Fhe section needs no change.

33.20, Section 206 provides : Bar (0 enforcement
“206, Nothing in this Part shall be deemed to authorise the contravention of pf Part against pub ५
any public act of settlement or of any legal directions given by a deceased legal dirggions by
proprictor of any property for the possession of his property after his deceased: |
decease in the event of minority or otherwise, and, in every such case, as

soon as the Judge having jurisdiction over the property of a deceased person t
is satisfied of the existence of such directions. he shai! give effect thereto,” पं

‘The section needs no change.

33.21. Section 207 provides :--- Section 297.

“207, Nothing in this Part shall be deemed to authorise any disturbance
of the possession of a Court of Wards of any property; and in case a
minor or other disqualified person, whose property is subject to the Court
of Wards, is the party on whose behalf application is made under this
Part, the District Judge, it he determines to summon the party in possession
und to appoint a curator, shall invest the Court of Wards with the curator-
ship of the estate pending the proceeding without taking security as aforesaid:
and if the minor or other disqualified person, upon the adjudication of
the summary, procecding, appears to be entitled to the property possession
shall be delivered to the Court of Wards,”

‘the section needs no change.
33.22. Section 208 provides-— Section 208.

“208. Nothing contained in this Part shall be any impediment to the
bringing of a suit either by the party whose application may have been
rejected before or atter the summoning of the party in possession, or by
the party who may have been evicted from the possession under this

part.”

The section needs no change.

33.23. Section 209 provides— Section 209,

209. The decision of a District Judge in a summary proceeding under
this Part shall have no other effect than that of settling the actual possession:
but for this purpose it shall be final. and shall not be subject to any

appeal or review.”

The section needs uo change.


Section 210. 33.24, Section 210 provides Uhat the St appoint public

Public Curaiors. - Curators for any disuict or number of distticts: and. the Diswict Judge having
jurisdiction shall nominate such public curators in all cases where the choice of a
curator fs left discretionary with him under this Part.

Vhe section needs no change,

CHAPTER 34

REPRESENTATIVE TITLE 10 ‘THE PROPERTY OF THE DECEASED
ON SUCCESSION, SECTIONS 21 TO 216

1. Introductory

34.1. Representative title to the property of the deceased on succession

Scape of the Chap- 4 t
fer. is an important (opic of the law of succession, dealt with in sections 211 to
216.

The Chapter begins with a positive provision in section 211, which enacts
that Ue executor or administrator of a deceased person is his legal representative
for alk purposes, and all property of the deceased vests in him as such, In case
of an administrator, ihe very definition of that expression’ requires that he must
be appointed by व competent authority. As regards an executor, section 213( 1)
provides, काश ulia, that (in cases whece that section applivs) no right as

a executor can be established in a cout without obtaining probate or letters of
administration with the will annexed. Thus, in some form or other, the court
enters into the picture in most cases,

} Executors and ad- 34.2. The position in India wader the Act offers a contrast to the continental

|. Ministrators. system. In most countries of Europe. where. in modern times, the influence of
Roman law has been predominant. property passes on immediately to the bene-
ficiarics, who by their acceptance of the benefit become directly liable for the

; payment .of the deceased's debts. In England, however, this is not the case’,

' “With us. the property must first vest in personal representatives whose duty

: it is to administer the estate by paying debts and distributing the residue amongst
the persons bencticially entitled. Morcover, their authority to administer must
be ratified or created hy what is in fact and in law an order of court. and this
order of court (either probate or letters of administration) becomes un essential
link in the title of the beneficiaries.”

Otigin of executot 34.3. The conception of the personal representative is founded upon the

and administrator. position of the executor appointed by the testator’s will to execute its terms, an
institution prevalent throughout Europe in the Middle Ages and perhaps traceable
to the ancient German Saiman to whom property was transferred in order that
he might carry out the wishes of the transferer. Where no executor was appointed,
the medieval Church claimed the right to administer, though practice the
Bishop appointed some member of the deceused’s family (by granting to him
letters of administration) to act as administrator in bis place. This practice was
Gin England} made compulsory by statute as early as 1357, and thereafter the
positien and functions of the adminisirator have been practically assimilated
to those of the executor.*

34.4, The scheme of these sections is that where those sections apply,
Scheme of sections. हि 2 . हे PP
it becomes necessary to obtain the appropriate document conferring or recognising

212.214, P i
the representative tide, before a right can be established to the property of
the deceased,

If, Survivorship and ihe question of sbares
Section 201) 34.5. We may now wake up the sections for detailed consideration, Section

211(1)., provides that the executor or administrator of a deceased is his Tegal

‘Section Mai : Administrator”.
“Stephen, Commentari¢s on the Law of England (1950) Vol. 1. page 520.
‘Stephen, Commentaries on the Law of England (1950), Vol. 1, page 520.


183

representative for all purposes. and all the property of the deceased person
vests in him as such. But, as regards Hindus, Mohamenadans, Buddhists, Sikhs.
Jains, Parsees and other persons, sub-section (2) provides that nothing in the
section shall vest in the executor or administeator any property of the deceased
person which would otherwise have passed by survivorship to seme other
person,

34.6, This naturally raises ihe guestion whether letters of administration Survivorship in ces
can be obtained in respect of property passing by survivorship to coparceners pect ofshares
in a Hindu undivided family. Much of the case 9७ on the subject relates to
shares in companies’. In general. property passing by survivorship is distinguished
from property passing by succession, The distinction, in fact, is elementary and
sound, But this theoretical distinction creates certain practical difficulties, because
of the fact that under the statutory provisions applicable’ to shares in companies.
shares ure registered only the name of a particular person, and only the
person registered is recognised as the “legal own of those shares so far
as the company is concerned. This does not. of cou mean that the rights of
the other persons against. the ‘le owner are affected as between the ‘legal’
owner and those other persons. But. as between the company and the share-
holders, this is the position. |

34,7, Now, these statutory provisions create some problems in regard to Shares जाता ia
ares belonging to the coparceners of a Hindu undivided family and standing the name of the
in the name of one coparcener—the manager, When the registered “legal” Manager
owner—i.e. the manager—dies. how is the tide of the surviving coparceners
to be established on bis death ?

34.8, Where. us a matter of general law, the right to shares passes by Applicability of sec
survivorship. the provisions of sections 211 to 213 would not, if construed tions 211-213 to
literally, be applicable to the situation, But if such a rigid view of the law is shares.

taken, then there remains no machinery for establishing, to the satisfaction

of the company, the title of the persons succeeding by survivorship. By and

large, courts have, taking a realistic view. construed sections 211 to 213

widely tor the purpose. There is, no doubt. some conflict of views on the

question as to the basis on which court fees are (0 be calculated® in respect of

petitions for latters of administration filed by the surviving coparceners, That

conflict, however as it pertains to the Court Fees Act. is not miteriol for our

purpose.

34.0 Qur primary concern is with the question whether letters of adminis- Letiers of adminis
(ration can be granted in respect of shares in joint stock companies where. the tration — regarding
shares stand in the name of the karta of a Mitakshara Joint Hindu family, On shares.
that question, most High Courts take the view‘ that in the case of such shares
the Companies Act. (and usually, the Articles of Association of the Company).
make jt abundantly clear that vis-a-vis the company. the local title in the
shares is in the registered holder of the shares, the karts of the joint family
in whose name the shares stand. He is the only person recognised by the company
as having the shares. The position. therefore. is that on the death of the karta
who was the registered holder of the shares, the title to the shares vis-a-vis
the company. does not, on death of the karta. without the grant of letters of
udministration, pass by survivership to the survivine members of the coparcenary
of which the deceased was the Karta. So far ay the company ix concerned, the
exceptions in cases of Hindu dying intestate, provided in Section 21112) and
242(2) of the Indian Succession Act. 1925. do not, therefore, apply in such
cases, At the same time. neither the principles of Hindu law nor the provisions
contained in the Succession Act. stand in the way of the grant of the Letters of
Administration fimited to the shares held by the karla of a joint Mitakshara
Hindu family, in the event of his dying intestate.

‘Paras 34.8 and 34.9, infra.

*The Companies Act. 1956,

‘Section 19D, Court Fees Act

‘The case law is reviewed in.

(a) Sri Ram ५. collector, Latwre, A.LR. 1942 Lahore 173:

(h) la re ; the gouds of Sew Praasad Saraf, AA.R. 1954 Calcutta 444, 445, 446,


166

View of most High 34.10.The conclusion on the question, as expressed in a Calcutta case’,

Courts. represents, in broud terms, the view of the most High Court-, namely. that
where shares in 8 joint stock company belonging to an andivided family governed
by the Mitakshara school of Hindu law stand in the name of the karta of the
family, letters of administeation limited to the shares can be granted to legal
representatives in the event of the Karta dying intestate. and. का particular. to
the nest karta of the family.

Need to add an Ex- 34.11, ॥ is desirable that this interpretation, which iakes a practical view

tanation to section al sl eine ५! | secti है a ७ speci
2regarding shares Of, the, matter should be incorporated in the section by adding 9 specific

> Section 211 ३4.12, In connection with seciion 211, the next important point is con-
Disposal by will of cecued with the Explanation to section 30 of the Hindu Succession Act 1956.
Pepys bury state the gist of that Explanation broadly, it confers, for the first time’, a
ivorship. ° right to dispose of (by will) property in the nature of the imerest of a male
Hindu -in a Mitakshara Coparcesiury property er the interest of the specified

persons in the specified property.

Sectivn 6, Hindu 34.13. Section 6 of the same Act also provides that such interest shall.

Succession Act. in certain cases, pass by succession, and not by survivorship’. The scope of
sub-section (2) of section 211 of the Succession Act has thus become limited.
Customary jaw prohibiting the disposition by will of certain property, of course.
still continues in force. section १0 of the Hindu Succession Act having no
application in such a case. The Punjab case of Jat Hindu belonging to an
agricultural tribe and governed by Punjab Customary Law may be cited>* in this
context, as an illustration of the judicial view as to customary law. This position
does not, of course. necessitue any umendment in the section in the Succession
Act.

Survivorship. 34.14, It wus decided in a Madras case’ that the expression “legal representa-
tives” and “successors” may not be applicable to persons taking by survivorship,
but it does not necessarily follow that such persons are not entitled to obtain
a4 succession certificate by culling themselves” legal representitives.*"

We are of the view that not only is there geed for a specific provision”
to cover shares in the contest of letters uf administration, but there is also need
to cover” all cases of survivorship in the context of succession certificate

Recommendation 34.15. In the light of what we have stated above”, we recommend that the
as to section 211, fofiowing Explanation should be added to section 211.

“Explanation —Where shares in a joint stock company belonging ta an
undivided famity governed by the Mitakshara school of Hindu law stand
in the name of the karta of the family, letters of administration limited to
the shares may, in the event of the karta dying intestate, be granted io the
legal representatives of the Karta (including, in appropriate case, ihe next
Karta of the family)”.

This amendment will cover letters of administration, The amendment as
to Succession Certificate will be dealt with Tater“.

Sint he goods of Sew Prasad Saruf, AIM. 1954 Cal, 444, 445, 446, para 24 (G.N. Das and SR.
Dasand 5.10, Das Gupta 73).

jee para 34.75, infra.

*Section 30014. Explanation, Hindu Succession Act, 1956.

‘Section 6. Hindu Succession Act. 1956.

‘Kaur Singh \. Jaggar Singh, ALR. 1961 Punjab 489.

SJuginder Singh’. Kehar Singh, A1.R, 1965 Punj. 407 (Full Bench).

? Krishnammal ९. Laxmi Anunial, VLR. (1950) Mad. 718. 726, 727, 728, 735

SCompare Batwari Lal. Maksudan Lal. (1929) VLR. 57 AIL 252 : ATR, 1930 AlL99
*See para 48.3 (section 3701, infre.
"See para 34.18. 487४.

11866 para 49 , 3 (section 370). infra.
37 छा 34.54, supra

‘Para 48%. infra.



187

11, Establishment of right to property of deceased

34.16. Section 212(1) provides that no right to any part of the property Section 212
of a person who dics intcstate can be established in any court of justice unless
fetters of administration have first been granted by a court of competent
jurisdiction. Sub-section (2) provides that this section shal] not apply in the
case of intestacy of a Hindu. Mohammadan, Buddhist, Sikh. Jain, Indian Christian
or Parsee.

‘The section needs no change.

34.17. Section 213 provides that before title (as an executor) can be Section — 213—
established, probate of the will must be obtained. There seems to be some Establishment of
uncertainty as to whether, in cases where probate is not obtained, (though- litle, ‘executor’.
required by the section), the provisions of the section merely bar the passing
of a decree on the basis of a right claimed under the will, or whether they bar
the very institution of the suit to enforce that right.

The Madras and Patna High Courts take the former view', namely, only
the passing of the decree is prohibited, The Andhra and Calcutta. High Courts*
take the latter view, namely, the very institution of the suit is barred.

It should be noted that in the case of an executor, the title depends on the
will, and not on the probate. Probate is needed only to prove title’,

34.18. Whatever be the correct construction of the present wording of Recommendati

section 213, it seems to us that on practical considerations it is desirable to to, amend section
adopt the former view‘, which would bar only the passing of a decree, It reflects 213:
a less technical approach than the contrary view. We therefore recommend that
section 213 should be amended by providing that where probate has not been
obtained, what is barred is only the passing of a decree*, and not the institution
of a suit.

34.18A, It has been represented to us, in one of the comments received gection 213- ex-
on the Workiog Paper* that while Hindus and Muslims can get relief from the clusion of Indian
court on the basis of a will, Christians have to get a probate or letters of adminis- Christians recomm:
tration for getting relief on the basis of a will. It has been suggested in that tions.
communication that Christians should be excluded from section 213, This is a
suggestion forwarded to us along with the letter of the Catholic Bishop's Con-
ference of India. We accept the suggestion, though the point was not contained
in our Working Papers. We recommend that (a) section 213 should be amended
as above; and (b) consequential changes be made, wherever necessary, in other
sections of the Act.

IV. Debts—uneed for succession certificate

34.19. This takes us to section 214, with reference 10 which a number Section 214, Phrase
of points requite consideration, The first question is concerned with the signi- ‘on succession’.
ficance of the phrase ‘on succession’.

Sub-section (1), clause (a) of the section prohibits the courts from passing
a decree against a debtor of a deceased person for payment of his debt to a
person claiming, ‘on succession’, to be entitled to the effects of the deceased
person or to any part thereof, except on the production, by the person so claiming,
of the requisite document covering the specified amount. The phrase did not
occur in the earlier Act of 1865, but was added by the Joint Committee that
considered the Bill which led to the present. Act.

The significance of these words will be soon realised when we consider
the cases where a claim is made against the ‘debtor of a deceased person’ on the

1(4) Inre Ramchand A.J.R. 1956 Mad. 274, 276.
1b) Bhude v. Chandva x. Bhishakar, A-LR. 1942 Pat. 120.
*(a) Venkata Subramaniam v. Andhra Bank, A.LR.\960A.P, 273, 280.
(6) Bibhuti Bhusan v. Narendra, AIR. 1951, Cal. 228.
*Meyappav. Subramanian, A.1.R. 1916 P.C. 202, 204.
‘Para 34.17, supra.
5Compare section 214 (1) (०).
‘Letter of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India, dated 3rd October, 1984.

85-L/B(D)144MofLI&CA—13


Claim on Insurance
policy.

Section 6, Married
Women’s Property
Act,

Practical problem
Seated by section

Hardship caused to
widows and child-
Ten

Absence of nomina’
tion.

Heir of owner or

tenants,

188

basis not of succession, but on some other basis, The other basis could be
survivorship—for example, in the case of Hindu coparcenary property or in the
case of debts duc to a partnership firm.

34.20. More frequently. the claim could be tor money due on an insurance
policy, the rights wherein have been transferred‘ to the claimant, or in respect
of which a nomination has been made. A claim for money so due is, in its
essence, based not on succession on death, but on a demand which merely
materialises on death. It can be stated that a person claiming insurance money
under a policy assigned to him does not claim as a successor, but in his or her
awn tight.

ict of Uccisions on the question whether amount

There seems to be a cout
a ‘debt, he need for 2 precise definition

due under an insurance policy
of the word ‘debt’ is obvious.

When the Succession Bill was discussed, the matter seems io have been
raised. Sir Hari Singh Gour, in his speech of the 18th March, 1925 in the
Legislative Assambly on the Bill, made a pointed reference to the nebulous state
of judicial interpretation of ‘debt’ in the on ferent High Courts, and pleaded for
a statutory provision which could preclude the possibility of a further conflict
of authorities’, Apparently, his suggestion was not accepted, But the point is
really of considerable practical importance. It appears to be desirable to provide
that a succession certificate can be issued in respect of an amount due under
an insurance policy.

34.21. In particular, with reference to section 6(1) of the Married
Women’s Property Act, 1874, it may be of interest to note that a succession
certificate is not required when a trust is created under that section’-. The
section constitutes « specific statutory provision which creates a trust. On such
a trust coming into being. the policy of insurance ceases to form part of the
estate of the deceased. The concluding words of section (1) of the above
mentioned Act, in fact, so provide. Although the point docs not necessitate
any amendment of section 214 of the Succession Act, it is worth noting in the
context of the subject undor discussion.

34,22, The 1005 important problem created by section 214(1) is 8 practical
one, The section has been resorted to by banks and other persons for refusing
payment of a debt of a claim owed to a deceased person where @ succession
certificate is not produced. Jt was never intended that the section should, in this
manner, come in the way of the heirs of the deceased person, The object of
the section is merely to make. it clear that no debt due to a deceased person
can be recovered through court except by a holder of a document of the cate-
gory’, However, practical experience shows that a provision which was intended
to have application mainly in relation to litigation has had the unintended effect
of causing hardship to the heirs of deceased persons.

34.23. Presumably, it was not che intention to jay down a rule of law
that a bank or other debtor can ever make a payment to the person who claims
to be the heir unless he produces the succession certificate or other document
specified in the section. Common experience, however, shows that banks and
other institutions do take such a stand, causing immense hardship to the heirs,
particularly to poor widows and children of deceased persons

34.24. Where the debt or claim is of such a nature that there is a statutory
provision for nomination and that provision has been actually utilised by the
deceased persons, then, in practice, the banks and other institutions make pay-
ment to the nominee. But in the absence of such a statutory nomination, great

hardship is caused to the heirs.

34.25, The position is enomutous in another respect ulso, inasmuch as the
aw imposes no such restriction in the case of title to immovable property.

‘Section 38. Insurance Act, 1938.
५, Subramania, "fs Insurance a debe. A.LR. 1927 Journal 14.

*Pameshwari Baiv, Nihal Chand, A. 1938 Sind. 20.
4Seealso in Re Asha Lata Desai, A.N.R.1940Cal. 217.
‘Kissen Lal ९. Titak Chandra, A.A.R.1940Cal, 24.



189

A person claiming to be the heir of a deceased owner of immovable property
can cortinue as owner of the immovable property of the deceased, without pro-
ducing a succession certificate. but he cannot withdraw moneys but oy the
deceased in a bank account—and this is so even where there is no Goubt that
he is the heir, Same is the position regarding tenant. Of course, a tenant has
also to bear the liability to pay rent. but the fact remains thai he gets a valuable
advantage without being required to produce a document establishing his right
to succeed. It is understandable that a bank may like to have some evidence
of death and of the claimant’s right before it makes payment, but there could be
other evidence—i.e. evidence other than a succession certificate.

It seems, therefore, desirable to recommend some reform that would solve
the above problem. While it cannot be provided that the claim must in every
case be paid without a succession certificate, it would be reasonable at least to
provide that a payment without such certificate is not illegal.

34,25A. We note that by a recent amendment’ made in the Banking Regu- Recent amendments
lation Act, 1949, it is now possible to make a nomination in respect of deposits made in banking
in banks, Where such nominations are made, the hardship otherwise experienced laws as to nomi-
by the relatives of a deceased depositor would be allcviated to some extent, nation.
s'nee the bank would be protected and would get a full discharge on making
payment to the nominee, But, in cases where no such nomination has been made,
the difficulties felt by virtue of-the practice of banks to which reference has been
already made” will survive. An amendment of the Succession Act would, there-
fore, possess considerable utility, even after the amendment of the banking
laws.

Incidentally, it may be mentioned that a nomination does not affect the Effect of nomina-
rights of the other heirs, and, as between the nominee and the rival heirs, the tion. mins
nominee does not get any higher orp referential status. The new sections inserted
in banking laws provide so expressly.

34.25B, We may also note that in a Kerala case reported recently*, the section 214, and

widow of a person who had been killed in an accident caused by the driver of small claims.
a truck, claimed compensation against the Kerala State Road Transport Corpo-

ration, which owned the truck. Presumably the claim was under the Fatal

Accidents Act read with the Motor Vehicles Act. Resisting the claim, the State

Road Transport Corporation insisted that the widow should produce a succession

certificate before payment could be made to her. The widow thereupon moved

the High Court of Kerala by a letter, which was treated as a petition. The High

Court pointed out that no succession certificate was required in this case, as

the widow was claiming in her own right, and not as an heir, As regards the

cases where the widow (or other relative) claims as an heir, the High Court

made the following observations, which are relevant to the provisions of the

Succession Act :-—

“It is for the legislature to deal with the matter by enabling payments to be
made, at least in respect of small sums of money without a succession
certificate being required to give immunity to the debtor, We are not going
into that question in this case, for, even, otherwise, we think we will be
able to give relief to the petitioner herein.”

34.26. For these reasons, in our opinion, the appropriate course would recommendation
be to add to section 214, an Explanation in suitable terms so as to ensure to add an Exptana-
that the section will not—as is the practice at present—be utilised as a shelter tion to section 214

a

in every case for deceased. as to payment of ©

We recommend that the section should be amended accordingly‘.

‘The Banking Laws Amendment Act, 1983.
Paragraph 34.22, sppra.

rn *Kocbupenm Lakshai v. Chairman, K.S.R.T. corporation, ALR. 1984 Ker. 97. 99. para 4
(June).

‘See para 34.45, infra, for a suggested re-draft of the section.


190

VI. Scope of the expression "Debt".

Meaning of “debi” 34.27. There seems to be a conflict of decisions on the exact scope of

Bombay and Patna the expression “debt” in sections 214, 370, 372(1)() and 381, The conflict

view, is apparent from a Bombay judgment’, which has discussed the matter at length,
dissenting from an Allahabad case*, and agreeing with a Patna case’,

In the Patna‘ case. the appellant applied, under section 370, for a succession
certificate in respect of certain ornaments pledged with the Punjab National
Bank at Darbhanga, The High Court dismissed the application, holding that
the expression “debts and securities” (in sections 370 and 381)° did not cover
pledged ornaments,

Allahabad view. 34.28, In the Allahabad case’, one tady had died in the Kumbha Mela
tragedy and the district authorities had taken possession of certain cash and
ornaments from the body of the deceased. When the petitioners, as her heirs,
asked for the return of valuables, the authorities insisted on the production
of a succession certificate. Consequently, the petitioners approached the court
for the purpose, The question arose whether “debt” would cover pledged
movables. The High Court held that the term “debt” meanc a liability owing
from One person to another whether in cash or kind, secured or unsecured,
whether ascertained or ascertainable, arising out of any obligation, express or
implied. The refund of ornaments recovered from the dead hody became an
obligation of the authorities who were bound to hand over the same to the
person entitled. Accordingly, a succession certificate was granted,

Bombay case, 34.29, The Bombay case’ discusses the problem of interpretation of the
term ‘debt’ at great length. In that case, one lady had died in 1963, leaving
behind her husband and three sons, Her husband died in 1966, leaving behind
his three sons. The lady had taken a demand loan of Rs. 3.000 from the State
Bank of India on the security of certain ornaments. ‘Ihe sons paid off the
loan amount with interest 10 the Bank, and claimed return of the gold. pledged,
The Bank informed them that it could not reurn the jewellery in the absence
of a succession certificate. The sons made an apy plies ation for a succession certi-
ficate. The High Court, construing the term ‘debt’ narrowly, held that a. certi-
ficate could not be granted in respect of the ornaments pledged with the Bank.
Thereupon, the petitioner sought Jeave of the court to withdraw the application.
which was allowed.

Recommendation 34.30. In this position, it is desirable to settle the law on the subject.

10 settle the law: Although, in general, “debt” could be taken as confined to a monetary obligation
for a ‘i uidated amount, practical considerations require that the expression
“debt” should, for the purposes of sections 214, 370(1) and 381, be defined
as including any actionable claim.

We recommend that the law should be amended on the above lines.

Of course, the eficct of the proposed amendment would be to extend the
restrictive as well as the beneficial provisions of the Act to actionable claims,
But that would be the only logical course.

Gist of the reie- 34.31. It may be mentioned for ready reference thut section 370(1) pro-
vantsectionssumm- vides that a succession certificate shall not be granied with respect to any
arised. “debt” or security to which a right is required by section 212 or section 213
to be established by letters of administration or probate. Section 372(1)(f)
provides, iter alia, that an application for succession certificate shall set forth
the “debts” and securities in respect to which the certificate is applied for. Section
381 provides that the succession certificate shall, with respect to the “debts” and

' Ranchoddas v. Govind Das, 1976) 78 Bom. L.R. 219 (Madon J.)

*Dinanath ५. Balkrishna, A.1.R. 1963 All. 46(Mithan Lal,J.).

:Shyam Sundari Deviv. Sarla Devi, A.1.R. 1962 Patna 220.

‘Shyam Sundari Devi ६. Sarla Devi, AAR. 1962 Pat. 220 (Untwalia. 0.1.
‘a, For gistof the sections see para 34.31, infra.

SDina Nath v. Batkrishna, A.A.R. 1963 AN. 46(Mithan Lal J).

tn Re : Ranchohdas,(1976) 78 Bom. t.R. 219.



191

securities specified therein, be conclusive as against the persons owing such debts
or liable on such securities, and shall afford full indemnity to all persons who
in good faith make payment to the person to whom the certificate was granted.

VIL. State for obtajaing succession certificate,

24.32. The stage at which probate or succession certificates should be ob- Stage for obtaining
tained has also become the subject of controversy. In one Allahabad cuse', grant.
the question for consideration was whether a probate or succession certificate
was required to be obtained by the plaintifis, before u decree could be granted
in their favour, The High Court, applying section 213(2), held that probate
will not be required to be obtained by a Hindu in respect of a will made
regarding immovable properties situated’ in Uttar Pradesh.

As to the applicability of section 214 at the stage of institution of proceedings,
the High Court held—

~The purpose of section 214 1510 make clear that uo debt to a deceased
person can be recovered fhrough the court except by a holder of one of
the documents specified, the जाए exception being either whether the claim
is made on survivorship, or whether it is in respect of rent. revenue or
profits payable ia respect of land used for agricultural purposes. Je may.
however, be pointed out that section 214 does not debar the Bling of the
sit. I merely debars ‘a corr from passing a decree. Wo suit has heen
filed, the court is forbidden from passing a deceree on the basis of a
debt against the debtor of the deceased.”

34.33. In our view, it is desirable that the matter should be put beyond Recommendation to
possible controversies by codifying the Allahabad view? An Explanation on the add an Explanation
subject could be usefully added to the section‘, for the purpose. as fo institution of

VILL Joint decrees.

34.34. Another question concerning the provisions of section 214 arises Joint decrees.
in connection with joint decrees. Where the decree was passed jointly in favour
of more than one decree-holder, and each one of them in his own right could
execute the decree (provided the execution is for the benefit of all), the bar in
section 214 does not apply‘. Section 214, it has been held, can apply only when
there is one decree-holder, Where there is only one decree-holder, taken on the
death of the decree-holder, the legal representatives have no right to take ont
execution proceedings unless they have stepped into the shoes of the decree-
holder by obtaining a succession certificate. In a Rajasthan 038८० there was
only one decree-holder, and in order 10 avoid future conflicts between rival
claimants, the bar of section 214 was held to apply. An Assam ९85९९, is to the
same cffect.

1X. Continuation of proceedings,

34.35, With reference to section 214{1)(b), ४ controversy has arisen Section 214 (1) ¢b)-

whether it bars the continuation of an execution proceeding without obtaining Execution Proceed-
a succession certificate, According to one view’, the main purpose of section”
214 is iv protect the debtor from vexatious proceedings and irom being harassed
at different times by different persons claiming to be successors: the continuation
of an execution proceeding by the legal representatives is not hit by the section,
and a succession certificate need not be produced in such a case. according to
this view,

\Bhanja ji, fageshwar Dayal, ALR. 1978 All. 268,

*See cuse law discussed, para 33.32, supra:

*Para 34.45, fufra.

‘Naud Lalv. Mahavir Kumar, AAR. 1974 Raj. 189.

*Ganeshmaly. Smt. Anand Kanwar, ALR, 1968 Raj. 273

‘Ranmibas Aggarwal. Mt. Badiwnikalita, A.1.R. 1967 Assam 27.

* Ramanatha v. K.V-Kuppuswami, है, 1971 Mad. 419, 421, para 7 (Ramanujam J.).
* Raghubir Singh v, Rajeshwar Prasad Singh, A.LR. 1957 Pat. 435.

*Lal tari v. Futmati Kaur, AR. 1965 Pat, 296, Para 2 (U.N. Sinha, J.).
7० 4(बाव Mabuichan ९. Rajeanma, AR. 1963 Andh. 69(D.B.).



192

The reasoning on which this view is based is that the ऐश of section 214
(1) (09) applies only when persons claiming on succession themselves apply
to execute a decree against a debtor for payment or recovery of the debt owing
10 the deceased. But, where no substantive application is initiated by the legal
representatives, merc continuation of the execution proceedings already initiated
by the plaintiff decrec-holder is not barred’, It has also been pointed out that
under 0.22. r. 2. C.P.C. fresh application is not required.

According to a contary view'-" an application by a legal representative to
bring himself on record in a pending case should be treated as an application for
fresh execution, and thtrefore attracts the provisions of section 214.

According (० a recent Kerala judgment’, section 214 applies 10 the continu-
ation of execution proceedings.

Recommendation 34.36. Whatever be the true construction of the present wording, practical
to add an Explana- considerations require that the former view should be adopted, i,c. the continuation
tion | 38 to conti-of execution proceedings by the legal representative should aot be hit by the
uation ofexecution section, A suitable Explanation should be added to deal with the matter’, No
" doubt, the object of section 214(1) is to protect the interest of the debtor and
to see that only the person entitled to succeed to the assets realises the debt
owing to the deccased. Nevertheless, there is a limit to which one can give
effect to this logic. Considerations of expeditious disposal must, at some stage,
vail, If a wrong person continues the execution, the rightful heir can claim

the fruits of the recovery from him.

X. Mortgage decrees.

Secured debts posi- 34.37. Certain questions have arisen as to whether a decree (preliminary

tion regard ing mor-or final) for the foreclosure or sale of property can be passed wthout a succession

tgage decrees. certificate where the mortgagee has died. Should the legal representative be
asked 10 produce a succession certificate before obtaining such a decree ? Section
214 does not expressly include within its scope a decree for the enforcement of
the mortgagee’s rights against the mortgaged property.

Fotectosure. 34,38. On a detailed examination of the case law, the position appears to
be this. A decree for the foreclosure of a mortgage is not_one for the payment
of a “debt” so as to fall within the provision of section 214, The direction to
pay within the period fixed in the decree, is given not te fix a personal liability
tor the debt, but to enable the defendants to save their right of redemption and
to prevent its extinction by foreclosure’.

Money due under 34.39. A suit to recover the money due under a usufructuary mortgage is
usufructuary mot- also not a suit for “debt” or money due under a contract, but is, in reality, one
teage. for assessment in money of the value of the plaintiff's mortgage interest”.

Redemption. 34,40, A suit for redemption (brought by the heir of the mortgagor) is also
nol a suit against a debtor to obiain a decree for payment of his “debt”. The
plaintiff is really the debtor, and not the creditor of the deceased mortgagor,
Obviously, therefore. a person who, as heir of the mortgagor, is bringing ६ suit
for redemption, is not suing to recover any debt, and a succession certificate
is not required”.

1 Benode v. Purnendt, AVR. 1973 Cal, 352, 353, (A.K. Sarkar, J.).
5 2Srinath Khandelwal, ७. Biswanath Pd. ATR. 1972 AW. 321, 323, 324, para 7-9 (MLN, Shukla
|e
2Tejramt Rajma\ ९. Rawr Kundan Lal, ALR. 1938 Nag. 538.
“Tejram Rajmalv. Renpyari Kundan Lal. कै |... 1938 Nag. 538.
sChacka v. Varghese, AAR. 1956 Tra, Co, 183.
*Gaueshamaty. Anand Kanwar, A.LR. 1968 Raj. 273.

*Ramkrishnan Nair v. Easwari Amma, 1979) K.L.T, 401 (June 4 and June 11. 1979), (1979)
yearly Digest, Supplement. Col. 1994.

*Para 34.45, infra.
2a) Ammaniav. Gurcenurthi, (1893) 1.L.R. 16 Mad. 64,
18) Marwant v. Mithrana, (1900) A.W.N. 95.
‘Arumuganv. Valura Goundan (1901) 1.L.R. 24 Mad. 22
" Zafer Aliv. Kenti Prakash, ALR. 1929 Ail. 896 (Dalal J.).



34.41, According 10 the majority of the High Courts, a suit to recover money Suits forsale of mo-
due on a simple mortgage, by sale of the mortgaged property, is also not a suit ‘gaged property.
tor the recovery of a ‘debt', It suit to enforce a charge on immovable property.
and no succession certificate, therefore, need be obtained by the heirs of the
mortgagee to recover the money',

The aere fact that the remedy by personal decree for the debt is still
available to the mortgagee would not also make any difference’. On this view.
“debt” would not cover a decree for the enforcement of the mortgagee’s rights
against mortgaged property.

34.42. The Allahabad High Court, in its earlier cases, expressed the opinion
that money lent on the security of a mor(gage is a “debt” due from the mortgagor
to the mortgagee, and the decree in a suit on such mortgage is a decree for the
payment of “debt-—i.e, payment by sale of the mortgaged properly. Consequently.
a succession certificate is necessary* ‘for proceedings on such decrees.

But. in a later Allahabad cise’, where the personal yemedy under the
niortgage deed had become barred by limitation long before the suit was brought.
and the mortgagee was simply entitled to a decree {or of the mortgaged
property, it was held that the application for the execution of the mortgage
decree for realisation of the amount by sale of the mortgaged property
was not an application to obtain an order for the payment of his “debi”, No
succession certificate was, therefore, necessary. The सह Allahabad rulings
are not cited in the judgment.

34.43. It seems 10 us that but for the early rulings of the Allahabad High True position.
Court, the position is well established that a decree for sale is not a decree for
“debt”, The later Allahabad judgment also discloses—if indirectly—a changed
trend, fir this position, a clarification of the law is not required.

34.44, As regards personal decree, an application by the heirs vf 4 mortgagee Personal decree
for a personal decree under section 90 of the Transfer of Property Act (0.34, Succession  certi-
1. 6. C. P. Code, 1908) requires a succession certificate’. ficate.

Thus, where, after a decree for sale had been made in a mortgage suit, the
mortgagee died and his sons got themselves substituted on the record, but the
proceeds of the sale of the mortgaged property proved insufficient, and the sons
applied for personal decree for the balance, it was held that until the applicants
obtained a certificate, nu such decree could be made in their favour’, These
cases also do not necessitate any amendment of the law,

‘ta) Nanchand ५. Yerawa, 904) LL.R. 28 Bom. 630, 632.

(b) Raghn Nath v. Porestt Nath, (888) LUR. 15 Cal. 5: पु

fo) Kauchaw. Buij Nath, (1892) LL.R. 19 Cab, 336, 339. dissented Jrom in 16 All. 259.

td) Baid Nath. Shamanand, (1895) 1,1..7. 22 Cal. 143

fe} Afolmmued Yusufy. Abdur Rakiat, (1899) LL.B. 26 Cal. 839.

(f) Subramanian 5. Rakkar, (1897) T.L.R. 20 Mad. 232

fg) Pallamrajes, Bapanna, 1189911.1..10, 22 Mad. 380.

(ते Palanivauti v. Veeranmial, (1906) (L.R. 29 Mad. 77,

(fh Base Devancnd ५. Raghiubie Savan, R. 1955 Pat. 284, 286, 287.

*Ramasaini ९, Venkanina, AAR. 1963 ALP. 115, 136, 137, paras 7 and 12 (reviews case law)
dissenting from (रथ! Chand ९ Muhammed Baksh, (1894) 1.L.R. 16 All, 259.

Sa) Fateh Chand v. Muhanunad Baksh (1894) 1.L.R. 16 All. 259 (FB (Case under section 4+
Succession Certiticate Act. 1880).

10) Allah Dad Khan ८ Sant Ram (1912) 1.1..1९, 35 AIL 74, 77(D.Ba

te) Azmat ५, Sirfa, 9 ALL. 766, 16 EC. 108,

‘Kasumari v. Mohku, AJR. 1927 All, 227: (This was & suit for sale-—see Zafar Ali v. Kanti
Prakash A.LR, 1929 All. 896.

Mohammad torahion 3. Bhagwan Das, ASR. 1935 All. 897, 898, (Sulaiman C.J. and Ben-
net J).

SKubvanta Bewa v. Karane Chand, (1942), 43 C.W.N. 4: AIR, 1983 Cal. 714. 5.

(a) Nanchand 5. Yenawa, V.L.R. 28 Bom. 630.

(b} Sahader v. Sakhawat, 10 C-W.N, 145, 149,

(टी Abdul Sattar v. Satva Bishan (1908), TLR. 35 Cal. 767,



RK

section

Section

Section

eCOMmmnicnt
amendments

xi

14

. Recommendation as to section 214,

34.45. We have disposed of the various questions relating to section 214.

in For carrying out the points made so far in earlier paragraphs with reference to

215.

216.

section 2
section :

XI

4

we recommend the insertion of the following Explanations to the

“Explanation \',—Nothing in this section shall be construed as precluding
a debtor of a deceased person from making payment of a debt to a person
(in this Explanation referred to as the ‘payce’) claiming, on succession,
to be entitled to the effects of the deceased person or to any part thereof,
where the debtor is satisfied that the payee is so entiiled and has taken
from the payee a bond indemnifying the debtor; and where a debtor makes
such payment in good faith and after due care and attention, he shall not be
pound to make payment of the debt again to the person entitled to the effects
of the deceased person or to any part thereof, as the case may be, but
nothing in this Explanation shail affect any remedy which the person so
entitled may have against the payee who has received payment from the
debtor*.”

“Explanation 2.—In this section, in sections 212 and 370, in sub-sectoin (1)
of section 372 and in section 379, ‘debt’ includes any actionable claim, and
“debtor” and “payment” shall be construed accordingly*’.

“Explanation 3.-—Nothing in this section shail be construed as precluding
the institution of a suit for the recovery of any debt, but no decree shall
be passed in a suit for such recovery unless the provisions of this section

are complied with’”

“Explanation 4.—Nothing in this section shall be construed as barring the
continuance by a legal representative of a proceeding for execution already
initiated®.”

Miscellaneous,
34.46, This takes us to section 215, which reads as under :—

ie)

215(1)—A grant of probate or letters of administration in respect of an
estate shall be deemed to supersede any cettificate previously granted under
Part X or under the Succession Certificate Act, 1889, or Bombay Regulation
No, शा of 1827, in respect of any debts or securities included in the’
estale, :

(2) When at the time of the grant of the Probste or letters any suit or
other proceedings instituted by the holder of any such certificate regarding
any such debt or security is pending, the person to whom the grant is
made shall, on applying to the Court in which the suit or proceeding is
pending, be entitled to take the place of the holder of the certificate in the
suit or proceeding :

“Provided that, when any cestificate js superseded under this section, all
payments made to the holder of such certificate in ignorance of such super-
session shail he held good against claims under the probate or letters of
administration.”

The section seems to need no change.

34.47. According to section 216, after any grant of probaie or letters of

administcation, no person other than the person to whom the same may have

been granted shall have power to sue or prosecute any suit, or otherwise act as

17 50 considered necessary, the first Explanation could be limited to claims for small amounts.
*See para 34,36, supra.
*The definition of “debt” should, besides being incorporated in section 214, also be made

applicable to sections 212, 370, 372(1) and 379,

“See para 34.30, supra.
sSee para 34.33, supra.
“See para 34.36, supra.


195

representative of the deceased, throughout the State in which the same may have
been granted. until such probate or letters of administration has or have been
recalled or revoked,

‘This section also needs no change, having created ao serious problems.

CHAPTER 35

PROBATE, LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION AND ADMINISTRATION
OF ASSETS OF THE DECEASED

SECTION 217-236

35.1. Probate, letters of administration and administation of assets and Scope.
liabilities of the deceased, form the subject matter of sections 217 to 236. The
sections are mostly of a procedural character.

35,2, Section 217, the first section in this group, provides that save as Section 217.
otherwise provided by this Act or by any other law for the time being in force.
all grants of probate and letters of administration with the will annexed shall
be made and the administration of assets of the deceased in cases of intestate
succession shall be carried out, in accordance with the provisions of this Part.

‘The section needs no change, being a purely introductory provision.
35.3. The next section 218 reads as under :— Section 218,

“218(1) If the deceased has died intestate and was « Hindu, Muhammadan,
Buddhist, Sikh or Jain or an exempted person, administration of his estate
may be granted to any person who, according to the rules for the distribution
of the estate applicable in the case of such deceased. would be ‘entitled to
the whole or any part of such deceased's estate.

(2) When several such persons apply for such administration, it shall be
in the discretion of the court to grant it to any one or more of them.

(3) When no such person applies, it may be granted to 2 creditor of
the deceased.”

35.4. In the context of this section, we propose to consider one question joint family pro-
that has asisen, Where joint family property passes by survivorship to the sole perty passing by
surviving co-parcener, the question arises whether the sole surviving co-parcener Sutvivorship.
is entitled to apply for letters of administration under section 218, Is he a person
‘who would be entitled to the whole or part of the estate of the deceased’ within
the meaning of the section? There seems to be a conflict of decisions on the

subject.

35.5. A Madras case' answers the above question in the atiirmative, though Conflict. of views.

the observations in the case may be regarded as obiter. But, according to the
Punjab view, if the deceased person and the present petitioner were members of
a joint family, then, immediately on the death of the deceased, his interest in
the estate at once ceases and the whole interest in the estate belongs to the
petitioner by survivorship, and there is no “estate of the deceased” to be adminis-
tered: there is no “succession” to the deceased’s estate, because he has left
nothing to succeed to. Consequently, an application for letters of administration
is not competent in such cases*.

Un re Des Manavala, (1910) LL.R. 33 Mad. 93, 97: 10 M.L.J. 591 {case under Court Fees
Act, construing section 23, Probate and Admn. Act).

%(a) Uttam Devi v. Dina Nath, 5 P.R. 1919, 51 LC. 651, 652, distinguishing in re Dest: Manavala,
L.L.R. 33 Mad. 93, on the ground that the remarks therein were obiter.

0) Ramagiri v. Govindammah, AAR. 1924 Rang. 329, 330.



Recommendation
to amend section

Section

219.

196

The Bontbay practice, us is shown by some reported cases’, is that wher

the court grants ictters of administration, it is not concerned with inquiries
about title. But the Bombay cases did not relate to claims by survivorship, The
claimants (petitioners) had their claim on the basis of succession, and it was
the opposite party that put forth a case that the property was joint family property.
The court held that it was not concerned with the question whether the property
was, or was not, joint family property. It was no part of the duly of the iesta-
mentary Judge to consider the question of title to properiy.

The real conflict is between the Punjab and Madras rulings. us stated

above,

35.6. We are of the opinion that it is desirable to clarify, the position, ia

view of the conflict of decisions on the subject. The Punjab view may, on a
literal construction of the section, be correct. But if the tw is to be clarified, the
choice, we think, should be in favour of the Madras view, which is more practical
and more convenient. We, therefore, recommend that the Madv:
be adopted, by amending section 218 in a suitable manner, Thi
by inserting an Explanation to section 218 in the following terms.

view. should
could be done

‘Explunation—Where the property of a Hindu undivided coparcenary passes
hy survivorship to the sole surviving coparcener, the sOle surviving coparcener
shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be a person entitled
te the estate of the person on whose death the property so passes, and shall
accordingly he entitled to apply for letters of adminisiraticn under this
section”.

35.8. This takes us to section 219, It provides that if the deceased has died

intestate and was not a person belonging to any of the classes referred to in
section 218, those who ate connected with him, either by marriage or by con-
sanguinity, are entitled to obtain letters of administration of his estate and effects
in the order and according to the rules hereinafter stated, namely :—

(ay Hf the deceased has felt a widow, administration shall be granted to the
widow, unless the court sees cause to exclude her, either on the ground
of some personal disqualification. or because she has nc interest in the
estate of the deceased.

There are two illustrations annexed to this clause, as under :-—

“(i) The widow js a lunatic or has committed adultery or has been barred
by her marriage settlement of all interest in her husband's estate. There
is cause for excluding her from the administration.

(ii) The widow has married again since the decease of her husband, This
is not good cause for her exclusion.”

(0) Next, it is provided that if the Judge thinks proper. he may associate
any person or persons with the widow in the administzation who would
be entitled solely to the administration if there were no widow.

If there is no widow, or if the Court sees cause to exclude the widow.
it shall commit the administration to the person or persons who woutd
be beneficially entitled to the estate according 10 the rules for the
distribution of an intestate’s estate.

fc

Provided that. when the mother of the deceased is one of the class of
persons so entitled. she shall ‘be solely entitled to administration,

(0) Those who stand in equal degree of kindred to the deceased are equally
entitled to administration.

(९) The husband surviving his wife has the same right of administration
of her estate as the widow has in respect of the estate of her husband.

Ma) Oochavaram ६. Dolatram. 1.1... 28 Bom. 644 Genkins, CJ.3.
(b) Parvati Bai 5. Raghunath Laxman. (1940) 42 Bom. 1.89

53 (Kania. 0.1. ALR. 1941

Bom. 60,

*See paragraph 35.4, supra.


197

(1) When there is no person connected with the deceased by Marriage or
consaguinity who ts entitled to letters of administration and willing
tc act, letters of administration may be granted to a creditor.

छः

Where the deceased has |; property (in India). letters of udministra-
tion shall be granted according to the foregoing rules, notwithstanding
that he had. his domicile in a counury in which the law relating to
testate and intestate succession differs from the law of India.

33.9. In this section, section 219, clause (a), illustration (ii)', needs some Recommendation
comments, Clause (2) provides that the court may exclude a widow on the fo amend sectior
ground of some personal disqualification or “because she has no interest in the 219 a Hitustra-
estate of the deceased”. In this connection, iltustration (ii) to the clause provides 7
that the fact that the widow has married again since the decease of her husband
is not a good cause for her exclusion (from the preferential right conferred by
the section), This jilustration seems to require some modification, The widow
who has remarried way not, in every case, be a suitable person to administer the
property of her deceased husband. All that can be said is that mere re-marriage
of the widow need not deprive her of the preferential right, usiration (ii) to
section 219(8) should, therefore, be revised as under :—

“iy The widow has married again since the decease of her husband. ‘This.
in itself, is not good cause for her exclusion.”

We recommend accordingly.

35.10, Section 220 provides that letters of administration entitle the adminis- Section 220-
trator to all rights belonging to the intestate as effectually as if the administration Eifect ol letters °
had been granted at the moment after his death. The main object of the section 4 ™t*ton.
is to make the grant of administration relate back to the date of death. The
section lias created no problems, and needs no change.

35.11. Section 221 reads as under :

“221, Letters of administration do not render valid any intermediate acts Section 221.

ot the administrator tending to the diminution or damage of the intestate’s fits sot, validarec
estate,

The section needs no change,

35.12. Section 222 provides that probate shalt be granted only to an executor Section 222,
appointed by the will. The appointment may be expressed or by necessary impli-
cation, There are three illustrations to the section, as under +

“G) A wills chat C be his executor if B will not. B in appoimed executor
by implication.

Gi) A gives a legacy 19 B und several legacies 10 other persons, among
the resi to his daughter-in-law C. and adds “but should the within-named
C be not living I do constitute and appoint B my whole and sole executrix”,
C is appointed executrix by implication.

Gili) A appoints several persons executors of his will anel codicils and his
nephew residuary legate, and ia another codicil are these words,-—“T appoint
my nephew my residuary legatee to discharge afl fawful demands against
my will and codicils signed on different dates”. The nephew is appointed ait
executor by implication.”

The section needs no change, not having created any serious controversies.

35.13. There is one new point requiring consideration. As the law in India Section 222A
stands at present, a person appointed executor in the will must be given the (proposed)—
it li ted ¢ . दि 71 . Unfit: executor.

grant of probate (it he applies for it), irrespective of his personal unfitness for
the position’. He can be removed only if, after commencing the administration
of the affairs of the deceased, he commits breach of trust, waste or other default,

"Para 35.8, supra. हे
*Section 2(1).


198

This seems to be English law! also, The question 10 be considered is whether
this position requires modification in order to deal with certain special aspects.

ty this context, we may refer to the suggestion that was made by one
learned writer? a few years ago. His suggestion is that while the court should
ordinarily have regard to the wishes of the testator, it should have a judicial
discretion to exclude, from acting as executor, persons who, on the face of it,
are unfit even to begin to administer the affairs of the deceased testator, The
court should not have to wait to see whether the persons so unfit in fact commit
waste or breach of trust and then remove them.

saat Position 35:14. The pros and cons of the matter may be examined. On the one band,
. the present position can be justified by stating that an cxecutor is a person of
the testator's own choice and the testator would not prefer someone else's
judgment to his own—not even a judgment of the court. Apparently, on this
principle, the law allows a testator to make the appointment of any person whom
he likes as an executor and leaves the question of determining the fitness of that
person absolutely to the choice of the testator.

As against this, one has to bear in mind the serious hardship which may
possibly be caused if a person acts as an executor when he is not fit at all, and
when (from the known facts), one can infer that the testator would not have
continued the appointment. A situation may, for example, arise where there
is some interval between the date of the will by which the appointment was
made and the death of the testator. The person appointed as executor in the wilt

: might have become unfit after the will, the testator might have not been able to

पु apply his mind to the question whether the appointment should be continued, The
testator might even have mentally taken a decision to make another appointment,
but might have found no time to effectuate it in a formal writing.

In a comment (on our Working Paper), forwarded to us* by the Catholic
Bishops’ Conference of India, a query has been raised as to how the court will
form the opinion that a person is “definitely” unfit to work as executor, It has
been stated, that the action of the court would be arbitrary. We do not, however.
share this apprehension. No doubt, positive acts of past misconduct on the part
of a person would be the best proof of his unfitness, but one need not rule out
other situations where adequate material is placed before the court about the
unfitness of a person to act as an executor. The court can be expected to act
with judgment and discretion, and not arbitrarily, in all such matters.

awer to be given. 35.15. Having regard to all aspects of the matter, we are of the opinion
that it would be in the fitness of things if the court is given a power to exclude
an executor who is definitely unfit, Evidence of actual commission of waste or
breach of trust by un executor after taking charge as executor, should not be
insisted on, in our opinion.

scommendation to 35.16. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that the following
EN new section new section should be inserted on the subject—
“222A, The court may by order exclude from acting as executor, द person

who, i: the opinion of the court, is defttitely unfit to administer the affairs
of the deceased, whether or not that person has committed waste or breach
of trust after commencing administration of such affairs :

Provided that no such order shall be passed without afferdine such person
« reasonable opportunity of being heard.”

ction 223 - Pro 35.17. Section 223 prohibits the issue of probate to persons who are minor
te to minors and or of unsound mind and restricts the grant of probate as regards certain classes
sorporations. of corporations. We are primarily concerned with the portion relating to corpora-

tions. On a literal reading of the section, probate cannot be granted to any

1R.v, Raines, (1698) | Ld. Raym 361: 91 E.R. 1138 Halsbury. 4th Ed., Vol. 17, para 720.
page 381.

*F.C. Hutlev, “Reconstruction of the faw of Succession” (1973) Vol. 15, Journal of the Indian
Law Institute, 420, 424.

*Catholic Bishops” Conference of India, letter dated 3rd October, 1984,


199

“association” of individuals unless it is a company satistying the prescribed require-
ments.

35,18. Some difficulty is created by the word “association”, in relation to
non-commercial corporations. For cxample, does this word cover a University ?
This question arose before the Allahabad High Court a few years ago. The High
Court held that the Banaras University was a “corporation”, but was not an
“association”, because a corporation having a separate identity from its members
cannot be called a mere “association” of individuals’,

The Allahabad High Court also cited an English case’, where James L, J.
had regarded “company” and “association” as synonymous, The Alahabad
case actually related to section 236, but is equally applicable to section 223, the
wording in both sections (so far as is material) being the same.

A similar view seems to have been taken by the Oudh' Chief Court, and
{impliedly}. by the Calcutta High Court’.

35.49. lt would appear that in England, the preseat taw on the subject is
somewhat more liberal. Under the statutory provisions now in force in England
probate can be granted to a trust corporation’, but judicial decisions and practice
directions {or rules of court) permit a corporation sole also to be an executor’,
and further permit the grant of probate to a corporation aggregate which is nol
a trust corporation. In the latter case, however (i.e. in the case of a corperation
aggregate which is not a trust corporation), the probate must be granted to its
nominee. It must also be shown that the corporation has power to act as personal
Tepresentative, and certain other safeguards are laid down'.

In India, probate cannot be granted to a registered society’, because of the
restricted language of section 223. A registered society is an “association”, but
net a “company”.

35.20. We are of the view that the section should be made as comprehensive
as possible. In any case, it appears to be desirable to revise the section so as to
indicate Specifically which corporate bodies can, or cannot, be granted probate.
As regards companies, the extsting restriction may continue. As regards other
corporate bodies, it is enough if the corporate body applying for probate is
competent to accept probate in law—a question primarily to be decided with
reference to the law governing its conrsitution.

35.20A. In a suggestion forwarded to us by the Catholic Bishops’ Conference
of India”, it has been stated that the Church will have to frame rules, if it is to be
legally empowered to seek probate. The relevant paragraph in the letter is some-
what un-intelligible, but this seems to be its purport. In this connection, we may
point out that the faw can merely provide for the capacity of corporations as
recognised in the legal system. Internal formalities, such as rules, will, of course,
have to be observed by the concerned agencies or authorities within the Church,
assuming that a particular Church is recognised as a corporation in law.

35.21, Accordingly, we recommend the following re-dvaft of section 223—

“233. Probate cannot be granted— t
(a) to any person who is 2 minor or is of unsound mind, or

‘Banaras Hinds Unversity v. Gauri Dutt, A.1.R. 1950 All. 196.

2Bagchi. Principles of the Law of Corporations, Tagore Law Lectuves, (1914), pages 253-259-
referred to.

*Smith ९. Anderson, (1880) 15 Ch. 0. 247, 273.

‘Benaras Hinds University v. Sri Krishan Das, A.1.R. 1920 Oudh 124 (Benaras Hindu Unversity).

SJitendra Nath Palit . Lokendra Nath Palit, A.T.R. 1916 Cal. 295.

"Section 161, Judicature Act, 1925. (Eng.).

* Re Havnos. (1842) 3 Curt. 75.

*Non-contentious probate Rules, 1954, rule 3463), and Practice Direction in (1956) 1 ४.1. १,127.

°*Mahashaya Krishna v. Maya Devi. A.1.R. 1948 Lah. 54.
“Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India. etter dated 3rd October, 1984.

Non-commercial
corporations.

Law in England

Need to amend th
section.

Section 223. खा
the point relating t
the Church.

Recommendation
to revise section 22


Pection 224-
ral executors.

be

200

(७) to any company unless it satisfies Une conditions presetibed by
tules to be made by the State Government in this behalf. or

(०) to any corporation ether than a company, if it is not legally conrperesit
to accept prohate.

35.22. According to section 224, when several executors are appointed.
probate may be granted to them simultaneously or at different times.

lhe section needs no change.

35.23, Section 225 provides that if a codicil is discovered after the grant of
probate, a separate probate of that codicil may be granted to the exceutor, if it
in no Way repeals the appointment of executors made by the will. It also provides
that if different executors are appointed by the codicil, the probate of the will
shall be revoked and a new probate granted of the will and the codicil together.

No amendment is required in the section, which has raised no problems,

35.24, According to section 226, when probate has been granted to several
executors, and one of them dics, the entire representation of the testator accrues
to the surviving executor or executors. No amendment is required in this section
also,

35.25, Section 227 provides that probate of a will, when granted, establishes

the will from the death of the testator, and renders valid all intermediate acts of
the executor as such,

This section also needs no change.

35.26, Section 228 provides that when a will has been proved and deposited
in a court of competent jurisdiction situated beyond the limits of the State, whether
within or beyond the limits of India, and a properly authenticated copy of the
wiil is produced, letters of administration may be granted with a copy" of such
will annexed,

Certain questions arise under this section, which concern section 241 also,
Section 241 is as follows :—

24). When any execuior is absent from the State in which application
is made, and there is no executor within the State willing to act, letters of
administration, with the will annexed’, may be granted to the attorney or
‘agent of the absent executor, for the use and benefit of his principal, limited
until he shall obtain probate or letters of administration granted to him.”

35.27. The question that needs to be considered regarding the precise scope

Spnsidered—absent of these two sections, is this. When a will has been proved and deposited in 2

Section 225,
Bection 226.
ब्लाक. 227.
ection 228.
Question — to
smecutor.
Case law.

court of competent jurisdiction situated beyond the limits of the State, which
is the provision whereunder letters of administration (with the will annexed or
with a copy of the authenticated copy of the will annexed), can be granted to the
attorney id the absent executor? It may be noted that section 24% postulates
production of the original will—note the words ‘with the will annexed”. In contrast,
section 228 speaks of a copy of the will being annexed.

35.28. It is necessary to refer to two cases—one decided by the Allahabad
High Court «nd the other by the Madras High Court—dealing with the question.

In the Allahabad case‘, a person had died in Scotland leaving property both
in India and in the U. K. By his will, he appointed an cxecutor, who, in due
course, obtained ‘confirmation’ of the will from the Court of Scotland. The executor
then appointed the present applicant as his attorney for the purpose of apply-
ing to the proper court in India for letters of administration with an authenti-
cated copy of the will annexed. The attorney accordingly applied to the High
Court of Allahabad.

'Note the word ‘copy’.
Note the word ‘will’.

sPara 35.26, supra.
‘In re Adwait Nath, A.1.R. 1948 51, 351 (F.B.).


201

The High Court noted that ie practice in Madras, Calcutta and Bombay
had been to grant the letters of administration in such cases under section 241,
but observed that, “the provisions of section 241, were rot intended to apply.
nor are they appropriate, to the case in which a grant of probate hias already been
obtained in another court. The section applicable in such case is section 228”.
The High Court took the view that it may, under section 228, grant letters of
administration, with a copy of the authenticated copy of the will annexed. to
the ageni or attorney of the executor.

35,29. In the Madras case', a lady had died in England, leaving a will. By
the will she appointed her two nieces to be the executrixes, They obtained probate
in England and appointed the Lloyds Bank Ltd., Calcutta, as attorneys, who,
in turn, appointed one of their officers, as Attorney, to obtain lelters of administra-
tion with a copy of the will annexed, in respect of the property of the deceased
in India. ‘fhe officer of the Lloyds Bank filed a petition in the Madras High Court
for the grant of letters of administration, to have effect only in ihe State of
Madras, along with ७ certified copy of the probate.

‘The question for consideration before the High Court was whether the grant
was to be a grant of letters of administration under section 241 or under section
228, The question was material, because the petitioner was unable to produce the
will in original, The Court observed that section 241 did not require the production
of the original will. Since the will had been proved and Gzposited in a court of
competent jurisdiction in England, what can be produced here is only a properly
authenticated copy of the will. Therefore, a case coming under section 228 woutd
be an exception to the general rule’ in section 276 as to the production of the
will in original, though the exception is not mentioned in section 276.

The court said that in section 241, the expression “tetters of administration
with the will annexed’ had been used in antithesis to letters of administration
granted on intestacy. It was permissible to read section 241 along with section
228, and an attorney or agent of the executor can obtain letters of administration
without producing the original will, if the will had been proved and deposited in
a competent court and a properly authenticated copy of the will is produced.

35.30, The points of difference between the Allahabod and the Madras
view can be thus summarised :

(a) According to the Allahabad view, in a case under section 241 the will
must be established, Not so, according to the Madras High Court:

(b) While the Allahabad view is that section. 228 does not make provision
for the grant of administration to an agent or attorney, according to the Madras
High Court, this defect can be cured with the aid of section 241.

(०) ‘the Madras High Court has put the case coming under section 228 as
an exception to the rule provided in section 276. The Allahabad High Court has
refused to accept this argument.

The controversy has ॥ practical aspect also, concerned with the furnishing
of a bond. In the kind of cases mentioned above, when the letters of administration
were granted under section 228 by the Allahabad High Court, the petitioner had
been asked to furnish an administration bond as required by section 291(1).
Since the Madras High Court granted letters of administration under section 241,
an administration bond under section 291(1) was not required to be furnished.
The Madras High Court, expressing its disagreement with the above-mentioned
Allahabad High Court decision, observed, “Sections 228 and 241 should not be
read as if they provided for separate circumstances and they were mutually
exclusive. On the other hand, they could be read together. lt is true that the
objects of these two sections differ. The real object of section 228 is to dispense
with the production of the proof thereof, for the reason that it had already been
proved and had been deposited in a court of competent jurisdiction. The real

MInve L.C. Levack. ALR, 1954 Mad. 898 (F B.).
*Section 276.

Points of diflerence
between Allahabad

and Madras
summarised.

view


202

object of section 241 is to dispense with an application by the executor himself
when he is absent from the province in which the application is made.”

According to the Allahabad High Court, these seciions are mutually exclu-
sive and deal with separate circumstances. The Madras High Court, however,
holds that they are not mutually exclusive and do not provide for separate sets
of circumstances.

Recommendation 35.31. In our opinion, it is desirable that the controversy should be resolved

for amending sec- hy amending section 241 so as to add’ an Explanation to the effect that (a)

ton dt. section 241 will apply also where the case falls under section 228 and (b) if
the case falls under section 228, a copy of the will is to suffice and the original
need not be produced.

Section 229 to 231. 35.32. Section 229 to 231 deal with renunciation. Although section 230
is applicable only in the case of an executor, and there is no corresponding pro-
vision in the act with regard to an administrator, sfill there is no reason why
the principle of these sections should not apply to an administrator, In English
law and practice, there is, as regards the right of renunciation, no distinction made
between the case of an executor and that of an administrator, and the same rule
should apply in India.

AS regards the withdrawal of renunciation, the rufe is that a renunciation
by an administrator cannot be withdrawn without the leave of the court, and he
can be allowed to withdraw only in a fit and proper case and not merely on
the ground that he has changed his mind*.

Section 232. 35.33. Section 232 reads :—

“232. When—

{a) the deceased has made a will, but has not appointed an executor,
or

(0) the deceased has appointed an executor who is fegally incapable
or refuses to act, or who has died before the testator or before he has

proved the will, or

(c) the executor dies after having proved the will, bur before he has
administered all the estate of the deceased.

an universal or a residuary legatee may be admitted to prove the will, and
letters of administration with the will annexed may be granted to him of
the whole estate, or of so much thereof as may be unadministered”.

Universal ant 35.34. Section 232 is concerned with two classes of legatees, namely the

residuary {fegatees universal legatee and the residuary legatee. The universal legatee is one who, by
virtue of the will, is entitled to the whole of the testator’s property, In the absence
of the executor, he has been given the right to prove the will ard to obtain fetters
of administration with the will annexed. He cannot, however, obtain probate.

The residuary legatee is, it is said, the testator’s choice; he is the next person
in his election to the executor’, When the residum has been disposed of to another
person, there would be no purpose in giving the administration to the next-of-hin,
because no benefit can accrue to them by the grant of the Letters of Administration
in such cases.

No change needed 35.35. What words would create a universal or residuary legatee is not

in section 232. ५ matter with which we are concerned at the moment, that teing a question of
corstruction of the words of the will, It is enough to note :hat there are adequate
reasons for the grant of letters of Administration to the wniversal legatee or the |
residuary legatee. in preference to the next-of-kin,

The section, therefore, needs no change.

“To be carried out under section 241.
“The Manchersa, A.LR. 1929 Bom. 33, 34 (Rangnekar J.).
Atkins v. Bernard, 2 Phill, C.18, cited in N.D. Basu, Law of Succession (1957), page 699,


203

35.30, Section 233 provides that when a residuaty legatee who has a bene- Section
ficial interest survives the testator, but dies before the estate has been fully adminis-
tered, his representative has the same right to administration with the will annexed
as such residuary legatec.

The section needs no change.

35.37. According to section 234, when there is no executor and no residuary Section
legatee or representative of a residuary legatec, or he declines or is incapable 10
act, or cannot be found, the person or persons who would be entitled to the
administration of the estate of the deceased if he had died intestate, or any other
legatee having a beneficial interest, or a creditor, may be admitied to prove the
will, and letters of administration may be granted to him or them accordingly.

The section needs no change.

35,38. According to section 235, letters of administration with the will annexed Section
shall not be granted to any legatee other than an universal or a residuary legatee,
until a citation has been issued and published in the manner hereinafter mentioned,
calling on the next-of-kin to accept or refuse letters of administration.

The section also needs no change.

35,39, Section 236 provides as follows : Section
“236. Letters of administration cannot be granted to any person who is a
minor or is of unsound mind, nor to any association of individuals unless it

is a company which satisfies the conditions prescribed by rules to be made by

the State Government in this behalf.”

234,

235,

236.

35.40. In view of what has been stated’ above under section 223, we re- Recommendation.

commend that section 236 should be revised as follows :—
“236. Letters of administration cannot be granted—-
(a) to any person who is a minor or is of unsound mind, or

(b) 10 any company unless it satisfies the conditions prescribed by rules
to be made by the State Government in this behalf, or

(c) 10 any corporation other than a company, if it is net legally competent
to accept letters of administration.”

CHAPTER 36
LIMITED GRANTS : SECTIONS 237 TO 260

36.1 Limited grants are dealt with in some detail in sections 237 to 260. Limited grants,

The various types of such grants are as follows :—
J. grants limited in duration—sections 237 to 240;
If. grants for the use and benefit of others having a right—sections 24f—
246;
UL grants for special pusposes—sections 247—254;
IV. grants with exception—sections 255-256;
V. grants of the rest—section 257;
VL. grants of effects un-administered—sections 258—260.

See discussion as to section 223, supra.
85-LIB(D)I44MofLI&CA—I4

रू


Sections 237-238
Introductory.

Loss of will before
death—applicability

of section 237,

Section 238-5
Narrow scope.

Defect in section
237 as to destruc-
tion otherwise than
the act or mistake
of testator.

Testator not men-
tally competent.

Want of symmetry
between sections 237
and 238.

204

1. Grants limited in duration.

36.2, Section 237 deals two situations. When a will has been lost or mislaid
since the testator’s death, probate may be granted of a copy or draft of the
will. This is the first situation dealt with in the section, The second situation
relates to the cases where a will, “has been destroyed by wrong or accident and
not by any act of the tesjator”, Here again, a copy or the draft may be utilised
for the grant of probate. In both the cases, the probate is limited until the
original will or a properly authenticated copy is produced.

36.3, According to judicial construction of section 237, the words “since
the testator’s death” qualify only the word “mislaid”, and have no referene to
the word “lost”. Thus, according to judicial construction, probate can be granted
where the will is lost before or after the testator’s death. In our opinion, it is
desirable to codify this interpretation so as to make the section self-contained.

Of course, the general rule* that there is a rebuttable presumption that the
testator destroyed the will where the will lost proved to be in his custody
and is not forthcoming applies in India also. At least, it was so held in a
Caleutta case’,

But another case‘ seems to create a doubt in this regard, inasmuch as it
holds that there is no rule of law that under certain circumstances a presumption
should be made that the will was revoked. In our opinion, the earlier Calcutta
case takes a more practical view. and that view should be incorporated in the

section’.

36.4, Under section 238, probate can be granted if the will has been lost
or destroyed and no copy has been made or draft preserved, Probate is then
granted of the contents of the will “if they (the contents) can be established by
evidence”. “Evidence” here, of course, means secondary evidence, The topic was
discussed in detail in the leading English case of Suge den v. Lord St. Leonards,
where a will was established by parol evidence alone.

36.5, Reverting to section 237, it-would appear that section 237 is narrowly
drawn, The words ‘wrong or accident’ do not, if taken literally, cover the
cases where a natural calamity, such as a flood, destroys the will. The section
is ,also defective, inasmuch as the language does not make it clear that the
section applies only where the testator had no intention of revoking the will.
if an act of the testator done with the intention of revoking the will result in
“destruction of the will”, it is obvious that the section should not be applicable.
This situation should be exculded from the scope of the section’.

36.6 On the other hand, where, though the will is destroyed! by — the
physical act of the testator, the testator is not a person in possession of his
mental facultics, the situation should be included in the section, We are recom-
mending to cover these points".

This criticism applies, in substance, to section 238 also, .

36.7. With reference to section 238, it is further to be pointed out that
jt does not deal with the various situations so elaborately as the preceding
section—section 237—does. The situations to which sections 237 and 238 apply
are the same, the only difference being that if a copy or draft’ of the wilt is

‘Sarat Chandra v. Golab Sundari, (1913) 18 C.W.N. 527.
4For the English law, see Welch v. Phillips, (1836) 1 Moo. P.C. 299, 302, Halsbury, 314 Ed-

Vol. 39, page 897, f.n. (q) (0) (७)
* Anwar Hossein v. Secretary of State, (1904) T.LR. 31 Cal. 885, Halsbury, 4th Ed., Volume 17,

page 449 para 448,
‘Efari v, Podai, A.L.R. 1928 Cat. 307, 309 (The case cites Allan v. Morrison, (1900) A.C. 60
(P.C.) which, however, holds to the contrary).
*See para 36.10, infra.
“Sugden v. Lord St. Leonards, (1875-1880) Ail E.R. Reprint 21.
*Para 36.2, supra.
3868 "para 36.10, tnfra.


205

ies, and i. ante secttan, 238 applies.
a en section applies, aud in other cases sev ie
Loe iten the provisions in bath the sections shonid as far as possible.

i e ९ vever, the wording of the two
coud in the same language. At present, however, 1 ६ i! "
oe eee 238 differs creating an anomaly. This difference should pe

removed',

36.8.

there also remains to be considered the situation of loss or destruc- toss or destruction

tion of व part of the with Judicial decisions’ have expressly held that probate can of part of the wifl,

be granted if a purt of the will is lost or desiayed, 16 is desirable that the
point should be expressly dealt with’,

36.9. Apart from these amendments of uw verbal nature, ay a miatter
policy, it is also desirable that sections the
will was fost or mistaid hefore the death cv afier the deuth. 10 fact, this is the
position in English Jaw’. which permits 16 grant of probate of a copy or draft

i such circumstances,

36.10, Jn the tight of the ubove discussion, we recommend that se
238 should be redraficd. and new sections should be inserted as follows :....

ज237, Whea-

Gal ॥ wilt has ben 1७७७ छा mislaid hejere or ajrer the testittur’s: deat पे
ar has been destroyed by a vadeal evoit and pot by any act of the
1एड1 anounting fn law to revecation of the will, xn

(b) a copy of the wil or the draft of the will has been Preserved,
probate may be granted of such a copy or draft. Emited until the
original or a properly authenticated copy’ of it is practiced,”

“238, When a will has been fost or misluid in the circumstances mentioned in
section 237, and no copy of draft of the will has been preserved, probat
may be granted of its contents if they can be established by evidene

TUBAL dn sections 237 and 238, “will includes a part of a will,

“238B. Where a will proved ro have heen lost in the <ustody of the testater
hefore his death is not forthcoming after his death, the court may presume
that it was destroyed by un act of the testator amounting in law to its
Fevocdion

360.11. This lakes us to section
will is in the possession of a perscn residing out of the Siate in which application
for probate is nite. who has refused to or neglected 10 deliver it up, but a copy
has been transmitted to the executor, and it is necessary for the interests of the
estate that probate should be granted without w ting for the arrival of the original,
probate may he granted of the copy 50 transmitted. limited antif the will or
an authemicated copy ot it is praduced,

Fhe sevtion needs no change,

26.12. According to section 240. where me will Ut the deceased ix forth:
com. but there is reason to believe that there is a will in. existence, letters
of adminisiraiion may be uranted, limited until the wil, or an authenticuted
copy of it is predueced,

The section needs no change

‘For the concrete recommendation, see para 36.10, iuficr,
inh alt Rath. Sarofint. O89 TLR, 26 Cal. 824 lease under section 25, Prof. and Administ.
uation Act, 1881),
‘For concrete recommendation, see para 36.10, dnfie.

11 Webh. Smith v, Johnson, (1964) 2 AULE.R, 0, 92 (Faulks J.) (Probate granted of completed
draft), There was evidence that later on. the lestatrix said that it was her wilt), ©

of Need to expand the
237 and 238 should apply whether the $60Pe of sections

uons 237 Recommendation

to revise sections

237 «

238 and to

insert section 2384

Section

39, According to section 239, when the section 239,

240,


Section 241.

Need to amend sec-
tion 241 so as to

je cases un-
der section 273.

Non-resident
attorney.

Recommendation
to revise section 241.

200

Ll. Grants for the benefit of others

36.43, Section 241 reads—

“When any executor is absent from the State in which application is made,
and there is no executor within the State willing to act, letters of administration,
with the will annexed, may be granted to the attorney or ugent of the absent
executor, for the use and benefit of his principal, limited until he shall obtain
probate or letters of administration granted to himself.”

An connection with this section, certain question arise by reason of  secton
. Section 273 reads—

rey
2

“273. Probate or letters of administration shall have effect over all_ the
property and estate, movable or immovable, of the deceased, throughout
the State in which the same is or are granted and shall be conclusive as
to the representative title against all debtors of the deceased and all persons
holding property which belongs to him, and shail afford full, indemnity
to all debtors, paying their debts and all persons delivering up such pro-
perty to the person to whom such probate or letters of administration have
been granted:

Provided that probaics and Jelters of administration granted—
{a) by a High Court, or

(b) by a District Judge, where the deceased at the time of his death
had a fixed place of abode situate within the jurisdiction of such
Judge, and such Judge certifies that the value of the property and
,estate affected beyond the limits of the State does nat exceed ten
thousand rupees.

shall, unless otherwise directed by the grant, have like effect throughout the
other States”.

“The proviso to this section shall apply in India after the separation of
Burma and Aden from India to probates and letters of administration
granted in Burma and Aden before the date of the separation, or after
that date in proceedings which were pending at that date,

“The proviso shall also apply in India after the scparation of Pakistan from
India to probates and letters of administration granted before the date of
the separation, or after that date in proceedings pending at that date, in
any of the territories which on that date constituted Pakistan.”

36.14. It should be noted that section 273 empowers the court (in cettain
cases) to make a grant effective beyond the limits of the State. In order that
the full benefit of this wider jurisdiction of the court under section 273 may be
available, it is desirable that section 241 should also be relaxed. We, therefore,
tecOmmend that suitable words excluding from section 241, the case, where an
order is passed under stction 273 proviso should be added.

36.15. Thre is some obscurity on the question whether the “attorney”
(agent) should be u resident of the State. Tt appears, however, that the attorney
may reside anywhere in India, if the grant is by the Righ Court: This interpreta-
lion can be suitably codified,

36.16. In the tight of the above discussion we recommend that section 241
should be revised as below:

“241, When any executor is absent from the State in which application is
made, and there is no executor within the State willing to act letters of
administration, with the will annexed may be granted to the attorney or
agent of the absent executor, for the use and benefit of his principal, limited
until he shall obtain probate or letters of administration granted to himself.

Un the goods of Cautly, 28 P.R. 1883.


207

Exception: Nothing in this section applies to a case falling within the
provisu to section 273.

Explanation : Where the grant is by the High Court, it is not necessary that
the attorney or agent should be residing within the State, provided he
resides within India.”

36.17. Section 242 provides as follows :— Section 242.

“242, When any person to whom if present, letters of administration, with
the will annexed, might be granted is absent from the state, letters of adminis-
tration, with the will annexed, may be granted to his attorney or agent,
limited as mentioned in section 241.”

The section needs no change.

36.18. Section 243 reads— Section 243,
*243. When a person entitled to administration in case of intestacy is

absent from the State and no person equally entitled is willing to act, letters

of administration may be granted to the attorney or agent of the absent

person, limited as mentioned in section 241.”

The section needs no change.

36.19. Section 244 reads as follows :— Section 244,

>244, When u minor is sole executor oy sole residuary legatee, letters of
administration with the will annexed may be granted to the legal guardian
or such minor or to such other person as the Court may think git until
the minor has attained his majority, at which period, and not before,
probate of the will shall be granted to him.”

It has becn held that the expression “legal guardian”, in this section, means
a guardian appointed under the Guardians and Wards Act, 1980. If the natural
guardian wants to apply under this section, he must first take proceedings (under
the Guardians and Wards Act) to be appointed legal guardian.’ If there is a
legal guardian of the person of the minor and another of the property of the
minor, the latter is entitled to the grant® (compare section 246, where the words
“care of his estate” are used).

A guardian appointed by the father under section 69 of the Succession Act
would appear to be a “legal guardian” within the meaning of this section.

It appears desirable to codify the Taw on the subject, as laid down in the
above decisions.

36.20. In the light of the above, the following Explanation should be Recommendation to
inserted below section 244 :— amend section 244,

Explanation » In this section, “legal guardian” means a guardian of the
property appointed by a person or authority having power to do so, whether
within or outside India, but does not include a natural guardian.”

36.21. Section 245 deals with administration during the minority _ of Section 245.-~
Several executors or several residuary legatees. An administration during Recommendation.
minority is, under the section, limited until one of the executors attains majority.

It is obvious that the section deals with the case dealt with in section 244 and,
is indeed, a kind of Explanation to that section. This should be brought out
by adding, after the words “the grant”, the words and figures “under section 244”.

We recommend that section 245 should be amended accordingly.

36.22. Section 246 reads as follows :— Section 246,

“246. If a sole executor or a sole universal or residuary legatee, or a person
who would be solely entitled to the estate of the intestate according to the

Xa) Arumilli Viramma v. Arumilli Seshamma, ALR. 1931 Mad 343, 344;
(७) In the goods of Nirojini Debi, (1907) LL.R. 34 Cal. 706.
*Ganjasur Koer ९. The Collector of Patna, LL.R, 25 Cal. 795.



Overlapping wilh
section 244,
Recommendation

to revise section246.

Section

247. -

Administration
pendente lite.

Section 247 (1)-
who can apply.

208

tule for the distribution of jntestates’ estate applicable in the case of the
deceased. is a minor or lunatic, letters of administration, with or without
the will annexed, as the ९४५९ may be shall be granted to the person to whom
the care of his estate has been committed by competent authority, or, if
there is no such person, to such other person as tie Court may think fit to
appoint, for the use and benefit of the minor or lunatic until he aftains
majority or becomes of sound mind, as the case may be”. .

36.23. There is some overlapping between this section and section 244,
as regards a minor sole executor or a minor sole residuary legatee. In section
217 of the Succession Act of 1865 (corresponding to present section 246), the
word ‘minor’ did not eccur, but the word occured in section 33 of the Probate
and Administration Act. The effect was that as regards persons governed by the
Succession Act of 1865 in the case of intestacy, if the minor was solely entitled
10 the estate of the intestate, there was no provision for the grant of letters of
administration to his guardian en his behalf. if the minor was the sole executor
or sole universai or residuary legatee, grant could be made under section 215
(present section 244). The insertion of the word “minor” in section 246 (in
1925) was intended to supply this omission. But it has created overlapping"
so far as the minor sele executor or minor sole residuary legatee is concerned, as
section 244 hus already provided for this contingency. So far, therefore, as sec-
tion 246 is concerned. the word “minor? should he read as confined to the
case of intestacy,

36.24. In our opinion, it is desirable to amend section 246 to bring out
that point.

‘Fo Garry out the hove obicet. we recommend that section 246 should be
revised as follows :—-

240, [fe

(a) a sole cuecutor er a sole universal or residuary legatee is a
Junatic. or

40) a persen who would be solely entitled 10 the estate of the intestate,
according to the rule for the distribution of intestates’ estate applicable
in the case of the deceased, is a minor or a lunatic,

letters of admin'station, with or without the will annexed as the — case
may be, shall be granted to the, person to whom the care of his estate
has been committed by competent authority, or, if there is no such person,
to such other person as the Court may think fit to appoint, for ¢ Re use
and benefit of the minor or lunatic until he attains majority or becomes of

sound mind. as the case may be”,
IT. Grants for special purposes.

36.25. Administration pendente lite is dealt with in section 247, which
reads as follows :

“247. Pending any suit touching the validity of the will of a deceased or for
obtaining or revoking any probate or any grant of letters of administration.
the Court may appoint an administrator of the estate of such deceased
person, who shall have all the rights and powers of a general administra-
lor, other than the right of distribusing such estate, and every such adminis-
trator shall be subject to the immediate control of the court and shall act
under its direction”.

36.26. A question that requires to be considered is—Who can make an
application under this section ? In a Calcutta case’, it was held that an appleation
under section 247 can be made only by the parties to the suit, According to the

'See Paruck, Succession Act, Commentary on section 246.
2Nirod ५. Chamrkarini, (1892) 19 C.W.N. 205,



209

English practice, however, such wn application may be made by any person
interested in the estate, and even by a creditor of the deceased.’

36.27. The appointmeni? of an administrator pendente lite does not follow Appointment.
as a matter of course whenever litigution is pending. Before granting administra-
tion pendnie lite, the Court must be satisfied as 10 the necessity of such an
administrator. The applicant is required to show, for instance, that it is neces-
sary for the preservation of the estate, for receiving rents, interest or dividends on
shares, and that no fit and proper person is in a position to discharge these
offices*.

36.28, Having considered the present position, we are of the view that it is Recommendation
desirable to amend the section so as to provide that an application for the to, amend section
appointment of an administrator wader the section can be made by any person 217:
interested in the estate, and even by a creditor of the deceased. Such a widening
of the section is likely to increase the utility of the section, in cases where the
parties to the suit do not take any initiative’. An Explanation to the above
effect can be added. We recommend accordingly.

yp
=

36.29. Section 248 reads— Section 248,

“248, If an executor is appointed for any timited purpose specified in the
will, the probate shall be limited to that purpose. and if he should appoint
an attOrney or agent to take administration on his behalf, the letters of
administration, with the will annexed. shall be limited accordingly”.

The section needs no change.
36.30. Section 249 reads— Section 249,

“249. If an executor appointed generally gives an authority, to an
attorney or agent to prove a will on his behalf, and the authority is limited
to a particular purpose, the letters of administration. with the will annexed,
shall be limited accordingly”.

This section also needs no change.

36.31, Section 250 reads— Section 250.

“250. Where ४ person dies, leaving property of which he was the sole or
surviving trustee, or in which he had no beneficial interest on his own
account, and leaves no general represeatative, or one who is unable or
unwilling to act as such, letters of administration, limited to such property
may be granted to the beneficiary, or to some other person on his behalf”.

The section needs no.change.
36.32. Section 251 reads— ‘Section 251.

“251. When it is necessary that the representative of a person deceased
be made a party to a pending suit, and the executor or person entitled to
administration is unable or unwilling to act, letters of administration may
be granted to the nomnee of a party in such suit, limited for the purpose of
representing the deceased in the said suit, or in any other cause or suit
which may be commenced in the same or in any other court between the
parties, or any other parties, touching the matters at issue in the said course
or suit, and until a final decree shall be made therein and caried into com-
plete execution”.

The section needs no change.

“TFichborne v, Tichborne, LR.A/TP.& D. 730. cited by Mitra, commentary on the Succession Act
under section 247,

2(a) Horrel v. Witts, (1866) 1.0. & D. 103.

(b) Bhuban Mohini v. Kiranbala, 13 C.J. 47; 9 1.0, 215, 216 (Cad).
(©) Jogendra v. Atindra, 13 C.L.J. 34; 2 LC. 638, 639.

(4) Pandurang v. Dwarkadas, A.LR. 1933 Bom. 342, 344,

(© In the Estate of Dav, (1940) 2 AN E.R. 544.
*See In the Goods of Borendra Nath, A.LR. 1952 Cal. 418.

«Compare the English practice in para 36.26, supra.


210

Section 252. 36.33. Section 252 reads—

~252. If, at the expiration of twelve months from the date of any probate
or letters of administration, the executor or administrator to whom the
same has been granted is abent from the State within which the Court
which has granted the probate or letters of administration exercises jurisdic-
tion, the Court may grant, to any person whom it may think fit, letters of
administration limited to the purpose of becoming and being made’ a
party to a suit to be brought against the executor, and carrying the decree
which may be made therein into effect”.

The section needs na change.

Section 253. 36.34. Section 253 reads—

“253. In any case in which it appears necesary for preserving the property of
a deceased person, the court within whose jurisdiction any of the property
is sitate may grant to any person, whom such Court may think fit. letters
of administration limited to the collection and preservation of the property
of the deceased and to the giving of discharges for debts due to his estate,
subject to the directions of the Court”.

The section necds no change.

Section 254. 36.35. Section 254 reads—

“254. (1) When a person has died intestate, or leaving a will of which
there is no executor willine and competent to act or where the executor
js, at the time of the death of such person, resident out of the State, and
it appears to the Court to be necessary or convenient to appoint some
person to administer the estate or any part thereof, other than the person who,
m ordinary circumstances, vould be entitled to a grant of administration,
the Court may. in its discretion, having regard to consanguinity, amount of
interest, the safety of th: estate and probability that it will be properly
administered, appoint such person as it thinks fit 10 be administrator.

“(2) In every such case letters of administration may be limited or not as

the Court thinks fit

The section needs no change.
Section 255. 36.36. Section 255 reads—

“255. Whenever the nature of the case requires chat an exception be made,
probate of a will, or letters of administration with the will annexed, shall
be granted subject to such exception.”

Section 256. 36.37. Section 256 provides that whenever the nature of the case requires that
हु an exception be made, letters of administration shail be granted subject to such
exception

Case law on the 36.38. An important point concerning sections 255-256 arises out of a

section. Madras case.’ In that case, the appellant, the widow of one $.R., had applied for
grant of letters of administration in respect of a bank account and death benefit
payable by a compaoy (apparently, the employer of the deceased). S.R. had
died at Madras, Ieaving a will dated 14-1-1964. He had an account in the United
Commercial Bank jointly with the appellant (the wife) and her daughter. The
respondent claimed to be the senior wife of the deceased and contended that the
assets left by the deceased amounted to much more than the value mentioned in the
affidavit of assets. She contended that it was necessary that all the assets of the
deceased should be valued and brought into the affidavit of assest of the deceased,
for granting letters of administration.

‘flapzinab Annathai Rangachari v. R. Anonthalakshnsi Rongachari. ALR. \97S Madras 342
{Veeraswami C.J. and Natarajan J.) .



211

The High Cowt, dealing with ‘this contention, first noted that the general
rule is that the entire assets should be disclosed in the affidavit of assets', which
will count for valuation [or the purposes of court fees. But where it is a case
of joint account in a bank and the amount is payable to either or survivor, the
nalure of the case requires that it should be treated as an exception to the above
tule that the entirety of the assets of the deceascU should be disclosed, in the
affidavit of assets. The High Court also held that it might not even be necessary
to obtain levers of administration. for there was, in this case, little to administer,
and the wife's right to draw the amount could be independently of the will.

However, since the bank had been insisting on letters of administration,
the High Court held that the application should be granted, the case being treated
as one falling within the “exception” clause in section 255.

36.39. ‘the facts of this case, whea examined closely, disclose need for Recommendation
amending the law. Lf, in such cases, obtaining letters of administration becomes aS to joint account
necessary by reasun of the practice of banks, should it nat be covered specifically 4 bank.
in section 255 (and also in section 256)?

36.40. As the language of section 255 stands at present, the proposition that Recommendation
the grant can be limited to a particular item is not so evident from the section, 10 amend section
it appears to be desirable to amend section 255, so as to make this clear. The 7>*
object could be achieved by adding the following execption to section 253 :

Exception to be added to section 255.

Exception—Notwithstanding anything contained in this section or in
section 256, where moneys have been deposited in joint account in a bank
and the amount thereof is payable to either er any survivor of the persons
depositing the money, the application for letters of administration in respect
of those moneys may, on the death of either or any of ysuck persons, be
made by the survivor,

V. Grants of the rest

36.41. This takes us to section 257, which provides that whenever a grant, Section 257.
with exception, of probate or of letters of administration with or without the
will annexed, has been made, the person entitled to probate or administration of
the remainder of the deceased’s estate may take a grant of probate or letters of
administration, us the case be, of the rest of the deceased’s estate. The section
has created no serious problems and may be left as it is.

VI. Grants of effects unadministered,

36.42. Section 258 provides that if an executor to whom probate has been Section 258,
granted has died, Jeaving a part of the testator’s estate unadministered, a new
represnialive may be appointed for the purpose of administering such part of
the estate. The section does not appear to need any change.

36.43, In the next section 259, it is provided that in granting letters of an Section 259,
estate not fully administered, the Court shall be guided by the same rules as
apply to original grants, and shall grant Setters of administration to those persons
only to whom original grants might have been made.

The section needs no change.

36.44. Section 260 deals with the situation where d limited grant has Section 260.
expired by effiux of time, or by the happening of the event of contingency on
which it was timited. If there is still some part of the deceased’s estate unadminis-
tered, then Ictters of administration shall, according to the section, be granted to
those persons to whom original grants might have been made. The section needs
no change, having created no difficulties.

एक, Parthasarthy Naidu in re: AAR. 1955 Mad. 411 was veferred 10.
*Point is relevant to section 256 also, which may need consequential changes.


Scope.

Section 261.

Section 262.

Section 263—-
Revocation or annu-
Iment for just cause.

ALTERATION AND REVOCATION OF GRANIS : SECTIONS 261—263

37.1. Alteration and revecai’en of grants form the subject matter of sections
261 to 263, which do not need any introductory comments.

37.2. Section 261 provides that errors in names and descriptions, or in
setting forth the time and place of the deceased’s death, or the purpose in a
limited grant, may be rectified by the Court, and the grant of probate or letters of
administration may be altered and amended accordingly.

The section needs no change.

. 37.3. Section 262 provides that if, after the grait of administration with the
will annexed, a codicil is discovered, it may be added to the grant on due proof
and identification, and the grant may be altered and amended accordingly.

The section needs no change.

37.4. Under section 263 the grant of probate or letters of administration
may be revoked or annulled for just cause, The Exptanation provides that just
cause shall he deemed to exist where—

(a) the proceedings to obtain the grant were defective in substance; or

(b) the grant was obtaincd fraudulently by making a false suggesGion or
by concealing from the Courc something material to the casey or

(c) the grant was obtained by means of an untrue allegation of a fact
essential in point of Jaw to justify the grant, though such allegation

was made in ignorance or inadvertently; or
(d) the grant has become useless and inoperative through circumstances; or

(९) the person to whom the grant was made has wilfully and without reason-
able cause omitted to exhibit an inventory or account in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter Vif of this Part, or has exhibited under that
Chapter <n inventory or account which is untrue in a material respect.

The following illustrations are appended:

Gi) the Court 15 which the grant was made had no jurisdiction;

(i) the grant was made without citing parties who ought to have been cited:
(iii) the will of which probate was obtained was forged or revoked;

(iv) A, obtained letters of administration to the estate of B, as his widow.
but’ it has since transpired that she was never married to him;

A has taken administration to the estate of B. as if he had died intestate,
but a will has since been discovered;

{v

(vi) since probate was granied, a later will has been discovered;

(vii) since probate was granted, a codicil has been discovered which revok-
ed or adds to the appointment of executors under the will;

(viii) the person to whom probate was, or letters of administration were,
granted, has subsequently become of unsound mind.

It may be stated with reference to the second illustration that the absence of
citation on a person who' was interested, being a transferee from the heirs at
law, would be a defect of substance which is “just cause” within the meaning of
section 263, Mxplanation.

The case may be different, where the parties themselves have led evidence*~*

‘The section seems to need. no change, as no serious difficulties have arisen in
its application.

“Vpanwari Lal v. Ku. Kuswn Bei, ALR. 1973 M.P. 69, 70, para 7.
2Bal Govind y. Shri Ram, A.LR, 1947 All. 372.
‘Anil Behari ९. Latika Bala, A.LR. 1955 S.C. 566.


213

CHAPTER 38

PRACTICE IN GRANTING AND REVOKING PROBATES AND LETTERS
OF ADMINISTRATION (SECTIONS 264 TO 302)

38.1, Practice in granting and revoking probatcs and ietters of administra- Scope.
tion being a matter of some detail, occupies about 40 sections of the Act--sections
264 10 302. The scetions could be grouped as under :-—

and connected matiers.

264, Jurisdiction of District Judge in granting and revoking probates, cle.

265, Power to appoint Delegate of District Judge to deal with non-conten-
tidus cases.

466. District Judge's power as to grant of probate and administration.
207. District Judge may order person to produce testamentary papers.

20%. Proceedings of District Judge’s Court in relation to probate and
administration,

269, When and how District Judge to inierfere for protection of property.
270. When probate or administration may he granted by District Judge.

271. Disposal of application made to Judge of district in which deceased
had no fixed abode,

272. Probate and letters of administration may be granted by Delegate.
£73, Conclusiveness of probate or letters of administration.

274, Transmission (0 High Courts of certificate of grants under proviso to
section 273.

275, Conclusiveness of application for probate or administration if properly
made and verified.

Il. The petition and immediate steps thereon
276. Petition for probate.

277. In what cases translation of will to be annexed to petition. Verification
of translation by person other than Court translator,

278. Petition for letters of administration.

279. Addition to statement in petition. ctc., for probate or letters of

administration in certain cases:

280. Petition for probate etc to be signed and verified.
281. Verification of petition for probate. by one fitness to will,

282. Punishment for false averment in petition or declaration,

TEL. Procedure for hearing

283. Powers of District Judge.
284. Caveats against grant of probate or administration. Form of caveat.

285. Afier entry of a caveat, no proceeding taken on petition until after
Notice to caveator.

286. District Delegate when not to grant probate or administration.

227. Power to transmit statement to District Judge in doubtful cases, where
no contention.


Section 264--
Jurisdiction of Di:
trict jn ip grant-
ing me revoking
Probates, etc.

Seciion 265--
District. Delegates:
Recommendation.

Pe 266

istrict = Sudge’s
75 8$ (oO grant
probate and

dministration.

IV: Disposal of Petitions.

contention, or District Delegate thinks probate

288. Procedue where there
ttion should be refused in his court.

or letters of adminis

V. Grant of Probate.

VE.

289. Grant of probate to be under seal of Court.

29, Grant of letters of administration to be under seal of Court.
291. Administration-bond,

292. Assignment of administration-bond.

293. Time for grant of probate and administration,

204. Filing of original wills of which probate or administration with will
annexed granted.

295. Procedure in contentious cases.

296. Surrender of revoked probate or letiers of administration,

297. Payment to executor or administrator before probate or administration
revoked,

Miscellaneous.

298, Power to refuse letters of adminiscration,

299. Appeals from orders of District Judge.

300, Concurrent jurisdiction of High Court,

301, Removal of executor or administrator and provision for successor,

302. Directions 10 execucor or administrator,

I. Jurisdiction and connected matters.

38.2. Section 264 reads—

+264601) The District Judge shall have jurisdiction in granting and revok-
ing probates and letters of admnisiration in all cases within his distrct.
(2) Except in cases to which section 57 applies, no Court in any local area
beyond the limits of the towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay, shall.
where the deceased is a Hindu, Muhammadan, Budhist, Sikh or Jain or an
exempted person, receive applications for probate or letters of administra-
tion until the State Government has. by a notification in the official Gazette.
authorised it so to do.”

The section needs no change.

38.3. Section 265 reads—

“265(1) The High Court may appoint such judicial officers within any dis-
trict as it thinks fit to act for the District Judge as Delegates to grant probate
and letters of administration in nor-contentious cases, within such local
Jimits as it may prescribe;

Provided that, in the case of High Courts not established by Royal Charter.
such appointment shall not be without previous sanction of the State Govern-
ment,

(2) Persons so appointed shall be called “District Delegates.”

We are ol the view that the proviso 10 sub-section(1) should be deleted as
unnecessary at the present day, and recommend its deletion.

38.4. Section 260 reucds—

“266. The District Judge shall have the like powers and autbority in relation
to the granting of probate and Jetters of administration and all matters


215

connected! therewith. as ave by law vested in him in relation to any civil
suit as proceedings pending in his Court”.

The section needs no change.
38.5, Seetinn 267 reads— Section 267.
“Section 26" (45 ihe District Judge may order atty person to produce and

britig into Court any paper or writing, being or purporting to be testamentary,

which may be shown to be in the possesson or under the control of such
person.

(2) If it is not shown that any such paper or writing is in the possession
or under the control of such person, but there is reason to believe that he
has the knowledge of any such paper or writing, the Court may direct such
person to attend for the purpose of being examined respecting the same.

(3) Such person shall be bound to answer truly such qeustions as may be
put to him by the Court, and, if so ordered, 10 produce and bring in such
paper or writing, and shall be subject to the like punishment under the
indian Penal Code, in case of default in not attending or in not answering such
questions or not bringiig iri such paper or writing, as he would have been
aubject t in case he had been 9 party to a suit and had made such default:

14) The costs of the proceeding shall be in the discretion of the Judge”.
We have no comnients On the section.

38.6. Section 268 provides that the proceedings of the Court of the Dis- section 368.
trict Judge in relation to the granting of probate and letters of administration shall,
save as hereinafter otherwise provided, be regulated, so far as the circumstances
of the case permit, by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

We have no comments on the section,

38.7. Section 269 reads—

“269(1) Until probate is granted of the will of a deccascd person, or an
administrator of his estate is constituted, the District Judge, with-
in whose jurisdiction any part of the property of the deceased person is
situate, is authorised and required to interfere for the protection of such
property at the instance of any person claiming to be interested therein, and
in all other cases where the udge considers that the property incurs any
risk of loss or damage; and for that purpose, if he thinks fil, to appoint an
officer to take and keep possession of the property.

Section 369.

(2) This section shalt not apply when the deceased is a Hindu, Moham-
madan, Budhist, Sikh or Jain or an exempted person. nor shall it apply
to any part of the property of an Indian Christian who has dicd intestate”,

We have no comments on the section.

38.8. Section 270 provides that probate of the will or letters of administra- Section 270— When
tion to the estate of deceased person may be granted by a District Judge under probate or adminis-
the seal of his Court, “if it appears by a petition, verified as hereinafter provided, granted by District
‘of the person applying for the same, that the testator or intestate, as the case may Judge.
be, at the time of his decease, had a fixed place of abode. or any property,
movable, or immovable within the jurisdiction of the Judge”.

A similar power is conferred on the High Court acting on the original side,
since “District Judge”, as defined in the Act, includes such a High Court.

38.9. It appears that section 270 would cover a case even where the Person not domici-
testator or intestate was a person not domiciled in India—say, a foreign national— led in India.
who left property most of which was outside India, while leaving some movable
property in India. Of course, section 270 is not concerned with the question dealt
with in section 4 and 5,—the law applicable regarding succession, The section is

Section 2 (bb).


Section 270-
Assets in India.

Origin.

English cases,

Section 271.

Section 272—Pro-
bate and letters of
administration may
be granted by
delegate.

216

concerned only with the jurisdiction of indian courts. It would appear—though
there is no case law on this point—that, in so far as a non-domiciled person
has left property in India, the section would apply. The law applicable will, of
course, be governed by sections 45.

For the present, and, in the absence of case law raisin any concreic questions,
we have no further comments on this point.

38.10. The foundation of the jurisdiction of a Court to grant probate or
letters of administration is that there is property of the deceased to be administered
with the country and section 270 does not, in any way, provide an alternative
basis for a grant’,

Thus, the section cannot be understood as dispensing with the necessity
of existence of Indian assets before probate, etc. can issue from an Indian Court.

38.11. Section 270 has
1857 (20 and 21 Vict. C. 77).

origin in section 46 of the Court of Probate Act.

38,12. English decisions from the earliest time have insisted op English
assets as a condition precedent to an English grant. For example Sir C. Cress-
well held?---

“Et does not appear from the affidavits that the deceased left any property
in this country. Unless he did so, there is nothing upon which the grant
asked for would operate and I should have no jurisdiction to decree letters
of administration to be granted”,

Sir J.P. Wilde observed in another case? :

“It is not one of the functions of this Court to determine as an abstract
qustion who is the proper representative of a deceased person, The
foundation of the jurisdiction of this Court is, that there is personal pro-
perty of the deceased to be distributed within its jurisdiction. In this case
the deceased has no property, within this country, and the Court has,
therefore, no jurisdiction”,

Other decisions to the same effect are ‘In Goods of Pittock’ where, administra-
tion was refused because the deceased left no personal property in England and—
In Goods of Coode* whete it was held that a will disposing only of property
in a foreign country was not entitled to an English probate.

It should, however, be pointed out that what section 270 requires is not
the existence of assets in India in every case. Two criteria are given, of which
one is enough.

38.13. This takes us to section 271, which reads—

“271, When the application is made to the judge of a district in which
the deceased had no fixed abode at the time of his death, it shall be in the
discretion: of the Judge to refuse the Application if in’ his judgement it
could be disposed of more justly or conveniently in another district, or,
where the application is for letters of administration, to grant them
absolutely, or limited to the property within his own jurisdiction”.

Th: section needs no change.

38.14. Section 272 reads—

“272. Probate jand feuters of adménistration may, upon application for
that purpose to any District Delegate, be granted by him in any case in which
there is no contention, if it appears by petition, verified ~ as. hereinafter
'Kalyanikutty v. Gourtkutty, ALR. 1953 T.C, 352, para 3 (Koshi CJ. and MS, Menon J).
*Evans v, Burret, (1859) 4 Sw. & Tr. P, 185, 154 ER. 1487.
“The Goods of Hannah Tucker, (1864) 3 Sw. & Te. 585, 164 ER 1402
‘Ia Goods of Fittock, (863) 32 J.L.P. M & A 157.
In Goods of Conde, (A867) 1 P & 13. 449.


217

provided, that the téstator or intestate, as the case may be, at the time of his
death had a fixed place of abode within the jurisdiction of such Delegate”.

No changes are required in the section.

38.415, Scetion 273 reads as under— Section 273-Con-
clusiveness of. prow

ve ०० er a bate or letters
re effect over all the Siminfetration

3. Probaie or leticts of adminisiration shall h
‘ty and estaic, movable or immovable, of ihe deceased, throughout
the Siuic in which the same is or ate granted, und shall be conclusive as
to the representative title ugainst alt debtors of the deceased, and all persons
holdins property which belongs to him, and shall afford full indemnity to all
debtors, paying their debts and all persons delivering up such property
lo the person % whom such probate or letters of administration have been
gyanted:

Provided That probates and letters of administration granted—~
(a) by a High Court, or

(b) by a District Judge, where the deceased at the time of bis death had
affeicted, beyond the limits of the State daes not exceed ten thousand
and such Judge certifies that the value of the property and estate
effected, beyond the limits of the State does not exceed ten thousand
repees, shall, unless otherwise directed hy the grant. have Uke effect
throughout the other States.

“The proviso to this suction shall apply in India alter the separation of
Burma und Aden from India to probates and letters of administration
granted in Burma and Aden before the date of the separation, or after
that date in preccedings which were pending at that date,

“The proviso shalt apply in India after the separation of Pakistan from
India iw probate and letters of administration granted before the date
of the separation, or after the date in proceedings pending at that date,
in any of the territories which on that date constituted Pakistan”,

The umount of ten thousand cupees should pow be increased to rupees.
fifty thousand in view of fall in the value of the rupee. We yecommend
accordingly.
38.16. Section 274 reads as under :--- Section 274—Tran-
smission to High
“274 (1) Where probate or fetters of administration has or have been Courts of certificate
granted by a High Court or District Judge with the effect referred, to in Of rants under Pro
the pioviso to section 273, the High Court or District Judge shali send ”
a certificate thereof to the following courts, namely:
(a) when the gran s been made by a High Court. 10 cach of the
other Courts:
(0) when the grant has been made by a District Judge, to the High
Court to which such District Jadge is subordinate and to each of the
other High Courts.

(2) Every certificate referred to in sub-section(1) shall be made as early
as circumstances admit in the form set forth in Schedule TV, and such
certificate shall be filed by the High Court receiving the same.

(3) Where any portion of the assests has been stated by the petitioner,
as hereinafter provided in sections 276 and 278, to be situate within the
inrisdiction of 2 District Tudge in another State. the Court required to send
the certificate referred to in sub section (1) shall send a copy thereof to
such District Fudge, and such copy shail be filed by the District Judge
receiving the same. a

वा, The petition and inmediate steps thereon.

38.17. Section 275 reads—- Section 275.

“275. The application for probate or letters of administration, if made
and verified in the manner hereinafter provided, shall be conclusive for



Section 276.

Section 277,

Section 278— Pet-
ition for letters of
administration.

218

the purpose of authorising ihe geant of probate or administration; aad no
such grant shall be impeached by reason only that the testator aq intestate
had no fixed place of abode or no Property within the district at the time
bf his death, unless by a proceeding to revoke the grant if obtained by
ai fraud upon the Court "

The section needs no change.
38.18. Section 276 reads—

>27601) Application for probate or for letters of administration, with the
will annexed, shali be made by a petition distinctly written in English or in
the language in ordinary use in proceedings before the Courts in which the
application is made, with the will or, in the cases mentioned in sections
237, 238 and 239 a copy. draft, or statement of the contents — thereof,
annexed, and stating—

(a) the time of the testator’s death,
(b) that the writing anvexed is his last will and testament,

(९) that it was duly executed, .

(४) the amount of assets which are likely to come fo. the pe tioner's

haiids, and

{e) when the application is for probatc, that the petitioner is the
executor named in the will.

(2) In addition to these particulars, the petition shall further state,—

(४) when the application is to the District Judge, that the deceased
at the time of his death had a fixed place of abode, or had some pro
perty, situate within the jurisdiction of the Judge; and

(b) when the application is to a District Delegate, that the deceased
at the time of his death had a fixed place of abode within the jurisdiction
of such Delegate.

(3) Where the application is to the District Judge and any portion of the
assests likely to come to the, petitioner's hands is situate in another State,
the petition shall further state the amount of such assets in each State and
the District Judge within whose jurisdiction such asgets are situate.” -

The section needs no change.

39.18. Section 277 reads—

“277. In cases wherein the will, copy or draft, is written in any language other
than English or than that in ordinary use in proceedings before the Court.
there shall be a translation thereof annexed to the petition by a translator
of the Court, if the language be one for which a translator is appointed;
or, if the will, copy or draft, is in any other language, then by any person _
competent to translate the same, in which case such translation shall be
verified by that person in the following manner, namely :—-

“I (A.B.) do declare that I read and perfectly understand the language and
character of the original and that the above is a true and accurate
translation thereof.” :

The section needs no change.

38.20. Section 278 reads— हि

“278 (1) Application for [etters of administration shail be made by

petition distinctly written as aforesaid and stating— tae ao
(a) the time and place of the deceased’s death;

(b) the family or other relatives of the deceased, and their’ respective
residences; :


219

(c+ the right in which the petitioner claims;
{d) the amount of assets which are likely to come to the petitioner’s
hands;
(e) When the application is to a District Judge, that the deceased
at ihe time of his death had a fixed place of abode, or had some pro-
perty, situate within the jurisdiction of the Judge; and,
(1) when the application is to a District Delegate, that the deceased at
the time of his death had a fixed place of abode within the jurisdiction
of such Delegate.
(2) Where the application is to the District Judge and any portion of the
assets likey to come to the petitioner's hands is situate in another State,
the petition shall further state the amount of such assets in each State and
the District Judge within whose jurisdiction such assets are situate.”

The section needs no change.

38.21. Section 279 reads—

>279, (1) Every person applying 10 any of the courts mentioned in the goog je
proviso to section 273 for probate of a will or letters of administration of ene ee cael
an estate intended to have effect throughout India shall state in his peti~ in application under
tion, in addition to the matters respectively required by section 276 and ston 273 proviso.
section 278, that to the best of his belief no application has been made to

any other court for a probate of the same estate, intended to have such

effect as last aforesaid.

Or, where any such application has been made, the court to which it was

made, the person or persons by whom it was made and proceedings (if any)

had thereon.

(2) The Court to which any such application is made under the proviso

to section 273 may, if it thinks fit, reject the same.

The section needs no change.

38.22. Section 280 provides that the petition for probate or letters of Section 280
administration shall in all cases be subse: by the petitioner and his pleader,
if any, and shall be verified by the petitioner in the manner laid down in the

jon,

The section needs no change.

38.23. Section 281 reads— Verification

“281. Where the application is for probate, the petition shall also be verified ose 21:22 =
by at least one of the witnesses to the will (when procurable) in the manner

or to the effect following, namely :—

“I (C.D.), one of thc witnesses to the last will and testament of the

testator mentioned in the above petition, declare that 1 was present and

saw the said testator affix his signature (or mark) thereto (or that the

said testator acknowledged the writing annexed to the above petition to

be his last will and testament in my presence)”.

The section needs no change.

38.24. Section 282 reads— - Section 282.

“282. If any petition or declaration which is hereby required-to be verified

contains any averment which the person making the verification knows or

believes to be false, such person shall be deemed to have committed an
4S or 1860. offence under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code.”

The section needs no change.
38.25. Section 283 reads— Section 283.

“283. (1) In all cases the District Fudge or District Delegate may, if he
thinks proper,—
85-1/B(D) 44MofLI&CA~15


Meaning of “inte.
rest.”

Section 284-Form
of Caveat.

Section 285.

Section 226.

220

(a) examine the petitioner in person. upon oath

{b) require further evidence of the execution of the will or the
right of the petitioner to the letters of administration, as the case
may be;

10) issue citations calling upon all persons claiming jto have any
interest in the estate of the deceased to come and see the proceedings
before the grant of probate or letters of administration.

(2) The citution shall be fixed up in some conspicuous part of the court-
house, and aiso in the office of the Collector of the district and otherwise
published or made known in such manner as the Judge or District Delegate
issuing the same may direct.

(3) Where any portion of the assets has been stated by the petitioner to be
situate within the jurisdiction of a District Judge in another State, the
District Judge issuing the same shall cause a copy of the citation to be
sent to such other District Judge, who shall publish the same in the same
manner as if it were a citation issued by himself, and shall certify such
publication to the District Judge who issued the citation.”

38.26. The “interest” in the estate, mentioned in section 283(1) (०), is only
that interest which, by citation, a person called upon may claim to have in the
estate of the deceased. It is not the interest which the deceased did not own,
but which the claimant, coming into the, picture by citation, claims to be vested
in himself .The title of the testator to the property which is the subject-matter
of disposition is entirely and necessarily outside the scope of probate proceedings;
that question will have to be settled ‘separately. By citation, a party cannot be
allowed to convert a probate proceeding into a suit for resolving title. This is the
gist of a Madras judgement

The section needs no change.
38.27. Section 284 racds—-
“284 (1) Caveats i
lodged with the जाएं
(2) Immediately on any caveat being lodged with any District Delegate.
he shall send copy thereet to the District Judge.

(3) Immediately on a caveat being entered with the District Judge, a copy
thereof shall be given to the District Delegate, if any, within whose juris-
diction it is alleged the deceased had a fixed place of abode at the time of

his death, and to any other Judge or District Delegate to whom it may
appear to the District Judge expedient to transmit the same.

he grunt of probaie or administration may be
or a Disrict Delegate.

(4) The caveat shall be made as nearly as circumstances admit in the
form set forth in Schedule ४०. .

The section necds no change.

38.28, Section 2&5 reads—

“285. No proceeding shall be taken on a petition for probate or letters of
administration after aveat against the grant thereof has been entered
with the Judge or District Delegate to whom the application has been made
or notice has been given of its entry with some other Delegate, untit after
such notice to the person by whom the same has been entered as the court
may think reasonable”.

The section needs no change.
38.29. Section 286 reads—

~286. A District Delegate shalt not grant probate or letters of administra-
tion i any case in which there is contention as to the grant, or in which

“Tn the : Narasimhan, AIR. 1975 Mad. 330, jing Fave ry.
sore Lathe 2 बात, ATR, 1975 Mad overruling Java Kumar v. Ramaratham, ALR.


221

it otherwise appears to him that probate or letters of administzation ought
not to be granted in his Court.

Explanaion--'Contention” means the appearance of any one in person, or
by his recognised agent, or by a pleader duly appointed to act on his
behalf, to oppose the proceeding.”

‘The section needs no change.

38,30. Section 287 reads— Section 287,

~287, In every cuse in which there is no contention, but it appears to the
District Delegate doubtful whether the probate or letters of administration
should or should not be granted, or when, any question arises in relation
to the grant, or application for the grant, of any probate or letters. of
administration, the District Delegate may, if he thinks proper, transmit a
statement of the matter in question to the District Judge, who may direct
the District Delegate to proceed in the matter of the application, according
to such instructions as to the Judge may seem necessary, or may forbid
any further proceeding by the District Delegate in relation to the matter of
such application, leaving the party applying for the grant in question to
make application to the Judge.”

‘The section needs no change, having raised no problems,
4५, Disposal of Petition

38.31. Section 288 provides that in every case in which there is contention, Section 288.

or the District Delegate is of opinion that the probate. or letters of administration
should be refused in his court, the petition, with any documents which may
have been filed therowith, shall be returned to the person by whom the applica-
tion was made, in order that the same may be presented to the District Judge
unless the District Delegate thinks it necessary, for the purpose of justice, to
impound the same, which he is hereby authorised to do, and, in that case, the
same shall be sent by him to the District Judge.

We have no comments on the section.
V. Grant of Probate. .

38.32. Section 289 provides that when it appears to the District Judge or Section 289.
District Delegate that probate of a will should be granted, he shall grant the
game under the seal of his Court in the form set forth in Schedule VI.

The section needs no change, having created no problems.

38.33. According to section 290 when it appears to the District Judge or section 290.
District Delegate that letters of administration to the estate of a person deceased,
with or without a copy of the will annexed, should be granted, he shall grant the
game under the seal of his Court in the form set forth in Schedule VII.

The section needs no change.

38.34, Section 291 reads as under— Section 291--
“291. (1) Every person to whom any grant of letters of administration, Qdeiciateation

other than a grant under section 241, is committed shall give a bond to
the District Judge with one or more surety or surities, engaging for the due
collection, getting in, and administering the estate of the deceased, which
tond shail be in such form as the Judge may, by general or special order,
direct,

(2) When the deceased was a Hindu. Muhammadan, Bhudhist, Sikh or
Jaina or an exempted person—

(a) the exception made by sub-section (1) in respect of a grant under
section 241 shal] not operate;

(७) the District Judge may demand a like bond from any person
to whom probate is granted”.


222

Need for giving 38.35, As the section stands at present, there is no discretion given (0
1 discretion to court. ihe court to dispense with the taking of the bond. If sub-section (1) applies.
then the only matter in respect of which the court has a discretion is as regards
the amount of the bond. Now, cases do arise in practice where a bond might
become an idle formality—for example, where the applicant for the grant of
letters of administration is the sole legatee or the sole heir. Under the present
section, even in the case of a sole legatee, the only matter in the direction of the
court is the amount of the bond. But subject to the above discretion and apart
from cases specifically execluded by statute? the provision as to security in sub-
section (1) is mandatory.

Rationale for taking 38.36, Security is required for guarding against possible malpractices by the

security bond. grantee. If there is reasonable protection against a malpractice arising from
the special circumstances of the case, the taking on an administration bond is an
unnecessary formality. It may even cause hardship. For example, the conditions
imposed or the amount fixed may make it impracticable for the applicant to
furnish the security demanded and consequently no letters of administration can
be taken out, {n such circumstances the safety of the estate may be scriously
imperiled if letters of administration are not granted.*

38.37. It may be noted that in England, while a bond is generally taken
from an administrator, the court has a discretion to dispense with sureties by
reason of special circumstances. For example, where all the debts had been paid
aid the persons applying were entitled to the whole of the residue, _ sureties
were dispensed with.‘ Again,’ where the applicant had no means, surities were
dispensed with, to enable the applicant (widow of the deceased) to carry on the
business of the deceased.

English Jaw.

‘Need of giving dis- 38.38. On a cuicii coisideraiiun of the matter, it seems to us that the
cretion to the court. Court should be given a discretion to dispense with the taking of the administra-
tion bond or with the need for sureties in the following cases :—

Gi) where the person to whom the grant is to be made is a sole legatee.
or a sole heir, ot :

(ii) where, for reasons to be recorded, the Court in the circumstance of
the case thinks it proper to dispense with the bond or sureties.®

38,39. As to sub-section (2) of section 291, its history is of interest, In
the case of probate, a bond can be demanded only from the special classes of
persons mentioned in sub-section (2). ‘The reasgn for the difference is thus stated
in the Statement’ of Objects and Reasons of the Probate and Administration
Act, 1881: “The Indian Succession Act, 1865 provided for the taking of security
for the due discharge of this oflice only from an administrator, it being considered
that in the case of an executor, who was selected by the testator himself, such
security can safely be dispensed with. But amongst the classes to which this
Act will app! , cases will, it is apprehended, accasionally occur, in which it may be
expedient to take security even from an executor and accordingly a section has
been inserted in the Bill amending section 256 of the seccession Act in such a
manner as to give a power to the court to require an executor to give security.”

History of sub-sec-
tion (2)

Recommendation 38.40. In the light of the above disussion, we recommend that the following
a amend section «uh.section should be added in section 291 :

“(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Court may
dispense with the taking of a hond thereunder or with the need for sureties
to such a bond where--

‘Mohan Mohini, v. Tava Mohini, AAR. (920 Cal. 733, 734.

For example . the Administrators Gernerals Act, 1963.

Amir Chandra v. Mahammdbibi, 6 Cal. Law Journal 453.

‘in the goods of Panton, (19011 Probate 188.

*Re Cory, (1903) Probale 62.

"Fora drafi see para 37.40, infra.

ICP. Section 78, Probate & Administration Act, 1881 (Repealed).


223

(a) the person 10 whom the grant of probate or letters of adnunistra-
tion is to be made is the sole legatee or the sole heir of the deceased, or

(b) where, jor reasons to be recorded, the Court in the circumstances
of the case thinks it proper to dispense with such bond or sureties,
us the case may be.”

38.41. Lhis takes us tw seetion 292, which provides that the court may, Section

on application made by petition and on being satisfied that the engagement of
any such bond has not been kept, and upon such terms as to secutity, or provid-
ing that the money received be paid into Court, or otherwise, as the Court
may think fit, assign the same to some person, his executors or administrators.
who shall thereupon be entitled to sue on the said bond in his or their own
name or names as if the same had been originally given to him or them instead
of to the Judge of the Court, and shall be entitled to recover thereon, as trustees
for all persons interested, the full amount recoverable in respect of any branch
thereof,

The sectivn needs no change. having created no difliculties,

292.

38.42, Section 293 provides that no probate of a will shall be granted Section 293.

until after the expiration of seven clear days, and no letters of administration
shail be granted until after the expiration of fourteen clear days. from the day
of the testator or intestate’s death,

This section also needs no change.

38.43. Section 294 provides that every District Delegate shall file and Section 294.

preserve all original wills, of which probate or letters of administration with
the will annexed may be granted by him, among the records of his Court, until
some public registry for will is established. It further provides that the State
Government shall ‘make regulations for the preservation and inspection
of the wills so filed. मु

The section needs no change of substance. However, the regulation to be Recoammendation.

made by the State Government should be published in the official Gazette and
we recommend that a sub-section to that effect be added in section 294.

38.44, This takes us to section 295, Ht lays down that in any case before Section 295,

the District Judge in which there is contention, the proceedings shali take, as
nearly as
Code of Civil Procedure, 1968, in which the petitioner for probate or letters of
administration, as the case may be, shall be the plaintiff, and the person whe
has appeared to oppose the grant shall be the defendant,

४ be, the form of « regular suit, according to the provisions of the

The section needs no change.

38.45. Section 296 reads— Section 296.

“296(1) When a grant of probate or {eters of adniinistration is revoked
or annulled under this Act, the person to whom the grant was made shall
forthwith deliver up the probate or letters to the court which made the grant.

(2) Tf such person witiully and without reasonable CailSe OMS ४0. to
deliver up the probate or letters. he shall be punishable with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to tree months. or with both.”

This section alsa needs no change.

38.46. Scetton 297 provides :— Sectron

“297, When a grant of probate or letters of administration is revokec, alt
payments bona fide made to any executor or adminisivator under such
grant before the revocation thereof shall, notwithstanding such revocation.
be a legal discharge t the person making the same; and the executor or
administrator who has acted under any such revoked giant may retain
and reimburse himself in respect of any payments made by him which the

297,


Section 298.

Section 299,

Section 301 Suspen-
sion and removal
of private executor,

Section 302—~Dir-
ection to executor
oradministrator.

24

person to whom probate or letters of administration may afterwards be
granted might have lawfully made.

The section needs no change.

VI. Miscellaneous

38.47. According io section 298, notwithstinding anything. hereinbefore
contained, it shall, where the deceased was a Muhammadan, Bu t, Or exempt.
ed person, or a Hindu, Sikh or Jaina to whom section 57 does not apply, be in
the discretion of the court to make an order refusing, for reasons to be recorded
by it in writing, to grant any application for letters of administration made under
this Act.

The section needs no change.

38.48. Section 299 provides that every order made by a District Judge by
virtue of the powers hereby conferred upon him shall be subject to appeal to the
High Court in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, applicable (0 appeals. Since every order is appealable, no revision is
maintainable,’

The section needs no change.
38.49.Section 300 reads :—
“300. (1) The High Court shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the District
Judge in the exercise of all the powers hereby conferred upon the District
Judge,
(2) Except in cases to which section 57 applies, no High Court, in exercise
of the concurrent jurisdiction hereby conferred over any local area beyond
the limits to towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay shall, where the
deceased is a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina or an cxempted
person, receive applications for probate or letters of administration until
the State Government has, by a notification in the Official Gazette, autho-
tised it so to do.”

The section needs no change, having raised no problems.

38,50. Section 301 reads :—

“301. The High Court may, on application made to it, suspend, remove or
discharge any private executor or administrator and provides for the suc-
cession of another person to the office of any such executor or administrator
who may cease to hold office and the vesting in such successor of any
property belonging to the estate.”

The section needs no change.
38.51. Section 302 reads :-—

“302. Where probate or letters of administration in respect of any estate
has or have been granted under this Act, the High Court may, on applica-
tion made to it, give to the executor or administrator any general or special
directions in regard to the estate or in regard to the administration thereof.”

‘The section needs no change.

CHAPTER 39
EXECUTORS OF THEIR OWN WRONG
. (SECTIONS 303 AND 304)
39.1. The special topic of “executors of their wrong” is dealt with in a

separate Chapter—sections 303 and 304, Of these two sections, one defines the
concept, and the other deals with the liability, of such an executor.

“Wada Lal v. Matinder Kumar, ATR.1973Raj 238.



223

39.2. Section 303 provides that a person who intermeddies with the estate Section rare
of the deceased, or does any Cilier act which belongs to the office of executor, nanin Is
while there is no rightful executor or administrator in existence. thereby makes
himself an executor of his own wrong.

There are, however, two exceptions io this general provision :

<1) litermeddling with the ४००05 of the deceased for the purpose of pre-
serving them or providing for his funeral or for the immediate neces-
sities of his family or property. does not make an executor of his own
wrong.

Q

Dealing in the ordinary course of business with gouds of Uie deceased
received from another docs not make an executor of his own wrong.

Milustration (1) esplains the scope of the main as follows :

“Cl) A uses or gives away or seils some of the goods of the deegased, or
takes them to satisfy his own debt or legacy or receives payment of the
debts of the deceased. He is an executor of his own wrong.”

However, if there is no notice of death, there is no intermeddling: Thus, in
illustration Gi), A, having been appointed agent by the deceased in his lifetime
te collect his debts and sci) his 80005, cominues tu do so after he has become
aware of his death. He is an executor of his own wrong in respect of acts done
after he has become aware of the death of the deceased.

The section does not seens to need any change,

39,3. Linder section 304. when a person has so uecg us to become an हि भा मिल अमित कक
executor of his own wrong, he is answerable to the rightful executor or adninis- of his own wrong.
trator, or to any creditor or legatee of the deceased, to the extent of the assets
which may have come to his hands after deducting payments made to the rightful
executor Or administrator, and payments made in due course of administration.

The section needs no change.

CHAPTER 40
POWERS OF AN EXECUTOR OR ADMINISTRATOR
(SECTIONS 305 TO 315)
1, Preliminary.

40.1. Sections 305 to 315 deal with powers of an executor or administrator. Score

Although contained in an enactment dealing with succession, some of the
sections in this chapter (particularly, section 306 which deal with the survival
of causes of action) have a much wider interest, and really the draftsman, in
dealing with this topic, has «mtered the realm of torts, It is well-known that the
topic of survival of causes of action has, during the Jast four or five decades,
been the subject matter of much legal learning. and of certain legislative develop-
ments in other countries: These legislative developments remedy, to some extent,
certain anomalies arising from the earlier common law rule. In India, however,
the section. not having been subjected to systematic review in the past, still
suffers from a setious drawback. Accordingly, it will be necessary to suggest
suitable reforms in this regard, when dealing with the section,

40.2. The general principle underlying the provisions in sections 305—315 General principle.
is that the executor or administrator represents the deceased—-though, until he
obtains probate or letters of administration, no right can be est: शर्त én a court
of justice. This principle is worked out in relation to several matters dealt with
in this Chapter, such as :-—

(a) the survival of causes of action ; sections 305—-036.

*Section 242 and Section 213 (1).


2i0

(b) disposal of property and general powers of the executor or administra-
tor—sections 307—325.

The executor or administrator cannot make a profit out of the office.
Accordingly, sections 309—-310 impose certain restrictions based on that prin-
ciple.

The rest of the sections (311—315) deal with matters of detail.

41. Survival of Causes of Action.

Section 305— 40.3. According to section 305, an executor or administrator has the same

Ig respect of causes . a .
of action surviving power to suc in respect of all causes of action that survive the deceased, and may

deceased and debts exercise the same power for the recovery of debts as the deceased had, when
due at death. living.

The section needs no change.
Section 306. 40.4. Section 306 reads as under :--

“306. All demands whatsoever and ali rights to prosecute or defend any
action or special proceeding existing in favour of or against a person at the
time of his decease, survive to and against his executors or administrators; except
causes of action for defamation, assault, as defined in the Indian Panel Code, or
other personal injuries not causing the death of the party; and except also cases
where, after the death of the party, the relief sought could not be enjoyed — or
granting it would. be nugatory.

ILLUSTRATIONS

(i) A collision takes place on a railway in consequence of some neglect or
default of an official, and a passenger is severely hurt, but not so as to. cause
death. He afterwards dies without having brought any action. The cause of
section does not ‘survive.

(ii) A sues for divorce. A dies. The cause of action does not survive to his

. representative.
The section relaies to an important topic whose interest transcends the

mere limits of “powers of an executor or Administrator”. A number of aspects
will require examination.

Position ia Kerala 40.3. It should be noted at the outset that in Kerala, a State Act contains
provisions, inter alia, relating to the survival of causes of action and expressly
tepeals section 306 by providing that that section, so far as it relates to the
right of action in torts, shall cease to apply in the State of Kerala. The Act
seems to re-enact an earlier Travancore Act® on the subject.

Origin of the maxim 40.6. Consideration of section 306 of the Central Act may begin with the
maxim—personal action dies with the person, Although somewhat obscure in
its origin, the principle that a personal cause of action dies with the person.
seems to have been linked with the criminal flavour of early tort remedies?

The maximum was originally introduced to prevent actions of a penal
character, like trespass and its offshoots, from being brought after the death of the
wrongdoer against his representatives.‘* The main reason was that the trespass was
“drowned in the felony”. Later, however, the maxim was applied to cases of
death of the injured person, even though the reason’ underlying the maximum
had no application”

‘Kerala Torts (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1976 (8 of 1977), /1977) K.L.T. Journal pages

*Travancore Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act (12 of 1124).
*Fleming, Torts (1965) page 695.

‘Holdsworth H.E.L. Vot. 3. page $76.

3866 also Street Torts (1977), page 407.

‘Death of Wrongdoer in case of penal action.

7 Adiniralty Commrs. ४. 5.5. America, (1917) AC. 38. 43, 44,


227

Thus, the wide scope that the rule came to acquire was more a product of
the accidents of history than of any deliberate view taken as a matter of policy.

40.7. In England, by the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, Position in England
1934,’ most causes of action survive on the death of 4 person. The relevant -
provision of the Act is as follows :— .

“1. Effect of death on certain causes of action :—

(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, on the death of any person
after the commencement of this Act all causes of action subsisting against
or vested in him shall survive against or, as the case may be, for the
benefit of, his estate.

“Provided that this sub-section shall not apply (0 causes of action — for
defamation. . . cn

There is no exception in England for personal non-fatal injuries. Even as
regards defamation. there is a section of opinion’-° that there should be no
exception.

sisting 40.8. In Australia,’ on the death of any person, all causes of action sub- Position in
sisting against or vested in him survive against or for the benefit of his estate; with Australia.
the exception of causes of action for defamation. seduction, cnticement of spouses
and damage claims for adultery. Even as regards defamation. the cause of action
survives in Tasmania.

40.9. In Canada, in many States, the law relating to survival of personal Position in Canada
causes of action has been reformed by statutes passed by the State Legislatures.’
For example, under section 38(1) and (2) of the Trustee Act of Ontario,® causes
of action survive as regards all torts or injuries to the person or to the property
for breach of promise of marriage.’ पु

Substantially to the same effect is the provision in sections 32 and 33 of the
Trustee Act of Alberta. To the same effect is section 71 of the administration
Act of British Columbia. Section 49 of the Trustee Act in Manitoba continues
all actions of tort except action for libel and slander, malicious prosecution, false
imprisonment or false arrest.

In New Bruswick, the Survival of Actions Act has followed the English Act
of 1934. In Newfoundland, the Trustee Act, section 22, in effect, provides for
actions by or against personal representatives of a deceased for wrong to the
property, The Saskatchewan Trustee Act (sections 52 and 53) allows at actions
to survive for wrongs “not resulting in death, except libel and slander”. In Nova
Scotia, the Survival of Actions Act provides that in the event of death of any
person, all causes of action subsisting against or vested in him shal survive,
except actions for adultery and actions for inducing a spouse to leave or remain
apart from him or her spouse.

40.10. In the U.S.A, in most Sites statutes have been enacted causing U.S.A.
tort” actions 10 survive the death of either party. (In many statutes, exceptions
are made as to actions for harm peculiarly personal, such as defamation and
malicious prosecution). Such statutes are commonly known as “survival Statutes”:
they transfer to the estate of the deceased person rights and liabilities which the
deceased would had, if he or she had lived.
‘Section I(t), Law Reform (Misceli: १९०७५ Provisions) Act, 1934 (24 and 25 Geo. 5 ०. 41)
as amended .
3566 para 40.18 ef seq., infra.
3415० Salmond Torts (1981) page 416 100०९ Note 57.
“Fleming, Torts (1965), pge 696.
*Wright, Cases on the Law of Torts (1967), pages 654-635
“Trustee Act, R.S.O. 1960, C. 408.
*Smallman ४. Moori, (1948) $.C.R. 295 (Canada).
*Trustee Act, R.S.A. 1955 C. 346, Sections 32-33.
°R.S.B.C. (1960), C. 3, Section 71.
“Keeton & Keeton, Cases and Materials on Torts (1977), page 195.


228

We may quote the Texas Survival Statute’ as one example of American
legislation :—

“All causes of action upon which suit has been or may hereafter be brought
for personal injuries, or for injuries resulting in death, whether such injuries
be to the health or to the reputation, “or to the person of the injured party,
shall not abate by reason of the death of the person against whom such
cause of action shall have accrued, nor by reason of the death of such
injured person, but in the case of the death of either or both, ali such
causes of action shail survive to and in fayour of the heirs and legal
representatives and estate of such injured party and against the person,
or persons liable for such injuries and his or their legal representatives, and
may be instituted and prosecuted as if such person or persons against
whom same accrued were alive.”

Virtually all States in the U.S.A. allow survival of actions for damage to
property, In slightly more than half the States, actions for such torts as defama-
tion survive’.

Recomnendation 40.11.So much as regards the legislative developments elsewhere. We now

to हज अत proceed to consider the need for reform in the Indian law. tn the flirst place,

a personal inju- W¢ consider the exception in section 306 for assault and other personal injuries

ries hot causing to be totally unsound in principle. It is an archaic survival of the rule that a

death. personal action dies with the person. The rule itself was unsound,’ Leing a
oduct more of historical accident than of any deliberate view of policy. Apart
From this, justice requires that such causes of action should survive. The mere
accident of the death of a person ought not to affect the survival of the cause
of action, whether the person dying is the wronged person or the wrongdoer.
In general, tortious liability arises because of certain harm caused by the tort.
A subsequent event ought not to affect a liability that has already accrued because
of harm already caused.

We, therefore, recommend deletion of the words “assault ...... or other
personal injuries aot causing the death of the party” from section 306.

iow of 40.12. In case, however, our recommendation’ to, delete from ifretion 306

the expression the exception regardin; personal injury is not accepted, we would like to point

ersonal injury”. out the need for a lar cation in the light of certain problems raised by the
case law on the subject,’ which we proceed to deal with,

जा * है 40.13, Case law on section 306 shows that the expression “personal

prosecution. injuries” in the section has proved to be unfortunate and controversial, For
example, the question whether the expression includes malicious . prosecution,
hhas been the subject of a conflict of decisions. The majority view on the subject
would include malicious prosecution within this expression, the reasoning being
that the word ‘personal’ in this section must mean all personal injuries in the com-
monly accepted use of the word ‘personal’, and cannot be restricted merely to
physical injuries 10 the person. Hence a suit for malicious prosecution does
not, according to thé majority view. survive after death. This view has been
taken by the Allahabad,’ Bombay,’ Madhya Pradesh,’ Madras,” and Patna" High
Courts, which hold that a suit for malicious prosecution is a suit for ‘personal
injury’ within the meaning of section 306.

पु. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann, (1958) Act. $525. Survival of Causes of Action. Reproduced in
Shapiro, Tort and Compensation Law (1976), page 478.

a) Gregory & Kalven, Cases and Materialson Torts (1969). page 522.
(6) Note in (1953) 48 Harvard Law Review 1108.

*Para 40.10, supra.

‘Para 40,5, supra.

*Para 40.11, supra

“Para 40.13, et seq.. infra.

7 Melitab Singh v. Hab Lal, ALR. 1926 All. 610, 612.

‘*Afotilal v. Haraaravan, 1.L.R. 47 Bom 716; A.L.R. 1923 Bom. 406.

$Ratanlal v. Baboolal, A.1.R. 1960 M.P. 200.

‘Murugappa v.’ Ponusami, A.1.R. 1921 Mad. 405.

“Punjab Singh v. Ram Autar Singh, (1919) 52 Indian Cases 348 (Patna).


The Madras cuses which discuss the matter at some length have spec:fically
held that the words ‘personal injuries’ do not mean, bodily injuries only, but
include injuries ejusdem generis with both defamation and assault, and therefore
include injuries such as thos: by malicious prosecution,’ *

Relying on earlier cases, it has been held’ in Madras that the maximum
‘action personalis moritur cum persona’ is a part of the law of this country,
except in so far as it has been modified by statute, and that in a suit for mali-
cious arrest, if a defendant dies, the right to sue does not survive.>

however, held® that malicious pro- Calcuttaand Lahore
in view.

40.14, The Calcutta High Court has,
secution is not a ‘personal injury’, and it is not covered by the exception
section 306 and, therefore, the right to sue for it survives. This was also the
Lahore view,’ which construed the words ‘personal injury’ as confined to bodily
injuries, According to this view, it must be construed with the immediately pre~
ceding word ‘assault’.

40.15. This brief resume of the case law on section 306 brings out the Recommendation
conflict of decisions as to the scope of the expression “personal injuries not {© amend section
causing death”, Whichever be the correct construction of the present wording 3(6-—Malicious
of the section, we are of the view that as a matter of policy, the exception for Prosecution.
‘personal injurics’ in the context of non-survival of causes of action (if at all any
such exception is to be retained),’ should be confined to bodily injury, Justice
requires that a cause of action for malicious prosecution should survive. There
are adequate reasons why it should be so, The deceased might, before his death
have spent money on defending the prosecution. His estate should, for that
reason, be allowed to recover the expenses, Apart from this pecuniary aspect, the

harm caused by a malicious prosecution is of such a character that a remedy
against it should continue tc be available even after the death of the person so
ee कण

prosecuted.

For the reasons stated above, we recommend that if the exception for
personal injuries not causing death in section 306 is not to be deleted, an amend-
ment should be made to section 306 by defining ‘personal injury’ as (i) including
any disease and any impairment of a person’s physical or mental condition,” and
(ii) excluding injury caused by malcious prosecution.

40.16, We are also of the view. that, on principle, causes of action for Survival of actions
defamation showld survive after death. Whatever be the thinking on the subject for defamation.
in the West at the time when the Act of 1865 (the predecessor of the Succession
‘Act of 1925) was enacted, Indian social notions would rather favour an approach
permitting survival of such causes of action. Reputation, in the eye of the
Indian Society, is certainly as precious as property, Jt may sound odd to quote
literary sources in a legal discussion, but the subject-matter is such that it
would be proper to draw support from the thinking of great writers. Shakespeare,
ia Othello," has thus described the value of reputation, in contrast with money :

“Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,
Is the immediate jewel of their souls;

Who steals my purse steals trash;

‘tis something, nothing

1Marwadi v. Samnaji, 31 M.L.J. 772, 826, 827.

2Rustomji v. Nurse, 1.L.R. 44 Mad. 357. 379, 380.

2Murugappa v. Ponusami. 1.L.R. 1921 Mad. 405.

“Arunachalam v. Subramanian, AAR. 1958 Mad. 142.

‘Cf. D.K. Cassim v. Sava Bibi, ALR. 1936 Rang. 17

(a) Krishna Behari Sen. Corporation of Calcutta, (1904) 1.L.R. 31 Cal. 993.

(8) Bhupendra v. Chandiramon, AAR. 1927 Cal. 277.

*People's Bank of Northern India v. Des Raj, A.I.R. 1935 Lah. 705.

*See para 40. 11, supra.

*Para 40.22, infra and paragraph 40.11, supra.
Cf, Section 3, Law Reform (Personal Injuries) Act. 1948 (Eng.).
“Othello, Act IIE, scene 3, Line 155.


230

“Twas mne. ‘tis his, and has been slave to thousands;
But he unat filches front = me my good name

Robs me of that which not enriches hipt.

And makes me poor indeed.”

in atother play,' Shakespeare has compared reputation to the “purest
Weasure” :—

“The purest weasure mortal times afford
fs spotless reputation: that away.
Men are but gilded toam or painted clay.”

Views expressed in 40.17, By many, reputation is ragarded as even more precious than life.
literature, Jodian literature has beautiful sayings on the subject?

We may mention that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights’ also
recognises the increasing importance of reputation. It provides :—

“ARTICLE 12, Nu one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with
his privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to attacks upon his honour and
reputation, Everyone has the right to the protection of the law against - such
interference or attacks.”

पा 40.18. Lt may be mentioned that the principle that the cause of action for
M y be 12: princip!
Baglead as Mo" de: defamation should survive has been approved by the Committee recently appoint-
famation. ed in England to report on the law of defamation.‘

View of academic 40.19. Editors of several leading books on torts have criticised the

writers, exclusion of defamation from the category of caused of action that survive.
“Defamation may cause much more harm to the next of kin than an 85800. ४, , ५
the exclusion or defamation from the provisions of the Act of 1934 is hard
to justify. Not only does the victim of a libellous attack lose his rights to damages
if his defamer dies, but he also Joses the opportunity of vindicating his character
in a court of 19७. ४

Recommendation 40.20, For the reasons stated above, we recommend that the word “defama-

fo delete (ता tion’ should also be deleted from section 306.

tion.

Applicability of 40.21. The next point arising out of section 306 concerns the applicability
section to re- of the section to representatives other than executors and administrators (who
Presentatives, are expressly mentioned in the section). There is a conflict of judicial decisions

on the subject.

According to the Allahabad High Court,” the word “executors or admums-
trators” in this section mean persons who are appointed by the courts to
administer the estate of the deccased person in the absence of a will or persons
nominated by the testator in his will to administrater his estate. The section, there-
fore, does not give ४ right ta continue proceedings by or against heirs as
representing an estate.

According to the Labore view,'* however, there is no reason to hold that
the liability of the Leirs who have not taken out probate or letters of administra-
tion should stand जा 2 different footing.

Richard ॥, Act I, scene 1, line 177

E.G. Bhagvadgeeta, Chapter 2, verse 34.

Article 12, Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

‘Committee on Defamation, Report (1975, March), page 116, para 423 and $909.

“Heuston (Ed.), Salmond on Tort (16th Ed.) (1973), page 451. foot note 49. Also Salmond
Torts (1981).

“1,A. Jollowicz and Ellis Lewis (ed) Winfield on Torts (1967). page 627.

"Official Liquidators v. Jugal Kishore, A.LR. 1939 All. 1, 3, 4 (Harries J.).

"Peoples Bank of Northern India Lid.v. Des Raj, ALR. 1935 Lahore 705.

*People Bank of Northern India Lid. v. Har Gopal, A.1.R. 1936 Lahore 271.


231

We are of the view. thai section 306 should apply to the other persons—-the
heirs—also, there being no reason for having a different rule as to survival of
actions for or against them.

40.22. In the light of the above discussion. we recommend that section
306 be revised as follows :

306. All demands whatsoever and all rights to prosecute or defend any

action or special proceeding existing in favour of or against a person at the

time of his decease, survive to and against his executors or administrators or

representatives, except ------.. in cases where, after the death of the party,
the relief sought could not be enjoyed or granting it would he nugatory.”
ILLUSTRATION
sae an eee

“A sues for divorce. A dies. The cause of action does not survive to his
representative.”

ALTERNATIVE SUGGESTION

If the words excluding “personal injuries” are not deleted, then the amend-
ment’ proposed to define the expression “personal injury” should be carried out,
and “representative” should also be added.* The amendment should’ define
‘personal injury’ as (i) including any disease and any impairment of a person's
physical or mental condition. and (ii) excluding injury caused by malicious
prosecution. i

For the purpose, an Explanation could be added to section 306.

भरा, Disposal of Property.
40.23. Section 307 reads :—

Revised section 206

Section 307.

“307. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) an executor OF Power of execator
administrator has power to dispose of the property of the deceased, vested in of administrator to
him under section 211, either wholly or in part, in such manner as he may 4isPo% of property,

think fit.
ILLUSTRATION

(i) The deceased has made a specific bequest of part of his Property. The
executor, not having assented to the bequest, sells the subject of it. The sale is
valid,

(ii) The executor in his discretion mortgages ५ part of the immovable
estate of the deceased, ‘The mortgage is valid.

(2) If the deceased was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Sain
or an exempted person, the general power conferred by sub-section (i)
shall be subject to the following restrictions and conditions, namely :—

(i) The power of an executor to dispose of immovable property so
vested in him is subject to any restrictions which may be imposed in
this behalf by the will appointing him, unless probate has - been
granted to him and the Court which granted the probate permits him
by an order in writing, notwithstanding the restriction, to dispose of
any immovable property specified in the order in a manner permitted
by the order.

Gi) An administrator may not, without the previous permission of
the Court by which the letters of administration were granted,—
(a) mortgage, charge or transfer by sale. gift, exchange or other-
wise any immovable property for the time being vested in him
under section 211, or

wWara 40.11, supra
>Para 40.15, supra.

*Para 40.11, supra.
‘Cf, section 3. Law Reform (Personal Injuries) Act. 1948 (Eng.).


232

1७) lease any such property lov a term exceeding five years

(iii) A disposal of property by an executor or administrator in
contravention of clause {i) Clause (ii) as the case may be, is
voidable at the instance of any other person interested in the property.
13) Before any probate or letters of administration is or are granted in
such a case, there shail be endorsed thereon or annexed thereto a copy of
sub-section (1) and clauses (i) and of subsection (2), as the case
may be.
(4) A probaie or सह of administration shall not be rendered invalid by
reason of the endorsement or annexure required by sub-section (3) not
having been made thereof or atiached thereto, nor shall the absence of
‘such an endorsement or annexure authorise an executor or administrator
to act otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this section.

Question of detail. 40.24, Various questions of detail have arisen under this section as to
powers of the executor, such as the power to refer to arbitration the question
of genuineness of the will, power to determive questions arising in administration
whea such a discretion is given to the executor by the will, power to employ
agents and servants, power in regard to the performance of contracts, carrying
on of businss, personal liability of the executor, unsecured loans and proper
expenses for improvement of the property. The determination of such questions,
however, depends on the facts of each case, and there is no need to amplify the
section on this score.

Section 308—power 40.25. This takes us to section 308 :
of executor of
administrator. ‘The section deals with the general powers of administration of an executor

or administrator. 1६ provides that an executor or administrator may, in addition
to and not in derogation of any other power of expenditure lawfully exercisable
by him, incur expenditure-—
18) on such acts as 110५ be necessary for the proper care or management
of any property belonging to an estate administered by him; and

(b) with the sanction of the High Court, on such religious, charitable
and other objects, and on such improvement, as may be reasonable and
proper in the case of such property,

The section needs no change.

Section 309-- 40.26. Section 309 provides that an executor or administrator shall not
Recommendation. be entitled to receive or retain any commission or agency charges at a higher
rate than that for the time being fixed in respect of the Administrator-General
by or under the Administrator-General’s Act, 1913. This should not be read

as referring’ to the Administrator-General'’s Act, 1963, °
Background of 40.27. The lagal background in which this section was considered
Section 309. necessary may be briefly explained. Ordinarily, at common law, a legal represen-

tative is not entitled to any allowance for this time and trouble spent by him.
He is entitled only to out of pocket expenses.* In the absence of a special clause
in the will authorising a charge for professional services, even a Solicitor-Execu-
tor or a Solicitor—Administrator is not allowed such remuneration.’ It has, there-
fore, become a practice to insert in the will a clause authorising the Solicitor-
Executor to charge and be paid the usyal professional charges for the business
done by him or his firm in relation to the execution of trusts, whether in the
ordinary course of his profession or business or not, and although of a nature
requiring the employment of a solicitor or other professional person, Even where
such a clause is inserted, it is regarded itself as a legacy, and not as a debt‘
due from the estate to the executor.

‘Section 45 of the 1963 Act

4in the case of Akshay Kuinar Ghose, A.1.R. 1949 Cal, 462.

Robinson १. Pett, (1734) 3 P. Williams 249.

“Agha Mohmad ६. Koolson Beebce. (1897) Law Reports 24 India Appeals 196 (Privy Goun-

cil).


235

40.28. This is the legal background of the section and the ful scope of Incompleteness 150
the section cannot be understood unless that background is kept in mind, How- व change in
ever, there seems to be a certain amount of incompleteness in form, which gubstance.
arises from the fact that the section does not tell Is clearly whether such
commission or agency cati be claimed only if the will allows it, or whether it
can be claimed unless the will prohibits it. The letter may be a more practical
approach and we think tiat there should be a specific provision on the subject.

40,29, Then, there is need for change in the substance of the section, Charges in exceas of
arising from the fact that it js not clear whether a provision in the will allowing those allowed under
charges in excess of those allowed under the Administrator-General’s Act’ would Administ ‘Act.
be valid. Of course, it would be reasonable to take the view that it is valid, but

the statement of the position could be made explicit in this regard also.

40.30. In this context, in particular, the case where a bank is appointed as pank as executor-
an executor requires 10 be considered. Where the will itself provides for the position of.
payment of charges, the bank may be entitled to the ordinary charges for the
work which is done in administering the estate.? However, it is possible that a
bank may refuse to accept executorship if its charges, which may, be more than
those permitted under the Administrator-General's Act, are not paid. In qrder
to meet such cases, the court should be given a power to relax the rule con-
tained in section 309.

40.31. On a consideration of all aspects of the matter, it seems to us that Recommendaticn
section 309* should he modified on the following lines : ‘oo amend section

(1) Whether or not the will provides for the payment of rcmuneration, so
Jong as the will does not prohibit such payment, an executor or
administrator shall be entitled to receive or retain reasonable com-
mission or agency charges.

Unless the will otherwise provides or the court otherwise permits,
those charges shail not be at a higher rate than that for the time being
fixed in respect of the Administrator General by or under the Adminis-
trator General’s Act, 1963.* .

As already stated above,’ the proposed relaxing power of the Court would
be particularly useful where a bank is appointed an executor.

‘The following is a suggested draft.
Revised section 309.

3

“309. (1) Whether or not the will provides for the payment of remunera-
tion, if the will does not prohibit such payment, an executor or adminis-
trator shalt be entitled to receive or retdin reasonable commission or agency
charges.

(2) Unless the will otherwise provides or the court otherwise permits, such
commission or charges shall not be at a higher rate than that for the time
being fixed in respect of the Administrator General hy the Administrator
General’s Act, 1963."

40.32. Section 310 provides that if any executor or administrator purchases, section 310~
either directly or indirectly, and part of the property of the deceased, the will is Recommesdation.
voidable at the instance of any other person interested in the property sold,

This section is based on the rule that a legal representative shall not derive any
pecuniary benefit from his office.’ With reference to this section, it is desirabld
to introduce an exception for the case where the purchase is done with the sanc-
tion of the court. At present, the section does not admit of any such exception,

'Now see section 45, the Administrator-General’s Act. 1963.
*Gamnbell, in the estate of (1934) AN E.R. 448.

3Para 40.28, supra.

‘*Paras 40.28 and 40.29. supra.

3Para 40.30, supra.

“Paruck. Indian Succession Act (1977), Page 733.


Recommendation

Section3 12,

Section 317,

Section 314.

234

but the reasonablencs of such an exception is obvious, We recommend that the
section should be so amended. _

40.33. Section 311 provides that where there are several executors or
administrators, the poweis of ull may, in the absence of any direction to the
contrary, be exercised by any one of them who has proved the will or taken out
administration.

There are six illustrations to the section, The gist of the first five may be
represented by stating that one of several executors has power to realise a
debt due to the deceased, surrender a 1085९, sell the Property of the deceased
(whether movable or immovable), assent to a legacy and endorse a promis-
Sory note payable to the deceased. But the powers of one of them may be
restricted if the testator so directs—a situation illustrated in illustration (vi).'

In th illustration, the will appoints A, 8, C, and D to be executors, and
directs that two of them shall be a quorum. No act can then be done by a
single executor.

40.33. A matter of detail may now be dealt with, The section speaks of
a “direction to the contrary”, but does not specify where the direction is to be
contained. The view expressed by one commentator is that the restriction contem-
plated in the section must be either in the will or in the grant. It appears to
be desirable to codify this position, and we, therefore, recommend that in section
311, after the words “either in the will or in the probate” should be inserted.’

40.34. This takes us to section 312, which lays down that upon the death
of one or more of several executors or administrators, in the absence of any
direction to the contrary in the will or grant of letters of administration, all the
powers of the office become vested in the surviors or survivor,

The section does not appear to necd any change,
40.35. Section 313 provides that the administrator of effects unadminister-

ed has, with respect to such effects. the same powers as the original executor or
administrator,

This: section also needs no change.

40.36, Section 314 provides that an administrator during minority has all
the powers of an ordinary administrator. No changes are needed in the section.

40.37. Section 315 provides that when a grant of probate or letters of

fection 7५०४ administration has been made to a martied woman, she has all the powers of
executrix or admi-an ordinary executor or administrator.

nistratrix.

This section also needs no change.

CHAPTER 41

DUTIES OF AN EXECUTOR OR ADMINISTRATOR
SECTIONS 316 TO 331

॥. Introductory.

41.1. The duties of an executor or administrator are governed by sections
316 to 331, which need no introductory comment.

‘Sanat Kumar v. Hem Chandra, AIR 1961 Cat. 411,418.
sParuck, Indian Sucession Act (1977), page 734.


235

Hi, Funeral Expenses.

41.2. According to section 316, it is the duty of an executor (a provide funds Section 316—provi-
for the performance of the necessary funeral ceremonies of the deceased in a ston a funds for
manner suitable to his condition, if he has left property sufficient for the purpose, "49°"! ceremomres.

The section needs no change.

(Hf, inventory.

41.3, Section 317 reads as under : Section 317—Inven-
5 adminis rs tery and account
“317. (1) An executor or administrator shail within six months from the

grant of probate or letters of administration, or within such further times
as the Court which granted the probate or letters may appoint, exhibit in
that Court an inventory containing a full and true estimate of al] the pro-
perty in possession, and all the credits, and also all the debts owing by any
person to which the executor or administrater is entiticd in that character;
and shall, in like manner, within one year from the grant or within such
further time as the said Court may appoint, exhibit an account of the estate,
showing the assets which have come to his hands and the manner in which
they have been applied or disposed of.

~(2) The Court may prescribe the form in which an inventory or account
under this section is to be exhibited.

“(3) Tf an executor or administrator, on being required by the Court to
exhibit an inventory or account under this section, intentionally omits to
comply with the requisition he shall be deemed to have commitied an offence
under section 176 of the Indian Penal Code.

“(4) The exhibition of an intentionally false story or account under this
section shall be deemed to be an offence under section 193 of that Code.”

41.4. The object of the provision regarding the exhibition of accounts, etc. Object of the sec-
under section 317 seems to be to ensure that the accounts, etc, are available tion.

for inspection by the parties interested in the administration of the estate.’

There is, however, no obligation to maintain accounts.

41.5. The origin of section 317 has been thus described*—~ History of the sec-
ion.

~The Statute 21 Hen. VII ¢.5, provides for the making of inventories by
executors and administrators of all the goods, chattels, wares, merchandise
as well movable as not movable whatsoever that were of the deceased, and
by Stat. 22 and 23 Car. HI, c. 10, section 1, an administrator must have
entered into a bond conditioned amongst other things for his exhibiting
into the registry of the court, at or “before a day specified, a true and
perfect inventory of the goods, chattels, and credits of the deceased that
come to his possession. The bond given under the Court of Probate Act,
1857 (20 and 21 Vict. ०.77), is conditioned to make the inventory when
lawfully called on, and to exhibit the same whenever required by law so to do.’
Sta. 22 and 23 Car. वी ०.10, required executors or administrators to exhibit
inventories. as part of their duty, without any proceedins to call upon them
to do so.”

According to the practice of the Prerogative Court, an executor was bound
to file an inventory befose grant of probate.-

41.6, The provisions of section 317 are mandatory so that a provision in Section mandatory.
the will that the executor shall not he bound to render accounts is of no avail’
See Chheda Lal v. Dulari, A.1.R. 1930 Oudh. 425, 426 (Srivastava J.).
°R.K. Ashere v. Tempton Jehangir, AIR 1961 Guj. 137. 140.
“Basu, Sucession Act. (1957), page 912).
«Williams on Executors, Ith Eda. page 233.
*Phillips v. Bignell. 1 Phill. 240.
‘Williams on Executors, (1th Eda. page 733.
हे *Peari Lal v. Bepin Behari, AIR 1918 Cal. 107,
85.E/B{D)144MofL3&CA—16


236

Consequences of 41.7. The consequences of non-compliance with section 317 are manifold.
non-compliance. The executor has, under this section, statutory duties to perform, and until he
has done that, he does not divest himself of the character of the executor, Non-
filing of the inventory and accounts under section 317 teads to the following
consequences! :

111 The executor makes himself liable to punishment under section 176.
Indian Penal Code. if the requirement of stth-section (3) of section 317

5 falfillecd:

(2) the executor subjects himself. at the instance of an interested party, to
an administration suit; and

(3) the grant is liable to be revoked i
without reasonable cause omitted to ex!
and

if the executor has wilfully and
it the inventory or account:*.'

(4) it would be a breach of the bond also.’

41.8. A connected provision in the Act is section 291. under which an
administration bond is required to be filed by every person to whom letters of
administration are granied. It may, however. be noted that the Administrator-
General is exempt from this requirement."

Provisions in 41.9, The relevant provisions in the Administrator-General’s Act, £963’ may
Administrator. now be considered, Under section 5 of that Act, the Administrator-General is 2
General's Act corporation sole, having perpetual succession. Under section 6, the High Court
is deemed to be the Court of competent jurisdiction as regards the grant of
probate or letters of administration to the Administrator-General under any law
for the time being in force. Under section 26, no administration bond or other
security is required from the Administrator-General. Under section 43, the
accounts of the Administrator-Gencral shall be audited by the prescribed person
and in the prescribed manne:

Under section 49, interested persons are entitled to inspect the accounts of
the Administrator-General, Section 53 provides that nothing contained in the
Indian Succession Act. 1925. affects the rights, duties and privileges of any
administrator-General, Under section 62, the State Government may make
rules for carrying into effect the Purpose of the Act and for regulating the
proceedings of the Administrator-General,

. 41.10. The corresponding provision in England (relevant portion of section
vistontn acta 25, Administration of Estates Act. is quoted below)—

“25. The personal representative of a deceased person shall, when lawfully
required so to do, exhibit on oath in the court, a true and perfect inventory
and account of the real and Personal estate of the deceased, and the court
shall have power as heretofore to require personal representative to bring
in inventories.”

Pactice in E | 41.11, In actual practice, however, in England. the executor does pot
regarding Ant exhibit an inventory unless an application is made to the Registrar on summons
inventories. for that purpose by some party interested?

41.12. Having regard to the form of affidavit for InInad Revenue, an applica-
tion for an order to exhibit an inventory is very seldom made.” in England, In

‘Gulati ५. Reeves--Brown AAR. 1939 Lah. 463, 464.

*Santiram Das v. Prosad Das, AAR. 1982 Cal. 358.

"Section 263, Explanation, clastic (९).

‘As to section 263, see Anil Behari v. Latika, (1955) S.C.R. 1026.
*See Lachman Das ४. Chater. (1888) 1.L.R. 10 All. 29, 34.
“Section 24. Administrator-General’s Act, 1963.

"The Administrator-General’s Act. 1963 (45 of 1963).

‘Section 25. Administration of Estates Act 1925 15 Geo. 5 ९. 23),
‘Williams on Executors (1960), Vol. 1. page 442.

**See Williams on Executors (1969), Vol. 1, page 442.



237

Jenkins,’ an account was ordered to be delivered by the ex-administrator on
the application of the executor under a will which was afterwards disclosed.

The English practice on the subject has been thus stated + —

“In practice, the representative never exhibits the inventory unless he is
called upon to do so.” The place of inventory is taken by the accounts
rendered by the personal representative to the Inland Revenue authorities
for the purpose of assessing the Death Duties.”

41.13. lt may be stated that in England, the ofticer corresponding 10 the Position in England
Administrator-General is the Public Trustee, governed by the Public Trustee regarding pubhe
Act, 1926. For our purpose, it is sufficient to refer co the relevant portion of TS
section 11 of the Act quoted below’ :--

“Lt. (4) Where, any bond or security would be required from ॥ private
person upon the grant to him of administration, or upon his appointment
to act in any capacity, the public trustee, if administration is granted to him
or if he is appointed to act in such capacity as aforesaid, shall not be
required to give such bond or security, but shall be subject to the same
liabilities and duties as if he had given such bond or securi

41.14. Although there is considerable case law on the section, yet it is Case Law.
unnecessary to discuss it in detail’ for the present purpose.

41.15, However, we must deal with a suggestion made by a State Govern- State Government
ment’ for the amendment of the law. The suggestion is to amend section 317(1) (0 amend $, 317,
so as to provide that when letters of administration are granted to the Administra-
tor-General, it shall not be necessary for him to file® the inventory and accounts
tequired 10 be filed by that section.

41,16. In our view, the suggested amendment has considerable merit, there Merits of suggested

being good reasons for exempting the Administrator-General from the operation amendment.

of section 317. In the first place, he is already exempt from the major obligation

to execute an administration bond,’ and it is lo; that he should be xempted

from section 317 also, In the second place, his accounts are audited regularly*

by the competent officers.’ Hence, no Further security is required. In the third

place, his position, being statutory, is quite different from that of a purely

non-official executor, It would, therefore, be proper to cxempt him from the duty

to file an inventory of his own accord; though the power of the court to require

him to do so may be preserved.

41.17. For the reasons given above, we recommend that section 317 of the Recommendation,
Indian Succession Act, 1925. should be amended by adding the following Excep- सिर 004 Section
tion to the section : .

“Exception—Where the Administrator-General is the executor or adminis«
war, he shall not be bound to exhibit an inventory or an account of the
estate under this sub-section, unless the court has directed him to do s0,
in which case he shall exhibit the inventory or the account, as the case may
he, within such period as the Court may aliow: but copies of the accounts
maintained by him shail be filed in court.

41.18. This takes us to section 318, which provides that where a grant has Section 318— Inven-
tory in case of grant

been made of probate or Jetters of administration intended to have effect through- valid “throughout
out India, the inventory must include all property in India along with a state- India.

'In the goods of Jenkins, (1897) 76 L.T. 164: 23 Diglot 250, Case No. 3081}.
2Myddleton v. Ruhout, 1797). | Phillim 244: Philips v. Bignell, (1811), 1 Philtim, at page
240.

Section 11, Public [15०८ Act. 1906 (6 Edw. 7, ९.5).

“Some of the cases are collected in Santiram Das v. Prashad Das. A.J.R. 1952 Cal. 358.

Law Commission File No. 3 (2) 58-L.C. S. No. 93.

As to the practice in Bombay, see Bai Panbai Morarji, A.L.R. 1927 Bom. 438, 349 (Mirza 2).
*Section 26, Administrator-General’s Act, 1963.

*Section 43, Administrator-General’s Act, 1963.


238

ment of its value in vach state separately, and the probate fee shail be payable
accordingly, 1.९, on the entire amount of value in India.

The section needs no change.

Section 319, 41.19. Section 319 provides that the executor or administrator shall collect.
with all reasonable diligence, the property of the deceased and the debts that
were due to him at the time of his death.

The section does not require any change.

Section 320—prio- 41.20, Section 320 deals with the payment of funeral expenses and death

ity for cerrain ex- bed charges, including fees for medical attendants, and fees for boarding and

penses. lodging for one month previous to the death of the deceased, These must be
paid before all other debts.

We have no comments on this section

Section 321. 41.21, Section 321 deals with the next category of expenses in the order
of priority. We are concerned this time with the expenses of obtaining probate
or letters of administration, including the cost of judicial proceedings necessary
for administering the estate. These must be paid next, after the funeral expenses
and death bed charges referred to in section 320,

The section does not require any change.
Section 322. 41.22. Section 322 provides that wages due for services rendered to the
deceased within three months next preceding his death by any labourer, artisan

or domestic servant shall next be paid, and then the other debts of the deceased
according to their respective priorities (if any).

The section needs no change, not having created any problems.
Section 323, 41,23. This takes us 10 section 323, quoted below :

“323, Save us aforesaid, no creditor shall have a right of priority over
another; but the executor or administrator shall pay all such debts as he
knows of, including his own, equally and rateably as far as the assets of the
deceased will extend.”

This section also needs no change.

Section 324, 41.24, Section 324 reads as under :—

“324. (1) If the domicile of the deceased was not in India, the application
of his moveable property to the payment of his debts is to be regulated by
law of India.

(2) No creditor who has received payment of a part of his debt by virtue
of sub-section (1) shall be entitled to share in the proceeds of the immov-
able estate of the deceased unless he brings such payment into account for
the benefit of the other creditors.

(3) ‘this section shall not apply where the deceased was a Hindu, Muham:
medan. Budhist. Sikh or Jain or an exempted person,”

The illustration is as follows :—

ILLUSTRATION

“A dics, having his domicile in a country where instruments under seal have
priority over instruments not under seal, leaving movable property to the.
value of 5,000 rupees, and immovable property to the value of 10,000
repees, debts on instruments under seal to the amount of 10,000 mp ees,
and debts on instruments not under seal to the same amount, The creditors
holding instruments under seal receive half of their debts out of the preceeds
of the moveable estate, The proceeds of the immoveable estate are to be
applied in payment of the debts on instruments not under seal until one-half
of such debts has been discharged. This will leave 5.000 rupees which are
to be distributed rateably amongst all the creditors without distinction, in
Proportion to the amount which may retain due to them.”



239

41.25. The ouly part of the section that requires comnwni in sub-section (2). Criminazion of sub.
whose utility seems rather difficult to appreciate. The sub-section assumes that hy section (
virtue’ of subesection (1), the creditor has received some kind of special rights,

This assumption is not, however, correct when one has yegurd (0 present sub-
section (1), The situation seems to dave arisen by reason of certain accidents
of drafting. This point will be best understood if the history of the section is
examined. Sub-section (1) of section 324 corresponds to section 283 of the |
Act of 1865 (10 of 1865), Sub-section (2) corresponds to section 284 of thai
Act, Before 1889, section 283 Jie, the predecessor of present sub-section (1)
was different from the present rule. 11 substance, it applied the law of the
country of domicile. At that time, therefore, the provision contained in section
284 (which was the predecessor of sub-section (23) made sense. In 1889 (hy
Act 6 af 1889), section 283 was amended so as to read Cin substance) as
section 324 (1) now reads,

In section 283 of the Succession Act (10 of 1865). (as originally enacted).
the words “the country in which he was domiciled” were used, Subsequently.
by Aci 6 of 1889, the words “British India” were substituted for the words
“the counwy in which he was domiciled” and the illustration originally attached
fo section 283 was repealed. This was really a change of substance. and not a
mere verbal amendment.

Al the time of the amendment of 1889! however, seetion 284 was
(apparently by slip) not amended. The unamended section was carried forward
in present section 324 (2).

44.26. I may be mentioned that section 283. (as origittally enacted in Original rule of

1865) followed the English law as regards the priority of debts, as i¢ then English law.
obtained in England,’ The vexed question was, what rule was 10 govern in the
administration of assets—the law of the domicile or the law of the situs ? Sir J
Romilly, in Wilson V. Lady Dunsay,' held that the personal estate of the testator
must be administered on the principle of the law of his domicile. In Cooke Vv.
Gregson,® it was decided that an Trish judgment—creditor of a testator domiciled
én Irclond was entitled in England to priority, according 10 Irish law, in respect
of assets which had been brought from Ireland to Enland*. But the observations
of Kindersley V.C., in that case. although not necessary, appeared to put the
question as though it were rather dependent on the situs of the ussetvethan on
the domicile of the deceased.

31.27. Section 283, ay it found place in the Indian Succession Act, followed Subsequem — deve-
the English law as shen widerstood. Subsequently, in 1885, in England, it was topments in Eng-
laid’ down’ that if a man domiciled in England dies possessing assets in France, lish law.
the French ts must be collected in France und distributed according to
the law of France, but that, in the administration of assets in ngland, a creditor
(of whatever nationality) is entitled to be paid equally with English creditors
in the same class, ॥ 1889, the Indian legislature by Act 6 of the 1889 {following
the English Jaw as laid down in 1885) amended section 283, by replacing the
words ‘ihe country in which he was domiciled’ by the words ‘British Indic’.

It is now well established that administration’-" is not governed by the law
which governs succession (last domicile) —but by the law the country where
adminisivation tukes place.

11.26. The following illustration appended to the original section 283 corves-
ponding (o present sub-section (1) was also repealed in 1889 :

'Note the words “by virtue of”

"For details. see para 41 , 29, infra

अर, Basu, Succession Act (1957), page 930.
‘Wilson v. Lads Dunsay, (1854) 18 Beav. 29:
Cook ९. Ge . 286
sFoot's Private Intecnational Jarisprudence, page 213,

Re Kloebe, Kanureuther \. Geisetbrecht, 1895) 28 Ch. B. 175
*Halsbury. duh Ed. Vol. 17, pages 582-583, para 1128

*Wolff, Private International law (1950) p. 605.

“CF. Morvis in (1950) Vol. 3 1.C,L.Q. 243.

3 1... Ch 492.



240

"A dies, having lus domicile in w country where insteumenis ander seul
have priority over instruments not under seal,’ leaving moveable property
to the value of 10,000 rupees, immoveable property to the valuc of 5,000
tupees, debts on instruments under seal to the amount of 10,000 rupees, and
debts on instruments not under seal to the same amount. The debts on the
instruments under seal are to be paid in full out of the moveable estate, and
the proceeds of the immoveable estate are to be applied, as far as they will
extend, towards the discharge of the debts not under seal. Accordingly, one
half of the amount of the debts not under seal is to be paid out of the pro-
ceeds of the immoveable estate.”

Anomaly how aris- 41,28, But, as stated already,’ unfortunately section 284 Jie, present section

ing. 324] was retained without any amendment at the time when sub-section (1)
was amended in 1889. The words “no creditor who has received payment of a
part of his debt by virtue of the last preceding section, etc.” were retained, even
though they were no longer appropriate after the amendment of sub-section (1).
This is how the present anomaly has arisen,

Need for amend- 41,29, It is necessary that this anomaly should be rectiited. Sub-scction (2)
ment in regard tohas now become nol only redundant, but also confusing
section 324,

dation

d. section 41.30. For these reasons, we recommend that seciion 324 (2), and the
nen ‘ illustration to the section, should be deleted.

I the provisions of the Act relating to domicile are exicnded to Hindus ete.
as recommended by us separately* sub-section (3) of section 324 will also have
to be deleted.

Section 325—debts 41.31. This disposes of section 324, Section 325 provides that debts of every
10 be paid before description must be paid before any legacy. Ic seems to be based on the principle
legacies. that a man must be just before he is generous.

It needs no change.
३. Legacies.

Section 326—+on- 41.32.

» पिया According tv section 326, if the estate of the deceased is subject to
tingent liabilities,

any contingent Habifities, an executor or administration is not bound to pay any
legacy without a sufficient indemnity to meet the liabilities whenever they may
become due,

The section needs no change.

Section 327-- 41.33, Section 327 provides that if the assets, after payment of debts,
Ae of genz- necessary expenses and specific legacies, are not sufficient to pay all the general

legacies in full, the latter shall abate or be diminished in equal proportions, and.
in the absence of any direction to the contrary in the will, the cxecutor has no
right to pay one legatee in preference to another, or to retain any money on
account of a legacy to himself or to any person for whom he is i: trustee .

‘The section needs no change.

Section 328--No 41.34, Section 328 provides that where there is specifi: Jegacy, and the
abatement of speci- assets are sufficient for the payment of debts and necessary expenses, the thing
60 legacies. specified must be delivered to the legatee without any abatement.

This section also needs no change.

Section 329—Prefe- 41.35. Section 329 provides as under :—
लक है “329, Where there is a demonstrative legacy and the assets are suificient
tive legacy. for the payment of debts and necessary experises. the !egatee has a preferen-

tial claim for payment of his legacy out of the fund from which the legacy
is directed to be paid until such fund is exhausted and if. after the fund
is exhausted, part of the legacy still remains unpaid, he is entitled to rank

"Emphasis is added.
2Para 41.26, supra.
*See recunmendation as to section 5-20, supra,


241

for the remainder against the geaeral assets as for legacy of the amount of
sach unpaid remainders.
having created no problems.

The section needs no chi

41,36, Section 330 provides that if Uhe assels are not su
the debts and the specific legacies. an abatement shal! be पाएँ
rateably in proportion t their respective amounts, The iflestration
under :--

cient 10 uMsWwel Section 330, illus-
from the Jaiter Wation io be revi-

In pa Sed

ILLUSTRATION

"A has bequeathed to B a diamond ring valued at 300 rupees, und to ६ #
horse. valued at 1.000 rupees. ॥ is found necessary to sell atl the effects
of the testator; and his assets. after payment of debts, ate only 1.000 rupees.
Of ihis sum rupees 333-5-4 are 10 be paid to B. and rupees 666-10-8 to C.~

The illustration wo the section should be revised, so us (0. express Ute
amounts in decimal coinage. We recommend accordingly.

41.37. Section 331 provides that for the purpose datcMient. U iegucy Section 331 A
for कट, a sum appropriate by the will 10 produce an ann and the value ot legacy for life.
an annuity when ne sum has been appropriated to produce it. shall be treated
as general legacies.

{

The section needs no change.

CHAPTER 42
T TO A LEGACY BY EXECUTOR OR ADMINISTRATOR
(SECTIONS 332 to 337)

42.1, Sections 332 10 337 lay down the law relating to asseit to a legacy of Scheme of the sec-
an executor or administrator. tions.

The yeneral principle is thai assent of the executor or administrator is
necessary to complete the title of a legatee to his legacy: section 332. This. in
fact, could be derived from the broader priuciple that it is the executor or
administrator who represents the deceased’ and in whom ‘the title vesis untit
steps are taken to “divest his interest.“ Once the assent is piven, it takes effect
from the death of the testator; section 336. Payment or delivery of the legacy.
however, by the executor is not obligatory. until one year expires after death :
sections 337 and 338.

The rest of the sections regulate certain matters of 0
10 a consideration of each section in detail.

9. We now procecd

42.2, Section 332 reads :-— Seetion 332.
2. Fhe assent of the executor or administrator is necessary to complete
egaice’s title to his legacy.

ILLUSTRATION
(i) A by his will bequeaths to B bis Government puper which is in deposit
with the Imperial Bank of India? The Bank has no authority to deliver the
securities, nor B a right to take possession of them, without the assent of
the executor.
Gi) A by his will bas bequeathed to C his house in Calcutta in the teaaney
of B. C is not entitled to receive the rents without the assent of the execu-
tor or administrator.” .

"See sections 305-315. and discussion refating thereto.
=Compare section 333 (1), and section 211.
“Hlustration (2) may be revised to substitute “State Bank of India” in place of the words
“Imperial Bank of India”. .



Want of assent -
Recommendation.

Section 333—
Assent to a specitic
bequest.

242

The precise purport of this section remains obscure, until one turns to the
remaining sections—particularly, section 336. Section 336 provides that an assent
to the title relates back to the date of death.

Thus. it is not a case of “no tide until assent”. but “inchoate tide until
assent”.

42.3. It has been held by Bombay High Court’ that evea where it was
expressly directed in the will that the legatee may take possession of his legacy
without the assent of the executor, yet. if he does rake possession, the executor may
miintain an action for trespass.

The Calcutta High Court has held! that the legatee hus a vested right to
the legacy even though the assent of executor is not given, with the result that
any alienation by the legatee before assent by the executor is not void, but
merely inchoate until assent is given. It was explained that the section is meant to
protect the executor. so that he may have money available for the payment of
debts.

These rulings show that there is some obscurity us to the vesting of title,
pending assent.

1. uppears to us that such an important matter as the ve: ing of title should
not be left in doubt. The position should be improved by tble clarification,
to the effect that nothing in this section shall be deemed to invalidate a transfer
of the property (which is the subject-matter of the Jegacy) by the legatee before
assent by the executor or administrator, but every such transfer shall be regarded
as conditional on the assent of the executor or the administrator, as the case
may be. We recommend that section 332 should be amended by inserting an
Explanation on the above lines.

2

42.4, Section 333 reads—

“333 (1). The assent of the executor or administrator to 4 specific bequest
shall be sufficient to divest his interest as executor or administrator therein,
und to transfer the subject of the bequest of the legatee, unless the nature
or the circumstances of the property require that it shall be transferred in
a particular way

(2) This assent may be verbal, and it may be either express or implied
from the conduct of the executor or administrator.

ILLUSTRATIONS

(i) A horse is bequeathed. The executor requests the legatee to dispose of
it, or a third party proposes to purchase the horse from the executor, and
he directs him to apply to the legatee. Assent to the legacy is implied.

(ii) The interest of a fund is directed by the will to be applied for the
maintenance of the legatee during his minority, The executor commences
so to apply it. This is an assent to the whole of the bequest

Git} A bequest is made of a fund to A and after him to B. The executor
pays the interest of the fund to A. This is an implied assent to the bequest
to B.

(1४) Executors die after paying all the debts of the testator, but before
satisfaction of specitic legacies. Assent to the legacies may be presumed.

(v) A person to whom a specific article has been bequeathed takes pcsses-
sion of it and retains it without any objection on the part of the executor,
His assent may be presumed.”

The section has created no problems and needs no change.

'Hasnali 5. Popattal, (1912) 14 Bom. LR. 73. L.R. 37 Bom. 211.
हि V. Khatranath. (1927) 11.R. 50, Cai. 171, 175 to 177 {Mookerjee and Cuming
»



243

42.5. Section 334 reads— Section 334,

“334, The assent of an executor or administrator to a iegacy may be condi-
tional, and if the condition is one which he has a right to enforce, and it
is not performed. there is no assent,

ILLUSTRATIONS

(i) A bequeaths to B his lands of Sultanpur, which at the date of the will,
and at the death of A. were subject to a mortgage for 10,000 rupees. The
executor assents to the bequest. on condition that B shall within a limited
time pay the amount due on the mortgage af the testator’s death, The amount
is not paid. There is no assent.

Gi) The executor assents to a bequest on condition thai the legatee shatl
pay him a sum of money. The payment is not made. The assent is neverthe-
Jess valid”.

‘The section needs no change.

42.6. Section 335 reads ;— Section 335--

. Assent of executor
“335. (1) When the executor or administrator is a legatce. his assent to © his owe legacy.
his own legacy is necessary (0 complete his title to it, in the same way as
it is required when the bequest is to another person, and his assent may.
in like manner. be expressed or implied.

42) Assent shall be implied if in his manner of administering the property
he does any act which is referable to his character of legatee and is not
referable to his character of executor or administrator.

ILLUSTRATION

“An executor takes the rent of a house or the interest of Government
securities bequeathed to him. and applies it to his own use. This is assent.”

186 sectivn needs no change.

42.7, Section 336 runs as follows :— Section 336--
Effect of executor’s

“336. The assent of the executor or administrator to a legacy gives effect sent:

to it from the death of the testator.

ILLUSTRATION

(i) A legatee sells his legacy before it is assented to by the executor. The
executor’s subsequent assent operates for the benefit of the purchaser and
completes his title to the legacy.

(ii) A bequeaths 1,000 rupees to B with interest from his death, The
executor does not assent to his legacy until the expiration of a year from
A’s death. B is entitled to interest from the death of A’

This section also needs no change.

42.8. Section 337 reads as under :—- Section 337--
Executor when to

“337. An executor or adminis‘rator is not hound to pay or deliver any “liver legacies.
legacy until the expiration of one year from the testator’s death.

ILLUSTRATION
A by his will directs his legacies to be paid within six months after his
death. The executor is not bound to pay them before the expiration of a
year.”

This section also needs no change.-


244

CHAPTER 43

PAYMENT AND APPORTIONMENT OF ANNUITIES
{SECTIONS 338 TO 340)

43.1. Payment and apportionment of annuities is dealt with in sections 338
to 340, The provisions deal with matters of detail, and need no introductory
comments.

Scope.

Section 338--Com- 43.2. Section 338 reads

mencement of an- . . . . for i
nuity when no time ~338. Where था annuity is given by a will and no time is fixed for its com-

lixed by will. mencement, it shall commnence front the testator’s death, vend the first payment
shall be made at the expiration of a year next after thai event.”

The section needs no cha

Section 339--Lom- 43.3. Section 339 reads :—-

mencement of pe-
riodical annuity. 9, Where there is a direction that the annuity shali be paid quarterly or
monthly, the first payment shall be due at the end of he first quarter, or
first month, as the case may be, after the testator’s death: and shall, if the
executor or administrator thinks fit, be paid when due, but the executor or

administrator shall not be bound to pay it till the end of the year.”

The section needs no change.

3.4, Section 340 reads :---

Section 340-—— +

Dates of successive oe हि . .

payments when first “340 (1). Where there iy a direction that first payment of an annuity shall

payment directed te be made within ong month or any other ion of time from the death of
रा time oF on a the testator, or on a day certain, the successive payments are (0 be made
y certain; death on the auniversary of the earliest day on which the will authorised the first

of annuitant before payment to be made

date of payment. - . ४५ ५ पि पि
(2) Uf the annuitant dies in the interval between the times of payment, an

vpportioned share of the annuity shall he paid to his representative.”
‘The section needs no change.

CHAPTER 44
'T OF FUNDS TO PROVIDE FOR ‘LE
{SECTIONS 341 TO 348)

INVESTM! CIES

Scope. 44.1. Investnent of funds 10 provide for legacies is regulaicd by sections
341 to 348. The sections deal with investment of varioys classes of legacies.
management of unnuitics and contingent bequests and bequests of residue for
life, time und manner of conversion and investment. and certain special situations
such as that of a minor entitled to immediate payment or possession of bequest
with no direction to pay any person on his behalf.

Section 341. 44.2, Section 341 reads -—

‘cn for fife, the sum
3 such securities as

“341. Where u legacy. not bei
bequeathed shall at the end of the year be invested
the High Court may by any general rule authorise or dire
thereof shall be paid to the legatee as the same shail acc

The section needs no change.
Section 342—-In- 44.3. Scetion 342 reads :—

दि of general ~342 (1) Where a general legacy is given to be paid at a future time, the
at future time. executor or administrator shall invest a sum sufficient 16 meet it in securities
of the kind mentioned in section 341.



245

2) The intermediate interest shall form part of the sesidue of te testator’s
estate”.

‘The section needs no change.

44,4, Section 343 reads as follows :-- Section 343--Proce-
५10 1७ का, 5 . as dure when no fund

“343. Where an amnuity is given and no fund is charged with its payment charged with, or

or appropriated by the will to answer it, a government annuity of the appropriated — to,

specified amount shall be purchased, or. if no such annuity can be obtained, nA.

then a ‘sum sufficient to produce the annuity shall be invested for that

purpose in sceurities of the kind mentioned in section 341.”

The section needs no change.

44.5. Section 344 reads — Section 334~

हर . हि कि | Transfer ‘0 resi
“34d. Where a bequest is contingent, the executor or administrator is not duary legatee of
bound to invest the amount of the legacy, but may transfer the whole residue contingent bequest.
of the estate to the residuary legatce, if any, on his giving sufficient security
for the payment of the legacy if it shall become due.

The section needs no chang

44.6. This takes us to section 345. It reads :— Section 345-

है हे . Investment of resi-
"345. (1) Where the wstator has bequeathed the residue of his estate to a due bequeathed for
person for life without any direction to invest it in avy particular securities, life, without direc-
so much thereof as is not at the time of testator’s decease invested in secu- particular ceca iti in
rities of, the kind mentioned in section 341 shall be converted into money ars es

and invested in such securities.

(2) This section shall not apply if the deceased way a Hindu, Muhameadan,
Buddhist. Sikh or Jaina or an exempted person.”

The section necds no change,
44.7. Section 346 reads :-- Section 346,

“346, Where the testator has bequeathed the residue of his estate to a
person for life with a direction that it shal! be invested in certain specified
securities, so much of the estate as is not at the time of his death invested
it securities of the specified kind shall be converted into money and invested
in such securities”

The section needs no change.

44.8. Section 347 provides that such conversion and jivestment as are con- Section 347. -Time
templated by sections 345 and 346 shall be made at such times and in such and manner of con-
manner as the executor or administrator thinks fit: and uni) such conversion went ns YES
and investment are completed, “the person who would be for the time being
entitled to the income of the fund when so invested shall receive at the rate of
4 per cent, per annum upon the markct-value (to be computed as at the date
of the testator’s death) on cach part of the fund as has not been so invested.”

44.9. Section 348 reads :— Section 348--Proce-
“348. (1) Where. by the terms of a bequest. the legates is entitled to the lure where ध्वज
immediate payment or possession of the money or thing bequeathed, but mediate payment or
is a minor, and there is no direction in the will to pay it 10 any person on pect and oh be-
his behalf, the executor or adininistrator shail pay or deliver the same 1000 fon to pay to vere
the Court of the District Judge. by whom or by whose District Delegate the son on his’ behalf.
probate was, or letters of adminisration with the will annexed were,

granted, to the account of the fegatee. unless the legatee is a yard of the

Court of Wards.

(2) If the legatee is a ward of the Court of Wards, the legacy shall be paid
to the Court of Wards to his account.

(3) Such payment into the Court of the District Judge. or to the Court of
Wards, as the case may be. shall he a sufficient discharge for the money so
paid.



Section 349—Lega-
tee’s title to produce
of specific legacy.

246

(4) Money when paid in under this section shall be invested in the purchase
of Government securities, which, with the interest thereon, shall be transferred
or paid to the person entitled thercto or other applied for his benefit.
as the Judge or the Court of Wards, as the case may be. may direct.”

The section needs no change.

CHAPTER 45
PRODUCE AND INTEREST OF LEGACH:
(SECTIONS 349 TO 355)

हि 45.1. Sections 349 to 355 coniain provisions relating to the produce and
interest of legacies,

‘Fhe provisions in sections 349 to 355. though apparently dealing with
matters of detail, are based on certain broad principles. namely. that :-~

(i) ‘the legatee’s tide (subject to the provisions as to assent of the executor
or administrator) is effective from the date of the testator’s death, so
that the “clear produce” of the legacy belongs to him from the date
of such death; sections 349-350.

(ii) the right to demand payment of the legacy, however, does not ordinarily
arise unless one year has expired since such death--a principle that
explains the provisions (section 351, main paragraph and section 354)
as to commencement of interest:

(iii) in certain exceptional cases, however, interest may start running
before the expiry of one year : Section 349, exception, section 352 and
section 355. These exceptional cases are based on the existence of
circumstances from which a contrary intention could be reasonably
inferred

The rate of interest is dealt with in section 353.

45.2. Section 349 reads as under :—~

"349, The legatee of ॥ specitic legacy is entitled to the clear produce thereof.
if any. from the testator’s death.

Exception A specific bequest, contingent in ils terms, does nut comprise
the produce of the legucy between the death of the testator and the vesting
of the legacy. The clear produce of it forms part of the residue of the
testator’s estate.

ILLUSTRATION

(i) A bequeaths his flock of shecp to 8. Between the death of A and
delivery by his executor the sheep are shorn or some of the cwes produce
lambs. The wool and lambs are the property of 8.

(ii} A bqueaths his Government securities to B, but postpones delivery of
them till the death of C. The interest which falls due between the death of
A and the death of C belongs to B. und must, unless he is minor, be paid
to bim as it is received,

Gii) The testator bequeaths all his four per cent, Government promissory
notes 10 A when he shall complete the age of 18. A. if he completes that
age, is entitled to receive the notes, but the interest which accrues in respect
of them between the testator’s death and A’s completing 18. forms part of
the residue”.

Thc section needs no change. .


247

Section 350 provides that the legate ander a geocral residuary hequest Section 350—R

is entitled 10 the produce of the residuary fund. from the testaior’s death. The duary Legatee's title
exception t the section lays down that a general resjduary bequest, contingent {f Produce oF resi-
in its terms. does not comprise the income which may accrue upon the fund हर

bequeathed between the death of the testator and the vesting of the legacy. Such

income goes as undisposed of.

Phe

(1) The testator bequeaths the residue of bis property to A a minor, 10 be
paid to him when he shall complete the age of 18. The income from the
testator’s death belongs to A.

Rustrations are as under :—

Gi) The testator bequeaths the residue of his property 1 A when he shall
complete the age of 18. A, if he completes that uge, is entitled to receive
the residuc, The income which has accrued in respect of it since the testa-
lors death goes as undisposed of.”

This section also needs no change.

45.4. While the last (छत sections were concerned with the — produce Of Section 351—4ate-
property, the next four deal with interest, Section 351 provides as follows :— rest when no time

7 - | fixed for payment

“351. Where no time has been fixed for the paysnent of 2 general legacy, of general legacy,

interest begins to run from expiration of one year from the testator’s death,
Exception—(1) Where the legacy is bequeathed in satisfaction of a debt,
imerest runs from the death of the testator.
(2) Where the testator was a parent or a more remote ancestor of the
legatec, or has put himsclf in the place of a parent of the legatee, the
legacy shall bear interest from the death of the testator.
(3) Where a sum is bequeathed to a minor with a direction to pay for hi:
maintenance out of it, imterest is payable from the wJeath of the testator.

45.5, The second exception to section 351 requires some commenis, Accord- Section 351
ing (० the practice of the Chancery Division in England,’ a minor who is entitled Scion Exception-
under the will of his parent, etc. to a legacy contingently on his attaining his origin,
majority is entitled, during minority, to maintenance out of the income of the
legacy. This is the basis of the second exception to section 351.

45.6. Unlike the third exception to section 351. the second exception to geetion 351-..
section 351 is not confined to minors. In this respect, the English Law is different, second exception-
the corresponding exception being confined to minors.’ It is also to be noted scope.
that the second exception to section 351, unlike section 352, does not exclude
cases where :—

the will contains

“a specific sum is given by the will for maintenance or .
a direction to the contrary.”

Some of the commentators have stated that the second exception is taken from
an English case.* but that case was one of a minor,

45.7. The solicitude shown by the law for the case’ dealt with in the Position of spouse—
second exception to section 351 should, we think, be extended also to the Recommendations.
spouse of the testator. At present, the legacy to spouse does not carry interest
until a year from the death. where no time is fixed for payment This js also the
English flaw. But justice requires that the Jaw should be changed,

We recommend accordingly.

45.8. Section 352 reads :-- Section 352—Inte-
352, Where a time has been fixed for the payment of a general legacy, (05 when time fixed.
interest begins to run from time so fixed. The interest up to such time

forms part of the residue of the testator's estate.

'Halsbury, 4th Ed. Vol. 17, page 641. para 1253.

*Stent x. Robinson, 12 Ves. 461

‘Wilson s. Madison. (W843) 2 ५ & © Chancery cases 372.

“Cf the facts in Rajaai Kant ६. Kika, 34 Bombay Law Reporter 1124, AIR. 1932 Bombay
506.

*Halsbury, 4th Ed. Vol. 17, page 641, para 1256.


248

Exception’—Where the testator was a parent or a more remote ancestor
of the legatee, or has put himself in the place of a parent of the legatee
and the legatee is a minor, the legacy shall bear interest from the death
of the testator, unless a specific sum is given by the will for maintenance.
ot unless the will contains a direction to the comwary.”

The section needs no change.

Section 353—Rate 458.9. Section 353 reads as under :—
of Interest.

“353. The rate of interest shal] be four per cent per annum ia all cases except
when the testator was Hindu, Muhammadan, Budhist, Sikh or Jain or an
exempted person, in which case it shall be six per cent per annum.”

Recommendation 45.10. The rates of interest laid down at present—four per cent and six

to revise section 353. per cent respectively—need to he revised in the light of present day conditions.
The rate now should be uniform and at least twelve per cent in cvery case.
Power may be given to the court to fix a different rate for special reasons, to
be recorded. We recommend that section 353 should be revised accordingly. The
following is a suggested redraft of section 353

Revised Section 353 :

“353, The rate of interest shall be nvelve per cent per annum in all cases,
except when the court. for special reasons to be recorded, fixes a different rate.”

Section fone 45.11. This takes us to section 354, which provides that no interest is pay-
interest for first able on the arrears of an annuity within the first year from the death of the

year. testator, although a period earlier than the expiration of that year may have been
fixed by the will for making the first payment of the annuity
This section also needs no change.
Recommendation. 45.12. The language of section 354 is htly defective. Although (as

provided in the section) annuities do not carry interest within the first year even
though an earlier time may have been fixed for payment, it is not intended that
no interest shall be paid, for the subsequent years. The position as regards the
period after one year is governed by section 352. This point was settled after
some debate in the Calcutta High Court. and is worth codification, To achieve
this object. we recommend the addition of the following Explanation to section

“Explanaticn—Nothing in this section shall affect interest admissible under
section 352.

Section 355—tnve- 45.13. Section 355 lays down that where a sum of money is directed to
Test sted top Ao} 0० be invested to produce an annuity, interest is payable on it from the death of
हित eeu the testator.

The section needs no change.

CHAPTER 46
REFUND OF LEGACIES (SECTIONS 356 TO 367)

1. Preliminary

Scape. 46.1. Sections 356 to 365 deal with the refund of legacies in case of assets
proving insufficient to pay all the legacies or in certain other cases. Sections
366-307 deal with certain other matters pertaining to the distribution of assets.
Halsbury, 4th Fd. Vol. 17. page 641. para 1255 and Wilson. Maddison, (1843) 2 Y &
€ Ch. Cas 372.
°Shrimati Balini_ Bala V. Administrator General of Bengal. Reported in Times of India
22nd June, 1939, page 14, quoted in Paruck, Succession Act (1977), page 781.



249

dt should be noted that section 307 (transfer of assets to a foreign executor )'
stand ina ckiss by itself and will require detailed discusston, As will appear
irem sections 336 and 357, there is a difference in the position as regards
voluntary payments and other payments,

11. Refund

"2, Section 356 provides that when an executor or administratoy has Section 356—Re
paid a legacy under the order of a Court, he is entitled to call upon the legatee to fund of legacy paid
refund in the event of the assets proving insuflicicnt to pay all the legacies, The orders Court's
section thus conlers power to cull for retund in case of a payment under the हु

order of a court. It needs no change, not having created any problems,

40.3. Section 357, presenting a contrast with section 356, provides that when section 357.
an executer or administrator hay voluntarily paid a legacy, he cannot call upon
२ legaice to refund, in the event of the assets proving insufticicnt to pay all the

legacies,

The section needs no chi

46.4, Section 358 provides Urat when the time prescribed by the will for Section  358—Re-
the performance of a condition has elapsed, without the conditions having been fund when legacy
perlomned. and the ea ¥ oy administrator has thereupon, without fraud, has become due on
distributed the assets, in stich a case, it further time has been

lowed under condition within
section 137 for ihe performance of the condition, and the condition has been further time allowed
pertormed accordingly, the legacy cannot be claimed from the executor or UNder section 137.
administrator, but those to whom he has paid it are liable to refund — the

amount,

The section needs no change, not having created any problems.

46.5. Section 359 lays down that when an executor or administrator has Section 359—when
paid away the asseis in legacies, and he is aiterwards obliged to discharge a debt cach काल come
of which he bad no previous notice. he is entilled to call upon each legatee to Proportion, nein

reiund in proportion.

‘rhis section also needs no comments.

46.6. Section 360 reads as under : Section 360—distri-
ra . + bution of assets.

“300. Where an executor छा administrator has given such notice as the

High Court may, by any general rule, prescribe or, if ao such rule has

been made, as the High Court would give in an administration—suit, for

creditors and others t send in to him their claims against the estate of the

deceased, he shall, at the expiration of the time therein named for sending

un claims, be at liberty to ibute the assets, or any part thereof, in dis-

018४ of such lawful claims as he knows of, and shail not be liable for

the assets so distributed to any person of whose claim he shall not have

had notice at the time of such distribution :

Provided that nothing herein contained shall prejudice the right of any cre-
diior or claimant to follow the assets, or any part thereof, in the hands of
the persons who may have received the same respectively”.

fhe section needs na comment.

46.7, Section 361 provides that a creditor who has not received payment 0° Section 361-—Credi-
his delw may call upon a legatec who has received payment of his legacy to for may cal! upon
refund, whether the assets of the testator's estate were or were not sufficient at 18110 to refund.
the time of his death to pay both debts and legacies : and whether the payment
of the legacy by the executor or administrator was voluntary or not,

The section needs uo change. The contest here is between an unsatisfied
creditor and satisfied legatees. The next two sections deal with a contest hetween
legatecs.

*Para 46.13, ef. seq. infra.


250

Section 362—When 46.8. This kes us to seetion 362, which reads as under :--
tegatee, not satisfied ' ; ;
or compelled to re- - If the assets were sullicient to satisfy all the legacies at the time
fund under seen or ihe testator’s dezth, 3 legaice who has 10 received payment of his legacy,
jot sant fall es or who has been compelled to refund under section 361, cannot oblige one
refund. who has received payment in full to refund, whether the legacy were paid

to him with or without suit, although the assets have subsequently become

deficient by the wasting of the executor.”

‘The section needs a verbat change namely, the last four words should read
“wasting on the part of the executor”.

, 40.9. Section 363 provides that if the assets were not sufficient to Satisly
Section, 363 owhen all the legacies at the time of the testator’s death, a legatee who has not received
must first proceed payment of his legacy must, before he can call on a saiisfied legates 10 refund,
against executor, if first proceed against the executor or administrator if he is solvent, but if the
solvent. executor or administrator is insolvent or not liable to pay, the unsatisfied legatee

can oblige each satisfied legatee to refund in proportion.

The principle underlying the section is that where assets are insufficient to
pay all the legacies, the executor must satisfy the legacies proportionately’, So, if
the legatee has been paid nil. he must have a right of action against the executor,

The section needs no change.

Section 364—Limit 46.10. Section 364 provides that the refunding of one legatee to another
to refunding of one shall not exceed the sum by which the satisfied legacy ought to have been redic-
legatee to another ९0 if the estate had been properly administered.

The illustration to the section reads as under :—

“A has bequeathed 240 rupees to B, 480 rupees to C, and 720 rupees to
D. The assets are only 12,00 rupees and, if properly administered, would
give 200 rupees to B, 400 rupees to C, and 600 rupees to 0. C and D
have been paid their legacies in full, leaving nothing to B. B can oblige
C to refund 80 rupees, and D to refund 120 rupees.”

The section needs no change, not having raised any difficulties,

Section 365--re- 46.11. Section 365 provides that the refunding shall in all cases be without
funding to be with- interest. The section needs no change,
out interest,

I. Distribution

i 46.12. According to section 366, the surplus or residue of the decead’s
—Resi- 1s
Prva ata pave property, after payment of debts and legacies, shall be paid to the residuary

ments to be paid toJegatee when any has been appointed by the will.
residuary legatee. .
This section also needs no change.

1४. Transfer of assets to foreign executor or administrator

Section 367--Per- 46.13. With section 367, we enter an area somewhat different from that to
son not domiciled which the preceding few sections belong. There is a foreign element introduced
leaving assets, which gives the section a theoretical interest of its own, Let us quote the sec-

tion : tk.
“367. Where a person not having his domicile in India has died leaving
assets both in India and in the country in which he had his domicile at the
time of his death, and there has been a grant of probate or letters of
administration in India with respect to the assets there and a grant of ad-
ministration in the country of domicile with respect to the assets in that
country, the executor or administrator, as the case may be, in India, after
having given such notices as are mentioned in section 360 and after having
discharged, at the expiration of the time therein named, such lawful claims
as he knows of, may instead of himself distributing any surplus or residue
of the deceased's property to persons residing out of India who are entitled
thereto, transfer, with the consent of the executor or administrator, as the case

CL $, 368.


251

may be. in the country of doaucile.. the surplus or residue to hia tor distri

bution 10 those persons.”

ubject mater of ihe section is ordinarily dealt with in the texte “Maun” and ‘ancil-
a > tary" udministra-

ary Administration tion

4o.14. The $।
books under “ani

The pusition regarding “main and ancillary” administration has been lucidly

stated by Wolf

“The jurisdiction of the Lugtish court is not cachisive in respect either
of administration or of succession, Administration may take place in more
than one country. In such a cuse the main administration lies in the country
where the deceased hud his last domicile. or, in the cause of renvai from
the domicile to the national lav, in the country of which he was a subject,
The administration in any other country is only ‘ancillary’, Therefore, if
the main udministration is abroad, und there is ancillary administration in
England. the duty of the English adminisivation is only 10 administer the
goods situate here. to collect the debis which are by Laglish law deemed
10 have an English situs, 10 pay the English debts and aft foreign liabilities
of which he has notice, and ultimately to hand any surplus to the main
administrator, unless the Eng court exercises its discretion to the effect
that the payment has to be made direct to be beneticiaries.”

5. Seetion 3 , Need lor change—
46.15. Section 367 is substeniially based on the sme approach and is Reese ane

sound as far as it goes, But its scope shuuld be expanded to cover cases where iq country other

the foreign country is one other than the country of domivily than counts of do-
micile,

scion 367 does not deal with the case where the foreign exccu-
lor or administrator was appointed in a country other than tte country of domicile.
Theoretically, such a situation cun arise if a foreign country has. in ils law regu-
lating the grant of probate or administration. a provision which confers jurisdi
tion-on its courts if some property is situated within its jurisdiciion’, Apparenily,
this situation has been considered to be too rare to deserve a specific provision
in our Act. हल

AL present,

ft may be noted that with reference io section 270 the existence of property
within the jurisdiction is enough. subject, -of course. ta the discretion of the
court under section 2717.

46.16, Tk appears 10 us that such a case should be provided: for by an Need ler amend.
express provision, even though it may net be very frequent. In ihe absence of a
specific provision, the executor or administrator may be ata 055 to decide what
to do with the balance. With the permission of the court, he should have power
to take action under the section in such cases also.

. oy. रे ५ Recommendation
46.17. In the dight of We above disctosion, we recommend पीता section to resise section 367.

367 should be revised as under :—
Revised Section 367,
“367. (1) Where—.

(2) 2 persen not having his domicile in India has died heaving assets
both in India and in the country हा which he had his domicile at the
lime of his death. and

iby there has been ते grant of probate or teers of administration in
India with respect to the assets के Peder पाए 1 Hoof wiministration
in the country of domicile with respect to the assets in that country,

60, para S83

Wolll, Private International Law 11950) pa
Hn re tetélloportos. 41 9281 1 Ch, ARR, 445,
“Compare section 279, fadian Succession Act.

‘tnt the matter of the Will of Rorchand, AAR. 1950 Mar. 2
“The exi ॥५ means in bidia’’.

85-L/B(D} 44 MofLJ&CA, 17

ing word “there”



Seope of section
367—after proposed
‘amendment.

252

the executor or administration, as the case may be, in India, after having
given such notices as are mentioned in section 360 and after having
discharged, at the expiration of the time therein named, such lawful
claims as he knows of, may, instead of himself distributing any surplus
or residue of the deceased's property to persons residing out of India
who are entitled thereto. transfer, with the consent of the exccutor or
administrator, as the case may be, in the country of domicile, the surplus
or residue to him for distribution to those persons.

(2) Where there has been a grant of administration in a country other
than the country of domicile and other than India, the executor, or adminis-
trator may, with the permission of the Court, take the sume action as he
could have taken if there had been a grant in a country of domicile other
than India and the provisions of this section shall, with necessary modifications
apply to the case as they apply if there had been a grant in a country of
domicile other than India.”

46.18. By way of anticipating certain possible objections to the proposed
extension of the scope of section 367, we may state that the provisions of the
section, even after the proposed amendment, would be confined to a person
not domiciled in India. Secondly, the provi in so far as its scope is to be
extended, will apply only subject to the permission of the Court, The Court, in
granting permission, will certainly satisfy itself that the transfer of assets to’ the
foreign executor or administrator under the section would be in the interests
of justice. It is better to keep the matter clastic as above, rather than tie down
the hands of the Indian executor or administrator or fetter the discretions of the

* Court by insisting upon the requirement of reciprocity or other rigid criteria,

Scope of sections
368 and 369.

Liability of execu-
tor or administrator
for devastation.

Liability of execu-
tor or administrator
for neglect to get
any part of property,

CHAPTER 47
LIABILITY OF AN EXECUTOR OR ADMINISTRATOR FOR DEVASTA-
TION : SECTIONS 368 AND 369

47.1, Liability of an executor or administrator for devastation is dealt with
in sections 368 and 369, which needs no introductory comments.

47.2. Section 368 reads :

~368. When an executor or administrator misapplies the estate of — the
deceased, or subjects it to loss or damage, he is liable to make good the 1055
or damage so occasioned,

ILLUSTRATIONS

(i) The executor pays out of the estate an unfounded claim. He is liable
to make good the 1053.

(10) The deceased had a valuable lease renewable by notice which the
executor neglects to give at the proper time. The executor is tiable to make
good the loss.

(iii) The deceased had a lease of tess value than the rent payable for it,
but terminable on notice at a particular time. The executor neglects to give
the notice. He is liable to make good the loss”.

The section needs no change. not having raised any serious difticulties.

47.3. Section 369 reads—

“369. When an executor or adminisiralor occasions a less to the estate by
neglecting to get in any part of the property of the deceased, he is liable!
to make good the amount.


253

ILLUSTRATIONS

(i) The executur absolutely releases a debt due to the deceased from a
solvent person. or compounds with « debtor who is able to pay in full, The
executor is liable to make good the amount,

(1) The eaccttor neglects to sue for a debt dill the debtor is able to plead
that the claim is barred by limitation and the debt is thereby Jost to the
estate. The executor is liable to make good the amount,”

This section also needs no change.

CHAPTER 48.
SUCCESSION CERTIFICATES (SECTIONS 370 TO 390)
1, Preliminary

48.1, Sections 370—390 deal with succession certificates. Under section
370, a succession certificate cannot be granted in respect of any debt or security
to which a right is, by section 212 or 213, required to be established by fetters
of administration or probate, There is an exception provided in the case of a
deceased Indian Christian,

The procedure for making an application for u succession certificate.. und the
Court to which it should be made, are dealt with in sections 371 to 373 and
(where applicable), in section 388, The contents of the certificate are provided
for in secton 374. Under section 375, the Judge may require security from the
grantee of the certificate.

. The form of the certificate and “extensions” thereof are regulated by sec-
tions 376 to 377'. Amendment of the certificate in respect of powers of the

holder as to securities is provided for in section 378, Fees on certificates are to

be paid as laid down in section 379.

The extent and effect of certificates are dealt with in sections 380—382
and 387. The effect of previous certificate is dealt with in section 385, revocation
in section 383 and appeals in section 384,

Section 386 validiwes certain payments nwde in good faith to the holder
of an invalid certificate, which has to be delivered to the court as laid down
in section 389. Section 390 deals with certain provisions regarding the exhibition
of inventories and accounts with respect to Bombay Regulation VITT of 1827.

These sections will now be dealt with in detail below,
11, Succession Certificates—Grant of

48. 2. Section 370 readys—

“370 (1) A succession certiticate (hereinafter in this Part referred to as a
Certificate) shatl not be granted under this Part with respect to any debt
or security-to which a right is required by section 212 ता section 213 to
be established by letters of administration or probate :

Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prevent
the grant of a certificate to any person claiming to be entitled to the effects
of u deceased Indian Christian, or to any part thereof. with respect to any
debt or security. by reason that a right thereto can be established by letters
of administration under this Act.

‘See Eighth Schedule,

Sections 370-390 -.
Scheme.

Section 370, Ress
triction on grant of
certificates under
this Part.


Recommendation

as to section 370

(2०.

Need for change of

substance.

254

(2) For the purposes of this Part. security” means—

{a) any promissory note, debenture, stock or security of the Central
Government or of a State Government:

(b) any bond, debenture, or annuity charged by Act of Parliament of
the United Kingdom on the revenues of India:

(९) any stock or debenture of. or share
corposated institution:

@ company or other in-

(d) any debenture or other security for money issued by, or on behaif
of, a local authority;

(९०) any other security which the State Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, declare to be 2 security for the purposes
of this Part,”

48.3. Sub-section (2}. clause (0) of section 370 seems 10 be obsolete and
should be deleted, We recommend accordingly.

48.4. Section 370 bars the grant of a succession certificate, inter alia, in
cases where letters of administration (or probate) are mandatory. Letters of
administration are mandatory in the case af Christians other than Indian Chris-
tians dying intestatc\—to mention the most usual situation, We are of the view
that this restriction is not required except where probate is mandatory, The bar
in section 370 should be jimited only to cases where probate is mandatory, In the
case of probate, the will has to be proved and 1 is understandable that without
proof of the will, payment should not be made on the strength of a mere succes-
sion certificate, But this reasoning does not apply with the same force to letters
of administration, where title ought to be Jenved on the basis of a right of
inheritance conferred by law and no formal writing is to be proved in general.

48.5. Accordingly, we recommend that section 370(1) should be revised

Recommendation «
29 to section 370(1) ५६ under :-——

Survivorship under

section 370.

Recommen
to add further, pro- added to section 370(1) :

yiso to
370(1).

dation

section

(1) A succession certificate (hereinufter in this Part referred to as a certi-
ficate) shall pot be granted under this Part with respect to any debt or
security to which a right is required by section 212 or section 213 to be
established by ...... probate. (Existing Proviso to be omitted as a con-
sequential change ).

48.6. We are also of the view that there should be 2 provision for the
grant of certificate on survivorship.

By making this amendment, the legislature would be merely giving recogni-
tion to what is already the practice’- in some parts of India.

48.7. Although a certificate. issued to certify survivorship should be des-
cribed as “Survivorship certificate. we do not propose to chage the present
nomenclature (succession certificate”), since it has, hy now, become familiar
to all concerned.

48.8. Accordingly, we recommend that the following proviso should be

“Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to pre-
vent the grant of a certificate to any person claiming to be entitled to survi-
vorship to the effects of a deceased Hindu, Mohammedan, Buddhist, Sikh,
dain or Parsi or to any part thereof, with respect to any debt or security
by reason that the right thereto is claimed by survivorship and not be suc-
cession.”*

sSection 212 (1).

*Banwari ४. Maksuda, A.1R. 1930 All. 99.

3566 also para 34.14, supra.

“Existing proviste is to be omitted: para 48.5, supra.


255

गा, Jurisdiction
48. 9. This takes us to section 371, which reads as under : Section 371.

“371. The District Judge within whose jurisdiction the deceased ordinarily
resided at the time of his death. or, if at the time he had no fixed place of
residence, the District Judge within whose jurisdiction any part of the
Property of the deceased may be found. may grant a certificate under this

part.” aa aa Of

Section 371 thus lays down two alternative criteria for jurisdiction—(i)
residence or (ii) existence of assets, But primacy is given to the first; the
second applied only if the first is not satisfied. How far the present criterian
should be retained, is one of the matters that will need consideration.

48,10. Although domicile determines the law applicable 10 succession to Domicile not adop-
movables and situs determines the law applicable to immovabies, the law does ted asa test.
not follow the same principtes in regard to jurisdiction to grant a certificate.

48.11. English textbook writers! state that the jurisdiction of the old eccel- English and Com-
siastical courts (of which the modern probate court is the successor) was wni- monwealth law.
versally founded upon the situation of movables belonging to the deceased.

1६ would appear that jurisdiction in probate in other countries of the Common-
wealth also mostly depends not on domicile, but on the existence of local
assets? >

48.12. Such a rule’ is a direct descendant of the rules regulating the juriss Genesis.
diction of church authorities under the old eccelsiastical law’,

48.13. This aspect of the matters was considered by us whilst discussing’ Need for examina-
section 270, which deals with jurisdiction to grant probate, but no change tion of the position,
in that section was recommended on this point, as no practical difficulty had
been experienced, In regard to section 371, however, some obscurity has arisen
because the words used in the section are—if at that time he had no fixed place
of residence,” without indicating whether the fixed place of residence should: be
in India or may be anywhere in the world.

Judicial decisions reveal a certain amount of conflict. According to the
majority view, after the words, ‘in question’, the words ‘in India’ should be
read. Thus, if a person is not domiciled in India, then his case would be covered
and the District Court would have jurisdiction on the basis of assets within its
local limits, notwithstanding that he has’a fixed place of abode outside India,

This view has been taken by the High Courts of Allahabad’ Calcutta’,
Lahore®, and Madras”.

48.14, The other view is taken in 2 Bombay case ". This was decided with
reference to the Succession Certificate Act 27 of 1860. Section 3 of that Act
contemplated the issue of a certificate for a British subject either resident
in the district where the certificate is sought, or else, having no fixed place of
residence, The deceased in that case was a resident of Baroda, (outside British
India) and had died there. The High Court observed “the representation of

Conflict of views.

‘Cheshire, Private International Law (1970) , page 580.
2Wolffe, Private Internationa! Law (1950), page 657.
*Sykes and Pry!es, Austcalian Private International Law (1979), page 442,
*in the Goods of Tucker, (1864) 3 Sw. & Tr. 585; 164 E.R, 1402,
5fn the Goods of Coode, (1867) L.R. 1 P. & 10. 449,
*See Chapter 34, supra.
+Goswami Gopal Lalfi v. Goswanii Jai Lalji, (1885) $ Allahabad Weekly Notes.
"Re. Kanju Abdul Rasoul, 54 C.W.N. 826.
* Amar Nath Singh ¥ Sham Singh, ALR, 1935 Lahore 646.,
WKrishna Ammal v. Laksteni Ammal, UL.R. (1950) Mad. 718. 726, 727, 128, 735.
UMir Abrahim v. Zialuntssa, (1888), [.1..10, 12 Bom, 150



256

such 2 person would properly be sought in the country he belongs to and ihe
constituent he represented would then sue or empower someone to sue in the
court. The Act does not make provision for the administration of ihe effecis of
«a foreigner domiciled abroad”.

Practical approach 48.15. For the present purpose. it is cumecessary to discuss which of the

to be adopted, (७० views now summarised above is correct, Practical considerations, however,
require that ihe first view should be adopted. That is the general practice in
the Commonwealth also, and creates no serious problems as such.

Some writers have expressed the apprehension that this would mean that
may be parallel proceedings in the two countries, This, however, is a rare
possibility. Generally. the other country also would grant administration only
where the assets are within the jurisdiction of the competent court of — the
country.

Moreover, it would be difficult for the court in one country to bold an en-
quiry into the truth or otherwise of an allegation that the deccased has had
his ordinary residence in some remote corner of the world,

48.16. lt may be noted that the corresponding provision regarding grant
of probate etc.—section 270-—is more specific. Under that section, the District
Sudge has jurisdiction if the deceased at the time of his death “had a fixed
Place of abode or any property movable or immovable within the jurisdiction
of the District Judge”, Disparity between section 270 and section 371 seems to
have arisen because the two provisions are drawn from two different earlier Acts.
relating to probate and succession certificate respectively. There is no need to
have any such disparity.

Sections 270 and
371 compared.

48.17. There does. of course, remain the question whetber the — assets
Bxistenen of assets- should have been within the jurisdiction of the District Judge at the time of death
time, or whether they should be within the jurisdiction at the time when the application
for succession is made. At present, the second course seems to have been adopted
in the section, while the re-draft recommended by ७७ adopts the first course
following the pattern of section 270. We have deliberately made a departure
in this regard, since we are of the view that there should, as far as possible,
be uniformity in the provisions relating to jurisdiction to grant probate, etc.
(section 270) and jurisdiction to grant a secession certificate (section 371),
In section 270, the first course has been already adopted. and we would prefer
to follow the same pattern in section 371 also.

Existe cf 48.18. Another question that needs to be considered in connection with
mihi India ake section 371—-and also in connection with section 270—is whether", for the
ther necessary. grant of succession certificate (or probate), it is necessary that some assets shouid
be situated within India, The section does not, of course, so require, but a view‘
has been expressed that such a requirement is implicit in the section. having
regard to the practice that existed in England before the passing of the Adminis-
tration of Justice Act. 1932 which made a slight modification by giving a dis-
cretion to the court in certain cases. It has also suggested judicially* that
the position should be changed in India on the same fines as it has been done

in 1932 in England.

Assets 48.19. Having given our careful consideration to the matter, we are of the
sary in ind. neces View that it is better not to make any verbal change in the section on this point.
‘ In general, where stalutory provisions on a particular matter in coJified law
on a particular subject are specified, courts in India do not seem to super-

impose any requirement on the basis of English practice or rules of _ private

international law. So far as we have been able to gather from the other reported

decisions on sections 270 and 371, a requirement that there should be assets in

'Cf. Para 48.12, supra.

*See para 48.20. infra.

*Point relevant to section 270.

‘Kalyani Kutti v. Gauri Kutti, AAR. 1953 Travancore-Cochin 252.
* Kalyani Kutti v. Gauri Kutti, ALR. 1953 T.C. 253.


257

पता has not been sead into the section. In the circumstances, we do not consider
it proper to make a change in the section, so as to throw a doubt on the width
of jurisdiction exercisable under the section as it has been generally under-

stood.

48.20. in the light of the discussion in the earlier paragraphs', we recom- Recommendation
mend that section 371 should be revised as follows : as to section 371.

“371. The District Judge within whose jurisdiction ie deceased, at the
time of his death, had a fixed place of abode, or any property, movable or
immovable, may grant a certificate under this part.”

IV. Procedure.

48,21, This takes us to section 372, which reads as under :—

~372.(1) Application for such a certificate shall be made to the District Aotleaiton for

Judge by petition signed and verified by or on behalf of the applicant in certificate.
the manner prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure, for the signing and 5 of 1908.
verfication of a plaint by or on behalf of a plaintiff. and setting forth the
following particulars, namely :—

(a) the time of the death of the deceased:

(09) the ordinary cesidence of the deceased at the time of his death
and, if such residence was not within the local limits of the jurisdiction
of the Judge to whom the application is made, then the property of
the deceased within those limits:

(०) the family or other near relatives of the deceased and their res-
pective residences:

(d) the right in which the petitioner claims;

(९) the absence of any impediment under section 370 or under any
other provision of this Act or any other enactment, to the grant of the
certificate or to the validity there of if it were granted; and

(1) the debts and securities in respect of which the certificate is applied
for.
(2) If the petition contains any averment which the person verifying it
knows or believes to be false, or does not believe to be true, that person
shall be deeemed to have committed an offence under section 198 of the
45 of 1860, Indian Penal Code.

(3) Application for such a certificate may be made in respect of any debt
or debts due to the deceased creditor or in respect of portions thereof”.

48.22. With reference to this section (section 372), there scems to be a
conflict of decisions on the question whether, the word “debt” includes movable Meaning of ‘debt’
property that has been pledged, In a Bombay case’, the question arose whether in section 372.
‘@ succession certificate could be granted in respect of gold or ornaments pledged
by the deceased with a bank. It was held that the pledgee’s obligation to return
to the pledger’s heirs the pledged movable property was not a ‘debt’, as it
was not a specific or ascertained or liquidated sum of money. A simitar view
had been taken in a Patna case’.

However, an Allahabad judgment’ takes a different view in this regard.

We have discussed the matter under section 2145, and need not repeat here
the points made in that discussion.

‘Para 48.16. supra.
2Ranchhoddas Govinddas Banatwala, (1976) 78 Bom. L.R. 219. 233.

2Sham Sundar Dew Sarti Devi, A.1.R, 1962 Part 220.
4Dina Nath V. Balkrishna, A.LR. 1963 All 46.
sparagraph 34.14, supra (section 214)


258

Section. STRUM) 48.22A. The Delhi Hindustani Mercantile Association. in its comment on
fity of succession PE Working Paper of the Law Commission on the Act. has offered the following
certifiacte to pro- Mion: -+
perties other than
debts. (section 386.4 “Wee mays

a nee certificates shoukl not be limited to debts
4 " payable te the but should extend to alt properties left — by
him withewt will, pendnig the grant of such a certificate, an ad
ministration suit fies, but such a suit can be filed only by creditor, A svit!

like this should be permitted to be filed by even the heirs!”

The purport of the comment is not very clear, but it would appear that the
intention is that the facility of succession” certifics
Properties other than “debts” also. At present, section 372(1) (1) confines suc-
session certificates 10 debts. Although the suggestion does not say so, presumably
the intention is this—in cases where “administration” of the estate is not con-
icmplated. and all that is contemplated is that some kind of judicial confirmation
of a person being the heiv to the preperty is needed, the law should provide
such a facility. Such a Hity may be of use in connection with dealings with
public olfices, where the question of succession to a particular property is in

issue and the public office concerned wants some such confirmation,
Utility of suggested 48.22B. We regard this as an important suggestion, if the reasons underly-
amendment ing the suggestion (which ave not stuted in the letter of the Association) are

what we have surmised above. There do arise, in practice, occasions when title
10 property other than debts may have to be established before public authorities
and if a court is given power to issue such a certificate, it would certainly prove
६0 be of use. At present. the object can be achieved by the somewhat more
cumbersome procedure os declaratory suit in which the claimant can seek
a declaration about his utic-a title based on testamentary or intestate succession.
Of course, the claimant filing a declaratory suit is expected to show that
there is some kind का on his title. Uf there is no controversy between
“rival heirs”. a declaratory s:tii_ may sot be quite appropriate, The suggestion
for extending the facility of succession certificate to property other than debts
has therefore a practical utility. ‘Iheorctically also, chere seems to be no objec-
tion in principle 10 such an amendment of the Act

Section 3864 to be 48.22C. No doubt. such an amendment would require extensive amendments
inserted, in several sections of the Act. This tsk could be left to the draftsman—though
we do have a suggestion which may probably avoid an amendment of too many
sections of the Act. What we have in mind is the insertion of a short section.
say, as section 386A—which wilt provide* that the provisions of section 370
to 385 shall, so far as may be, and with necessary modifications, apply, in rela-
tion to property other than debts, as they apply in relation to debts.

ion 372. 48.23. Anorher question. relevent to section 372, may be nowd oa the
application hy a subject of tne procedure t be followed regarding the grant of certificate to a
minor. “minor. There is x conilict of views, which can be summarised as under :—

(i) First, tbere is the Allahabad view*—which was also the earlier Cal-
cutta view'-—that a succession certificate may be granted to a minor
acting through his next friend. This is the most liberal view.

ii} Secondly, we have the Madras view* holding that a succession certi-
ficat2 can be granted to the minor on the application of his naruraé
guardian. This also appears to be the later Calcutta view’. Incidentally.

‘Law Commisston File No. F. 2 (6) 84 LC. 5. No. 6A.
Hindustani Mercantile Association Delhi. Letter No. HMA/2241 dated 30th May.

1984

"To. be cdrried out by inserting section 386A.

“Ram Kaur १" Sardar Singh, (1398) (.L.R. 20 All. 352.

‘Kali Coomar v. Tara Prosunne, 5 CAR. 517. referred to in Ram Kanr v. Sardar Singh.
(1898) 1.1... 20 All, 352

*Krishnamma v. Venkata, LL.R. 36 Mad. 314

*in Re--Sen Mohatra, 4894) 1.1 R.21 Cal. 911,



259

i may be pointed out thu this ७ ए me: 0 view than the first.
sinee. uccording to it, only the aarural guardian can apply and_no other
person can apply as the next friend on behalf of the minor, This may
be called the middle view.

io which ihe certificate
apointed a guardian of
n & Wards Act, 1890, This

dit) Shirdly, there is a Bombay rutting‘,
can be granted to the guardian only if he
the property of the miner under the (|
is the narrowest view.

48.24. le is poweworthy thar there is no specific provision in section 372 Grant to a minor,

prohibiting the grant of probate to a minor. In this respect, sections 223 and 236.
which relite to the grant of probate and letters of adminisiraion respectively,
may be contrasted. These sections prohibit grant 10 a minor, The reason why the
iwo sets of provisions are differently framed appears to be this, Probate is granted
to an executor appointed by the testator, Normally, the executor would not be a
minor, but in the rare cause in which he is a minor, the prohibition against grant
of probate—and consequential refusal by the court to grant the probate to him—
would not cause serious hardship, because letters of administration with the will
annexed can still be obtained 4 other suitable person,

[1 may be noted that the law does not impose very rigid limitations as to
the grant of letters of administration. In the case of a succession certificate, how-
ever. the position is different, Only the person who has the right to the debi
in question can apply. so that the field of choice is fimited and is determined, not
by statutory provisions or by the testator’s directions or by the orders of the
court, but by external circumsiances—the person who have survived Une deceased
and stand in the prescribed relationship to him, Apparently for this reason, the
Act does not provide a total bar as such against the minor being granted succession
certificate, Under section 372(1) (0), the right which the petitioner claims has to be
specified in the petion, this indicating that the claimant must be a person who has
some title or interest in the debt. If the person who has some title or interest
happens to be a minor, only he can apply for a succession certificate,

48. The question that should really survive for practical consideration is Question of proce
only one as to the procedure to be followed by the minor. The grant of succes- dure—Recommen-
sion certificate to a minor as such cannot be denied as a matter of law, but dtion.
safeguards could still be laid down, Of course, the salcguards should not impose
very severe restrictions on the pursuit of the remedy for enforcing a right that
is already vested in the minor

Having regard io the above considerations. the proper course, in our view,
would be to provide—by way of clarification and by way of indicating the correct
procedure—that where the applicant for succession certificate is a minor, he may
apply through a next friend as if he were a plaintiff in a suit and the provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908 should. so far as may be, apply in relation
such nest fiends as they apply in relation to a next friend suing under the
Cade?

We may add that the provi proposed would not only possess practical
atility, buc would also be consistent with the object underlying the provisions
of the Act as to succession certificate. Incideniully, section 384(3), by mentioning
section 141 of the Code of Civit Procedure, 1908 (though in a different context).
umes that the Code of Civil Procedure, as far as may be applies to proceedings
uccession certificate. Thus. the amendment which we are recommending would

for
he in harmony with the assumptions underlying the entire chapter.

48.25A. ॥ should be pointed out that the grant of a certificate only to a Position of Guar-
court—appointed guardian* would be highly inconvenient, It means that if the 4@"-
guardian is changed, x fresh succession certificate will have to he obtained.

Un ReeNarvan Khanderas, 33 Bombay Law Reporier 950: A.1LR. 1933 Bom. 436.
{Tor draft, see para 48.26, Patra.
in Re-Narvan Khanderao, AR. 1933 Bom. 436.


260

Recommendation, 48.26. Accordingly. we recommend ihat an Explanation should be inserted as
fg amend section follows, below section 372.

swplanation-—Where the applicant jor succession certificate is a minor, he
may apply through a next friend as if he were a plaintiff in ६ suit, and the
provisions vf the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall, so far as may be,
apply in relation to such next friend as they apply in relation to a next friend
suing under the Code.”

Section —373—Pro- 48.27. This takes us to section 373, It reads—
vedure on applica- . ist ; हे
tion. 7373. (1) If the District Judge is satisfied that there is ground for entertain-

ing the application, he shall fix a day for the hearing thereof and cause notice
of the application and of the day fixed for the hearing—

(3) to be seved on any person to whom, in the opinion of the Judge,
special notice of the application should be given. and

(b) to be posted on some conspicuous part of the court-house and pub-
lished in such other manuer, if any, as the Judge, subject to any rules
made by the High Court in this behalf. thinks fit, and upon the day
fixed, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable, shalt proceed 10
decide in a summary manner the right to the certificate.

(2) When the Judge decides that the right thereto to belong to the appli-
cant, the Judge shall make an order for the grant of the certificate to
him.

(3) 16 the Judge cannot decide the right to the certificate without determining
questions of law or fact which seems to be too intricate the difficult for deter-
mination in a summary proceeding, he may nevertheless grant a certificate
to the applicant if he appears to be the person having prima facie the best
title thereto.

(4) When there are more applicants than one for a certificate, and it appears
to the Judge that more than one of such applicants are interested in the
estate of the deceased the Judge may, in deciding to whom the certificate
is to be granted, have regard to the extent of interest and the fitness in other
respects of the «applicants.

The section needs no change, having created no serious problems.

V. Form and Contents

Section 374—Con- 48.28. Section 374 provides that when the District Judge grants a certificate,

tents of certificate. he shall therein specify the debts and securities set forth in the application for
the certificate. and may thereby empower the person to whom the certificate is
granted— .

(a) 10 receive imerest or dividends on, or
(b) 10 negotiate or wansfer, or

(९) both to receive interest or dividends on, and to negotiate or transfer, the
securities or any of them.

This section also needs no change.

48.29. Scction 375 reads:

Section 375~-Requi-
fen grantee of “375. (1) The District Judge shall in any case in which he proposes to
certificate. proceed under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 373, and may,

in any other case, require, as a condition precedent to the granting of a
certificate, that the person to whom he proposes to make the grant shall give
10 the Judge a bond with one or more surety or sureties, or other sufficient
security, for rendering an account of debts and securities received by him
and for indemnity of persons who may be entitled to the whole or any part

of those debts and securities.



261

(2) The Judge may, on application made by petition and on cause shown (0
his satisfaction, and upon such cerms as to security, or providing that the
money received be paid into Court, or otherwise, as he thinks fit, assign
the bond or other security to some proper person, and that person shall
thereupon be entitled to sue thereon in his own name as if it had been ort-
ginally given to him instead of to the Judge of the court, and to recover, as
trustee for all persons interested, such amount as may be recoverable there-
under.”

The section needs ao change, having raised ne problems,

48.30. Section 376 reads :--- Section — 376--Ex-
a oo. . पु . tension of certificate.
“376. (1) A District Judge may, on the application of the holder of a certi-

ficute under this Part. extend the certificate to any debt or security not origi-
nally specified therein, and every such extension shall have the same effect
as it the debt or security to which the certificate is extended had been origi-
nally specified therein,

12) Upon the extension of a certificate, powers with respect to the receiving
of interest ता dividends on, or the negotiation or transfer of, any security
to which the cerlificate has been extended may be conferred, and a bond or
further bond or o.her security for the purpose mentioned in section 375 may
be required, in the same manner as upon the original of u certificate.” .

This section alse needs no change

48.31. Section 377 provides that certificates shall be granted and extensions gectiog 377.
of certificates shall be made. as nearly as circumstances admit, in the forms set
forth in Schedule Vill.

The section needs no change.

48.32. This takes us to section 378, which provides that where a District Section 378
Judge has not conferred, on the holder of « certificate, any power with respect to Amendment | of
a security specified in the certificate, or has only empowered on him to receive of powers einen
interest or dividends on, or to negotiate or transter, the security, the Judge may, securities.
on application made by petition and on cause shown to his satisfaction, amend
the certificate by conferring any of the powers mentioned in section 374 or by
substituting any one for any other of those powers.

The section needs no change, having created no serious problems.

48.33. Section 379 consists of three sub-sections. Sub-Section (i) provides Section 379-—Mode
that every application for a certificate or for the extension of a certificate shall pf Collecting Court.
be accompanied by a deposit of 2 sum equal to the fee payable unde: the 1 शी SF ares.
Court-fees Act. 1870, in respect of the certificate of extension applied for.

Sub-Section (2) lays down that if the application is allowed, the sum depa-
sited by the applicant shall be expended, under the direction of the Judge, in
the purchase of the stamp to he used for denoting the fee payable as afore-
said.

Finally, sub section (3) provides that any sum received under sub section
(1) and not expended under sub-section (2) shall be refunded to the person
who deposited it.

48.34. The question has arisen as to the stage at which refund is permissible Controversy as to
untder section 379 (3), It is the stage before passing of the order for grant of St#ge of refund.
a certificate, could it be any later stage? The nature of the controversy will be
apparent on a consideration of selected cases on the section.

48.33. In a Madras casc', the District Judge. Tinnevelly, referred the follow- The case law.
ing question to the High 0७1 :—

“Up to whai stage in the proceeding for succession certificate is an applicant
entitled to obtain a refund ?~ -

‘Sankara Avyar v. Nainar Meappanar, (1898)
1T.R. 21 Mad. 241,


262

The High Court held that. if dic application is aHowed, i.c.. it the order
for the grant of a certificate has been made, the sum in deposit becomes at once
legally appropriated, as duty, to the extent of the debt covered by the order, and
cannot be refunded. fn other cases, we think that refund can be made.” This case
was decided under section 14 of the Succession Certificate Act, 1889. to which
section 379 of the present Act corresponds,

48.36. A Nagpur ०४०, however, seems to have taken a different view, The
applicant applied for a succession certificate and deposited the required fee. The
Court allowed the application for succession certificate subject to the appli-
cant’s furnishing security, but the applicant failed to furnish it. Thereafter, the
applicant applied for a refund of the sum deposited by him. The lower appellate
court, relying on the Madras case mentioned above’, rejected the application. The
High Court, in revision, held that section 379 (3) lays down two conditions
(i) the sum should be received under sub-section (1), and (ii) it should not
be expended under sub-section (2), If these two conditions are satisfied, the sum
should be refunded. Since in this case hoth the conditions were satisfied, the High
Court ordered a refund.

The same view has been subsequently taken in a Lahore case’,

Comment on case 48.37. Ut is, with respect, su sted that on the tangttage of sub-section

flaw. (2), refund is not permissible once the application is allowed. Under that sub-
section the money can he spent only for purchase of the stamp. It thas impliedly
bars refund, once the application is allowed,

The opening words of section 379(2) ure “if the application is allowed”,
and not “when the certificate is granted”, Therefore, once a court has allowed an
application for succession certificate and has passed an order to that effect,
whether with or without a condition, the sum can be appropriated only towards the
payment of the stamp. If the applicant has failed to fulfil a condition, the State
cannot be deprived of its legitimate dues, more particularly when the court has
heard the parties, spent its time and exercised its mind on the problems,

Recommendation 48.38. We recommend that in order to make the position clear, a new sub-

to insert sub- section should be inserted in section 379, as follows :—
section | in section
ne

379 as 3% amend. “(4). Uf the application is allowed with or without condition, the sum, shalt
section 3), not be refunded, even if, hy reason of breach of the condition, the certificate
cannot he granted.”

We also recommend that the provisions of sub-section (3) should be made
subject to new sub-section (4) which is proposed to be inserted as above,

Section 379 (3) should. therefore, begin as follows :--

“(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4) any sum received ........°,
VIL. Effect of certificate

39. Section 380 reads :--
Section 380---Local 48.39, tion read:

Extent of Certifica- “380. A certificate under this Part shall have effect throughout India.
cate--recommenda-

tion.

This section shail apply in India after the separation of Burma and Aden
from India to the certificates granted in Burma and Aden before the date of

the separation, or after that date in proceedings which were pending at
that date,

“It shall also apply in India after the separation of Pakistan from India to certi-
ficates granted befoze the date of the separation. after that date in proccedings
pending at that date in any of the territories which on that date constituted
Pakistan.”

[016 : ४४. Fatanhi. A.LR. 1940 Nag. 65.
*Sankara Avyar \. Nainar Mooppanar, (1898) I.L.R. 21 Mad, 241.
*Smu. Parkash Wai y Province of Punjab, ALR. 1941 Lahore 399


263

The second and third paragraphs ot section 380 have spent their purpose
and should now be deleted. We recommend accordingly. The section should.
therefore, be revised. so as to read as under

380. A certificate under this Part shall have effect throughout India.”

48.40. Sction 381 provigcs that subject to the provisions of this Part ue
certificate of the District Judge shail, wth respect to the debis and securities specfied
therein, be conclusive as against the persons owing such debts or liable on such
securities, and shall, notwithstanding any contravention of section 370, or other
defect, afford full indemnity to all such persons as regards all payments made.
or dealings had, in ood faith in respect of such debts or securities to or with the
person to whom the certificate was granted.

The seetion needs no change, hav

48.41 Section 382 reads :—

raised no problems.

“382. Where a certificate in the form, as nearly as circumstances admit, of

Schedule VIII—

(४) bas been granted to a resident within a foreign 5९ by an Indian
representative accredited to that State. or

(0) has been nied before the commeasement of the Part B States
(Laws) Act. 1951, to a resident within any Part B Stace by a District
Judge of that State or has been extended by him in such form, or

1९) has been granted after the commencement of the Part Bo States
(Laws) Act, 1951, to a resident within the State of Jammu and Kashmir
by the District Judge of that State or has been extended by him in
such form, the certificate shall when stamped in accordance with the
provisions of the Court-fees Act, 1870, with respect to certificates under
this Part, have the same effect in India as a certificate granted or ex-
tended under this Part.

fhe section needs no char

VILE, Revocation
48.42. Section 383 reads:-—

7483. A Cortilicate granted under this Part may be revoked for any of the
following causes, namely :—

Ge that the preceedings to obtain the certificate were defective in
substance:

{pe that the certificate was obtained fraudulently by the making of a
ulse suggestion, or by the concealment from the Court of something
material to the case:

cy that the certificate was obtained by means of an untrue allegation
of a fact essential] in point of law to justify the grant thereof, though
such allegation was made in ignorance or inadvertently:

(d) that the certificate hus become useless und inoperative through
circumstances:

(९) that a decree or order made by a competent court in a suit or
other proceeding with respect to effects comprising debts or secyrities
specified in the certificate renders it proper that the certificate should
be revoked.”

This section also needs no change.

48.43. Section 324 reads:-—

“384. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, an appeal
10 the High Court from an order of a District Judge granting, refusing or
revoking ५ certificate under this Part, and the High Court may. if it thinks
fit, by its order on the appeal, declare the person to whom the cartificate

Section 381.

Effect of certificate
granted or extended
by Indian represen-
nitive in foreign
State.

Section 383—~Revo-
cation of certificate ,

Section 384.---
Appeal.


264

should be granted und direct the District Judge. on application being made
therefor, to grant it accordingly, in supersession of the certificate, if any,
already granted.

(2) An appeal under sub-section (1) must be preferred within the time
allowed for an appeal under the Cade of Civil Procedure, 1908.

(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) and to the provisions us
10 reference to and revision by the High Court and as to review of judge-
ment of the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908, as applied by section 141 of
that Code, an order of a District Judge under this Part shall be final”,

The section needs no change. having created no problems,

Section 385~~Effect 48.44 Seciion 385 provides that save as provided by this Act, a certificate

on certificate of granted thereunder in respect of any of the effects of a deceased person shall be

reviews certificate invalid if there has been a previous grant of such a certificate or of probate or

Administration. letters of administration in respect of the estate of the deceased person and if
such previous grant is in fores.

The section needs no change.

1X, Miscellaneous

Validation of cer- 48.45, Section 386 read
tain Payments in व . . woe ५;
good faith to holder “386, Where a certificitte under this pact has been superseded or is invalid

of valid certificate, by reason of the certificate having been revoked under section 383. or by
reason of the grant of a certificate to a person named in an appellate order
under section 384. or by reason of a certificate having been previously
granted, or for any other cause. all payments made. or dealings had, as
regards debts und securities specified in the superseded or invalid certificate,
to or with the holder of that certificate in ignorance of its supersession or
invulidity, shall be held good against claims under any other certificate.”

The language is slightly involved. but the purpose is fairly clear, No change
is therefore needed in the section.

Section 386A. 48.46. We have already recommended! the insertion of a new section to
"provide for the facility of succession certificate, even in regard to properties other
than debts. The relevant section can be inserted as section 386A.

Section 387-—Eftect 48.47. This takes us 10 section 387, which provides that no decision under

Of decisions under this part upon any question of right between any parties shall be held to bar

this Act, and liabi- the trial of the same question in uny suit or in any other proceeding between the

lity (of holder of same pirties, and nothing in this Part shall be construed to affect the liability

certiBcate there: of any person who may receive the whole or any part of any debt or security.

. or any Interest ov dividend on any security. 10 account therefor to the person
lawfully entitled thereto,

The section nezds no change. having created no difliculties,

48.48. Section 388 reads:

Section 388—-Inves-

eet, Sime, 388 (1) The State Government may. by notification in the Official Gazette.
diction of District invest any Court inferior in erade to a District Judge with power to exercise
Court for purposes the functions of a Di Judge under this Part,

of this Act.

(2) Any inferior Court sc invested shall, within the local limits of — its
jurisdiction, have concurrent jurisdiction with the District Judge in the
vxercise of the powers conferred by this Part upon the District Judge.
and the provisions of this Part relating to the District Judge shall apply to
such an inferior Court as if वी were a District Judge:

Provided that an appeal from any such order of an inferior Court as is
mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 384 shail lie १० the District Judge,
and not to the High Court. and that the District Judge may, if he thinks

‘See discussion relating to section 372 (1) (0) for extending the facility of succession certi-
ficate to properties other than debts, supra.

S of 1908,

S of 1908,


5 of 1908,

265

fit, by his order on the appeal, make any such declaration and directions
as that sub-section authorises the High Cowt to make by its erder on an
appeal from an order of a District Judge.

(3) An order of a District Judge on an appeat from an order of an inferior
Court under the last foregoing sub-section shall, subject to the prcvi-
siOns as to reference to and revision by the High Court and as to review of
judgment of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as applied by section 141
of that Code. be final.

“(4) The District Judge may withdraw any proceedings under this Part from
an inferior Court. and may either himself dispose of them or transfer them
to another such Court established within the local limits of the jurisdiction
of the District Judge and having authority to dispose of the proceedings.

(5) A notification under-section (1) may specify any inferior Court spe-
cially or any class of such Court in any area.

(6) Any Civil Court which tor any of the purposes of any cractment is
subordinate to, or subject to.the control of, a District Judge shall, for the
purpose of this section. be deemed to be a Court inferior in grade to a
District Judge.”

‘the section needs no change.’

48.49. Section 389 provides that when a certificate under this Part has
been superscded or is invalid from any of the causes mentioned in section 386, Secrion sane
the holder thereof shall, on the requisition of the court which granted it, deliver ind हक ertifi
it up 10 that court. cates.

It he wilfully and without reasonable cause omits so to deliver it up, he
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with both,

The section needs no change. having created no problems

48.50. Section 390 reads: —

“390, Notwithstanding anything in Bombay Regulation No, VUI of 1827, section 390—Provi-
the provisions of section 370, sub-section (2), section 372, sub-section (1), sions with respect to
clause (1) anc! sections 374. 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 381, 382, 384, 387, 388 Certificate ponder
and 389 with respect to certificates under this Part and applications there- Bombay, | Regula:
for, and of section 317 with respect to the exhibition of inventories and

accoun's by executors and administrators, shall, so far as they can be made

applicable, apply, respectively, to certificates granted under that Regula-

tion, and applications made for certificates thereunder. after the ist day

of May 1889, iuid to the exhibition of inventories and accounts by the

holders of such certificates so granted.”

This section also necds ne change.

CHAPTER 49
SUCCESSION BY HOMICIDE
SECTION 390A
(Proposed }
1. Introductory

49.1. We are concerned in this Chapter with a fundamental principle of Se of the Chap-
public policy, namely. that 8 man should not be allowed to derive’ a benefit eee” © Be Ch?

‘Information as to empowerment is being cottected.


266

resulting from his ova crime. | principle, well-recognised in the legal systems
of many countries.” including India,* has not yet been expressly cnacted in the
Indian Succession Act. The object of this Chapter is to consider the necd for
codification of the above principle in a — suitable form in the Act. after a brief
examination of the present position in this regard.

The higher law 49.2. AM Jaws must conform ig a higher law. An American case which is
a good example of this approach is Riggs v. Palmer, where the New York Court
of Appeals held that  legatee did not gain 10. property — which
he would have received as the rcsult of murdering his testator. Earl J. said that
there are cetain principles that “have th al Jaw admini-

stered in all civilised countries” and that “all laws, as well as all contr: may
be controlled in their cperation and effect by general, fundamental maxims of

the common Saw”.

Motive immaterial. 49.3. cordingly. where ६ person murders another he generatly should
not be allowed to enjoy the property he acquires us the result of that death.
“A man shall not slay his benefactor and thereby take his bounty.” It is not
considered relevant what the murderers’ motive for the murder was.‘

Rositon under the 49.4. At present. however. there is no express provision in the — पा
. Su sion Act debarring a person who has committed homicide for his right
to succeed to the estate of the person whose death he has caused. No doubt, this
would be the position uuder the rules of the common faw (to be dealt with
later)? But it is appropriate that this important topic should be dealt with by

a specific statutory provision in an Act which is a consolidating enactment.

ip order to ehtain ए proper perspective of the matter, it would be useful
first to deal briefly with the position in cases not governed by the Act, and
then to recommend the ancodment that could be appropriately made in the
Act.

11. Hinds Law and Muslim law

Hindu Law, 49.5. According to Hinde . even before the passing of the Hindu
Succession Act,’ no heirship to another person could be claimed by or through
one who has been ७ privy to the murder of that person, This rule was one of
public policy and had been given effect to by the Privy Council, *-" relying on
ancient texis, Even before the Privy Council decision, substantially the same
result had been reached by the High Courts in India,

A Madras case may be cited" in illustration. Defendant, the mother of S.
had been charged, along with another accused, with having murdered S, Defen-
dant was acquitted, though the other accused was convicted. Plaintiff, the
person next in succession to §. (after the defendant), now sued for a declaration
of his right to the property of S on the ground that the defendani was not entitled
to the property, inasmuch as she had, (as the plaintiff alleged) been party to the
murder, The subordinate judge dismissed the suit without trying the question
whether he defendant had been « party to the murder. On appeal it was held by
the High Court that the question should have been tried. The reasoning was
as follows:

‘Cleaver \. Mutuat Reserve Fund Asveciation, A982) 1 Q.B. 147, 156, (103 Lado.

*Para 49.8 . (७.

“Section 25. Hindu Succession Act, 1956.

“Rite Paes (1889) 115 N.Y. 506 : 22 N.F. 188. 190 ciled by Youdan in 11973) 89

*Youdan, “Acquisition of Property by Ki (1973) 89 L.Q.R. 235. 237.
“te Hall (4914) Prabate 1. 7 111:
"See par 49.8. fafra,

*Para 49.5. infra.

*Kenchava \. Girimaltappa. AR. 1924, PC, 200.
Narada, 1-43.24. cited in Mitakashra, I-X. 3.

" Vedunavaga Mudaliar v. Vedammal, (१904), 1.L.R. 27 Mad. 591. 598 to 600. (This point was
not challenged in appeal Federal v. Vedanayaga, (1908) 1.L.R. 31 Mad. 100, 103. 104).

ras
tron LS)



267

The principle that no one shall be allowed to benefit by his own wrongful
act is of universal application. If the defendant was a party (0 the murder, her
‘wrongful act, while not preventing the vesting in her of the inheritaace, disentitled
her to any beneficial interest in it. Such beneficial interest would vest in those
who would be entitled to it if the guilty heir were out of the way.

. 49.6, In kentchava’s case,! it was held by the Privy Council that “the High Equity, Justice and
Court has tightly decided that the principles of equity, justice and good conse good conscience
cience exclude the murders”. The Privy Council also laid down the proposition
that “statutes regulating heirship or descent, or giving force to wills, should be
read as not intended to affect paramount question of public policy or depart
from well-settled principles of purisprudence”.

49.7, The Hindu Succession Act? now provides as follows:— Provision in Hindu
‘ . oe Succession Act.
“25. A person who commits a murder or abets the commission of murder

shall be disqualified from inheriting the property of the person murdered,
or any other property in furtherance of the succession to which he or she
committed or abetted the commission of the murder”.

49.8, The rule under Muslim law is also substantially the same.’ For Muslim law,
example,’ the Chief Court of Punjab held that 4 Muslim who had murdered his
half-brother could not be allowed to claim the property of the deceased as
is heir.

रा, Common Law Common law

49.9. There is enough authority in common law for such a bar, In England,
as early as 1892, it was laid down that murder forfeits all benetits under the
will of his victim. In 1914, this princi le was extended from murder to man-
slaughter.’ In regard to intestacy, tt was decided in 1935 that the same rule of
aaa ic policy applies.’

49.10, The general rule’ in England is that a person may not derive a
benefit resulting from his own crime.”

she principle that no criminal can retain a benefit which acrues to him
from crime" is now well accepted."-"

The English cases all deal with direct inheritance of the murderer from the
victim, The problem of indirect inheritance does not seem to have arisen in
» England,”

49.11, Some questions of proof have arisen’ in England, but we are not,
in the Succession Act, concerned with them. What requires to be emphasised
is that the rule barring the murderer from succession ts one of public policy, am

Public Policy

tKenchava v. Girimallappa, A.1.R. 1924, P.C. 209, 211.

4$oction 25, Hindu Succession Act, 1956. See Minote v. Suslil, AIR. 1982 Bom. 68 for mean-
ing of “murder”.

*Tyabji, Muslim Law (1968), pages 762, 820, 865.

‘Shah Kbanam, v. Kalahandhar Khan, Vol. | Punj. Rep. 455, vited in Vedanyada Mudaliar v.
Vedamal, I.L.R, 27 Mad, 591, 599.

°(a) Cleaver ५. Mutual Reserve Fund Life Association, (1892), 1 0.8. 147 (CA).

(b) Beresford (1938) A.C. 586.

*Re Hall, (1914) Probate 1.

‘Re Sigaworth, (1935) Ch. 89.

*Halsbury (3rd Ed.), Vol. 1, page 10, para 15.

°(u) Beresford v. Royal Insurance Co. Ltd., (1936) 2 AILL.R. 1052; reved. ९.७. (1937) 2 All
E.R. 243; affd. HiL., (1938) 2 All E.R. 602; (1938) A.C. 586.

(b) Cleaver v. Mutual Reserve Fund Life Assn., (1892) 1 0.8. 147. (C.A2.
te) In the Estate of Crippen, (1911) Probate ९. 108 (191{—13) AILE.R, 207.
1094, John Shipping Corporation v. Joseph Bank Ltd., (1957) 1 0.8. 267, 292, per Devlin J.

अं Beresfords Case, (1937) 2 K.B. 197, 220, Cointat v. Myham & Sons, (1913) 2 K.B. 220
v. Philip Trant & Sons Led., (1954) 1 0.8. 29, 39-40, per Denning LJ.

See also Haseldine v. Hosken, (1933) 1 K.B. 822; Askey ९. Golden Wine Co., (194) 2 AWE.R. 35,
See article by Professor Hahioin in 16 Modern Law Review 100.
18586 note by Magaty in 67 Law Quarterly Review 309.

85-L-BID)44Mof LI&CA— 18



208

as now been accepicd it mest countries, As Vaisey J. stated,’ “the rule based
©n public policy is that 00 person is allowed to take any benetit arising out of
a death brought about by the agency of that person acting felonious, whether
il be a case of murder or of manslaughter.”

iV. Law in certain viher countries

Civil law (France 49.12. In certain countrics of ihe world, the legislature fas enacted a rule
and German), preventing a person who kills the intestate from succeding to his property.”

49.13. In the civil taw sysicm, for example, the murderer is not allowed
. to reclaim the legacy.* हे
The French law has becu thus siated with reference to the French Civil
Codes “The heixy must not be unworthy. The Code hus three causes of un-
worthiness (indignite), ull somewhat academic which may exclude an heir from
the succession.

Uhese ate: (1) 1 he has been condemned tur having killed os attempted
lo kill the deceased, (2) if he has brought a complaint of a capital charge
against the deceased; 13) if he is aware that the deceased has been murdered
and does not inform the legal authors of the murder.”

“The children of an unworthy heie cannot take as representing him, but are
not excluded if they are the next heirs in their own right.’ The unworthiness
takes effec. by operation of law, any judgment of the court being merely
declaratory”.

Russian 189. 49.13. in the Kussian Law of unheritance, a citizen disquatities,. himselt
° trom succession’ under will or intestancy, if h& has promoted his inheritance by
untawful acts directed against the deceased, against any of his successors, or
against the carrying out of the wishes of the deceased as expressed’ in his will,

provided such acts are established in judicial proceedings,

Of course, ॥ ts Nel neeessiny that the motive of the person sought 10 be
disqualified must be to gain the inhetitance by his wuawful action,

USA, 49.14, In several States in the U.S.A., the principle had been recognised
by statute as early as 1936. It is apparent-" that “the social interest served by
refusing to permit the criminal lo profit by his crime is greater than that served
by the preservation and enforcement of legal righ‘s of ownership.”

The Restatement ou Restitutivn provides that a person shall not be allowed
to acquixe property by murdering another.”

Theo toi 49.15, Commentators iu the U.S.A. have suggested a constructive trust as

tructive Trust.” the logical device for denying enjoyment of benefits to one who accelerates his

हु interest by murdering the persons whose continued existence prevents acquisi-
tion. However, most courts which reject literal interpretation of an unequivocal
statute of descent, have found it simpler to draw an exception sanctioned by
public policy. (73

+ Re Callaway, (950) AIL E.R. 451, 452 (४४७८५ 4.) noted on in (1956) 72 L.Q.R. 475.
“See pasa 49.11, ef. seq. tafra.
2३५ to the civil faw system, see telerences in Vedunyada v. Vedamal (1904) LL.R. 27 Mad.
591, 600.
4Amos aid Walton, Lietreduction 10 Liench Law, (1967) page 29
Code Civil (1804), ALL. 72
“Code Civil (1804), 011. 728 gives details,
Main statutory autherily sceis 10 be Article 531 of the 1९.५.
into force on Ist October, 1964.
*Alice ‘Tay, "The Ruysian Law of inheritance”, (1968) 17 LC.L.Q. 472, 482 and Foote 2).
"Wade, “Acquisition of Property by Wilfully killing another statutory’ solution”, (1936) 49
Harvard Law Review 715, footnote.
See, further, “Development in the law-Trusts”, (1935) 48 Harvard Law Review 1162, 1180.
Scott on Erusts Grd Ed.) Section 492. .
“Cardozo, Nature of the Judicial Process.
*5Restatement of Restituliun, sections 187-189.
4Develupments--Trusts, (1935) 48 H.L.R. 1162, 1179.
2868 Amos, “Can a Murderer Acquire Title by His Crime and Keep It 2" in Lect. on Leg. Hist.
(£913); 3 Pomeroy, Equity Jurisprudence, s. 1054, note 0.

"1९. Civil Code which vane.



269

V. Need for Provision in the Indian Succession Act

49.16, Ube Indian Succession Act is, however. lacking in a specific provi- Existing sections
ston on the subject, as already stated.’ At present, the only provision of the Act in the Act as to
under which a murderer can possibly be debarred from taking advantage of his gerer
own wrong is section 263, by which the grant of probate or letters ef adminis-
sation could be revoked or annulled for a “just cause’, This is not. however. a
bar of the right to succeed, whether on intestacy or on leslamentary succession.

If any such bar is to be read, it has to be derived from the general principles
of law which have been mentioned above in the context of a uiscussion of the
law before the Hindu Succession Act® and the rule at common law.

In this position, pritia facie, there is need for inserting a suitable provision
on the subject in the Succession Act, so as'to make the Act comprehensive. On
the merits. there can hardly be any doubt, as to the soundness of the principle.

49.17. Certain questions of detail may, no doubt. require attention. There Debate as to mens
has, for example, been much debate in England whether the principle should व.
have any application if the criminal has no mens rea, but is nevertheless found
guilty of a criminal offence.

, This problem may, for instance, arise if the accused is convicted of a
statutory offence of strict liability or (in England) is found guilly of man-sta
ter by reason of diminished responsibility.” in England, some Judges
Tepected any such distinction.

In their view. 10 accept it. would be to encourage sentimental speculation
as to the motives and degrees of the moral guilt of a person who has beeu justly
convicted .

49.18, Thus, in Re. Gites,” Peunycuick V.C. refused to analyse the ground Decision in Re.

upon which the courts have established this rate of public policy. “It is suffiicent Giles.

to say that the rule has been established and that the deserving of punishment

cand moral culpability are not necessary ingredients of the type of crime to which

this rule applies, that is culpable homicide, murder or mausiaughter”. Conse~

quently, he held that a person convicted of manslaughter could not benefit under

his victims’s will, even though he was found guilty through diminshed responsi-

bility.

in the case referred to above,’ Lilian Myra Gites struck her husband a single
blow on the head with a domestic chamber pot, with the result that he dies ten
days later. The deceased had made a will in favour of his wife.

49.19, But the decision referred to above bas not escaped criticism, Goff
and Jones state their comments in this respect as follows? :--

“It is lo be hoped that these views will not prevail, Fears that the relaxa-
tion of Fry. L.J.'s principle would be “harmful and dangerous” are, in
our opinion, misconcjeved, There is much to be said for the view that the
principle should have no application if the criminal has no mens ree, but is
acvertheless found guiliy.*

“li is hardly defensible thut a person who is ‘guilty but insane’ can take
a benefit under his victim's will, but a person who is guilty by season of
diminished responsibility cannot.”

wPara 49.1. sapra,

*Para 49.4, supra.

“Para 49, 8, supra.

‘Goff and Jones. Law of Restitution (1978), page 486.

“tn the Estate of Half, (1914) Probate 17. per Hamilton LJ
*Re Giles, (1971) 3 W.L.R. 640: 11972) Ch. 544, 552

*Re Giles. (971) 3 W.L.R. 640.

* Re. Giles. (1970) 3 W.L.R. 640.

*Goff and Jones, Law of Restitution (1978), page 486.
85-L)B(D)144Mof LI&CA—19



Negligence not (०
be converted.

Offence under sec-
tion 304A, LP.C.

Cases under section
304A, LP.C.

270

Another writer has observed! :—

“The time seems ripe for a full consideration of the issues involved. The
most that can be expected of the courts is to limit the rule to murder and
manslaughter, and even to exclude manslaughter based on negligence would
now call for much judicial valour. Beyond this. it seems necessary to look to
Parliament.” 7

49.20. In India, the legislature has not had an opportunity of examining
the pros and cons of the matter. Having considered the position carefully, we are
of the view that the proposed disability in regard to succession should apply to
cases of culpable homicide (whether or not amounting to murder), but should
not extend to cases showing 9 lesser degree of mens rea—e.g. causing death by
rash or negligent act?

Public poticy—und the principle that no man should profit by his own
“wrong”—do not seem to necessitate the imposition of a disqualification in
cases of rashness or negligence. It is true that for reasons of deterrence, the
criminal law in most countries punishes rash or negligent conduct causing death
(Or certain other civil consequences). But such conduct does not attract the
doctrine that no man should profit by his own “wrong”. The emphasis that the
doctrine places on “wrong” would séem to indicate that its demands would be
amply met by confining the disability to cases where the mental element is of the
quality described in section 299 of the Indian Penal Code.

49.21. In particular, the offence under section 304A, LP.C. (causing death
by rash or negligent act) is of infinite variety, It may cover even a situation
where the morally culpable element is minimal. Serious cases of rashness would
really fall under section 304 (read with section 299) of the Indian Penal Code.

Extreme cases of rashness would fall even under section 302 (read with
section 300, fourth clause). These two sections, read together, cover a really
“culpable homicide’--culpable in the moral sense, Only cases with a. lesser
degree of mental element would fall within section 304A. It is on this rationable
that there is justification for noi attaching a disqualification (in regard to succes-
sion) to mere rashness or negligence which does not indicate a quality of mens
rea covered by sections 299 and 300 of the Indian Penal Code.

19.22. Some illustrative cases under section 304A of the Penal Code may
be referred to in this context. In one Allahabad case,’ the accused (a woman)
received a powder from an enemy of her relative, took no precaution to ascer-
tain whether it was noxious and mixed it with the relative’s food, believing that
by so doing she would become rich. It was held that her conduct was wanting
in that prudence and circumspection which every human being is supposed to
exercise, and as, by her rash and thoughtless act, she had caused death, she was
guilty of an offence under section 304A, LP.C. हु

In a Calcutta case,‘ the accused operated जा another person for internal
piles by cutting them out with an ordinary knife. The man died from haemor-
rhage. The Court hetd that he had no intention to casue the death of the patient.
In the circumstances of the case, it was held that the conviction under section
304A was a proper one.

Tn another case.’ the facts were as follows :—

The factory manufacturing fireworks etc. was situated in close proximity
10 residential quarters. Av explosion in the factory resulted in injuties to, and
death of, some persons, The explosives were of highly hazardous and dangerous
nature and their possession was prohibited. They were stored in the premises at
the time of the eccurrence. It was held by the Supreme Court that the appeal-

fants who were licence holders for manufacturing explosives in the factory were

'Gareth Miller. Note : “Slaying a Testator’. (1972) 35 Modern Law Review 42
*See draft in para 49.17. infra.

s£mp. v. Somua, (1909) 1.L.R. Ail. 290.

‘*Sukaroo Kobiraj v. The Empress, (1872) LAR. 14 Cal. 566.

4Bhalchandra v. State of Maharathira, ALR, 1968 S.C. 1319.



27h

liable to be convicted under sections 304A and 337, although there was ne
direct cvitlence of the immediate cause of the explosion. The manufacturers un-
doubtedly displayed a high degree of negligence by allowing or causing to be
tsed explosives of sensitive compositions and substances in the manufacturing
of fireworks, which must be the evicient cause of the explosion.

In yet another case, the accused, knowing that a pistol was loaded, was
trying to unload it and while doing so, acted so negligently that the pistol went
off and, as a result the complainant's son was killed. It was held that the accused
was guilty under section 304A, 1.P.C.

In a Bombay case,” the accused was out shooting with the deceased in the
jungle. While separate from the deceased, the accused saw something moving
in the jungle. Without waiting to see what it was, the accused fired and. shot the
deceased, It was held that the case fell within section 304, EP.C.

We are citing cases to show the wide scope of section 304A.

VI. Recommendation

49.23. On a consideration of the material summarised above we have COME, » commendation
to the conclusion that a new section on the subject discussed above should be to interest. sectii
inserted in the Act in the following terms:— 390A.

“390A. (1) A person who causes the death of any person by committing
culpable homicide, whether amounting to murder or not, or abets the
commission of such homicide, shall be disqualified from inheriting, or from
taking as a legatee,-—

(a) the property of the person whose death is so caused; or

(b) any other property in furtherance of the succession to which he or
she? committed or abetted the commission of such homicide.

(2) Nothing in this section applies to persons to whom section 25 of the
Hindu Succession Act, 1955 applies.

CHAPTER 50
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND SCHEDULES

50.1. Miscellaneous matters are provided for in section 391, which reads Section 391.
as unde

“391. Nothing in Part शा, Part IX or Part X shall:—

(i) validate any testamentary disposition which would otherwise have
been invalid:

(ii) invalidate any such disposition which would otherwise have been
valid;

Gii) deprive any person of any right of maintenance to which he
would otherwise have been entitled; or

tiv) affect the Administrator-General’s Act, 1913."

Moran Ram, (1930) 32 Cr. LJ. 463, referred to in Ratanlal, The Law of Crimes (22nd Ed.
page 815,
1000 (1888) Unreported Cr. C. 398, referred to in Ratanlat_ The Law of Crimes (22nd 70.).
page 813.

८ The words ‘‘or she” are strictly speaking unnecessary, having regard to section 13, General
lauses Act, 1897. However, in the Succession Act, expressions indicating mates da not at most
places, include females. Hence it is better to use specific words covering females.

‘The Proposed section should apply in ail cases where the section 25, Hindu Succession Act,
does not apply


272

Amendment of 30.2. No changes are needed in the substance of the section, But in clause
clause (iv) recom (iv) of the section, the reference to the Administrator-General’s Act. 1913
. should be revised so as to refer to the later Act of 1963 on the subject. We.
therefore, recommend that in clause (iv). for the figures “1913”, the figures

“1963” should be substituted.

Scoper out 50.3. We now come io the Schedules. The first schedule to the Act con-

First Schedule. tains the table of consanguinity. It needs no change.

Second Schedule. 30.4. The Second Schedule to the Act deals with the order of the next of
kin. Tt also needs no change.

Third Schedule - 30.5. The Third Schedule to the Act contains a list of the provisions of

Recomendation. Part VJ of the Act that are applicable to certain wills and codicils which are
described in section 61. In view of the s discussed by us under various
sections,’ certain changes will be needed in this schedule. Those changes should
be carried out.

Administration 50.6. It has been suggested’ by a mercantile association that an administra-
suit by heir (: tion suit should Le permitted to be filed even by the heirs. So far as we can see,
PRsepstiOn OF terca- SUCH a suit is permissible even under the. present law in appropriate cases and a
ntile Association’ change in the law as suc: ix net needed. In any case, the matter does not pertain
considered to the Succession Aci. but rather to the law of procedure,

CHAPTER 51
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

The recommendations made in the preceding chapters are summarised
below :--

Preliminary

(14 For the purpose of the Indian Succession Act, the definition of “Hindu”
in Hindu Succession Act, 1956, section 2, should be adopted, so as to secure
uniformity. A person to whom the Hindu Succession Act applies would, then,
be regarded as a “Hindu” for the pu s Of the Indian Succession Act also.
This should be carricd out by amen ang section 2 of the Indian Succession
Act, by inserting « definition of the expression “Hindu” after section 2(c).
As a consequential change. expressions referring to Buddhists, etc. along with
Hindu, wherever they occur in the Act, may be omitted.

(2) A definition of the expression “child” should also be — inserted, as
under ;—~ Roe

“(aa) ‘child’ includes—

(3) an adopted child. in the case of any one whose personal law
permits adoption;

(b) an illegitimate child.‘
(3) A definition of the expression “Parsi” should be inserted.

(4) To remove the discrepancy between the definition of “probate” as oc-
curing in section 2(f) and the form of probate as given in the Sixth Schedule
to the Act. the definition of “probate” ‘should be revised, and the expression

‘See for example. discussion as to sections 63—65, 91, etc.

4Law Commission File No. F. 2(6)/84-L.C. S. No. 6A Hindustani Mercantile Association,
Delhi letter No. HMA/2241 dated 20th May. 1984.

"Paragraphs 3.7. and 3. 14.
“Paragraphs 3.8, 3.9 and 9.18
sParagraphs 3.4 and 3.15.


273

“probate” should be defined as meaning a “document issued in respect of a will
under the signature of the proper officer of the court, certifying that the original
will was proved on a certain date and attaching a certified copy of the will,
with a grant of administration to the estate of the testator.'

(5) In regard to the rules of conflict of {laws as applicable on the subject
of the format validity of wills, the connecting factors that could possibly operate
should be made more liberal than at present, broadly on the lines of the (English)
Wills Act. 1963. This is desirable in order to avoid certain anomalies of the
present law. which are pointed out in the Report

(6) To avoid a possible inconsistency in the legislation, it will also be
necessary. as a consequential change, to modify suitably the text of section 5.
which is relevant on the subject of conflict of laws.’

On adding the tests that will become operative by virtue of the proposed
new provisions relating 10 formal validity of wills, the restrictive rule contained
in section 5 would, to some extent, become inaccurate, since that section pro-
vides for only two criteria (law of domicile of a person at the time of his
death, or the law of India). On this score. section 5 wilt need suitable amend-
ment.'

(7) Insertion of certain new sections 3A to 3E is recommended, to deal
with the rules of conflict of laws as to the formal validity of wills.*

(8) Section 4, ut present, provides that Part 11 of the Act (sections 4 10 19)
which deals with domicile, does not apply to Hindus, Mohammedans, Buddhists.
Sikhs or Jains. It is, however, desirable that Part [1 of the Act should be extended
to the persons who are at present excluded from its scope by section 4. The
reason is, that even now, the rules contained in sections 5 to 18 governing
domicile are, by judicial decisions, followed, in principle, in determining the
domicile of the excluded persons. Section 4 should therefore be deleted.*

(9) 10 regard 10 section 5, which deals with the Jaw that will regulate
succession to the immovable and movable property of a person deceased, it is
necessary to provide an exception for cases where the deceased has, by his
will, expressly opted for applying the national law in relation to succession’ to
his movable property, +

This change should be carried on in section 5. even if the recommendation
for the addition of liberal provisions generally in regard to the law determining
the validity of execution of wills is not accepted.’

(10) In the light of the separate recommendation for inserting certain tests
relating to the formal validity of wilis which are not contained in present section
5, section 5 will req consequential amendment. by adding, at the end of
that section, the following new sub-section:—

(3) The provisions of this section shall be subject to those of Chapter 1A.

(11) With reference to section 6, which provides that a person can have
only one domicile for the purpose of regulating succession to his movable pro-
perty, it is desirable to provide that where it is difficult to determine the domi-
cile of a person by reason of the fact that he has two or more places of perma-
nent residence, the place where he last permanently resided shail be the place
of his domicile. Section 19 may be the appropriate place for carrying out this
object, and it is therefore, recommended that a suitable Explanation should be

added to that section for the purpose.’

»Paragraph 3.20.

“Paragraphs 4.2, 4.18 and 4.20.

‘Paragraph 4.18, second sub-paragraph and paragraph S.19.
“Paragraphs 4.14 and 4.19.

+Paragraph 4.20.

*Paragraphs 5.12 to 5.15.

*Paragraph §.20 10 5.22

*Paragraph $.23

*Paragraph 5.25


274

(12) Under section 7. batter half, the domicile of origin of 4 posthumous
child is that of the father of the chitd atthe time of the father’s death. This
rigid provision might lead to certain anomalies, which are pointed out in the
Report. It is, therefore, reconimended that in section 7. latter half, the mother’s
domicile should be substituted in place of the father’s.’ In certain exceptional
circumstances, however, such a rule might not benefit the child, for example,
where the meth. deliberately and mala fide changes the domicile so as not to
benefit the child. For this purpose, section (4 may be amended to the effect
that where the change of domicle eifected by the mother is not for the welfare
of the minor, the change in the domicile of the minor, which may otherwise
Jollow from a change of domicile on the part of the mother, is not to be regarded
as a necessary consequence of change in the mother's domicile

(13) As regards section 7, latter half, as well as section 14,, to carry out
the above recommendations. suitable re-draft/amendment ‘have been recom.
mended in the Report,’

114) With re!
domiciic, a verbal ८
word “man”, the word “

(15). IHustration (i) tw section 10 should be verbally amended, and iltus-
trations (vi) and (vii) to that section should be deleted as obsolete. for reasons
given in the Report.‘

ction 10, which deals with the acquisition of a new
reeymmended so as to substitute. for the existing
an

116) The Explanation to section 10 should be revised as under :-—

Explenation—A person is not deemed to have taken up his fixed habitation

India or in any other country merely by reason of his residing there in
serivee of any Government, authority or person or in the exercise of any
profession or calling, but if a person, having gone to another country for
the purpose of service or the excrcise of any profession or calling intends
to remain there. he may acquire a domicile in that country.”

(17) 4n regard to section 11 which deals with a special mode of acquiring
domicile by making a declaration in the prescribed office, it is desirable to clarify
its scope (which is intended to be a limited one) by adding an Explanation to
the effect that the provisions of the section confer a limited domicile only for the
Purpose of regulating succession 10 movable property, and not for any other
purpose.’

(18) Section 11 provides that “any person” may acquire a domicile in
India by depositing a specified declaration. It should be made clear that the
section is not intended to cover the case of a Person who is not competent to
contract. The section should, therefore, be amended by adding, after the words
“any person,” the words “competent to contract by the law of the country in
which he was immediately before such declaration domiciled,

(19). As regards section 14 which deals with the domicile of the minor, .
certain changes, based largely on section 4, Domicile and Matrimonial Proceed-
ings Act, 1973 of England. are recommended?

(20) Further, from the scope of section 14, the case where the parent
mala fide changes his domicile, should be excluded. This change has been recom-
mended by the Commission while dealing with section 7.”

‘Paragraph 5.28
*Paragraph 5.28 A.
sParagraph 5.29.
“Paragraph 5.37
sParagraph 5.42
“Paragraph 5.41.
‘Paragraph 5.46.
“Paragraph 5.47.
*Paragraph3. 58.
“Paragraphs 5.27 and 5.59.



275

(21) To provide for the domicile of a minor who has no parent and has
only a guardian. the following new section should be inserted :—

“t4A. A change in the domicile of a guardian other than a parent brings
about a change in the domicile of the ward, unless, by virtue of the change
of domicile, the guardian ceases to be guardian and the relationship of
guardian and ward thereby ceases.”"!

(22) Section 15 provides that, by marriage, a woman acquires the domicile
of her husband, if she had not the same domicile before, How far the section
should be retained in its present form. depends on the view to be taken with
reference (6 section 16.

(23) As regards section 16 which, in its main paragraph, provides that the
wife’s domicile during macriage follows her husband's domicile, it is necessary
to substitute a different rule, which would leave the domicile of a marsied
woman to be governed by the rules that will otherwise apply.

(24) The amendment of section 16 recommended above.’ would render the
Exception to section 16 unnecessary, The Exception provides that the wife’s
domicife no Jonger follows that of her husband, if they ace scparated by the
sentence of a competent court or if the husband is undergoing 8 sentence of
transportation, However, if section १6 is not amended as recommended above,
it will be necessary to carry out certain verbal changes in the Exception, having
regard to current usage und law. Hence, if the main paragraph of section 16
is to be retained in the present form, the Exception to the Section should be
revised as under:——*

“Exception~The wile’s domicile ao longer follows that of her husband if

they are separated by a decree of judicial separation or the husband is

undergoing a sentence analogous to transportation.”

(25) Tf sections 15 and 16 (relating (o the cffect of marriage on domicile)
ave reiainet without substantial amendment, a new section 16A should be inserted
to deal with the domicile of widows and divorced woman, as under :-—-

“(6A (1) A widow retains. after the death of her husband, her late hhus~
band’s last domicite until she changes it in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.

(2) A divorced woman retains, after the divorce, her former husband's last
domicile, until she changes it in accordance with the provisions of this Act.’*

(26) Section 18. at present, provides thal an insane person cannot acquire
a new domicile in any other way than’ by his domicile following the domicile
of another person, It is recommended that the section should be revised as

under :—

“48. The domicile of an insane person follows that of the person in whose
care and protection he is for the time being.“

(27) Yo meet cases where domicile of a person cannot be determined, new
section 18A should be inserted. on the following lines :-+

“18A. Where it is difficult to determine the domicile of a person by reason

of the fact that he bas two or more places of permanent residence, the

place, being one of the two or more places aforesaid, where such person
fast resided permanently. shall be deemed to be the place of his domicile.”

\Paragraph $.6}.
2Paragraph 3.62.
*Parageaph 5.74,
‘Paragraph 3.75.
SParagraph 5.78.
*Paragtaph 5.83,
"Paragraph 5. 84.


alo

(28) To provide tor cases where foreign Jaw cagnot be easily proved, the
folowing aew section 19A should be inserted :—

“19A. The court may, for the purpose of this Chapter, presume that the
law of a foreign country is the same as that of India.”

(29) Section 22(1) should be revised as under :—

“(1) The property of a minor may be settled in contemplation of marriage.
provided the settlement is made by the minor—

(a) with Ue approbation of the minor's father or

(b) if the father is dead or absent from India or under disability, with
the upprobation of the minor’s mother, जज

(९) if both the father und the mother are dead or absent from India
or under disability, with the approbation of the High Court.”

(30) To clarify the position under section 29 on the points discussed in the
Report, two recommendations are made :—

(a) The Travancore Christian Succession Regulation’ of 1092 should be
repealed by un express provision. This course may be adopted if, as a
matter of social policy. it is considered that the Indian Succession Act
should apply to the persons governed by the Travancore Regulation,
referred to above.

If. on the other hand, it is considered that as a matter of social policy.
the provisions of the Travancore Christaian Succession Regulation should
govern succession to the persons concerned, then there should be inserted
a provision in section 29 of the Indian Succession Act to the effect that
the Travancore Regulation would apply to Christians governed by that Regu-
Jation in respect of intestate’ succession—

(i) in the State of Kerala, and

(ii) the adjoining areas in the State of Tamil Nadu (in the district
of Kanya Kumari and Shencottah taluk). .

(bh) Resides the above amendment. an Explanation should be added to sec-
tion 29(2) of the Indian Succession Act. to the effect that “Jaw” in this
section does not include custom."

(०) The recommendation made above regarding the Travancore Succession
Regulation applies with necessary adaptation. to the Cochin Succession

Act also.

If the Indian Succession Act. 1925, becomes applicable to the persons in
question. provisions made for daughters by the father should be taken
jnto account when the succession opens on intestacy, Tt is therefore,
recommended that suitable provision should be made to the effect that
from the share to be distributed to a daughter on intestacy, the amount
or value of the property so provided by the father during his lifetime
should he deducted. provided the following conditions in favour of
the daughter are fulfilled :--

(d

the making of such provision is evidenced in writing, whether or

(i
hot the writing js stamped or registered: and

(ii) the amount of the provision or its value. on each individual occa-
sion, is not Jess than five hundred rupees.

"Paragraph 5.88.
*Paragraph 6.10.
*Paragraph 8.12.
‘paragraph 8.12.
sParagraph 8.12.


277
Intestates other than Parsis : Sections 31 to 49

(31) Where the intestate governed by section 33 leaves no surviving issue,
parent, brother or sister of the whole blood or issue of such brother or sister,
his whole estate should pass to the widow, On this point the provision in section
46, Intestates Estates Act, 1952 (Eng.) € worth adopting, being in consonance
with the present day sentiments. Section 33 should be amended accordingly.’

(32) Section 334, providing for the compulsory share of the widow where
the deceased has left no lineal descendants, should be amended so as to—

(i) increase the amount from 5,000 Tupees to Rs. 35,000; and
(ii) increase the rate of interest from 4 p.c. to 9 p.c?

(33) Section 34 provides that where the intestate has left no widow, his
property shall go—

(a) to his lineal descendants; or

(0) to those who are of kindred to him, not being lineal descendants, accord-
ing to the prescribed rules; or

(c) if no kindred are left, then to the Government.

The most usual cases under the last part are of illegitimate persons, Although,
technically, their property goes to Government, it appears that there was practice
in the past of the Crown (now, the State) re-granting the property to certain
relatives, in case of illegitimate persons.*

The Law Commission has not been able to Ascertain whether these arrange-
ments still continue. However, social justice requires that the need for such
arrangements should be considered in the context of section 34,

(34) There is also a point of drafting pértaining to section 34, The corres-
ponding provision in the Hindu Succession Act is more precise than the provi-
sion in the section 34 of Indian Succession Act. The Hindu Succession Act (sec-
tion 7) rovides that the Government takes the property subject to all the obli-
gations of the heir. It is recommended that in section 34, for the last six words
“jt shall .......... the Government”, the words “such property shall devolve
on the Government; and the Government shall take the property subject to all
the obligations and libabilities 10 which an heir would have been subject,” should
be substituted.

(35) Even in cases governed by sections 37—39, there should be succes-
sion per stripes, as that would be more in consonance with the general sense of
the community. Section 37 should be revised as under, to carry out this object,
Revised section 37

“37, Where the intestate has left surviving him a child or children, but no

more remote lineal descendant through a deceased child, the property shall—

(a) belong to his surviving child, if there is only one, or
(b) shall be divided among all his surviving children as if section 40
applied to the case.”

“child includes—

(a) an adopted child, in the case of any one whose personal law permits
adoption.
{b) an illegitimate child.”

1Paragraphs 9.5. and 9.6 and 9,8.
*Paragraph 9.8.

“Paragraph 9.11.

‘Paragraph 9.12.

*Paragraph 9.13.

“Paragraph 9.17.

Paragraph 8.20.


278

(38) Section 38 should be revised as recommended in the Report.’

(39) With reference to sections 43-46, even where brothers and sisters
of the intestate are alive, the father and mother should take the property (sharing
equally) and if only one of them surjves, he or she should take the whole?

(40) In regard to section 47, it should be made clear that the section does
not apply unless there is at least one brother or sister alive.

(41) With reference to section 48, which provides that where the intestate
has left neither lineal descendant nor parents, nor brother, nor sister, the pro-
perty of the intestate shall be divided equally among relatives in the nearest
degree of kindred to the deceased, an Explanation should be added to the effect
that where such relatives are children or brothers or sisters of the intestate, they
shall take per stirpes. Mlustration (iv) to section 48 should also be revised,
accordingly.

(42) Section 51 (succession to a male Parsi—division of his property among
his widow, children, and parents) gives to the sons double the share of the
daughters. This discrimination against women should be removed.>

(43) Similarly, in sections 54(d) and 55, the present provision giving
males double the share of each female standing in the same degree of propinquity
should be amended, so as to remove the disparity of shares based solely oa sex.®

(44) In section 59 Céompetence to make a will), the first paragraph should
be revised, so as to provide that a person may, by will, dispose of not only his
property, but also any propetty over which he has a disposing power which he
can exercise by will’

(45). To section 59, the following proviso should be added :—

“Provided that any person, whatever his age may be, may, by will, revoke or

alter any will appointing a guardian or guardians, for his child during mino-

rity.”

(46) Explanation 1 to section 59 (power of married woman to make a
will) is not intended to dispense with the requirements of capacity to make a
will as prescribed in the main paragraph of the section, To make this clear,
the Explanation should be revised as un si —

“Explanation 1—A married woman, if otherwise competent to make a@ will,
may by will dispose of any property which she could alienate by her own
act during her life.”*

(47) The law should be amended by providing that the court exercising
jurisdiction under the Indian Lunacy Act, 1912, in relation to the property of a
lunatic shall have power to make an order, direction or authority for the execution
for the lunatic, of a will making any provision which could be made by a will
executed by the lunatic if he were a person of sound mind. The amendment could
be in the form of—

(a) a anew section, to be inserted in the indian Succession Act, as section

59A; or

(b) two new sections, io be inserted मो the Indian T Sci, 1912. as

sections 49A and 71A, intended to provide for the powers of the
High Court and the district court, respectively, on the subject.”

‘Paragraph 8.24.

sParagraph 8.29.

*Paragraph 8.33.

“Paragraph 8.37.

*Paragraph 10.6.

*Paragraph 10.7.

*Paragraph 12.11.
*Paragraph 12.12.
*Paragraphs 12.13 and 12. 14.
\Pparagraphs 12.20 to 12, 22


279

(48) The right to appoint, by will, a guardian for a minor child, given
by section 60 to the father, should be given to the mother also, where the tather
is absent or not competent to act.’ Further, it should be made clear that only
& person of sound mind may appoint a guardian during the minority of the
child? . .

{A suitable re-draft, of section 60 is suggested for the purpose)’

(49) In section 61, the case of mistake of the testator should be covered,
by adding, after the words “the free agency of the testator,” the words “or by
mistake.”* .

(50) In section 63(a) (which deals with the formal requirements of wills),
it should be made clear, by adding an Explanation, that the “other person” sign-
ing for the testator is competent to attest the will under clause (c) of the section.

(51) As a consequential change, it should also be made clear that the pro-
visions of clause (c) of section 63 are subject to those of clause (a) and of the
Explanation thereto (which is to be added as above).‘

(52) In section 64, which deals with documents incorporated in will by
reference, it should be made clear that the document must not only be acutally
in existence, but must be also described (in the will) as actually, in existence.”

(53) Section 65 should be extended to Hindus etc. by amending the Third
Schedule.

(54) In Section 65, it should further be provided that a person otherwise
competent to make a privileged will can do so, whether or not he has completed
the age of eighteen years.’

(55) A new section 65A should be inserted, to confer, on persons affected
by natural calamities, the right to make a privileged will, where there is a reasona-
ble apprehension of death.”

(56) If the provisions of the Act relating to privileged wills are to be
extended to persons affected by calamity (by inserting section 65A) as recom-
mended above, section 66 will also require consequential changes."

(57) On the insertion of a new section (as recommended above) to extend
the facility of “‘privilged wills” to persons affected by natural calamity, (proposed
new section 65A) consequential changes will become necessary in section 66(2),
caluses (e), (f) and (8). In these clauses, the words “soldier, sailor or airman
should be replaced by the words” the person entitled to make a privileged will.”

(58) Section 67 should be amended by inserting the following exception
in the section, before the Explanation :—

“Exception—For the purposes of this section, the attestation of a will be 4
person to whom or to whose spouse there is given any such benefit as is
described in this section shall be disregarded—

(a) Where, by means of an oral trust, a beneficial interest is conferred
upon an attesting witness who at the time of attestation is unaware of
the secret trust in his favour; or

‘Paragraphs 12.26 to 12.29.
*Paragraphs 12.27 and 12.28.
*Paragraph 12.29.
‘Paragraph 12.52.
‘Paragraphs 13.9 and 13.21.
‘*Paragraph 13.23.
*Paragraph 13.26.
*Paragraphs 13.4 and 14.11.
“Paragraph 14.12.
Paragraph 14.20.
“Paragraph 14.23.
*Pacagraphs 14,20 and 14.24.


280

(b) where the marriage to an attesting witness of a person taking
a beneficial interest under the will takes place after the attestation, or
(०) where at the time of the attestation it could not be predicted that
the attesting witness was person taking a beneficial interest under the
will; or

(d) where the will has been witnessed by not less than two other witnes~
Ses, 10 whom no such benefit as is described in this Section is given by
the will.”

(59) Section 69 should be revised as under :—

“69. (1) Every will, not being a mutual will, shall be revoked by the
marriage of the maker, except a will made in exercise of a power of appoint-
ment, when the property over which the power of appointment is exercised
would not, in default of such appointment, pass to his or her executor or
administrator, or to the person entitled in case of intestacy,

Explanation—Where a man is invested with Power to determine the disposi-
tion of property of which he is not the owner, he is said to have power to
appoint such property.

Exception—A will expressed to be made in contemplation of a marriage
or indicating an intention that it was so made shall not be revoked by the
solemnization of the marriage contemplated; and such an intention may be
inferred from any portion of the will showing that marriage was thought of.

(2) Where the law of domicile of the maker of the will at the time of
death has a different rule, that rule shall prevail, and the provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to the extent to which there के
between the two.”?

(60) Specific provision (proposed section 69A) to deal with the effect of
divorce or annylment of marriage, on wills should be inserted, on the lines
recommended in the Report.*

(61) If, as recommended above (under section 69), the case’ of effect of
divorce or annulment of marriage is added in the Act, it will also be necessary to
amend section 70, by adding, after the word “marriage”, the words “or dissolu-
tion or annulment of marriage.’* . पु

(62) The following new section is recommended to be inserted as section

“TOA. Where, after the execution of the will by a Hindu testator who has,
in the will, purported to deal with co-parcenary property, a son is born to
that testator, the will shall stand revoked as regards all property, unless the
will contains an express provision indicating a contrary intention,” *

(63) The present structure of section 72 being complicated, its main. para-
graph should be re-structured, as recommended in the Report.$ :

CONSTRUCTION OF WILLS—SECTIONS 74—111,

(64) To section 89, an Explanation (regarding bequests for Dharma) should
be added on the lines of section 10, Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950."

(65) The various rules as to construction of will, contained in section 99
are intended to be applicable only if a different intention is not disclosed, This
should be made clear by inserting, in section 99, at an appropriate place, in the
words “in the absence of any intention to the contrary.”*

*Paragraph 15.16.
"Paragraph 15.23,
*Paragraph 15.32.
‘Paragraph 15,34.
"Paragraph 15.38,
“Paragraph 15.41.
"Paragraph 16.26,
"Paragraph 16.39 and 16.46.



281

(66) The following Explanation should be inserted in section 99 on the
subject of a child in the womb :

“Explanation—For -the purposes of this section, a child is presumed to have
been in the womb at time of death of a person if the child was born within
three hundred and fifteen days of such death.”

(67) But if the illustration is to be retained at all, then illustrations (vii)
and (viii) should be amended, so as to incorporate the reasoning on which the
view taken in the illustrations is based, In illustration (vii), the words “since it
would be against public policy” should be added at the end, And, in illustration
(viii), the words “since there is evidence of contrary intention” could be added
at the end for the purpose.”

(68) Section 100 should be suitably re-drafted so as to refer to a reputation
or relationship, but not necessarily a reputation of legitimacy. The object could
be ‘achieved by substituting, in place of the words “being such relative”, the
words “being a child, son or daughter or otherwise standing in the relationship
in question”.

Revised section 100 would then read thus—

“100. In the absence of any intimation to the contrary in a will, the word
“child”, the words “son”, the word “daughter”, or any word which expresses
“relationship, is to be understood as denoting only a legitimate relative, or,
where there is no such legitimate relative, a person who has acquired, at
the date of the will, the reputation of being a child, son or daughter or
otherwise standing in the relationship in question.”*

(This recommendation to be carried out, only if the alternative recommenda-
tion to revise the section is not accepted).

(69) Section 100, illustration (vii), is anachronistic, Both from the juristic
point of view and on wider considerations of social justice, a bequest to an illegiti-
mate child, whether already begotten or otherwise, should not be regarded as
against public policy. In the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 there is no provision
corresponding ‘to section 100, illustration (vii), as regards gifts during life time
tind there is no reason for retaining any such provision in the law of testamentary
succession:

(70) Mlegitimate children should be regarded as prima facie included with-
in.the scope of reationship, in the absence of expression of a contrary intenuon.
If a person begets an illegitimate child, it would not, in general, be unrealistic.
to presume that he would, in making a testamentary disposition, like to benefit
his illegitimate children as well. There will still remain scope for the expres-
sion of a-contrary intention by him. But, subject to this safeguard, it would be
proper, as a matter of social justice, to reverse the present rule, which was
framed at a time when the notions of society on the subject under consideration
were much more rigid than they are now. Section 100 should be revised and
new section 100A should be inserted for the purpose, as recommended in the
Report.$

(71) In regard to section 105, illustration (vi), dealing with the situa-
tion of “commorients” (deaths of two or more persons in a common disaster),
attention is drawn to the Law Commission’s recommendation in its Report on
the Evidence Act.?

Tf the will does not, in any manner, indicate an intention that the two persons
are to take it jointly, the presumption should be in favour of a tenancy in common.

"Paragraphs 16.45, 16.47 and 16.53.

*Paragraph 16,64.

*Paragraph 16.61.

See infra (summary of paragarphs 16.72 to 16.76).
‘Paragraph 16.69.

"Paragraphs 16,72 to 16.76.

*Patagraph 16.92 et seg.


282

For this purpose, the law should be amended; and an Explanation to section 107
should be added somewhat in these terms.

“Explanation—If the will does not, in any way indicate an intention that
the legacy is given to two persons jointly, it shalt be presumed that the
testator intended to give them distinct shares of it?”

(72) Section 113 should either be deleted, or amended as recommended
in the Report.’

(73) Section 114 should be revised as recommended in the Report’

(74) In section 118, the changes of substance and drafting, as recommended
in the Report, should be carried out.‘

tn brief, the amendments recommended in section 118 are :—

(a) Removing the present provision for compulsory deposit of the will,
in cases where the section applies;

(b) removing the present provision that there should be the prescribed
minimum interval between execution of the will and death of the
testator:

(c) substituting a requirement that (in the case of a will governed by the
section), one of the near relatives of the testator must be an attesting
witness;

(d) defining the expression “near relative”, as meaning a nephew or a niece
or nearest relative; and

(c) inserting, in the section, an Explanation on the following lines :—

“Explanation—The spouse of a person shall be deemed to be the nearest
relative of that person for the purposes of this section.”

(75) New section 118A should be inserted in the Act as follows :—

118A. The restrictions contained in sections 114, 116, and 117 shall not
apply in the case of a bequest for the benefit of the public, for the relief
of poverty or the advancement of religion, education, commerce, health, safety
or any other object beneficial to mankind.’”*

(76) In section 120, Exception, a proviso should be inserted at the end,
to make it clear that the Exception does not affect the provisions of section 121.*

(77) Section 124 should be brought in line with the present English law.
Tt is recommended that the following proviso should be added to section 124,
for the purpose.

“Provided that :

(8) where the event so specified is the death of any person without
issue or unmarried or before a particular age or accompanied by any
other specified circumstance, and

(0) that person is the holder of a prior bequest contained in the will,
then, unless the will indicates an intention to the contrary, the legacy
shall take effect whether the death happens before or after the period
when the prior bequest takes effect.”

‘Paragraph 16.104.
*Paragraphs 17.7 and 17.8.
*Paragraphs 17.10, et. seq.
“Paragraphs 17.11 and 17.19.
sParagraph 17.23.
“Paragraph 18.5.

"Paragraph 20.16.



283

(78) The fourth illustration to section 124 should also be revised in con-
formity with the above recommendation. The object could be achieved by re-
framing the last eleven words of the illustration, as under’ :--

“in case B dies without children during or after the lifetime of A”.

The second illustration 10 section 124 should also be revised, as recom-
mended in the Report.*

(79) Under section 127, a bequest upon a condition, the fulfilment of
which would be contrary to law or to morality, is void. This section should be
amended by adding the words “or to public policy” after the words “or
morality.”*

(80) Section 136 should be revised as recommended in the Report, the ob-
ject being to provide that where the testator has not prescribed a particular
time limit for the performance of a condition atiached to a bequest, the donee
should have his (donee’s) entire lifetime for performing the condition.‘

(81) Section 137 should be amended by adding, after the word “fraud”,
the words “of a person who would be directly benefitted by non-performance of
the condition.”*

Bequests with directions etc.—sections 138—144

(82) In sections 138-139, the present word “fund” would seem to suggest
that the sections are intended to apply only to movable property. But the sections
should apply to all types of property and, accordingly, the word “fund” should
be replaced by the word “property”, with necessary consequential change’.

Legacies to executors—section 141

(83) Section 141 (legacy to executors) should be made subject to an inten-
tion to the contrary, by adding, at the end, the words “unless a different intention
appears from the will.’”

Demonstrative Jegacies——section 151
(84) A recommendation is made to combine sections 151 and 157.7

Ademption—sections 152—166

(85) Conversion of an asset by /egislative action falls within section 163, and
is outside section 152. The cause should be excluded from section 152 by
express words’ and it is recommended that in section 152, after the words,
“has been converted into property of a different kind”, the words “by act of
parties” should be inserted for the purpose.’

(86) Further, section 152 should be made subject to a different intention.”

The will should govern the converted property as it would have governed
the original property, if such an intention can be inferred.”

(87) The situations in which sections 155 and 156 operate are distinct from
each other and this should be brought out by a suitable re-casting of the section.
There is also need to introduce symmetry between the two sections. The two
sections should, therefore, be re-cast, as recommended in the Report.”

‘Paragraph 20. 16.
*paragraph 20.7.
*Paragraph 21.7.
“Paragraph 21.16.
*Paragraph 21.20.
“Paragraph 22.7.
‘Paragraph 23.4.
*Paragraphs 25.3, 26.12, 26.13 and 26.14.
*Paragraph 26.6.

Paragraph 26.6.

‘paragraph 26.6.

‘3Paragraph 26. 10.


284

(88) Overlapping between sections 151 and 157 should be removed, and
the law simplified, by combining the gist of the two sections in one section‘.

(89) In regard to section 162, it should be made clear that the section
applies to “specific bequests”. For this purpose, the section should be amended by
substituting, for the words “the thing bequeathed”, the words “the thing specifi-
cally bequeathed’.” दि

Payment of liability in respect of subject of bequest: Sections 167--172

(90) Section 170 (specific bequest of stock in a company) should be
suitably amended, so as to add an express mention of shares in a company with
a limited liability, A re-draft of the section is recommended for the purpose.

(91) In regard to section 172, it should be made clear that the section
applies to “specific bequests”, For this purpose, the section should be amended by
should be added, after the word “funds”, with consequential changes.‘

(92) There is an inconsistency between sections 173 and 174, and where
a fund is set apart for the payment of an annuity, there arises a conflict between
the two sections, ‘To remove the conflict, there should be excluded, from section
174, cases where the annuity is for life only, or where it otherwise appears that
it is not intended to be perpetual. Re-drafts of the two sections on the above
basis are recommended’.

Legacies to creditors and portioners
(93) A new section 177A should be inserted as under, to deal with bequests
to debtors :—

“177A. Where a creditor bequeaths a legacy to his debtor, and it does
not appear from the will that the legacy is to be paid even if the debt is
not repaid by the debtor, the debtor shall not be entitled to the legacy
unless so much of the debt as has become due and payable has been
repaid*.”

Election :—Sections 180—-190

(94) The law relating to election in India, as incorporated in section 180,
insists on forfeiture and is unduly harsh. Section 180 (the principal section on
the subject) should be revised as under’ :—

“180, Where a testator, by his will professes to dispose of some thing which
he has no right to dispose of, the person to whom the thing belongs shall
elect either to confirm such disposition or to dissent from it; and in the
latter case, he shall compensate any person who has, by virtue of such
election, lost the benefits provided for him by the will, such compensation
not tc exceed the benefits which may have been provided by the will for
the person so dissenting.”

(95) Section 181 should also be deleted, if section 180 is deleted as re~
‘commended above, since, after the proposed amendment of section 180, there
will be no “relinquishment” by the legatee.*

96, In section 182 the reference to section 181 should be deleted, if section
181 is deleted as recommended above. Illustration to section 182 will also require
change, if the recommendation to substitute (in section 180) compensation. in
place of forfeiture is accepted. Illustration (iv) to section 182 has become obsolete

1Paragraph 26.12.
*Paragraph 26.19.
aParagraph 27.10.
‘Paragraph 28.4.
‘Paragraphs 29.3 and 29.4.
“Paragraph 30.6.
‘Paragraphs 31.9 to 31.11.
*Paragraph 31.12.


285

fa view of present English law as to the age of majority and should be deleted.
On the above basis, the illustrations to section 182 should be revised as recom-
mended in the Repoxt’

Gifts iu contemplation of death; section 191

(97) Section 191 should be extended to Hindus etc. by amending the Third
Schedule von Be

(98) In regard to section 192, judicial interpretation of the word “succession”
should be codified by adding, after the word “succession” wherever it occurs in
the section, the words “testamentary or intestate”

(99) With reference to section 200 (suit in the name of the curator), it
should be made clear that it is not necessary that the curator must have been
specifically authorised to institute or defend the suit.‘ It should also be made
clear, by amending section 200, that it is not necessary for the curator to obtain
a succession certificate before instituting a suit to recover the debt!

Drafts of Explanations 1 and 2, to bs added to section 200 on the above
points, are suggested *

Representative title of the deceased—sections 211 to 216

(100) A special provision is needed to cover shares, in the context of the
grant of letters of administration (section 211). There is also need to cover ali
cases of survivorship, in the context of grant of succession certificate. Accordingly,
an Explanation should be 40060 to section 211, as under :-—

“Explanation—Where shares in joint stock company belonging io an undivid-
ed family governed by the Mitakshara school of Hindu law stand in the name
of the karta of the family, letters of administration limited to the shares
may, in the event of the karta dying intestate, be granted to the legal
Tepresentatives of the karta (including, in an appropriate case, the next karta
of the family)

The amendment to authorise grant of succession certificate in cases of
survivorship is dealt with later.*

(101) Section 213, which provides that before title as an executor under
a will can be established, probate of the will must be obtained, should be
atiiended, by clarifying that where probate has not been obtained, what is barred
is only the passing of a decree in favour of the executor, and not the institution
of.a.suit by

(102) From section 213, Indian Christians should be excluded, and conse-
quential changes, where necessary, be made in other sections.”

(103) For carrying out the various points made in the Report with reference
to section 224, insertion of the following Explanations to section 214 is re-
commended.”

“Explanation 1, Nothing in this section® shall be construed as precluding a
debtor of a deceased person from making payment of a debt to ६ person (in
this Explanation referred to as the ‘payee’) claiming, on succession, to be
entitled to the effects of the deceased person or to any part thereot, where

‘Paragraph 31.14.
“Paragraph 32.9.
"Paragraph 33.3.
“Paragraph 33.12.
"Paragraph 33.13.
“Paragraph 33.14.
"Paragraphs 34.14 and 34415.
“Paragraphs 48.8 and 49.3.
“Paragraph 34.18,
Paragraph 34. 186A.
“paragraph 34.45 read with paragraphs 34.40, 34.33 and 34.36.
“If so considered necessary, the first Explanation (proposed to be added to section 214).could
be Limited to claims for smali amoun:


286

the debtor is Satisfied that the payee is so entitled and has taken from the
payee a bond indemmifying the debtor and where a debtor makes such pay-
ment in good faith and after due care and attention, he shall not be bound
to make payment of the debt again in the person entitled to the effects of
the deceased person or to any part thereof, as the case may be; but nothing
in this Explanation shall affect any remedy which the person so entitled
may have against the payee who has received payment from the debtor.”

(104) To section 218, an Explanation should be added as under :—

Explanation—Where the Property of a Hindu undivided coparcenary passes
by survivorship to the sole surviving coparecener, the sole Surviving coparcener
shall, for the purpose of this section, he deemed to be a person entitled
to the estate of the person on whose death the property so passes, and shalt
accordingly be entitled to apply for letters of administration under this
section®.”

(105) In section 219(a). illustration (ii) should be revised as under* :—
“«ii) The widow has married again since the decease of her husband, This,
in itself, is not a good cause for her exclusion.”

(106) The following new section should be inserted in the Act, as section
222A.

“222A, The court may by order exclude from acting as executor, a person
who, in the opinion of the court, is definitely unfit to. administer the affairs
of the deceased, whether or not that person has committed waste or breach
Of trust after commencing administration of such affairs :

Provided that no such order shall be passed without affording such person
@ reasonable opportunity of being heard‘, ”

(107) Section 223 should be re-drafted as under :—
“223—Probate cannot be granted—

(a) to any person who is a minor or is of unsound mind, or

(b) to any company, unless it satisfies the conditions prescribed by
tules to be made by the State Government in this behaif; or

(९) 10 any corporation other than a company, éf it is not legally compe-
tent to accept probate'.”

(108) To section 241, an Explanation should be added to the effect that—

(a) section 241 will apply also where the case falls under section 228; and

(0) if the case falls under section 228, a copy of the will is to suffice and
the original will need not be produced.*

(109) In view of that has been stated above section 223, section 236
should be revised as follows :—

“236, Letters of administration cannot be granted—

(a) to any person who is a minor or is of unsound mind, or

(0) to any company unless it satisfied the conditions rescribed by
rules to be made by the State Government in this behat , Or

"Paragraph 34.36.

*varagraph 35.7.

‘Paragraph 35.9.

‘Paragraph 35.16.

‘Paragraph 35.21.

“"Paagraph 35.31.


287

(©) to any corporation other than a company, if it is not legally compe-
tent to accept letters of administration’.

{110) Sections 237 and 238 should be re-drafted, and new sections 238A
and 238B should be inserted, as follows* :—

“237, When—

(2) a will has been lost or mislaid before or after the testator's death,
or has been destroyed by a natural event and not by any act of ahe
testator amounting in law to revocation of the will, and हे

(0) a copy of the will or a draft of the will has been preserved, probate
may be granted of such a copy or draft, limited until the original or a
properly authenticated copy of it is produced.”

“238, When a will has been lost or mislaid in ie circumstances mentioned
in section 237, and no copy or draft of the will has been preserved, probate
may be granted of its contents if they can be established by oral evidence.”

“238A. In sections 237 and 238, “will includes a part of a will.

“238B. Where a will proved to have been lost in the custody of the testator
before his death is not forthcoming after his death, the court may presume
that it was destroyed by an act of the testator amounting in law to its
revocation.”

111. Section 241 should be revised as follows :

“241. When any executor is absent from the State in which application is
made, and there is no executor within the State willing to act, letters of adminis-
tration, with the will annexed, may be granted to the attorney or agent of the
absent executor, for the use and benefit of his principal, limited until he shall
obtain probate or letters of administration granted to himself.

Exception : Nothing in this section applies to a case falling within the pro-
visions of section 273.

Explanation: Where the grant is by the High Court, it is not necessary
that the attorney or agent should be residing within the State, provided he
resides within India’.”

(112) Below section 244, the following Explanation should be inserted :—

“Explanation : In this section, “legal guardian” means a guardian of the
property appointed by a person or authority having power to do so, whether
within or outside India, but does not include « natural guardian.”

(113) Section 245 deals with the case dealt with in section 244 and, is indeed,
a kind of Explanation to that section. This should be brought out by adding in
that section, after the words, “the grant”, the words and figures “under section
244”!

(114) Section 246 should be revised as follows (to remove overlapping with
section 244),

“246. If
(a) sole executor or a sole universal or residuary legatee is a lunatic, or

(७) a person who would be solely entitled to the estate of the intestate,
according to the rules for the distribution of intestates’ estate appli-
cable in the case of the deceased, is a minor or a funatic,

letters of administration, with or without the will annexed, as the case may
be, shall be granted to the person to whom the care of his estate has been
committed by competent authority, or, if there is no such person, to such

"Paragraph 35.40.
*Paragraph 36.10.
»Paragraph 36.16.
*Paragraph 36.20.
‘Paragraph 36.21.



288

other person as the Coyrt may think fit to appoint, for the use and benefit
of the minor or Junatic until he attains majority or becomes of sound mind,
as the case may he’.

(115) Section 247 should be amended to provide that an application for
the appointment of an administrator under the section can be made by any
person interested in the estate. and even by a creditor of the deceased’.

(116) To section 255, an Exception should be added as under*-* :—

Exce ption—Notwithstanding anything contained in this section or in section
256, where moneys have been deposited in joint account in a bank and the
amount thereof is payable to either or any survivor of the persons depositing
the money, the application for letters of administration in respect of those
moneys may, on the death of either or any of such persons, be made by
the survivor.”

Practice in granting and revoking probate etc. sections 264, 302.

(117) Under the present proviso to section 265(1), the appointment of
judicial officers as “Delegates” for granting probate etc. in non-contensous cases
requires, in the case of High Courts not established by Royal Charter, the
previous ‘sanction of the State Government, This proviso should be -deleted; as
unnecessary at the present day*

118. In section 273, the amount of ten thousand rupees should be increased
to. rupees fifty thousand, in view of fall in the value of the rupee.

. (119), In section 291, the following sub-section should be added :-५

“(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Court may
dispense with the taking of a bond thereunder or with the need for: sureties
to such bond where— .
(a) the person to whom the grant of probate or letters of administration
is to be made is the sole legatee or the sole heir of the deceased, ot

(b) where, for reasons to be recorded, the Court in the circumstances
of the case thinks it proper to dispense with such bond or ‘sureties, as
the .case_may be.’"

- (120) From section 306, the exception for assault and other personal injuries
not causing death should be removed.*

(121) From section 306 (survival or causes of action after death), the
provision for non-survival of proceedings for defamation should also be deleted?

(122) Section 306 should apply to other persons (besides executors or.
administrators), who represent the estate of a deceased, such as heirs.”

(123) Section 306, should, therefore, be revised as follows"

“306. All demands whatsoever and all rights to prosecute or defend any action

or special proceeding existing in favour of or against a person at thie time

of his decease, survive to and against his executors or administrators or

representatives, except ........ in cases where, after the death of the party,
_ the relief sought could not be enjoyed or granting it would be nugatory.”

‘Paragraph 36, 24.

"Paragraph 36.28.
_ ‘Paragraph 36.40.
, “Section 250 may require consequential change.
“Paragraph 38.3.

‘Paragraph 38.15.

‘Paragraph 38-40.

"Paragraph 40.11.

"Paragraph 40.20.

wWParagraph 40.21.

“Paragraph 40.22. bts


289

ILLUSTRATION

कक कक ory + +e

A sues for divorce. A dies. The cause of action dges not survive to his
representatives.”

(124) 16, from section 306, the words excluding “personal injuries” are
not deleted (as recommended above}, then the expression “personal injury” should
be defined as recommended, and the expression “representative” should also
je added in the section. The amendment should define ‘personal injury’ as (i)
including any disease and any impairment of a person’s physical or mental condition,
and (ii) excluding injury caused by malicious prosecution.

For the purpose, an appropriate Explanation could be added to section 306.
(125) Section 309 should be modified on the following lines :

(1) Whether or not the. will provides for the payment of remuneration to
an executor or administrator, so long as the will does not prohibit such
payment, an executor or administrator shall be entitled to receive or
Tetain reasonable commission or agency charges.

(2) Unless the will otherwise provides or the court otherwise permits, those
charges shall not be a higher rate than that for the time being fixed
in respect of the Administrator General by or under the Administrator-
General’s Act, 19632

(126) From section 310, the case where purchase is sanctioned by the court
should be excluded.* ह

(127): Section 311 speaks of a “direction to the contrary”, but does not
specify where the direction is to be contained. It is recommended that in section
311, it should be made clear that the direction may be either in the will or in
the probate.‘

(128) Section 317 should be ameadéd, by adding the following Exception
to the section* :

“Exception—Where the Administrator-General is the executor or adminis-
trator, he shall not be bound to exhibit an inventory or an account of the
estate under this sub-section, unless the court has directed him to do so,
in which case he shall exhibit the inventory or the account, as the case may
be, within such period as the Court may allow; but copies of the accounts
maintained by him shall be filed in court.”

(129) Section 324 (2), and the iflustration to the section, should be deleted.

(130) If the provisions of the Succession Act relating 10 domicile are extended
to Hindus etc. (as recommended separately), sub-section (3) of section 324
will also have to be deleted, as a consequential change.”

(131) In section 330, the illustration should be revised, so as to express the
amounts in decimal coinage.*

(132) In regard to section 332 (assent of the executor etc. to legacy), the
position should be improved by a suitable clarification, to the effect that nothing
in this section shall be deemed to invalidate a transfer of the property (which is
the subject-matter of the legacy) by the legatee before assent by the executor
or administrator, but every such transfer shall be regarded as conditional on the

*Paragraph 40.15.
*Paragraph 40.31.
‘Paragraph 40.32.
“Paragraph 40.33.
‘Paragraph 41.17.
“Paragraph 41.30.
*Paragraph 41.30.
“Paragraph 41.36.


290

assent of the executor or the administrator, as the case may be. The section
should be amended by inserting an Explanation on the above lines.*

Also, in illustration (i) to the section, the words “Imperial Bank of India”
should be replaced by the words “Siate Bank of India?

(133) Section 362 needs a verbal change, namely, the last four words should
read “wasting on the part of the executor” (and not “wasting of the executor”).

(134) In section 367, 2 pew sub-section should be inserted, as under :—

“(2) Where there has been दर grant of administration in @ country other
than the country of domicile and other than India, the executor or adminis~
rator may, with the permission of the Court, take the same action as he
could have taken if there had been a grant in a country of domicile other
than India; and the provisions-of this section shall, with necessary modi-
fications, apply to the case as they apply if there had been a grant in a
country of—domicile Other than India.”

Succession Certificates—Sections 370 to 390

(135) Section 370 bans the grant of succession cerificate, inter alia, in cases
where letters of administration (or probate) are mandatory’, Letters of adminis-
tration are mandatory in the case of Christians other than Indian Christians
dying intestate—to mention the most usual situation. The restriction ia section
370 is not required, except where probate is mandatory. The bar in section 370
should be limited only to cases where probate is mandatory. In the case of
probate, the will has to be proved and it is understandable that without proof
of the will, payment should not be made on the strength of a mere succession
certificate. But this reasoning does not apply with the same force to letters of
administration, where title is sought to be derived on the basis of a right of
inheritance conferred by law and no formal writing is, in general, to be proved.

Accordingly, section 370(1) should be revised’ as uader :—

“(1) A succession certificate (hereinafter in this Part referred to as a
certificate) shall not be granted under the Part with respect to amy debt
or security to which a right is required by section 212 or section 213 to be
established by .....-..-- probate.”

(Existing proviso to छठ omitted, as a consequential change).

(136) There should also be inserted in section 370, a provision for the
grant of succession certificate on survivorship. By making this amendment, the
legislature would be. merely giving recognition to what is already the practice in
some part of India. Although a certificate, issued to certify survivorship, should
be, strictly speaking, described as a “Survivorship certificate”, it is not proposed
to change the present nomenclature (“Succession Certificate”), since it has,
by now, become familiar to all concerned.

Accordingly, the following proviso should be added to section 370 (1):

“Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prevent
the grant of a certificate to any person claiming to be entitled on survivorship
to the effects of a deceased Hindu, Mohammedan, Buddhist, Sikh, Jain or
Parsi or to any part thereof, in respect of any debt or security by reason
that the right thereto is claimed by survivorship and not by succession’.”. हि

(137) Section 371 should be revised as follows :--

“371. The District Iudge within whose jurisdiction the deceased, at the
time of his death, had a fixed place of abode, or any property, movable or
immovable, may graut a certificate under this Part’.”

"Paragraph 42.3.

*Paragraph 42.2, footnote.
"Paragraph 46.8.

“Section 212{1).

‘Paragraphs 48.4 and 48.5.
“Paragraphs 48.6 and 48.8.
*Paragraphs 48.13 and 48.17.


291

(138) To section 372, an Explanation should be inserted below :-—

“Explanation—Where the applicant for succession certificate is @ minor, he
may apply through a next friend as if he were a plaintiff in a suit, and the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall, so far as mey be,
apply in relativn to ‘such next friend as they apply in relation to व next
friend sueing under Code'.”

(139) In section 379, a new sub-section should be inserted as follows* :—

“(4) Hf the application is allowed with or without condition, the sum shall
not be refunded, even if, by reason of breach of the condition, the
certificate cannor be granted.”

(140) It is also recommended that the provisions of sub-section (3) of section
379 should be made subject to those of new sub-section (4), which is proposed
to be inserted, as above, in section 379.

Section 379 (3) should, therefore, begin as follows :—
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4) any sum received ..-.--
(141) New section 386A should be inserted, as recommended, to provide
the facility of succession certificate to properties other than debts‘
Succession by homicide (proposed section 390-A)

(142) A new section 390A should be inserted, disqualifying a person who
commits culpable homicide, or abets its commission, from inheriting, or from
taking as a Tegatee—

(a) the property of the person whose death is so caused; or

(0) any other property in furtherance of the succession to which he or
she committed or abetted the commission of such homicide.

‘The new section will not apply to persons to whom section 25 of the Hindu
Succession Act, 1955, applies.”

Miscellaneous provisions (section 391) and Schedules :

(143) The Third Schedule to the Act will need changes in the light of the
points discussed under various sections (sections 63—65) etc’.

»Paragraph 48.23.

*Paragraph 48.35.

sParagraph 48.35.

‘paragraph 48.42A, read with paragraphs 48.19A to 48.19C.
‘Paragraph 49.23.

*Paragraph 50.5.

85-L/BIN)LM1LJ2CA—625—3-5-86—GIPB


Sd/-
K. K. MATHEW
Chairman

Sd/-
J. P. CHATURVEDI
Member

Sd/-
Dr. M. B, RAO
Member

Sd/.
P. M. BAKSHI
Part-time Member

Sd/.
VEPA P. SARATHI
Partetime Member

s $0/-
Member-secretary

Daten : 21-2-85