LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH REPORT
on

THE FATAL ACCIDENTS ACT,1855

May, 1985.


Justice K.K.Matnaw.

New Delhie110001.
Dated the 16th May, 1985.

My dear Minister,

T om forw herewith the One Himdred and
Eleventh tare et et ef the Law Commission en "The Fatal
Accidents Act, 1855".

The subject was taken u) Law Cemmission
ried for taking up the subject is
in para 1.1 of the Report,

The Comuissien is indebted te Shri P.M.Bakshi,
Partetine and Shri S.Remaiah, Meuber Secretary,
for “heir valual assistance in the preperation of
the Report.

With regards,
Yours sincerely,
/ ee -
है (K.K. Mathew)
८
Shrd AK.
Henoural Minister ef Law
ami Justice,
New Dalai.

Engh! 11109; Revert.


CHAPTER

I.
qr.
It,
IV.

v.

VI.
vit.
VIII.

IX.

XI.

XII.
XIIz.

XIV.

INTRODUCTORY.
LAW IN ESGLAND AND IN OTHER COUNTRIES.
TITLE,EXTENT AND APPLICATION: SECTION 1,

RIGHT TO COMPENSATION: SECTION 1A,
FIRST

RELATIVES ENTITLED TO COMPENSATION’
SECTION 4A, SECOND PARAGRAPH.

DAMAGES: SECTION 4A,THIRD PARAGRAPH,
WIDOW!» REeMARRIAGE.

WULTIPLICITY OF SUITS
SECTION 2,

PROCEDURES SECTION 3.
DEFINITIONS: SECTION 4,
DEDUCTIONS FROM DAMAGES.
SUCCESSION CLURTIFICATE.
777 eee ON THE

REVISED ACT RECOMMENDED.

AEFENDICES!

Appendix 1: Recommendation in the form of 8 draft Bill.

Appendix 21 Comparative table showing section of the
existing Act and the corre: eeponding clause

recommende

Appendix 31 List of certain statutory provisions p:.. i497

for compensation on death.

PAGE

1-8
9०42
13
14915

16=20

21824
25=31
32-34

उ5-57
58
29-44
42-44
45

46

4५-५५

53

d


why the
Aat taken
Up.

Judictal
oriticisn.

1-1.

CHAPTER 1.
URORUCL AL
This Report is concerned with the century-old Act

entitled the Fatal Accidents act, 1855. The Act deals with
the recovery of damages for the death of a person, caused by
the "wrongful act, neglect or default" of another person.

The subject has been taken up by the Law Commission ag a part
of its function of revision of laws, so as to remove injustice,
Gertain defects in the Act have been pointed out. by judiclal
decisions? Deficiencibs have also been diseoverad in the Act
on a few other matters and the need for en over-all review

of this act, which was passed more than a century age, is
obvi-us in tly light of the above defects and deficienates,

1.26

By yay of example of defects in the present Act, we

2
may 762८0 to the following observations made in a Kerala caset-

"The Fatal Accidents Act, placed on the statute book
as eatly as 1865, 48 a tréfle arabaic in form and
somevbst obsolescsnt jn content, but Courts are called

upon to enforce the statute as it is, Under the Indian
Act, which 48 largely modelled on the English statute

of 1846, hrothers and aisters are not entitled to rank
as “dependants, although, in England, the mother country
(I mean, of the statute), by Section 2 of the Fatal
Accidents Act, 1959, brother, aister, uncle and aunt of
the deceased and the isgue of such welatives have been
inducted into the area of statutory dependency, The
other progressive amendments to the English statute also
have not been copied in our country. In one of the three
suits we are concerned with, vir.) 0०9 80. 22 of 1965,

plaintiffs 3, 4 end 5 are the two Mothers sod sisters

1
a.

Para 1.2) infZfae
P.B.Keder V. Thatohamma, A.I.R. 1970 Ker, 941, 243.


- Be

of the deceased wio, under the Indian Act, are not entitled
to claim compensation, Again, the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855,
states that “every such sotion or suit shall be for We
benefit of the wife, husband, parent and child, if any, of
the person whose death shall have been so caused, and shall
de brought by and in the name of the executor, administrator
or representative of the person deceased”,

"The Act also raguires all tha dependents to be named
inthe plaint, what bapnens, if ali thease dependents are
nok“ xeaord, althoush they sre elive of the autis
brought by some but nok for the benefit of the ofbarsalso?
Strictly speaking, the section visualised some sort of a
Pepresent:tive action, but, where the suit is brought, not
by the executor or administrator, but by some of the
peneficlaries themselves, should “the suit be dismissed
begause the others are not on record ? That would be taking
an extremely teehnical view and therefore an objection
in that form, taken in two suits where the parents are
alive, but not impleaded (nor claim made on their behalf),
has been rightly overruled by the trial court, although
that does not mean that the plaintiffs should get the
penefit of the compensation which should have gone to the
parents had they (the parents) also claimed".

Apert from the defects referred to in the Kerala jJudgnent
cited above, many others are revealed on a detailed stuty of
the act. We shall deal with them in dus course, Before
doing so, a few words regarding the nature of the legislation
on the subject would be useful,

>«००३/०


Bffect of
death on
causes of
actions
two
aspects,

omm n Law
ule as to
eath.

-3-
1.3. Legislation of the niture under oonsideration belongs
primatily to the realm of torts (though not exelusively so),
and is concerned with the effect of death as creating
tortious liability. It may be useful to point out that
in the law of torts, death might opernte in two different
directions, Death may axtinguish a cause of action; or it
may afaaka one, The first asrect is concerned vith the
questions “How far does a cause of action survive the
death of the person wronged or the wong-doer?* In Indien
statute law, this subject is dealt with primarily in the
F-ceession Act, which provides for the survival, on death,
of most causes of setion,

In relation to the second aspect of death - namely,
death as creating a cause of action = the question to be
considered iss “How far does one person have an interest
in tha life of another so that the law gives him a cause of
aotion on the death of the other?" In Indie, this question
is dealt with in the Sct under discussion, that is to say,
the Fatal Accidents act.

The two questions mentioned above are, in essence,
distinct from each other. ‘The first question is primarily of
an adjective nature, concemed as it is with the effect of
death on an existing cause of action. The second question
is of a aubstantive nature, concerned as it is with the
creation of a new cause of action, In the present stuly,

we ate concerned with the second question,

1.4. On this particular qu-stion, (whether death creates
a cause of action) at common law, the death of a human being
could not create a cause of action in favour of any person.

1. Section 306, Indim Succession Act, 1926.
2. See also paragraph 1.10, infra
3. Baker V. Bolton, (1808) 1 Camp 493; 170 E.R. 1033,


History of the
rule disallow-
ing recovery
for fatal

822८1 dent,

Common law rule
indefensible.

-4e
This was the position even if the death was the result of
the wrongful act of the person causing death, The law of
torts closed ita boundaries when death wanted to enter it,
1.6. It was, thus, one of the celebrated oddities of the
common law that, for the wrongful killing of a huaan being,
redress could not be obtained in tort. An overestatement
by Lord Ellenborough is considered to have been responsible
for stopping the development of such a remedy. The exact
origin of the rule is, however, complex and obscure.

80 far as the person injured (and oonsequentially
dead) is concerned, naturally, he could not physically
susy and his own cause of action « even if the law gave
096 = would not have survived at common law, in view of
the operation of another rule, namely, that personal
actions die with the person, But this rule, by itself,
would not have prevented the recovery of compensation
by_bis denendsnta, What prevented recovery by the
Gependants was the rule prohibiting award of compensation
for death, which has been mentioned above.

1.6. The common law rule mentioned above, giving a
wrongdoer 01911 immunity if the injury caused death
(oezore a juignent was seoured), was obviously indefen-
sible. If a wrongful act causes injury short of death,
compensation wolld be recoverable. If a wrongful act
Gauging death is made immume from liability, the result
would be that the more serious hatm would remain
uncompensated for, while the less serious hard would be
compensated.

1. (a) Holdswor' “origin of rule in Baker v. Holton”
916) 32 L
(b) Holdsworth, H.E.Le (1923) Yol. 3, page 332.
2. Maloney “Genes s of wrongful Death" (1968) 17
* *

3. Note “Inslequacy of existing won gt ul death and
survival legislation" (1930-31) Hay, Law Review 980.


Mmglish Act
eof 18485,

Indi sn Act
of 4855,

story of
Legisiative
prote@dings.

-~5e-

1.7. The intolerability of this position led, in
Sngiand, to the passing of the Patal Accidents Act, 1845,
Known also as Lord Campbell's act. The Act created a

new cause of action for the death in favour of the
peFsonal representatives of the deccased, for the

benefit of certain designated relatives. xt this

abolished the rule in Baker v. Bolton . Successive
enendments and re-enactaent of the act in England spell
out various detaile, but preserve the prinaiple of the

sot of 1846,

34.8. After the Mglish Fatal accidents Act was macted
47 1848, the Indian legislator® followed ait in 1855.

The Fatal Accidents Act, 1855, witch is the subject matter
of tile study, provides that on the death of a person
caused by the “wrongful act, neglect oF default™ of
another person, the personal representative of the
deceased can maintain an action for damages on behalf

of the wife, husband, parent or ७1110 of the decsased,

if "the wrongful act, neglect or default” is such as

would (if death had not ensued) have entitied the party
infwed to malztein an action end recover demages in
respect thereof,

2.9. It appears from the proceedings relating to the 4111
whieh led to the Indian Act of 1856, that in the beginning,
the proposal was to follow the dnglish act of 1845, almost
xerbkatin, The Belect Committee which reported on the Bill
doas not” seen to have made radical alterations in the BIL
However, the Seleat Committee did make & few changes on
matters of detail in the Bill. for example, it added a
preamble to the Mili and introduced a provision enabling
the plaintiff to include a oleim for tha lose to the estate,

5. #etal Acatdants Act, 1845.

2, See now the Fatal Accidents Act,i1975, extensively
amended in 1982,

3. Paragraph 1.3, alta

4, National Archives Fapers relating to act 13 of 1856.

S. Heport of the Select Committee on the Fatal Aceidente
81751, 1856 + and February, 1855.



Two interests
VioLated.

छठ

The Select Committee also altered the last clause of the
Bill, by directing that partioulars as to the nature of
the alaim ond as to the persons for whose benefit the
claim was brought, should be inserted in the pleint. ‘The
Select Committee observed that this alteration had besn
wade to accommodate the provisions to the practice of the
mwofussil courts, Besides making a few other verbal
alterations, the 8019 ४४ Committee added an interpretation
clause, This clause was taken from the British statute
on 1846 on the subject, but limited the meaning of the
word "parent" so as not to include a step-father or a
step-mother.

Cause of action for wrongful death has thus been
effectively provided for,

1.10. At this stage, it should be mentioned that when a
tort causes death, two interests have been invaded
(1) The first is the interest of _tha deceased in the
security of his person and property - an interest
which has been invaded by compelling him to endure
a suffering and to submit to the loss of earnings.
If the reeovering of compensation for invasion
of this interest is allowed, the amount to be
reoovered should really be an asset of the estate,
It 1a to be calculated on the harm caused to the
decnased,

(21) The second interest invaded is that of tha relatives.
of the deceased - an interest in the nature of an
expectation; their anticipation of sharing in the
prospective earnings of the vietign ia necessarily

1. See Note in (1915) 28 Harvard Law Rey. 802.


Felonious
tort.

-7T7.-

destroyed by the termination of the life of the
wiotim itself, The aout tc be recovered under
this head is not an asset of the estate,

Interest of the first type can be protected only if
there is provision for survival of the cause of action
which had accrued to the deceased before his death.

A statute in the nature of Fatal Accidents Act would
protect only the second type of interest.

1.11. It is also appropriate to mention that at common law,
there was another rule which prevented recovery for a
felonious tort - a rule not confined to a tort causing

de th, The classic formulation of the File is contained
in the juignent of Phillimore L.R, in Saith ४६ gan?
from whieh the followlng passage 13 takens-

“it is a welleestabliched rule of law that a plaintiff
against whom a felony has been committed by the
defendant sannot make that felony the foumdation of
a Cause of action unless the defendant has been
proseeuted or a reasonable excuse hag been बचा
for his not having been prosecuted.”

It may be mentioned that in England, the rule of the
common law mentioned above hay been abolished by statutes
The rule has been abolished by express provision in many
other gomtries also. Thus, the provision in Canada on the
subject is in the following forms.

"No civil remedy for any act or omission shall be
suspended, oF ally proceedings taken in connection
therewith stayed, by reagon only of the fact that.
such act or omission constitutes a felony.”

le See tote in (1915) 28 Harvard Law Rev. 902.

2. See also paragraph 2.3, suptes

3. Gmith v. Gelyyn, (1914) 3 K.B. 98, 106 (९.७. )«

4. Pannam, “Felonious Tort Rule” (1966) 38 Aust.L.d.164.
5. Section 1, Criminal Law act, 1967 (Eng.).

6. Section 13, Canadien Criminal Code.


-~8«

working Peper. 1.12. In order to facilitate consideration of the
subject, the Commission had prepared a working paper
containing the tentative proposals of the Commission,
for eliciting the opinions of interested persons and
bodies on the subject. The comments received on the
working paper will be dealt with, at the appropriate
place, in this Reports

1. Law 00713 88407 file No, F, 2(1)85. L.C. Working
Paper on Patel Accidents Act, 1855 (January 1985) .

2. Chapter 4B, 1227.


Reforms in
Bngland.

Some salient
features of
the position

in England.

oe
CHAPTER IT

el. The Indian Act is mainly modelled on the English
Act of 1846, as atated above. However, in England,
several improvements have been wade in the law on the
subject. The process of reform has been gradual.

Until 176, the stututory provisions had to be collected
from scattered enactaents passed from time to time to
reform the law. In 1976, the law was consolidated as
the Fatal Accidents Act, 1976, In 1982, the first four
sections of the Act of 1976 were replaced by new sections
gubstituted by the Administration of Justice Act, 1982
(2,53). As aresult, one hus now to read both the Act
of 1976 and the Act of 1982, for ascertaining the
Bnglish law on the subject.

2.2. Attention may be usefully drawn to a few salient
features of the legisl.tive developments in England ~
(a) Where the defendant's tort has catsed the

death of the deceased by wrongful act,
neglect or default, the Fatal Acoldents Act,
compels the defendant to compensate the
specified dependants, for their loss of support
from the deceased, provided that the deceased
(if he had survived) would himself have been
able to sue the defendant,

(b) The executor or administrator of the deceased
brings the action, but holds the damages
recovered on behalf of the dependants, Any
dependant entitled under the Act may bring
proceedings in his own name, if the executor
or administrator has not started proceedings
within six months of the death of the deceased.

60प04, , ७५ « -20/«


-l-

The; moneys are not diminished by death duties or
by the claims of the deceased's creditors, because
they do not pass into the deceased's estate,

(c} The "dependants" entitled under the Acts are the
Spouse, ex-spouse, children or other descendants,
stepechildren, parents, step-parents or other
asoendants, brothers, sisters, aunts of uncles and
issues of aunts and uncles. Certain de-facto-
relations are also recognised.

(4) Any of these relationships can arise by adoption, or
by marriage (affinity") and the relationship may be
illegitimate or of the half-blood. (Relatives of the
“half-blood" are persons related by virtue of a
common anoestor, but descended from different spouses
of that ancestor),

(e) The measure of damages in such a case is the extent
of the dependence of the relative multiplied by
the likely period of its time of continuance,

(f) Benefits accruing to the relative as a result of
the death of the deceased are not to be taken into
account in the assessment of damages.

(g) A defendant must not be made to pay damages twice
over in respect of the seme wrong. Hence, when the
executor sues the defendant both under the Law Reform
etc. Acty 1934, and under the Fatal Accidents Act,
the damnges awarded under each Act are calculated
with reference to those awarded under the other Act,
so that the total award involves no duplication,

1. Rose V. ह:10, (1937) a.C. 826; (1937) 3 All. BR.

369 (H.L.).


elle

ना 2 Act 9.3. By the Administration of Justice Aet of 1982,
. recently enacted in England, sections 1 to 4 of the Act

of 1976 have been been replaced by revised sections.
In the course of this revision, some important additions
have also been made. Provision has now been made for
treating what may be called a da facto wife as a “dependant®
for the purposes of the Act. A right has also been given
to the former wife or husband of thea deceased, to rank
as a dependant. The earlier provision that insurance
and other benefits which accrue to the dependants are to
be disregarded has now been made comprehensive, In effect,
the court is barred from taking into account (by way of
deduction) apy benefit which accrues to a dependant on
death, Certain other changes have also bee made to
enhance the social justice aspect of the legislation,
An attempt has also been made to remove certain anomalies
arising from the co-existence of a claim under the Act
and a claim for shortened expectation of life. Provision
has also been made to allow damages for bereavement
an idea probably inspired by the Scottish lew.”

Law im otner 2.4, The law on the subject in most Commonwealth countries
Qorennt-wealth
aomntries, has also been modelled mainly on the English pattern.

Position in 2.5. In the United States, the statute law in the majority
8.8 .&.
of the States provides for compensation for death,
substantially on the seme lines 88 the English Act, The

3
phraseology differs, but the substance is the same,

——
1. The sdmini stration of Justice Act, 1982 (Eng.),

2. See paragraph 2.7, infra,

3. Note in (1964-65) 17 Stanford Law Review,
pages 1064-1055.


tien tit sh Law

aa Bo
10४4 wm.

Mri Law
aoumteles.

- 126

2.6. in Scotland also, damages are allowed to the
bereaved family for solatium, as Well as for loss of
supports Lord Watson has observed that the action for
solatium snd damages had been allowed to the spouse,
parent of child for a century in sootiend.” It has
already been mentioned that the Miglish Act, a8 amended
in 1982, now allows damages for bereavement,

2.7. In modern civil law jurisdictions, sueh 88 France,
wh ३७ law has been greatly influenced by the Roman Law,
the courts have, since the beginuing, encountered
little difficulty in awarding damages to the family

of the deceased victim for both pecunl ary and
nonepsauniary losses from his death,

1. Note in (1964-65) Vol. 17 Stanford Law Review, pages
1084-1055.

2. Clarka v. Carfin Coal Co, (1891) A.C. 412, 418 (HAL),
3. Paragraph 2.3, sunta
4. Note in (2064-65) Vol. 17 Stanford Law Review,

pages 1054=1055.


la Bion 1.

Seem t and
aAppiteation=
rreaionmm end ae
tuan.

CHAPTER ITT

TITHE, BXTUNT AND APPLICATION 3 SRORION 1 XT UNL b PLIC ATION

3.1. We can now take up examination of the Fatal
Accidents Act, 1855, section by section.

Bee. Section 1 of the Act deals with the
(territorial) extent of the Act. On this particular
point, no change is needed. But if the present Act is
to be replaced by a new Act, (as is going to be

our recommendation) it will be proper to insert,

in the new Act, a provision that ite provisions
will not apply retrospectively.! It is better to
avoid controversies on the subject. That particular
qualification can be inserted in section 1, and also
in the repeal clause.” We recommend accordingly.
Incidentally, the present title "Fatal Accidents"

is not appropriate, and should be replaced by the

more appropriate words "wrongful death".

LR LL : सससरककॉएइकइकसकइकइक्‍

1. See Apvendix 1, clause 1(3).

2. Appendix 1, Clause 14(2).


CHAETER IV
‘AIG? 22 COMPENSATION; SPOT ION ths FIRST PARAGRAPH.
ive Adon 4.4. Section 1A is the principal operative section in
a

firet
poraaraph. tie Act, and enables a suit to be ftled for loss

aecasionea by death. The sani ean be filed by the
specified relatives. There are also a few other matters
of detail, Jealt with in the section. It will be
convenient to deal with the various paragraphs of the
section one by onee

She first paragraph of section 1 enacts es under t-

"4A. Shenever the death of a person shall be caused
py wrongful act, nexlect or defanit, and the act,
nelect o- default i: such as would (47 death had not
ensued) have entitlei the party injurea to maintain
an action and recover damages in respect thereof, the
party ho would bave been liable if death had not
ensued shall be liable to an action or suit for
damages, notwithstanding the death of the person
injured, and althow:: the death shall have been
caused under suck circumstances as amount in law
to felony or other crime".
dwt 4.2. With reference to the first paragreph, it is to be
Pipemd ant
Pomaintain= nected that two conditions are necessary before the suit
yer on हु ci: ve maintained under the section $-
i) the death must have been "caused by wroagful
act, neglect or default"; and

4i) the act, neglect or default must be such as
would (if death had not ensued) have entitled
the party injured to maintain an action and
recover damages in respect thereof.

Qhese conditions, when read together, postulate that,
put for the rule prohibiting recovery for death, the act
which caused the death woult have been actionable. Tie
right of action under the section, however, is a new one,
and not a survival of the cause of action of the deceased.
1६ is "“derivative't, only to the extent that the conditiont

wrecedent applicable to the deceased must exist!

4. See Williams, "Some Reforms in the Law of Torta"
(1961) 24 Modern L.E. 100, 106.


af
FE -

due 78.1 dan
anne,

66 ७७ 0६५०7

Merdal
@banger in
@ection ta,
first pare
erapn ८
Recommens
६६1०

4.%. AS to the words "wrongful act, neglect or default"
44 aay be stated that in mont cases under the Act, the
svaee of action is in tort. In England, it has been held
(with reference to the Act of 4946) that breach of con-

1 the lenguavze of the Snglish provi=

tract will suffice.
sion and the Indian provision being aubstantially the

s me in this respect, our courts may be expected to take
tae sume view on the above point. In fact, the rule in
paker v. Bolton (which the Fetal Accidents Act is intended

te supersedey iteelf did 80% apply to breach of contract’.

4.4. Im an Australian case arising under substantially
similar legislation, a mother recovered for the death of
her son who was electrocuted by a defective light bulb
purchased by him from defentants. Negligence on the part
ot the retailers could not be established, but there was
yreach of implied warranty of fitness which could have

conferred a right of action on the deceased.”

45. £5 to the nature of the connection between the
woong?nl conduct relied on ané the death cansed thereby

it nas been held that the wrongful conduct need not be

the direct or sole cause of death, ont it must be one of tl

effective causes leading to the death.©

4.6. No changes of substance are called for in the first
paragraph of section fAe A few verbal changes, however,
are required. ilaving regard to current usage «

4) the word "action" should be replaced by the
word "suit"; and
44) the words "felony or other crime" should be
replaced by the word "offence".
‘le recommend accordingly.
Certain other minor verbal improvements, based mainly
on section 1(1) of the (inglieh) Fatal Accidente Act, 1976
are alwo desirabie. These will be upparent from the draft
BL11 recommended in an appendix to the Report.

0 ne
4. Grein ve os 1 हैहरे irweS a8 1936) 2 All 3.४५ 1258.
2, See how eee ४ Act of 1976.

3. Paragraphs 1.3 and ti

Sypra »
seal eet (4645) t 5.७. 608.

4. Erost ४० gidesbur, D S
5. Woolworths v. grotty ५ (1442) 66 Ceti 605

(High Court of अपहरुरु511 8५ v. Baeowari Devi»

Ge Governor-General of india in co
BeteR. 191 ALL. 14, 15, para 48.


fer tlon hy
Bemmd pmo
आयात =

1॥७1-8 ५.1 ४ 6
ऋ।१11 16. to

ककाकाए।श ता 5०
ALon.

Lilesitimate
ant acopted
e@niacren =
powirion in
wma nde

GUARTEL १
क्रय UR TRY So CAO 4

5et- The second paragraph of section tA of the

Act of 1855 is as follows :
"avery Such action or suit shail be for the
benefit of the wife, husband, parent and
child, if any, ०? the person whose death shall
have been so caused, and shall be brought
by and in th. name of the executor, adminis~
trator or representative of the person
deceased."
This paragraph, thus, deals with two matterse

1) the relatives entitled to compensation, «
which i) a substantive matter; and

414i) the form of the action, + which is a
procedural one.

52. AS to the first matter (relatives entitled
to! compensation), tho provision at present is
Limited to the wife, husbend, parent and child.
Prima facie, tiis seems to be ४00 narrow a circle.
In this context, it should be noted that the
category of relatives has been expanded in England.
As the law in Englend now stands, ! it includes ~
(a) the wife, husband,” parent and chi1a;?
(७) any person who 48, or who is the issue
of, \ brother, sister, uncle or aunt of
the deceased person.
(fhe expressions "parent" and "child" are
defined in a wide manner, both in Fngland and in
India).

5.3. Illegitimate dependants and step-children of

- the eeveral categories are also included in England.

4. Fatold aceidents Act, 1976 (Melish).

2. Also a divorcee spouses see paracraph 507, jnfra.
3, Sertiorn 1(9),Patal Accidente 20% 1976 (Inglish).

4. Section 1(3),Fatal Accidents act, 1976(Englich).


Pare 5.3.
trom td.

ewope of
reae.ives
ont. tied

propoe al
for
extension.

>> Li=
adopted children are included in England by a
general enactment. Briefly stated, the position under
that enactment is that an adopted chiid shail be treated,
in law, as if he had been born 88 4 child of the

marriage. 1

5.4. (a) It may be noted thet in India, sisters and
brothers re recognized dependents under the workmen's
Compensation act? and aiso under the Railways aot.”
in our view, the wider list of reiatives* adopted in
England is suitable for India also. In the context of
the Fatal Accidents Act, uncles and aunts, brothers

and sisters, and their issues should be included.

(४) In fact, havin> regard te Inf_ian sentiments,
there 0०4३0 be scope even for including a widowed
daughter-in-law living vith the deceased. Cases are
not uncommon where the widowed Caughter-in-law, not
having an independent source of income, was economi~
cally dependent on the father-in=.aw who had died as
a reeuit of tue injury. ‘Sven in @ngland,” the
inelusion of the widowed daughterein=law and mother=
inlaw hed been susgested in the debates on legislation
propose on the subject, thovgh the Suggestion does
not seem ty have been inplemmted. Inclusion of the
widowed daughtercin=law within the category of persons
entitled to compensation would be eminently desirable
in Indian conditions. ‘The same iogic applies to a
deceased brother's widow, ‘ne iist should, therefore,

be expanded to cover these two relatives also.

4. Pirst Schedule, paragraph 3, Chiidren Act, 1975
(०.72) (Bnglish).

2. Section 4(1) and 8(5), workmen's Compensation
Act, 1925.

3. section 82a, Indian Railways Act, 1890.

4. Paragraph 5.2, Supra.

§. Sec H.L, Debates, Vol. 216, col. 1079-1080.


Polat cves
Bie womt=
pro pont.

5.5. On the basis of th above discussion, the
following relatives should be covered for the purposes

of section 1A, second paragraph:

(a) wife or husband , *

(४७) ehild? including step-child, adopted
child,* and illegitimate child? ana
grandechildren or persons of like
description.

(ec) parent, including etep-parent, and
grand=parent,

(4) brother,’ including that by half-blood
or uterine blood, ani his issue,

(e) sister,® including that by half=blood or
uterine ४१७०५, and her issue,

(f) aunts ond uncies and their issues,”
(2) widowed daughter-in-law. 1°

(h) widow of brother. '!

5 Ge It is also proper that persons in the womb at
the time of death should also be covered, if
subsoquently born alive. !?

1. See Appendix 1, clauses 4(1) and 4(3).
2. ae to divorced spouses, Sce paragraph 5.1, infra.

3, See pararra v 10.6 que and Appendix 1
Clauses 2(1) and 2t3y. !

4. see paragraph 10.1, infra and Appendix 1, Clauseg2(?

5. See Appendix 1, clease 2(2) and paragraph 10.4(i),
infra. ‘

G. see pursagraph 10.4(ii), infra.

7. See purograph 5.4(a), Supra.

®. See paragraph 5.4(a), Supra.

9. See paragraph 5.4(a), supra.

10. Paraz:raph 5.4(b), Supra.

11. Paragraph 5.4(b), Supra.

12. See Appendix 1, clause 2()), Compare section
99 व Indian Succession Act, 1925.


Biworw wd

Mpeias:

1 1 Le

.t in the
ne of

vee execie
ter, vimle

J. trator

repre=

ror tautives

5.7. While desline with the question of persons who
shonld be entitled to renk 2s beneficiaries, some
comments sve in order ar te divovecd spouses. In
mpgland, the expression “wife” ac ovcurrin; in the
vratal accidents Legislatioa was judicially construed

as not including a Givorcet. wite.! However, in 1982,
the law wns amended. ‘ection 1(4)(2) and section

1(4), Fatal Accidents Act, 1976 (as amended by section 3
of the Administration of ductice Act, 1982) provide

that the expression "dependant" meiunbs Anter-alis, the

wife or husbend or former wife or husband of the er
deceased. it is also mauve clear that the reference

to the “former wife or husbiné™ of the deceased includes
a reference to a person whose marri-u:e to the deceased
has been annulled or (06०१७ -ed void, a8 well as a

person whose marriace nas peen discolveds

On merits, this 13 a good provision, On the
passins 07 a decree 9 divorce or nullity of marriage,
the court menerally orders 3 spouse to make to the
other spouse, periodical payments by way 0: maintenance.
If the spouse so ordered to pay maintenance dies,
liability should survive azsinst the estate of the
deceaned. .ut in India, this has now been achieved

judicially. Hence no statutory provision is needed.”

5.3. ‘this disposes oY one point concerning the second
part of section 4A, Second parngraph of the existing
Acts ‘het paragraph furthey provides that the avit
shall be brought by, ant ia the nunc of, the executor,

administrator or represontutive of the person deqeased.

cn जज

1- Payne Ce Jujlor_yogdroe Constnue. w Construction Cos
itd ey “tt 1 ar 09.

2. Agung v. Dorothers i. foie 1983 5 916 «



१.१.

Burt vb,
ame fic ५ ५
Wien =
propom ii.

payment
Unto
Oaurt=
Propos:..

The expresion "representative" in this context meant
the -ife, husband or parent or eni1a,! - i.e. the person
entitled at present to the benefits of the Act. It is
well understood that the claim made by the representativ:

ir e sentially a claim on behalf of all the defendanta.*

¥vurtrer, even if one of the dependants does not
put in a claim, that ००७8 not deprive the others of

3

their right to compensation. The suit is for the

benefit of all. ‘The relief is given not to a class,
but te individuais.4

5.9. It may be noted that the English Act?

expressly
allows a suit by the beneficiaries, if the executor or
administrator does not bring an action within the

specified provision. ‘There should be a similar provige

sion in the Indian Act. lts utility is opwious.©

5-10. Another point requires consideration in the
interests of speedy disposal. If the defendant is
advised to pay money into court, it should suffice that
he pays it as one sum, which is intended to cover the
compensation payable to all persons, without specifying
the shares of the relatives. Suc’ a provision should be
inserted in our Act, so that the defendant payine into
court is not bothered with the subsequent stages of

the trinl which woulc be concerned only with the
apportionment of compensation « a matter in which the

defendant would have no Interest.”

Sage fy; aan eames coe टी: 18
2. Sa a RE . A.I.R. 1966 Punjab
Ty gnryrange v- snuvrata, ingel

3. (1970) 82 Punj.U.k.42,45, noted in the Yearly Diges+

4. Goncord of India fpoursace Co ord dia Insurance Co. ve Subranagian Ler,

Re Kere हे 0, paragra|
5. Section 2(2), Fatal accidents act, 1976 (English).
6. See Appendix 1, clause 4(2).
7. See Appendix 1, Clause 9.



wives 14,
Bie) parr
am.

Mame! t-

@ban
=e ure
jp the prom

promt Lome,

on

CHAPTER Vi
DAMAGES: SECTION 1A, THIRD PARAGRAPH s
6.1. We can now come to the question of damages, The
third paragraph of section 1A of the Act of 1855 reads

as under te

"Nand in every such action the court may give such
damages as it ma, think proportioned to the loss
resulting from suc! death to the parties respecti~
vely, for whom and for whose benefit such action
shall be brought, and the amounts recovered, after
deducting all costs and expenses, including the
costs not recovered from the defendant, shail be
divided amonst the before-mentioned parties, or
any of them, in such shares as the Court by the
judgement or decree shall direct."

6.2. It will be noticed that under section 1A, third
paragraph, ' damages are to be proportioned to the "loss

resulting from death to the parties respectively", for
whom and for whose benefit the action shall be brought.
The nature of the ‘loss' to be compensated 18 not
described in the above provision (nor in the correspon=
ding provision in the English Act), The question,
therefore, naturally arises, ~ what is the nature of
the loss to be compensated? The answer to this questior
depends on the view which one takes with reference to a
deeper aucstion, namely, wat ought to be the conceptior

of the law as regerds the interests of the dependants?

Having laid down that survivors interested in a
man's life should be compensated for the injury which
they sustain from the wrongful act causing his death,
the law must also answer the question = in respect of
which interests (nf the dependants) ought the compen=
sution to ७९ provided?

LT RS

41. Paragraph 6.1, gupra.


Trang sole
and one
Maing. 016
tinterecta,

ee Bal

fe

ares
E loss.

6.3. The interest of the survivor in the continuance of
the life of the person dying may be materjal, or jntangible,
or both, A material interest consists in (i) the present
enjoyment of the pecuniary benefits or material advantages
having a value in money, “hich are brought to an end by

the death of the person dying, or (ii) in a reasonable

expectation of the enjoym-nt of such benefits or advantages,

An intangible interest in the continuance of life
consists in the natural ties of relationship or close assoe
ciation with 8 particular person and the mora]. comfort and
companionship arising thereout.' If compensation is to be
me..ured with reference to the interest affected, and is
tc be fair and just compensation in money for the destrue
ction of tnat interest, then it should include compensation
for the intangible interest as well as for a tangible
interest. It should include a solatium 8380,

6.4, Having taken these aspects into consideration, we
recommend that section 1A, third paragraph, should be
widened so as to covere damages for loss of the nature

indicated above oa

Incidentally, it may be mentioned here that in England,
by @ recent amendment of the Fatal Accidents Act, 1976,
provision has been made allowing the parents and spouse of
tne deceased to claim compensation, specifically for

"bereavement", subject to a maximum .?

4. Owen Dixon, “Survival of Causes of Action" (1943) 1
Univ., Queensland L.J. 1, reproduced in The Jesting
Pilate, 238, 243.

2. Owen Dixon, "Survival of Causes of Action" (1948) 1
Univ. Queensland L.J. 1, reproduced in the Jesting
Pilate, 238, 243,

3, Paragraph 6.3, supra.

4, Appendix 1, clause 6(4).

5, Section 1A, Fatal Accidents Act, 1976, as amended
in 1982.


walk,
mud,

wetior
$ third

wrapr ine

कराना 1
Brena 5

i
pol ded,

The common law did not allow damages for bereavement. !

6.5. Another point concerning section 1A, third paragraph,”
may be mentioned at this stage. In our view, a specific
provision to the effect that the damages should be propor]
tionate to the injury is needed, and the present provision
may, therefore, be retained, However, we recommend in

this paragraph certain verbal improvements and additions
which will be apparent from the draft appended at the end
of this Reporte?
6.6. It is also necessary to make an express provision

as . funeral expenses.”

In a Kerala case,” the following observations occur on
the subjects«=
“Another head of compensatory damages, that may fall
within the scope of section 1-4, is the expenditure that the
relatives have met for the medical treatment and the funeral
of the deceased,
"(7) The heads of damages recoverable under section 2 are:
i) Pain and suffering undergone by the deceased;
4i) Loss of expectation of life;

454) Loss of earnings and profits upto the date of
death (but not of future earnings);

iv) Medic:1 and hospital expenses, if incurred;
v) Funeral exvenses, where they have been paid out
of the estate of the deceased,"

In our view, it would be desirable to make an express

दि provision for funer:1 expenses.

1, Salmond and Jeuston, Torts (1981), page 542, and cases
cited therein,

2. Paragraph 6.1, Buprds
3. See Appendix 1, clause 6(1).
4. Appendix 1, clause 6(3).

5. Sepcors of angie rd In ve oI.K. 1964 Ker,
? > oy dade ae ae navan Nair, JJ. =
judgement by Madhwan Nair, J.).


konertion= 6.7. We recommend that a provision as to the

necommen=

dution apportionment of compensation awarded may also

be usefully included, somewhat on the following

linest=

"(1) Where the compensation has pot been
otherwise apportioned, the Court way epportion apport. Cor rt,

At among the persons entitjeds amo: ne persons entit

(2) ‘The Court may in its diseretion postpone Court may in its 9 postpone

the distrjbution o distribu of money to which minors are ey _ tow] Ors 8:
entitled and may direct payment from the may direc ent fr:

undivided fund. ot

nD

4. Appendix 1, clause 10.


The question
conside=
r tion,

Position where
wiiow has
reenarried,

Prospects of
reemarriage
of widow.

CHAPTER VIL

7.1. In regard te the persons entitled to
compens::tion and the possible bars to their right
to recovery, one question that needs consideration
is tne position of the widow who resmarries, The
precise questions that have arisen in this context
are t= :

a) Is the wide» who has re-married entitled
to compens:ition?

4i) Is the widow who has not yet re«married,
but who has a prospect of re-marriage,
entitled tc compensation?

It will be convenient to deal with the
position sepera.cly with reference to each of the
two situations enumerated above.

7१.2, Where the widow has already re-married by
the time the claim petition comes to be determined,
her dependency on the estate of the deceased may,
for all practical purposes, be said to have come
to an end, On this reasoning, the Allahabad High
Ccurt has held that the भव who has re-married

is net entitled to compensation.’

7.3. Where, however, the widow has not yet
reemarried and the questicn to be considered is as
te the effect of the prospect of her re-marriage,
the question 43 not easy of solution. F:r any court,
it is difficult to assess satisfactorily whether,
and if so, when and with whom, the widow has a
"prospect" of resmarriage. A case from Karnataka

illustrates the very delicate task which the court

1... लडकी eS TT TIS

paragraphs 10 and 11.


Para 7e36
contd,

Ciomm ent
tm 5 Yelhi
ure,

must perform, wien the court comes to be faced with the
question of assessing the prospect of remarriage cf a
widow.! The claimant in that case was a Muslim widow.
When she was cross-examined before the Claims Tribunal
constituted urder the Motor Vehicles Act, her age was 21
years and she clearly deniec that she had any intention of
reemarrying. Nothwithstanding her denial, the Claims
Tribunal, after considering whet {in its opinion) were
"peal and imminent" prospects 04 her remuarriage, quantified
the compensation to be awarded tqner on the basis of only
five years' purchase value. On appeal, the High Court
held this to be a wrons approach. The High Court stated
thr+ it was true that in the case of Muslis claimants,
their personal law treats merriage as a civil contract
and the re-marriage of a widow does not attract any social
ostracism, Even 80, according to the High Court, 3 higher
standard of re-assurance as to the reality of the prospects
of such re-marriage and of its beneficial economic reper=
cussions on the dependant widow was necessary, before her
prospects of re~marriage could be taken into account in
fixing the amount of compensation, That was lacking in
this case, according to the High Court.

7.4. The point has arisen before the Delhi High Court
also, Commenting on the difficulty of determining the

uestion of prospects of remarriage, the Delhi High Court

observed as under in a judgement reported in 1976 i=

"So cog ag there is no Legislative reform, the
possibility of the resmarriage of the widow claimant
must continue to hold the centre of the stage in
India, The judges will continue to be engaged in the
guessing game of sizing up the claimant's chances of
finding a new husband and bringing the dependency

to an end?

a2. Jajmal Sing V. Sawala Deve, Alois 1976 Delhi 127,131



English Law.

227 -

7.5, In this context, it may be vseful to
note that in Enzland, previously the prospect
of reemarriage ci a widow was considered to
te a relevant congiderction for assessing
the quantum of damages payable to her on

the ceath cf her husbana, The question
whether the wedow, on reemarrizpe, forfeits
the right te cleim damages arose before the
House cf Lords in an interestin, case, The

cement conteins certain strong arguments

apeinst considering t.« prospects of
rewmarrisge as relevant to the assessment

ov damages te be granted to the widow.”

Lor: Diplock pointed out that the prospects

of marriase might themselves be affected by
the amount of the award of aamages, sc that
the larger the damages for the lost dependency,
the better vould be the widow's chance of

obtaining another husband.

4g has becn pointed out by a leerned
writer ,? it was not necessary for the House of
Lords to consider what will be the measure of
damages for the lost dependency, if the widow
had resmarried after the husband's death but
before final award of damages. But ne points

out =

“It is of interest, nowever, that

twice in his speech Lord Diplock

1. walpens २० Melionaghe, (1969) 2 v.L.k. 767

2 RV. Baker, Note (1969) 85 L.Q.K. 305, 306.



Paragraph
7.5. contd,

> B«

pointed out that amount of the dependency

should be estimated 'nt the date of his (the
husband's) ¢eath', If the widow marries again
after her husband's deatii, vugit the compene
setion that became payabie on his death be
reduced because of a subseguent event such as

her rewmarriage? ‘The widew's expectation of

life will, of course, be taken into considera-
tion ir celowlating the amourt of the payment
which she is entitled to receive, but her
re-marriesge might be regarded as an independent
act arisine after her right has vested in her,

If there ic evidence thet she has refused an
offer of marriage, oon this be used to reduce

her clieim to dependency on the ground that it

was her duty to take reasonable steps to limit
her loss? Again, if a widow who has read the

Law Reperts reelises thet fJnancially 1t may be
better for her to live in sin than to get married
before she has received her dependency payment,
ought the law to encourage ber to do so? Of
course, if the dependency payments were an annual
payment to be made only until resmarriage, then
the answer would be a simple one, but if it is a
Lump sum that becomes payable on her husband's
deeth, then she ought to be entitled to it in full,
even though thereaftei she takes the independent
step of getting reemarried before the sum has

been paid to her,

“A final point may be of interest. If the
widow lias suffered a severe accident to her face bet=

ween the time of her husband's death and the

eeocoe


orm in
land,

resent
povision
8 ongland.

— 29 --

“calculations made at the trial regarding her
dependency, will the damages be substantially
increased because her chances of re-marriage
have lessened during the interval?"
7.6. The problem was solved in England by intervention
of the Legislature, which enacted the Law keform (Miscella-
neous Provisions) Act, 1971. Section 4(1) of the act!
provided that "in assessing damages payable to a widow....
there shall not be taken into account re~marriage of the

widow or prospects of her re-marriage".

ToT. The provision has been re-enacted in the Fatal
Acv..dents Act, 1976. The present provision in England on
the subject is in the following terme, as contained in the
Fatal Accidents Act? 4 -

"(3) In an action under this Act where there
fall to be assessed damagea payable to a widow in
respect cf the death of her husband, there shall
not be taken into account the reemarriage of the
widow or her prospects of re~marriage."

This provision settles the matter, It is, however,
possible to say that the knglish provision goes too far ,
in disregarding even actual re-marriage of the widow,

This provision was, as stated above, first inserted
in England in 1971, in view of certain judicial decisions”
which had pointed out that it would be very difficult for
a@ court to embark upon an inquiry as to how far a parti-

cular wicow has “prospects” of Yre-marriage.

1. Section 4(1), Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act, 1971 (Eng.). See now section 3(3), Fatal Accidente
Act, 1976, ae amended in 1982,

2. Section 3(3), Fatal Accidents Act, 1976, as amended
in 1982,

3. See paragraphs 7.9 and 7.11 infra.

4. Section 4(1), Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act, 1971, replaced by section 3(2), 1976 Act, again
replaced in 1982.

5. Buckley v. Allan, (1967)1411 5.8, aM $35.


ate in
। House
nords,

ritician
of the
inglish
act.

>> 30 --

7-8. It may be mentioned that when the Law Reform (Misce-
lianeous Provisions) bill (as introduced) was under debate
in the Rouse of Lords, very strong views were expYessed
against tresting the prospecta of re-marriage as relevant to
the assesament of compensation. The Bill aa it then stood
presumabaly allowed the court to take into account her Sgtual
Xeemarriage. The most vociferoue objection was that of
Baroness Summerskill, and it may be of interest to quote
one passage from her speecd.! न
"Finally, I say that it is lamentable that noble Lords
by this Amendment should seen to perpetuate in our courts
thie crude assesament of the value of a woman, oblivious to
the mental stress to which she is subjected, Again, I
Should like to emphasise that the widow ahould be regarded
as having been the working partner of her late hueband for
whom she has worked in the home, reared the children and
has thus enabled him to earn his wage or salary and to
improve bis skills. as I said on Second Reading, that was
just one phase of her life, a phase which haa had & tragic
ending. Her financial compensation should bear no relation
ship to the next phase, whether she marries or remains

single."

7.9. It 48 obvious that there is need for reform of the
law in India, At the same time, it should be pointed out
that the English Act? seems to have gone too far in exelud—
ing, from consideration, not merely the prospect of re~
marriage, but also the actual Peenarriage of the widow.

To prohibit the court from such an inquary ig to disregard
realities, In fact, even in England, the provision 88
enected has not been welcomed by everyone. It has been

1+ Baronnese Summerskill in (1971) Vol. 318, House of Lorde
Debates, col, 539-540 (6th May, 1971).

2. Section 3(3), Fatal Accidente Act, 1976, as amended in
1982.

3. See paragraph 7.7, supra.


.mond''s
ow,

ommisgion's
lew as to
he 7 ७-
arrying
idow.

kecommenda—
tion Tee
mrding re~
warriage

of widow,

— 31l—

criticised by the English Lay Commission, ! as also by the
Pearson Commission on Personal Injury.”
7.40, ‘the editors of the latest edition of Salmond on
Torts record their views as under?:-

"This legislation shows that change is not equivalent

to reform; it has led to grose injustice, not least in

that the court may be obliged to disregard a vital fact

which has happened, namely, the widow's re-marriage to

& wealthy second bugbang."4 :
7.11... In our opinion, the Erglieh provision relating to
Teemerriage (which we have quoted above’) 48 partly good,
and partly tad. In so far as it requires the court to dia
vegard the prospects of the marriage, it 48 good, as it
saves the court from the task of embarking upon an aimless
inquiry, However, in 80 far ag it requires the court to
disregard even the actual reemarriage of the widow, it 00७8
not appear to be a sound one. After Te-marriage (assuming
that re-marriage takes place before the trial of the claim
concludes), the court knows that the woman will receive
support from some other source. The court snould not be

required to disregard that reality.

7.12. In the light of the above'discussion, our recommenda-
tion is thet the court need not assess the Frospects of re~
marriage of the widow, but, at the sane time, the court must

take into account the actual Yre-warriage of the widow.®

1. Law Commission of snglana, Report on Personal Injury
Litigation (Law Com. No, 56).

2. Pearson Commission (hoyal Commigaion on Civil Liabili-
ties and Compensation for Personal Injuries) keport
(1978) Omd. 7054, para 411,

3. Salmond and Heuston, Torts (1981), pa.e 548 (edited by
Heuston and Chamvers),

4. See also Atiyah, Accidents, Compens: tion and the Law
(3rd ed.) page 184.

5. Paragraph 7.7, supra.

6. See Appendix 1, clause 6(2).


botion 2 ~
iret part.

voation 2,
firet pert -
keoommenda-
tion for
sinor

verbal
ennnges.

vootion 2,
second part
sinor yerbal
change
needed.

SHAPTAR VILE

MULTAPLAULTY OF BUITA: YBOTION 2
8.1. Wa now proceed to a considerntion of section 2 of the
Act. Curiously, the section begins with the words "Provided
that", The section really 00161 808 of two parte. The first

part readn:

"2. Not more than one 604६ ty be brought.
Provided alwaye thet no more than one aotion or
suit shal} be brought for, and in respeot of the
game wibjoot-mutter of complaint’.

The necond part of the section readat
"provided thnt, in any auch action or suit, the
exeoutor, administrator or repranentative of the
dacensel may innert 8 olaim tor and recover any
peouniary lone tu the estate of the deceased
oooasioned by such wrongful 8०४५ negleot or
default, which sum, when recovered, shall be deemed

part of the anpete of the eatate of the decenned."

Bad. The firet pare! of the asotion 16 intended to prohibit
2 multiplicity of nections, and requirne no changes of sub-
stance. Sut few minor verbal changes are necesrary in order
to bring the languave in lina with modern legal uenge. ‘These
will be apparent from the draft whioh we are appending to

this Report.”

6.3. The peoond part? of seotion 2 4७918 with a much more
Amportant matter. 25 permite the executor, administrator or
representative of the decenned to inmert a olaim for an’

reovver peouninry 10७8 to the estate oooapioned by the

wrongful, not, nonligence or default.

1. Raragraph 6.1, 00178 «
2. Bppendix {, claves 3.

3, Paragraph 1.1, supre.


wo 33 on
कप: 8.4. The Cuprene 0099४ had ocoasicn to compare the
te contents of eaations 1 and 2, and observed as fellown! y=
“The onuwe cf action under Seotion 1 and that
under weution 2 are different, While, under
Beotion 1, damague are recoverable for the benefit m
of the persona mentioned therein, under section 2
compennation goen to the benefit of the estate;
whereas under rection ! damagen are payable in (a)
Fespect of loss sustained by the persons sentioned
therein, under section 2 damages oun de olained
Anker alia for loss ef expectation of life. Shough
in come 08808 partion that are entitied to compensae
4101 under both the sections may happen to be the
sane persons, they need not necessarily be 90) persons 9)
entitled to benefit under section { may be different
from those oluiming under section 2. gripe 28218 ae a)
the two claims are to be based upon different causes
of action, the claimants, whether the same or
different, would be entitled to recover compensation
separately under both the heads. If & peraon taking
benefit under both the sections 18 the same, he oannot
be permitted to recover twice over for the sane loss,
In awarding damages under both the heads, there shall
not be duplication of the same claim, that is, if
any part of the compensation representing the loss
to the estate goan into the oaloulation of the
peroonnl lows under pneotion 1, that portion shall be
exoluded in giving compeneation under section 2 and
4448 30:90"

) ७००३-3० ५०+ ०७ ase mene ne on a0 2

1. 80084 Motor 307/46.114  *« 80५8, Vodumands ATK
1962 8.0. 1.

,२७ 3७ ae ne ७७७2७ 4७ 3 aa Oe 3५०७० ee 3 ३७ nO Os HO nN GN भा.



sition
ler

ve

We

Verbal
changes
recommended,

ae 34 =

8.5. It 1s settled law that under the Fatal Accidents
Act the liability under section 1 and the liability under
Weotion 2 are distinot, different and independent. ! Under
@eotion 1, damages are recoverable for the benefit of

persons mentioned therein ae loss sueteined by them. In
contrast, under section 2, damages are awarded for the

recoupment of the peouniary 2,088 to the setate of the

decensed 98 a result of the scoident. The two olaims are
based upon different causes of action and the claimants
would ba entitled to recover compensation separately under
both the heads. If, however, the person who takes benefit
under section 1 happens to be the same person as entitled
tu cumpensation unier seotion 2, there oanno$ be duplication
of the sane claim and compensation awarded under seotion 2
for the logs of the estute of the deceased will bea taken
4740 account in the onloulation of the componsstion payable
to the claimants under seotion 1.

Me claim thus relates to economic lose. “727

8.6. No change of substance 10 needed in this portion
of the section. llowever, minor verbal changes are needed,
These will be evident from the re-draft recommended by us

aa contained in an Appendix to this Report.?

1. Kahin v. Savard Bad, A.I.R, 1973 Mad. 83, 88.
2 KGB 178६ *. 1.8, Nadr, «1.8, 1970 8.0. 888 376, 377,

pare 4,
3. Bad Hanie v. Patel Snivabhan, 1.1.8. (1966) Guj. 500,

4 Buginsere International v- Banuasotha Byius (1974)
{Mileds 376

5. Appondix 1, ulause 8.


hotion 3 -
amendment
Woposed,

Anendneont
of 800०
tion 3
proposed,

Particulars
40 be
given,

Affidavit.

wn 355 oe

OHAPTER. JE
ERQORLORD 1 SRCRTON 2

9.1. We may now deal with certain procedural mattera.
Beotion 3 of the Act 48 relevant in this respect and
reads aa follownt
"S$. PAnantife shel) deliver partioulers, eta. -
The plaint 40 any such nation or audit shall give
a full partioular of the pergen or persons for whoa,
or on whoee behalf, suoh notion or suit shall be
brought, and of the nature of the claim in reapeot
of waioh damages shall be sought to be recovered."

9e2. The portion relating #0 nature of the claim ie
reduudant, in view of the specific proviatone in the 001७
of Civil Procedure as to contents of plaint,! and should
de omitted.

9.3. When neotion 3 provides that the slaint nuet give
particulare of the nature of the claim, the ecction, of
course, contemplates that the loss aunt be eet out with
reasonable datails deoause, after all, the ०१७१७ 49 for
danagen for the 1008, It would be better if the section
expressly wo provides, and we propose accordingly.”
Oppertunity may 81.89 be taken of Amproving the language,

which 4a, at present, archaic,

Geode I may also be provided that there shall be tied
with the plaint an affidavit by the plaintiff in which he
phall otate thet to the bost of bis knowledge, infomation
and belief the persons on whose behalf the ait is brought
as set forth tn the plaint are the only persons entitled

nwo नकल सम ७ न a tren ce nan ae ee न a 33 ज+ ote es at ote enon enemies

1. 070७४ Rule 1, Cede of Civil Procedure, 1908.

2. 800 = (०) Goodbads v» Remtonins AIH. 1955 808 5१5, 555.
(०) Bothexs v- Maurdoe, AIR. 1954 Cal, 655,658.

3. Yee Appendix 1, clause 11(1)«



Determina-
tien of
questions.

‘etermina-
tion of
questions
of liabi-
lity and
claim.

Non-
joinder

of some
bene
fioiaries.

1०:
2
3.
4

6.

>> 56 -+«

or who 01848 ५० be antitled to tho benufit thoreor,! the
court 49 whioh the 0०४६ 48 dinetitutud, If of opinion that
there uro auffiolent renaons for Aging Ho, may dispense

with the tilZing of tre aff idavit.?

9.5. It way further be provided that where suits are
brought by or for the venefit of two or more persons
claiming to ba entitled, as wife, husvand, parent or ohild
of the deounsod, the vourt in which the quits or either

of them are pending may make such order as deems just for
the &eterminntion, not only of the question of the
Liability of the defendant, but aleo of all questions as
40 the persons entitled under thie Act to the damages if

any, that may be recovered.”

9.6. Xt may algo be useful to have a provision setting
out the procedure for determining questions of Liability
and questions of oleim. The former - 4०0७५ questions of
Liability - should preferably be determined first. A suit

able provision on the subject is recommended.’

9.7. Tha provinion contained in the exiating Aot that the
olaim under the Act must be made on hehalf of al). the
dependants, rnisea the queation as to what 18 to happen if
the suit ia brought by only some of the beneficiaries. As
was pointed out in a Kerala cane,” to which & reference hes
already been made,® to hold that a suit should be dismissed
Deonuse the other beneficiaries sre not on record, would

be to take too technical a view. In that particular case,

the objection on the 80074 of non-Joinder hnd deen overruled
Appendix 1, clause 11(2).

Appendix 1, obevee 11(5)«

Appendix 1, olause 12.

Appendix 1, clause 13.

Bab. Kader v. Thatobanna, A.1.R. 1970 Ker, 241, 246.
Paragraph $.2, gupre.


Pagrach
ntd,

~ 7 न

by the trial 6007९, vhooe view wea upheld by the Bigh
Court, To ovodd pak contreveretor erining eleavhere,

1% may be propor te make an oxprese provision on the
eubjeot to onmure thet the nen-joinder of some of the
venefioiaries 81411 not be a ground for Asemtenal of the
suit brought by the other beneftosaries but the court may,
when passing the decree, rake auch provioions in the
deoree as it way consider just in order to proteat the

interests of the benefiotarien not joined!

ee cniestadadndadaratahenanantaneetenetetetetededetentieneeanietont a अभा+ ७०५० ९० ८०» >> ७००

1« ४७३७ Appendiz 1, clause 4(4)«

a)

b)


potion 4 ~
inition
| "Person"
be
Utted,

Definitions
of "60410
and "parent*
to be
omitted.

Definition
of "injury"
to be
added,

Other
revisions
yw

interprete=

sion

Teconment ed.

SHAETER 2
RALLAIZIONS: SROTION 4

10.1, In the present dot the definitions are placed at the
end, in section 4, The word *"peraon", ३९ 48 provided,
Spplies to bodies politio and corperate. This definition is
no longer required, as the expression “person” is defined in
Seotion 3(42) of the Oneral Clauses Act, 1897, which will
become applicable to the preposed new dct. The definition
of “pereon" shauld therefore be omitted.

10.2. The present Act defines the expression "child" as
inoluding son and daughter, grandson and grand daughter and
Step-son and step-daughter. I¢ 8100 defines the expression
“parents” as inoluding father, mother and grand father and
grand mother, In the light of the considerations already
mentioned,’ these definitions may require suitable re=
drafting, which we are separately reconmending.*

10,3. So much aw regards the definitions already contained
in the Act. Some new definitions also require to be added,
71788, it is necessary to insert a definition of the
expression "ingury",? on the lines of section 1(6), Snglish
Aot of 1976.

10.4. Purther, it is necessary to insert certain other
provisions in the nature‘of interpretation, for which
assistance can be taken from the English Aot of 1976.
Theme relate to «

(4) Legitinnoy,4 and

(44) relationship by affinity.”

ewan ews ९७) ७ 3 2७3० 2७.3० ५ ७32७ ७े >>) जन 3० mee wene nese ले ese ne mee eee

1. Paragraph 5८ (७), 8४278 -

2. Bee Appendix 1, clauses 2(1) (9) and 2(2)«

3. Appendix 1, Olause 2(4).

4. See Appendix 1, olause 2(2) and paragraph 5.5(b), gupra.
5. See Appendix 1, olause 2(3).


nefits
v fer

be
ducted,

Deductions

from damages

not permi=

38104 6 under

43010 8 8727
of 1982
dn Bngl

- we
SHARTAR 25

1{.1. ‘There still remain to be discussed certain matters
which are not dealt with in the Act at present. These may
now be taken up.

First, there is the question of dedutions from
damages. Often, the person liable to pay damages under the
dot argues that certain benefits whioh accrue on death
should be deducted while assessing Gamages foe death.
Bivevhere the matter hae been dealt with by epecific
legielation, but not 80 far in India, Asa result, certain

Aiftioult questions 87480 in India, whioh need consideration.’

14.2. In Sngland, by section 4 of the Fatal Accidents Act
of 1976, 1% wae provided that in asseusing damages in
Teapeot of a person's death in any action under the dot,
there shall not be taken into account any insurance money,
benefit, pefnaion, or gratuity which haw been + or will,

ex may be, paid “as a result of the death". “Insurance
money" was defined, in section 4(2) of the Act, ae including
return of preniume. ‘The word “pension” wae defined to
tnolude? return of contributions and any payment of &

lump sus.

(1.3. This elaborate provision wae contained in section 4
of the English dot of 1976, By the anendsent of 1982,

a simpler and more comprehensive provieion has been substi-
tuted for section 4, in Inglend.? Beotion 4, ss substi~
futed in 1982 in England, now reads as f underi-

eee ee eewenmens

toteet em ere eee भा men ७७३ वज+ eee meen ++ ७3 3+ न me a

1. Paragraph 11.4, dogma.

2, 8०० Peacock १० Amusement Bouinmens Co. Ltt., (1954)
2 &11 WLR, 689.

3, Administration of Justice Act, 1982 (Bng.).

4)

1)


>+ 40 --

“4. Agpoompent of damages: disregard of benefits

In assessing damages in respect of a person's death
in an action under this dot, benefits which have accrued
or will or may nocrue to any person from his estate or

othervine as a result of bis death shall be disregarded."

nd dan 11.4. In Indda, 1% 18 now well settled that the amount of

hee law
8 te insurance payable to a dependant of the deceased cannot be
asurance.

deducted from the damages payable under the Fatal Accidente
act,! But questions often arise regarding other benefits
ecoruing on death. Thue, it hae been held that ez-araiia
payments cannet be taken into gocount in assessing
compensation, Sven as regards insurance amount, some
High Courts make @ nice Adetinotion between the insurance
amount proper and ite “wcoeleration”. ‘Thus, the Bombay
view in that the insurance amount is not to be deducted,
but the acceleration is to be deduoted.”

Ten, there 10 the question offanily pension.
According to the Karnataka High Oourt, family pension
must be taken into socount for deduction, put provident

fund of gratuity oannot be taken into account.”

Reconenda- 11.5. All such contreversies should, in our view, be

stitenions. avoided. It appears to us that the comprehensive provision
dn section 4 of the Bngliah Act (as amended), oan be
usefully adopted in India, At the sane tine, 1% appears
proper to provide precifically, (in the Indian Act), that
the various benefite that were specifically mentioned in

the English Aot of 1976 (before its amendment in 1982),°

ere ee nnn eee meee

wee ewe nnn ene ne en eee ene meme न >>» >०+० +» «०.

1. dmarids Kaur v. Yonguard Insurance Company, 41.8. 1982

Delhi 1 (reviews cases).

2. ४4214 Veorii dg. v. Bareig, AI.R. 1982 Bom. 467 (7.8,).
3. Deputy Genered Nenager, State Rout transport (४४७६ ए*

Ha faxoiauma ATR. 1981 Karn. 129.
4. Paragraph 11.3, gupm-
5. Paragraph 11.2, 21273


Pouprehen-
ive
Pecommenda-

are also not deductible, 80 that, on those matters, there
may not arise the possibility of different views being
adopted in different courts, Such a comprehensive pre-
vision on the subjeot of benefits accruing on death will
settle the position on important pointe.

11.6. We are, accordingly recommending an omnibus
provision,’ requiring the court to disregard ali benefits
acoruing on death, and also specifically providing that
penefite specifically enumerated in the proposed pro-
vision ehall not be taken into aceount in acvessing

damages payable under the Act.

ee eco a naa a no ०७ A nee a ०» ५० ९3 ७ ९७ OD ५७ ७७ ५७ ३७७७ 3 ३० aM EN कर mn ER A eR अब ाकआ,

1. Bee Appendix , clause 7.


A Kerala
Case.

६४०७३ ५४५8५ AL]
SUGRSSION OMNZIFICATH

12,1. It is desirable to discuss at this stage
the position regarding succession certificate. Ina
Kerala case reported recently, the Kerala State Road
Transport Corporation contested the clain, for
Compensation, of a widow whose husband had been killed
in an ecoident caused by the negligence of the driver
of a bus belonging to the Corporation. The Corporation
dneisted that tHe widow shovld produce & succession
certificate, before payment of the compensation sould be
made to her, Agerieved by thie refusal, the widow moved
the High Court of Kerala by a Letter which was treated
as a petition. In 488 Judgeent, the High Cour} pointed
out that the widow waa not claiming as 4 successor to
her husband's estate, but was claiming on her om
Rocomt and a succession certificate waa not needed in
the case. Miadorating, the point, the High Court made
the following observations 1"
“the assumption that a succession certificate
48 necessary for payment of compensation to
the dependants of a person who dies on account
of accident is evidently not correst, In
two decisions of this Court in stshe Insurance
Offsoer v. Xhankamms, (1980) Ker, ut: $62),
the schene of the Indian Fatal Acoddents Act
hae been adverted to.

4. Xoghupenna takebad ¥- Qhairmens KAT. Commies

AsTR. 198% Ker. 975 99, paragrarh 5 (June).


Position
where
91848
Dased on
auqcession.

“Evidently, that enactment 1s brought into exietence
to enable dependants of a person whose death has

deen caused bf wrongful act, neglect or default

to claim compensation. Sut for that Act, there

Would be no case for the heirs of a deceased to

Claim compensation on account of death caused by
Wrongful act. It is to meet this situation that

the Fatal Accidents namely, the wire, husband, parent
and child of the person whose death has 00७1 caused,
to claim loss resulting to them from such death.”
12.2. Inetdentelly, in the sane Kerale case, the
following observations vere wade rogarding miccesseion
Certificate required when a oleim is made on the basis

gf succossions
"Th de for the Lesinlaiure ta das) with the

matter by enabling payments to be made at

Least in respect of amall suns of money,
without a secession certificate being required
to give immunity to the debtor. We are not
going into that question in this case, for,
even otherwise ve think we will be able to
give relief to the petitioner herein.”

4, Xoshupenna (200 v. Chairman, ५६8 7९५५ Compress
AsLR. 198% Ker, 97, 99 paragraph A (dune).


Bpecific
Provision
not
needed,

-44-

12.3, We have considered the question whether 18 48
necessary to introduce, in the Fatal Accidents Act,

& provision that no succession certificate shall

be required for a claim under the Act. However,

we think that this 10 obvious, and the objection
raised by the Kerala State Road Tranepart Corporation
in the case cited above, if we may say so, betrays a
total misconception of the law, It is inconceivable
hat such an objection could be made by any Corporation
(public or private) which is properly advised. We do not,
therefore, propose any clarificatory provision on the
above points, at least for the present,

a TE EER RREREEEnenIgunnmnensmmmmmomemeneemel

1, Paragraph 12.2.) 11723 «


Trend of
Comments,

Comments in
reenent
th the

working .

paper.

Gomment
fogarding
quantum of
poliey.

QUAPTIR बाप
COMMENTS RBCHIVED OM 1४ WORKING ApEn

13.1. As already stated, the Coumission has
Prepared a working paper on the subject and invited
Comments on tentative proposals. ‘Three comments have
been received on the working paper,

13.2. Comments received on $he Working paper from
State Government gf Himachal Pradesh and the State
Oovernment of Karmatake Oonour with the proposals

of the Law Commission, ae put forth in the working

paper (which were substantially the same as those going
to be set out in the next chapter of this eport).

13.3. Ong, comment on the working paper received

from an individual 80880 008 that the amount of Fatal
Accident Insurance Policy should be raised in view of
the rise in the cost of Living. In thie context, we may
point out that the Fatal Accidente Act does not deal
with the amount of insurance polioy nor with the quantun
of compensation, the quantum is left to be fixed by

the court, with die regard to all relevant factors. .
_.. जन: i
1, Paragraph 1०12 AUDXE
2, Lew Commisaion File No,
3. Lav Commission File No.2(4)/85-10, Serial No. 15.

741० No.2(1)/85e10 , Serial No. 16,
Me (diet es sein ale 7020४ Vishakhapatnan

atrict).

2(4)/85e10, Serial No. 12.


CHAPTER 277
BEYIMED AQT BROOMMENDED
0७७6 Act 14.4, In view of है
47777: ote of the extensive changes which will have
४९ nob with to be carried on in the Act if our recommendations
petrospective
effect. Contained in the preceding Ohapters are accepted, a

Fevised Act (rather than a mere amending Act) would be
More convenient, The revised Act should not have
retrospective effect, for reasons already stated,
Recoumenda-  1%,2, In Appendix 1, we annex & draft Bill, Ite
Appendix 4 several clauses seek to show, in a concrete form, the
various points made in the preceding Chapters.
1%,3. A Comparative table showing the section of the

Appendices

a3 , existing Act and the corresponding provision as
recormended in the draft 9111. envisaged by us १० given
in Appendix 2.

Appendix 3 contains & List of selected statutory
provisions in India providing for @ompensation on
death.

__ | / रििड।।भपपभ।पभ।:7

4. Appendix Z, cLetse 1(3).

2, See paragraph 3.1, 27013


(K,K, MATHEW)
CHAIRMAN

(J.P, CHATURVEDI)
MEMBER

(DR. ४,8. RAO)
MEMBER

(P.M. BAKSHI)
PART-TIME MEMBER

VEPA P, SARATHI)
1171 vEMBER

8, RAMAIAR)
vanien BEOPETARY

DATED: 16th MAY, 1985.


ALL EUDIX 4
IMALT BILL
RMB OMMENDAT IONS. In THe beaut 01 ॥ DAL
Arrangemont of clauses

BILL

4. Short title, extent, commencement and arpltentton,
2. Intérpratation.

३. Right of nett for wrongfin) denth,

Anit for benefit of roletivos,

5. Only one anit perminsibla.

6. Damages proportionnte to injury.

7 Renefita not to be taken into scconnt,

1... 0171 for Tons to the antate,

9 reney pold inte court.

40. Apporttonment of componantion.

41. Plaink end nf ddnvit.

12, Vower of court.

tion of Mabtitity before claim.

141. Detarminntion of ones

th, Repent.


THE WONOFUL DEATH BILL, 1985
EraLiminary.
1. (1) ९40 Act may de called the Wrongful Death Act
1985, !
(2) 7६ extends to the whole of India except the
State of Jamu end Kashuir,
(3) Th apAL some into forse on much date as
abe Central Government nay, by nobifioation in the Official
Ganatte, aproind in this behait, but shalt not ७2712. to
BAY_omuas of ston arising on 6 death ४1221 snaurred
before ite commencement.
2. (1) In thie 400, unless the context othervise

Tequires, 2
(a) १०३16" dnoludes son, daugiter, grandson,

Frandedaughter, adopted 20414, and 8 person to ४६६ the
daoesaad stood in Loge narentias

(>) “parent” includes father, mother, grand-father,

srendother, sap-father, sten-nother. a pecent ४09
80004 ५ ०१६५ ands 00800 0.4 ४204 4 1200 arate

00००००००००००००००००००००० ००० ००९००१००००७००१०००००००००९५००५०५०००९००५

1.

५ be: at gee clause 2(3) .
Fy As to eee x yma 4 १ intra
i pee rarest 1171: a | and 10.M4),


Butt for
honefit of
relatives
LRection 1A,
second pato~
arsph §n part 7

OD In Gee tie any 1044 जाएव- 11. for th
जात for the

PUrpo oa at 111
She 4०६, any Tokablonohdy by. Affindty ghar

’ Ded ‘onahdy by eongannutnsty , ay

rel tkhonch tp of the al! bleod. 54.8 72100 ७4019 ef tha

Wghe 01०० ५ ul the ba

409 2

be -troqten है

stop: chiid of ANY ORION Ae hog

(any 110 diy (145 ६6६ ta dntary tnolides
ANE Wee so and Bie 4. Ament, 61 a vergon's thy odeat
OP mental co udttgon.

(०) SU werds 10 thks Soh ospreggdin: at
PARAGON LY 55] १.०1 An he vom Who Lo after
Wrds horn ALi.

14६8६ of sult for wren rp Month.
३, TE the कैसे तो | parent hin bean eanaad hy nny
vane ras त61, ५ हा कि] तक age तह 111, Mich ds meh 319

1
would (10 fast Det onet, erened), Neve antitind the
Darron dn jurad he tn mutntadn » mb on) raonvor daminoe
dn ragpert therant, the person who woot thew haon 1111७
11 Aesth क ते nat enenedy 70511 he 14 कात te न नव for

danaresy ne tytthatandins the ook of tha parnnn injured,
and although the death
खफा An Auw to quivable ॥97161प७ or te qny other a
offence,

Suugod under edreunatances

Ny (1) 7५७७५ att wroneht anion thin tet ehal} be a
For the bene ttt of the कह 1 छह apeet Clad dn onhenacttor
(३) the parson whare leoth yon an eaanad, Wty axcast
ac hor inaftar provided, shell be hroneht hy oni dn the

Toma of कील तरतलाफैतत ar oanintatrater af the decannad,

1. feo porneraph 7,508) ond 19% (11).

Gee (छाए! के 1.

Garba वा | Tay 1 है 5 1७1: [हुछ

Wy Varbol doprevenanta hove heen meiay tarts an
of thre inpraved drafting an tha Bret tah, vet ot 1076,

Yn t roafarenens to An [४7७ fae claus He a

है, phe हर worda "taloky nr other ertnns™ tn wont te

7 41 nye hecoms fnnpproprinte, Heres the ehanrar

woreinn,
6. Sex | 110) WG,
D2. Men कही) 675.


~ 51»

177 2० Cr
f 1976 (६) there 4s no executor or administrator
of the deceased, or
(>) no Hit 18 brought Wdthin eix\nonths
after the death by and in the name of
an executor or aduinistrator of the deceased,
the suit may be brought by and fn the name of ६11. 1
07 eay of the relatives specified dn sub-section (3),
f. 86% ‘4 (3)
झगड़ा! are the following, namely, +
(8) wife or husband)
(७) ०७३14,

५
(०) +
(6) parent, न
(०) ‘unter and brother's 1808,
(f) पा widoy?

a
(६) slgher ond sister's 0008,
(h) 40004.4804 40214: tania,
(4) aunt and 0801 tame

» Bee paragraph i .
ie lause ९) = "01416 ,
8080 2(1)(0) « "parent",

5:50
# ०७५०० Amo



= Be
(4) The non-joinder of some of the
dependants to suit under this Act shall not be a greund
for diemissal of the suit brought by the other dependants,
but in such a suit the Court, when passing a decree, है
may make such provisions ae it considers just for
protecting the interests of the dependents not om

Yreoord.

Only one mit 5. Not more than one suit shall lie under this
raiesible. + ack
6.2, f4: % Act for and 4n respect of the same cause of action.
paragraph _/,

0१.82 3)

ड0811 #॥ Ast
of 1976.

Damages (1) ग्रा& 8125 ४08: this Acts sich damages
पग 1900७ ope ३०४ an asa 200100७ Ao 0550
rasuitane from She death to the relatives snd tht
snount so sasovered, shall, after deducting the
poste not recovered from the atandant ba divided,
pone the Talahmes in sinh shares ne par be directed

bythe souxt.
(2) Daa 843 under his 390 4182-80:

Fe roe densies parable toa vidoy $n resmect of the dasthof

९ 1962. hex husband,
हे

छ has there aps) be taken dio 42090)
ae fa (>)
ananéed 98 26
tr ee ere Tr
of 1 .
(४) फ्रड101 1148.311311001:::.887904-8007
! sop 70204 8-11 an for-snvancinie lost fort tr arin what aS _ .

aroun oh
1. OS sk (० fore . | 2.४,
ae be eile ‘ise मा q
९ 18 8४ 704१ कै लिए we 8:80 paracrephe
21621 पक हु (गे has a भर

tation Act, 190
3. see paragraph 8.2.


bees
ru:

on death
not to be
taken into
account,

Claims for

loss to the
states
Section 2,
second 9०170) «

7 (1) 21.4 ॥७४ under thie Ast. ip ansesping

6. ०००००००००००००००००००० IM any suit under this
ACts the plaintsss may insert ४ claim fur and recover

any peouniary loss to the estate of the deceased
occasioned by such wrongful act, negiect or default,
wheh sum, when recovered, ahiall be deemed part of

the assets of the estate of the dvcensed.?

I
1. Paragrephe 11.4 and 11.6.

2. Bee paragraphs 11,4 and 1.66

Be 8 ९ paragraph 8.6.


Money paid
in gourt,

Compares3(4)
En, ४1180 Act
of 1976,

Plaint and
affidavit,
(8.3).

9, Money paid {nto court tn satisfaction of « cause

of ection under this Act may be in one sum without
specifying the ahares of the relatives,’

10, (1) Where the compensation has not. been otherwise
apportioned, the Court may apportion 1६ among the persons
entitled,

(2) The Court may in ita dinoretion postpone the
distritution of money to which minors are entitled and

may diract payment from the undivide:t tuna,2

Erogeduia
11, (1) Ins sult under this Act, the plsintisy
abell, in bis pleint, set forth the persons for vhos
or on whose behalf the sult is brought, and 8180 to set
out in reasonable detail the loss suffered by each of

such paraona.?

(2) There shall be filed, with the plaint in such
a 801६, an affidavit by the plaintiff in which he shall
state that to the best of his knowledge, information and
belief, the persons on whose behalf the 6110 18 brought
as set forth in the plaint are the cnly persons entitled

or who claim to be entitlod tu the benefit thereot 4

.

(3) The court in which the suit 16 instituted,
if of opinion that there ore sufficient ressons for
doing 80, may dispense with the filing of the affidavit
required by sub-section(2).°

4, See paragraphs $,5 and 5,10.
2. See paragreph 6.7.
3. See paragraph 9.3.
4 See paragraph 9.4.
Se dee paragraph 9.4,


Power of
eourt to
determine
certain
questions

(New),

Determins-
tion of
question of
lfabi1it:

ws 2

Repeal.

(c) {he court shel give an oprortunity for

(4) the court ghed) then cronounce judgements
(e) after the sudgenent ie pronounced. the defendants

4, 800 peregraph 9,5.
2. See paragraph 9.6.
3. Ser paragraph 3.2.


bt_the esjating Act and the ocrremonding
Slouse dnjrecomended draft Bill

Slause dnjrecommended draft Bill
Bxiating section Proposed olause
Section 1. 1.
Section 1A, first paragraph 3.
Bection 1A, second paragraph W141), 42).
Bection 1A, third paragraph. 6).
Svotion 2, first paragraph. 5.
Beotion 2, second paragraph. 8६
Geotion 3. 1.
Bection 4, part relating to
@afinition of "parent". 21) (०)
8000460 4, part relating to
definition of "obild" 2¢1) (1)
Beotion 4, relating to

onitted.

definition of "person".


1.

2.

3.

4,

5.

Bection 020, Indian Ruilways Act, 1890.

Bection (1) read with section 8(5),
Workmen's Compensation Aot, 1923.

Geotion 3, last paragraph, Employers!
Ldubility Act, 1938 (2% of 1938).

Bections95(1) (b), 96 and 102, Motor
Vehicles Act, 1939.

feotion 53, Bmployecs' State Insurance
Aot, 1948 (3% of 1948).

Bections 346, 347 and 352, Merehant
Bhipring Act, 1958.

Legislation relating to carriage by air.