LAW COMMISSION OF -INDIA
ONE HUNDRED AND TWELFTH REPORT

ON

SECTION 45 OF THE INSURANCE ACT, 1938.

June, 1985. —


Chupuer

Chapter

Chapier 3

Chapter
Chapter
Chapter

we

CONTENTS

Introduction

Scope of section 45 of the Insurance Act, 1938
Working of the section and the problems arising
therefrom

The position in other countries ..

Comments received on the working Paper

Recommendations.

Paces

le

3-4

6-7


CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

1.1. This report deals with section 45 of the Insurance Act, 1938. The section
deals with the right of the insurer to repudiatea policy on the life of the insured.
In the working of the section, certain difficulties have been noticed and the
Law Commission has taken up its examination as part of its function of revising
the laws of our country.

1.2. Section 45 of the Insurance Act, 1938 reads as follows :

“Policy not to be called in question on ground of —mis-statement after 2
years—No policy of life insurance effected before the commencement of
this Act shall, after the expiry of two years from the date of the com-
mencement of this Act and no policy of life insurance effected after
the coming into force of this Act shall, after the expiry of two years
from the date on which it was effected, be called in question by an in-
surer on the ground that a statement made inthe proposal for insurance
or in any report of a medical officer, or referee, or friend of the in-
sured, or in any other document leading to the issue of the policy, was
inaccurate or false, unless the insurer shows that such statement was
on a material matter or suppressed facts which it was material to
disclose and that it was fraudulently made by the policy-holder and
that the policy-holder knew at?the time of making it that the statement
was false or that it suppressed facts which it was material to disclose -:

Provided that nothing in this section shall prevent the insurer from calling
for proof of age at any time if he is entitled to do so, and no_ policy
shall be deemed to be called in question merely because the terms of
the policy are adjusted on subsequent proof that {the age of the life
insured was incorrectly stated in the .proposal.””

1.3. The period of two years mentioned in the section runs, in the case of a policy
effected before the commencement of the Act, whichis July 1, 1939; and in other
cases, the period runs from the date on which the policy was effected. Even in
the case of revival of a lapsed policy, the period hasto be calculated from the date
on which the policy was originally effected.

1.4, The Government of India decided to nationalise life insurance business
in India in order to ensure absolute security to the policy-holder in the matter
of his life insurance protection, to spread insurance much more widcly and in
particular to the rural areas, and as a further step inthe direction of more effec-
tive mobilisation of public savings.? Accordingly, in 1956, Parliament passed
the Life Insurance Corporation Act, and s. 43 of the LIC makes 5. 45 of the
Insurance Act applicable to the Life Insurance Corporation as it applied to

any other insurer.

1.
2. Statement of Objects and Reasons to the LIC Act, 1956,

Scope of the
report.

Section 45, Insu-
rance Act, 1938

Date from which
the period of 2
years is counted,

Effect of the Life
Insurance Corpo-
ration Act, 1956.


Scope of 5. 45.

LIC and s. 45.

CHAPTER 2

SCOPE OF ION 45 OF THE INSURANCE ACT, 1938

2.1. Under the English Common Law, contracts of insurance are contracts
uberrima fides ov contracts of utmost good faith, so that, if the insured had made
incorrect statements or suppressed facts, the insurer could avoid the contract even
after the policy had been in foree for several years and all the premiums paid
would be forfeited to the insurer. It had been the practice of the insurer to
insert in the policy and the form of proposal, a clause, that a// the answei stated
formed the basis and part of the terms of the contract. The result was that any
variation, whether it was material or not, and however slight the variation may
be, gave a right to the insurer to avoid the policy. This caused immense loss
and hardship 10 the insured and more often to his legal representatives, if he was
dead, especially to illiterate widows. The section was therefore enacted to modify
the rule and to mitigate the rule of ulmost good faith. The contractual right of
the insurer to repudiate a claim whenever the inaccuracy or suppression was
covered, was restricted. The section docs not affect the insurer's right for a pet iod
of two years from the date of the policy, but thereafter, no policy canbe challeng-
cd on the ground that any statement made in the proposai or in any report
of the medical officer or any document was inaccurate or false unless it was
material to disclose, and it was fraudufently made, and the policy-holder knew at
the time he made it, that it was false; or he suppressed a fact material to be
disclosed, provided that nothing in that section prevenis the insurer from

_calling for proof of age of the insured or to adjust the rate of premium according

to the correct age.

2.2. In one case* decided by the Madras High Court, where the Corporation
sought 10 repudiate a claim, one of the learned Judges observed :

“Whenever claims are repudiated or disputes come to courts of law, the
LIC should not put up fight on the pattern of ordinary litigants. But it
must be ona higher plane so as to inspire confidence in the public that claims
are not resisted on frivolous pleas and reckless allegations. All the relevant
materials gathered by the Corporation in the course of its investigation
ofa particular claim shall be placed before the court to enable it to judge the
truth. There shall be a frank and full disclosure of all the material evidence
and no attempt should be made to suppress or withhold the same.”

Other Courts have also made similar remarks,‘

OL v. Parvathavardhini, AVR 1965 Mad, 357.
व Danlat Ram v. Bharat Insurance Co. AUR 1973 Delhi 180; LIC v » Shakunala Bai, AVR

1975 AP 68; and V. Srinivasa Pillai v. LIC, AIR 1977 Mad. 381


CHAPTER 3

WORKING OF THE SECTION AND THE PROBLEMS ARISING
THEREFROM

3.1. Cases which have come up before courts can be classified into three categories, Judicial decisions,
namely (a) where the policy has lapsed but renewed and the insured died within
2 years of the renewal bul more than 2 years after the date of the original policy
and the claini was repudiated; (b) where the insured died within 2 years of the
date of the policy and the claim was also repudiated within that time; and (c)
where the insured died within 2 years of the date of the policy and the claim
was repudiated more than 2 years of the date of the policy. In cases of death
after 2 years from the date of the policy, there is no difficulty, because s. 45 will
be applicable and enforced strictly.

3.2. In a case from Punjab,® the insured took two policies in 1944. They "४४०३ ७)

lapscd in 1947 and in 1948 they were revived on a personal declaration of good
health by the insured but without any medical examination or certificate. The
insured died in 1949 and the insurer sought to repudiate the claim on the ground
that the insured was suffering from tuberculosis even from 1944, Since theinsur-
er failed to prove the allegation, the claim of the insured was decreed:

3.3. In this case, the death of the insured is within 2 years and the repudiation Category (b)
of the claim is also within 2 years. In this class of cases, courts, while accept-
ing the doctrine of uberrima fides have insisted upon the fairness of the insurer
also and required proof that someone, on behalf of the insurer, had drawn the atten-
tion of the insured to tricky and ambiguous questions in the form of proposal
and that the insured had clearly understood the question before giving his answers.

IM All India General Insurance Co. ९. S.P. Maheshwari?, the Court upheld the
repudiation of the claim of the respondent, on the ground that there was a deli-
berate mis-representation by the insured about his drinking habits and that there
was non-disclosure by the insured that he was suffering from veneral discase.
In the course of the judgment, Anantanarayanan J., however observed :

“ even within the 2 years period, only misrepresentations which are

material, in the sense of having some effect.upon life expectation, whether

direct or indirect, should be allowed in defence for avoidance of the contract.

Of course, within this period, the further conditions laid down in s. 45

need not be made applicable. For instance, it may not at all be necessary

tolay down that the policy-holder knew that the statement was false, or that
he fraudulently suppressed this knowledge. But, ithe law is jto be retained,
as if stands,’ cases of hardship and injustice might arise, within the 2-year
period, which the courts would be powerless to remedy, since the principle
of warranty would hold the field. I might also observe that, with modern
scientific methods of medical examination including serological and x-ray
tests, in cases of doubt, it should be more and more possible for Insurance

Companics to satisfy themselves about life expectation by accurate data,

which have nothing to do with what the insured man says about his own

health’.

3.4. The Supreme Court had occasion to examine the scope of the section’, In Category ७)
this case, the policy was issued in March, 1945 but it was to come into effect

5. Lakshini Insuraace Co. ४. Bibi Padmavati, AUR 1961 Punj 253.
6. LIC ४. Shakuntala Bai, AIR 1975 AP 68.

7. AIR 1960 Mad 484.

8. Mithoolal v. LIC, AIR 1962 SC 814.


ne insured died in November 1946 and the claim of the
assignee of the policy was repudiated on October 10, 1947. The Supreme Court
while holding on the facts of the case that the policy holder was guilty of fraudu-
and that the respondent rightly repudiated the claim, laid down

from January 15, 1945.

ion
propositions 2—

lent suppress!
the follow:

(1) Whether the revival ofa lapsed policy constitutes a new contract ता not
for other purposes, it is clear from the wor ding of the operative part of 5. 45 that
the period of two years for the purpase of the section has to be calculated from
the date on which the policy was originally effected.

(2) The (hree conditions for the applicability of the second part of 8. 45
are—
(a) Ue
it was material to disclose;
(0) the suppression must be fraudulently made by the policy-holder; and
(०) the policy-holder must have known at the time of making the statement
that it was false or that it suppressed facts which it was material to

atement must be ona material matter or must suppress facts which

disclose.

On the basis of this statement of the law the High Courts have held that the
repudiation by the LIC, of the claims of persons entitled to the insurance amounts
on the death of the insured, was wrong.

In New Indian Assurance Co. vs. Sulachana,® the Policy came into effect
in 1949, the insured died in 1950, and the repudiation of the claim was in 1952.
The High Court held that the insurer must provethe ingredients sei outin the 2nd
proposition Jaid down by the Supreme Court.

So also in LIC Ys. Janaki Ammal'®; LIC Vs. B. Chandra Vathamna;"
Manohar Lal Vs. LIC?

Therefore, in order to avoid the onerous part of s. 45, the insurer must
challenge the claim within two years of the coming into effect of the policy, when
the insured had died within the period. This state of law might cause the fol-
lowing difficulties to the insurer +

(1) 11 does not allow sufficient time to the insurer to make the necessary

investigation for repudiating the claim;

(2) Aclever claimant may wait for the 2 yearsto elapse before informing the

(3) The insurer may not know to whom the repudiation is to be made,
because, if the insured is dead the insurer must wait and seeto whom the

letters of administration to the estate of the deceased are granted.

3.5. We may now restate the problems as follows :

(0) Where the insured dies within 2 years ofthe date when the policy comes

into effect. should the insurer be allowed some time for investigation to

enable the insurer to repudiate a claim afier 2 years from the date of the

policy without being under the obligation of satisfying the onerous
conditions of s. 45 ?

(2) Where the insured dies within 2 years of the date of the policy and
the repudiation of a claim is also within that period, canthe insurer rely
on the doctrine of uberrima fides ot should the insurer be allowed to
repudiate only for material mis-representations ?

The Problem.

9, AIR 1962 Assam 65,
10, AER 1908 Mad. 32
11. AIR 1971 AP. 41.
12. AIR 1981 071 171.



CHAPTER 4
THE POSITION IN OTHER COUNTRIES

4.1. As far asthe U.K. is concerned, the position is that while the doctrine of
uberrinia fides is strictly adhered to, courts come to the rescue of claimants by insis-
ting on fairness and good faith on the part of the insurer also.

4.2. Section 84 of the consolidated Life Insurance Act, 1945-61, provides that a
policy shall not be avoided by reason only of any incorrect statement (other than
a statement as to the age of the life insured) made in any proposal or other docu-
ment on the faith of which the policy was issued or re-instated by the company
unless the statement

(a) was fraudulently untrue; or

(0) being a statement material in relation to the risk of the company under
the policy, was made within the period of three years immediately pre-
ceding the date on which the policy is sought to be avoided or the date
of the death of the life insured, whichever is earlier.

Therefore, if the insured dies within 3 years of the date of the policy and the
policy was issued on the basis of an incorrect statement material fo the risk of the
company, any claim based on the policy can be repudiated at any time thereafter,

43. Inthe United States, the method employed is to have ‘incontestable clauses’
in the policy. In some States they are imposed by statute. The effect of these
clauses is that after a certain period, the policy cannot be contested and a claim
cannot be challenged onany ground of error or mis-statement. Ifdeathtakes place
during the contestable period, any claim based on the policy can be challenged on
the grounds of error or mis-statement at any time, so that, the insurer’s right to
repudiate does not depend upon the time when the repudiation is made.

The Position in
U.K,

The Position
in Australia.

The Position
in the U.S.


Comments on the
working Paper.

CHAPTER 5

COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING PAPER

5.1. ‘The Working Paper prepared on the subject under consideration was circu-
Jated by the Commission in March, 1985 to interested persons and bodies including
the Life Insurance Corporation of India, State Governments, High Courtsand Bar
Associations. A request was made to forward comments by the 151] April, 1985.
Allthe comments received upto the [st June, 1985 have been taken into considera-

tion before finalising the Commission's views.

Himay alse be mentioned that very informative views have beea expressed by
one Association. The Commission would like to express its appreciation of the
interest shown by the said Association in the nvatter’® and also its gratitude to
those wha have sent comments on the Working Paper.

As regards the receipt of comments, the following persons/bodies have for-
warded us their comments oa the Working Paper :

{w) two High Courts.4

(0) State Governments.

(©) one research institution."

(d) two persons.!7

{e) Life Insurance Corporation of India.24

One High Court") concurs with the suggestions of the Law Commis-

sion to recast section 45 onthe ground that the section as proposed to be revised
would reduce the scope of avoiding the lawful claim of an insured by the insurer.

However, inthe reply received trom the other High Court, it has been men-
tioned that the Judges have no comments to offer.40)

Four State Governments have concurred with the suggestion of the Com-
mission. One State Government? fully endorses the background given by the
Commission for the examination of the working of section 45 of the Insurance
Act, 1938, and states that if the law is to be retained as it stands, cases of hard-
ships and injustice might arise within the two year period and the courts would
be helpless to remedy.

Another State Government” does not agree with the suggestion of the Law

Commission because, according to it, the proposed amendment. would make the
provisiona rigid one resulting in injustice to the insurer ina genuine case of fraud.

One person suggcsts® that a period of 2 years instead of 3 years is more
than sufficient alter which LIC cannot repudiate claims under any circumstances,

whatsoever.

13. Law Commission Vile No. 1:

14. Law Conmnission File No.

1468). Law Commi 85-LC, 51. No. 24(R).

14(b). Law Commission Fit No. P.2(2, Sy 91. No. 16(R).

15. Law Commission File No. F.2(2)/85-LC, SI. Nos. 12(R), 150२), 1808), 19(R), 23(R)
and 27(R).

16. Law Commission File No. P.2(2y/85-LC, 81. Nos, 13(R) and 22(R).

17. Law Commssion Pile No. P.2(2)/85-LC, Sl. Nos. 17(R) and 216).

38. Law Commission File No. Sl. Nos. 12(R), 15(R), 23(R) and 27(R).

19, Law Commission File No, F.2(2)/35-LC, 81. No. 19(R).

20, Law Commission File No. F. SI. No. 18(R).

21. Law Commission File No, £,2(2)/85-LC, $1. No. 216२).

285-LC, Sl. Nos. 13(R) and 2207).
(285-LC, 51, Nos. 16(R) and 24(R).



Another person®? does not make any specific comment on the Working

Paper.
The Life fnsurance Corporation of India®* has in its comments suggested
that if death occurs within three years from the date of the policy or its revival,
the right to repudiate for mis-statemets should be available for a period of one
year from the date of intimation of death. In cases of fraud, it has suggested that
it should have a right to call the policy in question for a period upto 5 years and
that where a policy is continuously in force for a period of 6 to 8 years without
its being called in question, the LIC shall be deemed to fave waived ifs right to

repudiate the policy on any ground.
idered the suggestion of the LIC in the

The Commission has carefully cor
light of the decided cases mentioned earlier in this Report. “In view of the observa-

tions of many of the Courts that (he LIC should not be likean ordinary litigant and
put forth frivolous defences to repudiate claims and in the interests of the insured
and claimants, the Commission feels that such a long period should not be given
to the LIC to repudiate claims and the period of 3 years recommended is a sufli-
ciently long period for the LIC to make independent investigations rather than
leave the insured ina state of uncertainty for a period of 8 years. The Commission
therefore feels that no change need be made in its recommendations

P20Q,/85-LO, 5।

22. Law Commission bile No.
Y85-LC, SI. No. 28(R).

23. Law Commission File No. |



Recommendation

How 5. 45 should
be recast.

CHAPTER 6

RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1. On the bi of the materials contained in the preceding Chapters, we now
proceed to make our own recommendations on the subject under consideration.
Section 45 should be recast in such व manner as would reconcile the right of the
insured or a claimant by giving protection from challenge on frivolous grounds,
and the right of the LIC to repudiate only on good grounds.

62. We recommend that section 45 of the Insurance Act, 1938, should be recast
in the following manner ३
“Section 45 ; Policy not to be called in question on ground of mis-statement
after 3 years.
(1). No policy of life insurance shall be called in question after the expiry
of three years from the date on which the policy is effected or where the
dafter it has lapsed for any reason, from the date on which

policy is re

it is so revi

(2) A policy of life insurance may be called in question at any time within
three vears from the date on which the policy is effected or. as the case
may be, the date on which it is revived, on the ground that any statement
being a statement material to the expectancy of the fife of the insured
was incorrectly made in the proposal or othei document on the basis of
which the policy was issued or revived.”

(K.K. MATHEW) Sdj-
Chairman

(0.7, CUATURVEDD Sdf,
Member

(DR. M.B. RAO) Sd/,
Member

(P.M. BAKSHI) Sd/,
Part-time Member

(VEPA 7. SARATHID) Sd,
Part-time Member

(5. RAMAIAI) Sd/,

Member Secretary

Dated ; 6th June, 1985.

MGIPNLK—770/Min, of Law/85—30-7-86—735 Copies.


1.0, INo.F.2(2)/85-L.C.
Justice KK. “athe New Delhi-11 0001.
Dated the 6th June, 1985.

My dear Mini tev.

Ja a sorwarding herewith the One Hundred and Twelfth
Report of the Law Commission on “Section 45 of the Insurance
Act, 1938: Policy not to be called in question on ground of mis-
statement after 2 years.”

The subject was taken up by the Law Commission on ils
own. The need for taking up the subject is explained in para 1.1
of the Report.

The Commission is indebted to Shri Vepa P. Sarathi, Part-
time Member, and Shri S. Ramaiah, Member Secretary for their
valuable assistance in the preparation of the Report.

With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/
(K.K. Mathew)

Shri A-K. Sen,

Honourable Minister of Law
and Justice,

New Delhi

Encl : 112th Report.