LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTEENTH REPORT

ON
INJURIES IN POLICE CUSTODY


JUSTICE K.K. MATHEW

9.0. No, F. 2(4)/85-LC
CHAIRMAN
LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
New Delhi-110 001.
Dated the 29th July, 1985

My dear Minister,

1 am forwarding herewith the One Hundred and Thirteenth Report of the

Law Commission on “Injuries in Police Culstody—Suggested Section 114B,
Evidence Act”,

The subject was taken up by the Law Commission on its own. The need for
taking up the subject is explained in paras 1.1 and 1.2 of the Report.

The. Commission is indebted to Shri P. M. Bakshi, Part-time Member, and

Shri 5. Ramaiah, Member Secretary, for their valuable assistance in the prepara-
tion of the Report.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(K. K. MATHEW)

Shri A. K, Sen,
Honourable Minister of Law and Justice,
New Delhi.

Encl : 113th Report.


CONTENTS

CHAPTER Pace No.
1. Introductory. 1
2. The Problem. 2
3. The Present Law and the Need for Reform, 4
4, Working Paper and Comments Received Thereon. 5
5. Recommendation. 7

APPENDIX
APPENDIX : Recommendation in respect of other Acts. 8

6)


CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY

1.1. The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 on which a comprehensive repo rt has Geresis.
already been forwarded by the Law Commission,’ seems to need amendment in
the light of certain observations made by the Su ipreme Court in a recent judg-
ment.’ The Supreme Court had to deal with a highly shocking incident of torture
of a suspect in police custody, who died within almost six hours of his arrest
by the police. A trial of the concerned police officer and his superior resulted in
conviction for culpable homicide not amounting to murder. In the course of its
judgment, the Supreme Court passed strictures about the treatment meted out
by the police to the detained suspect and felt constrained tg go to the length of
suggesting an amendment in the law of evidence, in regard to the burden of proof
in such cases.

1.2, Taking note of the Supreme Court judgment, the Law Commission of
India decided to take up the subject on its own and to examine whether there
is need for reform of the law on the subject.

1.3. In order to facilitate a consideration of the subject, the Law Commis-
sion had prepared and circulated a-Working Paper setting out the present posi-
tion and the gist of the Supreme Court judgment and discussing the need for
amendment. The Commission had invited views from interested persons and bodies
and the public on the Working Paper.’ The Commission is grateful for all those
who have, in response to the Working Paper, sent in their comments. A gist of
the views expressed in these comments will be given in a later Chapter of
this Report.

1Law Commission of India, 69th Report (Indian Evidence Act, 1872).

*State of U.P. v. Ram Sagar Yadav ( ॥ Appeal No. 69 of 1975, decided 22nd January,
1985). A. 1985 S.C. 416 (Marcl )) : (1' 885) 1 Scale 108.

3Law Commission of India, Working Paper on Injuries in Police Custody : Suggested Section
114B Evidence Act (14 June 1985).

‘Chapter 4, infra.



The facts in the
Supreme Court
case.

The prosecution
and conviction

Observations of
the — Supreme
Court

CHAPTER 2
THE PROBLEM

2.1. The facts of the case decided by the Supreme Court which has been
mentioned above' lie in a very short compass. A farmer from U.P. named Brij
Lal had some difference with his neighbour. The neighbour filed a complaint
against Brij Lal for the offence of cattle trespass. It appears that the complaint
was unfounded and false. The police officer concerned started demanding bribe
from Brij Lal for hushing up the matter and persistently repeated his demand.
Ultimately, in order to escape the false charge, Brij Lal offered a sum of Rs. 100
to the constable. The constable was not satisfied with this amount and Brij Lal
complained to the Superintendent of Police, who forwarded the case for inquiry
to the Station House Officer, Hussainganj. Enraged at the boldness of Brij Lai,
the Station House Officer, Hussainganj decided to teach Brij Lal a lesson and
sent two other constables to bring him to the police station. It was at 10.00 A.M.
in the morning that Brij Lal was brought to the police station. By noon, he was
in a critical condition and had to be taken in a state of shock to the Additional
District Magistrate. Brij Lal could not even walk into the courtroom. The Addi-
tional. District Magistrate went out into the varandah and found that Brij Lal
had 19 injuries on his body. The Additional District Magistrate was able to record
the dying declaration of Brij Lal. In the dying declaration, Brij Lal charged the
Station House Officer and two police constables with having caused the injuries
by beating him up while he was in police custody. Brij Lal died in the evening.

2.2. In due course, the Station House Officer and the two police constables
were prosecuted and convicted in the Court of Session of the offence of culpable
homicide not amounting to murder and sentenced to imprisonment for seven
years, On appeal to the High Court, however, they were both acquitted. Presum-
ably, the High Court did not consider the evidence on record as sufficient to
prove the case against them beyond reasonable doubt. Against this judgment of
the High Court of Allahabad, the State Government of U.P. appealed to the
Supreme Court and it was in this appeal that the Supreme Court had to pass
very stringent strictures against the police officers concerned, Allowing the appeal,
the Supreme Court observed that it was ironical that a person who had complained
against the police of misconduct was done to death by policemen and their superior
officer. The Supreme Court also observed that the persons charged in this case
had committed the more heinous offence of murder, and not merely the lesser
Offence of culpable homicide not amounting to murder of which the trial court
had convicted them.

2.3. The observations made by the Supreme Court in its judgement stress
the need for adopting a different approach where an incident involves an allega-
tion against the police. These observations have a direct relevance to the law of
evidence. The Supreme Court was anxious that the handmaids of law and order
do not use their position for oppressing innocent citizens who look to them for
protection. The court noted with regret that police officers, “bound by the ties
of a kind of brotherhood”, often prefer to remain silent in such a situation, and
“when they choose to speak, they oftefi put their own gloss upon the facts and
often pervert the truth”. The Court emphasised the extremely peculiar character
of a situation where a police officer alone, and none else, can give evidence regard-
ing the circumstances in which a person in police custody comes to receive
injuries. This situation naturally results in paucity of evidence and probable
escape of the guilty persons. It was for this reason that the Supreme Court
called for a re-examination of the law of burden of proof, The Supreme Court
was anxious that police officers who commit atrocities on ace, in the custody
of the police do not escape punishment for want of evidence. {The following
observations occur towards the end of the Supreme Court judgément :— _
“Before we close, we would like to impress upon the Government the need
to amend the law appropriately so that policemen who commit atrocities
on persons who are in their custody are not allowed to escape by reason of

aParagraph 1. 1, supra.
2


paucity or absence of evidence. Police officers alone, and non else, can
give evidence as regards the circumstances in which a person in their custody
comes to receive injuries while in their custody, Bound by the ties of a kind
of brotherhood, they often prefer to remain silent in such situation and when
they choose to speak, they put their own gloss upon facts and’upon the truth,
The ‘result is that persons on whom atrocities are perpetrated by the “police
in the sanctum sanctorum of the police station, are left without any evidence
to prove who the offenders are. The law as to the burden of proof in such
cases may be re-examined by the legislature so that handmaids of law and
order do not use their authority and opportunities for oppressing the
innocent citizens who look to them for protection. It is ironical that in the
instant case, a person who complained against a policeman, for bribery,
was done to death by that policeman, his two companions and his superior
officer, the Station House Officer. The vigilant Magistrate, Shri R. C. Nigam,
deserves a word of praise for dutifully recording the dying declaration of the
victim which has come to constitute the shect anchor of the case of the
prosecutiol |

2.4. The observations made by the Supreme Court must be read with the
facts of the case. The entire incident happened in a short span of a few hours.
Nineteen injuries in all were found on the body of the victim Brij Lal. There
was a positive history of an illegal and improper demand from the victim. The
dying declaration also gave indication of the guilt of the police officers. In these
circumstances, the fact that the High Court acquitted the accused must have
deeply pained the Supreme Court which, if one may say so with respect, was
not slow in taking note of the peculiar situation in which the prosecution finds
itself when it desires to get a judgement of conviction against a police officer
guilty of atrocities on a person in a custody.

In the very nature of things, one can rarely expect eye witnesses to such
incidents, excepting police officers. As regards police officers themselves, their
reluctance to give evidence disclosing all the facts was noted by the Supreme
Court. The situation is of an unusual character—which is the reason why the
Supreme Court thought it proper that the Government should have a second
look at that part of the law of evidence which deals with the burden of proof,
We proceed to examine the present law and the need for amendment,

Comment


CHAPTER 3

THE PRESENT LAW AND THE NEED FOR REFORM.

‘The present law 3.1. In order to facilitate a consideration of the question it is convenient
to deal first with the present law. The law relating to burden of proof and con-
nected matters is contained in a few short sections! of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872. It is unnecessary to go into detail, but the general principles deductible
from these sections is that it is for the prosecution to prove the essential ele-
ments of the offence charged and if those essential elements are proved, it
is for the accused to prove that the case falls within the general or special
exceptions to criminal fiability recognised by by the criminal law. In certain special
situations, this position does undergo ifications, For example, where a parti-
cular fact is within the special knowledge of a person, it is for him to prove
it. Thus, a person charged with ticketless travel has the burden of proving that
he had a ticket with him at the time of travelling. A$ the law stands at present,
however, there is no special provision as to the burden of proof where the
injuries were received by a person in police custody.

Question of amend- 3.2. The question to be considered is this. Is it desirable to enact a special
ment considered rule for such a situation ? Prima facie, there seems to be a need for such a pro-
vision in the light of the incidents that are reported from time to time, Some
incidents might possibly go unreported also. It may be mentioned that in the
context of the law of rape as contained in the Indian Penal Code, Parliament
has recently enacted a special provision addressed to the situation of women
who are sexually exploited by persons in whose custody or under whose charge
they might have been placed for the time being. The provision became necessary
in view of reported incidents of abuse of position and transgression of the
law by such persons. Incidents of torture during police custody are analogous
to the above mentioned situation and amount to abuse ‘of official position,
resulting in a transgression of the law. It is, therefore, a matter for serious consi-
deration if there should not be inserted a suitable provision addressed to the
problem which the Supreme Court had to deal with.

3.3. It appears that the best course would be to give power to the court
Need for amend- to draw a presumption where bodily injuries (fatal or otherwise) are caused
to a person while he is in the custody of the police. The court may be given
a discretion to presume that the injuries were caused by the police officer having
custody of the person during the relevant period. The vesting of such a power
in the court would be justified because, as regards a person in police custody,
it is unlikely that any one else would have the opportunity of inflicting injuries.
The presumption should, of course, be discretionary and rebuttable so that
extraordinary situations can be taken care of. The formula “may presume” would
be appropriate for the purpose. At the same time, it may be desirable to furnish
to the court some guidelines in administering such a provision as the proposed
provsion would be a qualification to the general rule of burden of proof.

3Sections 101 to 114, Indian Evidence Act, 1872.


CHAPTER 4
WORKING PAPER AND COMMENTS RECEIVED THEREON ;

4.1. As already stated,’ the Commission circulated a Working Paper on
the subject, for eliciting informed public opinion, In the Working Paper, a broad
outline of a provision which could be inserted in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872,
as section 114B, was put forth in the following form:

“114B. (1) In a posecution (of a police officen) for an offence constituted
by an act alleged to have caused bodily injury to a person, if there is evidence
that the injury was caused during a period when that person was in the custody
of the police, the court may presume that the injury was caused by the police
Officer having custody of that person during that period.

(1) The court, in deciding whether or not it should draw a presumption
under sub-section (1), shall have regard to all the relevant circumstances, in-
cluding in particular, (a) the period of custody, (b) any statement made by
the victim as to how the injuries were received, being a statement admissible
in evidence, (c) the evidence of any medical practitioner who might have
examined the victim, and (4) evidence of any magistrate who might have recor-
ded the victim’s statement or attemped to record it”.

4.2. In its Working Paper, the Law Commission of India invited views
on the above proposal. In particular, suggestions were also invited as to whether
any further guidelines should be set out in the proposed statutory provision,
apart from those already suggested in the outline of a provision as given in the
Working Paper.

The Commission also invited suggestions as to whether the proposed
provision should cover, within its scope, any legal proceeding before a court
in which a question of the nature discussed above is at issue, so that the provi-
sion may apply even where the proceeding is not by way of prosecution of the
police officer.

4.3. The comments’ received on the Working Paper ‘without exception
agree that there is need for an amendment of the law as was suggested in the
Working Paper. Some of the comments have made a few other points of legal
or administrative character, which are outside the scope of this Report 2. But
so far as the question if inserting a specific provision of the nature put forth
n the Working Paper is concerned, the comments are unanimously in favour
of such a provision. ~

4.4, It may be mentioned that the comments (all favouring the proposal)
are as under:— न
(a) State Government of Orissa.’
(0) Three senior Police officers‘, namely,
(i) the Inspector General of Police, Crime, Punjab,
(ii)the Deputy Inspector General of Police, C..D., Manipur and
(iii) the Director General and Inspector General of Police
Karnataka, [The D.I.G. 01.0. Manipur has, in his letter to the
Commission added that the Legal cell of the Department was
itself considering the question of moving the Government for such
an amendment].

(०) An Advocate from Muzaffarnagar, U.P.5

iparagraph 1.3, supra.
2All comments received upto 19th July, 1985 have been covered in the above analysis.
2.a, See also paragraph 4.6. infra.
2Law Commission File No. F 2(4)/85L.C. (S. No. 51) letter of 12 July, 1985,
‘Law Commission File No. F.2(/85-L.C. (S. No, 38) and (S. No. 40) and (8, No. 55) ietter dated
24-6-1985.
sLaw Commission File No. F. 2(4)85-L.C. (S. No. 36).
5

Pre
(०88 ae
Paper

Views invited

General trend of
the comments

‘

Analysis.


6

(d) editor of the Hindi Weekly SamacHar-Sausriti, Kanpur (U.P.)';
(e) a social worker from Kolar Distriet, Karnataka*,

(f) several private individuals, who have not only welcomed the propo-
sal for amendment, but also narrated several incidents of torture by
the police within their knowledge’.

Proceedings other 4.4, On the question whether the proposed amendment should cover legal
than prosecutions proceedings other than prosecutions of police officers, the comments received
on the Working Paper have not expressed any specific views, except the State
Government of Orissa which does not favour such a widening of the pro-

posal’,

Other guidelines 4.5. The comments received on the Working Paper are also silent. on the
‘whether needed question whether any further guidelines should be incorporated in the proposed
Statutory provision, (besides those that were already suggested in the Working
Paper of the Commission); as to the principles on which the court should draw

a presumption of the nature under discussion.

Additional 4.6. In some of the comments received on the Working Paper, a sugges-
su: 1०0 iodo tion has been made that every accused person, on arrest, should be got medi-
cally examined and injuries, if any, on his person should be noted, This point
has been elaborated particular ly by the Director General and Inspector General
of Police, Karnataka, who has, after referring to sections 53-54 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure 1973, suggested that in every case where a person arrested
by the police has injuries on his person, the police must get him’ medically
examine व He has further added that the proposed provision should apply even
where the “custody” is illegal and that every person arrested or taken charge
Of by the police must have the right to get himself medically examined by
the police and that section 53, Cr. P.C. should be amended for the purpose.

We shall revert to this point later‘.
Law Commission File No. F. 2 (4) 85-L.C. (5. No. 49).
*Law Commission File No, F. 2(4)85-L.C. (S. No. 54) letter in Kannada, dated 11-7-1985.
Law Commission File No. F. 2(4) 85-L.C. (5. No. 33, 37, 39, 41, 42).

“Law Commission File No. F. 2(4) 85 L.C. (S. No. 51) letter dated 12 July, 1985 (State Govern-
ment of Orissa).

‘Law Commission File No. F. 2(4)85-L.C. (3. No. 55) letter dated 24th June 1985 from Director
General and Inspector General of Police, Karnataka.

“8 Paragraph 5.4, infra.



CHAPTER 5 ~~

RECOMMENDATION

5.1. On a consideration of all aspects of the matter and in the light of the Amendment neekd

comments received on the Working Paper, the Law Commission has come to
the conclusion that there is need for amending the Evidence Act and inserting
therein the proposed section. The Commission is aware that there may be
special circumstances, where the drawing of a presumption against the police
officer having custody of a person who is found to have received injuries may
not be justified. However, such situations can be taken care of by the court
not exercising its discretion, The reasons in support of amendment as set out
earlier! are adequate. It may also be added, that support for the proposed
amendment has come not only from the public, but also from a few. senior
police officers’.

5.2. In the circumstances, the Law Commission recommends the insertion
of 8 new section, say, as section 1148, in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, as
under:—

“114B. (1) In a prosecution (of a police officer) for an offence consti-
tuted by an act alleged to have caused bodily injury to a person, if there is
evidence that the injury was caused during a period when that person was
in the custody of the police, the court may presume that the injury was caused
by the police officer having custody of that person during that period.

(2) The court, in deciding whether or not it should draw a presumption
under sub-section (1), shall have regard to all the relevant circumstances, in-
cluding, in particular, (a)' the period of custody, (b) any statement made by
the victim as to how the injuries were received, being a statement admissible
in evidence, (c) the evidence of any medical practitioner who might have exa-
mined the victim, and (d) evidence of any magistrate who might have recor-
ded the victim’s statement or attempted to record it”.

5.3. The expression “custody” as used in the provision suggested above
will, in oug view, cover custody following upon legal as well as illegal arrest.
We do not think that the expression needs any definition for that purpose.

5.4, We have taken note of the fact that some of the comments received
on our Working Paper* have raised the question of medical examination of the
arrested person immediately on his being taken into charge or custody by the
police. The point, no doubt, deserves consideration. However, as the matter
has several aspects, it will be convenient if it is considered when the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, is revised. Of course, if the problem assumes
serious dimensions, or acquires urgency, it can be taken up even indepen-
dently.

Chapter 3, supra.
*See Chapter 4, supra,
sParagraph 4.6, supra.

Recommendati cn

Meaning of custody

Medical
tion of
arrest

‘accused

BD


APPENDIX
RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF OTHER ACTS

Sections 53-54 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 (medigal cxa-
mination of the accused) should be examined in order to consider whether it
should be provided that every person arrested or taken charge of by the police
Must on arrest be got medically examined.

(K. K. MATHEW)
CHAIRMAN

0. P. CHATURVEDI)
MEMBER

(Dr. M. B. RAO)
MEMBER

(P. M. BAKSHI)
PART-TIME MEMBER

(VEPA P. SARATHI)
PART-TIME MEMBER

(5. RAMATAH)
MEMBER SECRETARY

DATED 29TH JULY, 1985.

‘Paragraph 5.4 Supra

8
5-1. /B(D)455MofLJ&CA—910-—23-6-85—GIPS,

A >>