LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTEENTH REPORT

ON
TAX COURTS

1986


D.O. No, F.2(6)/85-LC

Shri Ashok Kumar Sen,
Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,

Shastri Bhavan,

NEW DELHI.

L August 28, 1986

Dear Minister for Law and Justice,

I have great pleasure in forwarding the second report of the present Law Com-
mission (One Hundred and Fifteenth Report of the Law Commission) suggesting
structural changes in the hierarchy of courts dealing with conflicts and controversies
arising out of the levy and collection of direct taxes, indirect taxes and the enforce-
ment of legislation relating to exports and imports.

You will be happy to know that the Commission is continuing its search for
finding out ways and means with a view to reducing workload in the High Courts
and Supreme Court. Diversification of jn judicial administration is one amongst
many methods for achieving this result. ile assigning the task for recommending
judicial reforms to the present Law Commission, it was suggested that the Commis-
sion may examine the need for decentralisation of the system of administration of
justice by amongst others establishing other tiers or systems within the judicial
hierarchy to reduce the volume of work in the Supreme Court and the High Courts.
In its search for diversifying administration of justice, the Commission came across a
stark reality that there are numerous stages of appeals in the tax litigation. The
litigation in this behalf is practically unending and in the course of an upward move-
ment of the litigation, the revenue to the tune of thousands of crores has remained
frozen by the interim orders granted by the courts.

The Commission, accordingly, examined, the existing vertical hierarchy a
tribunals and courts involved in tax litigation. The delay was found at the Bligh
Court level. Accrdingly, the Commission examined the feasibility of setting-up
a Central Tax Court for Direct and Indirect Taxes.

I would like to recall your attention to your D.0.1914/MLJ/86 dated May 5
1986 forwarding therewith the copy of a letter dated 23rd April i 1986 from Shri
Ramus Deora, Chairman, Federation of Indian Export Organisations, Western
Region drawing your attention to the delay in disposal of disputes arising under
various Import/ export laws: The Commission was by you to this
aspect into consideration in making, its recommemdat reacted on Tax Courts.

Chaper IV of the report deals with disputes and method of resolution arising
under various export/ import laws. The reference made by you thus in this behalf
would stand disposed of.

With regards,
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
D.A. DESAI
Encl : A Report

‘H-86-M/P(D440M0fLJ&CA—1


CONTENTS |

1. CHAPTER I—Introduction .
2, CHAPTER II—Direct Taxes
3. CHAPTER III—Indirect Taxes

4. CHAPTER 1V—Import-Export Cases

iy
H-86-M/P(D}M40Mof LI&CA--1(a)

Pages

1-4

5-13
14-16

17-18


CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

1.1. Government of India was toying with an idea of setting-up a separate
Judicial Reforms Commission. In Fabruary, 1986, Government of India decided
to assign the task of studying and recommending judicial reforms to the Law
Commission. Terms of reference in the context of studyin, ag Judicial reforms which
were drawn-up were forwarded to the Law Commission. a receipt of the terms
of reference, the Law Commission drew-up its own programme of action and comm-
enced work according to the schedule set out in the programme. Introducing reforms
in the judicial system requires a multi-pronged approach. Before undertaking
the task of recommending reforms, it is necessary to apprise oneself about the
present judicial administration in vogue; its infirmities, deficiencies, deformities
and weaknesses as well as its strength and retainable features, causes that contribut-
ed to the present disconcerting situation; whether repairing the system can improye
the situation or restructuring it as a whole or in parts is inevitable. The changes
to be introduced must not only have newness and utility, but also they must be result-
oriented. It is, therefore, inevitable to approach the question of: reforms in judicial
administration from different angles. Unless the disease is diagnosed, the remedy,
if any prescribed, is likely to prove infructuous. ° .

1.2. Numerous causes have been identified by the Law Gommission..which
have individually and cumulatively contributed to making the present adminis-
tration of justice stratified, highly expensive, inaccessible, unduly formal, protracted
and dilatory. Bach of these causes is-individually dangerous-caough to destroy the
judicial -administration: but in their cumulative effect, have made administra-
tion of justice a- preserve of the rich and the well-to-do to be used
generally for shadow-boxing. Poorman can ‘ill-afford the fuxuryof modem
litigation. He is wholly alienated’ from the system. Judicial- reforms.ta.-be ‘effective
must make the system resilient, speedy, inexpensive, result-oriented-and the access
to it unimpeded. While drawing-up the terms of reference in the context of studying
judicial. reforms, each of these contributory factors lave been kept in. view so that
each one can be tackled by a definite and separate repott.

1,3. Amongst the terms of reference, Item Nos/ Ifiii) and 2 read as under:

“I. The need for decentralisation of the system of- administration of justice
0)
@)
Git) establishing other tiers or systems within the judicial hierarchy to re-
duce the volume of work in the Supreme Court and the HighCourts,

2. The-matters for which Tribunals (exchiding services Tribunals) as. envisaged
in Patt-XIVA of the Constitution need tobe established. expeditiously - and
various aspects related to their establishment and working.” .

1.4. The genesis of Term No. I(iii) appears to be the mounting -backlog of
cases in ‘the Supreme Court and the High Courts. Any proposed reform in the
administration of justice must amongst others take note. of the fact that'the. present
4 stem of disposal of cases have an inbuilt tendency of piling-up arrears. because

18 inflow and the outflow are not coordinated. The Law Commission is accord-
ingly asked to examine the present hierarchy of courts in relation to the question of
inflow of work in the High Courts and the Supreme Court and the incapacity of the
system to deal with the same. As a corollary, by Term: No. 2, the Law Commis-
gion was fequired to examine the question of establishing Tribunals as-envisaged in
Part XIV-A of the Constitution so as to diversify the administration. of justice. with
a view to reducing the volume of work in the Supreme Court and tie Hight Courts,

1.5. Administration of justice primarily aims at providing mechanism for
resolution of disputcs arising in the society. - Different form havc been set-up to
deal with different types of disputes c.g. civil courts, criminal courts, labour courts,
tax tribunals ctc. Specific forum specially devised to deal. with specific: disputes
caters to the needs of persons who seek resolution of thesc specified types-of disputes,


2

Judicial Administration as envisaged by Constitation ' ह .

1.6. The judicial administration envisaged by the Constitution of India is one
integrated pyramidic structure. Base level fora operating under different nomen-
clature cater to the needs of different types of persons in search of justice in relation
to their disputes. There is generally a cal hierarchy of courts in each branch.
Historically speaking in some sections, there are number of stages of appeals e.g,
direct tax laws, and in some others e.g. criminal cases, very . Constitution
provided for setting-up a High Court for each State. The  {atisdiction of the High
Court was so devised as to permit anyone perieved by decision of different.
forum to invoke its jurisdiction for redressal ng. While invoking civil jurisdic- .
tion, the aggrieved party may reach High Court by way of a first appeal or a second
appeal, as the case may be. In criminal matters, an aggrieved person can invoke
the jurisdiction of the High Court by an appeal or a revision petition, as the case,
may be. In the matter of direct taxes, the aggrieved person can approach the High
Court by way of a reference as provided in Sec, 256 of the Income-tax Act, 1961,
Sec. 26 of the Gift-tax Act, 1958, Sec. 27 of the Weatlh-tax Act, 1957, Sec. 130 of
the Customs Act, 1962 etc. An aj grieved person may as well invoke the jurisdiction
of the High Court under Art. 226 of the Constitution complaining of breach of
fundamental rights or for any other purpose. The fall-out of this vertically struc-
tured administration of justice is that every conceivable type of legal dispute reached ,
the High Court. If there are numerous inlets into one reservoir of work, there is
bound to be accumulation and tion of work unless the disposal outlet func-
tions with equal if not higher 5 peed I Experience shews that disposals did not keep
pace with admissions. _ _

1.7. Supreme Court stands at the apex of the judicial administration. It has
been described as the sentine! on guivive. -Its jurisdiction is so wide that it. can
reach and curb injustice perpetrated by any judicial or quasi-judicial or administra~‘
tive tribunal. The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of India can be invoked by any
person aggrieved by a decision of the High Court or of any Tribunal. Art. 136 of
the Constitution confers very wide jurisdiction on the Supreme Court of India to
grant special leave to appeal ania aay any judgment, decree, determination, sentence
or order in any cause or matter or made by any court or Tribunal in the
territory of India. It has been conceded on all hands that Supreme Court of India’
enjoys the widest jurisdiction compared to any of its counterpart anywhere in the
world. Add to this the original jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court of
India under Art. 32 of the Constitution to seek-redress in the matter of violation of
fundamental rights and the width and ambit of its jurisdiction can be gauged. _

1.8. With the introduction of a Bill of Rights in the Constitution of India
(Part IIE of the Constitution), a wind of change swept over the country. The sequiter
of an awakening or awareness about one’s own rights inevitably goads one to seek
enforcement of the rights, meaning thereby, a resort to forum devised for the purpose
for redress of grievance. Litigation was thus bound to multiply. Year after year,
more and more cases landed into the courts. The court system as in vogue prior
to independence continued to perform its function according to the same leisurely
process as it was doing during the colonial days. A wide gap developed between

the incoming litigation and the outflow by way of disposals. .

1.9. Independent India was bound to enact numerous laws for translating the
goats of the Constitution into reality. Economic planning with the emphasis on
industrialisation could focus attention on the resources of the country available for
development programme. ° Direct and indirect taxes, the principle sources of revenue
were bound to multiply. The Income-tax Act which had extended its coverage.to
a microscopic minority of the country till 1947, expanded its tentacles far and wide
from year to year. The Wealth-tax Act made its appearance in 1957, the Gift-tax
Actin 1958 and the ill-fated Estate Duty Act in 1953. The First Schedule to. the
Central Exeises and Salt Act, 1944, specifying the the excisable goods on which duty
of excise is levied and chapters of First Scl to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975
proliferated from year to year. Extensive coverage of tax-laws coupled with the
known human tendency not to pay or pay as muck less as possible or recover as
auch as possible resulted in an avalanche of liti gation in this branch of Jaw, .con-
gestion: was inevitable... It has acquired high visibility. Te

“1.10. Numerous labour laws for ameliorating the conditions of work for assur-
ing social security and for eliminating exploitation were enacted. number.
of labour courts and industrial tribunals were sbt up for obtaining relief various:


3

labour laws. The organised industrial labour. initiated numerous actions before
such tribunals for seeking relief. As the pace of industrialisation increased, simul-
taneously adding to the strength of organised labour, the paradox of i growing edu-
cated unemployment resulted in large. numbet of. actions coming before the

and industrial tribunals. : .

1.11. The facility for higher education did not keep pace with the seekers of
admissions to the institutions for scientific or technical education.. Affirmative
action under Art. 15 of the Constitution by the State generated an area of conflict
between the votaries of meritocracy and supporters of positive discrimination in
favour of the members of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other back-
ward classes. Admission to the centres of higher education being an annual p' hheno-
menon, number of actions were initiated year after year seeking relief and redress in
this . पु

1.12. An exhaustive written Constitution may provide fruitful source of
interpretation of its provisions. Specific enumeration of matters in Union Lise ist,
State List and Concurrent List coupled with power of judicial review of legislative
and executive actions brought to fore a new and hitherto unknown kind of litigation.
‘No sooner the ink was dry on a legislative measure either Central.or State, the court
was moved on the allegation that it is Constitutionally invalid on diverse ground
including legislative incompetence.

1,13. With the first flush of independence and an entrenched bill of rights
coupled with conferment of jurisdiction on the High Court under Art. 226 and
Supreme Court of India under Art. 32, numerous petitions were filed complaining.
contravention of fundamental rights. Till the deletion of Art. 31 incorporating
fundamental right to property read with Art. 19(1)(g), every agrarian reform statute
enacted by the State was challenged on the ground of contravention of fundamental
right to property. Even acquisition of sick industries with a view to infusing fresh
life into them did not escape the scrutiny by the court.

1.14. The inevitable fall-out of what is herein stated was a phenomenal in-
crease in the causes and controversies coming before the High Court and reaching
the Supreme Court via Art. 136. The graph of pendency in each High Court without
an exception rose from year to year. As the pendency piled-up, the period between
the initiation of action and its final disposal expanded. Today it can be said that
almost in any branch of litigation, if thé matter moves vertically from the base level
to the Apex court, the time spent averages between 15 to 10 years. S| ‘ic efforts
at streamlining the procedure which was said to be the root cause ०0] Pac and in-
crease in the manpower strength of the High Courts, did not make any dent in the
mounting arrears. A shrill cry rose that ‘justice delayed is justice denied’. It
shook not only the Judiciary but also the Parliament. In paragraph 5 of the State-
ment of Objects and Reasons accompanying the Constitution (Forty-Fourth) Amend-
ment Bill, 1976, a note of the situation was taken. It wassaid :

“To reduce the mounting arrears in High Courts and to secure the speedy dis-°

|] of service matters, revenue matters and certain other matters of special
importance in the context of the socio-economic development and pr 4
it 1s considered expedient to provide for administrative and other tribunals
for dealing with such matters while preserving the jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court in regard to such matters under Art. 136 of the Constitution. It 1s also
necessary to make certain modifications in the writ jurisdiction of the High
Courts under Art. 226.”

1.15. The assumption that the High Court ,the highest court at the State level
with its all expansive jurisdiction, would be able to handle litigation coming to it
from diverse sources, has been belied. A further upward revision of the strength
of the High Court judges is likely to attract Parkinson’s law. Need for diversifica-
tion in the matter of administration of justice, in specialist fields, is now keenly felt.
Litigation arising under tax laws, so also under lal Sour laws, educational activities
necessitate a special skill to deal with it. It is not for a moment Suggested that
the Judges of the High Court would not be able to deal with the same, but frequent
changes in benches, non-availability of benches round the year to deal with revenue
matters and recurring phenomena of admissions to higher centres of learning could
‘be better dealt with by a specialist body exclusively devoted to this work. It will
have two distinct advantages; (i) it would avoid repeated enunciation of the same


4

principle over and over again by different benches'and (ii) citation of the precedents,
a time consuming exercise, repeatedly before different benches. Additionally, it
would. provide continuity, consistericy arid certainty in the matter of relevant princi-.
plés to.be dealt with in such matters. It rtiust be a judicial body composed of.
apart from judges of High Courts, legal technocrats such as legal academ: es, Vice- -
Chancellors of the Universities, experts in labour law and experts in taxation laws --
as also those who have dealt with the subject for a long tinie. i will be a body com-

posed of experts who. on acconnt of their expertise, would accelerate the pace of
handling the cases, हि



CHAPTER II
DIRECT TAXES

2.1. Chapter XIV of the Income-tax Act, 1961 prescribes procedure for assess-
ment. There are corresponding provisions prescribin; Procedure for assessment in.
the Wealth-tax Act, Gift-tax Act and Companies @rofits) Surtax Act. On a return
being filed by the person who under the Law is required to file the return, the Income
Tax Officer proceeds to assess the tax payable by the assessee. .

2.2. Section 252 of the 1961 Act provides for setting up an Appellate Tribunal,
consisting of Judicial and Accountant Members. The Income Tax Appellate Trt
bunal is, as its name indicates, an appellate authority. Anvappeal lies to the Appel-
late Tribunal against the orders of Appellate Assistant Commissioner/Commis-
sioner (Appeals) at the instance of the assessee as well as Revenue. The width and
ambit of t Be | judicial powers conferred on the Appellate Tribunal may be gauged
from the language used in Section 254 which provides that “the Appellate Tribunal
may, after giving both the parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass
such orders thereon as it thinks fit”. Thus, the Appellate Tribunal can interfere
with finding of facts, as well as, on question of law.

2.3, On a decision rendered by the Appellate Tribunal either the assessee or
the Revenue may require the A; ppellate Tribunal to refer to the High Court, any
question of law, arising out of such order. If the appellate Tribunal agrees to make
a feference, it shall draw up a statement of the case and refer it to the High Court
urider Section 256(1). If on the other hand, the Appellate Tribunal is of the opinion
that no question of law arises from its order and, therefore, refuses to make a reference,
tho aggrieved person may approach the High Court underSection 256(2) and the
High Court may, if it is not satisfied with the correctness of the decision of the Appel.
late Tribunal, require the Appellate Tribunal to state the case and to refer it tothe
High Court. If the High Court declines to call for a reference, the aggrieved person
can approach the Supreme Court of India under Article 136’ of the Constitution.
Cases are not unknown when the Supreme Court of India differed with the decision -
of the High Court and remitted the case with a direction to the Appellate Tribunal
to draw up the case and to refer it to the High Court. .

2.4, Section 257 confers powers on the Appellate Tribunal to make a direct
reference to the Supreme Court if it is of the opinion that on account of a conflict
of judicial dicta amongst various High Courts, it is expedient that the matter may be
decided by the Supreme Court.

2.5. When the reference is made, the High Court will hear the question of law
and render its advisory opinion. Anyone aggrieved by the decision-of the High
Court on the reference, can appeal to the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the
Constitution. If the Supreme Court entertains the appeal and decides the question
of law, the same will be remitted to the Income Tax ppellate Tribunal who tmnust
dispose of the case in accordance with the opinion of the Supreme Court. पु

2.6. To appreciate the numerous stages through which an assessment proceed: -
ing moves, one may briefly recount the stages such as Income Tax Officer, Appet late
Assistant Commissioner/Commissioner (Appeals), Income Tax Appellate Tribunal,
reference under Section 256(1), reference under Section 256(2), a Fossible appeal
at that stage under Article 136 to the Supreme Court of India and then back to the
High Court. Vertically, there are as many as 8 stages of review with regard 10 an
assessment order. It is said that the finding on a question of fact by the Appellate
Tribunal is final and the advisory jurisdiction of the High Court in a Teference under
Section 256(1) or 256(2), as the case may be, is confined to a question of law. Though
broadly stated the statement is correct, but anyone who has dealt with tax references
knows how under the guise of inviting opinion on a question of law, findings of
facts are tinkered with. One has merely to look at the form of reference: on:question
of law either drawn up by the Appellate Tribunal or called for by the High Court,
It always starts with : ‘whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case
etc.”

5°


6

2.7. Probably, this long cumbersome Procedure has been borrowed from
corresponding provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1952 of the United Kingdom with
minor variations.

2.8. Apart from the relief by way of statutory appeals, a large number of writ
petitions are filed questioning the correctness of the orders of the tax authorities
under Article 226 of the Cons tution to the High Court or Articl: 32 to the Supreme
Court. Numerous writ petitions have been filed at the stage of issue of a mere
notice invoking the extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court or the Supreme
Court on the ground that the mere issuance of notice is wholly without jurisdiction.
If the matter 15 entertained. stay of further procecJings follows as matter of course.
Proceedings at the initial stage are thus held up for decades and if the writ petition
is finally rejected, the proceedings from the stage of notice would start after lapse
of a decade or decades. If initially the jurisdiction of the High Court is invoked under
Article 226 and the High Court declines to interfere at the '€ of notice, not in-
frequently a petition for special leave to appeal under Article 136 is moved in the
Supreme Court and cases are not unknown where it is entertained. It is equally not
unknown that finally the contention was found to be frivolous. Yet and unscrupulous
litigant delays the decision adverse to him by decades and wants undeserved respite
from the tentacles of revenue laws.

2.9. It would thus appear ata glance that the numerous stages of appeals
statutorily prescribed. inheres an in-built potentiality for delay in finalising assess-
ment proceedings.

2.10. There is one additional reason for the delay in disposal of tax proceedings
and accumulation of work not only in the High Court but especially in the Supreme
Court. The Benches of Appellate Tribunal hold sittings in all the States. Against
the decision of the Appellate Tribunal, as stated herein before, an application for
reference to the High Court having jurisdiction over the Appellate Tribunal, can be
made. Each High Court hears the reference and disposes it of in the light of its own
understanding of the relevant law. High Courts are known to differ frequently from
each other. The discomfiture suffered by Members of the I.T.A.T. because of this
situation is really agonising. Members of the Appellate Tribunal are liable to be
transferred. When a Member sits in a bench in one State, the bench in that State
is bound to decide in conformity with the law laid down by the High Court of
that State. On his transfer when he is posted in another State, he is bound to decide
the same point in conformity with law laid by the high Court of that other State.
And if the two High Courts differ, he has to decide the same point in a contradictory
manner with no regard for his own view, Certainly this would cause discomfiture.

"2.11. This undesirable situation can be demonstrably established by reference
to the functioning of Appellate Tribunal bench at Delhi. Couple of benches of the
Appellate Tribunal hold sittings in Delhi. Different benches are assigned jurisdiction
over different arcas. Some benches have jurisdiction over Delhi Metropolitan area.
One bench has jurisdiction over Madhya Pradesh. Another bench has jurisdiction
over part of Uttar Pradesh. One bench has jurisdiction over part of Madhya Pradesh
and part of Uttar Pradesh. Now, when an appeal comes before the last mentioned
bench, 7 the appeal is from Madhya Pradesh, the de n of the M.P. High Court
would be binding on the bench. If the same bench is hearing an appeal from Uttar
Pradesh, the decision of Allahabad High Court would be binding on it and the
two decisions may be irreconciably contradictory. If oa ihe same point there is
decision of Delhi Court. the Appellate Tribunal is not bound by it though holding
the sitting at Delhi. This introduces a sort of functional disintegration in ine applica-
tion of law. The situation is attributable to a glaring lacuna in the Income-tax law
in that till the matter reaches the Supreme Court, there is no intermediate judicial
authority which can develop an all India perspective with regard to the interpretation
of various provisions of Direct Tax Laws. Conceptually. the Saprene Court was
broadly to concern itself with constitutional questions or questions of law of general
public importance. It was not to be a body for reconciling dissent between High
Courts on trivial questions of law. Today it has to perform that role. When there
is a difference of opinion between two High Courts, even on a minor point, the
Supreme Court grants special leave to appeal for asking. A need was, therefore,
felt for a long time for a body having an all India jurisdiction but at a stage lower
than the Supreme Court.

2.12. Wanchoo Committee toyed with the idea of abolishing reference procedure
and inits place to set up a tax court, It did not pursue the proposal further for the
fear 01 extensive amendments needed to give effect to it.


7

The 12th Report of the First Law Commission deals with the Income Tax
Act. At that time, the Income-tax Act of 1922 was on the statute book. Dealing with
the topic relevant to this Report, the commission obeserved that the ‘existing system
of appeals to the Appellate Tribunal and thereafter a reference ot the High Court
on a question of law either under Section 66(1) or under Section 66(2) of the Income-
tax Act of 1922 is very cumbersome and causes unnecessary delay in the disposal of
appeals so as to finalise the assessment’.(1) : .

It recommended the abolition of the Appellate Tribunal and in substitution
of it, recommended an appeal to the High Court fromt the orders of the Appellate’
Assistant Commissioner, both on question of facts as well as law. (2 While enacting
Income-tax Act, 1961, it appears that recommendation for abolition of the Appellate
Tribunal itself was not accepted. The appellate Tribunal was retained simultaneously
retaining the procedure of reference. .

2.13. In June, 1977, the Government of India consituted what is Styled as the
Direct Tax Law Committee, popularly known as Choksi Committee. In its report,
while dealing with the Appellate Tribunal, the Committee recommended that section
252 of the Income Tax Act should be deleted and a separate statute should be enacted
to deal with the constitution and composition of the Appellate Tribunal. (3) While
examining the procedure of reference, the Committee took notice of the dilatory,
cumbersome reference procedure which caused enormous delay in disposal of tax
litigation and recommended its abolition, The Committee recommended the setting .
up of a Central Tax Court with all-India jurisdiction to deal with tax litigation to the
exclusion of the High Courts. (4) It also recommended that the Proposed Central
Tax Court should have benches located at important centres. It further recommended
that the persons to be inducted to man the Central Tax Court should be from amongst
the persons who are High Court Judges or who are eligible to be appointed as High
Court Judges. It further recommended that in the matter of conditions of service,
scales of pay and other privileges, Judges of the Central Tax Court should be on par
with the High Court Judges. (2) It therefore recommended that the proposed Central
Tax Court should be entrusted with jurisdiction to decide questions of contitutional
validity of the provisions of the Tax laws.or of the rules framed thereunder.'(®) As
the proposed Central Tax Court will be a creature of a statute, it may be handicapped
in dealing with the question of constitutionality of a tax statute or rules made there-
under. 116 then prevailing situation called for a radical change in the structure of
court system dealing with tax laws. That recommendation is still not implemented.
In the interregnum the situation has worsened. The pendency for the year 1984-85
may be set out for comparison with the situation presented before Choksi. Committee,

1984-85

High Courts: .
(a) Reference application

where
re ee refer) 7214 2506 9720 2490 729
(9) Cases u/s 260 (admit-
ted references) :

24935 3146 28081 1942 26139
(c) Petitions u/s 261 (Cer-
tificate for appeal to

oe 525 240 765 216 489
@ Wis . . 4116 616 = 4732 888 384d

() LCI Twelfth Report, paragraph, 90, 7. 44.

(0 LCI Twelfth Report, paragraph 6, p. 53.

0) Direct Tax Laws Committee Final Report, Chanter 6, para 1-6. 7. (1978).
(न Ibid, para 11-6.15.

©) 10, para 1-6.17.

©) Ibid, para 11-6.18


Suprente Court:
(०) Appeals u/s 261 (iled

on certificate of High

Court} : . 1264 46 1310 4 1396
(5) Special Leave Poetic

tions (where High Cou

Court declines to refer

orinothercases) =. 1346 265 1611 19 1592
(©) Writs. पु . 335 9 344 8 336

3234

Pendency of tax appeats|petitions in the Supreme: Court of India-as on
30-6-1986

Tax appeais पु : 6502 Oldest pending appeal is of 1972.
Consi‘tvtional Tax 112 Oldest pending writ petition is of 1970.
snatters

2.14. Two peculiar features of tax litigation deserve specific notice. In the
matter of direct taxes such as Income Tax and Wealth Tax, the assessec has to submit
his return every year. By the time the next return becomes due, in all probability,
the assessment in respect of the earlier years is generally not finalised. If the assessec
has raised some legal contentions and if there is a variance in the approach as to
fact-situation, the pendency of the proceedings of the earlier year will entail re-
petition of the same contentions. When the first assessment is finalised and the
decision is adverse to the assessec, he would ordinarily prefer an appeal. By the
time the appeal is disposed of, more returns have become due and the litigation
multiplies at an yearly rate. If the litigation moves vertically upto the Supreme
Court, the dispute raising its head year after year will be pending for an average
duration of 15 to 20 years. In thc meantime, same contention has multiplied into
numerous appeals, and if the Supreme Court finally accepts the view of the assessee,
all the earlier assessment orders at whatever stage pending will have to be brought
in conformity with the decision of the Supreme Court.

2.15. A company registered or deemed to be registered under the Companies
Act, 1956, or a corporation set up under a statute will have to finalise its balance
sheet and profit and loss account. Jt has to file its return. If the controversy arises
about the stand taken by the company on the one hand and the revenue authority
on the other and the litigation moves upward, question would arise how long the
balance sheet can be kept ina state of flux. Finally, when the matter is disposed of by
the highest court andthe decision imposes some additional liability, the company
will have serious difficulty in adjusting its financial affairs. the judgment of the
Supreme Court in Lohia Machines Lid. v. Union of India, 2) interpreting the expres-
sion “capital employed” in rule 194 of the Income-tax Rules, 1962 and retros-
pective amendment of Sec. 80 J incorporating rule 19A in the section effective, from
April 1, 1972, would necessitate numerous companies reopening their balance
sheets in respect of the intervening period of 13 vears. This is hound to cause dis-
location in the financial and economic planning of the corporate sector.

2.16. The failure of the system to dispose of tax litigation finally within a
reasonable time creates hardship both for the revenue and for the assessee. The
delay over a period results in multiplicity of proceedings causing avoidable harass-
ment. The special feature of tax Jiligation must induce a thinking as to how to
provide for a disposal of tax litigation which may dcal with the same expedi-
tiously. Viewed from this angle, the present system is dilatory and prolix. In terms
of results, it is counterproductive.

@ AIR 1985 SC 421.


9

2.17. One additional unfair advantage flowing. from :the deldy:.én -dispaeal
of tax litigation and which often appears to be the prime motive for ‘filing का appeal
is the interim stay order granted by the Hi gh Court or.the Supreme: Court, as ‘the
case may be, against payment or recovery:of tax found due alreatly by two.oriin seme
cases three authorities. Occasionally, a blanket stay is granted. If ultimately, the
aséessee loses, a fresh round of litigation for recovery ‘of tax starts.

2.18. Having brought into focus some of the ugly features of the present ‘aases-
sment and- recovery of direct tax proceeding, the -questiom:that- ‘itself 15
-whether-all these ugly features.can be eradicated -and the ‘system:can: ‘be-restruc-
tured so as to make it effective, time-bound and ‘result-oriented. पु

2.19. From-the discussions that the Commission has ‘withthe President. and
Members of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal anda comprehensive note submiteed
by the former President of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, it transpises . that
the time lag between the date of ‘assessment. order apd the order-of the Income:Tax
Appellate Tribunal disposing of the appeal.is about three years, The:delay-seatly
occurs after the decision is rendéred' by the Income Tax Appellate'Tribunal, when
either. the assessee or the revenue moves-an application for referenos and the matter
lateds into the High Court. The bottleneck is at the level of. reference undersecg..256
(1) or sec. 256(2) as the High Court is unable to handle the reference within azeaso~
nable time. Tax experts, leading tax advocates and speakers at symposia workshops
and seminars broadly concurred in the same opinion but there was-wide diyeegerne
of views in the matter of remedial measures. There is a concensus amongst concerned
interests that the reference procedure has outlived 1७8 utility.

2.20. Having:given the matter anxious consideration the Commission has aot
‘been able to find valid, convincing and cogent reasons for. retention of. séfemenee
procedure. :

2.21. This procedure found its way in the Indian law at a time when legislation
was-fashioned on colonial model. Sec. 64 of the Income Tax. Act, 1952 of: United
kingdom conferred a right both on the assessee.as well. as on the: surveyor, if dissa-
tisfied with the determination of-appeal as being erroneous.in point of law, to declare
his dissatisfaction to the Commissioners who heard the appeal and on payment
of the prescribed fee was entitled to give notice in writing addressed ito.the Clesk
ofthe Commissioners requiring the Commissioners to state:and sign.a.case.for the
‘opinion of the High Court thereon. It is not open to the Commissioners.to reject
the request. Simon described this procedure as.conferring a sight-of appealito the
High Court against the determination by General or Special Commissioners,
as the case may be. Even though an appoal, if it can.be so described under sec. 64,
lies against a determination only on a point‘of law. alleged-to be erroneous, in
truth and substance, a determination of facts may become the subjest matter’of
appeal. To take one illustration, in Bomfbrdev. Osborna, (00 Viscount Simon; L:C.,
observed that where the Commissioners detluce further conclusions -of' fact

the facts proved or admitted, they should state thatthe question ofilaw:is ‘whether
their further conclusions can be supported by the facts proved or admitted: Whatever
be the garb, this permits reopening of determination of facts. In such a dituation
‘the question of law is whether the facts found or admitted can support their ‘further
conclusions of fact.’ This view Has almost bodily permeated in the decisions of the
High Court and Supreme Coutt wh te deciding the contours of’ what constitutes
‘question of law’. Once a device is:devised to reopen-determination on. questions
of fact, the whole determination becomes open-ended: Therefore, in-this-provedure,
apart from anything else, there is an inherent tendency to delay the disposal of cases
and to widen the area of jurisdiction: of the High Court under sec. 256(1) and (2)

2.22. What then is the justification for such.a long drawn out procedure ?-
Till very recently, property was considered so sacrosanct that its deprivation even
by lawful means for lawful purpose was to be discouraged at all costs. Deprivation
of property in contrast with danial of liberty has caused greater flutter in the courts.
A.K. Gopatan (2)in search of liberty did not secure liberal interpretation of ‘Consti-
tution. R.C. Cooper (3) (Bank Nationalisation) in: search of property reversed the
_ trend. The history of Art. 31 of the Constitution is replete with instances. where

© (941) 2 AN ER 426. ~
0) A. K. Gopalan v. State of Madras, 1950 SCR 88. ,
0) R. C. Cooper v. Union of India, 1970 (3) SCR 530.



10

socially beneficient legislation met its waterloo on the touchstone of Arts.
31 and 19(1) (f) of the Constitution. These two articles built-up such an insurmount-
able roadblock in the pursuit of socio-economic justice that ultimately they had
to be given a decent burial. Secs. 256(1) and (2) are a relic of those bygone days.

Further, the courts generally leaned in favour of giving any benefit of doubt
in the interpretation of taxing statutes to the assesee. The court went so far as
to hold that “avoidance of tax liability by so arranging commercial affairs that
charge of tax is distributed is not prohibited. A taxpayer may resort to a device to
divert the income before it accrues or arises to him. Effectiveness of the device depends
not upon considerations of morality but on the operation of the Income-tax Act.
Legislative injunction in taxing statutes may not, except on peril of penalty, be
avoided, but it may lawfully be circumvented.”.(1) More often tax evasion donned
the robe of tax avoidance. If the transaction is a device to avoid tax, then judicial
process need not accord its approval to it. This was first hinted in Wood Polymer
Lid. v. Bengal Hotels Ltd.(2) Finally, a Constitution Bench unanimously laid the
ghost of Westminster in Mc Dowell & Co. Ltd.v. The Commercial Tax Officer.)
Conceding that there is no equity about tax, let it not be forgotten that no civilised
society can exist unless taxes are paid without undue delay. This approach recently
- disclosed would provide an additional reason for doing away with the reference
procedure which is a colonial relic.

Approach to. Taxation Law

2.23. Approach to taxation law has to undergo a sea change. While evasion
of tax was frowned upon, avoidance by legal devices was pampered. ‘The large
hidden loss to the community’ (as pointed out by Master Cheatcraft in Modern
Law Review 209) by some of the best brains in the country being involved in the
perpetual war waged between the tax- avoider and his expert team of advisers, lawyers
and accountants on one side and the tax- gatherer and his perhaps not so skilful
advisers on the other side. (*) A dilatory process provides a haven for these tactics.
A developing society must find resources for its development projects. Taxes, direct
and indirect, provide themain source of revenue from which socially beneficient
activities can be undertaken by the State. Therefore, taxes must be recovered expedi-
tiously. If court proceedings intervene to delay payment of taxes, the budgetary
exercise ‘is likely to transfer the burden of tax liability to the shoulders of the guide-
Jess good citizens from those of the artful dodgers’.(5) It is, therefore, necessary to
reiterate what Justice Holmes said “Taxes are what we pay for civilized society. 1
like to pay taxes. with them, I buy civilization’’.(®)

2.24, Reducing one of the numerous stages of appeal and review may, to some
extent, help in improving the situation. Human fallibility generated the concept
of appeal. Therefore, court of appeal was styled as a court of error. But somewhere
it must stop. At some stage, faith has to be reposed in adjudicating authority.
Too many appeals do not guarantee non-erroneous decisions. Revarsal of decisions
at every upward stage may induce doubt about the system. Therefore, some stages
have to be cut out. The one considered as the most superfluous and yet time-cons-
uming must be axed first. Reference procedure under sec. 256 of the Income-tax
Act and the corresponding provision 0 the Gift Tax and Companies (Profits) Surtax
Act deserve to be abolished and must be abolished. That would remove two unneces-
sary stages in the upward journey of tax litigation. It would simultaneously render
the procedure for direct reference to Supreme Court under sec. 257 otiose.

2.25. The lacuna felt in the present day tax litigation, as pointed out earlier,
is the absence of an all-India perspective till the matter reaches the Supreme Court
of India. Even if reference procedure is abolished, the High Court may interpose

0) Commissioner of Income Tax v. A Raman & Co., 1968 (1) SCR 10 at 15.
0) 40 Company Cases $97 (Gujarat High Court).

(2) 1985 (3) SCR 791.

() Me. Dowell & Co. Vs, Comercial Tax Officer; 1985 (3) SCR 791 at 809,
( Ibid, 809.

(0) Ibid, 809. .


it

itself under Art. 226 and defeat the very purpose for which the reference procedure _
deserves to be abolished. Interference of the High Court having statewise jutisdic-
tion is the fruitful source of conflict in the matter of interpretation of tax laws. Every.
such apparent or real conflict adds to the workload in the Supreme Court much as
tax law, like any other law, should have certainty in its application throughout
the country. Therefore, the jurisdiction of the High Court under Art. 226 must
equally be abolished. ड़

Central Tax Court

2.26. Having eliminated the possible source of delay and conflict in the inter-
pretation of tax laws, a suitable forum must be created at a stage above the Income .
Tax Appellate Tribunal and below the Supreme Court-of India which will have a
nation-wide jurisdiction. A Central Tax Court having an all-India jurisdiction
would have two disinct advantages; (1) that it will introduce an all-India pers- -
pective in the matter of interpretation of tax laws and (2) conflicts of decisions
amongst various High Courts making it obligatory for the Supreme Court to deal
with the matter would be eliminated. There are some more incidental advantages
which may be briefly narrated. A body dealing with specialist litigation round the
year will acquire both speed and consistency in its views. A possibility of difference
of opinion amongst benches of the Central Tax Court can be easily resolved by
a dissent being examined by & larger Bench of the Central Tax Court. Common
questions of law arising in a number of appeals coming before it can be dealt with
by a common judgment. There will be thus unanimity in decisions, continuity and
consistency in dealing with common questions arising before it. Therefore, a Central
Tax Court at a stage midway between Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and Supreme
Court of India must be set up.

2.27, What must be the format of the Central Tax Court ? It appears that
since the introduction of Part XIV-A in the Constitution by the Constitution (Forty-
second Amendment) Act, 1976, a belief has gained ground that appropriate legisla-
ture may set up Tribunals in respect of all or any of the matters specified in ‘clause
(2) of Art. 323 B with respect to which such legislature has power to make laws.
Amongst the subjects referred to in clause (2), is levy, assessment, collection and
enforcement of any tax: The appropriate legislature can also be the Parliament
in the matter of levy, assessment, collection and enforcement of any tax referable
to entries in the Union List. It is not disputed that a Tribunal having all-India juris-
diction can be set up to deal with levy, assessment, collection and~ enforcement
of any centrally leviable tax. But this should not impede a further enquiry whether a
court can be set up for the same purpose within the framework of the Constitution.
And let it be remembered that there is a recognisable and visible difference between
a court and a tribunal both with respect to its capacity, credibility and impact.

५.५ 2,28. Parliament has powers to enact direct tax laws such as Income-tax Att,
Gift-tax Act, Wealth-tax Act and the Companies (Profit) Surtax Act and set upa.
machinery for its levy, assessment and recovery. Entries 82, 85, 86 in the Union
List in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution confer power on the Parliament
to levy tax on income, tax on corporation, tax on the capital value of the assests
exclusive of agricultural land, on individuals and companies, and tax on the
capital of companies. Where Parliament has power to levy tax it comprehends the
power to provide machinery for the collection of tax and for resolution of di: putes
or complaints arising out of the levy and recovery of tax. The Central Tax प्रा

“herein envisaged will be a court with jurisdiction to deal with disputes or compl-
aints arising out of the levy, assessment and recovery of the aforementioned taxes,
Entry 95 in the Union List reads

“Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with respect
to any of the matters in the List.”

When the entry deals with jurisdiction and power of court, it comprehends both
the creation of courts, conferment of power and jurisdiction or extinguishment
thereof. Entry 95 enables the Parliament to deal with the jurisdiction of.a High
Court. Therefore, on a conspectus of all these entries, Parliament will have wer
by law to set up a Central Tax Court or as the office of the Ministry of Fi nance
would like to describe it as National Court of Direct Taxes. Undoubtedly, the offi-
cers of the Ministry of Finance conceived it as an administrative tribunal under Art,


n

3238 of the Constitution. The Commission is of the firm opinion that such a Central
Tax Court should not be a tribunal, but a Court of Appeal with aif its trappings
and having an all-India jurisdiction. Those who favoured to set up a national tribunal
under Art. 323B appeared to have overlooked the fact that suitable legislation will
have to be enacted for that purpose. If law has to be enacted, it would be comparati-
vely advantageous to set up a Central Tax Court rather than a tribunal envisaged
Art. 323B. Now that it is intended to confer jurisdiction on the Proposed Central
Tax Court to deal with constitutionality of tax legislation, a tribunal would be of no
use. Tribunal cannot examine the constitutionality of a statute or subordinate legis-
lation, ‘his approach may, as a whole, defeat the charge of tribunalisation of justice,
‘Therefore, the Commission is of the firm opiniom that a Central Tax Court/National
Court of Direct Taxes be set up under an Act of Parliament having all-India_juris-
diction.

2.29. ‘There is near unanimity of opinion that Income Tax Appellate Tribunal
has immensely justified its existence and largely vindicated the trust reposed in it.
It has, therefore, to be retained with its regional jurisdiction. It would be the last
fact finding authority.

2.30. The proposed Central Tax Court will have jurisdiction to entertain appeal
against the decision of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal on a question of Jaw. As a
at present provided, findings of facts by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal shall be
final. Every appeal filed before the Central Tax Court shall be listed for addmission be-
fore a Bench of the Court. If the Bench is satisfied that the appeal does not disclose a
question of law, it would have jurisdiction to dismiss it in Jimine. Uf at the time of ad-
mission, the Bench of the Central Tax Court hearing the appeal is satisfied that the
appeal discloses a question or questions of law, it should frame the question 07 ques-

2.32. The terms and conditions of service of the members of the Central Tax
Court would be on Par with the conditions of service, in the matter of pay, perquisites,
Pension and leave, in force at the relevant time for the Judges of the High Court.
Similarly, the terms and conditions of service of the Principal Judge of the Central
Tax Court will be on par with the Chicf Justice of a High Court.

2.33. In order to attract Judges of the High Court coming over to the Central
Tax Court, some incentive is necessary. It can be provided in the form of age of Tetire-
ment fixed at 65 years, as has been done under the Administrative Tribunals Act,

2.34, The Headquarters of the proposed Central Tax Court should be, of course,
at Delhi. But, in order to make access to justice nearer to the doorstep of the consumers
of justice, it must have benches in the first instance, at places like Ahmedabad, Bom-
bay, Calcutta and Madras.



13

the Supreme Court held that such an appeal cannot be disposed of in the light manner *
as is done under Article 136 of the Constitution. Art. 136 confers a discretionary
jurisdiction on the Supreme Court which may be exercised for "weighty reasons.
While exercising jurisdiction under Article 136, Supreme Court is not a regular
court of appeal. Now if a statutory appeal is provided, the Supreme Court would be a
regular court of appeal and in view of Sita Ram‘s' decision, records will have to be
called, notice will have to be issued to either side and both sides will have to be heard
before the appeal can be disposed of. If Central Tax Court, a‘High Court level appel-
laté forum, has heard the appeal, there is no necessity nor justification for providing
a statutory appeal'to the Supreme Court. To correct any error of law,'the Supreme
Court will always have jurisdiction under Art. 136 of the Constitution, Therefore,: it
is made-crystal clear that no statutory appeai to the Supreme Court should be pro-
vided against the decision of the Central Tax Court.

2.36. On the setting up of the Central Tax Court, all present references pend-
ing in any High Court shall stand transferred to: the Central Tax Court.

2.37. One interesting feature of the Central Tax Court which attracted a good
‘number of conflicting. opinions is with regard to the question whether: the. Central
Tax. Court should be invested with jurisdiction to examine the contention.as'to the
constitutional validity of a taxing statute or any rule or regulation made thereunder.
The Central Tax Court is conceived as an all-India body replacing. various :High
Courts. The High Court today has jurisdiction to examine the question of constitu-
tional validity of a statute or rules or regulation made thereunder. If the Central
Tax Court is not to be a Tribunal under Art. 323-B, but a court, it can be:confitently
conferred with jurisdiction to examine the question of constitutional validity of-taxing
statutes and subordinate legislation thereunder. If , as suggested by the officers of the
Ministry of Finance, it were to be a Tribunal, it ‘could neverbe invested: with juris-
diction to‘examine the constitutional validity of provisions. aforementioned. This: is
one-additional’ reason why there has to be a Central Tax Court and. not: a: Tribunal
as envisaged by Art, 323 B. It will have an added advantage ‘in that those who would
complain about the abolition of the jurisdiction of the High Court, can be effectively
answered by saying that an equally competent forum is created to deal with consti-
tutionality of taxing statute.

2.38. The officers of the Ministry of Finance also discussed some suggestions
for restructuring tax authorities at the level below the Income Tax AppellateTribunal.
‘There is enough scope for the same’in as much as when it comes to deprivation of life
(Capital punishment) only one appeal on facts is available while more than one appeal
on facts is available in the matter of tax litigation. The Commission has, however,
not undertaken this exercise because at present, it is dealing with the question of
inflow of work in the High Court and the Supreme Court, as stated at the Com--
mencement of this Report.

2.39. Setting up of a Central Tax Court will make a deep dent on the arrears
in the High Court and the other pending. proceedings will get accelerated treatment


CHAPTER ता
INDIRECT TAXES

3.1, The most important and extensive revenue generating indirect taxes are
customs and excise duties. The bulk of the tax revenues of the Central Government
to the tune of 80% of the revenue receiots is derived from the customs and central
excise duties. Sec. 12 of the Customs Act, 1962 empowers the Government to levy
duty of customs at such rates as may be specified in the First and Second schedules of
the Customs Tariff Act, 1975. Similarly, Sec. 3 of the Central Excises and Salt Act,
1944 empowers the Government to levy and collect excise duty on all excisable goods
other than salt which are produced or manufactured in India anda duty on salt manu-
factured in, or imported by land into, any part of India as. and at the rates, set forth
in the First Schedule. .

3.2. Both the aforementioned Acts designate officers, confer power on them
and precribe procedure for levy and collection of tax as authorised by each of the Acts.
Comprehensive rules have been made under both the Acts providing for their effective
implementation. The First and Second schedules of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 and
First Schedule of the Central Excises and Salt Act,i944, which specify the goods
imported into and exported from India and excisable goods respectively which become
dutiable have undergone extensive amendments and revisions and numerous addi-
tions have been made in them over years. It is an undeniable fact that duties of
customs and excise are major sources of revenue in the budget of the Central Govern-
ment. With the escalating industrialisation of the country, different types of goods
which were not manufactured in India or were not required to be imported are now
being manufactured in India or are 52ing imported in India, Similarly, numerous
manufactured goods are exported out of India. The tariff schedules in both the Acts
keep pace with this development.

3.3. Bot the Acts provide for a hicrarchy of officers empowered to deal with
disputes and controversies arising in the implementation and enforcement of the
Acts. This report is concerned with the stage at which provision for appeals have

been incorporated in both the Acts.

3.4, Sec. 128 of the Customs Act, 1962 provides for an appeal at the instance of
an aggrieved person by any decision or order under the Act by an officer of customs
lower in rank than a Collector of Customs to the Collector (Appeals) within the
period of limitation prescribed therein. Sec. peo envisages the constitution of an Ap-
pellate Tribunal to be called the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate
Tribunal consisting of as many Judicial and Technical Members as it thinks fit, to
exercise the powers and discharge the functions conferred on the Appellate Tribunal
by the Act. Sub-sec. (2) of Sec. 129 prescribes qualifications for being eligible to be a
Judicial or Technical Member of the Appellate Tribunal. The Appellate Tribunal
will have a President and one or more Vice-Presidents as may be necessary. Sec.
129A confers appellate jurisdiction on the Appellate Tribunal against the orders
enumerated therein. Every appeal to the Appellate Tribunal has to be heard by the
Appellate Tribunal implying that it does not enjoy the power to dismiss an appeal
at the admission stage in_limine even if it is of the opinion that it is of a frivolous
nature. The Appellate Tribunal enjo.s wide jurisdiction to interfere with questions
of law and facts arising from the decision under appeai. It has power to remand the
matter for a fresh adjudication or decision after taking additional evidence, if neces-
sary. It enjoys the power to suo motu rectify or amend its own order or exercise
the same power if the mistake is brought to its notice by the Collector of Customs
or by the other party to the upped, with this limitation that it can be exercised
within a period of four years from the dai of the order sought to be rectified. Sec.
129C envisages benches of the Appellate Tribunal to be constituted for dealing with
the appeals. Ordinarily each bench to be composed of a Judicial Member and a Techni-
cal Member, It also envisages a special bench to be set up in respect of certain specified
appeals. See. 129D confers revisional jurisdiction oa the Central Board of Excise
and Customs constituted under the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963 to examine
the record of any proceeding in which a Collector of Customs as an adjudicating au-
thority has passed any decision or order for the porpose of satisfying itself as to the

14



15

legality or propriety of any such decision or order and in excercise of this jurisdiction,
the Board may direct such Collector to apply to the Appellate Tribunal for the deter-
mination of such points arising out of the decision or order as may be specified by the
Board in its order. Similar revisional jurisdiction is conferred on the Collector of
Customs which can be exercised suo motu with feference to the record and proceedings
of an adjudicating authority subordinate to him. Such revisional jurisdiction can be
exercised within a period of two years from the date of the decision or order of the
adjudicating authority. Sec. 129E provides that a person desirous of appealing
against a decision against which an appeal lies under Chapter XV, shall, pending the
appeal. deposit with the proper officer the duty demanded or the penalty levied.
The Appellate Authority has power to dispense with the deposit or direct the deposit
subject to conditions,

3.5. Sec. 130 confers power on the Collector of Customs or the other party to
the proceeding before the Appellate Tribunal to make an application accompanied
by a fee therein prescribed requiring the Appellate Tribunal to refer to the High Court
any question of law arising out of such order and subject to the other provisions con-
tained inthe section, the Appellate Tribunal shall, within 120 days of the receipt of
such application, draw up a statement of the case and refer it to the High Court
The Appeliate Tribunal may decline to make the reference, if it is satisfied that no
question of law arises from its order which requires to be referred to the High Court.
Briefly, the procedure prescribed under Sec. 130 is analogous to the procedure pres-
cribed under Sec. 256(1) and (2) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 which has been exten-
sively dealt with in Chapter I of this report. Sec. 130A is in puri materia with sec.
257 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 enabling the Appellate Tribunal to make a direct
reference to the Supreme Court of India in the circumstances mentioned therein
Sec, 130E provides for an appeal against a decision of the High Court to the Supreme
Court of India.

3.6. Chapter VIA was introduced in the Central Excises and Salt Act by the
Amending Act 44 of 1980 with effect from 11th October, 1982. Sec. 35 envisages a
Collector (Appeals) to whome an appeal would lie at the instance of an aggrieved person
against any decision or order passed under the Act by a Central Excise Officer lower
in rank than a Collector of Central Excise. Sec. 35A prescribes procedure for hearing
of the appeals. Sec. 35B provides for appeals to the Appellate Tribunal, which has
been defined to mean Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal consti-
tuted under Sec. 129 of the Customs Act, 1962. After the decision by the Appellate
Tribunal, there is a provision for reference to the High Court under Sec. 350 and an

appeal to the Supreme Court of India against the decision of the High Court under
sec. 35L.

3.7. Sec. 81 of the Gold (Control) Act, 1968 provides for an appeal to the Ap-
pellate Tribunal meaning the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tri-
bunal constituted under Sec. 129 of the Customs Act, 1962 against any of the orders
enumerated therein. Sec. 82B is in pari materia with Sec. 130 of the Customs Act and
Sec. 350 of the Central Excise and Salt Act providing for a procedure for reference to
the High Court by the Tribunal. Sec. 82C is in pari materia with Sec. 130 A of the
Customs Act which enables the Tribunals to make a reference direct to the Supreme
Court in the circumstances mentioned therein.

3.8. The Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal has been
set up on October 16, 1982. It has a heavy backlog of cases. Roughly 25,000 appeals
were pending on 315 March, 1986.

3.9. The Appellate Tribunal was conceived on the same lines as the Appellate
Tribunal under the Income-tax Act and identical reference procedure is prescribed
for the direct and indirect taxes under the relevant statutes. While the Appellate
Tribunal under the Income-tax Act has numerous Banches, the Benches of the
Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal have been set up at Bombay,
Madras, Calcutta with Headquarter at Delhi. However, even if the appeal is filed
at Delhi and is heard and disposed of by a bench at Delhi, the reference, if any,
to the High Court wil! have to be made to the High Court of that State from which
the appeal before the Appellate Tribunal arose. (See Sec. 131 C of the Customs
Act,1962), The fall out of this parallel procedure is the same as in the case of Appellate
Tribunal under the Income-tax Act. A Bench of the Customs, Exicse and Gold
(Control) Appellate Tribunal at Delhi may hear appeals from Delhi, Rajasthan,


16

Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh etc. Depending upon the decision of the aforemen-
tioned High Courts, the Bench will have to render conflicting decisions on the
same point depending upon the State from which the appeal arises and relevant
to which the High Court of that State has rendered its decision. The Appellate
Tribunal will not be able to provide an all-India perspective, as it has to render
conflicting and contradictory decisions depending upon the conflict of opinion
amongst various High Courts. Till the matter reaches the Supreme Court, an all-
India perspective will not develop. The reasons therefore, given for setting-up
Central Tax Court for direct taxes will mutatis mutandis apply for setting-up a
Central Tax Court for indirect taxes, The benefits accruing from the setting up of
such a court would far outweigh the additional costs that may have to be incurred
in setting-up the Central Tax Court. Once the Central Tax Court is set up for the
reasons mentioned in Chapter II,the reference procedure has to be abolished under
various provisions of the various statutes herein indicated. The reference procedure,
it is generally conceded is the prime cause of delay. It entails an additional disadvan-
tage in that the private party seeking the reference shall move for interim stay
of the recovery proceeding till such time as the reference is disposed of. There
is enormous delay in disposing of the references. The revenue is held captive during
this period causing dislocation in budgetary estimates. A chart compiled by the
office of the Finance Ministry on the question of delay and blocked recovery of
revenue revealed the following position:

(Rs. in lakhs)

Customs Central Excise
fan A on ~ =
No. of Amount No. of | Amount
Cases Blocked Cases * Blocked
Supreme Court a 925 4178.19 2181 78288 .99
High Courts न 6974 21640 .30 5389. 277489 . 23
7899... 25818 .49 7570 355778 .22
No. of “Amount हु
Cases Blocked
Grand Total of Customs 7899 25818 .49
& Central Excise oe 7570 355778. 22
In Supreme Court &
High Courts (Both) .. 15469. 381596.71

i
Approximately, 15,000 cases involving indirect taxes are Pe nding in the High Courts
and the Supreme Court blocking roughly a revenue of Rs.3816.17 crores. It may
incidentally be mentioned that the Central Govt. spent on litigation Rs. 22,96,000
in cases arising under the Customs Act and Rs. 22,17,000 in cases arising under
the Central Excises and Salt Act. This information reinforces the case for abolition
of reference procedure to High Courts which has in fact now totally outlived its
utility.

3.10. In the discussion with the officers dealing with indirect taxes in the
Ministry of Finance, it transpired that a model Bill has been drafted to provide
for setting-up Customs, Central Excises Revenue (Appellate) Tribunal. The whole
thinking appears to have been influenced by the provision in Art. 323B(2). For the
detailed reaons given in Chapter II of this report recommending a Central Tax Court
for direct taxes and not a Tribunal. the Commission is of the firm opoinion that no
Tribunal should be set-up as envisaged in the draft Bill, but a Central Tax Court for
indirect taxes on the lines set-out in the Chapter II of the report be set-up. While the
power and jurisdiction of such a Central Tax Court in both the cases must be
identical, they must maintain separate and distinct identity because there will be no
functional integrality between them,

3.11. Clause 16 of the draft Bill provides for an appeal to the Supreme Court
against the decision of the Central Tax Court For the reasons set-out in Chapter II
of the report this provision deserves to be deleted. In fact, the bill will have to be
recast to bring it in conformity with various aspects dealt with in this report.


CHAPTER IV
IMPORT-EXPORT CASES

4.1. The Minsiter of Law and Justice by his letter dated May 5, 1986 forwarded
10 the Commission a letter received by him from Shri Ramu S. Deora, Chairman,
Western Region of the Federation of Indian Export Organisations set up by Minis-
stry of Commerce and Supply, Government of India requesting the Commission
to examine the feasibility of setting up of a Special Court to clear Import/Export
cases. While forwarding the letter, the Minister of Law and Justice requested the
Commission to take into consideration the suggestions put forth in the letter while
making recommendations on Tax Court. The Commission by its reply dated May 14,
1986 agreed to examine the suggestions in the letter aforementioned while dealing
with the feasibility aspect of setting up a Central Tax Court for direct and indirect
taxes. Hence this part.

4.2. The Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 was enacted to confer
power on the Central Government to prohibit, restrict or otherwise control imports
and exports and to deal with matters connected therewith. Sec. 3 of the Act con-
fers power on the Central Government by order published in the Gazette to make
provision for prohibiting, restricting or otherwise controlling in all cases or in speci-
fied classes of cases, and subject to such exceptions, if any, as may be made by or
under the order :—

(a) the import, export, carriage coastwise or shipment as ships, stores or
goods of any specified description;

(6) the bringing into any port or place in India of goods of any specified
description intended to be taken out of India without being removed
from the ship or conveyance in which they are being carried.

The Act replaced Rule 84 of the Defence of India Rules under which control
over imports and exports was imposed and subsequently extended under the Emer-
gency Provisions (Continuance) Ordinance, 1946 which expired on 24th Maroh,

47. The power to regulate import/export sought to avoid any disturbance to the
economy of the country during the transition from war time to peace time conditions.
That apart, even during peace time, control over export and import has to be ex-
ercised for development of economy ina planned manner. Sec. 4B confers power
to enter and inspect any premises in which imported goods or materials which are
liable to confiscation under the Act are suspected to have been kept or concealed
Sec. 4C confers power to conduct search and Sec. 4D confers power to seize imported
goods or materials under circumstances mentioned therein. Sec. 4G confers power
to confiscate any imported goods or materials in respect of which any condition of
the licence or letter of authority, under which they were imported, relating to the
utilisation or distribution of such goods or materials ef ef has been or is being con-
travened. Sec 41 provides for levy of penalty. Sec 4K provides for adjudication for
confiscation or levy of penalty. Sec. 4M provides a forum of appeal against the deci-
sion of the Chief Controller or Additional Chief Controller to the Central Govern-
ment and in any case to the Chief Controller or where he so directs to the Additional
Chief Controller. Sec. 4N confers power of revision on the Chief Controller. This
is the brief outline of the Act.

4.3, Since the escalation of the process of industrialisation of the country,
exports and imports have multiplied manifold, both as in quantum and variety of
goods. Numerous orders have been issued for control of export and import of
various denomination of goods. A number of disputes have arisen and are likly to
arise between the exporter and/or the importer on one hand and the authorities
under the Act on the other with regard to the nature of goods, the degree of con-
trol ९ e/. To illustrate, when total ban was imposed on the export of silver, ban
order was challenged as violative of the fundamental right guaranteed by Art.
19(1)(g) of the Constitution. A question was also raised whether the administrative
policy behind the ban is justiciable at all.(t) Gloves were imported and the question

0) Union of India ५. Damani & Co. ATR 1980 SC 1149.
17


18

arose whether they were prohibited goods and whether they were dutiable also.(1)
Such illustrations can be multiplied manifold.

4.4. Whenever there is a dispute between the importer or exporter on one
hand and the authorities under the Act on the other, it has to be adjudicated after
giving opportunity to the owner of the goods to be heard before either confiscation
1s ordered or penalty is levied. (See secs. 4K and 4L of the Act). Any person aggrie=
ved by the decision of the adjudicating authority may prefer an appeal as provided
in sec. 4N, Thereafter, the aggrieved person may either invoke the jurisdiction of
the High Court under Art. 226 or an appeal to the Supreme Court under Art. 136
of the Constitution. This is the present set up for adjudication and relief by recourse
to judicial authorities after the matter has been dealt with by quasi-judicial autho-
Tities,

4.5. The Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 is a statute cognate to the
Customs Act, 1962 and various other statutes which deal with export or import
such as Antiquities (Export) Control Act. 1947. There are numerous other cognate
provisions which need not be enumerated here.

4.6. It would appear at a glance that as exports and imports proliferated, the
area and quantum of disputes between the authority under the Act on the one hand
and the exporter/importer on the other get wider. The power to confiscate goods
or to levy penalty for contravention of the law is of a drastic nature. But it is equally
useful to curb the tendency to recklessly import unnecessary goods as would dis-
turb the economy or export essential gocds and create shortages again disturb-
ing the economy. Further till the dispute is resolved, goods may not be released.
If the goods consist of essential raw material, the delay in its delivery pending the
procedure would affect production of finished products. The federation on whose
letter the Law Commission was invited to examine the question of setting up of a
special court, has stated that there occurs divergence of opinion in the matter of
imports/exports policies by different authorities such as Import Trade Control
Organisation , Customs, Judiciary, Reserve Bank of India and Importers/Exporters.
This causes delay in imports/exports clearance considerably affecting imports/exports
and resulting into litigation. The author of the letter refers to the controversy about
the import of Mutton Tallow and the consequent Debarment Orders issued by
Chief Controller of Imports and Exports. Disputes also arise, according to him,
in the case of certain canalised items. Such disputes arose in the case of diamonds,
almonds et el. He points out that because of the disputes, the consignments are
held up for 5/6 months at a stretch and the Supreme Court takes 4/5 months just to
clarify the scope of the licences it itself and earlier ordered to be issued. During the
period, according to him, the importers had to suffer double demurrage of BPT
and container detention. He further pointed out that if the commodity is a perish-
able one, it gets damaged in quality inevitably resulting in national loss. These
are certainly weighty considerations.

4.7. Now if the Import and Export Act, 1947 would operate in close collabo-
ration with the Customs Act, 1962, the expertise in dealing with the provisions of
the Customs Act would assist in dealing with the questions arising under the Imports
and Export (Control) Act, 1947. Therefore, the Commission is of the view that the
Central Tax Court for indirect taxes as envisaged in Chapter वा of this report must
also deal with the decision of the Chief Controller or the Additional Chief Controller,
as the case may be, and the appeal to the Central Government under sec. 4N must
be abolished. The Commission is therefore, of the view that the jurisdiction of the
Central Tax Court for indirect taxes must be enlarged to include appeal against the
decision of the Chief Controller or the Additional Chief Controller, rendered in
appeal or as an adjudicating authority, as the case may be, must lie to that court
and shall be dealt with in the same manner as it deals with appeals under the
Customs.Act or the Central Excises and Salt Act. This will provide a unified machi-
nery for dealing with identical issues and reduce the time spent in the disposal of
disputes arising under the Imports and Exports (Control) Act. 1947.

1. D.A. DESAI
Chairman

2, Mrs. V. S. RAMA DEVI
Member Secretary

Dated the 28th August, 1986,

0) Ram Kirpal Bhagat vy. State of Bikar, ATR 1970 SC 951.
H-S6-M/ PLD 40OMol LI & CA—,S00---18-3-87—-GIPS.