LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH REPORT

ON

FORMATION OF AN ALL INDIA
JUDICIAL SERVICE

NOVEMBER 1986


ERRATA
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH REPORT
ON FORMATION OF AN ALL-INDIA JUDICIAL SERVICE

Page Para Line For Read
(0) 2nd 10 litigation, litigation;
(i) Concluding Word regards. regards,
(i) Signature side (Sd.)D.A. Desai _ sd.
(DA DESAI)
3 253 last line Committeein' Committee in
4 2-3 13 i 2
4 2:3 16 2 3
4 2-3 last line 3 4
4 Foot note 3 to be added Ibid
4 Foot note 3 3 4
5 255 I qustion question
5 “26 19 organisation organised on
6 2-9 5 312. “312.
9 Foot note 1 111, MW
12 34 12 constitution Constitution
12 Footnote 2 AIR, 1975 AIR. 1975
12 Footnote 10 (4) 4
14 3-6 18 constitutional — Constitutional
14 3-6 4th from bottom » :
16 41 5 proportion promotion
16 41 8 all Courts all High Courts
18 4-4 7 hardlv hardly
20 5-2 11 further future
22 5-4 5th from bottom Why every
23 555 ॥| shal shall
23 555 competitve competitive
24 5-6 2nd from bottom wih with
26 5.8 7 Court. (1)! The Court. ! The
26 5.8 18th from Once Once,
bottom
28 5-11 19 inter se Inter se
29 5-11 16 leaving to leaving it to
29 5-11 20 Mohal Mehal
31 5-14 20 with wet
31 5-14 21 Many man
33 6.3 12 Tribunals, Tribunals
33 signature (S.C. GHOSH) (S.C. GHOSE)


D.O. No. F. 2 (63/85-L-C

Shri Ashok Kumar Sen,
Minister for Law & Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri: Bhavan,

NEW DELHI

November 27, 1986.

Dear Minister for Law & Justice,

I have great. pleasure in forwarding to you One Hundred
Sixteenth Report of the Law Commission on the topic : ‘Formation
of an All-India Judicial Service’ (Item No. 9 of the terms of reference)
in the context of studying judicial reforms.

As desired in your letter dated February 17, 1986 by which you
conveyed to the Law Commission the decision of the Government to
entrust the work of recommending judicial reforms to the present Law
Commission 10 accord top priority to the same, tie Law Commission
re-scheduled its plan of action. The first report dealt with rural
litigation, the second report dealt with re-structuring courts in rela-
tion to tax laws. This report: deals with formation of an all-India
judicial scrvice. Immediately after this report, the Law Commis-
sion hopes to forward the report recommending a comprehensive
scheme for the training of judicial officers (Item No. 5).

1 was given to understand that the Government of India is
very keen to usher in basic judicial reforms. ‘The reports already sub.
mitted and the one which is in the pipe line would give the Govern-
ment of India enough material for enacting comprehensive legislation
to usher in judicial reforms.

1 hope that the report will be expeditiously placed before the
Parliament and printed and circulated so that concrete follow-up
action can be taken soon.

1

With regards.

Yours sincerely,
(Sd.) D. A. Desai

Encl: A Repore

@


CONTENTS

Pages

CHAPTER  {—Introductory 1-2

CHAPTER II—Historical Background है 2-7
CHAPTER Ili—Attempts to create All-India Judicial Service

and views thereon पु 7-16

CHAPTER IV—Positive approach 16—18

CHAPTER V—Justification for setting up Indian Judicial Service 18—32
CHAPTER VI—Removal of difficulties 32—33

(iii)


CHAPTER |

INTRODUCTORY

1.1, The Government of India accorded high priority to the introduction
of basic reforms in the administration of justice as prevailing in the country.
Accordingly, the Law Commission was requested to submit comprehensive pro-
posals on various aspects relevant to judicial reforms. One of the terms of
reference in the context of studying judicial reforms assigned to the Law Com-
mission was term No. 9: “Formation of an All-India Judicial Service’. The
assignment was received by the Law Commission on 17th February,
1986, accompanied by a request to accord top priority to the
terms and submit separate recommendations relating to each term
of reference as expeditiously as possible. The anxiety for speed is well appre-
ciated. Whenever an inquiry was made about the steps Government proposed
to take for introducing comprehensive and basic reforms in the administration
of justice, the official spokesman. on behalf of the Government, stated that this
work was assigned to the Law Commission and that the Law Commission is
dealing with it as a top priority matter. Even apart from this, the present state
of justice delivery system which has been examined by the present Law Com-
mission in depth in its One Hundred Fourtcenth Report submitted to the Govern-
ment of India on August 12, 1986. the Law Commission found it imperative to
draw up strategies for judicial reforms and to deal with distinct areas requiring
claborate focussed analysis. But all these areas though distinct are also re-
lated: when implemented, the cumulative result, it is hoped, would be that the
justice delivery system which is moribund may revive, become resilient and

access to justice comes within the easy reach of the poorest and the system becomes
result oriented. informa! and de-professionalised

‘The Law Commission is convinced that court system, in final analysis,
is nothing but a mechanism for resolving disputes arising in a society. Indian
sociat scene presents a grim picture of society ultra rural to most advanced
industrialised one. There are intermediate layers. | Commonsense dictates
that mechanism fcr solving highly complex disputes would be counter-produc-
tive for resolving simple petty disputes arising in rural areas. | However. the
monolithic British legal system introduced in colonial days operates today with-
out any perceptible change for all layers of society. To illustrate, a dispute
in metropolitan area involving complex legal formalities and complicated facts
may need a highly developed justice delivery system but the same would be
wholly unsuited for speedily solving simple disputes arising in rural areas without
waste of time. money and energy. As a first step it collected data to ascertain.
the nature of disputes in rural. semi-urban. urban and metropolitan areas.
According priority ta the needs of the rural population for a simple mechanism
for resolution of their small and petty disputes. it prepared a working paper
for reviving Gram Nyayalaya providing a de-professionalised, less formal forum
for resolution of simple disputes arising in rural areas. As that was the first
attempt of the present Law Commission to tackle the difficult question, an
attempt was made to develop a national debate so that views and comments
from -all vitally affected interests could be gathered so as to be able to present
a comprehensive report mecting all points of view. A number of workshops
were held throughout the length and breadth of the country in collaboration
with local academics. Bar associations, Universities and Law Colleges. Taking
advantage of the cpportunity presented by intensive discussions in workshops.
the Law Commission also invited a debate on aspects inter-connected with re-


One Hundred Sixteenth Report

structuring grassroots judiciary. One such aspect was formation of all-India
judiciary.

1.3. The control over district courts and courts subordinate thereto has
been vested in the High Court of the State. The scope, the content, the ambit
and the width of the control have been the subject matier of numerous judicial
decisions. ‘Ihe control has become all pervasive. | Accordingly, it was felt
that the Chief Justice of India and the Judges of the Supreme Court of India,
the Chief Justice and Judges of cach High Court would be well informed and
well equipped to assist the Commission in formulating a scheme for setting up
all-India judicial service. To encompass a broad spectrum of considered opinion
refevant to the subject. the Commission addressed individual and personal letters
to cach Chief Justice and cach sitting Judge of each High Court functioning in
the country A detailed letter wes also addressed to the Chief Justice of India.
A copy of the terms of reference in the coniext of studying judicial reforms
was annexed to cach such etter. Each Judge was requested to give his de-
tailed comments and suggestions with regard to all cr any of the terms of refe-
rence but $| cally inviting attention to term No. 9 which specifies formation
of all-India judicial service. It is heertening to note that even though. extremely
busy with their day-to-day work, a number of Judges from various High Courts
responded to the letter of the Commission. There was elaborate discussion
with the Chief Justice of India, some of the Chief Justices of the High Courts
and some Judges of the High Courts, It is sad that this compliment cannot be
extended to the Judges of the Supreme Court of India.

The Conmmission had discussions with the officers in the Department of
Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India. They also submitted ,
the information colleeted by them in this behalf from State Governmenis, Union
territory Adiministrations as well as the resolutions of the conferences of the
Chicf Justices held in the past. The opinion of the Chief Justices of the High
Courts were also summarised and submitted to the Commission. -

The Conumission was also inviied to hold a dialogue at the Indian Law
Institute where all the members of the Governing Council were present along
with select invitees. The discussions provided aew ways of exploration of
the many dimensions of the problem. The Commission is especially appre-
ciative of the initiative taken in this regard by Dr. Upendra Baxi, Director
(Hony.) of Research of the Indian Law Institute.

CHAPTER IL
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

2.1. By and large. “the Government of India Act, 1935° has been accepted
as a model while framing the Constitution for free India. Part IX dealt with
the ‘Judicature’. Chapter I in Part IX dealt with the Constitu-
tion and jurisdiction of the Federal Court and appointment’ of Judges
to the Federal Court. The provisions contained in Chapter 11 Part. IX
dealt with the constitution, jurisdiction, functions and duties of the High Courts
in British India. Though Part 1X dealt with the ‘Judicature’, services below

the High Court did not find any place in that Part. Part X dealt with the ser-
vices of the Crown in India. Sections 254, 255 and 256 under the sub-title

“special p:cvisions as to Judicial Officers’ in Chapter II Part X dealt with sub-
ordinate judiciary. Sec. 254. provided for appointment of district judges and
it'is in pari materia with article 233(1). Sec. 25472) is in pari materia with
article 233(2) with this difference that for being eligible to be appointed as a
district judge from amongst senior and experienced members of the Bar, the


One Hundred Sixteenth Repori

minimum qualifying practice required was five years which has been enhanced
to seven years under the Constitution. Sec. 254 (3) is bodily reproduced in
article 236(a\. Sec, 255 dealt with subordinate civil judiciary and Sec. 256 dealt
with subordinate criminal magistracy The framers of the Government of India

Act, 1935, showed their disinclination to separate Executive from the Judiciary
and the executive stranglehold of criminal Megistracy was effectively main-

tained by the provisions contained in Sec. 256. The Provincial Services Com-
mission was given a role in the matter of selection of members of subordinate
civil judicial service. Entry 2 in List Il. Provincial Legislative List, conferred
legislative and executive power on’ the State’ to presctibs. jurisdiction and powers
of all courts except the Federal Court. The departure made in the Constitu-
tion in this behalf has insulated subordinate judiciary against outside inter-
ference. The High Court has been accorded a decisive voice in the matter
of appointment to the cadre of district judges directly from the Bar and even in

the matter of promotion from the subordinate rank to the cadre of district judge.
Even in the matter of recruitment to judicial service of a State below the district

judge, the power to select candidates was conferred on the State Public Service
Commission as was provided in Sec. 255 of the Government of India Act. 1935.
Consultation with the High Court before making appvintinents was made obli-
gatory. Article 235 made a specific departure in that the control over district
court and court subordinate thereto was conferred on the High Court.’ The
control has become all pervasive as will be pointed out hereafter.

2.2. The services known as the. Secretary of State’s services namely, Indian
Civil Service and the Indian Police Service were tc lapse on the advent of
freedom.' The interim Government undertook an exercise to devise alterna-
tive models to replace those services. The question whether the judicial service
should be organised on an all-India basis or should be left to be organised by
each State. was examined in the conference of the Premiers of the Provinces in
1946 chaired by the then Home Minister, late Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. This
conference resolved that subordinate judicial service should be organised by the
Governments of Provinces. The conference was of the opinion that there was

no necessity for organising subordinate judiciary on ail-India level on the model
comparable to administrative services which was wo be formed on an all-India

basis replacing the then existing एच services. Two factors appeared to have
a bearing on the decision of the conference. Till the advent of independence.
there was a qucta for members of Indian Civil Service to be posted as District
and Sessions Judges and who in turn got elevaied to the High Court. This
was a devious device to thwert total separation of Executive from Judiciary.
Undoubtedly. when the Secretary of State’s Services lapsed and were replaced
by IAS. and 1.P.S. respectively. a policy decision was taken not to post any
member of the I.A.S. to man judicial posts. though those who were already fixed
in service were not recalled. Ths was the starting point in independent India
of separating Exccutive from the Judiciary It may be recalled that during
the indenendence movement. separation of ‘Executive from the Judiciary was
the vital plank of nationalist demand which has found its reiteration in article 50
of the Constitution. But apart from all this. probably the model found in
the provisions contained in Secs. 254 to 256 relating to subordinate Judiciary with
minor variations was found acceptable and hence reproduced in Part VI. Chatper
VI. of the Constitution.

2.3. Neither in the Draft Constitution prepared by the Constitution
Adviser in 1947 nor in the one prepared by the Drafting Committee in’ 1948,

1, Sec. 10, The Indian Independence Act, 1947.


One Hundred Sixteenih’ Report

there was any specific provision on the subject of subordinate judiciary.’ This

omission was specifically noticed and mentioned by the Conference of the Judges
of the Federal Court and the Chief Justices of High Courts held in March 1948.

Their Memorandum observed:

“So long as: the subordinate judiciary, including the district judges, have
to depend op the provincial executive for their appoinument, posting, pro-
motion, and leave, they cannot remain entirely free from the influcnce of
members of the party in power and cannot be expected to act impartially
and independently in the discharge of their duties. It is therefore recom-

mended that provision be made placing exclusively in the hands of the High
Courts the power of appointment and dismissal, posting, promotion and

grant of leave in respect of the entite subordinate judiciary including the
district judges.”

The Drafting Committee accepted these recommendations. The view expressed
was that the two branches of justice, both civil and criminal, be assimilated and
be placed equally under the control of the High Court.” The matter remained
there. The provision regarding the subordinate judiciary came up for discus-
sion nearly nine months later on September 6, 1949. Dr. Ambedkar moved
articles 20%a) to 209(f). There was. no provision for extending the control
of the High Court over criminal Magistracy. Dr. Ambedkar conceded that
there is nothing revolutionary in the articles moved by him. © Even in the Act
of -1935, appoiniment and control of the civil judiciary was vested in the High
Court. The language. as earlier pointed out. of Sec. 254 may indicate that the
power of appointment was conferred on the Governor to be used in his indivi-
dual judgement and before so using the power. the High Court was to be con-
sulted. The word ‘control’ was not there. After the advent of the Consti-
tution. the word ‘contro! made all the difference as has been examined in detail
a little later. There was hardly any debate worth the name on the relevant pro-
visions.

When article 282, the precursor of article 312, was debated, no attention

was focussed on the question of judicial service being organised on an all-India

_ level. The focus of attention was whether the Parliament can legislate for

organising any service on all-India basis if, and only if. a resolution with requisite

majority is adopted by the Rajya Sabha. Replying te the debate. Dr. Ambedkar
pointed out that —

“Article 282 proceeds by laying down the proposition that the Centre
will have the authority to recruit for services which are under the Centre
and each State shall be free to make recruitment and Jay down condi-
tions of service for persons who are to be under the State service. We have,

therefore. by article 282 provided complete jurisdiction. 282C
to some extent takes away the autonomy given to the States by article

282. and obviously if this autonomy is subsequently . to” be
invaded. there must be some authority conferred upon the Centre to do
so, and the only method of providing authority to the Centre to run into,
so to say. afticle 282 is to secure the consent of two-thirds of the members

of the Upper Chamber. The Upper Chamber is the only body men-
tioned in article 282. Ex-hypothesi the Upper Chamber represents the
States and therefore their resolution would be tantamount to an authority
given by the States. That is the reason why these words are intro-
duced in article 282C”$

he Framing of India’s Constitution, A study, p. 508.

3, The Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. 1X B, 9, 1118.


One Hundred Sixteenth Report

2.4. Even though our Constitution is quasi-federal in character, duplication
of services. one for the States and other for the Union, was clearly rejected.

Even in the two premier administrative services, the I.A.S. and the LP.S., though
organised on an all-India level, its members were allocated to the States. There
was no allocation of any of its members to the Union. The States would de-
pute from amongst the members allocated to them for rendering service to the
Union as per the requirements of the latter. . Ordinarily, a service common to
States and Union should be organised on an all-India level. Article 312 was en-
acted to make an enabling provision conferring power on the Parliament to set up
all-India services. Broadly interpreted, if the pre-requisites sct out .in article
312 are satisfied, Parliament by law could .create an all-India service common
to the Union and the States. It appears some doubt was felt whether the judi-
cial service can be organised on an all-India level.

2.5. Swaran Singh Committee. 1976, dealt with the qustion of organising
judicial service at an all-India level. Without expressing any opinion, it referred
the problem of all-India Judicial service to the Government for their consi-
deration and decision after consultation with the State Governments. Commenting

on the proposal whether judicial service should be organized on an all-India level.
the then Chairman of thc Law Commission' exprzssed in his personal opinion
an apprchension that no lawyers with sufficient practice would like to face the
Prospects ‘of transfer by applying for the posts of subordinate judges. It may be
said that practising lawyers joining Indian Judicial Service would form a small
fragment of it as per the scheme envisaged in this report.

2.6. Cl. 45 of the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Bill, 1976, dealt
with amendment to article 312 by introducing the words ‘including an all-India
judicial service’ afrer the words ‘all-India service’ aad before the words ‘common
to the Union and the States.’ Explaining the Objects and Reasons for the pro-
posed amendments accompanying the Bill, it was said: .

“This clause seeks to amend article 312 of the Constitution relating to
all-India Service to provide for the creation of an all-India judicial
Service by a Parliamentary law. Such service shall not include any post
inferior to that of a district judge.”

It is rather difficult to make out any compelling necessity for the amendment.
In fact, even without the amendment if the resolution was adopted by the Rajya
Sabha with requisite majority, Parliament could have enacted a legislation for
setting-up an all-India judicial service. That apart, it may as well be pointed
out that no worthwhile debate appears to have taken place relevant to clause 45.
The Constitution Amendment cannot be undertaken as a futile exercise. It is,
therefore, legitimate t> assume that what was considered unnecessary in 1946
after a lapse of threé decades became a compelling necessity. And it does not
tequire long argument or detailed analysis to reach the conclusion that a service
organisation an all-India level attracting talent from the whole country would
provide more competent service than the service organised at a State level.

2.7. As the service upto and inclusive of the level of district judge re-
mained a State subject. every State enacted its own laws for recruitment to the
service, conditions of service of the members therzof and allied subjects. These
laws vary from State to State. In a separate report which is being submitted a
short time later. a detailed examination has been undertaken to point out the
inadequacy of the laws dealing with the State Judicial Service and as a conse-
quence the present distressing situation.

1. Shri P.B. Gajendragadkar, Chairman, Law Commission, submitted his comments in his
individual capacity.

2-3 M of L&I/87


One Hitndred Sixteenth Report

2.8. The All India Services Act, 1951, was enacted to regulate the recruit-
ment and the conditions of service of persons appointed to the all-India services
common to the Urion and the States. At the commencement of the Act, there
were already two services common to the Union and the States, namely, the
Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service. Section 2A was
incorporated in the Act by the All India Services (Amendment) Act, 1962, with
effect from 6th September. 1963." Since then a number of all-india services
have becn set up, such as (1) the Indian Service of Engineers (Irrigation, Power,
Buildings and Roads); (2) the Indian Forest Service: (3) the Indian Medical and
Health Scrvice: (वी the Indian Revenue Service: (5) the Indian Audit and Ac-
counts Service, ete. Formation of an all-India judicial service was equally with-
in the contemplation of those charged with the duty to set up services common
to Union and the States. However, till 1976 the earlier view that the judicial
posts up to the level of a district judge should be dealt with by the State and
the High Court in the respective States remained firmly implanted.

2.9. Article 312 of the Constitution of India provides for creation of one or
more all-India services. It was amended by the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976, to include an all-India judicial service, For convenience
of reference, it may be extracted here :

312, All-India services.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in Chapter
VI of Part Vi or Part XI, if the Council of States has declared by reso-
lution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and
voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest so to do,
Parliament may by law provide for the creation of one or more all-India
services (including an all-India judicial service) common to the Union
and the States, and subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, regulate
the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to
any such service.

(2) The services known ai the commencement of this Constitution as
the Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service shall
be deemed to be services created by Parliament under this article.

(3) The all-India judicial service referred to in clause (1) shall not
include any post inferior to that of a district judge as defined in article
236.

(4) The law providing for the creation of the all-India judicial ser-
vice aforesaid may contain such provisions for the amendment of Chap-
ter VI of Part VI as may be necessary for giving effect to the provisions
of that Iaw and no such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of
this Constitution for the purposes of article 368.”

Article 312 even in its unamended form would have enabled the Union Govern-
ment to set up an all-India judicial service provided a resolution with the
requisite majority to that effect was adopted by Rajya Sabha and pursuant to
the same a legislation was enacted for that purpose. The amendment merely
made explicit what was implicit in the unamended article. Having regard to
the provisions contained in Chapter VI, Part VI,.of the Constitution (articles
233 to 237), it was provided in article 312(4} that consequential changes or
amendments in any of the aforementioned articles because of the enactment of
a legislation setting up an all-India judicial service would not be deemed to be
an amendment cf the Constitution for the purposes cf article 368. Article
312(3) restricts the power of the Parliament, while enacting a law for setting
up of an all-India jud service, not to include any post in it inferior to that
of a district judge as defined in article 236. Consequently, even if an all-India



One Hundred Sixteenth Report

judicial service is to be set up. it cannot include any post inferior to that of a
district judge as defined in article 236. Such a service, when set
up, would bé common to the Union and the States including the
Union territories, and would regulate the recruitment and conditions of
service of persons appointed thereto. If, therefore, Rajya Sabha adopis a
resolution with requisite majority, it would enable the Parliament-to enact a
legisletion for creation of an all-India judicial service common to the Union
and the States. To that extent, the power vested, under entry 65 of the State
List read with articles 233 and 234, in the State Goverment would be effecti-
vely curtailed. If the requisite pre-conditions prescribed in article 312 are
satisfactorily carricd out, there is no constitutional smpediment to the furma-
tion and cication of an all-India judicial service which can be appropriately
described as Indian Judicial Service.

CHAPTER ता
ATTEMPTS TO CREATE ALL-INDIA JUDICIAL
SERVICE AND VIEWS THEREON

3.1. The first Law Commission specifically charged with a duty to recom-
mend judicial reforms favoured the creation of an all-India judicial service. Law
Commission recommended that in the interest of cffitiency of the subordinate
judiciary. it is necessary that an all-India service called the Indian Judicial
Service should be established.' This recommendation of the Law Commission
was considered in the Law Minister’ Conference heid in 1960. There 185
always been a vociferous support and fierce opposition to the concept of an
all-India Judicial service from the States and the High Courts. The proposal was
then considered not practical and the recommendation was shelved. On the
other hand, the periodical conferences of the Chief Justices of various High
Courts convened by the Chief Justice of India in 1961, 1963 and 1965 favoured
the acceptance of the recommendation and implementation thereof. In the last
mentioned conference, a firm suggestion was made to the Government to take
carly steps to set up Indian Judicial Service. Again, the views of the State
Governments after consultation with the respective High Courts were solicited.
Seven States (Bihar, Haryana, Kerala. Or'ssa, Punjab, Rajasthan and = Tamil
Nadu) lent support to the proposal while 10 States, namely, Andhra Pradesh,
Assam, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Mysore,
Nagaland, West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh disapproved the proposal. Later on,
threc States, Kerala, Punjab and Tamil Nadu which had lent support to the
propesal withdrew their support. Probably, this concerted opposition — by
more than half the number of States forming the Indian Union had a dampen-
ing effect on the decision of the Government of India to set up such a service.
However. the concept of such a service remained hibernating at regular intcr-
vals. In August, 1969. the then Chief Justice of India was requested by the
Government cf India to offer his views on the proposal for setting up such a
service. He reiterated his view that the proposal was not feasible in the pre-
valent circumstances. As the situation in the State judicial services further
deteriorated. both as to the availability of personnel and manner of recruit-
ment as also efficiency, resulting in clogging of cases, the Chief Justice of India
in March 1972 wrote to the Prime Minister suggesting some improvements in
conditions of service of State judiciary. Demarcating the areas where improve-
ment was called for, he poisted out specifically that simultaneously it may be.
useful to examine the question of having an _all-India judicial service. He

1, Law Commission of India, Fourteenth Report, Vo!, J, Chapter 9, Para 59, 0, 184,


One Hundred Sixteenth Report

pointed out that even though it was not considered feasible in 1969, the ques-
tion may again be examined. Nothing concrete appears to have emerged from |
this correspondence

3.2. The Eighth Law Commission, while examining the problem of “Delay
and arrears’, in trial courts recommended formation of an all-India judicial
service’. It was of the opinion that the suggestion to have an all-India judicial
service of the same rank end same pay scales as the Indian Administrative
Service should receive serious consideration. After taking note of the current
school of thought and the fact that many States were strongly opposed to the
creation of an all-India judicial service, it reiterated the recommendation of the
first Law Commission that such a service would be able to attract talented
young pcrsons to man it. The recommendation lent support to the protagonists
who favoured setting up of such a service. The Government of India stated
in Patliament that the States would be consulted jn this behalf again as early
as possible. The issue figured in the Consultative Committee meeting of the
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs held on [7th August, 1978.
The Minister slated that the question of constituting an all-India judicial ser-
vice may be considered at a suitable time. The issue again figured in the meet-
ing dated 4th July, 1979. Finally, in the Consulative Committee meeting held on
November 2, 1980, a consensus emerged in favour of creating an all-India
judicial service in principle subject to appropriate mechanism being drawn up
keeping all aspects in view.

3.3. After the amendment of article 312 by specific inclusion therein of
all-India judicial service, steps were taken by the Central Government to elicit
the vicws of the States in this behalf. The Chief Ministers of Kerala and
Manipur had reservations about the proposal principally on the ground that if
the control over the State Judiciary is transferred to the Union Government
removing the contro! of the High Court as at present provided in article 235,
independence of the judiciary would be undermined and its efficiency would be
impaired. Government of India clarified the position that it was not its inten-
tion to transfer the contro] over the State judiciary to the Union Government
and the control of the High Court as at present provided in article 235 over
the subordinate judiciary would remain intact. The subject again cropped up
at the time of the Ministers’ conference in 1982. he main theme of the
conference was ‘arrears in lower courts’ in respect of which the Law Commis-
sion had already submitted its recommendations contained in its Seventy-
seventh Report. A consensus emerged in the conference. Majority of the
Law Ministers favoured the establishment’ of an all-India judicial service in
principle as it was of the view that such a judiciary common to Union and
the States would attract talented people to Join the judiciary. The lone dis-
sent came from the Law Minister of Tamil Nadu for the same reason for
which earlier that State had opposed the proposal, namely, that the courts upto
the level of District and Sessions Judge transact their business in the State
language- and that recruits on an All-India level would find it very difficult to
acclimatise themselves with State language end in the process dispensation of
justice would suffer.

Slowly but surely the States were veering round in favour of setting up
Indian Judicial Service. Thirteen States and four Union territories favoured
such setting up and eight States opposed it. The State of Kerala and the
Union territory of Mizoram were non-committal:

1. Law Commission of India, Severty-seventh Report, Chaptet 9, Para 9-6, p. 32.


One Hundred Sixteenth Report

The stand taken by the State of Jammu and Kashmir was equivocal in
that it was said on its behalf that as the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir
had its own provision for subordinate judiciary and having regard to the local
conditions and a special local language, it was not in favour of establishment
of Indian Judicial Service’.

3.4. Before the Law Commission can give shape and form to its views on
the questi.n of setting up of Indian Judicial Service, it is imperative that it gives
full consideration to the views and comments of the states which have expressed
their opposition to the proposal.

The opposition of the: States to the setting up of Indian Judicial Service is
founded substantially on three grounds:—

(A). inadequate knowledge of regional language would corrode judicial efi-
ciency both with regard to understanding and appreciating parole evi-
dence and pronouncing judgments;

(B) promotional avenues of the members of the State judiciary would be
severely curtailed causing heart-burning to those who have already
entered service and manning of the State Judicial Service would be
adversely affected; and

(C) erosion of the control of the High Court over subordinate judiciary
would impair independence of judiciary.

A. THE PROBLEM OF LANGUAGE

It is undoubtedly true that in exercise of the power conferred by section 272
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and sub-section (2) of section 137 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, most of the State Governments have declared
local language to be the language of the court. Therefore, up to and inclusive
of the court of District and Sessions Judge, the proceedings are conducted and
the judgments are written in the local language. When a judicial service common
ta Union and the States is set up and recruitment is made at national level, it
is distinctly possible that one who is educated and has cleared his examination
in one State language may find his posting in another State with an entirely differ-
ent local language. It is equally true that witnesses in every trial, civil or criminal,
give evidence in the local language and even occasionally in local dialects. It
is also true that judicial process requires thorough understanding of the oral evi-
dence given in local language and documents drawn up in local language so as
to render even-handed justice. It follows as a corrollary that a member of the
Indian Judicial Service allocated to a particular State must be proficient and
conversant in the local language. Giving maximum consideration to these genu-
ine apprehensions, could it be said that the language presents an insurmountable
obstacle which must render the concept of Indian Judicial Service impracticable?

Prior to the reorganisation of States in 1956, a composite State like Bombay
comprised three major regions having distinct regional languages such as Marathi,
Gujarati and Kannada. Similarly, the State of Tamil Nadu, then known as the
State of Madras. had large areas speaking different local languages, such as Tamil,
Telugu and Malayalam. Before Bihar was set up as a separate State and Orissa
was carved out from Bengal, the composite State had three principal languages-
Bengali, Hindi and Oriya. Such illustrations can be multiplied. Taking the illus-

1. Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir articles 109, 110. 111, and 113. Articles 109 to 113
have been bodily incorporated from articles 233 to 237 of the Constitution of India.



10

One Hundred Sixteenth Report

tration of the bigger bilingual Bombay and recalling the fact that the proceedings
in the lowest court were always conducted in the local language, the difficulty was
solved by making it obligatory for each member of the subordinate judiciary to
pick up one more language over and above his mother tongue. To illustrate, a
member of the subordinate service having Gujarati as mother tongue had to
learn and pass an examination either in Marathi or Kannada. Later on, it was
obligatory to pass Hindi examination. Such an arrangement also operated in the
then Madras State. This arrangement worked well and a complaint was never
heard that a member of the subordinate judiciary posted in an area where langu-
age other than his mother tongue is spoken, found it difficult to understand the
witness, interpret the document drawn up in local language and render judge-
ment. Members of Indian Civil Service were posted as District and Sessions Judges
till the advent of independence and some of them continued in judiciary even
thereafter. Only fresh induction was stopped. Some of these judges came to be
posted in a State other than their State of birth or education. As Sessions judges,
they had original trial jurisdiction. They heard’ and recorded evidence of wit-
nesses given in local language. They presided over the court having jurisdiction
to hear first appeal. They read, interpreted and dealt with documents drawn up
in local language with overtones of dialects) Never a complaint was heard that
there was miscarriage of justice attributable to the failure of the judge to under-
stand local language other than his mother tongue. Even foreign recruits proved
to be competent judges at that level.

Further, the members of the JAS and IPS are recruited from all over india and
are allocated to States other than the one in which he or she may have been edu-
vated. IAS and IPS officers come in close and direct contact with the masses. As
far as the court proceedings are concerned, ordinarily, there is always a lawyer
to speak for the client. But officers of administrative services will have close con-
tact with masses in rural areas and have to converse directly with them on all
development and welfare projects. They are so trained that they pick up the
local language. Would it then be very difficult for the recruits of 195 to be trained
in the language of the State to which he or she is being allocated? The Govern-
ment of West Bengal, while opposing the proposal for setting up of an All-India
judicial service, conceded that ‘it is true that the question of language does not
present any problem in the case of IAS and IPS officers, but that would not
hold good in respect of all-India judicial service officers because the nature of
work required to be done by the judicial officers is quite different from that of
the IAS and IPS officers. Accuracy of. judicial decisions depends on proper read-
ing, appreciation of documents, the language of which is very different from
the spoken Janguage. Again, recording of oral evidence given in courts in local
language and dialect and proper assessment of it would need thorough know-
ledge of the language which we cannot expect from AIJS officers from other
States” The very statement concedes that language cannot be an insurmountable
difficulty in the way of setting up IJS. The objection on the ground of inadequate
knowledge of local language cannot be summarily dismissed or overlooked as
unsustainable. It must be given due importance. However, picking up one addi-
tional language is not that difficult. Further, it must be remembered that there

_ is always an interpreter like a lawyer in the court providing a link between the

judge and the litigant: there is no such intermediarly in the case of officers of
the administrative services who directly deal with the masses. Therefore, the for-
mation of the Indian Judicial Service cannot be discountenanced on the ground
that the recruits to the Service would not have sufficient or at any rate adequate
knowledge of the local language of the State where he or she is allocated. At
that young age. intensive training that is proposed to be imparted to the recruits
to WS for picking up one more language would certainly provide adzquate and


One Himdred Sixteenth Report

effective knowledge of the local language of the State to which he or she is
allocated.

B. THE MORALE ARGUMENT

The: second ground on which the opposition is founded is that the promo-
tional avenues of the members of the State Judicial Service would be severély
curtailed causing heart-burning and frustration and, in final analysis, impairing
the chances of recruiting bright young persons to the State Judicial Service. A
member of the State Judicial Service who enters at the lowest level, such as.
Munsif ‘Judicial Magistrate First Class/Civil Judge (J.D.) moves vertically up-
wards. Ordinarily, in most of the States, the post of the District and Sessions
Judge is the second stage of promotion. In, Maharashtra and Gujarat, a Civil
Judge (J.D.)/J.M.F.C. is first promoted as Assistant Sessions Judge and Assis-
tant Judge and next gets promotion as District and Sessions Judge. In some
other States, a Munsif Magistrate is promoted as subordinate judge and then
further promoted as Civil and Sessions Judge or Additional Sessiofis Judge and
then promoted as District and Sessions Judge. All-India Judizial Service can be
set up-at the level not below the District Judge as the term is explained in arti-
cle 236. By setting up of the All-India Judicial Service. the promotional ave-
nucs of the members of the lowest cadre are hardly likely to be impaired. Fur-
ther, in mest of the States, there is always a rule for direct recruitment at the
level of District and Sessions Judge. Therefore, all posts in the cadre of Dis-
trict and Sessions Judge in a given State are not available to the promotees from
the lower ranks. The judgment of the Supreme Court of India in O.P. Singla vs.
Union of India’ shows that direct recruitment to the cadre of District Judges
was provided by rules for Delhi Higher Judicial Service. To the extent direct
recruitment takes place in the higher judicial service, the chances of promotion
of the subordinate ranks are proportionately reduced. This position is not likely
to be materially altered when Indian Judicial Service is formed and set up.
Undoubtedly. there will be direct recruitment to that service from fresh law grad-
uates and the Bar, but a high percentage of posts would be reserved for pro-
motion from subordinate State Judicial Service. Also. members of the subordi-
nate State Judicial Service would be entitled to compete by appearing at the
competitive examination for recruitment to Indian Judicial Service. A principle
well established in service jurisprudence should not be overlooked. It is to the
effect that a person already in service is not disqualified from taking examination
for direct recruitment on the ground of being age-barred. Therefore. the -appre-
hension that the formation of Indian Judicial Service will substantially reduce
or impair the promotional avenues of the members cf the subordinate State Judi-
cial Service is wholly unfounded.

C. CONTROL OF HIGH COURT

The third ground of objection was founded on an erroneous belicf that
upon the setting. up of the Indian Judicial Service. the control of the High Court
over district courts and courts subordinate thereto would be impaired or weak-
encd and thereby independence of the judiciary which ‘s already severely cur-
tailed would suffer further erosion. The control of the High Court over district
courts and courts subordinate thereto has become all pervasive. The provisions
contained in Chapter VI. Part VI, of the Constitution are aimed at insulating
the subordinate judiciary and even the officers and servants of the court from
the influence of the executive, The fasciculus of articles—-233-237-—under the
heading. “Subordinate Courts” were designed to save the subordinate judiciary

AIR 1984 SC 1595.

YN


One Hundred Sixteenth Report

from interference from the executive. The expression “control”, as used in article
235, gave rise to a spate of litigation between the State executives and High
Courts which was resolved by the Supreme Court kezping in view the high pur-
pose of the particular provisions. The scope, the content and the width of the
control is expanding from judgment to judgment of the Supreme Court. The
expression, “control” received its flesh, bone and blood from various judgments
of the Supreme Court. The Court held that the scope and ambit of control -vested
in the High Courts under article 235 covers the entire spectrum of administra-
tive control and is not confined merely to general superintendence or to arrang-
ing the day-to-day work of the subordinate courts. Thus, the control envisaged
by article 235 comprehends control over the conduct and discipline of district
judges;' their future. promotions and confirmations’; dispute regarding their sen-
iority:" their transfers:' the placing of their services at the disposal of the
Government for an ex-cadre post: considering their fitness for being retained
in service and recommending their discharge from service:" exercise of complete
disciplinary jurisdiction over them including initiation of disciplinary enquiries;
and their premature retirement.In a later decision, the court held that the
members of the subordinate judiciary are not only under the control of the
High Court but also under the care and custody of the High Court. The exclu-
sion of executive interference in subordinate judiciary, i.e., grassroot justice, can
prove a teasing illusion if the control over them is vested in two masters, namely.
the High Court and the Government. the latter being otherwise stronger. Any
interpretation of administrative jurisdiction of the High Court over its subor-
dinate limbs must be aglow with the thought that separation of the executive
from the judiciary is a cardinal principle of the constitution.” All these decisions
were summarised by the court while interpreting article 222 of the Constitution
which enables the President to transfer a judge of the High Court from one
High Court to any other High Court. The majority. even while conceding that
the power io transfer a High Court Judge vests in the President 2nd is hedged
in with the only condition that the power can be exercised in consultation with
the Chief Justice of India, held that even if the opinion of the Chief Justice
of India may not be binding on the President, it is entitled to a great weight
and is normally 10 be accepted by the Government because the independence of
the judiciary is a fighting faith of our founding document”. Unquestionably,
these decisions spzll out the all pervasiveness of the control of the High Court
over the subordinate judiciary, simultaneously almost totally excluding execu-
tive interference in any overt or covert manner. The fundamental principle on
which these constitutional provisions, as interpreted by the Supreme Court in
its decisions. rest, cannot be allowed to be violated or diluted directly or indirectly
while framing a scheme for setting up Indian Judicial Service.

Members of the Indian Judicial Service wilt be allocated to States. When
posted in the States. they will be subject to article 235 save and except in the
matter of initial recruitment. In the matter of discipline, suspension, etc., the con-
trol of the High Court would remain unimpaired with this difference that while
State of West Bengal vs. Nipendra Nath Bagchi, AR 1966 SC 447

State of Assam vs, Kuseswar Sakia. ATR 1970 SC 1616: and Jogindar Nath vs. Union of
India, AYR, 1975 SC 511.

State of Bihar vs. Madan Mohan Prasad (1976) 1 SCC 529.

State of Assam vs. Ranga Muhammad, AIR 1967 SC 903.

State of Orissa vs. Sudhansu Sekhar Misra. AYR 1968 SC 647,

Ram Gopal Chaturvedi vs. State of Madhya Pradesh (1970) 1 SCR 472.
Punjab and Haryana High Court vs. State of Haryana, ATR 1975 SC 613,
State of Haryana vs. Inder Prakash Anand (1976) 2 SCC 977.

Shamsher Singh vs. State of Punjab, AVR 1974 SC 2192.

Union of India vs. Sankalchand में, Sheth (1977) (4) scc 193.

पा

ee rPNayveay


One Hundred Sixteenth Report

at present it recommends various, things such as promotion or disciplinary
action to the Governor, it would be recommending the same to the
National Judicisi Service Commission which, in turn, would make necessary
recommeadaticn to the President of India but the President of India will act in
the same manner as at present it is done by the Governor having regard to the
almost binding character of the recommendations of the High Court. Therefore.
the apprehension that setting up of ladian Judicial Service would impair the
ventrol of the High Court and, therefore, corrode, independence of the judiciary
is more imaginery than real. On the contrary, when a National Judicial Service
Commissicn is being recommended as part of this very report with power to
deal with probiems of Indian Judicial Service, it is iegitimate to beheve that the
independence cf subcrdinate judiciary would be further strengthened.

Having cxamined all the three limbs of the oppesition independently on
merits, the Ccmmuission remains unconvinced that any one or all of them would
militate agairst the setting up of Indian Judicial Service if i: 1s otherwise needed
and helpful in improving and strengthening the edministration of justice.

3.5. Next to the States, the views of the High Courts in the matter of for-
mation of Indian Judicial Service would be of considerable importance. Amongst
the High Courts which responded to the queries relevant to the question, six
High Courts. that of Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat. Kerala, Bihar
and Rajasthan favoured the formation of the Service. Barring Jammu & Kashmir
High Court. rest of the High Courts in the country have either formally recor
ded their firm opposition to the proposal or have serious apprehensions about
ibility and utility.

Before undertaking an indepth examination of the views of the High
Courts, it would be proper to examine their collective wisdom as expressed in
the latest resolution adopted at the Conference of the Chief Justices convened by
the Chief Justice of India in January, 1985. The Resolution reads as under:—

“This Conference is of the opinion that the constitution of an all-India
judicial service will lead to various practical difficultics and that, there-
fore. such a service should not be constituted: The erosion of the High
Court's salutary control over the subordinate judiciary and its impact
on judicial independence are two of the prime reasons why an all-
India judicial service should not be constituted. It was, however, felt that
it was not possible for the Conference to express more definite opinion
on the proposal in the absence of a fuller Scheme.”

This resolution was conveyed by the Chief Justice of India to the Govern-
ment. Their reservation stems from the apprehended erosion of the control of
the- High Court over the subordinate judiciary exposing them to executive inter-
ference which would run counter to the substantive provisions of the Consti-
tution as well as one of the cardinal features of the Constitution. The approach
lacks justification as pointed out hereinbefore.

Analytical evaluation of the views of High Courts opposing the formation
of the Indian Judicial Service surfaces three broad grounds of cbjection. They
ars: (1) erosion of the control of the High Court corroding judicial independenc:.
(2) uncertainty of the level up to which posts should be included in Indian Judi-
cial Service: and (3) inadequacy of the knowledge of the local language Jikely
to lead to inefficiency in discharge of duty as judicial officer. Ignoring the usual
tendency to oppose any change especially by members of judicial fraternity
haviny 2 preference for so-called certainty and continuity of law, status quo and

3-३ M of L&J/87 *

13


One Hundred Sixteenth Report

stare decisis, the legitimacy or otherwise of the aforementioned three objections
may be examined to determine whether they have any validity.

There is absolutely no justification for apprehending erosion of control of
the High Court as has been succinctly pointed out. In fact, as will be pointed
out later on in this report. the formation of the Service is likely to strengthen
independence of judiciary-

The objection founded on the possible misapprehension about the posts to
be included in the Indian Judicial Service lacks validity because Explanation
to article 236 clearly defines what posts are included in the expression “District
Judge” as din Chapter VI, Part VI, of the Constitution. This provision,
when read with article 312 (3), clearly spells out the level and nature of posts
that can be included in Indian Judicial Service. There is absolmely no uncer-
tainty about this aspect.

One necd not attach any importance to the vague apprehension ot mem-
bers of judicial service who generally manifest a tendency to oppose any change
and, even though they complain about the present malaise in ihe administration
of justice, they would be loathe to take any steps for improving the situation.

It is thus clear that the Commission has not come across any valid and
formidable objections both from the States and the High Courts in the States
against fortnation of Indian Judicial Service.

GENERAL PUBLIC APPREHENSIONS

3.6. There exists a bedy of local public opinjon that any change in the
judicial set up of the country must be concurred in by the States and the High
Courts a3 also members of the legal fraternity, otherwise the change would
be still-born. In Parliamentary democracy, a broad acceptance of any proposal
introducing funcamental changes in age old institution by the vital interests
affected by the change would certainly ensure a smooth transition, yet con-
currence of the States or a majority of them is not an essential prerequisite.
The composition of Rajya Sabha is founded on the principle of adequate cqual
representation to the States. A resolution of the Rajya Sabha supported by not
less than two-thirds of the members present and voting would enabie the Parlia-
ment to enact a legislation for setting up Indian Judicial Service. The very ado-
ption of such a resolution would imply concurrence of a large number of
States. Therefore, in the face of such a resolution; one cannot prescribe con-
currence of States outside the Rajya Sabha as an essential prerequisite for set-
ting up of Indian Judicial Service. Further, the resolution of the Rajya Sabha
backed by requisite majovity would enable the Government to enact legislation
for setting up Indian Judicial Service which legislation again would have to
be passed both in the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha. This constitutional
mechanism ensures concurrence by States expressed through their chosen re-
presentatives. However, during the debate on the resolution for the creation of
the all-India Services of forestry, engineering, medical and health services in
Rajya Sabha in the vear 1961, the then Home Minister, late Shri Lal Bahadur
Shastri, expressed an opinion that one need not take a narrow technical view
of the provision of the Constitution and that after the requisite resolution is
passed, the views of the State Governments concerned should be ascertained
reevant to the question of formation of All-India Services. This view ever
today holds the field. Therefore, despite the constitutional provision, after the
resolution of the Law Ministers’ Conference, very recently the Government of
Inds approached all the State Governments inviting their views and comments
on the question of setting up Indian Judicial Service. The State Governments


One Hundred Sixteenth Report

were informed that they must also obtain the views of the respective High
Courts. Broadly stated the majority of the State Governments and the adminis-
tration of the Union territories and several High Courts favour the creation of
Indian Judicial Service-

3.7. Turning to the response of the ussociations of judicial officers, vehe-
Ment condemnation came trom Rajasthan Judicial Service Officers’ Association.
Its Executive Committee resolution may be reproduced here:-~-

“The fear that the Indian subordinate judiciary is feeling today is that
il pick and choose method is adopted in the matter of absorption vf
existing strength of subordinate judiciary cither by way of higher and
lower judicial service or by way of length of service or by way of selec-
tion from the present strength, it will not only harm the interest of
existing cadre of all States on the day of its formation but will be 4
life-long frustration in the mind of youngest member of the Service who
had entered judicial service in any State with aspiration of better promo-
tional avenues after undergoing tough competitive examination.”

Usually, in every State there is direct recruitment at the level of Gistrict
judge and it is at taat fevel that the Indian Judicial Service is bemg formed.
In scme States, direc: recruitment at the level of district judge is as high as
30", It is, therefore. nct correct to say that the promotion prospects of the
members of the ‘subordinate judiciary would be seriously curtailed on the
formation cf Irdian Judicial Service. As pointed out earlizz, provision wouid
also be made for allowing members of the subordinate judicial service, apart
from getting promotion m their quota, to contest in the ccipet.tive examination.
The approach discloses the status quoist attitude. Apprehending that vociferous
opposition, not founded on substantive grounds, would not carry conviction,
the “Association in ihe alternative suggested that the proposed service at the
time of its initial constitution must absorb and include ail cadres of subordinate
State Judicial Service. In order to overcome the difficulty of integrating lower
judicial service with higher judicial service, the Association suggested a dual
seniority list—one for ali-Incia service and one for State service. The sugges-
tion is ill-conceived and betrays lack of knowledge of the constraints placed by
article 312 (3) which prohibits inclusions of any post inferior in rank to that
of a district judge, as explained in article 236, in the al!-India judicial service.
The remedv suggested, therefore, is unconstitutional and cannot be accepted.

The All India Judges Association favoured the crzation of all-India Judi-
cial service. Drawing sustenance from the views expressed by the Law Com-
mission ip its Fourteenth anc Seventy-seventh Reports, it procceded to state
that all-!ndia judicial scrvice will foster national integraiicn, improve the tone
of judicial! administration in the country, attract meritorious persons to the judi-
cial service and create cenfiderce in the judicial service officers. The Association
is of the view that the premotion prospects, instead of being curtailed, are
likely to be augmented by the setting up of Indian Judicial Service.

3.8. The officers of the Indian Administrative Service who responded to.
the query of the Commission suggested that there should be no separate Indian
Judicial Service examination, but it should be a part of the normal Civil Service
Examination conducted by U.P.S.C. and those who come at the top should
be given an option zither to opt for IAS or IJS. It was further suggested thar
intensive training be imparted to the recruits to JS and during the period sf
training, they should man posts at the lowest level in the hierarchy of judiciary.
In their view, degree in law should not be a pre-requisite for contesting for a



One Hundred Sixteenth Report

pest in IS. This will be considered at the appropriate plac:. Suffice to say thai.
when the practice at the Ber is being dispensed with for entering imo WS, it
would give a rude shock to many as an act of sacrilege if a degree in law
is also dispensed with as a pre-requisite for competing at the examination io
te heli 13 recruit members of IJS.

CHAPTER 1५
POSITIVE APPROACH

4.1. As the control over the district courts and courts subordinate thereto
has been vested by article 235 in the High Court of the State, Judges of the High
Court can be presumed to be well informed about the present position of the
members of the subordinate judiciary manning district courts and courts sub-
ordinate thereto, the problems faced in recruitment, proportion and postings as well
4s a need for change if there be any. The Law Commission, in search of reliable
and trust-worthy information, individually approached Chief Justice of each High
Court and sitting Judges of all Courts in the country requesting each one of them
personally to acquaint the Commission about, inter alia, the necessity, the feasi-
bility, the advisability of setting up all-India judicial service. Further, as Bar
has a vital role to play in moulding judiciary and, therefore. must have an im-
portant say in the matter of recruitment and conditions of service including pro-
motional avenues as also efficiency, integrity and capability of the members
manning the subordinate courts. Accordingly, the Commission addressed de-
tailed letters to the President and Members of the All India Bar Council and
Bar Council of each State. Coupled with this, the Commission also through the
media invited everyone interested in the topic of setting up all-India judicial ser-
vice to send their views and comments to the Commission. It is gratifying 10
note that there was widespread response to the enquiries of the Commission and,
broadly speaking the emergent view favoured formation of all-India judicial
service, While supporting the setting up of All-India judicial service, some re-
tions were expressed which may again be briefly dealt with, The most
familiar and almost common to all responses were—

ser

A. A lurking apprehension that the control conferred by article 235 and
exercised by. the High Court over the subordinate judiciary 15
so pervasive that it insulates subordinate judiciary against executive
interference and any whittling down of this control would corrode
independence of subordinate judiciary;

8. The handicap arising from lack of knowledge of language of the
State in which an outsider is posted when recruitment is on all-India
basis;

C. Posting outside the State would be a disincentive to the’ middle level
senior members of the Bar from accepting. direct recruitment as
district judges which is in vogue in almost all. the States of India: and

D. Recruitment from Hindi speaking belt will dominate the Service.

4.2. The Chief Justice of Calcutta High Court having noticed these appre-
hensions has supplied an effective answer and declared himself wholeheartedly in
favour of setting up Indian Judicial Service. There was a broad measure of ag-
reement with his views. As pointed out earlier, the apprehension about whittling
down the control of the High-Court over subordinate judiciary lacks legitimacy.
Tt would remain intact and undisturbed. Lack of knowledge of jocal language
has been dealt with earlier. Today it is even the declared policy of me Govern-
ment of India concurred in by the Supreme Court of 13: and repeatedly re-



One Hurdied Sixteenth Report

commended by the previous Law Commission that one-third of the Judges of
each High Court should be from outside the jurisdiction.' A policy decision has
been taken that one-third of the total strength of Judges of each High Court shall
be from outside the State in which the High Court is functioning. Divergence
és in respect of methodology of implementation of this decision. It is by transfer
ज at the time of initial recruitment. Further, the policy that the Chief Justice
of each High Court shall be from outside the State is not only accepted but is
being implemented albeit in fits and patches. That apart, it is too late in the day
to worry about some members of the Bar being disinclined to accept judgeship
cither at the level of district judge or at some other level on the sole ground that
he or she may be posted outside the State. We have moved far away from the
halcyon days when persons were appointed from the Bar to the State judiciary in
one’s own State. Possible domination of the Service by the people from the
Hindi speaking belt can be dismissed as mere figment of imagination.

4.3. On the other hand, it is congeded that an all-India service affords
greater attraction to young persons and this will to a considerable extent out-
weigh the supposed disadvantages. The prospects of the higher judicial service
being formed on all-India basis is likely to attract lawyers whose appetite for
study and movement to different parts of the country has not been dulled by
possible prosperity at the Bar. There is still discernible residual idealism
to render service for a noble cause. It is not unknown that exceptionally suc-
cessful lawyers have accepted judgeship at the district judge level and High Court
level,

4.4. Before briefly referring to reservations disclosed by some Judges of the
High Courts, a classic adage about Indian judiciary be recalled. As a general
rule, members of Judiciary in their individual and corporate capacity are averse
to any change. Precedent-oriented legal system and the principle of stare decisis
combine to provide not .only a myopic vision but an inbuilt resistance to any
change. With this background, let us refer to the strong opposition to the con-
cept of all-India judicial service emanating from some of the Judges of the High
Court. It was said that ‘the formation of all-India judicial service will give a
death blow to the State Subordinate Judicial Service. If officers of all-India
judicial seryice will become Chief Judicial Magistrates and District and Sessions
Judges over the State subordinate judicial service officers, the effect will be deva-
stating on the morale of the latter’ Finding that they have no avenues for further
promotion because there is a block created by the all-India judicial service offi-
cers, the lower judiciary will become restless, hopeless and may become corrupt.
This apart, recruitment to the cadre of district judges directly from the Bar is
to be stopped in case of formation of all-India judicial service’. The criticism,
apart from being not well merited, is the outcome of lack of knowledge about
how Indian Judicial Service will be formed, set up and manned. The Service
conceived in this report is one in which there will be direct recruitment through
competitive examination, there will be substantial promotion from State sub-
crdinate judicial service cadres and there will be an opening for direct recruit-
ment from senior and experienced members of the Bar. The best features of
the present situation will be retained and the ugly dispensed with. One other
Judge strongly expressed himself against setting up of the Service. According to
him, ‘there is basic fallacy in equating judiciary with police or administrative
officers where perhaps the principle of “catch them young” may be .advanta-
geous. But in the administration of justice, experience and knowledge of law
and correct perspective is required. The formation of Indian Judicial Service is
the thin end of a political wedge by which the judicial service may be brought

1, Law Commission of India. Eightieth Report, Chapter 6, Para 6:21, ए, 25.


One Hundred Sixteenth Report

under political control and deprive the High Courts of the same. It will sound
the death knell of an independent subordinate judiciary. Thus independent and
cogent objections are grouped together. The first is ‘catch them young’ slogan is
unsuited to a service where experience and knowledge of law and correct pers-
pective is a must. Senior well placed members of the Bar are reluctant to accept
judicial services a fact universally accepted. Service with poor or inadequate
salary is hardlv attractive to a Jawyer who has started earning because he is
aware that sky is the limit. This is true of every layer of judicial service. If ex-
perienced lawyer is impervious to judicial service or social accountability, why not
catch people young and give them intensive training. A short practice hardly
trains effectively. If, on the other hand, as is contemplated herein, intensive
preservice training is given to the fresh young recruits, they will turn out to
be better judges. There are countries in which practice at the Bar is not a
pre-requisite or essential qualification to be eligible to become a Judge.! Un-
doubtedly. in common law countries practice at the Bar is a must to bea judge
at any level. But experience shows that practice for a very short period say
{cr a period of two to three years at the Bar hardly imparts such training so as
to make him a good judge. .

Second and mare formidable objection is that formation of Indian Judicial
Service is the thin end of a political wedge by which judicial service may, by
a covert operation, be brought under political control. Is the State Judicial
Service exposed to this possibility? If the answer is in the negative, it would
all the more be impossible to penetrate political interference at all-India level.
However. one can guard against this threat effectively by retaining the effective
control of the High Court and setting up National Judicial Service Commission
which is an integral part of the scheme.

CHAPTER V
JUSTIFICATION FOR SETTING UP
INDIAN JUDICIAL SERVICE

5.1. The question that must now be posed is whether, having regard to the
cxisting situation, four decades after the decision was taken to leave judicial
service below the High Court to be handled by the States, a situation has
arisen which calls for a radical departure from the existing pattern and provide
for setting up a judicial service on an all-India basis. Commencing from the
year 1958. and continued through. experts have consistently opined that in
order to improve, tone up and raise the level, it is in the interest of the system
that an all-India judicial service, called the Indian Judicial Service, be establish-
cd. This expert opinion carries its own weight and formidable arguments
and unanswerable objections will have to be advanced to negate this view.

“Having regard to the present state of the judicial service below the High Court,

the malaise that has set in, the inadequacy of the talent being attracted, vary-
ing conditions of service from State to State, unattractive conditions of service
and ineffective voice of the High Court in the matter of recruitment, failure of
Public Service Commissions on this front, utter and total antipathy of State
Governments have contributed in no uncertain measure to the falling standards
in the State Judicial Service. Available evidence shows that they are totally
dissatisfied with the existing situation. Silent march of civil judges and metro-
politan magistrates in the capital not long ago is a grim reminder of the situa-
tion. Occassionally one hears of strike by them also. How do you repair or
improve the situation? If the situation is allowed to stagnate, as the law

Judiciary in France by David Annoussamy, Vol. 8 (1981) JBCI 296.

Law Commission of India, Fourteenth Report, Vol. 1. Chapter IX, Para 59, P. 184.

Law. Commission of India. Seventy-seventh Report, Chapter 1X, Para 9.6 and 9.68.
pp. 32-33. .

ep


One Hundred Sixteenth Report

stands today, States alone will be competent to repair or improve the rot.
They are shown to be indifferent. Any expense on State Judicial Service will
be classified as non-plan. non-productive expense even though millions are
collected as court fees.’ Law and justice project into the lives of all segments
of society from bottom to top. Therefore. a national approach and perspective
is a must. Futile litigation is time consuming and an unproductive expenditure
luxury. The structure of judiciary has to some extent contributed to this un-
desirable situation. A fresh look from broader national perspective is. pre-
eminently necessary. If other services were organised on all-India basis for
acquiring definite improvement in efficiency and productivity of service, why not
judiciary by which everyene is vitally affected ? If administrative service, police
service, forest service. medical service. engineering service, accounts and audit
service, etc., could be more effectively organised on an all-India level, one fails
to find adequate justification for not attempting to organise judicial service on
all-India basis. Further, the cost benefit structure clearly tilts the balance in
favour of all-India service. The objections against setting up the same which
are merely repetitious in character have been effectively answered earlier
and fully dealt with hereinbefore. The benefits flowing from the constitution of
judicial service on all-India basis would far outweigh some minor adjustments
that may have to be made. Having. therefore, regard to all the aspects of the
matter, the Commission is of the firm view that the judicial service within the
parameters of article 312(3), ic.. at the level of district judge, as the term is
defined by an inclusive definition in article 236 below the High Court in each
State which is at present called State Judicial Service must be organised on an
all-India basis. meaning thereby a service common to States and the Union and
10 be styled as Indian Judicial Service.

PRELIMINARY STEPS FOR THE CONSTITUTION OF SERVICE

5.2, While accepting that the independence of the Judiciary is a cardinal
feature of our Constitution and therefore the framers of the Constitution took
adequate and effective steps for insulating judiciary from outside pressures and
interference, yet in the matter of judiciary subordinate to the High Court, it
was not given effective protection in Part VI, Chapter VI. of the Constitution which
deals with subordinate courts. The assumption underlying the sketchy pro-
visions is that the High Court would stand as a bulwark against any attempts
at undermining the independence of subordinate judiciary. In fact the fiesh and
blood have been infused into the skeleton provisions of articles 233, 234, 235
and 236 by numerous decisions of the Supreme Court of India. One view was
that even a provision with regard to setting up Indian Judicial Service with all
its ramifications should have found its place in Part VI, Chapter VI, of the
Constitution. Be that as it may. time has now come to take all effective and
concrete steps towards setting up Indian Judicial Service.

Article 233 provides that appointments of persons to be, and the posting
and promotion of, district judges in any State shall be made by the Governor
of the State in consultation with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in rela-
tion to such State. Article 233 (2) provides that a person not already in service
of the Union or of the State shall only be eligible to be appointed a district
judge if he has been for not less than seven years an advocate or a pleader and
is recommended by the High Court for appointment. Article 234 provides that
appointments of persons other than district judges to the judicial service of a
State shall be made by the Governor of the State in accordance with rules made
by him in that behalf after consultation with the State public Service Commis-
sion and with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State.

1. Material collected by the Government of India to examine the proposal for abolition
of court fees,


One Hundred Sixteenth Report

Both these articles will have to be suitably amended to provide for setting up
of Indian Judicial Service. Article 234 will have to be amended for removal of
State Public Service Commission even in the matter of appointment to State
Judicial Service. Let it be recalled that the amendment would be by an ordi-
nary law as article 312(4) ensures that the law providing for the creation of an
all-India judicial service as per the resolution of the Rajya Sabha may contain
such provisions for the amendment of Chapter VI, Part VI, as may be neces-
sary for giving effect to the provisions of that law and no such law shall be
deemed to be an amendment of the Constitution for the purposes of article 368:

Article 233 and 234 would need suitable amendments to provide for setting
up of Indian Judicial Service, its initial constitution, further recruitment and a
body charged with a duty to take steps for future recruitment to the Service.
Articte 23. will have to be amended to confer power on the President to
appoint members of Indian Judicial Service on the recommendation of Na-
tional Judicial Service Commission. Article 234 will have to be amended
for the purpose first indicated herein above.

INITIAL CONSTITUTION OF SERVICE

5.3. In view of the provision contained in article 31209), the oft-repeated
suggestion that the Indian Judicial Service should include two tiers of service
from grassroot to that of the district judge must be rejected as untenable.
Article 31203) bars inclusion of any post in Indian Judicial Service inferior to
that of a district judge as defined in article 236. Therefore, at the time of
initial constitution of the Service, the existing posts which are comprehended
in the expression ‘district judge’, as defined in article 236, can alone be taken
into consideration for inclusion in Indian Judicial Service. The expression
‘district judge’ has been defined in article 236(a) to read as under: —

‘the expression “district judge” includes judge of a city civil court, addi-
tional district judge, joint district judge, assistant district judge. chief
judge of a small cause court, chief presidency magistrate, additional
chief presidency magistrate, sessions judge. additional sessions judge
and assistant sessions judge’.

Designation of various layers of judicial service up to the cadre of district
judge differ from State to State. However, most of the States have divided
State Judicial Service into what are designated as higher or superior judicial
service and subordinate or lower State judicial service. In most of the States,
entry at the grassroot level is to the cadre of munsif or district munsif (as in
Tamil Nadu) and Civil Judge (Junior Division) (as in Maharashtra and Guja-
rat). As the proposed Indian Judicial Service will have also promotional quota
from the State Judicial Service. it is absolutely necessary to rationalise the desi-
gnations and cadres in judicial service below the Indian Judicial Service. It
may be designated as State Judicial Service. Having regard to earlier recom-
mendation.?. the entry cadre in State Judicial Service should be desig-
nated as Civil Judge (Junior Division) and Judicial Magistrate first class.
In this cadre, the incumbent will have pecuniary jurisdiction on the civil
side not exceeding Rs. 20.000 and on the criminal side will have all the powers
conferred on judicial Magistrate First Class by the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973. If pecuniary limit is considered a legacy of the past. the other way to
organise and prescribe jurisdiction is to specify heads of disputes amenable to
the jurisdiction of the incumbent in service at entry level leaving the rest to the
first promotional stage court. The next promotional stage should be Civil

1. Law Commission of India, Fourteenth Report, Vol. 1, Chapter IX, Para 21, P. 169.


One Hundred Sixteenth Report

Judge (Senior Division)/a Judge of the Small Causes Court/Metropolitan
Magistrate. The designation would be functional depending upon the .assign-
ment of work in the scheme of things. The posts with the aforementioned
designations will be comprehended in the service to be designated State Judi-
cial Service.

The posts bearing the designation District Judge, Assistant District Judge.
Chief Judge of Smal! Causes Court. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate; Sessions
Judge. Additional Judge. and Assistant Sessions Judge will be comprehended
and included in Indian Judicial Service. These are functional designations
drawn from various statutes like the Code of Civil Procedure, the Code of
Criminal Procedure, the Presidency and Provincial: Small Causes Courts Act
etc.

The law to be enacted pursuant to the resolution of Rajya Sabha for
setting up Indian Judicial Service will specify a date, to be styled as appointed
date. on which day Indian Judicial Service will be constituted. At the time of
the initial constitution of the Service, persons holding posts in higher judicial
service :n vaious States. and, where no such designation as higher judicial
service exists, all those persons holding the posts having the designation sct out
in article 236, or their equivalent posts. will be included in Indian Jndicial
Service. They will all become members of Indian Judicial Service from the
date of initial constitution. In the event of a dispute or disagreement about
equivalence of posts, the matter should be referred to the National. Judicial
Service Commission whose decision will be final.

There were suggestions that a screening committee should be set up even
in respect of those who are members of the State higher judicial service or
hoiding the posts having various designations as set out in article 236 to screen
such persons to weed out the incompetent and unsuitable. That would neces-
sarily create heart-burning in view of the fact that such persons must have
already reached the stage by promotion and have become members of the
higher judicial service where such designations exist. Where no such designa-
tions exist. our scrutiny shows that the holders of designated posts as set out
in article 236 have come usually by a second stage of promotion. Therefore,
at the time of initial constitution of service. no screening need be done. In
order to facilitate movement from State Judicial Service to Indian Judicial
Service. it is advisable to retain the designations of various posts included in
the expression “district judge” as set out in article 236 save and except chang-
ing Chief Presidency Magistrate and Additional Chief Presidency Magistrate’
to mean Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and Additional Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate respectively. All States thereafter will have common designations
for posts included in Indian Judicial Service as set out in article 236. Neces-
sary provisions will be incorporated in the legislation for setting up Indian
Judicial Service. This will also determine the initial strength of the Service
being the sum total of members holding posts included in the expression
“district judge". who would become members of Indian Judicial Service.

The strength can be varied in future depending upon the needs of the Service
by the President of India who would undertake a review of the strength and the
needs of Service at regular interval of five years in consultation with National
Judicial Service Commission. Review must be statewise and cadre strength
of each State must be determined depending upon’ various factors such as work-
load. rate of disposal. arrears and average time taken in disposal of causes and
controversies.

1. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, sec. 6.
4-3 M of 1,&1/87


22

One Hundred Sixteenth Report

FUTURE RECRUITMENT TO SERVICE

5.4. Every State has framed and promulgated rules for recruitment to the”
State Judicial Service. In view of the provision contained in article 234, ordi-
narily recruitment is made to the entry cadre at the lowest level in State Judicial
Service by the State Government in consultation with the Public Service Commis-
sion as ulso in consultation with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation
to,such State. The State Judicial Service provides vertical promotion up to,
and inclusive of, the post of district judge. In every State, there is some kind
of direct recruitment to the post of District Judge. The percentage of direct
recruitment to the total strength of the cadre of district judge varies from State
to State. But cases are not unknown where such direct recruitment to the
cadte of district judge is as high as 50°. In any case, in no State it is lower than
257, It would be highly unjust and iniquitous to provide for direct recruit-
ment by competitive examination to the tune of 100% in the Indian Judicial
Service. Such an approach would be destructive of the State Judicial: Service
and it would be a disincentive to anyone joining State Judicial Service. While
examining the relevance and the pertinence of the objections that the very for-
mation of Indian Judicial Service would be causing frustration to the members
of the subordinate judicial service, it was indicated that a fair proportion of
the posts in Indian Judicial Service would be reserved for promotion from mem-
bers of the State Judicial Service.. It is. therefore, imperative to ascertain a
just and fair proportion cf percentage of posts to be reserved for being filled
in from the sources, namely. direct recruitment by competitive examination and
promotion from Staté Judicial Service. While working out the fair proportion,
a singular feature of the judicial service, namely, that some senior members of
the Bar are directly recruited as district judges must be kept in view. This
source of availability of experienced members of the Bar to man posts of dis-
trict judges and thereby to enrich the service should be kept open. According-
ly. we will have to take into account this third source of recruitment. How-
ever. as a fairly high percentage of posts in Indian Judicial Service are being
reserved for direct recruitment by competitive examination, the percentage of
posts to be reserved for direct recruitment from experienced members of the Bar
as district judges should be worked out by keeping in view the existing situation
in various States. While meticulously examining this question of division of
posts for recruitment from three independent sources with some anxiety, we
came upon various suggestions in this behalf. A draft scheme for constitution
of all-India judicial service proposed by the Government of India to the Con-
ference of Chief Ministers. Law Ministers and Chief Justices of High Courts
convened by the Ministry of Law and Justice proposed that 50%, of the sanc-
tioned strength of posts in Indian Judicial Service should be filled in by direct
recruitment by competitive examination and the remaining 500, by promotion
from State Judicial Service. This arithmetic of equal division between twa
services overlooks the existing fact that why State has provided for direct recruit-
ment to the cadre of District Judge from the experienced and senior mem-
bers of the Bar. Such experienced members are not likely to appear at com-
petitive examination. This fruitful source of recruitment would be dried up
if this scheme is accepted as a whole. The scheme proposed by the High
Court of Himachal Pradesh presided over by Chief Justice. Shri P. D. Desai,
who submitted a detailed note in this behalf. suggested that 50% of the total
strength of posts in Indian Judicial Service should be filled jn by promotion
from the members of the State Judicial Service: 25% of the posts by competi-
tive examination and 25% by selection from amongst members of the Bar.
This approach strikes at the very raison d'etre of setting up Indian, Judicial
Service. The whole plrpose behind setting up of Indian Judicial Service is

1. In the State of West Bengal direct recruitment bas been done away with by statute.



One Hundred Sixteenth Report

to attract to the judiciary capable young graduates fresh from universities, from
all over the country so that the cream of talented men being drawn into admi-
nistrative service may find an attractive diversion to Indian Judicial Service.
‘They will be free from local prejudices, caste and community divisions and local
attachments. The suggestion that only 25%, of the posts should be available
to young talented fresh graduates for recruitment to Indian Judicial Service
leaving 75५, to the present method of recruitment would not create an impact
solely needed for rejuvenating the subordinate judicial service. The genesis
of this suggestion appears to be that in LAS 75५, of the posts are filled in on
the result of competitive examination ‘leaving 251%, of posts to be filled in by
promotion from State Civil Service. Law Commission of India recommended
that 40". of the posts should be reserved for direct recruitment. by competitive
examination and of the remaining 60%, 30% of the posts should be filled in
by promotion from the members of the State Judicial Service and the balance
of 30%, of posts should be filled by direct recruitment from the members of the
Bar of sufficient seniorjty and standing’. Numerous different proportions have
been suggested in this behalf such as 66-2/3% by promotion, 33-1/3% by
direct recruitment by Chief Justice of Calcutta High Court.

Having regard to all the aspects of the matter and to strike a just balance
between competing interests, the Commission is of the view that 40% of the
sanctioned strength of posts in Indian Judicial Service shall be filled in by direct
recruitment on the result of a competitive examination to be held by a body
styled as National Judicial Service Commission. Of the remaining 60% of
posts, 40‘. shall be filled in by promotion from the State Judicial Service to be
made on the recommendation of the High Court keeping in view the quota of
posts allotted to each State by the National Judicial, Service Commission. The
remaining 20%, of posts shall be filled in by direct recruitment from amongst
senior and experienced members of the Bar who have put in not less than seven
years of practice on the recommendation of the High Court of each State by
the Naional Judicial Service Commission.

Rigid adherence to quota rule has caused untold harm to the — services:
Flexibility in this behalf is the need of the day. Therefore the law for setting
up Indian Judicial Service must provide that the quota prescribed must be ad-
hered to as far. as possible keeping in view the exigencies of service. If the
quota alletted to a source remains unutilised, recruitment be made from the
remaining sources raising the quota proportionately for the year. At any rate
carry forward of vacancies must be avoided.

Recruitment to Indian Judicial Service is thus to be from three sources: —
(1) direct recruitment by competitive examination to the extent of 40%,
of sanctioned strength; -
(2) promotion from State Judicial Service to the extent of 40°, of the
sanctioned strength;

(3) recruitment from senior experienced members of the Bar who have
put in not less than seven years of practice to the exient of 205.

DIRECT RECRUITMENT

5.5. 40°,. of the posts in Indian Judicial Service shal be filled in by direct
recruitment on the result of a competitve examination and viva voce test.
National Judicial Service Commission will make all arrangements for holding «

1. Law Commission of India, Fourteenth Report, Vol. I, Chapter IX, para 67, p, 187


24

De पाए S$ (१22३ है Report

competitive examination year to year. Anyone who has been awarded a degree
in law by a recognised university will be eligible to appear at the cxamination-
At present. subject to the universities which have introduced five years’ course
after higher secondary examination, anyone can obtain a degree in law after he
has graduated in any discipline. In fact, there are two facets of a law degrec.
A two years’ course after graduation enables one to obtain’a general degree
in law but this does not qualify the person for practising as 4 lawyer. In order
to qualify for being enrolled as an advocate, one has also to obtain a degree after
one more year’s course, called special degree in law. Till the introduction of
five years’ course by Bar Council of India, anyone desiring 10 acquire a degree
in law enabling him to enrol as an advocate, had to pass Secondary School Cer-
tificate Examination, and take up three years’ degree course in any discipline,
and thereafter three years’ law degree course. He had thus to spend six years
alter passing Higher Secondary School Examination, The new curriculum
introduced by the Bar Council of India provides for a five ye: degree course
after higher secondary examination for obtaining a degree in law. He saves
one year in new dispensation. Anyone who has obtained a degree in law, in
second ciass, wiil be eligible to appear at the competitive examination to be
held for recruitment to Indian Judicial Service. In recommending eligibility
criterion as merely a degree in law, in second class, which itself is a minimum
qualifying standard, we are not unmindful of the suggestion of an outstanding
legal academic that a first class in degree of law should be the minimum qualifi-
cation. There was another suggestion. that the candidate must have a Master’s
degree in law before he should be considered eligible for taking a competitive
examination. While these are weighty suggestions which would bring in higher
talent, we fear that the field of choice would hereby be unduly curtailed making
the choice rather difficult. Even in competitive examination as LA.S. and
LP.S., the eligibility criterion’ is the graduate’s degree. Therefore, while we
appreciate the anxiety of persons who made the suggestions, we would like to
prescribe a second class degree in law as eligibility criterion.

In the schéme of things, a reasonably intelligent person would be able to
acquire degree in law at the age of 22 years. There is nothing objectionable
in permitting him to appear at the competitive examination. But an upper age
limit must be fixed beyond which no one would be eligible 10 appear at the exami-
nation. Having regard to all the circumstances of the case, the upper age limit
should be fixed at 30 years. The Government, in consultation with National
Judicial Service Commission will issue orders made for the benefit of scheduled
castes, scheduled tribes, women and other handicapped classes with regard 10
relaxation in upper age limit, reservation in service and allied matters.

RECRUITMENT BY PROMOTION

5.6. Members of the State Judicial Service who have put in not less than ten
years of service would be eligible for being considered for promotion to Indian
Judicial Service. Depending upon the sanctioned strength of the Indian Judicial
Service for each State, 40%, of the posts shall be filled in by promotion from

* State Judicial Service. In order to select eligible persons for promotion, a small

committee of two persons from amongst the members of the National Judicial
Service Commission will be set up for each State. To this committee, the
Chicf Justice of the High Court having jurisdiction in the State wherein candi-
dates are to be selected for promotion will be co-opted. The promotion will
be on the basis of a written test and viva voce examination. The written test
shall be conducted on an all-India basis. The committee as herein indicated
will conduct the viva voce test. At one stage it was suggested that the High
Court of the concerned State should be charged wih a duty 10 make recommen-
dation. Without any disrespect, this approach is likely to attract the criticism


One Hundred Sixteenth Report

that it may have the inbuilt tendency to promote regionalism and parochialism
and, even in some: Status, casteism. In order to put the matter beyond the pale
of controversy, the viva voce test should be conducted by the commitee as here-
in indicated. The annual confidential reports maintained by the High Court
of each State for the members of the State Judicial Service shall also be taken
into consideration. On a combined reading of the performance at the written
test. viva voce and the annual confidentia! reports, thie candidates would be
selected for promotion to Indian Judicial Service. Unless a case of outstand-
ing merit is made out, those selected at one time would retain their inter se
seniority as in the cadre from which they are being promoted.

DIRECT RECRUITMENT FROM THE BAR

5.7, The remaining 20% of the posts in Indian Judicial Service shall be
filled in from amongst the senior and expetienced members of the Bar who have
put in not less than seven years of practice at the Bar. Though ‘this is the
constitutional requirement, selection from this area should desirably be confined
to those who have put in practice at the Bar for a period of ten years and
above. The selection should be made by interview to be conducted by the
committee as recommended in the just preceding paragraph.

In the matter of selection from the Bar, one suggestion made was that the
upper age limit should be fixed at 50 years. In our opinion, for recruitment
from this source. upper age limit is not required to be fixed. If an experienced
senior member of the Bar is willing to become a member of the Indian Judicial
Service at any age. there is no reason why he should be disqualified on the
ground of being too old. Maturer the experience, better would be the service
tendered by him. But at any rate, those below 35 years of age should ordi-
narily not be selected as direct recruits from the Bar to the Indian Judicial
Service.

In prescribing the period of practice and the age, what has weighed with
us is that when recruitment is from three different sources, there must not be such
disparity in age while entering the service as to provide a fertile field of unfair
competition for promotion to the next higher office of a High Court Judge,

INFRASTRUCTURE FOR HOLDING EXAMINATION

5.8. The next aspect which must engage our attention is about the body to
be charged with a duty not only to hold the examination but to be ‘wholly res:
pousible for all the aspects of effectively implementing the scheme of introducing
aud managing the service. Union Public Service Commission. having the

expertise to hold examinations for various all-India services, was, according

to some persons. quite competent to undertake this task. One view was that
the examination for recruitment to Indian Judicial Service must not be separetly
held but it must be a part of the examination to be held for recruitment to 185
and allied services with some special subjects in law.

Judicial service has a speciality of its own. — It is not a service, it is a way
of life. It has been conceded on all hands that those who have served the
judiciary are pre-eminently suited to participate in the process of recruitment
to judiciary. Even though article 234 of the Constitution provides that recruit-
ment to judicial service of a State other than the cadre of district judge shall be
made by the Governor after consultation with the Public Service Commission and
the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State, it has been judi-
cially noticed that even where the power to recommend persons for recruitment
to State Judicial Service vests in the Public Service Commission, usually at’ the

35


26

One Hundred Sixteenth Report

time of selecting candidates for State Judicial Service, the Public Service Com-
mission invites a sitting or retired Judge of the High Court as an expert and
the advice given by such expert High Court Judge who also participates in the
viva voce test is generally accepted. However, cases are not unknown where
this advice is sometimes ignored. The Supreme Court frowned upon this
departure by observing that such practice is undesirable and does not. commend
to the Supreme Court({) ‘The court recommended that when selections to the
judicial service are being made. a sitting judge of the High Court to be nominat-
ed by the Chief Justice of the State should be invited to participate in the inter-
View as an expert and since such sitting judge comes as an expert who by reason
of the fact that he is a sitting High Court judge knows the quality and character
of the candidates appearing for the interview, the advice given by him should
ordinarily be accepted unless there are strong and cogent reasons for not acept-
ting such advice and such strong and cogent reasons must be recorded in writing
by the Chairman. and members of the Public Service Commission. The Sup-
reme Court gave a direction to the Public Service Commissions in every State
that the finest talent should be recruited to the judicial service and that can be
secured only by having a real expert (sitting judge of the High Court) whose
advice constitutes a determinative factor in the selective process. In the matter
of selection of members of the Bar to be appointed as district judges, the High
Court has a preponderent voice as required by article 233. It need not be
recalled that article 217 accords the place of preeminence to the Chief Justice
of the High Court and the Chief Justice of India. in the matter of selection of
High Court Judges. Finally, in the matter of appointment of a judge of the
Supreme Court. the power is conferred on the President to appoint a person
as a Judge of the Supreme Court after consultation with such of the Judges of
the Supreme Court and of the High Courts in the States as the President may
deem necesary and that in the matter of appointment of any Judge of the Sup-
reme Court except Chief Justice of India, the latter shall always be consulted.
(See article 124 of the Constitution) It cannot, therefore, be gainsaid that in
the matter of appointment to judicial service, personnel manning the judiciary
at various levels have not only a decisive voice but they are considered pre-emi-
nently suitable for this task. Once therefore: the function to hold competitive
examination for direct recruitment to Indian Judicial Service is handed over to
Union Public Service Commisison, this pre-eminence would be displaced or
abrogated. Only non-judicial personne! would be recommending persons for
recruitment to judiciary which would run counter to the spirit of the Constitution
(articles 124, 217, 233 and 235). Therefore, it is absolutely indispensable that
a body composed of judges, lawyers and legal academics should be charged
with a duty to conduct examinations to hold viva vuce test for recruitment to
Indian Judicia) Service. Such a body. when formed, can be charged with a
duty to look after the management of the service also. It is, therefore, recom-
mended that National Judicial Service Commission should conduct the exami-
nation.

For holding the examination. the Nationa) Judicial Service Commission
shajl draw up_a_ syllabus. While leaving the prescription of the detailed
syllabi to such a body. of experts composing the National Judicial Service Com-
mission, broadly it must be stated that the same should include papers on—

(a) Constitution of India:

(b) sociology of law and inter-disciplinary correlations;

1, Ashok Kumar Yadav vs. State of Haryana (1985) 45 C C417.
2. Ibid., 9. 457.


One Hundred Sixteenth Report

(c) procedure—vivil and criminal:

(0) legal aid:

(e) goals of justice system, conciliation: methodology and — expeditious
resolution of disputes. and participatory justice:

(f) Judicial discretion, sentencing procéss, interim orders; costs, anc

(g) modern court management techniques and inter-relation with jail. |
- bails, Bar, social activists and legal educational institutions.

This list is illustrative and not exhaustive. Those who qualify at the written
test by obtaining 60°, of the total marks would be eligible for being called for
viva voce test which shall be of 100 marks. On the combined result of the
written test and the viva voce test. a merit list must be drawn up.

SCALES OF PAY

5.9. The Service shall consist of two scales—the senior scale and the junior
scale.

A. Senior Scale.—-The holders of the following posts shall be eligible for
the senior scale:—
(i) District and Sessions Judge:
(ii) Joint/ Additional District and Sessions Judge: and
(iii) (a) Chief/ Principal Judge of City Civil Court:

(b) Additional Chief/Additional Principal Judge of City Civil
Court and

(c) Judge of the Civil Court.

B. Junior Scale—The holders of the following shall be in the junior
scale:—

(i) Assistant Judge and Assistant Sessions Judge:
(ii) Chief / Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate: and
(iii) Chief Judge, Small Causes Court.

All persons recruited to the Indian Judicial Service upon the result of a
competitive examination shall be placed in the junior scale initially.. Those
recruited by promotion to Indian Judicial Service from the State Judicial Service
and those directly recruited from amongst the senior and experienced members
of the Bar upon the recommendation of the High Court shall be placed in the
senior scale.

National Judicial Service Commission shall devise the senior and the junior
scales of pay for the members of the Indian Judicial Service keeping in view the
comparable scales in the Indian Administrative Service and in no case they
shall be lower than comparable scales in the Indian Administrative Service or
Central Civil Service. Class 1, whichever is higher.

INITIAL POSTING

5.10. While a detailed scheme for the training of the persons recruited to
Indian Judicial Service upon the result of a competitive examination is being


28

One Hundred Sixteenth Report

prescribed in a separate report to be submitted just following the present one
in order to acquaint them fully with the methodology of work and decision
making process in every post of judicial service functionally so designated as
to make them fully eligible to be appointed substantively as District and Sessions
Judge, it is necessary that a direct recruit on completion of his pre-service train-
ing. should be successively posted and required to work as under:—

(1) the first posting should be as munsif/sub-judge (junior division)-cum-
judicial magistrate for a period of two years:

(2) at the second stage, they must be posted as civil judge (senior divi-
sion)/metropolitan magistrate or judge of the small causes court’ for
a period of two years, and

(3) thereafter, they must’ be posted as assistant judge and assistant
sessions judge/chief metropolitan magistrate/chief judge. small causes
court for a period of three years.

At the end of first year, they must be required to pass local language test
to be held by the High Court. National Judicial Service Commission will pres-
cribe number of opportunities to be given for passing the test.

After a service of first four years. these direct recruits who are working in
the junior scale should be promoted to the senior scale.

SENIORITY

5.11. Detailed rules for determining inter se seniority of the members of
the Indian Judicial Service will have to be formulated by the National Judicial
Service Commission keeping in view the broad principles generally judicially
accepted. Some Chief Justices suggested that the seniority of the members
appointed to the Service at its initial constitution shall be fixed in accordance
with the date of entry into State Judicial Service, whether on an ad hoc, tem-
porary or officiating capacity. subject to the rule of continuous  officiation.
This approach leaves many areas uncovered. Tt is founded on the assumption
that the members of the Indian Judicial Service will have enly State level senio-
rity. Tt is implicit in an all-India service that it will have an all-India seniority.
Some broad outlines governing the rules of inter se seniority may be accordingly
indicated :---

(1) At the time of initial constitution of the service. the inter se seniority
of members of State Judicial Service who have become members
of the Indian Judicial Service shall be retained without any distur-
bance: °

(2

While integrating those members of the State Judicial Service coming
from different States who would become members of the Indian
Judicial Service at the time of initial constitution, the inter se senio-
tity of all such persons shal! be regulated by the date of holding
the post which enables each one of them to become members of the
Indian Judicial Service subject to the rule of continuous officiation:

GB

Persons who officiate in the post which is included in the Indian
Judicial Service at the time of its initial Constitution from the same date
will have inter se seniority regulated by age, the older becoming senior
to the younger. In the case of a tie even in this situation, the National
Judicial Service Commission will prescribe criterion for inter se
seniority; . .



One Hundred Sixteenth Report

(4) Persons appointed by direct recruitment from the senior and experien-
ced members of the Bar shall always be senior to the promotees and
direct recruits of that year. Their inter se seniority will be determin-
ed by the merit list prepared by National Judicial Service Commission
according to merit;

(5) Inter se seniority of promotees from State Judicial Service will be
regulated according to the place assigned. in the select list by the
National Judicial Service Commission which will regulate placement
according to merits. In the event of two candidates being found
equal, the date of entry in the State Judicial Service will regulate
inter se seniority. In the event af date being common, the age will
determine seniority: and

(6) Persons recruited as a result of the competitive examination in a
given year shall as a bloc be junior to promotees from the State Judi-
cial Service in the year in which examination is held.

Having broadly indicated the principles - governing seniority and leaving
10 the proposed National Judicial Service Commission to draw up detailed
rules governing infer se seniority, it would be worthwhile to point out that the
rules shoul! conform to the judicial dicta as laid down in A. Janardhan vs.
Union of India, ? P. 5. Mohal vs. Union of India’ 0. P. Singla vs. Union of
ladia, *G. 4. Lamba vs, Union of India*+ and the recent judgment in Narender
Chadha & Others vs. Union of India & others’ Broadly they lay down that
unless exigencies of service require, a person already rendering service, may
be as a promotee te a cadre in which a direct recruit comes much later, the
promotee should not be made to go down below late coming direct recruit.
Cases ate not unknown where a promoiee who has been regularly promoted to
the cadre had to yield his place in seniority to the later direct recruit, who at
that time may be a schoolean if not in embryo, by the unjust and iniquitable
application and interpretation of rules. It was succinctly po‘nted out that the
time has come to recast’ service jurisprudence on more just and equitable foun-
dation. While making the rules for the proposed Indian Judicial Service, care
must be taken not to comit the error over again.

PROBATION

5.12. Every person recruited to Indian Judicial Service either by way
of direct recruitment on the result of a competitive examination or by promo-
tion from State Judicial Service shall be put on probation for a period of
two years. In the case of direct recruit from the senior and experienced mem-_
bers of the Bar, the per'od of probation should not extead over one year. ता
would be open to the National Judicial Commission to extend the period of pro-
bation upon a report of the High Court under whom the concerned person
is working for a period not exceeding two years. .

A probationer may be discharged from service or reverted to his sub-
stantive post, as the case may be,—

(1) if he fails to pass the departmental examination, if any, within the
prescribed attempts on the completion of his training period but
before the expiry of. the extended period of probation, if any;

(1983) 3 SCC 601.
(1984) 4 SCC 545,
(1984) 4 SCC 450,
(1985) 2 SCC 604

(1986) 2 SCC 157,

yaeepr

5—3 M of L&J/87


One Hundred Sixteenth Report

(2) upon a report of the High’ Court under whom he is posted certify-
ing that the probationer concerned lacks character and integrity
and acts in a manner ufbecomitig of a judicial officer or has not
the requisite capacity to discharge the functions of his office.

The probationer shall be discharged upon an order made by the Presi-
dent of India upon the recommendation of the National Judicial Service .Com-
mission which would be entitled to collect every material requis.te for reach-
ing the decision one way or the other from the High Court under whom the
probationer has been posted and has worked.

TRAINING.

5.13. Term No. 5 of the Terms of Reference in the context of studying
judicial reforms requires the Law Commission to prescribe a course of train-
ing for judicial officers. The Law Commission hopes to submit, closely fol-
low.ng this report, a déta‘led report on the question of training of judicial offi-
cers both for pre-service and in-service training. Therefore, the present out-
line for the training of judicial officers indicated here has to be read in con-
junction with detailed report that is being submitted to the Government.
In the meantime, the Government of India, Ministry of Law and Justice, has
forwarded to the Law Commission a blueprint for the establishment of an
academy for the training of judicial officers prepared by the Chief Justice of
India for its consideration and views. That aspect is also being dealt within
the report herein indicated.

Way back in 1958, the Law Commission, after quoting with approval,
an observation of the Civil Justice Committee, observed’ that in order to re-
move the undesirable tendency of a munsif being overawed by his munasarim
or reader, it is necessary to provide for pre-serv ce training to the new entrants
to the Service. The broad feature of the scheme for training of judicial officers
must enable the probationer to familiarise himself with (a) actual trial work—
civil and criminal, (b) revenue work, (c) conduct of cases, and (0) adminis-
trative work. They should be put in charge of a senior District and Sessions
Judge whose duty would be to guide them during the period of training and
report on their working. The Law Commission, about two decades after, in

1978, reiterated that the judicial officers have to face all kinds of situations
_in courts, including difficulties created by obstructionist and cantankerous
litigants and over-bearing and agressive counsel. To enable them to meet
such situations and equip them properly for the discharge of the responsibi-
lities, it is essential that there should be a course of training for all judicial
officers before they start functioning as judicial officers? The pattern and
period of training was devised bearing in mind that’ the recruit.
‘ment even at the grassroot level from the Bar requires a  mini-
mum three years’ standing at the Bar. While recommending constitution of
Indian Judicial Service, a bold step is taken to make a total departure from the
earlier view that 2 minimum practice at the Bar is a pre-requisite to become
a judicial officer. To the extent that a fresh law graduate, after qualifying
at the competitive examination, would enter judicial service, the importance
of pre-service training, both as to pattern, subject and duration, has been con-
siderably increased. This training must be for a minimum period of two
years, one of which will be spent in the academy to be set up for the pur-

1, Law Commission of India, Fourteenth Report, Vol. 1, Chapter IX, para 42, 0. 178.
2. Law Commission of India, Fourteenth Report, Vol. I, Chapter IX, para 44, p. 179.
3. Law Commission of India, Seventyseventh Report, Chapter xu, Para 13*2., p. 46.


@ne Hundred Sixteenth Report

pose and another year to be spent by sitting in the court with munsif/civil
judge (junior division)-cum-judicial magistrate, first class for a period of three
months, civil judge (senior division) for a period of three months, Chief Met-
ropolitan Magistrate for a period of six weeks, chief judge, small causes court
for a period of six weeks and last three months to be spent at the adminis-
trative headquarters of the district court under the direct supervision of the
District and Sessions Judge.

The curricula and the detailed heads of training with the aid of case
‘method system for a period of one year at the academy will be set out in the
teport just to follow.

It is equally necessary to provide for in-service training at an interval
of five years for a period of three to six weeks. The justification for the same
‘will also be offered in the proposed report. To set out the same here would
be mere duplication.

In order to ascertain that the trainee has taken full advantage of the
training period during which he will get the minimum of the junior scale,
a departmental examination to be held by the National Judicial Service
‘Commission will have to be cleared by him.

APEX BODY TO BE IN OVERALL CHARGE OF JUDICIAL
SERVICES

5.14. Judicial service is not a service so-called. It is a way of life.
There used to be some kind of reverence for judges because the seat of jus-
tice was described as seat of God. And yet the judicial service did not have
an apex body composed of experts to deal with it. Supreme Court of India
has no superintendence over High Courts. Each High Court in its own State
deals with its own problems. Local hue and colour paint the scenario. Its
ugly features are that over a period, regionalism, parochialism and in some
cases even narrow casteism reared their ugly head in judicial’ service causing
loss of status, prestige and credibility of the service. To arrest these  ten-
dencies, in 1982, the Ministry of Law and Justice is reported to have taken
a policy decision that the Chief Justice in each High Court shall be from out-
side the jurisdiction. The policy is being implemented in fits and patches.
This policy was said to be supported on the plea that it would advance natio-
nal integration, arrest fissiparious and parochial tendencies and generally be
conducive to the healthy growth of judicial service. The person coming
from outside the jurisdiction would be free from local bias, local prejudice and
local undesirable atmosphere.

Working of the Constitution for nearly three and a half decades has
belied. albeit partially, some of the assumption underlying some provisions
of the Constitution: to with article 233 which involves States Public Service
Commission in the matter of recommending candidates to many posts in sub-
ordinate judiciary below the level of the district judge, It does not require
a long argument to affirmatively assert that State Public Service Commissions
generally have lost their credibility. Way back in 1958, the Law Commission
opserved that ‘the evidence given by members of the Public Service Commis-
sions in some of the States does create the feeling that they do not deserve to
be in the responsible posis they occupy. In some of the southern States, ‘the
impartiality of the Commissions in making selections to the judicial service
was seriously questioned.” Recently in Ashok Kumar Yadav, the High Court

1, Law Commission of India, Fourteenth Report, Vol. 1, Chapter 1X. para 27. 9, 171.
2. Ashok Kumar Yadav vs, State of Haryana (1985) 45 C C 417.
6-3 Mof L & 3187.

3


32

One Hundred Sixteenth Report

of Punjab and Haryana held that ‘the Chairman and Members of the Haryana
Public Service Commission have been appointed purely on the basis of poii-
tical partisanship and caste considerations and that they did not satisfy the
Stringent test of being men of high integrity, calibre and qualifications.’ Un-
doubtedly, the Supreme Court did not approve of these remarks but, in the
concluding para of its judgement, the Supreme Court observed that when the
Public Service Commissions undertake the task to recommend candidates for
judicial service, in every State a sitting judge of the High Court must be in-
vited as an expert to judge the quality and character of each candidate appearing
for the interview and the advice given by him should ordinarily be accepted,
unless there are strong and cogent reasons for not accepting such advice and
such strong and cogent reasons must be recorded in writing by the Chairman
and Members of the Public Service Commission. The rot that has set in, as
noticed in 1958, has further accentuated as transpires from the aforemention-
ed observations. Therefore, a time has come to set up a body composed of
experts in the judicial service to take over the functions of setting up, manning,
tunning and dealing with judicial service from the grassroot to the top level. The
Law Commission has in its time table plans to submit a detailed report in this be-
half because, while examining the question of delay in disposal of cases from
various angles, one defect that has come to its notice is the delay in making
appointment of justices to the High Courts and Supreme Court of India. The
delay in making appointments varies from three years as in the case of Andhra
Pradesh High Court to around one year on an average and around ten months
in the Supreme Court of India. The delay in making appointments may be
on account of complex multiple reasons but its fall out is that it acts as a brake
in the disposal of causes and controversies in the courts as whole and piles up
backlog of cases. This will be dealt with in detail in the proposed separate
report.

Now that a judicial service at an all-India level is being proposed and
recommended, it is necessary to set up a National Judicial Service Commission.
Its raison Petre, composition, powers, functions and duties will be set out-in
detai] in a separate report dealing with this aspect. Broadly it must be com-
posed of a recently retired Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of India, one
or two retired Justices of the Supreme Court, three to five retired Chief Justices
of the High Courts, one to two retired Judges of the High Court, two outstand-
ing members of the Bar, President of the Bar Council of India and two to
three outstanding lega} academics. The body shall be constituted by the Pre-
sident of India.

CHAPTER VI
REMOVAL OF DIFFICULTIES

6.1. While discussing the concept, the format and the ancillary aspects
of setting up of Indian Judicial Service, apart from the apprehensions voiced,
it was seriously suggested that the scheme would face formidable difficulties
in the way of its implementation and, therefore, it is better to leave the situa-

‘tion undisturbed. If the fear of possible difficulties would thwart every attempt

at change, no change is possible. The present situation is admittedly frustrat-
ing and exasperating. To say that no solution can be found is to proclaim
bankruptcy of talent and intellect which can indicate change and innovation.
Every change may experience some difficulties. They have to be solved but
they cannot be allowed to be road blocks in the path of progress.

6.2. The first apprehended difficulty is a possible imbalance in the age
factor between persons coming from three independent sources of recruitment
which may cause frustration and dejection. This is a very superficial view of


One Huudred Sixteenth Report

the matter. If any one enters the State service in the age between 25 and 30
and hopes to get promotion at the end of every year, to the Indian Judicial
Service, he could be anywhere between 32 and 37 while entering the service.
A member of the Bar who has put in about 10 years of practice would enter the
service at about the same age. A person coming by way of direct recruitment
through competitive examination would be anywhere between 23 to 25
years of age. He would have to undergo two years training. There
after he would have to put in seven years’ service at different levels to be
eligible to man the post of District Judge. He would also be in the same age
group with minor variations which exist even at present. It is at that’ level
that the real competition would start for elevation to the Bench of the High
Court. And all have equal opportunity. This difficulty is more imaginary
than real.

Two illustrations should set at naught any anxiety on this account.
There are three well known cases of persons joining as civil judge or munsif
at the lowest level who came to be elevated to the Supreme Court of India. Two
other known cases are of persons who came to be recruited as district judges
from the Bar, reached the Supreme Court. Two others who entered as district
civil court judges were elevated to Supreme Court. For selection of High
Court Justices, talent plays an important part and age is a secondary factor.
Therefore, the Commission would dismiss this difficulty as unreal.

6.3. Some associations of judicial officers viewed the setting up of the
administrative tribunals under the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, as a
thin end of a wedge for interfering in the judicial services. They say that the
moment Indian Judicial Service is set up, the President will acquire power simi-
Jar to that which he enjoys with regard to other all-India services. The Service
will then be treated as a Central Government service. Consequently, adminis-
trative tribunals would exercise jurisdiction corroding not only the indepen-
dence of judiciary but even whittling down the control of the High Court.

In the matter of control of the High Court, care is taken to see that it is
in no way whittled down. A specific provision can be made while setting up
the service in section 2 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, that the
Administrative Tribunals, will have no jurisdiction over the service. Even in
the absence of such a specific exclusionary clause, the Supreme Court having
regard to various provisions in the Constitution ensuring independence of judi-
ciary, denied jurisdiction to Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal over sub-
ordinate judiciary and the staff of the High Court.’

6.4. Thus, having regard to all the aspects of the matter and having re-
gard to the deleterious effects visible on State Judicial Services, it is time that
an all-India judicial service is set up. It is so recommended.

(D.A. DESAT)
Chairman

(S.C. GHOSH) .
Member

(V.S. RAMA DEVI)
Member Secretary

New Delhi, dated the 27th November, 1986.

1, Chief Justice, Andhra Pradesh High Court Vs. L.V.A. Dikshitulu, AIR 1979 SC 193. ~

MGIJPCBE—SI—3 M of L&J/87—11-1-88—1010.

33