"LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA:

(ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH REFORT

. ‘TRAINING OF JUDICIAL OFFICERS

NOVEMBER 1986


ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH REPORT

ERRATA
S. No. Page No. Para Line For Read
1 1 1.1 18 he the
2 2 1.1 14 Socity Society
3 2 Footnote 2 1 2
4 2 Footnote 2 Lic Lcl,
5 2 Footnote 3 2 3
6 2 Footnote 3 Ler Lcl,
7 5 Footnote 1 Legar Legal
8 5 Footnote 1 534 554
9 6 2.4 1 Cleaning —_ Gleaning
10 8 2.11 From below to the
2
11 13 Footnote 1 Para Page
12 21 8 From below mus must
4
13 25 App वा 18 applatele appellate
14 27 App IL 19 Probations Probation
15 27 App IL 21 Sentensing sentencing

MGIPCBE— S2—5 M of L & J/87—30-12-88—1,010.


DO No. F. .2(6)/85-L.C.
D.A. DESAI
Chairman

LAW COMMISSION,
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA,
“ SHASTRI BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI.
Tel. No. 384475.

Shri Ashok Kumar Sen,
“Minister for Law & Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhavan,
NEW DELHI.
November 28, 1986.

Dear Minister for Law and Justice,

Quick on the heels of my letter forwarding One Hundred and
Sixteenth Report of the Law Commission sent yesterday, I am
happy to forward One Hundred and Seventeenth Report of the
Law Commission on the topic; ‘The Training of Judicial Officers’
(Item No. 5) of the terms of reference in the context of studying
judicial reforms.

Justifiably assuming that you had time and opportunity to
read the reports submitted by the present Law Commission, you
must have noticed that they form a chain and provide continuity
fram topic to topic. To illustrate, the first report dealt with the
mechanism for resolution of disputes in rural areas and thus cater-
ing to the needs of the rural population and encompassing 60% of
the litigation coming to courts. It covered in part Item No. | of
the terms of reference in the context of studying judicial reforms;
the second report dealt with restructuring courts dealing with dis-
putes under taxation laws with a view to their expeditious disposal
and avoiding multiple litigation. It had the inbuilt tendency to re-
duce pressure on the High Courts helping them to clear the backlog
of cases. It was in reference to Item No. | (iii) of the terms of refe-
rence in the context of studying judicial reforms.

The third report dealt with the Formation of an All-India
Judicial Service which formed Item No. 9 of the terms of reference -
hereinabove mentioned.

This report deals with Item No. 5 as pointed out earlier
recommending a comprehensive scheme for training judicial offi-
cers at various levels.

@
1-5 M of L&I/87


(ii)

You will appreciate that this establishes a chain in the matter
of introducing judicial reforms, to wit, train the officers in the
modern methods of resolution of disputes, make justice participa-
tory so as to re-establish credibility of the justice system, restructure
judiciary on an all-India level and deal with one aspect which had
a major contribution in piling-up backlog of cases. You will ap-
preciate that if any link in the chain is broken, the whole thing will
go out of the gear.

I will appreciate if the Ministry of Law & Justice keeps the
Law Commission informed of the follow-up action taken in the
matter of these reports as also the difficulties experienced in the im-
plementation so that a two way traffic will expeditiously resolve
the problems that may confront introduction of judicial reforms.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,
(Sd.)
(D. A. DESA)

Encl: A Report

Copy to:

Shri Hans Raj Bhardwaj,
Minister of State for
Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhavan,

NEW DELHI.


CONTENTS

Pace
Chapter I Introductory. 1
Chapter IL Justification for Imparting Training : . 3
Chapter IL Approach of the Law Commission. : . » 12
Chapter IV Scheme of Training 13
Chapter V Syllabus 17
Chapter VI Faculty पु . . पु . . पु . 19
Chapter VIL The Constitution of the Academy and the Incidental
Managerial Aspects . » 20
Chapter VIII Regional Training Centres 21
Appendix I - 22
. 25

Appendix IL

(iii)


CHAPTER 1
INIFRODUCTORY

1.1, Any organisation—service-oriented in character—can be appraised in
terms of (a) effectiveness in the achievement of its objectives-goals— results, and
{b) promotion of internal ‘efficiency’ in order to achieve the results. What
are the goals or objects to achieve which justice delivery system was devised?
Indian Judicial System is admittedly colonial in origin and imported in struc-
ture. Without even a semblance of change in the last four decades since in-
dependence, in its mode, method of work, designations, language, approach,
method of resolving disputes, it has all the trappings of the system established
by the foreign rulers. .

On the attainment of independence, this system was overnight expected
to be an effective instrument of ushering in sociat revolution in Republican India.
On the enforcement of the Constitution in January 1950, this system was ex-
pected to adapt itself to facilitate the transformation of Indian society into a
nation and to become an effective instrument for carrying out the mandate of
article 38. Judiciary being an important instrumentality for exercise of State
judicial power, it had to shoulder the burden along with other wings to set’ up
a welfare State in which justice—social, economic and political—shall inform all
the institutions of national life. 1t must also shoulder he primary responsibility
of eliminating inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities not only amongst
individuals but also amongst groups of people residing in different areas engag-
ed in different vocations. It had the added responsibility of becoming a guar-
dian angel for the protection of fundamental rights of the citizens. Thus, from
a purely colonial institution operating more or less as a wing of law and order
enforcement machinery, it was to become a sentinel on the qui vive.

Human resources constitute a critical clement of any organisation: the
quality and quantity of human resources significantly influence the level of effec-
tiveness as well as efficiency of organisation. The criticality of human resources
is reflected in the oft-repeated adage that any organisation (its structure and
systems included) is only as good as the people who operate it. The nature
and degree of knowledge. skills and ethics of the people on the one hand, and
clarity in their appreciation of, and commitment. to, the objectives on the other,
are critical to the internal efficiencies and external effectivencss of organisation.’
If the human resources of an organisation thus form a very important part of
an organisation, it is undeniable that it must remain up-to-date both with re-

rd to changes in the hopes and aspirations of the people, demands from the
justice system and contemporary needs of the society, research in the field of
law. new and revised methods of resolving disputes in the society, the concept
of equality -in a society consisting of unequals and the goals of the Constitution.
Further, the Indian society is in a constant state of flux. Under the impact of
technological advances coupled with developments plans, it is facing new chal-
lenges and problems. Bhopal gas disaster has thrown up numerous challenges
to the Indian Justice system and necesasrily the personnel’ manning the same.
And yet what the Chief Justice Warren Burger said while addressing the Ame-
rican Bar Association mutatis mutandis applies to the present day Indian justice
delivery system. He said, “In the final third of the century, we are still trying
to operate courts with fundamentally the same basic methods, the same pro-
cedures and the same machinery, Roscoe Pound said. were not good enough

1. Dr. G.R.S. Rao, Senior Faculty Chairman, Public Policy and Systems Area, Admi-
nistrative Staff College, Hyderabad: A note submitted to the Commission—Sept. 1986.


2

4n 1906."" What Lord Devlin said for British Justice system has equal validity
for our system. He said, “If our business methods were as antiquated as our
legal system, we would have become a bankrupt nation long back”. If it is
thus undeniable that the judges have to be up-to-date and can afford to fall be-
hind at their own peril, the updating can hardly be left to the voluntary effort
of the judge to read modern literature on the subject. Add to this the hardship
of availability of such literature in lower Tung of the ladder where need to up-
date knowledge is keenly felt. Thus, the need for imparting training to the
members of the judiciary at every level with a view to improving performance
and efficiency cannot be over-emphasised. Knowledge is power and it can only
be acquired by facilities for training. It is conceded that training can signifi-
cantly upgrade the capability of everyone called upon to perform a duty. It is
all the mote so in the case of judicial officers, because sociology of law is acquir-
ing new and added significance in the development of the socity. Therefore,
their knowledge, skills and attitudes require to be sharpened. In the report
of the Law Commission for introducing participatory justice at the grass-roots
level! and in the report recommending all-India judicial, service) Law Commis-
sion has reiterated the need for continuing and on-going Programme of pre-
service and in-service training for judicial officers. This report deals thus with
item No. 5 of the Terms of Reference in the Context of Studying Judicial Re-
forms assigned to the Law Commission which relates to “the training of judi-
cial officers”.

1, 1970 Address of Chief Justice Warren Burger to the American Bar Association.
1, LIC One Hundred Fourteenth Report.
2. LCL One Hundred Sixteenth Report.


CHAPTER IT
JUSTIFICATION FOR IMPARTING TRAINING

2.1. The need to impart technical training has not received its due re-
cognition till recently. Pre-service institutional training for entrance to judicial
service has hardly engaged the attention of the High Courts and the Supreme
Court of India or the Government. It was assumed that! standing at the Bar
for certain number of years before entering judicial service would provide ade-
quate training to be able to preside over the court to which one is appointed.
Later on, schemes were devised for imparting practical training by attaching
the new entrants to the service to the courts presided over by senior judges for a
period extending roughly to three months. Observation in the court was to be
the form of training. Before we examine the need for a comprehensive train-
ing programme for judicial officers, it is necessary to look around and gather in-
formation about the need and the scope of training for judicial officers.

2.2. France recognised the need for institutional training by invoking the
famous dictum of Napoleon when he said:

“Military qualities are required only in a few circumstances. Civil
virtues which characterise a true Judge, have an influence every moment
on public felicity.”

One can enter judicial service in France after graduation without any qualify-
ing previous practice at the Bar. This method has attracted young people
with good talent to the service without the hazard of a waiting period at the
Bar. It was believed that direct entry into service without some kind of practice at
the Bar would eliminate the possible allegiance of the entrant to some senior mem-
bers of the Bar as also any attachment to private interest, which might have pro-
vided legal work to him. For imparting training to judicial officers, the Ministry
of Justice has set up the National Academy for the Judiciary which as such is
an autonomous body. The administration vests in the Principal assisted by
Vice-Principal in charge of practical training and a Director of Studies. The
teaching staff consists of Professors and Readers of Law and Senior Judicial
Officers appointed by the Principal in consultation with the Advisory Board.
A competitive examination for the recruitment to judicial service is held every
year, It is open to persons of both sexes aged 27 or less and possessing the
degree of Bachelor of Law. The recruitment is according to the merit list
prepared on the result of the examination, Institutes of Judicial Studies attach-
ed to Faculties of Law provide instructions for preparing to appear at the
competitive examination. The written tests consist of an essay on general
culture, one test in civil law, another in criminal law or public law and the
preparation of a note with the help of documents relating to judicial problems.
Those who qualify at. the written test have to undergo oral tests consisting of a
conversation of 30 minutes with the Board of Examiners, five oral tests of
15 minutes cach on different branches of law and a test of 30 minutes in foreign
language.’

Ordinarily, the recruitment is primarily from the source of fresh gra-
duates taking competitive examination. Few persons may also be admitted after
a special examination, if need be, from advocates, notaries, sarishtadars, govern-
ment servants specialised in legal activities, other persons who distinguished
themselves in the juridical field. provided they all possess the degrec-of Bachelor
of Law.

1, David Annoussamy, Judiciary in France, Journal of the Bar Council of India (1981)
Vol. 8, 9. 296.

3


4

The training lasts for 28 months and consists of a study in the Academy
for 9 months, a period of practical training, a final practical training of — two
months after the final examination in the court where the officer is to be post-
ed first and a period of specialised training of four months which should be
completed within the four years of their appointment as judicial officers in one
of the specialised branches of the judiciary.’

The training aims at giving sufficient expertise in the profesisonal techni-
que required for the performance of the duty of a judicial officer. Seminars,
lectures on methodology, study of files, lectures on special subjects, are or-
ganised during the period of training. Practical training is imparted in the
courts. They are even aflowed to observe the deliberations of the Benches of
the judicial officers for arriving at judgments. It may be mentioned here that
following the old French Proverb “juge unique, juge unique, (single judge un-
fair judge”. in France every court except the lowest is provided with a Bench
of Judges and in no higher court does a single judge give decision.’ This gives
them an opportunity io view the deliberations of judicial officers for arriving at
judgments. Occasionally. they are invited to express their own opinion. As
part of training, the trainees are sent for short periods to police stations, prisons.
home for delinquents, industrial and commercial concerns and in some cases
to foreign countries also. At the end of training, there is a final examination
amongst others of:

(1) drafting judgments: and

(2) oral test of 15 minutes consisting of penal or civil pleading.

The French system has been extensively reproduced here to specifically em-
phasize the need for training, both institutional and Practical.

2.3. Article 80 of the Constitution of Japan provides that the judges of
the inferior courts shall be appointed by the Cabinet from a list of persons no-
minated by the Supreme Court. Ordinarily, the recommendation of the Supreme
Court is invariably accepted. The term of office for judges of the inferior court is
of 10 years. They are generally re-appointed. If the Supreme Court does not re-
commend re-appointment, the judge is removed from judicial office without any
recourse to an impeachment type process. According to the Courts Act, there are
four categories of judges of the inferior courts, The are:

(1) Presidents of the High Courts;
(2) Judges:
(3) Assistant Judges: and

(4) Summary Court Judges,

The matter worthy of notice is that assistant judges are appointed from amongst
those people who have completed two years of training at the Legal Training
and Research Institute. an agency of the Supreme Court. After having _ first
passed the Bar examination, summary court judges are appointed cither:

(1) from amongst those who have served for not less than three years
as an assistant judge, public prosecutor or practising attorney:
OR

from amongst those who have the knowledge and experience neces-
sary for carrying out the duties of a summary court judge such as

1. David Annoussamy, Judiciary in France, Journal of the Bar Council of India (1981)
Vol. 8, 9. 298.

2. Lehar Singh Mehta, The French Legal System; Journal Section, All India Reporter,
1959 p. 83.


5

those who have engaged in judicial business for many years and
have been recommended by the Supreme Court."

Tt thus appears that the entry at the grassroot level as assistant judges is from
those who have completed two years training at the institute hereinabove men-
tioned. Before entering the institute, the candidate ought to have passed. the
national legal examination. The institutional training provides for class-room ins-
truction, field training under the guidance of individual judges, étc., and a course

- in drafting. On the completion of the course spreading over two years and
qualifying at the examination, one becomes eligible to be appointed as an assis-
tant judge.”

2.4. The need to impart training, both pre-service and in-service, has
been felt for a long time and ‘has been nationally neglected so far, with the
rather disastrous consequences to development and justice’. Inefficiency, inex-
perience or inadequacy of knowledge of the judicial personnel had come to
surface way back in the early fiftees. Training course for judicial officers was
considered imperative to improve their efficiency. Some kind of training has
been in vogue, the period varying from three months to two years. Topics for
training were: the practical experience in the trial work in civil and criminal
matters, in some cases in revenue work and administrative work.‘ The approach
at that time was that the training must be confined to equip the judge to handle
day-to-day cases and effectively manage his office. This narrow view with
regard to training remained in vogue for a long time. The Eighth Law Com-
mission, while dealing with the question of delay and arrears in trial courts, ex-
pressed an opinion that the training course lasting for a period of three to six
months for recruits to subordinate judiciary must be provided. Such period
was to be utilised for giving intensive training to the judicial officers by compe-
tent and experienced members of the Bar, the stress in such course being to
acquaint the recruits with procedural requirements for dealing with different
stages of cases. The training, it was suggested. must be directed to inform the
new entrant as to how to record statements of parties before framing issues,
how to frame issues and how thereafter to record evidence and write judgments.
Training may as well be imparted in the art of writing interlocutory orders. They
may be familiarised with different stages of execution proceedings and they may
be taught how to dispose of matters at each of those stages. The 1983 con-
ference of the Chief Justices of High Courts adopted a resoution requesting the
Government to set up regional training institutes for members of subordinate
judiciary in four zones of the country where eminent professors, lawyers, judges
and jurists could be invited to deliver lectures on various legal and other impor-
tant subjects. A fresh approach indicating the width and content of training
that was to be imparted to the members of the judiciary was clearly spelt out.

2.5. Pursuant to this resolution, the Government of India in the Depart-
ment of Justice collected information from State Governments and Union Ter-
ritories as regards the existing training facilities for judicial officers available
in each State with a view to examining the feasibility of setting up of regional
training institutes. The information collected is tabulated and annexed hereto
as Appendix 1 will show at a glance the cxisting facilities available in each
State for imparting training to judicial officers.

1. Hideo Tanaka (Edited): The Japanese Legar System, Ch. 6, Sec. 2. p. 534 to 556.
2. Id. at Sec. 4, 9. 566.

3. Blueprint forwarded by Chief Justice of India to Ministry of Law and Justice,
Government of India.

4, LCI, Fourteenth Report, Vol. 1, Ch. IX, para 42-46, pages 178-179.
5. LCL Seventy-seventh Report, Ch. IX, para 9.8, page 34.
2-5 M of L&J/87


6

Cleaning through the information, it transpires that’ institutional training
at present is being imparted only at the North-Eastern Judicial! Officers Train-
ing Institute at Guwahati and Andhra Pradesh State Judicial Academy of Ad-
ministration at Secunderabad. Broadly stated, the judicial officers taking train-
ing in these Institutes have the benefit of a short-term pre-service training in the
conduct of proceedings in the court and allied matters as also the management
of office. No refresher course is being held at these Institutes with the result
that the training begins and ends at the pre-service level and it is of a short
duration. ‘There is an Administrative Training Institute set up at Nainital by
the Uttar Pradesh Government where pre-service training is imparted to judicial
officers extending over a period of six to eight weeks. The relevant rules adopt-
ed by the State of Orissa provide for an elaborate training programme. In the
Test of the country, fresh recruits to judicial service are given a semblance of
training by being directed to work with senior civil judges and/or district or
sessions judges for an average duration of three to six months before actual post-
ing is given.

2.6. The most glaring omission in the existing training schemes is that
they do not provide for in-service training or refresher courses, save and except
a few selected individuals being deputed to attend training course on “crime
and justice and criminology” conducted by the Institute of Criminology and
Forensic Science, New Delhi, and some others are deputed to participate in the
course “Administration of criminal justice” conducted by the Indian Intsitute
of Public Administration, New Delhi. The duration of these courses varies from
one week to three weeks.

Another lacuna in the present day schemes is emphasis only on giving
practical training by observation in courts on how to conduct cases. This sys-
tem has an in-built disadvantage of sustaining the past practice without any
change or without any effort to tone it to the mores of the day. The basic aim
of training briefly spelt out is to equip the trainees not only with tools to execute
their work, but to endow them with vision as to what is expected of the system
which they serve. . What is meant by justice? What is decision making pro-
cess? What are the goals of the Constitution? What is the direction in which
law must move? What does the dictum justice according to law imply? And
a horde of other questions must confront the authority in charge of the new
in-coming judges.

2.7. Are these facilities adequate enough to impart requisite training,
both pre-service and in-service, to judicial officers? Inadequacy of these train-
ing facilities stare into our face. It ig not the opinion of the Law Commission
but it is the opinion of all concerned. In August-September, 1985, the Chief Justice
of India and the Ministry of Law and Justice Jointly convened for the first
time in the history of India a joint Conference of Chief Justices of High Courts,
Chief Ministers and Law Ministers of all States to debate what ails the pre-
sent justice delivery system and, after diagnosing the disease, to sort out and
prescribe the remedies. The question of imparting training to judicial officers
was in the forefront. Tt was unanimously resolved at this Conference that there
should be an institute or academy for the training of judicial officers to be set
up by the Central Government with the Chief Justice of India as Chairman. A
governing body under the Chairmanship of the Chief Justice of India should be
set up to be in charge of the administration of the institute or academy. The
governing body was to devise a whole scheme of pre and in-service training for
judicial officers as also to specify places where branches of the institute or aca-
demy should be set up. In fact the expectation was that the governing body
will devise the structure of academy, the selection of entrants to the academy,


7

faculty, syllabi and all other aspects relevant to the efficient functioning of the
institute or academy.
x
‘Thereafter, the Law Commission was requested as part of recommending
overall judicial reform to study the advisability. need and operational require-
ment for imparting training to members of judiciary. The Commission set in
motion its own enquiry.

2.8. Pursuant to the aforementioned resolution, the Chief Justice of India
prepared and sent a blueprint, for the establishment of an academy for the train-
ing of judicial officers. The Minister of State for Law and Justice forwarded
a copy of the blueprint to the Law Commission for its consideration. As this
report exclusively deals with the question of imparting training to judicial offi-
cers at every level, the blueprint of the Chief. Justice of India would be care-
fully considered with respect it is entitled to in the course of this report. As nas
been the practice, the Law Commission, with a view to adequately informing it-
self of various currents and cross-currents relevant to the topic under examination,
addressed detailed letters to the Chief Justice of India, all Judges of the Supreme
Court, Chief Justice of each High Court and all Judges of the High Courts
requesting them, infer alia, to give us the benefit of their detailed views on
various topics relevant to judicial reforms. one such being training of judicial
officers. As the question of training pertains to the field of expert academics,
the Commission also wrote detailed letters to the principal of every law college
in the country with a request to bring the letter to the notice of the professors
working with him, to the Deans of Law Faculty of every university as also
to bodies like Indian Law Institute, Indian Institute of Public Administration
and Director, Administrative Staff College, Hyderabad. Bar Council of India
claims that it has sole responsibility for legal education and allied subjects. Ac-
cordingly, the Commission also wrote detailed letters to the Chairman of the
Bar Council of India and Chairmen of various State Bar Councils requesting
them to accord benefit of their views to the Commission on all topics relevant
to judicial reforms, specifically including therein training of judicial officers.
Chairman of All India Bar Council did not extend the courtesy of acknowledg-
ing the letter and wholly ignored it. The response from State Bar Councils
was wholly inadequate. The Commission also invited information and views
of the Supreme Court Bar Association and such other bodies as also organi-
sations of judicial officers. All others responded with enthusiasm. A fair mea-
sure of the cross-country opinion is available to the Commission.

2.9. The Commission was informed that as a scquel to the resolution of
the Joint Conference of Chief Justices of High Courts, Chief Ministers and Law
Ministers of States, the officers of the Department of Justice, Government of
India, drew up a tentative scheme of training for our consideration, The com-
mission called for the proposed scheme drawn up by the Department of Justice.
A skeleton scheme appears to have been drawn up. It is in fact a brief outline
of what ought to be the approach to the question of training of judicial officers.
The Department of Justice probably was unaware of the fact that the Law
Commission dealing with recommending comprehensive judicial reforms would
engage itself in examining the feasibility and advisability of setting up an all-
{India Judicial Service, to be styled as Indian Judicial Service. The Law Com-
mission has submitted a comprehensive report recommending setting up of Indian .
Judicial Service to which there would be recruitment from fresh law graduates
on the result of a competitive examination.’ The hitherto accepted norm of
some minimum practice at the Bar as an essential qualification for entry in judicial
service at any stage has been given a go-bye for very valid and vital reasons. Once

1. LCI, One Hundred and Sixteenth Report.


8

the recommendation as to setting up of Indian Judicial Service is translated into
action and in reality the service is set. up, the whole gamut of imparting training
would acquire a new dimension. The note proceeds on the assumption that
both pre and in-service training will have to be imparted to such recruits to
judicial service who have had some minimum stint at the Bar. The assumption
would no more be valid. Therefore, even though the scheme may be examined
for whatever it is worth, a de nove approach to the problem is necessitous.

2.10. The scheme in its bare outline deals with institutional and in-ser-
vice training. Without specifying the period, it has been suggested that the
existing institutional facilities for imparting taining to the officérs recruited to the
State Civil Executive Service and State Police Service should be utilised to im-
part training to the cecruils to the judicial service after suitably augmenting the
existing facilities to meet the needs of the judicial service. The scheme further
provides that the period of training for recruits to judicial service must be the
same as for the recruits to executive and police service. The subjects for pre-
service training include: (1) salient features of the Constitution of India: (2) Civil
Law, criminal law and labour law: (3) local laws; (4) law relating to police
excesses and customs and other economic offences: (5) law relating to condi-
tions of service of employment: (6) nyaya panchayats, etc.: (7) relations with
police and civil executive officers: (8) problems of scheduled castes/tribes, other
backward communities and weaker sections. family disputes; (9) jail administra-
tion; (10) aspects to be taken care of by presiding officers of subordinate courts
with a view to minimising delay in disposal of cases and reducing: arrears in
courts: and of writing judgments, (11) historical development of legal and judi-
cial system in India; and (12) cultural and social conditions and their impact on
legal and judicial administration. The scheme also provides for refresher
courses of short duration for judicial officers having put in eight to ten years
of service. The refresher courses according to the scheme must include: (1) amend-
ment of the Constitution and the civil, criminal and other laws in the last 10 to
15 years; (2) case law—decisions of the Supreme Court/High Courts; (3) new
developments in the field of economic laws and constitutional law; (4) modern
practices of office management, including documentation and storage of judicial
records; (5) modern jail administration; (6) measures to expedite disposal of
cases in courts and reduce arrears; and (7) problems of scheduled castes and
tribes, other backward communities and weaker sections, family disputes. After
quoting resolution adopted at the 1985 meeting hereinbefore referred to the
framers of the scheme frown upon establishment of new regional training institu-
tes as it would involve considerable expenditure and would, therefore, suggest
feasibility of expanding the existing institutional arrangements available in the
State of Andhra Pradesh and one set up at Gauhati by the Governments of
Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur and Nagaland. It further refers to the possibility
of providing facilities for refresher courses at Indian Law Institute, Delhi. This
is the brief outline of the scheme.

2.11. It is time to advert to some suggestions received by the Commission
in its search for concrete proposals for providing facilities for training of judi-
cial officers. The search was a multi-pronged one in that what should be the
institutional framework for imparting training, the subjects to be taught, the
duration of the training and incidental and ancillary matters. In the words of a
legal academic of repute, the basic aim for imparting training must be central
to the programme of training. In his words the whole concept of judicial pro-
cess has undergone metamorphosis, such as from an adjudication, of conflicting
claims to a creative dispute resolving process, balancing the competing  inte-
rests with a view to maximising to total social interests through this process and
as such it would be helpful if the judicial officers actively engaged in dispute



9

resolving process are exposed from time to time to the emerging trends in legis-
lative and judicial spheres.

There was a broad consensus on traditional lines on the topics form-
ing the curricula for training. The question to be posed is, in what subjects
should the judges be traincd? Traditionally stated, the answer was, court manage-
ment, current developments in law, judgment writing, handling the ways of
the Bar, solicitude for human rights of the impoverished. To this can be added
goals and objects of the Constitution, more particularly as set out in Part 1V
of the Constitution, the goals and objects of justice system, what constitutes
justice and the role of justice egal system in Republican India.

The next question which was posed was the time frame for the training
to be imparted pre-service, in-service, workshop, refresher courses, etc. It will
also include the question up to what level judicial officers should receive train-
ing, the training varying from level to level. The emerging picture in this behalf
from views received and discussions held was, in the words of an outstanding
academic, that it should not be a one-shot affair. Depending upon the educa-
‘tional qualification and the length of practice at the Bar as minimum qualifi-
cation, the pre-service training may vary from 1 to 2 years to 3 to 6 months.
The refresher courses may be of the duration of 12 to 18 weeks. The training
programme must include, apart from the pre-service training, continuous in-
service exposure.

On the question of constitution of faculty, those who responded to the
queries of the Commission were broadly of the view that legal academics, judges
and some top members of the Bar must be invited to be the faculty members.
It was said, ‘It is the mistake, common enough in India, that knowledge grows
necessarily in proportion to seniority, age and hierarchical position’.’ The sug-
gestion was that, rejecting this untenable assumption, lawyers, judges and aca-
demics should be involved in terms of their specialists’ competences. A novel
suggestion worthy of acceptance was that ‘the victims of administration of justice
may as well be invited to contribute to the training’. One suggestion was that
eminent citizens in different, walks oi life, not claiming to have direct specia-
lisation in law, may as well be invited. One academic expressed the view
that ‘if the bed-rock of the Constitution is a society which would be governed
by laws rather than by men and that the entire transformation of the society
was to be ushered in through law, then those responsible for implementing, those
laws ought to know the law and principles of justice’. A correlation, it was
said, must be firmly ingrained in the minds of the entrants to judicial service bet-
ween law and justice.

There were numerous other suggestions more or less on the same line
and primarily focussing upon the intensive training in the application of pro-
cedural laws (Civil Procedure Code and Criminal Procedure Code), understand-
ing of the penal law and more especially the Indian Penal Code, Indian Evi-
dence Act and certain local laws.

Two distinct trends were noticeable bearing on the question of what ought
to be the subjects of topics to be taught at the time of the pre-service training.
One view was that an effective grasp of procedural laws would help in reduc-
ing delays and expeditious disposal of causes and controversies brought before
the court. The other view was that the goal of justice system is not any other
than the one enshrined in the preamblar statement of the Constitution, ie. of
transforming the society in which there will be no exploitation of man by man,

1. Dr. Upendra Baxi—comprehensive note submitted to LCL
2. Ibid.


10

justice, social, economic and political, will inform all institutions of the national
life including judiciary. Therefore, the goals of Constitution must be specifi-
cally taught so that justice system makes its effective contribution in the trans-
formation of society. For this Purpose, it was suggested that the curriculum
must be devised first for pre-service training and specific subjects should be
reserved for refresher courses taking account of the developments in the field
of law and administration of justice, both internal as well as external, from the
time of entry in judicial service till the date of refresher course, the distance
between the two should not in any case be more than five years.

The Indian Institute of Public Administration holds refresher courses and
it has an expertise in this behalf. Its view was that each judicial magis-
trate should be required to undergo three training programmes before
he is able to reach the level of additional district judge. It was of the opi-
nion that the pre-service training course must spread over a period of one
and a half years and one month’s refresher course at’ an interval of 6 to 10
years of service, two weeks refresher course after 10 to 16 years of service and
one week's seminar after 16 to 20 years of service. It was of the opinion
that three days’ conference of High Court Judges (biennial) and annual con-
ference of Chief Justices of High Courts may as well be. utilised for the pur-
pose of acquainting the justices of the higher and highest courts in the deye-
lopments and sociology of Iaw. Such conference, it was suggested, may as
well be utilised for a short duration to acquaint themselves of the effect of
judgments rendered to determine whether the development, has taken place in
the right direction or not.

A member of the Bar expressed an opinion that instead of providing
institutional training to the entrants to the judicial service, which would entail
huge cost, it would be advantageous to provide statutorily that anyone who
wishes to join subordinate judiciary must have adequate training under senior
lawyers practising exclusively either in civil or criminal courts for a period
of six months each, which would adequately, according to him, impart train-
ing to make such person competent to become an effective and efficient judge.
Before the advent of three-years degree law course, it was incumbent upon
anyone wishing to join the Bar to enrol under a senior advocate for a period
of one year to be trained in the art of advocacy, After evaluating this mode
of training, it has been given a decent burial. It is not possible to retrieve
it {rom the past where it is buried.

Chief Justices of some of the High Courts responded to the query of
the Commission. S§/Shri Satish Chandra and P.D, Desai jointly submitted
their proposal. It was suggested that an entrant to Indian Judicial Service
should be required to undergo a training. According to them, a direct re-
cruit should be imparted institutional training for 14 years and 6 months’
training in court and a promotee to the service should receive training for a
period of 6 months at, the institute. A further training should be imparted at
the institute when a promotee is Promoted to the senior scale. On the ques-
tion of syllabus, they expressed an opinion that the same may be adequately
prescribed by a Committee of the Chief Justices. They recommended a pro-
viso that anyone who is promoted to Indian Judicial Service at the age of 50
years or above shall be exempt. from undergoing any training or passing any
departmental examination. Almost an identical scheme was recommended by
the High Court of Himachal Pradesh. Chief Justice Chandurkar of the
Madras High Court was of the opinion that every person appointed to the
service shall be required to undergo a training for one year at the end of which
he must clear a departmental examination. In his view, anyone who is pro-
moted to service at the age of 50 years or after shall be exempt from under-


11

going training. One more suggestion received from one of the Chief Justices
was that a Judicial Administration School should be established to impart
training to the entrants to the judicial service on the topics of fairness, imparti-
ality, objectivity and independence from executive interference. They may be
trained, according to him, to undertake administration of justice free from
personal bias and ideology. One other suggestion emanating from the Chief
Justice was that on entering the service, a judicial officer may be designated
as an apprentice for a period to be determined by High Court in each case
and he should not be put in independent charge until the High Court is satisfi-
ed that he is in a position to deal with cases coming before him. In his view,
the training may take the form of observation in courts at! all levels, coupl-
ed with lectures and discourses by the Judges of the High Court and Senior
District and Sessions Judges.

Rendering justice is the primary goal of any justice delivery system.
In the context of Indian situation, rendering social justice is one of the impe-
tatives for the justice system. Even if the system were to maintain a stance
of ‘judicial-processual neutrality’, it has to commit itself to the demands of
change ordained by the Constitution. ‘The shift in the objectives of Indian
Judiciary should be traced to the imperatives of change, (with both value and
materialistic orientations) emerge from the preamblar statement to the Cons-
titution in terms of secularism, socialism, egalitarianism. This is juxtaposed
to the existing realities in terms of abuse and misuse of law where “Rule of
Law is operating more as a mask for the Rule of Class” as 8.7, Thompson
observes’. :

The Kerala High Court Staff Association expressed an opinion that
more intensive training is now required to be imparted in view of the inade-
quate knowledge acquired at the law colleges. It was suggested that a train-
ing must take the form of practical working in courts as also discussions with
those well-versed in law and allied subjects.

There were suggestions from Professors attached to law colleges and a’
few lawyers, all of whom while conceding the imperative necessity of impart-
ing training to the entrants to judicial service, differed in specifics, about the
method of imparting training and subjects to be taught.

1, E.P. Thompson: Whigs and Hunters, 1975, p. 1259, cited in Dr. G.S.R. Rao’s note
submitted to LCI.


CHAPTER III
APPROACH OF THE LAW COMMISSION

3. Law Commission has in its One hundred — sixteenth Report recom-,
mended constitution of Indian Judicial Service to which recruitment would be
from three independent sources: (i) direct recruitment on the result of a com-
petitive examination through which fresh law graduates would enter service,
(ii) promotion from the Siate Judicial Service and (iii) direct recruitment from
amongst senior and experienced members of the Bar. The time honoured ap-
proach envisages practice in the courts for a period ranging from two to three
years before one can qualify for entering judicial service at. the lowest tung of
the ladder. Article 233 (2) of the Constitution prescribes practice of not less
than seven years at the Bar before being cligible for entering service at the
level of district judge or the term as explained in article 236. Standing at
the Bar for a certain period was considered adequate to equip the entrants to
judicial service for effectively handling causes and controversies and resolving
them according to law. The assumption underlying this approach was that
a certain number of years of practice at the Bar enables the person not only
to be effectively acquainted with various stages of trial and the method of
dealing with them but also observation of working of the court, so that the
entrant to judicial service could be presumed to be adequately equipped for
performing the duties of a judge. Apart from the fact that this assumption has
been found to be wholly unsustainable.’ now that a fresh law graduate is being
given an opportunity to enter judicial service, the need for pre-service training
which was keenly felt since long as pointed out hereinabove, is further accen-
tuated by this radical departure in doing away with the essential qualification for
entering service, namely, standing at the Bar. A degree in law, presumably,
may equip the holder thereof with the knowledge of rudiments of law. The
art of advocacy is acquired in the course of standing at the Bar] Rendering
justice is an art in itself and acquiring rudiments of art needs tratfiing. The
minimum equipment to render justice requires a keen intellect to shift grain
from the chaff, to perceive falsehood, to appraise relative claims, to evaluate
evidence, a fair and balanced approach, needs of the society, the constitutional
goals and above all a keen desire to do justice. None of these aspects are dealt
with in the syllabus prescribed at law colleges. If training is imparted to an
impressionable mind, not contaminated by some of the prevailing undesirable
Practices in vogue in the present day Bar. amongst others by judges who have
mastered the art of rendering justice, the same can be acquired. In order there-
fore to equip a fresh law graduate to be a good judge a pre-service training is
indispensable. Similarly, those who enter state judicial service at grass roots
level will equally need training in the art of rendering justice. While the basic
tenets of training in respect of both may be same. the duration may vary de-
pending upon the minimum qualification prescribed for becoming eligible for
entering service. The Law Commission must cater to the needs for pre-service
{raining at both the levels, institutional as well as practical training. ”

1. Civil Justice Committee in its Report, para 8, page 183, observed that “The rule in
force in certain provinces required the candidates to have practised at the Bar for a period
of three years or more furnished no guarantee that the candidates have acquired any real
useful experience.”

12


CHAPTER IV
SCHEME OF TRAINING

4.1. A comprehensive training scheme must comprehend the institutional
format, scope and content of training, the duration of training, the syllabus
and the faculty. Each limb may now separately be examined.

INSTITUTIONAL. FORMAT

4.2. Only two recognised institutions are at present functioning for impart-
ing training to judicial officers. They are:—

(i) Andhra Pradesh State Judicial Academy of Administration at
Secunderabad; and

(ii) North Eastern Judical Officers Training Institute at Guwahati.

A training institute for judicial officers was set up by the Government of Maha-
Tashtra at Nagpur in the year 1972, but it appears to have been wound up in
1978 on the spacious plea that the cost of maintaining institute far outweighs the
bencfits. The Government of Gujarat has set up a training institute for labour
judiciary named Gandhi Labour Institute at Ahmedabad. This was in pursuance
of a recommendation made by the Gujarat Labour Law Review Committee in
1974. The Chief Justice of India in his blueprint has adopted the suggestion
put forward in the resolution adopted by the joint conference of Chief Justices,
Chief Ministers and Law Ministers held on 31st August—Ist September, 1985,
in New Delhi which recommended the setting up of an Academy by the Central
Government for imparting training to judicial officers with a view to improving
their quality and efficiency. At a conference on the Indian Legal System orga-
nised by the Indian Law Institute. to celebrate its silver jubilee in February,
1983, the Committee on judicial reforms expressed an opinion that “it was agreed
that a training college or a college and research institute be established for
Judges and that refresher course be introduced for judicial officers to keep them
abreast of developments in law and to inculcate decision making skills.
The importance of a training centre or college for Judges was emphasis-
ed and so also the importance of continuing legal education”. The
draft scheme prepared by the officers of the Department of Justice,
Ministry of Law and Justice, envisages setting up of regional institutions in four
zones of the country for providing training facilities for judicial officers. There
is in vogue. in various States, a method of imparting practical training by attach-
ing entrants to judicial service to Judges of some standing. The present system.
method and facility for imparting training to judicial officers is wholly inade-
quate and it has in no way helped the judges to acquire proficiency in the art
of rendering justice. Jt is absolutely necessary to set up a Central Academy
at a suitable place in the country for providing intensive training to new entrants
to Indian Judicial Service. All those who qualify at a competitive examination
and are recruited to Indian Judicial Service and are allocated to the States shall
have to take training in the Academy. The Academy may suitably be located
at a central place. The Chief Justice has recommended Bangalore as the seat
of the Academy which, if otherwise found to be suitable, may be accepted.

1, Report of Labour Law Review Committee, Gujarat, 1974, Ch. 4, para 19,

13
3—5 M of LJ/87


14
SCOPE OF TRAINING

4.3. What ought to be the scope of training must next engage our attention.
In recent years, expectations from Judiciary have increased manifold. Widen-
ing scope of locus standi, public interest litigation, epistolary jurisdiction, relax-
ing considerably the mandate of procedural laws, legal aid and Lok Adalats,
have contributed to the expanding horizon of judicial duties and functions.
Union and State Governments accepting the mandate of part IV of the Consti-
tution, have enacted plethora of legislations with a view to improving the lot
of the poor, the down-trodden and the deprived. The labour laws have brought
to fore a different kind of causes and controversies. Members of the Judiciary
aiming to translate into action the concept of socio-economic justice within the
framework of the Constitution must be fully equipped to meet the challenges
facing the Judiciary. This equipment can come from institutional training.
The scope of training must comprehend all these aspects. The Commission
is of the view that the recommendations of the Omrod Committee of the United
Kingdom would not be adequate for imparting sufficient training to the new
entrants to the judiciary. That Committee recommended the setting up of an
institute of professional legal status to offer continuing legal education in five
broad sections:—

(i} Courses in Judicial duties;
(ii) Refresher courses:
(iii) Courses in new legislation;
(iv) Specialist’s courses; and
(v) Inter-disciplinary courses.

Undoubtedly, courses in judicial duties may include topics such as fair and
unbiased approach, critical appreciation of evidence, object and purpose behind
legislation and achievement of constitutional goals. If such be the splitting-up
of heads then, of course, the five broad sections indicated by the Omrod Com-
mittee may provide adequate scope for imparting training to judicial officers.
While broadly indicating syllabus, topics to be included in the three distinct
courses will be specifically set out. Suffice it to say at this stage that the train-
ing must be comprehensive so as to equip a fresh young entrant to judicial
service with all such qualifications as would make him an ideal and useful
judge. पर

DURATION OF TRAINING COURSE

4.4. What should be the length of training is not easy to answer? The
period may vary for different categories of entrants to judicial service. The
virtual indispensability of training is for that class of entrants to judicial service
who would be fresh law graduates, recruited on the result of a competitive exa-
mination. Their exposure to law would be what they learnt in the law colleges.
The academy atmosphere and the court atmosphere materially differ. Un-
doubtedly, innovative approaches such as, moot courts and case method system
have to some extent helped the students in law colleges to have a glimpse into
the working of the court system. However, this peripheral knowledge could
hardly be said to be adequate for being effectively posted as a Judge. At any
rate, the curriculum vitae in the law colleges do include procedural laws but
not, the art of advocacy, recording of evidence, decision-making process and
writing of judgements. Further, a day-to-day working in a court room requires
a skill to handle the Bar, to effectively dispose of frivolous objections, the ad-
journment mania etc. Therefore, extensive training is a sine qua non for such
fresh law graduates entering judicial service. In their case, the duration of
institutional training should extend to a petiod of one year. We consider the


15

suggestion in the blueprint of the Chief Justice of India that the foundation course
duration for new entrants as direct recruits as District Judges and other judges
should extend from 12 weeks to 18 weeks wholly inadequate. A fresh law
graduate in the age group of around 24 years should be exposed to intensive
training in an academic environment by giving him instructions in various topics
directly and indirectly connected with trial of causes and controversies not
merely by acquainting him with processual stages but to bring to bear upon the
subject, the wisdom, the sagacity, broad mindedness, catholicity of outlook,
constitutional culture and the goals of justice system. Such extensive training
cannot be compressed within a period of 12 to 18 weeks. Therefore, the Com-
mission is of the firm opinion that for entrants to Indian Judicial Service on the
result of a competitive examination from fresh law graduates, the institutional
training must extend over a period of one year. While discussing the syllabus,
the detailed heads of instruction would be pointed out.

4.5. An institutional training for a period of one year by itself would not
develop the faculties of trainee to such an extent as to qualify him for confer-
ment of power of adjudicating causes. A further practical training is absolu-
tely a must. The court atmosphere, the trial of cases, the art of advocacy cannot
be reproduced adequately in a moot court in the institution. Therefore, at the end
of training for a period of one year, the fresh recruit to Indian Judicial Service
should be given further training of a practical nature involving technique of
applied law by first posting him as a super-numerary officer in the court of Munsi€/
Civil Judge /Judicial Magistrate, First Class for a period of three months. There-
after, he must he posted in the same capacity and for the same duration in the
court of Civil Judge, Senior Division or the Judge having unlimited pecuniary
jurisdiction. He must then be posted for six weeks to sit with Metropolitan
Magistrate and other six weeks with Judge, Small Causes Court. In the next
three months, he must be attached to the court of District and Sessions Judge at
the District Headquarters.

4.6. During the period of his attachment with various Courts, he must per-
form the obligatory duties of sitting with the Judge concerned. Throughout
the working day, he must listen to all the cases being tried by the Principal
Judge of the Court. If the evidence is being recorded, he must record for
his own benefit the evidence. He must listen to all arguments. He must
read all the case papers of the cases being heard in his presence in the
court. At the conclusion of the trial after listening to the arguments, he must
prepare his own judgement. This is the extensive training to which he must
be exposed in all the courts to which he is attached for a period of one year.
All the judgments or orders written by him shall be submitted to the District
Judge who must, after calling for remarks from the concerned Principal Judge
with whom the supernumerary Judge was sitting, analytically examine the same
and prepare his own comments. Thereafter, the person concerned should be
called for personal discussion and the merits and demerits of his work should
be brought to his attention. The District Judge should then submit a compre-
hensive report to the High Court who would forward it with its own remarks
to the National Judicial Service Commission that the person concerned has ade-
quately utilised the training facilities provided to him. He must also clear a
test at the end of a training period of two years. Thereafter, he must be
given a substantive posting. Thus, the raw graduate, fresh from the law
college, will have an extensive training for a period of two years, both institu-
tional and practical, which it is hoped would adequately equip him to undertake
the task of deciding causes and controversies at the lowest level of judicial
service. This intensive training would adequately compensate for having no


16

practice at the Bar before joining judicial service. The Law Commission is.
of the opinion that the two years intensive training would outweigh the advan-
tage, if any, of three years practice at the Bar which often enough hardly helps
in the matter of equipping oneself,

4.7. The next cadre for whom training facility must be provided is the one
Of promotees from State Judicial Service to Indian Judicial Service, They must
be given institutional training for a period of 12 weeks, It is unnecessary 10
provide for them any practical training course because it is assumed that the
promotees would have to be in active judicial service of seven years and over
before being promoted to Indian Judicial Service. For them, in-service train-
ing as herein indicated, would be adequate.

4.8. It is a matter of regret for the Law Commission to note that while in
ali other disciplines workshops, seminars and symposia are lield at regular
intervals, the judges are hardly, if ever are exposed to it. In fact, the Law
Commission has information which it considers reliable that there is some
reluctance on the part of High Courts to permit the District Judges and Judges
subordinate to it to Participate in workshops and seminars, The Commission
came across an incident which is worth referring here. In one of the Northern
States. a body set up by the local Government and charged with a duty to ex-
pand legal aid service convened a workshop at a district level for setting up
local legal aid body. The workshop was presided over by a Judge of the
High Court having jurisdiction in the State. Surprisingly, neither the District
Judge. nor the Judges subordinate to the District Judge Participated in the
workshop. On an enquiry at the proper place, the information given was that
the High Court does not favour exposure of judges in such seminars and work-
shops. The Law Commission found this closed-door non-exposure approach
un-understandable. Therefore, over and above the in-service training for pro-
motees to Indian Judicial Service, there should be regular refresher courses for
each judge at the interval of 5 years. Workshops, seminars and symposia
may be held for discussing latest trends in the development of law, inter-dis-
ciplinary relations and expanding goals of justice system. It must be the
obligatory duty of the High Court to make provision for convening such work-
shops, seminars and symposia for District Judges with the active Participation
of the Judges of the High Courts, teachers from the faculty of law and leading
advocates. This is how comprehensive training is conceived for judicial
service.


CHAPTER V
SYLLABUS

5. Any training scheme, to be effective, useful and result-oriented, must
haye comprehensive syllabus. It must be frankly confessed that drawing up
a comprehensive syllabus by a body composed of non-academics is a challeng-
ing task. The Law Commission, with a view to acquainting itself about the
topics to “be ‘prescribed for training, has held long discussions with the Chief
Justice of India, Chief Justices of High Courts and some legal academics.
The Commission had a close look at the five years’ law course prescribed by
the Bar Council of India. Judgeship can. be appropriately styled as a multi-
disciplinary office. To be a judge worthy of his office, the incumbent must
know sociology, economics, humanities, constitutional culture, unbiased
approach, psychology to understand the litigant and witnesses, decision-making
Process, modern management techniques and, above all, social orientation of
rural society, problems of poverty and the problems of the neglected sections
of the society, such as members of the scheduled tribes, scheduled castes and
the underdog. To draw up a comprehensive syllabus incorporating all these
topics is a difficult task. To some extent. the Commission is relieved from
undertaking this exercise in view of the blueprint submitted by the Chief Jus-
tice of India in which comprehensive syllabus has been drawn up. The same is
being annexed here as Appendix II to this report for ready reference. The
authorities in charge of the academy proposed to be set up for imparting train-
ing in collaboration with the National Judicial Service Commission will draw
up a comprehensive syllabus for training in the academy. Without being
exhaustive, those topics which must be given priority may be briefly set out
bereunder:—

SOCIOLOGY OF LAW

(1) Goals of justice system:

(2) Role of judiciary in the development of society:

(3) Concept of justice:
(4) Goals set out in the Constitution of India:

(5) Conciliation, not confrontation, as a method for resolution of dis-
putes;

(6) Method of expeditious disposal of causes and controversies;
(7) Problems of poverty:

(8) Affirmative State action or positive discrimination in favour of the
weaker sections of the society;

(9) Recent decisions of the Supreme Court of India indicating the direc-
tion in which law is moving.

MODERN COURT MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES

(1) Internal management of office, including the computerised manage-
ment;
(2) Inter-relations with allied branches, such as Bar, Police, Jail, etc;

7


18
(3) Classification of records;
(4) Preservation of old records, including micro-filming of them, etc.

CRIMINAL
(1) Problems of victims of crime;
(2) Sentencing process;

(3) Approach in the matter of violation of socially beneficient legisla-
tions, such as Minimum Wages Act, Bonded Labour Abolition Act,
शा;

(4) Theory of punishment.

PROCEDURE
(1) Important provisions of Procedural laws, both civil and criminal;
(2) Art of writing judgements.


CHAPTER VI
FACULTY

6. Selecting competent faculty for manning training course in the academy
is of vital importance. Ordinarily, every member of the society comes direc-
tly or indirectly in contact with the judiciary. Expectation from the judiciary
by the society is very high. An honest, intelligent and upright judge inspires
so much confidence in the society that any investment in producing such judges
should not be viewed from the standpoint of cost benefit syndrome. To train
and produce such judges, the academy will have to assemble highly qualified
members of the faculty. It can be broadly indicated here that they must be
drawn from outstanding legal academics, justices of the High Court and Supreme
Court, senior and outstanding members of the Bar, and even leading citizens
rendering social service though not equipped by any formal legal knowledge.
The last category would draw up a picture of a judge in the society and what
the society expects of him. The authorities in charge of the Academy and
the National Judicial Service Commission will draw up a detailed requirement
of the members of the faculty and select the same.

19


CHAPTER VII

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE ACADEMY AND THE INCIDENTAL
MANAGERIAL ASPECTS

7.1. The Academy hercin recommended must be set up by the Govern-
ment of India. The Chief Executive Officer of the ‘Academy would be the
Director who would be in overall charge of the administration of the Academy.
In order to avoid multiplicity of bodies dealing with one or other aspects of
judicial services, National Judicial Service Commission should act as an
advisory body for the Academy. Broad policy framework should be laid down
by the National Judicial Service Commission in the capacity of an advisory
body of the Academy. The function of selecting the Faculty must be entrust-
ed to a committee of experts to be set up by the National Judicial Service
Commission in consultation with the director of the Academy. The Director
will set up a committee of himself and four senior members of the faculty to
be in charge of the internal administration of the Academy. The adminis-
trative staff may be selected and appointed as per the requirements of the Aca-
demy by this committee. पर .

7.2. Separate reports are being submitted by the Law Commission dealing
with different terms prescribed with reference to judicial reforms. | However,
they form a chain not permitting any link to be broken. The Law Commis-
sion in its earlier report’ referred to National Judicial Service Commission
while dealing with the question of Indian Judicial Service. The body therein
conceived is to be charged with multifarious duties, one such being to be the
advisory body for the Academy recommended in this report. Its constitution,
composition and functions would form the subject matter of a separate report
to be handed in shortly. It is accordingly suggested that National Judicial
Service Commission will be the advisory body for the Academy of which Direc-
tor will be the Chief Executive Officer.

1. LCL, One hundred and Sixteenth Report.

204


CHAPTER VIII
REGIONAL TRAINING CENTRES

8. The need for imparting training to those who would enter State Judicial
Service cannot any more be under-estimated. The reasons for imparting
training to the members of Indian Judicial Service will mutatis mutandis apply
for imparting training to the entrants to the State Judicial Service. The dura-
tion of the institutional training for such recruits must not be less than three
months. This is predicated on the assumption that the States would retain
minimum practice qualification at the Bar for entering into State Judicial Ser-
vice. However, every State cannot afford to set up its own judicial training
centre nor would it require the facility of such a training centre for few entrants
to its judicial service from year to yeat. Therefore, the proper thing to do is
to set up regional training centres catering to the needs of three to four States
contiguously situated. To illustrate, the training centre at Secundrabad in
Andhra Pradesh must cater to the needs of Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Karnataka.
One centre may be set up at Nagpur. There was alreatly one there as pointed
out earlier but it has been wound up. It must be restarted. The training
centre at Nagpur must cater to the needs of Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh,
Rajasthan and Gujarat. The third training centre must be set up at Allahabad
which must cater to the needs of Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab, Haryana,
Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. The centre at Guwahati which is already function-
ing must also cater to the needs of West Bengal, Sikkim and Orissa. The
States taking advanage of the various centres must contribute proportionately
to the cost and expenses of running the centre. The topics to be selected for
training may be appropriately selected from those herein above mentioned sub-
ject to the requirement that goals of justice system, art of writing judgment and
court management mus be among the core subjects.

The Law Commission accordingly recommends the setting up of an aca-

demy, regional training centres, courses for pre-service and in-service
training and allied subjects.

(D. A. DESAT)
Chairman

(S. C. GHOSE)
Member

(Vv. S. RAMA DEVI)
Member—Secretary

New Delhi, dated the 28th November, 1986.

21

4-5 Mof L & J/87


TABLE

TRAINING FACILITIES FOR JUDICIAL OFFICERS IN VARIOUS STATES

APPENDIX 1

S.No. State

Officers to whom
training is im-
parted

Nature of training

Training Institute Other Forums

Duration of — Future Plans
Training

Other Remarks

1. Andhra Pradesh

District Munsifs

Andhra Pradesh
State Judicial Aca-
demy of Administra-

Refresher course
for all Officers
under contempla-

tion, Secundrabad. tion.
2. Assam, (i) Munsifsand North Eastern (i) 4 months
Meghalaya, Judicial Judicial Officers
Manipur and Magistrates Training Institute
Nagaland (ii) Additional Guwahati. (ii) 1 month
District and
Sessions Judge
3. Bihar No training Insti-
tute and no provi-
sion for refresher
courses
4. Delhi Judicial Service Attached to civil 4 weeks To set up a trai-
Officers judges & Session ning institute
Judges
5. Gujarat Civil Judges In courts Depending on No objection to
(Jr. Division) the experience training _ institute
at Bar of the at the Central level

candidate con-
cerned

coq


APPENDIX I—Contd.

1 2 3 5 6 7
6. Jammu and Kashmir Training —_ courses
for new recruits and
refresher —_ courses
for senior judicial
officers were started
in 1972 but have
ceased to function
since long
7. Karnataka Munsifs of 1980 At High Court Setting up of
batch Training Institute
under active con-
sideration
8. Kerala (i) Munsifs and (i) At High Court (i) 6 months
Judicial Magis- (ti) Courses conducted
trates IT Class by Indian Institute
(ii) District Judges of Public Adminis-
and Chief tration and Institute
Judicial of Criminology and
Magistrate Forensic Sciences
9. Madhya Pradesh Civil Judges Under District 6 months
Judges
10. Maharashtra Civil Judges cum Under District 6 months udicial Officers
Magistrates Judges raining Institute
Nagpur started in
1972 but closed in
1978 as expenses
were not commen-
surate with advan-
tages derived
11... Orissa (i) Munsifs Inservice training (i) Provision Favour _ training
(ii) Officers of for a refresher course for 2 years programmes with
Lower and which may extensive refresher
Higher Judicial be shorte- courses
Services ned by High

Court



APPENDIX I—Coneld.

2

6

12.

(i) Punjab &
Haryana
(i) Himachal Pradesh

Judicial Officers

Training course at
Institute of Crimino-
logy and Forensic
Sciences

Himachal Pradesh
propose to train
their new officers
at Himachal Pra-
desh Institute of
Public Administra-
tion

13,

Tamil Nadu

(i) Judicial Magis-
trate IT Class
(ii) Judicial Magis-
trate Ist Class
(iii) State Judicial
Service Officers

1) 39 weeks

(i) State Departments
i- (ii) 3 weeks

(ii) Institute of Crimi
yology and Forensic}
Sciences

(ili) (i & ii)

Training of judicial
officers at Central
level not necessary

14,

Uttar Pradesh

Judicial Service
Officers

Administrative Trai- 6-8 weeks
ning Institute,
Nainital

No refresher course
organised at present

15.

West Bengal

Junior Judicial
Officers

With Senior Judicial Short duration
Officers

16.

Gandhi Labour
Institute, Ahmedabad

Other Centres for Training of Judicial Officers

Labour Judiciary

If the Institute has
capacity, can it be
used for _ training
other judicial offi-
cers also?

17,

Indian Institute of
Public Administration
New Delhi

Short duration

Offer courses in Ad-
ministrative Law
and Criminal Jus-
tice Administration

18.

Institute of Criminology

and Forensic Sciences
New Delhi.

Short duration

Offer courses in
Crime and Justice,
Criminology and
Forensic Sciences

XJ
=


1. INTRODUCTION

It is absolutely Imperative for improving the quality and efficiency of the Judiciary to set up an Academy
for training of Judicial Officers at an All India level. The need for such an Academy was _ recognised at the Joint
Conference of Chief Justices, Chief Ministers and Law Ministers held on 31st August — Ist September, 1985 in New
Delhi and a resolution almost to the same effect was passed. The resolution provided that the Academy should be
set up by the Central Government with the Chief Justice of India as the Visitor and that the Academy should be under
the supervision of a Governing body to be appointed in consultation with the Chief Justice of India. It is therefore
Proposed to set up such an Academy to be called “National Academy for Training of Judicial Officers’,

U. OBJECTIVES

Training for the entrants and in-service training of officials for state and union services is now an accepted na-
tional priority. The need for such training for Judicial Officers has been nationally neglected so far, with the rather
disastrous consequences to development and justice. Any investment made in the training of Judicial Officers is an
investment in democracy and national development.

The entrants to judicial services need foundational training in the administration of justice. They must be
equipped with skills and competence in their daily tasks; they must, at the same time, stand informed by a wider
perspective of national development (including science and technology policy planning) ; nation-building and national
integration.

The in-service training will also be oriented to the development of the wider perspective, along with endowment
in competence for justice-system management.

The Academy will also design advanced seminars/colloquia for senior applatele justices. On many issues—es-
pecially the role of law in science and technology-—-advances symposia will be designed for senior appellate justices
to impart to them necessary cognitive competence.

Ill. VENUE

The National Academy may be set up in Bangalore where fortunately space is available.

IV. GOVERNING BODY
The Governing Body of the National Academy shall consist of the following :

1. Chief Justice of India . Visitor

2. Retired Chief Justice of India or retired Judge of the Supreme Court nomi- Chairman
nated by the President of India in consultation with the Visitor.

3. Two Judges of the Supreme Court of India to be nominated by the Chairman Members 2
in consultation with the Visitor.

4. Four Chief Justices of High Courts to be nominated by the Chairman in con- Members 4
sultation with the Visitor.

5. Minister for Law and Justice of the Government of India. : पु . Member 1

6. Minister Incharge of Department of Personnel and Administration - Member 1

7. Minister of State for Law and Justice of the Government of India. » Member I

8, Chairman of the Law Commission of India. पु : : पु » Member 1

9. Two Ministers of Law from the States to be nominated by the Govt. of India| Members 2

, in ‘consultation with the Visitor.

10, Law Secretary of the Government of India. . . . . . - Member 1
11, Attorney General of India . पु : : : : पु पु - Member 1
12. Director, The Indian Law Institute . . . : . . - Member 1
13. Director, The National Law School of India. : पु : पु - Member 1
14... Three Law Academics to be nominated by the Chairman in Consultation Members 3
with the visitor

15, The Director . . ‘ + Member 1

TOTAL 20

25


26
V. FINANCES

The National Academy will be financed by the Government of India but ; .
of the Judicial Officers who come from the States will have to be borne by the respertive Stare Gee ose
Government of India may if possible, arrive at a mutually acceptable arrangement by whick the State Gone and the,
may be persuaded to bear some part of the cost of running of the National A ici है
States will be getting the benefit. ड़ cademy since the Judicial Officers of the

VI. FACULTY
The National Academy will have broadly the following staff:—

1. Director who may be a retired High Court Judge taken on tenure basis or a seni ici;
nominated by the Chairman in consultation with the Visitor. a senior Judicial Officer, to be

2. Additional Director who shall be a Law Academic to be nomi airman in consultation
with the Visitor. "९ nominated by the Chairman in cor

3, Five Members of the Faculty to be selected by a Selection Commi i
ing Covell yy mmittee to be appointed by the Govern-
4. Administrative Officer to be appointed by the Governing Council and the supportive staff.

The proposal in regard to the staff is not comprehensive or exhaustive and it beco.
eas may ecessat
additional staff as the Academy progresses. y Become ni ry to have

VIL CONTENT AND DURATION
The Courses will be of three types :
(a) Foundation Courses for new entrants ;
(b) In-service refresher courses ;

(c) Seminars and symposia for appellate judges.
DURATION
Course (a) : . व . . . . . . For direct recruits to District Judges and oth पु
12 weeks for District Judges; 18 weeks for other page *
Course (bh): 10 Weeks.
Couse(c)i 5B Weeks.

CONTENTS FOR THE THREE TYPES OF COURSES (TO BE SUITABLY ADOPTED).
A. Court Management

A. 1 Docket Management (Arrears)

A. 2 Record Systems.

A. 3. Discipline over staff.

A. 4 Computerized Management and Information Retrieval to the extent applicable.
A. 5 Management of Ex-parte Stay, Interim Orders.

A. 6 Management of Adjournment Motions.

A. 7 Library Management.

A. 8 Monitoring Judicial Performance.

A. 9 Patterns of Feedbook to High Courts.
A.10 Management of Legal Aid including Lok Adalats.

B. Training in systems Management
B. 1 Understanding of the law as a mutually intricating cultural, institutional, normative behavioural system
B.

2 Systemic interrelations :

(a) Jail

(b) Police

(c) Bar

(व) Legal/social activists.

(e) Law colleges/departments.
(f) High Court.


27
C. Law and Legal Principles

Fundamental principles of procedural jurisprudence.

Constitutional Law, Administrative Law and other important All India legislation.
Forensic science and criminology.

Broad principles of law of evidence, evidenciary problems in trial courts, etc.
Procedural laws : proper use of procedural laws and preventing their misuse or abuse.
Principles governing exercise of judicial discretion.

Eliminating causes of delay.

Art of judgement writing-civil and criminal.

Maintenance of decency and decorum in courts including certain aspects of work of Judicial Officers,
court-craft, code of conduct and ethics.

C.10 Accounts and financial matters.

229799797299599
Lor कक के ०७० कल

. 0. Substantive Law developments
D.1 Methods of keeping abreast with the decisional law of High Courts and the Supreme Court.
D.2 Orientation to the nature of Judicial process.
D.3 Problems of the Scheduled Castes/Tribes, Women, Children and Weaker Sections of Socicty, problems
of rural poverty, exploitation and injustice.
D.4 Awareness of legislative developments.
10.5 Awareness of plans and policies designed to fulfil the Directive Principles of State Policy.

E. Sentencing Discretion.

E.1 Patterns of Sentencing Discretion.
E.2 Probations of Offenders.
E.3 Socio-economic Offences.

. E.4 Crimes against weaker sections of society—problems of sentensing discretion.
E.5 Crimes against the State—sentencing policies and patterns.
8.6 Constitutionality of sentencing discretion.
E.7 Feedbook from the Supreme Court and High Courts on sentencing discretion.

F, Related Matters of Judicial Policy.
F.1 Awarding of costs.
F.2 Compensating for violation of fundamental rights.
F.3 Human rights in the administration of civil and criminal justice.
F.4 Science and technology developments in relation to the law.
F.5 National development and Integration through the law.
F.6 Interaction between legislative policies and the judicial process.
F.7 Interaction between executive policies and the judicial process.

6. General Orientation

G.1 Cultural and socio-economic conditions and their impact on legal and judicial administration.”

G.2 Creating awareness of new judicial thinking and using law as an instrument of socio-economic change
and a vehicle for delivery of social justice : combating exploitation and injustice through the process
of law

6.3 Visit to rural areas : discussions with interested groups, pressure groups and victim groups.

G.4 Legal Aid in all its aspects and dimensions.

6.5 Lok Adalats.

The subjects mentioned above at Items A to G shall form part of the courses for both types of courses at (a)

and (b) but so far as seminars and symposiums mentioned in (c) are concerned, the subjects at items D, F and G shall
form the subject-matter of such seminars and symposiums.

Practical Training

The trainee Judges

who are new entrants and who are doing foundation course mentioned in (a) shall also
be given training as part of the foundation courses. *

‘The practical training will include sitting with


|
|
!

28

senior presiding officers of the civil. criminal and revenue courts and they will also be instructed in regard to pro-
cedural matters such as—

I CIVIL
(a) Daily cause list,
(b) Calling out of cases,and the situation arising on the lawyers or the party not attending ; control of court
proceedings.
(c) Issue of notices and scrutiny of service reports and the orders and procedure for ex parte proceedings
(d) Court decorum and ethics,
(०) Examination of Parties before issues under Order X CPC,
(f) Framing of issues,
(g) Maintenance of diary and fixing dates for evidence.
(h) Recording of evidence and problems arising therein.

(i) Questions of relevancy and admissibility and dealing with objections re : want of stamp and registration |
of document.

(j) Closing of evidence.

(0) Arguments.

(1) Cutting down of delays : preventing abuse or misuse of procedural laws.

(m) Delivery of judgements.

(n) Court registers-their maintenance and scrutiny.

(0) Functioning of revenue department, police department and other government department.

I. CRIMINAL

(a) Putting in of challans/filing of private complaints and their registration.

(9) Bail/Remand work.

(c) Procedure of issuing notices, summons and warrants, their services on the accused/respondent and the
agency responsible for service,

(d) Framing of charge, essentials therefor and the necessity for hearing both the sides for the purpose.

(९) Recording of plea of guilty/non-guilty.

(f) Maintenance of diary and finding cases for evidence.

(g) Prosecution/complainant’s evidence.

(0) Examination of the accused under section 313 of the Cr. P.C. its significance and mode,

(i) Defence List, its scrutiny and recording of defence.

(j) The need/necessity of summoning and the procedure for recording evidence of court witnesses where
necessary in particular cases. ‘

(k) Avoidance of avoidable adjournments in hearing of cases and arguments and the practical method for
securing attendance of witnesses.

(I) Cutting down of delays and preventing misuse or abuse of procedural laws.

(m) Hearing arguments.

(n) Judgement.

(0) Court Registers—their maintenance and scrutiny. cn

Regional Academy.

The foundation course outlined above must be followed by a course of training at the State level for a period
of at least two to three months so that the trainee Judge should acquire sufficient familiarity with local laws and
legal practices as also with the local socio-economic conditions and local problems and difficulties. This can be
done best by setting up in the first instance regional academies and subsequently State academies, but since the
setting up of regional academics and State academies may take some time and moreover it would require a large
outlay of expenditure, it is suggested that there should be a core visiting faculty provided by National. Academy
which can visit every State capital for giving legal training to the trainee Judges after the foundation course. This _
faculty can be assisted by local faculty provided by the State Government. This may require additional teaching
staff at the National Academy but it would be worthwhile to have more staff at the National Academy for providing _
the visiting faculty than to immediately set up regional and State academies. The ultimate goal should however be *
that every State ‘should set up a State-level academy for Providing training to trainee Judges following’
foundation course. It would be useful for the trainee Judges who are entrants to watch the conduct of cases in
the concerned High Court for about a week after the completion of the foundation course consisting of theoretical..
and practical training, mentioned above, so that they may imbibe the judicial culture, broaden the horizon of their ~

wledge and acquire familiarity with the judicial process, 74 mo

MGIPCBE—S2—5 M of 1J/87—30-11-87—1010.