a

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH
REPORT
ON
METHOD OF APPOINTMENTS TO
SUBORDINATE COURTS/
SUBORDINATE JUDICIARY

DECEMBER, 1986


LRRALA
One Hundred Seventeenth Report

S. No. Page No. Para Line For Read

1 1 1.1 18 he the

2 2 1.1 14 Socity Society

3 2 Footnote 2 1 2

4 2 Footnote 2 LIC LCI.

5 2 Footnote 3 2 3

6 2 Footnote 3 LCI LCl,

7 5 Footnote 1 Legar Legal

8 5 Footnote 1 534 554

9 6 2.4 1 Cleaning Glean‘ng
10 8 2.11 From below 2 to the

ie 13 Footnote 1 Para Page

12 21 8 From below 4 mus must

13 25 App वि 18 applatele appellate
14 27 App Il 19 Probations Probation

15 27 App 21 Sentensing Sentencing


LAW COMMISSION OF [NDIA

One Hundred Eighteenth Repert on Method of Appointments to Subordinate
Courts/Subordinate Judiciary.

ERRATA
Page No. Para No. & Bine Nos. For Read
1. 1.1 2 Monolithic Monolithic
4, 2.2 From below 4 But But.
5. 2.3 9 Governor, Governor.
6. 2.4 From below 17-18 ad-hoc ad-hoc
6. 2.4 ” » (10 athough although
7. 2.5(b) 8 Andhra Pradesh Andhra Pradesh,
10. 4.1 From below 18 eleceted elected
12. 4.7 22 Shiqdar-i- Shiqdar-i-
Shiqdaran Shiqd’ara’n
12. 4.7 23-24 “Munshif-i- “Munsif-i-
Munsifan Minsifan
of the adminis- was in charge of
tration was in Administration
charge of civil of Civil Justice.”

justice.”’


B. A. DI'SAT Tel. No. 384475
Chairman

विधि आयोग

LAW COMMISSION

भारत सरकार
D.O. No. F. 2(6)/86-LC GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Shri Ashok Kumar Sen, शास्त्री भवन
Minister for Law and Justice, SHASTRI BHAWAN
Government of India, नई दिल्‍नी
Shastri Bhavan, NEW_ DELHI
New Delhi. December 26, 1986.

Dear Minister for Law and Justice,

The Law Commission is happy to forward its Sth report
(118th Report of the Law Commission) dealing with item No. 4; The
Method of Appointments to Subordinate Courts /Subordinate
Judiciary: of the terms of reference in the context of studying judi-
cial reforms.

As you must have noted by now that the reports submitted
by the Law Commission form a chain and they are interlinked and
inter-connected.

As I was happy to inform you in my earlier letter, the Law
Commission has by now given adequate and enough material for
undertaking the task of ushering in judicial reforms by setting-up -
Gram Nyayalayas (114th Report of the Law Commission), setting-up
an All-India Judicial Service (116th Report of the Law Commission),
setting-up an Academy for Training Judicial Officers at all levels
(1170 Report of the Law Commission) and re-organising and re-
structuring of the subordinate courts /subordinate judiciary forming
part of the present report. You will immediately appreciate the inter-
connection and linkage between these reports. Coupled with this is
the Report on Central Tax Court (115th Report of the Law Commis-
sion). If all these reports submitted by now are effectively imple-
mented, it will have a visible impact on the backlog of cases in the
High Courts, easy access for the rural poor to the seat of justice. ex-
panding the horizons of knowledge of judicial personnel with a
view to equipping them with the philosophy of the Constitution. the
economic planning and the national expectation from the Judiciary.

You are more than aware that the structure of judiciary at
the State level has deteriorated to such an extent as to deprive it of
its glory and credibility. The present report will assist the Govern-
ment in re-structuring subordinate judiciary at State level by Parlia-
mentary legislation. The whole structure will undergo a change.

_ On the time-table of the Law Commission, the next topic of
enquiry is National Judicial Service Commission, a collegium for
judicial appointments and judicial service tribunal.

With regards.
Yours faithfully,
(Sd.)

(D. A. DESAD
Encl: A Report


Chapter I
Chapter ता
Chapter वा
Chapter 1५
Chapter V
Chapter VI

Annexure 1

Annexure IT

CONTENTS

Introductory

Recruitment to Subordinate Judiciary
Competence/Jurisdiction to deal with Subordinate Courts
Reorganization of Subordinate Judiciary

Views and Comments

Conclusions .

(iii)

PAGE


CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY

1.1. Court structure in India is pyramidic in nature. Unlike the Ame-
tican model of dual court system—federal and state—India has monolithie
system. The judicial service has practically the same structure with variations
in designations. Designations of courts connote their functions. They have been
derived principally from important codes prescribing procedure, the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, further embelli-
Shed by local statutes. Workload determines whether the Presiding Officer
should preside over both courts with power under the relevant statutes conferred
on him. The courts at the base level cater to the needs of the society in respect
of disputes not involving high pecuniary stakes though the designations of the
courts and the personnel manning them differ from State to State. By and
large, they fall into a pattern starting from the bottom.

At the base level, there are courts variously described as Munsif Magis-
trate or Civil Judge (J.D.): Judicial Magistrate First Class. In some States,
Munsif is also described as District Munsif. In some States, there are posts
of Judicial Magistrates, Second Class but they have ceased to exist. The situa-
tion as evident at present is that at the base level, there is the court of Munsif:
District Munsif/Magistrate or Civil Judge (J.D.)/JMFC. This is what is called
the court of primary or initial jurisdiction. Most of the disputes, subject to a
ceiling on pecuniary limit, are brought to these courts for their resolution. In
some States where workload does not justify existence of two separate cadres,
the Munsif is also invested with the power of Judicial Magistrate, First Class.
Similar is the situation with regard to Civil Judge (J.D.) as in the case of Maha-
tashtra and Gujarat. Members of this cadre, when posted in large urban areas,
are assigned either exclusively civil or exclusively criminal work. When they
are posted in Metropolitan areas as envisaged in section 6 and 8 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, they are described as Metropolitan Magistrates, and as
Chief Judicial Magistrate, as envisaged in section 12 of the Cr.P.C.

1.2. Vertically moving upward, the next set of courts are described as
courts of District and Sessions Judge which also include the courts of Addi-
tional Judge, Joint Judge or Assistant Judge. In some States, there is a court
called Court of Civil and Sessions Judge. These courts generally have un-
limited pecuniary jurisdiction and depending upon the power conferred on
the incumbent officer in charge of the court, it can handle criminal cases where
maximum punishment would not exceed seven years. In some States, these
courts with unlimited pecuniary jurisdiction are called courts of Civil Judge
(Senior Division) and in some States, they are described as Courts of Subordinate
Judge. Courts have also been set up under two statutes called the Provincial
Small Causes Court Act applicable to places other than Presidency Town and
the Presidency Town Small Causes Court Act applicable to Presidency Towns.
The first mentioned is subordinate to District Court and the last to High Court.
The judges in charge of these courts are designated as Small Causes Court
Judge, the first among equals called the Chief Judge of the Court. The Court
of the District and Sessions Judge at the district level is the Principal court
of original jurisdiction and is presided over by an officer called the District
and Sessions Judge. The designation district court is derived from the Code
of Civil Procedure and Sessions Court from the Code of Criminal Procedure.
As a tule, same officer invested with power under both the statutes presides over
the court known as District and Sessions Court.

1


2

1.3 The next hierarchical stage in the pyramidic structure of courts at
State level is the High Court which is the highest court set up under art, 214 of
the Constitution. The Supreme Court of India is the apex court at the national
level. This can be illustrated by diagram as shown in Annexure I, which will
be self-explanatory.

1.4. The courts herein delineated are called subordinate courts as the
expression is understood in article 236 of the Constitution which reads as under: —

“236. Interpretation.—In this Chapter. —

(a) the expression “district judge” includes judge of city civil court,
additional district judge, joint district judge, assistant district
judge, chief judge of a small cause court, chief Presidency magis-
trate, additional chief presidency magistrate, sessions judge,
additional sessions judge and assistant sessions judge;

(0) the expression “judicial service” means a service consisting ex-
clusively of persons intended to fill the post of district judge
and other civil judicial posts inferior to the post of district
judge.”

These courts deal with all the disputes of a civil nature or criminal nature as
per the powers conferred on the incumbent -presiding over the court. This is
one common vertical and hierarchical subordinate courts/subordinate judiciary
distinguishable from the American model of dual ६९७ up, Federal Judiciary and
State Judiciary.

1.5. The nomenclature of the courts as well as the designations of the
incumbents in charge of courts specify their functions referable to the various
provisions of the statutes prescribing civil and criminal procedure providing
for setting up of courts. To illustrate, Section 6 of the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1973 provides that besides the High Courts and the courts constituted
under any law other than the Code of Criminal Procedure, there shall be in
every State, the criminal courts of the following classes:—

(i) Courts of Sessions;

(ii) Judicial Magistrates of the First Class and in any Metropolitan area,
Metropolitan Magistrates;

(iti) Judicial Magistrates of the Second Class:

(iv). Executive Magistrates.

Similarly, section 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, envisages the setting
up of a district court. as principal civil court of original jurisdiction subordinate
to the High Court. Every State has enacted its own law for setting up courts
subordinate to the district court and variously described as herein-before indi-
cated. Ordinarily, the district court has jurisdiction over a district demarcated
as a unit of administration in every State also known as revenue district, but
cases are not unknown where there can be one district court having jurisdiction
over two revenue districts. In fact, every State is divided into districts as units
of administration and each district is divided into taluks/tehsils and each taluk/
tehsil comprises certain villages contiguously situated. These are but admini-
strative units. The court structure more or less corresponds with these admini-
strative units except in urban areas. Ordinarily, a court described as a court
of Munsif/District Munsif-cum-Magistrate or Civil Judge (J.D./Judicial Magis-
trate is set up at a taluk/tehsil level but given the quantum of institution of


3

causes and cases, such a court may have jurisdiction over more than one taluk/
tehsil. Similarly, depending upon the workload, a district court may have juris-
diction over more than one district. Small Causes Court are set up under either
the Provincial Small Causes Courts Act at district level or under the  Presi-
dency Town Small Causes Court Act in Presidency/Metropolitan Towns. This is
the infra-structure of the courts set up in India.

1.6. Terms of reference in relation to studying judicial reforms assigned
to the Law Commission requires it to examine:—

“4, the method of appointments to subordinate .courts/subordinate judi-

ciary”.

The Law Commission had drawn up its schedule of work keeping in view the
continuity and intetlinking of its reports. With a view to provide for decen-
tralisation of the system of administration of justice, the Law Commission re-
commended restructuring of courts at grass-roots level in its teport (114th Report
of the Law Commission) recommending “Gram Nyayalaya’. The participatory
forum for administration of justice therein recommended would need re-struc-
turing subordinate judiciary having an impact on subordinate courts, that again
can be described as grass-root court. The next vertical stage is that of a
district court presided over by a District Judge. The Law Commission was
Tequired to study, examine and opine on the question of formation of an all-
India judicial service. Accordingly, as a next step, that exercise was under-
taken and a detailed report (116th Report of the Law Commission) has been
submitted to the Government recommending formation, constitution and setting
up of All-India Judicial Service. It would immediately appear that there would
still be subordinate courts manned by subordinate judiciary between the “Gram-
Nyayalaya™ and the Distriét Judge. The all-India judicial service recommended
by the Law Commission in view of the constraints imposed by article 312
could be set up at the level of the District Judge, as the expression is under-
stood in article 236 of the Constitution, The All-India Judicial Service which
has been styled in that report as ‘Indian Judicial Service’ would be manned by
Personnel recruited from three independent sources. One such source is the
State Judicial Service. Therefore, with a view to scientific structuring of Indian
Judicial Service, it is inevitable that the State Judicial Service must be restruc-
tuged where the promotion to an all-India service is at a national level, all units
coming within ‘the zone of consideration for promotion must be more or evenly
Placed. The additional compelling reason for examning the method of appoint-
ment to subordinate courts/subordinate judiciary is that it is going to provide
feed-back for 40% of posts in Indian Judicial Service. The Indian Judicial
Service is to be structured on an all-India level. If the feed-back is to come
from the States by way of promotions to Indian Judicial Service, it is inevi-
table that the arena of selection must be brought on a common denominator.
Accordingly, apart from the fact that the Government of India in the terms of
reference drawn up by it desired that, the Law Commission should examine
the method of appointments to subordinate courts/subordinate judiciary as part
of a package for judicial reforms which includes setting up of Indian Judicial
Service, a close look at the present; structure of subordinate judiciary in various
States is unavoidable so as to bring it on a common denominator so that it
can provide a feed-back for promotion to Indian Judicial Service from amongst,
by and large. equals. That is the raison detre of the present report.

CHAPTER II
RECRUITMENT TO SUBORDINATE JUDICIARY
2.1. Chapter VI in Part VI of the Constitution deals with subordinate

courts. Article 233 provides that appointments of persons to be, and the posting
and promotion of, district judges in any State shall be made by the Governor


4

of the State in consultation with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in rela-
tion to such States. Sub-article (2) of article 233 provides that a person not
already in the service of the Union or of the State shall only be eligible to be
appointed as district judge if he has been for not less than 7 years an advocate
or pleader and is recommended by the High Court for appointment. Article
234 provides for recruitment of persons other than district judges to the judi-
cial service. Appointments of persons other than district judges to the judicial
service of a State shall be made by the Governor of the State in accordance with
tules made by him in that behalf after consultation with the State Public Ser-
vice Commission and with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to
such State(s). Aticle 235 provides that the control over district courts and
courts subordinate thereto including the posting and promotion of, and the
grant of leave to, persons belonging to the judicial service of a State and hold-
ing any post inferior to the post of a district judge shall be vested in the High
Court. A conspectus of these articles would show that the subordinate judi-
ciary would consist of a district judge and persons other than and subordinate
to district judge. Recruitment to the cadre of district judge can be made
from two sources, viz., promotion from the subordinate judiciary and direct
Tecruitment from the Bar. In the matter of promotion from the subordinate
judiciary, power is conferred on the Governor to give promotion in consultation
with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to it. In the matter
of recruitment from the Bar, the appointment can be made on the recommen-
dation of the High Court. Thus, the High Court has a preponderating voice
in the matter of recruitment to the cadre of district judge, whereas power of
making appointments vests in the Government.

POWER OF APPOINTMENT

2.2. In the matter of recruitment of persons other than a district’ judge
to the judicial service of the State, the power to make appointments is conferr-
ed on the Governor which he exercises in accordance with rules made by him
in that behalf after consultation with the State Public Service Commission and
with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State. Though
at one point of time. a doubt was expressed whether the State Public Service
Commission and the High Court had to be consulted in the matter of making
rules or in ‘the matter of making appointments ag envisaged by article 234.
The view that’ has held the field is that the Governor shall make the recruitment
rules in consultation with the State Public Service Commission and the High
Court exercising jurisdiction over it. In exercise of the power conferred by art.
234, every State has made rules for recruitment of persons other than district
judges to the State Judicial Service. These rules broadly lay down the age
of entry, academic qualifications, practice at the Bar, if any, ef al. Except
where recruitment is by promotion, the State Public Service Commissions under-
take the programme of recruitment on an indent received from the High Court
about the existing and possible vacancies in the cadre in the near future. The
State Public Service Commission invites applications by issuing advertisements
setting out therein the minimum qualifications and other requirements. Some
States provide for written cxamination to be conducted by Public Service Com-
missions and/or a viva voce test. Some other States provide for a viva voce test
by members of the State Public Service Commission. Some States provide for
inviting a sitting Judge of the High Court to be nominated by the Chief Justice
for participating in the viva voce test as an expert. But while he can record
his opinion, he is not entitled to participate in the decision making process or in
assigning marks, evaluating the performance of each candidate. The Public
Service Commission submits a list of candidates recommended by it as being


5

cligible for appointment. The State Government makes the appointments from
the list. The relevant rules in this behalf vary from State to State. A com-
prehensive table setting out the broad requirements of rules in cach State, as
made avilable to the Law Commission representing a wide spectrum of infor-
mation, is set out in Annexure IT.

AGENCY FOR RECRUITMENT

2.3. Consistent with the constitutional provision, most of the States have,
in their respective rules for subordinate judiciary, conferred power on the State
Public Service Commission to select and recommend candidates for posts in
subordinate judiciary where the recruitment is from the market. As there is
a hierarchy in the subordinate judiciary. before one vertically reaches the post
of District and Sessions Judge, there are posts in the subordinate judiciary to
which recruitment can be made by promotion. Where recruitment is thus by
promotion, power is conferred on the High Court alone to make the recom-
mendation even though the power to make appointment vests in the Governor,
State of Karnataka has made a bold departure in this behalf. Even in the mat-
ter of recruitment. from the market. to posts in the subordinate judiciary, a
committee of five judges of the High Court constituted by the High Court of
Karnataka makes arrangements for both written and viva voce tests. In accor-
dance with the metit list prepared by this Committee, appointments are made
by the Governor. The information from Assam in this behalf is rather sketchy.
From whatever is made available to the Law Commission, it appears that re-
cruitment to what is described as Grade II] in subordinate judicial service is
from two sources. Fifty per cent of posts are filled in by recruitment on the
recommendation of the State Public Service Commission by the Governor and
the remaining 50%, of posts are filled in on the recommendation of the High
Court by the Governor. The State Public Service Commission, in order to
select. candidates. holds a written examination. The High Court, while making
its recommendation, holds only a viva voce test and the recruitment is from
the members of the Bar. The State of Haryana has a different model in this
behalf. It has set up a Committee charged with the duty for recommending per-
sons for induction in subordinate judiciary from amongst members of Haryana
Civil Service for whom there is a reserved quota of 20%, of the total posts. It is
styled as a Selection Committee consisting of three High Court Judges, the
State Advocate-General and the Legal Remembrancer of the Government of
Haryana. The remaining 80%, of the posts are filled in on the recommendation
of the State Public Service Commission based on the combined result of written
and viva vOce tests. From amongst those States where the State Public Service
Commission also holds a viva voce test for recruits to the subordinate judicial
service. some State Public Service Commissions invite a High Court Judge, sitt-
ing or retired, to be nominated by the Chief Justice of the State High Court to
act as an expert and while he expresses his opinion, he is not entitled to parti-
cipate in the decision-making process, nor is entitled to assign marks candi-
date-wise. In this behalf. it is necessary to invite attention to a very perti-
nent observation by the Supreme Court of India directly bearing on the ques-
tion of participation by a sitting Judge of the High Court in the matter of
selection of candidates for recruitment to subordinate judicial setvice. The
Supreme Court of India recommended that when selections to judicial service
are being made. a sitting Judge of the High Court to be nominated by the Chief
Justice of the State should be invited to participate in the interview as an ex-
pert and since such a sitting Judge comes as an expert who, by reason of the
fact that he is a sitting High Court Judge, knows the quality and character
of the candidates appearing for the interview, the advice given by him should
ordinarily be accepted unless there are strong and cogent reasons for not accept-
ing such an advice, the same must be recorded in writing by the Chairman and

2—4 M of L&J/87



6

Members of the Public Service Commission. The Supreme Court gave a direc-
tion to the Public Service Commision in every State that the finest talent should
be recruited to the judicial service and that can be secured only by having a
real expert (Sitting Judge of the High Court) whose advice constitutes a deter-
minative factor in the selective process.’ Despite this mandatory direction, it
is well-known that some State Public Service Commissions do not provide for
any participation by a High Court Judge in the matter of selection of candi-
dates for recruitment to State Judicial Service. It is also not unknown that
when a Judge is invited, the view expressed by him is ignored without com-
plying with the direction given by the Supreme Court that' when the advice given
by the expert Judge is departed from, the Chairman and Members of the Public
Service Commission constituting the Committee of Selection should give reasons
for such departure. It is a matter of serious concern whether in the matter of
selection of candidates for recruitment to subordinate judicial service in the State,
the time has not come to wholly exclude the Public Service Commission of the
State or the Union. The Law Commission, in its next succeeding report, is going
to deal with this aspect. .

MODE OF RECRUITMENT

2.4. In a majority of States—14 out of 19 States—whose rules for recruit-
ment to Subordinate Judiciary have been analysed by the Law Commission, candi-
dates for recruitment to subordinate judiciary are selected on the combined re-
sult of written and viva voce tests. The States of Assam and Punjab do not
provide for viva voce test and the selection is made on the basis of the result
of a written tests held by Public Service Commission. At the other end of the
spectrum, in Maharashtra and Gujarat, there is no provision for holding a
written test and the candidates are selected on the basis of viva v0ce test only.
In this connection, it is necessary to highlight the divergence in the approach
in the matter of recruitment methods adopted by various States. Some States
provide for direct recruitment and recruitment by transfer from other depart-
ments of the State Service or by holding tests which are open exclusively to de-
partmental candidates of State Governments. The recruitment by transfer has
sinister implications. It has proved nefarious. A gross case of total depar-
ture from the Constitutional mode of recruitment that has come to the notice of
the Law Commission is of Tamil Nadu where, according to as authentic an
information as can be had at present, 260 posts of Munsif Magistrates are mann-
ed by persons who have not been recruited to subordinate judiciary but are ad
hoc transferees from the other departments. In fact, this total departure from
the constitutional maridate and a back-door re-unification of separated execu-
tive and judiciary so agitated the minds of the members of the legal profession
in Tamil Nadu State that there was a prolonged strike by the members of the
Bar for a very long period focussing attention on the failure to make recruit-
ment to subordinate judiciary according to rules. Similarly, in the States of
Punjab and Haryana, the rules permit for appointment of members of Civil
Service (Executive Branch) by transfer as subordinate judges athough such
transferees do not possess essential minimum qualifications for recruitment as
subordinate judges. This is another gross violation of the norms prescribed for
recruitment., In fact, these are the various devices by which attempt is made
to re-unite the separated executive and judiciary as mandated by article 50 of
the Constitution. The Recruitment Rules of four States provide for emergency
tecruitment in which departure from specific requirements and esesntial quali-
fications can be made with impunity. One fails to understand how in the
matter of recruitment to subordinate judicial service, an emergency situation
may arise. One can always have a preview of the requirements including the

“|. Ashok Kumar Yadav Vs. State of Haryana, (1985) 4 SCC 417.


1

one necessitated by review of strength much in advance and if, in the meantime,
the High Court of the State is charged with a duty to make recruitment from the
market by varying the procedure which gives equal opportunity to all concerned
to compete for the same in view of the over-populated legal profession, the
recruitment can easily, conveniently and within a time-frame, be made. The
emergency cannot be even contemplated. In fact, it is another dubious device
of encroachment in the matter of appointment to judiciary. The States of
Tamil Nadu and Kerala have two separate sets of rules for recruitment to civil
judicial posts and magisterial posts, though both are under the administrative
and judicial control of the High Court. The Law Commission is informed
by the High Court of Kerala that steps are in progress for integrating the civil
and criminal wings of the judiciary in the State.

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA

2.5. Entry into subordinate judiciary pre-supposes knowledge of law and
the practical experience of the working of the Courts. Accordingly, eligibility
criteria prescribing minimum requirements for being able to compete for entry
into State Judicial Service can be examined under three separate principal require-
ments:—

(a) Academic Qualifications—A degree in law obviously must be a
necessary requirement’ by way of academic qualifications. Recruit-
ment Rules of the States generally provide for the same, but there
are some grey areas. Where appointment! by transfer is permitted,
it is not assured that the transferee has a degree in law. In some
States, the requirement is stated as practice at the Bar for a certain
period. This, however, ensures a degree in law because the Bar
Council would not enroll anyone as an advocate unless he holds a
degree in law recognised by the Bar Council of India.

(b) Age.—Recruitment Rules of most of the States provide for minimum
and maximum age with relaxation in favour of weaker sections of
society for recruitment to subordinate judiciary. It varies between
21 years to 45 years. There is also a distinction in the matter of
age between direct recruits and recruits by transfer. Some. States
provide for the age group of 21-38 years for direct recruits while
extending the upper age limit to 45 years in the matter of recruits
by transfer. Andhra Pradesh Kerala, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu
States do not provide for any minimum age. Variations in the
matter of minimum age from State to State is referable to other
requirements in the Recruitment Rules providing for practice for a
certain period at the Bar. Longer the period of practice prescrib-
ed, the higher age follows as a matter of course.

(c) Experience—-As pointed out just herein-before, by and large, the
duration of practice varies from one year to five years. However,
we are not able to get authentic information from the State of
Assam on the question whether the candidates who offer themselves
for competitive examination held by the State Public Service Com-
mission would require practice of any particutar duration at the
Bar as a pre-requisite for appearing at the examination.

LANGUAGE

2.6. Knowledge of local language has assumed considerable importance
in recent times, more so in view of section 2 of the Official Language Act and


8

section 272 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and section 137 (2) of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. Eleven States have prescribed  know-
ledge of local language as an essential qualification. In the rules of some States,
a provision is found requiring proficiency in one more language. At least in
one State, power is conferred on the concerned authority to prescribe knowledge
of a third language too.

DISQUALIFICATIONS

2.7. Most of the States have prescribed positive disqualifications which
would make intending candidates ineligible for entry into subordinate judicial
service. It is not necessary to refer to them in detail except saying that very
recently the Supreme Court of India has held that past political affiliations by
themselves do not disqualify a person from entering the service if he is other-
wise qualified.'

CHAPTER III

Competence/Jurisdiction to deal with the subject—Subordinate Courts

3.1. Can the Law Commission of India set up by the Government of India
deal with the question of subordinate courts/subordinate judiciary which are at
present handled by the States? Can a Parliamentary legislation be enacted to
re-structure subordinate judiciary/subordinate courts even without recourse to
articles 247, 249 or article 252 of the Constitution?

3.2. Prior to the Constitution (Forty Second Amendment) Act, 1976, entry
3 in list I[-State List, read as under:—

“3, Administration of Justice; constitution and organisation of all
courts except the Supreme Court and High Courts: officers and servants
of the High Courts; procedure in Rent and Revenue Courts; fees taken
in all courts except the Supreme Court.”

By section 57 of the Constitution (Forty-Second Amendment) Act, 1976, this
entry was recast by deletion of the words: “Administration of justice: constitu-
tion and organisation of all courts except the Supreme Court and the High
Courts.” Simultaneously, entry 114 was inserted in Jist वा - Concurrent List
which reads as under : -

“ITA. Administration of justice: constitution and organisation of all
courts, except the Supreme Court and the High Courts.”

3.3. The States enjoyed the power to set up subordinate courts and prescribe
ty rules the conditions of service including eligibility criteria for recruitment to
subordinate judiciary. Every State had a statute for setting up subordinate
courts with their designations as have broadly been indicated in the earlier por-
tion of this report and the nomenclature of the court coincided with the designa-
tion of the various cadres in subordinate judiciary. This power was enjoyed by
the States under un-amended entry 3 of the State List. This situation had its
genesis in a decision taken in the ‘conference of the Premiers of the provinces
in 1946 chaired by the then Home Minister, late Sardar Vallabhai Patel’?
This conference resolved that subordinate judicial service should be organised
by the Government of Provinces and it was not considered necessary to organize

1, State of M.P. Vs. Ramashankar Raghuvanshi and another, 1983 (2) 502 145.
2. LCI, 16% Report, para 2.2, 7. 6.


9

the same on an all-India icvel on the model comparable to administrative ser-
vices which were to be formed on all-India basis, replacing the then Secretary
of State’s services. Article 312 conferred power on the Parliament by law to
provide for the creation of one or more all-India services if the Council-of-
States has so declared by a resolution. sipported by not less than two-thirds of
the members present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national
interest to do so. On such a resolution being adopted with the requisite mzjo-
rity and the Parliament consequently enacting a_ legislation to that effect, a ser-
vice on an all-India basis common to Union and the States could be set up.
The legislation must provide for regulating the recruitment and the conditions
of service of persons appointed to any such service. A doubt was felt whether,
in view of entry 3 in the State List. the Council of States can adopt a resclu-
tion and the Parliament can pass a legislation for setting up of an all-India
Judicial Service. There was a body of public opinion that the time has com*
15 re-structure the judicial service on an all-India basis at least from ihe level
of a District Judge Therefore. while making the necessary amendment in
entry 3 of the State List with corresponding entry in the Concurrent List, an
amendment was also made by section 45 of the same Amendment Act to insert
ihe words “including an all-India judicial service” in article 312 after the words,
“all-India service” and before ‘common to the Union and the States’. The
cumulative effect of these amendments have unquestioningly conferred power
on the Parliament to enact a legislation for setting up an all-India judicial ser-
vice provided a resolution with the requisite majority is adopted by the Parlia-
ment and within the constraints of article 312(3). The Law Commission has
already submitted a comprehensive report jn this behalf recommending consti-
tution of Indian Judicial Service| Therefore, the desks are now clear for the
Parliament to take appropriate action for setting up a judicial service on all-
India basis.

3.4. Once it is considered desirable and necessary to set up judicial service
at the level of District Judge which was hitherto part of the State Judicial Ser-
vice, on all-India basis. it became a compelling necessity to provide sources of
recruitment to the same. Amongst various sources for recruitment to that ser-
vice recommended by the Law Commission, one source is subordinate judicial
service in the State. Now, if Indian Judicial Service, being judicial service ता-
eaniscd on an all-India level, is also to be manned by persons promoted from
the subordinate State judicial service. it becomes a compelling necessity tu of-
ganise State Judicial Service in such a manner as to provide an equal opportu-
nity to everyone in each State to compete for a berth in Indian Judicial Service.
It would be impossible to recommend persons from subordinate judicial — ser-
vice for being promoted to Indian Judicial Service jf the subordinate judicial
service at the State level is not re-organised on a pattern common to all States
simultaneously retaining it as a State Service. It would be impossible to ask
each Slate to undertake enactment of a common legislation. Therefore, it is
necessary to have a uniform legislation with uniform designations replacing the
present ones and common to all States in respect of posts and cadres in sub-
ctdinate judicial service which should be styled “State Judicial Service’. This
designation in relation to Indian Judicial Service will demarcate the functions
and spheres of both the services. For bringing about a common pattern of
State Judicial Service, it is inevitable that legislation must be enacted by the
Parliament and this is no more difficult or open to question in view of entry

1. LCI, 116th Report.


10

118 of Concurrent List. It is accordingly recommended that Parliament should
enact a legislation dealing broadly with subordinate courts in States, the designa-
tion of courts and cadres of services in State Judicial Service and in Union
territories which would also provide a common denominator for further promo-
tion of the members of such State Judicial Service to Indian Judicial Service.

3.5. The Law Commission has recommended a legislation for setting up
Indian Judicial Service in its report.'. That very legislation can provide a
chapter in respect of subordinate judiciary. Let it be made clear that even when
the subordinate judicial service at State level is being set up under a law to be
enacted by Parliament, the service would none-the-less remain a State Service
and the responsibility to man the same would be of the States and the expendi-
ture on the establishment of State Judicial Service will undoubtedly be borne on
the Consolidated Fund of each State. There is no dearth of power in the
Parliament to enact such a legislation.

CHAPTER IV
RE-ORGANISATION OF SUBORDINATE JUDICIARY

4.1. In the matter of re-organisation of subordinate judiciary, the Law
Commission is not writing on a clean slate. Attempts made in the past to deal
with this may be traced back to the report of the Joint Parliamentary Committee
dealing with the question as to the necessity for securing the independence of
the subordinate judiciary. The relevant observation may be extracted?: —-

“This subject is not mentioned in the White Paper, but there are
aspects of it which seem to us of such importance that we think it right
to state our opinion upon them. The Federal and High Court Judges
will be appointed by the Crown and their independence is secure; but
appointments to the subordinate Judiciary, must necessarily be made by
authorities in India who will also exercise a certain measure of control
over the Judges after appointment, specially in the matter of promotion
and posting. We have been greatly impressed by the mischiefs which
have resulted elsewhere from a system under which promotion from grade
to grade in a judicial hierarchy is in the hands of a Minister exposed to
pressure from members of a popularly eleceted Legislature. Nothing is more
likely to sap the independence of a magistrate than the knowledge that his
career depends upon the favour of a Minister. It is the Sub-
ordinate Judiciary in India who are brought most closely into
contact with the people, and it is no less important, perhaps indeed even
more important, that their independence should be placed beyond ques-
tion than in the case of the superior Judges.”

4.2. This approach found its echo in the Government of India Act, 1935,
which has more or less been a model for the founding fathers of the Constitution.
Section 254 of the Act provided for appointment, posting and promotion of
persons to be appointed as district judges. They were to be made by the
Governors of the Provinces exercisng their individual judgement in consultation
with the High Court. Sub-section 2 of section 254 provides for direct recruit-
ment from the Bar to the cadre of district judge. It can be safely stated that
article 233 (1) and (2) is in peri materia with sections 251 (1) and (2) with only
minor and consequential changes. Similarly, section 255 is in pari materia
with article 234 of the Constitution. Further, article 235 re-enacts section 255
(3) with certain minor variations except that article 235 vests control over district

1, LCI, 116th Report,

2. Joint Committee on Indian Constitutional Reforms Report; (1933-34), Vol. 1, p. 201.
Para 337


i

courts also in the High Court while section 255 (3) limits the control to posting
and promotion and grant of leave in respect of persons belonging to the sub-
ordinate civil judicial service holding any post inferior to the post of district
judge.

4.3. The Constitution, keeping in view the intendment of article 50, name-
ly, the obligation of the State to separate the Executive from the Judiciary,
enacted provisions contained in Chapter VI, Part VI of the Constitution which
have been designed to secure the independence of the subordinate judiciary from
the Executive, so that they may be free from any extraneous influence in the dis-
charge of their judicial duties. The control vested in the High Court over the
district courts and courts subordinate thereto including the posting and promo-
tion of. and the grant of leave to persons belonging to the judicial service of a
state has by numerous decisions of the Supreme Court been made all envelop-
ing. insulating the subordinate judiciary from any extraneous outside influence
or interference including from executive. The all-pervasiveness of the control
has been extensively set out by the Law Commission.' This effective control has
to be retained and cannot be tinkered with in larger public interest and in the
interest of independence of judiciary which has been held to be a cardinal fea-
ture of our Constitution.’

4.4, The First Law Commission undertook a review of judicial adminis-
tration in all its aspects with a view to suggesting ways and means for improv-
ing it and making it speedy and less expensive. While dealing with the sub-
ordinate judiciary, it recommended setting up of an all-India Judicial Service.
In its view, a District and Sessions Judge is the highest authority in the district and
is responsible for its judicial administration in all its aspects. Normally.
only one in ten persons recruited as Munsif can aspire to reach this selection
post.’ In view of the recommendation of the Law Commission, the post of
the District Judge including those posts which are comprehended in the expres-
sion ‘District Judge’ as set out in article 236 would stand included in the Indian
Judicial Service. Therefore. the State Judicial Service will comprise posts and
cadres below the cadre of district judge as understood in article 236. It recom-
mended for such posts, uniform designation and a written test to be conduct-
ed by the State Service Commission for recruitment. It does appear vnavoid-
able that with a view to  re-organising the State Judicial Service, uniform
designations will have to be devised.

4.5. As the situation now stands, certain States as for example Mahara-
shtra, has divided its State Judicial Service into what is designated as Senior
Branch and Junior Branch. Some o the States like Rajasthan have sub-divi-
ded the State Judicial Service into lower service and higher judicial service. In
this behalf, the recommendation of the First Law Commission, even after a
lapse of three decades, holds good and it would be proper to adopt it. The
State Judicial Service should be styled as State Judicial Service Class I and
Class Il. After uniform designations are devised, it would be necessary to
determine holders of which particular post would be comprehended in Class
IL and which in Class I. Suffice it to say that the views of the First Law Commis-
sion that the district judge should belong to the State Judicial Service Class 1
would no more be valid in view of the recommendation for formation of

1. LCI, 16th Report, p. 26 sub-heading (0).
2. Shamsher Singh Vs. State of Punjab, (1974) 2 SCC 831.
3. LCI. बिक Report, Vol. J, Chapter 9, para. 66, 0, 187.


12

Indian Judicial Service.! Any other approach would introduce an inconsistency
between the two reporis which must at any cost be avoided. Therefore, it is
Tecommended that ihe State Judicial Service below the rank of a district
judge should be organized into State Judicial Service Class I and Class JI.

4.6. The recommendation of the First Law Commission ‘that looking to
the uniform functions performed by the judicial officers though variously desig-
nated, it would be advisable to aim at uniformity of designations’ holds good.
The historical background of various designations have. lost not only the vali-
dity but even the relevance. It is necessary even with a view to infuse a sense
ot dignity in the holders of posts in lower ranks to provide such designations
as would avoid the word ‘subordinate’ or the designation ‘Munsif’.

4.7. The expression *Munsif’ has historical overtones. It is in a way of
Indian origin though it is shown to be of Persian vocabulary. It was spelt as
“Moonsiff’ and its connotation was ‘equitable, just, a decider of what is just,
an arbitrator. a Judge’. Under the British regime, the term was applied to
a native civil judge of the first or the lowest tank” It appears that another .
designation was coined during the regime of Shershah. For administration of
justice, Shershah divided his empire into administrative units called Sarkars,
which again was sub-divided into Paraganas. He divided administration of justice
into two branches, civil and criminal. Shiqdar was invested with power to dis-
pense with criminal cases and Munsif was invested with powers to try civil cases.
Shiqdar-i-Shiqdaran was Tesponsible for the administration of criminal justice in
each Sarkar. Similarly, on the civil side, Munsif-i-Munsifan of the administration
was in charge of civil justice in each Sarkar. The novel feature of the administra-
tion was that Munsif-i-Munsifan was a circuit judge and had to go round in course
of administration of justice. This probably provides the genesis of the present day
cry for taking justice to the door-step of the people. The recruitment of Munsif
was not confined to Ulemas or Faqish (Lego: Theologians).* It appears at
some point of time in the development of the institution of Munsif, the holder
of the office was not a full-time regular, salaried employee. The whole cadre
consisted of honorary judges and received no remuneration for discharging their
judicial functions. In Jater years, upon an apprehension that the system of
honorary judges is susceptible to corruption or is niggardly or negligent in
performance of duty in the absence of regular compensation, the salaried system
came into vogue. The institution of Munsif made access to justice easy and
within reach because. in the absence of it, people may have to travel upto the
Headquarters of the district and the journey in those days was slow, tardy
and inconvenient. It also helped in relieving congestion at the Sarkar level
as small and petty disputes were disposed of by the Munsifs.*

Then came the designations Sadar Diwani Adalat and Sadar Fouzdari
Adalat. However, the designation of Munsif continues to be accepted in some
States till today.

4.8. The word ‘subordinate’ in the judicial hierarchy sounds incongruous.
To be precise. when any matter is before a court of competent jurisdiction even
at the grass-root level, it handles the matter un-influenced by any extraneous or
irrelevant consideration and wholly free from any outside pressure including
pressure from upper layers of service. To illustrate, even the district judge,
though an administrative superior of a civil judge (Junior Division) cannot
interfere when the proceedings are before the Civil Judge except when he
hears any appeal or revision. If he interferes when the court of Civil Judge

1. LCT, 116th Report.
2. William H. Motley, The Administration of Justice in British India, Reprint 1976--p, 354,
3. Waheed Husain, Administration of Justice during Muslim Rule in India,

4. M.P. Jain, Outlines of Indian legal History, p, 21921.


13

is seized of the matter, a charge of contempt may as well be made against him.
In the Administrative hierarchy, a superior officer can give direction to the
inferior officer even with regard, to matters which are being dealt with by him.
This is the basic difference between a hierarchy of officers in the Executive and
the hierarchy of officers in the judiciary. Therefore, the word, ‘subordinate’
which implies a sort of subordination of one to the other which may inhere cr
give rise to an inference of something akin to command obedience relationship
has to be avoided. as far as possible. Undoubtedly, we are conscious of the
fact that even the Constitution uses the expression ‘subordinate courts’. The
court structure being pyramidic and hierarchical in character may tolerably be
described in relation 10 a superior as subordinate court. But, as far as the
designation of judicial officer is concerned, every attempt must be made to avoid
that word. Therefore. it would be proper to devise a uniform designation for
the entry cadre.

49. A tabulation of the structure of courts at the State level extensively
set out herein-before would show that the entry cadre has more or less been
designated as ‘Munsif/District Munsif’ on the civil side and ‘Magistrate or
Magistrate First Class on the criminal side’. By and large. in smaller towns and
courts with inadequate or lower institutions, the Presiding Judge is both a
*Munsif’ for civil matters and a ‘Magistrate’ for dealing with criminal matters.
Gujarat and Maharashtra have changed the designations of the entry cadre to
Civil Judge Gunior Division) on the civil side and ‘Judicil Magistrate First Class”
on the criminal side. The entry cadre, howsoever designated, is manned by
fresh recruits from the market except where someone is posted by transfer.
Accordingly. keeping in view the lack of experience in the matter of decision
making process and allied subjects, it is considered advisable to give them juris-
diction over less controversial, small and petty matters measured by the yard-
stick of pecuniary jurisdiction on the civil side and the gravity of offence on the
criminal side. Ordinarily, this jurisdiction on the civil side extends up to the
value of the subject matter being Rs. 20,000/- and offences punishable with a
sentence of three years and fine on the criminal side.

4.10. The next cadre which also provides a promotional avenue to the
members of the entry cadre is variously designated as Civil Judge (Senior Divi-
sion) in Maharashtra and Gujarat and subordinate judge or senior sub-judge
in almost all other States. At this level. the holder of the post is dealing with
civil matters without any ceiling on pecuniary jurisdiction. In other words, the
holder of the post has unlimited jurisdiction in the matter of pecuniary valua-
tion of the subject matter in dispute. This post is sometimes combined with the
post of Chief Judicial Magistrate who has powers higher than the judicial
Magistraté First Class in that he can try cases punishable with imprisonment for
seven years and fine. When the holders of this post are posted in metropolitan
areas, they are designated as Metropolitan Magistrates and when they are posted
in small causes court. they are called Judges of the Small Causes Court. It
is not necessary in this report to deal with the functional designations which are
comprehended in the expression District Judges, such as Judge. City Civil Court,
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate. Chief Judge, Small Causes Court, etc. In
fact, the designations must be more or less functional in the sense that the
designation would indicate the functions of the holders of the post. Again,
some designations are already provided by the two procedural Statutes, viz.,
the Code of Civil Procedure and the Code of Criminal Procedure. With a
view. therefore. to re-organise the State Judicial Service with uniform desig-
tions, it is suggested that the law providing for re-organisation of State Judicial
Service should include and incorporate the following designations:

34 M of L&J/87



14

On the civil side, the entry cadre must be designated as Civil Judge (Juntor
Division) with pecuniaty jurisdiction up to the ce'ling of Rs. 25.000/- The
holder of a similar post on the criminal side must have the designation of Judicial
Magistrate First Class as envisaged by section 6 of the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure. The members of this cadre when posted in district towns or areas
where institutions both on the civil side and criminal side are fairly heavy. they
may be designated as Civil Judge (Junior Division) exclusively and Judicial
Magistrate First Class exclusively though the holders of these posts must belong
to a common cadre and must be placed in State Judicial Service Class II.

4.11. The next promotional stage must cater to the needs of courts with un-
limited pecuniary juridiction as well as jurisdiction to entertain suits against
Government of Union or the State. The holders of these posts must be desig-
nated as Civil Judge «J.D.) having no ceiling on their pecuniary jurisdiction.
This cadre must also include the cadre of Chief Judicial Magistrate. The
holders of the post can, depending upon the institution, have both the designation
or where the institution does not permit one person to handle inflow of work
on both sides, he can be exclusively posted as Civil Judge, Senior Division.
Chief Judicial Magistrate, as the case may be. The designation ‘Chief Jud
Magistrate’ is adopted trom section 12 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

4. In some States, there are officers designated as subordinate judges or
civil judges of the rank higher than that of the Munsif. All these, of course,
may be re-designated as herein indicated and the holders of these posts may
be admitted to the common cadre.

4.13. There are two Statutes in operation providing for setting up of courts
for dealing with small pecuniary disputes in big commercial towns prescribing
a procedure of a summary nature. They are the Provincial Small Causes
Courts and the Presidency Town Small Causes Courts. Ju of the Provin-
cial Small Causes Court may have their functional desiznation as Small Causes
Court Judge. but they must belong to the same cadre to which a Civil Judge
(Senior Division) belongs. — Similarly, the Judges of the Presidency Small Causes
Courts must be put on par with Metropolitan Magistrates and even though they
will retain their funcjional designations as prescribed by the various Statutes.
they will form one cadre. Every cadre in the State Judicial Service except
the grass-root cadre of Civil Judge (Junior Division)/Judicial Magistrate First
Class will belong to the State Judicial Service Class 1.

CHAPTER V
VIEWS AND COMMENTS

5.1, The real debate focussed on the question about the role of Public
Service Commissions in the matter of selection of Personnel for subordinate
judiciary. Intervention of any agency other than the judiciary in the matter
of selection of personnel for recruitment to judiciary at any level has not only
been frowned upon and disanproved, but has b.en held to be a threat to the
independence of the judiciary. Even though therefore positive role was assig-
ned to the State Public Service Commissions in the matter of selection of per-
sonnel for entry at grassroot level in subordinate judiciary, our experience has
been that, in practice. it has been found 10 be undesirable. This view is not
recently formed with reference to recent occurrences in this behalf. Way
back in 1958. the first Law Commission examined the quest'on of reforms in
subordinate judiciary. Examining the role of Public Service Commission in



15

the matter of selection of personnel for manning posts in subordinate judiciary,
it reached a none too flattering conclusion in respect of the role of the State
Public Service Commission in this behalf. Let it be extracted:

“Having regard to the importaat part played by the Public Service
Commissions in the selection of the subordinate judiciary. we took care
10 examine. as far as possible, the Chairman and some of the members
of the Public Service Commissions in the various States. We are cons-
tained to state that the personnel of these Public Service Commissions
in some of the States was not such as could inspire confidence from the
poiets of view of cither efficiency or of impartiality. There appears to
be वार doubt that in some of the States, appointments to these Commis-
stoas are made not on considerations of merit but on grounds of party
and political afiliations. The evidence ‘given by members of the Public
Service Commissions in some of the States thus create the feeling that
they do not deserve to be in responsible posts they:occupy. In some of
the seuthera States. the impartiality of the Commissions in making selec-
tions to the judicial service was seriously questioned.””

5.2. The situation, as has been the general trend in all Public Services, must
have further deteriorated. However. this must not be left to a mere inference.
The High Courts of Ori mmu and Kashmir and Andhra Pradesh have ex-
pressed a firm opinion that recruitment to subordinate judiciary should be taken
out from the purview of the State Public Service Commission and instead, it
must be entrusted to the Hizh Courts which would work out the modus vivendi
for selecting proper personnel. Of course. some judges in some High Courts
have opined in !avour of retention of. the Public Service Commission in the
matter of selection. A few of the Judges of the High Courts indicated a
preference in favour of an independent body to be styled as ‘Judicial Services
Commission’ to undertake this tusk.

5.3. Whether minimum practice at the Bar should be a pre-requisite for
eniry into judicial service even at the lowest level has become a subject matter
of lively debate and strong opinions are expressed one way or the other. This
agitin is not of recent origin. Even about three decades back, the Law Com-
mission took note of a view expressed by the then Chairman of the Bihar
Public Service Commission that during the 3-5 years of practice at the mofussil

Bar, the young man deteriorates more or less completely, The Law Commis-
sion also took note of the opinion of the Civil Justice Committee in this behalf.
It reads as under:-

“The rule in force in certain Provinces requiring the candidates
10 have practice at the Bar jor a period of three years or more, furni-
Shes no guarantee that the candidates have acquired any really useful

experience.

Even then. some Judges who responded to the querics of the Commission have
expressed preference for retention of minimum practice at the Bar as a pre-
requisite for entry into judicial service. It is time to dis-abuse our mind on
this point because the Law Commission has reached an affirmative conclusion
that this minimum practice at the Bar hardly qualifies the person to be a better
The Law Commission has given cogent reasons for reaching this con-
clusion and the same need not be repeated here.$

1. LC! ih Report, Vol. Chapter 9, Para 27. poli.
2. Id, Para WN. 165.
3. LCL 7th Report


16

5.4. By and large. there was otherwise near unanimity in the matter of
standardising subordinate judiciary at State level. Uniform standards for entry
into judicial service at the State level would be conducive to making State
Judicial Service a reliable forum for recruitment to Indian Judicial Service, and
it is an incongruity that while the Code of Civil Procedure and the Code of
Criminal Procedure uniformly apply throughout the length and breadth of the
country, those Civi! Judges and Judicial Magistrates implementing the laws
common to all States would differ in nomenclatures, status, designations, emolu-
ments and other conditions of service. This is hardly conducive to a national
standard, national integration and a national service.

CHAPTER VI
CONCLUSIONS

6. In exercise of power conferred by Entry 118 in the Concurrent List of
the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. Parliament is competent to
legislate for bringing uniform standards in the matter of recruitment to subordi-
nate judiciary. A comprehensive legislation in this behalf will have to be
enacted replacing the State legislations. This comprehensive legislation must
aim at the following:—

(a) Uniform designations to various cadres of posts below the District
and Sessions Judge. As pointed out earlier, they should be, at
the entry level, Civil Judge (Junior Division) and Judicial Magis-
trate First Class. At the next higher level, the designation must
be Civil Judge (Senior Division) and Chief Judicial Magistrate.
When posted in metropolitan towns, the designation must be Metro-
politan Magistrate. Where Small Causes Court is set up, the
Judge should be styled as Judge of the Small Causes Court. All
other designations may be rescinded by a provision in the Statute
herein indicated except those which are set out in inclusive defini-
tion of ‘district judge’ in article 236 of the Constitution.

The legislation to be enacted in this behalf must provide for a
minimum qualification for entry into service which must not be less
than a degree in law. and though not necessary, if considered advis-
able, minimum practice at the Bar not exceeding three years;

(b) The service at the State level is to be styled as State Judicial Service.
It shall be divided into two classes. viz., State Judicial Service Class
T and State Judicial Service Class Hl. The cadre of Civil Judge
(Junior Division) and Judicial Magistrate First Class shall be placed
in State Judicial Service Class TI and shall be manned by recruit
ment from the open market to the extent of 100° of posts. There
shall be no direct recruitment to State Judicial Service Class I and
the posts in that class will provide promotional avenues to members
of State Judicial Service Class IT;

(c) The entrants to service must be given training as per the recom-
mendations of the Law Commission in its 117th Report;

(0) The law to be enacted in this behalf must provide for uniform con-
ditions of service relating to pay, pension, promotional avenues,
eligibility criteria for promotion, minimum age for entry in service,
ete.5


17

(९) The agency for recruitment to the service would be National Judi-
cial Service Commission in respect of which the next detailed report
is being submitted. It is, therefore. not considered appropriate to
add to the length of this Report;

(0 The National Judicial Service Commission will also arrange for
written and viva voce tests upon combined result of which entry
into the State Judicial Service branch Class Il may be — given.
While the academy recommended by the Law Commission’ will
Prescribe detailed curricula for the examination, keeping in view the
requirements of the grassroot judiciary, the subjects can be broadly
indicated as:—

(i) General knowledge;

(ii) Procedural laws: Civil Procedure Code and Criminal Procedure
Code, and Evidence Act;

(iii) Expectations of the society from the judiciary:

(iv) A.simple viva voce test not exceeding 50 marks must be pres-
cribed;

(v) Art of writing judgment:

(g) The usual reservations should be made in favour of Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes and socially and ducationally backward
classes;

(h) Training in local language should be imparted where the candidate's
mother tongue is other than the language spoken in the erea where
he is posted:

(i) The role of Public Service Commission in the matter of selection of
personnel for judicial posts must be wholly excluded,

(00, A. DESAI)
Chairman

(S. C. GHOSE)
Member

(SMT. V. S. RAMA DEVD
Member-Secretary.

New Deni
Dated the 26th December, 1986.

LCE 117th Report.



ANDHRA PRADFSH

18

ANNEXURE T
SUPREME COURT

High Court

District and Sessions Judge—Ist Grade

District and Sessions Judge—2nd Grade

District &

Chief Judge,

Chief Judge, Chief City Additional Distt.
Sessions City Civil Small Causes Magistrate. & Sessions Judge.
Judge (2nd Grade) Court. Court.
Additional Chief
. Judge, City Civil
Court,
Subordinate Judge
District Munsifs
Munsif’ Assistant Railway Municipal Magistrate
Magistrate. Magistrate. Judge, City Magistrate. Magistrate, Juvenile Court,

BIHAR

Civil Court.

SUPREME COURT
High Court
District and Sessions Judge
Additional District and Sessions Judge

Subordinate Judge

Munsil’


DELHI

Additional District and Sessions Judge

SUPREME COURT

High Court

District and Sessions Judge

| Senior Subordinate Judge

Additional Senior Subordinate
Judge.

Subordinate Judge.

Judge, Small Causes
Court.

Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate.

Additional Chief

Metropolitan !

Magistrate. |
1

Metropolitan
Magistrate.

GUJARAT

SUPREME COURT
High Court

District and Sessions Judge

Senior Branch

Junior Branch

Principal Judge Chief Metro-

District

r Chief Judge, Assistant
City Civil Court politan Small Causes Judge Judge
Ahmedabad. Magistrate. Court, : :
धर Ahmedabad,
Additional :
Chief Metro-
politan
Magistrate
Mctropolitan Judge, Small Civil Judges, Chief Judicial
Magistrate. Causes Court, Senior Divi- Magistrate
Ahmedabad. sion, :
Civil Judge, Judicial
* Junior Divi- Magistrate.

sion.


20

HARYANA
SUPREME COURT
High Court
District and Sessions Judge
Additional District and Sessions Judge
Senior Sub-Judge Chief Judiciat Magistrate Judge Small
पु Causes Court

Additional Senior Sub-Judge Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate

Sub-Judge Judicial Magistrate

HIMACHAL PRADESH
SUPREME COURT

High Court
District and Sessions Judge

Additional District and Sessions Judge

Senior Sub-Judge Chief Judicial Magistrate

Sub Judge Judicial Magistrate
Sub-Judge-cum-
Judicial Magistrate


KARNATAKA

KERALA

21

SUPREME COURT

|
High Court

v

|

v
District Judges

v
Civil Judges

v
Munsifs

SUPREME COURT
|

|
High Court

|

|

|

Vv
District and Sessions Judge

v

v
Subordinate Judge

v
Munsif

4—4 M of L&J/87

|
|
v
Chief Judicial Magistrate
|

v
Judicial Magistrate, First Class

v
Judicial Magistrate Second Class


MADHYA PRADESH

SUPREME COURT

Court

v
District and Sessions Judge

v
Additional District Judges

Vv
Civil Judge (Class 1)

v
Civil Judge (Class 1)

MAHARASHTRA

SUPREME COURT
|

|
High Court

First Class

Senior Branch Junior Branch
rc I ar
District Principal Judge, Chief Judge,
Judges Bombay City Small Causes
| Civil Court Court, Bombay
| |
| |
Additional Judge, Bombay Additional Chief
District City Civil Court Judge, Small Causes
Judge | Court, Bombay
| |
i —: I
| |
Judge, Small civil Judge Chief Judicial Chief Metropoli- Judge, Small Metropolitan
Causes Court (Senior Division) Magistrate tan Magistrate Causes Court, Magistrate
at places 1 | Bombay Juvenile Court,
other than | | | Bombay
Bombay | | |
Civil Judge Additional Additional
(Junior Chief Judicial Chief
Division) Magistrate Metropolitan
| Magistrate
| |
Judicial Metropolitan
Magistrate Magistrate



MANIPUR

23

SUPREME COURT

High Court

District Judge

— है <----

1. छाए

Vv

Additional District Judge
|

॥

v

v
Sub-Judge

v
Munsif

ORISSA

v
Chief Judicial Magistrate
|

: v
Magistrate

SUPREME COURT

High pout

Vv

District and Sessions Judge
|
|

v
Additional District and Sessions Judge
1

|
v
Subordinate Judge (Class 1)
|
|
v
Munsif (Class II)


PUNJAB

SUPREME COURT

High Court

v
District and Sessions Judge

v

Additional District and Sessions Judge

v

|
|
v
Senior Sub-Judge
|

v
Additional Senior Sub-Judge
1
|
v
Sub-Judge

RAJASTHAN

Vv
Chief Judicial Magistrate
1

v
Additional Chief Judicial
Magistrate

v
Judicial Magistrate

SUPREME COURT
I

v
HIGH COURT
॥|
v
District and Sessions Judge

v
Additional District and Sessiois Judge
|

I

v

7
1
v

Judge, Small Causes Court

1 किए
Civil Judge

Chief Judicial Magistrate
|

|
Civil Judge-cum-Chief Judicial Magistrate
|

|
Civil Judge-cum-Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate वि
॥|

I
v

|
Munsif

Judicial Magistrate

|
Judge, Small Causes Court


TAMIL NADU
SUPREME COURT
High Court
1
v
District and Sessions Judge
v
Additional District and Sessions Judge
1
Vv
|
Iv
Criminal
'
v ——
| | | !
Chief District Subordinate Assistant Puisne Judge,
Metropolitan Magistrate Judge Judge, Court of
Magistrate (Judicial) City Civil Small Causes,
| ॥ | Court, Madras.
v v v Madras
Metropolitan Additional District
Magistrate First Class Munsif
Magistrate
v
Sub-Judicial Magistrat>
(Subordinate Judiciai
Magistrate)
TRIPURA
SUPREME COURT
|
|
High Court
|
v
District and Sessions Judge
i
v
Additional District and Sessions Judge
i
_ v
| |
| |
v v
Subordinate and Chief Judicial Magistrate
Assistant Sessions Judge |
| |
v v
Munsif Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate
|
|
v
cial Veo
Judicial Magistrate Sub-Divisional

Judicial
Magistrate


ANNEXURE II

हे ELIGIBILITY
Sl. STATE Categories of Agency for Representation of Appointing a .
No. Sub-Judges Recruitment other bodies and authority Educational Age
their powers Qualification
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
1, | Andhra Pradesh 1. Subordinate
Judges.
2. District Munsifs| Public Service A Judge of the Governor — Direct recruitment
Commission High Court but no —below 32 years.
power to award Transfer — Transfer—
marks (i) Law Degree. | below 45 years.
(ii) Passed * the
Exam. in Law
of Practice
and Proce-
dure
2. | Assam Grade I, व & TIT Public Service _ Governor
(Only extracts of Grade III Commission
the Rules made High Court
available to the |
Law Commission)
3. | Bihar I-Subordinate
Judges.
II-Munsifs Public Service An Officer of the Governor Graduate degree | 22-31 years
Commission High Court to in Law
advise
|
4, Maharashtra Class 1 consists High Court/ Governor/ 21-45 years—
of six categories Public Service High Court varies with different
Commission categories



ANNEXURE वा

ELIGIBILITY ns Method 1 ~ ~
Experience Quota for | Language Emergency Disqualifi- Sr. State
|= Recruitment Written [Viva |Both} Requirement Recruitment cation No.
Bar Other exam ००९
9 10 n 12 BC 14 2
— I. I__.-
Actual practice Direct recruitment— yes | _ _ Bigamy Andhra Pradesh
for atleast three —first four
years. Transfer-every fifth
|
1
Direct recruitment— | yes Assam
50% and selection
from the Members
of the Bar 50%.
One year yes | Hindi Bigamy but Bihar
relaxable.
Yes Varies yes Marathi Retired Judges _- 4. | Maharashtra
may be appoint-

Le


ELIGIBILITY

SI. State Categories of Sub- | Agency for Representation of Appointing —
No. Judges. } recruitment other bodies and authority Educational Age
i Hl | — powers Qualifications
1 2 3 4 5 6 | 7 “8s
|—- | —— _
हि H
5. Delhi Grade 1 and ! High Court (i) Chief Justice or Administrator Practising advu- | Not more than 32
Grade IT i a Judge of the cated or qualified! years.
| | High Court depu- to be registered |
Hy 1 1. 6१ by the Chief | as on advocate.
| | | Justice.
|
i (ii) Two Judges of |
! the High Court |
| H nominated by the
Chief Justice.
। (iii) Chief Secretary,
Delhi Adminis-
i tration.
| (iv) A Secretary of
the Delhi Admi-
nistration nomi- B
nated by the Ad-
H ministrator.
6. Gujarat Junior Branch Public Service High Court Governor LL.B. (Special) | (i) 21-35 years.
Class 1 and Commission A degree or (ii) Upto 45. years
Class I qualified to be for certain State
enrolled as an Govt. Officials.
Advocate.
7. | Haryana Sub-Judge Public Service — Governor Law Degree for | 23-30 years.
Commission direct recruits (relaxable upto 35
years for  pleaders

who have practised
for more than two
years).

Relaxable upto 37
years for certain
categories.



|
+

~~ ELIGIBILITY { Method — Language | Emergency Disqualification : SI. “State
Experience | Recruitment ——— —— Requirement Recruitment No.
wee eh written! Viva- | Both 1 )
Other | exam. | voce | i
5 i a Fre er Ses (TY | | ह ~
"जज eee Ja - —|__ fin ete en ene po
| i ‘
1 ‘ yes | Hindi and | जन Bigamy but 5. Delhi
; i English i \ telaxable. |
| |
1 ! |
— ! | | |
H _ 1 i H है
\ | | | ॥ i
1 ! । | i \ !
Hb ae
' \ | i { i
| | | i i
i | |
i f | |
: i | | ' | |
| | i | |
! i ! | i i
' i i i ! : : i i
| ॥ । |
i
ee ep जन >>
| H 6. Gujarat
Three years} 100", direct vyes | English, BF |
and five years | recruitment { Hindiand है |
i Gujarati.
‘Fouryeas | /@ Direct | | yes | Hinge [ | Bigamy but 7 | Hanana
recruitment relaxable.
(ii) H.C.S. (Execu-
tive Branch)
H.C\S. (Exe-
cutive Branch)
with Law Degree i |
Provided that the
quota for category
(iii) shall not ex-
ceed 20% of direct |
recruits, EE ! 5



ELIGIBILITY

Sl. State Categories of Sub- Agency for Representation of Appointing Educational Age
No. Judges Recruitment other bodies and Authority Qualifications
their powers.
1 i 3 4 3 6 7 8
8. Himachal Pradesh Grade I and Public Service High Court Governor Degree in Law | 21-30 years
Grade II Commission relaxable upto
40 years for
i certain categories
9. ॥ I-Civil Judge A committee of ~ Degree in Law | 25-38 years
I-Munsif five Judges of
the High Court
cons'ituted by
the High Court
of Karnataka
10. Kerala Civil :-
1-Subordinate
Judge
T-Munsif Public Service Governor Degree in Law | Below 35 years
Commission
Criminal :—
| 4 Categories of Public Service Governor Degree in Law| Below 32 years
| Magistrates Commission
11. Madhya Pradesh Civil Judge
(Recruitment Rules Grade I and Public Service — Governor Degree in Law | 20-30 years
yet to be finalised Grade IT Commission

but the pract
the State 1.
cated)

OF


i

z

ELIGIBILITY हु ह j
Experience Quota for Method. Language Emergency Disqualifica- | Sr. State
a -———~| Recruitment |---| Requirement Recruitment tions No.
Bar other written] Viva- [8001
i | Exam. | voce |
1. _----- |= eo _ _ _
9 | 10 i 12 | 13 14
— ot a re _ on —- -|- -
i 100% direct yes Hindi ; Governor may Bigamy but | Himachal Pradesh
| | Tecruitment appoint from relaxable.
| ! H.A.S. Officers
of graduate in |
| Law
i |
1
|
aa + नि “५ 5वि++ a | oo —-- a ofp a ता आन ऊन
4 years. | lyes Kannada. — न 9. Karnataka
and English |
1
| | :
| |
| 1
_ रा रा आओ हि विद
ne + — ;
5 years Every first and third yes yes, provided | 10) Kerala
direct recruitment that the incumb-
and every second ent fulfils. the |
| by transfer. qualifications. |
3 years | Alternatively by -do- I
direct recruitment yes i
and transfer from \
certain officers of
the State Govt. j
_|_____--~- “>> i _
| |
— 100% direct yes. — _ — 11. Madhya Pradesh
recruitment (Recruitment — Rules
yet to be finalised
but the practice in
the State is indicat-
° ed)

1६


ELIGIBILITY

Sr. | State Categories of Agency for Representation of Appointing Educational | Age
No. | Sub-Judges Recruitment Other bodies and Authority Qualifications |
| their powers हे |
1 | 2 3 4 7 | 8
| |
12. | Manipur Grade I- i
| Sub-Judge/ |
i Chief Judicial
: Magistrate 1
Public Service न Governor Degree in Law | 22-32 years for direct
t Grade [1[. Commission; ruits 25-35 for
i Munsif} High Court the Members from
| Magistrate the Bar.
| |
13. Meghalaya
(Recruitment Rules
not finalised. But | i
recruitments. are i
| made through State |
| Public Service Com- |
| mission and appoint- |
| ments are made by H
the State Govt. with
the prior approval
of Guwahati High
Court.
14, Orissa Class 1-Sub-Judge
Public Service High Court Governor Degree in Law 21-28 years for
Class I[-Munsif Commission probationers and
32 years for tempo-
rary recruits. Re-

laxable for certain
categories of can-
didates.



| not finalised. But
recruitment are
made through State
| Public Service Com-
mission and appoint-
merts are made by

.
ELIGIBILITY wp ~~ —y
Experience Quota for Method | Language ; Emergency Disqualifi- 51६1९
a | Recruitment por ra Requirement 1 Recruitment cations.
Bar Othe: written, Viva- Both
Exam. | voce | |
10 11 7 ‘ 4 1 >
a जे जन ज+न+- -- - ee een ee
\ Jot
Three years for _ 2/3 by direct recruit- ! ives English _— _ 112.) Manipur
the Members of | ment and 1/3 by i 1 ) 4
the Bar \ selection from the i i |
Bar. |
| : 1
कि
i |
a T a जज -- boo 7 wee ee जलन क्‍जऊ-+-+-+-त+तन-
| | |
| 13. Meghalaya
H (Recruitment Rules
}
i |
|
{
1
|
'
4

; | 1 the State Govt. with
| | i the prior approval
| of Guwahati High
\ | | | : Court.

|

_ | — | 100°, by direct H

yes | Oriya Emergency { 4 Orissa
| recruitment 1

Recruitment

Rules. 1979, —

Law degree.
8.

interview by the
; Public Service
Commission
with a nominee
of the High
Court.

i

|

i

|

1

|
||
| Selection by
i

€€


ELIGIBILITY

Rajasthan

Categories of Sub-. | Agency for Representation of Appointing ee जध अप-- a
Judges Recruitment other bodies and Authority Educational Age

. their powers Qualifications

3 7 5 6 7 ~
“Sub-Judge Public Service | High Court ma Governor Degree in Law | 23-27 years.

Commission

] Public Service

३ may
suggest subjects of
examination,

Judge of the

(State Govt.

may appoint

officers from
Punjab — Civil
Services  (Exe-
cutive Branch)
and certain
other Officers to
act as Sub-
Judges although.
they may not
hold law degrees.

normally

Tamil Nadu

Category II-
Subordinate Magis-

trates.

Governor Degree in Law । Below 35 years.
Commission High Court as an |
expert at the viva- i
voce test
j
Judicial Services :—
Category I- |
Sub-Judges |
Category Il- Public Service Governor For direct | Below 32 years for
District Munsit Commission recruits direct recruits
i B.A.'B.Sc.’ ॥
B.Com.—
Honours Degree.
i For transferees .; Below 45. years,
| 8.0./8.50.1 .
B.Com. Ho-
nours’ Degree
and B.L,
Magisterial Services: or L.L.B
Category | -Addl.
First Class Public Service Governor For transferees—| For transferees --
Magistrate Commission Graduate degree; Below 35 years.

and a degree in

Law. For direct recruits—

Below 30 years.

re


ELIGIBILITY Method Language Emergency Disqualifi- Sr. State
Quota for |__| -——-— Requirement Requirement cations No.
perience | ~——sRecruitment written} Viva- | Both
Other Exam. [४0००९
oe eee a oe en ie _ - an ----- |. —
9 10 11 12 13 14 I 2
yes Punjabi Bigamy but 15. | Punjab
(Gurumukhi) telaxable.
! i
|
i { i
i i
100%, by direct yes Hindi Prior conviction | 16. Rajasthan
recruitment, not a bar prov-
| | ed a certificate
| 1 from a Superin-
| | } tendent of Police
| or After care-
1 Home I.G.Prisons,
f is furnished.
Three years’ Out of every 20 Tamil Yes subject to | Bigamy 17. Tamil Nadu.
actual practice! posts, 11 by direct the possession
Tecruitment and of necessary
every 9 by transfer qualifications.
from certain cate-
gories of Officers
of the State Govt.
2 years 5 years न _ — | Tamil Temporary Bigamy
appointments.
2 years |
|]

SE


ELIGIBILITY

State Categories of Agency for Representation of He अत लअजज++_
Recruitment other bodies and Educational Age
their powers Qualifications
ro 2 4 5 7 8
Public Service Degree in Law | For direct recruits

| Tripura
|

1 West Bengal

Commission;
High Court

Public Service
Commission}
High Court

Degree in Law

22-35 and for the
Members of the
Bar 25-40.

For direct recruits
21-32. and 607
Members of the
Bar 27-32.

9६


. * a
Quota for Method Language Emergency Disqualifi- Sr. States
___ ELIGIBILITY Recruitment opto ae} Recruitment Recruitment cations No.
Experience written|Viva | Both
Bai Other | Exam | Voce
न 11 12 | 4. | 1. 2
_ Le जज | - i _ -
3 years for 50% by direct Bengali Bigamy 18. | Tripura
the Members recruitment and 50% yes
of the Bar by selection from
the Bar.
3 years for 50% by competitive Both | Bengali and
the Members examination and English 9.) West
of the Bar 50% by selection Bengal
from the Bar.

Le

MGIPCBE—St-~4 M of L & J/87—11-1-88--1010.