LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED NINETEENTH REPORT
ON

ACCESS TO EXCLUSIVE FORUM FOR VICTIMS
OF MOTOR ACCIDENTS UNDER THE MOTOR.
VEHICLES ACT, 1939

FEBRUARY, 1987


D.O. No. F.2(6)/87-LC,

विधि आयोग
LAW COMMISSION
भारत सरकार
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
शास्त्री भवन,
SHASTRI BHAWAN,

D. A. DESAI नई दिल्‍ली
Chairman NEW DELHI

February 19, 1987.

pod

Shri Ashok Kumar Sen,
Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,

Shastri Bhavan,

New Delhi.

Dear Minister for Law and Justice,

Continuing its search for rendering access to justice unhampered by any
roadblocks, the Law Commission forwards one more report. This is the Sixth
Report of the present Commission (119th report in the series) dealing with
the problem of victims of motor accidents unable to claim compensation on
account of the inaccessibility to the exclusive forum created under Sec. 110A(2)
of The Motor Vehicles Act, 1939.

As you are aware that the road transport is proliferating fast. It is going
to receive a push and acceleration by the provisions made in the Seventh Plan
Documents for roads and tourism. As you are also aware that under Sec. 110,
an exclusive forum in the form of Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal has been
created for adjudicating upon the claims for compensation and damages arising
out of motor accidents. Sec. 110A(2) provides that every application for com-
pensation shall be made to the Claims Tribunal having jurisdiction over the area
in which the accident occurred. Now numerous operators have obtained per-
mits for contract carriage for inter-state operation. Even the ceiling on
tourist permit is being removed. Upward revision of total number of permits
enabling inter-state operation of goods vehicles corresponding to the rise in
commerce and industry is a known phenomenon. Further incentive for tourism
encourages people coming from lower middle classes and weaker sections of
the community to hire buses for movement throughout the country visiting
religious shrines in distant places. Similarly educational institutions are en-
couraged to organise study tours for students at all levels. Mostly they move
in hired buses. They move far away from their habitat.

All these have also contributed to larger number of motor accidents
occurring. Victims of such accidents are required to file their claims petition
before the Claims Tribunal in whose local jurisdiction the accident occurred.
More often the Claims Tribunal at a prohibitive distance from the ordinary
place of residence of the claimants will alone have jurisdiction to entertain
petitions as a result of combined operation of Sec. 110A(2) and Sec. 110F of
The Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, as the latter one provides for ouster of jurisdic-
tion of ordinary civil courts,

@


Gi)

Numerous cases came to the notice of the Supreme Court and the Law
Commission where pilgrims who had started from down South by a bus met
with an accident that occurred somewhere in the Himalayas where the pilgrims
were visiting such shrines as Badrinarayan and Kedarnath. The legal repre-
sentatives or dependants of the deceased pilgrims residing ordinarily somewhere
in the Southern region will have to travel all the way to the distant Northern
region to obtain compensation. Geographical barrier would prove a disincentive.
Moving the Supreme Court for transfer of claims petitions after they are filed
is a costly luxury.

The Law Commission having examined this in depth has drawn up a report
recommending amendment to Sec. 110A(2) of The Motor Vehicles Act, 1939,
to confer jurisdiction on more than one Claims Tribunal to remove geographical
roadblock and provide easy accessibility to the forum for obtaining compensa-
tion which is both a measure of social justice and social security.

I hope that this report which is likely to go a long way to help the weaker
sections of the society would be given priority and implemented forthwith.

With regards,
Yours faithfully,

Sd/-
(D.A. DESAI)

Encl: 4 Report


CHAPTER

CONTENTS

Pace
Introductory . n . . . 1
Exclusive form. : . . . . . 5
Proliferation of Motor Transport . + . 7
Parallels for Guidance . . 9
Conclusion . . 12

(iid


CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY

1.1. Consistent with the task assigned to the present Law Commission to re-
commend comprehensive judicial reforms touching almost all aspects of ‘Justice
delivery system’, the primary focus was on decentralisation of justice system.
Decentralisation, amongst others, must have the object of removing road blocks
in access to justice. The guiding consideration of the Law Commission in this
behalf has been to take justice to the door-steps of the people. That is also
the mandate of article 39A of the Constitution which requires the State to
secure that the operation of the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of
equal opportunity, .... and to ensure that opportunities for securing justice
are not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities. This
Report deals with a small but significant aspect of removing geographic barriers
which are intertwined with economic barriers in the access to justice in the
developing branch of compensation for the victims of motor accidents.

1.2. With the widening horizon of Law of Torts and the awareness about the
right to recover compensation for the harm suffered by the wrongful act of
some other person, victims of motor accidents came forward to file suits for
compensation by way of damages suffered. Till 1956, they were required to
invoke the jurisdiction of ordinary civil courts where generally litigation has a
tendency to drag on for a long time and the underlying object of compensation
by way of restitution stood defeated. Until 1956, there was no special forum
for adjudication of claims for compensation by the victims of motor accidents.
Surface transport, especially the road transport, was in the process of fast
development. With the pace of industrialisation and the incapacity of the
Railway Administration to transport goods, road transport expanded consider-
ably. On the introduction of State Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950,
all the States set up their Road Transport Corporations and gradually the
private passenger bus operators were being eliminated. However, transport of
goods by trucks remained within the exclusive domain of private sector and
proliferated. Permits for tourist buses under section 63(7) of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1939, were in great demand. With the realisation that tourism
is an industry with a high potential for earning profits even in terms of foreign
exchange, the Tourism Development Corporations came into existence and
provided numerous facilities for attracting tourists. Every year, the number of
indigenous and foreign tourists went up. Permits for tourist buses entitled to
Inter-State operations were in great demand. Levy of taxes by the States on
passenger vehicles and goods vehicles had to meet the challenge of article 301
of the Constitution which guaranteed freedom of trade, commerce and inter-
course. Interpreting the content and contours of the freedom of trade, com-
merce and intercourse, the Supreme Court held that if such taxes were com-
pensatory in character, they would be immune from the challenge of article
301.1 To make the tax compensatory, the State agreed to set apart a substantial
part of the receipt of tax on improving facilities for road transport. Tt was

asserted that a tax, the receipt of which is utilised for facilitating road transport,
could not be said to

ensures trade, commerce and intercourse and, therefore,
violate the freedom guaranteed in article 301. Accordingly, facilities for road

. Tea Co. Ltd. vs. State of Assam (1964) 5 इटार 975 ; Atiabari Tea Co. Ltd. vs. State of
1 Eigebatt 961) 1 SCR 809; Automobile transport (Rajasthan) Co. Ltd. vs. State %, Rajasthan
(1963) 1 SCR 491; ‘and State of Karnataka vs. Hansa ‘Corporation (1980) 4 SCC 697,

1
2—105 LD/ND/87


LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA ONE HUNDRED NINETEENTH REPORT

transport multiplied. Long distance travel by cars, buses and taxies increased
substantially. The cumulative effect of all these facilities led to larger number
of accidents and the risk inherent to pedestrians and users of the road accele-
rated considerably. Awareness slowly grew that the victims of motor accidents
who suffered damage are entitled to recover compensation from the party whose
action inflicted the injury. Upto 1956, claim for compensation was to be filed
before the ordinary Civil Court having jurisdiction in the area. The Civil
Courts treated the claims as of routine nature and the proceedings dragged on
interminably.

1.3. That raised the vital issue as to what is the principle behind compensation
payable by way of damages. The simplest answer is that he who inflicts harm
must repair the same, and that the repair may come in terms of money com-
pensation. The next important question that agitated the minds of those charged
with a duty to determine adequate compensation was as to what ought to be
the yardstick for measuring the damages. Compensation has to be assessed
keeping in view the injury suffered by the victims or the loss caused to the
dependants of the victim in case of death. Undoubtedly, there is some distinc-
tion between compensation and damages, but in final analysis, this distinction
becomes blurred. The expression, ‘compensation’ has been defined as the
pecuniary recompense which a person is entitled to receive in respect of damage
or loss which he has suffered, other than as a result of an actionable wrong,
litigated in the Civil Court, committed by the person bound to make the
recompense. Shorn of embellishment, compensation is payable by the person
who is responsible for the damage to person or property suffered by the
victim. In the event of death, the approach has been to assess the earn-
ing capacity of the deceased, deduct from it what is spent for him-
self, ascertain whether the balance was spent on the dependants of
the victim and restore the same by way of adequate compensation.
This, in short, is called the principle of restitution, which implies that
one must restore, so far as money can do, to the plaintiff or one entitled
to and seeking compensation, to the position he would have been if the tort in
question had not been done to him. In simple language, restore in economic
terms what the deceased was providing in his life time to his dependants or to
himself before he suffered harm. Avoiding the discussion with regard to the
various heads under which compensation can be claimed in respect of the
pecuniary loss to the dependants or to the injured himself on account of injury,
it is to be ascertained by balancing on the one hand the loss to the claimants
for future pecuniary benefit, and on the other, any pecuniary advantage which,
from whatever source, comes to them by reason of death, i.e., the balance of
loss and gain to a dependant by the death must be ascertained. After this
balance is ascertained, it has to be quantified in the manner provided in some
judgments by keeping in view the age of the deceased and his expected span
of working life. In simpler language, after taking into account the various
legal aspects, what the Court tries to do is to provide, as far as possible, the
same benefit which the dependants enjoyed when the deceased was alive by
awarding such compensation that his death would not deny the benefits.

1.4. Once the principle of compensation is scientifically understood, it cannot
be gainsaid that it must be awarded as early and as expeditiously as possible.
Tf the bread-winner dies and the dependants are ill-equipped to earn their
livelihood, if the amount of compensation is not made available forthwith or as
expeditiously as possible, unwittingly, the lot of the dependants would be
destitution and starvation. Ordinary civil courts take long time to determine
and award compensation. To mitigate this hardship, a comprehensive amend-
ment was made in the Motor Vehicles Act, by ‘Act 100 of 1956, enabling. the
State Governments to set up Claims Tribunals for the purpose of adjudicating


LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA ONE HUNDRED NINETEENTH REPORT

upon claims for compensation in respect of accident involving the death of, or
bodily injury to, persons arising out of the use of motor vehicles or damages
to the property of a third party so arising or both. A new forum was thus
devised exclusively for entertaining claims for compensation arising out of
motor accidents with a fairly simple procedure as provided in section 110C of
the Motor Vehicles Act.

1.5. One other ugly feature of the legal system was also sought to be cured by
making ‘Third Party Risk Insurance’ compulsory. Earlier, cases came to light
where an owner of a motor vehicle, with a view to avoiding his liability in the
event of an accident, either registered a vehicle in the name of a driver or a
man of no means with the result that an award of compensation may become
infructuous. To avoid this contingency, section 94 of the Motor Vehicles Act
provided that no person shall usc, except as a passenger, or cause or allow any
other person to use a motor vehicle in a public place, unless there is in force
in relation to the use of the vehicle by that person or that other person, as the
case may be, a policy of insurance complying with the requirements of chapter
VIII of the Act. It was assumed that on account of the combined operation
of the provisions prescribing compulsory third party risk insurance and a
special forum like the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, claimants will be able
to expeditiously obtain compensation where it is due and where it is just and
fair to be awarded. Once a policy of insurance as provided by section 94 is
in force, it was assumed that the recovery would be as well easy in that the
Insurance Company would satisfy the award as provided in section 96 of the
Motor Vehicles Act. The assumption, of course, by subsequent events stands
badly belied.

1.6. The Law Commission of India recommended insertion of section 109A(1)
in the Motor Vehicles Act to extend protection to victims of ‘hit and run’ acci-
dents, where the person liable to pay such compensation or his whereabouts
cannot be. ascertained after reasonable effort by providing that in such an event,
the person entitled to such compensation shall be entitled to receive it from
the State. This recommendation like many others has not found favour with
the Government but solatium fund has been set up under section 109A of the
Motor Vehicles Act, from which compensation can be paid to the victims of
‘hit and run’ accidents.

1.7. By 1980, a wind was blowing that compensation to the victims of motor
accidents should be by way of social security and the liability to pay the same
must be ‘No-fault’ liability. The law, as it stands at present, save the provision
in Chapter VIIA, inserted by the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1982,
enables the victim or the dependants of the victim in the event of death to
recover compensation on proof of fault of the person liable to pay compensa-
tion and which fault caused the harm such as bodily injury or death. In the
event of death of a victim of a motor accident and the consequent harm caused.
to his dependants, the question whether the person responsible for the action
causing harm had committed a fault or it was an inevitable accident, is hardly
relevant from the point of view of victim or his/her dependants. The expanding
notions of social security and social justice envisaged that the liability to pay
compensation must be a ‘No-fault’ liability. The Law Commission of India
undertook an examination of this concept and submitted its report in May,
1980.2 The Law Commission recommended that a new section 92A should be
inserted in the Motor Vehicles Act, by which the doctrine of liability without
fault should be introduced in the Act and strict liability imposed in regard
to death or bodily injury caused by an accident of the nature specified in section

1. LCI SIstReport.
2. LCI 85th Report.


LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA ONE HUNDRED NINETEENTH REPORT

110(1) with the ceiling on ‘No-fault’ liability of Rs. 1,00,000. It appears that
this recommendation was accepted with a modification by Providing ‘No-fault’
liability in the event of death in the amount of Rs. 15,000/- and in respect of
Permanent disablement of any person, upto Rs. 7,500/-. It appears that the
recommendation as to strict liability does not appear to have been accepted.
There were some other recommendations, but while dealing with the question
of jurisdiction of Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, an observation has been
made which needs to be examined in the light of the present-day situation. In
Chapter XVI bearing the heading, “Jurisdiction and Limitation” under the
sub-title ‘Limits of Jurisdiction’, paragraph 16.2 reads as under :—

“As to territorial jurisdiction, section 110A(2) provides for the filing of

an application in a tribunal within the local limits of whose jurisdiction

the accident occurred. This sub-section has raised no problem so far.”

It would be pointed out that this Provision works hardship and blocks access
to justice. Section 110A(2) reads as under :-—

“Every application under sub-section (1) shall be made to the Claims
Tribunal having jurisdiction over the area in which the accident occurred,
and shall be in such form and shall contain such particulars as may be
prescribed.”

There is a proviso which is not material for the Present purpose. The present
report concerns itself with the impact of this section. It would be pointed out
in the course of the report that it has Proved to be both a geographic, economic
and psychological barrier to access to justice, and these barriers need to be
removed.

1, LCI 85th Report, Chapter XVI, para 16.2 page 56.


CHAPTER वा
EXCLUSIVE FORUM

2.1. Once the awareness proliferated that the wrong doer must be made td
compensate the victim, a debate started about the nature and character of the
forum to which victims of tort feasor must approach for quantification and
recovery of compensation. Till 1956, no specific provision was made in the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, for setting up a forum for recovery of compensation
by the victims of motor accidents. Such a claim for compensation was treated
as a claim for damages for which one had to resort to ordinary civil courts.
One claiming compensation may file a suit in a civil court like any other civil
suit and pray for damages.

2.2, Section 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, provided for jurisdiction
for suits for compensation for wrongs to persons or movables. It reads as
under :— oy
“Suits for compensationfor 19. Wherea suit is for compensation for wrongdoneto the person
wrongs to personormovables. or to movable property, if the wrong was done within the local
limits of thej arisdiction of one court and the defendant resides,
orcirries on business, or Personally works for gain, within the
locallimits of the jurisdiction of another court, the suit_ may be
institutedat the option of the plaintiffineither of the said Courts”
A person claiming compensation may have to file a suit in the court within
whose jurisdiction the accident occurred because by the accident, the wrong
was done to the victim. Alternatively, the plaintiff can file a suit in a court
within whose jurisdiction the defendant resides or carries on business or perso-
nally works for gain. Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure provided for
jurisdiction for suits other than those specified in section 19. In such suits,
the plaintiff was required to file a suit within the jurisdiction of the court in
which the defendant resides, or in the court within whose jurisdiction the
cause of action has arisen. If the accident furnishes the cause of action,
obviously, the suit will have to be filed within the jurisdiction of the court
having jurisdiction in the area where the accident occurred or where the
defendant resides or carries on business or personally works for gain. Section
20(b) provides that every suit shall be instituted in a court within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction any of the defendants, where there are more than
one, at the time of the commencement of the suit, actually and voluntarily
resides or carries on business or personally works for gain, provided that in
such case either the leave of the court is given, or the defendants who do
not reside or carry on business or personally work for gain, as aforesaid,
acquiesce in such institution. These provisions govern the institution of suits
in the matter of geographical jurisdiction prior to 1956.

2.3. In a petition for recovering compensation by the victim of a motor accident,
the respondents to be impleaded would be the driver and owner of the offending
vehicle and the Insurance Company with which the vehicle is insured for third
party risk (to be referred to as the ‘Insurer’). It may be that prior to the
nationalisation of the General Insurance, the insurer, as the defendant, may
have offices in a few places and in view of the Explanation to section 20 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the insurer as the defendant could be said to
carry on business where it has a subordinate office also. The driver however
could be said to be residing or working for gain at the place where he is
employed and the owner of the vehicle could be said to carry on business where
he is actually carrying on business. The petition for compensation in such a

5


LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA ONE HUNDRED NINETEENTH REPORT

situation will have to be filed more or less in the court within whose jurisdiction
the accident occurred alleging that the accident has furnished the cause of
action. This situation underwent a material change in 1956.

2.4. Section 110 was inserted in the Motor Vehicles Act, by Act 100 of 1956,
with effect from 16th Feb., 1957. Section 110 conferred power on the State
Government to constitute one or more Motor Accidents Tribunals for a specified
area(s) for the purpose of adjudicating upon claims for compensation in respect
of accidents involving death of, or bodily injury to persons arising out of the
use of motor vehicles or damages to any property of a third party so arising,
or both. The qualifications for appointment as a Member of a Claims Tribunal
were prescribed in section 110(3) to the effect that the person to be appointed
(a) is, or has been, a Judge of the High Court; or (b) is, or has been, a District
judge; or (c) is qualified for appointment as a Judge of the High Court. Section
110A provided for application for compensation. Sub-section (2) thereof pro-
vided that every application under sub-section (1) shall be made to the Claims
Tribunal having jurisdiction over the area in which the accident occurred, and
shall be in such form and shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed.
The application has to be made within a period of six months from the date
of the occurrence of the accident. Section 110F provides for ouster of juris-
diction of civil court. It provided that where any Claims Tribunal has been
constituted for any area, no civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any
question relating to any claim for compensation which may be adjudicated upon
by the Claims Tribunal for that area, and no injunction in respect of any action
taken or to be taken by or before the Claims Tribunal in respect of the claim
for compensation shall be granted by the civil court. These provisions, at a
glance, show that an exclusive forum was created for entertaining and adjudi-
cating upon claims for compensation and damages to property of third party
arising out of use of motor vehicle in a public place and that the jurisdiction
of the civil court for entertaining suits in respect of claims for which a petition
for claim under section 110A could have been filed was simultaneously ousted.

2.5. After setting up an exclusive forum, it was considered advisable to specify
the jurisdiction of each Claims Tribunal. Claims Tribunals would be set up
throughout the length and breadth of the country. Unless jurisdiction is pres-
cribed, one may resort to multiplicity of proceedings before different tribunals.
Section 110A(2) clearly specifies that the Claims Tribunal, within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction an accident occurred alone, would have the jurisdic-
tion to entertain an application for compensation arising out of the accident.
This is unquestionably the present position in law.

2.6. Is this situation conductive to provide easy access to the Claims Tribunals
for recovering compensation ? If setting up of an exclusive forum was intended
to expedite adjudication of claim for compensation, is the object realised by
conferring jurisdiction only on a Claims Tribunal within the local limits of
whose jurisdiction the accident occurred? If a passenger bus on contract
carriage started from Kanyakumari and met with an accident while passing
through Haryana, and in this accident, say roughly about 20 persons died and
10 others suffered injuries, the petition for compensation by the dependants of
cach deceased and also the petition for compensation by each injured person—
all ordinarily residing in Kanyakumari—will have to be filed before the Claims
Tribunal within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the accident occurred
in Haryana State. The forum being exclusive, nowhere else the claim can be
made and the exclusive forum is at such a prohibitive distance that one may
have to think hundred times before filing a petition to claim compensation by
undertaking the hazardous task of travelling hundreds of miles and involving
huge costs in search of illusory compensation. This is the problem posed for

consideration in this report.


CHAPTER वा
PROLIFERATION OF MOTOR TRANSPORT

3.1. In order to appreciate that the proposed change which is being recom-
mended by this Report has become a compelling necessity, it is necessary to
guage the present position with regard to road transport. Even after great
strides having been taken during the last six Plan periods, the country’s
economy is still largely agrarian in character and the settlement pattern is
rural-oriented.t Roads accordingly constitute a critical element of the trans-
portation infra-structure. Since the inception of planning (1952), the road
network has expanded from 4 lakh k.m. to 17.7 lakh km. The National
Highways encompass a road length of 37,110 k.m. and carry nearly a third of
the total road traffic. The rural road network now connects 64% of the
villages, though not with all-weather roads. Amongst various objectives of the
Seventh Plan, there has to be continued emphasis on provision of roads to
villages so as to achieve “Minimum Needs Programme” targets by 1990 as also
reduction in road accident rates.? By the end of the Seventh Plan period, it is
intended by the “Minimum Needs Programme” for rural road construction link-
ing of all villages with a population of 1500 and above and 50% of the
villages with a population between 1000 and 1500.

3.2. With the improvement in the road transport facility, simultaneously the
motor vehicle population in the country has been continuously increasing. From
just 34,000 in 1950-51, the number of buses has gone up to 2,60,000 in
1984-85. During the same period, the number of trucks increased from
82,000 to 7,63,000. The Seventh Plan envisages an annual growth of 8% of
both the truck and bus fleet.*

3.3. In 1984, 12,19,752 tourists (including Nationals of Pakistan and Bangla-
desh) visited India. The foreign exchange earnings from tourism were estimated
at Rs. 1,200 crores for 1983-84. During the Seventh Plan period, the aim is
to achieve an annual growth rate of 7% in the tourist arrivals.

3.4. Better roads, more modern vehicles, love for travel, incentives to Tourism
industry, constraints in capacity on the Railways, combined with inherent
advantages of road transport, and expansion of the road network, all in their
cumulative effect. contributed to ever rising numerous motor accidents. Victims
of road accidents are, generally speaking, poor pedestrians and the dependants
of such poor pedestrians have to seek out a forum for compensation. Obviously,
as a compelling necessity, the forum must be within their easy reach.

3.5, With inter-state operation permits, as envisaged by section 63(7), expand-
ing year after year, the middle and lower middle class people hire buses on
contract carriage and move out to distant parts of the country. Schools organise
educational tours, and religious fervours encourage journey to distant holy
shrines. Numerous lower middle-class people travel from the extreme sourthern
tip of the country to Badri Narayan and Kedarnath, the northern most points
in the Himalayas. Similarly, people from the eastern part of the country travel
to Dwarka and vice-versa. Goods transport trucks criss-cross the country from
one end to the other end. While undoubtedly the roads are being improved,
the roads were laid for a slow moving economy and the roads cater to not very
1, The Seventh Five Year Plen ————————inasingn Vorb paretS4,poge4S. 8,54, pege 485.
2, टैग... pages 485, 486.

3,. Id, Para 8.87, page 494.



LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA ONE HUNDRED NINETEENTH REPORT

heavy trucks. As we move to the 21st century, bigger air-conditioned buses,
heavy tonnage goods vehicles, have started appearing on the roads. The roads
are not simultaneously widened, nor are any special channels set apart for
goods vehicles. A noticeable tendency of the drivers of the goods vehicles is
to move at an alarming speed so that if the distance is covered faster, the profits
multiply. In their cumulative effect, all these factors have taken a toll of
human life, an ever-rising graph of motor accidents.

3.6. Buses with contract carriage permits having inter-state operation rights
move throughout the length and breadth of the country. Those who hire a
contract carriage bus are people who are either of the same village or a small
city, or are members of the same community or are students of the same school.
After a bus taken on contract carriage, travels hundreds of miles and meets
with an accident, the victims of the accidents, in view of section 110A(2) have
to file their claims petition at a place far away from their habitat. Recently, a
bus from Gujarat on the way to the shrines in the Himalayas met with an
accident and about 23 persons died and 15 others suffered injuries. The accident
eccurred within the jurisdiction of the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal at
Garhwal in Uttar Pradesh. The dependants of victims of the accident and the
injured persons—all had to travel more than 1500 miles to reach the Accidents
Claims Tribunal having jurisdiction to entertain their petition for compensation.
Is not the distance prohibitive for any middle-class or lower middle-class verson
to travel such a distance and initiate action? Would not the distance be itself
a disincentive ? Would it not be a geographical barrier to access to justice? Is
not the geographical barrier directly inter-linked with the economic barrier
because one who is wealthy and well-to-do, distance would be ignored? And
small claims may not be preferred only because the time, the cost and the
labour involved in realising the same would be disproportionately higher than
the benefit acquired. Section 110A(2) thus becomes, instead of providing an
exclusive forum but at such a prohibitive distance as not to be of any use and
utility, a barrier to access to. justice. Can this barrier to access to justice be
removed or surmounted? That is the area of inquiry.

3.7. The geographic barrier to access to justice is also to some extent an
economic barrier. Forum at a long distance would be a disincentive. It can
become physically or economically impossible for disputants to use the courts
for most disputes.’ Cost of travel, taking witnesses, finding lodging and boarding
would add to costs of litigation and render geographic barrier an economic
barrier. Litigation by persons of modest means who have lost a bread winner,
or whose capacity to earn is impaired by injury would be effectively foreclosed
by the distant forum. Therefore the ‘haves’ always come out better in litigation
strategies.” bey >

3.8. It is therefore imperative to discuss the importance of accessibility of courts
as one feature in improving the quality of the ‘justice industry’.*

3.9. The problem of access can be addressed in a number of ways. The design
of any given dispute resolution forum—including a court—involves a series of
policy decisions.* The fundamental strategies available to respond to perceived
deficiencies of the present time lies in bringing it within the easy reach of
claiments.

ee
1, Access to Justice, Vol. 111, page 10.
2, Galatenr, Why the ‘‘Haves”? Come Out Ahead : Speculation on the Limits of Legal Change
(1974), 9’Law and Society Rev. page 95.
3. Cahnand Cah What, Prive Justice,? The Civilian Perspective Revisited (1966), 41, Notre Dame
Lawyer page 929.
4, Access to Justice, Vol. 111, page 14,


CHAPTER IV
PARALLELS FOR GUIDANCE

4.1. The serious legal impediments caused by distance experienced here had
also figured in a comparable but different situations. A discarded or divorced
wife in search of maintenance, or one seeking divorce or restitution of conjugal
rights, etc., faced the same problems in view of creating of exclusive fora.

4.2. Way back at the turn of the last century, it was felt that discarded and
divorced wives must have easily accessible expeditious remedy to recover main-
tenance from their errant husbands. Section 488 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898, conferred power on the Magistrate to award maintenance to
a wife, who is unable to maintain herself, from her husband. The right also
expanded to include illegitimate children and later even parents. Sub-section (8)
of section 488 provided for jurisdiction of courts to award maintenance. Under
it, proceedings may be taken against any person in any district where he resides
or is, or where he last resided with his wife or, as the case may be, with the
mother of the illegitimate child. Now, after the wife is discarded, she would
hardly be in a position to reside in the same village or town where she last
resided with her husband, and it would be humanly impossible for the wife to
travel to the place where the husband is residing and to initiate action ina
court of competent jurisdiction. The courts recognised that the provision con-
tained in section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, aimed at
preventing vagrancy and starvation. The courts also recognised that under
Indian conditions, women being unable to remain economically independent,
and once the husband discards or divorces the wife, the only option left to the
wife is destitution or vagrancy. Any civilized society must guard against this.
Therefore, even though claiming maintenance is ordinarily considered as civil
right, a cheap, expeditious remedy was provided. However, this remedy could
not be availed of because of the forum being inconvenient and uncongenial.
The Law Commission examined this aspect and recorded its observation as
under :—
“Under sub-section (8), the place where the wife resides after desertion by
the husband is not material as regards the venue of the proceedings, though
the place where the husband resides—even temporarily—is relevant. Often
deserted wives are compelled to live with their relative far away from the
place where the husband and wife last resided together. They would be
put to great harassment and expenditure, unless the venue of the proceeding
is enlarged so as to include the place where they may be residing on the
date of the application.”

The Law Commission accordingly recommended re-drafting of the provision.
Section 126 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, appears to have taken
note of this recommendation. It reads as under :—
+4126. Procedure (1) Proceedings under section 125 may be taken against any
person !n any district—
6). where he is., or
(ii) where he or his wife resides; or
(iii) where he last resided with his wife or, a8 the case may be, with
the mother of the tegitimate child,

1. LCI 4ist Report Vol. 1, page 306.


10

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA ONE HUNDRED NINETEENTH REPORT

This provision enables the discarded or divorced wife to initiate proceedings
where she resides. That will make access to the forum easy and within accessible
limits. Situation in terms of justice being identical, this provision can provide
guidance in the present situation.

4.3. Similar defects were also noticed during the working of the unamended
section 19 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. It reads as under :—

“Court to which petition 19. Every petition under this Act shal] be presented to the district

should be made. court within the local limits of whose ordinary original civil juris«
diction the marriage was solemnised or the hustend and tke wife
reside or last resided together.”

The Law Commission found numerous infirmities in the actual working of the
section. It pointed out :—
“The place of solemnisation of marriage or the last matrimonial home—
two of the tests given in the section—may not turn out to be satisfactory,
because both may have ceased to be of any importance to the parties, in
these days of mobility of population. The place where the parties are both
residing—which is the third test—is inapplicable on the facts,”!
The recommendation of the Commission received consideration and section 19
was amended by the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976. The amended
section reads as under :—
‘*Courtto which petition shal] 19, Every petition under this Act shall be presented to the district
be presented. court within the local limits of whose ordinary original civil juris+
diction—
(i) the marrige was solemnized, or
(ii) the respondent, at the time of the presentation of the peth
tion, resides, or
(iii) the parties to the marriage last resided together, or
(iv) the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentetion
of the pitition, in a case where the respondent is, at that
time, residing outside the territories to which this Act
extends, or has not been heard of as being alive for a

period of seven years or more by those persons who
would naturally have heard of him wif heere alive.”

4.4, It is not necessary to multiply such illustrations. The underlying object
behind these amendments was to make access to special forum easy. If the
exclusive or special forum cannot be reached on account of prohibitive distance,
obviously it results in denial of justice. The object underlying the amendment
was not to do away with exclusive or special forum but confer a jurisdiction
on more than one such forum so that anyone can be within the easy accessibility
or reach of the party who feels injustice or aggrieved by injustice and wants
or wishes to move the Court for relief and justice.

4.5. In the matter of claims for compensation before the Accidents Claims
Tribunal in respect of motor accidents, the situation is unbearable and
intolerable. While in the case of a husband and wife even when they part
company, though they may not be residing in the same village or town, they
may not be far away from each other. Marriages take place within community,
clan or caste settled in specified regions. Even inter-caste marriages in big
metropolitan cities take place within the area of metropolitan cities. Therefore,
one can reach the special forum in the same geographical division. Even then,
cases came to light where women, the weaker of the two sexes, felt handicapped
in invoking the jurisdiction of the special fora for relief, among others, on the
ground of prohibitive distance. This road block to justice was sought to be
removed by the aforesaid amendment. Similar relief is overdue in respect of
claimants who are victims of motor accidents.

1, LCI 59th Report, page 73.


LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA ONE HUNDRED NINETEENTH REPORT

4.6. There is one aspect which must be mentioned here. If the accident occurs
in @ State and if the State has set up a number of Claims Tribunals district-wise
and if accident occurs within the jurisdiction of one Claims Tribunal and the
claimants are, though in the same State, may be residing in the jurisdiction of
a different Claims Tribunal, it would be open to the High Court, on an appro-
priate application being made, to transfer these cases from one Claims Tribunal
to other Claims Tribunal under the general power of transfer and withdrawal
of civil cases conferred on the High Court under section 24 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908. Similar power is conferred on the Supreme Court of
India for inter-state transfer of civil cases. It was said by some observers
that these provisions are sufficient to rectify the situation dealt with in this
Report and, therefore, there is no need to amend the provision. This approach
betrays lack of knowledge of expenses incurred in moving petitions for transfer
either in the High Court or in the Supreme Court. To illustrate, say in a motor
accident, 20 people died and 10 suffered injuries. Legal representatives entitled
to recover compensation of each of these dead persons will have to make a
separate application to move the High Court or the Supreme Court, as the case
may be. Similarly, each injured person will have to make a separate applica-
tion for transfer. And a similar procedure will apply if the petition for transfer
is to be moved in the Supreme Court of India for inter-state transfer. The cost
will be prohibitive. Numerous petitions for such transfer by a compelling
necessity come up before the Supreme Court of India. No costs are usually
awarded even if the transfer is ordered. Already impoverished people by death
of bread winner are further exposed to avoidable expenses.

4.7. Therefore, the Law Commission is of the opinion that it is necessary to
amend section 110A(2) to provide for conferring jurisdiction on 8 Claims
Tribunal within whose jurisdiction the claimants reside.

4.8. One other view that was expressed to us was that if in the process of
taking justice to the door-step of the people, jurisdiction is conferred on the
Claims Tribunal within whose jurisdiction the claimants reside, would it not
work hardship on the driver and the owner of the vehicle at fault? As pointed
out earlier, in a petition for a claim for compensation arising out of a motor
accident, the respondents ordinarily are the driver and the owner of the offending
vehicle and the Insurer. After the nationalisation of General Insurance, the
Insurer has offices all over the country. It is a large public sector undertaking
which cannot feel any inconvenience if the jurisdiction is conferred on a Claim
Tribunal other than the one where the petition will have to be filed, as the law
stands today. Therefore, it must be excluded from further consideration. There
remain the driver and the owner of the offending vehicle. As against the con-
venience of these two persons, 3 large number of claimants coming from the
weaker sections of the society who may forego the claim for compensation
because of prohibitive cost of transfer and distant litigation and obviously the
balance would tilt in favour of such weaker sections of the society. Further,
the driver and the owner of the offending vehicle, both are entitled under the
Policy of Insurance to ask the Insurer to undertake the defence. One or two
witnesses may have to be called to prove rashness and negligence and other
factors. In fact, the surviving passengers may themselves be good witnesses.
As against that, claimants—dependants and injured persons—all will have to
travel a long distance to give evidence to prove their claims. Factors relevant
to proof are age of the deceased, his earning capacity, his possible estimated
span of life, etc. ‘Numerous witnesses will have to be taken as against driver
and conductor. It is also an experience not to be overlooked that the driver
generally does not participate in the proceedings. The expenses and the in-
convenience of claimants would be prohibitive. Putting the rival considerations
in balance, the balance tilts in favour of the victims of the accident.

i


CHAPTER V
CONCLUSION

5.1, Compénsation for victims of motor accidents is itself, to some extent, a
>, Measure of social justice as also a facet of social security. Compulsory insur-
wance for third party risk supports this inference. If that be so, availability of
social justice and social security must be within the easy reach of people entitled

to it. Victims of accidents, excluding some very rich persons, belong to this
class, As against poor pedestrians or travellers in cheap vehicles as motor
rickshaws and not so very road-worthy buses on contract carriage hired by
weaker sections of society, the insurer and the insured are better placed.
Further, the cost of transport of witnesses, claimants, the inconvenience of
Prosecuting litigation in a wholly unknown area may induce an instinctive
reaction to the initiation of Proceedings. To counteract this Position, it is
necessary to amend section 110A(2) so as to provide therein that every appli-
cation under sub-section (1) shall be made to the Claims Tribunal having
jurisdiction over the area in which the accident occurred, or to the Claims
Tribunal within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the claimant resides or
carries on business or personally works for gain or within the local limits of
whose jurisdiction the defendant resides or carries on business or works for
gain, at the option of the claimant.

5.2. Necessary consequential amendments may have to be made in the rules,
forms, etc. +

1. (0.4. DESAI)
Chairman

2. (S.C. GHOSE)
Member

3. (MRS. V.S. RAMA DEVI)
Member Secretary

New DELHI
Dated the 19th February, 1987.

12
GMGIPN—S2—105 L D(ND)/87—31-10.87—1000


ERRATA

Page (iii) Chapter 2 Read ५ Forum” in place of “form”
Page 2 Put page No. 2 above top

Page 6 Put page No. 6 above top
Para 2.4 line 10 Read “Judge” in place of “‘judge”
Para 2.6 line 1 Read ‘‘Conducive” in place of ‘*Conductive”

Page 8 Para 3.9 line 3 Foot note no. read ‘4’ in place of 3
Foot note 2 line 1 Read ‘‘Galanter” in place of ‘‘Galatenr”
Foot note 3 line 1 Read ‘‘Cahn and Cahn” in place of ‘Cahn and Cah”

Foot note 3 line 1 Remove comma after 41.

Page 10 Para 4.3 line 2 read “read” in place of ‘‘reads”
line 20 read ‘‘marriage” in place of ‘‘marrige”

line 29 read «‘if he were alive” in place of ‘‘wif heere alive”

Page 11 Para 4.8 line 9 read ‘*Claims” in place of “Claim”.