“CONFIDENTIAL”
“Not for Pabli¢ation™

©

LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

TWELFTH REPORT
(income-tax Act; 1922)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA—MINISTRY OF LAW


CHAIRMAN
LAW COMMISSION
New Dei,
September 26, 1958.

Shri. Ashok Kumar Sen -
Minister of Law,

Government of India,

New Delhi.

My dear Minister,

I have great pleasure in forwarding. herewith the Twelfth Report
of the Law Commission on the Income Tax Act.

2. At the request of the Government of India, the Commission
agreed to take up the revision of the Income Tax Act and ¢ntrusted
the task to a Committee consisting of Shri P. Satyanarayana Rao, Shri
G. N. Joshi and Shri N. A. Palkhivala who was specially appointed a
Member for the purpose of tHe revision of this Act.

3. The Committee held more than nine meetings, some of which
were spread over several days’and formulated a scheme for the, revision
of the Act. Some aspects of the work 88 well as the scheme 4 discuss-
ed at meetings ‘of the 98 and evision $ection of the Commisgion held
on the 22nd September, 1956 the 1 ‘th March, 1958. A draft Report
prepared by Shri P. Satyanardyana R: pi the senior Member off the sec-
tion of the Commission, dealig with te law revision, was circulated
to all Members of the Commishion and their views invited theredn. These
views together with the draft Report were disCussed at 2 meetikg of the
Statute Revision Section held on the 23rd and 24th August, 19: ५ Some
suggestions made by Members at this meeting were accepted 200 it was
left to the Chairman and Shri:P. Satyamarayana Rao to finally fettle the
Report in the light of the discussion.

4. Shri G. S. Pathak, being outgide India, is unable : sign the
Report. But he concurs in the recom: mentions and has authorised the
Chairman to sign the Report on his Hf. Dr. N. C. Sen 0690 and
Shri.D, Narasa Raju are unatjle ‘ocope ¢ down to Delhi to sigh the Re-
port but similarly concur in the endations and have apthorised
the Chairman to sign the repbrt on their behalf. Dr. N. C. Gupta
while expressing his concurreace with the Report has added a. separate
note on certain points.

5. The Commission wishes to acknowledge the services rendered
by Shri S. A. L. Narayana Row, Commissioner of Income tix. Shri
N. Srinivasan, Deputy Secret in the Ministry of Finance, and Shri
K. N- Srivastava, Income Tak Officer, jn connection with the| fps

* tion of this Report. i 1


ii

6. The Commission also wishes to place on record its appreciation
of the services of its Deputy Draftsman Shri P, M. Bakshi in pi reparing
the report and drafting the clauses. The assistance rendered by Shri M.

Bhujanga Rao, Private Secretary to Shri P. Satyanarayana Rao in draw-
ing the report also deserves mention.

Yours ‘sincerely,
M. C. SETALVAD.


Bt

Paragraphs

4
58

1O-12
12813,
14-17
18-22
23-29
3०-4०

डरा

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

Need for simplification and reference to the Law Commission .
Scheme of Simplification . :

Aheration of tax structure essential for simplification
Analogous statutes. ५ ५9 9 ५. <-

Changes proposed कर the Act. 6 ee

Chapter I. Preliminary. ©. 0.
Chapter II. Basis of charge foe
Chapter वी, Incomes which do not form part of the total income
Chapter IV. Computation of total income

Chapter V. Incomes of other persons, included in assessce’s
total income...

Chapter V1. Aggregation of income, and set-off or carry forward
and set off ofloss ५

Chapter VIi. Incomes on which no income-tax is payable
Chapter VILE. Rebates and reliefs . . पु न्‍
Chapter IX. Double taxation relief . -

Chapter X. Provisions against avoidance of ax.

Chapter XL. Super Tax. .

Chapter 3९11. Determination of tax in certain special cases
Procedural provisions Soe ee

Chapter XIII. Income-tax authorities

Chapter X(V. Procedure for assessment 5s.
Chapter XV. Liability in special cases : fo
Chapter XVI. Special provisions applicable to firms .
Chapter XVII. Special provisions applicate to companies.
Chapter XVIII. Collection and recovery of tax. « . .
Chapter XIX. Tax deemed to have been paid on dividends
Chapter XX. Refunds. . . sek
Chapter XXI. Appeals and revisions.

Chapter १० 1. Penalties imposable by Income-tax authorities
Chapter XXITT. Offences and prosceutions an
Chapter XXIV. Recognised providents funds . न
Chapter XXV. Approved superannuation funds.
Chapter XXVI. Miscellancous . . . . .
Schedules . . . . . . . . .
Scheme of notcs on clauses. . .

Increase in number of sections. . . .

Scheme of Appendices 5 see ee

Lists appendedio the report. eet

List 1—-List of changes . . . . . . .

List 11—List of recommendations See
APPENDICES,

Appendix I.~Showing the proposals in the form of draft clauses

(Detailed index is givén at the beginning of the Appendix)

Appendix I1—-Comparative tables. ar

NOTES ON CLAUSES

Notes on clauses . . - . . . . . .

Pages

2

72-76

71-297
298-319

320-gge


INTRODUCTION

1. There is hardly any A¢t on the Indian Statute Book Need for sim.

which is so complicated, so illogical in Its arrangement, and PEC.
in some respects so obscure as the Indian Income-tax Act, io the Law
1922, Courts and commentators have commented on the Commission.
illogical arrangement of the provisions of the Act. It has
been repeatedly pointed out that the amendments made
from time to time to the Ac#, directgd as they frequently
are at stopping an’ exit through the net of taxation freshly
disclosed, are too often frametl withowt sufficient regard to
the basic scheme upon which the Act originally rested. Pro-
visions dealing with the same topic of subject-matter are
scattered through the various Chapters of the Act, and only
a thorough knowledge of the whole Act would enable any
one to find out ali the provisions bearfng on a certain point.
Added to the illogicality of the arr: engine are two other
defects, inaccuracy in the us¢ of | e and a degree of
obscurity which make it diffiult to re a glimpse of the
real intention of the legislature. As Lord Wrenbury said
{with reference to the corréspon ding Act of the United
Kingdom), “No reliance can be place@ upon an assumption.
of accuracy in the use of language in these Acts”.’

2. The hopeless confusiqn into which the Income-tax
law has fallen is mainly due to any 122 and continuous _
‘tinkering with the Act by the legislate. The amendments
te the Income-tax Act have'been sq short-sighted and so ,
short-lived as to rob the law of ee modicum of stability
which is essential to its he Before the provi-
sions of the Act can be rind iently clakified by the judicial.
process, new provisions are bubstitufed in their place. In
gislation as in other fields of hs humap 7 activity, it is well to
bear in mind the dictum of on, *Tarry a little, so that |
we may make an end the sopner.” §tgbility is most essen~
tial to the proper administration of: a taxing statute, and
if the tax structure of this cpuntry हल है put on a sound
footing, it is essential that a halt [6 be called to the
making of ill-digested amesdmentsiih a frenzy of hurry
which has characterised the history‘ df income-tax law of
the last few years.

3. The Government has asked ug to revise the Incorme-
tax Act so as to make its iF tajore intelligible with-
out affecting its basic tax '| |The task is difficult,
and, as the Codification in England said, “to
expect from us a codifica' of th e law of income-tax
which the layman could easily readiatdl understand was a.
vain hope, which only the ummstructéd could cherish”." It

,

3 Rex v, Kensington Income-tax Commissioner, 6 T. C. 613, 62g (HLL)
+ Report of the U. K. Commi fs on =

Geadfg31, pare 26, quoted in the Figral report fof the Royal Commitioh on

the Taxation of Profits and Income, 34 $30 para. 108


2

is perhaps possible to make the provisions of the Act more
logical and clearer without affecting the tax structure; but
it is certainly not possible to make the Act simpler without
encroaching upon at feast the fringe and verge of the tax
structure. However, we have made an attempt to arrange
the provisions of the Act in a more logical manner and also
to make them simpler and clearer. We have also codified
some of the principles well established by decisions but
not contained in the provisions of the present Act.

. 4, In November, 1956, we issued a press communique
and invited suggestions in this behalf. We received sugges-
tions from various individuals and bodies. We have con-
sidered these suggestions in redrafting the Act.

Scheme of 5. As the first step in the simplification of the Act,

simplifica- we have made a fairly logical rearrangement and re-group-

tran, ing of the sections of the Income-tax Act. Each chapier
deals with a particular topic.

6, The next step was simplification of the language of
the Act. This was done by splitting up the present sec-
tions. which run into several pages, into independent sec-
tions. Wherever possible, provisos were removed and were
converted into independent provisions of the Act.

7. As our terms of refererice implied the restriction
that the tax structure should not be altered, no major
change affecting the substance of the law has been made
in the substantive provisions.

8. We, however, felt that a few minor changes in the
substantive parts and @ few major changes in the present
procedural provisions would make for simplification. These
changes have been made and will be indicated in the appro-
priate places.

Alteration of 9. We would like to say at the outset that there can

duential to De 09 real simplification of the Income-tax law without a

make forsim- simplification of the tax structure. As this was beyond

plification. the purview of our work, our task of simplification has
been greatly hampered. :

Analogous

‘matutes. 10, We have examined the Income-tax Acts of other

countries to study the scheme of arrangement of the gec-
tions and the manner in which analogous provisions have
been drafted in those Acts. We have derived considerable
help from them. We wish the Indian Legislature would
simplify the tax structure of this country on the lines ad- ,
opted by some other progressive countries.

पु 11. We may also add that ia framing our proposals we
have not been unmindful of the recent taxing statutes
enacted in India, such as the Estate Duty Act, the Wealth
Tax Act, the Expenditure Tax Act and the Gift Tax Act.
We have examined these statutes, and where we thought .
desirable, drawn upon the provisions of these statutes jin
framing our proposals. . 3


3

12. We now proceed to indicate the lines on which Changes pro-
the Act has been redrafted and the important changes Roed in the
‘effected by us. पु .

13. The changes made by us fall into two catego-
ries :

(1) changes of substance, and
(2) changes of form.

Changes of substance are discussed in the succeeding
paragraphs; while changes of form or improvements in
drafting will be explained in “Notes on clauses”.

There are certain changes which have not been embo- (Recommen-
died in the draft clauses in Appendix I, but which we ations not
regard as desirable. Our recommendations as to such cmbodied in
changes will be found either in the discussion in the body ppendix 1).
of this Report or in the notes to the relevant clause in
“Notes on clauses”, or, in the list of recommendations an-
nexed to this part of the Report. हु

14. As in the present Act, the preliminary Chapter Chapter 1
contains only two sections. One is the section head- Preliminary.
ed ‘Short title, extent and commencement’ and the other
is the section containing definitions.

Several new definitions were found necessary and New defini-
have been inserted. Of these, the following deserve notice— tions,

A definition of assessment -has been added to make it ‘Assessment’,
clear that “assessment” includes re-assassment.

This expression has been used by decisions of courts 174 अं
and is well-understood as meaning the financial year for विश
which the assessment is being pace at ‘the rates prescribed

by the Finance Act of the ४६७ concerned. A definition of
‘assessment year’ has therefor® been ingerted in the Act

These are two new definitions which were found neces- “Average o
sary. In respect of several incomes which are included in jitome-Tax”
the total income, abatement of the tax is given at the «avgrage rate
average rate of income-tax. The predent Act provides a of Super
complicated process for the computation of the abatement, भी.
in section 17, where the method of working the average.

+ rate of income-tax is referred to. 10 was found convenient
to give definitions of these two exprgssions and to refer
to them in the appropriate sections instead of repeating a
Jong clause every time.

The basis of charge under ‘the Act varies according as yo" nag

a person is a resident of India or a non-resident. The ex- “Resident”.”*
pressions ‘Resident’ and ‘Non-resident’ have specific mean-
ings for the purpose of the Act. It .was, therefore, felt
“pecessary to introduce these two new definitions in the


4

“Tax” A definition of 48% has been introduced. Under this
definition, ‘tax’ means both income-tex and super-tax charge~
able under the provisions of this Act. The definition will
make it clear that where income-tax is referred to in any
provision of the Act only income-tax is meant, and where
super-tax is referred to in any provision of the Act, only
super-tax is meant. Where ‘tax’ is referred to, both income-
tax and super-tax are meant.

Sue def: _ 15. The definition of “assessee” has been amplified so

nitions. as to include all the various classes of persons who may

‘Assessee”™ become liable for assessment or payment of tax or other
sum.

“Capital as- Item (iii) of existing section 2(4A), which excludes,

wet”, from the definition of “capital asset”, land from which the
income derived is agricultural income has been redrafted
by substituting the words “agricultural land in India”. Land
lying fallow and yielding n@ income should, it is felt, be
excluded from this definition Hence this change.

“Income”. The definition of “income” has been amplified so as to
include profits and gains. This will obviate the necessity
of repeating the lengthy expression “income, profits and
gains” in the substantive sections. Wherever practicable,
only the expression “income” has been used in the substan-
tive sections.

.

Scheme of 16. The substantive provisions of the Act relating to

substantive One topic or subject matter are at present spread afl over

provisions. the Act. This has naturally led to considerable difficulty
in ascertaining a person’s liability under the Act. Forexam.
ple, section 42 which deems certain incomes to ac : or
arise in India is separated fram section 4 which deal$ with.
the charge to tax of incomeg accruing or arising in |India.
Similarly, while most incom@s excluded from the total in-
come are dealt with in section 4(3) of the Act, thete are
some provisions pertaining to exclusion in other sections
e.g. sections 14(1), 25(3) and 25(4) etc. We have, thetefore,
in grouping the sections in various Chapters, taken Beas to
see that all the provisions pertaining to a particular ject
or topic are placed in the same Chapter.

mainly in Chapters I, I and. EX in the existing ss

ter Ili deals with seteral subjects. It deals with

of charge, the computation af total income under ious
heads, the rebates on life insprance premia and 011९३ mat-
ters and the provisions pertaining to salaries, wagds and
other matters. In the draft af the Act which we have pre-
pared, the substantive provisions pertaining to income-tax
and super-tax have been classified and grouped in éleven
Chapters which deal with the following subjects :

17. The substantive provisions are at present ihe
ap
basis.

‘The notes to clause 2 (9, in the Notes on clauses, contain a fetailed
discussion.


(i) Basis of charge. (Chapter II)

(ii) Incomes which do not form part of the total in-
come. (Chapter III)

(iii) Computation of total income. (Chapter IV)

(iv) Incomes of other persons, included in the assessee's
total income. (Chapter V)

(v) Aggregation of income ahd set-off or carry-forward
of losses, (Chapter VI)

(vi) Incomes on which no income-tax is payable. (Chap-
ter VII)

(vii) Rebates and reliefs. (Chapter VIII)

(viii) Double taxation relief. (Chapter EX)

(ix) Provisions against avoidance of tax. (Chapter X)

(x) Super-tax. (Chapter XI)

(xi) Determination of tax in certain special cases.
(Chapter XII).

18. All the provisions which concern the charge of Chapter 1
income-tax have been brought together. in this Chapter. Basis of char
The definition of ‘previous year’ is one of the essential 8०
criteria for the basis of charge and has been included in
this Chapter.

The basis of charge has been expressed more generally

than in the present Act, by refer to every “person” in

’ the charging section. This is in ane formfity with the laws
of other countries’.

19. In the present Act the scope of total income is
given sometimes in relation to the nature of income and
sometimes in relation to the residence af the assessee. To
avoid any confusion, the scope of total im ome of residents
and non-residents has been put in two different sub-sec-
ions. :

20. Several provisions of the Act refér to income which
is “deemed” to accrue in India, Shou adi ६0 to be received
in the previous year. We have ught ajl'these provisions
together and placed them in praximity each other’.

21, At present, there is no provision'which determines Residedce.
the residence of an artificial = =a mpon. A new sub-
clause" has therefore been introdyced in section relating
to ‘Residence’ providing that + than those for
which a speci fe provision has n la. would be resi-
dent in India, unless the control: and ‘agement of their ©
affairs is situate wholly outside India.

“© See section 2(1), Canadian Income-tax Act, 1948} section 5(1), Sou-
th Alfican Tneome-tax Act, 19qt;and section 17, Austialian Incomesiak er,
ct, 1996 —53.
© Bee clauses 4 (1) and 4 (2), App. 1.
3 See clauses 7-10, App. 7.
4 See clause 6 (4), APP. J.


22. The present Act (section 4) speaks of three cate:
gories cf persons:

(i) Persons who are resident in India;

{tij Persons who are not ordinarily resident in India,
and

(10) Persons who are not resident in India.

So far as the second category is concerned, certain incomes
mentioned in section 4 accruing outside India are not to
be included in their total incomes. This category is also
of importance for the purpose of certain transactions men-
tioned in sections 42(2) and 44D but is of no importance
for any other purpose. The Taxation Enquiry Commission’
considered the question whether the category of “not
ardinarily resident persons” should be continued for the
purpose of assessment, and expressed the view that there
was no justification for continuing the exemptions given
to this category of cases any longer. We are in entire agree-
ment with the view expressed by the Taxation Enquiry
Commission, Our primary recommendation is, therefore,
that this category should be abolished. If, however, the
Government wishes to continue the exemptions, we would
prefer to put in Chapter III the items which are to be
excluded from the total income in the case of persons not
ordinarily resident’, We would also mention the other lia-
bilities of persons not ordinarily resident at the appropriate
place. We have not. therefore, referred to persons’ ‘got ordi-
narily resident’ in the section “Scope of total income”.
We would like the basis of charge to be determirled only
with reference to cne question, namely, whether the per-
son is resident in India or not resident in India.

The definition of “ordinary residence” in sec! fon 48
is couched in a negative form, with the result that the
section is ambiguous in its import. The view takes by the
Madras and Travancore-Cochin High Courts’ is that resi-
dence in India for less than nine years out of the preceding
ten years is sufficient to make. the assessee “not ordinarily
resident”, whereas the view taken by the Bombgy High
Court’ is that in order to claim the status of “npt ordi-
narily resident” the requisite condition-is that the assessee
should be non-resident in India in nine out of the ten years
immediately preceding the relevant accounting year. Under
the Madras view non-residence in one of the sajd nine
years would make the assessee “not ordinarily resident”,
even if he has been resident in the remaining ei years.
Under the Bombay view non-residence in each of the nine
years is required before the assessee can be regarded as “not
ordinarily resident”, We understand that the Central Board

&

1 Vide T. (i95-t95¢), Vol. TI, Chapter U, para 1
Pages 26-29.

* Pide clause 17 13) iv), App. T. .

२. Marimntive Pritai v (1945) 12 1. TR. 166, 188; Swaminathan
छह vs €- 7. 7., उ947 1. TR. दा, 42g; Bawa vs, GET. (2955) 27
1.1. R. 463.

“Manibhai Patel vs. C. 7. 77. (1958) 23 1. 1. R. 27.



7

of Revenue. has approved of the Madras view in some cases
where the question arose for its consideration. If, contrary
. to our recommendation, the coneept of ordinary residence
is retained, it would be advisable to redraft the definition
of “ordinary residence” so as to make it clear which of

the two conflicting views is the one intended by the Legis-
ture.

We would like to draw the attention. of the Govern-
ment to twa provisions of the Income-tax Act which deserve
to be deleted. The first is section 4(1)(b)(iii), taxing an
assessee in respect of the remittances by him into india
out of the income of past years (४,९., years prior to the rele-
vant accounting year). Such a provision has only the effect
of preventing capita! being brought into this country at 2
time when the country badly needs capital. It is true that
the effect of this provision has been to a large extent
counteracted down by the fourth and fifth provisos to
section 4(1), which were inserted by the Indian Income-tax
(Amendment) Act, 1953; but there is no reason why any tax
on remittances out of past year’s profits should be levied
‘even in a modified form. To tax the aggregate of the
profits of the past twenty years as the profits of the year in
which they are remitted into India is unjustifiable on prin-
ciple, apart from the fact that, as noted above, it resu is in
capital being kept out of the country.

Another provision which we regard as still less sup-
portable is section 4(1), Explanation 4, which niakes an
assessee liable to tax if he moves his past profits from one
part of India into another, that is, from the erstwhile merged
territories 07 1287६ B States, into another part of the coun-
try. India is one country and it is wrong on principle to
tax the movement of money from one part of the country
to another. Besides, a fairly long period has already elaps-
ed since the integration of the former native States into
the Republic of India, and it would be amachronistic to re-
tain any longer provisions which were appropriate at a
time when the political map of India was different from
what it is today.

We recommend that these two provigions, namely, sec-
tion 4(1)(b)(iii) and section 4(1), Explanation 4, should be
deleted. (We have not, however, given effect to this recom-
mendation in the draft clauses in Appendix I, since this
would affect the tax structure).

23. The exemptions in the Act are of several al in Speed
Some incomes are not liable to!inclusion in the total in- I:
come. Some incomes are liable to inet sion in the total co
income but are not liable to. pay any tax’. It was felt that the

this distinction should be brought out prominently by income.

grouping together provisions pe eatin to these two cate-
gories separately and putting them in different Chapters.

comes which under the provisions of the Act, are not
to be included in the total income have been put together
in Chapter या.

3 See section 16 (3) (a).

ss

da not


Charity.

24. A few of the exemptions notified under seetion 60,
under which the income is to be excluded from the total
income, have been mentioned here', as it was felt that
such important notifications should be prominently brought
to the notice of the tax-payer, e.g., income of a University

or other educational institution, scholarships and others.

The exemptions have, wherever possible, been classifi-
ed into well-defined categories e.g., non-residents, foreign
residents, interest and others.

25. The provision in existing section 4(1) 2nd Proviso,
for incomes accruing outside India which are to be exclud-
ed from the total income of a person who is not ordinarily
resident, has been retained in the draft proposed ‘by us.
If the Government accepts our primary recommendation’,
this provision’ would have to be omitted.

The provision in section 4(3) (xiv), relating to the
exclusion of हाल tion received by employees of foreign
enterprises, is sought to be confined to foreigners, since .
there is no reason why the exemption should be enjoyed
by Indian citizens‘.

The provision in section 4(3) (xiva), relating ta salary
received by certain foreign technicians. is sought to be
slightly widened so as to cover salary received for work
done before the actual commencement of business’.’

26. The provisions of seetion 4(3) (i) and (ii) (income
of religious and charitable trusts) have been the subject-
matter of interpretation by, various courts. It a Pears to
us that the'intention of the legislature is not c rk from
the present language of the Act. It also appears to ts that
the distinction between a trust and an institution Has not
been borne in mind in drafting section 4(3)(i). An dnstitu-
tion is something défferent from a trust. A trust (18 not
necessarily an institution’. :

27. In our opinign’ the intention of the legisla in
framing section 4(3){i) was té exempt three categ
income :— :

(i) Income from property held under trust forichari-
table or religious purposes. t

(ii) Income from ‘busin« pote st under trust for religious
or charitablé pur , subject to the conditions
mentioned in provisp (9) to section 4(3) (i

2 sae ad on Are |

३ Clause 11 (4) (iv), App. I.

# See clause rr (8), App. I.

© See clause 11 (9), App. I.

§ Minister of National — Resemme vs. Trusts and Guarantees Co, Lid,

(t939) 4 AER. 149, P. C. हे pace

? The notes to clause 74 may be perused for a detailed examination of

the position. :

1 a t


(iit) Income from a business carried on on behalf of a
religious or charitable institutien, subject to the
epnaitions mentioned in provisg (9) to section 4

2).

28. It appears to us that in view of the decision of the
Supreme Court’ it will be diffieult to exclude “business”
from “property” which is the subject of a trust. But, it is
also clear to our minds that income from business should
be exempted only if the conditions mentioned in proviso
(8) are fulfilled. We have, thefefore, redrafted section 4
(3)(i} to make this position clear*.:

29. We are of the opinion that the legislature intended
also to exempt the income from a business carried on by
a religious or charitable institution, if the conditions men-
tioned in proviso (9) are satisfied. As the exemption of
the income from a business carried on on behalf of a
religious or charitable “institution” is not covered by the
category of income from business held: under “trust”, we
have provided’..for the exemption of such income of a
religious or charitable institution,

Chapter

IV

Competation

30, As stated above’, the provisions regarding computa- oro

tion of total income, computation of incpme under various me.
heads, and other matters are containd.in Chapter Hil of
the present Act along with other profisions pertaining
to exemptions and other matters. We’ consider that’ the
provisions pertaining to the computatiep ‘of income under
each head specified in section : should 1 be grouped to-
gether under the Chapter “Computation: of total income”,

Though there are separate modes df computation un-
der each head, we find a basi¢ scherfe underlying the
method of computation under all the heads. The Act first
provides for different categorieg of incdme being assessed
under different heads of income. a is, then, a provi-

sion for deducting from the a inkome under each
head expenditure incurred for qarning t income. There
is, again, a provision which prohibits deductions in

computing the income sel t = Having regard to
this basic scheme of the Act, ४७ have peoivided under each
head a section which deals with the gories of incame
or the nature of income which is a: able under that

perticular head, eg.. under > 991 , and business.

luctions to be allowed or nog in col ing the income
under each head are Separately P rovided. ‘The sections per-
taining to a head of income grouped under sub-tittes,
for example, A—Salaries, B—Inferest ar Securities, C—In-
came from house property and so:on.

1 3. है. Trust vs. Commssioner of Incometax, (1957) $2.1. T. R- 595 (5.0.).
*® See clauses 12 (2) and 12 (4), App. I. :
® 5०८ clause 12 (3), App. 1.
A है
| जा rey

af? '

inco-


Interest on
Securities.

Income from
Property.

Profits and
gains of busi-
ness profes-
sion of voca-
tion,

10

31. In the present Act the expression “tax shall not,
be payable” has been used even in respect of deductions,
in computing the income under each head. The language
has been criticised and has occasioned some confusion. In,
the scheme adopted by us deduction have been separate-
ly listed and the expression “tax shall not be pay: bie” ig
not used in regard to deductions’.

Section 8 provides that the tax should be payable in
respect of interest “receivable” by assessee. As the word
“receivable” has been intespreted by courts as meaning
“received”, we have adopted this interpretation and re-
drafted the section accordingly’. .

32. The income assessable under section 9 is more
appropriately described as “Income from house property”>
we have adopted this phraseology.

33. Section 10, which pertains to income from business
covers about fourteen printed pages of the Income Tax.
Manual. The section is divided into thirteen sab-sections,
and sub-section (2) has about fifteen clauses and a large.
number of provisos. In the absence of any marginal notes
appended to the sub-section and the clauses, it has been
found very difficult to find out whether any particular
deduction is admissible in the case of business income or
not, or to trace a pravision relating to any particular topic.
We have, therefore, divided the provisions pertaining to
business, profession or -vocation into a number of sections..
The important changes are mentioned below’.

34, One provision which has caused a good deal of
hardship in practice is that regarding bad debts. The allow~
ance for a bad debt under section 10(2)(xi) is cond}tional
upon the Income-tax Officer. finding that the amount had
become bad in the relevant accounting year, and this has
been found to bear hardly on the assessee in many’ cases.
An assessee may write off and ¢laim a debt as a fe debt.
in a particular year, honestly thinking that it had become
bad in that year; the Income-tax Officer may disalldw the
claim on the ground that the claim was premature pnd it
really become bad in a subsequent year; on appeal, the
appellate authorities may uphold the disallowance but on
the ground that the debt had actually become bad/in an
earlier year. By the time the cjaim is finally di ed, it
may be too late for the a: ‘oe to claim the bag debt
in any earlier or later year. Ho: make the allowance pend
upon the chance of the as: ’s view as to the y in
which the debt became bad’ goinciding | with the part...
ment’s view of the matter, and to put the assessee 1; peril
of completely losing the right to the allowance ih the
absence of such coincidence, % not a very satisfactory basis:

2 See clause 19, App. I.
+ See clause 18, App. 1.
Rep For ober changes, see list of changes appended to this part of the
epori.


11

of allowance. We have therefore Proposed an express pro-
vision’ in the Act that if a bad debt ig disallowed as being
claimed too late, the assessment for: the year in which,
according to the Income-tax Officer, the debt became bad
can be reopened and the allowance mpy be given for that
year wherever possible.

We have also proposed a provision’ 10 meet the con-
verse case of a bad debt being claimed prematurely.

35. We have also enumerated in a. Separate section the
topics covered by these sections’.

36. The proposed arrangement will make it conveni-
ent to find the provision pertaining to a deduction or a
charge easily. कर

37. The provisions pertaining to insurance business
have been placed in a Schedule, as at present.

38 Two changes that we have made in section 10 (2)
(vib), relating to development; rebate, tmay be pointed out
here’, In the first place, we hiave sligh tly altered the pro-
vision so as to allow the rebate in pect of the year in
which the machinery or plant is first put to use by the as-
sessee, if the machinery or t is Ee used in the year
of acquisition. Under the Pin ting ‘ovision, the deduc-
tion is allowed only in the year 01 hisition or installa-
tion, and the Position regarding cases where the machi-
nery or plant is not “used” ip the yéar of acquisition or
installation is doubtful. This has now been made clear.
In the second place, we have omitted sub-sections (2B)
and (2C) of section 10, rela he to deposits or profits by
companies. The proposed orhission $f sub-sections (2B)
and (2C) of section has beert made bf view of the fact
that these sub-sections are nat being jenforced at present.
The omission is relevant also} for thé; purposes of clauses
(vi), (via) and (vii) of sub-section (2) bf section 10.

39. Section 12B has been criticised as containing the

Jargest number of provisos. ‘It has been criticised 1 .

on the ground that it is difficult to kndw, from the present
language of the section, the fet a person is entitled
to on account of the cost of the assets; We have felt it
necessary to coin an expressic te viz, [Statutory cost” for
this purpose. We have made provisi or the determina-
tion of the statutory cost sey tely {ni respect of depre-
ciable and non-depreciable assets’. ‘Provision has_ also
been made for determining the statutory cost in relation
to the mode of acquisition of the assets by the assessee by
purchase, inheritance and other methods.

See clause 162 (6), App. F

366 clause 36 (6), znd Proviso, App. I.
Clause 29, App. I. h
Vide Clause 33, App. 1.

Vide Clause 49, 50, 51, App. 1. ¢
Vide Clause 50 and 51, App. I.

2-1 Law Com./58,

ital


12

Income ons 40. The provisions pertaining to the computation of
er Sources. income from other sources have now been put after the
Provisions pertaining to the computation of all other
incomes including capital gains. The section is thus a resi-
duary section for computing the income from all sources

for which no provision has been made earlier.

We would like to draw the attention of the Govern-
ment to the fact that the present system of taxing divi-
dends creates a good deal of difficulty. At present, com-
panies are taxed at a very heavy rate under the annual
Finance Act but section 18 (5) and 49B (1) of the Income-
tax Act treat income-tax paid by companies as paid on
behalf of. the shareholders and allow the shareholders
credit for the income-tax paid by the company. The tax
to be so credited to the shareholder has to be arrived at
after an elaborate computation under the process known
as “grossing up” of dividends. This process, dealt with
in section 16(2) of the Income-tax Act, is a complex one.
Moreover, difficult questions often arise in practice as to
whether dividends are declared out of the taxable profits
of the companies or not, since money has no ear-mark and
it is not easy in practice to identify the fund out of which
a dividend has been declared. This difficulty has been
accentuated after the substitution of the present rule 14 of
the Income-tax rules prescribing the new form of certifi-
cate to be furnished Py the company to the spe arehdider
along with the dividend warrant. It would m: the law
much simpler and easier to administer if at least public
companies are taxed at a very low rate and the share-
holders are taxed at the normal rates without any credit
being given to them for the tax paid by the companies.
We have not made any changes on this point in the draft
clauses in Appendix I, since such change would Es fect
the tax structure; but we fe feel that the Government
should consider the simplification of the law on this point.
The notes to the relevant draft clause may also be perused
in this connection. .

Chapter V 41. Income which belongs to other persons is, in ‘cer-
Incomes of tain circumstances, liable to inclusion in the total income
ther Persone of the assessee, e.g., under sections 16 (1)(0) and 16 (3).
included | in These have been grouped togather in this Chapter. The
total income. language of section 16(1) (c) leads to some confusion. The

provisions pertaining to settlement of income and trans-

fer of property have therefore been separately dealt wit he

Chapter VI 42. The method of computation of the total inc me.

Aggregation the method of computing the loss and the right to carry

of Income forward such loss to later years all pertain to the conjpu-

and wt offor tation of total income atter the mcome under each head

Garry fooward has been separately computed. All these provisions have
हु therefore, been grouped together in this Chapter.

Under section 24 ag it stands at present, a loss under
a head other than capjtal gains is set off also againgt a
loss under the head ee ‘apital pains”. Since the tate! of


13°

tax in the case of capital gains is lower than the rate for
other heads, this provision for the eompulsory set off of
other fosses against capital gains is unfair to the assessee.
The benefit which he derives from the set off is smaller
than what he would have derived if. the loss were set off
against other income. We have, therefore altered the pro-
vision’ by*barring the set off of a loss under any head
(other than capital gains) against income under capital
gains, so that for the purposes of set off, capital gains now
becomes a completely independent category.

43. The second proviso to section 24(1) does not bring
out clearly the intention of the legislature. We have now
put the proviso in the form of an independent section’ so
as to leave no doubt as to its meaming. The provisions
pertaining to set off and carry forward of the losses of
registered and unregistered firms in the assessment of the {
firms and their partners have also been put in separate
sections’.

44. It is now well settled by a series of decisions’ that
a cash credit whose nature and source have not been ex-
plained is to be treated as.the income of the year in which
it occurs. There are similar decisions’ regarding invest-
ments whose nature and source are not explained. These
decisions have been codified in two sections’ of this
Chapter.

45, As stated at the outset, the present Act does not ieee vu

make a clear distinction between the three categories of on id

on
no

exemptions: Tngome-tax

(i) Incomes which do not form: part of the total in- is payable.

come and are altogether excluded from compu-
tation ;

(ii) Incomes which form part of the total income, but
which are exempt from tax:

(iii) Expenditure incurred by an assessee, on which
an abatement is given.

The present Act uses the words “the tax shall not be

payable” in respect of all the three categories ; e.g.—

(a) Any sum received by a member of a Hindu Undivi-
ded Family as a member of such family—S. 14(1).

(09) The taxed share of a partner of an Unregistered
Firm—S. 14(2) (a).

(०) Payments made to effect insurance on the life of
the assessee or on the life of a wife or husband
of the assessee—S. 15(1).

fe clauses 37 (1) ard 75 (1) , App. 1.
See clauses 78 (1) and 76 (1); App. T.
See clauses 76 to 79, App. I. डर
See clause 70, App. I. and the notes i
See clause 71, App. I. and the nptes the:
Clauses 70-71, App. I. : 1

eee


Chapter VII
bates and
Reliefs,

4

46. It would be inappropriate to use the same language
in respect of the three categories. We consider that
the expression “tax shall not be payable by an
assessee” is inaccurate in respect of expenditure in-
curred by the assessee, as such expenditure is not part of
his “income”. We have, therefore, separated these three
categories and put them into three different Chapters’.
We have already dealt with the first category in the
Chapter’ in which all the exclusions from total income
have been gathered together. The incomes which are in-
cluded in the total income but exempt from income-tax
have been gathered together in this Chapter. The pro-
visions of the Act which allow a rebate in respect of expen-
diture incurred by the assessee, e.g., sections 15(1), 158.
etc., have been grouped together in the Chapter’ headed
“Rebates and reliefs”.

47. In respect of several of the incomes referred to in
the Chapter under discussion the exemption is a
to income-tax and is not applicable to super-tax. To avoid
confusion, the expression “income-tax shall not be payaby ie”
has been used in this Chapter. The exemptions applicable
to super-tax have been specifically mentioned, in the Chap-
ter relating to Super-tax’. हि

48. In view of the present scheme of taxation (under
the Finance Act, 1958) under which no deduction is allow a
ed for earned income, we consider it unnecessary to cdn-
tinue section 15A in the Act. We nave therefore came dt
the latter part of section 15A, leawing it to the Government
to omit its earlier part also. 1

49. We have discussed above’ the unsuitability of 1 e
present language in regard to ab tement of tax on expen-
diture by the assessee. We have made the necessary vér-
bal changes. i

50. This Chapter provides for a deduction, from the
income-tax payable on the totql income, of an रे t
equal to the income-tax calculated at the average rate pf
income-tax on the amounts on which the assessee is en-
titled to a rebate, for example, ljfe insurance premia,
contributions, to Provident Fun@. The language of tijis
Chapter has been borrowed from the U. K. and Ceylgn
Acts‘. हे

60(2), (relating to power of the Central Government
grant appropriate relief where $alary is paid in arre:
and other matters), so ag to covar'“perquisites” also.

power will thus be available wiefe a perquisite, enjoyed
in the form of cash, is paid in afrears.

1, ivill, कक... Lt
Chapter UT, App. 1. ।
Chapter Vill, App. 1.

Chapter XI, App. 1.

Vide paragraph ee and 46 above.
Sce section 219 (१ -Hocome-tag Act, 1952, and section 14 (yor
the Ceylon Income-tax i ; 1

7 See clause go, App. I.

Chapters गा, VH and


“6

51. The provisions of the Act which pertain to double
taxation relief have been gathered together in this Chapter.

52. This Chapter deals with the provisions against
avoidance of tax by means of transactions with non-resi-
dents and by dealings in securities-cum-dividends agd in
other ways. We have also dealt in this Chapter with the
provision pertaining to avoidance of tax in the hands of
a resident principal.

53. As regards transactions in securities the present
law {section 447) deems the interest to accrue de die in
diem. As a tax avoidance provision it would be very ap-
propriate to tax the interest wholly in the hands of the
person transferring the securities before the due date of
maturity. We have altered the provision’ accordingly.

54. The provisions pertaining to super-tax are contain-
ed in Chapter IX of the Act. There are a few other pro-
visions not included in that Chapter which pertain to super-
tax, e.g., section 23A which provideg for the levy of addi-
tional super-tax in the case of certam companies. All the
provisions relating to super-tax have been brought toge-
ther in this Chapter. In regard to syper-tax, the basic pro-
vision that the total income for super-tax shall be the
same as the total income for income-tax has been retained’,
but the provisions which exclude certain incomes from
computation of the total income have been made into se-
parate sections’.

Chapter IX
Double
Taxation
Relief.

Chapter X
Provision

against avoi-
dance of tax,

Chapter XI
Super-tax,

In connection with section 23A, we may draw atten-

tion to the latest pronouncement of the Privy Council’,
on an identical provision of a foreign statute. It decides
that if having regard to the smallness of profits or past
053९5 or any other relevant factor or circumstances the
payment of a dividend or a large dividend than that declar-
ed would be unreasonable, no order should be passed un-
der section 23A. We have not mate any change in the
existing section on. this point; bub we think that the
Income-tax Officer should ndt pass an order under section
23A where the declaration af a divigiend or a larger divi-
dend would be unreasonable on actount of current busi-
ness requirements.

We may also draw the ,attentiah to the inconsistency
inherent in the present provisions delating to tax on dis-
tributed. and undistributed profit$.’ Section 23A of the
Income-tax Act taxes undistributed profits, while the pro-
vision usually inserted in the ann Finance Act has the
effect of increasing the tax on exeessive distribution of
profits. This inconsistency must be removed. A detailed

Vide clause 97 (3), App. J.
Vide clause 99, App. I.

Vide clauses 104 to 108, App. ;
CLT. vs Williamson Diamonds did., 1955 tf 4 (P.C.).


Chapter XII
Determina-

16

discussion of the subject appears in the notes to the rele-
vant draft clause. We have, of course, not made any
change in the existing section on this point; but we re-
commend that the Government should take steps as indica-
ted.

+55. We have placed under a separate group provisions
relating to rebate on super-tax on, certain types of expen-
diture or reliefs in respect of certain incomes as in the
case of newly established industrial undertakings’. The
Act is not clear as to whether certain incomes exempted
from super-tax are to be included in the total incomes for
purposes of rate or are to be excluded altogether; for
example, the exemption [in section 14(3)} in respect of co-
operative societies. In our draft we have borne in mind
the distinction between an item which is excluded from
the total income’ and an item on which only a relief is
applicable at the average rate of super-tax’.

56. In this Chapter we have dealt with cases which

tion of taxin लए not covered by the normal rules regarding the com-
certain spe- Putation of total income or the rate of tax applicable there-

cial cases.

Procedural
provisions,

to. The topics dealt with here include the computation
of tax for income comprising exempt incomes, liability in
respect of compensation payable, the rate of income-tax
and super-tax applicable to non-residents, the mdde of
computation of imcome-tax on capital gains, and to on.
We have made it clear’ that in the case of compe: “pation
payable to and received by a registered firm, the iat
mode of computation mentioned in the Act applies to the
partners. The position is not clear in the Act.

57. In respect of capital gains the provisions af the
present Act are not easily intelligible, and we have there-
fore clarified the position by expressing the computation
of tax on capital gains in the form of a mathematical for-
mula‘. ot

58. The provisions pertaining to income-tax = ori-
ties and procedure are at present contained mai: 4 in
Chapters II. ITA, IV. V and V-A. All these provisions) have
been brought together, with section 64 which pertaips to
the place of assessment and section 54 which pertains to
disclosure of information by public servants. These pro-
visions have been divided into the following Chapters:

(7) Income-tax authorities (Chapter XIII).
(ii) Procedure for assessment (Chapter XIV).

7. See clauses 109 to t12, App. T.

* Contrast clauses rog-208, on the one hand, with clauses rog (० 112, on
the other, in App. T.

9 Vide clause 123 (2), App. T-

«Vide clause 125, App. है, Gf section 6 (1) of the South African Income-
tax Act, 1941 for the device of mathematical formula.



17

(iii) Liability in special cases (Chapter XV).
(iv) Special provisions applicable to firms (Chapter

(०) Special provisiéns applicable to companies (Chap-
ter XVII).
(vi) Collection and recovery of tax (Chapter XVIID.
(vii) Tax deemed to have been paid on dividends
(Chapter XIX).
{vili) Refunds (Chapter XX).
(ix) Appeals and Revisions (Chapter XX1).
{x) Penalties imposable by income-tax authorities
(Chapter XXII).
(xi) Offences and prosecutions (Chapter XXIII).

(xii) Recognised provident funds (Chapter XXIV).
(xiii) Approved superannuation funds (Chapter XXV).
(xiv) Miscellaneous (Chapter XXVI).

59. The provisions pertaining to Income-tax authori- chapter XUT
ties are contained in sections 5, 54 and 64 of the present Ipcome-ax
Act. The provisions contained in sections 37, 38 and 39 abchorities,
pertain to the powers of Income-tax authorities. We have,
therefore, grouped all these sections in this Chapter.

The present classification of these provisions is not
very happy. We have, therefore. classified the provisions
pertaining to Income-tax authorities as under:

(a) Appointment and control,
{b) Jurisdiction.
(९) Powers, and
(9) Disclosure of information.

60. Effect has been given to the observation of the
Supreme Court in a recent case’ by providing that the as-
sessee should be given an opportunity, wherever possible,
of being heard before a case is transferred from one Income-
tax authority to another.

There is at present no provision in the Act as to the
Inceme-tax authority who should take proceedings where
there has been a transfer of the case from one Income;tax
authority to another. A doubt has been expressed as to
which Commissioner is to exercise jurisdiction when a
case has been transferred from an Income-tax Officer under.
the jurisdiction of one Commissioner to an Income-tax
Officer under the jurisdiction of another Commissioner.
We have provided specifically for such cases by inserting
@ new section on the subject’. The new provision will also

1 Pannulal Binjraj ond ethers vs. Union of India (1957). 37 1.3 R. 565, 589
A.LR. (1957) 5.0. $97. 410.
म See clause 134, App. I.


18

meet cases of transfer of a case from one Income-iax Offi-
cer to another. A few minor changes made in the various
sections have been indicated in the Notes on clauses.

An important addtion to the provision relating to dis-
closure in section 54 (8) is the new provision’ enabling the
Income-tax Officer to disclose the substance of the parti-
culars on which he relies (for the purpose of an agsess-
ment) to the assessee without. of course, disclosing the
name of the person to whom the particulars pertain. This
is intended to give effect to the decision of the Supreme
Court in the case of Dkakeshwari Cotton Mills Ltd’. One
other provision added to this section’ enables the Income-
tax authority to disclose the facts pecessary for the pur-
pose of enabling an officer of the Central Government to
levy or realise any tax imposéd by it.

A provision has also been added‘ authorising the dis-
closure to civil courts of certain documents (like balance-
sheets, profit and loss accounts etc.) prepared by a nies
under ‘the Companies ‘Act, or documents of which cgpies
can be obtained under the Registration Act. As 1 of
these are private documents, there is no harm in permiftin;
their disclosure in cases where the documents are relewan'
in a proceeding before a civil court. Similarly, we have also
added a provision’ authorising the disclosure of accounts
filed by the assessee before an Income-tax authority hes
the accounts are required by a.civil court fer the puryjoses
of proceedings to which the assessee is a party. We da not
see any reason why the mere fact that the accounts, are
tying with the Income-tax authorities should debar their
production in court. :

One important change whiqh we have made rt ing
section 5 may also be noticed. Section 5(8) provides that
officers and persons enfployed [ni the execution cf the!Act
shall observe the orders, instructions and directions issued
by the Central Board of Revenue. i

As some of the orders and instructions affect ch S
in general, we have a [9९0 a provision‘ to the effect that
orders and instructions of a general nature should be
published.

i
We have also added a clause providing for the fe Tm
of documents produced by an astessee before any Income-
tax authority’.

4 See clause 141 (3) (०) App. I. }
3 (1954) 26 LTR. 775-

* Cause 141 (3) (४), App. है;

4 Gyauses 142(3) (f) (di) and (iii), App. T.

5 Clause ६41(3) (1 5), App. 1.

* Clause 130 (1), and Proviso, App. हैं;

7 Sec clause 136 (4), App. 1-


है
61. In view of the fact that we have. recommended the
abolition of the Appellate Tribugal, the provisions pertain-
ing to the Appellate ‘Tribunal have been omitted from this
Chapter.

62. The provisions pertaining to procedure for assess- Chapter XIV
ment have been gathered together in this Chapter. Procedure:

for —_assess~
ment,

The Chapter has been divided into sections so as to
bring out clearly and prominently the various stages of an
assessment. The principal changes made by us in respect
of these provisions are given below :—

(1) The date by which the voluntary return is to be
filed has been fixed as the 30th day of June’. बढ

(2) A primary obligation to make a return of income
has been imposed’ without the necessity of a general notice
as under the existing section 22(1).

(3) The provision has been extended to representative
assessees, e.g., agents of non-residents, trustees’ and others.

(4) The person who is to sign the return is mentioned
at present in a footnote to the form of return of income.
We consider that this provision is so important that it
should be embodied as a part of the Act itself. We have, ac-
cordingly, added a section on the subject. We have
made special provisions for the signing of returns in the
085९ of mentally incapacitated persons, minors and persons
absent from India.

(5) The criteria for making a “best judgment assess-
ment” have been specifically mentioned.’

(6) The provisions which are now epntained in section
18 have been transferred to this Chapter. The provision
bas been so drafted‘ as to avoid any cdnflict between sec-
tions 13 and 23. It has been made clegr that section 13
applies only where the accounts are cogrect and complete.
Section 23(4) will apply to cases where the accounts pro-
duced are not correct or are not complete.

(7) The Act—section 34(1), Ist Proviso, (ii) enables with
the permission of the Central: Board of Revenue, the re-
opening of assessments without limit of time in cases where
the aggregate income which has éscaped assessment is over
Rs. 1,00,000. We consider that in mosti of the cases there
should be some finality as to an assessntent after the lapse
of a certain period of time. While proteeting the interests
or revenue by providing’ that where income which has
escaped assessment in a particular year is over Rs. 50,000

1 See clause 143 (1), App. 1.

है Sec clause 144, App. I.

3 See Ghauses 148, 149, App. I.

+ Sce clause 150, App. I.

* See clause 155 (1) (} (i), App. 7.



20
the proceedings can be re-opened without limit of time, we
have provided’ for a limit of 16 years in all other cases
which are now covered by section 34(1)(a) Ist proviso, clause
(ii). We would, further recommend that even where the
income escaping assessment in a particular year is over
Rs. 50,000, there should be no re-opening of the assessment
after the lapse of 16 years from the end of the assessment

year concerned. This last recommendation has not been
embodied in Appendix I.

(8) In the case of Parashar vs. Vasantsen Dwarkadas,*
the Bombay High Court held that the provisions of section
34(3) are invalid to the extent to which they allow the
assessment of a person other than the assessee to be re-
opened without limit of time. We have now provided’ that
the person whose alleged income is included in the assess-
ment of the assessee, should be given an opportunity of
being heard, before the assessment is completed. This will
cure the invalidity of the provision.

(9) At present there is no time-limit for the completion
.of an assessment made under section 34(1)(a). We think
that the proceedings for such assessments should not go on
indefinitely. We have accordingly provided‘ for a time-
limit of four years for the completion of the assessment.
The time limit will run from the end of the assessment year
in which the notice under section 34 is issued.

Similarly, we have provided’ a time-limit of four years
in a case where a notice is issued under section 28(3) read
with section 28(3}(c) (i.e., notice for the imposition of a
penalty where the assessee has concealed the particulars of
his income or deliberately furnished inaccurate particulars).
Under section 34(3) there is no time-limit for the comple-
tion of such assessments.

(10) Section 35 has been split into two sections. The
rectification of mistakes, strictly so called, is put:in one
section. Several rectifications which are permitted under
section 35 are deemed to be mistakes apparent on the face
of the record. All sych deeming provisions have been
gathered together in another section.

chapter xv 63. All the provisions of the Act dealing with liability
special cases, in special cases have been gathered together in this chapter

The following topics have been dealt with in this
Chapter :— t .

Legal representatives;

Representative assessees {i.e. persons liable as trustees,
guardians, managers, agents of non-residents etc.};

Executors;

2 See clause 155 (1) (8) ( I.
3 (1956) 29 E-T-R. 857 (Bombay H.C.).
3 Vide clause 160, Expl. 3, App. ३.
+ Vide clause 160(2) (8), App. 1०
* Clause 160(1) (b), App. है.

i



oy

Suecession and partition;

Shipping business of non-residents;

Persons leaving India;

Discontinuance of business etc., or dissolution of asso-
ciation; °

Royalties;

Liability of State Governments.

64. The principal changes made in respect of these pro-
visions are as under :—

(i) The provision relating to legal representatives has
been made more elaborate’ so as to cover all possible situa-
tions.

(ii) A new expression has been coined’, namely “repre-
sentative assessee”, to cover all cases where a person is
made responsible in an assessment for the income of ano-
ther person under sections 40, 41 or 42 (as trustee, guardian,
Administrator-General, Court of Wards, receiver, agent of
non-resident and otherwise), This scheme has been adopted
from the South African Act.’ The adoption of this scheme
has made for a considerable simplification in drafting.

(iii) A new provision‘ has been inserted to make the
representative assessee personally liable where he disposes
of or parts with the assets in his possession after the tax
has become payable.

Under the Act, a person liable as a representative
assessee (particularly a guardian, trustee, or manager) can
be assessed either under the special provisions applicable
in such cases (sections 40, 41 and otherwise) or under the
normal charging provision in section 3. We feel, however,
that such persons should not be chargeable under section 3
when there are special provisions applicable to them. We
have, accordingly, added a provision’ for the purpose.

The position regarding the rate of tax applicable to
income received by a trustee in cases where the shares of
the beneficiaries are unknown or where the income is not
received on behalf of a particular beneficiary, has been
slightly amended’ so as to provide that the tax on such
income in the hands of the trustee and. otherwise will be
at the rate applicable to an association of persons; a provi-
sion has, however, been added to the effect that where the
income is actually received by the beneficiary, the Income-
tax Officer has the discretion to tax at the rate applicable

1 Vide clause 168, App. I.

2 Vide clauses 169-177, App. T.

3 See sections 69-75, South African Income-tax Act, 194.

4 Clause 172, App. I

§ Clause 170 (3), App. I.

4 Vide clause 174 (a), App. (.



22

to the beneficiary. We feel that the existing provision in
section 41(1), Ist proviso, authorising the levy of tax at the
maximum rate (in eases where the beneficiary has other
income) is not fair. The sheer accident that a beneficiary
has income from other sources, should not be a ground for
taxing him at the maximum rate.

(iv) There is at present no provision in the Act for the
assessment of executors. We have inserted a new provision‘
for the assessment of executors, based on the corresponding
provision of the Ceylon Act.

(v) The provisions of section 25A, it is now well settled,
apply only to cases of total partition of the family. There
is no provision in the Act as to the enquiries to be made
and the procedure t9 be adopted in the case of partigl parti-
tion of a Hindu undivided family. We think that some
provision on the subject is desirable. We have therefore
amplified the section so as to cover cases of partial partition
of Hindu undivided families.’

(vi) It has been made ¢lear’ that the rate at which a
State Government is to pay the tax on its tax free sdcurities
should be laid down by the Finance Act.
sa XVI 65. All the provisions of the Act applicable to firms have
visions fap. been gathered together in this Chapter. This will enable
plicable ' to the partners and others to ascertain the law from one
firms. Chapter instead of searching for provisions dispetsed all
over the Act. :

The principal changes made in this Chapter ate given
below : ;

(1) The provisions confained at present in the Rules,
regarding the registration ahd cancellation of registfation of
firms, have been ihcorpordted in the Act.

(2) The provision for fresh application for regjstration
every year has been deleted, as it entails hardphip. A
declaration that there has Coen no change in the fonstitu-
tion of the firm will suffice 1

(3) There was some ‘difficulty in = g when
there is a change in the gonstitution of a firm ahd when
there is a succession. The,specific circumstances which re-
sult ina change in'the congtitution of a firm have now been

efined.* ;

(4) It has beep noticed that Income-tax .Offi reject
the applications for registration on the ground of technical
defects in the instrument. of partnership. For pxample,
where the partners of firm A and firm B form a bigger firm—

2 Clause 178, App. I

® See clause 181, App. I.

3 Vide clause 188, App. I.

* See clause 191(7)4 App. I.
5 See clause 194, Ap. I.



3

firm C, the registration of firm C is refused if the instru-
ment of partnership of firm C does not itself specify the in-
dividual shares of the partners, but merely mentions the
constituent firms as the partners. In such cases, the shares
of the partners in firm C, we feel, should be ascertained
with the help of the instruments of partnership relating to
firms A and B. We have, therefore, proposed a change in
section 26A, so that in considering the application for regis-
tration, the Income-tax Officer will be required to have
regard to the instruments of partnership of the connected
firms also.

(5) A clause enumerating all other provisions rele-
vant to firms has been added.

The provision for registration of firms (section 26A and
the rules made thereunder) has worked great hardship in
practice. Practical experience of the working of the Act
shows that the department is astute to find technical. defects
on the strength of which registration may be refused. Such
refusal can obviously work enormous hardship, since the
result of such refusal would be that tax would be attracted
at a much higher rate in most casés than it the income were
apportioned among the various ners afd taxed separate-
ly in their hands. The reports df incomp-tax cases afford
many illustrations of how even ‘genuine’ firms have been
refused registration merely because of some technical defect.
We have tried to alleviate the hardship ky liberalising the
provisions to some extent, as indipated above. But we feel
that if the provision for registration is at all to be retained,
there should be a complete change in the approach of the
income-tax authorities, and the provision should not be
administered in a hyper-technical spirif, as is done at
present. If the law is not administered: in a liberal and
reasonable spirit, the old adage “the let#er killeth” would
fully apply.

We would also like to draw the attention of the Gov- als taxa
ernment to another provision relating t® firms which we tion of /regir-
feel is totally unjust. We are referring : i section 23(5)(a)(i) tered
of the Act, which provides for the levy of tax on registered :
firms in addition to the tax levied'on the ihdividual partners
of registered firms. This is the ‘least ‘ansible provision
of the present income-tax law. Prior td the amendments
made by the Finance Act,.1956, a cre ae firm did not

pay any tax itself, but each er’s, re of the firm’s
profits was added to his other Pipe me
is

the tax payable
by each partner on the basis of His total income (including
his share of the firm’s profits) was determined and the levy
was made on the partners individually. Thus, there was
no double taxation. But after the amendment made by the
Finance Act, 1956, (see paragraph D of the First Schedule
to that Act for the rates of tax), imcome-tak is now assessable
on a registered firm, and. the aE ers of [F registered firm
are again liable to be charged their|ipdividual assess-

ments to both income-tax and ~-tax J] respect of their


24

shares of the firm’s profits. There is, thus, double taxation
in the case of a registered firm so far as income-tax is
concerned, (though not as regards super-tax), and only par-
tial relief against such double taxation is afforded by
section 14(2)(aa). This provision for double taxation is:
without precedent, so far as we have been able to gather,
in the history of income-tax legislation, either in this coun-
try or in the other countries whose laws we have examined.
To assess a firm in respect of its profits and to assess the
individual partners again in respect of their shares of the
firm's profits is virtually double assessment on the same
individuals in respect of the same income. This type of
legislation cannot be supported on any considerations of
justice or fairness or any sound principle of taxation. It
would work as a dangerous precedent. We appreciate that
it.is a matter of legislative policy how high the incidence
of taxation should be; but there is no reason why’ resort
should be had to pure and simple double taxation on the
same individuals, in respect of the same income under the
same Act, as a mode of raising the revenue. As alteration
in the tax structure is not within the scope of our proposals,
we have not made any change on this point in the draft
clause in Appendix I.° But we strongly recommend that
this provision [the system of taxing a registered firm under
section 23(5)(a)(i) read with the annual Finance Act} should
be abolished.

ChapterXVIE 66. We felt that it would be useful to enumerate in
Special pro- one place all the provisions of the Act which pertain to

plicable “2 Companies. The provisions themselves have been put in the
companies. relevant places, e.g., residenee has been put in the Chap-

ter on ‘Basis of charge’, the additional super-tax payable
by a company has been put in the Chapter on super-tax. and
so on. But all the provisions of the Act which pertain to
the assessment of companies have been listed here, for easy
reference.

Chapter 67. The provisions pertaining to collection and re¢overv
XVI Col; of tax are contained at present in Chapters IV add VI.
recovery of Phe provisions pertaining to deduction of tax, and advance
tax, payment of tax are really provisions pertaining to re¢overy
of tax. Therefore, the provisions pertaining to deduction,
advance payment of tax and recovery of tax have all been

brought together in this Chapter.

68. The principal changes made in this Chapter are
as under :— :

(i) Some doubt was felt as to whether the provisions
pertaining to deduction at soyrce or advance paymeat of
tax were valid in the absence’ of a charge of tax. We have
made it clear by adding suitable provisions’ that there is
a “charge” for deduction of tax, and advance payment of
tax etc.

1 Vide clause 199(t) rea@ with clause ¢(2), App. I.


25

We have aiso made it clear’ that advance tax on divi-
dends is confined to advance super-tar. So far as income-
tox is concerned, the question of advance payment does not
arise in view of the provisions of section 16(2) read with
section 18(5) and 49B.

We have also made changes" in the rate of interest in
connection with advance tax and the date from which the
interest is to run, so as to secure uniformity. The notes on
the relevant clauses indicates in detail the changes made
in this respect.

{ii} In regard to the provisions for recovery of tax.
the principal change made is that the provisions pertaining
to the procedure for recovery of tax by the Collector to
whom a certificate is issued have been incorporated in a
separate Schedule to the Act, which will constitute a self-
contained Code. In drafting this Schedule, we have exa-
mined the provisions of the various Revenue Recovery
Acts of the various States as also of the various Municipa!
Acts. The procedure to be followed by the Collector
is not very clear and varies from State to State. This va-
riance in procedure has been commented upon by the Su-
preme Court. Whatever the position may be in regard
to recovery of tax levied by States, we consider that there
should be a uniform procedure in regard to recovery of
Central taxes. (See detailed discussions below under
“Revenue Laws.)

(iii) Provision’ has been made for an Income-tax Off-
cer to send a certificate to the Collector of any district
in India in which the assessee possesses property or resides.
At present, the Income-tax Officer can send a certificate
only to the Collector of the district in which he functions,
and where the certificate is to be sent to another Collector,
the Collector to whom the certificate has been sent has to
forward it to the other Collector, This procedure re-
sults in delaying proceedings for recovery.

(iv) It is the departmental practice and it is also con-
venient from ihe point of view of assessees~—that the power
to grant payments in instalments should rest with 1 fe In-
come-tax Officer, and that the power shduld continue even
after the issue of a certificate to the Cellector. We have
inserted the necessary provisions on the subject’.

(ए) The scope of sections 46 (3) and 46(4), under which,
in areas notified by the Commissioner, ‘arrears can be rea-
lised in the manner provided by the Municipal Act of the
State, has been narrowed down. Of the various remedies
provided by Municipal Acts. the power of distraint and
sale is the only one that is really effective, and that has

3 Vide clause 215(3), App. 1.
4 See App. I, clauses 221, Proviso and 22g for rate, and 223(1) for date.

LE Eerste Govindji Hated vs. Additional Collector of Bombay—(1955) 28 ¥.
. ९"

4 866 clause 239, App. I. -
3 See clauses 229(2) and 234(r), App. ३.


26

been specifically dealt with in the draft. It will be avail-
able to any Income-tax_ Officer authorised for the purpose
by the Commissioner. The procedure to be suopted by the
Yncome-tax Officer. in the case of @istraint of property
has been dealt with in a separate Schedule.

Several Municipal Acts contain provisions for an ap-
plication being made to a Magistrate having jurisdiction
over the area and provide that the Magistrate will jthere-
upon collect the tax in the manner provided for the reco-
very of fines or prosecute the defauiter for non-payment of
the tax. These powers have in fact never been exetcised,
and we think it unnecessary to retain them’.

(vi) For expediting recovery, we think that it would
be desirable to have a provision enabling the Incorhe-tax
Officer to apply directly to a court (in whose custody: there
is money belonging to the assessee) for payment of the mo-
ney in its possession, This will save time, and do'away
with the necessity of proceedin; through the Collector as
at present. We have accordingly inserted a provision’ for
the purpose. :

(vii) One more mode of rpeovery is recovery by 4 suit.
This is implied under the present law, but we felt that it
might be useful to make a ‘specific mention of it jn the
‘Act, and have mentioned it atcordingly*. ॥

{viii) At present one of the modes of
imposition of a penalty undey section 46 (1), the a,
penalty imposed not te page the tax payable.
ject of this provision is to prevent the assessee from
ing money which belgngs to ernment without co!
sating the Government by of interest for the delay-
ed payment. Under the pr ft procedure, however, it
may happen that wn the % malty is imposed in ong case
where payment is Jayed, St may not be im in
another case where also payment is delayed. It | may
also happen that in ‘the cabé of a particular as:
the penalty imposed under sqction 46 (1), is remitte
appeal. This, we cosider, wauld lead to discrimi
between assessees whb are sp jlarly situated, The
sion in the Australian Act in} this behalf has appeal
us as being more equitable. We have, therefore, provided"
for interest at 10 per gent being payable by every ai e
who is in default in Fespect $f the amount ouistangi
from the date on whith the amount falls due. (We
that the rate of inter¢st should be sufficiently high
to induce assessees to make prompt payment of arr ars.)
i पाप |

1 See clause ३35(5% App. 1.

+ Detailed discussion below under the bead “Municipal laws" may be seen,
2 Vide clause २३54) App. E.

+ See clause 243 (0); Apa 7

हू See clause 230 (1), “me


2

We have also provided’ for the interest being waived in

cases where the tax is paid within three months of the
default.

The corresponding provisions in the Canadian, UK.
and Australian Acts may be compared’.

(ix) The position regarding the action to be taken
for the correction or cancellation of a recovery certificate
issued by the Income-tax Officer to the Collector is very
uncertain at present. If after the issue of a certificate
some mistake is detected or the amount is reduced or in-
creased or the Income-tax Officer desires to withdraw the
certificate for some reason, the action to be taken is not
easily ascertainable from the Act. We have, therefore, ad-
ded a provision* to make the position clear. Under the pro-
vision proposed by us, the assessee cannot challenge the
correctness of a certificate before the Collector; but he will
have the right to move the Income-tax Officer (who issued.
the certificate) in appropriate cases. We have also provid-
ed for an appeal against an order of an Income-tax Officer

rejecting an application of the assessee raising objection to
the certificate.

(x) Regarding section 46 (5), which confers on the
Income-tax Officer a power to require the employer of an
assessee to withhold the assessee’s salary and remit the
amount to the Income-tax Officer to’ is payment of the
assessee’s arrears, we feel that the power should not be
available in respect of that portion of the salary which
exempt from attachment under the Civil Procedure Code.
We have changed the provision accordingly‘.

69. As regards recovery under revenue Laws, a detail- Revenue
ed discussion of the position appears to be desirable. Sub- Laws.
section (2) of section 46 contains the Procedure to be fol-
lowed by the Collector after receipt of the certificate from
the Income-tax Officer. The procedure is the same as that

laid down for the recovery of arrears of land revenue in
his State.

The proviso to sub-section (2) of section 46 confers

ep on the Collector all the powers which a court under the
‘ode of Civil Procedure, 1908, exercises for the purpose of
recovery of an amount due under a decree. This, of course,

is without prejudice to any other powers of the Collector
in that behalf.

(The provisions of sections 46 (3) and 46 (4) will be
discussed later.]

1 See clause 230 (2), App. 1.

* Of section 54, Canadian 1. T. Act, 1938 (where the rate is 6p. c.) and
section 495, U.K.}.T. Act,1g52 (the rate being 3 p. c.jgand Section 270,
Australian Income-tax etc. Act, 1936-1953 (where * rate is 10 p.c,),

4 Glause 233, App. I.

4 See clause 235 (2), App. I.

3-1 Law Com. 58.



. 7. The powers of the Collector are to be gathered
from the laws relating to the realisation of land revenue
obtaining in the appropriate State, supplemented by the
powers exercisable under,the Code of Civil Procedure. An
examination of the revenue laws obtaining in the States
now forming part of India shows that under these laws
the following processes for realization of arrears of revenue
are available.

(a) distraint and sale of moveable property of the de-
faulter;

(b) attachment and sale of immoveable property of
the defaulter;

{c) attachment of property belonging to the defaulter
and management thereof;

(9) arrest and detention of the defauiter in civil pri-
son.

All these modes of recovery do not obtain in all the
States. Further, in the same State, there are variations
depending upon the place of accrual of the revenue ar-
rears, according as the arrears arose in the capital city or
outside.

71. Section 51 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908,
lays down the modes of execution and it contains as many
as five methods of execution of a decree of Civil Court. Sub-
clauses (9), (c) and (d) of that section are alone relevant
for the purpose of income-tax law, and they are :—

(i) attachment and sale, or sale without attachment of
any property (the word property is here used so
as to include moveable and immoveable property);

(ii) arrest and detention in prison, and
(iii) appointment of a’ receiver.

72. It will be seen by a comparison of the modes, avail-
able under the revenue laws with those under the Civil
Procedure Code that the only additional power whi¢h the
Code of Civil Procedure confers is the power to appoint
a receiver in execution of a decree. The Code of Civil
Procedure lays down in Order XXI the procedure to be
followed in respect of these modes. Revenue laws pf the
States also lay down the detailed procedure to be Blow:
-ed by the Collector for realising arrears of land rev

73. The revenue laws relevant are :—

[Owing to the distribution of States before and after
the S. R. C. Act it has not been possible to attempt a classi- |
fication of these Acts on the basis of the States ag they
now exist. Some of these Acts apply in one or more States.
The list is also not exhaustive.]

1. Madras City Land Revenue Act (XII of 1851), read

with the Madras City Land Revenue (Amend-
ment Act (Vi of 186%}


or on

~

29

. Madras Revenue Recovery Act (Ii of 1864).

. Bombay City Land Revenue Act (II of 1876).

. Bombay Land Revenue Code (V of 1879).

. Bengal Land—Revenue Sales Act (XI of 1859) read

with the Bengal Land revenue Sales Act (VII of
1868).

. Bengal Public Demands Recovery Act (III of 1913).
. Caleutta Land revenue, Act (XXII of 1850).

8. Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Re-

10.

131.
22.

33.
14.
135.

16.

17.
18.

19.

forms Act, 1950 (I of 1951).

. Assam Land Revenue Regulation, 1886 (I of 1886).

Bihar and Orissa Public Demands Recovery Act
{IV of 1914).

Punjab Land Revenue Act (XVII of 1887).

Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1954 (II of
1955). -

Hyderabad, Land Revenue Act (VII of 1317 Fasti).
Mysore Land Revenue Code, 1888 (IV of 1888).

Madhya Bharat Revenue Administration and
Ryotwari Land Revenue and Tenancy Act (66 of
).

Rajasthan Public Demands Recovery Act (V of
952).

Rajasthan Land Revenue Act (XV of 1956).

Travancore-Cochin Revenue Recovery Act (VII
of 1951).

Coors) Land and Revenue Regulation, 1899 (I of
1 .

20. Vindhya Pradesh Land Revenue and Tenancy Act

1953 (ITT of 1955).

+ 74, The following analysis gives a summary of the re
medies available for realisation of arrears of revenue in
each of the States :

J. Madras Acts.

1

«

Madras -Revenue Recovery Act. (Ii of 1864).

{i} Distress and sale of moveable property.

{ii) Attachment and sale of immoveable property or
management of it.

iii) Arrest and detentian.


30

2, Madras City Land Revenue Act (XII of 1851) read
with Madras City Land Revenue (Amendment)
Act (VI of 1867).

(i) Distress and sale of moveable property.
(ii) Attachment and sale of immoveable property..

वा, Bombay Acts.
1. Bombay Land Revenue Code (V of 1879)
(i) Attachment and management of land.

(ii) Forfeiture of the occupancy or alienated hold-
ing.

(iii) Distress and sale of moveable property.
(iv) Sale of immoveable property.
(v) Arrest and imprisonment of the defaulter.

2. Bombay City Land Revenue Act (II of 1876).

(i) Distress and sale of moveable property.

(ii) Attachment and sale of immoveable property.
(iii) Arrest and detention. 7

IIL. West Bengal Acts .

1. Bengal Public Demands Recovery Act (III of 1913)
(i) Attachment and sale of moveable property.
(id) Attachment and sale or sale only of immoveable

property.
(iii) Attachment of a decree.
(iv) Arrest and detention.

IV. Bihar Acts.

1. Bihar and Orissa Public. Demands Recovery Act
(IV of 1914).

(i) Attachment and sale of moveable property.
(ii) Attachment and sale or sale alone of immove-
able property.
(iii) Arrest and Detention.

V. Orissa Acts.

1. Bihar and Orissa Public Demands Recovery Act
(IV of 1914).

As in Bihar.

2. Madras Revenue Recovery Act (II of 1864). As in
Madras 1.


31

3. Central Provinces and Revenue Act (II of 1937).
(i) Arrest and detention.
(ii) Attachment and sale of moveable property.

(iii) Attachment of estate, maha! or land and taking
it under direct management,

(iv) Transferring the share of land to another. co-
sharer.

(v) Annuling the settlement of the estate, mahal or
land.

(vi) Selling estate, mahal or land.
(vii) Attaching and selling other immoveable pro-
perty.
VI. Madhya Pradesh Acts.
1, Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1954 (II of
5).

{i) Attachment and sale of moveable property.
(ii) Attachment and sale of holding.
(iii) Attachment and sale of other immoveable pro-
perty.
VII. Punjab Acts.
1, Punjab Land Revenue Act {XVII of 1887).
(i) Arrest and imprisonment.
(ii) Distress and sale of moveable property.
(iii) Transferring the holding.
(iv) Attachment of the estate or holding.
(v) Annulment of the assessment.
(vi) Sale of the estate or holding.
(vii) Proceeding against other immoveable property.

VIL. Uttar Pradesh Acts.

3. Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Re-
forms Act, 1950 (I of 1951) Sections 58 to 188
(chapters V to VIII) of the United Provinces Land
Revenue Act, 1901 have been repealed by this

0६.
(i) Arrest and detention.
(ii) Attachment and sale of moveable property.
(iii) Attachment and sale of the holding.
(iv) Attachment and sale of other immoveable pro-
perty. :


32
IX. Assam Acts.
1. Assam Land Revenue Regulation (I of 1886).
(i) Sale of moveables.
(ii) Attachment of estate and management. thereof.
(iii) Sale of estate.
(iv) Annulment of settlement.
(५) Attachment and sale of other immoveable pro-
perty.
X. Mysore Acts.
1. Mysore Land Revenue Code 1888 (IV of 1888).

(i) Forfeiture of the occupancy or alienated hold-
ing.

(ii) Distraint and sale of moveable property.
(iii) Sale of immoveable property.
(iv) Arrest and imprisonment.

(v) Attachment of holding (consisting of entire vil-
lages er shares of villages) , management
thereof.

XI. Madhya Bharat Acts.

1. Madhya Bharat Revenue Administration and Ryot-
wari Land Revenue and Tenancy Act (66 of 1950).

(i) Attachment and sale of moveable property.

(ii) Attachment and sale of immoveable pro} tty
(other than the land in respect of which the
arrears have accrueé).

(iii) Attachment and sale of the land.
(iv) Taking the land under direct management or
letting it in farm.
XI, Travancore-Cochin Aets.

1. Travancore-Cochin Revenue Recovery Act (vit of
1951).

(i) Distraint and sale of moveable property.
(ii) Attachment and sale.of immoveable property.
XUI, Rajasthan Acts.
1. Rajasthan Land Revenue Act {15 of 1956).
(i) Attachment and sale of moveable property.
(ii) Attachment of the land.
(iii) Transfer of such attaghed land to a co-sharer. :


33

(iv) Sale of such attached land.
{v) Sale of other immoveable property.
2. Rajasthan Public Demands Recovery Act (Vv of
1952).

The same modes as in the Rajasthan Land Revenue
Act (15 of 1956).
XIV. Hyderabad Acts.
1. Hyderabad Land Revenue Act ‘No. Vill of 1317 F.
(i) Distraint and sale of moveable property.
(ii) Distraint and sale of immoveable property.
(iii) Arrest and imprisonment.
(iv) Forfeiture of the o¢cupancy.

(v) Temporary attachment of village or share of @
village.

XV. Vindhya Pradesh Acts.

1. Vindhya Pradesh Land Revenue and Tenancy Act,
1953 (III of 1955).

(i) Attachment and sale of moveable property.
(ii) Attachment and sale of the land in arrears.
(iii) Attachment and sale of other land.
(iv) Attachment and sale of other immoveable pro-
perty.
XVI. Coorg Acts.
1. Coorg Land and Revenue Regulation, 1899 (I of 1899)..
(i) Arrest and imprisonment.
(ii) Distraint and sale of moveable property.
(iii) Attachment and sale of immoveable property.

75. The following revenue laws do not provide for
arrest and detention of the defaulter in civil prison when
the amount of revenue due is not paid—

1, Calcutta Land Revenue Act (XXHI of 1850).

2. Madras City Land Revenue Agt (XII of 1851) read
with Madras City Land Revenue (Amendment)
Act (VI of 1867).

3. Assam Land Revenue. Regulation, 1886 (I of 1886).
4, Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1954 (II of
1955).

5. Madhya Bharat Revenue Administration and Ryot-
पु wari Land Revenue énd Tenpncy Act (66 of, 1950).


6.
7

8,

“4
Rajasthan Land Revenue Act (15 of 1958).
THER Core Cochin Revenue Recovery Act (VII of

Vindhya Pradesh Land Revenue and Tenancy Act,
1953, (HII of 1955).

Municipal ___ 76. For the purpose of sub-sections (3) and (4) of sec-
laws. tion 46 it is also necessary to have an analysis of the laws
obtaining in the various States for recovery of arrears of
municipal tax or local rates. An analysis of these Acts

is also given below :—

1,

2.
3.

क 9 IA Aw

15.
16.

1.

18,
19.

20,
21,
22,

Bombay District Municipal Act (III of 1901).
Bombay Municipal Corporation Act (III of 1888).

Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act
{LIX of 1949).

. Bombay Municipal Boroughs Act (XVIII of 1925), *
. Madras City Municipal Act (IV of 1919).

. Madras District Municipalities Act (V of 1920).

. Bengal Municipal Act (XV of 1932).

. Calcutta Municipal Act (XXXII of 1951).

. Punjab Municipal Act (II of 1911).

10. )
11.
12.
13.
14.

Orissa Municipal Act (XXIII of 1950).

Bihar and Orissa Municipal Act (VII of 1922),
Assam Municipal Act (I of 1923),

United Provinces Municipalities Act (II of 196).

Central Provinces and Berar Municipalities Act (II
of 1922).

City of Nagpur Corporation Act 1948 (II of 1950).
Cig oF Jabbalpore Corporation Act 1948 (III of
950).

Hyderabad Municipal Corporations Act (XXXVI of
1950)

Hyderabad Municipal and Town Committees Act
CXXVIL of 1951).

Bangalore City Municipal Corporation Act (LXIX
of 1949).

Mysore City Municipalities Act (VI of 1933),
Mysore Town Municipalities Act (XXII of 1951).
Rajasthan Town Municipalities Act (XXIII of 1951).

. Rewa State Municipalities Act 1946.
24.

United Provinces District Boards Act (X of- 1922).


35

25. Bombay Local Boards Act (VI of 1923).
26. Madras District Boards Act (XIV of 1920).
27. Rajasthan District Boards Act (II of 1954).

28. Mysore Village Panchayats and District Boards Act
(IV of 1952).

” 99. Punjab District Boards Act (XX of 1883).

71, The various remedies available under Municipal Remedios

Acts are as follows : recovery
Y of Munici-
I. West Bengal. Pal dues,

i. The Bengal Municipal Act (XV of 1932).
(i) Distress and sale of moveable property.

(ii) If unsuccessful in collecting the amount of arrear
by the employment of the first mode, recovery
may be made by certificate under the Bengal
Public Demands Recovery Act (III of 1913).

(iii) Instead of or in the case of failure to realise the
amount by adopting the first two modes, the ar-
Tears may be recovered by bringing a suit in a
court of competent jurisdiction against the person
liable for the arrears.

2. The Caleutta Municipal Act (XXXIII of 1951).
(1) Distress and sale of moveable property.

(ii) If unsuccessful by adopting the first mode, the
arrears may be recovered by a certificate under
the गा चल Public Demands Recovery Act (IiI
° पु

(1) Instead of or in the case of failure to realise the
amount by adopting the first two modes, the ar-
rears may be recovered by bringing a suit in a
court of competent jurisdiction.

(iv) If any tax (other than the consolidated rate) is
due the Commissioner may either prosecute the
defaulter or proceed to realise the amount by
distraint and sale of the moveables.

+ H. Madras.
1. The Madras City Municipal Act (IV of 1919).
(i) Distress and sale of the moveable property.

(ii) If distraint or sufficient distraint is impracticable
the defaulter is prosecuted before a Magistrate.

(iii) If the defaulter has Jeft India or cannot be found
the amount may be: recovered as if it were an
arrear of land revertue.


36

2. The Madras District Municipalities Act (V of 1920).
(i) Distress and sale of moveable property.

(ii) If distraint or sufficient distraint is impracticable
the defaulter may be prosecuted before a Magis-
rate,

{iii) If the defaulter has left India or cannot be found
the amount may be recovered as if it were an
arrear of land revenue.

3. The Madras District Boards Act (XIV of 1920),

(i) Distraint and sale of moveable property.

(ii) If distraint or sufficient distraint is impracticable
the defaulter may be prosecuted before a Magis-
trate.

II, Bombay.
1. Bombay District Municipal Act (III of 1901).
(i) Distress and sale of moveable property.
(ii) Attachment and sale of immoveable property.

(iii) If the above mentioned powers have bean sus-
pended by the State Government, sums dye may
je recovered on application to a Magistrate कि
distress and sale of moveable property within
the jimits of the jurisdiction of such’ Magis-
trate).

{iv) If the person liable for payment of any sum
(other than octroi or toll) is residing outside the
State or has not sufficient property in the State
then the amount may be recovered as if it were
an arrear of land revenue under the provisions.
of the Revenue Recovery Act, 1890,

2, The Bombay Municipal Corporation Act (II of
1888).

(i) Distress and sale of moveable property.
(0) Attachment and sale of immoveable property.
(iii) Suit in a court of competent jurisdiction.

3. The Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act
(LIX of 1949). है

{i) Distress and sale of moveable property.

(ii) Attachment and sale of immoveable property.
(iii) Attachment of rent. .

(iv) Suit in a eburt of ¢ampetent jurisdiction.


37

4. The, Bombay Municipal Boroughs Act (XVIIL of

(i) Distress and sale of moveable property.

(ii) Attachment and sale of immoveable property.

(iii) Recovery as arrears of land revenue (if the per-
son liable is residing outside the State and has
no property in the State).

5. Bombay Local Boards Act (VI of 1923).

(i) Distress and sale of moveable property.

(ii) Application to a Magistrate for recovery (distress
and sale of moveable property).

IV, Bihar.
1. The Bihar and Orissa Municipal Act (VII of 1922).

(i) Distress and sale of the moveable property.

(ii) Recovery as a public demand payable to the
Chairman under the Bihar and Orissa Public
Demands Recovery Act (IV of 1914).

iii) Suit.

V. Orissa.
1. The Orissa Municipal Act (XXII of 1950).

(i) Distress and sale of the moveable property.

(ii) As an arrear of land revenue.

(iii) Suit,

VI. Punjab.
1. The Punjab Municipal Act (III of 1911).

(i) Property tax may be recovered as an arrear of
land revenue (without the power of arrest of
the defaulter). हु

(9) Application to the Magistrate (by distress and
sale of moveable property).

2. The Punjab District Boards Act (XX of 1883).

(i) Application to a Magistrate (by distress and sale
of moveable property).

(ii) As arrears of land revenue.

VII. Uttar Pradesh.
1. United Provinces Municipalities Act (II of 1916).

{i) Distress and sale of moveable property.

(ii) Bringing a suit in a court of competent jurisdic-
i

n.
2. United Provinces District Boards Act (X of 1922).
(i) Distress and sale of moveable property.
(ii) Bringing a suit in a Court of a competent juris-
diction.
VUI, Assam.
1. Assam Municipal Act (I of 1923}.
(i) Attachment and sale of mo’ able property.
1 if


(ii) Bringing a suit in a court of competent jurisdic-
‘ion.

1X. Madhya Pradesh.
1. The Central Provinces and Berar Municipalities Act
(II of 1922).

(i) Recovery on application to a Magistrate having
jurisdiction (by distress and sale of moveable
property).

(ii) Application to the Deputy Commissioner to re-
cover arrears (of property tax only) as if they
were an arrear of land revenue,

X. Hyderabad.

1. The Hyderabad Municipal Corporations Act (XXXVI
of 1950).

(i) Distraint and sale of moveable property.
(ii) Attachment and sale of immoveable property.
(iii) Attachment of rent (for property tax only).
(iv) Suit.
2. Hyderabad Municipal and Town Committees Act
(XXVIII of 1951).
(i) Distress and sale of moveable property.
XI. Mysore.
1. Mysore Town Municipalities Act (XXII of 1951).
(i) Distress and sale of moveable property.
(1) Prosecution before a Magistrate.

(iii) Application to a Magistrate (Distress and sale
of moveable property).
2. Mysore Village Panchayats and District Boards Act
(IV of 1952),
(i) Distraint and sale of moveable property.
(ii) Suit. .
3. Mysore City Municipalities Act (VII of 1933),
{i) Distress and sale 6f moveable property.
4. City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation Act
(LXIX of 1949).
(1) Distress and sale of the moveable property.
(ii) Prosecution before a Magistrate.

(iii) Recovery as an arrear of land revenue (if the
person liaBle has left Mysore and cannot be
ound). .


39

जया, Rajasthan.

1. Rajasthan Town Municipalities Act (XXIII of 1951).
(i) Distress and sale of moveable property.
(ji) Application to a Magistrate (distress and sale of

moveable property).

2. Rajasthan District Boards Act (II of 1954). ,
(i) Distress and sale of moveable property.
(ii) Bringing a suit.

XI, Vindhya Pradesh.

1. Rewa State Municipalities Act, 1946.
(i) Distress and sale of moveable property.
(ii) Bringing a suit.

78. From the foregoing analysis it is clear that the re-

medies available in the different States under the revenue

laws are not uniform and the procedure also varies in some
details.

79. In Purshottam Govindji’s case’ the Supreme Court Need - for.

held that section 46(2) is valid and does not offend articles uniformity.
21, 22 and 14 of the Constitution. Chandrasekhara Iyer J.,
though he agreed with the majority view, observed that
“for the enforcement of the levy of a Central Tax like the
income-tax there should be uniformity of procedure and
identity of consequences from non-payment”, The learned
Chief Justice in his judgment compared the provisions of
different laws adopted by the different States for the reco-
very of land revenue and observed that even in “the same
State there were two procedures to which defaulting
assessees could be subjected according as they were in or
outside the city of Bombay”. The fearned ‘thief Justice
also pointed out the variation in the terms of imprisonment
provided in the State Acts and that in some State (e, g.
Assam) there was no provision for imprisonment. Thoug
section -46(2) was upheld as valid, a perusal of the judg-
ment convinces one that uniformity is desirable and that
the observations of Chandrasekbara Iyer J. are justified.

80. We have therefore thought it incumbent upon us to Action
codify the law in this respect and include it in a separate posed Reve,
Schedule. The judgment of the Supreme Court also gives 2°18)
an authoritative interpretation of the proviso to section
46(2). The meaning of the proviso may be stated, in the
words of the Supreme Court, as follows:—

“On a proper reading, that sub-section does not pres-
cribe two alternative modes of procedure at all.
All that the sub-section directs the Collector to do
is to proceed to recover the amount as if it were
an arrear of land revenue, that is to say, he is to
adopt the procedure prescribed by the appropriate
law of his State for the recovery of land revenue,

1 (1955) 28 1. T. R. 891.


40

and that in this proceeding he is, under the pro-
viso, to have all the powers a Civil Court has
under the Code. The sub-section does not prescribe
two separate procedures. The statement to the con-
trary in the judgment of the Bombay High Court
in Sai Ali Ahmed v. Collector of Bombay’, dees not
appear to us to be correct. In our opinion, the pro-
viso does not indicate a different and alternative
mode of recovery of the certified amount of the
tax but only confers additional powers on the Col-
lector for the better and more effective application
of the only mode of recovery authorised by the
body of sub-section (2) of section 46”.

81. A power is distinct from the procedure for the exer-
cise of the power, The procedure laid down by the Code
for the exercise of the powers enumerated in section 51 is
contained in Order 21 of the Code. The revenue laws of
each state lay down the powers as well as the procedure.
As held by the Supreme Court, the Proviso confers only
additional’ powers on the Collector for the better

-and more effective application of the only mode of

Action Pro-
posed (Muni-
-£ipal laws).

recovery authorised by the body of sub-section (2) of sec-
tion 46. The only additional power contained in section 51,
C.P.C. is the power to appoint a receiver in execu-
tion of a decree. In some of the Revenue Acts, the Collector
possesses the power to attach an estate or a village or a
part of it and manage such attached p roperty through his
agent. Section 51 of the Civil Procedure Code is not res-
tricted in its scope and a receiver may be appointed ‘in any
cage even without attachment of the property. This addi-
tional power is also now included by us in the proposed
raft. ‘ .

82, The process enforceable for the recovery of an
arrear of municipal tax and: local rate, referred to in sub-
sections (3) and (4) of section 46, has nothing to ‘dp with
the Collector. Distraint and sale of moveable property
(and in some states attachment and sale of immoveable pro-
perty also) or proseaution before 8 magistrate ae the
default in payment of the tax or the rate as an offence
and imposing a fine and recovery of the arrear and the fine
under the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Cqde (8.
386) or recovery of the arrear as if it were a fine imposed
by a criminal court, are the modes laid down. The Acts
which contain provisions for prosecution before a magis-
trate or recovery of the arrears by application to the Magis-
trate for distraint and sale of moveable property are de-
tailed below :—

1. Rajasthan Town Municipalities Act (XXIII of
1951) S. 97 (Only if there is suspension of the
other powers by the Government). .

+ 1.1.. R. 1950 Bom. 150,155-


4
2. Caleutta Municipal Act (33 of 1951).

. 3. Punjab Municipal Act (III of 1911), (S. 81 applica-
tion to Magistrate).

4. Madras City Municipal Act (IV of 1919) Rules 21(2)
and 29-B of Schedule IV to the Act.

5. Madras District Municipalities Act (V of 1920),
Rules 21(2) and 36 of Schedule IV.

6. City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation Act (LXIX
of 1949) [Rules 30(2) and 39 of Schedule Ii}.

पे, Mysore Town Municipalities Act (XXII of 1951)
Section 96.

8. Bombay ‘District Municipal Act (III of 1901) S. 88
(Only if there is suspension of the. other powers of
recovery by the Government).

9. Bombay Local Boards Act (VI of 1923) 8. 115 (Only
if the other powers of recovery are suspended by
the State Government).

10. Madras District Boards Act (XIV of 1920), Rules
33(2) and 39 of Schedule IV.

11. Punjab District Boards Act (XX of 1883) S. 58-B

(Only in the case of other sums (other than local
} rates and taxes) due}.

12. Central Provinces and Berar Municipalities Act (II
of 1922). Section 77.

83. All the processes are enforceable by the Income-
tax Officer if the requirements of sub-sections (3) and (4)
of section 46 are satisfied.

84, In the draft we have restricted the power of the
Income-tax Officer to the mode of recovery by distraint and
sale of moveable property. Even this power is, we are told,
seldom invoked except in a few places. We have omitted
the power to approach the magistrate either to recover the
arrears as a fine or to prosecute the defaulter, as such a
power is never in practice exercised. The procedure is cir-
cumlocutory and is not suited to modern conditions of
society. The existing power of the Income-tax Officer to
make a garnishee order is retained.

85. It may be of interest in this connection to mention Remedies in
that in other countries the remedies for recovery of In- other Coun-
come-tax are very simple as could be seen from the follow- "i
ing analysis :-—

United Kingdom—U. K. Income-tax Act 1952.

(a) Distraint by Collector (S. 76).

(०) Recovery of small amounts of tax in court of Sum-
mary Jurisdiction as’ if it were a civil debt (Sec.


(९) Suit in the High Court (Sec. 79).
United States.
(Internal Revenue Code 1954)
Chapter 64—Collection

Sec. 6331—Levy and distraint and sale of property
whether real, or personal; tangible or in«
tangible.

Commonwealth of Australia.

Income-tax and Social Services Contribution Assessment
Act 1936—53

(a) Section 8. 208—Suit.
(0) Garnishee Order by the Commissioner—S. 218,

Canada. .
Income-tax Act 1948 (Secs. 118 to 121)
(a) Certificate by the Minister is registered in the Ex
chequer Court and such registration has the force
+ of decree and is executable by the Court (5. 119),
(b) Garnishment (Sec. 120).
(९) Seizure of Chattels (Sec. 121).
South Africa. है
The 12०९-८८ Act 1941 (Sec. 85)

(3) Statement by the Commissioner of the tax duly
filed with a clerk or registrar of a court is treated
as a judgment and enforced by the Court as such.

(b) Proceedings by the Commissioner for the seques~
tration of the estate of the tax-payer.

(९) Enforcement by a Magistrate.
Ceylon.

The Income-tax Ordinance Sec. 79

{a} Commissioner issues a cerfificate and is enforced
by seizure and ३81९ of moveable property.

(७) Certificate to the District Court who would en.
force it by way of execution against the moveable
and immoveable property of the defaulter.

(c} Proceedings for recovery before a magistrate.

(9) Garnishee Order.

86. A portion of the tax paid by the company is deem-

ed to have been paid by the shareholder under sections

18(5) and 49B. The tax paid by the company in respect of
dividends is thus given a special treatment in the Act in


43

the assessment of the shareholder. We felt that it would
be useful and convenient to bring together the various pro-
visions of the Act pertaining to such treatment. The pro-
visions of the Act pertaining to the tax deemed to have
been paid in dividends have, therefore, been gathered to-
gether in this chapter.

87. The provisions of the present Act pertaining to re- Chapter XX
funds, have been grouped together in this Chapter. Refunds,

To avoid delay in refunds, we have inserted a provi-
sion' fon the analogy of section 57(3) of the Canadian
Act] that where the refund order is made more than three
months after the application for refund, the Central Gov-
ernment shall pay interest at the rate of 2%. A similar
recommendation was made by the Income-tax Investiga-
tion Commission’, We have also made it clear’ that where
refund is due as a result of an appellate order or as a
result of decision by the High Court, no separate applica-
tion is necessary.

88. All the provisions pertaining to appeals have been Chapter XXI
brought together in this Chapter. prea aud

89. On principle, it may appear objectionable that an Desirability
agency which is under the direct control of the Central of ५] sppeals
Board of Revenue should be vested with jurisdiction to peing, beara
hear appeals from the orders of the Income-tax Officer. 4, tant
Justice should not only be done, but should appear to be Commission-
done and should inspire confidence in the Persons concern- ¢r.
ed. It is an elementary principle of the law that a person
should not be a judge in his own cause. The Appellate
Assistant Commissioner, being under the direct control of
the Central Board of Revenue, may not be considered as
a satisfactory authority to hear and dispose of appeals
against the orders of the Income-tax Officer. One sugges-
tion that was made long ago was that the Appellate Assis-
tant Commissioner should be placed under the control of
the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, so as to make him in-
dependent of the authority and influence of the Central
Board of Revenue. This question was examined by the
Income-tax Investigation Commission, and that Commis-
sion observed* that there was no reason to think that by
reason of the subordination of the Appellate Assistant
Commissioners to the Central Board of Revenue, they were
influenced by the Central Board of Revenue in their deci-
sions or that they were in any manner partial in the dis-
charge of their duties, or that their judgments were
affected by any considerations irrelevant to the decisions
of the appeal. No doubt, in spite of this conclusion the
Commission did make a recommendation that there should

Wide clause 252, App. |.

*Para. 279, pages 125, 126, 1. T. 1. C. Report, 1948.
Vide clause 250, App. 1. saat
“Paragraph 319, Pages 142, 143, I. T.|L. C..Repdrt; 1948.
4-1 Law Com,/58


Appellate
‘Tribunal.

44

be an alteration in the then existing system and that Ap-
pellate Assistant Commissioners should be removed from
the control of the Central Board of Revenue and placed
under the Appellate Tribunal. But this recommendation
was not accepted by the Select Committee constituted in
connection with the Income-tax Amendment Bill of 1952,
which examined the question in the light of the recom-
mendations made by the Income-tax Investigation Commis-
sion. The Select Committee was not in favour of any
change in the existing system. The Taxation Rnquiry
Commission’ again examined the question in greater detail
and also came to the conclusion that no change was neces-
sary. In support of their conclusion, the Taxation Enquiry
Commission gave figures to show that in nearly 90% of the
appeals disposed of by the Appellate Acsistant Commis-
sioners the orders of the Appellate Assistant =e ioner
were either accepted by the assessee or confirmed y the
Tribunal. We have examined the further figures for the
years 1953-54, 1954.55 and 1955-1956 furnished to us y the
Central Board of Revenue and they establish that 92% of
the orders of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner$ have
either been accepted by the assessee or confirmed by. the
Tribunal. From this it follows that only about 8% of the
appeals disposed of by the Appellate Assistant C fe
sioners are reversed on appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.
The value of the filtration made by the Appellate Asgistant
Commissioners cannot be ignored, and if the decisions in
92% of the appeals disposed: of by them are accepted by
the assessee or confirmed by the Appellate Tribunal, jit fol-
lows that the disposals are not affected ot vitiated any
extraneous influence and give satisfaction to the : ssees
concerned. Though we feel the force of the principle that
appeals should be disposed af by an independent al ncy
other than the one which is subordinate to the Cpntral
Board of Revenue, the figures furnished to us do ne ps
tify any alteration in the existing system. We thetefore
agree with the conclusion of the Taxation Enquiry |Com-
mission that a change in thig behalf is neither n
nor justified. We cansider therefore that the Ap
Assistant Commissioners should continue to functign as
at present. !

90. The position, however, of the a peals to the Ap-
pellate Tribunal and the dispogals made by them is entirely
different. We feel thet the existin, system of appe; i to
the Appellate Tribunal and thereafter a reference th the
High Court on a question of law either under section 66(1)
or under section 66(2), is very cumbersome and cause$ un-
necessary delay in disposing of the appeals so as to finalise
the assessments. We have obtained State-wise figurds re-
garding the institution of the appeals before the Appdllate
Tribunal and of the SE i Applications under sertion
66(1) and section 66(2) for the years 1955-56 and 1946-57.

GaGa Fr & Report (1953-1954). Voll वी, pages 232 to 294, hs


45 :

During the year 1955-56 the total number of appeals insti-
tuted in the Appellate Tribunal was 8553. The State-wise
figures are given below

Andhra) | eee. go
Ajmer व 1 451. - gg
Assam . . . . . . . 106
Bhopal. Sek 99
Bihar व ४ . - ७४. ge
Bengal cee gre
Bombay . ee सार
Coorg पु . . . . . . ar
Delhi Be 28
Hyderabad 1 ye २०
Himachal Pradesh . . . . पु न 8
Jammuand Kashmir ५. 9. . . ३3२9
Kutch . . . . . . . rs
Madhya Pradesh. 7 www. 2२०6
MadhyaBharat. . ww wg
Madras. eg
Mysore. weet
Orissa ० - « eg
Punjab. ek 32
PEPSU : . . . : + Ur
Rajasthan...
Saurashtra . . . . . . . . 37
Travancore-Cochin 5 seeks
Tipwa  . ee, 1
Utiar pradesh. 2 tg
Vindhya Pradesh. se eek 54
‘Toray + 8553

The number of Reference Applications under section
66 (1) during the year 1955-1956 was 1,080 as per statement

below :--
अटट सतत
“ High Courts Order
meee Ys eel UjS 66 (2) in respect
of ref. applications
= BF Nodispoed हैंड BE 26
ag 2 Es ह। ye
States co a Toyz, 25, #5
2o 2 हे ge “ge $F
sf ४ प्य SB 2s हि
go 8 5 es ३५०8 ४५०६
Zs os 2 $5 88० g gs
2 iss, = 38 stedae
SE S38 8 Sg, (em Say
. 2 a 8 cf, ES
88 228 2 g28 282988
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 ७
Bombay. oF 275 + mortar
Madhya Pradesh . 8 14 t 20 4 7
Bhopal . . 1 a a . न
काका Rp fe: . 2 10 . 1
Kutch . Doo



मर 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Andhra पु + 32 Bt +) 5०0 मा 38 986
Hyderabad ws 53. 78 -. OS 5
Uttar Pradesh. =. tgs BB 7
Vindhya Pradesh a ee -
Madras... या 2860 -- शाई 66 OB
Travancore-Cochin 5 2. 230) 5 5 9 7
Mysore 2. 3 59 » - 897 -ल्‍- 3
Coorg ee Zo 2 coe
West Bengal» tk 85... - Gee 78 | 28
Asam 0-0 ee ee 20० 9... ४ Qe too.
Dlhi ५... + ६4 Be Be 48 2 +$ 6
Punjab... 9. 55 - - ३ Loo
Rajasthan. . +2 Too 6 2
Madaya Bharat... + hoe कक
Repu tt we
Himachal Pradesh =. eee ewe
Ajmer. ee? Soe - Be
Bhar.) SR ४ 49 723 77. 79
Orisa. |. 723. 3०

Jammu & Kashmir... 3

——
Torar 347 1080 313 623... 930. 1734 7232 218

Nore,—Figures in columns 7, 8 and g include cases in which High Courts,
‘Orders ७३ 66 (3) and 66 (4) were received. However, the number of
cases u/s 66 (3) and 66 (4) 1s quite small.

{In cases in which the reference applications were
rejected by the Appellate Tribunal under section 66 a the
matter came up to the High Court under section 66(2) and
the number of such applications during the year 19! 1956
was 232).

91. A statement of the appeals instituted during the
year 1956-57 is given below PRState-wise figures are not
available) :— .

1956-57
Appeals instituted in the year 1956-57

Appeal by Appeal by

assessee department
Bombay Bench A ee ee 2,636 380
Bench B . . . . बन ve
Bench C Doe i u
Allahabad Bench es 1,193 55
Madras Bench : - 4 1,823 3
Calcutta Bench see 1,185 133
> Dethi-Bench व 908 or
Patna Bench हर तल तन 529 3
Hyderabad Bench ee 479 52

Oe इऑल्‍्. : 8,694 299
Toran »493
—— |;



al

These figures comprise appeals by the assessees and also
by the Department. The appeals instituted by the assessees
were 8,694 and by the Department 799, in all 9,493.

The number of Reference applications under section
66(1) filed during the year (1956-1957) was 1,014, .as per
statement below :—

State-wise statement showing institution, disposal and pen-
dency ‘of Reference Applications before the Income-tax
Appellate Tribunal Bombay, during the year 1956-57.

Reference application u/s High Court’s orders
66(1) u/s 66(2) in respect of
दर reference applications
हर No. disposed SS
of Se tom BE.
? ———__ i8h8te ss
States aod Zz Toad है ५ ५ ६.३ न्ध्च
8 28 डे 8७8 e965
3 zo 8 cas geo Sa
° Es 3 weed se 383
S Sir SBE spe 8००
z am श् 2 8.5 23 8 दे 514
—
' 2 3 4 5 6 8 9
Bombay 16: 2 286
Madhya Pradesh 2 9 2 3 9 *$
Bhopal . a . a
Saurashtra 5 2 4 1 न 1
Hyderabad 3 2 2 ro. t
bra I 7 uy '
Kutch an 28 x 9 ee
itiar es! 2 66 3:
Vindhya Pradeth BM, oe अं
Madras हि 343. 757 248. 841. 82... 135
‘Travancore-Cochin 20 24 28 3 10 1
Mysore 5 10 9 3 3
Pepse - 3 बन न कर
Coorg - - te 2
West Bengal 20 162 o 6 18 22
Assam toa moor oF ढ़
‘Tripura जज +- - >> कं
Delhi 14 387 38 a
Punjab 31 42 40 कि
Jammu & Kashmir 3 002 3 न
Rajasthan 313 9 2 *े 2
Madhya Bharat - = i i
Himachal Pradesh _ 1 1 te
Ajmer 168 3
Bihar -- 57 बे 3; 8
Orissa 4 9 9 41 6 6
‘Foray 491 1014 360 625 985 148-205-282

Nova.-~Figures in columns 7, 8 & ‘foe clude cases in which High Courts
Orders u/s 66(3) & 66(4) were received. =, oop number of cases ujs
66 (3) and 66 (4) is quite smail. :


[Out of the applications rejected by the Tribunal, 205
cases were taken up to the High Court under section 66(2)].

92. The average, therefore, of the appeals instituted
before the Tribunal may be taken up roughly at 10,000 per
year. The largest number of appeals is from Bombay.
Madras, Uttar Pradesh and Bengal also contribute a large
number of appeals. Jn other States, except in Bihar where
the number is nearly 600 per year, the number of appeals
instituted is comparatively small.

93. The Tribunal is constituted the final fact-finding
authority for four taxes,—income-tax, wealth-tax, expendi-
ture-tax and gift-tax, and it is also proposed to make it
the final fact-finding authority under the Estate ey Act.
We are constrained to observe that men of the requisite
calibre and independence are not being recruited for dis-
charging so heavy a responsibility as that of the final fact-
fiding authority under the new pattern of taxation. There
are many complaints that the disposal of appeals by the
Appellate Tribunal is very unsatisfactory for a varie ty of
reasons, Often, the judicial and independent apyroach
which is necessary in the final fact-finding authority, is, not
displayed by the Tribunal, In several cases the determina-
tion of complicated questions of fact and law is done in a
very perfunctory manner. Very often, the Tribuna] does
not clearly record its findings of fact or its reasons for arriv-
ing at its findings. In a number of cases, factual 07 legal:
contentions raised by the parties are not dealt with @t all,
resulting in applications for rectification being mad¢ sub-
sequently to the Tribunal for considering the points o1 2
to be dealt with in the original order of the Tribunal.
While dealing with the references under section 66(]) and
section 66(2), High Courts had occasion to comment’; upon
the unsatisfactory nature of the orders passed by the :
late Tribunal and also on tha unsatisfactory statemehts of
case drawn up by them in the references under sectipn 66.
The High Courts had to remit the cases to the Appellate
Tribunal for a further and better statement of the casq with
fuller particulars. To give satisfaction to the 1878९ nymber
of assessees, a decision of an independent and good appellate
authority is an undoubted necessity, if justice is to bd done
to them. There is considerable delay in disposing gf the
appeals and very often it is said that they, the Tribjinals,
spare very little time for the appellate work with which
alone they are concerned. Very often the Members $f the
Tribunals attend the sittings at any time they choose, there-
by not conforming to regular office hours, for the digposal
of the work. A Bench of two members of the Tribunal
hears the appeals, but in practice the contribution to the
decision of the case by one of the members is often not
appreciable.

tH

x even i :

See extracts given in $e next paps

जज



94. The following extracts from the decisions of courts Extracts from

will show how unsatisfactorily the Appellate Tribunals have ४
been functioning :—

Hanumantram Ramnath vs. C.LT., ‘Bombay’.

“This reference must go baek to the Appellate Tribunal
for the finding of further facts. As this is the second refer-
ence we have been constrained to send back out of the last
ten which have come before us, and as in these cases not
only is public time and money wasted, but there is also
obviously a hardship cast upon the apsessee, it is in my
opinion necessary that certain matters should be stated for
the guidance of the Appellate Tribunal in preparing fur-
ther cases... पु ”

Hira Mills Ltd. Cawnpore vs. I. 7. 0., Cawnpore*.

“Those, as we understand them, are the facts to be
gathered from the statement of the case and the accompany~
ing judgments and orders. Perhaps we may properly ob-
serve that it would be a practice more in conformity with
section 66(1) of the Act and with general convenience, if
the statement of the case itself had contained all the rele-
vant facts, rather than that they should have had to be
sought for in the judgments”.

Badar Shoe Stores, In re.

“We deprecate the practice, which is becoming too
common, of omitting a sufficient statement of facts from
the statement of the case and of referring this Court to a
miscellany of other documents for the collection of the full
facts necessary for determination of the question of law
submitted, and we shall take the oppgrtunity of referring
हा the unfortunate consequences of this practice at a later
stage .. we

P. M. Huthee Singh & Sons Ltd. vs. C.LT.*

“J must point out here that both in the statement of
case and in the judgment there are certain inaccuracies.
When a fact-finding authority is in the position of the
Tribunal (whose findings of fact are cansidered conclusive),
it is always very desirable for them to. ke accurate in their
statement of facts. I would like to join the learned Chief
Justice in emphasizing the duty cast*upon the Appellate
Tribunal with regard to findings of facts. Under the Act
it is the final fact-finding authority and I think it is the
duty of the Tribunal when they submit a statement of
case to the High Court to state the facts clearly, carefully

2(1945) 13 1. 7. R. 203 at 206.
(1948) 741. T.R. 407 at 427-
3(1946) 14 1. 438 at 433-
(1946) 14 LT.R. 653 at 659-

ents.


50

and precisely. After all the High Court only exercises an
advisory jurisdiction. Its jurisdiction is to advise the Tri-
bunal on questions of law submitted to it and that advisory
jurisdiction cannot be exercised usefully unless the fact-
finding authority submits the facts carefully, clearly and
accurately. I am sorry to say that in the reference with
which we are dealing both in the statement of case and
in the judgment there are several inaccuracies which in
Some cases are patent. A little more care would have
been sufficient to make the Tribunal realise that the state-
ment of facts prepared by them was not as correct and
as satisfactory as it should have been. I hope that in
future the Tribunal will bear this in mind when preparing
the statement of case”.

Messrs. Gobindaram Bros. Ltd. vs. CLT.

“The supplemental case returned to us by the Tribunal,
and which is now before us is highly unsatisfactory. The
Tribunal appears to be far more concerned with excusing
the statements of fact in the first case, which are unques-
tionably contradictory, than with complying with the direc-
tions of this Court given under Section 66(4) of the Income-
tax Act. हर

“The matter was referred back to the Tribunal to record
its finding. of fact more clearly, and implicit in that direction
is the taking of further evidence, if there is no other way
of determining facts in order that the Tribunal may make
its finding clear. For the Tribunal to say that because a
fact was not before it when they disposed of the assegsee’s
appeal “we are unable to inchide it in the case at this
stage of the proceedings”, is a most surprising statement
and is one which indicates that the Tribunal does not appre-
ciate the duties cast upon it when this Court refers a matter
back under section 66(4). The reference back to the Ttibu-
nal was to record its finding more clearly and after a lapse
06 one year and ten months the matter now comes back
with nothing new except the affidavit of Mr. Pralhadrai
Brijlal, which is annexed to the supplemental case”.

Bikaner Trading Company, Calcutta vs. CLT.

“We have so far endured with patience the type of
statements of cases which have been submitted to this
Court in connection with the references that have come
up this session, but we think that the limit has been pagsed
and we ought to make some observations. One common
feature of these statements of cases is that the appeal was
heard by two members, whereas the statement of the case
in almost every case was drawn up by different members.
In drawing up the statement, they do not seem to have

#(1946) 14 LTR. 764 at 770.
31959) 24 LTR. ata at 422.


51

always considered it necessary to refer to the appellate
order, nor necessary to be exact in the statements they
made, nor necessary to make a fuli statement of the rele-
‘vant facts.’ Most of the statements of cases are sketchy in
the extreme and, were one to rely upon them alone, it would
be impossible to answer any question at all. It has been a
frequent experience this ‘session to find two members of a
Tribunal deciding a particular case in a particular manner
and one of those members, acting with a third member,
stating a case for this Court which differed materially from
the case made and found at the hearing of the appeal. We
shal] not say, out of respect for the Tribunal, that, the
members have acted in a careless manner, but we feel
bound to say that the manner in which they have dischar-
ged their duty of drawing up statements of cases for this
@ourt can only be called carefree”.

Calcutta Co. Ltd vs. C.LT..

“Unfortunately, the treatment of the question by the
authorities below has been of a somewhat summary charac-
ter presumably because it was raised and argued before
them in a superficial form. But even if such was the case,
there is hardly any justification for the Tribunal failing to
realise at least what facts were required to be found and
stated. The statement of the case is ‘sketchy and bare and
like most of the statements we have had to deal with dur-
ing this session has hardly any appearance of a case seri-
ously stated”.

CLT. West Bengal vs. Hanwman Prasad Bagria’.

“In our opinion, the statement in the case referred are
clearly insufficient to enable us: to determine the question
raised. The appellate order passed in the case is a striking
example of what appellate orders should not be and the
statement of the case itself is an example of the con-
sequences that must sometimes follow when the appeal is
heard by two particular members of the Tribunal and the
reference is made by two other members”.

“This finding of the Income-tax Officer and the Appel-
late Assistant Commissioner was reversed by the Appel-
late Tribunal by an order which reads like an order pas-
sed by Honorary Magistrates at summary trials”.
(Italics are ours).

Dhirajilal Giridharilal vs. C.LT., Bombay’.

“Tt is apparent from the following quotation from the
judgment of the Tribunal that not only was its approach
to the question raised before it tainted with suspicion, but
it took into consideration a number of circumstances based
purely on conjectures and surmises and for which there
was not a scintilla of evidence on the record”.

4(1953) 24 TTR. 454 at 459°
4(1953) 24 LT-R. 495 at 497 498
1954) 26 1. ता. 8९. 726 at 739 (S- qi.


Shantikumar Narotham Morarii vs. C.LTS

“There is a finding given by the Accountant Member
in the following words : “We understand that no part of
the borrowings were utilised in the agency firm business
and therefore the interest paid was not incurred for the
purposes of the business”. Mr, Palkhivala has rightly
quarelled with the nature of this finding. With res 3 to
the learned Accountant Member. it is difficult to ynder-
stand how a judicial tribunal ¢an record a finding in the
language in which this so-called finding has been recorded.
The duty of a fact-finding tribunal is to find facts, and not
to understand that certain fagts may exist or may have
been established”.

Indian Steel and Wire Product Ltd. vs. CLT?

“Before parting with this case, I find nee ry. to
repeat once again what I had occasion to say during the
last sittings of this Bench...................-- If this Court dannot
depend on the Tribunal even for the accuracy of the sum-
mary of the orders passed by itself, it becomes difficult to
deal with these references, particularly as this Coprt is
bound by the statements contained in the statement of
the case and should not be put to the necessity of verifying
and if necessary correcting the summaries given of thé vari-
ous orders, What makes the inaccuracy strange in. the
present case is that one of the members who was r ber
sible for the statement of the case was himself a m¢mber
of the Bench which had passed the appellate order jrelat-
ing to the first of the two chargeable accoumting peripds”.

The Bhopal Trading Co., Kanpur vs, C.L.T.’

“We are not undertaking the responsibility of t ming
the questions ourselves as the statement of the case as also
the appellate orders are, as is too frequently the | case,
wholly unsatisfactory”. i

CLT. vs. Malchand Surana’. :

“¥ confess I do not feel altogether happy the way in
which the facts have been faund in this case or the! man-
ner in which the case has been stated”.

“Before I take up the question on the merits, I pould
say a word in passing as regards the appellate ak jer of
the Tribunal. The whole of it appears to be based} upon
a misconception of both fact sand law............ ”

|]

“मुह is perfectly clear that the Tribunal failed to japply
themselves to the real question before them and indeed
their order, one regrets to find, does not indicate that, they
had any appreciation of what the real question was..,......”

(1955) 27 £. T. R. 69, at 80 (Bombay H. C.).

(1955) 27 1. T. R. 436, at p- a 446 (Calcutta H. C.).
(1955) 28 1. T. R. 479, at p. 489 (Allahabad H. C.).
*(1955) 28 1. T. R. Est 687, 69 (Calcutta H. 0.).



53

95. The present procedure leads to delay also. If the
Tribunal refuses to make a reference to the High Court
where it should have done sa, the agessee or the depart-
ment have had to go to the High Court under section 66(2)
and this has led to considerable delay in giving a finality
to the assessment. The extracts givan above would also
show that the statements of cases submitted by the Tribu-
nals to the High Court are scrappy, with the result that
the High Court has had to ask for a supplementary state-
ment in several cases.

96. For these reasons we are strongly of the opinion Abélition of
that the Appellate Tribunal should be abolished and that a !he)Appellate
direct appeal should be provided both on questions of fact posed, Pro
as well as of law to the High Court from the orders of the
Appellate Assistant Commissioner. The assessee should
have the satisfaction that the facts of the case and the law
applicable ta it have been examined by a competent autho-
rity. It would also save the time of the High Court, as
it would avoid the necessity for a reference to the High
Court on a question of law either under section 66(1) or
under section 66(2). We have therefore, provided’ an ap-
peal to the High Court from the decisions of the Appellate
Assistant Commissioner. Where the amount in dispute is
Rs. 7,500 or more, the appeal will be on fact as well as
on jew. In other cases the appeal will be only on questions
of law.

It is stated that the disposal by the High Courts may
cause delay, particularly as the rules of the High Courts
require printing in first appeals. To obviate this difficulty,
we suggest that by a rule made by the appropriate autho-
rity the printing of records in such cages may be dispensed
with, and the Department and the assessee may be allowed
to furnish typed copies of papers on which they intend to
rely at the time of the hearing of the appeal before the
High Court.

97. We have also examined the financial implications
of the proposal and we are satisfied that it does not involve
the States in any extra expenditure, as all expenditure
necessitated by the appointment of more Judges in the
High Court and the necessary staff 0४० be met by the fee
that will be levied on the appeals instituted in the High
Court. At present the fee ig Rs. 10D in case of appeals
to the Appeilate Tribunal and, the arhount realised in the
year 1955-56 by the iribunal is Rs. 8,46,390 which, of
course, includes also fees for Referenee Applications. (The
department does not pay any fee when it files an appeal
or asks for a reference). The expenditure incurred’ in
that year for the Appellate Tribunal. is Rs. 8,74.684. We
have not got the figures for 1956-57. Even if the fee is res-
tricted to Rs. 100 per appeal and if 10,000 appeals are filed,

all the States will get an ingome ० Rs, 10,00,000. If 20 States will get an ingome : BS 10,00,000. If 20

Side clause a60, App. I.


Appointment
and training
of Appellate
Assistant Co-
mumissioners.

54

Judges are appointed for all the High Courts, the total
salary payable per year will be Rs. 8.40,000 leaving a sur-
plus for the expenditure on the additional staff that would
be required by the appointment of additional Judges.

If we consider the position State-wise, the highest ins-
titution of appeals is in Bombay and may be taken rough-
ly at 2,000 appeals per year. The Bombay State will get a
fee of Rs, 2,00,000. Even if four more Judges are appointed
their total salary per year will be Rs. 1,68,000, leaving a
surplus for the additional staff. Similarly, Madras may re-
quire three Judges. Bengal may require two Judges
and Uttar Pradesh ma: require two or three
Judges. In other States like Bihar and Punjab an addi-
tional Judge may be required, It will, therefore, not en-
tail any additional expenditure from State funds which
could not be met from the fee leviable on the appeals ins-
tituted in the respective State High Courts. As observed
already, the work in which the High Courts are now enga-
ged namely disposing of references either under section
66(1) or under section 66(2) will pro tanto be reduced, and
this is an additional advantage for the High Courts.

98. Rules will necessarily have to be made to regulate
the procedure for the disposal of the appeals expeditjous-
ly. Delay is occasioned by the printing of records which
will not be necessary. If the ru’ fe making power is confer-
red on the various High Courts there may not be uniformi-
ty in that behalf. We, therefore, think that it will be more
appropriate to confer the rule making power upon the
Supreme Court’ as was done in the case of the Companies
Act, 1956. As regards the levy of the fees and the scales
which are to be prescribed, it may not be possible for: the
Centre to prescribe the fee. Some method should be adopt-
ed to make the Court-fee payable on the memoranda of
appeal presented to the High Court in such matters uniform
in all the States. We have not therefore made any definite
Proposal in this behalf.

99. In view of the recommendation made by us for: the
abolition of the Appellate Tribunal, and as appeals would
henceforth lie to the High Court from the Appellate As-
sistant Commissioners’ orders, we consider that Gov fant
ment should ensure that the posts of Appellate Assistant
Commissioners are held by experienced and senior officers.

100. It will be more satisfactory if experienced and

senior officers of the Department hear appeals, ;

101. The Appellate Assistant Commissioner should
also. in our opinion, be given some training in judicial
practice and procedure by being attached to a Judge of a
Civil Court, i.e, a District Judge. for a period of, say, three
months. This will be very necessary because the order of
the Appellate Assistant Commigsioner should be written,

1866, clause 277, App. I.



55

more or less, like a judgment’and should make mention of
the points for determination, and the findings thereon. We
consider that if Appellate Assistant Commissioners are
given this type of training, it will inspire greater confi-
dence in the litigant public.

102. It may be recalled in this connection that when
the Appellate Tribunal was net_in existence, i.e., prior to
1939, the reference to the High” Court, though directed
against the order of the Assistant Commissioner, was made
by the Commissioner of Income-tax himself. Though an
officer of the status of Commissioner of Income-tax may
not hear all appeals, it would be desirable if appeals .
against assessments of incomes in excess of rupees one
lakh were heard by the Commissioner of Income-tax or by
an officer of equal status. If this recommendation is ac-
cepted, the necessary amendments may be made in the
Act. Other appeals should be heard by senior officers
whose scale of pay is attractive. We would recommend for
Appellate Assistant Commissioners a scale of pay inter-
mediate between the present Appellate Assistant Commis-
sioner’s scale and the present Commissioner’s scale.

103. As second appeals would lie (if our proposal is Commission-
accepted) to the High Court and as the smailer assessees “*

may not be able to afford the expense involved in such ari

appeal, we would recommend the free use by commission-

ers of Income-tax of their judicial powers to give relief to

the smaller assessees. In the ease of smaller assessees the
Commissioner should treat an application in revision as an

appeal. Administrative instructions to this effect may be

given by the Central Board of Revenue. हु

104, The other important change which has been made Other chan-
in this Chapter is the provision’ Yor appeals against _ all ges.
orders of the Income-tax Officers which are prejudicial to
the assessee, e.g, an order under section 35, the levy of
interest under section 18A (6), an order refusing to correct
a recovery certificate, an order refusing to treat the asses-
see as not in default and other similar orders.

105. The provisions of the existing Act relating to pen-Cbapter,
alties have been grouped together in this Chapter. Penal अत

No change has been made in the substance of these potable | by
provisions. authorities.
106. The provisions of the existing Act relating tochapter
offences and prosecutions have been grouped together in XXIII.
this Chapter. No change of substance has been made. Offences and
prosecutions.
107. The provisions of Chapter DXA, Recognised provi- Chapter
dent funds, have been incorporated in this Chapter, with . XXIV |
suitable modifications explained in the notes to the rele- provisi’ cat
vant clauses. 4 ting to
_ - p+ —_________ectain Provie
4See clause 254, sub-clauses (१), { | > (॥) हा 1), App. I. . प्रथम Funds.
1



56

Sie pter 108. Provisions relating to approved superannuation

XXV Special funds, contained in Chapter IX B, have been reproduced

provisions re- 5. n E .. ८ ५ si

lating to cer- in this chapter with suitable modifications explained in

tain Superan- the notes to the relevant clauses.

nuation

Funds. 109. All the other provisions of the Act which are not
Xxvr covered by the earlier Chapters have been grouped toge-

Miscellan~ ther in this Chapter." ,

wous. aoe important changes made in this Chapter are as

under :— :

(1) Authorised representatives.—We consider that there
is no justification for permitting a person who is mot a
lawyer or a chartered accountant to appear in the se ome+
tax proceedings. The Income-tax Officer exercises pbwers
which are often far more responsible than the eure en
larly exercised by a civil court or a criminal court. hen
persons other than lawyers are not allowed to appear Hefore
the civil court and the criminal court, there is no reason
why persons who are not entitled to appear before 'such
courts should be permitted to appear in an income-tax pro-
ceeding. An exception should however be made in favour
of chartered accountants as they assist companies 1॥ the
maintenance of accounts. Moreover, they have certain, fe
gations under the Companies Act in relation to the prepara-
tion of the accounts of comparties. We have there! for ro-
vided that appearance in income-tax proceedings be confined
to lawyers and chartered accountants. :

In order to protect the interests of those persons) who
are, under the provisions of the present Act a id to
appear in the income-tax proceedings, we have provideHi for
the continuance of their right to appear in the incomp-tax
proceedings. We have however, provided that they sHould

e registered as Income-tax Practitioners. We are alfo of
the opinion that there should be a disciplinary body to
control such Income-tax practitioners. We have theréfore
made suitable changes in the provisions of sections 59| and

(2) Service of notices—We have provided for the rhode
of service of notice under the Act in the a of
dissolved firms, dissolved associations and disrupted
HLULFs. also. .

(3) Rules—We have added a provision authorising the
Central Board of Revenue to make rules relating to हि
issue of tax verification certifieptes. Such certificates have
been found useful in practice 4 it is desirable to place
them on a statutory footing. '€ have also added a pfovi-
sion for making rules relating to the constitution of| an
authority to take disciplinary action against Incomd-tax
practitioners (other than lawyers and Chartered Accoun-’
tants).

110. The Schedules which we propose to annex to the
Act are as under :—

715 3877 | माता Schedule—relates to gnsurance business.” |
अल clause 324, App. 1, had clause ७4७ iid.

Schedules,

२866 notes on the Schedule, for the dhdnges made.


3?

Second Schedule—Brings together in one place the pro-
visions pertaining to the procedure to be adopted by the
Collector for the recovery of tax on a certificate issued to

im.

Third Schedule—Deals with the procedure to be adopt-
ed by the Income-tax Officer who is empowered by the
Commissioner to recover tax by distraint and sale of mov-
able property.

111. In the preparation of notes on clauses we have Scheme of
departed from the method adopted by us in our previous fp'e§ on
reports. In the previous reparts we have followed the clauses.
order of the sections in the Act under revision and wherever
new provisions were suggested, they were dealt with in
appropriate places. This method could not be followed in
revising this Act (Income-tax Act) as we have reshuffled
all the sections and sub-sections of the Act. Hence the order
of the clauses in the proposed draft has-been followed in
preparing the Notes on clauses.

112, A word may be said about the increased number Incrgase in
of the sections in the draft.' The U.K. Act of 1952 contains number of
532 sections and 25 Schedules. The existing Income-tax 1"
Act has 67 sections and one Schedule. One section (Sec-

tion 10) of the existing Act however, covers 14 printed pages

in the Income-tax Manual, and some of the sections in the

Act, though bearing one number have the letters A to V

added e.g., sections 58A, and 588. The 67 sections of the

Act cover 186 printed pages in the Income-tax Manual.

The actual number of sections in the’ existing Act is not

67. but“about 120. The number of sections in the draft

is thus only two and a half times the number in the ex-

isting Act. The increase in the number of sections is

due to the fact that the existing sections have been split

into a number of sections. It is hoped that the, total cover-

age of the draft in printed pages will not show any appre-

ciable increase.

113. Appendix I contains our proposals in the form of Schyme of
draft clauses. Api if indices.
Appendix IJ contains comparative tables showing the
existing provision and the corresponding provision in the
draft in Appendix I.
Notes on clauses have been appended at the end. These
explain, with reference to each clause in Appendix I, chan-
ges made by us in the form or substance of the existing
provision.

114. For convenience of reference, we have given at the Lists appen-
end of this part of the report two lists, the first containing ded:to the 7९०
a summary of changes of importance proposed by us which" ~
have been embodied in the draft in Appendix I, and the
second containing a list of recommendations made by us
which Rave not been embodied & the pp oo eee have not been ome in the @raft in Appendix I. ¢

*The draft proposed by us contaihe 220 clasts and Three Schedules.



Existing Sec.
2
Draft Cl. 265)

Existing Sec.
2.
Draft Cl. 2

Existing Sec.
2. (4A)
Draft Cl. 2.
(10).

Existing Sec,
2. (8)
Draft Cl. 2.
(as).

Existing. Sec.
3

Draft Cl. 3.
(4).

Existing Sec.

brat 81 19

(2), 72 (3)
12 (4).

Existing Sec.

(3) (vi)
bral ot”
15).

Existing Sec.
4 (3) (9)
para. (b)

& Wye
Draft io "
9) (ii) anc
v (7) Gv).

58
LIST I

Summary of important changes proposed in the Income-
tax Act and embodied in the Draft Clauses in Appendix I.

The definition of “assessee” has been amplified to cover
all the situations in which a person becomes assessable for,
or liable for the payment of, tax or other sum.

Several new definitions have been added, important
amongst them being “assessment”, “assessment year”, “ave-
rage rate of income-tax and super-tax” and “tax”,

Item (iii) of the existing definition of Capital asset, ex-
cluding land from which the income derived is agricultural
income, has been redrafted and replaced by the words “any
agricultural land in India”.

The existing definition of “Magistrate”, which includes
2 Second Class Magistrate empowered by the Central Gov-
ernment {or in the State of Jammu and Kashmir hy the
State Government) to try offences under the Act, has been
altered so as to confine the power to First Class Magistrates
throughout India. .

The present enumeration of the chargeable entities
that is, “individual, Hindu undivided family” etc. has been
replaced by the word “person”. This will cover all entities
having legal personality besides the entities enumerated in
the General Clauses Act. ‘

With reference to the exemption for income derived
from property held under trust etc. for religious or ch arit-
able purposes, the following changes have been made |:—

(i) it has been made clear that the exemption is avail-
able in the case of a business, held on trust, subject
to the conditions given in the existing Proviso (०);

(ii) it has also been made clear that the exemption is
available to business carried on by institutions not
subject to trust.

With reference to the exemption for special allowances.
or benefits granted to an employee to meet expenses wholly

1. and necessarily incurred in the performance of the duties

of an office or employment, the words “wholly and neces-
sarily” have been replaced by the words “wholly and ex-
clusively”. The requirement of necessity has been omitted.

The exemption for income received by a Consul Gene-
ral, Consul or Trade Commissioner etc. is at present avail-
able to Indian citizens also. A requirement that the person,
so exempted should not be an Indian citizen has been added,
on the lines of existing section 4(3)(x) (c) and {e).  *


59

The exemption in respect of salaries of members of Existing Sec.
Nepalese military forces serving with the armed forces of foam eed «i
India or of members of Indian State forces, has been omitted the draft).

as obsolete.

The exemption in respect of income received by an Existing Sec.
employee of foreign enterprise is at present available to 4 (3) xiv)
Indian citizens. Under the draft it has been confined to et cl.
foreigners. 1 )-

The exemption in respect of salaries received by foreig- Existing Sec.
ners for services rendered as technicians has been 4(3) (iva)
extended to services rendered before the actual commnce- (gy ~~

ment of the business. Explanation
I, .

Certain exemptions enjoyed at present by virtue of Eximing Sec.
notifications under section 60 have been added in the Act. 4 -
These relate to scholarship, and income of Universities or Draft Cl. tt
other educational institutions not established for profit. (a

The condition for residence in the case of a person who Existing Sec.
has beeri'in India within four preceding years, at present, #4 ,(, (i)
requires the presence of that person in India “otherwise oo
than by an occasional or casual visit”. This-condition has
been made more specific, by requiring the person: to be
present for at least 30 days in the previous year concerned.

The existing provision authorising the Income-tax Offi- Exitting Sec.
cer to treat a person as a resident if he is satisfied that 4A-@) Gv)
the person is likely-to remain in India for not less than Draft Cl. 6.
three years has been omitted. ; ह

A provision has been made to the effect that a person Existing Sec.
who is resident in respect of one source of income ig to be 4A cl. 6
treated as resident for all other sources. oe

A new provision regarding transfer of cases from one Beas Sec.
Appellate Assistant Commissioner to another has been Draft Ch gt
added. (3). (b).

With reference to the power of the Board or the Com- Existing Sec.
missioner to transfer cases from one Income-tax Officer to 5 (7A)
another, a provision has been added requiring opportunity or a
to be given to the assessee before the transfer is ordered :
(except in special cases).

It is proposed to abolish the Ap pellate Tribunal. Ap- Exéting Sec.
peals from the Appellate Assistant Commissioner will lie 54! Sinitted)
to the High Court. . (Omitted) .

Salary received from foreign Government has been Banting See:
I

specifically made taxable under the head “Salary”. 4 1 छा, 17 हि
(7) ह
, Specific provision has been made in respect of salaries Existing Sec.
paid in arrears. al 1). '
Cl. 18
(०

5--1 Law Com./58


60

Existing Sec. The allowance for expenses incurred by an employee

Brae (i) in the performance of his dties has been redrafted by

Gv). omitting the words “necessarily” from the requirement that
the employee should be required to spend the amount
“wholly, necessarily and exclusively” in the performance
of his duties.

Raining Sec. Income assessable under the head “Interest on securi-
Draft Cl. 18. ties” is at present chargeable if it is “receivable”. This has
+ #8 been replaced by a provision charging such interest when
“received”. The receipt basis has thus been substituted in
place of the present provision.

Existing Sec. Sums expended for realising interest on tax-free secu-
8 af a rities have been disallowed as a deduction in computing the
ii. ५ Cl. 21 income chargeable under the head “Interest on securities”.

Existing Sec. Interest paid on moneys borrowed for the purpose of

8 aft Cia: investment in tax-free securities has been made inadmitsible

dij, asa deduction in computing ineome under the head “Interest
on securities”.

Existing Sec. Reasonable sums spent on realising interest on Layfree
8 aft securities are proposed to be allowed to be deducted, for
iC tor. the purpose of super-tax, in computing income chargeable
under the head “Interest on Securities”. If money has been
borrowed for investment in such securities, then interest
paid on the money so borrowed is also proposed to be al-

lowed to be similarly deducted.

Existing Sec. Rules for furnishing guidance to the Income-tax Officer
है, AY Yo in determining the annual value of tenanted property! have
@) 3 been added.

Existing Sec. {rrecoverable rent has been made an admissible fe

eat tion for computing income chargeable under the head “In-

aft Cl. 24 come from property”.’ (At pregent the deduction is- is-
(xii) sible by virtue of a notification only). “Nj
|

Existing Sec. The provision relating to development rebate 3 been
10 (2) (vib) changed as regards the year in respect of which the yebate
Dra om 33 is to be allowed. The existing'section allows the rebat¢ only
pare. ‘for the year of acquisition or installation; under th¢ pro-
vision as proposed, it will be available in the next ygar, if
the ship or machinery is actually put to use for th¢ first

time in the next year. :

Existing Sec. If the bad debts written. off in an_ earlier a ting

ro (2) (४) year are not allowed Wy the Ingme-tax Officer for that year,

Draft Cl. 36 they will be allowable for & subsequent accounting| year,

(8), 2nd Fro- if the Income-tax Officer is then satisfied about the i ver-

न ability of the debt. (As to the converse case, see elow
under existing section 35.)

Existing Sec. The provisions for deposit of profits by companies have
oe and been omitted. *

(omizted in
the draft).


हा

A new provision has been added whereunder in com- Existing See.
puting income from business, profession or vocation, bonus be Pa 6
paid in pursuance of the award of an industrial Tribunal (2) (ii). 3
will be allowed as a deduction, even if the amount of the
bonus is not reasonable.

A new provision has been added whereunder contribu- cr ting Sec.
tions made by an employer to funds established for the bene- (20) (a) 6
fit of his employees have been listed as admissible deductions (५) (8)... 3
for computing income from business ete., even if the fund

is not a recognised provident fund or an approved super-
annuation fund, under certain conditions.

A new provision has been added to the effect that Existing 8००.
buildings constructed by an emp loyer for the residences of De raft Cl
his employees should be treat as bwildings used for the ~ 7 43
purpose of the employer's business, if the occupation by ~
the employees of the buildings is subservient to and neces-
sary for the purpose of the employees’ duties.

A new provision has been added laying down rules for Existing Sec.
estimating the value of the consideration received in are Chess.
transaction of exchange. (This is with reference to charg- 53:
ing of tax under ‘Capital gains’.)

The scope of the existing. provision, relating to power Exjsting Sec.
of the Income-tax Officer to treat the-fair market value of 128 (2), tt
a capital asset as the value of the consideration for which Brits
the sale etc. of the asset is made (where the sale is effected ot
with the object of avoidance etc. of the liability of the
assessee to tax under capital gains), has been narrowed down
by confining the power to a case where the actual considera- +
tion is not correctly recited in the deed of sale etc. On the
other hand, the scope has beef widened by deleting the re-
quirement that the transaction must heve been entered into
with a person directly or indirectly connected with the
assessee. .

It has been made clear that where the accounts of the Ex|sting Sec.
assessee are not correct and complete, the assessment will 13:
be a best judgment under section 3). The power to oo
compute the income “upon such basis and in such manner (1
as the Income-tax Officer may determine” (existing section +
13, Proviso) will be confined to a case where the accounts
are correct and complete.

A new provision has been added wherein interest paid an See,
by an assessee on money borrpwed fog investing his capital 16)(+) 2
in a firm has been listed ag an admissible. deduction in 8 } 69
. 5७ $ by his . , .
computing his income comprising hig share in the firm’s
profits.

It has been made clear that section 16(1)(c), 3rd Pro pwisting Sec.
viso, which removes from the scope of the section income 76 (1) (०
arising by virtue of a settlement etc. which is not revokable Daxft Cl. 64.
for a period of more than six years etc., does not apply in
a case where the assets =i Sie rty of the settior |
ete. In other words, where is transfer of the cor- | .
pus, the proviso wil} have wie हर


62

Existing Sec. The existing provision, whereunder income arising from

18) © ५, assets transferred to any person etc. for the benefit of a

®). 1 °7 minor child of the assessee is regarded as the assessee’s in-
come in certain cases, has been modified so as to exclude
cases where the minor child is a married daughter.

Existing Sec. It has been made clear that the rate applicable for de~
38 (3A) (38), duction of super-tax is one in force for a company which

कद 1.2० has not made the arrangements for deduction of super-tax
(3) (b). referred to in section 18(3D).
Existing Sec. A new provision has been made imposing a first charge

upon the assets of a person who, after deducting tax under
the Act, fails to pay it into the Government Treasury.

Existing Sec. A general provision has been made to the effect that
1 G)and 7 where tax is deductible at source, the assessee shall not be
(1), and prov called upon to pay the tax himself unless he has received
Draft Cl. 213. the income without such deduction. (The existing provision

is confined to salary.)

Existing Sec. A provision has been added to the effect that advance
18A (1) payment of tax will not apply in respect of income-tax om
हि 7 २5 dividends

Existing Sec. The rate of interest to be paid by an assessee who
18A (३) pro- does not pay advance tax on commission receipt within
४180 fifteen days of the date on which the income is received,
Draft Cl. 221. has been reduced from 6 per cent. to 4 per cent.

Existing Sec. Interest payable by an assessee in a case where the
184 (6), tax estimated by him falls short of 80 per cent. of the tax
9). 3 regularly assessed, is made to run not from the ket day of

January of the year of payment but from the Ist day of
April of the next financial year,

Existing Sec. The rate of interest payable by an assessee in cases of
18A (7) under-estimate of advance tax has been reduced from 6 per
Drafe Cl.224. cent. to 4 per cent.

38 (9)
Drea. 209.

Existing Sec, Instead of the general notice requiring all persons to
22 (1) submit a return of income, a provision has been made for
pee 743 the compulsory submission of the return by every person
(0) (@). who is assessable in respect of his income or in respect of

any other person’s income. The return will have to be
submitted by the 30th June, each year.

Existing Sec. A provision has been added to the effect where a return

2 of income is sent to an Income-tax Officer who has no juris-

page 143 diction over the assesgee, he shall forward it to the In¢dome-
" tax Officer having such jurisdiction.

Existing Sec. A new provision has been added clarifying the power
Be aft Cl. 146 of the Income-tax Officer to make such inquiries as he may
@). ° think necessary for the purpose of assessment.

Existing Sec. A new provision has been added requiring the Income-
Ban ct. 1३6 वि Officer to give the assessee an opportunity of rebutting

we" 140 any material which is proposed to be used for the pufpose
of assessment. (An exception has however been made for
+ ‘best judgment” assesment.) ;


63

The power of the Income-tax Officer to take into ac- Existing Sec.
count material gathered by him (in addition to the evidence Draft Ch 1 “7
produced in the case) for the purposes of assessment, has (3).

een clarified.

1६ has been made clear that a “best judgment” assess- Busting Sec.
ment is to be made after consideration of the material Baer sae
which the Income-tax Officer has gathered. 8),

An indication of the material which the Income-tax Existing Sec.
Officer may use in an assessment under section 23(3) or Fs "10.3.
23(4), has been given. पु RCH :149-

A specific provision has been added laying down the Existing Sec,
right of set off of loss from one business against profits in Rae CG

any other business, “Te

The provision relating to set off of losses has been Existing Sec.
modified in respect of set off against capital gains. A loss 24 (1)
Sustained under any head other than eapital gains cannot pang. 3
be set off against capital gains, under the provision as 78
proposed,

Thm respect of the assessment of a person about to leave Existing See.
India, it has been provided thet the Period of notice to be 244
given by the Income-tax Officer may be shortened even in am Gh. 184
respect of the assessments for earlier previous years, (0.

For the assessment of a person about’ to leave India, a Existing Sec,
time-limit of three months has been provided for complet- if aft 01. 184
ing the assessment, where the assessment is made under the Q.
special procedure given in existing section 24A. -

‘She section relating to partition of a Hindu undivided Existing Sec,

family has been made applicable in respect of partial parti- 256.
tion also. p peat Cl. 181

A new ठीक has been added laying down which Ex sting Sec.
Income-tax Officer is entitled to assess a Hindu family after 234
its partition. on Ot 181

The provision relating to assessment after partition has Existing Sec.

i A Draft
been extended to penalties and other sums. a as: (8).

A definition of partition has been added. कण Sec,
Draft Cl. 181
txpin,

Tt hag been made clear that an application for the regis- Existing Sec.
tration of a firm may be made even after the dissolution of igs Draft
the firm. ४ का (2).

The provision (at present contained in the rules) relat- Existing Sec.
ing to the time within which a firm should be registered 26A
has been modified. It has been provided that the applica- Draft Cl. 797
tion should ordinarily be made before the expiry of the ६
Previous year in respect of which registration is being
sought.

The provision requiring that the individual shares of Existing Sec-
the partners should be “; allow regifteat the partnership deed" Sion 26A

has been altered, so as to tation where the shares; कल


Existing
Sec. 26A.
Draft CL
tgt (7).

Existing
Sec. 260
Draft

Cl. 192 (a).

Existing

Cl. tg2 (4).

Existing
Sec. 26A
Draft

6. 193 (1).

Existing
Sec. 26A
Draft

Cl. 199 (5).

Existing
See. 30 (1)
Draft

Cl. 254.

Existing

ec. 31
Drafi Cl.
259, Expl.

64

though not specified in the instrument, can. be ascertained
from that instrument or from the partnership deeds of any
connected firms.

The provision (at present contained in the rules) re-
lating to renewal every year of the registration of a firm
has been modified. So long as there is no change in the
constitution of the firm or the shares of the partners, a
formal application for renewa] will not be necessary and
it would suffice if the firm files a declaration, with the
return of the income, to the effect that there has been no
change as aforesaid.

A provision prohibiting the Income-tax Officer from
rejecting an application for registration of a firm on tech-
nical grounds has been added.

A time-limit has been provided within which an appli-
cation for registration of a firm must be disposed of by the
Income-tax Officer.

Jt has been made clear that the only ground on which
the registration of a firm can be cancelled is misrepresenta-
tion. It has also been provided that the firm must have an
opportunity of being heard before cancellation, and | that
cancellation can be ordered ०४५ with the previous appro-
val of the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner.

A time limit has been laid down within which tegis-
tration cf a firm can be cancelled.

It has been made clear that an objection as to the
status under which the assessee is assessed can be rpised
by way of appeal. '

A new provision authorising appeals in respept of
orders passed under existing ‘section 35 (rectificati of
mistakes etc.) has been added. !

Various orders relating tp interest passed under sec-
tion 18A (advance payment af tax) have been made ap-
pealable in appropriate cases. H

The following orders have been made appealable :—

(1) An order passed by the Income-tax Officer a an

assessee’s application ‘for withdrawal or canfella-

tion of a recovery ceftificate issued to the Cpllec-
tor; |

(2) An order passed by the Income-tax Officer it ing

an assessee’s request’to treat him as not i de-
fault in view of an appeal. :

It has been made clear that an Appellate x stant
Commissioner, in disposing of an appeal is not co! d to
the grounds raised by the appellant in the appeal and may
redetermine any matter which fell to be decided by the
Income-tax Officer in ‘the coufse of the proceedings which
Jed to the order in appeal. 7


65

Appeal to the. Appellate Tribunal is replaced by a) Existing
peal to the High Court, and the ‘Tribunal is to be abolis! Be 20०88
ed. Ci. 260 (1).
It has been made clear that an order passed by the Exining
Appellate Assistant Commissioner rejecting or refusing an are 7
appeal without a decision on merits is appealable. Ch. 260 (1).

The power to reopen an assessment any time, where the Existing
income that has escaped assegsment in the past amounts Sec. 34 (705
to one lakh of rupees or more, has been modified. we
Only the incomes for the sixteen assessment years Dra oa
prior to the year in which a notice under section 34 is 55 (3) ale
issued will, it is prop osed, be taken into account in_arriv-

ing at the figure of one lakh of rupees or more. It has,
however, been added that where the income which escap-

ed assessment in a single assessment er is at least fifty
thousand rupees, the assessment for that year can be re-

opened at any time.

A new provision has been added prescribing a time- Exigting scc-
limit of four years for the completion of an assessment in tios 34, (3)
the case of a notice under section 98(3) read with 28(1) ee 6) tb).
(९) (penalty for concealment of income etc.)}. °

1६ is proposed to allow the Department a period of at Existing Sec-
least one year for the completion of an assessment in a Hon st)
case where an assessee files a retutm or revised return 166 (1) (०).
under section 22(3). हे

A new provision has been added prescribing a time- Easting
limit of four years for the completion of an see mich eh ion 34 (3)
under section 34(1) {a} (ie, assessment for income which Gibuse 160
escaped assessment by reason of the assessee’s omis- (2).

sion or failure to disclose the material facts), The time- 1

limit will be counted from the end ,of the financial year

in which the notice was issued.

A provision has been added to the effect that while Existing 30०
computing the period of limitation laid down by the Act tia 34 (3)
for the completion of ass¢ssments, any period durin; Oe ‘Expln. ¢
which assessment proceedings were stayed by an order 0: ,

a court will be excluded.

A new provision has been added empowering the re- Ex
vision of the assessment of # member of an association in tin 35.
a case where the assessment of the association itself is re~ raft clause
vised. " a).
(Existing Section 35{5) may be compared.) ;
With reference to the provision that where a’ re-assess- Lom Sec-
ment etc. has to be made in consequence of an order passed ०५ 42 (3)
on appeal or other proceedings in respect of the assessee OF 100, uxpla-
any other person, the time-limit 107 assessment would not gations aa
apply, two Explanations have been added explaining the ¢nd 3-
scope of the provision.
With reference to the provision that if a company does Existing See-
not pay the tax on its pro’ as within, three years after ब० 28,
claring the dividend the wi recovered from the cs (4).


Existing Sec-

tion 35

Drafi_ Clause
6

162 (6)

Existing
Section 37.

Draft

Existi

ing

Section 37.
Draft

Gt. 136 (4).
Existing
Sec. 40,41
and 42.
Draft Cl.
169, ete,

Existing
See, 40,41
and 42
Draft Cl.
470 (2).

Existing

Sec.
ral

4014 1,42.
a 4 194:

C170 (3).

Existing

Sees.
Draft

4041042
ft

Ch. खा (1),
Existing
Secs.40,41, 42

Draft छो.172.

Existing

Sec.

at (3),

1st proviso,
Drait Cl.

474)

and

pata
hs (a)
(b).

66

Tt has been made clear that while exercising the power
of the court with reference to the discovery of documents

. and examination of witnesses, the Income-tax authority

should follow the same procedure as a civil court,

A new provision for return of documents produced by
any person before an Income-tax authority has been added,

‘The provisions relating to assessment of guardians,
trustees, managers, Court of wards, Administrator-general,
agent of a non-resident etc. have been combined under one
topic, under the group of sections relating to “Representa.
tive assessees”. -

A new provision has been added limiting the liability
of all “representative assessees” (ie.. guardians, trubtees,
agents of non-residents etc.) to the extent of the ass¢ts in
their possession. (Special remedies available against cer-
tain representative assessees have, of course, been saved).

A new provision has been added to the effect that a
Person liable to be assessed as a representative asgessee
(i.e., trustees, guardians, agents of non-residents etc.) yould
not be assessed under the general charging section (section
3) in respect of the income concerned.

A new provision has been added empowering a repre-
sentative assessee to recover tax paid by him from the per-
son represented by him.

A provision has been made to the effect that a repre”
sentative assessee who parts with the assets without ipay-
ment of tax, is liable personally. :

The provision for mode of computing tax for in¢ome
received by a Court of wards, trustee appointed undér a
a deed in writing, Administrator-general etc, in ¢ases
where the income is not specifically receivable on bahalf
of any one person or by where the individual shares are
not known has been altered in two respects :—

(1) regarding income-tax, it has been Provided that it
should be charged as the income of an association
of persons, or, if the income is received by a bene-
ficiary, then at the rate. applicable to the bpne-
ficiary if the Income-tax Officer so directs ; 1

¢

|
|


87

(2) as regards super-tax, it has been provided that it
should be charged in all eases as if the income
were the income of an association of Persons,

A new provision has been added allowing the Income- Existing
tax Officer te continue assessment Proceedings, started be- Seth
fore the dissolution ete. of a firm or association or the dis- 1986 (2) and
continuance of its business; against the persons who were 196 (2).
Partners or members.

With reference to the Provisions for charging tax in Existing
the case of shipping business, it has been made clear that Sec. “48 (3).
the rate applicable is one in force for a company which has ria a
not made the arrangements for deduction of super-tax on 4).
dividends under existing section 18(3D).

The provision regarding income arising to a non-resi- Existing
dent from a transfer etc, governed by section 44D has been Sec. 44D (1).
slightly widened. Under the Present provision, only in- BiG.
come arising from the transfer is taxable under this section. 96 (1) (a).

vered by this section, (if the power to enjoy itself arises
from the transfer).

The existing provision, whereunder a sale of securities Exists
is disregarded where there is agreement to buy back such Sea. 445 (3).
securities by the owner of the securities, has been widened ities
by removing the requirement of an agreem ay lent to buy those ©. 97 (1).
securities. The provision as prop will be applicable to
all cases where the transaction of sale and repurchase of
Securities results in advoidance of tax. (The provision will
not, of course, aply if there was no avoidance or if the
avoidance was not systematic),

Under the existing Provision, where a person transfers Existing
securities before the declaration of the dividend, the in- Sec. 44F.
come attributable to the period upto the transfer is deem- ried
ed to be the transferor’s income.” Under the provision as @- 97 (3).
Proposed, however, the income for the whole year will be
deemed to be the transferor’s income if there is avoid-
ance of tax. It has also been provided that the avoidance
need not be of more than ten per cent. of the amount of the
income-tax.

A new provision authorisin, the Income-tax Officer Existing
to extend the time for payment of tax or to allow payment Sec.
by instalments has been added. Consequential Provision ५५५ (2) and
for failure to pay instalments ete. has also been added. 4).

The present provision regarding the imposition of a Existing
penalty on an asseessee in default has been modified, Seq a8 (0).
Penaity has been replaced by penal interest at the rate of pra )
10 per cent. per annum, which will run automatically from qi. 980 (1).
the date of default, and no express orders by the Income-
tax Officer will be necessary. In consequence existing sub- §
Section (A) has been omitted. हि


Exining
Sec. 46 (2).
Draft Cl.
231 read
with the se-

cond Sche-
due.

Exiting
ee. 46 (2).
Daa” 00

Cl. a32.

Existing

Existing,
८०. 46 (3).
Daa’?
Cl. 235 (5).
Exciting

०. 46. (5).
Draft ch?
235 (2) se
cond para-
graph.
Existi
Sec. 46.
Drafi 00.
235 (4).
Existing
Sec. 46A.
Bratt

241 (4)
aod (5).
Existing
Sec. 48.
Draft
(2. 249 (1).
Sins
Draft

Existing
Sec. 52.
Draft
Cl. 286.

Existing
Sec. 54 (2).

741 (3) (०.

The various modes of recovery which a Collector can.
adopt when the Income-tax Officer sends a certificate to
him have been listed in the draft clause, and detailed pro-
cedure to be followed by the Collector is sought to be em-
bodied in the Schedule which will be a self-contained
Code. A uniform system will thus be substituted in place.
of the existing procedure which applies the Revenue law
of each State.

It has been made clear that the Income-tax Officer can
send a recovery certificate to the Collector within whose
jurisdiction the assessee resides or carries on business
etc. or has property. Further, it has been made clear that.
the certificate can be sent to the Collector of any district
in any part of India.

A provision debarring an assessee from challenging
before the Collector the assessment which led to the issue
of the recovery certificate has been added. Procedyre for
withdrawal or correction of the certificate by the Income-
tax Officer has been laid down.

The provision authorising the Income-tax Officer, to re-
cover tax by any process contained in any municipal law
has been narrowed down, by limiting it to only one mode,
namely, distraint and sale of movable property.

The power of an Income-tax Officer to attach falar
is sought to be limited to that portion of the salary (whic
can be attached by a civil court.

come-tax Officer to apply to any court in which any money
of the assessee is lying, for payment of the money fo dis-
charge tax due from the assessee. . हि

A new provision has bean added requiring the pwner
of ships or aircraft carrying 5 Rassengers for destinations
beyond India to submit peri ly lists of such passen~
gers.

A new provision has been added to the effect that a
elaim for re fund should be made in the prescribed forte and
verified in the prescribed manner. 1

A new provision has bean added to the effect that if
the Income-tax Officer does not dispose of a refund aj pe
tion within three months, the Government shall pay in-
terest at the rate of 2 per cent. per annum on the amount
that is ultimately found to ७९ refundable. }

The provision penalising a person who makes ai false
statement in a verification is sought. to be extended) so as
to be applicable to Verification under any provision of the
Act.

A new provision has been added empowering the In-

“A new provision has been added authorising the dis-
closure by the Income-tax Officer of the substance $f the
material gathered by’him for the purpose of a “best|judg-
ment” assessment. ~


A new provision authorising the disclosure by an In- Existing
come-tax Officer of accounts of assestees which are lying Sea. 54 (2)-
with him and are required by a court, has been added. Simi- (47'() 6).
larly, a provision allowing the diselosure of registered
documents of which copies can be obtained under the Re-
gistration Act, or of documents like balance sheet, audit
report etc. prepared under the Companies Act, has been
added.

A new provision authorisiag the disclosure of informa- Existing
tion required in connection with levy or realization of Se: 54 (2)-
other Central taxes (for example Wealth Tax, Estate Duty ; a my (0-
Tax etc.) has been added.

It has been made clear that the privilege conferred Exining -”
by existing section 54 can be waived by the assessee. Sec. cae
Ch. 142.
With reference to the exemption in respect of super- Exiningg ढ़
tax on dividends received from an Indian company en- Sec. 56A.
gaged in certain industries, the conditions to be satisfied Dratt 8.
by the Indian Company paying the dividend have been set “ *%
out in extenso, unlike the existing section which merely
makes a cryptic reference to section 15C.

A new provision has been added authorising the Com- Existing
missioner to relax the conditions for the recogniticn of a Drake ३508 (1).
provident fund, in the case of ‘provident funds established Cl. 4 89 (1)
under the Employees’ Provident Funds ‘Act, 1952 and ex- Pro. 8).
empted from the operation of the scheme under section 17
of that Act.

A new provision allowing the deduction of contribu- Existing
tions paid by an employer towards a recognised provident Sct. 84 to
-fund has been added. rai} Cl.293

It has been made clear that an approved super-annua- Existing
tion fund should satisfy not only the conditions set out in Sec. gen to
the Act, but also the conditions to be imposed by rules है 0 °
made by the Central Government. (पल उथ

A new provision has been: added; to the effect that Exs
where there is a repugnancy hetween the rules of an ap- ae hd
proved superannuation fund and any provision of the Act, & 3):
the latter shall prevail. |;

It has been made clear that. the proyision for deduction sofa
of income-tax on contributions repaid ta an employee from Sec. $85 (1)
an approved superannuation fund appljes not only to the a 2.
employee's contributions but also to the employer's contri- 3"?
butions. It has also been made clear that payment of con-
tributions to an employee on death or termination of em-
ployment does not come within the scope of this section.

A new provision has been added laying down elabo- Exist
rately the power of the Cent Gove: on fone to make rules Sec. to
in relation to approved superep uation |f EY r


70

Posting A new provision has been added authorising the Cen-
Dae? tral Board of Revenue to make rules relating to :—
Cl. 3०9 (2).

(i) registration of income-tax practitioners who are
not lawyers or accountants ;

(ii) constitution of an authority to take disciplinary
action against such income-tax practitioners ;

(iii) issue of income-tax verification certificates.

Beer Provisions relating to exemptions for tax etc. to be
and 60 (3) granted by notification b: y the Central Government are pro-
(omitted in posed to be deleted as obsolete.

the draft).

Existing The power to grant relief in cases where salary is paid
Sec. 60 (2) in arrears or in advance etc., which is at present confined
Draft Cl. 90. ६6 salary or vrofit in’ lieu of salary, has been extended to

perquisites also.

‘Existing The right of any lawyer to appear before an Income-
Sec. 61 (2) tax authority is sought to be confined to legal practitioners

) entitled to appear in a civil court. (Persons actually in
practice at present will not be affected.)

Existing
(2.0) Beat tered Accountants or authorised to audit the accounts of
“Cl. 324 (2), companies under section 226(2) of the Companies Act, 1956,
Explan. and from the category of “accountants” entitled to appear be-

It is proposed to exclude persons who are not Char-

324(2)(%)- fore an Income-tax authority. (Persons actually in prac- .

tice at present will not be affected.)

The category “Income-tax practitioner” is to be abolish-
ed for the future, except as regards persons already in
practice.

Bxisting Sec. The power to take disciplinary action against income-
0 9). Dratt tax practitioners other than lawyers and accountants,
- 324 (4). which is vested in the Commissioner at present, is proposed
to be transferred to an authority whose constitution would

be laid down in the rules.

Existing (Re- Consequent on the proposed abolition of the Appellate
fence peak Tribunal, provisions relating to references to the High
‘sions) omitted Court have been omitted.

injthe draft. हे

Exisiting With regard to the assessment of persons carrying on
Schedule, general insurance business, it has been made clear that
pute 6. Draft leductions for depreciation must be allowed as entbred in

rule 5(2) the accounts prepared under the Insurance Act, abd can-
369)... ७0: be questioned by the Income-tax Officer.

(New) Draft Unexplained cash credits, appearing in the books of
Cl. 70. accounts of the assessee, have been made assessable as
his income.

(New) Draft Investments. not appearing in the books of the assessee
६४. 77- and not explained satisfactorily have been made asfessable
for the financial yedr in which the investments were made.


a

A new provision has been’ added laying down the (New) Draft,
position regarding liability of an executer to pay tax in res- Gl- 176:
pect of the income accruing after the death of the person
whose estate is being administered.

It has been made clear that in cases where tax is de- (New) Draft
ductible at source or payable in advance, some kind of &l- 199.
“charge” of tax is implied.

Power has been conferred on the Supreme Court to (New) Draft
make rules regulating the progedure to be followed by the ©! 277
High Court in disposing of appeals under the Act.

A new provision has been added providing that income (New) Draft
once charged to tax shall not be charged to tax again in ©! 3'9-
the hands of the same person.

A new provision for the service of notices after the (New) Draft -
partition of a Hindu family has been added. get (1)

A new provision has been added requiring every In- (New) Draft.
come-tax authority to endorse documents placed on __ the Cl. 323.
file and to refer to the documents in any order which is
based on the document.


Existing Sec-
tion 4 (2) (०)
Gis).

Existing Sec-
tions s. 4 (1).
and Prov.
48, 5. 42 (2)
vands. 44 0.

Existing Sec-
tion 4 (1),
Expl. 4.

Existing Sec-
tion 4 (3)(i).

Existing Sec-

tion 5 (8).

Existing Sec-
tion 7 (1), 18
Prov. o

72
LIST 1

Changes recommended in the Income-tax Act but not
embodied in Appendix I.

Besides the changes already embodied in the draft
proposals in Appendix J, the following changes are recom-
mended in the Act, (These have not been embodied in
the draft proposals in Appendix 1). :

The reasons in support of these changes have been
stated below, or, in the bogy of the report or the notes
to the relevant draft clauses :—

(1) The provisions for taxing the income of a resident
which accrued outside India in past years and is
brought into India in the accounting year, should
be deleted’.

(2) The category “not ordinarily resident” may be
totally deleted’.

If the provisions relating to persons not ordinarily re-
sident are retained, some clarification of the existing defi-
nition is necessary, so as to settle the conflict of decisions
mentioned in the body of the report’.

(3) The provision relating to income which agcrued
in a Part B State or a merged territory before the exten-
sion of the Income-tax Act thereto and which is brought
into any other part of India thereafter, should be omitted,
as obsolute*.

(4) The existing words “subject to the provisions of
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 16”, contaise ed in
existing section 4(3) (i), opening line, should be de! ted’.

(5) Whether the provision authorising the Diredtor of
Inspection, the Commissioner etc. to issue instructidns to
subordinate officers should be retained, may be cohsider-

(6) The limit of one-fifth of the salary laid down at
present in respect of rebate for sums deducted from ‘salary
for deferred amunities etc.. should be raised to one-fo fourth,
on the lines of section 15(3) as amended by the ance
(No. 2) Act, 1957’.

ina ny

1 Vide para. 22 of the body of this Report; this relates to draft clause 4 (1).
(9).

+ Vide para. 22 of the body of this Report, and para. (1) of notes to draft
clause 6 and also para. (3) of notes to draft clause 4.

३ See para. 22 of the body of this Report.

3 Vide para. 22 of the body of this Report and notes to draft clause 4, para.
(11). second sub-paragraph.

3 Vide notes to draft clayse 12, parg. 9 (0).
+ Vide the second para. ¢f notes to draft clause 130.
१ Vide the second paragtaph of the ites to drafi’ clause 88 (1) (c)i


3

(7) In existing section 7(2) (iii), the words “wholly, Existing Sec’
necessarily and exclusively in the performance of his du- 7० 7(2) (iii)
ties’ may be replaced by suitable words connoting expen-

-ses reasonably incurred in the performance of duties’.

(8) The deduction of one-half of the taxes levied by a Existing Sec-
local authority is at present allowed only in respect of pro- on 2 (2)-
perty occupied by a tenant. No such deduction is allowed 3° 77"
where the property is occupied by the owner himself. There
is, however, no reason why this deduction should not be
-available in the case of property occupied by the owner.

There is no apparent justification for making a distinction
between the two classes of properties’.

(9) Certain special statutes lay down the rates of de- Existing Sec
eciation for undertakings governed by those statutes. Ittion 70. (2)
as been suggested that the rates of depreciation allowed (४):
-by such statutes for the purposes of those statutes should
be made applicable for purposes of 607९-85 also, in re-
lation to those undertakings. If the same rates are adopt-
ed, the assessees owning such undertakings would be saved
a lot of trouble and duplicatidn of labour.
This question requires consideration by the Govern-
ment’.

(10) Where machinery, plant or furniture is let on hire Existing Sec-
and the income from hire is assessed under head “Income tion 12 (3)
from other sourcés”, the Act allows the assessee certain १०१ 7२ (4):
deductions on the lines of.income from business. The
list of deductions so allowed, as given in existing sections
12 (3) and 12(4), does not mention the deductions referred
to in existing sections 10(2) (via) and 10(2) (vib) ie. the
additional depreciation allowed for mew building, machi-
nery etc. and the development rebate allowed for new ma-
chinery etc. These should be-added im sections 12(3) and
12(4) as they stand on the same footing as normal deprecia-
tion’.

(11) The question of making a provision for the spread- Existing Sec-
‘over of income in the case of patents on the lines of exist-tio# 12 AA.
ing section 12AA should be considerea’.

(12) The method of calculating the cost of acquisition =F ing Sec-
of an asset in the case of ital gains, may be simp ified tiog 12 BY2)
by substituting the fair market valug or the actual cost,.4 72 ४ ()-
in place of the present complicated Provisions".

{
(13) The Income-tax Offi ‘or, preferably, the Ins- Beis ing ३०८०
pecting Assistant Commissioner Nie rie issue z certificate "°F 15%
to an institution qualifying under existing section 15B, so
1 Vide notes to draft clause 16 (iv), in paragraph 6 of the rotes to draft
clauses 15 (० £7.
2 This relates to draft clause 24 (1) (i).
3 This relates 10 draft clause 32 (1) (i) and (ii),
+ This relates to draft clause 60 (ii).
Vide notes to draft clause 187, lastipara.
3 Vide notes to draft clause 51.



Existing Sec-
tion 16 (2).

Existing Sec-
tion 16 (2).

Existing Sec
tion 16 (3).

Existing Sec-
tions 17 (6)
and 17 (7).

Existing Sec-
tion 18A (5),
and its and
Proviso.

4

that assessees making donations to such institution need
not prove, in each individual case, that the institution falls
within the section’.

(14) The provision for grossing up of dividends should
be simplified’. .

The question of requiring companies to deduct tax.
from dividends may be considered’.

(15) Regarding grossing up of dividends, it is further
recommended that where a dividend is declared out of pro-
fits taxed in earlier years, and there are no taxable profits
of the company in the year of declaration of the dividend,
the grossing up should be allowed at the rate which would
have been applicable to the company in the year of decla-
ration if the company had got any taxable income, This
would clarify the position’.

(16) Under existing section 16(3), the income arising
to a wife from her membership of a frm in which her hus-
band is a partner, is included in the total income of the hus-
band. In modern times, however, a large number of
partnerships have come into existence, in which the wife
contributes substantial capital, or renders active assistance
by virtue of her professional qualifications. It is recom.
mended that the provision in question should not apply
to professional partnerships in such cases. (The case of a
wife working in partnership with her husband as a doctor

or lawyer may be cited as a typical example.)

It may be noted that the provision in question was
enacted at a time when women had no resources of their
own and had not joined the jearned professions. With the
changes in economic and social conditions that have taken
place in modern times, the provision must be modified.
‘his will also be in accordance with the s| pirit of article 15
of the Constitution, since it will place husbands and wives
on an equal footing’.

(17) Capital gains should be com pletely excluded from
the total income of the assessee for the purposes of: super-
tax’. +

(18) The correct construction of existing section 184
(5) and its second Proviso should be examined, with refer~
ence to the alternative draft given in the notes’. '

3 Vide the last paragraph of notes to draft clause 89. .
1 Vide pata, 40 of the body of this Report and also notes to draft clause 59(2).
ह Vide notes to draft clause 59 (2).
«-Phis relates to draft clause 59 (2).

_ 6 Phis relates to draft clause 67 (i).
* Vide notes to dratt clause 125, last para.
2 Vide notes to draft clause 222 (4).


a

(19) A separate form of return should be prescribed Existing Sec-
for losses incurred by an assessee, Which the _assessee to 22 (24).
wishes to carry forward’.

(20) The existing provision regarding assessment of Existing Sec-
registered firms, resulting in double taxation of the same fon 23 (5) a
income to some extent, should be deleted’. 0).

The provisions for registration of firms should not be
administered in a hyper technical manner’.

(21) The present anomalous position regarding assess- Existing Sec
ment of companies in respect of distributed and undistri- tion 23 A.
buted profits should be removed. The anomaly arises from
the fact that existing section 23A of the Income-tax Act
encourages the maximum distribution of profits, while the
provision in the Finance Act aims at the minimum distri-
bution of profits’.

(22) It is further recommended that a provision should Existing Sec.
be added to the effect that in passing an order under exist- ५ ०४ ag. (1)
ing Section 23A(1), the Income-tax Officers should also
take into account the current business requirements of
the company. He should not pass an order under the
section if he is satisfied that having regard to current busi-
ness requirements, the declaration of a larger dividend
would have been unreasonable’. हु

(23) An assessee should, along with his return of Existing Sec-
income, pay tax on the basis of his return. An order of tion 23 9 (1).
provisional assessment by the Income-tax Officer should
not be necessary. Such a system of voluntary payment of
tax by the assessee will save considerable time of the
Department’.

(24) It should be considered whether it is necessary to Existing 500
retain the concessions allowed by existing sections 25(3) ५१७ 25, (3)
and 25(4), relating to discontinuance of or succession to a “75 (4)-
business assessed under the 1918 Act. The lapse of time :
since the 1918 Act would seem to render this provision un-
necessary’. :

1 This relates to draft elause 143 (3)-
6) 3 Vide para 65 of the body of this Report and notes to draft clause 189
3).

3 Vide para 65 of the body of this Report. This relates mainly to draft
clauses 189 and 190, .

५ Vide the last three paragraphs of the notes to draft clause 113.

‘ vite para. 54 of the body of this Report. This relates to draft clause
113 (2).
© ‘This relates to draft clause 145.
* Vide the last paragraph of notes th clause gi - :
11 Law Com./58. i ‘ |


76

Existing Sec (25) Appeals against assessments of income-tax in ex

tion 31. cess of rupees one lakh should be heard by the Commis-
sioner and not by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner
as at present’. Other appeals should be heard by senior
officers whose scale of pay is attractive’.

Exiting Sec- (26) It is recommended that a notice under section 34

tion 34 2/4 should not be issued in any case after the éxpiry of six-

(i). Pp teen years from the end of the assessment year in which
the income was first assessable’.

Existing Sec-

tion 40 (1). (27) Existing section 40(1) should not make a men-

tion of trustees. It should be confined to guardians of

minors and committees and managers of lunatics and
idiots’.

M. ८. SETALVAD,
(Chairman)

जा, C. CHAGLA,

K. N. WANCHOO,

P. SATYANARAYANA RAO,

N.C. SEN GUPTA,“

V. K. T. CHARI

9. NARASA RAJU,*

5. M. SIKRI,*

G. S. PATHAK,*

G. N. JOSHI,

N. A. PALKHIVALA.

K. SRINIVASAN,
DURGA DAS BASU,
Joint Secretaries.

New Deu;

The 26th September, 1958.

*Besides Dr. Sen Gupta and Shri Narasa Raju and Pathak, who are
mentioned in the forwarding letter, Shri Chari and Shri Sikri’ have also
authorised the Chairman tosign the report on theit bebalt.

1 See paragraph 102 above.

3 Vide para. 62 (7) above. ५.

2 Vide notes to draft clause 169 (1) (ii).

* Dr. Sen Gupta bas signed the report, subject to the Note appended at
the end,


Sey ease

33.

14

1
16.
47

INDEX
Subject matter . Existing section
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY

Short title, extent and commencenment 2. Sear
Defnitioss 2. ke, See

CHAPTER U

BASIS OF CHARGE
Charge ofIncometax 6. +- + -+ - See.
Scope oftotalincome =. | wk. Seen gy
Previous year. eee TL See. शव)
Residence in India. =. sk, Secu इसे & 48
Income deemed to be received soe. New
Dividend Income se ee, See. 16(2), part
Income deemed to accrue or aise in India... Secs. g2(r ९ 4219) & Sec.

Ws & Die #

Remittance by a non-resident husband =... See. (2)

CHAPTER पा
INCOMES WHICH DO NOT FORM PART OF THE TOTAL INCOME

Agricultural income, Income received as members of Sec. 4(1), and 0 5th
Hindu Undivided family, Casual receipts, etc. . 1503.

prov:

Sec. 4(3)(ii) to (xxii)

Sec. 7(1), proviso

Sec. 7(1), Explanation 2,
prov.

Sec. 14(1) and New.

Income from property held for religious or charitable Sec. 4 ® (), (ii) and

i

purposes, and income of religious or charitable institue concluding part.
tions,

Business assessed under the Income-tax Act, 1918, . Sec. 25(3),(4) part.

CHAPTER Iv
COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME

Heads of income
Heads of income. : oe . . » Sec. 6
A. Salaries
Salaries . se + - See. 7 (2) part
Deductions . . . न + Sec. 7 (2)
Interpretation =. - be ee se. (oy, part, and


19.
20.
ar

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.

a7.

28.
29.
30.
gt
32.

33-
34

35-

36.

37.
38.

39
49.

43+

fnterest on Securities

Deductions - - . . . - .
Banking Company». ee . oe
Amounts not deductible es
C. Income from house property
Income from house property. 0-0) ee
Annual value
Deductions . . .
Amounts not deductible . ee ee
Property oWned by co-owners © = ee
Interpretation 99.4
D. Profits and gains of business,
Profits and gains of business, profession or vocation
Provisions applicable =. set
Rent, repairs and insurance for buildings . ५
Repairs and Insurance of machinery, plant and furniture
Depreciation . . . : oe
Development rebate . . . . . .
Conditions for depreciation allowance and development
rebate. .
Expenditure on Scientific research. - . .
Other deductions. « . . . . .
General . . . . . . पु .
Buildings etc. partly used for business ९९८, ० not exclu-
sively so used
Maragingagency - +) set
Amounts not deductible . पु . . .
Profits chargeable totax.. 6 set
Interpretation . eee .
Residence of employees wee .

“N
78

Subject matter
B. knterest on Securities

Existing section

Sec. 8 (1) main patt and
New.

Sec. 8, ist proviso part.
Sec. 8, Expl.

Sec. 8, 18t proviso part.

Sec. 9(1)

Sce. 9(2), part & New.
9(2) part & Sec. g(t) pare
Sec. 9(1), (iv), proviso

Sec. 9(3)

Sec. 9(4), Sec. g(t), (vii)
xp

profession or vocation

Sec. 10(t), and Sec. 10
(5A) 7० 56५ 10(6),New.
and Sec, 24(1) Expl.

New.

Sec. i) and (ii), (i
28020: ए०
86०... 1०(9) (iv) and (v)
parts.

Sec. 10(2), (vi) (via) & (vii)
parts.

Sec. 10(2) (vib) part.
Sec, 10(2)(vi), (via)

(vib) parts, see. 10 (4B)
and

Sec. 10(2) (xii), (xiii) and
(xiv).
Sec. 10 (2) (४0, (iv), part

(viii), (x) and

Sec. 10 (2) (xv).
cs. 10 (2) (i), prov,

Pre

10(3)

Sec. 128.

Secs, 10(2) (iii) part, 10
(4), 10(4A) and Sec. 8
Exp. part.

Secs. 10(2) (vii) part, 10
(2) (xiv) part 10
(2) (xi) prov. part 10 (2A).

Sees. 10 (5), 7० (2) (xiv)
Sec.12B (1) 2n@ prov. part

Sec.eg (1)Expl.'2 and New,
New. '

& New,


प्र

Clause Subject matter Existing section.

Insurance business

44. Insurance business. ५. ५, + . + - See, 10 (7) and Sch. rule 9
E. Capital Gains

45. Capital gains eee See. 9B (5) part

46. Previous year : : ५.9... See. 228 (0) part.

47. ‘Yransactions not regarded as sale ee. =. =» = 52०. 12B (1), 8t prov.

part.
48. Mode of Computation and deductions =. ‘Sec. r2B (2) part.

49. Statutory cost with reference to modes of acquisition . New.
50. Determination of statutory cost in the case of non- Secs. 12B (2) part and 128

न depreciable 358९४. (3) part.
51. Determination of statutory cost in the case of depreci- Secs. 12B (2) part and 128
able assets. (3) part.
57. Option money received... + See. इश्क (2) $फ prov.
53. Consideration for exchange . New,
१ 54- Consideration for sale etc, how determined in case of Sec. 128 (2) 1st prov.
{ unders atement.
॥ 55. Capital gains exempt from tax + See. 12B (4) (a)

Sec. 328 (4) (b)
New and Sec. 12B (2) (ii)
patt.

56. Profit on sale of property used for residence
57. Interpretation . . . . . :

की. Income from other sources

98. Income fromother sources» st Sec. 12 (2) (1A) and New
. 59% Grossing up of dividends. 5 + + ++ Stee 16 (2) part
60. Deductions » 5 - ett Sete 12 (2) part हि
61. Amounts not deductible . . . . . . Sec. 12 (2) prov. and 12
(5) part.
62. Profits chargeable to tax. . . . . . Sec. 19 (5) part, 14 (3)
१ and (4)
पु CHAPTER V
~ JNCOMES OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDED IN ASSRSSEB’S TOTAL INCOME
63. ‘Transfer of incomes, 9. © 6 e+ Secs 16 (1) (6) part
नि 64. Revocable Transfer of property: = +++ Sec. 16 (7) (० part
65. Irrevocable Transfers + + + + 900. 16 (1) (©) part

66. Definition of revocable transfer- > =» > + Se, 16 (7) (० part
67. Husband, wife and minor children. «= + See 16 (3)

CHAPTER VI
AGGREGATION OF INCOME AND SET OFF OR CARRY FORWARD OF LOSSES
68. Total income bee et + Sec. 16 (1) (39) pare
- 6g. Method of computing a partner’s share in the income Sec. 16 (1) (b)
of the firm.
yo. Casheredits . + + + + te New

91. Unexplained investments. 9. + + ++ New.


Clause Subject mater Existing Section
72. Sct off of toss from one. business to loss (roma another. New,
73- (4) Sct off of losses from one head to another. - See. 24 (1) part

(2) Carry forward & set off of business losses

. + Sec. 24 (2) part
74. Losses in speculative business...

+ + Sees. 2६ (1) part, 24 (2)
part.

75- Losses under the head ‘capitalgains'. =. Sec. 24 (2A) & (2B)

76. Losses of registered firms + 5 + + See. 24(2) part & (2) part
77. Losies of unregistered firms assessed as registered firms Sec. 24(2) part

78. Losses sustained by partners of unregistered firms . Seca. 24(1) part, 2q(2) part
79. Set off of losses in case of change in constitution of frm Sec. 24 (2) part.

80. Submission of return of losses =... . 36०. 2४ (2A) part.

GHAPTER VI
INCOME ON WHICH NO INCOME-TAX 1S PAYABLE

81. Earned income Hee kk See. 17524.
82. Co-operative Society se +» + - See. 749)
83. Dividends from Co-operative Society . + + See. 144)
84. Marketing Society se kL See. 1465)
85, Newly established industrial undertakings. =, Sec. 150 part.
86. Dividend from new industrial undertaking + Sec. 150 (4)

87. Other income . पु . . . . + Sec. 8, and and 3rd provisos

Sec. |, See.
की LOSE (0

CHAPTER शा
REBATES AND RELIEFS

88. Rebate on fife insurance prem

हु » annuities and Sec. 15
contribution to Provident Fun

etc.

89. Donations for charitable purposes + + See. 158 part.
Reliefs for Income-tax
9°. Salary paid for more than one year... Sec. 60 (2) part

Qt. Business assessed under the Income-tax Act, 1918 . Sec. 25 (3) & (4) parts.

CHAPTER IX
DOUBLE TAXATION RELIEF

92 Agreement with countries. |... 3००. 495
93- Countries with which no agreement exis ‘Sec. 49D

94. Relief to company to be regarded as relief to share-
holder See. 490

CHAPTER X
TROVISIONS AGAINST AVOIDANCE OF TAX.

95. Certain transactions with non-residents . .—. Sec. 42(2)
96. Avoidance of income-tax by transctions resulting in
«ransfer of income to non-residents +. See. 440.

97- Avoidance of tax by certain transactions in securities Secs. 448 and 44F


Clause

98.

99-
100.

102.
103.

104.
105.
106.
107.
108.

109.
110.

att.
ra.

113.
m4.
115.
116.
117.
.

118,

119.
120.

yar.
122.

123.
124.
225.

126.

8i

Subject matter Existing section
CHAPTER XI. ह
. SUPER-TAX
Principal Provisions
Charge of Super-tax 2 et See. 55 part
‘Total income from Supertax . . =. ss See. 56.

Business, Profession or vocation charged under

1gi8 Act. . . . Sec. 25(4) prov.
Deductions under interest on securities पु . New
Applicability of provisions to super-tax  - . . See. 58 (1)
Avoidance of super-tax eee New,

Incomes which de not form part of total income for super-tax
Share in unregistered firm or association of persons. Sec. 55, and prov.

Co-operative Society ..". . ++ See. 14 (3) part.

Dividends from co-operative Society . . «Sec. 14(4) part

Marketing Society ee eg ३८०३5 (5) part

Dividends from certain companies. =. =.=. 56०. §6A.
Rebate of Super-T ax

Donations for charitable purposes... ३6९, 158 part.

Newly established industrial undertakings ५... 5८९८. 150 part and
Sec: 17(3) part.

Share from registered firm. | . ete . Sec. 14(2)(aa), pare
Relief for salary received in arrearetc. 9. Sec. 60(2) part
'

Additional Super-T ax on undistributed Profits

Super-tax on undistributed income of certain companies Sec. 23A(1)
Special provisions for certain companies =. =. ~— «Sec. ag A(2)
Approval of Inspecting Assistant Commissioner . , Sec. 23A(8)
Saving for company in which public are interested. Sec. 238 (9)
Company in which the public are substantially

interested =. . . . Sec. 23A Expl. 1.
Distributabie Income 5 sw see 36०. 2g A(t) part.
Tavestment Company . . . . . » New
Statutory percentage 9. se $6०. 230 Expl. २.

ay

CHAPTER हा
DETERMINATION OF TAX IN CBRTAIN SPECIAL CASES

Determination of Income-tax .  . - s+ Sec. 17(2) part.
Tax on accumulated balance of Recognised Provident

Fund .* *« . . see . . . New.
‘Vax or compensation. —- - + 4s See. 10(5A) part and New.
Tax in the case of non-residents. ++ See. 17(2).

'ax on capital gains in cases of assessces other than

companies. . eet Sec 8706).

‘Tax on capital gains in case of companics + + See. 17(7).


Clause Subject matter Existing section

127.
128,
329.
330.
13t.
332.
193.
334.

136.
137.
138.
139.
340.

14h
242.

143.

344.
145.
146.
147-
148.
149.
350.
15h
152.
153.
154.
155.
196.

157.
158.
159.
160.

CHAPTER XII
INCOME-TAX AYTHORITIES.

Appointment and Control

Income-tax Authorities. ©... kk Seen x).
Appointment of Income-tax Authorities. .  . «Sec. 5 part.
Control of Income-tax Authorities. . . =... Sec. 5 part,
Instructions to subordinate Authorities =. =.=. Sec 5 part.
Jurisidiction of Income-tax Authorities . . —, ‘Sec. 5 part. :
‘Transfer of case from one Income-tax officer to another Sec. 5(7A) & New
Change of Incumbent ofan office =. =... Sec, 5(70)
Authority competent to take or continue certain pro-

ceedings. : . oe New
Income-tax officer entitled to assess. . 5s. 568, 64

Powers

Power regarding discovery, production of evidence ete. Sec. 37 part.

Power ofseatch andseizure. . . . =... Sec. 37 part.
Power tocallfor information. . =... See. 38.
Power to inspect registers of companies. Sec. 39.
Powers of Directors of Inspection and Inspecting Assistant
Commissioners. aa «Sec. 5(7B) part.
Disclosure of Information
Disclosure of information prohibited . 5 =.=. Se. 54.
Savings regarding voluntary disclosure by person mak-
ing the statementetc, . . . . . New.

CHAPTER XIV
PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT

Return ofincome . . . . « Sec. 22(t), (2), (28) part,
(3) & (5).

Return by whomtobesigned . . =. New.

Provisional assessment =. =. 0... Sec, 2B part.

Enquiry before assessment =. 2s ss, 8८० 27 (4) & New.

Assessment. Fee +« - - See. 2362), (2) and (३8)

Best judgment assessment. 5... 86०. 23 (4) part,

Relevant material. . मु पु . . + New.

Method of accounting 5 sw, See age

Reopening of assessment at the instance of the assessee Sec. 27.

Income escaping assessment. + 4 + See. 34) part.  -.

“Income which has escaped assessment” . , —._ Sec. 34 (1) part.

Issue of notice where income has escaped assessment . Sec. 34 (1) part.

Time limit for issue of notice... . 5०० 34 (7) part, (3) part.

Provision for cases where notice of assessment is issued Sec. 34 (3) part.
after appeal etc. : . oe

~Sanction for issue fnotice =. =. sg 86०. 34 (2) part.
Other provinon —. see See. 34 (7) part 34 (2).
Saving regarding time limit for completion . =. ‘New.

Time limit for completion of assessment and se-assess-
ments... a Sec. 34 (3).



Clause Subject matter Existing section

16t. Rectification of mistake. . =. = | ss «Sees 95 0) (2) (3) & (३). *

162. Other amendments . ee +« -+- - Sees 95 (5)s (8) & (9).

163. Noticeofdemand 2 2. eee 56०. २५

364... Intimation of loss व ०1 + - - See. 24 3).

165. Intimation of assessment of firm =. =». 56०. 23 (6).

366. Information and Return न ee te Sees, 208,21, 198 and Sec,
581.

167. Certificate by company to share holders receiving

169.

170.

wt.
172.

173.
174.
178.
176.
177.

378.
179.

383.
384.

385.
186.

187.

188,

dividends. . . ~ Sec. 20.

GHAPTER XV
LIABILITY IN SPECIAL CASES
A. Legal Representatives

gal representatives +. Sec. 248.

8. Representative assessees—General provisions
Representative assessee 5 ५... See. 42 (1), 40 (7), guCt)e
Liability of representative assessee . =. «=. == «Secs. 40 part qi part and
Right of representative assessee to recover tax paid. New and Sec. 42(1) part.
When representative assessee personally liable. - New.

6. Representative assessees—special cases

Who may be regarded as agent : . Sec. 43.
Charge of tax where shares of beneficiaries unknown . Sec. gt (1), 18 prov.
Case where part of irust income is chargeable. «Sec. 41 (1); 2nd prov.

20. Representative assessees—General
Remedies against Property in cases of representative as- New.

sessees. :
Direct assessment not barred. . 0. sss 86०. gt (2) and Secs 42(7%
paris.

है... Executors
Executors. . . . . . पु +.. New.
Right of executor to recover tax paid. eee New.

F. Succession to business, profession or vocation.

Succession to business. - . . . . « See. 26 (2).

G. Partition

Assessment after partition of a Hindu undivided family. Sec. 25A and New.
H. Shipping business of non-residents
Shipping business of non-residents. . . «+ ‘Sees. 4A» 44B and, 44C.
I. Recovery of tax in respect of non-residents i
Recovery of tax in respect of non-resident from hie assets Sec. 42 (1), 18t Prov.
J. Persons leaving Indio

‘Assessment of person leaving Indie. . 9. =» ss ‘Ste. 4A. :
K. Discontinuance of business or dissolution .

Discontinued busines. =. 2 ५. - See. 25 (1).

Dissolved association of persons. ५... 8८५. 44 part.

LL. Special provisions for certain kinds of income

Royalties or copyright fees for literary or artistic work
and fees for patents. ५ + Sec. 2AA.

M. Liability of State Governments

Interest on income-tax free securities of a Sthté Govern-
ment... - ~ «+ See. 8, grd prov.


Clause

189.

1gt.
192.

193.

194.
195.
196.

197.

199.
200.

201.
202.

203.
204.
205.

206.
207.
208.
209,
210.
an.
212.
213.
214.

84

Subject matter Existing section
CHAPTER XVI
SPECIAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO FIRMS
Astessment
Assessment of registered firms . =. =» Ste. 23 (5) (०).
Assessment of unregistered frms 5 | See. २३ (5) (०)-
Registration .
Application for registration . =. =. ss ‘Se, 26A. part.
Procedure on receipt of application . . =. ~—._-‘Sec. 260. (2) part
Sec. 23 (4) part,
and New,
Cancellation of registration .  . . - —« Newand Sec. 23 (4) part.
Changes in constitution, Succession and dissolution
Change in constitution ofa firm. . - ss Sec. 26 (1).
Succession of one firm by anotherfirm  . . «New.
Firm dissolved or business discontinued . . «See. 44 part.
Other provisions
Other provisions... eee New
CHAPTER XVII
SPECIAL PROVISION RELATING 10 COMPANIES
List of provisions applicable to companies . + New.

GHAPTER XVIII
COLLECTION AND RECOVERY OF TAX

A—General>
Deduction at source and advance payment - . + New.
Direct payment . . . . . . . Sec. 19
B~ Deduction at source

Salary. . पु . . . . पु » Sec. 18 (2), (2A) & (2B)

Interest on Securities. =. wee See. 18 (3) part, (ZA)
Parte

Dividenps 5 sees $८८. 18 (30) part

Other sums . . . . « Sec. 18 (3B), (gC) parts.

Certificate for deduction at lower rate . . . Sec. 18. (3), (3A), (3B)
(30) ), parts.

Tax deducted is income received . . . «Sec, 18(4).

Credit for Tax deducted . = 0. ss See. 18(5) part.

Duty of person deducting tax 2. + es Sec. 186).

Consequences of failure to deduct or pay. - «Sec. 18(7).

Deduction only one mode of recovery 9... See. 18/8}.

Certificate fortax deducted =. se See. 289). *

Persons responsible for paying . 9. =. «ss See. 18, Expl.

Bar against direct demand on assewee =. =.= ‘Stec. 7(1), and prov.

Saving regarding tax deemed to have been paid on
divit . . . . New.


Clause

a5.
216,

217.

218.
arg.

220.
221,

293.
224.
225.
226.
227.
228,

229.
230.
231,

232.
233.
234.
235-

236.
237.
238.
239.
240.
24%.
242.
243.

244.
245.

246.

247.
248.

Subject matter

85

(C—Advanee payment of tax

Advance tax and income subj

ject to advance tax -

Condition of liability to pay advance tax - .

Computation of advance tax

Order by Income-tax Officer
Instalments of advance tax

Estimate by aseessce
Commission receipts :
Interest payable by Governme!
Interest payable by assessee

at ote

Interest payable by assessee in cases of underestimate ete.
Interest where no estimate made . न . .
When assessee deemed to be in default . . .

Credit for advance tax
Exclusion of capital gains

D—Collection and Recovery
When tax payable and when asseasee decined in default

Interest payzble when tax in
Certificate to Collector

Collector to whom certificate

default . .

isto be issued. - .

Validity of certificate and amendment thereof . .

Amendment, cancellation or
Other modes of recovery

Recovery through State Gove:

withdrawal of certificate

Tment oe मु

Recovery through Collector in Pakistan.

Recovery of Pakistan tax

Condition for recovery of Indian tax in Pakistan or of

Pakistan tax in Incha
Recovery of Penalties

Tax Clearance Certificate 9. se ee
Period for commencing recovery proceedings.
Recovery by suit or under otherlaw . ee

Existing section

Sec. 386 (1) (a) part.

Sec. 18A(1) (a) part.

Sec. 186 (1) (a) pare and
New.

See. ३88 (1) (a) part

Sec. 18A(1) (a) part and
(3)(b)-

Sec. 18#(9) & (3)

Section 18A(4)

Sec. 188 (5) part

Sec. 188 (6)

Sec. 188 (7)

Sec. 8A (8) a
Sec. 18A (10)

Sec. 18# (11)

Sec. 18A (12).

g

See. 45.
Sec. 46(1).
Sec. 46 (2) & 46 (7) Expl.
part.
New.
New.
New.
Expl. part Sec.
40 (5) BAN) तो
See. 46 (6),
Sec. 46 (8)
Sec. 46 (9)

Sec. 46 (10)

Sec. 47.

Sec. 46 A.

Sec. 46 (7)

Sec. 46 (7) Expl. part.

E—T ax payable under provisional assessment

“Recovery of tax payable under provisional assessment
Tax paid by deduction or advance payment ५.५

CHAPTER XIX

Sec. 2g 8 (5).
Sec. 2g 8 (6).

TAX DEEMED TO HAVE BEEN PAID ON DIVIDENDS
Tax deemed to have been paid on dividends ५... +

funds

Person entitled to claim refund in certain special cases Sec. 49 है

CHAPTER XX
REFUNDS

‘Secs. 18 (5) part and 49 B

Sec. 48 (1)


254.
255.
256

"57.
258.

259.

260.

261.

262.
263.
264.
265.
266.
267.

268.
269.

270,

271.
272.

273.

274.
275.

Clause Subject matter Existing section
249. Form of claim for refund, and limitation. . =. =. New.

1 250 Refund onappealetc. .  . ५ . -.. _- See. 48 2)
251. Correctness of assessment not to be questioned . —. Sec. 48 (4)
252. Interest Se New.

253. Seteoff of refunds against tax remaining payable + Sec. 49 E.

CHAPTER XXI
APPEALS AND REVISIONS
A—Appeals to the Appallate Assistant Commissioner

Appealable orders. . . . . . « Sec. go (17) part
Appeal by partner. व ५ + - - + Sees go (7) and prov.
Appeal by person denying lability to deduct tax. ‘Sec. 30 (1A)

Form of appeat, and limitation «ew -+ See. 30 (3), 30 (2) part

Sec. go (1) part, 31 (2), gt
(2A), 31 (3) and prov., 3

Procedure in appeab 5 sk wt

(5) and New.
Powers of the Assistant Appellate Commissioner . Sec. 37 (3) part & New.
B—Appeals to High Court
Appealable orders fo. :

Sec. 33 (1) part. 33 (2) part

49 $ (3B) pare & New.

Limitation ©... See. 35 (1) part, 33 (2) part
33 B (3) part, 33 (2A)
and 66 (7A).

Formofappeal . - ५» + +  -. Ste. 33 (9) and 33 8 (4) part

Powers and Procedure. ww ws, See. 66 (5) part

Hearing by Bench see ey See. 66A (1) part

Communication of order inappeal. =. =~. ‘Sec. 66 (5) part

Costs. : . se eee. 52८. 66 (6).

Refund consequential on appeal - . . + Sec. 66 (7) prov. and New,

C—Appeals to Supreme Court हि

Appealable Judgment . =. 0. sg. See, 66A (2)

Procedure. 0. ५ + + + +.- Se, 658 (3) part, New and
. 66A (4)-

D—Appeals to the Central Board of Revenue
Appeals to the Central Board of Revenue . - New,

E—Revision by Commissioner
Revision of order prejudicial to Revenue ++ Sec. 39 8 (1) & 33 8 (a)
Revision of other orders, =. sss See. 33 A (1) part, Sec.
33A(2) part, Sec. 334(3)

FGeneral
Tax to be paid notwithstanding appeal. . ~—.- Sec. 66(7) part & 66A(3)
13t prov. part.
Execution for costs awarded by Supreme Court. _ See. 66 A (3) and prov.
Amendment of assessment on appeal . — , Sec. 33 (4) & 93 (5) modkfied,

|


ta. Clause Subject matter Existing section
276, Exclusion of time taken forcopy - ५. 5५ -]. + 36० 5978.
. 277+ Rules by the Supreme Court . . . . - New,
278. Definitions eee + + + *+ Set. 66 (8) & New.

CHAPTER XXII
PENALTIES IMPOSABLE BY INCOME-TAX AUTHORITIES

e 279. Failure to furnish information regarding securities etc. . Sec. 44 E (6) part
280. Concealment of income or improper distribution of profits Sec. 28 (r), (2).
i 281. Failure to give notice of discontinuance oe . Sec. 25 (2) part
. 282, False estimate of of failure to pay advance tax,» =. Sec. 18. A (9).
283. Procedure ५. +« eee + - See, 28 (3), (6) and (5)
28%. Bar against prosecution 9» > + = ++ 36०. 28 (4).

CHAPTER XXIII
OFFENCES AND PROSECUTIONS

285. Failure to make payments or deliver retums or statements
or allow inspection - : Sec. 51.

286. False statement in declaration. =. + + + Sees 52

287. Prosecution to be at instance of Inspecting Assistant
Commissioner. 6 ee tt ००. 53.

288. Disclosure of particulars by public servants Sec. 54 (2) part, Sec.
54 (5).

CHAPTER XXIV
RECOGNISED PROVIDENT FUNDS.
Recognition .
89. According and withdrawal of recognition + + + Sec. 508 पर
289. According and witl & nd o (2), (3)

ago. Conditions to be satisfied by recognised provident ‘unds Sec. 58 C (1)| part.

2gr. Relaxation of conditions =. . न . . +» Sec. 580 (1) part, 58D
58S (4). *
’ . 297... Repugnancy in regulations. . . . . « Sec. 58C (2)!

Treatment of contribations and balances
293. Employer's contributions whed deducted in assessing his

income. . . New.
294. Employer's annual contributions whea deemed (० be
income received by employee. . Sec. 588
295- Employer's contributions exempt : . Sec. 58F.
296. Exclusion of ‘accumulated balance and Exclusions from
totalincome  - . . . . Sec. 58G (2)& Sec. 7 (3)
Expl. 2, prov. part
297. Taxon accumulated balance =» + +++ Ses 5 8G(3)&58G(1)part
! 298. Deduction at source of income-tax payable on accumu
हे lated balance Sec. 5H. |
i agg. Treatment of balance in newly Focognised Pfovident Funds Sec. 50107), (0), (9) & (6).

™



88

Clause Subject matter Existing section
Other Provisions
300. Account of Recognised Provident Funds» =. ‘See. 58 1 .
gor. Appeals - न ० -«- - + - See. 588 (५)
302. ‘Treatment of fund transferred by employer to trustee. Sec. 58K
303. Provision relatingtorules -  . . se. See. 58L
304. Application of this Chapter ee See. 58M.
gos. Definitions... 3०० 588 |
CHAPTER XXV
APPROVED SUPERANNUATION FUNDS ~
Approval
406. Approval and withdrawal of approval... s,s See. 580.
307. Conditions for approval =. =. s,s ‘See. 582 part & New.

08. Application for approval =. : . . . . Sec. 58Q.

Treatment of Investment and Contributions

309. Income from investment . . . . «See. 58 R part
g10. Employer's contribution—deductionfor. . =. ~—. 8००. 58 R part
gu. Employee’s contribution when exempt fo Sec. 58 R part
312. Contributions paid to employee when deemed to be
income, « . . . . . + Sec, 588 (1)
313. Deduction of tax on contribution paid to an
employee... ee See. 588 (०)
Other Provisions
314. Deduction from pay of and contributions on bebalf of
employee to be included in retura . . . « Sec. 586
15. Liabilities of trustees on cessation of approval of funds Sec. 587
4:6. Particulars to be furnished in respect of Superannuation “
Funds. : + + See. 589
317. Provisions relating to rules व ० 1 + New
gi8. फशकांधगछ ...... ५ - - - . See. 580
CHAPTER XXVI है
MISCELLANEOUS
A—Miscelleneous Provisions
319. Bar of double taxation under the Act मु . . . New
920. Service of notice—general se eek See. 63
gat. Service of notice where family is disrupted or firm, ete.,
is dissolved . . . « New
922, Setvice of notice in the case of discontinued business . Sec. 25 (6)
923. Marking of exhibits See - - - New

9%. Appearance by authorised representative न . + Sec. 6r part. and New.


Clause

Subject matter

325. Receipttobegiven. 5

326. Indemnity

gay. Bar of suits in Civil Court.

g28. Act to have effect pending legislative provision for
charge oftax » है

gag. Power tomake rules.

Firat Schedule

Insurance business

B—Rules

Second Schedule Procedure regarding recovery under vari-
‘ous modes mentioned in section 242 (1)

Third Schedule

‘Manner of recovery by distraint and sale
‘of moveable property under section

246 (6)

Existing section
Sec. 62
Sec. 65
Sec. 67

Sec. 67B

Sec. 59
Schedule,


Clauses 1-2
APPENDIX I

Proposals as inserted in the body of the existing Act*,

(This is, however, not to be treated as a Draft Bill.)
_ {Corresponding sections of the existing Act are noted
in the margin, and additions to-the provisions of the exist-
ing Act are shown in the text in italics, wherever pos-

sible]
THE INCOME-TAX ACT, ig—
CHAPTER I
Secti PRELIMINARY
me eine: 1. (1) This Act may be called ६९............... Income-

ree oad tax Act, 19-——.
commence-
By (2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on the ist day of April,

Seqion a 2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant im
“Agricultu- the subject or context,—

ral income”’

(s. 2 (1) (1) “agricultural income” means—

{a) any rent or revenue derived from land which is
used for ag ricultural purposes, and is either asses-
sed to land revenue in India or subject to a local
rate assessed and collected by officers of the Gov-
ernment as such;

(b) any income derived from such land by—
(i) agriculture, or
(ii) the performance by a cultivator or receiver of
rent-in-kind of any process ordinarily em, ployed
by a cultivator or receiver of rent-in-kind to ren-
der the produce raised or received by him fit to
be taken to market; or हि हे
{iii) the sale by a cultivator or receiver of rént-in-
kind of the produée raised or received ete him
in respect of which no process has been ee form-
ed other than a process of the nature despribed
in paragraph (ii) of this sub-clause;

*In the draft clauses, references to any other draft clause have been put in
a condensed form. |For example, if section r61 (b) is to be referred tor it is
referred to only as “161 (b)”” and not as “clause (b) of s. 161”. The object is
to economise space.

References within rectangular brackets are to sections of the existing Act
(or, in some cases to the topi¢ dealt with in the section referred to).

90


a1
Clause’ 2

{c) any income derived from any building owned and
occupied by the receiver of the rent or revenue -
of any such land, or occu; pied by the cultivator,
or the receiver of rent-in-kind, of any land with
respect to which, or the produce of which, any
operation mentioned in paragraphs (i) and (tii) of
sub-clause (9) is carried on:

- Provided that the building is on or in the immediate [s. "2 (1) (c)
vicinity of the land, and is a building which the receiver Provisl
of the rent or revenue or the cultivator or the receiver of
the rent-in-kind, by reason of his connection with the land,
requires as.a dwe ling house, or as a store-house, or other
out-building;

न .

(2) “annual value”, in relation to any property, means “Annual
its annual value as determined under section ............ 23... value”
{Section re: determination of annual value for income [Ned
from house property]; पु

(3) “Appellate Assistant Commissioner” means a person “Appettate
appointed to be an Appellate Assistant Commissioner of Assistant

Commission
Income-tax under section ... ... ... 12861) ... ... {Section 5 (oF I 2 (i

) “approved superannuation fund” a recognised “App!
(4) « d ion fund” and “ ised “Approved

provident fund” have the meanings assigned to them _ in {eprrannue:,

section ... ... ... 318 ... : and section 305 and «Recog-

(58A], respectively ; nisdd provi-
dent fund”
New)" .

(5) “assessee” means a person by whom income-tax or ‘“‘Asessee””
super-tax or any other sum of money is payable under * ३ (१)
this Act, and includes—

(a) every person in res} pect of whom any proceeding

under this Act has been taken for the assessment
of his income or of the income of any other per-
son in respect of which he is essessable, or of the
loss sustained by him or by such other pérson
or of the amount of refund due to him or to such
other person;

(0) every person who is deemed to be an assessee un-  ;

_der any provision of this Act;

(c) every person who is deemed to be an assessee in

default under any provision of this Act;

(6) “assessment” includes re-assessment; ne

(7) “assessment year” means the period of twelve “Assessment
months commencing on the 1st day of April every year; फल

(8) “average rate of income-tax” means the rate arriv- «average rate

- ed at by dividing the amount of income-tax calculated on of iacome-tax

the total income, at the rate or rates applicable to the total and} average
income, by the total income: |
7-1 Law Com/i8 :


Clase 2
Fate of super- “average rate of super-tax” means the rate arrived at
tax” by dividing the amount of super-taxr calculated on the
{New] total income on which super-tax is chargeable, at the rate
or rates applicable to such total income, by such total in-
come ;
“Business” (9) “business” ineludes any tuade, commerce or manu-
fs. 2 (4)] facture or any adventure or concern in the nature of trade,
commerce or manufacture;
“Capital (10) “capital asset” means property of any kind held
asec”. by an assessee, whether or not connected with his business,

8-4 (4A)] profession or vocation, but does not include—

(i) any stock-in-trade, consumable stores or raw mate-
«rials held for the purposes of his business, grofes-
sion or vocation;

(ii) personal effects, that is to say, moveable property
(including wearing apparel, jewellery and furni-
ture) held for personal use by the assessee or any
member of his family dependent on him;

(iii) agricultural land tn India; .
“Central (11) “the Central Board of Revenue” means thi है 25%]
Board of tral Board of Revenue constituted under the Central a

0) of Revenue Act, 1924; ॥

4 रण 1924 पर i
“Commission- (12) “Commissioner” means a person appointed. td bea
fo oy Commissioner of Income-tax under section 128(1), [5(2)];

+ “Company” « ”” meat :
ee Gayl (13) “company” means— |

(i) any Indian campany, or ,

(ii) any association, whether incorporated or रे and
whether Indian or 120० १९ which is or wps as-
sessable or was assessqdias a company for the assess-

11 of 1922 ment year 1947-1948 Whder the Indian Income-tax
Act, 1922, or ‘which # declared by general of spe-
cial order of the Cenbral Board of Revenue to be
a company for the pprposes of this Act; |

“Co-opera- (14) “co-operative society”! means a co-operative s@ciety

tive society”. registered under the: itive Societies Act, i 2, or

{2 58). under any other law cooper the! time being in force in] any
97925 State for the registration of ¢o-operative societies;

“Dizector" (15) “director”, “manager” and “managing agent”, in
«“Manager", relation to a company, have {he meanings respectively as-
& “Manag- signed to them in the Companies Act, 1956; |

{s. 2 (8A)]
1 of 1956.

“Director of (16) “Director of Inspection” means a person appoint- -
Inspection”. ed to be a Director of Ins; Papen mn under section 128( i [5
{s.2 6)} (1)], and includes a gerson agyainted to be an Additional


93
Clause 2

Director of Inspection, a Deputy Direetor of Inspection or
an Assistant Director of Inspection:

(17) “dividend” includes— “Dividend”,

(a) any distribution by a company of accumulated {s. 2 (6A)]
profits whether capitatised or not, if such distribu-
tion entails the release by the company to its
share-holders of all or any part of the assets of
the company;

{b) any distribution by a comp any of debentures, de-
benture-stock or deposit certificates in any form,
whether with or without interest, to the extent to
which the company possesses accumulated profits,
whether capitalised or not ;

(०) any distribution made to the share-holders of a
company on its liquidation, to the extent to which
the distribution is attributable to the accumulated
profits of the company immeftiiately before its li-
quidation, whether capitalised or not;

९9) any distribution by a company on the reduction
of its capital to the extent to which the company
possesses accumulated profits which arose after
the end of the previous year ending next before
the Ist day of April, 1933, whether such accumu-
lated profits have been capitelised or not;

(९) any payment by a company, nat being a company
in which the public are suljstantially interested
within the meaning of section 117 [23A Expl. 1},
of any sum (whether as representing a part of
the assets of the cortpany ot otherwise) by way
of advance or loan to 4 oo beth ider or any payment
by any such company; on bel or for the indivi-
dual benefit of a shareholder, to the extent to
which the company +e either; case possesses accu-
mulated profits; but “dividend” does not include—-

(i) a distribution made im accordahce with sub-clause
(९) or sub-clause (d} in res} of any share issu-
ed for full cash cossideratt| pa where the holder
of the share is not éntitled in the event of liqui-
dation to participate in the strplus assets;

(ii) any advance or loan, made tp a shareholder by a
company in the or rdinary 756 of its business
where the lending (० mol oy is a substantial
part of the businegs of the company;

(iii), any dividend paid by a company which is set off
by the company against the whole or any part
of any sum previously paid by it and treated as

. a dividend within the meaning of sub-clause
(९), to the extent to which it is so set off.

Explanation 1.~-The oe ies lated profits”,

wherever it occurs in this , Shaft not include capital
gains arising before the 1st of Agra, 1946, or after the


94
Clause 2
jist day of March, 1948, and before the Ist day of April,
1

Explanation 2—The expression “accumulated profits”,
in sub-clauses (a), (9), (d) and (९), shall include all pro-
fits of the company up to the date of distribution or pay-
ment referred to in those sub-clauses.

“Earned ine (18) “earned income” means any income of an asses-

come”. see who is an individual, Hindu undivided family, un-

{s.2 (6AA)] registered firm or other association of persons not being a
company, a local authority, a registered firm or a firm as-
sessed under section 190(b) [clause (9) of sub-section (5)
of section 23]--

(a) which is chargeable under the head “Salaries”; or

(0) which is chargeable under the head “Profits and
gains of business, profession or vocation” where
the business, profession or vocation is carried on
by the assessee; or

(c) which represents the share in the profits and .gains
of a firm, where the assessee is a partner actively
engaged in the conduct of the business, profession
or vocation of the firm; or

(d) which is chargeable under the head ‘Other sour-
ces’ if it is immediately derived from personal
exertion or represents a pension or superannuation
or other allowance given to the assessee in respect
of his past services or the past services of any de-

e ceased person;

but does not include any such income on which
no income-tax is payable under section 87(iil) (iv)
and (v) [sub-section (2) of section 14.].....

Explanation—Where any such income is, though it

is the income of another person,......included in ‘hg as~

. sessee’s total income under the provisions of this Act, it
shall be regarded as earned income in the hands of the

assessee;... :
“Firm”, (19) “firm” “partner” and “partnership” have the same
“Partner and meanings respectively as in the Indian 2905४ Act,
oon 1932; provided that the expression ‘partner’ includeg any
[s. 2 (6B)} person who being a minor has been admitted to the: bene-
9 of 1932, its of partnership: हु
सा (20) “income’ includes— .

(i) profits and gains:

{ii) dividend: .

(iii) the value of any perquisite or profit in i u of
salary taxable under section 17, clauses (3) and
(4) [7, Exgls. 1 & 2];


95
Clause 2

(iv) the value of any benefit or perquisite, whether
convertible into money or not, obtained from
a company either by a director or by any other
person who has -a substantial interest in the
company,... >> and any sum paid by any such
company in respect of any obligation which but
for such payment would have been payable by
the director or other person aforesaid;

(५) any sum chargeable to income-tax under section
41 (2) [second and fourth provisos to clause (vii)
of s. 10(2)] or under section 41 (3), [the second
proviso to clause (xiv) of sub-section (2) of sec-
tion 10] and any sum chargeable to income-tax
under section 41 (1) [sub-section (2A) of s. 10]
or under section 62(1) [sub-section (5) of sec-
tion 3

(vi) any sum chargeable to incowe-tar under section
28(ii)......[sub-section (5A) of s. 10] or under sec-
tion 28(iii) [sub-section (6) of section 10};

(vii), any capital gains chargeable under section 45......
[section 12B(1), main para, part dealing with
charge];

(viii) the profits and gains of any business of insurance
carried on by a mutual insurance association or
by a co-operative society, computed in accord-
ance with section 44 [Rule 9 in the Schedule]
or any surplus taken to be such profits and gains
by virtue of that provision:

(ix) any contributions and interest thereon, paid to [New}
an employee by an approved superannuation
fuse to the extent provided in section 312 [58S

* (1)];

Explanation.—In this clause, the expression “person
who has a substantial interest in the company” means a
person who is concerned in the management of the busi-
ness of the company, being the benefieial owner of shares,
not being shares entitled to a fixed rate of dividend whe-
ther with or without a right to participate in profits, car-
rying not less than twenty per cent. of the voting power.

(21) “Income-tax Officer” means a person appointed “Inbornestax
to be an Income-tax Officer under section 128(1) or 128(2) Officer”’.
1591; 9-4 (7)

(22) “Indian company” means a company formed and «tndian com-
registered under the Companies Act, 1956, and includes— pany”.

7 {s. 2 (7A)
{i) a company formed and registered under any 1 of 1956,

previous companies law for the time being in
force in any part ०] if India (pther than the State
of Jammu and Kashmir), ; Hl



96
Clayse 2
(ii) in the case of the State of Jammu and Kashmir,

@ company formed and registered under any
other law for the time being in force in that

State;
शण्मंवेश्व........................ the registered office of the
“Inspecting company in all cases is in India.
Assistant (23) “Inspecting Assistant Commissioner” means a

gone person appointed to be an Inspecting Assistant Commis-

[s.2(6D)]_ sioner of Income-tax under section 128(1) [5(3)];

qinspector of (24) “Inspector of Income-tax” means a person a)
fs. 2 68) pointed to be an Inspector of Income-tax under section 1
है (2) [8(3)];
Pies all (25) “Magistrate” means a Presidency Magistrate, or
हु a Magistrate of the first clags.........
“Non-resi- (26) “non-resident” means a person who is not a “resi-
dent”. dent”:
[New] ; °
«Person”’. (27) “person” indudes—
(2 (9)) है

(i) an individual,

(ii) a Hindu undivided family.

(iii) a company, .

(iv) a firm or other association of persons, whether

incorporated or not, or the-partners of tl he firm
or the members of the association individually,

(v) a body of individuals, whether incorporated or
not. .

{vi) a local authority, and

(vii) every artificial juridical person, not falling ,with-
in sub-clauses (i) to (vi).

Gel (28) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules 4 un.
der this Act;

“Previous (29) “previous yaar’ megns previous year as ined

ear". in section 5 [section gefining previous year, placed ir} the

New} draft after section 4];

Sareincieal (30) “principal officer”, used with reference to | local

B. 2 (12) authority or a company or ahy other public body any

association, means—

(a) the secretary, treasurer, manager or agent df the
authority, company, body or association, or |

(b) any person connected with the authority, -com-
pany, body, or association upon whom the In-
come-tax icer eh served a notice of in-
tention of “Feating im as the principal icer

|

thereof; |


97
न Clauses 2-3

(31) “public servant” has the same meaning as in the “Public sen
Indian Penal Code, 1860; fee ( 3
45008
(32) “registered firm” means a firm registered under «Registered
the provisions of section 192 (a) or under that provision frm”,
read with section 191 (7) [26A embodied in sections in the & 2 (4)}
chapter on firms dealing with registration];

* (33) “regular assessment” means the assessment......... “Regular
made under section 147 or 148 (23(1) to (5)]; तिल आर
haa para,

part
(34) “resident” means a person who is resident in “Resident”,
India within the meaning of section 6 [4A]; (New)

(35) “tax” means income-tax and super-tax chargeable “Tax”.
under the provisions of this Act; [New]

(36) “total income” means total amount of in- “Total

come............ reférred to in gection 4 [4(1)] computed in eas)
the manner laid down in this Act; part]
“Total world

(37) “total world income” includes all income,............
wherever accruing or arising, except ircomes which are not
included in the total income under any of the provisions of patt]
Chapter WI [Incomes which go not form part of total in-
come] and except any capital gain which is not includi-
ble in the total income of an assessee;

(38) “unregistered firm” means a firm which is not a “Uforegiater-
registered firm. ee cpl

indome”’,
8... 2(15),

CHAPTER II

BASIS OF CHARGE

(1) Where any Central Act enacts feat income-tax shal] Seqion 3_
be charged for any assessment year @t. any rate or rates, Charge of ia~
income-tar at that rate or thope rates'shall be charged for 4 eran,
that year in accordance with, and subjert to the provisions (31

of, this Act in respect of the fotal incbme of every person H

of the previous year or years, as the qase may be, for that ;
assessment year :

Provided that where by v{rtue of any provision of this
Act income-tax is to be charged in respect of the income of
a period other than the previous year, income-tax shall be
charged accordingly.

{2) In respect of income chargeable under sub-section
(1), ineome-tax shali be ded: rab at source or paid in
advance, where it is so dedi le payable un der any |
provision of this Act. : off


Section 4
Scope of t otal
income.
Residents.

[5.4 _ (3) (a),
part)

{s-4(5)(6)(0]
{s.4(1)(b)(ii)]
{s.4 0) (०)
iii)

६-40] Bop
५ fread. with

3. #(1)(b)(iif)
and 3.2(14A)]

{Do}

[Do]

Non-residents
6. 4 (1) (a),
rt, and s. 4

6] (J

98
Clause 4 .

(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the total in-
come of any previous year of a person who is a resident
includes all 19९02. ...............---------- from whatever source
derived which— .

(a) is received or is deemed to be received in India in
such year by or on behalf of such person; or

{b) accrues or arises or is deemed to accrue or arise to
him in India during such year; or

(९) accrues 07 arises to him without India during such
year; or

{d) having accrued or arisen to him without Indie be-
fore the beginning of such year and after the 1st
day of April, 1933, is brought into or received in
India during such year by him or on his behalf; or

(e) having accrued or arisen to him in a merged terri-
tory other than Cooch-Behar after the lst day of
April, 1933, and before the commencement of the
previous year for the assessment year 1949-1950, is
brought into or received in any part of India ther
than that merged territory during such year by him
or on his behalf; or

(6) having accrued or arisen to him in a territory which,
immediately before the ist day of November,
1956, was comprised in a Part B State other
than Jammu and Kashmir, or in the merged terri-
tory of Cooch-Behar, after the 1st day of April. 1933
and before the commencement of the previous, year
for the assessment year 1950-1951, is brought into
‘or received in any part of India other than. that
territory or merged territory during such year by
him or on his behalf; or

(8) having accrued or arisen to him in the Stats of
Jammu and Kashmir after the ist day of April,
1933, and before the commencement of the pre in
year for the assessment year 1954-1955, is brdught
‘into or received in any part of India other than the
State of Jammu and Kashmir during such year by
him or on his behalf. :

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the total in-
come of any previous year of a person who is a non-resident
includes all income.............:::eccsecre ees from whatever
source derived which—

(a) is received or is deemed to be received in India in
such year by or on behalf of such person; or

(b) accrues or ariges or is deemed to accrue or arike to
him in India during such year.

Ne


Clauses 4-5

(3) Income ........ : . accruing or arising without [s. 40)
india shall not be deemer be received in or brought into Explon. 1
India within the meaning of this section by reason only of |
the fact that it is taken into account in a balance sheet pre-
pared in India. .

(1) For the purposes of this Act, “previous year” Section 5.
means— Previous year

{s.2(t2)(i)(a)
(a) the financial year immediately preceding the as- Mar Pear
sessment year; or 92071) 0)

(9) if the accounts of the assessee have been made up main para,
to a date within the said financial year,.................. latter part)
then, at the option of the assessee, the twelve
months ending on such date; or

(०) in the case of any person, business or company or {s. 2 (ax) 6)
class of person, business or company, such period
as may be determined by the Central Board of Re-
venue or by any authority authorised by the Board
in this behalf; or

(@) in the case of a business, profession or vocation...... fs. $ (0) 0)
५-५८ newly set up in the said financial year, the Oe
period beginning with the date of the setting up of
the business, profession or vocation and—

(i) ending with the said financial year, or
(ii) if the accounts of the assessee have been made up
to a date within the said financial year, then, at
the option of the assessee, ending on that date, or
(iii) ending with the period, if any, determined under
clause (c),

As the case maybe; or .

{e) in the case of a business, profession or vocation [s. ¢ (tt) (i)
newly set up in the twelve months immediately (¢): Prov,
preceding the said financial year— ter part]

(i) if the accounts of the assessee have been made
up to a date within the said financial year and
the period from the date of the setting up of the
business, profession or vocation to such date does
not exceed twelve months, then, at the option of
the assessee, such period, or

(ii) if any period has been determined under clause
(c), then the period beginning with the date of
the setting up of the business, profession or voca~
tion and ending with that period,

As the case may be:

{f) where the assessee is a partner in a firm and the fs. 2(11)(ii)}
firm has been assessed as such, then, in respect of
the assessee’s share of the income.................... of
the firm,. ia tiod determined as



[ Schedute,
Rate 5 6)]

4 of 1938
31 of 1956
9. 2 (11) (i)

(८), Prov.,
earlier part}

bs. 2 01) 6),
opening
lines}

(5. 2 (18) (9)
(3), Prov.)

Section 6
Residence in
India

&. 44 (a)(i)]

8. 48(०069)]

fs. 440) 9]

100

Clauses 5-6

(8) in respect of profits and gains from life insurance:
business, the year for which annual accounts are re-
quired to be Brepared under the Insurance Act, 1938,
or under that Act as read with section 43 the
Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, imme. a tely
Preceding the assessment year.

no previous year for the said assessment year under sub-
clause {i) of clause (d) of sub-section (1); and such aption
shall, in relation to the immediately succeeding asses¢ment
year, have effect as an option exercised under sub-clause
(i) of clause (९) of sub-section 0).

(3) Subject to the other Provisions of this section, an
assessee may have different previous years in respéct of
Separate sources of his income.

(4)... Where in respect of a particular sburce-
of income........ in respect of a buslness,
profession or vocation newly set up, an assessee hasi once.
exercised the option under clause ( 8) or sub-clause : ji) of
clause (d) or sub-clause (i) of clause (e) of sub-secti (1)
or has once been assessed, then he shall not, in respdet of
that source, or, as the case y be, business, profession or
vocation, be entitled to vary the meaning of the exprdssion
‘previous year’ as then applicable to him, except with the
consent of the Income-tax Offiter and upon such conditions.
as the Income-tax Officer may think fit to impose. पु

For the purposes af this Act~ i

(i) any individual is resident in Indie in any preyious

year, if he-— i

(a) is in India in that year for a period ot im
all to one hundred and eighty-two days or mo:

(b) maintains or eauses 1७ be maintained for
dwelling place in India for a period or

‘iods:
amounting in all to one hundred and eighty-two
days or more in that year and has been in India
for any time in that year; or .

(c) having within the four years preceding that year,
been in,Jndia for a period or periods amounting in
all to three hi 12 eas days or mo! is
in India for a period iods amounting in dll to
thirty days or|more year;



101

Clauses 6-8

(2) a Hindu undivided family, firm or other associa- (s. 4A (b)]
tion of persons is resident in India in any previous year,
unless during that year the control and management of its
affairs is situated wholly without India; ...........................

(3) a company is resident in India in any previous year, [s. #A (c)]
if—
(i) it is an Indian company; or

Gi) during that year the control and management of
its affairs is situated wholly in India;

(4) every other person is resident in India in any pre-[ New]
vious year, unless during that year the control and manage-
ment of his affairs is situated” wholly without India;

(5) if @ person is resident.in India in a previous year [New ]
relevant to an assessment year in respect of any source of
income, he shall be deemed ta be resitlent in India in the
previous year relepant to the assessment year in respect of
each of his other sources of income;

(6) a person is “not ordinarily resident” in India in [&- 4B(a)(b)]
any previous year if such person is—

(a) an individual ............. who has not been resident
in India in nine out of the tem previous years pre-
ceding that year. or ............ has not during the
seven years preceding phat year been in India for
a period of, or period: amountin ing in all to, seven
hundred and thirty days or moke; or

a Hindu undivided family ......:..... whose manager
has not been resident in nine out of the ten previous
years preceding that year, or has not during the:
seven years preceding ‘that ६08 ir been in India for ५
a period of, or periods amounting in all to, seven |
hundred and thirty days or |

The following incomes shall be deémed to be received = 7
in the previous year— . Geerhed to be

(i) the annual accretion in the previous year to the 7९०८
balance at the credit of an employee participating ( NeW)
in a recognised provident fund, to the extent pro-
vided in section 294 [5BE];

(1) the transferred balance in a recognised provident
fund, to the extent provided in section 299(3)
[585(3)]. Sete 8

For the purposes of inclusion in the total income of an Dividend

assessee, any dividend shall be aH + to be income of &. 142)
the previous year in which it is fei ted or distributed Fy, pati

(०

or deemed to have been paid, ited $7 distributed......... Sh wat}


102
Clauses 9-11
Section 9

Feed _ The following incomes shall be deemed to accrue or

deemedto arise in India—

accrue or (४) all income ... aceruing or arising,

arise in India whether directly or indirectly, through or from any

{s. 42 (2). business connection in India, or through or from

catlies halt] any property in India, or through or from any asset
or source of income in India, or through or from any
money lent at interest and brought into India in
cash or in kind or through or from the sale, ex-

change .. .. transfer or relinquishment of a
capital ass uate in India.
135. 42 (3) ] Explanation.—In the case of a business of which all the

operations are not carried out in India, the income of the
business deemed under this clause to accrue or arise in
India shall be only such part of the income as is reasonably
attributable to . . the operations carried out in
india. :

पे (ii) income which falls under the head “Salaries”...
Expl 2) , if it is earned in India :

Provided that any pension payable éutside India to a
person residing permanently outside India shall not be
deemed to accrue or arise in India, if the pension is payable
to a person referred to in article 314 of the Constitution or
to a person who, having been appointed before the 15th
day of August, 1947, to be a Judge of the Federal Court or
of a High Court within the meaning of the Government of
India Act, 1935, continues to serve on or after the commence-
ment of the Constitution as a Judge in India;

fs. 4 (1), (iii) a dividend paid by an Indian company without

Expl 3) India, ................. to the extent to which it has
been paid out of profits subjected to income-tax in
India.

Section 10 For the purposes of section 4(1)(b) [4(1) (b) (i)], where’
Remittances: husband is not resident in India, remittances received by
dent husband 07 on behalf of his wife resident in India out of any part of
{s.4(2)} his income which is not included in his total income ishall

be deemed to be income accruing in India to the wife.
CHAPTER ग्रा
INCOMES WHICH DO NOT FORM PART OF TOTAL
INCOME

Section 11 In computing the total income of a previous yepr of
Incomes not any person, any income falling within any of the following
included in clauses shall not be included therein—

total income
Agricultural (1) agricultural income;
re Fawn} (2) any sum received by an individual as a member

Income re- Of a Hindu undivided family, where such sum has jbeen
ecived as paid out of the incomhe of the family, or, in the cabe of


+ 163

Clause 11 member at
iu _undi-
any impartible estate, where such sum has been Paid out vided family
of the income of the holder of the estate belonging to the [s. 14(+)]
family;

(3) any receipts which are of a casual and non-recur- Casual recei-
ring nature, unless they are— pts.

(i) capital gains, chargeable under the provisions of Ss. $(3(थ)]
section 45 [12B, part te: charge]; or .

{ii) receipts arising from business or the exercise
of a profession, vocation or occupation; or

(iii) receipts by way of addition to the remuneration
of an employee;

(4) in the case of a resident— - Foreign

(i) the unremitted foreign income chargeable to in- ingame of
come-tax under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of
section 4 [section 4 (0) (ii)], subject to the fotlow-
ing limit, that is to say,— fs. of [९ ge

{a) the amount not to be included in the total income
by virtue of this sub-clause shall not exceed four
thousand five hundred rupees; and

(b) where any part of such unremitted- foreign income
consists of salaries paid by the Government, a lo-
cal authority or a corporation established by a
Central, State or Provincial Act, the amount of
such salaries not to be included as aforesaid shall
be further limited to a sum calculated at the rate
of one thousand rupee§ for each month of service

in respect of which the salaries are received ab-
road;

(ii) any income accruing or arising outside India and [5 €(3) ath
मिनी chargeable to income-tar by virtue of proviso} हि
clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 4 [4 (1) {b)

(iii)], if he was a non-resident in two out of the
three years immediately preceding the previous
year;

(iil) where the case does not fall under sub-clause (ii), [s. J. 5th
income accruing or ws i: cupid India and char- pro

eable to income-tax vi of section 4(1) (9)
fia) (०) (iii), if witl three months of the date
of receipt in India of such indome .. the as-
sessee makes paymeni of the: dmount of income-
tax, interest or penalty or other sum, if any, due
from him on such date;

(iv) if such Person is not ordinarily resident in India {s. 441), ond
during the previous year, inc wee which ac- Proviso]
crues or arises to him without India. and
is neither derived from a business controlled in
or 8 profession or a vocation set up in India nor
brought into or received in Tedia by him during
the previous year; t 1



104 *

Claue 11
‘Non-residents (5) in the case of a non-resident—
Es. 4(3)@<vi)] {i) any income from interest on, or from premipm on

the redemption of, any bonds issued by the Central
Government under a loan agreement between the
Central Government and the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development, or by any
industrial undertaking or financial corporation in
India under a loan agreement with the said’ Bank
which is guaranteed by the Central Government’

Ts. 4(3)0००] Gi) any income from interest payable without India
on a loan issued for public subscription before the
Ast day of April, 1938:

Provided that.............
in sub-clause (ii) 29092 shall
income of the non-resident:

“Travel en (6) subject to such conditions as the Central Govern-
Sation "ment may prescribe, the value of any travel concession or
assistance received by or due to any person, being & citi-

{See-4(3}(via) zen of India, from his employer for himself, his wif@ and
children, in connection with his proceeding on leave to his
home-town or village in India; १

(7) in the case of an individual who is not a ditizen

Foreign ) |
nationals” of India— i
00% (i) subject to such conditions as the Central Gi Ee

ment may prescribe, passage moneys or the [value
of any free of concessional passage received or
due to such individual from his employer for him-
self, his wife and children, in connection wifh his
proceeding om home dave out of India;

"8-4 (3) (४) (७)) (ii) the remuneration received by a Consul 11: eral,
Consul. Vice Consul of Consular Agent of a fgreign

‘ State . visees Eromisuch State for service inj such
capacit: i

3 .4(3) (0 (०)] (iii) the remuneration received by an employee the

consulate of p foreigh State : था such

State for service in suqh-capacity ;

3.4 (3) (१) (6 (iv) the official sale ry of a Trade Commissioner or jpther

TAO) official represtntative:in India of a foreign State,
if the official salary of the correspon done offictal, if
any, of the Central Government resident for :simi-
lar purposes in the country concerned is simplarly
exempted from payment of income-tax or per-
tax or any cotresponding tax in that country}

15-40) ७) (०) (v) the official salary of a member of the staff bf a
Trade Commi igsioner ox official representative Fat
ela ir

is
u

red to in sul use £ when such membre
a subject of the counts represented, if the o}


"108
Clause 11

salary of the members af the staff of the correspon-
ding officials of the Cantral Government is simi-
larly exempted from payment of income-tax or
Super tax or any corresponding tax in that country;

(8) the remuneration received by an employee of a Employee of
foreign enterprise for services gendered: by him during his foreign enter-
stay in India, provided the following cbnditions are fulfil- Pres
led— Is. 4(3)(xiv))

0) the foreign enterprise is not engaged in any trade’

usiness in India; .
(ii) the employee is not a citizen of India;
(iit) his stay in India does not exceed in the aggregate
a period of ninety days in suth previous year;
{iv) his stay in India did not exceed in the aggregate
a period of nitiety days in any financial year prior
to the previous year; an
(v) such remuneration is not liable to be deducted
from the income, >> of the employer charge-
able under this Act;

(9) the remuneration, chargeable under the head “Sala- Foreign tech
TES” for services “ri stiewed by an individual. nici रू हु
who is not a citizen of India, 88 a technician in the emp- 5. 4 0०)
loyment of Government or af a local authority or of any 73 प P*4)-
corporation set up under any special law or in any busi-
ness carried on in India, if he, was not resident in any of
the four financial years imm नगर preceding the finan-
cial year in which he arrived India, fo the extent men-
tioned below— :

(i) «where a contract of service was approved [s-4 ) (xiva),

Central Government 0807९ the commence- 27४ provise|
ment of his service . =

to or received by

financial year in = he a

two financial years fol
(ii) in other cases, such ref

ed by such individual for the
dred and sixty five days in

ih: remuneration due
dual during the |
in India and the

due to or receiv- [14 bec
४00 of three hun- 1४ Hroviso}
‘commencing from:
हट the date of his, arrive |. ५०० ०+००« ai this cla H
‘cplanation 1 :—For the |purpo: is clause, ser- [New]
vices rendered by an हि ०065 Lin _ to a business i
in India before its commencement shqlt be deemed to be
services rendered by him ina fs darried on in India.
Explanation 2 :—“Techni m a person having uh (sive)
specialised knowledge and exgerience ji# constructional or Exp|n.
manufacturing operations, or minigg or in the genera-
tion or distribution of electri¢ity or other form of
power, who is employed in Ipdia in &.capacity in which +
such Specialised knowledge and expérience are actually
‘utilized :

3

Provided that, in relation to— 4 132),

(a) a person to whom sub-clause (i) of this clause ap- Fingnce Act,
plies and whose 42:23 t of ice was approved {95 nich
by the Central ent fore the ist day ition as

of March, 1958, or


10

Clause 11
ey हि the (9) any other person who arrived in India before the
ace * 1958, ist day of April, 1958, “technician” means a per-
for certain son having specialised knowledge in industrial
cases.) arts and sciences and having experience in indus-

trial practice who is employed in India in a capa-
city in which such specialised knowledge and ex-

perience are actually utilized.
Persons wot- (10) (0) in the case of an individual who is assigned
king under to duties in India in connection with any co-operative te-
‘fechnical chnical assistance programmes and projects in accordance
Programmes with an agreement entered into by the Central Govern-
fs. 4(3) (xwyy MeRt and the Government of a foreign State (the terms
whereof provide for the exemption given by this clause}—

(a) the remuneration received directly or indirectly
from the Government of that foreign State for
such duties, and

(b) any other income of such individual which accrues
or arises outside India, and is not deemed to ac-
crue or arise in India, in respect of whick such
individual is required to pay any income or social
security tax to the ‘Government of that foreign
State;

(ii) any income of the members of the family a such
individual accompanying him to India, which ac-
crues or arises outside India, and is not हि
to accrue or arise in India, in respect of ‘which
such member is required to pay any income or
social security tax to the Government of that
foreign State;

Death-cum- (11) any........ death-cumrretirement gratuity rgceived
retirement under the revised Pension Rules of the Central Govern-
gratuity. ment or under any similar scheme of a State Government,
[s.7(1), Expl. a local authority or a corporation established by a Central,
2,Provopatt} State or Provincial Act;

Payment (12) any payment from a provident fund to which the

from a Provi- Provident Funds Act, 1925, applies; :

dent Fund. . '

19 of 1925

(.7(1) Expl.

2 prov., part} :

Accumulated (13) the accumulated belonce due and 27778 9 97%

ance in gbhle to an employee participating in a recognise "
29 [GON]:

recopa dent fund, to the extent provided in section

fund.

[New] हि
Payment (14) any payment from an approved superannuation.
from fund made on the death of a beneficiary or in lieu of or

approved in commutation of an annuity, or by way of retgn dof
माप contributions on the death of a beneficiary or on leav-
[s.7(2),Bpin, ing the employment in connection with which the fund is

2, prov., part) established;


107

Clause 11

(15) any special allowance or benefit, not being in Allowance
the nature of an entertainment allowance or other perqui- fer expenses
site within the meaning of section 17, clause (3) [70)]), 6. 4(3)vi)]
Specifically granted to meet expenses wholly and exclu-
sively incurred in the performance of the duties of an
office or employment of profit, to the extent to which such
expenses are actually incurred for that’ purpose;

(16) (i) interest on the 10 year Treasury Savings De- Interest. _
posits Certificates or the monthly payments on the 15 year [s-4(3)(xvii))
‘Annuity Certificates issued by or under the authority of
the Central Government for an amount not exceeding the
maximum amount which is permitted to be invested
therein;

(ii) interest on deposits in Post Office Savings Bank. {s.4(3)(xviia)}
Post Office Cash Certificates, Post Office National
Savings Certificates and Post Office National Plan
Ceatificates for amounts not exceeding in each
case the maximum amount which is permitted to
be deposited or invested therein; .

(iii) interest on securities held by the Issue Depart- {s.4(g)(xviii)}
ment of the Central Bank of Ceylon constituted
under the Ceylon Monetary Law Act, 1949;

(iv) interest payable— ea

(9) by Government or a local authority on moneys
borrowed by it from sources outside India from
any non-resident or from any institution estab-

5 lished outside India;

(b) by an industrial undertaking in India on moneys
borrowed by it under a loan agreement entered
into with any such financial institution in a
foreign country as may be approved in this be-
half by the Central Government by general or
special order;

(c) by an industrial undertaking in India on any
moneys borrowed or debt incurred by it in a
foreign country in respect of the purchase out-
side India of capital plant and machinery in any
case where the loan or debt is approved by the
Central Government, having regard to its terms
generally and in particular to the terms of its
repayment;

tion ay) scholarships, granted to meet the cost of educa- Scholarships
5 (New]

(18) any income chargeable under the head “Income GSegitem 5 of
from house property” in respect of a building the erection No. 878F(In-
of which is begun and completed between: the Ist day come-tax) dt.
of April, 1946, and the 31st day of March, 1956, (both dates | 1979)
inclusive), for a period of two years ftom the date of such + ull ding
completion; 1 (5.445) (xii)}

81 Law Com./58.



108
Clause it
Daily altowa- (19) any daily allowance received by any person by
pecs otmem” reason of his membership of Parliament or of any State
ment and Legislature or of any Committee thereof;

other Legista~ (20) any payment made, whether in cash or in kind,
{s.4(3)(xixy) by the Central Government or any State Government in
p

Gallantry pursuance of gallantry awards instituted or approved by

Perey 7 the Central Government;

Base) (21) any amount received by the Ruler of an Indian

[sa (3) (x) State as privy purse under article 291 of the Constitu-

(3, tion,

Local autho- (22) (i) income of a local authority chargeable under

हुए ५10, the head “Interest on securities”, “Income from house pro-

95 (39) (ii), perty”, “Capital gains” or “Income from other sources”;

{S. 4 (3) Gii) (1) income from a trade or business carried on by @

pard local authority which accrues or arises from the supply
of a commodity or service within its own jurisdictional
area;

Scientific Rew (23) any income of a scientific research association for

search Asso- the time being approved for the purposes of section 35(1)

fos जा (ti) [10 (2)(xiii)] which is applied solely to the purpopes of

(S440) that association;

Educational (24) any income of a University or other educafionat

रण: institution, existing solely for educational purposes and

[See tem 12 20 for purposes of profit;

9 Notifica-

tion No. 878F

fincgmestax)

21-3-22] (25) any income chargeable under the head “Interest

Certain inco- On securities”, “Income from house property” and‘ “In-

mes of Trade come from other sources” of a registered trade union

iets; ..,, Within the meaning of the Indian Trade Unions Act,’ 1926,

6 400 formed primarily for the purpose of regulating the: rela-

16011926 tions between workmen and employers or between work-
men and workmen;

Income of (26) (i) interest on securities which are held by, or
provident ate the property of, any provident fund to which — the
and superan- Provident Funds Act, 1925, applies, and any capital gains
nuation funds of the fund arising from the sale, exchange or trans! fer of

8. ५(3) (५ ities:
& 4) such securities;

{s. 4(3){ix)] (9) any income received by trustees on behalf af a
recognised provident fund;

(iii) income of an approved superannuation fung, to
[New] the extent provided im section 309 [s. 58R, main pafa];
(27) any income. of a member of a Scheduled fribe,
Scheduled as defined in clause (25) of ei ticle 366 of the Constithtion,
[s. 4(3)(xxi)) Tesiding in any area specified in Part A or Part B of the
table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedyle to
the Constitution, or in the Union Territories of Manipuy and
Tripura, provided.. such member is not in at ser-
vice of Government.



109
Clause 32

(1) Subject to the provisions of sections 63 to 66, [16 Section et
(1) (०)], the following income shall not be included in the some from

} ¢ i NE property held
total income of the previous year of the person in receipt pre relgious
of the income— or charitable

purposes and

(3) (a) so much of the income derived from property ee he
held under trust . wholly for charitable 0 ritabte insti-
religious purposes as applied or accumulated tution.

for application to such. purposes in India: [s. 4 (3) 6)

and main para}

(0) in the case of property so held in part only for
such purposes, so much of the income derived
from the property as is applied or finally set apart
for application to such purposes in India:

Provided that so much of any income referred to in [s.4 (3) (i),
sub-clause (a) or (b) of this clause as is applied to purposes Proviso (er
other than charitable or religious purposes as aforesaid, or ee proviso
ceases to be accumulated or set apart for application there- (०)]
$0,............. shall be deemed to be the income of such per-
son of the previous year in which it is so applied or ceases
to be so accumulated or set apart;

(४) (a) income from property held under trust............ fs. 4(3) Wi»
created on or after the 1st day of April, 1952, Proviso (a)
for charitable purposes which tend to promote
international welfare in which India is interest. ५
ed, applied to such purpeses outside India, and .

(9) income from property held under trust.. fea. "4. (3) 0.
for charitable or religious pur sO a}

poses
fore the ist day of Aprit, 1952, applied to such
purposes ottside India,

if the Central Board of Revenue by general or special
order directs in either case that it shall not be included in
the total income of the person in receipt of such income.

Explanation.—In this sub-section, “property” does not
include business.

(2) Subject to the provisions of gections 63 to 66 [16(1) i (3) Si
(c)], any income derived from business carried on by or on ‘a ©),
behalf of a’ trust for charitable or religious purposes shall
not be included in the total income of the previous year of *
the trustees, if the conditions specified in sub-section (4)
are satisfied.

(3) Any income derived from business carried. on by छा 4 (3) 8)
or on behaif of a religious or charitable institution shall not Prov: 0)
be included in the ६0061 | of As, previous year of the part)
1५४2 if the ‘conditions| speci in sub-section (4) are |

satisfied. t



110

Clauses 12-13
Is. 4 (3) {is (4) The provisions of sub-section (2) or sub-section (3)
Prov. (), shall apply only if the following conditions are satisfied—

Part] (a) the income is applied wholly for the purposes of the

trust or institution, as the case may be; and

{b) either the business is carried on in the course of
the actual carrying out of a primary purpose of
the trust or institution, or the work in connection
with the business is mainly carried on by bene-
ficiaries of the trust or institution.

4(3) Gi) (5) Any income of a trust for charitable or religious
purposes or a religious or charitable institution, derived
from voluntary contributions and applicable‘solely to
charitable or religious purposes shall not be included in the
total income of a previous year of the trustees or the insti-
tution, as the case may be.

[s. 4(3), last (6) Nothing contained in this section shall operate to

para. part] exempt from the provisions of this Act that part of the
income from property held under a trust............... for pri-
vate religious purposes, which does not enure for the bene-
fit of the public.

(s. 4(3), last Explanation—in this section,-—

para. part] (a) “charitable purpose” includes relief ot the poor,
education, medica] relief and advancement of any
other object of general public utility;

New) 3) (0) “trust” includes any other legal obligation.

CEs. 4(8

G), main

para.
3. 4 (3) (i),
Pane (a) 6) (i) Where any business, profession or vocation on
3, 40), 188 Which income-tar was at any time charged under the pro-
arth visions of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1918, is discontinued,
Section 13. then, unless the provisions of sub-section (2) have been
Business as- rendered applicable by virtue of there having been a suc-
sessed under cession, the income, ............ of the period from the date
the Ac to8 of commencement of the previous year in which the bysi-
is. 2503), ४९४४ was discontinued to the date Of ................*- disconti-
part] nuance, shall not be included in the total income of the
70f1918 person who was carrying on the business, profession or vaca-
tion.

wa 25(4) (2) Where the person who was on the Ist day of April,
1939, carrying on any business, profession or vocation.on
7 of 1918 which income-tax was at any time charged under the pro-
9 visions of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1918, is succeeded
in such capacity by another perton, the change not merely
being a change in the constitution of a firm, the incame
मम of such business, profession or vocation of the
period from the date of commencement of the previous year
im which the succession took place to the date of...............
succession shall not be included:in the total income of the

first mentioned person. हु



१48 ६
Clauses 13-16

(3) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall not fs. . हि
apply to a business, profession or vocation on which in- roviso (B).
come-tax was at any time charged in the hands of a com-
pany under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1886, or on which 2 of 1886
income-tax would have been charged in the hands of a
company for the assessment year ending the 3ist day
of March, 1918, if the company, having Keon in existence
in that year, had also been in existence in the year ending
on the 31st day of March, 1917.

CHAPTER IV
COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME

Heads of income

Gave as otherwise provided by this Act, all income Section | if
shall, for the purposes of charge of income-tax and com> came.
putation of total income, be classified under the following 5 6]
heads of income—

_  A-Salaries.
4 B—Interest on securities.
C—Income from house property.
D—Profits and gains of business, profession or voca-
mn.
E—Capital gains.
F—Income from other sources.

A—Salaries
Section 15

The following income shall be chargeable to income- Salaries.
tax under the head “Salaries”— , ”
s. 7a)

(a) any salary............ due from an employer or former main para.
employer to an assessee in the previous year, whe- part)
ther paid or not;

(b) any salary paid or allowed to him in the previous
year by or on behalf of the employer or former
employer though not due or before it became due
to him;

{c) any arrears of salary paid to him in the previous
year by or on behalf of the employer or former
employer, if not charged to income-tax for any
earlier previous year. Section 16
i «“ ies” Deductions.
The income chargeable under the head “Salaries” shall (, ५ (2) (ij)
be computed after making the following deductions,
namely— .
(i) any amount not exceeding five hundred rupees,
expended by the assessee on. the purchase of books
and other publicatigns necdsgary for the purpose
of his duties; 5 t + |
ié


112

Clauses 16-17

[$, 7 (2) (ip) ii) in respect of any allowance in the nature of an
entertainment allowance specifically granted to the
assessee by his employer—

(a) in the case of an assessee who is in receipt of
a salary from the Government, a sum equal
to one-fifth of his salary (exclusive of any spe-
cial allowance, benefit or other perquisites) or
five thousand rupees, whichever is less; and

(b) in the case of any other assessee who is in
receipt of such entertainment allowance and
was in receipt of such entertainment allowance
regularly from his present employer before the
ist day of April, 1955, the amount of such
entertainment allowance regularly received by
the assessee from his preseut employer in any
previous year ending before the ist day of
April, 1955, or a sum equal to one-fifth of his
salary (exclusive of any special allowance,
benefit or other perquisites) or seven thougand
five hundred rupees, whichever is the least......

£72) (ia) GH) ...........- where the assessee is not in receipt of a

conveyance allowance whether as such or as patt of
{s. 7 (2) (iia) his salary, and owns a conveyance which is gsed
main’ para] for the purposes of his employment, such sum as

the Income-tax Officer may estimate in respect of
such use as representing the expenditure incurred
by him in its maintenance and as representing its
normal wear and tear;

[s. 7(2) (ii) {iv) any amount actually expended by the assessee, not
being an amount expended on the purchase of
books or other publications, or on entertainment or
on the maintenance of @ conveyance, which, by’ the
conditions of his serviee, he is required to spend
out of his remuneration wholly. .. and exelu-
sively in the performance of his duties.

Section 17. For the purposes of sections 15 and 16 [preceding sec-
Inter preta- tions re: salary] and of this section,—

“Employer” (1) “employer” means an employ eT, who is the Central
8. 20) part) Government, a ‘State Government, any forgign

Government, a local authority, a company, anyi.....
०००55] public body or association, or any priyate

employer;
“Salary”. (2) “salary” includes—
(s. 70), part) (i) any salary or wages;

(ii) any annuity 07 pension;
(iii) any gratuity;

(iv) any fees, commissi perquisites or Rat in
lieu of or in कल to any salary or wages;


113
Clause 17

(ए) advances by way of loan or otherwise of the
amounts enumerated in sub-clauses (i), (ii), (iii)
and (iv) above;

(vi) the annual accretion to the balance at the credit [New}
of an employee participating in a recognised pro-
vident fund, to the extent to which it is charge-
able to tax under section 294 [58E]:

(vii) the aggregate of all sums that are comprised in [New]
the transferred balance, as referred to in section
299 (2) [583 (2)] of an employee participating in
a recognised provident now , to the extent to
which it is chargeable to tar under section 299(3)

{585 (3)]; “Perquisite”

(3) “perquisite” includes— हिकाओ]

(i) the value of rent free accommodation.......... -PFO- [Item @
vided to the assessee by his employer; part]

(ii) the value of any concession’ in the matter of rent ead (9
respecting any accommodation provided to the
assessee by his employer;
{iii) the value of any benefit or amenity granted or
provided...... ...free of cost or at concessional
rate in any of the following eases :—~ :
(a) by a company to an employee who is a direc- (९५ (ii)
tor thereof............ part]
(b) by ० company to an employee who is a share- [item (ii),
2,060 concerned in the management of the wh . alee
company and is the bengficial owner of shares, (iii))
not being shares entitled to a fixed rate of
dividend whether with or without a right to
participate in profits, carrying twenty per
cent or more of the voting power;

(९) by any employer (including a company) to a” [item (iii
employee to whom thé provisions of para. | Od
graphs {a) and (b) of this sub-clause do not
apply and whbse incdme under the head
“Salaries” exclusive of the value of all bene- ¢
fits or amenities not provided by way of .
monetary payment ex eighteen thousand -
rupees;

{iv any sum paid by the emplayer in respect of any {Tem (iv)}
‘obligation which but for such payment would
have been payable by the assessee; and

(५) any sum payable by the employer, whether
directly or through e fund other than a recognised
provident fund or an appnoved superannuation
fund to effect an assurance on the life of the
assessee or to neste a contrpat for an annuity on
the life of the 5 oo



114

Clauses 17-20
{Profs in (4) “profits in lieu of salary” includes— .
salary”
(7 &), {i} the amount of any compensation due to or received
Expln. pan] by an assessee from his employer or former em-

ployer at or in connection with, the termination of
his employment, whether solely as compensation for
loss of employment, or for any other consideration;

(ii) the amount of any contributions to an approved
superannuation fund {including interest on such
contributions) paid to an employee, to the extent to
which such bmount ig deemed to be the income of
the employee under section 312 (58-5(1)];

(ili) without prejudice to the provisions of sub-clause (ii)
of this clause, any payment due to or received by
an assessee from an employer or former employer
or from a provident or other fund, (not being an
approved superarnuation fund), to the extent to
which it does not consist of contributions by the
assessee or interest on such contributions.

. B. Interest on securities
Section 18, The following amounts received by an assessee in the
Interest on previous year shall be chargeable to income-tax under the
{8,13 para) Head “Interest on securities”............ —
(i) interest... on any security of the Central
Government ;
(ii) interest on any security of a State Government ;
(iii) interest on debentures or other securities for mo-
ney issued by or on behalf of a local authority or
a company.

Section 19. Subject to the provisions of section 21 [section regarding

Deductions. amounts not deductible], the income chargeable under the

[2.8 180 छा० head “Interest on securities” shall be computed after mak-
Vivo, earker ing the following deductions—

part] (i) any reasonable sum expended by the assessee for

the purpose of realising such interest;...............

(ii) any interest payable on moneys borrowed for the

purpose of investment in the securities by the as-

sessee.
Secti .
Banking * (1) In the case of a banking company—
Company. (i) the sum to be regarded as a sum reasonably ex-
{s. 8, Expin, pended for the purpose referred to in clause (i) of
(3) part] section 19 {section regarding deductions} et be

an amount bearing to the aggregate of its expen-
ses as are admissible under the provisions of sec-
tions 30, 31, 36 and 37, other than clauses (3), (5)
and (6) of section 36, [sub-section (2) of section 10
{other than ¢lauses (ii), (vi), (via), (vib), kvii),
(viii), (xi), (tii), (xi) and (xiv) thereof)]; the


118
Clauses 20-21

same proportion as the gross receip’ ts from interest
on securities (inclusive of tax jucted at source)
chargeable to income-tax under section 18 [main
section re: Interest on Securities) bear to the gross
receipts of the company from all sources which
are included in the profit and loss account of the
COMpaNy j...- eee

GID. the amount to be regarded as interest payd- [s. 8. Expin.

ble on moneys borrowed for the purpose referred (b) part]
to in clause (ii) of section 19 [section regarding
deductions} shall be an amount which bears to the
amount of interest payable on all moneys borrow-
ed by the company the same proportion as the
gross receipts from interest on securities (inclu-
Sive of tax deducted at source) chargeable to in-
come-tax under section 18 {main Section for in-
terest] bear to the gross receipts from all sources
which are included in the profit and loss account
of the company ;

(2) The expenses deducted under clauses (i) and (४) [s. 8 Expin.
of sub-section (1) shall not again form part of the,deduc- ® and (0)
tions admissible under sections 30 to ff [sub-section (2) 1 nes]
of section 10) for the purposes of computing the income of
the company under the head “Profits and gains of business,
profession or vocation”.

Explanation :—For the purposes of this section, “mo- {s. 8, Ex pin,
neys borrowed” includes moneys received by way of de- ० first line}
posits.

Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 19 Section ar
and 20 [sections regarding deductions and banking com- ee
pany], the following amounts shall not be deducted in
computing the income chargeable under the head “Interest ४. 8, it Pros
on securities”— है part] latter

(i) interest chargeable under this Act which is paya-
ble outside India (not. being interest on a loan
issued for public subscription before the ist day
of April, 1938) on which tax has not been paid or
deducted under sectioh 202 or 204 {section 18) and
in respect of which there is. no person in India
who may be treated as an agent under section 173
{section 43] ;

(ii) sums expended by the assessee for the purpose of
realising interest on securities on which no income-
tax is payable under section 87 (i) or 87 (ii) [s.
8 provisos 2 and 31;

(iii) interest payable on money borrowed for the pur:
pose of investment in securities, being securities
on the interest on wi # है; no i tk yme-tax is payable
under section 87(i) of 8701) {section 8, provisos 2
and 3]. s ‘G


Section 22.
Income from
house pro-
perty.

3. 9 (1) open-
ing para]

Section 23.
Annual value

3.9 (2), Ist
para]

[New]

(5. 9 (2), rst
Proviso}

fs. 9. (2), and
Proviso, | x:
Sept last tine}

6
Clauses 22-23
C. Income from house property

The... 2. annual value of property consisting of
any buildings or lands appurtenant thereto of which the
assessee is the owner, other than such portions of such
property as he may occupy for the purposes of any busi-
ness, profession or vocation carried on by him the profits of
which are assessable to income-tax, shall be chargeable to
income-tax under the head “Income from house property”.

(1) For the purposes of section 22 [chargeability of
income from house prope rty], the annual value of any pro-
perty shall be deemed to be the sum for which the pro-
perty might reasonably be expected to let from year to
year.

(2) In determining the sum for which the property
might reasonably be expected to let from year to year, due
regard may be bad, where the property is let to a tenant,
to the following factors, besides others, namely—

{i) the annual rent agreed to be paid by the tenant;

(ii) the other obligations, if any, undertaken by the te-

« 7ant on behalf of the owner, including the poy:
ment of taxes due to the Government or a local
authority ; .
(ili) the annual value of the property, if any, as! fixed
by the local authority for the purposes of any tar

on property levied by it; and

{iv) the rents of Properties in the neighbourhood simi-~

larly situated and with similar advantages.

(6) Where the property is in the occupatjon of
the owner for the purposes of his own residence, the
annual value of the property... ... shall be the annual
value of the property determined in the same manmer as
if the property had been let, reduced by the tower of the
following— :

(0) one half of such annual value, or
(ii) one thousand eight hundred rupees ;
but shall in no case exceed eleven per cent. of all income

of the assessee, other than the annual value of such
perty, able to inclusion in his total income undet this
ct. :

(4) . . . . « Where the property referred to in Ses
tion (3) consists of one residéntia! house only and ce can-
not actually be occupied by the owner by reason the
fact that owing to his employment, business, professibn or
vocation carried on at any other piace, he has to teside
at that other place in a building not belonging to. him,
जज the annual value of such house shall—

{a) if the house was not-actually occupied by. the
owner during} the whple of the previous yedr, be
taken to be nfl, or * :

i


117
Clauses 23-24

(०) if the house was actually occupied by the owner
for a fraction of the previous year, be taken to be
that fraction of the annual value determined un-
der sub-section (3);
provided the following conditions are in either case fulfil-
led: —
(9) the house is not actually let, and
(ii} no other benefit therefrom is derived by the
owner.
(1) Income chargeable under the head “Income from.
house property” shall, subject to the provisions of sub- Section. 24
section (2), be computed after making the following deduc- Deduetions-

tions, namely—

()............ ...where the property is in the occupation
of a tenant, oo... eee one half of the total [s. 9 (2), 3rd
amount of the taxes levied by any local authority P™™!
in respect of the 970.९719....... . ... ..

(ii) in respect of repairs,— B90), @

{a} where the property is in the occupation of the part] uw
०णए्ग्९,............... ...a sum equal to one-sixth
of the annual valu
(b) where the property is let to a tenant and the ते
owner has undertaken to bear the cost of re- & a (के
pairs, a sum equal to one-sixth of the reduced
annual value ;

(iii) where the property is in the occupation of a te- 0) Gi
nant who has undertaken to bear the cost of re- pt @
pairs—~

(a) the difference between the reduced annual value
and the amount of rent payuble for a year by
the tenant, or

(9) one-sixth of such value,
whichever is less;

(iv) the amount of any- annual preniium paid to insure &* 90060) ]
the property against risk of damage or destruc-
tion ; .

{v) where the property is subject toa mortgage or other bof? avy
capital charge, the amount of any interest on :
such mortgage or charge ; .

(vi) where the property is subject tp an annual charge, fae im
not being a capital charge, amount of such
charge ; . हु

{vii} where the property is subject to a ground rent, Ba? (४)
the amount of such ground rent ;

(viii) where the property has been acquired, construct- [s- ५() (iv),
ed, repaired, the amp r जिन] ted with एग- शशि,
rowed capital, the unt of: y interest paya- i
ble on such capital ; ,

a


Es. 9 (9) (शो
is. 9 0) (i)

(s. 9 (a) (viiyy

[New-Gran-
ted by noti-
fication No,
878F dated
21-3-1922,
item 38)

Is. 9 (2), 2nd
proviso "last
line)

Section 25.
Amounts not
deductible.

bs. 9 0) (iv),

Proviso,

Section 26.
roperty
owned — by
co-owners.

(७. 9 (3)]

Section 27.
Interpreta-

tion.
fs. 9 (4) (a)}

118

Clauses 24-27

(ix) any sums paid on account of land revenue in res-
pect of the property ;

{x} amounts spent to collect the rents from the pro-
perty, not exceeding six per cent. of the reduced
annual value of the property ;

(xi) where the property is let and was vacant during a
part of the year, that part of the reduced annual
value which is proportionate to the period during
which the property is wholly unoccupied or, where
the property is let out in parts, that portion of the
reduced annual value appropriate to any vacant
part, which is proportionate to the period during
which such part is wholly unoccupied ;

{xii) such amount, in respect of rent from property let
to a tenant which the assessee cannot realise, as
may be prescribed.

Explanation.—In this sub-section, “reduced annual
value” means the annual value as reduced by one-half of
the total amount of taxes levied hy any local authority in
respect of the property.

(2) The total.amount deductible under sub-section (1)
in respect of property of the nature referred to in section
23(4) [sub-section in section defining annual value, relat-
ing to residential house not occupied] shall not exceed the
annual value of the property as determined under section
23 [section for annual value].

Notwithstanding anything contained in section 24
{section regarding deductions], the following amounts
shall not be deducted in computing the income chargeable
under the head “Income from house property”—

any annual charge or interest............chargeable under

this Act which is payable outside India (not being interest

on a loan issued for public subscription before the ist day
of April, 1938) on which tax has not been
paid or.......... leducted under section 202 or 204 [183
and in respect of which there jg no person in India who
may be treated as an agent un section 173 [43].

Where property consisting of buildings or buildings
and lands appurtenant thereto is owned by two or more
persons and their respective shares are definite and .ascer-
tainable, such persons shall not in respect of such property
be assessed as an association of persons, but the shpre of
each such person in the income from the property ag com-
puted in accordance with sections 22 to 25 [section re} com-
putation] shall be ihcluded in his total income.

For the purposes of sections 22 to 26 (sections regard-
ing income from house property]

(i) the holder of an impartible estate shall be deemed

to be the individua: owner of all the properties

comprised in the estate



ig

Clauses 27-28

(ii) a member of a co-operative society to whom a (s.9(4)<b)}
building or part thereof built by the society is
allotted or leased under a house building scheme of
the society shall be deemed to be the owner of that
building or part thereof ;
(i) ............ “annual charge” means a charge to secure [s. 9 (1),
an annual liability, but does not include any tax in Expla, below
respect of property or income from property impos. 1: (“ii)I
ed by a local authority, or a State Government or
the Central Government ;

(iv) “capital charge” means a charge to secure the dis-. [New]
charge of a liability of a capital nature ;

(v) taxes levied by a local authority in respect of any 5- 9 (4) (०)
property shall be deemed to include service taxes
levied by the local authority in respect of the
property.

D—Profits and gains of business, profession or vocation
The following income shall be chargeable to income- Section 28.
tax under the head “Profits and gains ०: 1 pusiness, profes- Profits and
sion or vocation” — हि कक,
{i) the profits and gains of any business, profession or profestion or
vocation which was carried on by the assessee at [ete th)
any time during the previous year; ,

of

part)
(ii) any compensation or other payment due to or re- (2-10 (5A);
ceived by,— 4९% 71507०+मी
earlier half]

{a) a managing agent of an Indian company, at or [s.10(§A)(a)}
in connection with the termination or modifica-
tion of his managing agency agreement with
the company ;

{b) a manager of an Indian company at or in con- (s.10(5A)(b)}
nection with the termination of his office or
modification of the terms and conditions relat-

) ing thereto ; h led

(०) any person, by whatever name called, managing »,,
the whole or substantially the whole affairs of ४७७७४
‘any other company in India, at or in connection
with the termination of his office or the modi-
fication of the terms and conditions relating
thereto;

(9) any person, by whatever name called, hold- [2.10(5A)(d)}
ing an agency in India for any part of the
activities. relating to the business of any other
person, at or in connection with the termination
of the agency or the modification of the terms
and conditions relating thereto ;

(iii) income derived by a trade, professional or similar fs. 10 (6)]
association from specific servi Performed for its

members for remuneration ‘itely related to

inose services i



120

Clauses 28-30
[New] Explanation 1.—The profits and gains of business shall
include the profits and gains of managing agency.
[s. 24(1), Ex- Explanation 2.—Where............; speculative transactions
pin. 1) carried on by an assessee are of such a nature as to con-

stitute a business, the business (hereinafter referred to as
“speculation business”) shall be deemed to be distinct and
separate from any other business.

Section 29. The income of an_assessee referred to in section 28

Provisions [section 10(1), part embodied in main section for income

thew) © from business} shall be computed in accordance with the
provisions of the following sections—

Section 30—Rent, repairs and insurance for buildings.

Section 31—Repairs and insurance of machinery, plant and
furniture.

Section 32—Depreciation.
Section 33-——Development rebate..
Section 34—Conditions for depreciation allowance and
development rebaie.
Section 35—Expenditure on scientific research.
Section 36—Other deductions—
Insurance of stocks or stores.
Bonus or commission to employees.
Interest.

Contributions to certain funds for employees’
benefit.

Animals.
Bad debts.

Section 37—General. .

Section 38—Building etc. partly used for business etc. or
not exclusively so used.

Section 39—Managing agency.

Section 40—Amounts not deductible.

Section 41—Profits chargeable to tax.

Section 42—Interpretation. : !

Section 43—Residences of employees. :

Section 30 In respect of rent, repairs and insurance for bubldings,

Rent, repairs the following deductions shall be allowed—
and insu-

rance for (a) in respect of any premises used for the purposes of

buildings. the business, profession or vocation,—

{s.10(2){i), (i) where the. premises are occupied by the qssessee

‘without the as a tenagt— ४ i

Proviso] (a) the rent paid for such premises; and |
||


121

Clauses 30-32 -
(b) if he has undertaken to bear the cost of......... (s.10(2) (ii),
repairs to the permtises, the amount paid on without the
account of such repairs; Proviso}

{ii) where the premises, being a building, are occu- {s.10(2)(v),
pied by the assessee otherwise than as a tenant, pact, for
the amount paid by him on account of current vildings)
repairs to the premises ;

(0) any sums paid on account of land revenue, local {s.10(2) (ix),
rates or municipal taxes ;............... earlier part]

.. the amount of any premium paid in res- (s.10(2){iv),
pect of insurance against risk of damage or destruc- Pate, for
tion of the premises, being a building uiltings)

In respect of machinery, plant or furniture used for Section 31.
the purposes of the business, profession or vocation the fol- Repairs and

J > insurance of
lowing deductions shall be allowed— ta hinery,
plant and.
furniture,
(i) the amount paid on account of current repairs [s-10(2)(v),
thereto ; Part for
; inery
ete.
(४) .......... the amount of any premium paid in res- (3. 1० (2)(iv),
pect of insurance against risk of damage or des- part for ma-
truction thereof. chinery etc.]

(1) In respect of depreciation of buildings, machinery, section 32.
plant or furniture owned by the assessee and used for the Depreciation.
purposes of the business, profession ar vocation, the fol-
lowing deductions shall, subjact to the provisions of sec-
tion 34 [section re: conditions for depreciation}, be allow-
ed—

(i) in the case of ships other than ships ordinarily fe.r9(2)(vip,
plying on inland waters, such percentage (for first-para,
each completed month of user) on the original Pad
cost thereof to the assessee as may in any case
or class of cases be prescribed ;

(ii) in the case of buildings, machinery, plant or furni- {s.19(2)(vi),
ture, other than ships covered by clause (i), such ant ४)
percentage (for each completed month of user) P*
on the written down value thereof as may in any |
case or class of cases be preséribed ; i

(iii) in the case of buik dings newly erected or machi- tsp (2) (via),
nery or plant being n¢w which has been installed,
after the 315६ day of March, fe , a further sum...
equal to the amount deductible under clause {i) or
(४0), allowable for five consecutive previous years,
including the previous year of erection or instaltla-
tion.

Explanation—For the purposes of clause (iii), any [s.10(2)(via),

extra deduction for se aden bie uilige le shift working of
the machinery or plant admispible uty clause (ii) shall |
be ignored.


122

Clauses 32-33
fe 20(2)(vii), (iv) in the case of any. .. building, machinery or
irst para) plant which 4s sold or discarded or demolished or

destroyed in the previous year, the amount by
which the moneys received in respect of such

[s.10(2) building, machinery, or plant, together with the
(wi), ist amount of scrap value, if any, fall short of the writ-
Prov.} ten down value thereof, provided such deficiency

is actually written of in the books of the assessee.

Explanation—For the purposes of this clause, the

“moneys received” in respect of any building, machinery
or plant shall include—

[s.10(2) (vii), {a) any insurance, salvage or compensation moneys
oe Pray” received in respect thereof ;
[New] (b) where the building, machinery or plant is sold, the

price for which it is sold, whether such prite has
deen actually realised or not.

{s-10(2)(vi), (2) Where, in the assessment of the assessee, (or, if the

prov, (b),  assessee is a registered firm or an unregistered firm assess-

Part] ed as a registered firm, in the assessment of its partners)
full effect cannot be given to any ......... allowance under
clause (i) or (ii) of sub-section raf (10(2)¢vi), main para) in
any previous year owing to there being no profits or gains
chargeable for that previous year, or owing to the profits or
gains chargeable being less than the allowance, then, sub-
ject to the provisions of sections 73{3) and 74(3) [Sub-sec-
tion’ (3) of main Section re:set off in business], the ellow-
ance or part of the allowance to which effect has not been
given as the case may be, shall be added to the amount of
the allowance for de preciation for the following previous
year and deemed to part of that allowance, or if there
is no such allowance for that previous year, be deemed to be
the allowance for that previous year, and so on for suc-
ceeding previous years..............0005

Section 33. In respect of a new ship acquired or new machinery
Development oy plant installed after the 3lst day of March, 1954, which
rebate A

{[s.10(2)(vib) is wholly used for the purposes of the business carried on
main para). by the assessee, a sum by way of development rebate, ...

नव equivalent to,—

(i) in the case of a ship acquired after the Sst de ry of
December, 1957, forty per cent. of the act cost,
of the ship to the assessee, an

(ii) in the case of a ship acquired before the 1st apy of
January, 1958, and in the case of any machinery
or plant, twenty-five per cent. of the actual cost
of the ship or machinery or plant to the assessee
shall, subject to the Provisions of section 34 [sec-
tion re: conditions for depreciation], be allow-
ed as a deduation in respect of the previous year
in which the ghip wag acquired or the macht ery
on plant was imstalled: or, if the ship, machinety or


123

Clause 33

plant is first put to use in the immediately suc-
ceeding previous year, then in respect of that pre-
vious year,

Explanation 1.—In the case of a ship acquired or ma-
chinery or plant installed after the 31st day of December,

7, where the total income of the assessee assessable for
the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which
the ship was acquired or the machinery or plant installed
(the total income for this purpose being computed without
making any allowance under this section) is nil or is less
than the full amount of the development rebate calculated
at the rate applicable thereto under this section —

{i) the sum to be allowed by way of development re-
bate for that assessment year under this section
shall be only such amount as is sufficient to reduce
the said total income to nil ; and

(ii) the amount of the development rebate, to the ex-
tent to which it has not been allowed as aforesaid,
shall be carried forward to the following assess-
ment year, and the development rebate to be al-
lowed for the following assessment year shall, be
such amount as is sufficient to reduce the total
income of the assessee assessable for that assess-
ment year, computed in the manner aforesaid, to
nil, and the balance of the development rebate,
if any, still outstanding shall be carried forward
to the following assessment i, and s0 on, so
however that no portion of the development re-
bate shall be carried forward for more than eight
assessment years immediately succeeding the as-
sessment year for which the development rebate
was first allowable,

Explanation 2—Where for any assessment year deve-
lopment rebate is to be allowed in accordance with the pro-
visions of Explanation 1, in respect of ships acquired or
machinery or plant installed in more than one previous
year, and the total income of the assessee assessable for
the assessment year relevant to that previous year (the
total income for this purpose being computed without mak-
ing any allowance under this section) is less than the aggre.
gate of the amounts due to be allowed in respect of the
assets aforesaid for that assessment year, the following pro-
cedure shall be followed, namely :—

(i) the allowance under paragraph (ii) of Explanation

1 shall be made before any allowance under para-
graph (i) of that Explanation is made; and

(ii) where an allowance has to be made under para-

Braph (ii) of Explanation 1 in respect of amounts

carried forward from more than one assessment

year, the amount carried forward from an earlier

assessment year shall ७६ allowed | before any amount

carried forward from $ later aptessment year,
9--1 Law Com, 58 ई i:


124

Section. 34 Clause 34
for ‘depreciax (1) The deductions referred to in sub-section (1) of
tion allowan- section 32............[s. 10(2)(vi) 10(2) (via), and (vii)} shall

हा and deve- be allowed only if the prescribed particulars have been fur-
a ment nished; and the deduction referred to in section 33............
10 (a) (vi [s. 10(2)(vib)] shall be allowed only if the particulars pres-
be 3° 8 ©): cribed for the purpose of clauses (3) and (ii) of sub-section
3. ro(a) (vib), (1) of section 32 [S. 10(2)(vi)] have been furnished by the
Prov.para(a)] assessee in respect of the ship or machinery or plant.

[New] (2) For the purposes of section 32 [10(2)(vi), (via) and
[see rule 8] (V1I)J— है

(i) if the buildings, machinery, plant or furniture have
been used by the assessee for the purposes of his
business, profession o7 vocation for more than a
month, the deduction under section 32(1), clauses
(i) Gi) and (iii), (10(2) (vi), (via)] shell be deter-
mined proportionately with reference to the‘ com-
plete months of user thereof by the assessee :

Provided, however, that if the total period of user is less
than one month, it shall be deemed to be one com-
plete month for computing the deduction propor-
tionately.

Explanation.—In the case of a seasonal nt worked
by the assessee during all the working seasons ०] the pre-
vious year. the buildings, machinery, plant or furniturd shall
be deemed to have been used by the assessee throughout the
period he was the owner thereof during the previous year.

fs. 10(2)(via), (ii) the deduction provided for by section 32(1), clause

part] (iti)... [10(2)(via)] shall be allowed only in
respect of a का year relevant for the dssess-
ment year 1 1959;

{s. 10(2) (vi) (iti) the aggregate of all deductions in respect of flepre~

proviso(c)) ciation made under section 32(1), [10(2) (vi), (via)

11 of 1922 and (vii)] or under the Indian Income-tax: Act.
1922, or under any Act repealed by that Act or

, under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1886, shall, in

2 of 1886 no case, exceed the ariginal cost fo the assessee of
the buildings, machinery, plant or furniture, as
the case may be;

[s. 10 (4B), (iv) nothing in gection 300 or (ii) (10(2)(9)] or
हक by 32(1)(iii) [seetion 10(2)(via)] shall be deemkd to
re 1988) authorise the allowance for any previous ¥P ar of
हु any sum in respect of any building, mactinery,
plant or furniture sold, discarded, demolished or
destroyed, in that year;

(3) (a) The deduction referred to in section 33 [S. 10(2)

re) (vib), main para.) shall not be allowed unless—
latter ball} 35 amount equal to seventy-five per cent, of the d ore
ment rebate to be adtuall: 025 is debited to फल profit
and loss account of the rele’ previous year and credited

‘


125
Clauses 34-35

to a reserve account to be utilised by the assessee during a
period of ten years next following for the purposes of the
business of the undertaking, except—

(४) for distribution by way of dividends or profits; or

(ii) for remittance outside India as profits or for the
creation of any asset outside In dia

Exception.—The provisions of clause (a) shall not ap- [s. 10(2){vib)
ply where the assessee is a ny, being a licensee with- Len acy
tm the meaning of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, or 5408 1948
where the ship has been acquired or the machinery or plane
has been installed before the 1st day of January, 1958.

(0) ......... Tfany ......... ship, machinery or plant is sold fe roca vib
or otherwise transferred by the assessee to any person other lent gars
than the Government at any time before the expiry of ten कि एश० ]
years from the end of the previous year in which it was ac-

quired or installed, any allowance made under section 33...

theca [s. 10(2) (vib), main para] in respect of that ship,
machinery or plant shall be deemed to have been wrong! G

made for the purposes of this Act.

(1) In respect of expenditure on scientific research, the Section 35
following deductions shall be allowed— Expenditure

on scientific

(i) any exp enditure (not being in the nature of capital each
expenditure) laid out or expended on scientific re- [s- 10(2)(xii)]
search related to the business;

(ii) any sum paid to a scientific research association fs. 10(2) (xiii)
which has as its objects the undertaking of scienti- part)
fic research related to the class of business carried
on, and which is approved for the purposes of this
clause by the prescribed authority;

ii) any sum paid to a university, college or other in- {s. 10(2) (xiii)
stitution to be used for scientific research, research Pact]
in social science or statistical research related to
the class of business carried on, being @ ...............
university, college or institution which is for the
time being approved for the purposes of this clause
by the prescribed authority;

{iv) in respect of any expenditure of a capital nature on fe robe)ixiv
scientific research related to the business carried on ॥ para,
by the assessee, such deduction as may be admis- catliet part}
sible under the provisions of sub-section (2).

(2) For the purposes of clause (iv) of sub-section (1),--

(i) one-fifth of the capital expenditure incurred in any [7 10(2)(xiv)
previous year shall be deducted for that previous first para,

year; and the balance che ae fiture shall be शिव part]
deducted in equal inst ts fdrieach of the four
immediately succeeding lpreviowy pears.


126

Clause 35
Is. 10(2)(xiv) Explanation.—Where any capital expenditure has been
rst proviso] incurred before the commencement of the business, the ag-
gregate of the expenditure so incurred within three years
unmediately preceding the commencement of the business
shall be deemed to have been incurred in the previous year
in which the business is commenced;

[s. 10(2)(xiv) (ii) notwithstanding anything contained in clause (i),
Gay Browse where an asset representing............ expenditure of
tne a capital nature ceases to be used in a previous year

for scientific research related to the business and
the value of the asset at the time of the cessation,
together with the aggregate of deductions already
allowed under clause (३), falls short ofthe said
expenditure, then— _

arian @ .......... pov, there shall ............... be allowed @
(iy Prov. deduction for that previous year of an amount

equal to such deficiency, and

{s. 10(2)(xiv), (b) no deduction shall be allowed under that clause

and proviso, for that previous year or for any subsequent pre-
2° modi- vious year; eo.

(iii) if the asset mentioned in clause (ii) is sold, without

8. ro(2){xiv), having been used for other purposes, in the year of

a proviso cessation, the sale price shall be taken to be the

value of the asset at the time of the cessation; and

if the asset is sold, without having been used for
other purposes, in a previous year subsequent to the
year of cessation. and the sale price falls short of the
value of the asset taken into account at the time of
cessation, an amount equal to the deficiency shall
be allowed as a deduction for the previous year in
which the sale took place;

[s. 10(2}(xiv), (iv) where a deduction is allowed for any previous year

and prov.(a)} under this section in respect of expenditure repre-
sented wholly or partly by an asset, no deduction
shall be allowed under section 32(1) clauses {i) (ii)
and (iv) [10(2)¢vi) or (vii) i.e. section authorising
depreciation allowance] for the same previous year
in respect ‘of that asset;

[s. 10(2) (xiv), (v) where the asset is used in the business after it

and proviso ceases to be used for scientific research related to

oy that business, depreciation shall be admissible
under section 32(1), clauses (i) (ii) and (iv), [10(2)
(vi) and (vii) ie., section authorising deprediation
allowance].

{s. 10(a) (xiv), (3) If any question arises under this section as to

and proviso’ whether, and if so, to what extent, any activity constitutes
(8) or constituted or any asset is or was being used for scientific
research, the Central Board of Revenue shall refer the
question to the prescribed authority, whose decision shall be

inal. :

[s. 10(2){xiv), (4) The provisions of sub-section (2) of secti 32
and proviso’ (Section re : depreciation] shel] apply in relation to deduc-
(1) par} tions allowable under} clause te of sub-section (1) a they


127
Clauses 35-36

apply in relation to deductions allowable in respect of dep-
reciation. .

The deductions provided for in the following clauses section 36
shall also be allowed in respect of the matters dealt with Other deduc-
therein, in computing the income referred to in section 28 tions.
{mam section for income from business]— Insurance of

(1) the amount of any premium paid m respect of in- stocks or
surance against risk of damage or destruction of............... stores.
stocks or stores used for the purposes of the business, pro- 5: '0(2)(),

* a 7
fession or vocation.. pat for stock |

(2) any sum paid to an employee as bonus or commis- Bonus or co-
sion for services rendered. where such sum would not have mmission to
been payable to him as profits or dividend if it had not been employees.

paid as bonus or commission, in either of the following fs. १००७
cases, namely— main para)
G) ...... vs... where the amount of the bonus or com- fs. 10(2)(x),
mission is ..... reasonable . >> With refer- proviso}
ence to—
(a) the pay of the employee and the conditions of his
service;

(b) the profits of the business, profession or vocation
for the previous year in question, and

(०) the general practice in ...... , similar businesses,
professions or vocations; or

(ii) where such payment is in pursuance of the award (New }
of an industrial or other tribunal constituted under
any law for the settlement of industrial disputes;

(3) ................. the amount of the interest paid in res- Imtetest
pect of capital. borrowed for the purposes of the business, 80200

profession or vocation. part]
Explanation.—Recurring subscriptions paid periodically fs 10(2)(ii3),

by sharehciders or subscribers in such Mutual Benefit So- Bxpln.)

cieties which fulfil such conditions as may be prescribed,

shall be deemed tc be capital borrowed within the meaning

of this clause.

(4) (a) ony sum paid by the assessee as an employer by Contributions
way of contribution towards @ recognised provident fund aera fu-
or an approved superannuation fund, to the extent provided [vee beneht
in section 293 [New Section in chapter on Recognised Pro- [ New]
vident Funds re : allowing deduction for employer's contri-

bution] or section 310 (58R, main para, part re : deduction

for employer’s contribution] as the case may be;

(७) any sum paid by the assessee as employer by way
of contribution towards any other fund created by
him for the exclusive benefit of his employees under
an irrevocable trust;

(5) in respect of animals which have been used for the Patera
purposes of the business, prof¢ssion of vocation otherwise ©"
than as stock-in-trade and hava died or become permanently
t


128

Clauses 36-38

useless for such purposes, the difference between the origi-
nal cost to the assessee of the animals and the amount, if
any, realised in respect of the carcasses or animals;

Bad debts. (6) ......... debts, or parts thereof, that are established to
Bro, have become bad debts in the previous year, provided—

(i) such debts or parts of debts—

(a) have been taken into account in computing the
income of the assessee of that previous year or of
an earher previous year, or

(b) represent money lent in the ordinary course of
the business of banking or money-lending which
is carried on by the assessee; and

(Last words of (8) such debts or parts of debts have been written off as
wane irrecoverable in the accounts of the assessee for

that previous year :

6. 10020. Provided that if the amount ultimately recovered on any
Fairy , such debt or part of debt is less than the difference between

the debt or part and the amount so deducted, the deficiency
shall be deductible for the previous year in which the ulti-
mate recovery is made :

Provided further that any such debt or part of debt as
is referred to in sub-clause 2) may be deducted if it has
already been written off as irrecoverable in the accounts of
an earlier previous year but the Income-taxr Officer had not
allowed it to be deducted on the ground that it had nat been
established to have become a bad debt in that year.

Section 37 Any expenditure (not being expenditure of the nature
General described in sections 30 to 36 [all other sections re : deduc-
8. 10(2)(xv)] tions) and not being in the nature of capital expenditure or
personal expenses of the assessee), laid out or expended
wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the busine: cM pro-
fession or vocation shall be allowed in computing income
chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business,
profession or vocation”.
section 38 (1) Where any substantial part of any premises ib used
peer as a dwelling house by the assessee, the deduction |under
for business section 30(a){i) [10(2)(i) and {ii)] shall be such sum fas the
etc. or not Income-tax Officer may determine, having regard—

exclusively so

used. है (a) in a case under section 30(a)(i)(a) [10(2)6)] to the
[s. r0(2)(i), proportionate annual value of the part used for the
Proviso] purposes of the business, profession or vocation, or

{s. 7००06) (9) in 6 case under section 30(a){i)(b) £ 9७0०९ I, to
Proviso} the part of he premise es used for the purposes
the business. lprofesst@n or vocation.


129
Clauses 38-40

(2) Where only a part of any premises is used for the [s. to(2)(x),
purposes of the business, profession or vocation, the deduc- लि portion)
tion under section 30, clause (9) [10(2}{ix), earlier portion]
shall be such sum as the Income-tax Officer may determine
having regard to the part so used.

(3) Where any building, machinery, plant or furniture [ $. 10(3) ]

जज "० . is not exclusively used for the purposes of
the business, profession or vocation, the deductions under
section 30(a)(ii), 30(c), 3160) and 31 (४), 32(1), clauses (i) (ii)
and (iv) and 36 clause (1) [S. 10(2) (iv), (४), (vi) or (vii)]
shall be restricted to a fair proportional part thereof which
the Income-tax Officer may determine having regard to the
user of such building, machinery, plant or furniture for the
purposes of the business, profession or vocation. .

Where a managing agent of a company is liable undez Section 39
an agreement made for adequate consideration to share wanes
managing agency commission with a third party or parties, conmission
the said agent and the said party or parties shall file a [s.12A}
declaration showing the proportion in which such commis-
sion is shared between then, and on proof to the satisfac-
tion of the Income-tax Officer of the facts contained in such
declaration such agent and each such party shall be charge-
able only on the share to which such agent or party is en-
titled under the agreement.

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in sections Section 40
30 to 39, [10(2)}, the following amounts shall not be de- Anjounts not
ducted in computing the ineome charg able under the ache हु
head “Profits and gains of business, fession or vocation”

(a) in the case of any assessee— s. p0(2) (iii)

proviso, part

(i) .........any interest charg eable under this Act which
is payable outside India (not being interest on a |
loan issued for public subscription before the ist
day of April, 1938),......... on which tax has not
been paid or deducted under section 202 or 204
[18]and in respect of which there is no person in
India who may be treated as an agent under sec-
tion 173 [43];

(ii). any sum paid en account of any cess, rate 0 5. :10(4) firs
tax levied on the profits or gains of any business, 7१.
profession or vocation or assessed at a proportion
of or otherwise on the basis of, any such profits
or gains;

(iii) 8089............ payment which is chargeable under {s, 10/4) (a))
the head “Salaries”, if it is payable without India

and if the tax has been ins thereon on assess-
ment nor deducted therefrom binder section 201.
[2.18] nor ince He nder 209 {s.8(7)1;


130

Clauses 40-41
छ. 10(4) (€).) (iv) any... payment to a provident or other fund
established for the benefit of employees of the

assessee, unless the assessee has made effective ar-
fangements to secure that tax shall be deducted at
source from any payments made from the fund
which are chargeable to tax under the head “Sala-
ties”;

[s. 10{4) (b).] (b) in the case of any firm, any.......... payment of
interest, salary, commission or remuneration, made
by the firm to any pariner of the firm;

Tar0(4A)(a)§ (c) in the case of any company—

Gi) 8४५............ expenditure which results directly or
indirectly in the provision of any remuneration or
benefit or amenity to a director or a person who
has a substantial interest in the company within
the meaning of section 2 clause (20), Explanation
(5. 2(6C) (ii1)};

(ii) any expenditure or allowance in respect of any

[s.10(4A)(b)} assets of the company used by any person refer-
red to in sub-clause (i) either wholly or partly for
his own purposes or benefit,

if in the opinion of the Income-tax Officer any such
expenditure or allowance as is mentioned in sub-
clauses (i) and (ii) is excessive or unreasonable
having regard to the legitimate business needs of
the company and the benefit derived by or accru-
ing to it therefrom.

& py (A) Explanation : The provisions of this clause............
हे {Section 10(4A)] shall] apply notwithstanding that any
amount disallowed under this clause is included in the

total income of any person referred to in sub-clause (i).

3. SExpl, Jase (9) in the case of a banking company, the amounts
st) & which have been allowed as a deduction in com-

puting its income chargeable to income-tax under
the head “Interest on securities” under the provi-
sions of section 20(1) [8 Expln(1) (b)]

Section nat (1) Where for the purposes of computing income un-
geable rex, der the head “Profits and gains of business, profession or
Amounts rec- vocation” an allowance or deduction has been made ig the
cived in res- assessment for any year in re: t of any loss, expenditure
pect of lost or trading lability’ incurred “bythe assessee and, subse-
eee quently during any previous. year, the assessee has re-
8. 10(2A)}. ceived. whether in cash or in any other manner whatso-
ever, any amount in respect of such loss or expenditure
or has obtained some benefit in respect of such trading
liability by way of remission or cessation thereof, the
amount received by him or the value of the benefit ac-
cruing to him shall be chargeable to income-tax as: the
income of the business, professton or vocation of that ypre-
vious year. ‘ हें


131
Clause 41

.. Where any building, machinery or plant Profits onsale
which is owned by the assessee and which was or has ofdepreciable
been used for the purposes of business, profession or voca-*6
tion, is sold, discarded, demolished or destroyed in the 9 10(2)(vii).
previous year, and the moneys received in respect of such part, ind ah
building, machinery or plant, as the case may_be, together proviso. part
with the amount of scrap value, if any, exceed the written simplified}
down value, so much of the excess as does not exceed the
difference between the original cost and the written down
value... shall be chargeable to income-tax ds income

of the business, profession or vocation of the previous year

in which the moneys are received.

Explanation 1—For the purposes of this sub-section, i r0(2)(vii)
the expression “moneys received” in respect of any build- dare)
ing, machinery or plant has the same meaning as in sec-
ton 320) (iv) (sec. re: depreciation-clause for loss on
sale

Explanation 2—The provisions of this sub-section shall [s. 10(2)(vi),
apply notwithstanding that the business, profession, or vo- 204 | PION?
cation for the purposes of which the building, machinery OF ther......
plant was being used is no longer in existence at the time there
when the building, machinery or plant is sold, discarded,
demolished or destroyed.

Explanation 3.—For the purposes of this sub-section, {s. r0(2)(vi)
the original cost of a building, the written down value of Sth proviso.
which is determined in accordance with section 42 clause

(7) (b), proviso [Section 10(5) (9), Ist proviso] shall be

deemed to be the written down value so determined as

at the date of its being brought into use for the purposes

of the business, profession or vocation

(3) Where an asset representing expenditure of a capi- Profits onsale
tal nature on scientific research within the meaning of sec. of scientific
tion 35(1) (iv) read with section 42 clause (5) [Section 10 research ase
(2) (xiv)] is sold whether during the continuance of the  *
business or after the cessation thereof without having been Eyota) cn}
used for other purposes and the proceeds of the sale toge- (¢).}
ther with the total amount of the deductions made under
Section 35(2) (i) [s. 10(2) (xiv) first para, latter part] ex-
‘ceed the amount of the capital expenditure, the excess or
the amount of the deductions so made, whichever is the
less. shall be chargeable to income-tax as income of the
‘business, profession or vocation of the previous year in
which the sale took place.

(4) Where a deduction has been allowed in respect of {s.10{2) (xi),
a bad debt or part of debt under the provisions of section Proviso car-
36 clause (6) [5. 10(2) (xi) first para] then if the amount Mer half]
ultimately recovered on any such debt or part is greater
than the difference between the debt or part of debt and
the amount so allowed, the ekcess sha be chargeable to
income-tax as income of the tea fj 5 ३३५५९९%९# or voca-
tion of the previous year in which itji¢ recovered.



132

Clause 42

Section a2. In sections 28 to 41 [all sections incorporating any part
pretation of section 10]and in this section, unless the context other-
wise requires,—

Actual cost ६1) ......... “actual cost” means the actual cost of the as-
Bon 30) sets to the assessee reduced by that portion of the cost
end, earlier thereof, if any. as has been met directly or indirectly by

dart] Government or by any public or loca! authority......0..

S. 10(2) (xivy Explanation 1—Where an asset is used in the business
o Proviso after it ceases to be used for scientific research related to
pa] that business, and a deduction has to be made under sec-
tion 32(1), clause (i) (ii) or (iv) [Section  10(2) (सं) or
(vii)] in respect of that asset, the actual cost of the asset
to the assessee shall be the ectual cost to the assessee as
reduced by the amount of any deduction allowed under
section 35(1) (iv) [10(2) (xiv)] or under any corresponding
11 of ig22. provision of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922. ‘

[S. 10(5) (¢}.j Explanation 2—Where an asset is acquired by the as-
sessee by way of gift or inheritance, the actual cost of the
asset to the assessee shall be the written down value there-
of as in the case of the previous owner for the previous
year in which the asset is so acquired or the market: value
thereof on the date of such acquisition, whichever ip the
less. '

हि 10(5) Le Explanation 3.—............ Where, before the date of ac-
Ls “" quisition by the assessee, the assets were at any timé used
by any other person for the purposes of his busine: SS pro-
fession or vocation and the 10070 6-90 Officer is sakisfied
that the main purpose of the transfer of such assets, direct-
ly or indirectly to the assessee, was the reduction of.a lia-
bility to income-tax (by claiming depreciation with trefer-
ence to an enhanced cost), the actual cost to the asbessee
shall be such an amount as the Income-tax Officer, may,
with the previous approval of the Inspecting Ashe istant
Commissioner, determine having regard to all the circum-
stances of the case.

IS. 10(5) (a), Explanation 4—...... Where ...... assets which had once

and proviso] belonged to the assessee and had been used by him for
the purposes of his business, profession or vocation and
thereafter ceased to be his property by reason of transfer
or otherwise, are re-acquired by hum, the actual cost to
the assessee shall be the actual cost to him when a first
acquired the assets less all depreciation actually allowed

11 of 1922, to him under this Act or under the Indian Income-tat Act,
1922, or under any Act repealed by that Act or under exe-

2 0f 1886. cutive orders issued when the Indian Income-tax Act, 1886,
was in force.

{5.12B(1),2nd Explanation 5.~When any capital asset is transferred
Prowse later by a company to its subsidiary company, then, if the condi-
half pard tions of section 47(iii) [section ,12B(2), 8nd proviso, tee
half] are satisfied, the actual.cpst ... ...... of the tr To
red capital asset to 4 e subsiqiery company shall be faken


133
Clause 42

to be the same as it would have been if the parent com-
pany had continued to hold the capital asset for the pur-
poses of its business.
‘paid?

(2) “paid” means actually paid or incurred according ts. 10(5)
to the method of accounting upon the basis of which the First para,
profits or gains are computed under the head “Profits and part.)
gains of business, profession or vocation”;

(3) “plant” includes ships, vehicles, books, scientific so)
apparatus and surgical equipment purchased for the pur-Firt para,
poses of the business, profession or vocation; part]

(4) “received” means received according to the method “‘Reccived”
of accounting upon the basis of which the profits or gains (New.]
are computed under the head “Profits and gains of business,
profession or vocation”;

(5) (i) “scientific research” means any activities in the ‘Scientific
fields of natural or applied science for the extension of revearch’

S.
knowledge; EB.r0la) (a)
(ii) references to expenditure incurred on scientific re- [S.10(2)(xiv)
search............include all expenditure incurred for the pro- Bxpla. (1i).]

. secution of, or the provision of facilities for the prosecu-
tion of, scientific research, but do not include any expen-
diture ipcurred in the acquisition of rights in, or arising
out of, scientific research;

'S.40(2) (xiv)

(iii) references to scientific research related to a busi- x
ixpin. (tii). }

ness or class of business include—

(a) any scientific research which may lead to or faci-
litate an extension of that business or, as the case
may be, all businesses of that class;

(b) any scientific research of a medical nature which
has a special relation to the welfare of workers -
employed in that business or, as the case may be,
all businesses of that class ;

(6)............“speculative transaction” means a transac- 24(1)
tion in which a contract for purchase and sale of any देव. (2).]
commodity, including stocks and shares, is periodically or .
ultimately settled otherwise than by the actual delivery
or transfer of the commodity or scrips:

Provided that for the purposes ot this clause—-

(a) a contract in respect of raw materials or merchan-
dise entered into by a person in the course of his
manufacturing or merchanting business to guard

, against loss through future price fluctuations in
respect of his contri for ;actual delivery of
goods manufactured S him dr merchandise sold
by him; or


134
Clause 42

(b) a contract in respect of stocks and shares entered
into by a dealer or investor therein to guard
against loss in his holdings of stocks and Hares
through price fluctuations; or .

{c) a contract entered into by 2 member of a forward
market or a stock exchange in the course of any
transaction in the nature of jobbing or arbitrage
to guard against loss which may arise in the ordi-
mary course of his business as such member;

shall not be deemed to be a spéculative transaction;

“Written (7) “written down value” means—~
fown vata (3) in the case of assets acquired in the previous year,
main part.] the actual cost to the assessee;
* * *
{s. 7०(5) (०), (b) in the case of assets acquired before the previous
main part.) year, the actual cost to the assessee less alt depre-
ciation actually allowed to him under this Act,
31 of 1922. or under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, or any
of 1886 Act repealed by that Act, or under executive
2 of 1886.

orders issued when the Indian Income-tax Act, 1886

was in force:

Is. 10(5) (b), Provided that in the case of a building previously the

3st proviso] property of the assessee and brought into use for the pur-
poses of the business, profession or vocation after,the 28th
day of February, 1946, “written down value” means the
actual cost to the assessee reduced by an amount equal to
the depreciation calculated at the rate in force on that
date that would have been allowable had the building been
used for the aforesaid purposes since the date of its ac-
quisition by the assessee and had the provisions of _ this
Act relating to the allowance for depreciation been in force
on and from the date of acquisition.

&. 10(5) (b), Explanation 1—When in a case of succession ip busi-

and proviso] ness profession or vocation, an assessment is made on the
successor under section 180(2) [Section 26(2) proviso], the
written down value of any asset shall be the amount which
would have been taken as its written down value if the
assessment had been made directly on the person succeed-

. ed to,

&.. 328 (2), Explanation 2—When any capital asset is transferred
pad Prove by a company to its subsidiary company, then, if the con-
part) a" ditions of section 4769) [section 12B(1), 2nd proviso, ear-
है lier half] are satisfied, the............written down value........,
of the transferred capital asset to the subsidiary company
shall be taken to be the same as it would have been if the
parent company had continued to hold the capital asset for
the purposes of its business. .
8. 1०(5) Explanation 3—Any allowance in respect of any de-
Expl. ‘ater preciation carried forward under Chapter VI (chapter on
3 Aggregation and set aff] shall be deemed to be deprecia-
tion “actually allowed”. .


135 .
Clauses 43-47

Buildings provided by the assessee for the residential section 43
accommodation of his employees engaged in the business, Residences of
profession or vocation, where the occupation by the em- employees.
ployees of such building is subservient to and necessary for [New]
the performance of their duties, shall, for the purposes of
computation of income chargeable under the head “Profits
and gains of business, profession or vocation”, be deemed
to be buildings occupied by the assessee for the purposes
of his business, profession or vocation.

Insurance business

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Section “44,
the provisions of this Act relating to the computation of insurance
income chargeable under the head “Interest on securities”, and
“Income from house property” or “Income from other-sour- {204 (7) aie
ces”, or im section 207 [18(5), main para, part regarding 9) i
credit for tax deducted at source] or in sections 28 to 43
{all earlier sections regarding Profits and gains of busi-
ness], the profits and gains of any business of insurance,
including any such business carried on by a mutual insu-
rance association or by a co-operative society, shall be com-
puted in accordance with the provisions of the First Sche-
dule (Schedule, Rules 1 to 8].

E—Capital gains

vee ..Any profits or gains arising from the sale, ex- Section 45
change, relinquishment or transfer of a capital asset effect Capital gains
ed in the previous year shall, save as otherwise provided [s._ 12 8 (1)
in sections 55 and 56 [12B(4)} be churgeable to income-tax main para
under the head ‘Capital gains’. carfier part.]

The income chargeable to income-tax under the head $2tion ve
“Capital gains” shall be deemed to be the income of the fs. r2B(s)
previous year in which the sale, exchange, relinquishment main
or transfer took place. latter part.}

Inst
business.

For the purposes of section 45 (12BY1) main para}, the Section 47
following shall not be treated as a sale, exchange, relinqui- Transactions,
shment or transfer of capital assets— fete

as sale etc,
(i) any distribution of cay pital assets on the total 67 5... 12B(1)
partial partition of a Hindu undivided family; ci Prov,
(ii) any transfer of a capital asset under a...... gift...... Pp ee
or will;
(iii) any transfer of a capital asset by a company to its frarBegnd
subsidiary company if— part.)

(७) the parent company or its nominees hold the
whole of the share capital of the subsidiary com-
pany, and

{b) the subsidiary company is an Indien company
and is a re: t.


136

Clauses 48-50

Section 48. The income chargeable under the head “Capital gains”
Mode of com- shall be computed by deducting from the full value of the
putation and consideration for which the sale, exchange, relinquishment

anes or transfer of the capital asset is made, the following

डिक ng. 2) amounts, namely—

Vines] (i) expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in

fs. 12B(2) ()) connection with such sale, exchange, relinquish-
ment or transfer;

[s. 2B(2) (ii) (i) the statutory cost of the camtal asset, as determin-

part.} ed in accordance with the provisions hereinafter
contained.........-.

Section Where the capital asset became the property of . the

Statutory Bi assessee by any of the following modes, the statutory cost

with referen- of the asset shall be determined in accordance with the

Ge £0 modes provisions of sections 50 and 51 [next two sections follow-
quisition ing, dealing with determination of statutory cost]—

Wew]
(i) under a purchase, exchange, relinquishment or other
transfer;

(ii) on any distribution of capital assets on the totel or
partial partition of a Hindu undivided family;

(iii) under a gift or will;
(iv) (a) by succession, inheritance or devolution; or

(b) on any distribution of capital assets on the dissolu-
tion of a firm or other association of persons; or

(c) on any distribution of capital assets on the liquida-
tion of 6 company; or

(d) under a transfer on revocable or irrevocable trust.

Section 50. The statutory cost of an asset shall be determined as

Determina-  follows—
tion of statue

tory cost. (1) Where the capital asset became the property of
the assessee by any of the modes Specified, in
section 49(i) {clause (i) of section for  statytory
cost with reference to modes of acquisition], the
statutory cost of the asset shall be—

3. 12 8 (2) (a) the cost of acquisition of the asset to the apses-

fy, part.) see. > as increased by the cost of any; im-
provements made thereto, incurred and borne by
the assessee; or

fs. 12B(2)» (b) where the capital asset became the property of
कप. Prov. the assessee............ before the 150 day of Janu-
Part.] ary, 1954, then, at the option Of the assessee, the

fair market value of the asset on the ist day of
January, 1954, as increased by the cost of any
improvements made thereto on or after the 1st
day of Janugry, 1954, incurred and borne by the
assessee. i


137
Clause 50

(2) Where the capital asset became the property oft 128(3),
the assessee by the mode specified in section 49 (ii) [clause caclter Paka
(४) of section re: statutory cost with reference to modes pare). half,
of acquisition], the statutory cost of the asset shall be de-
termined as follows—

(i) where the capital asset became the property of thes. 128 (9),
assessee before the 156 day of April, 1956, the sta- prov. a),
tutory cost of the asset shall be the highest of the P#*]
following—

{a) the cost of acquisition of the asset to the previ- [s. 12B(3).
ous owner thereof, as increased by the cost of main para,
any improvements made thereto after its acqui- eae half,
sition by the previous owner or the assessee, in- P
curred and borne by the previous owner or the
assessee, as the case may be; or

(9) ............ the fair market value of the......asset on[s.12B (4),
the date on which it became the property of the prov. i),
688९53९6.................. » as increased by the cost of part)
any improvements made thereto after its acqui-
sition by the assessee, incurred and borne by
the assessee; or

(c

where the capital asset became the property of [s.1e B (2),
the previous owner...... before the ist day of 3rd. prov.
January, 1954, the fair market value of the as- Patt

set on the lst day of January, 1954, as increased

by the cost of any improvements made thereto

on or after the lst day of January, 1954, by the

previous owner or the assessee, incurred and

borne by the previous owner or the assessee, as

the case may be;

(ii) where the capital asset became the property offs 12B (3)
the assessee on or after the 15६ day of April, 1956, Provito ff
जज the statutory cost of the asset shall be the
fair market value of the asset on the date of the
partition, as increased by the cost of any improve-
ments made thereto on or after the date of the par-
tition, incurred and borne by the assessee.

(3) Where the capital asset became the property of
the assessee by any of the modes specified in section 49
(ili) [clause (ii) of section regarding statutory cost with
reference to mode of acquisition}, the statutory cost of the
asset shall be determined as follows :— fe 2B (2)

(i) where the capital asset became the property of 3a ons

the assessee before the ist day of April, 1956, its (3),, main
statutory cost shall be determined in accordance para, earlier
with the provisions of clause (i) of sub-section (2); pt Ba

(ii) where the capital fi he ea the property of Provito (i),

the assessee on or a} the 134 day of April 1956, rei
the statutory cost of the be~—


138

Clauses 50-51
[s. 12B (3), (a) the cost of acquisition of the asset to the previ-
main para, ous owner thereof, as increased by the cost of
earlier halt, any improvements made thereto after its acqui-
part) sition by the previous owner or the assessee, in-

curred and borne by the previous owner or the
assessee, as the case may be; or

&. 128 (2), (9) where the asset became the property of the pre-
grd__ prov. vious owner before the 156 day of January, 1954,
part.) then, at the option of the assessee, the fair mar-

ket value of the asset on the ist day of January,
1954, as increased by the cost of any improve-
ments made thereto on or after the 15६ day of
January, 1954, by the previous owner or the as-
sessee, incurred and borne by the previous own-
er or the assessee, as the case may be.

(4) Where the capital asset became the property of
the assessee, whether before or after the Ist day of Janu-
ary, 1954, by any of the modes specified in section 49 (iv)
[clause (iv) of section re: statutory cost and mode of ac-
quisition}, the statutory cost of the capital asset shall be—

[s.12B (3), (a) the cost of acquisition of the. asset to the previous
main para, owner thereof, as increased by the cost of any im-
cartier half, provements made thereto after its acquisition by
Part] the previous owner or the assessee, incurred and

borne by the previous owner or the assessee, as
the case may be; or

[5.12 B (2), (b) where the asset became the property of the previ-
grd prov. ous owner before the ist day of January, 1954,
part] then, at the option of the assessee, the fair market

value of the asset on the Ist day of January, 1954,
as increased by the cost of any improvements
made thereto on or after the ist day of January,
1954, by the previous owner or the assessee, incut-
red and borne by the previous owner or the as-
sessee, as the case may be.

fs. 128 (3), Explanation.—Where the cost of acquisition of @ capt-

main ci tal asset to the previous owner cannot be ascertaingd, the

jauet half} fair market value on the date on which the capital asset
became the property of the previous owner shall be deem-
ed to be the cost of acquisition thereof to the previous
owner for the purposes of this section.

Section 53 Where the capital asset is an asset in respect of which
Special pro- a deduction on account of depreciation has been obtained
muting OY the assessee in any previous year either under this Act
hatutory cost OF under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, or any Act re-
in the case of pealed by that Act, or under executive orders issued when
depreciable the Indian Income-tax Act, 1886, was in force, the J i=
assets. sions of section 50 {preceding section regarding ddermi-

t ft |


139
Clauses 51--55

nation of statutory cost} shall be subject to the following ™ Of 1922
modifications :— 2 of 1886

(3) The written down value, as defined in section 42
clause (7) {s. 10(5)], of the asset, as adjusted, shall & 2B पक
be taken as the statutory cost of the asset. i ,

part)
(2) Where under any provision section 50......[pre-
ceding section regarding computation of statutory [+ 118 (2),
cost] the fair market value of the asset on the lst Proviso part)
day of January, 1954, is to be taken into account
at the option of the assessee, then, the statutory
cost of the asset shall, at the option of the assessee,
be the fair market value of the asset on the said
date, as reduced by the amount of depreciation, if
any, allowed to the assessee after the said date,
and as adjusted.

जज Where any capital asset was on any previous Section 52
occasion the subject of negotiations for its sale, exchange, Option
relinguishment or transfer, any option or other money re- my a.
ceived and retained by the assessee in respect of such nego- B (2),
tiations shall be deducted from the cost of acquisition or 9 i
the written down value or the fair market value, as the
case may be, in computing the statutory cost.

The full value of the consideration for the exchange segtion 53°
of a capital asset referred to in section 48 [section re: Considera-
computation of income] shall be taken to be the fair mar-tion for ex-
ket value, on the date of the exchange, of the asset obtain- change.
ed by the assessee in exchange,— [New]

(a) as increased by the value of any other considera-
tion obtained by the assessee, and

(b) as diminished by the value of any consideration,
in addition to the capital asset, given by the asses-
see, है

Where the Income-tax Officer is Satisfied that the con-seation 54.
sideration recited in any deed of sale, exchange, relin- Consideca-
quishment or transfer of a capital asset is low and that it tioa for le,
was so recited with the object of avoidance or reduction SSermined in
of the liability of the assessee under section 45 {section of
re: chargeability], the full value of the consideration re- understate-
ferred to in section 48 [section re: computation of capital ment.
gains] shall, with the prior approval of the Inspecting As- {s.12 B_(2),
sistant Commissioner.................. » be taken to be the fair !t prov.]
market value of the capital asset on the date on which the
sale, exchange, relinquishment or transfer took place.

Notwithstanding anything contained in section 45 {s. Section aie
12B(1) main paraJ, where a capital gain arises from the ei vom
sale, exchange or transfer of one or more capital assets, tax
being buildings or lands appurtenant thereto the income js. 12 8 (4)
of which is chargeable under the head “Income from house fo
10--1 Law Com./58.


Section 56.
Profit on sale
of property
used. for resi-
dences.

{s. 12 B (4),
(b)}

Section 57
{nterpreta-
tion.

{New]

(ef-s. 728 (2),

end prov.
latter half)

28 (के
ii) part}

140
Clauses 55-57

property”, and the full aggregate value of the considera-
tion for which the sale, exchange, or transfer is made does
not exceed the sum of twenty-five thousand rupees, the
capital gain shall not......... _.. be included in the total in-
come of the assessee:

Provided that this section shall not apply in any case
where the aggregate of the fair market values of all capi-
tal assets, being buildings or lands appurtenant thereto
the income of which is chargeable under the head “Income
from house property”, owned by the assessee immediately
before the sale, exchange or transfer aforesaid is made,
exceeds the sum of rupees fifty thousand.

Where a capital gain arises from the sale, exchange,
relinquishment or transfer of a capital asset to which the
provisions of section 55 [12B(4) (a)]} are not applicable, be-
ing buildings or lands app’ wurtenant thereto the income of
which is chargeable under the head ‘Income from house
property’, which in the two years immediately preceding
the date ‘on which the sale, exchange, relinquishmenf or
transfer took place, was being used by the assessee.or a
parent of his mainly for the purposes of his own or the
parent’s own residence, and the assessee has within a
period of one year before or after that date purchased a
new property for the purposes of his own residence, then
instead of the capital gain being charged to income-tar
as income of the previous year in which the sale, exchange,
relinquishment or transfer took place, it shall, if the gsses-
see so elects in writing before the assessment is ma de, be
dealt with in accordance with the following provisions of
this section, that is to say,—

(i) if the amount of the capital gain is greater than
the cost of the new asset, the difference between
the amount of the capital gain and the cost of the
new asset shall be charged under section 45 [(12B)
(1), main para] as income of the previous year; or

(ii) if the amount of the capital gain is equal to less
than the cost of the new asset, the 520 gain
shall not be charged under section 45 [section 12B

(1) main para]. ;

In sections 50 and 51 [sections re: determinatidn of
statutory cost]— i

(a) “adjusted”, in relation to written down vate or
fair market value, means diminished by any loss
deducted or increased’ by any profit assessed, ender
the provisions of section 34(1) clause {iv) fs. 10
(2) (vii}—part for losses] or section 41(2) [s.;10(2)
(vii)—part for profits], as the case may be; .

(9) “cost of any improvements” means all expenditure
of ० capital nature incurred in making any iaddi-
tions or altesations to the capital asset, but does

1


141

Clauses 57—59
not include any expenditure which is deductible
in computing the income chargeable under the
head “Interest on securities”, “Income from house
property”, “Profits and gains of business, profes-
sion or vocation” or “Income from other sources” }
and “improvements” shall be construed according-

ly.
F—Income from other sources Section 58
6) . Income...... of every kind ............ shall Income from
be charge income-tax under the head “Income from ot sources.

other sources” if it is not chargeable to income-tar under (Section 2(1)}
any of the heads specified in section 14, items A to E [Sec-
tion 6, clauses (1) to (iv) and (vi)].

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the genera-
lity of the provisions of sub-section (1), the following in-
come shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head “In-
come from other sources”, namely :—

(0) &७४०७॥४४३..................; है Rice

(1) income from machinery, plant or furniture belong- Hirg of है
ing to the assessee and let on hire, if the income plane शत
is not chargeable to income-tar under the head furnture.
“Profits and gains of business, profession or voca- [New]
tion”;

Gil) where an assessee lets on hire machinery, plant or Magis 2 of
furniture belonging to him and also buildings, and buildings
the letting of the buildings is inseparable from the fonds eae of
letting of the said machinery, plant or furniture, mad inery
the income from such letting of the buildings, if it etc.
is not chargeable to income-taxr under the head [New]
“Profits and gains of business, profession or voca-
tion.

of an assessee......... any dividend paid by a company whose G: a ing up
total income is chargeable to incomedax under this Act ° dividends.
shall be the gross amount of the dividend as determined [S..16 (2);
under sub-section (2). - main para.

part,
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the gross (s.1 (2),
amount of the dividend shall ba the ambunt of the net divi- main pars,

dend as increased in accordance with the following for- past
™ [गा

(1) For the purposes -of inclusion in the total income Section 59

DxR
Increase=

100 minus R.
In the above formula,—

{i} “Increase” stands for a ##। increage:-to be made in the
amount of the net dividend;


142
Clauses 59-60
(ii) ‘D’ stands for the amount of the net dividend; and

(ili) ‘R? stands for the average rate of income-tax ap-
plicable to the company for the financial year in
which the dividend is paid, credited or distributed
or deemed to have been paid, credited or distri-
buted. The rate is to be expressed as a percentage;
for example, where the rate is 25 naya paise ‘per
rupee, ‘R’ stands for the figure 25.

(3B) ............ When the fund out of which the dividend
(S.16(2} has been paid, credited or distributed or deemed to have
Proviso.) been paid, credited or distributed includes—

(i) any profits and gains of the company not included
in its total income, or

(ii) any income of the company on which income-tax
was not payable, or

(iii) any amount attributable to any allowance made in
computing the profits and gains of the company,
the increase to be made under sub-section (2) shall
be calculated only upon such proportion of the net
dividend as the said fund after deduction of the
inclusions enumerated above bears to the whole of
that fund.

Section 60 The income chargeable under the head “Income from
Deductions. Other sources” shall be computed after making the follow-
ing deductions, namely :—

2 GQ) ............ in the case of..,......... dividends, any reason-

(3. 12 (2) able sum paid by way of commission or remunera-

part] Para, tion to a banker or any other person realising such
. dividend on behalf of the assessee ;

(ii) in the case of income of the nature referred to in

& 12 (3) & section 58(2), clauses (ii) and (iii), [new sub-sec-

wh part for tions regarding income from hire of machinery ete,

luctions.} and lease of buildings, inseparable from machinery,

in the Section regarding chargeability 1, deductions,
so far as may be, in accordance with the provisions
of sections 30(a){ii), 30(c), 31, clauses (i) and (ii),
32(1). clauses (i) (ii) and (iv), and 36, clause (1)
[section 10(2){iv), (v), (vi) and (vii) portions in-
corporated in draft section for deductions in income
from business], and subject to the provisions of
sections 34 and 38 [section 10, provisions incorpo-
rated in draft section regarding conditions for de-
preciation and development rebate and partial

[$. 12. (2), user];

part.) pare (iii) any other expenditure (not being in the nature of
capital expenditure) laid out or expended wholly
and exclusively for the purpose of making or earn-
ing such income................ .


143
Clauses 61-62

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Section 61
section 60 [Section regarding deductions for income from Amounts not
other sources}, the following amounts shall not be deduc- deductible.
tible in computing the income chargeable under the head
“Income from other sources”, namely :—

(a) in the case of any assessee— [S. 12 | (2),
proviso]

(3) any personal expenses of the assessee;

(ii) any interest chargeable under this Act which is
payable outside India (not being interest on a
joan issued for public subscription before the
Ast day of April, 1938),.. on which tax
has not been paid or ded ler section 202
or 204 [Sections regarding deductions of tax at
source]. and in respect of which there is no per-
son in India who may be treated as an agent
under section 173[section 43];

(iii) any payment which is chargeable under the head
“Salaries”, if it is payable without India, unless
tax has been paid thereon on assessment or de-
ducted therefrom under section 201 [18(2)}
or recovered under section 209 [18(7)];

(b) in the case of a company, any expenditure or allow-[S. 12 (5)
ance of the nature referred to in section 40, clause का 5 read
(०) [section 10(4A)(a) and-(b)}. notwithstanding (५५). 19
that the amount thereof is included in the total in-
come of any person referred to in section 40(c)(i)
[20(4A) (a)].

(1) The provisions of section 41(1) (Section 10(2A)] Section 62
shall apply, so far as may be, in computing the income of Profits
an assessee under section 58 [main section regarding charge- chargeable
ability of Income from other sources], as they apply in 0 ७४५
computing the income of an assessee under the heads. 12 (5)
“Profits and gains of business, profession or vocation”. part.]

(2) When any buildings, machinery, plant or furniture fs 12 (3) &

to which section 58(2), clauses (ii) and (iii) [sub-sections ore part for
regarding income from hire of machinery etc. and lease 3)
of building, inseparable from machinery, in the section re-
garding chargeability) apply are sold, discarded, demolished
or destroyed, the provisigns of section 41(2) [Section 10(2)
(vii), 2nd and 4th provisos, so far as they deal wifh, profits]
shall apply, so far as may be, in computing the income of
an assessee under section 58 (Section regarding chargeability
of income from other sources] as they apply in computing
the income of an assessee undér the head “Profits and gains
of business, profession or vocation”.



14
Clauses 63—67
CHAPTER V

INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS. INCLUDED IN
ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

Section 63 All income arising to any person by virtue of a transfer
Transfer of |... - Whether revocable or not and whether effected
oe before or after the commencement of this Act, shall, where
PS sen pa? there is no transfer of the assets from which the income

earlier half] arises, be chargeable to income-tax as the income of the
6s transferor............and shall be included in his total income.
Section

है All income arising to any person by virtue of a revo-
z

Revoeab © of cable transfer of assets shall be chargeable to income-tar

assets. as the income of the transferor and shall be included in his

(S. 16 (1) (० total income.

main — para,

latter half]

Section 65 (1) The provisions of section 64 [S. 16(1)(c), main para,

Irrevocable latter half] shall not apply to any income—
transiers,

{S. 16 (1) (०), (a) arising to any person by virtue of a transfer which
Benes is not revocable for a period exceeding six years
her nals. or during the lifetime of the transferee, or, m the
case of a transfer by way of trust, during the life-
time of the beneficiary, and
(9) from which income the transferor derives no direct
or indirect benefit.
§s 16 (1) (०) (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
oe hat] (1), all income arising to any person by virtue of a transfer
“ shall _be chargeable tg income-tax as the income of the
transferor as and when the power to revoke the transfer
arises, and shall then be included ‘in his total income.
Section 66 For the purposes of sections 63, 64 and 65 [section 16
Definitions, (1)(¢), main para and 3rd proviso] and of this section,—-

हू AAS (a) ...... ..a transfer shall be deemed to be revocable
(i) it contains any provision for the retransfer direct-
ly or indirectly of the income or assets to the
sees transferer, or
(ii) it, in any way, gives the transferor a right to
reassume power directly or indirectly ovet the
income or assets; :

6०592 (0) “transfer” includes any settlement, trust, covenant,
pari} agreement or arrangement. |
Section 67 In computing the total income of any individual, being
Husband, a male, there shall be included all such income as arises
wife .and directly or indirectly—
minor child-
ren, (i) to his wife from the membership of the wife in a
(5. 16 (3).] firm in which such individual is a partner;
(ii) to a minor child of such individual from the a fe
sion of the minor to’ the benefits of partnetship
in a firm in which sucth individual is a partner.


145
Clauses 67-69

(iii) to his wife from assets transferred directly or in-
directly to the wife by such individual otherwise
than for adequate consideratiom or in connection
with an agreement to live apart }.............

(iv) to a minor child, not being a married daughter, of
such individual from assets transferred directly or
indirectly to the minor child by such individual
otherwise than for adequate consideration; or

(५) .........- .to any person of association of persons......
_.....from assets transferred-otherwise than for ade-
quate consideration to the person or association by
such individual for the benefit of his wife, or a
minor child (not being a married daughter), or both.

CHAPTER VI

AGGREGATION OF INCOME AND SET-OFF OR CARRY
FORWARD OF LOSS

Aggregation of income

In computing the total income of an assessee, there Section 68
shall be included all income on which no income-tax is Total income
payable under the provisions of sections 81 to 87 {Sections [S. 16 (1) &
relating to income on which no income-tax is payable]. earlier part.

(1) In computing the total income of an assessee who Sédiion 69 ~
is a partner of a firm............/ swhether' the net result of the Mathod of
computation of total income of the firm is a profit or a loss, omputing |
his share (whether a net profit or a net loss) shall be Sa ८
computed as follows— income of the

(a) any interest, salary, commission or other remunera- is 16 (1) (७)
tion paid to any partner in respect of the previous main para.}
year shall be deducted from the total income of
the firm, and the balance aspertained and appor-
tioned among the pattners ;

(b) where the amount apportioned to the partner under
clause (a) is a profit, any salary, interest, commission
or other remuneration paid tp the partner by the
firm in respect of the:previous year shall be added
to that amount, and the result shall be treated as
the partner’s share in the incame of the firm;

(c) where the amount apportioned to the partner under
clause (a) is a loss, any salary, interest, commission
or other remuneration paid to the partner by the
firm in respect of the previous year shall be ad-
justed against that amount, and the result shall be
treated as the partne#’s share in the income of the
firm. 3 |


146
Clauses 69-73

{New] (2) A partners share in the income of the firm. as

- computed under sub-section (1), shall, for the purposes of
assessment, be apportioned under the various heads of in-
come in the proportion which the income of the firm under
each head bears to the total income of the firm.

{New] (3) Any interest paid by a partner on capital borrowed
for the purposes of investment as his capital in the firm
shall, in computing his iricome cag eable under the head
“Profits and gains of business, profession or vocation” in
respect of his share in the income of the firm, be deducted
from the share, but no other deduction shall be allowed in
respect of the said share.

ES. 16 (1) (b) (4) If 6 partner's share in the income of the firm, as

Proviso. ] computed under this section, is a loss, such loss may be
set off, or carried forward and set off, in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter.

[New] Explanation.—In this section, “paid” has the same mean-
ing as ig assigned to it in section 42, clause (2) [s. 10(5)].
Section 7० Where any sum is found eredited in the books of an
Cash credits. assessee maintained for any previous year, and the assessee
{New} offers no explanation about the nature and source thereof

or the explanation offered by him is not satisfactory, the
sum so credited shall be deemed to be the income of the
assessee and shall be chargeable to income-tax as the in-
come of that previous year.

Section 71 Where in the francial year immediately preceding the
aexplained assessment year the assessee has made investments which

Gre not recorded in the books of account maintained by him
INew} for any source of income, and the assessee offers no epla-
nation about the nature and source of the investments or
the explanation offered by him is not accepted by the In-
come-tax Officer, the value of the investments shall be deem-
ed to be income of the assessee of such financial year.

Section 72 Set off, or carry forward and set off

Seto of loss Save as otherwise provided in this Act, where the net

from one bu- result for any assessment year in respect of any business,

frome ag oss profession or vocation carried on by the assessee, computed

vom another. under the head “Profits and gains of business, profession or

{New] vocation”, is a loss, the assessee shall be entitled to have
the amount of such loss set of against the profits and
gains assessable for that assessment year from any other
business, profession or vocation under the said hea of in-
come.

ion ? :
eet lose (1) Where in respect of any assessment year the net

f head TeSult 01 the computation under any of the heads of income
to another, mentioned in section 14 [6] other than “Capital gains” is
8. 24 (1), @ loss to the assessee, the assessee shall, subject to the other
main para] provisions of this Chapter, be entitled to have the amount


147
Clauses 73-74

of such loss set off against his income assessable for that
assessment year under any other head.................. except
“Capital gains”.

(2) Where for any assessment year the net result of Cary for
the computation under the head “Profits and gains of busi- OF d and set
ness, profession or vocation” is a loss to the assessee, not tows
being a loss sustained in a speculation business, and such
Joss has not been wholly set off in accordance with the pro- ls. 24 (2)
visions of sub-section (1), so much of the loss as is not so pa
set off or the whole loss where the assessee had no income ~
under any other head, shall, subject to the other provisions
of this Chapter, be carried forward to the following assess-
ment year, and...

(i) ............it shali be set off against the profits and
gains, if any, of any business, profession or voca-
tion carried on by him and assessable for that assess-
ment year, provided that the business, profession or
vocation for which the loss was original fy computed
continued to be carried on by him in the previous
year relevant for that assessment year; and

(ii) if the loss............cannot be wholly so set off, the

amount of loss not so set off shall be carried forward
to the following assessment year and so on.

(3) Where any allowance or part thereof is under sub- (5. 24. (2),
section (2) of section 32 [section regarding depreciation] or Dror by pat
sub-section (4) of section 35 [Section regarding scientific (xiv) and
research expenditure] to be carried forward, effect shall Prov.(f)part.)
first be given to the provisions of sub-section (2).

(4) ......... No loss shall be.........carried forward under [s. 24 (2)
this section for more than eight assessment years imme- pare] para
diately succeeding the assessment year for which the loss part}
was first computed.

Section 74.

{1) Any loss computed in respect of a speculation bUSi- 1 ७६५०3 ७ spe-
ness carried on by the assessee, shall not be set off except culation busi-
against profits and gains, if any, of another speculation busi- ness.
ness. 8. 24 (1), Ist

prov)

(2) Where for any assessment year any loss computes छ. 94)
in respect of a speculation business not been wholly set main para
off under sub-section (1), so much of the loss as is not so part.)
set off or the whole loss where the assessee had no income
from any other speculation business, shall, subject to the
other provisions of this Chapter, be carried forward to the
following assessment year, and—
0) we it shall be set off against the profits and
gains, if any, of any speculation business carried on
by him assessable for that assessment year; and
(ii) if the loss cannot be wholly so set off, the amount
of loss not so set off shall be carried forward to the
following assessment year and\so on.


148
Clauses 74-77

Bvt) ee (3) In respect of allowance on account of depreciation or
ands. 10 (2) capital expenditure on scientific research, the provisions of
(xiv), 2nd sub-section (3) of section 73 [preceding section regarding set
Prov, —_(f) off ete. in non-speculation business] shall apply in relation to

part) speculation business as they apply in relation to any other
business. :
$. 24 (2), (4) No loss shall be carried forward under this section

main. Pata, for more than eight assessment years immediately succeed-

Part} ing the assessment year for which the loss was first com-
puted.
Section 75 (1) Where in the previous year relevant for any assess-

Losses under ment year the assessee sustains a loss under the head “Capi-
the न jhead tal gains”, the assessee shall, subject to the other provisions
an” of this Chapter, be entitled to have the amount of such

loss set off against his other income assessable for that as-
[s 24(24)] sessment year under the head “Capital gains”.

[s. 24 (2B), (2) Where in respect of any assessment year the net

part.] result of the computation under the head “Capital gains”
is a loss to the assessee, such loss shall, subject to the other
provisions of this Chapter, be carried forward to the follow-
ing assessment year and set off against capital gains assess-
able for that assessment year, and if it cannot be so set off,
the amount thereof not so set off shall be carried forward
to the following assessment year and so on...... : .

Provided that where the loss computed in respect of
any assessee, not being a company, for any assessment year
does not exceed five thousand rupees, it shall not car-
ried forward under this sub-section.

fs. 24 (aR) (3) ...........- No............loss shall be carried fdrward
part] under sub-section (2) for more than eight assessment, years
immediately succeeding the assessment year for whith the
loss was first computed. i
Section 76. . .
Losses of re- QQ) ...........- Where the assessee is a registered firm, any
gistered firms, loss which cannot be set off against other income............
of the firm shall be apportioned between the partners of
Is. 24 (1).2nd the firm and they alone shall be entitled to have the amount
Pal] 4 aire loss set off under sections 73(1), 74(1) and $501) 1) [24

[s. 24(2) (2) Nothing contained in section 73(2), 74(2) or

Proviso (c), 75(2) [s. 24(2) main para and 24(2B)] shall entitle any as-

earlier part segsee, being a registered firm, to have carried forwatd and
set off its loss... ..under the provisions of section 73(2)

Section 77. or 74(2) (24(2) main para] or section 75(2) [24(2B)}:

Losses of

paregistered In the case of an unregistered firm.......... .agsessed

as tes psenucd under the provisions of section 190(b) (23(5)(b)] im res-

farms [3.2 (2) pect of any assessment year, its losses for that assessment

Proviso (d)]_ year shall be dealt with as if ay were a registered firm.



149

Clauses 78—82
(1)........ Where the assessee is an unregistered firm Section 78
which has not been assessed as a registered firm under लए ed
the provisions of section 190(b) [23(5)(b)] any............l0sS grmeor its
of the firm shall be set off only against the income......... partners.
of the firm. [s. 24(1) and
(2) --+...Where the assesse is a partner of an unregis- castles halt]

tered firm which has not been assessed as a registered firm
under the provisions of section 190(b) [s. 23(5)(b)] and his
share in the income of the firm is a loss,—

(a) such loss shall not be set off under the provisions [New]
of section 73(1), 74(1), or 75(1) [Sec. 24(1)};

(b) nothing contained in section 73(2) or 74(2) [Sec, 24 8- 24(2),
(2) main para] or section. 75(2) [S. 24(2B)} shall (0000 (©),
entitle the assessee to have carried forward and set .
‘off against his own income such loss.

(1) Where a change has occurred in the constitution of Section 79
a firm, nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to entitle Set off of
the firm to have set off so much of the loss pro-losetin case
portionate to the share of a retired or deceased partner com- conetiteion
puted in accordance with the provisions of section 69 [clause of farms or on
(७) of sub-section (1) of section 16] as exceeds his share of succession.
profits, if any, of the previous year in the firm, or to entitle [s.24(2), Pro
any partner to the benefit of any portion of the said loss ४३०० (०)-)
which is not apportionable to him under section 69 [sec-
tion 16(1)(b)].

(2) Where any person carrying on any business, profes-
sion or vocation has been sueceeded in such capacity by
another person otherwise than by inheritance, nothing in
this Chapter shall be deemed to entitle any person other
than the person incurring the loss to have it set off against,
his income.......... we पु

Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, no Secon 80
loss which has not been determined in pursuance of a re- sul ‘Per i
turn filed under the Provisions of section 143 [22] shall be of rpturn for
carried forward and set of. under section 73(2) or 74(2) losds.
[24(2)] or section 75(2) (24(2B)} 5 BRCM

CHAPTER VII
INCOMES ON WHICH NO INCOME-TAX IS PAYABLE

Income-tax shall not be payable by an assessee in res- Section 81
pect of such portion, if any, of the earned income inclu-gareed  in-
ded in his total income as is directed’ by the annual Cen- come. हु
‘tral Act fixing the rate or rates of income-tex for any as- 5. ७, catli-
sessment year to be deducted in making an assessment for 7 शान
that year... ०००५-००

(1) Income-tax shali not be payable by a co-operative दा aint

society, including a co-operative soci¢ty carrying on ae) ty.
business of banking,— 5. % (3).
: maig para.}


150
Clauses 82-85

(i) in respect of profits and gains of business carried
on by it;

(ii) in respect of interest and dividends derived from
its Investments with any other co-operative socie-
tys

(iii) in respect of any income derived from the letting
of godowns or warehouses for storage, processing
or facilitating the marketing of commodities ;

(iv) in respect of any interest on securities chargeable
under section 18 [8] or any income from property
chargeable under section 22 [9], where the total
income of such society does not exceed twenty
thousand rupees and the society is not a housing
society or an urban consumer's society or a society
carrying on transport business.

(2) For the purposes of this section an “urban consu-
mers’ co-operative society” means a society for the benefit
of consumers within the limits of a municipal corporation,
municipality, municipal committee, notified area committee,
town area or cantonment.

(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply.

{i) the Sanikatta Saltowners’ Society ;

(ii) a co-operative society carrying on insurance busi-
ness in respect of the profits and gains of that
business computed in accordance with section 44
[Rule 9 of the Schedule).

Income-tax shall not be payable by an assessee, who
is a member of a co-operative society, in respect of any
dividends received by him from the society.

Income-tar shall not be payable by an assessee, which
is an authority constituted under any law for the time be-
ing in force for the marketing of commodities, in respect
of any income derived from the letting of godowns or ware-
houses for storage, processing or facilitating the marketing
of commodities.

(1) Save as otherwise hereinafter provided, income-
tax shall not be payable by an assessee on so much of the
profits or gains derived from any industrial undertaking
to which this section applies as do not exceed six per cent.
per annum on the capital employed in the undertaking,.
computed in accordance with such rules as may be made
in this behalf by the Central Board of Revenue.

(2) This section applies to any industrial undertaking
which fulfils all the following conditions, namely: —

(i) it is not formed by the splitting up or the recons-

truction of business already in existence ;



151
Clauses 85-87

(ii) it is not formed by the transfer to a new business
of building, machinery or plant used in a business
which was being carried on before the 15६ day of
April, 1948 ;

(ii) it has begun or begins to manufacture or produce
articles in any part of India at any time within a
period of thirteen years from the ist day of April,
1948, or such further period as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify with reference to any particular
industria! undertaking ;

(iv) it employs ten or more workers in a manufactur-
ing process carried on with the aid of power, or
employs twenty or more workers in a manufac-
turing process carried on without the aid of power.

(3) ee The Central Government may, by notifi- [3.15 6 (2),
cation in the Official Gazette, direct that the exemption proviso.
conferred by this section shall not apply to any particular
industrial undertaking.

(4) The profits or gains of an industrial undertaking 8-75 50]
to which this section applies shall be computed in_accor-
dance with the provisions of sections 28 to 43 [Section
10).

(5) Nothing in this section shall affect the application {s.15 56)]
of sections 113 to 120 . 3A] in relation to the pro-

fits or gains of an indus! undertaking to which this sec-

tion applies.

(6) The provisions of this section shall apply to the [6.15 000]
assessment—

(i) for the assessment year if in the previous year for
that assessment year the assessee begins to manu-
facture or produce articles, and

(ii) for the four assessment years immediately suc-
ceeding.

Income-tax shall not be pay md pal by a shareholder in Section 66
respect of so much of any divi dend id or deemed to be pivjdend
paid to him by an industrial undertaking as is attributable from new} io-
to that part of the profits or gains on which income-tax 4 fal
is not payable under section $5 (preceding section re: new Tet 7 ae
industrial undertakings]. “15 Aa).

Income-tax shall not be payable by an assessee in res- Section 87
pect of the following amounts which are included in his Other
total income— comes,

6)

ine

the interest received on any security of the [s.8. 2nd pro-
al Government issued or declared to be 70-07
come-tax free ;



152

Clauses 87-88
[New] (ii) the interest received on any security of a State
Government issued income-tax free, the income-
{CF 5.8, 3rd tax whereon shall be payable by the State Gov-

proviso.} ernment ;

[s-14(2) (3)) (iii) if the assessee is a partner of an unregistered

धिए,............... any portion of the assessee’s share

in the profits and gains of the firm computed in

the manner laid down in section 69 [16 (1) (b)] on

which income-tox has already been paid by the
rm ;

5.14 (2aa)) {iv) if the assesse is a partner of a registered firm,
the amount which represents the difference bet- |
ween—

(a) the assessee’s share in the total income of the
firm, and .

(9) his share in such total income as reduced by the
income-tax, if any, payable by the firm,
the shares in either case being computed in the
manner laid down in section 69 [(16(1) (b)]; and

(v) if the assessee is a member of an associatipn of
persons, other than a Hindu undivided family. a
company or a firm, ...... any portion of the arhount
which he is entitled to receive from the associa.
tion on which income-tar has already been paid
by the association.

CHAPTER प्रा
REBATES AND RELIEFS
A—Rebate of income-tar.

[s.14(2) (०)

Section ee (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the as-
life insurance SeSsee shall be entitled to a deduction, from the amount of
premia, income-tax on his total income with which he is charge-
annuities and able for any assessment year, of an amount equal to ae in
contributions come-tax calculated at i e average rate of income-tdx on
fondsetc. the following sums, namely: — :
[s. गए (2), :
part} (७) ............' where the assessee is an i any
835 02] sums paid in the previous year by the assefsee—
(i) to effect or to keep in force an insurance the
life of the assessee or on the life of a wife or
husband of the assessee ; or

(ii) to effect or to keep in force a contract for a de-
ferred annuity on the life of the assessee or on
the life of a wife or husband of the assessee ; or

(iii) as a contribution to any provident fund to which

19 of 1925. the Provident Funds Act. 1925, applies ;


153

Clauses 88-89

(9) where the assessee is a Hindu undivided family,... fs. 15 (2)}
any sums paid in the previous year by the assessee
to effect or to keep in force an insurance on the
life of any male member of the family or of the
wife of any such member ;

(० ...... any sum deducted in the previous year from [5.7 (3), rst
the salary payable by or on behalf of the Govern- proviso.)
ment to any individual, being a sum deducted in
accordance with the conditions of his service, for
the purpose of securing to him a deferred annuity
or making provision for his wife or children, in
so far as the sum so deducted does not exceed one-
fifth of the salary ;

(d) if the assessee is an employee Participating in @ [New]
recognised provident fund, his own contributions
to his individual account in the fund in the previ-
ous year, to the extent provided in Section 295
{58F] ;

(९) if the assessee is an employee participating in an (New)
approved superannuation fund, any sum paid in
the previous year by him by way of contribution
towards the superannuation fund, to the extent
provided in section 311 [58R].

(2) The provisions of clauses (6) and (b) of sub-section fs.15;(2A))
(1) shall apply only to so much of any premium or 0
ayment made on a policy (other than a contract for a
leferred annuity) as is not in excess of ten per cent. of the
actual capital sum assured.

Explanation:—.........In calculating any such capital
sum, no account shall be taken—

{i) of the value of any premiums agreed to be return-
ed, or

(४) of any benefit by way of bonys or otherwise over
and above the sum ad¢tually assured, which is to
be or may be received under the policy by any
person.

(3) The aggregate of the sums in respect of which ७ |...
deduction of 0002-42 is allowed under sub-section 0), " 79 (31
shall not . exceed, in the cage of an individual,
one-fourth total income ............ or eight thousand '
Tupees, whichever is less, and in the case of a Hindu undi-
vided family, one-fourth of ‘its total income or sixteen
thousand rupees, whichever is less.

(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the asses- Section 89.
see shall be entitled to a deduction from the amount of Donations for
income-tax on his total income with qrhich he is charge- charitable
able for any assessment year, of an nt equal to the HO

. i


(5.153 (7)
main pra
and 17 (2),
part.)

{5.158 ()and

154
Clause 89
income-tax calculated at the average rate of income-taxr
on any sums paid by him in the previous year as donations
to any institution or fund to which this section applies.

(2) No deduction shall be made under sub-section (1)

Proviso. (a). if the aggregate of the sums paid as aforesaid by the asses-

8-158 (vJand
proviso, (b).]

{s.15B (3)]

[5.158 (2),
main para.)

21 of 1860

1 of 1956

see is less than two hundred and fifty rupees.

(3) No deduction shall be made under sub-section (1)
in respect of any sums paid in excess of one-twentieth of
the assessee’s total income as reduced by any portion there-
of on which income-tax is not payable under any provi-
sion of this Act and by any amount in respect of which a
deduction of income-tar has been granted under the pro-
visions of this Chapter, or one hundred thousand rupees,
whichever is less.

(4) The amount of income-tar deductible under this
section, together with the amount of super-tax deductible
under section 109 [section 15-B—for super-tax] shall not
ih any case exceed half the aggregate of the donations in
respect of which the deduction is allowed under this sec-
tion.

(5) This section applies to any institution or fund
established in India for a charitable purpose which fulfils
the following conditions, namely :—

(i) if the institution or fund derives any income, such
income would not be liable to inclusion in its total
income under the provisions of section 12 (1) to
12 (4) [section 4(3)(i)] or section 12(5) [4($) Gi}
or section 11(24) [new provision added in the drai
clause for exclusion from total income, which re-
lates to universities or other educational institu-
tions not existing for profit] ;

(ii) the institution or fund is not expressed to be for
the benefit of any particular religious community ;

(iii) the institution or fund maintains regular accounts
of its receipts and expenditure ; and

(iv) the institution or fund is either constituted as a
public charitable trust or is registered under the
‘ocieties Registration Act, 1860, or under any law
corresponding to that Act in force in any part of
India or under section 25 of the Companies Act,
1956, or is a university established by law, or is

any other educational institution recognised by
Government or by a university established by law,

or affiliated to any university established by law

or ......... is an institution financed wholly or in
part by the Government or a local authority.


155
Clauses 89-92 ~

(6) An institution or fund established for the benefit [s.15B (2),
of scheduled castes, backward classes, scheduled tribes or Expl Bf
of women and children shall not be deemed to be an insti-
tution or fund expressed to be for the benefit of a religious
fgynmunity within the meaning of clause (ii) of sub-section
5). दि

B.—Relief for income-tax

Where, by reason of any portion of an assessee’s sala- Section go
ry being paid in arrears or in advance, or by reason of his satay paid
having received in any one financial year salary for more for more thao
than twelve months or a payment which is under the pro- one year.
visions of section 17 [sub-section (1) of section 7] 6 perqui- [-60 (2)}
site or a profit in lieu of salary, his income is assessed at
arate higher than that at which it would otherwise have
been assessed, the Central Government may grant the ap-
propriate relief.

(1) Where by virtue of the provisions of section 13 Section 91.
[section 25(3) part and section 25(4) part as incorporated in Business ass-
the Chapter on exclusion from total income] the income cased under
of any business, profession or vocation of any period has tax Act, 1918
not been included in the total income of the assessee, the [s.25 (3),par
assessee may further claim that the income .....:...... from and 25 (4),
that business, profession or vocation of the said period P*:
shall be taken as the amount of income from that business,
profession or vocation of the previous year immediately
preceding the said period, Where any such claim is made,
the income-tax payable in respect of the total income of
the previous year immediately preceding the said period
shall be determined in accordance with that claim. and if
an amount of income-tax has already been paid in respect
of that previous year in excess of the amount payable on
the basis of such determination, a refund shall be given
of the excess.

(2) No claim to the relief afforded under sub-section (9,2 (5)}
(1) shall be entertained unless it is made before the ex-
piry of one calendar year from the date on which the busi-
hess, profession or vocation was discontinued or the suc-
cession took place, as the case may be. ~

CHAPTER IX
DOUBLE TAXATION RELIEF

‘The Central Government may enter into an agree Section 92

ment— Agrtement
with coun
{a) with the Government of any country outside India tries.

for the granting of relief in respect of income on [+494]
which have been paid} both me-tax (including
super-tax) under this jAct ang incometax in that

country, or

H—1 Law Com.j58


Section 93
Countries

156

Clauses 92-93

(b) with the Government of any country outside
India for the avoidance of double taxation of in-
come......... under this Act and under the corres-
ponding law in force in that country; and may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make such provi-
sions as may be necessary for implementing the
agreement.

_ (1) If any person who is resident in India in any pre-
vious year proves that, in respect of his income whieh ac-

with which Crues or arises during that previous year without India
no agreement-{and which is not deemed to accrue or arise in India), he

casts.
७-49 D(x)

{3.49 D(3))

11000

has paid in any country, with which there is no agreement
under section 92 [49A] for the relief or avoidance of dou-
ble taxation, income-tax, by deduction or otherwise, ander
the law in force in that country, he shall be entit ra to
the deduction from the Indian income-tax payable by him
of a sum calculated on such doubly taxed income at the
Indian rate of tax or the rate of tax of the said country,
whichever is the lower, or at the Indian rate of tax if both
the rates are equal.

(2) If any person who is resident in India in any pre-
vious year proves that in respect of his income whi¢h ac
crues or arises to him during that previous year in Pakis-
tan he has paid in tl hat countty, by deduction or othe}wise,
tax payable to the Government under any law for the
time being in force in that country relating to taxatto m of
agricultural income, he shall be entitled to a dedwction
from the Indian income-tax payable by him— :

(a) of the amount of the tax paid in Pakistan pnder
any law aforesaid on such income which is ‘liable
to tax under this Act also; or :

(0) of a sum calculated on that income at the indian
rate of tax;

whichever is less.

Explanation.—In this section,—

(i) the expression “Indian income-tax” means intome-
tax and super-tax charged in accordance with the
provisions of this Act ;

(ii) the expression “Indian rate of tax” me: है the
rate determined by indian Ta the amount of Indian
income-tax, after deduction’ of any relief due un-
der the provisions of this Act but before dedjiction
of any relief due under this section, by thd total
income ;

(iii) the expression “rate of tax of the said coyntry”
means income-tax and super-tax actually paid in
the said country in accordance with the qorres-
ponding laws, of the spid country after deduction of
ail relief dud, but bpfore deduction of any -relief

t .


157
Clauses 93-96

due in the said country in respect of double taxa-
tion, divided by the whole amount of the income
asessed in the said country;

(iv) the expression “income-tax” in relation to any coun-
try”, includes any excess profits tax or business
profits tax charged on the profits by the Govern-
ment of any part of that country or a local autho-
rity in that country.

(1) Where any dividend has been paid, credited or dis- Section 94
tributed or is deemed to have been paid, credited or dis- Reliefto
tributed to a shareholder of a company which has obtain- fer regard: cg
ed the relief............ granted under section 92 [49A] or une; selief to
der the India and Burma (Income-tax Relief) Order, 1936, share holder.
the shareholder shall be deemed in respect of such divi- fs, 4५0]
dend himself to have obtained such re! Let at the rate at
which such relief has been granted in respect of income-
tax only to the company for the financial year preceding
the year in which the dividend was paid, credited or dis- -
tributed or is deemed to have been paid, credited or dis-
tributed.

(2) If the rate at which a shareholder is deemed un-
der sub-section (1) to have obtained relief exceeds the rate
at which he would have been entitled to relief had such
relief been given direct to him by or under the said section
or Order, any excess shall be recovered from him either
as an addition to the tax payable by him on any assess-
ment made on him under section 147 or 148 [23] or section
152 [34] or by setting it off against any relief due to
him under section 247 [48].

CHAPTER X

PROVISIONS AGAINST AVOIDANCE OF TAX.

Where business is carried on between a resident and a Seftion 99

non-resident,............ and it appears to the Income-tax int
Officer, that owing to the cloge connge tion between them, “ue ents,

the course of business is so arranged that the business (¢. 40 (2)}
transacted between them prgduces to the resident either

no profits or less than the ordinary ptofits which mi, ght be °
expected to arise in that business, the Income-tax Officer
shall determine the amount of Rrofite ... Which may
reasonably be deemed to have nm derived therefrom
and include such amount in the total inceme of the resi-

९॥............

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “non-
resident” includes a person who is not ordinarily resident
within the meaning of section 6, clause (6) [4B]. Sebtion 96

(1) Where there is a transfer of essets by virtue or it Ayoidance of
consequence whereof, either alone or in conjunction with indometax
associated operations, any income... .becomes payable by transac.
to 6 non-resident, the following provisions shall apply— ines resulting.

Sine



. 440 (7),
दि ©

. 44 0 (9),
Part.)

fs. 440(3)]

fs. 44D(4)]

iii) ..
01

(Gv)

158 .
Clause 96

{a) where any person has by means of any such trans-
fer... . either alone or in conjunction with as-,
i erations, acquired any rights by virtue
veseeceeeed of which he has. within the meaning of
this section, power to enjoy......whether forthwith
or in the future, any income of a non-resident per-
son which, if it were income of the first-mentioned
person received by him in India, would be charge-
able to income-tax, that income shall, whether
it would or would not have been chargeable to
jncome-tax apart from the provisions of this sec-
tion, be deemed to be income of the first-men-
tioned person for all the purposes of this Act;

(b) where, whether before or after any such transfer,
प्‌ ... any such first mentioned person receiv-
e is entitled to receive............ any capital sum

the payment whereof is in any way connected
with the transfer or any associated operations, then
any income which, by virtue or in consequence
of the transfer, either alone or in conjunction with
associated operations, has become the income of
a non-resident shall, whether it would or would
not have been chargeable to income-tax apart from
the provisions of this section, be deemed to be the
income of the first-mentioned person for all the
purposes of this Act. .

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply

if such first mentioned person shows to the satisfaction of
the Income-tax Officer either—

(a) that neither the transfer nor any associated ope-
ration had for its purpose or for one of its putposes
the avoidance of liability to taxation; or

(०) that the transfer and all associated operations: were
bona fide commercial transactions and werd not
designed for the purpose of avoiding liabilijly

taxation. :
(3) For the purposes of this section, an  “assotiated

eration” means, in relation to any transfer, an opetation
any kind effected by any person in relation to—-

(i) any of the assets transferred, or

(ii) any assets representing whether directly or indi-

rectly any of the assets transferred, or
he income arising from any such assets,

.. any assets representing whether directly
or indirectly the accymulations of income arising
from any su¢h asseta.



159
Clause 96

(4) A person shall, for the purposes of this section, be, ५५05)]
deemed be have power to enjoy income of a non-resident

(a) the income is in fact so dealt with by any persor
as to be calculated at some point of time and, whe-
ther in the form of income or not, to enure for
the benefit of the first-mentioned person, or

(b) the receipt or accrual of the income operates to in-
crease the value to such first-mentioned person of
any assets held by him or for his benefit, or

(c) such first-mentioned person receives or is entitled
to receive at any time any benefit provided or to
be provided out of that income or out of moneys
which are or will be available for the purpose by
reason of the effect or successive effects of the as-
sociated operations on that income and assets
which represent that income, or

(व) such first-mentioned person has power by means
of the exercise of any power of appointment or
power of revocation or otherwise to obtain for
himself, whether with or without the consent of
any other person, the beneficial enjoyment of the
income, or

(९) such first-mentioned person ig able, in any man-
ner whatsoever and wl Tether directly or indirectly.
to control the application of the income.

(5) In determining whether a person has power to en- [s- 44D(6)]
joy income within the meaning of this section, regard shall
e had to the substantial result and effect of the transfer
and any associated operations, and all benefits which may
at any time accrue to such person as a result of the trans-
fer and any associated operations shall be taken into ac-
count irrespective of the nature or form of the benefits.

(6) For the purposes of this section— hye? 7)

(a) ......... ‘assets’ includes property or rights of any
kind, and...... ‘transfer’ in relation to rights includes
the creation of those rights;

(b) ‘benefit’ includes a payment of any kind; ७-#०00०1

{c) ‘capital sum’ means— {s. 44 0 (a)
part.]

(i) any sum paid or payable by way of a loan or re-
payment of a loan; and

{ii) any other sum paid or payable otherwise than
as income, being a sum which is not paid or
payable for full fonsideration in money or
money’s worth. © ‘ *


160
Clauses 96-97

b-44D(7)(@)} (d) references to assets representing any assets, income
or accumulations of income include references to
shares in or obligation of any company to which,
or obligation of any other person to whom, those
assets, that income or those accumulations are or
have been transferred;

(s-44D(7)(€)} {e) any body corporate incorporated outside India shall
be treated as if it were a non-resident;

0820) & (0 a person shall be treated as a non-resident if he is

a)pert.) not ordinarily resident within the meaning of sec-
tion 6, clause (6) [48].
8.440 (8)] (7) The provisions of this section shall apply............

also in relation to transfers of assets and associated opera-
# tions carried out before the commencement of this Act.

{s.44D (9) (8) Where any person has been charged to income-tax
on any income deemed to be his under the provisions of
this section, and that income is subsequently received by
him, whether as income or in any other form, it shall not
again be deemed to form part of his income for the pur-
poses of this Act.

Section 97 (1) Where the owner of any securities (in this sub-
Avoidance of section and in sub-sections (2) and (3) referred to as “the
hae by cer owner”) sells or transfers those securities, and.
tions in secu. OUYS back or re-acquires the securities, then, if
tities, of the transaction is that amy interest becoming payable
in respect of the securities is receivable otherwise! than
{s-44E()] by the owner, the interest payable as aforesaid EE whe-
ther it would or would not have been chargeable to intome-
tax apart from the provisions of this sub-section, be Heem-
ed. for all the purposes of this Act, to be income of the
owner and not to be the income of any other person.,

[3.44 E(2)) + (2) The references in sub-section (1) to buying back
or re-acquiring the securities shall be demed to include
references to buying or acqbiring similar securitie: so
however, that where. similar securities are bought pr ac-
quired, the owner shall be under no greater liabilit; to
income-tax than he would have been under if the omiginal

: securities had been bought back or re-acquired.

0५478 0) & (3) Where any person............ has had at any | time

i and 8-44F during any previous year any beneficial interest in! any

para.) securities, and the result of any transaction relating to
such securities or the income thereof is that, in resppet of
such securities, within such year, either no income is re-
ceived by him or the income received by him is less than
the sum to which the income would have amounted if the
income from such securities had accrued from day to day
and been ites for sugh 2200: 7 fit ly, then the income oie
such securities for year shall be deemed to be the in-
come of such person.



161
Clause 97

ee The provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-

[s-44F (3)

(4
section (3) shall not apply if the owner, or the person who proviso.

has had a beneficial interest in the securities, as the case
may be, proves to the satisfaction of the Income-tax Offi-
cer—

(a) that here has been no avoidance of income-tazx, or

(b) that the avoidance of income-tax......... was excep-
tional-and not systematic and that there was not
in his case in any of the three preceding years any
०००००००००००५ avoidance of income-tax.........by a trans-
action of the nature referred to in sub-section (1)
or sub-section (3).

(5) Where any person carrying on a business which
consists wholly or partly in dealing in securities buys or
acquires any securities, and............ sells back or re-trans-
fers the securities, then, if the result of the transaction is
that interest becoming payable in respect of the securities
is receivable by him, no account shall be taken of the
transaction in computing for any-of the purposes of
this Act the profits arising from or hoss‘sustained in the

usiness.

(6) Sub-section (5) shall have effect, subject to any
necessary modifications, as #f referen¢es to selling back or
re-transferring the securities included references to selling
or transferring similar securities.:

(7) The Income-tax Officer may by notice in writing
require any person to furnish him within such time as
he may direct (not being mi than twenty-eight-days), in
respect of all securities of w' opie such ‘person was the owner
or in which he had a beneficial interdst at any time during
the period specified in the notice, stich particulars as he
considers necessary for the purposes of this section and
for the purpose of discovering whether income-taxr has
been borne in respect of the interest on all those securi-

(8) For the purpose of this section.—
(9)............ ‘interest’ includes a dividend;
(b) ............ ‘securities’ includes stocks and shares;

(c) securities shall be deemed to be similar if they
entitle their holders to the same rights against
the same persons as to capital and interest and the
same remedies for the enforcement of those rights,
notwithstanding any differenée in the total nominal
amounts of the respective s She mat or in the form
in which they are Held or the- manner in which
they can be transfered. i |

[8-44 E(3)]

fone EC]

10:1220
डबल half.}

१
{
i
:
i
'
i
|

।
|

ज ७.


Section 98
Charge of
super-tax.
[s.55, maia
para,]

[New]

8:55, 72
prov.]

Section 99
Total income
for suy pra
(8.56.

Section 100
Business, pro-
fession or
vocation cha-
aged under
1918 Act.
[Sec. 25,
proviso fa)
below subsec-
tion(4).)
Section 701
Deductions
under interest
on securities,

[New]

162

Clauses 98-101
CHAPTER XI

SUPER-TAX
A—Principal provisions

(1) In addition to the income-tax charged for any
assessment year, and save as otherwise provided in this
Act, there shall be charged, levied and paid for that as-
sessment year in respect of the total income of the previ-
ous year or previous years, as the case may be, of every
person, not being a registered firm. .an additional
duty of income-tax (in this Act refe: as super-tax)
at the rate or rates laid down for that assessment year by
any Central Act:

Provided that where by virtue of any provision of this
Act super-tax is to be charged in respect of the income of
@ period other than the previous year, super-tax shpll be
charged accordingly.

(2) In respect of income chargeable under sub-section
(1), super-tax shall be deducted at the source or paid in
advance, where it is so deductible or payable under any
provision of this Act.

(3) ............ In the case of a registered firm, or an un-
registered firm which has been assessed, in the manner ap-
plicable to a registered firm under the provisions of sec-
tion 190 (b) [s. 23(5) (b)], supe r-tax shall be payable by
each partner of the firm individually on his share ip the
income..:......... of the firm and not by the firm itself.

vee Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the total
income of any person shall, for. the purposes of super-tax,
be the total income as assessed............ for the purposes of
income-tax, and where an assessment of total incomg has
become final and conclusive for the purposes of incomp-tax
for any assessment year, the assessment shall also be :final
and conclusive for the purposes of super-tax for the game
assessment year.

The provisions of sections 13 and 91 [25(3) whole; and
(4) whole} shall not apply to tke determination of the total
income for the purposes of super-tax except where the pro-~
fits and gains of the business, Profession or vocation ' were
assesed to super-tax for the t time either for the} as-
sessment year 1920-1921 or for the assessment year 4921-
1922.

Where and in so far as the total income of an assdssee
includes any interest on securities on which no income-taxr
is payable under section 87(i) or section 869)
{section 8 Provisos 2 and 3], the follow-
ing amounts shall be deducted in computing his total in-
come for the purposes of super-tax, namely :—

(i) any reasonable sum expended by the assessee for

the purpose of realising interest on such securi-
ties;


> 163
Clauses 101-107

(ii) any interest payable on money borrowed for the
purpose of investment in such securities by the as-
sessee.

(1) All the provisions of this Act relating to the charge Section 102
assessment, collection and recovery of income-tax......shall applicability”
apply, so far as may be and save as otherwise provided, of provisions
to the charge, assessment, collection and recovery of su- to supertax.
per-tax. (5.58 (*)part]

(2) Save as expressly provided in any other section in [Sec.s8(1),
this Chapter, the provisions of sections 3, 167 174 (a)(i) and part] (VI)
(ii), 188 and 200 (1) [Section 3, section’ 19, section 20, and
First Proviso to sub-section (1) of section 41, section 8, 3rd
proviso] and of Chapters VII and VHI and sections 295
and 311, and rule 3(c) (ii) of the First Schedule [chapters
relating to income on which no income-tax is payable and
rebate of income-tax] shall not apply to the charge, assess-
ment, collection and recovery of super-tar.

Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions Section 105
of section 99 [section providing that total income for Avoidance of
income-tax shali be the total income Py super-tax also} superar.
the provisions of sections 97(2), 97(3), 97(4), 97(7), and 279 [New]
[44E(2), 44F(3), Proviso and 44E(6)] apply in relation to ch sae
super-tax as they apply in relation to income-tax, with *™

the modification that references therein to income-tar

shall be construed as references to super-tax.

B.—Incomes which do not form part of total income for
super-taxr

ties Where the income of an unregistered firm or other Sectipn 104
association of persons not being a company has been 85- Shar¢ in un-
sessed to super-tax,............ the share of a partner in the registered
income of the firm or the amount of such iricome which frm aad
is proportionate to’ the share of a member of the associa- persons,
tion, as the case may be, shall not be included in his total [६ 5. ond
income for the purposes of super-tax prow
Any income of a co-operative society, in respect where- झा we
of no income-tax is payable by it by virtue oF the provi- society, "
sions of section 82 {14(3), for income-tax], shall not be ,, 14 (3) for
included in its total income for the purposes of super-tex ae Si
पर Any dividends received by a member of a co-operative माह 106

society from the society shall not be included in Ris total trom Co-op
income for the purposes of super-tax. erative socie-

ty.

जन Any income derived from the letting of go- (5९०. 14 (+)

downs or warehouses for storage, processing or facilitating !‘Super'x]
the marketing of commodities by an assesse, which is an Sectior 107
authority constituted under ai + waa, ‘or the time being Mar ed

in force for the marketing of moditjes, shall not be-in- co 5) for
cluded in its total income for 4 put of super-tax. fax.)

H



164

Clause 108
Section 108 a
Dividends _(1) Dividends received by a company. ... from an
from certain Indian company formed and registered aft 31st day of

Coe ACO) March, 1952, shall not be included in its total income for the,

pease lines} PUTPOSES of super-tax, where—

8. 564 (7081) (i) the Central Government is satisfied that the Indian

Part.J company is wholly | or mainly engaged in an indus-
try for the manufacture or production of apy one
oF more of the items specified in sub-section (3),
an

(5.564 ()(४)] (ii) the Indian company fulfils the following -condi-
tions, namely :—

(a) it is not formed by the splitting up or recons-
truction of business already in existence; :

(b) it is not formed by the transfer to it of building,
machinery or plant used in a business whith was
at any time being carried on; and हु

(0) it employs ten or more workers in a magnuface
turing process carried on with the aid of power,
or employs twenty or more workers in a;manu-
facturing process carried on without thelaid of
power. ‘

\ AS. 368 (2)} (2) The exclusion specified in sub-section (1) shall
apply also to dividends payable to a company in fespect
of any fresh capital raised by an Indian company! after
the 28th day of February, 1953, by public iar tab for
the purpose of increasing the production of, or 5 ing a
separate unit of, any one or more of the items 3; in
sub-section (3). i

5, 568 (1) (3) The items referred to in sub-sections (1) dnd (2)
i) part.) are the following, namely :—

(1) Coal, including coke and other derivatives; '
(2) Iron and steel; A

(3) Motor and aviation fuel, kerosene, crude oifs and
synthetic oils (not being oil exploration);

(4) Heavy chemicals in¢luding fertilizers;

(5) Heavy machinery uaed in industry including ball
and roller bearing and gear wheels and | parts
thereof, boilers and: steam generating दर ment;

(6) Machinery and equipment for the gengration,
transmission and distribution of electric epergy;

(7) Non-ferrous metals ineluding alloys;
(8) Paper including newsprint and paper boarg;
(9) Internal corgbustion | engines;

(10) Power-drivet Pumps


165

Clauses 108-112

(11) Automobiles;

(12) Tractors:

(13} Cement:

(14) Electric Motors;

(15) Locomotives:

(16) Rolling Stock:

(17) Machine Tools:

(18) Agricultural Implements;

(19) Ferro-manganese;

(20) Dye-stuffs:
as specified in the First Schedule to the Industries (Deve-65 ef 1951
lopment and Regulation) Act, 1951.

C—Rebate of super-tax. Secon 109
(1) Where under the provisions of section 89. [158 for ona for
income-tax] an assessee is entitled to a deduction of income- Dore Hable
tax in respect of any sum paid as donation, he shall also Purposes,
be entitled to a deduction, fram the gmount of super-tax (158 -for super
with which he is chargeable on his total income, of an ay part and
amount equal to the super-tax calculated at the aver. S.17(3),part.]
age rate of super-taxr on such sum.

(2) The provisions of this section do not apply to a fs. ISB (1)
company. 81 prov.)
. . Section 110

(1) The assessee shalt be entitled to a deduction, from Ny estab-
the amount of super-tax with which he is chargeable on a indus
his total income, of an amount equal ta the supertax cal- trial undertak:
culated at the average rate of super-tax on profits or gains Sr tse for
derived from an industrial undertakitg, in cases where ie “tax &
and to the extent to which income-tet ‘ig not payable on $.19(3),past,]
such profits or gains under section कि [15C for income |
tax].

(2) A shareholder shali be entitled to a deduction, from
the amount of super-tax with which he is chargeable on
his total income, of an amount equal tg the super-tax cal-.
culated at the average rate of isuper-tae on so much of any
dividend paid or deemed to he paid to him by an induse ©
trial undertaking as is attribufable to'that part of the pro- |
fits or gains on which he is entitled to a deduction of su- |
per-tax under this section, :

Where the assessee is a partner of a registered firm, sehion वा
he shall be entitled to a dedtction, from the amount of Share trom
super-tax with which he is chargeable on his total income, resistered
of an amount equal to the super-tax calculated at the aver- (402) ७०)
age rate of super-tax on the following sum, that is to mafn para for
say—— supfer-tax,

the amount which represents the difference between—

sec. 17
(i) the assessee’s share Tin the fetal income of the a Part.]
firm, and रे ‘ H


166

Clauses 111-114

(ii) his share in the total income of the firm as re-
duced by the income-tax, if any, payable by the
firm, at the rate of income-tax applicable to its
total income, on the amount of its income from
all sources other than from any business carried
on by ite.

the shares in either case being computed in the manner
laid down in section 69 {section 16(1) (b)].
Section 112

rf The provisions of section 90 [Section 60(2)] apply in
Rolie er sal relation to super-tax as they apply in relation to income-
in arrear ete. 102.
[Sec. 60(2)— कि «opt
for Super- D—Additional super-tax on undistributed profits.
tax]
Section 113 (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) and of
Super-tax on S€ctions 114, 115, and 116 [Sec. 23A, sub-sections (2), (8)
undistributed and (9)], where the Income-tax Officer is satisfied that in
income of respect of any previous year the profits and gains distribu-

cervain ies, ted as dividends by any company within the twelve mon-
(8 23A (1) ths immediately following the expiry of that _ previous
part.} year are less than the statutory percentage of the distri-

butable income of the company of that previous year,

ake an
writing that the company shall, api from the sufn de-
termined as payable by it on the basis of the assessment
under section 147 or 148 [23], be liable to pay super-
tax at the rate of—
(a) fifty per cent, in the case of an investment com-
pany, an
(b) ............ thirty-seven per cent. in the case of any
other company, .
on the undistributed balance of the total income of the
previous year, that is to say, on the distributable income

ag reduced by the...........:...dividends actually distributed,
if any.

{S. 23A (1) (2) The Income-tax Officer shail not make an order
part}, under sub-section (1) if he is satisfied— :

(i) that, having regard to the losses incurred by’ the
company in earlier years or to the smallndss of
the profits made in the previous year, the pay ent
of a dividend or a larger dividend than that dec-
Jared would be unreasonable; or :

(ii) that the payment of a dividend or a larger: divi-
dend than that declared would not have resulted
in a benefit to the revenue............

Section 114
Speci No order under section 113 [s. 23A(1) operative part]
Special Provir shall be made,—

te. ome (i) in the case of an investment company which has
distributed not less than ninety per cent. of its
{S. 234 (2)] distributable income; or
!


167
Clauses 114-117

(ii) in the case of any other company whose distribu-
tion falls short of the statutory percentage by not
more than five per cent. of its distributable in-
come; or

(iii) in any case where according to the return made
by a company under section 143 [22] it has dis-
tributed not Jess than the statutory percentage of
its distributable income, but in the assessment
made by the Income-tax Officer under section 147
or 148 [23] a higher total income is arrived at
and the difference in the total income does not
arise out of the application of section 150(1) Pro-
viso or section 150(2) [proviso to section 13} or
section 148 [sub-section (4) of section 23] or the
omission by the company to disclose its income
fully and truly; y
unless the company, on receipt of a notice from the

Income-tax Officer that he proposes to make such an or-

der, fails to make within three months of the receipt of

such notice, a further distribution of its profits and gains
so that the total distribution made is not less than the sta-
tutory percentage of the disributable income.

No order shall be made by the Income-tax Officer under Section 115
section 113 [s. 23A(1) operative part] unless the previous Approval of
approval of the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner ............ Jaspecting
s.-has been obtained, and the Inspeeting Assistant Com- Commission-
missioner shall not give his approval to any order proposed er.
to be made by the Income-tax Officer until he has given the [s. 23 A (8).]
company.econcerned an opportunity of being heard.

Nothing contained in section 113 [s. 234 (1), operative Section 716
part] shall apply— Savings for
company in
(a) to any company in which the public are substantial- 7 की एए०४०
ly interested; or tally inter>
(b) to a subsidiary company of such company if the es A@)a

whole of the share capital of such subsidiary com-

pany has been held by the parent company or by

its nominees throughout the previous year.

(1) For the purposes of ........................... section 116 Sectjon u7
[233 (9)] a company shall be deemed to be a company in ‘Company in
which the public are substantially interested— pubic are

substantially

(a) if it is a company owned by the Government or in interested.”
which not less than forty per cent, of the shares are bees 23 A

G . . ॥ claus

held by the Government; se (aj, clause
(b) () main

para, clause

(b) (ii) and

clause (b)

(iii): main

earlier


168
Clause 117

1 of 1956 (9) if it is & public company as defined in the Com-
panies Act, 1956, and—

(i) its shares {not being shares entitled to a fixed
rate of dividend, whether with or without a fur-
ther right to participate in profits) carrying not
less than fifty Per cent. of the voting power have
been allot unconditionally to, or acquired un-
conditionally by, and were throughout the pre-
vious year beneficially heid by, the Government
or a corporation established by a Central, State
or Provincial Act or the public {not including a
company to which the provisions of section 113
(23A(1) operative part] apply):

fsec. 23 A, Provided that in the case of any such company: as is
or 1, ०. referred to in clause (1) of section 120 [s. 23A, Exp. 2], this
(0) 6) Prov] sub-clause shall apply as if for the words “not 1284 than

fifty per cent.” the words “not less than forty per cent.” had
been substituted;

(ii) the said shares were’ at any time during the pre-
vious year the subject of dealing in any ‘recognised
stock exchange in India or were freely transferable
by the holder to other members of the publi¢; and

(iii) the affairs of the company or the shares carrying
more than fifty per cent. of the total voting power
were at no time during the previous year con! folled
or held by five or leas persons. !

(४८०, 23 A, Provided that in the case of any such company! as is

Expl 1 cl. (0) referred to in clause (ii) of section 120 (Sec. 23A Exp. 2),

(iit) Prov.) this sub-clause shall apply as if for the words “mord than
fifty per cent.” the words “more than sixty per cent!” had
been substituted. . .

(2) In computing the number of five or less persons

Seren aforesaid, —

2, clause (P), (a) the Government or any corporation establis| by

(iii) main a Central, State or Provincial Act or a com a to

para, loner which the provisions of ......... section 113 EZ (1),
if part. operative part] do not apply, shall not be taken

into account, and :

(9) persons who are relatives of one another and per-
sons who are nominees of any other person to; nie
with that other person shall be treated as a Single

[secs 23 A person.
7

clause (b), Explanation —In this sub-section, the expression “rela-
fub-clause tive”... .... megns hushand, wife, lineal ascendant or
wa) latter descendant, brother or sister: हु

1801



169
Clauses 118-120

For the purposes of sections 113 and 114 [234 (1), sub- Section 188
stantive part and (2)], “distributable income’ means the “Distributa-
total income of a company ............... as reduced by— ble inceme”,

५ 28 A (3).
{a} the amount of income-tax and super-tax payable by poe ®

the company in respect of its total income, but
excluding the amount of any super-tax payable
under section 113 [s. 2BA(1) operative part];

(b) the amount of any other tax levied under any law
for the time being in force on the company by the
Government or by a logal authority in excess of the
amount, if any, which bas been allowed in comput-
ing the total income; .

(९) any sum in respect of which a deduction of income-
tax is allowed under the provisions of section 89
[58]; and

(a) in the case of a banking company, the amount ac-
tually transferred to a. reserve fund under section a
17 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 40 ० 1949:

For the runposes of sections 113. 114 and 120, [56० 234, Sestjon गा
sub-section (1) Operative part, sub-section (2) and Explana- company.”
tion 2], “investment company” means a pray whose busi- [New]
ness consists wholly or mainly in the eating in or holding **
of investments.

For the purposes of ......... | लाकर 113 and 114 [232 (1), Sectjon 120
substantive part and 23A (2)] “statutory percentage’ “Stgtutory
means,— . ew
is. सु
(i) in the case of an investment company ......... 100%. Expl. थे

(ii) in the case of an In it company whose business
consists wholly in the manufagture or’ processing of goods
or in mining or in the generation or dibtribution of electri-
city or any other form of power. 9.

(ii) in the case of an Indipn com#any, a part only of
whose business consists in anylof the yen. 2 specified in

clause (ii)—

(a) in relation to the said part of the company’s busi-

79688..... ... «०००० हन्‍न४०२००० oe %.

{b) in relation to the Temaining part of the company’s
business—

(1) if it is a company which sa‘ iisfles the conditions

specified in sub-clause (a) of dlause (1५). 90%.

(2) in any other ९8४६.................... 60%
the said percentages being applied with
reference to the amounts of profits and gains
attributable to tg 14 of the company’s
business aforesaid if fre amounts were
respectively the i the company in



Section 121
Determina-

come-tax on

170
Clauses 120-122

relation to each of its parts, the amount of divi-
dends and taxes also being similarly apportioned,
for the purposes of sections 113 and 118 [s. 23A
(1)~-part regarding “Distributable Income”);

(iv) in the case of any other company not referred to in
the preceding clauses,—

(a) where the accumulated profits and reserves (includ-
ing the amounts capitalised from the earlier re-
serves) representing accumulations of past profits
which have not been the subject of an order under
section 113 {s. 23A(1), operative part] exceed the
greater of the following, that is to say,—

either

I. the aggregate of—

{i) the paid-up capital of the company exclusive of the
capital, if any, created out of its profits and gains
which have not been the subject of an order under
section 113 [s. 23861), operative part];

(ii) any loan capital which is the property of the share-

holders;
or
Il. the actual cost of the fixed assets of the company,
(b) where sub-clause (a) does not apply ......... 60%.

CHAPTER XII
DETERMINATION OF TAX IN CERTAIN SPECIAL
CASES

Where there is included in the total income of any
ASSESSEE .................. any income on which no income-tax

tion of in- is payable by or under the Provisfons of this Act, he shall
from

income
which

be entitled to a deduction, the amount of income-tax

no With which he is chargeable on his total income, of an

incometax is amount equal to the income-tar calculated at the average
payable [3. 17.rate of income-tax on the amount on which no income-

(2), part.)

Section raz

tax is payable.
(1) Where the accumulated balance due to an ene ployee

Tax on accu- P27 ticipating in 6 recognised provident fund is included in

mulated
balance of
recognised
provident

fund.
[New]

is total income, owing to the provisions of sectio bree
{s. 58G(2)) not being applicable, the Income-taxr er
shall calculate the total of the various sums of income-tax
and super-tax in accordance with the provisions of section
297(1) [s. 58G(3)].

(2) Where the accumulated balance due to an employee
participating in a recognised provident fund which is not
included in his total income under the provisions of spction
296 [Sec. 58G(2)], ego omes pay yable, super-tax shall cal-
culated in the mani 9 by section 297(2) [48G(1)
latter half). : an


हि 171
Clause 123

(1) Where the total income of an assessee includes ONY Section 123
compensation or other payment which is chargeable as the Tax om
profits and gains of a business carried on by the managing compensa-
agent, manager or other person, as the case may be, under bo 5 A),
the provisions.of section 28(ii), (a), (b), (c) and (9) [10(5A) jase Sarat
opening lines, clauses (a) (b) (०) (d) and last para, earlier taner half}
half], the tax payable by him on his total income shall, if
he so elects, be—

(i) the income-tax payable on his total income as re-
duced by the amount of such compensation or other
payment, at the average rate of income-taz,

(ii) the supe?-taxr payable on his total income as re-
duced by the amount of such compensation or other
payment, at the average rate of super-tax, and

(ili) the tax on such compensation or other payment ot
the average of the average rates of income-tax and
super-tax applicable to his total income for the
three assessment years immediately preceding the
assessment year...

Explanation.—For the purposes of determining the (New]
average under clause (iii), the rates of imcome-tax and super-
tax applicable for any assessment year preceding the assess-
ment year shall, where the assessee had been assessed as a
registered firm, be the rates applicable for such assessment
year to an unregistered firm having the same total income
as that declared by the assessee for suck assessment year.

(2) Where an assessee is a partner of a registered firm [New]
097 an unregistered firm assessed as a registered firm under
the provisions of section 190(b) [23 (5) (b)], and such firm
is in receipt of any such compensation or other payment,
the fam payable by him on his total income shall, if he so
elects, be—~

(i) the income-tax payable on his total income as re-
duced by the amount of his share in such compensa-
tion or other payment, at the average rate of in-
come-tax,

(ii) the super-taxr payable on his total income as reduc
ed by the amount of his share in such compensation
or other payment, at the average rate of super-tar,
and

(iii) the tax on his share in such compensation or other
payment at the average of the average rates of in-
come-tax and super-tay set te to his total in-
come for the Greesemebt yeor sment years immediately
preceding the t year.|:

12—1 Law, Com/38. '


1%

Clauses 124-125
‘Section 124. (1) Where a person is a non-resident and is not a com-
‘fax in the pany. -he tax .............-...---- payable by him or on hig be-
faseof non: half on his total income shall be an amount equal to~
fs. 7705) (a) the income-tax which would be payable on his
main para.)

tatal income at the maximum rate, plus

(9) either the super-tax which would be payable on his
total income at the rate of nineteen per cent. or the
super-tax which would be payable on his total in-
come if if were the total income of a resident,
whichever is greater. -

fs. 17(2),18¢ (2) Any non-resident, other than 6 company, may
prov., earlier
bake cette

‘on or before the 39% day of June of the assess-
in which he first becomes assessable, .
by notice in writing to the Ineome-tax Officer dec!
declaration being final and being applicable to all assess-
ments thereafter) that the tak ................ ०.००, payable
by him or on his behalf on bis total income shall be peter-
mined with reference to his total world income, and there-
upon notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (1), such
tax shall be determined in accordance with sub-section (3).

fe. 37(10) ast (3) Where under the provisions of sub-section (2) or
prov. latter under any similar provision of the Indian Income-tar Act,
par] 1922, any non-resident has exercised his option to be taxed
11 1922. ith reference to hig totel world income, the tax payable
by him or on his behalf on his total income shall he an

HE ol fe bare aval on hs tal iid co

which would have been payable on his total world ipcome

had it been his total income the same proportion hs his
total income bears to his tots! world income.

Is. 17 (1) 2nd (4) Where काए़............ person referred jto in

Prov.} sub-section (1) satisfies the Income-tax Officer that he was
prevented by sufficient cause from making the decigration
referred to in that sub-section or in any similar provision

11 of 1922 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, on th e first occasion on
which he became assessable under this Act or the s fk Act
as the case may be, and his failure to make such declaration
has nat resulted in reducing his liability to tax for any year,
the Income-tax Officer may, with the previous appr ia of
the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner, allow such fperson
toe make the declaration at apy time after the expiry! of the
period specified, and such Jaration shal] have in
relation to the assessment for the year in which te Jara-
tion is made (if such assessment had not been completed
before such declaration} and ali assessments thereafter.

Section 125- Where the total income of an assessee. not teing a
hie on cap company, includes any income chargeable under the head
Rsevorasses, “Capital gains”, the tax. .......... जज payable by him on
ses other than his total income shall be—

nn, (6) (a) the amount pf incompytax and super-tax payable on
‘opening lines his total incpme as fefuced by the amount of such


173

Clauses 125-127 fs. 17 (6)

inclusion, had the total income so reduced been his at (9
total income, plus

(७) an amount of income-tax determined in accordance (s. 17 (6)(ii).

with the following formula, that is to say— main para.)
YxCG
x= T—2/3CG

where—

X stands for the amount of income-tex referred to in
the beginning of this clause.

T stands for the total income of the assessee (which in-
cludes capital gains),

CG stands for the income chargeable under the head
“Capital gains” include@ in the total income of the *
assessee, and

Y stands for the income-tax which would have been
payable on the total income of the assessee as re-
duced by two-thirds of the amount of the income
chargeable under the head “Capital gains” included
in his total income. had the total income so reduced
been his total income :

Provided that— [s. 19 (6) (ii)

(0) ......... where the total income does not exceed the Proviso-]
sum of ten thousand rupees, the amount payable
under clause (b) shall be nil; and
(ii) in no case shall the amount payable under clause
(b) exceeds one-half of the amount, if any, by
which the income chargeable under the head
“Capital gains” exceeds the sum of five thousand हु
rupees. Section 126
Where the total income of a company includes any a gains es
income chargeable under the head “Capital gains”, the tar

bt -
payable by it shall be— pani.

(a) the amount of income-tax with which it is charge- [s. 17 (7),
able on its total income, and part.]
(b) the amount of super-tax with which it is charge-
able on its total income as reduced by the amount
of such inclusion. had the total mcome so reduced
been its total income. 1
CHAPTER XIII _
INCOME-TAX AUTHORITIES

A‘—Appointment and. control

Section 127.
There shall be the following classes of Incometax Inchme-Tax
authorities for the purposes of this Act, namely :— authorities.

(a) the Central Board = enue, (% 50))
(09) Directors of Inspection, I. .
fc) Commissioners of In tax,


174

Clauses 127-130

(d) Assistant Commissioners of Income-tax, who may
be either Appellate Assistant Commissioners of In-
come-tax or Tnspecting Assistant Commissioners of
Income-tax.

(९) Income-tax Officers, and
(f) Inspectors of Incometax.

(1) The Central Government may appoint as many Di-
Section 128. rectors of Inspection, Commissioners of Income-tax, Appel-
Appoint late or Inspecting Assistant Commissioners of Income-tar
ments of In- ond Income-tax Officers of Class I Service, as it thinks fit...

come-tax
Authorities.

(86०. 5180?

See. _ (2) .......... ००० The Commissioner may, subject’ to
earlier pare, the rules and orders of the Central Government regulating
and Sec. | the conditions of service of persons in public services and
5(3). earlier Dosis, appoint as many Income-tax Officers of Class If Ser-

fee, 564) vice and as many Inspectors of Income-tax, as he thinks fit.

fatter part.] (8) Subject to the rules and orders of the Central Gov-
ernment regulating the conditions of service of persons in

[Sec. 5(34)] public services and posts, an Income-tax authority may ap-
point such executive or ministerial staff as may be neces-
sary 10 assist it in the execution of its functions.

Section 129 (1) Appellate Assistant Commissioners ...........- shall be

Control under the direct control of the Central Board of Reve-

Authorities, NUC...
(8८० 5/4),
॥ earlier part,]

(2) ....... ... Inspecting Assistant Commissioners

[Sec. 5 (7) shall be subordinate. to the Director of Inspection, and to

@.J the Commissioner ............ within whose jurisdiction
they perform their functions. पु

5८८... 500 (3) Income-tax Officers shall be subordinate to the Di-

GOL rector of Inspection, the Commissioner . add the
Inspecting Assistant Commissioner ... within whose
jurisdiction they perform their functions.

{see. 5 (5A) (4) Inspectors of Income-tax shall be subordinate to the

atter part.) Income-tar Officer or other Income-tax authority under
whom they are appointed to work and to any other Income-
tax authority to whom the said officer or authority is
subordinate.

Explanation—For the purposes of sub-section (2), “Di-
rector of Inspection” does not include a Deputy Director of
Inspection or an Assistant Director. of Inspection; and for
the purposes of sub-section (3), “Director of Inspection”

Section 130. does not include an Assistant Director of Inspection.
Insemictions (1) All officers and persons employed in the execution
te गीत Of this Act shall observe and follow the orders, instguctions
rities. and directions of the Central Board of Revenue: |
Gee. 5 (8).] 5 !



175
Clauses 130-131.

Provided that no such orders, instructions or directions
shall be given so as to interfere with the discretion of the
Avp-late Assistant Commissioner in the exercise of his
appellate functions:

Provided further that all such orders, instructions and {New}
directions of a general nature affecting assessees shall be
published in the of India Gazette.

(2) The Director of Inspection, the Commissioner or the Sec. 508)
Inspecting Assistant Commissioner, as the case may be, may earlier Brey
issue such instructions as he thinks fit for the guidance of
any Income-tax Officer subordinate to him in the matter
of any assessment..................

B-Jurisdietion
. Directors of In: tion shal], subject to the Section 151

(1)...
control of the Central Board of Revenue, perform such func- Jurisdiction
tions of any other Income-tax authority as may be assigned of income-tax

to them by the Central Government. हि
८ ५ हु yatter part.)
(2) oe ‘ommissioners shall perform their func-(sec..5 (2),

tions in respect of such areas or of such persons or classes latter par']
of persons or of such incomes or classes of income or of such
cases or classes of cases as the Central Board of Revenue
may direct, and where such directions have assigned to
two or more Commissioners ............... the same area or the
same persons or classes of persons or the same incomes or
classes of income or the same cases or classes of
cases, they shall have concurrent jurisdiction sub-
ject to any orders which the Central Board of Revenue
may make for the distridution and allocation of the work to
be performed.

(3).(a) sui. Appellate Assistant Commissioners igec. 5५),
shall perform their functions in respect: of such persons or latter part.}
elasses of persons or of such incomes ar classes of income
or in respect of such areas as the Central Board of Revenue
may direct, and, where such directions have assigned to
two or more Appellate Assistant Commissioners ............
the same persons or classes of versons or the same incomes
or classes of income or the same area, in accordance with
any orders which the Central Board of Revenue may make
for the distribution and allocation of the work to be per-
formed:

(b) The Central Board of Revenue may transfer an
appeal from one Appellate Assistant Commissioner to ano-
ther.

(4) Inspecting Assistant rp be we vee and (5)

New}

Income-tax Officers shall perform thei ctions in respect «tile part)
of such persons or classes of ‘sons ० gf such incomes or


176
Clause 131

classes of income or in respect of such areas as the Com-
missioner . >> May direct, and where such directions
have assigned to two or more Inspecting Assistant Commis-
sioners ......... or Income-tax Officers, the same persons or
classes of persons or the same incomes or classes of income
or the same area, in accordance with any orders which the
Commissioner may make for the distribution and allocation
of the work to be performed.........

{Sce. 565), (9) ............ The Commissioner may, by general or

ater part,

{See. 5 (54)

| special order in writing, direct that the powers corferred
on the Income-tax Officer and the Appellate Assistant Com-
missioner by or under this Act shall in respect of any speci-
fied case or class of cases or of any specified person or classes
of persons be exercised by the Inspecting Assistant Commis-
sioner and the Commissioner respectively, and for the pur-
poses of any case or person in respect of which any such,
order applies. references in this Act or in any rules made
hereunder to the Income-tax Officer and the Appellate As-
sistant Commissioner, shall be deemed to be references to
the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner, and the Commis-
sioner, respectively.

(8) Inspectors of Income-tax shall perform such func-

Ny. f हि डे ४
earlier Paci.) tions in the execution of this Act as are assigned td them

{Sec. 5(6)}

[New]

[New]

by the Income-tax Officer or other Income-tax authority
under whom they are appointed to work

(7) The Central Board of Revenue may, by notiflcation
Avpliatedsnstat Commmanons tnd income के ३०००० .
Appellate Assistant Commissioners and Income-tax Officers
to perform such functions in respect of such classes >f per-
sons or such classes of income or such area as may “4 speci-
fied in the notification, and thereupon the functions sq speci-
fied shall cease to be performed. in respect of the specified
classes of persons or classes of income or area, by thé other
authorities appointed under sub-sections (2), (3) and! (4).

Such notification shall nat render necessary the 7 # aad
of any notice already issued by the Income-tax Offic¢r who
was previously exerdising sueh functions. j

(8) For the purposes of eny case or person in qespect
whereof an order under sub-section (5) applies — |

(a) any provision of this Act requiring the axprovat
or sanction of the Inspecting Assistant Cdmmis-
sioner in any matter shall not apply;

(७) any appeal which would otherwise lie to the Ap-
pellate Assistant Commissioner shall lie to the
Commissioner; and

{c) any appeal which would have lain from any order

of the A; tr Anti. dee Commissioner dm the
High Court frall lie the order of the Cammis-
sioner to th High 4


177
Clauses 132-134

(1) The Commissioner ........... may, for reasons tO Section 132
be recorded in writing, transfer any ¢ase from one In- Trangor of
come-tax Officer subordinate to him to another also sub- case from one
ordinate to him, and the Central Board of Revenue may, !nconse-tax
for reasons to be so recorded, transfer any case from any Officer to an-

sosseses-Income-tax Officer to any other............ ia (7A)

(2) The Commissioner or the Central Board of Reve- tarkier pare]
nue, as the case may be, shall, before passing any order un- [New]
der sub-section (1), give the assessee @ reasonable oppor-
tunity of being heard in respect of the proposed transfer.

(3) The Commissioner or the Central Board of Reve- [New
nue, as the case may be, may, in special cases and for
reasons to be recorded in writing, dispense with the giving
of such opportunity as is referred to in sub-section (2), but
the assessee shall, in every such case, be entitled to make
a rep resentation to the Commissioner or the Central Board
of Revenue, as the case may be, against the order of trans-
fer within one month of the date on which he comes to
know of the order.

(4) ............ Transfer of a case under sub-section (1)[s5 (7A)
may be made at any stage of the proceedings, and shal] mam para,
not render necessary the re-issue of any notice already is- २ part}
sued by the Income-tax Officer from whom the case is
transferred.

Explanation —In this section, “case”, in relation to any [Is (9)
person whose name is specified in the order of the trans- झकाण
fer. means all proceedings under this Act in respect of
any year (including a past yeer) which may be pending on
the date of the transfer, and वात all proceedings un-
der this Act which may in respect of any year (including

@ past or a future year) be commented after the date of
the transfer............

Whenever in respect-of any proceeding under this Act Section 133
an Income-tax authority ceases to exercise jurisdiction. - ange of
and is succeeded by another who has and exercises jurisdic- ijpumbent of
tion, the Income-tax authority so suaceeding may fing was 2, (70),
the proceeding from the stage at whieh the proceeding was nhin para] >
left by his predecessor :

Provided that the assessee concerned may demand मई, 5 (70), Ist
that before the proceeding is so ceritinued the previous 1०]
proceeding or any part thereof be re-opened or that be- ©
fore any order for assessment is passed against him he be
reheard.

(1) For the purposes of sections 260, 265, 267(2), 271 Section 134
and 272 [Section 33(2), earlser part,'section 33(4), section Authority
33A, section 33B(1), section $6(1), seetion 66(2), 66(3), 66(5), ¢ompetent to
66(7)] the Commissioner ae shall, in relg- ke or conti-
tion to an assessee, be ee Com: having for the ings.
time being jurisdiction the ag fey"


178
Clauses 134-135

(2) For the purposes of sections 230 to 239 and 275
{section 32(5). sec. 46] the Income-tar Officer referred to
therein shall, in relation to an assessee. be the Income-tax
Officer having for the time being jurisdiction over the as-
sessee

Section 135 (1) Where an assessee carries on a business, profes-
Income-tax sion or vocation at any place, he shall be assessed by the
Officer cult Income-tax Officer of the area in which that place is situ-
8, 64 on + ate or, where the business, profession or vocation is carried
. on in more places than one. by the Income-tax Officer of
the area in which the principal place of his business, pro-

fession or vocation is situate. पु

{S. 64(2)] (2) In all other cases, an assessee shall be assessed
by the Income-tax Officer of the area in which he resides.
S64 (3), (3) Where any question arises under this section as to

main para} the place of assessment, such question shall be determined
by the Commissioner, or. where the question is between
places within the jurisdiction of different Commissioners,
by the Commissioners concerned or, if they are not in
agreement, by the Central Board of Revenue:

{S. 64(3), lee Provided that, before any such question is determined.
prov. the assessee shall have had a reasonable opportunity of
being heard in respect of the question.
(4) ............The place of assessrient shall not be cal-
led in question by an assessee—
18.64(3), and (a) 3f he has made a एशैपाओ, ...............................०.०-

prov. ‘earlier under section 143(1) [Section 22(1)] and has

part]. stated therein his principal place of business, pro-
fessicn or vocation, or

(5,64(3), and (0) (if he has not. made such a return), ......... after

prov. latter the expiry of the time allowed by the notice under

part.) section 143(2) [sub-section (2) of section 22] or
under section 154 [34] for the making of a re-
turn.

Is. 64(3), ard (5)......If the place of assessment is called in question

Prov.] by an assessee, then, subject to the provisions of sub-section
(4), the Income-tax Officer shall, if not satisfied with! the
correctness of the claim, refer the matter for determination
under sub-section (3) before assessment is made.

8. 64(4)) (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this .sec-
tion. every Income-tax Officer shall have all the powers
conferred by or under this Act on an Income-tax Officer
in respect of any income............accruing, or arising or
received within the area for which he is appointed.

(2) shall not apply........,...to any assessee—

(a) on whom an agsessment or re-assessment for , the
purposes of wai as Act has‘been, is being or is tq be
made in the of qny case in respect of which

a

(s. 64(5)] (7) The provisions of sub-section (1) and sub-section


179
Clauses 135-136
a Commissioner. appointed without refer-

9!
ence to area und ion 131{2) [Sec. 5(2), latter
part] is exercising the functions of a Commissioner,

(b

where by any direction given or any distribution
or allocation of work made by the Commissioner

i .... [Sec 5(5), earlier.
part] or in consequence of any transfer made un-
der section 132 {[Sec. 5(7A), main paral], a particular
Income-tax Officer has been charged with the
function of assessing that assessee, or

(०) who or whose income is included in a class of per-
sons or a class of incomes specified in any notifi-
cation issued under section 131(7) [S. 5(6)];
but the assessment of such person............shall be
made by the Income-tax Officer for the time being charged
with the function of making such assessment by the Central
Board of Revenue or by the Commissioner............ to whom
he is subordinate, as the case may be.
C—Powers. हु
(1) The Income-tax Officer, App ellate Assistant Com- Section 136
missioner and Commissioner......shall, for the purposes of domes, rena.
this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a court symeduction
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 when trying of” evidence
a suit in respcet of the following matters, namely-:— ere.
{a) discovery and inspection; (Sec. 37(1)]
(0) enforcing the attendance of any person, including 5 ४ 7908
any officer of a banking company and examining
him on oath;
(९) compelling the production of books of account and
other documents; and
(9) issuing commissions.

(2) Where any Income-tax authority exercises any Ne
powers referred to in sub-section (1), it shall follow, so "Nel
far as may be, the same procedure as a court under the
said Code. .

(3) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, any au- (Sec.37(3))
thority referred to in sub-section (1) may impound and
retain in its custody for such period as it thinks fit any
books of account or other documents produced before it
im any proceeding under this Act:

Provided that an Income-tax Officer shall not—

{a) impound any bgoks of account or other documents

without recording his reasons for so doing. or

(0) retain in his custody any such books or documents
for a period exceeding fifteen: days (exclusive of
holidays) without obigining the approval of the
Commissioner therefor, aoe


180
‘Clauses 136-138

{New] _ _ (4) Where any person, whether a party to the proceed~
tng or not, is desirous of receiving back any book of ac
count or other document produced by him in any pro~
ceeding under this Act before any Income-tax authority,
the Income-tax authority may, unless the book ‘of account
or other document is impounded under sub-section (3), re-
turn the same to such person on an application made for
the purpose.

[s. 37¢4)) _ _(5) Any proceeding before any authority referred to
in this section shall be deemed to be a judicial pro¢eeding
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 and for the

45093860 purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code.

Section 137. Subject to any rules maile in this behalf, any Income-

Powers of se- tax Officer specially authorised by the Commissidner in

arch and sei- this behalf may,—

zure. :

fs. 37(2)} (i) enter and search any building or place where he
has reason to believe that any books of account or
other documents which in his opinion will be use-
ful for, or relevant to, any proceeding under this
Act, may be found, and examine them, if found;

(ii) seize any such books of account or other पाया ents
and have them removed to his office, if ne ssary;

(iti) place marks of identification on any such beoks of
account or other documents or make or 2408९ to
be made extracts or copies therefrom;

(iv) make a note or an inventory of any artic les 67
things found in the course of any search under this
section which in his opinion will be usefyl for,
or relevant to, any proceeding under this | Act;

5 of 1898. and the provisions of the Code of Criminal ;Proce-
dure, 1898, relating to searches shali apply,'so far
as may be, to searches under this section.

Section 138 The Income-tax Officer, the Appellate Assistant Com~

Power to cat! Missioner or the Inspecting ‘Assistant Commissioner| may,

or informa- for the purposes of this Act,— १

tion.

(sec. 38] (1) require any firm......to furnish him with a return
of the names and adilresses of the partners of the fitm and
their respective shares; हु

(2) require any Hindu undivided family to furnish
him with a return of the names and addresses of the man~
ager and the members of the family;

(3) require any person whom he has reagon
believe to be ott trustee, nope jan or agent, to 211 मै him
with a return of the}names $f the persons for or of} whom
he is trustee, or agent, and of their addrepses;


181

Clauses 138-141

(4) require any assessee to furnish a statement of the
names and addresses of all persons to whom he has paid
in any previous year rent, interest, commission, royalty or
brokerage, or any annuity, mot being an annuity taxable
under the head “Salaries”, amounting to more than four
hundred rupees, together with particulars of all such pay-
ments made;

(5) require any dealer, broker or, agent or any person
concerned in the management of a stack or commodity Ex-
change to furnish a statement of the names and addresses
of all persons to whom he or. the Exthange has paid any
sum in connection with the sale. exchange or transfer of a
capital asset, or on whose behalf or from whom he or the
Exchange has received any such sum, together with parti-
culars of all such payments and receipts;

(6) require any person, including a banking company
or any officer thereof, to furnish information in relation
to such points or matters, or to furnish statements of ac-
counts and affairs verified in the mamner specified by the
Income-tax Officer. the Appellate Aésistant Commissioner
or the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner, giving informa-
tion in relation to such pointé or matters as, in the opinion
of the’ Income-tax Officer, the Appellete Assistant Commis-
sioner or the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner, will be
useful for. or relevant to, any procegding under this Act.

The Income-tax Officer, the Appellate Assistant Com- ps ction 139
missioner or the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner, or Ppwer to
any person subordinate to him authorised in writ-! rei
ing in this behalf by the Income-tax, Officer, the Appellate companies.
Assistant Commissioner or the Inspecting Assistant Com- [s, 39)
missioner, may inspect, and if necessary, take copies, or

cause copies to be taken, of any register of the members,
debenture holders or mortgagees of any company or of any

entry in such register.

The Director of Inspection, the Commissioner and the ES हर
Inspecting Assistant Commigsioner od be competent to 11 तक of

make any enquiry under this Act, ang for this purpose shall 1 tion,
have all the powers that an Incom Officer has under ahd Inspect-
this Act in relation to the making of enquiries. i ne Assistant
fs etc,
5 8),
लकी

D—Disclosure of information.

(1) All particulars contained in any statement made Section 148
return furnished or aceounts or documents produced unde: isclosure of
the provisions of this Act, or in any: evidence given, or af- prohibited.
fidavit or deposition made, in the course of any proceedings ६. 54 (1)}
under this Act, other than proceedings under Chapter XXIII
(Existing Chapter VIII-Offences and penalties], or in any
record of any assessment i ic or any proceed- 1! 1872
ing relating to the recovey of a{j demand, _ prepared |

|

for the - purposes shall be treated


x of 1872

Ts. 54 (2),
earlier part]

[5-54 (3) (») ]

45 of 1860

Us. 54 (3)(b)}

[New]

Is. 54 (3) (०)

Is. 54 (3) (१))

[New]

19 of 1908

1 of 1956

182

Clause 141

as confidential, and notwithstanding anything contained in
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, no court shall, save as छा0-
vided in this Aci, be entitled to require any public servant
to produce before it any such return, accounts, documents
or record or any part of any such record, or to give evidence
before it in respect thereof.

(2) No public servant shall disclose any particulars
contained in any such statement. return. accounts, docu-
ments, evidence. affidavit, deposition or record............

(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to the disclo-
sure—

(a) of any such particulars for the purposes of a prose-
cution for any offence under the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 in respect of any such statement, return,
accounts, documents, evidence, affidavit or deposi-
tion, or for the purposes of a prosecution for any
offence under this Act: or

(b) of any such particulars to any person acting in, the
execution of this Act...... where it is necessary or
desirable to disclose the same to him for the pur-
poses of this Act......; or

(c) the substance of any material to an assessee, being
relevant material gathered for the ect joses of
making an assessment under section 147(3) [Sec-
tion 23(3)] or under section 148 [Section 23(4)],
without disclosing any information which miaht
enable the assessee to identify the person to whom
the material relates: or

(9

of any such particulars, where the disclosure is 00-
casioned by the lawful employment under this Act
of any process for the service of any notice or the
recovery of any demand; or

(e) of any such particulars to a civil, court in any
suit or proceeding to which Government or any
Income-tax authority is a party, which relates to
any matter arising out of any vroceeding under
this Act or under any other law for the time being
in force authorising any Income-tax authority to
exercise any powers thereunder; or

(f) (i) of any such particulars contained in any ac
counts, or

(ii) of any registered document of which a certified
copy can be obtained under the provisions of the
Indian Registration Act, 1908, or

(iii) of 6 balance sheet or audit report or profit, and
loss occounts fee w the Companies Act, 1956,
or any other Act iat iggy to companies,

|| ‘


183
Clause 141

to a civil court in any suit or proceeding to which
the person who produced the accounts, registered
document, balance sheet, audit report or profit and
loss account, or his representative-in-interest, is @
party, if the particulars, registered document, ba-
lance sheet. audit report. or profit and loss account
are relevant to any matter in issue in such suit or
proceeding;

{g) of any such particulars to the Comptroller and Au- [s. 54 (3) (©)
ditor-Generai of India for the purpose of enabling
him to discharge his functions under the Consti-
tution; or

th) of any such particulars to any officer apoointed by [s. 54 (3) 6)
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or
the Central Board of Revenue to audit income-tax
receipts or refunds; or

(i) of any such particulars, relevant to any inquiry [Se 54 (3)
into the conduct of an official of the Income-tax ()]
Department. to any persons appointed Commis-
sioners under the Public Servants (Inquiries) Act.

1850, or to an officer otherwise appointed to hold 37 of 1850
such inquiry, or to a Public Service Commission
established under the Constitution, when exercis-

ing its functions in relation to any matter arising

out of any such inquiry ; or

into a charge of misconduct in connection

income-tax proceedings against a legal practitioner

or chartered accountant. to the authority referred

to in section 324 (3) [Section 61(3)}], when exer-

cising the functions referred-to in that sub-section
, or

(k) of any such particulars by any public servant, [Seq 54 (3)
where the disclosure is occasioned by the lawful (8)}
exercise by him of his powers under the Indian
Stamp . Act. 1899, to impound an insufficiently 9 of 1899
stamped document; or

(I) of such facts. to an authorised officer of the Gov- | fe 54 (3)
ernment of any country outside India which has 61.1

entered into an agreement with India for the grant-

ing of relief in respect of or avoidance of double

taxation ...... + as may be necessary for the purpose

of enabling such relief or a refund under section

92 [49A] to be given or such avoidance under that

section to be made effective ; or

() of any such particulars relevant to any inquiry fs ५ 5 (3)
wit Da

2s mav be necessary for the purpose of enabling
that Government to; levy of realise any tax im-
! '

(m) of such facts. to an officer of a State Government ivi 54 (3)
posed by it; or ‘


184

Clauses 241-142

[New] (n) of such facts, to an officer of the Central Govern-
ment as may be necessary for the purpose of en-
abling that Government to levy or realise any tax
imposed by it; or

{See. 54 (3) (०) of such facts, to any authority exercising powers

(k).) under the Sea Customs Act, 1678, or any Central

7 of 3878 Act imposing a duty of excise as may be neces-
sary for enabling it duly to exercise such powers ;
or

{Sec. 54 (3) (p) of such facts, to any person charged by law with

3 the duty of inquiring into the qualifications of
electors as may be necessary to establish whether
a person is or is not entitled to be entered on an
electoral roll; or

[Sec. 54 (3) (q) of so much of such particulars, to the appropriate
{m).] authority, as may be necessary to establish whe-
ther a person has or has not been assessed to in-
come-tax in any particular year or years, where
under the provisions of any law for the time be-
ing in force such fact is required to be established:

or
[See. 54 (3) (7) of such particulars to the Reserve Bank of India
@).J as are required by that Bank to enable it to com-

pile financial statistics of international investment
and balance of payments; or

i 54 (3) (9) of such information as may be required by any

(0). officer or department of the Central Government
or of a State Government for the purpose af in-
vestigation into thé conduct and affairs of; any
public servant; or

[See, 54 (3) (t) of any such particulars to the Custodian of iEva-
(p).] cuee Property appointed under the गा tion
31 of 1950 of Evacuee Property Act, 1950, for the purpope of

enabling him to discharge the duties imposed upon
him by or under the said Act.

Sec. 54(4)] (4) Nothing in this section shall apply to the produc-
tion by a public servant before a court of any document,
declaration or affidavit filed, or the record of any state-
ment or deposition made ia a proceeding under section 181

7 [258] or sections 191 ३० 193 or to the giving of evidente by
a public servant in respect thereof.

{New} (5) In this section, “public servant” means any public
servant employed in the execution of this Act.

Section 142. Nothing in section 141 [54(1), 54(2) and 54(3), as re-
Saving remar duced in preceding section] shall prohibit the voluntary
tary diselosu- disclosure of any particulars referred to in sub-section (1)
res by persons of that section, by the person by whom the statement was
making the made. the return sf gshed, He , accounts or document pro-
matement 26, duced, the evidence piven ‘the affidavit or depo} (10%
{New} made, as the case mag be.


18800;
Clause i43
CHAPTER XIV
PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT

(1) (3) Every person,............ if his total income, or the Section 143
total income of any other person in respect of Return of in-
which he is assessable under this Act, during (0:
the previous year exceeded the maximum [s. 22 (1)}
amount which is not chargeable to income-tax
shall furnish, to the Incomertar Officer having
jurisdiction to assess him, on or before the 30th
day of June of each financial year, a return of
his income or the income of. such other person
during the previous year, in the prescribed form
and verified in the prescribed manner and set-

i .such other particulars as may

Provided that the Income-tax Officey may in his discre-
tion extend the date for the delivery of the return in the
case of any person or class of persons:

Provided further that no such return need be furnished
by any such person if he has already furnished a return
of income for such year in accordance with the provisions
of sub-section (2)............ [22(2)].

(b) Where a return of income kas been sent under
clause (a) to an Income-tax Officer who has no
jurisdiction to make the sopacement. it shall be

is duty to forwartl the return to the Income-
tax Officer having jurisdiction.

(2) In the case of any person whd, in the Income-tax [s. 2 (2)}.
Officer’s opinion............, + 18 assessable under this Act, whe-
ther on his own total income or on the' total income of any
other person during the previous year, ‘the Income-tax Offi-
cer may before the end of the relevent assessment year
serve a notice upon him requiring him to furnish, within
thirty days from the date of service off the notice, a return
of his income or the income of such other person during that
year. in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed
manner and setting forth. such’ other particulars as
may be prescribed............

Provided that the Incomé-tax Officer may, in his dis-
cretion, extend the date for the delivery of the return.

(3) If any person.............has sustained a loss............ in fs..22 (२०8),
any previous year under the head ‘Profits and gains of busi- एन.)
ness, profession or vocation’, and such ‘loss or any part there-
of would ordinarily have been carried forward under sec-
tion 73(2) or 74(2) [Sub-section (2) of section 24], such per-
son, or the person tis in re: 3022 of the total income
of such person. shall, if he not be with a notice
under sub-section (2), ...... ish: on: #r| before the 30th day



fs. 22 (3))

4s. 22 (5)]

Section i

Secti . (1) The Income-tax Officer may, at any time roofed हर the
Provera? receipt of a return made under section 143[22], prooped

186
Clauses 143-145

of June of the assessment year or within such further time
as the Income-tax Officer in any case may allow, a return
of loss in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed
manner and containing such other particulars as may be
prescribed; and all the provisions of this Act shall apply as
if it were a return under sub-section (1).

(4) If any person has not furnished a return within
the time allowed by or under sub-section (1) or sub-section
(2), or having furnished a return under either of those sub-
sections discovers any omission or wrong statement therein,
he may furnish a return or a revised return, as the case
may be, at any time before the assessment is made.

(5) The prescribed form of the returns referred to in
sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall, in the case of an assessee
engaged in any business, profession or vocation, require him
to furnish particulars of the location and style of the prin-
cipal place wherein he carries on the business, profession or
vocation and of the branches thereof. the names and ad-
dresses of his partners, if any, in such business, profession
or vocation and the extent of the share of the assessee and
the shares of all such partners in the profits of the busi-
ness, profession or vocation and any hranches thereof.

+t The return under section 143 [22(1) or 22(2) or 22(3)]
e shall be signed and verified—

(a) in the case of an individual, by the individual him-
self; where the individual is ab sent from India, d:
some person duly authorised by him in this behal:; 14
and where the individual is mentally incapa¢itated
from attending to his affairs, by his prone m or
committee or by any other person competent to act
on his behalf;

(9) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, by the
Karta, and, where the Karta is absent from IJridia or
is mentally incapacitated from attending to his
affairs, by any other adult member of such femily;

(c) in the case of a company or local authority, by the
principal officer thereof; ,

(d) in the case of a firm, by any partner thereof, not be-
img a minor;

(e) in the case of any other association, by any member
of fh association or the principal officer thereof;
an

(£) in the case of any other person, by that person or
by some person competent to act on his behalf.

to

ascstment. make, in a summary} mann: 43 provisional assessm¢nt of


187
Clause 145

the tax payable by the assessee, on the basis of his return {s. 238 ay
and the accounts and documents, if any, accompanying catlier part.
Bee

(2) In making any assessment under this section due पर 23B (1);
effect shall be given 00-% fatter part.]

(9) the allowance referred to in section 32(2) (para (०)
of the proviso to section 10(2)(vi)], and

(0) any loss carried forward under section 73(2) or 74
(2) [24(2)].

(3) A partner of a firm may be provisionally assessed [s. 23 B (2)}
under sub-section (1) in respect of his share in the income
of the firm, if its return has been received, even if the
return of the partner himself has not been received.

(4) A firm may be provisionally assessed under sub- [s. 23 B (3)]
section (1) as an unregistered firm, exreept in the following
cases, where it shall be assessed as a registered firm—

(a) where the firm was assessed as a registered firm for _[New. See
the latest assessment year for which its assessment Notification
has been completed, and it has before the date No 830f3.9-
prescribed for the purposes of this clause, filed its Migary of
application for registration or declaration under Finance,
section 191(7) [section for declaration] for the as- Revenue
sessment year for which the provisional assessment Division.)
is to be made; .

(b) where no regular assessment has been made on the
firm for any assessment year preceding the assess-
ment year for which the provisional assessment is
to be made, and the firm 3, before the date pres-
cribed for the purposes of this clause, filed its appli-
cation for registration, or declaration as aforesaid,
for the assessment year for which the provisional
assessment is to be made.

(5) After a regular assessment has been made......any ७. ४३ 8 (7)

amount paid or deemed to have been paid towards the pro-
visional assessment made under sub-section (1) shall be
deemed to have been paid towards the regular assessment:
and where the amount paid or deemed to have been paid
towards the provisional assessment exceeds the amount pay-
able under the regular assessment, the excess shall be re-
funded to the assessee.

(6) Nothing done or suffered by reason or in consequ- [s. 23 8 (8)}
ence of any provisional assessment made under this section
shall prejudice the determination, on the merits, of any
issue which may arise in the ¢ourse of the regular assess-
ment.......... . :

13-1 Law Com.f58


188.

° Clauses 145-147

(६ 23 B (4)]

Section 146.
Enquiry फिट
fore asses-
sment,

{s. 22 (4)]

{New]

{New]

Section 147
Assessment,

Ts. 23 (1)]

{s. 23 (#)]

(7) There shall be no right of appeal against a provi-
sional assessment made under sub-section (1).

(1) For the purpose of making an assessment under this
Act, the Income-tax Officer may serve on any person whe
has made a return under section 143(1) [22(1)] or section
143(3) (22(2A)] or upon whom a fotice has been served
under section 143(2) [22(2)] (whether 6 return has been
made or not), a notice requiring him, on a date to be there-
in specified,—

{i) to produce, or cause to be produced, such accounts
or documents as the Income-tax Officer may require,
or

(ii) to furnish in writing and verified in the prescribed
manner information in such form and on ‘such
points or matters (including a statement of all as-
sets and liabilities of the assessee, whether inclu-
ded in the accounts or not) as the Income-tax Offi-
cer may require : .

Provided that the previous approval of the Commis-
sioner shall be obtained before requiring the assessee to
furnish a statement of all assets and liabilities not included
in the accounts:

Provided further that the Income-tax Officer shall not
require the production of any accounts relating to a period
more than three years prior to the previous year.

(2) For the purpose of obtaining full informatian ‘in
OR ect of the income or loss of any person, the Income-texr
Officer may make such enquiry as he considers necesdary.

(3) The assessee shall, except where the assess-
ment is made under section 148 [s. 23(4), part regarding best
judgment assessment], be given an opportunity of rebutting
the substance of any material gathered on the basis of an;
enquiry under sub-section (2) and proposed to be utilised.
for the purpose of the assessment.

(1) Where a return has been made under section 143
[22] and the Income-tax Officer is satisfied without requir-
ing the presence of the assessee or the production by him
of any evidence that the return. . is correct andicom-
plete, he shall assess the total i ie ar loss of the assessee,
and shall determine the sum payable by him or refundable
to him on the basis of such return.

(2) Where a return has been made under section 143
[22] but the Income-tax Officer is not satisfied without re-
quiring the presence of the person who made the return or
the production of evidence that the return............... is cor-
rect and complete, he shall serve on such person a hotice
requiring him, on a date to therein specified, either to

t a i


189

Clauses 147-149

attend at the Income-tax Officer’s office or to produce, or
to cause to be there produced, any evidence on which such
person may rely in support of the return.

(3) On the day specified in the notice issued under sub- [s. 23 (3)]
section (2), or as soon afterwards as may be, the Income-tax
Officer, after hearing such evidence as such person may pro-
duce and such otKer evidence as the Income-tax’ Officer may
require, on specified points, and after taking into account
ail relevant material which the Income-tax Officer has
gathered and which the Income-tax Officer is competent to
take into account, shall, by an order in writing, assess the
total income or loss of the assessee, and determine the sum
payable by him or refundable to him on the basis of such
assessment.

(1) If any person— Section 148.
(a) fails to make the return reguired by any notice Best Jude.

given under section 143 (2) [sub-section (2) of Mean”
section 22] and has not made a return or a revised -
return under section 143(4) [sub-section (3) of sec- [s. 23 (4)
tion 22], or carhier part
{b) fails to comply with all the terms of a notice is-

sued under section 146(1) [sub-section (4) of sec-

tion 22], or
(०) having made a return, fails to comply with all the

terms of a notice issued under section 147 [section

re: assessment under 23(1) (2) & 23(3)],

the Income-tax Officer, after taking into account all rele-
vant material which the Income-tar Officer has gathered
and which the Income-tax Officer is competent to take into
account, shall make the assessment of the total income or
loss to the best of his judgment and determine the sum
payable by the assessee or refundable to the assessee on
the basis of such assessment.

rder under [New]
sub-section (1), refer to the material on the basis of which

the assessment is made.

For the purposes of sections 147 and 148, [two preced- Section 149.
ing sections regarding assessment and best ju gment} the “Rélevant
relevant material which the Income-tax Officer is compe: material’
tent to take into account in respect of an assessee inclu- [New]

les—

(a) market conditions in the previous year of the trade
in which the assessee was engaged in the previous
year,

(b) rates of profits disclosed by the accounts of other
persons engaged in the same fine of trade, and

(०) rates of profits is fo ned in case of the asses-
see in assessments for earlier jot subsequent years.


x7 390
Clauses 150-152

Section 150% (1) Income ......... chargeable under the head “Profits

Method रण and gains of business, profession or vocation” or “Income

ounting- from other sources” shall be computed ...... in accordance

ag ™!n with the method of accounting regularly employed by the
assessee : . हु

{s- 13, Provi- Provided that, if, though the accounts are correct and

80, part] complete to the satisfaction of the Income-tax Officer, the
method employed is such that, in the opinion of the In-
come-iax Officer, the income ......... cannot properly be de-
duced therefrom, then the computation shall be made upon
such basis and in such manner as the Income-tax Officer
may determine.

[s. 13, Provi- (2) Where the Income-tax Officer is not satisfied about
80, part.) the correctness or the completeness of the accounts of the
assessee, or where no method of accounting has been re-
gularly employed by the assessee, the Income-tax Officer
may make an assessment in the manner provided in sec-
tion 148 [23(4) main para, part regarding best judgment
assessment].

Section 151. Where an assessee assessed under section 148 [23(4)]
Reopening of makes an application to the Income-tax Officer, within
the instance 006 Month from the service of a notice of demand issued

of the asses- in consequence of the assessment, for cancellation of the

हा 1 assessment on the ground—
ar
छिः 27 (i) that he was prevented by sufficient cause from
making the return required by section 143 [22],
or
{ii) that he did not receive the notice issued under
section 14601) [22(4)] or section 147 [23(2)], or
(iii) that he had not a reasonable opportunity to comply,
or was prevented by sufficient cause from comply-
ing, with the terms of the ...... . Notices referred
to in clause (ii),
the Income-tax Officer shall, if satisfied about the exis-
tence of such ground, cancel the assessment and proceed
to make a fresh assessment in accordance with the provi-
sions of sections 147 and 148 [section 23).
Section 152. LE
Income ‘cs- (a) the Income-tax Officer has reason to believe: that
सा पड assess by reason of the omission or failure on the payt of
7 an assessee to make a return of his income under
Is 34 (1). section 143 [22] for any assessment year or to dis-
st para, close fully and truly all material facts necessary
clause (a), for his assessment for that year, income ...... char-
part.] geable to tax has escaped assessment for that year,
हब००००००० or
&, 34 (1) (b) notwithstanding that there has been no omission
vst ro, or failure as mentionéd in clause (a) on the part
par, (७), of the assessee, the Income-tax Officer has in;con-

sequence of ipformatipm in his possession reason


191

Clauses 152-155

to believe that income ....... chargeable to tax
has escaped assessment for any assessment year,

he may, subject to the provisions of sections 153 to 159[s-. 34 (7)
[other sections in group dealing with escaped in- 1 para
come} assess or reassess such income . or recompute Ma

the loss or the depreciation allowance, he case may be,

for the assessment year concerned (hereafter in sections

153 to 159 [other sections in the group for escaped income]

referred to as the relevant assessment year). .

Explanation.—Production before the Income-tax Offi- {s. a)
cer of account books or other evidence from which mate- Ex j*
rial evidence could with due diligence have been discover-

ed by the Income-tax Officer will not necessarily amount

to disclosure within the meaning of this section...............

For the purposes of section 152 [section regarding in- Section 153.
come escaping assessment], the follewing shall also be “Income
deemed to be cases where income chargeable to tax has Which | has

escaped assessment, namely— cacaped २, “
Meaning.

(a) where income......chargeable to tax has been un- fe. 34. (9)

der-assessed ; or rst pata,

clause (a),

(b) where such income ...... has been assessed at toopart, and

low a rate; or . clause — (b),

pati).
(९) where such income has been made the subject of
excessive relief under this Act; or

{d) where excessive loss or depreciation allowance has
been computed.

(1) Before making the assessment, reassessment, or re- Section 7
computation under section 152 [section regarding income ee where
escaping assessment], the Income-tax Officer shall serve ON ingome has
the assessee, or, if the assessee is a company, on the prin-esqaped as-
cipal officer thereof, a notice containing all or any of the se#men.
vequirements which may be included in a notice under {s. 34 (1),
section 143(2) [section 22(2)}; and the provisions of this #cond para,
Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly as if the part]
notice were a notice issued under that sub-section.

(2) The Income-tax Offieer shall, before issuing any ie 34, rit)

. ६ ५ हि 1
notice under this section, record his reasons for doing so... clause (iit)

patj 5
(1) The notice under section 154 [section regarding Section 155.

notice] may, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) Aimedirast

and of section 157 [section regarding sanction], be issued— 'F PN

{a) in cases falling under clause (a) of section 152 f& 34 4),

[section ...... regarding income escaping assess- smo para,
ment],—
(i) at any time, if the income......... chargeable to tax | 3¢ (), ast

which has escape sed a ४ nt or has been aa latter
der-assessed or asgessed at too a low rate or has hpif part]


192

Clauses 155-157

been made the subject of excessive relief under
this Act, or the loss or depreciation allowance
which has been computed in excess, amounts to
or is likely to amount to fifty thousend rupees
or more for the relevant assessment year ;

fs. 34 (1), 15४६ (ii) within a period of sixteen years from-the end
Re clause of the relevant assessment year, where the case
hal, pare does not fall under sub-clause (i) of this clause
modified? and the income chargeable to tax which has
escaped assessment or has been under-assessed
° or assessed at too low a rate or has been made
the subject of excessive relief under this Act
का of 1922 or under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, or the
loss or depreciation allowance which has been
computed in excess under this Act or under the
said Act, amounts to or is likely to amount to
one lakh of rupees or more in the aggregate for
the sixteen assessment years (including assess-
ment years under the said Act) immediately pre-
ceding the assessment year in which such notice

is issued ;
[s. 34 (1), (5६ (iit) within a period of eight years from the end of
हमर the relevant assessment year, in any other case ;
i 34 (7) (9) in cases falling under clause (9) of section 152
second para, (section regarding income escaping assessment],
part) within a period of four years from the end of the

relevant assessment year.
(1१ (2) ...... If the person on whom a notice under section

G  3¢
and Prov.) 154 {section re: notice] is to be served is a person treeted

Section 1
Provision

as the agent of a non-resident under section 173 [s..43]
and the assessment or reassessment to be made in pursu-
ance of the notice is to be made on him as agent of guch
non-resident, the notice shall not be issued after the ex-
piry of 6 period of two years from the end of the relevant
assessment year. ‘

58. Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
fot or sub-section (2) of section 155 [preceding section], but

men's subject to the provisions of section 157, [section regarding
in pursuance Sanction}, the notice under section 154 [section regarding
of an order notice] may be issued at any time for the purpose of npak-
onappralete, ing an assessment or re-assessment on the assessee or any
6. 34 i person in consequence of or to give effect to any finding
and Tov. or direction contained in an order under section 259, :263

part

Section +
Sanction
issue
notice.

(s. 34 (1),
Prov.

(ii), part}

farrer hall. 269, 271, or 272 {section 31, 33, 338, 338, 66 or 668] passed

in the case of the assessee,

537 (1) No notice shall be issued under section 154 [sec-

for tion regarding notice} after the expiry of eight years from

गे the end of the relevant assessment year, unless the Cen-

ist tal Board of Revenue ...... is satisfied on the reasons  re-

cl. corded by the Income-tux Officer that it is a fit case for
the issue of such notica.


193

Clauses 157-160

(2) No notice shall be issued under section 154 [section [s. 34 (1), rst
regarding notice] after the expiry of four years from the Prov el. (ii),
end of the relevant assessment year, unless the Commis-
sioner is satisfied on the reasons recorded by the Income-
tax Officer that it is a fit case for the issue of such notice.

(1) In an assessment or re-assessment made under Section 158°
section 152 [section regarding income escaping assessment], Other Pro-
the tax shall be chargeable at the rate or rates at which it “°*
would have been charged had the income......not escaped as- (5: “eo and
sessment or full assessment, as the case may be. Prov.

(2) Where an assessment is reopened in circumstan- [s. 34 (2)]
ces falling under clause (b) of section 152 [section regard-
ing income escaping assessment], the assessee may, if he
has not impugned any part of the original assessment order
for that year either under sections 254 to 256 [30] or under
section 272 [33A], claim that the proceedings under section
152 [section regarding income escaping assessment] shall be
dropped on his showing that he had been assessed on an
arnount or to a sum not lower than what he would be right~
ly liable for even if the items alleged to have escaped asses-
sment had been taken into account, or the assessment or
computation had been properly made:

Provided that in so doing he shail not be entitled to
reopen matters concluded by an order under section 271
[338] or section 161 or 162 [35] or by a decision under
section 263 [66] or section 269 [66A].

An assessment or re-assessment under section 152 = 159.
{section regarding income eseaping ent] shall be Ss ting time
completed within the time, if any, limi fed bys by section 160 [34 fife for
(9). cor ४००.

(N
(1) No order of assessment ...... shall be made under Section 160.
section 147 or 148 [23] ...... at any time after— fe * conte

(a) the expiry of four years from the end of the ass- पंण of assess:
essment year in which the income .. was first "eps, and
assessable ; or 9. , 34 (3):

para,

pai
(b) the expiry of four years from the issue of a notice [Nqw}
under section 283(1) [28(3)], in_a case falling under : rast 3.
section 280(1) (९) [s. 28(1) (c}]: or 34 [3), main
par, words
“other than
हु . applies”).
(0) the expiry of one year from the date of the filing [new)
of a return or a revised return under section 14:
{4) [22(8)];
whichever is latest.

(2) No order of assessment or re~assessment shall be [New]
made under section 152 [sectjon re iyipeome escaping as-~ .
sessment]— ‘ rt

(a) where the assessment or refagse ssment isto be


छ. 34 (3),

main para,

party

fs. 34 {3

at Prov.

s. (3),
fa
earlier half]
is. 34 (3),
Bea ph
jatter half,
part)

पर 0)
छठ Fro"

[New]

{New]

194

Clause 160
made under clause (a) of that section , [sec-
tion re: income escaping ing assessment], after the
expiry of four years the end of the assess-

ment year in which the notice under section 154
(section re: notice] was served ;

where the assessment or re-assessment is to be
made under clause (b) of that section [section re:
income escaping assessment], after—

(i) the expiry of four years from the end of the
assessment year in which the income was first
assessable, or

Gi) the expiry of one year from the date of service
of the notice wu: section 154, [section re:
notice],

whichever is later.

(3) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (2) shall not
apply to the following classes of assessments and re-assess-
ments, which may be completed at any time--

(0) were a re-assessment is made under section 151
(27);

(b

(ii) where the assessment or re-assessment is made on
the assessee or any person in consequence of or to
give effect to any finding or direction contained
in an order under section 259, 263, 269, 271, or 272
{section 31, 33, 33A, 388, 66 or 66A].

Explanation 1.—......... in computing the period of li-
mitation for the purposes of this section, the time talten in
reopening the whole or any part of the proceeding or in
giving an opportunity to the assessee to be reheard under
section 133, Mproviso [5 (70) ist Prov.], or any period dur-
ing which the assessment proceeding is stayed by an order
or injunction of any court, shall be excluded.

Explanation 2.—Where, by an order under section 259,
263, 269, 271 or 272, [31 section 33, section 33A, section
338, section 66 or section 66A] any income is ‘excluded
from the total income of the assessee for an asses¢ment
year, then, an assessment of such income for another as-
sessment ‘year shall, for the purposes of section 15¢ and
this section [34(3), 2nd Proviso, latter half both parts],
be deemed to be one made in consequence of or to give
eect to any finding or direction contained in thd said
order.

Explanation 3.—Where, by an order under section 259,
263, 269, 271 or 272, [31, section 33, section 334A,
section 338, section 66 or section 668] any income is ex-
cluded from the total income of one person and held ‘to be
the income of another person, then an assessment of such
income on such other-person ghall, for the purposes of sec-
tion 156 and this segtion [| 18), 2nd Proviso, latter half


* 195
Clauses 160-161

both paris] be deemed to be one made in consequence of
or to give effect to any finding or direction contained in
the said order, provided such other person was given an
opportunity of being heard before the said order was
passed.

(1) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent Section 161.
from the record— Reatifcation

(8) the Income-tax Officer may amend any order of bs. 35)
assessment or of refund or any other order, passed main para,
by him: part]

(09) the Appellate Assistant Commissioner may amend fs. 35 (1)
any order passed by him in appeal under section main” pary
259 [31]; part]

(c) the Commissioner may amend any order passed by fs. 35 (3)
him in revision under section 272 [332] or section main’ para,

271 [3388]. pact]
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this section, the fs. 35 (७
authority concerned— main para

(a) may make an amendment under sub-section wr

of its own motion, and

(b) shall make such amendment for rectifying any
+ such mistake which has been brought to its notice
by the assessee.

(3) An amendment which has the effect of enhancing [s. 35 (1), 1st
an assessment or reducing a refund or otherwise increas- PO"]
ing the liability of the assessee, shall not be made under
this section unless the authority concerned has given no-
tice to the assessee of its intention so to do and has allow-
ed the assessee a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

(4) Where an amendment is made under this section, (Neb}
an order shall be passed in writing by the Income-tax
authority concerned,

(5) Where any such amendment has the effect of re-[s. 35 (3)}
ducing the assessment, the Income-tax Officer shall make
any refund which may be due to such assessee.

(6) Where any such amendment has the effect of en-[s. % (4)}
hancing the assessment or reducing a.refund already , ~
made, the Income-tax Officer shali servé on the assessee
a notice of demand in the prescribed form specifying the
sum payable, and such notice of demand shall be deemed
to be issued under section 163 [section 29], and the provi-
sions of this Act shall apply accordingly.

(7) Save as otherwise provided in section 162 or sec- (sec. 35 (1),
tion 193 (4), [s. 35(5) to 35(10) or sec. re: cancellation of main para,

registration], no amendment under se section shall be 9
made after the expiry of four years the date of the
order sought te be amended. : 1.


Section 162.
other amend-
ments

{s. 35 (5)

[New]

fs. 35 (8)]

196
Clause 162

(1) Where in respect of any completed assessment of
a partner in a firm it is found—

(a} on the assessment or reassessment of the firm, or

(b) on any reduction or enhancement made in the in-
come of the firm under section 161(1), 259, 263,
269, 271 or 272, [section 31, section 33, section 33A,
section 33B, section 66, section 66A or section 35(1)],

that the share of the partner in the income of the firm has
not been included in the assessment of the partner or, if
included, is not correct, the Income-tax Officer may amend
the order of assessment of the partner with a view to the
inclusion of the share in the assessment or the correction
thereof, as the case may be; and the provisions of -section
161 [35(1) to (4}] shall, mutatis-mutandis, apply thereto,
the period of four years specified in sub-section (7) of
that section being reckoned from the date of the final order
passed in the case of the firm.

(2) Where in respect of any completed assessment of a
member of an association of persons it is found—

(8) on the assessment or re-assessment of the agsocia-
tion, or

(b) on any reduction or enhancement made in the in-
come of the association under section 161(1}, 259,
263, 269. 271 or 272, [section 31, section 33, section
386, section 338, section 66, section 66A or spetion
35(1)).
that the share of the member in the income of the | asso-
ciation has not been included in the assessment of the|mem-
ber or, if included, is not correct, the Income-tax er
may amend the order a assessment of the member ah a
view to the inclusion of the share in the assessment ९7 the
correction thereof, as the case may be; and the provisi F of
section 161 [35(1) to (4)] shall, mutatis-mutandis, ply
thereto, the period of four yeers specified in sub-section (' |
of that section being reckoned from the date of the final
order passed in the case of the association : {

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall iaffect
the provisions of section 87, clause (v) [14(2)(b)}.

(3) Where, as a result of proceedings initiated under
clause (a) of section 152, [section corresponding to existing
section 34(1) and (2)] '. a firm or an: asso-
ciation of persons is assessed reassessed ............ » and
the Income-tax Officer concerned is of opinion that it is
necessary to compute or recompute the total income of a
partner in the firm or a member of the association ee -
8005, ..............- as the case 5०585 the Income-tax icer
may proceed to compute or 1: ute the total income and

‘ . | :



197

Clause 162

determine the sum payable on the basis of such computation

- or recomputation and make the necessary amendment; and
the provisions of section 161 185(1) to (4)] shall mutatis-
mutandis apply thereto, the period of four years specified
in sub-section (7) of that section being reckoned from the
date of the final order passed in the case of the firm or
association, .................. as the case may be.

(4) Where ithe Income-tax Officer is satisfied that the [s. 35 (9)]
income-tax payable by a company on its profits and gains
out of which the company has declared a dividend, has not
been paid within three years after the financial year in
which the dividend was declared or within one year after
the financial year in which the assessment of the company
for the assessment year concerned was made, whichever is
later, the amount of income-tax which a shareholder of the
company is deemed himself to have paid in respect of such
dividend under section 246 [498], or the amount for which
credit is due to him under section 246 [sub-section (5) of
section 18] in respect of such dividend, shall be deemed to
have been wrongly computed; and the Income-tax Officer
may, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, pro-
ceed to recompute such amount by reducing it in the same
proportion as the amount of income-tax remaining unpaid
by the company bears to the amount of income-tax payable
by it on such profits and gains, and make the necessary
amendment: . >> and the provisions of section 161
(35(1) to (4)) i mutatis mutandis apply thereto, the
riod of four years specified in sub-section (7) of that sect’ On
being reckoned from the date on which the period of three
years aforesaid has expired or the date on which the period
of one year aforesaid has expired, whichever is later.

(5) Where an allowance by way of development rebate 5. 35 (771
has been made wholly or partly to an assessee in respect
of a ship, machinery or plant in any assessment year under
section 33 [clause (vib) of sub-section (2) of section 10],
and subsequently at any time before the expiry of ten years
from the end of the previous year in which the ship was ac-
quired or the machinery or plant was installed— :

{i) the ship, machinery or plant is sold or otherwise
transferred by the assesgee to any person other than
the Government: or

(ii) the assessee utilises the amount credited to the
reserve account under the said section read with
section 34 [section for conditions]—

(a) for distribution by way of dividends or profits; or

(b) for remittance outside India as profits or for the
creation of any asset outside India, or

(c) for any other purpose} which if not a purpose of
the business of the un ५225 H

Hi



198
Clauses 162-166

the development rebate originally allowed shall be deemed
to have been wrongly allowed, and the Income-tax Officer
may, notwithstanding anything contained -in this Act, ......

51०० Fecompute the total income of the assessee for the
relevant previous year and make the necessary amendment;
and the provisions of section 161 [s. 35(2) to (4)] shall, muta-
tis mutandis, apply thereto, the period of four years specified
in sub-section (7) of that section being reckoned from the
end of the previous year in which the transfer takes place
or the money is so utilised.

{New} (6) Where any such debt or part of debt as is referred
to in section 36(6)(i) [sub-clause (i) of clause (6) of section
relating to deductions from business] is written off as irre-
coverable in the accounts of the assessee for a previous year,
and the Income-tax Officer is satisfied that such del 9४ or
part thereof became a bad debt in an earlier previous year,
the Income-tax Officer may, notwithstanding anything con-
tained in this Act, allow such debt or part of debt as a
deduction for such earlier previous year, and recompute the
total income of the assessee for such earlier previous year
and make the necessary amendment; and the provisions of
section 161 [35(1) to (4)] shall, mutatis mutandis, apply
thereto, the period of four years specified in sub-section (7)
Of that section being reckoned from the end of the previous
year in which the debt is actually written off as irrecover-
able,

Section 163. When any tax, penalty or interest is due in consequence

Notice | ° of any order passed under or in pursuance of this Act, the

हु Income-tax Officer shall serve upon the assessee ...... a

{s. 29} notice of demand in the prescribed form specifying the

sum so payable.

Section 164. When, in the course of the assessment of the total in-
intimation of come of any assessee, it is established that a loss ...... a
Joss. has taken place which the assessee is entitled to have carri-

fs. 24(3)] ed forward and set off under the provisions of section 73(2),
74(2) or 75(2) (24(2) (2B)], the Income-tax Officer shall
notify to the assessee by an order in writing the amount of
the loss as computed by him for the purposes of section 73
(2), 74(2) or 75( 3 (24(2), (2B).

Section 165. Whenever a registered firm is assessed, or an unregister-

Intimation of ed firm is assessed under the provisions of section 190(b)

iment ० {23(5)(b)} ५ the Income-tax Officer shall notify to the firm

हा 6)] by an order in writing the amount of its total income ...... .

bs 23.) assessed and the apportionment thereof between the several
partners.

Section 166. (1) The person responsible for paying any interest,
Information not being “Interest on securities”, shall, on or before the
& rewrns. fifteenth day of June in each year, furnish to the Income-
{s. 20A and tax Officer having jurisdiction to assess him, a return, in
Rules 424 & the prescribed form and verffied in the prescribed manner,

of the names and addresses pf all persons to whom ‘during


199

Clauses 166-167

the previous financial year he has paid interest or aggregate
interest exceeding such amount, not being less than four
hundred rupees, as may be prescribed in this behalf, to-
gether with the amount paid to each such person.

(2) The prescribed person in the case of every Gov- ६. कु
ernment office, and the principal officer or the prescribed
person in the case of every local authority, company or
other public body or association, and every private employer
shall prepare, and within thirty days from the 3lst day of

- March in each year. deliver or cause to be delivered to the
Income-tax Officer in the preseribed form and verified in
the prescribed manner, a return in writing showing—

{a) the name and, so far as it is known, the address,
of every person who was receiving on the 315६ day
of March, or has received or to whom was due
during the year ending that date, from the Govern-
ment, the authority, company, body, association or
private employer, as the case may be, any imcome
chargeable under the head “Salaries” of such
amount as may be prescribed;

{b) the amount of the income so received by or so due
to each such person, and the time or times at
which the same was paid or due, as the case may

re;

(c) the amount deducted in respect of income-tax and
super-tax from the income of each such person.

(3) Where an employer deducts from the emoluments [५, 5811]
paid to an employee or pays on his behalf any contribu-
tions of that employee to an approved superannuation
fund, he shall include ali such deductions or payments
in the return which he is required to furnish under sub-
section (2), as provided by section 314 [58T].

(4) The principa} officer of every company which is an [$, 19७]
Indian company or a company which has made such effec- .
tive arrangements as may be prescribed for the declara-
tion and payment of dividends in India shall, on or before
the 15th day of June in each yeer, furnish to the (0 rescribed
officer a return in the prescribed form and verified in the
prescribed manner of the names and of the addresses, as
entered in the register of shareholders maintained by the
company, of the shareholders to whom a dividend or aggre-
gate dividends exceeding such amount ag may be prescribed
in this behalf has or have been distributed during the pre-

ceding year and of the amount so distributed to each share-
holder.

The principal officer of every company shall, at the Section 167.
time of distribution of dividends, furnish to every person Certificate by
receiving a dividend a certificate to the effect that the Smbeey, i
company has paid or will pay income-tax or that no income- a i
tax is payable (as the case yng ९) on profits which are dividgnds.
being distributed and specifying such bata particulars as fs, a
may be prescribed. 4


Section 168.
Legal repre
sentatives.

{s. 24B (1),
part]

4191

{New}

{New)

Ts. 24 B (x),
part]

fs. 2 i Q),
Part

200
Clause 168
CHAPTER XV
LIABILITY IN SPECIAL CASES

A-—Legal representatives.

(1) Where a person dies, his .. legal repre-
sentative shall be liable to pay any 7 alty or other
sum which the deceased would have been liable to pay if
he had not died, in the like manner and to the same extent
as the deceased.

(2) For the purpose of making an assessment (includ-
ing an assessment under section 152 [section 34] ) of the in-
come of the deceased and for the purpose of levying any
tax, penalty or other sum in the hands of the legal repre-
sentative in accordance with the provisions of sub-section
(1),-

(a) any proceeding taken against the deceased before
his death shall be deemed to have been taken
against the legal representative and may be con-
tinued against the legal representative from the
stage at which it stood on the date of the ddath of
the deceased;

(9) any proceeding whith could have been taken
against the deceased if he had survived, may be
taken against the legal representative; and

(०) qu the provisions of this Act shall apply accarding-
3: 2

(3) The legal representative of the deceased shall, for
the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be an assessee.

(4) The provisions of sub-section (3) of section 170
[section relating to liability of representative assesse sub-
section (3)], section 171 [new section regarding right of
representative assessee to recover tax paid] section 172,
{new section providing when representative assespee is
personally liable] and section 176 [new section relating to
remedies against properties in case of representative as-
sessee] shall, so far as may be and to the extent to pwhich
they are not inconsistent with the provisions of thts sec-
tion, apply in relation to a representative assessee.:

(5) The liability of a legal representative under this
section shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), be
limited to the extent to which the estate is capable of meet-
ing the liability.

(6) In this Chapter, “legul representative” includes an
executor or administratr. ~


201
Clauses 169-170
B—Representative assessees—General provisions.

(1) For the purposes of this Act. “representative asses- Section 169.
see” means— “Representa-
tive assessee,
0) in respect of the income of a non-resident specified [६ 4०(1) main
in section 96) [Section 42(1), main para, earlier para, latter
part], the agent of the non-resident, including a per- half, part)
son who is treated as such under section 173 [43];

(ii) in respect of income of a minor, lunatic or idiot, the fs. 4० (1),
guardian or committee or manager or trustee who part]
is entitled to receive or is in receipt of such income
on behalf of such minor, lunatic or idiot;

(37) in respect of income which the 5- 4 (1),
Court of Wards, the Administrator-General, the MAN Para,
Official Trustee or any receiver or manager (in-
cluding any person. whatever his designation, who
in fact manages property on behalf of another)
appointed by or under any order of a court,.
cecteteceeeersenes receives or is entitled to receive, on
behalf of any person, ............... such Court of
Wards, Administrator-General, Official Trustee, re-
ceiver or manager

जज तन im respect of income which a trustee or [s. 41 (1)
trustees appointed under a trust declared by a main para,
duly executed instrument in writing whether tes- Part)
tamentary or otherwise (including any Wakf deed

which is valid under the Mussalman Wakf Valid-

ing Act, 1913) receive or are entitled to receive on 6 of 1913
behalf of any person, ...... >> SUCH trustee or
trustees. see

(2) Every representative assessee shall be deemed to rower 1.42
be an assessee for the purposes of this Act. »)

(1) Every representative assessee, as regards the in Section 170.
come in respect of which he is a representative assessee, Liabllity of
shall be subject to the same duties, responsibilities and lia- representa

bilities as if the income were income received by or accru- \Y* MseHee:
ing to or in favour of him beneficially, and sha it be liable _ (0), art
to assessment in his own name in respect of that income; paral’ part,
but any such assessment shall be deemed to be made upon s. 42{1), main
him in his representative capagity only, and the tax shall, pata} latter
subject to the other provisions contained in this Chapter, half: part}

be levied upon and recovered from him in like manner and

to the same amount as it would be leviable upon and re-

coverable from the person represented by him.

(2) Any tex payable in respect of any such assessment [New]
shall be recoverable from the representative assessee, but
to the extent only of assets Se onging to the ‘son whom
he represents which may be on may TP in Ris possession
or under his management, di Lor trol:


202

Clauses 170-173
Provided that nothing in this sub-section snall affect
ion 1

the provisions of section 172 ................ .---०००- ० लत
(newly added section laying down when representative as-
sessee personally liable.]

(New] (3) Where any person is, in respect of any income, as-
sessable under this Chapter in the capacity of a represen-
tative assessee, he shall not, in respect of that income, be
assessed under any other provision -of this Act.

Section 171 (1) Every representative assessee who, as such, pays
Right of ree any tar, shall be entitled to recover the amount so paid
resentative from the person on whose behalf it is paid, or to retain
fecovertax out of any moneys that may be in his possession or may
paid. come to him in his representative capacity, an amount
(New) equal to the amount so paid.

[3.4० (7), 2nd (2) ..... cee Any representative assessee, or any

prov.) person who apprehends that he may be assessed as a repre-
sentative assessee, may retain out of any money payable by
him to the person on whose behalf he is liable to pay tar
(hereinafter in this section referred to as the Erincinal), ‘a
sum equal to his estimated liability under this ptey, and
in the event of any disagreement between the principal
and such representative assessee or person as to the atnount
to be so retained, such representative assessee or gerson
may secure from the Income-tax Officer a certificate stating
the amount to be so retained pending final settlement of
the liability, and the certificate so obtained shall be his
warrant for retaining that amount.

8. 42 (1), 371 (3) ................-५५० The amount recoverable from such

prov. representative assessee or person at the time of final settle-
ment shall not exceed the amount specified in such certi-
ficate except to the extent to which such representative
assessee or person may at such time have in his hands addi-
tional assets of the principal.

Section 172. Every representative assessee shall be personally liable

When. repte- for any tax payable by him in his representative capacity,

seat’ per tf, while his liability for tax remains undischarge 1 he

sonally liable Charges, disposes of or parts with any assets, which pre in

[New] his possession or come to him after the tax is payable, when
from or out of such assets, the tax could legally have been
paid. .

C—Representative assessee—special cases.

Section 173. tio
Who may be (i) For the purposes of this Act, “agent”, in relation to

regarded 4s a non-resident, includes any person in India—

fs. 43. main (a) who is employed by or on behalf of the non-resi-
para} dent. or
(89) who has any business connection with the non-
resident, or


203
Clauses 173-174

(०) through whom the non-resident is in receipt of any
income,

(७) who is the trustee of the non-resident ...
Provided that a broker in India who

Is. 40 (2)}
tm res [s. 43, Ist

pect of any transactions, does not ....... deal directly Prov-]
with or on behalf of a non-resident principal but deals with
or through a non-resident broker .................. shall not. be

deemed to be an agent under this section in respect of such
transactions, if the following conditions are fulfilled, name-
ly :—

(3) the transactions are carried on in the ordinary
course of business through the first-mentioned
broker; and

(0) the non-resident broker is carrying on such tran-
sactions in the ordinary course of his business and
not as a principal.

Explanation.—A person, whether a resident or a non- छू. 45, Expln.}
resident, who acquires किम whether by sale,
exchange... 0. .. transfer or reli: inguishment, a
capital asset in India from a non-resident shall, for the pur-
poses of charging to tax the capital gain arising from such
sale, exchange, . . transfer or relinquishment, be
deemed to have connection, within the meaning |
of this section, with such non-resident.

(2) .. No person shall be treated as the agent (s. 43, 2nd
of a non-resident ..................... unless he has had an oppor- Prov.)
tunity of being heard by the Income-tax Officer as to his
liability to be treated as such.

seeseeeeeeteseeees Where any income. in respect है! which Section 174.
the persons mentioned in section 169(1) 1) (iii) and (iv), [S. Ch Lie
41(1) Part, as embodied in the clauses ling with Court of be nee
Wards etc. and trustees in the mewly added section defining ९, akiowa
representative assessee) are lidble as tepresentative asses- [s. 4x (3), 280
sees, or any part thereof, is not specifically receivable on Prom ‘earlier
behalf of any one person, or where the ‘individual shares of half; part]
the persons on whose behalf 5061 income or such part there-
of is receivable (which persons are hereinafter in this sec-
on referred to as the beneficlaries) are indeterminate or
unknown,—

(8) income-tax shall be charged—

(i) ................. 2 a8 if such incorhe ............ or such हि. 41 प्र 1st
part thereof were the total income of an association halt fatter
of persons, or half, part)

(ii) if such income or such part thereof is received by (5. 44 (1), rst
4 beneficiary, then at the rate or rates applicable !rov., earlier
to the beneficiary, aj modi-

as the Income-tax Officer may direct; and A
14—1 Law Com /58. |


204
Clauses 174-178

{New] (b) super-tax shall be charged as if such income or
such part thereof were the total income of an asso-
ciation -of persons.

Section 175..0.................- Where part only of the income ..................
hoong ott, of a trust is chargeable under this Act, that proportion only
income is of the income, ...................--*-- receivable by a beneficiary
chargeable. from the trust which the part so chargeable bears to the
{s. 4t (7) 2nd whole income ... of,the trust shall be deemed to
Prov.) have been derived from that part.

D—Representative assessees—General.

Section 176. The Income-tax Officer shall have the same remedies
Remedies > against all property of any kind vested in or under the con-
perty in cases {70L or management of any representative assessee &s he
of representae would have against the property of any person liable to pay
tive assessees. any tax, and in as full and ample a manner.

[New]

Section 177. Nothing in the foregoing sections in this Chapter shall
Direc! asses’ prevent either the direct assessment of the person on whose
red behalf income. therein referred to ts receivable, or
[s.41 (2) and the recovery fro: person of the tax payable in rdspect
3.42(1), main Of such income............

para, latter
hal art, 6
extended} E—Exzecutors.

Section 178. (1) Subject as hereinafter provided, the income of the
Executors estate of a deceased person shall be chargeable to tax in the
{New] hands of the executor,—
(a) if there is only one executor, then as if the executor
were an individual, or
(b) if there are more then one executor, then as tf the
executors were an asseciation of persons.

(2) ‘The assessment of an. executor under this section
shall be made separately from any assessment, that
may be made on him in respect of his own income. ‘

५ (3) Separate assessments shall be made under i: sew
tion on the total income of eaph completed previous ir or
part thereof as is included ig the period from the dpte of
the death to the date of compfete distribution to the Henefi-
ciaries of the estate according to their several interests.

(4) In computing the total income of any oo year
under this section, any income of the estate of that previous
year distributed to, or appliel to the benefit of, any) bene-
ficiary of the estate during that previous year shpll be
excluded; but the income so excluded shall be included in
the total income of the previous year of such beneficlary.

Explanation—lIn this section, “executor” includes an
administrator or other person administering the estate of a
deceased person.


205

Clauses 179-180

The provisions of section 171 [New section authorising Section 179.
a representative assessee to recover tax paid from the prin- Right of
cipal] shall, mutatis-mutandis, apply in the case of an exe- ‘secover tax
cutor in respect of tax paid or payable by him as they paid.
apply in the case of a representative assessee. {New]

F—Succession to business, profession or vocation.

(0) Where a person carrying on any business, profes- Section 180,
sion or vocation, (such person hereinafter in this section Succession to
being referred to as the predecessor) has been succeeded othtrwne
therein by another person (hereinafter in this section refer- than on death
red to as the successor) who continues to carry on that busi-(s. _26(2),
ness, profession or vocation, the predecessor and the succes- main para)
sor shall. subject to the provisions of sections 13(2), 13(3),

91(1) and 100 [section 25(4)] each be assessed in respect of
his actual share, if any, of the income.... : of the
previous year, that is to say —

{a) the predecessor shall be assessed in respect of the
income of the previous year upto the date of succes:
sion, and

(b) the successor shall be assessed in respect of the in-
come of the previous year after the date of succes-
sion.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section i 26(2),
(), when the predecessor carinot be fopnd, the assessment heyy comer
of the income of the previous year in which the succession
took place upto the date of sutcession, dnd for the previous H
year preceding that year shalli be made‘on the successor in -
like manner and to the same amount # या; would have been
made on the predecessor... 3

i
-When the tax in respect of the income of et | 26(2),
, profession or vacation, for the previous year |. 5 latter
in which the succession ak lace upto: the date of succes-
sion or for the previous year pteceding that year, assessed on
the predecessor, cannot be vered him, it shall be
payable by and recoverable from tl Mf cur and the
successor Shall be entitled to tecover ‘from the predecessor
the amount of any tax so 9810.

५

-Where any....... Ga

«carried ontby a
ig succeeded to, ands stmultay
cession or after the succession there
of the joint family property betwe.

ess, profession or vo- [+ | 25A(2),
du undivided family paf Par
ly with the suc-
been a partition §

the members or

groups of members, the tax dye in 7 ct of the business,
profession or vocation succeet to the date of suc-

cession shall be assessed and wecovered tn the manner pro-

vided in section 181{4) and 1; done [segtion 25A(2), remain-

ing part, as embodied in secti:
prejudice to the provisions of this



206
Clause 181

G—Partition.

Section 181 dea (i). ....A Hindu family hitherto assessed as undivi-

fer partitio: shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Act,
of As Hindu to continue to be a Hindu undivided family, except where
undivided and in so far as a finding of partition has been given under
का) this section in respect of the Hindu family.
8... 2580), (2) Where, at the time of making an assessment under
ae para section 147 or 148 [23], it is claimed by or on behalf of
cattier part] any member of a Hindu family........... assessed as undivid-~
ed that a partition, whether total or partial, has taken place
among the members of such family, the Income-tax Officer
8. ३540): shall make an inquiry thereinto............ after giving notice
prev.) of the inquiry to all the members of the family.

fs. 25A(1), (3) On the completion of the inquiry, the Income-taxr
डिक Officer shall record a finding as to whether there has been

anter part} कु total or partial partition of the joint family Property, and,
if there has been such a partition, the date on which it has
taken place. .

9... 25A(2), (4) Where a finding of total or partial partition has been

par] Para, recorded by the Income-tax Officer under this section and
pal the partition took place during the previous year,—

(a) ............the total income received by or on behalf of
the joint family in respect of the period upto the
date of partition shall be assessed as if no partition
had taken place; and

(s._ 25A(2) (b) each member or group of members shall, in addition
part} para, to any tax for which he or it may be separately
Ps liable and notwithstanding anything contained in

section 11, clause (2) [section 14(1)], be jointly! and

Be pone). severally liable 107............ the tax on the income so
ov) 35585580................
(New] (5) Where a finding of total or partial partition | has

deen recorded by the Income-tax Officer under this ह tion
and the partition took place after the expiry of the preqious
year, the total income of the previous year of the foint

family shall be assessed as if no partition had taken पर
and the provisions of clause (b) of sub-section (4) ti,
mutatis mutandis, apply to the ease.

fs. 25A(2), (6) For the purposes of clause (b) of sub-section: (4),

main “para, the several liability of any member or group of members
Part] thereunder shall be computed according to the portion of the
joint family property allotted to him or it at the partition.

[New] (7) After a finding of total partition has been recorded
by the Income-tux Officer under this section in respegt of
any Hindu family, the Income-tax Officer having juripdic~
tion to assess the sy 6 family shall, subject to the provi~
sions of section 135(7) [64(5)],— . :


207
Clauses 181-182

/ (a) if the Hindu family carried on any business, pro-
fession or vocation, be the Income-tax Officer of the
area in which its principal place of business, pro-
fession or vocation was situate immediately before
the partition; and

(b) in other cases, be the Income-tax Officer of the area
in which the person who was the last manager of
the Hindu family was residing immediately before
the partition.

(8) The provisions of this section shall, mutatis mutan- [New]

dis and so far as may be, apply in relation to the levy and
collection of any penalty or other sum in respect of any

1 period upto the date of the partition, whether total or par-

tial, of a Hindu family as they apply in relation to the levy
and collection of tax in respect of any such period.

Explanation—In this section,— [New]
(a) “partition” means—

(i) a physical division of the property, if the pro-
perty admits of such division, or,

{ii) where the property does not admit of physical
division, then such division as the property admits
Of; ............ and @ mere severance of status shall
not be deemed to be a partition;

(b) “partial partition” means a partition which is par-
tial as regards the persons constituting the Hindu
undivided family, or the properties belonging to
the Hindu undivided family, ar both.

H--Shipping business of non-residents,

(1) The provisions of this section shall, notwithstanding Section 182.
anything contained in the other provisions of this Act, apply Shipping
for the purpose of the levy and recovery of tax in the case besiness | of
gf a non-resident who carries on business in India in any fy, aghvenrer
financial year as the owner or charterer of a ship (such per- pari
son pereinafter in this section being referred to as the prin-
ल्ं990)............

(2) Where a ship of the principal carries passengers, fs, 4B 2),
livestock, mail or goods shipped at a port in India, one-sixth latter at
of the amount paid or paya' ote on account of such carriage

to the principal or to any person on his behalf, whether that

amount is paid or payable in or out of India, shall be deemed

to be income accruing in India to the principal on account

of such carriage...........

(3) Before the departure from any port in India of any (s. 44867]
such ship. .the mastex of the ship shall prepare and
furnish to me-tax er 3 ret of the full amount
paid or payable to the pin pal, a any person on his ;

t



Is. 44B(2),
earlier half,
part)

8... 44B(3),

earlier pact]

fs. 44B(2),
earlier half,
part)

{s. 44B(3),
fatter part}

(s 4461

(30400
[800८६ part ]

Section 183.
Recovery of
tax in respect
of non-resi-
dent from his
assets

(.42(1), rst
Prov.}

208
Clauses 182-183

behalf, on account of the carriage of all passengers, live-
stock, mail or goods shipped at that port since the last arri-
val of the ship thereat.

(4) On receipt of the return, the Income-tax Officer shall
assess the income referred to in sub-section (2)............and
determine the sum payable as tax thereon at the rate or
rates for the time being applicable to the total income of
a company which has not made the arrangements referred
to in section 203 [18(3D), main para], and such sum shall be
payable by the master of the ship. :

(5) For the purpose of determining the tax payable
under sub-section (4), the Income-tax Officer may call for
such accounts or documents as he may requite.. .

(6)......... .A port clearance shall not be granted to the
ship until the Customs-Collector, or other officer duly autho-
rised to grant the same, is satisfied that the tax assessable
under this section has been duly paid.

(7) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent
the principal from claiming in the financial year following
that in which any payment has been made on his behalf
under this section, that an assessment be made of his fotal
income ‘of the previous year, and that the tax payable on
the basis thereof be determined in accordance with the
other provisions of this Act, and if he so claims, any such
payment as aforesaid shall be treated as a payment in
advance of the tax leviable in the relevant assessment year,
and the difference between the sum so paid and the amount
of tax found payable by him an such assessment shall be
paid by him or refunded to him, as the case may be.

(8) The provisions of this section shall not apply where
the Income-tax Officer is satisfied that there is an agent of
the principal from whom the tax will be recoverable in the
‘elevant assessment year under the other provisions of this
Act.

I—Recovery of tax in respect of non-residents.

Without prejudice to the provisions of section : (1)
[section embodying the rule that a representative assefsee
is liable to pay the tax] or of section 176 {section newly 4dd-
ed authorising the Income-tax Officer to proceed agajnst
assets with agent], where the person entitled to the incgme
. referred to in section 9, clause (i) [42(1) main ७878,
t part] is a non-resident. the tax chargeable thergon,
whether in his name or in the name of his agent whd is
liable as a representative assessee, may be recovered by
deduction under any of the provisions of sections 201 to
204 [18(2) to 18(3D)] and............; any arrears of tax may be
recovered also in accordance with the provisions of this
Act from any assets of the nonyesident which are, or may
at any time come within, India. |



—

209
Clause 184

J—Persons leaving India.

(1) Notwithstanding anything cortained in_ section 3 Section 184.
{section 3], when it appears to the Income-tax Officer that मय
any individual may leave India during the current assess- jeaving India,
ment year, or shortly after its expiry, and that he has no ¢ »4a(1)
present intention of returning... the total income of main para,
such individual for the period from the expiry of the pre- earlier haif]
vious year for that assessment year, to the probable date
of his departure from Indic... shall be chargeable to
tav in that assessment year.

(2)...........- The total income of each completed previous [s. 248 (1),
year or part thereof included in such period...................-. main pai >
shall be chargeable to tax at the rate or rates in force in Jatter al,
that assessment year, and separate assessments shall be par’
made in respect of each such completed previous year or
part thereof.

(3) The Income-tax Officer may estimate the income of 9: 2५१6).
such individual for such period or any part thereof, बोस Pair
where it cannot be readily determined in the manner pro- pat]

vided in this Act.

(4) For the purpose of making an assessment under sub- [+. 24A(2)}
section (1), the Income-tax Officer may serve a notice upon
such individual requiring him to furnish, within such time,
not being less than seven days, as may be specified in the
notice, a return in the same form and verified in the same
manner as a return under section 143(2) {sub-section (2) of
section 22], setting forth........... his total income for each

... completed previous year comprised in the period re-
ferred to in sup see (1) and his estimated total income

‘or any part of a complete previous प्र comprised in that
period. ........... ; and the provisions of this Act shall, so far
as may be, and subject to the provisions of this section,
apply as if the notice were a notice issued under section
143(2) [sub-section (2) of sectidn 22}.

(5) Tax chargeable under. this seation shall be in addi- [New}
tion to the tax, if any, chargeable under any other provision
of this Act.

(6) Where the provisions of sub-section (1) are appli- [New}
cable, any notice issued by the Incame-tax Officer under |
section 143(2) [sub-section (2) of sectipn 22] or section 154 ;

(1) {section 34(1), second para, portiog relating to the issue ।
of a notice containing the requirement to be included ता.
the lines of section 22(2)] in respect df any tax chargeable '
under any other provision of this Act may, notwithstanding
anything contained in section 143(2) [section 22(2)] or sec-
tion 154(1) [section 34(1) second para, portion relating to
notice containing such requirements] as ‘the case may be.
require the furnishing of the return by such individual
within such bgied, not. being less than seven days, as the
Income-tar Officer may thinleiproper. *

‘


210
Clauses 184-186

[New] (i) Every assessment under sub-section (1). shall be

हे completed within three months of the date on which the
notice under sub-section (4) is served, except where such
individual himself waives his right to have the assessment
so completed, or where the assessment is delayed owing to
any conduct of such individual.

K—Discontinuance of business, or dissolution.

Section 185. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3,

Discontinued, [section 3] where any business, profession or vocation which

pusiness was not charged under the provisions of the Indian Income-

& eo tax Act, 191 8 is discontinued in any assessment year, the

7 of 1918 total income of such business, profession or vocation of the
period fnom the expiry of the previous year for that assess-
ment year upto the date of such discontinuance may, at
the discretion of the Income-tax Officer, be charged to
tax in that assessment year.

fNew] (2) The total income of each completed previous year
or part thereof included in such period shall be chargeable
to tax at the rate or rates in force in that assessment year,
and separate assessments shall be made in respect of each
such completed previous year or part thereof.

[s. 25(2), (3) Any person discontinuing any such business, pro-
earlier part] fession or vocation shall give to the Income-tax Officer
notice of such discontinuance within fifteen days there-

र्ण............
fs. 25(2), (4) Tax chargeable under this section shall be in addi-
Part! tion to the tax, if any, chargeable under any other provision
of this Act.
Section 183. {1) Where any business, profession or vocation carried
Association on by............an association of persons has been discontinu-
dissolved or ed or where. an association of persons is dissolved —
discontinued. (a) the Income-tax Officer shal! make an assessment of
000 the total income of the........... association of per-
sons as if no such discontinuance or dissolution had
taken place; and
Is. 44(3), (b) every person who was at the time of such digcon-
part] tinuance or dissolution a............ member of the

association, and the legal representative of any such
member who is deceased, shall in respect of the in-
come of the association be jointly and séverally
liable for the amount of tax............ payable, and
all the provisions of this Act, so far as may be,
shall apply to any such assessment... पु

[२८७] (2) Where such discontinuance or dissolution takes place
after any proceedings in respect of an assessment year
commenced, the proceedings p be continued agains: te
persons referred to in sub-s tt (1) from the stage at



ae

aii
Clauses 186-188

which the proceedings stood at the time of such disconti-
nuance or dissolution, ard all the provisions of this Act
shail, so far as may be, apply accordingly.

(3) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall, so (New)
far as may be and mutatis mutandis, apply in relation to 446 (2) part
any penalty or other sum, chargeable under any .provision ३44५9) part]
of this Act, as they apply in relation to tax.

(4) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of {New)
section 170(2) [24B(1), portion limiting liability of legal re-
Presentative to extent of estate].

’
L-—Special provisions for certain kinds of income.

Where the time taken by the author of a literary or Section 187.
artistic work in the making thereof is more than twelve Royalties or
५ months,. ..the amount received or receivable OPyrebt
by him during any previous year on atcount of any lump rary Or artis
sum consideration for the assignment of grant of any of stic work.
his interests in the copyright of that work or of royalties

or copyright fees (whether receivable in lump sum or other- 8. ada}
wise), in respect of that work, shall, if he so claims, be
allocated for purposes of assessment as hereunder—
{i) where the time so taken is less than twenty-four
months, one-half of the amount of such lump sum,
royalties or fees as the income of the previous year
in which the Whole amount is received or receiva-
ble, and the other half as the income of the next
succeeding previous year; and
(ii) where the time so taken is twenty-four months, or
more, one-third of the amount of such lump sum,
royalties or fees as the income of the previous year
in which the whole amount is received or receiva-
ble, and one-third of the said amounf'as the income
of each of the two next succeeding previous years.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the ex-
pression ‘author’ includes a joint author, and the expression
‘jump sum’, in regard to royalties or cepyright fees, inclu-
‘des an advance payment on account of such royalties or
copyright fees which is not returnable.
M—Liability of State Governments. Sectibn 188,
- income-tax,
मम Income-tax payable on the interest............ on free securities

any security of the State Government . issued income-tax Corda nt
free shall be payable by the es, ite Government at such rate 8.8, gd
as may be laid down by any Cenfral Act.. : peor

t


212
Clauses 189-191
CHAPTER XVI
SPECIAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO FIRMS
A—Assessment.

Section 189. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 147

emer and 148 [section 23(1) to (4)], .--and subject to the pro-

firms. visions of sub-section (3 7 in case of a registered firm,
{s.23 (5) after assessing the total income of the firm,—
openiny
tines] 6 (i) the income-tax payable by the firm itself shall be
[s. 29(5) (०), determined ; and
main para] (ii) the share of each partner in the income of the
firm... shall be included in his total income
and asseased to tax accordingly.
[s. ever (2)............ If such share of any partner is a loss it shall
ust Proviso} be set off against his other income or carried forward and
set off in accordance with the provisions of sections 72.to 80
{24(1) and (2)}.
[s. 23(5)(a), (3)............ When any of the partners of a registered
and Proviso] firm ig a non-resident, the tax on his share in the in-
come............0f the firm shall be assessed on the firm at
the rate or rates which would be applicable if 10 were
assessed on him personally, and the tex so assessed shall
be paid by the firm.
Section’ 190. In the case of an unregistered firm, the Income-tax Offi~
Assessment of C€r—
paregistered (a) may............determine the tax payable by the firm
on b itself on the basis of the total income of the firm;
(s-23(5)()] or
(७) .. if, in his opirion, the aggregate amopnt of
-payable by the partners if the firm
were ti as a registered firm would ater
than the aggregate amount of the tar which would
be payable by the firm under clause (a) afd the
tax which would be P ayable by the partnerg indi-
vidually, may proceed to make the pasesamentiunder
section 189(1)(ii) [23(5)(a){ii)] as if the firm were a
registered firm; and where the procedure specified
in this clause is applied to any unregistered firm,
the provisions of section 189(2) and 189(3) 2 t and
2nd provisos to section 23(5)(a)] shall apply fthere-
to as they apply in the case of a registered firm.
. B—Registration. ‘
Section 791:
Application (1) An application for registration of a firm for the ur

for registra- poses of this Act may be made to the Income-tax cer
100. on behalf of any firm if—

{s. 26 A (1)} (i) the partnership is evidenced by an instrunjent,...
and : 1


213 a
Clause 191

(ii) the individual shares of the partners are specified
in that instrument, or can be ascertained from that
instrument with or without the aid of the instru-
ments of partnership of any other connected firms.
(2) Such application may, subject to the provisions of (New}
this section, be made either during the existence of the
firm or after its dissolution. .
(3) The application shall be made to the Wicome-tax [s. 264 (2),

Officer having jurisdiction to assess the firm, and shall be beta nie
signed— second para,

(a) by all the partners (not being minors) personally, P*
or

{b) in the case of a dissolved firm, by all persons (not
being minors) who were partners in the firm im-
mediately before its dissolution and by the legal
representative of any such partner who is deceas-
ed.

(4) The application shall be made before the end of &,6A,(»
the previous year for the assessment year in respect of with Rule 2,
which registration is sought: माल para,
Provided that the Income-taxr Officer may entertain an
application made after the end of the previous year, if he
is satisfied that the firm was prevented by sufficient cause
from making the application before the end of the previous

year. .
(5) The application shall be accompanied by the origi- OAD?

nal instrument evidencing the partnership, together with with Riles)
a copy thereof:

Provided that if the Income-tax Offider is satisfied that
for sufficient reason the original instrument cannot con-
veniently be produced, he may accept a 0०99 of it certified
in writing by all the partners (not being minors). or, where
the application is made after the dissolution of the firm,
by all the persons referred to in clause (b) of sub-section
(3), to be a correct copy, or a certified of the instru-
ment: and in such cases the application 2९% Il be accompa-
nied by' a duplicate copy of the original instrument:

Provided further that where the individual shares of
the partners are not specified in the ins' ent of partner- i
ship, the provisions of this sectiqn shalt कि ply also in rela-
tion to the instruments of partnership referred to in clause
(ii) of sub-section (1) as they apply in relation to the instru-
ment evidencing the partnership of the firm to be register-
ed.

(6) The application shall be made in the prescribed 9. 26A (2),
form and shall give the following particulars— Pare, tie 5
(i) the names and addresses of the pertners of the firm Form lL
during the previous year, topather with their Sebedyfe]
shares: + boos |

i i


[New]

{See. Rule 6]

[New]

Section 399.
Yrocedure on
receipt of
application.
fs. 26A (2),
part, read
with Rule 4)

{See Rule 4
32)

छः Rule 4
2)3

[New]

{New]

214

Clauses 191-192
(ii) the dates of their admission to the partnership ;

Giii) the interest on capital or loans payable to the
partners;

(iv) the salary or commission or any other amount
payable to the partners; and

qv) the manner in which the profits of the firm were
divided for the latest previous year for which
such division has been made and the mode of
distribution, that is to say, whether the distribu-
tion was made by crediting the accounts of the
partners or in any other manner, or if the profits
have not been divided the reason for not dividing
the profits.

{?) Where registration is granted to any firm for any
assessment year, it shall have effect for every subsequent
assessment year, provided there is no change in the consti-
tution of the firm or the shares of the partners as eviden-
ced by the instrument of partnership on the basis of which
the registration was granted, and provided the firm furni-
shes, along with its return of income for the assessment
year concerned, a declaration to that effect, in the prescrib-
ed form anu verified in the prescribed manner.

(8) Where any such change has taken place in the pre-
vious year, the firm shall apply for fresh registration for
the assessment year concerned in accordance with the pro-
visions of this section.

~

(1) On receipt of an application for registration of a
firm, the Income-tax Officer shall inquire into the genuine-
ness of the firm and its constitution as specified in'the in-
strument of partnership (as read with the instruments of
partnership referred to in clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of
section 191, where the case ३० requires), and—

(a) if he is satisfied that there is or was during the pre-
vious year in existence a genuine firm with the
constitution so specified, he shall pass an drder in
writing registering the firm for the asse8sment .
year ;

(b) if he is not so satisfied, he shall pass an arder in
writing refusing to register the firm. पर

(2) The Income-tax Office? shall not reject ay appli-
cation for registration merely on the ground that !the ap-
plication is not in order, but shall intimate the defect to
the firm and give it an opportunity to rectify the defect
in the application within a period of one month from the
date of such intimation.

(3) If the defect is not rectified within such time, the
Income-tax Officer may reject the application.


215
Clauses 192-193

(4) The Income-tax Officer shall finish the inquiry un- {New}
der this section before the expiry of a period of one year
from the date of filing of the a; pica ition, or before making
an assessment on the firm for assessment year, which-
ever is earlier.

(5) Where a firm is registered for any assessment year, {New}

the Income-tax Officer shall record a certificate on the in- [See Rule 4
strument of partnership or on the certified copy submitted (1) par
in lieu of the original instrument, as the case may be, to

the effect that the firm has been registered under this Act,

for that assessment year ; and where a declaration under
section 191 (7) [relevant sub-section of section for applica-

tion for registration, to the effect that in the case of subs-
equent assessment year only a declaration need be sent]

is furnished by the firm for any subsequent assessment

year, he shall also endorse a note of such declaration hav-

ing been furnished on the said instrument or certified copy.

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in’ this sec- [s. 23 (4),
tion, where, in respect-of any assessment year, there is, on main para,
the part of a firm, any such failure as ig mentioned in sec- latter half,
tion 148 [S. 23(4), main para, earlier half, embodied in sec- ?'*
tion re: best judgment assessment], the Income-tax Officer
may refuse to register the firm for the assessment year.

(1) If, where 6 firm has been एड or its regis- Sectian 193.
tration has effect under section 191 (7) [newly added sub- Canceltatio:
section in section re: application for registration, to the of Regis
effect that registration has effect for subsequent year}, for
any assessment year, the Inconte-tax Officer is of opinion [Newl
that there was during the previous yedr no genuine firm [See Rule 6B}
in existence as registered and that the registration was ob-
tained or continued by misrepresentation, he may, with
the previous sanction of the Inépecting Assistant Commis-
sioner and after giving the firm a reasonable opportunity
of. being heard, cancel the registration af the firm for that
assessment year.

(2) If, where a firm has been registered or its regis- fs
tration has effect under section 191(7) [newly added sub-
section in section re: application for registration, provid- latter
ing that registration once grawted hag effect for future?!
years}, for any assessment year, there is, on the part of the
firm, any such failure in respect of the assessment year as
ig mentioned in, section 148 [section 23(4), main para, ear-

_lier half, i.e., section for best judgment assessment], the
Income-tax Officer may cancel the registration of the firm (७. 25.44)
for the assessment year, after giving the firm not less than Provsof ,
fourteen days’ notice intimating his intention to cancel its
registration and after giving if a reasenable opportunity
of being heard. | ae



216
Clauses 193-195

{New] (3) Where the registration of a firm is cancelled for
any assessment year, the Income-tar Officer shall amend
the assessments of the firm and its partners for that assess-
font year on the footing that the firm is an unregistered

१८८]

iNew] (4) The provisions of section 161 [35 (1) to (4)] shall,
mutatis mutandis, apply to the amendments of the assess-
ments of the firm and its partners under sub-section (3).
the period of four years specified in section 161 (7) [S. 35
{1)} being reckoned from the date of the order cancelling
the registration.

{New} (5) No order cancelling the registration of a firm for
any assessment year shall be made after the expiry of
eight years from the end of that assessment year.

C—Changes in constitution, succession and dissolution.

Section 194. (1) Where, at the time of making an assessment under
Change in section 147 or 148 [23] it is found that a change has occur-
constitution red in the constitution of a firm, ...... the assessment shall
ofa fir, be made on the firm as constituted at the time of making

{8.26 (1)) the assessment:

Provided that the income ...... of the previous year
shall, for the purposes of inclusion in the total incomes of
the partners, be apportioned between the partners who, in
such previous year, were entitled to receive the same:

Provided further that when the tax assessed ypon a
partner cannot be recovered from him, it shal} reco-
vered from the firm as constituted at the time of making
the assessment.

[New] (2) For the purposes of this section, there is a ¢hange

in the constitution of the fitm— :

(a) if one or more of the partners cease to be ie
or one or more new partners are admitted, ig such
circumstances that one or more.of the pers who
were partners of tha firm before the changp con-
tinue as partner or partners after the change, or

(b) where all the partners continue with a charge in
their respective shares or in the shares of same of
them.

A Where a firm carrying on 6 business, profession pr vo-
Section 195: ५ cation is succeeded by another firm, and the case is npt one
one firm by covered by section oh (26 (1), relating to changes P the
. another fim, constitution of the firm], separate assessments shpll be

{New] made on the predecessor firm and the successor ffm in
accordance with the provisions of section 180 [26(2)};


217
Clauses 196-197

(2) Where any business, profession or vocation carried Section 196.
on by a firm ...... has been discontinued, or where a firm Firm dissolv-
विजय is dissolved,— ed or business

discontinued,

(a) the Income-tax Officer shall make an assessment ba,

{b)

of the total income of the ...... firm as if no such
discontinuance or dissolution had taken place ; and

every person who was at the time of such discon-[s. 44 (3).
tinuance or dissolution a partner of the firm, and Pert]

the legal representative of any such partner who -

is deceased, shall, in respect of the income of the

firm, ...... be jointly and severally liable for- the

amount of tax ......... payable, and all the provi-

sions of this Act, so far as may be, shall apply to

any such assessment .............+.

(2) Where such discontinuance or dissolution takes [New,

place after any proceedings in respect of an assessment
year have commenced, the proceedings may be continued
against the persons referred to'in sub-gection (1) from the

stage at which the proceeding stood at the time of such

discontinuance or dissolution,

d all the provisions of this

Act shall, so far as may be, apply accardingly.

(3)

mutatis

to any penalty or other sum dhar,
sion of this Act, as they apply in rela

of section 170 (2) [248 (1), portion

1 :
The provisions of subrsectiona (2) and (2) shall, be (2), part
mutandis and so far ag may He ‘apply in relation * + Is)» part]
under any provi-
to tax.

imiting liability of

(4) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions [New]
J

legal representative to extent of estate.

D—Other provisions. ‘oN

(1) Besides the provisions, contain’ & in this a 197:
the following are the provisions of thig Act specially rele- List of cet

vant in respect of firms— पु

Section 78

Nef)
Section 6, clause (2)... [44 (b)] relating ¢o.residesoezof firms. i
Section 26 (ii). (०500 part} relating ai share of compensation = |
“Section 4० (b) 200 128 lating 19 igadmiasibitity of 5
anew) 00 शाह etna tier |
partner. : HW :

Sections 76 & 77.. nd Ae 7 is and (0)

ime nae are ag ee 0 0) oe

unregistered firm treated as registered.

(24 (3) 2nd proviso, part and 24 (2) proviso (०)
part] relating to loss of an unregistered firm.

3, Underlining of sections in the list hasjnot been pe for facility of reading.
* i : .


Seetion 198,
List of provi-
sions applica-

218

Clauses 197-198
Section 99 (1). [eq (2) Prov. (०)] relating to set off of losses in
cases of change of constitution in a firm.
Section 123 oe {10 (5A) part} relating to computation of tax on
compensation ete.

Section 138 clause(1) {8 (2)] relating to information and returas by a

Section 165 >> [23 (6)] relating to intimation of shares.
Section 280 (2) & 280 (4) [28 (1) Proviso (d) and 28 (2)] relating to computa-
tion of penalty in the case of firms and penalty for
wrong i:pportionment of shares.

Section 320 (2) (a) .. {lal relating to service of motices in the case of
Section gat (2) ..._-—((Newly added section in Mise. Chapter] relating to
service of notices in the case of dissolved firms.

(2) The list of provisions given in sub-section (1) is
for convenience of reference only.

CHAPTER XVII
SPECIAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO COMPANIES

(1) The following provisions of this Act are spécially
relevant in respect of companies, namely,* —

ble to comp- Section 6 clause (3) [4A(c)} relating to residence of a company;

anies.

[New]

Section 20 [8 Expin,} relating to deductions in the case of a banki
company under the head ‘Interest on securities 3

Section 28 (ii) [10 (5A)} relating to compensation etc., ४० ७ managing agent;

I
Section 47 (i) 128 ( relating to transfe of capital assets to. spibsidia-
and prov.} ry company ;

Section 8: 10 relating to non-applicability aaa to
Se repeal eles

Section 108 {56A} relating to exemption from tax of divi from,
certain Indian companies;

Section rog (2) [758 { relating to non-applicability of section 109 [15B] ७९
ist prov]. supertax in relation to companies;

Sections 113 to 120 [258] relating to additional super-tax;

Section 123 (7). [10(5A), relating to computation of tax where total income
part] ” includes compensation ctc.;

Section 126 [7 (7)] telating to computation of tax where total income
includes capital gains; f
Section 139 [39] relating to powers of the Income-tax Officer etc. ६०

examine registers;

2,Provisions applicable only to partnezs have not been included.
4. The list of sections has ४७६ been underlined, for facility of reading.


219
Clauses 198-201 .
“Section 166 (4) [194] Felating to information and return regarding divie
- lends;

Section 167 [20] relating to oertfcates im respect of tax on divide-
nds;

Section 203 {18 (gD)] relating to deduction‘of super-tax from dividends;

SeBtion 254 (a) {30 (1) relating to appeals against an order under tection
prov.) 113 [23A);

Section 320 (2)(b) [63] _rclating to service of notices.

(2) The list of provisions given im sub-section (1) is
for convenience of reference only.

CHAPTER XVI
COLLECTION AND RECOVERY OF TAX.
A—Gereral.

(1) Notwithstanding that the regular assessment in res
pect of any income is to be made in a later assessment year,

the tax on such income shall ‘be payable by deduction at ss and
source or by advance payment, as tl may be, in accor. पट? Pay
dance with the provisions of thig Chap pe (New)

(2) Nothing in this section shall grei p judice the charge
ta” on such income under the provisions of section 36) .

(1) In the case of income in res; of which provision 3 ion 200.
is not made under this Chapter for tting income-tax at pay-
the time of payment, and in atyy case where income-tax has fe 9}

not been deducted in accordange with fhe provisions of thi.

Chapter, income-tax shall be re का, by ‘the assessee direct.

2 Save as provided in this ५ Super-tax shall be fs. fe 2)
payable by the assessee direct. 2

B—Deduction at soutce

(1) Any person = for a any income =
chargeable under the head “! ies” 4 , at the time of Seley.
Payment, deduct income-tax afd sy on the amount be 8 ५]
payable at a rate representing{the av, rate of income- Pere)
tax and average rate of suj q vely, in force for
the financial year in which it is made, on
the estimated............ income off the under this head
for that financial year.

(2) Any person responsib! ig for कु) ying any income (s. 8 (2B),
chargeable under the head ‘Salaries!’ to a non-resident mai para}
shall, at the time of payment, deduct. taxon the esti- |
mated income of the assessee ‘Fe peorsene i id for the finan~
cial yea fear in accordance with pr of section 124
[section 17(1)]. a i पु

13--7 Law 0०७./58.



226
Clauses 201-203

fs. 18 (2), (3) .........' The person responsible for making the pay-

Proviso} ment referred to in sub-section (1) or (2) may, at the time of
making any deduction, increase or reduce the amount to be
deducted under this section for the purpose of adjusting any
excess or deficiency arising out of any previous detluction
or failure to deduct during the financial year.

{New] (4) The trustees of a recognised provident fund, or uny
person authorised by the regulations of the fund to make
payment of accumulated balances due to employees, shall
in cases where section 297{1) [58G (3)] applies, at the time
an accumulated balance due to an employee is paid,.make
therefrom the deduction provided for in section 298 [58H].

{New} (5) Where any amount standing to the credit of an em-
ployee in an approved superannuation fund is paid to the
employee, income-taxr on the amount so paid shall be deduct-
ed by the trustees of the fund to the extent provided in
section 313 [58S (2)].

[s. 18 (2A), (6) For the purposes of deduction of tax on salary pay-
latter part] able in foreign currency, the value in rupees of such salary
shall be calculated at the prescribed rate of exchange.

Section 202, The person responsible for paying any income charge-

Interest on “ anders
अध्याय able under the head “Interest on securities” shall............ वि

fs. 38. (3) ot the time of payment,—

main para}
(a) unless otherwise prescribed in the case of any, secu-
rity of the Central Government,. wd ine
come-tax on the amount of the in! t det le at
the maximum rate : and
fs. 18 (3A), (b) also deduct super-tax on such amount, when paid
main para] to a non-resident—

(i) in the case of a company, at the rate es: able
to a company which has not made the nge-
ments for deduction of super-tax refe: to
in section 203 [18(3D)); j

(ii) in the case of any other person, in accor@ance
wo the provisions of section 124(1)(b) §17(1)
Section 203. The principal offieer of an Indian company or a com-

Dividends. pany which has made such effective arrangements as, may
Sia pany? be prescribed for the fr a of super-tax from iat jends
. shall, at the time of gaying ahy dividend to a sharehplder

whom the principal ‘no reason to believe fo be


221

Clauses 203-205

«@ resident, deduct super-tax on the amopnt of such dividend
as increased in accordance with the provVisions of section
59 [Section 16(2) main para, latter part], at the following
rates :—

(i) if the shareholder is a company, at the rate appli-
cable to a company which has not made the
arrangements for deduction of super-tax from
dividends referred to above;

(ii) if the shareholder is a person other than a com-
pany, in accordance with the provisions of section
124(1) (9) [Section 1701) (७)).

(1) Any person responsible for paying to a non-resi- Section 204.
dent... any... .sum chargeable under the provi- erie
sions of this Act, (not being income chargeable under the (8). main
head “Salaries” or “Interest on securities’. and not being para}

a dividend) shall, at the time of payment, unless he is him-
self liable to pay any income-tax and super-tax thereon as
an agent. deduct on such sum—

(a) income-tax at the maximum rate, and

(७) super-tax—

{i) in the case of a company, at the rate applicable
to a company which has not made the arrange-
ments for the deduction of super-tax referred to
in section 203 [18(3D)];

(ii) in the case of any other person, in accordance
wor the provisions of section 124(1) (b) [1701)

Provided............ that nothing in this sub-section shall fs 18 (3B),
apply to any payment made in the corse of transactions 47 prov}
in respect of which a person res] ible for the payment

is deemed under section 173(1 ae Proviso [section 43,

First Proviso] not to be an agent of the payee.

(2) Where the person responsible for paying any such [s. 18 (3C)]

ड्णगा............ (other than interest) to a 7/01/728106166 considers
that the whole of such sum would not be income chargeable
in the case of the recipient, he may make an application
to the Income-tax Officer to determine, by general or spe-
cial order, the appropriate proportion -of such sum so
chargeable, and upon such determination tax shall be deduc-
ted under sub-section (1) only on that proportion of the
sum which is so chargeable.

(1) Where. in the case of any incgme in respect of दा 205
which income-tax or super-tax is requirad to be deducted Certificate
at the time of payment at a particular rate under the pro- for deduction
visions of sections 201 to 204 [Section 18(2B) main para, See. 18 (2
Section 18(3) main para, ai 8(3A) main para, Section (10% &®
18(3B) main par a or Section 18{(3D) para], the In- ne are
come-tax Officer is satisfied: the co income or the iso, (44)]


Proviso;(38),
18६ proviso,
and (3D),
proviso;}

[s. 18 (2B),
prov, part]

Section 206.
‘bax dedu-
ated is inco-
me received.
(S18 (५)]
Section 207.
Credit for tax
deducted
($. 18 (5).
main para,
earlier half,
part]

[S. 18 (5)
main para,
latter halt,pa-
rt, and ist
prov.)

&. 38 (5)and
prov., part)

{s. 18(5), grd
prov. pari}

Section 208.
Duly of per-
son deduct-

ing tax.
($. 18 (6)}

Section 209.
Consequen-

ons of failure

to deduct or

Pay.

222
Clauses 205-209

total world income of the recipient justifies the deduction
of income-tax or supemtax at any lower rate or no deduction
of income-tax or super-tax, the Income-tax Officer shall, on
an application made by the assessee in this behalf, give a
certificate in writing to that effect.

(2) Where any such certificate is given, the
person resp: jie for paying the income shall, until such
certificate is cancelled by the Income-tax Officer, deduct
income-tax and super-tax at the rates specified in such cer-
tificate............ or deduct no tax, as the case may be.

All sums deducted in accordance with the provisions of
sections 201 to 204 [18(2) to 18(3D)] shall, for the purpose
of computing the income of an assessee, be deemed to be
income received.

Any deduction made........... ain accordance with the
provisions of sections, 201 to 204 (18(2) to 18(3D)).. ee
shall be treated as a payment of income-tax or super-tpx, os
the case may be, on behalf of the person from whose income
the deduction was made, or of the owner of the security or
of the shareholder as the case may be, and credit shali be
given to him for the amount so deducted (exclusive af any
portion of such tax for whieh he obtains, in Prodjction

with the provisions of this Act, a refund,) on the pro tion.

of the certificate furnished under section 211 [sul tion

(9) of section 18} ............... , 18 the assessment, if any, made

for the immediately following assessment year undef this
ct:

Provided............that where such person or owner or
share-holder is a person whose income is included under
the provisions of section 63 or 64 (clause (९) of sub-si fetion
(3) of section 16], section 67 [sub-section (3) of section
16}. section 96 [44D] or. section 97(44E] in the! total
income of another petson, the payment shall be deenfed to
have been made on behalf of,-and the credit shall be given
to, such other person............ ei

Provided further that where any security or shi | in
a company is owned jointly by two or more persors not
constituting a partnership, it in respect of the tax
deducted...... ...May be given to each such person in the
same proportion in which the interest on such secur}ty or
dividend on such share has bean included in his total income.

Any person dedueting any sum in accordance wifh the
provisions of sections 201 to [18(2) to 18(3D)] shalt pay
within the prescribed time, the sum so deducted the
credit of the Central Government or as the Central Board
of Revenue directs. ,

(1) If any such person does not deduct or after déduct-
ing fails to pay if as ia ied by or under “ie 201
te 204 118 (2) to 18 1(99)] 19 ae ees ified
in section 203 [Section 18( )) the principdl offi¢er and



Clauses 209-212
the company of which he is the principal officer shall, [= 18 9)
without prejudice to any other ences which he or

it may incur, be deemed to be an assemee in default in res-
pect of the tax:

Provided that no interest shall be charged -under sec-
tion 230 [Section 46 (1)] from such person, principal officer
or company unless the Incorie-tax officer is satisfied that
such person or principal officer, as the case may be, has
wilfully failed to deduct and pay the tax.

(2) Where the tax has not been peid as aforesaid after (New]
it is deducted, it shall be a first charge upon all the assets
of the person, or the company, as the ease may be, referred
to in sub-section (1).

The power to levy by deduction under sections 201 to oe tion 210.
204 (section 18 (2) to (3D)] shall be without prejudice to (| ne
any other mode of recovery. deiof recove-
f 78 (8)]

Every person deducting incomeitax or super-tax in Seetion 211.
accordance with the provisions of sections 201 to 204 [Sub- Cr iBcate for
sections (2), (2B), (3), (3B), (3C), or (3D), of section 18] [६.18 (9)
shall, at the time of payment pf the sum from which tax ~
has been deducted, furnish to the person to whom such
payment is made, a certificate to the éffect that income-tax
or super-tax has been deducted, and specifying the amount
so deducted, the rate at which the tax has been deducted,
and such other particulars as may be prescribed.

For the purposes of sections 201 to 211 [All sections in- e 9195
corporating any part of section 18] and section 166(1) Pefson respo-
[20A] the expression “person responsible for paying” ए ble for pa-
means— is 18 Expl.)

. (i) in the case of payments of imcome chargeable un-
der the head “Salaries” other than payments by
the Central Government or the Government of a
State, the employer himself pr if the employer is
a company, the company its¢lf including the prin-
cipal officer thereof ; :

Gi) in the case of payments of ihgome chargeable un-
der the head “Interest on -gecurities” other than
“payments made by br on Hehalf of the Central
Government or the Government of a State, the
local authority or company including the princi-
pal officer thereof ; .

(iii) in the case of payments of any other sum char-
geable under the pravisions of this Act, not being
income chargeable under the head “Interest on
securities”, the te him: or if the er is
a company, the co! yi including tl he prin-,
cipal officer ther:


224
Clauses 213-217
Scetion 213-0. Where tax is deductible at the source under sec-
Bar against tions 201 to 204 [section 18(2}, 18(2A), 18(3), 18{3A), 18(3B),

direct dema- 18(3C) or 18(3D)}, the assessee shall not be called upon

see to pay the tax himself unless he has received the income
iS. 7 (3), 2nd without such deduction.

tended}

tendes

Section 214. The provisions of section 207 [section re: credit for

Saving regar- tax deducted at source—i.e., parts of 5. 18(5)] are without
ding tahave Prejudice to those of section 246 [section re: tax deemed
been paid on 0 have been paid on dividends—existing 5. 18(5), part and
dividends. Ss, 498]. . रू
[New]

C—Advance payment of tax.

Section 215. (1) Tax shall be payable in advance in accordance
Advance tax with the provisions of sections 216 to 228 [All other sec-
are aoe. tions embodying any part of section 18A] in the case of
vance tax, income in respect of which provision is not made under
{3. 18A (3)(a) sections 201 to 204 [sections embodying section 18(2), 18
main paraea- (2A), 18(2B). 18(3), 18(3A), 18(3B) and 18(3C)] for deduc-
tlier half pa- tion of income-tax at the time of payment and whith is

read with “Capi ins”,
B18 aa} not chargeable under the head “Capital gains”.

{New] (2) Such income is hereinafter. in this Chapter tefer-
red to as “income subject to advance tax”, and such tax
is hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as “advance tax’.

[New] (3) The provisions of this section shall, in relatién to
any dividend which is to be increased under the provi-
sions of section 59 [section 16(2), main para, part regard-
ing increase of dividends], apply only for the purposes of

super-tax,

Advance tax shall be payable in the financial year—
Section 216.,
Condition of (a) where the total income of the assessee referred to
liability to in section 217 (a) (i) {18A (1) (a), main para, ear-
pay advance lier half, part. as embodied in the draft seption
b 18A (1) relating to “computation of advance tax”] ih sevens
(a)main para exceeded the maximum amount not chargeable to
earlier half, income-tax in his case by two thousand five !hun-
part} dred rupees, or -

(b) where it is 89% jable wirtue of the provisiogs of

section 220(3) [s. WAG) )].

Section 217: Subject to the provisions of section 215(3), [sub-clause
of denne newly added re: advance tax on dividends) the amount of
tax. advance tax payable by an assessee in the financial .year

[New] shall be computed as follows:— —

9. 786) (@), (a) (i) ......his 14720 ‘of the latest previous |year
eatlier halt in respect of which He‘ has been Essessed pratt
part.) first be ascertgined: |: '



or

”

225

Clauses 217-218

(ii) so much of such total income as consists of income
which was or could kave been subject to advance
tar in that previous fear shail next be ascertain-
ed;

(iii) income-tax and supertax shall then be calculated fe 18A (1)
on the last mentioned income at the average rate (a) main
of income-tax and the averaye rate of super-tac falc latter
respectively applicable in the financial year to the Part)
total income determined for the said previous year;

(iv) the sum total of income-tax ard super-tax so calcu-
lated shall, subject to the prawisions of clauses (b)
and {c), be the advance tax payable;

(b) ...... in cases where under the provisions of section fs. 18A(1)

124(2), or 124 (3) [section 17(1) 15६ Proviso], the tax () Prev
. payable by the assessee is to be determined with re- Patt pare} का

ference to his total world 9007९, the advance tar’
payable by him shall bear to the total amount of
income-tax and super-tax which would have been '
payable on his total world income of the said pre-
vious year had it been his tatal income the same
proportion as the amount of the income subject to
advance tax which is included therein bears to his
total world income;

(९) in cases where an estimate is sent by the assessee (Néw.]
under section 220(1) or 220(2) [18A(2)] or section
220(3) [18A(3)], the total income so estimated ._
shall, for the purposes of calqulation of tax under
this section. be substituted for the total income re-
ferred to in clauses (a) and (b), and the income
subject to advance tax so estimated shall be subs-
tituted for the income to be ascertained under
item (ii) of clause (a).

Explanation.—......If the assessze is a partner of afs., 7856)
registered firm and an assessment of the firm has been and Prov.)
completed for a previous year later than the latest previous
year for which the assessee’s......asses§rnent has been com-
pleted, his share in the income of the firm shall, for the |
purposes of clauses (3) and (b), be included in his total «
income on the basis of the ais assessment of the firm. :

i:
(1) Where a person has been prewiously assessed un~ Seqtion 218.
der this Act or under the Indian Incone-tar Act, 1922, the 11 : of 1922.
Income-tex Officer may, on or after the ist day of April Inches roby
in the financial year, by order in writing require him to Incpme-tax
pay...... to the credit of the Central Government, advance 7
tax determined in accordance with the provisions of sec- £ weac 9)
tions 215, 216 and 217 {s. 18461) (a) as embodied in other ताल ‘half
sections]. , part.)

(2) The notice of ae Same -under section 163 (5 '8A(1)
er 3!
is

{29] in pursuance of suc] ify the instal- 7
ments in which the adva: le under section part}


226

Clauses 218-220

219 [s. 18A(1), (a) earlier half, part and 15६ Proviso and
section 18A(1) (b), and newly added provision, as embodi-
ed in the draft sectien relating to instalment}.

{s.  18A(2) QB). If after the making of an order by the Income
4), ard tax Officer under this section and before the 15th day of
Prov.] February of the financial yearan assessment of the asses-
see (or of the registered firm of which he is a partner) is
completed in respect of a previous year later than that re-
ferred toin the or der of the Income-tax Offi-
cer, the Income-tax Officer may make an amended
order requiring the assessee to pay in one ins-
talment on the specified date, or in equal instalments an the
specified dates, if more than one, falling after the date of
the amended order, the advance tax computed on the re-
vised basis as reduced by the amount, if any, paid te ace
cordance with the original order; but if the amount alteady
paid exceeds the advance tax determined on the revised
basis, the excess shall be refunded.

Section arg. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section and of sec-
Instalments | tion 220[18A(2) and 18A(3)], advance tax shall be payable
of advance? in equal instalments on the 15th day of June, 15th day of
tax. September. 15th day of December and 15th day of Marth in
{s. 18AG) the financial year: :

(a), main

para, earlier 1

half, pare.)
| | 88, व
(३), Poe} in Provided that, where the previous year of the assessee

‘espect of any source of ingome ends after the भूल day
of December and befare the ‘oth day of April,......the ad-
vance tax on that source of income shall, subject as afore-
said, be payable in three equal instalments on the 15t day
of September, the 15th day of December and the 15t day
of March, respectively. 1

fs. 18A(1) (2) If the notice of demand issued under section 163

(७).) [29] in pursuance of the order under section 218 [se : .
18A(1) (a), main para, earlier -Half, Part relating to qrder
of Income-tax Officer] is servdd after any of the dat& on
which the instalments specified therein are payable, | the
advance tax shall be payable - equal instalments on bach
of such of those dates as fall after the date of the service
of the notice of demand, or in one sum on the 15th day of
March if the notice is served after the 15th day of De¢em-

ber.

५ i
Section 220. (1) If any assessee who is required to pay Se tax
Estimate by by an order under section 218 [s, 18A sub-section (1) (a),
sassessee. main para, earlier half, part re: Order by Income-tax Dffi-

(8... 18(2), cer] estimates at any time before the last instalment is}due
main para.) that his total income or income subject to advance tad for
the period which sh be “2112. idus year for the imme-
diately following asse: t > is less-than the totaf in-
come on the basis of aghich, om income on whieh, He is



227
Clause: 220

Yequired to pay such tax, as the case may be, and accord-
‘ingly wishes to pay an amount less than the amount which
ae is so required to pay, he may send to the Income-tax
. icer—

(i) an estimate of the total income for that period,

ii) an estimate of the income subject to advance tax
for that period, and

(iii) an estimate of the advance tax payable by him cal-
culated in the manner laid down in section 217 [s.
18A(i) {a) main para, pa as embodied in
section re: computation of ta . He shall pay such
amount as accords with his estimate in equal ins-
talments on such of the dates: specified in section
219 {s. 18A(1) (a) main para, darlier half, part as
embodied in draft section re: instalments] as have
not expired or in one sum if ohly the last of such
dates has not expired.

(2) ......The assessee may send a revised estimate of {s.  18A(2),
“the advance tax payable by him before any one of the dates 17०५]
:specified in section 219 [5. 184 (1) (8), main para, earlier
half, as embodied in draft segtion re: instalments] and , .
adjust any excess or deficiency in respect of any _ instal-
ment already paid in a subsequent instalment or in subse-
quent instalments.” :

5 (3) Any person who kas not prevjously been assessed [S. ' BACQ)]
under this Act or under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, 11 of 1922.
shall, before the 15th day of tess in.each financial year,
if his total income of the iod which would be the
previous year for the immediately following assessment
year is likely to exceed the méximum ‘amount not charge-
able to income-tar in his case by two! thousand five hun-

.dred rupees, send to the Income-tax Offi¢er—

{i) an estimate of the total income of the said previous
year;

(ii) an estimate of the income subject to advance tar.
of the said previous year; and

iii) an estimate of the advgnce a able by him.
calculated in the manner laid dbwn in section 217
(s. 18503) (a) main para, earler half, part as em-
bodies in section me: Hutation of tax],
and shall pay such amgunt as ords with his esti-
‘mate, on such of the dates spécified in section 219
fs. 18A(1) (a), main para, earlier half, as embodi-
ed in section part re: de nt} as have
not expired, by sah ts ith may be revised
according to sul i (2) iso to 3. 18.4(2)].

. sa

£



228

Clauses 220-223
{New}. (4) Every estimate under this section shall be sent in
the prescribed form end verified in the prescribed man-
ner.
Section 221. Where part of the income subject to advance tax con-
Commission sists of any income of the nature of commission which is.
receipts. receivable periodically and is not received or adjusted by

{S. 18A(4).] the payer in the assessee’s account before any of the quar-
terly instalments of advance tax become due, he may defer
payment of advance tax on that part of his income to the
date on which such income would be normally received or
adjusted, and if he does so he shall communicate to the
Income-tax Officer the date to which such payment is defer-
red :

Provided that, if the advance tax of which the pay-
ment is deferred is not paid within fifteen days of the date:
on which such income or part thereof is received or adjust-
ed by the payer in the assessee’s account, the advance tax
shall be payable with four per cent. simple interest per
annum from the date of such receipt or adjustment to the
date of payment of the advance tax.

Section 222. (1) The Central Government shall pay simple in-
Interest paya- terest......... at four per cent. per annum............ op the:
ble by Gov- amount by which the aggregate sum of any instalments of
ernment, advance tax paid during any financial year in which they are
(S._ 18A(5), payable under sections 215 to 221 [All sections embotlying
pare] Para, any part of section 18A(1), 18A(2), 18A(3) of 18A(4)] exreeds
the amount of the tax determined on regular assessm@nt,...
from the ist day of April next following the said financial
(8. 18A(5), year to the date of the regular assessment... .. for the:
and Prov. assessment year immediately following the id financial
year.
(2)...... On any portion of such amount which is refund-
(S._ 384(5), ed under the provisions of seations 215 to 221 [section 18A.
ist Prov.] " (1) to @) interest shall be payable only up to the date on
which refund was made,

Sectio (1) Where in any financial ear an asgessee
कि "923" has paid advance tax under section 22001) or et sub-
abe Pa)” section (2) of s. 188] or section 220(3) [sub-section (3) of
assessee, — S. 18A] on the basis of his own estimate, and the advande tax’

so paid is less than eighty per cent. of the tax determined
8... 18A(6), on the basis of the regular ment, so far as such tax

mae prov} Telates to income subject to advance tax and so he Fan ag it is.

not due to variations in the rates of tax made by the Fiance
Act enacted for the year for which the regular nt
is made, simple interest at the rate of four per cent,’ per
annum from the ist day of April next following the. said
financial year up to the date af the said regular asses¢ment
shall be payable by the assessee upon the amount by which
the advance tax so paid falls short of the said eighty per

cent.

a _ Sey rs oe आन 5
3, See also alternative in the on Clauses. :
3, Existing section 18 ag , Ist prescribes, the rate of four pte cent.

as from 35६ Aprif, 1952-


229
Clauses 228-225

....Where provisional assessment is made under {s.18A (6)
section 145 [23B],— and Prov.}

(i) interest shall be calculated in accordance with the
foregoing provision up to the date on which the tax
as provisionally assessed is paid, and

(ii) thereafter interest shall be calculated at the rate
aforesaid on the amount by which the tax as so
assessed (in so far as it relates to income subject to
advance tax) fails short of the said eighty per
cent.

(3) ...Where as a result of an order under section 259 &. 4 318A (6)
[31] or section 272 [335] or section 161 or 162 [35] or section srd Prov.
263 [66], or section 269 {66A],.the amount on which inte-
rest was payable under this section has been reduced, the
interest shall be reduced accordingly and the excess interest
paid, if any, shall be refunded together with the amount of
income-tax that is refundable.

(4)...In such cases and under such circumstances as may i 1A (6)
be prescribed, the Income-tax Officer may reduce or waive sth Prov}
the interest payable by the assessee under this section.

Where, on making the regular assessment. the Income- Section 224.

tax Officer finds that any assessee has— Interest pay-
able by asses—

(8) under section 220(1) or 220(2) (5, 18A(2)] or section ed in case
220(3), (s. 18A(3)} under estimated the advance tax of परमात्मा
payable by him and thereby reduced the amount fs. Naa (71
payable in any of the first three instalments, or ह

(b) under secion 221 {s. 18A(4)] wrongly deferred the
payment of advance tax on a part of his income,
he may direct that the assessee shall pay simple
interest at four per cent, per annum—

(i) in the case referred to in clause (a), for the period
during which the payment was deficient on the
difference between the amount. paid in each such
instalment and the amoynt which should have been
paid having regard to the aggtegate advance tax
actually paid.........during the year, and

(ii) in the case referred to in clause (b), for the period
during which the payment of atlvance tax was......
so deferred.

Explanation. —...For the purposes of this section, any in-
stalment due before the expiry कं six months from the com-
mencement of the previous year in r t of which it is
to be paid shall be deemed to have be due fifteen days
after the expiry of the said six months.

(1) Where, on making the regular ssment, the In- Section 225.
come-tax Officer finds that no ake advance tax has ati.
been made in accordance with{ the isions of sections eh wade
215 to 220 fs. 18A(1), 18A(2), * (3)], uift¢rest calculated in (६. rap (8)}



230
Clauses. 225-229

the manner laid down in section 223(1) and 223(2) [s. 18A(6),
main para, and Ist Proviso and 2nd Proviso} shall be added

to the tax as determined on the basis of the regular assess-
ment.

New] {2) The provisions of section 223(3) [s. 18A(6), 3rd Prov.]
and of section 223(4) [s. 18A(6), 5th Prov.) shall apply to
interest payable under this section as they apply to interest
payable under section 223 [s. 18A(6) }.

‘Section 226. (1) If any assessee does not pay on the specified date any
When | ong instalment of edvance tax that he is required to pay under
to be in defy section 218 [section 18A(1)} and does not, before the date ou
ult. which any such instalment as is not paid becomes due, send
{r8A(10)] under section 220(1) or section 220(2) [s. 18A(2)] gn esti-

mate or a revised estimate of the advance tax paypble by

him, he shall be deemed to be an assessee in default in res-

pect of such instalment or instalments.

(2) If any assessee has sent under section 220(1) or 220(2)
* {18A(2)] or section 220(3) [18A(3}] an estimate or a revised
estimate of the advance tax payable by him, but dpes not
pay any instalment in accordance therewith on the pate or
dates specified in section 219 [s. 18A(2) (a), main si a, ear-
Hier half, part embodied in section re: instalmen }, he
shall be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of
such instalment or instalments : :

Provided that the assessee shell not, under sub-section (1)
or this sub-section, be deemed to be in default in respect of
any amount of which the payment is deferred under pection
221 [s. 18A(4)] until after the date communicated y him
to the Income-tax Officer under section 221 [s. 18. ia,

‘Section 227.

eee 3 Any sum, other than a penalty or interest, pai by or

advance tax recovered from an assessee in pursuance of the prdvisions

fs. 18A (11)] Of sections 215 to 236 [all sections embodying any part of
section 18A(1) to 18A(10)] shall be treated as a pay’ ent of
tax in respect of the income of the period which w be
the previous year for an assessment for the assessmekt year
next following the financial year in which it was payable,
and credit therefor shall be given to the assessee in tl Tegue
Jar assessment. .

‘Section 228. Any income chargeable under the head ae
capital gains Shall not be taken into account for any of the purppses of
Js. 184 (29)] Sections 215 to 227 [All other sections embodying aqy part
of section 18A]; ang the expressions “total incomb” and
“total world income” occurring in any of those sections shall
accordingly be construed as not including such inco’ me.
Section 229, D—Collection and Recovery
When, ta 4 § ever fou
aeeen assesnce (1) Any 5 4 payable 0 2 n if of

eemed in demand under..... jon 1 fhe seve Shali-be: pbid jwithin
‘default. the time, at the plage. and persolt फिसला

in the

Lf



231

Clauses 228-230
3 or if a time is not so mentioned, then on or

notice... fs. 45, main,
before ६ ity of a period of forty-five days from the date para, part}
of the service of the notice.

(2) On an application made by the assessee before the [New)
expiry of the due date under sub-section (1), the Income-
tax Officer may extend the time for payment or allow pay-
ment by instalments, subject to such danditions as he may
think fit to impose in the circumstances of the case.

(3) If the amount is not peid within the time limited [s. 45, main,
under sub-section (1) or extended under sub-section (2), para, pare] |
as the case may be, at the place and tothe person men-
tioned in the satd notice, the assessee......... shall be deeme-]

_ to be in default.

(4) If, in a case where payment by instalments is allow- {Nevt]
ed under sub-section (2), the gssessee commits default in
paying any one of the instalments within the time fixed
under that sub-section, the asséssee shall be deemed to be
in default as to the whole of the amount then outstanding,
and the other instalment or instalments shall be deemed to

have been due on the same date as the instalment actually
in default.

(8)......... Where an assessee has presented an appeal [s.
under section 254 [30], the Ingome-tax Officer may, in his ?r0
discretion, and subject to such conditions as he may think
fit to impose in the circumstanees of the case, treat the as-
sessee as not being in default, in respect of the amount in
dispute in the appeal, even though the time for payment

has expired, as long as such :appeal remains undisposed
of.

ast;

(() ‘Where an assessee has beep assessed in respect i Sy हे:
of income arising outside Yndia im a country the Pro

laws of which prohibit or restrict the nemittance of Money =

to India, the Income-tax Officer shall nbt treat the assessee '

as in default in respect of that part of the tax which is due
in respect of that amount of his income, which, by reason of
such prohibition or restriction, cannpt be brought into
India, and shall continue to treat (६: ne fassessee as not in
default in respect of such part ‘of the until the prohibi- :
tion or restriction is removed.’ :

Explanation—For the purj of|this section, income fs. ah. Expl;
shall be deemed to have been roa brought; into India if it has

been utilised or could have nm util =, for the purposes
of any expenditure actually inturred the assessee with-
out India or if the income, whpther talised or not, has
been brought into India in any form.

(1) When an assessee is in default or is deemed to be Section 23०...
in default in making a srrears, pe of si shall, in addition = t pay.
to the amount of the arrears, fe pay, by way Off tax कल्प

‘ego.


232
Clauses 230-232

penalty, simple interest from the date of default to the date
of payment at the rate of ten per cent. per annum on the ~
amount of arrears.

(2) If the arrears of tax are paid within three months

from the due date, the interest. by way of Realty levied or
leviable thereon under sub-section (1) shall be remitted.

(3) No interest shall be charged under sub-section (1) in
respect of any period for which the gssessee is, by virtue of
any provision of this Act, treated as not in default.

Section 231. (1) When an assessee is in default or is deemed to be in

Gertificate to default in making a payment of tax, the Income-tax Dfficer

$- 460]... ™ay forward to the Collector a-certificate under his signa-
ture specifying the amount of arrears due from the aséessee,
and the Collector, on receipt of such certificate,
shall proceed to recover from such  assessee the
amount specified therein by one or more of the modes men-
tioned below, in accordance with thé procedure laid down
in the Second Schedule— -

(a) attachment and sale of the assessee’s movable pro-
perty; .

(9) attachment and sale of the assessee’s immavable
property;

(९) arrest of the assessee and his detention in prison;

(d) appointing a receiver for the management of the
assessee’s movable and immovable properties,

s.46(7), Expl, (2) The Income-tax Officer may issue a certificate under
fauer half sub-section (1) notwithstanding that pr ‘oceedings for :reco-
part] very of the arrears by any other le have been taken.

Section 292. (1) The Income-tax Officer may forward the certificate

Coll i és i
ता ae referred to in section 281 [46(2}, main para] to—

ficate is to be (a) the Collector within whose jurisdiction the as: agessce
inet carries on his business, profession or vocatign or
within whose jurisdiction the principal place df his

business, profession or vocation is situate, or :

{b) the Collector within whose jurisdiction ag as-
sessee resides or any movable or immovable: pro-
perty of the assessee is situate.

(2) If the Collector to whom a certificate is sent oy an
Income-tax Officer is not able to recover the entire amount
by sale of the property, movable and immovable, but has
information that the assessee has property in a district
within the jurisdiction of ai 7 Collector, he sorte end
the certificate to such qther Cc or to a Collector with-
in whose jurisdiction ithe asi qstee resides, and t pon


283
Clauses 232-234

that Collector shall proceed to recover the amount under this
‘Chapter as if the certificate was sent to:-him by the Income-
tax Officer. .

Explanation.—In this section, “Collector” means a Col-
lector of a district in any part of India, and includes an
Additional Collector of any such district.

(1) When the Income-tar Officer sends a certificate to Section 293.
डू Collector under section 231 [46(2) main para] it shall not Validity “of
be open to the assessee to dispute before the Collector the इस amend>
correctness of the assessment, and 2o objection to the ment thereof.
‘ertificate on any ground shall be entertained by the Col- {New}
lector.

(2) An assessee objecting to the issue of any certificate,

‘on any ground open to him, other than the correctness of

the assessment, may apply to the Income-taxr Officer for

withdrawal or cancellation of ‘the certificate, and the In-

come-tax Officer shall, after giving the assessee a reasonable

Spportunity of being heard, pass such orders as he thinks
it.

(3) Notwithstanding the issue of a certificate to a Col-
lector, the Income-tax Officer shall hage power to correct
any clerical or arithmetical mistake in the certificate by
sending an intimation to the Collector.

(4) The Income-tax Officer shall intimate to the Collec-
tor any orders withdrawing or cancelling a certificate pass-
ed by him under sub-section (2), or any correction le by
him under sub-section (3) or any amendment made under
section 234(4) [sub-section in newly added section providing
for amendment of certificate on reduction etc. in any pro-
ceeding under the Act].

(1) Notwithstanding that a, certificate has been issued Sectipn ag.
to the Collector for the recovery of arty tax, the Income- Amefdment |
tax Officer may grant time for the payment of the tax and ation: or
thereupon the Collector shall stey the proceedings until the withdrawal of
expiry of the time so granted. ani te,

{Ne

(2) Where a certificate for the recovery of tax has been हु
issued, the Income-tax Officer dhall ॥९६०. the Collector in-
formed of any tax paid or A 0480 ‘ed fdr payment, subse-
quent to the issue of such 2६ te.

(3) Where the order covey ise to @ demand of tax for
which a certificate for recov has bepn issued has been
reduced in appeal or other proteeding under this Act but
is the subject-matter of further proceeding, the Income-tax
Officer shall stay the recovery of such part of the amount of
the certificate as pertains to the or pes reduction, for the
period for which the appeal of ot] faceeding remains
pending. :



234

Clauses 234-235
_ (4) Where 6 certificate the recovery of tax has beer
issued and subsequently amount of the outstanding

demand is reduced ag a result of an a: Ppa or other
ceeding under this Act, the Income-texr er shall, when.
the order which was the subject-matter of such appeal or
other proceeding has become final and conclusive, amend.
the certificate or withdraw it, as the case may be.

Section 23 5. (1) Notwithstanding the issue a certificate to the Col-

ee ne lector under section 231 [46(2) main para}, the Income-tax

(s. 40, Expl, Officer may recover the tax by any one or more of the

latter half modes provided in this section.

part

{s. 46 (5)] (2) If any assessee is in receipt of any income charge-
able under the head “Salaries”, the Income-tax Officer may
require any person paying the same to deduct from any
payment subsequent to the date of such requisition any
arrears due from such assessee, and such person shall. com~
ply with any such requisition and shall pay the skm so
deducted to the credit of the Central Government, ‘or as:
the Central Board of Revenue directs.

Salary exempt from attachment in execution of a

decree of a civil court under section 60 of the Code of Civil

5of1g08. Procedure, 1908, shall be exempt from any requisition, made
under this sub-section. |

[s. 46 (5A), (3) (i) The Income-tax Officer may, at any time o1 =

ast Para, time to time, by notice in writing......... , require any person.
Part] from whom money is due or may become due to the as-

sessee or any person who holds or may subsequently hold
money for or on account of the assessee, to pay to the In-
come-tax Officer either forthwith upon the money om
ing due or being held or at of within the time speci in
the notice (not being before the money becomes due! or is
held) so much of the money as is sufficient to pay the
amount due by the assessee im respect of arrears....... oes OF
the whole of the money when it is equal to or less than
that amount. j

9. 46 (55), {ii) A copy of the notice shall be forwarded to BR
Hae हि para, sessee at his last address known to the Income-tax shes
हू 46 (5A), (iii) Where a pergon to whom a notice = thig sub-
ih para section is sent objects to it om the ground that t!
demanded or any part thereof is not due to the
that he does not hold any for or on account
assessee, then, nothing contained in this sub-section |shall
he deemed to require such m to pay any sucl
ore art thereof, as the case imey be be... + if the Inc
Officer is satisfied about the cprrectness of such 001९

46 (5A), (iv) The Income-tax Officer may at any time or: from

6.
and par] time to time amend fp ng ३४ notice issued orede ¥ this
sub-section or extend i bit making any payment in
pursuance of such not se
{


Clauses 235-238

(५) The Income-tax Officer shall grant a receipt for any [s. 46 (5A),
amount paid in compliance with a notice issued under this Kd para}
sub-section, and the person so paying shall be: fully dis-

charged from his liability to the assetsee to the extent of
the amount so paid.

(vi) Any person dischargirlg any liability to the assessee [s. 46 (5A),
after receipt of a notice under this suli-section shall be per- 4th para]
sonally liable to the. Income-tax Officer to the extent of his
own liability to the assessee so discharged or to the extent
of the assesee’s liability......for tax, interest and penalties,
whichever is less.

(vii) If the person to whom a notice under this sub- [s..46 (5A),
section is sent fails to make payment in pursuance thereof sth pata)
to the Income-tax Officer, further proceedings may be taken
against him for the realisation of thelamount as if it were
an arrear of tax due from him, in the manner provided in
sections 231 to 234 [S. 46(2)], and the notice shall have the
same effect as an attachment of a debt by the Collector in
exercise of his powers under section 231 [46(2)).

(4) The Income-tax Officer may apply to the court in (New]
whose custody there is money belonging to the assessee for
payment to him of the entire amount of such money, or,
tf it is more than the tax due, an amount sufficient to dis-
charge the tax.

(5) The Income-tax Officer may, if so authorised by (s.46 (3) and
the Commissioner, proceed to recover the tar by distraint (4)
and sale of the movable praperty of the assessee in the ः
manner laid in the Third Scke dule. i;

. toy
If the recovery of tax in any area-has been entrusted to Bo 236.
a State Government under article ‘258(1) of the Constitu- R overs.
tion, the State Government may direct with respect to that-thfoush State
area or any part thereof, that tax shall be recovered there-

in with, and as an addition to, any municipal tax or local
rate, by the same person and in the s4me manner as the
municipal tax or local rate is recovered

For the purposes of section 231 [%6(2)], the expression
“Collector” shall include a Collector in Pakistan, and the 5 ough
Income-tax Officer may forward a eertificate under that ©
section to a Collector in Pakistan through the Central
Board of Revenue of Pakistan, if the 'assessee has property ral
1

femmment
8:46 (6)

in the district of that Collector.

Where a Collector in India receives through the Central Settion 338,
Board of Revenue of India a certificate under the.sighature Peer ok
of an Income-tax Officer in Pakistan, the Collector shall / 609]
proceed to recover the amount specified therein in the *: 47 (9
manner jn which he would proceed to recover the amount
specified in a certificate received from an Income-tax Officer
in India, and shall remit any sum so, tecovered by him to
the Income-tax Officer in it istan, r deducting’ Kis ex-
penses in connection with the reco proceedings... 7

16—1 Law Com,/58 + दि



236
Clauses 239-241

Section 239- The provisions of sections 237 and 238 [Section 46(8)
Condition for and (9)] shall remain in force only so long as there are in
recovery of force similar provisions in the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922,
Pakistan or &5 in force as part of the law of Pakistan or under any other
of Pakistan similar Act forming part of the law of Pakistan for the
tax in India. recovery of tax by a Collector in Paksitan on receipt of a
{s. 46 ०]. certificate from an Income-tax Officer in India.

Section 240. Any sum imposed by way of penalty under the provi-

penalties, sions of section 282 [Sub-section (9) of section 1881, sec-

interest. and tion 281 (Sub-section (2) of 25], section 280 [Section 28],

other sums. or section 279 [Sub-section (6) of Section 44E], or payable

is. 47] under section 230 [Sub-section (1) of section 46], and any
interest payable under the provisions of sections 221, 223,
224 and 225 [Sub-section (4), (6), (7) or (8) of section 18.5]
and any other sum able under the provisions of this
Act, shall be recoverable in the manner provided in this
Chapter for the recovery of arrear of tax.

Section 241. (1) Subject to such exceptions as may be made by the
Tax Clear- Central Government, no person who is not domiciled in
ance Certi- India, or who, even if domiciled in India at the time of
है his departure, has, in the opinion of an Income-tax autho-
{ 464 (D1 yity, no intention of returning to India, shall leave the terri-
tory of India by land, sea or air unless he first obtains from
such authority as may be appointed by the Central Gov-
ernment in this behalf (hereinafter in the section referred
to as the “competent authority”) a certificate stating that
35 of r he has no liabilities under this Act, the Excess Profits Tax
Sof1940 Act, 1940, or the Business Profits Tax Act, 1947, or the
21 of 1947. Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, or that satisfactory arrange
sof 1922! ments have ‘been made for the payment of all or any of
such taxes which are or. may become payable by that per-

son :

Provided that if the competent ‘authority is satisfied that
such person intends to. return to India, he may issue an
exemption certificate either in respect of a single journey
or in respect of all journeys to be undertaken by that per-
son within such period as may be specified in the certificate.

fs. 464 (2), (2) If the owner or charterer of any ship or aircraft

main para] carrying persons from any place in the territory of India
to any place outside India allows any person to whom sub-
section (1) applies, to travel by such ship or aircraft without
first satisfying himself that such person is in possession of
a certificate as required by that sub-section, he shall be
personally liable to pay the whole or any part of thé amount
of tax, if any, payable by such person as the Income-tax
Officer may, having regard to the circumstances of the
ease, determine.

{s. 46 (3)] (3) In respect of any sum payable by the owner or
charterer 09 any ship of aircraft under sub-section nef the
owner or charterer, as the case may be, shall be dee: to


237
Clauses 241-242

be an assessee in default for such sum, and such sum shall
be recoverable from him in the manner provided in sections
230 to 240 [all sections, including see: for interest, relat-
ing to recovery] as if it were an arrear of tax.

(4) The owner or charterer of every ship or aircraft, [New}
which takes passengers on board on any port or place in
India for any place outside India, shall, within one month
from the departure of the ship or the aircraft from that port
or place, furnish to the Commissioner having jurisdiction
over the area in which that port or place is situated, a list
in the prescribed form showing the name and last known
address in India of every person (other than members of
the crew and the staff of the ship or aircraft) who travelled
on the ship or aircraft and the particulars of the certificate
or the exemption certificate presented by such person under
this section.

(5) No proceedings shall be commenced for enforcing [New]
the liability under sub-section (2) after the expiry of two
years from the date on which the list required to be filed
under sub-section (4) is filed.

{6) The Central Government may make rules for regu- {a 46A (4))
lating any matter necessary for, or incidental to, the pur-
pose of carrying out the provisions of this section.

Explanation—For the purposes of this section, the ex-[s. 46A (2),
pressions “owner” and “charterer” include any represen- Expl]
tative, agent or employee empowered by the owner or
charterer to allow persons to travel by the ship or aircraft.

Save in accordance with the provisions of section 183 Section 242.
[Section 42(1)] or 229(6) [second proviso to section 45], Period for
‘and except as otherwise provided in section 241 (5) {new commencing
sub-section in section 46A, laying down a limit of 2 years], गयी,
no proceedings for the recovery of any sum payable under ?” .
this Act shall be commenced ‘after the expiration of one Ce Os
yen from the last day of the financial year in which the

lemand is made, or, in the case ofa 6 person who is deemed
to be an assessee in default wu any provision of this
Act, after the expiration of one year from the last YY of
the financial year in which the Income-tax Officer sends an
intimation in writing to such person to the effect that he is
deemed to be an assessee in default:

Provided that the period of one year......... ++ Peferred fs. 46 (7) Ist
to above shall be reckoned— Prov.)

(i) where an assessee has been treated as not being
in default under section 229(5) [Sec. 45, Ist proviso!
as long as his appeal ig undis; ther ०, ...........० from
the last day of the financial # in which the ap-
peal is disposed of; H .

t


fs. 46 (7),
Expl., earlier
half}

Section 243.
Recovery by
suit or under
other law

{s. 46 Expl.
laticr half,
part}

Section 244.

Recovery of
tax payable

under provi-
sional assess:
ment.

(s. 238 (5)]

Section 245-
‘Vax paid by
deduction or
advance pay-
ment.

[s. 238 (6)]

238
Clauses 242-245

(४) where recovery proceedings in any case have been
stayed by any order of a court, ............ from the
last day of the financial year in which the order is

’ withdrawn;

(iii) where the date of payment of tax has been extend-
ed by an Income-tax authority to another date,
from ‘the last day of the financial year in which
such other date falls;

(iv) where the sum payable is allowed to be paid by
instalments, from the last day of the financial year
in which the lest of such instalments ts due.

Explanation.—A proceeding for the recovery of any
sum shall be deemed to have commenced within the nhean-
ing of this section, if some action is taken to recovef the
whole or any part of the sum within the period herein-
before referred to .............. .--*-**

The several modes of recovery specified in this Chap-~
ter shall not affect in any way—

(a) any other law for the time being in force relpting
to the recovery of debts due to Government .........
ज्ज्ज्ज्ज्ज्ज OF

(b) the right of the Government, to institute a suit for
the recovery of the arrears due from the assessee;

and it shali be lawful for the Income-tax Officer ..............*
or the Government, as the case may be, to have recpurse
to any such law or suit notwithstanding that the tax due
is being recovered from the assessee by any . mode
specified in this Chapter.

E—Tax poyable under provisional assessment.

For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that
the provisions of section 229, {all sections embodying any
part of section 45] except section 229(5) [45, ist Prov. i and
sections 230 to 239 {all sections embodying any part of
section 46] apply in relation to any tax payable in pursu-
ance of a provisional assessment made under se¢tions Be)
and 145(2), [s. 23B(1)] as if it were a re; ular asses$ment
made under section 147 or 148 [23(1) to (5)]. है

Tax paid or deemed to have been paid under se¢tions
201 to.213 [all sections embodying any part of section
18] or sections 215 to 228 [all sections embodying any part
of section 18A] in reapect of any income provisionally 8355
sessed under sections | 145(1) and 145(2) {section 23B(1)],
shall be deemed to have beenipaid towards the pow ional
assessment. i at


239
Clause 246
CHAPTER XIX
TAX DEEMED TO HAVE BEEN PAID ON DIVIDENDS Setter 45
Q) .............-- Any sum by which a dividend has been aid on divi-
increased under section 59 [section 16(2), main para, latter |, 8 (
half] shall be treated as a payment of income-tex (exclu- Pain” pa
sive of super-tax)............... by the shareholder .............. jearlier half,
and credit shall be given to him therefor on the produc part]
tion of the certificate furnished under section 167 [20], {s. 18 (5),
in the assessment, if any, made for the assessment year main para

referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) : latter half

Provided that, where such shareholder is a person [s. 18 (5)
whose income is included under the provisions of section znd Proviso,
63 or 64 [clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 16], section
67 [S. 16(3)}, section 96 [44D] or section 97 [448] in the
total income of another person, the payment shall be deem-
ed to have been made by, and the credit shall be given to,
such other person :

Provided further that where any share in a company is {38 gis
owned jointly by two or more persons not constituting a ao
partnership, the credit ............... may be given to each such
person in the same proportion in which the............ divi-
dend on such share has been included in his total income:

Provided further that where any share in a company is (New}
owned by two or more persons constituting a partnership .
and the firm is a registered firm or an unregistered
firm assessed under the provisions of section 190(b) [23(5) :
(b)], the credit may be given to each such person in the
proportion in which the profits of the firm are shared by

Am.

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply
unless the following conditions are fulfilled :-— .

(9) ......... the company ......... is assessed to income-tax [s, 49B (1),
in India or elsewhere; and Pbed
(b) ......... the dividend is included in the total income

of the shareholder or other person to whom credit
is to be given, as assessed for the assessment yeur
immediately following the previous year of which
the dividend is deemed to be the income.

(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), income-tax [+ 498(2)]
shall be deemed to include agricultural income-tax  as-
sessed on a company by any State Government, and where
any shareholder proves that the company has been so as-
sessed to agricultural income-tax. he shall be entitled to
the reduction from the tax ppyable ty him under this Act j
of a sum equal to— i


240
Clauses 246-249

(a) the appropriate agricultural income-tax (reduced
by the amount of refund, if any, allowed to him by
the State Government), or

(b) the appropriate Indian Income-tax on the amount
of the dividend which has not been increased under
section 59, [Section 16(2), main para, latter half]

whichever is the less.

Explanation.—in this sub-section,—

(a) “appropriate agricultural income-tax” means such
proportion of the agricultural income-tax as the
amount of dividend which has not been increased
under section 59 [S. 16(2), main para, latter half}
bears to the total profits of the company assessed
to agricultural income-tax; and .
“appropriate Indian Income-tax” means such pro-
portion of the income-tax payable by the share-
holder under this Act as the amount of dividend
which has not been increased under section 59 (5.
16(2) main para, latter half} bears to the total in-
come of the shareholder.

CHAPTER XX

(b

REFUNDS
Section 247. If any person satisfies the Income-tax Officer
funds न

(s. 48 (1)] vee पु
that the amount of tax paid by him or on his behalf or
treated as paid by him or on his behalf for any assessment
year exceeds the amount with which he is properly charge-
able under this Act, for that year, he shall be entitled'to a
refund of the excess. .

fection oe (1) Where income of one person is included under any

Wed to claim Provision of this Act in the total income of any dther
refund incer- person, the latter alone shall be entitled to a refund under
tain special this Chapter in respect of such income.

cases.

Es. 48 (3)] . .

fs. 49 F} (2) Where through death, incapacity, bankruptcy, ligut-
dation or other cause, a person............... is unable to claim
or receive any refund due to him, his executor, administra-
tor or other legal representative, or the trustee or guardian
or receiver, as the case may be, shall be entitled to claim
or receive such refund............ for the benefit of such per-

Section 249. Son or his estate.

dain Foal (1) Every claim for refund under this Chapter shall be
refund and made in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed
limitation. manner, हि te
{New)


241

Clauses 249-254

(2) No such claim.....................shall be allowed, un- [Cf _ Rules
less it is made within four vers from the 1985 day of the 36373-
assessment year in which income in respect of which 5: 5०
the claim is made was assessable. main para.)

Where, as a result of ony order passed in appeal or Section 250
other proceeding under this Act, refund of any amount be- Refund on
comes due to the assessee, the Income-tax officer shall, 7? *
except as otherwise provided in this Act, refund the amount © 48 (2)
without any application by the assessee.

In a claim under this Chapter, it shall not be open to Section 251
the assessee to question the correctness of any assessment Gorrectness
or other matter decided which has become final and conclu- 24°"™a™pt
SIVE ............... or ask for 4 review of the same, and the Questioned.
assessee shall not be entitled to any relief on such claim {s. 48 (4)}
except refund of tax wrongly paid or paid in excess.

If, within a period of three months from the date on Section 252
which a claim for refund is made under this Chapter, the Interest.
Income-tax Officer does not puss an order thereon, the Cen- [New]
tral Government shall pay the claimant simple interest at
the rate of two per cent. per annum on the amount directed
to be refunded from the date on which the claim is made
to the date of the order directing the refund.

Where under any of the provisions of this Act, a re ६०८७०:
fund is found to be Sane to ah person, the income-tax Set |
Officer, Appellate Assistant Commissioner or Commis-of refunds
sioner, as the case may be, may, in lieu of payment of the baie i”
refund, set off the amount to be refunded or any part of payable *
that amount, against the tax, interest or penalty, if FR 4 49 E]
remaining payable by the person to wham the refund is dueg''
after giving an intimation in writing to such person of the
action proposed to be taken under this section.

CHAPTER XXI
APPEALS AND REVISION
A. Appeals to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.

Any assessee gogrie rieved by any of the following orders
of an Income-tax O: may appeal to the Appellate Assis-
tant Commissioner against such ०1 ool 8०5४
(a) an order against the assessee, being a company, Appesiabio™
under section 113 [23A{(1) main ‘para, operative orders.

part]; 8. 3०. (1),
(9) an order of assessment under section 147 or 148 main paral!
{sections 23(1) to (5)], .............*०००० where the as-

sessee objects to the amount of income assessed,
or to the amount of tax determined, or to the
amount of loss computed, or to the status under
which he is _assesse a
2As the section has been broken into inept ve clauses, reference 10 to" pro-
visign bas not been given for cach cl ec, and, verbal changes have not itali-
cised. i



242
Clause 254

(c)'an order under section 151 [27] refusing to’
reopen an assessment made under section 148
{23(4) main para, part authorising best judgment
assessment};

(d) an order under section 161 or 162 {section’ 35],

where the assessee objects to the amendment made
or refused thereunder;

(e) an order adverse to the assessee, where the assessee
denies his liability to be assessed under this Act;

(0 an order under. section 180(2) or 180(3) [section
26(2) Proviso];

(8) arf order under section 181 [25A]J;

(h) an order refusing to register a firm under section
192(1)(b) (section in the Chapter on Firms relating
to refusal of registration because there wag no
genuine firm in existence in the previous year] or
under section 192(6) [section 23(4) main para,
latter part relating to refusal to register a firm
because of failure to file return etc. leading to best
judgment assessment);

(i) ari order cancelling the registration of a firm under
section 19361) (section in the Chapter on Firms au-
thorising cancellation of registration because there
was no genuine firm] or under section 193(2) [sec-
tion in the Chapter on Firms corresponding to
section 23(4), main para, part. authorising ian-
cellation on such failure. as leads to best judgment
assessment];

(j)_ an order levying interest under section 224[18A(7)];
(k) an order under section 229(5) (5. 45, lst Prov.];
Q

an order under section 233(2) [new section re:
withdrawal of certificate];

(m) an order under section 247 [48(1)];
(n) an order imposing penalty under—
G) section 279 [44E(6)], or
Gi) section 280 [28(1) & (2)J. or
(iti) section 281 [25(2), latter part], or
(iv) section 282 G8A(9)},
4 :


243
Clauses 254-258

_ Explanation—For the purposes of clause (b) an objec- -
tion to any interest charged under section 223 [1886 (6)] or
section 225 [188 (8)] shall be treated ag an objection to the
amount of income assessed.

निधि Where the partners of a firm are individually Section 255.
assessable on their shares in the total income of the firm, Appeal by
any such partner may appeal to the Appellate Assistant parmer.
Commissioner against any order of an Income-tax Officer [s. 30 (1)
determining the amount of the total income or the loss of 2nd Prov.)
the firm or the apportionment thereof between the several
partners, but he cannot agitate such maiters.. i
any appeal preferred against an order of assessm:
mining his own total income or loss.

Any person having in accordance with the provisions of Section 236.
section 208 [ub-section (6) of section 18] read with Appeal den”
section 208 [sub-section (6) of section 18] deducted and Pe labilivy
paid tax in respect of any sum chargeable under this Actto deduct
other than interest, who denies his liability to make such tax.
deduction may appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commis- [s. go (:A)}
sioner to be declared not liable to make such deduction.

(1) The appeal shall be in the prescribed form and shall Section 257.

be verified in the prescribed manner. Form of ap-
. peat and

limitation,
(2) The appeal shall ordinarily be presented within & 3° 1
thirty days of the following date, that is to say,— arg (2),

(a) where the appeal relates to any tax deducted under
section 204(1) [18(3B)], the date of payment of the 4 ©
tax, or :

(9) where the appeal relates to any assessment, interest
or penalty, the date of receipt of the notice of de-
mand relating to the assessment, interest or pen-
alty, or

(९०) in any other case, the date on which intimation of
the order sought to be appealed against is received

(3) ............ The Appellate Assistant Commissioner may [s. ४ (2),
admit an appeal after the expiration of the said period if क्र
he is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for
not presenting it within that period.

(1) The Appellate Assistant Commissioner shail fix a Scction 258.
day and place for the hearing of the appeal, and shall give eer in
notice of the same to the appellant and to the Income-taxc ७, 3 (४)

Officer against whose order the appeal is preferred. earlier part)
(2) The following shall have the right to be heard at [s. 3: (3)
the hearing of the appeal— नि and Prov.)

(a) the appellant either in {person ‘ by an authorised, !
Tepresentative; i


244
Clauses 258-259

(b) the Income-tax Officer, either in person or by @
representative.

fi 871 (1). (3) The Appellate Assistant Commissioner shall have
latterpart} the pi ..to adjourn the hearing of the appeal’
from time to time.

fs. 37 (2)} (4) The Appellate Assistant Commissioner may, before
disposing of any appeal, make such further inquiry as he
thinks fit, or may direct the Income-tax Officer to make fur-
ther enquiry and report the result of the same to the Ap-
pellate Assistant Commissioner.

{s. 31 (2A)] (5) The Appellate Assistant Commissioner may, at the
hearing of an appeal, allow the appellant to go into any
ground of appeal not specified in the grounds of appeal, if
the Appellate Assistant Commissioner is satisfied that the
omission of that ground from the form of appeal was not
wilful or unreasonable.

[New] (6) The order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner

disposing of the eppeal shall be in writing and shall state
the points for determination, the decision thereon and the
reasons for the decision, and the relief, if any, to which the
appellant is entitled.
{+ 31 GN (7) On the disposal of the appeal, the Appellate Assis~
tant Commissioner shall.............. communicate the order
passed by him to the assessee and to the Commissioner.

Section 259. (1) In disposing of an appeal, the Appellate Assistant

Powers of the Commissioner shall have the etlowing powers—
Appellate As-

sistant. Com- (a) in an appeal against an order of assessment, he may

missioner. confirm, reduce, enhance or annul the assessment ;

{ge (Rh oP or he may set aside the assessment and refer

(s. 3143), the case back to the Income-tax Officer for making

main “para, a fresh assessment in accordance with the directions

Cl. (»)] given by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner

or 36) and after making such further eng wiry as may be

c. by} necessary, and the Income-tax Officer shall there~
upon proceed to make such fresh assessment and
determine, where necessary, the amount of tax
payable on the basis of such fresh assessment;

[ss 313), (b) in an 07069 against an order imposing a penalty,

main | para, he may confirm or cancel such order or vary it 8०

ch OI as either to enhance or to reduce the penalty;

5... 379) (c) in any other case, he may pass such orders in the

main para, appeal as he thinks fit.

९1, (०) (१),

(०), (g) and

i 1(3)y ast (2)............The Appellate Assistant Commissioner shall

“ov not enhance an assessment or a penalty unless the appellant

has had a reasonable opportunity of showing cause égainst
such enhancement.

s


245
Clauses 259-261

Explanation—In disposing of an a: al, the Appellate
Assistant Commissioner may consider od. decide ony mat- New}
ter determined by the Income-taxr Officer in the course of
the proceedings in which the order appealed against was
passed, notwithstanding that such matter was not raised

before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner by the appel-
lant.

B—Appeals to the High Court.

(१) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), any Section 260.
assessee aggrieved by any of the following orders may Appe ala 91 ९-
appeal to the High Court...... against such order— fers.

(| 33(1),
(a) an order passed by an Appellate Assistant Commis- ped
oe under section............ 280............ (28(1) and part] 33(%

(0) an order passed by an Appellate Assistant Commis- [s. 33(1),,
sioner under section 259 [31(3) embodied in sec- part]
tion dealing with powers of Appellate Assistant
Commissioner];

(c) any order passed by the Appellate Assistant Com- [New]
“massioner rejecting or dismissing an appeal without
a decision on the merits;

(d) ........... an order passed by the Commissioner under [s.  33B(3),.
section 271(1) (S. 33B(1)]. . part]

(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the fs. 33(2), ear.
Commissioner may, if he objects to any order passed by an lier part)
Appellate Assistant Commissioner under section 259 [31

re as embodied in section for powers of Appellate Assis-

tant Commissioner], appeal to the High Court against such
order...

(3) Where the amount or value of the subject matter [New]
in dispute in appeal to the High Court is rupees seven
thousand five hundred or more, an appeal shall lie under
this section both on a question of fact and on a question
of law; but where the amount or value of the subject mat-
ter in dispute in such appeal is below rupees seven thousand
fire hundred, the appeal shall lie only on a question of
law. :

(1) The vi peal to the High Court shall be filed within Section 26r
sixty days of the date on which the order sought to be Limitation.
appealed against is communicated to the assessee or to the (s. वि S31).
Commissioner, as the case may be. pare + Bs a

न 5. oy
on alt 3.
main
para, part}

(2) The High Court may admit an appeal after the ex- है A:
piry of the sixty days referred to in sub-section (1) if it Saag
is satisfied that there was sufficiént caus¢ for not presenting :
it within that period. : t


246
Clauses 262-268

Section 262. The appeal to the High Court shall be in such form
Form of ap- and shall be verified in such manner as may be prescribed
par) bs 333) by the Supreme Court by rules made under this Chapter.

en Subject to such rules as may be made by the Supreme
Powers and Court in this behalf, the powers to be exercised and the
Procedure: , procedure to be followed by the High Court in respect of
Pod 5)* appeals under this Chapter shall be the same as those appli-
cable in respect of appeals to the High Court against the
original decrees of courts subordinate to it.
Section 264. (1) ......... The appeal shall be heard by a Bench of not
Hearing by less than two Judges of the High Court and shall be decid-
Bench ed in accordance with the opinion of such Judges or of
we ea, the majority, if any, of such Judges. हि
[s. _ 664६1) 429) ........... Where there is no such majority, the Judges
Prov.} shall state the point... -upon which they differ, and the

case shall then be he upon that point only by one or
more of the other Judges of the High Court, and such
‘point shall be decided according 10 the opinion of the
majority of the Judges who have heard the case, including
those who first heard it.

Section 265. A copy of the judgment of the High Court shall be

Communi:

tion of order

in appeal.

ca- sent to the Commissioner. to the Appellate Assistant Com-
missioner and to the assessee; and the Commissioner shall

[s. 6615), Cause such steps to be taken as may be necessary to give

part] effect thereto.

Section 266. s-u:-+..-..The costs of the appeal shall be in the discre-
ree tion of the High Court.

s. 6

Section 267. (1) Notwithstanding that an appeal has béen preferred
Refund cons- under this Chapter to the High Court, the refund, if any,

equential
appeal.
[New]

= due to the assessee shall be made, unless the High Court
makes an order authorising the postponement of the pay-
‘ment of the refund until disposal of the appeal.

fs. 6667), (2) If, as a result of the appeal to the High Coprt, the

Proviso.]

A lab!

Section 268. An appeal shi Hips lie fhe Supreme Court 41 ee any
le judgment of the oe m delivered on an 57८44 prefer.

joe का

amount of an asseasment is reduced............, the amount
over-paid shall be refunded with such interest as the High
Court may fix, unless the High Court, on intimation given
by the Commissioner within thirty days of the reteipt of
the result of such appeal that he intends to ask for leave
to appeal to the Supreme Caurt, makes an order authorising
the Commissioner to postpone payment of such! refund
until the disposal of the appeal by the Supreme Gourt or
the rejection of the application for leave to appeal, as the
case may be. .

C—Appeals to the Supreme Court.
din

red under section }: main para, part’ emd;


‘2a
Clauses 268-271
section for appealable order] in any case which the High [s. 66A(2)]

Court certifies to be a fit one for appeal to the Supreme
ourt.

(0) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, Section 269
relating to appeals to the Supreme Court shall, so far as He aring
may be, apply in the case of appeals under section 268 before the su~

[S. 66A(2)] in the like manner as they apply in the case preme Court,
of appeals from decrees of a High Court: ae Aa),

Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed छा Beals)

to affect the provisions of section 263 or 265 [S. 66(5)] or mt Prov,
seeeeed section 273 [66(7), main para]. part]

(2) The costs of the appeal shall be in the discretion (New}
of the Supreme Court.

(3) Where the judgment of the High Court is varied [५, 664(4).)
or reversed in the appeal,............ effect shall be given to
the order of the Supreme Court in the manner provided
in section 265 [S. 66, sub-section (5)] and section 267 [S.
66(7) Prov.] in the case of a judgment of the High Court.

D—Appeals to the Central Board of Revenue.

(1) Any employer objecting to an order of the Com- Secion 270
missioner refusing to recognise or an order withdrawing Appeals to
recognition from a provident fund may appeal to the Cen- the Central

tral Board of Revenue in accordance unth the provisions of Board of Re-
section 301 (58B(4)]. INew}

(2) Any person in respect of whom a direction disquali-
fying him for representing an assessee ig made under section
324(4) [S. 61(3), main para, latter half} may appeal to the
Central Board of Revenue in accordance with the provi-
sions of section 324(4), Proviso [S. 61(3), Prov. (b)].

E—Revision by the Commissioner.

(1) The Commissioner may call for and examine the Section 271
record of any proceeding under this Act, and if he con- a sion of
siders that any order passed therein by the Income-tax Offi- eft fore.
cer is erroneous in so far as it is prejudicial to the interests venhe.
of the revenue, he may, after giving the assessee an oppor- {s. $3B(1)]
tunity of being heard and after making or causing to be
made such inquiry as he deems necessary, pass suc: order
thereon as the circumstances of the case justify, including
an order enhancing or modifying the assessment, or can-
celling the assessment and directing a fresh assessment.

(2) No order shall be made under sub-section (1)—

(a) to revise an order of re-assessment made under [ . 33B(2)}
the provisions of section 152 [34(1), (a) (b) power
to reopen], or

(9) after the expiry (पं years fflom the date of the {|
order sought to be ri 2d. i .


248
Clause 272

‘Section 272 (1) In the case of any order other than an order to
Revision हा of which section 271 [33B(1) and (2)] applies passed by an
S F 3346), authority subordinate to him,, the Commissioner may.
main para, either of his own motion or on an application by the assessee
&.  33A(2), for revision,... call for the record of any proceeding

main “para, under this Act in which any such order has been passed

party, -+ and may make such inquiry or cause such inquiry
to be made and, subject to the provisions of this Act, may
pass such order thereon, not being an order prejudicial to
the assessee, as he thinks fit.

[New] (2) Where an application for revision was made by the
assessee, he shall be given an opportunity of being heard
before the application is disposed of.

& अर! (3) The Commissioner shall not of his own motion re-

beaded vise any order under this section if............ the order has
been made more than one year previously.

fs. 33A(2), (4) In the case of an application for revision under this

main Para, section by the assessee, the application must be made with-

part} in one year from the date on which the order in question
was communicated to him or on which he otherwise came
to know of it, whichever is earlier:

Provided that the Commissioner may, if he is satisfied
that the assessee was prevented by sufficient cause from
making the application within that period, admit an appli-
cation made after the expiry of that period.

(5) The Commissioner shall not revise any order under
this section in the following cases—

Ts. 33A (1), {a) where an appeal against the order lies to the
Prov a),part, Appellate Assistant Commissioner.. but has
and 328 not been made and the time within which such
pat appeal may be made has not expired ;

99, 20000 (७) where an appeal against the order lies to the High
Rent Court but has not been made, and neither the time
1st Prov. (Bi within which such appeal may be made has expired
bart} nor the assessee has waived his right of appeal ;
8... 33861),
Prov.(b), part (c) where the order is pending on an appeal before the
and 53340), Appellate Assistant Commissioner............ 3

. g(r),
Prov. कफ {d) where the order has been made the subject of an
and s.33A(2), appeal to the High Court, and the appeal is pend-

rat Prov. (०1 ing or has been disposed of on the merits.

{s. 330 (3)) (6) Every application by an assessee for revision under
this section shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty-five
rupees.


29
Clauses 272-277

Explanation 1—An order by the Commissioner declin. {.33A(2)204
ing to interfere shall, for the purposes of this section, be proviso}
deemed not to be an order prejudictal to the assessee.

Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section, they, 33A(2),
Appellate Assistant Commissioner shall be deemed to be Expl.j
an authority subordinate to the Commissioner.

F—Generat Section 233

Notwithstanding that an appeal has been preferred Tax wine
under this Chapter to the High Court or to the Supreme Randing ae
Court, tax shall be payable in accordance with the assess- ८४४5.
ment made in the case, unless the High Court or the [s.66(7),main
Supreme Court, as the case may be, grants stay of the Pav and s.

collection of the tax pending the disposal of the appeal. PAG), bart]

Sectis 2
cesteteeeees The High Court may, on petition made for the Execution oe
‘execution of the order of the Supreme Court in respect of ००७४५, awarded

any costs awarded thereby, transmit the order for execu- by Supreme
tion to any court subordinate to the High Court. ६,664 (3), 20५
veoviso.}

Where as the result of an appeal to the Appellate section 275
Assistant Commissioner, the High Court or the Supreme srendment
Court— of assessment
on appeal.
(a) any change is made in the assessment of a firm or {s.gr(4)_ and

an association of persons or a new assessment of Ber madi-

a firm or an association of persons is order-

ed to be made, or

(७) any alteration in any assessment has to be made,
he Income-tax Officer shall, whether or not a direc-

iven by the appellate authority, make an amend-
ment of. the assessment so as to carry out the order of the
appellate authority, including, where necessary, an amend-
ment of any assessment made on any partner of the firm
or any member of the association.

In computing the period of limitation prescribed for Section 276
an appeal or an application under this Act,..........-..: the Exctusion of
day on which the order complained of was' made, and, if time taten for
the assessee was not furnished a copy of the order when ९००१०
the notice of the order was served upon him, the time [s. 674]
requisite for obtaining a copy of such order, shall be ex-
cluded.

The Supreme Court may make rules, not inconsistent Section 277
with the provisions of this Act, on all or any of the follow- Rules by the
v preme
ing matters, namely— . Court.

(४) the powers to be exercised and the procedure to [New]

be followed in appeals to the High Court under
this Chapter ; .

(b) any other matter which is to be oar be pres-
cribed by the Supreme Cour under this Chapter. ;


. Clauses 278-280
Section 278 In this Chapter,— |
Definitions.
[s. 66(8)] (a) ‘the High Court’ means,—

(i) in relation to any State, the High Court for
that State ;

(ii) in relation to the Union territories of Delhi and
Himachal Pradesh, the High Court of Punjab ;

(iii) in relation to the Union territories of Manipur
and Tripura, the High Court of Assam;

(av) in relation to the Union territory of the Anda-
man and Nicobar islands, the High Court at
Caleuita ; and

(v) in relation to the Union territory of the Lacca-
dive, Minicoy and Amindivi islands, the High
Court of Kerala;

{New] (b) “status” means the category under which the asses-
see is assessed, with reference to the Finance Act
applicable to the case, as “individual”, “Hindu
undivided family” and so on.

CHAPTER XXII

PENALTIES IMPOSABLE BY INCOME-TAX
AUTHORITIES

Section 279 .If any person without reasonable excuse fails to
Failure to comply with 6 notice issued under section 97 (7) [s. #4E(6),
furnish infor. earlier half], the Income-tax Officer may direct that such
Garo tear. Person shall pay a penalty not exceeding five _hyndred
tierce rupees and a further penalty of the like amount for every
3. 86), day after the infliction of such penalty during which the
Bier fate failure continues.

Section 280 (1) If the Income-tax Officer, o7 the Appellate Afsistant
Concealment Commissioner............ , in the course of any proceedings
of income under this Act, is satisfied that any person— ः

or improper

distribution :

of profits etc. (a) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish the
हिना return of his total income which he was required

to furnish ......... under section 143 (1) [22(1)] or
by notice given under section 143 (2) [sub!section
(2) of section 22] or section 154 [34 (1) (a) {b)] or
has without reasonable cause failed to furnish it
within the time allowed and in the manner re-
quired by section 148 (1) [22 (1)].or by such! notice,
as the case ngay be, oF , :

!


251
Clause 280

(७) has without reasonable cause failed to comply with
a notice under section 146 (1) [sub-section (4) of
section 22] or section 147 (2) [sub-section (2) of
section 23], or

(९०) has concealed the parti¢ulars of his income or deli-
berately furnished inafcurate particulars of such
income,

16............ may direct that such. person shall pay by way of
penalty,— .

(i) in the case referred to in clause (a), in addition to
the amount of the tax, if any, payable by him, a
sum not exceeding one and a half times that am-
ount, and

(ii) in the cases referred te in clayses (b) and (c), in
addition to any tax payable by him, a sum not
exceeding one and a half times the amount of the
tax, if any, which would have been avoided if the
income as returned by guch person had been accept-
ed as the correct income.

(2) When the person liable to penalty is a registered {s,28(1),Prov.

firm or an unregistered firm which has been assessed under (d)}

section 190 (b) [23 (5) (b)], then, notwithstanding anything
contained in the other provisiogs of this Act, the penalty
imposable under sub-section (1) shall be a sum not
exceeding— -

(i) in the case referred to -in clause (a) of sub-section
(7), one and a half tithes the amount of the tax

«payable by an. unregi istered firm on an

equal to the firm’s total income, and

(ii) in the cases referred to in clayses (0) and (c) of
sub-section (1),............. ane and ‘a: half times the
difference between the amount’ af the tax............
payable by an unregisteted firm.on an income equal
to the firm's total income and the amount of the

i re payable by unregistered firm on an
income equal to the in dime of fhe firm as actually
returned by it.

of his total income under ng 143 (॥ far) (1)] shall be
7

imposed under sub-section (1) an whose total
income does not exceed the imuih grount not charge-
able to tax in his case by one ind fe hundred rupees.

a)

i
(3) (a) ...... No penalty for failure toi ish the return “en
|

(b) Where a person has failed te comply with a notice
under section 143 (2) [sub-section (2) of section 22] or

section 154 (section 34 (1) न )] पी moves that he has
no income liable to tax, the i under sub-
section (1) shall not exceed ty-fi pees.

17--1 Law Com./58

.98(1),
हज]


252
Clauses 280-282

[s.28(2),Prov. (c) No penalty shall be imposed under sub-section (1)
(©) upon any person assessable under section 169 (1) (i) read
with section 170 [42 (1) main para, latter half, part regard-
ing liability of agent to be assessed as representing non-
resident] as the agent of a non-resident for failure to fur-

nish the return............ under section 143 (1) [22 (1)].
{s-28(2)} (4) If the Income-tax Officer, or the Appellate Assistant
Commissioner, .in the course of any proceedings

under this Act, tisfied that the profits of a registered
firm have been distributed otherwise than in accordance
with the shares of the partners as shown in the instrument
of partnership on the basis of which the firm has been
registered under this Act,............ and that any partner has
thereby returned his income below its real amount. he.........
may direct that such partner shall, in addition to the tax,
if any, payable by him, pay by way of penalty a sum not
exceeding one and a half times the amount of tex which
has been avoided, or would have been avoided if the in-
come returned by such partner had been accepted as his
correct income ; and no refund or other adjustment shall be
claimable by any other partner by reason of such direc-
tons.

Section 281,000 "००-०० Where any person fails to give the notice of
Failure to discontinuance of his business, profession or vocation re-
ive notice of quired by section 185 (3) 125 (9 earlier half), the in comes
iscontinuan- tax officer may direct that a sum shall be recovered from
ce. him by way of penalty not exceeding the amount of tax
beza(aslater subsequently assessed on him in respect of any income
Par ee of the business, profession or vocation up to the
date of its discontinuance.

Section 282 If the Income-tax Officer, in the course of any pro-
False estima- Ceedings in connection with the regular _ assessment, is
te of orfailure Satisfied that any assesse— .

dva-

nets. (8) has furnished under section 220 ten eating mn (2)
8. 18A(0), or sub-section (3) of section 186] an eatimpte of
main para the advance tax payable by him which he knew

or had reason to believe to be untrue, or

(७) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish an
estimate of the advance tax payable by rn in
accordance with the provisions of section 220 (3)
[sub-section (3) of section 18A],

he may direct that such person shall, in addition to the
amount of tax, if any, pauarle by him, pay by way of
penalty a sum not exceeding—

Is. 28A(9), (i) ......... in the case referred to in clause (@ one
Prov. and a half times the amount by which je tax
actually paid during ithe financial year immefliately


253
Clauses 282-285

preceding the assessment year, under the provi-
sions of sections 215 to 228 [s. 18A] falls short of~

i (1) etghty per cent. of the tax regularly assessed,
1 + as modified under the provisions of section 223
. (18A (8)), or

(2) where a notice under section 218 [184 (1) (a),
main para, part as embodied in section regard-
ing order of Income-tax Officer] was issued to

i the assessee, the amount payable thereunder,

whichever is the less; and

“ (ii) in the case referred to in clause (0), one and a half
times the amount on which interest is payable
under section 223 [s. 188 (6)].

(1) No order imposing a penalty under this Chapter Section 283
shall be ए1806............... unless the assessee or the partner Protedure
or the other person on whom the penalty is sought to be [s. 28(3))
imposed, as the case may be, has been heard, or has been
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

हे ~ (2) The Income-tax Officer shall not impose any penalty [s, 28(6))

पु under section’, 280 {s. 28(1) or (2)] or section 282 [18A(9)]
without the previous approval of the Inspecting Assistant
Commissioner.

(8) An Appellate Assistant Commissioner, on making {s. 28(5))
- an order under section 280 (28(1) or (2)], shall forthwith
send a copy of the same to the Income-tax Officer.

No prosecution for an offence against this Act shal] be Section 28%
instituted in respect of the same facts on which a penalty Baragainst
has been imposed under this Chapter. क्षाा

CHAPTER XXIII
OFFENCES AND PROSECUTIONS

If a person fails without reasonable ¢ause or excuse— = 285

(a) to grant inspection or ‘allow copies to be taken in
accordance with the provisions of section 139 [39]; ver

i (b) to furnish in due time any of the returns mentioned or wins
in section 166(4) [Section 19A}, 166(1) [section pecton.
204], 166(2) [section 21] 143(2) [sub-section (2) of |s- te, open-
section 22] or 138 {section 38]; pear) है
॥।

|. 91

(०) to produce, or cause to be produced, on or before [s. 51(4)}
हर the date mentioned in any + tice under section —
1 146(1) [Sub-section (4)| of sectiby’ 22] such accounts H
| and documents as arej referred to in the notice;

i


254
Clauses 285-289

Is. 57(०)1 (9) to deduct and pay tax as required by sections 201
to 204 [all sections embodying section 18] or under
section 235(2) [Sub-section (5) of section 46]; or

(s. 51(b)} (e) to furnish a certificate required by section 211 [sub-
section (9) of section 18] or by section 167 [section
20] to be furnished;

Is. st, he shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be punishable

‘astpart] = with fine which may extend to ten rupees for every day
during which the default continues.
Section 286 lf a person makes a statemént in any verification under

False state’ this Act which is false, and which he either knows or be-
declaration. eves to be false, or does not believe to be true, he Spal all...
fs. $2} cots, OR Conviction before a Magistrate. be punishable

 $ with simple imprisonment which may extend to six mnths,
or with fine which may extend to 006 thousand rupeks, or
with both.

Section 287 (1) A person shall not be proceeded against for an
Prosecution offence under section 285 [51] or section 286 [52] exer pt at
er St Inspec. the instance of the Inspecting Assistant Commissionkr.
ting Assistant

Commissio-

ner. (2) The Inspecting Assistant Commissioner may pither
Is. 53) before or after the institution of proceedings compounfi any
"53 such offence. :

Section 288 (1) If a public servant diseloses any particulars, the dis-
Disclosure of closure of which is prohibited by section 141(2) ee (2),
Particulars by earlier part, as incorporated im Chapter on Income-tax Au-
Le thorities], he shall, on convietion before a Magistrate, be
3, 54(2) punishable with imprisonment which may extend six
fi 54 part) months, and shall also be liable to fine. i

(s. $4(5)) (2) No prosecution shall be instituted under i sec~
tion except with the previous sanction of the Commisgioner,

CHAPTER XXIV. i

RECOGNISED PROVIDENT FUNDS |
Recognition

i
Section 289, {1) The Commisgioner......... may accord reco; ee
According & to any provident fund which, in his opinion, satisfids the
Sithdrawal conditions prescribed in section 290 [58C embodied in sec-
tion. 8" tion for conditions} and the rules made thereunder, and
e588) 212% at any time, withdraw such recognition if, in his opi-
“  nion, the provident fund coptravenes any of those con-

ditions: , है i

H i: i



mone

Clauses 289-290
Provided that the Commissioner may—

(a) subject to such conditions, if any, as he may con-
sider necessary, accord recognition to any provi-
dent fund maintained by an enterprise which has
been exempted fer. any or ali of the provisions
of any scheme framed under the Employees’ Pro-
vident Funds Act, 1952, notwithstanding that any 19 of 1952.
Of the conditions mentioned in section 290 [58C
embodied in ‘section regarding conditions} are not
satisfied ; and

(b) withdraw such recognition if, in his opinion, the
provident fund contravenes any of the conditions
subject to which recognition was accorded by him.

(2) An order according recognition shall take effect [s. 58B(2).)
on such date as the Commissioner may fix in accordance
with any rules the Central Board of Revenue may make
in this behalf, such date not being later than the last day
of the financial year in which the onder is made.

(3) An order withdrawing recognition shall take effect (s. 588(3).]
from the date on which it is made. +

(4) An order according ‘recognition to a provident [s. $88 (3A)]
fund shallgnot, unless the Commissioner otherwise directs,
be affected by the fact that the fund ig subsequently amal-
gamated with another provident fund on the occurrence of
an amalgamation of the undertakings in connection with
which the two funds are maintained, or that it subsequent-
ly absorbs the whole or a part of andther provident fund
belonging to an undertaking which ig wholly or in part
trans: ferred to or merged in the undertaking of the em-
ployer maintaining the first mentioned fund. :

In order that a provident fund may receive and retain Section 290
recognition, it shall, subject to the provisions of =e itions to
291 [s. 58C(1) Provisos to cls. (a), (b), (d). 58J(4), 58(D), be | satisfied

. 58(C) (1) (g) latter part], satisfy the, conditions set out BY मे ised

below and any other conditions which the Central Govern- fy,
ment may, by rules, prescribe—

1
(a) All employees shall be employed in India, or shall fs. | 5800)
be employed by an empi main

yet whose principal (a),
place of business is in India. parq.]

* » -
(0) The contributions of an employee in any year [s. , 5800)"
shall be a definite proportion af his salary for that (b),, main
year, and shall be deducted by the employer from P44]
the employee’s salary in that proportion, at each
periodical payment r such in that year,
and credited to the ln individua] account
in the fund. ft



256

Clauses 290-291
* . .
fs. 5866) ६०) ........-' The contributions of an employer to the in-

©] dividual account of an employee in any year shall
not exceed the amount of the contributions of the
employee in that year, and shall be credited to
the employee’s individual account at intervals not
exceeding one year.

(. 50007) (१) The fund shali consist of contributions as above
ony main specified and of donations, if any, received by the
Pars trustees, of accumulations thereof, and of interest

(simple and compound), credited in respect of such
contributions, donations and accumulations, and
of securities purchased therewith and of any ca-
pital gains arising from the sale, exchange or
transfer of capital assets of the fund, and of no
other sums.

* . .

fs, on (3) (९) The fund shall be vested in two or more trustees

. or in the Official Trustee under a trust which shall
not be revocable save with the consent of all the
beneficiaries.

fs. 5006) (0) The employer shall not be entitled to recovet any

0). sum whaisoever from the fund, sav@ in cases
where the employee is dismissed for miscohduct
or voluntarily leaves his employment otherwise
than on account of ill-health or other unavoidable
cause before the expiration of the term of service
specified in this behalf in the regulations of the
‘und.

In such cases the recoveries made by the employer
shall be limited to the contributions made by him to the
individual account of the employee, and to interest ‘(sim-
ple and compound) credited in respect of such contribu:
tions and accumulations thereof, in accordance with the
regulations of the fund.

fs 58001) (8) The accumulated balance due to an employes, shall
Bry earlier be payable on the day he ceases to be an employee

of the employer maintaining the fund............

[s._ 58C(:) {h) Save as provided in clause (8), or in accorfance

{h)]- with such conditions and restrictions as the! Cen-
tral Government may, by rules, prescribe, no por-
tion of the balance to the credit of an employee
shall be payable to him. .

Section 291, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section
Relaxation of 290(a) [38C(1), (a) main para], the Commissioner may, if
conditions. he thinks fit, and subject to such conditions, if ro as he
fs. _ 5800) thinks proper to attach to the: recognition, accord rerogni-
(a), Prov] tion to a fund maintgined byi an employer whose prihcipal


237
Clause 292
place of business is not in India, provided the proportion

of employees............... employed outside India does not
exceed ten per cent,

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section {s.
290(b) [580(1) (9) main para}, an employee who retains (b)

his employment while serving in the armed forces of the
Union or when taken into or employed in the national ser-
vice under any law for the time being in force, may, whe-
ther he receives from the employer any salary or not, .con-
tribute to the fund during his service in the armed forces
of the Union or while so taken into or employed in the
national service a sum not exceeding the amount he would
have contributed had he continued to serve the employer.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section ६.

290(d) [580(1)(0) main para} or section 290(g) (58C(1)
(g), earlier part],—

(a) at the request ...... made in writing by the em-
ployee who ceases to be an employee of the em-
ployer maintaining the fund, the trustees of the
fund may consent to retain the whole or any part
of the accumulated balance due to the employee
to be drawn by him at any time on demand;

(0) where the accumulated balance due to an employee

who has ceased to be an employee is retained in (a),

the fund in accordance with clause (a) of this sub-
section, the fund may consist also of the accumu-
Jated balance due to the cmp) oyee.........and of
interest (simple and compound) in respect thereof

58061)

rovisa).

(1)
fatter

5800)
Proviso.}

(4) Subject to any rules which the Central Govern: . $80.)

ment may make in this behalf, the Commissioner may, in
respect of any particular fund, relax the provisions of sec-
tion 290(0 [58C (1) (०0]1--

(8) so as to permit the payment of larger contribu-
tions by an employer to the individual accounts
of employees whose salary does not exceed five
hundred rupees per mensem; and

(b) so as to permit the crediting by employers to the
individual accounts of emplpyees ~of periodical
bonuses or other contributions of a contingent
nature, where the calculation and payment of such
bonuses or other contributions is provided for on
definite principles by the regulations of the fund.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 290 {s. 581 (५)-)

(h) [58C(1)(h)], ...... in order to enable an employee to
pay the amount of tax ass ad on i total income as de-
termined under section 299( 58703), he shall be enti-
tled to withdraw from the Balance tq his credit in the


258

Clauses 291-296

recognised provident fund a sum not exceeding the. dif-
ference between such amount and the amount to which
he would have been assessed if the transferred balance
referred to in section 299(3) {s. 583(3)] had not been in-
cluded in his total income.
Section 292 Where there is a repugnance between any regulation
Repugnancy Of @ recognised provident fund and any provision of this
im regulations, Chapter or of the rules made thereunder, the regulation
[s. 58C(2).] Shall, to the extent of the repugnance, be of no effect.

The Commissioner may, at any time, require that such
repugnance shall be removed from the regulations of the
und.

Treatment of contributions and balances.

Section 293. Any sum paid by an employer by way of contribition
Employer's towards a recognised provident fund shall be deductéd in
Hone when Computing his income for the purpose of assessment.
deducted in

assessing his

Income.

{New} That portion of the annual accretion in any Previous
Section 294. year to the balance at the credit of an employee paftici-
Employer's Pating in a recognised provident fund as consists of—~-
annual (a) contributions made by the employer in excegs of

fone ten per cent. of the salary of the employee, arid
when deemed (b) interest credited on the balance to the creat of

to be income the employee in so far as it exceeds one-third of

received by ;
foyee. the salary of the employee or is allowed at a:rate
5 5081 : exceeding the rate fixed by the Central Goyern-

ment in this behalf by notification in the Official
Gazette,

shall be deemed to have been received by the emelbyee
in that previous year and shall be included in his total
income for that previous year, and shall be liable tq in-

come-tax and super-tax,
Section 295. An employee participating in a recognised = lent
Employee’s fund shall be entitled to a deduction, from the amouzt of
contributions income-tax on his total income'with which he is charg ble
है Exemption for any assessment year, of an wmount equal to the ४: =
fs. 58.) tax calculated at the average rate of income-tax on his bwn
contributions to his individual account in the fund in| the
previous year, in so far as the aggregate of such conttibu-
. tions. does not exceed one-fifth of his salary in that
vious year or eight thousand rupees, whichever is less. |

gene The accumulated balance due and becoming a
Section 296.

able to an employee ticipating in a recognised provifient
कप किक कक 7 नह fund shall be exclu ded from the computation of his total
clusion from income—
total income.
eae
Eepl2, pre (i) if he has rendered cori fee service with his

viso, part] . ployer for a me of years or more, or

em-



238
Clauses 296-299

tii) if, though he has not rendered such continuous ser-
vice, the Commissioner.. being of the opinion
that the service has bee! rminated by reason of
the employee's ill-health, or by the contraction or
discontinuance of the employer’s business or other
eause beyond the contro! of the employee, allows
the employee the benefit of this section.

(1) Where the accumulated balance due to an employee Section 297.
participating in a recognised provident fund is included in Tax on accu-
his total income owing to the provisions of section 296 [58G mulated ba-
(2)] not being applicable, the Income-tax Officer shall cal- lance.
culate the total of the various sums of income-tax and [s. 8G(3)]
super-tax which would have been payable by the employee
in respect of his total income for each of the years con-
cerned if the fund had not been a recognised provident
fund, and the amount by which such total exceeds the total
of all sums paid by or on behalf of sue¢h employee by way
of tax for such years shall be payable by the employee in
addition to any other income-tax and super-tax for which
he may be liable for the previous year in which the accu-
mulated balance due to him becomes payable.

(2) Where the accumulated balance due to an employee fs. 58561)
participating in a recognised provident fund which is not latter part}.
included in his total income under the provisions of section
296 [58G (2)] becomes payable....... ज ah amount equal to
the aggregate of the amounts of super-tax on annual ac-
cretions that would have been payable-under section 588
of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, for any assessment year 11 af 1922.
upto and including the assessment ydar 1932-1933, if the
Indian Income-tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1933, had come ,8 d 1933.
into force on the 15th March, 1930, shall be payable by the
employee in addition to any other tax payable by him for
the previous year in which such balante becomes payable.

The trustees of a recognised provident fund, or any Section 298. *
person authorised by the regulations of the fund to make
payment of accumulated balances due to employees, shall,
im cases where section 297 (1) fc} applies, at the time
an accumulated balance due an ein nployee is paid, de- tab}
duct therefrom the amount payable under section 297 (1) fee)
15. 58G(3)J........., and all the provisions of sections 206 to
211 [18(4) to 18(9)] shall apply as if the accumulated bal- हि
ance were income chargeable under thé head “Salaries”.

(1) Where recognition is accorded ‘to a provident fund secon 299.
with existing balances, an adcount shall be made of the treptment of
fund up to the day before the day on which the recognition, bala ein
takes effect, showing the balance to i je credit of each em- newly recog-
ployee on such day, and containing such further particulars deat provie

as the Central Board of Revenue may prescribe. i BIG)

(2) The account shall १५ show : in respect of the 5 ३6309):
which is to be transferred to tliat

palance to the credit of each. @mploy: amount thereof
it em foes account in the


(s. 58 5(3)]

{s. 58 3090]:

Section 300

Accounts of

recognised
provident
किक,

fs. 58—1]

Section gor.
Appeals.
{97 58 B(4))

260

Clauses 299-301

recognised provident fund, and such amount (hereinafter
called his transferred balance) shall be shown as the
balance to his credit in the recognised provident fund on
the date on which the recognition of the fund takes effect,
and sub-section (3) of this section and sub-section (5) of
section 291 [s. 585(3) (4)] shall apply thereto.

Any portion of the balance to the credit of an em-
ployee in the existing fund which is not transferred to the
Tecognised fund shall be excluded from the accounts of the
recognised fund and shall be liable to income-tax and
super-tax in accordance with the provisions of this Act,
other than this Chapter.

(3) Subject to such rules as the Central Board of Reve-
nue may make in this behalf, the Income-tax Officer shall
make a calculation of the aggregate of all sums comprised
ine a transferred balance which would have been liable to
income-tax if this Chapter had been in force from the date
of the institution of the fund, without regard to any tax
which may have been paid on any sum, and such aggregate
(if any) shall be deemed to be income received by the em-
ployee in the previous year in which the recognition of the
fund takes effect and shail be included in the employee’s
total income for that previous year, and, for the putposes
of assessment, the remainder of the transferred balance
shall be disregarded, but no other exemption or reli ti by
way of refund or otherwise, shall be granted in respect of
any sum comprised in such transferred balance:

Provided that, in cases of serious accounting difficulty,
the Commissioner shall have power, subject to the said
rules, to make a summary calculation of such aggregate.

(4) Nothing in this section shall affect the rights of the
persons administering an unrecognised provident fund or
dealing with it, or with the balance to the credit of any
individual employee, before recognition is accorded, in any

‘manner which may be lawful.

Other provisions

(1) The accounts of a reeognised provident fund shall
be maintained by the trustees of the fund and shall !be in
such form and for such periods, and shall contain! such
particulars, as the Central Board of Revenue may! pres-
cribe. .

(2) The accounts shall be open to inspection at all rea-
sonable times by Income-tax authorities, and the trustees
shall furnish to the Income-tax Officer such abstracts there.
of as the Central Board of Revenue may prescribe.

An employer objecting to an order of the Commis-
sioner refusing to recognise or an order I within sieig cOg>
nition from a provident fund may appeal, within sixty deys
of such order, to the; Centralj Board of Revenue.

- {


261

Clauses 301-303

The appeal shall be in the form and shall be verified in
the manner prescribed by the Central Board of Revenue.

(1) Where an employer who maintains a provident fund Section ३०२.
(whether recognised or not) for the benefit of his employees Treatment of
and has not transferred the fund or any portion of it, trans- fund transfer-
fers such fund or portion to trustees in trust for the em- red by om
ployees participating in the fund, the amount so transfer- a aetee ०
red shall be deemed to be of the nature of capital expendi- {s. 58-K)

ure.

(2) When an employee participating in such fund is
paid the accumulated balance due to him therefrom, any
Portion of such balance as represents his share in the
amount so transferred to the trustee (without addition of
interest, and exclusive of the employee's contributions and
interest thereon) shall, if the employer has made effective
arrangements to secure that tax shall be deducted at source
from the amount of such share when paid to the employee,
be deemed to be an expenditure by the employer within
the meaning of section 37 [clause (xv) of sub-section (2)
of section 10}, incurred in the previous year’in which the
accumulated balance due to the employee is paid. .

(1) All rules made under this Chapter shall be subject Section 303.
to the provisions of section 329 (4) [sub-section (5) of sec- Peodsions
tion 59]. ing to

les,
fs. 58 1..]

(2) In addition to any power conferred by this Chap-
ter, the Central Government may make rules-—

(a) prescribing the statements and other information
to be submitted with an application for recogni-
tion ; .
limiting the contributions to a recognised provi-
dent fund by employees of a company who are
shareholders in the company ;

(०) providing for the assessment by way of penalty of
any consideration received by an employee for an
assignment of, or creation of 8 charge upon, his
beneficial interest in a recognised provident

‘und ;

determining the extent to and the manner in |
which exemption from payment of income-tax and -
super-tax may be granted in respect of contribu-
tions and interest credited to the individual ac-
counts of employees in a provident fund from
which recognition has been withdrawn; and

(e) generally, to carry out the purposes of this Chap-

ter and to secure such further control. over the
and the adminis-
funds as it may

(b

(d

recognition of provident fun
tration of recognised provid
deem requisite. 3



262

Clauses 304-305
Section 304. This Cha

ee हे ipter shall not apply to any provident fund to
ofthis cbap- Which the Provident Funds Act, 1925, applies,

ter.

Is. 58M}

19 of 1925,

Segion. 305 _In this Chapter, unless the contert otherwise re-

[ 583) quires,—

(a) a “recognised provident fund” means a provident
fund which has been and continues to be recog-
nised by the Commissioner, in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter;

(b) an “employer” means any person who maintains
6 provident fund for the benefit of his or its em-
+ ployees, being—

(i) a Hindu undivided family, company, firm or other
association of persons, or

(ti) an individual engaged in a business, profession
. or vocation whereof the profits and gains age as-
sessable to income-tax under the head “Profits

and gains of business, profession or vocation”,......

(९) an “employee” means an employee -participating
in a provident fund, but does not include a per-
sonal or domestic servant;

d

a “contribution” means any sum credited ap jor on
behalf of any employee out of his salary, or by an
employer out of his own monies, to the individual
account of an employee, but does not include any
sum credited as interest;
(९) the “balance to the credit” of an employee means
the total amount to’ the credit of his individual
account in a provident fund at any time;

(£) the “annual accretion” to the balance to the rredit
of an employee means the increase to such balance
in any year, arising from contributions al fi in-
terest;

(8) the “accumulated balance due” to an em fle
means the balance to his credit, or such है! rtion
thereof as may be claimable by him und¢r the
regulations of the fuhd, on the day he ceas¢s to
be an employee of the employer maintaining the
fund; and .

(bh

the “regulations of a fynd” means the special body
of regulatior pa ‘ing the constitution and ad-
matin a parfi¢ular provident fund.


263

Clauses 306-307

CHAPTER XXV
APPROVED SUPERANNUATION FUNDS

Approval

(1) The Central Board of Revenue May accord appro- Section 306.
val to any superannuation fung or any part of a superan- Approval and
nuation fund which in its opinion complies with the re- biases]
quirements of section 307 [587], and may at any time with- et ७ .

Taw such approval, if in its opinion, the circumstances of (+ $80]

the fund or part cease to warrant the continuance of the
approval,

(2) The Central Board of Revenue shall communicate
in writing to the trustees of the fund the grant of approval
with the date on which the 221 proval is to take effect, and,
where the approval is grant subject to conditions,. those
conditions.

(3) The Central Board of Revenue shall communicate
in writing to the trustees of the fund any withdrawal of
approval with the reasons for such withdrawal and the
date on which the withdrawal is to take effect.

(4) The Central Board of Revenue shall neither refuse
nor withdraw approval to any superannuation fund or any
part of a superannuation fund unless it has given the trus-

tees of that fund a reasonable opportunity of being heard
in the matter.

(1) In order that a superannuation fund may receive com 2 307.
and retain approval, it shall Satish fy the Prin Cations set out Conditions
below and any other conditions which the Central Govern. %r .
ment may, by rules, prescribe— 9.5? 1

(a) the fund shall be a fund estalilished under an ir- मे P**

revocable trust in copnection with a trade or
undertaking carried on in India ;

(b) the fund shall have for its sole Purpose the provi-
sion of annuities for employdes in the trade or
undertaking on their peo Is at or after a speci-
fied age or on their becoming pacited prior to
such retirement, or for the widows, children or
dependants of persons who ara or have been such
employees on the death of thoge. persons; and

(०) the employer in the trade or undertaking shall be
a contributor to the fund,

€2).........' The Central Boagd of Bgvenue may, if it wae है
thinks fit and subject to sudh con ns, if any, as it Provo}
thinks proper to attach to the approval, approve a fund or

any part of a fund—

(i) notwithstanding that the rules of the fund provide
for the return in certa ‘in contingencies of contribu-
tions paid to the fund, or

(0) if the main purpose of ईः fi
such annuities as afo: ae
such provision is not it sole

js the provision of
ithstanding that


264

Clauses 307-310

(iii) notwithstanding that the trade or undertaking in
connection with which the fund is established is
carried on only partly in India.

{New] (3) Where there is a repugnance between any rules of
an approved ‘superannuation fund or the terms of the in-
strument under which the fund is established and any pro-
vision of this Chapter or of the rules made thereunder, the
rules of the fund or the terms of the instrument under
which the fund is established, as the case may be, shall,
to the extent of the repugnance, be of no effect; and the
Central Board of Revenue may at any time require that
such repugnance shall be removed from the rules of the
fund or the terms of the instrument, as the case may be.

Section 308. (1) An application for approval of a superannuation

Application fund or part of a superannuation fund for any assessment

for approval. year shail be made in writing before the end of that year

{s58Q] by the trustees of the fund to the Income-tax Officer by
whom the employer is assessable, and shall be accomparfied
by a copy of the instrument under which the fund is estab-
lished and by two copies of the rules and of the accounts
of the fund for the last previous year for which sueh ac-
counts have been made up. The Central Board of Revenue
may require such further information to be supplied as it
thinks proper.

(2) If any alteration in the rules, constitution, objects
or conditions of the fund is made at any time after the
date of the application for approval, the trustees af the
fund shall forthwith communicate such alteration to the
Income-tax Officer mentioned in sub-section (1), and in
default of such communication any approval given -shall,
unless the Central Board of Revenue otherwise orders, be
deemed to have been withdrawn from the date on which
the alteration took effect.

.Treatment of investments and contributions.

Section 309. ress Income derived from investments or deposits of an
Income Tom approved superannuation fund, and any capital gains aris-
investments. ing from the sale, exchange or transfer of Capital asgets of
fs. 58R main such fund, shall not be included in the total income bf the
para, part] person in receipt thereof.

Section 310... Any sum paid by an employer......by way gf con-
Employer's tribution towards an approved superannuation fund shall
fee es be deducted in computing his income......for nd pur-
Deduction Pose of assessment: :

for. : :

[s. 58R, main ; हे हि
para, part] Provided......that where the contribution is not ah ordi-
{s. 58R, 2nd nary annual contribution, it shall be treated as the Central
Prov.] Board of Revenue may direct, either as a deduction for the

year in which the sum is paid, or as a deduction to be

spread over such petiod of years as the Central Boprd of
Revenue thinks proper. धर i


265

Clauses 311-315

Where the assessee is an employee participating in an Section git.
approved superannuation fund, any sum paid in the pre- Employee's
vious year by him by way of contributien towards the super- Gon when
annuation fund shall, in so far as such sum is an ordinary exempt.
annual contribution, be treated for all the Purposes of this [s. 58२, main
Act as if it were a sum.to which the Provisions of section para, ” part
88 [15] apply. and Ist

proviso}

Where any amount standing to the credit of an em- .
ployee in an approved superannuation fund is paid to the Contribution
employee during his lifetime but not at or in connection Paid to em-
with the termination of his employment, the amount so Becca ne?
Paid-shall be deemed for the purposes of income-tax (but be income,
not for the purposes of super-tax) to be income of the em- fs. 585 ()) |
ployee of the previous year in which it is so paid to him.

Where any amount standing to the credit of an em- Section 313.
ployee in an approved superannuation fund is paid to the Deduction of
employee during his lifetime but not at or in connection का fontri:
with the-termination of his employment,. .income- oan one
tax (but not super-tar) on the amount SO.........paid shall, ployee.
except in the case of an employee whose employment was [s. 585 (2)}
carried on abroad, be deducted by the trustees of the fund
at the average rate of income-tex at which the employee
was liable to income-tax during the preceding three years
or during such period, if less than three years. as he was
@ member of the fund, and shall be paid by the trustees
to the credit of the Central Government within the pre-
scribed time and in such manner as the Central Board of
Revenue may direct.

Other provisions.

Where an employer deducts from the emoluments paid Section 314.
to an employee or pays on his behalf any contributions of Peduction of:
that emp lovee to an approved superannuation fund, he shall and) boxe
include all such deductions or payments in the return butipns on
which he is required to furnish under dection 166(2) [21], bebsif of

employee to
be “included
in rdturn.

छ sBT] .
If a fund or a part of a fiind for any reason ceases to tai 31S.
e an approved superannuation fund, the trustees of the Liabilities of
fund shall nevertheless remain liable to account for tax ‘ruses on

on any sum paid— 72] of
(3) on account of returned contributions (including
interest on contributions, if any), and (s. sBU}

(b) in commutation or in lieu of annuities,

in so far as the sum so paid is in respect of contribu-

tions made before the fund or part of the fund ceased to

९ an approved superannuation fund Mnder the provisions
of this Chapter.


266 i
Clauses 316-317

Section 316. The trustees of an approved superannuation fubd and
Particulars to any employer who contributes to an approved =
in respect of tion fund shall, when required by notice from the I
superannua- tax Officer, within such peridd, not being less then’
tion funds. one days from the date of the notice, as may be
[s. 50५] in the notice, furnish such return, statement, parts

information, as the Income-tax Officer may require.

ene sae aes .
N abe

ees eee see

eon one een 1

Section 317. (1) All rules made under this Chapter shall be dubject
imanaions "fo to the provisions of section 329(4) {sub-section (5) $f see-
rules. tion 59].
(New] वि

(2) In addition to any power conferred by this Chapter,

the Central Government may make rules— |
(3) prescribing the statements and other informa} ea to
be submitted with an application for apprdval;

(b

prescribing the returns, statements, particulérs, or
information which the Income-tax Officer ५ re-
quire from the trustees of an approved superdnnua-
tion fund or from the employer; :

(९

other contributions te an approved 5220 tion

limiting the ordinary annual contribution and any
fund by an employer;

(व

\
providing dt, the assessment by way o tore a of
any consideration regeived by an employee for an
assignment of, or creation of a charge upon, his
pensficial interest in'‘an approved superannation

fund; :
(e) determining the extent to and the manner a hich
exemption from payment of income-tax and per=
tax may be granted in respect of any payment] made
from a supemnnuatian fund from which tf
has been withdrawn;

(f) providing for the withdrawal of approval 4 the
case of a fund which: ceases to satisfy the refyuire-
ments of this Chapter or of the rules made there-
under; and H

(8) generally, to carry out the purposes of this pter
and to secure such further control over the dp jppro-
val of superannuation funds and the admini: ration
of approved quperanmuntion funds, as it may|deem
requisite. ‘

| 1


267

Clauses 318-320
In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,— Section 938
Definitioas.

(8) “approved superannuation fuad” means a super- {s. s8N]
annuation fund or any part of a superannua-

tion fund which has been and continues to

be approved by the Central Board of Revenue in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter;
“employer”, “employee” and “contribution” have, in
relation to superannuation funds, the meanings
assigned to those expressions in section 305 [58A]

in relation to provident funds;

(छ

(c) “ordinary annual .contribution” means an annual
contribution of a fixed amount or an annual con-
tribution computed on some definite basis by refe-
rence to the income chargeable under the head
“Salaries”, the contributions or the number of mem-
bers of the fund.

CHAPTER XXVI
MISCELLANEOUS
A—Miscellaneous provisions.

Income which has once been charged to income*tax or Section 379.
super-tax in the hands of any person for any assessment Bar of doable
year shall not be charged again to ineome-tax or super- ation, a
tax, as the case may be, in the hands of the same person, °° the Act.
either for the same assessment year or for a different [New]
assessment year.

(1) A notice or requisition under this Act may be serv- Section 320.
ed on the person therein named either by post or as if it Service of

were a summons issued by a court under the Code of Civil रद ico—Le~
Procedure, 1908. nel off: at

(2) Any such notice or requisition may be addressed—

(a) in the case of a firm or a Hindu undivided family,
मो to any member of the firm or to the mana-
ger or any adult male member of the family ;

(b) in the case of a local authority, company, or other
association of persons............ > to the principal
officer thereof ;

(६०) in the case of any other person: (not being an indi-
vidual), to the person jwho manoges or controls
his affairs. i
18--1 Law Com./58.


268

Clauses $21-323
Section 322. (1) After a finding of of total partition has been recorded
Service of by the Income-tax under section 181 [25.8] in res-

family is pect of any Hindu family, , notices under this Act in respect
garupted or of the income of the Hindu family shall—
rm etc., is हु

dissolved. (8) in the case of a notice under section 154 [sub-section

{New (1) of section 34], be served on all persons who were
members of the Hindu family immediately before
the partition and the legal representative of any
such member who is deceased ; and

{b) in other cases, be served on the person who was
the last manager of the Hindu family, or, if such
person is dead. , then on all adults who were mem-
bers of the Hindu family immediately before the
partition.

(2) Where a firm or other association of persons : dis-
solved, notices under this Act in respect of the
income of the firm may be served on any person who was
@ partner (not being a minor) or member of the firm or
association, as the case may be, immediately before its dis-
solution.

Section 522, Where an assessment is to be made under ait of 185
elice in the (2003), or section 91(1) [section 25(3), latter half o7 sec-
case of dis. tion 25(4) main para, latter half], the Income-tax. cer
continued may serve on the person whose income...........- is to be
business. assessed, or in the case of a firm, on any person | who
fs. 256)) was a member of such firm at the time of its discon-
tinuance, or, in the case of ३ company, on the रे cipal
officer thereof, a notice containing all or any of the require-
ments which may be included in a notice under section 143
(2) (s. 22 (2)]), and the provisions of this Act shall, sp far
235, 7189 be, apply accordingly as if the notice were a rotice
isthed under section 143 (2) [s. 22 (2)]. i
Section 323. _ (1) There shall be endorsed on every document hich
Marking” of has been placed on the record by any Income-tax authority
exhibits. the following particulars, namely— i

[New]
(a) the number of the case,
(b) the name of the person producing the docuntent,
(९०) the date on which it was produced, and

(9) a statement of its having been so placed op the
record ; .

and the endorsement shall be signed or initialled by the
Income-tax authority. 1

(2) Where any Income-taxz authority bases any or 148 or
any part of the order on any document, the Income-tax
authority shall expressly riediar reference in its jer to
such document, giving particalars sufficient to sath the
document. | i


269

Clause 324
(1) Any assessee who is entitled or required to attend sept tion 324.
before............ any Income-tax authority in connection with Appearance

any proceeding under this Act otherwise than when requir- Py authorised

ed under section 136 [37] to attend personally for exarnina- jive.

tion on oath or affirmation, may, subject to the other pro-;, 6, ay
visions of this section, attend by an authorised representa- part.)

tive.

(2) For the purposes of this section, “authorised repre-
sentative” means a person authorised by the assessee in
writing to gppear on his behalf, being—

fs. 6 (1).
pati]

0) a relative of or a person regularly employed by ६. 61 (a)
the assessee ; 07............ part}

GI) ............ any officer of a Scheduled Bank with which 5० (26) ]
the assessee maintains a curfént account or has
other regular dealings ; or

(iii) any legal practitioner who 18 entitled to practise [६ 6: (2)(ii)]
in any civil court in India ; or

(iv) an accountant ; or fan (1)

{v) any other person who, immediately before the js.’ 6: (1)
commencement of this Act, was a lawyer, an patt, and
accountant or an Income-tax practitioner within 51'(2) (iv)
the meaning of sub-section (2) of section 61 of .
the Indian Income-taz Act, 1922, and was actually या of 1922
practising as such.

Explanation.—In this section, “accountant” means als. 6: (2)
chartered accountant within the mearting of the Chartered i)
Accountants Act, 1949, and includes, in relation to any State, 38! 1949
any person who by virtue of the provisions of sub-section j;

(2) of section 226 of the Companies Att, 1956, is entitled to! 1956
be appointed to act as an auditor of companies registered ~
in that State. i

(3) No person who has keen dismissed from Govern- sf 61 (3),
ment service after the 15६ day of April, 1938, shall be quali- man para,
fied to represent an assessee under sub-section (1); and if ?'
any legal practitioner or............ accountant is found guilty .
of miscon duet in connection with any income-tax proceed- |
ings by the authority empowered to take disci linary action 1
against members of the profession which he belongs, '
जन -he shall be thenceforward disgualified to represent

an assessee............ under sub-section (1).
(4) .........1f any person, other than a legal practitioner [s 61 (3)
‘or accountant, is found guilty of............ misconduct in con- par pare

nection with any income-tax proceedings by the prescribed
authority, the prescribed a icc mp an that he shall «
be thenceforward disqualifiedjto Tepryspnt an assessee un-
der sub-section (1):


हि. 6: (3),
Prov.]

[New]

11 of 922.

Section 325.
Receipt ~ 10
be _ given.

{s. 62)

Section 326.
Indemnity.
fs. 65)

Section 327+
Bar of suiis in
civil court,

[s. 67)

Section 328.
Act (० Rave
effect pend-
ing legistative
provision for
charge of tax,

[s. 678]

Section 329.
Power to
make rules.

(s. 59]

270
Clauses 324-329
Provided that~

(a) no such direction shal! be made in respect of any
person unless he is given a reasonable opportunity
of being heard ;

(b) any person against whom such direction is made
may, within one month of the making of the direc-
tion, appeal to the Central Board of Revenue to
have the direction cancelled ; and

(०) no such direction shall take effect until one month
from the making thereof, or, when an appeal is
preferred, until the disposal of the appeal.

(5) A person disqualified to represent an assessee by
virtue of the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 61 of
the Indtan Income-tax Act, 1922. shall be disqualified to
revresent an assessee under sub-section (1).

A receipt shall be given for any money paid or recover-
ed under this Act.

Every person deducting, retaining, or paying any ‘tax
in pursuance of this Act in respect of income belonging to
another person is hereby indemnified for the deduction, re-
tention, or payment thereof.

No suit shall be brought in any civil court to set aside
or modify any assessment made under this Act, and no
prosecution, suit or other proceeding shall lie against any
officer of the Government for anything in good faith done
or intended to be done under this Act.

If on the 15६ day of April in any assessment year pro-
vision has not yet been made by a Central Act for the
charging of income-tax or super tax for that assessment
year, this Act shall nevertheless have effect until such pro-
vision is so made as if the provision in force in the preted-
ing assessment year or the provision proposed in the Bill
then before Parliament, whichever is more favourable to
the assessee, were actually in force.

B—Rules.

(1) The Central Board of Revenue may, subject to the
control of the Central Government, by notification in. the
Gazette of India, make rules for carrying out the purposes
of this Act and for the ascertainment and determination of
any class of income. Suph rules,may be made for the whole
of India or for such part therebf as may be specified. ।


271

Clause 329

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may—

(a) prescribe the manner in which, and the procedure
by which, the income...............shal] be arrived at
in the case of—

(i) income derived in part from agriculture and in
part from business ;

(ii) persons residing out of India;

(9) provide for the determination of the value of any
perquisite chargeable to tax under this Act in such
manner and on such basis as appears to the Central
Board of Revenue to be proper and reasonable;

(c) prescribe the procedure to be followed on applica-
tions for refunds;

(१) prescribe the procedure for giving effect to the
terms of any agreement for the granting of relief
in respect of double taxation or for the avoidance
of double taxation which may be entered into by
the Central Government under this Act;

provide for the maintenance of a register of persons

other than legal practitioners or accouptants as

defined in section 824(2), Explanation [61], practise

ing before Income-tax authorities and for the con-

stitution of, and procedure to be followed by, the

1 71 referred to in sub-section (4) of section
1);

(f) provide for the issue of certificates verifying the
payment of tax by dssessees ; हे

(8) provide for any matter which by this 22:15 to be
or may be prescribed.

{e

where tha (eee coming une jable to tax cannot be पल
ascertained, or can be asceftained only with an amount of
trouble and expense to the .assessee which in the} opinion
of the Central Boatd of Revenue is unreasonable, the rules
made under that sub-sectioft may— i

(a) prescribe methods by which an estimate ‘of such
income............ may be made, an

(3) In cases coming under clause (a) of sub-se¢tion (2),

(9) in cases coming under sub-clause (1) of clause (a)

. of sub-section (2), prescribe the proportion of the
income which shal] be deemed to be income............
liable to tax;

and an assessment b: on such estimate or ‘i portion
shall be geemed 4 be a jmade in accordance with the

provisions of this Act. Jo
i


Sex. I 272
(4) All rules made under this section shall be laid
before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after
they are made, and shall be subject to such modifications

as Parliament may make in the session in which they are
so laid or the session immediately following:

€—Transitional provisions and repeal’

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
INSURANCE BUSINESS

(See section 44)
A—Life insurance business.

Rule i. In the case of a person who carries on or at any time
Profs of life in the previous year carried on life insurance business, the

bint to be PFOfits and gains of such person from that business shail

computed be computed separately from his......... profits and gains
separately. from any other business.
[Schedute,
Rule 1}
Rule 2. (1) The profits and gains of life insurance busihess
Compntation shall be taken to be the greater of the following— 1
of profits of :
life insurance
business. (४) the gross external incomings of the previous year
fered from that business, less the management expenses
of that year...... as
(b) the annual average of the surplus arrived i by
adjusting the surplus mde deficit disclosed by| the
40f 1938 actuarial valuation in accordance with| the
Insurance Act, 1938, respect of the last शान

valuation period ending before the commencement
of the assessment yeat, so as to exclude fi i
any surplus or deficit included therein which
made in any earlier inter-valuation period and/any
expenditure which is pace under बा ~

visions of sections 30 t 40 [Sections regarding de-
ductions for business] ip computing income charge-
able under the head “Profits and gains of business,
profession or vocation”............

(2)... The aniount to be allowed as management
expenses under sub-rule (1) shall not exceed the aggregate
of the following—

(a) 74 per cent. of the premiums received during} the

previous year in respert of single premium: life
insurance policies,. saat ~

Not ac Sex no fr ce oe poc See notes, (br a discusliqa of the important pointe. |



273

(७) in respect of the first year’s premiums received
in respect of other life insurasce policies for which
the number of annual premiunts payable is 1९55 than
twelve, or for which ‘the nurhber of years during
which premiums are ‘payable is less than twelve,
for each such premium or each such year 74 per
cent. of such first year’s preméums received during
the previous year}......-...-

(c) 90 per cent. of the first year's. premiums received
during the previous tyear in respect of all other
life insurance policies;

(d) in respect of all renewal premiums received during
the previous year, am amount calculated at such
percentage thereof as is permissible under sub-
section (2) of section 40B of: the Insurance Act,

Sex. I

1938, as reduced by any expenditure which is 4 की 1938
t

not deductible under: section$ 30 to 40 [sections
regarding business deductions} in computing in-
come chargeable undér the haad “Profits and gains
of business, profession or vocation”.

In computing the surplus for the purpose of rule ‘=
[Schedule, rule 2]—~

(a) four-fifths of the amounts paid. to or reserved for
or expended on behalf of pdlicy-holders shall be
allowed as a deduction:

wee nee one ane

Provided........-.-- that if any ameunt so reserved for
_policy-holders ceases to be sa reserved, and is not paid to
or expended on behalf of policy-holders, that proportion of
such amount (one-half or fowr-fifths.,as the case may be)
if it has been previously allowed as a deduction under this
Act or under the Indian Incpme-tat Act, 1922, shall be rr
treated as part of the surplus for thd period in which the
said amount ceased to be so regerved:

(b) any amount either a
accounts or through the ac!
sheet to meet depreciption of
tion of investments s¥all be
and any sums taken :credit
actuarial valuation balance et on account of
appreciation of or gaihs on realisation of invest-
ments shall be included in the surplus :

or reserved in the
ipl valuation balance
t loss on the realisa-
lowed as a deduction,
8 in the accounts or

Provided that if upon investigation it appears to- the
Income-tax Officer after consultation With the Controller of
Insurance that having due regard ‘0 the necessity for
making reasonable provision for bothuses to participating
policy-holders and for ear rie the rate of interest or
other factor employed jn mining {the liability in res-
pect of outstanding policies § materfally inconsistent with
the valuation of investments Bd as. ially to reduce the

le 3.
juctions
edute,

le 3]

of 1922


Ses. I 274

surplus, such adjustment shall be made to the allowance
for depreciation or to the amount to be included in the
surplus in respect of appreciation of such investments as
shall increase the jus for the purposes of these pro-
visions to a figure ‘which is fair and just;

(९) (i) interest received during the inter-valuation
period in respect of any securities of the Cen-
tral Government which have been issued or
declared to be income-tax free, shall not be
excluded, but

(ii) no income-tax shali be payable on the annual
average of the amount of such interest.........

Rule 4. Where for any year an assessment of the profits of life

‘Adjusiment wmsurance business is made in accordance with the annual

of tax paid average of a surplus disclosed by a valuation for an inter-

by deduction valuation period exceeding twelve months, then, in com-

Sch., Rul puting the income-tax payable for that year, credit shall

[Sch., Rule 4] not be given in accordance with section 207 [Section 18 (5),
main para, part regarding credit for tax deducted at
source] for the income-tax paid in the previous year, but
credit shall be given for the annual average of the income-
tax paid by deduction at source from interest on securities
or otherwise during such period.

B—Other insurance business.

Rule 5. The profits and gains of any business of insurance other
Computation than life insurance shall be taken to be the balance of
of Props of the profits disclosed by the annual , accounts, copi¢s of
oa euines’ which are required under the Insurance Act, 1938, p be

furnished to the Controller of Insurance, subject to the

Sch., Rule 6 7 i F _
दिए Rule 5 following adjustments

part] (a) any sum written off*in the accounts as representing
4of 1938. depreciation of any building, machinery, plaat or
[New] furniture used for the purposes of the bustness

shall be allowed as a deduction, whether such’ sum
is or is not admissible under the provisions “bi sec-
tion 32(1) clauses (i) and (ii) [10(2) (vi)], subject
to the condition that the aggregate of all such deduc-
tions allowed under this Act or under the Indian

11 of 1922 Income-tax Act, 1922, or under any Act repealed by
that Act or under exedutive orders issued when. the
2 of 1886 Indian Income-tax Act, 1886, was in force, shall, in

no case, exceed the original cost to the assessee of
the building, machinery, plant or furniture. ak the
case may be;

{Sch., Rule 6, -(b) subject to the other provisions of this rule, any de-

earlier half duction which is not admissible under the provi-

part] sions of sections 30 hint Sections regardin, usi-
ness deductio. कं in 2 ing the profits and gains
of a business spall be back:


275 Sex. 1

(०) any amount either written off or reserved in the [Sch. Rule हा
५... 6000%2४8 to meet depreciation of or loss on the rea- 47 half
lisation of investments shall be allowed as a deduc- Rule 3(b) }
tion, and any sums taken cred for in the accounts
on account of appreciation of or gains on the rea-
lisation of investments shall be treated as part of
the profits and gains.

C—Other provisions.

(1) The profits and gains of the branches in India of Rule 6.
-@ person not resident in India and carrying on any business Profits a and
of insurance, may, in the absence of more reliable data, 0 er
be deemed to be that proportion of the world income of ,on.
such person which corresponds to the proportion which his [scy., Rule 8,
premium income derived from India bears to his total pare 1)
premium income.

(2) For the purposes of this rule, the world income in {Sch., Rule 8,
relation to life insurance business of a person not resident para 2]
in India shall be computed in the manaer laid down in this
Act for the computation of the profits and gains of life
insurance business carried on in India.
(1) For the purposes of rules 1 to 6 [other rules regard- Rule Le
ing insurance business] and of this rule,— पाए बा
(i) “gross external incomings” means the full amount [Sck., Rule
of incomings from interest, dividends, fines and 5(ii)}
fees and all other incomings from whatever
source derived (except premiums received from
policy-holders and interest and dividends on any
annuity fund), and includes also profits from re-
versions and on the sale or the granting of annui-
ties, but excludes profits on the realisation of in-
vestments :

Provided that incomings, including the annual value of
the property occupied by the assessee. which but for the
provisions of section 44 [10(7)] would have been assessable
under the head “Income from house property”, shall be
computed in the manner applicable to income chargeable
under that head, and that there shall be allowed from such
gross incomings such deductions as are permissible in res-
“cect of income chargeable under that heus a

ii) “% ts” i as [Seb Rute
(ii) snestmen 387 includes securities, stocks and [जे motte a

(iii) “management expenses” means the full amount aes Rule
of expenses (including commissions) incurred ex- 5c)
clusively in the management of the business of
life insurance. and in the case of a company carry-
ing on other classes of business as well as
the business of cay i 9078 , in addition thereto
a fair proportion of the e: incurred in the

* . general manag it of the; whole business.

1


Scu, वा

[Sch., Rule
5tiy)]

4 of 1938
[New]

[New]

4 ०1938

31 of 1956

Rule or.
Definitions.

& 3(4),

jengat
Public _ De-
mands Reco-
very Act,
1973 (Bengal

Act 9 of

1913]

276

Bonuses or other sums paid to or reserved on
behalf of policy-helders, depreciation of, and
losses on the realisation of investments, and any
expenditure other than expenditure which may
under the provisions of sections 30 to 40 [Sections
regarding business deductions] be allowed for in
computing the profits and gains of a business, are
not management expenses for the purposes of
rules 1 to 6 [all other rules regarding insurance
business] and of this rule;

(iv) “life insuzance business” means life insurance
business ag defined in clause (11) of section 2 of
the Insurance Act, 1938;

{v) “rule” means a rule contained in this Schedule.

(2) References in rules 1 to 6 [other rules regarding in-
surance business] and in this rule to the Insurance Act,
1938, or any provision thereof, , shall, in relation to the Life
Insurance Corporation of India, be construed as references
to that Act or provision as read with section 43 of the Life
Insurance Corporation Act, 1956. :

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
PROCEDURE FOR RECOVERY OF TAX
[See section 231 (1)]

PART I
General provisions.

In this Schedule, unless. the context otherw: re-
quires,—

(a) “certificate” means a certificate received by the Col-
lector from the Income-tax Officer for the repovery
of arrears under this Schedule ;

(b) “defaulter” means the assessee mentiond jn the
certificate ; हु

(९) “execution”, in relation to a certificate, i Ins re
covery of arrears in pursuance of the certificate ;

(d) “movable property” includes growing crops }’

(e) “officer” means an officer authorised to m@ke an
attachment or sale under this Schedule ; a1

(£) “rule” means a rule ¢antained in this Schedule.

+ ‘The provisions contained in thik Schedule, though new, have fr been

underlined for facility of + 3 3
* This Act will hereaf be refe € ९० as the “‘Bengat Act’”.
* Of-S. 2(13), 0. ए. 1;


शा Seu. If

When a certificate has been received: by the Collector Rule 9. issue
from the Income-tax Officer for the retovery of arrears of Notice.
under this Schedule, the Collector shall cause to be served [S. 7, Bengat
upon the defaulter a notice requiring tHe defaulter to pay Act]
the amount specified in the certificate within fifteen days
from the date of service of the notice and intimating that
in default steps would be taken to realise the amount
under this Schedule

No step in execution of a certificate shall be taken Rule g. When
until the period of fifteen days has clagsed since the date ceruifate
of the service of the notice required by preceding rule : executed.

[S. 13,
Bengal Act }
Provided that, if the Collector is satisfied that the
defaulter is likely to conceal, remove or dispose of the whole
or any part of such of his movable property as would be
liable to attachment in execution of a decree of a civil
court, and that the realisation of the amount of the certi-
ficate would in consequence be delayed or obstructed, he
may at any time direct, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, an attachment of the whole of any part of such
property :

Provided further that if the defaulter whose property
has been so attached furnishes security to the satisfaction
of the Collector, such attachment shall be cancelled from
the date on which such security is accepted by the Col-
lector.

If the amount mentioned in the noah is not paid within Rule dit
the time specified therein or within su further time 88 pvery-

the Collector may grant in his discretlon, the Collector (३, of the
shall proceed to realise the amaunt by one or more of the rer ue Ree

following modes :—~ covery Act,
1964 (2 of

| हे
(a) by attachment and sale of the movable property of हि; Bengal
the defaulter ; ct J

(b) by attachment and sale of the immovable pro- {5 f The
perty of the defaulter ; Revehve

(०) by appointing a receiver of the property belonging Codes 187
to the defaulter ; (5 of boro)

(d) by arrest and detention of thejdefaulter in civil
prison. हु «

There shall be recoverable,.in the proceedings in exe- Rule. Inte-
cution of every certificate,— rest, | costs
and jcharges
recoverable,
(a) such interest upon the tax to which the certificate [S.16, Bengat
relates as is payable under this Act, and Act]

Raed This Act will hereafter be referredjto as the “Mipdras Act” .
3. This Act will hereafter be referred sp as the “pchbay Act”.


Scx. If 278

(0) all charges incurred in respect of —

(i) the service of notice upon the defaulter to pay
the arrears, and of warrants and other pro-

cesses, and
(ii) all other proceedings taken for realising the
arrears, ~ .
Rule 6. (1) Where property is sold in execution of a certificate,

Purchase’, 8 there shall vest in the purchaser merely the right, title
8 2०. (a), and interest of the defaulter at the time of the sale. even
Bengal 4०८) though the property itself be specified.

{S. 20 42), (2) Where immovable property is sold in execution of

Bengal Act] a certificate, and such sale has become absolute, the pur-
chaser’s right, title and interest shal! be deemed to have
vested in him from the time when the property is sold.
and not from the time when the sale becomes absolute.

Rule 7. Suit (1) No suit shall be maintained against any person
against Pure claiming title under a purchase certified by the Collector

chaser | not in the manner laid down in this Schedule, on the Froud
on ground of that the purchase was made on behalf of the plaintiff or on

purchase behalf of some one through whom the plaintiff claims.
being made a
on behall of (3) Nothing in this section shall bar a suit to obtain

S. 21,Bengal a declaration that the name of any purchaser certified as

Act] aforesaid was inserted in the certificate fraudulently or
without the consent of the real purchaser, or interfere with
the right of a third person to proceed against that property,
though ostensibly sold to the certified purchaser, on the
ground that it is liable to satisfy a claim of such third per-
son against the real owner. :

Rule 8. (1) Whenever assets are realised, by sale or otherwise
pase of in execution of a certificate, they shall be disposed of in
execution, the following manner :—

§ 6, .
gal Act) (a) there shall first be paid to the Income-tax Officer
the costs incurred by him ;

(७) there shall, in the next place, be paid to the Income-
tax Officer the amount due under the certificate
in execution of which the assets were realjzed ;

(९) if there remains a balance after these sums have
been paid, there shall be paid to the Incdme-tax
Officer therefrom any other amount recoverable
under the procedure provided by this Act which
may be due upon the date upon which the assets
were realized; and

(d) the balance (if any) remaining after the payment
of the amopnt (if pny) referred to in clase (c}
shall be paid to the taaier. 1


279 Seu. IL

(2) If the defaulter disputes any claim made by the
Income-tax Officer to receive any amount referred to in
clause (c), the Collector shall determine the dispute.

Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Act. Rule 9.
every question arising between the Income-tax Officer and General bar
the defaulter. or their representatives, relating to the exe- toon igrisdic-
cution, discharge or satisfaction of a certificate duly filed 2५0 Courts,
under this Act, or relating to the confirmation or setting save where
aside by an order under this Act of a sale held in execu- fraud alleged.
tion of such eertificate, shal! be determined, not by suit, but [S.37, Bengal
by order of the Collector before whom such question Act]
arises :

Provided that a suit may be brought in a civil court
in respect of any such question upon the ground of fraud.

(1) All such property as is by the Code of Civil Pro- Rule 10. 11०-
cedure, 1908, exempted from attachment and sale in execu- perty exempt
tion of a decree of a civil court shall be exempt from attach- *™ atach-

ment and sale under this Schedule. 5 of 1908 [s.
(2) The Collector’s decision as to what property is so Acy Bengal
entitled to exemption shall be conclusive. -

fs. ,
ae ०]
(1) Where any claim is preferred to, or any objection Rule tr.
is made to the attachment or sale of, any property in execu- nvestigation
tion of a certificate, on the ground that such property is by Callecior,
not liable to such attachment or sale, the Collector shall [Rule (9
proceed to investigate the claim or obje¢tion : Bengal Act}

Provided that no such investigation shall be made
where the Collector considers that the claim or objection
was designedly or unnecessarily delayed.

(2) Where the property to which the claim or objec-
tion applies hag been advertised for sale, the Collector
ordering the sale may postpone it pending the investigation
of the claim or objection, upon such terms as to security or
otherwise as the Collector shall deem fit.

(3) The claimant or objector must adduce evidence to (Rule 40,
show that— ay ang
(a) (in the case of immovable property) at the date ne
of the service of the notice issued under this
Schedule to pay the arrears, or
(b) (in the case of movable property) at the date of the
attachment.

he had some interest in, or was possessed of, the property
in question.

(4) Where, upon the said investigation, the Collector is (Rule 41,
satisfied that, for the reason stated in the claim or objec- Sch. II,
tion, such property was not, af the ; date, in the pos- Beng#l Act}
session of the defaulter or of sqme perspr in trust for him


Sex. IT 280

or in the occupancy of a tenant or other person paying
rent to him, or that, being in the possession of the defaulter
at the said date, it was so in his possession, not on his own
account or as his own property, but on account of or in
trust for some other person, or partly on his own account
and partly on account of some other person, the Collector
shall make an order releasing the property, wholly or to
such extent as he thinks fit, from attachment or sale.

{Rule 42 (5) Where the Collector is satisfied that the property
h. Ui, _ was, at the said date, in the possession of the defaulter as
Bengal Act} his own property and not on account of any other person,
or was in the possession of some other person in trust for
him, or in the occupancy of a tenant or other person paying

rent to him, the Collector shall disallow the claim.
Rule 43, (6) Where a claim or an objection is preferred, the
ch. ‘U, party against whom an order is made may institute a suit
Bengal Act] in a civil court to establish the right which he cl4ims to
the property in dispute; but, subject to the result of such
suit (if any), the order of the Collector shall be conclu-

sive.
Rule 32. Where—
Removal of (a) the amount due, with costs and all charges and ex-
on satisfac- penses resulting from the attachment of ay pro-
ton Wei perty or incurred in order to hold a sale, afe paid
ancellation Cc
of certificate. to the Collector, or i
Rule 24,Sch- A « पु
{Re शा (9) the certificate is cancelled,
Act

all, if

the case of immovable property, the withdrawal if
, an

the defaulter so desires, be proclaimed at his expe!
a copy of the proclamation shall be affixed in the
provided by this Schedule for a proclamation of sal
movable property.

the attachment shall be deemed to be withdrawn fnd, in
anner
of im-

Rule 13. The attachment and sale of movable property . the
Officer enti. attachment and sale of immovable property may be made
tled to attach by such officers or class of officers as the Collector may
and sell. from time to time direct. '
S. 154 |
jatter part, i
Bombay i

ct.

acrd 14. Any deficiency of price which may happen धर a re-
Defauting sale by reason of the purchaser's default, and all expenses
purchaser’ attending such re-sale, shall be certified to the Co Rector
answerable by the officer holding the sale, and shall, at the inst nce of
fore १ either the Income-tax Officer or the defaulter, be rpcover-
{Rule 51,Sch. able from the defaulting purchaser under the prdcedure
i, pe provided by this Schedule :

ct

Provided that "fm lication shall be en tained
unless filed within en from the date of reysale.


281 Scu. If

(1) The Collector may, in his discretion, adjourn any Rule 15.
sale hereunder to a specified day and heur ; and the officer Adjournment
conducting any such sale may in his discretion adjourn ofsaie 8
the sale, recording his reasons for such adjournment : [Rule 50,

HE,
Bengal Act}

Provided that, where the sale is made in, or within
the precincts of, the office of the Collector, no such adjourn-
ment shall be made without the leave of the Collector.

(2) Where a sale of immovable property is adjourned
under sub-rule (1) for a longer period than one calendar
Tonth, a fresh proclamation of sale under this Schedule
shall be made unless the defaulter consents to waive it.

{3) Every sale shall be stopped if, before the lot is
knocked down, the arrears and costs (including the costs
of the sale) are tendered to the officer eonducting the sale,
or proof is given to his satisfaction that.the amount of such
arrears and costs has been paid to the Callector who ordered
‘the sale.

Where an attachment has been matle under this Sche- ie
dule, any private transfer or delivery of the property Priv tion of
attached or of any interest therein and any payment to the Pror tion ०
defaulter of any debt, dividend or other monies contrary attachment
to such attachment, shall be void as against al! claims to ba void.
enforceable under the attachment. (5.64 0.7.0.]

8. 3$,
a Bengal

No officer or other person having amy duty to perform a Ds
in connection with any sale under this Schedule shall, Prohjbition
either directly or indirectly, big for, adquire or attempt to 2st

acquire any interest in the property sold. ped Se by
officdr.
: 2
gt
Bengal Act.)

No sale under this Schedule shall take place on Sunday Ruld 18.
or other general holiday recoghised by the State Govern- Prohpbition
ment or on any day which hag been nptified by the State sim sale
Government to be a local holiday fori the area in which ve
the sale is to take place. : 7 Act}

or to arrest the defaulter or ‘charged: with any duty to oboe e
be performed under this Schedule, may:apply to the officer. 7 °
in-charge of the nearest policej station’ ‘be such assistance -
as may be necessary for preventing dbstruction to such
officer in the discharge of his duties, and the authority to
whom such application is ma हवन depute a sufficient
number of police officers for i {such assistance.

Any officer authorised to attach or sell any property Rulq 19.



Scu. Hf 282
PART ID
Attachment and sale of movable property.

Rule 20. Except as otherwise provided in this Schedule, when.
Warrant. any movable property is to be attached, the officer shall be
[S. 8 (First) furnished by the Collector (or other officer empowered.
earlier part, by him in that behalf) a warrant in writing and signed

Mamas with his name specifying the name of the defaulter and the
amount to be realised.

Rule at. हे ser The officer shall cause a copy of the warrant to be serv~

Ol warren, © on the defauilte>.

[5. 8 (First) .

Taner part

Madras Act]

Rule 22 If, after service of the copy of the warrant the amount |

‘Auachmen. iS not paid forthwith, the officer shall proceed to attach
- the movable property of the defaulter.

Rule 23. Where the property to be attached is movable pro~

Vroperty in perty (other than agricultural produce) in the possession

dcfaulter's of the defaulter, the attachment shall be made by actual

possession. seizure, and the officer shall keep the property in his own

(Rule Hy custody or the custody of one of his subordinates and shall
be responsible for due custody thereof :

Bengal Act}

Provided that when the property seized is subject to
speedy and natural decay or when the expense of keeping
it in custody is likely to exceed its value, the officer may
sell it at once.

Ruie iat, Where the property to be attached is agricultural pro-
peice duce, the attachment shall be made by affixing a copy
". of the warrant of attachment—

(Rule 16,
Sch. गा, (a) where such produce is growing crop,—on the land
Bengal Act] on which such crop has Frown, er P
(b) where such produce has been cut or gathered,—on
the threshing floor or place for treading out grain-
or the like. or fodder-stack, on or in which it is de~
posited.
and another copy on the outer door or on some other con~
spicuous part of the house in which the defaulter ordinarily
resides, or with the leave of the Collector on the puter
door or on some other conspicuous part of the houpe in
which he carries on business or personally works for :gain,.
or in which he is known to have last resided or carried on
business or personally worked for gain. The produce shall
thereupon be deemed to have passed into the possession of
the Collector.

Rule ie (1) Where agricultural produce is attached, the. Col-
to agricultu. lector shall make such arrangements for the custody, watch-
ral produce ing. tending, cutting and gathering thereof as he may deem
under attach sufficient ; and the Income-tax Officer shall bear such sum

ment, as the Collector shall require. in order to defray the cost
[Rule ip of such arrangements.
. Ti,

Bengal Aer?


283 Scx. प्‌

(2) Subject to such conditions as may be imposed by
the Collector in this behalf, either in the order of attach-
ment or in any subsequent order, the defaulter may tend,
cut, gather and store the produce and do any other act
necessary for maturing or preserving it; and, if the default-
er fails ६0 60 all or any of such acts, any person ap inted
by the Collector in this behalf may, subject to the li ke eon-
ditions, do all or any of such acts, and the costs incurred
by such person shall be recoverable from the defaulter as
if they were included in the certificate.

(3) Agricultural produce attached as a growing crop
shall not be deemed to have ceased to be under attachment
or to require re-attachment merely because it has been
severed from the soil:

(4) Where an order for the attachment of a growing
crop has been made at a considerable time before the crop
is likely to be fit to be cut or fathered, the Collector may
suspend the execution of the order for sich time as he thinks.
fit, and may, in his discretion, make a further order prohi-
biting the removal of the crop pending the execution of the
order of attachment.

(5) A growing crop which from its nature does not admit
of being stored shall not be attached under this rule at any
time less than twenty days before the time at which it is
likely to be fit to be cut or gathered.

thi ना Rule ०6.
(1) In the case of. le 06-4
{a) a debt not secured by a negotiable instrument, “e or
acre fs

(b) a share in the capital of a corporation, or

(०) other movable property not in the session of the
defaulter except property deposite: din, or in the cus-
tody of, any court,

the attachment shall be made by a written order prohi-
biting, —
(3) in the case of the debt—the creditor from recovering
the debt and the debtor from making payment
thereof until the further order of the Collector ;

(ii) in the case of the share—the person in whose name
the share may be standing frem transferring the
same or receiving any dividend thereon;

(iii) in the case of the other moveable property (except
as aforesaid)—the person in possession of the same
from giving it over to the defaulter.

(2) A copy of such order shall be affixed on some conspi-
cuous part of the office of She Sa {and another co) opy

a,
Act]

shall be sent, in the case of debt, e debtor, in
ease of the share, to the proper 1116 corporation, and
19--1 Law Com./58 हे



छल, प्‌

Rule 27
Attachment
of decree.

[S.19, Bengal
Aaj

5 of 1908

Rule 28
Share in
movable
property
Rule 19.
शक i,
Bengal Act}
Rule ag. Sal-
ary of
Goverment
servants.

of 1908
(ate 20,
ichedute IT,
Bengal Act)
Rule 30.
Auachment
‘of negotiable
instruments.
Rule 21,
schedule IT,
Bengal Act]
Rule 31.
Attachment
of property
in custody of
Court or
public officer.
[Rule 22,
Schedule I,
Bengal Act}

284

in the case of the other moveable propeity (except as afore-
said), to the person in possession of the same.

(3) A debtor prohibited under clause (i) of sub-rule (1)
may pay the amount of his debt to the Collector, and such
payment shall discharge him as effectually as payment to the
party entitled to receive the same.

(1) The attachment of a decree of a civil court for the
payment of money or for sale.in enforcement of a mortgage
or charge shall be made by the issue to the civil court of a
notice requesting the civil court to stay the execution of the
decree unless and until— .

(i) the Collector cancels the notice, or
Gi) the Income-tax Officer or the defaulter applies to
the court receiving such notice to execute the decree.
(2) Where a civil court receives an application under
clause (ii) of sub-rule (1), it shall, on the application of the
Tncome-tax Officer or the defaulter, and subject to the provi-
sions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, proceed to execute
the attached decree and apply the net proceeds in satisfac-
tion of the certificate. *

(3) The Income-tax Officer shail be deemed to be the re-
presentative of the holder of the attached decree, and to be
entitled to execute such attached decree in any manner
lawful for the holder thereof.

Where the property to be aitached consists of the share
or interest of the defaulter in movable property belonging to
him and another as co-owners, the attachment shall be made
by a notice to the defaulter prohibiting him from transfer-
ring the share or interest or charging it in any way.

Attachment of the salary or allowances of servants of
the Government or a local authority may be_ made in the
manner p rovided by rule 48 of Order 21 of the First Schedule
to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and the provisions of
the said rule shall, for the purposes of this rule, apply sub-
ject to such modifications may be necessary.

Where the property is a negotiable instrument not depo-
sited in a court nor in the custody of a public officer, the
attachment shall be made by actual seizure, and the instru-
ment shall be brought before the Collector and held subject
to his orders.

Where the property to be attached is in the custody of
any court or public officer, the attachment shall be made by a
notice to such court or officer, requesting that such property,
and any interest or dividend becoming payable thereon, may
be held subject to the further orders of the Collector by
whom the notice is issued :

Provided that, where such property is in the custody
of a court, any question of title or priority arising bi ian
the Income-tax Officer and ay other person, not being the


285 Seu. प्र

defaulter, claiming to be interested in such property by
virtue of any assignment, attachment or otherwise, shal!
be determined by such court.

In the case of attachment of mcvable property by ac- Rule 32.
tual seizure, the officer shail. after attachment of the pro- Inventory.
perty, prepare an inveniory of ail the property attached. [s- 9, Madras
specifying in it the 110९९ where 1६ is lodged or kept, and Actl
shall forward the same to the Collector. A copy of the in-
ventory shall be delivered by the officer to the defaulter.

The attachment by seizure shall not be excessive, that Rule oy
“is to say, the property attached shall be as nearly 88 pos- not to be
sible proportionate to the amount specified in the war- excessive.
rant. . fs 14,
Madras Act]
Attachment by seizure shall be made after sun- Bale Obs
rise and before sunset and not otherwise. woot nonrise
and sun-set.
is. 15
Madras Act)
{s. 47, Bengal
ct.

The officer may break open any inner or outer door Rule 35.
or window of any building and enter any building in order Power io
to seize ‘any movable property if the officer has reason. break open
able grounds to believe that such building contains mov- 7००४ ete.
able property liable to seizure under the warrant and the [ 19 & 20),
officer has notified his authority and intention of breaking Madras Act}
open if admission is not given. He snall, however, give al (६ 47, Bengal
reasonable opportunity to women to withdraw. cx]

Sale A

The Collector may direct that any movable properiy Rule 9. Sale.
attached under this Schedule or such portion thereof as may हरी
seem necessary to satisfy the certificate shall be sold. Bengal Act},

When any sale of movale property is ordered by the Rule 97, Issue
Collector, the Collector shall issue a proclamation, in the ९ proclama-
language of the district. of the intended sale, specifying tp first
the time and place of sale and whether the sale is subject para, Bombay
to confirmation or not. | Act.]

(1) Such proclamation shall be made by beat of drum Rule 38. Fro-

clamation
‘or other customary mode, how made.

(a) in the case of property attached by actual seizure— हि हे खाते
(i) in the village in which the property was seized. Kod jombay
or if the property was seized in a town or city,
then in the locality in which it was seized,
and
(ii) at such other places as the Collector may direct;
(b) in the case of property attached otherwise than by
actual seizure, in such places, if any, as the Col-
lector may direct. (Role हक

(2) A copy of the proclamation shal! aie. be affixed on al © 4B

से conspicuous part of the office jot the Hector. Benga}, Act)


Sc. If 286

Rule 39: Sale Except where the property is subject to speedy and
ater Been natural decay or when the expense of keeping tun custody
[Rule 48:Sch. is likely to exceed its value, no sale of moveable ptoperty
YI, Bengal under this Schedule shall, without the consent in writing of
Act. Le 167, the defaulter, take place until after the ex: piry of at least
Bombay Act.] fifteen days calculated from the date on which a copy of

Weel the sale-proclamation was affixed in the Collector's office.

Rute 4०: Sale

7 Scul- (1) Where the property to be sold is agricultural pro-
Sat woduce. duce, the sale shall be held, —
{Rule 55: (a) if such produce is a growing crop—on or near the
Pal Act] Jand on which such crop has grown, or

(9) if such produce has been cut or gathered—at or
near the threshing-foor or place for treading out
grain or the like, or fodder-stack, on or in which it
is deposited :

Provided that the Collector may direct the sale to be
held at the nearest place of public resort, if he is of opinion
that the produce is thereby Fikely to sell to greater advant-
age.

(2) Where, on the produce being put up for sale,—

(a) a fair price, in the estimation of the person holding
the sale, is not offered for it, and

(b) the owner of the produce, or a person au Ae posts
to act on his behalf, applies to have the salle post-
poned till the next day or, if a market is ‘hel fe at
the place of sale, the next market day,

the sale shall be postponed accordin; gly. and shall be then
completed, whatever price may be of fered for the produce.

५ Spee (1) Where the property to be sold is a growihg crop
Rule qr Spe and the crop from its nature admits of being stored but has
ons relating not yet been stored. the day of the sale shall be fo fixed
to growing as to admit of the crop being made ready for sor before
Crops. the arrival of such day, and the sale shall not be hdid until
Rule |. 5f; the crop has been cut or gathered and is ready for-storing.
Bengal Act.} (2) Where the crop from its nature does not 4dmit of
being stored or can be sold to a greater advantage in an
unripe state (e.g., as green wheat), it may be sold before
it is cut and gathered ; and the purchaser shall be entitled
to enter on the land, and to do all that is necessary for the

purpose of tending or cutting or gathering the crop.

Rule 42: Sale The property shall be sold by public auction in one or
to be by auc- More lots as the officer may consider advisable, and if the
tion. amount to be ae ed by 5111 is satisfied by the dale of a
fs. 2 ag Mad- portion of the pr y, t ‘ie shall be immediately stop-
ras Act.} ped with respect the inder of the lots.

(5


287 Seca. वा
(3) Where movable property is sol ey public auction, Rule 43: Sale

the price of each lot shall be at time of sale or by yublic

as soon after as the officer 94171 sale directs, and लकी:

in default of payment the property shall forthwith be (Rule 57,

resold. Schedule 11,
Bengal Act.]

(2) On payment of the pyrchase-money, the officer
holding the sale shail grant a certificate specifying the
property purchased, the price paid and tt the name of the
purchaser, and the sale shall bécome absolute.

(3) Where the movable property to be sold is a share in
goods belonging to the defaulter and a co-owner, and two
or more persons, of whom one is such co-owner, respec-
tively bid the same sum for such property or for any lot,
the bidding shall be deemed to be the bidding of the co
owner.

No irregularity in publishing or conducting the sale Rule 44: Irre-
of movable property shall vitiate the sale, but any person gularity not to
sustaining substantial injury by reason of such irregularity but aay se
at the hand of any other person may institute a suit in a son injured
civil court against him for compensation, or (if such other may sue.
person is the purchaser) for the recovery of the specific pro- (Rule 58,
perty and for compensation in default of such Schegule दा,
recovery. Bengal [Act.}

Notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedule, Rule, 45:
where the property to be sold is a negotiable instrument or Negetiable
a share in a corporation, the Collector may , instead of direc- and ghares in

ting the sale to be made by public augtion, authorise the corporations.

sale of such instrument or share through a broker. Order 21,
: ule 76,
CPC.)

Where the props erty attached is current coin or cur- Rule’ 46: Ord-
reney notes, the Collector may, at ary time during the Stent of ea
continuance of the attachment, direct that such coin or or currency

notes, or a part thereof sufficient to satisfy the certificate, notes to the

be paid over to the Income-tax Officer. Tngome-tax
: one ;
ae
PART HI GP.C.)
Attachment And Sale of Immovable Property.
Attachment.

Attachment of the immovable property of the defaulter Rulc 47:
shall be made by an order prohibiting the defaulter from Attachment.
transferring or charging the property in any way and pro-
hibiting all persons from taking any benefit under such
transfer or charge.

A copy of the order of attachment shall be served on Rule 48: Sere

vice of notice
the defaulter. es hment

(8. a, Mad-
ras Act.)


Scx. व्‌ 288

Role 49 : The order of attachment shall be proclaimed at some

on ae place on or adjacent to the property attached by beat of

ment. drum or other customary mode, and a copy of the order
shall be affixed on a conspicuous part of the property and
on the notice board of the Collector’s office.

Rule 50: At- Where any immovable property is attached under this
tachment 8 Schedule, the attachment shall relate back to, and take
from tbe dave effect from, the date on which the notice to pay the arrears,
of service of issued under this Schedule, was served upon the defaul-
notice ter’.

Sale

Rule 51: Sale (3) The Collector may direct that any immovable pro-
and procla- ७९०६७ which has been attached, or such portion thereof as

i पु
ae ° may seem necessary to satisfy the certificate, shall be sold.
Rul +
Ce tt
Bengal Act.]
Rule 4611): (2) Where any immovable property is ordered to he
ch. 1!

sold, the Collector shall cause a proclamation of the mtend-
Bengal Act. ९0 sale to be made in the language of the district.

Rule 5a A proclamation of sale of immovable property shall be
proclamstion, drawn up after notice to the defaulter, and shall state the
Rule 46 * time and place of sale, and shall specify, as fairly and ac-
{Rule 46)" curately as possible —

ch. u
Rengal Act} (a) the property to be sold ;
(b) the revenue, if any, assessed upon the property or
any part thereof ;
(०) the amount for the recovery of which the sale ix
ordered; and
(9) any other thing which the Collector consig ers it
material for a purchaser to know, in order to
judge the nature and value of the property.

Ru'e 53: (1) Every proclamation for the sale of immovable pro-
Mode गे perty shall be made at some place on or near such property
making Fro: by beat of drum or other customary mode, and a copy of
Rute ' the proclamation shall be affixed on a conspicuous part of
ch. a the property and also upon a conspicuous part of the office
Bengal Act.}; Of the Collector.

(2) Where the Collector so directs, such proclamation
shall also be published in the Official Gazette or in a local
newspaper, or in both; and the cost of such publication shall
be deemed to be costs of the sale.

(3) Where the property is divided into lots for the
purpose of being sold separately, it shall not be necessary
to make a separate proclamation for each lot, unless pro-
per notice of the sale cannot, in the opinion of the Collec-
tor, otherwise be given.

1 GE section 28(7), Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920, and séction 5%
Presidency Towns Insolvency Act, 1909


289 Scu. If

No sale of immovable property under this Schedule Rule 4
shall, without the consent in writing of the defaulter, take Time of sale.
Place until after the expiration of at least thirty days cal- (Rule 48,
culated from the date on which a copy of the proclamation a LA i,
of sale has been affixed on the property or in the office of ™78*! Actd
the Collector, whichever is later.

The sale shall be by public auction to the highest bid- Rule 55:
der and shall be subject to confirmation by the Collector. Sale 10 be by
{S. 36 (First
Batt) Madras

: ct.

(1) On every sale of immovable property, the person Rule 56:
declared to be the purchaser shall pay, immediately after Deposit “by
such declaration, a deposit of twenty-five per cent. on the purchaser | in
amount of his purchase money, to the officer conducting default,
the sale; and, in default of such deposit, the property shal! [Rule 68,
forthwith be re-sold. Sch, I,

Benga! Act.]

(2) The full amount of purchase money payable shal! Rule 69:
be paid by the purchaser to the Collector on or before the Sch. ik,
fifteenth day from the date of the sale of the property. Bengal Act.]

In default of payment within the period mentioned in Rule 57:
the preceding rule, the deposit may, if the Collector thinks Procedure हर
fit, after defraying the expenses of the sale. be forfeited to payment ०
the Government, and the property shall be re-sold, and the [Rule ‘0.
defaulting purchaser shall forfeit all claims to the property कला Th,
er to any part of the sum for which it may subsequently Bengal Act.]

e sold.

All persons bidding at the sale shall be required to Rule 58:
declare if they are bidding on their own behalf or on behalf Authority to
of their principals. In the latter case they shall be required bia.
to deposit their authority. and in default their bids shal? [S. ‘i ee
be rejected Madras Act.

(1) Where immovable property has been sold in execu- Rule 59:
tion of a certificate, the defaulter, or any person whose Application
interests are affected by the sale, may, at any time within © tet aside

thirty days from the date of the sale, apply to the Collector «of prope:
to set aside the sale, on his depositing— rty on depor

(a) for payment to the Income-tax Officer, the amount १४५
specified in the proclamation of sale as that for the 16 ०
recovery of which the sale was ordered, with inter- Benda Act
est thereon at the rate of six and a quarter per
cent. per annum, calculated from the date of the
proclamation of sale to the date when the deposit
is made; and

(0) for payment to the purchaser, as penalty, a sum
equal to five per cent. of the purchase-money, but
not less than one rupee.

(2) Where a person makes an application under the

next rule for setting aside the sale of his immovable pro-
erty, he shall not, unless he withdraws that application.
e entitled to make or prosecute an application under this
rule. i


Scx. IT 290

yet 60: Where immovable property has been sold in execution
Application, | of a certificate, the Income-tax Officer, the defaulter, or any
sale of immo Person whose interests are affected by the sale, may, at
vable proper- any time within thirty days from the date of the sale, ap-
tyon groand ply to the Collector on the ground that notice was not
ofnon-service served on the defaulter to pay the arrears as required by
irregularity. this Schedule or on the ground of a material irregularity
{S. 23, Bengal 1? publishing or conducting the sale :

Act]

Provided as follows :—

{a} no sale shall be set aside on any such ground un-
less the Collector is satisfied that the applicant has
sustained substantial injuiry by reason of the non-
service or irregularity; and

(b) an application made by a defaulter under this rule
shall be disallowed unless the applicant deposits
the amount recoverable from him in ली m of
the certificate.

Role 61: At any time within thirty days of the sale the pur-
Setting aside chaser may apply to the Collector ‘to set aside the sale on
sale eee the ground that the defaulter had no saleable interest in
no sateabic the property sold.

interest.
{s.24, Bengal
Act}

Rule 6a: (i) Where no application is made for setting aside the
Confirmation sale under the foregoing rules or where such an applica-
of sale. tion is made and disallowed by the Collector, the Collector

is. 25, Bengal shall (if the full amount of the purchase-money hay been
Act. paid) make an order confirming the sale, and, thereupon,
the sale shall become absolute. पु
(2) Where such application is made and allowe i. and
where, in the case of an application made to set aside the
sale on deposit of the amount and penalty and charges. the
deposit is made within thirty days from the date of the
sale, the Collector shall make an order setting aside the
sale :

Provided that no order shail be made unless notice of
the application has been given to the persons affected

Rule farRe- thereby.
chase ‘money Where a sale of immovable property is set aside, any
in certain money paid or deposited by the purchaser on account of

cases. the purchase, together with the penalty, if any, deposited
(Ree 7p for payment to the purchaser, and such interest as the
Bengal Act.j Collector may allow, shall be paid to the purchaser.

Rule 64: Sale

certificate.

[Rule (1) Where a sale of immovable property has become
Sch. 7 absolute, the Collector shall grant a certificate specifying
Bengal Act.) the property sold, and the name of the person who at the

& ads A time of sale is declared to be the purchaser. 5
re “iw Ac] (2) Such certifiedte shall; bear date the day on pies

ay Act.) the sale became absoltite.


383 Sex.

(1) Where an order for sale of immovable property Rule 65:
has been made, if the defaulter can. satisfy the Rollector Nestpone.
that there is reason to believe that the amount of the cer- DLR
tificate may be raised by the mortgage or lease or private defaulter to
sale of such property, or some pari thereof, or of any other raise amount
immovable property of the defaulter, the Collector may, 4¥¢. gnder
on his application, postpone the sale of the property com- CotBcate.
prised in the order for sale, on such terms and for such [Rule a
period as he thinks proper, to enable him to raise the Bengal Act)
-amount.

(2) In such case the Collector shall grant a certificate
to the defaulter, authorising him, within a period to be men-
tioned therein, and notwithstanding anything contained in
this Schedule, to make the proposed mortgage, lease cr
Sale:

Provided that all moneys payable under such mortgage,
dease or sale shall be paid, not to the defaulter, but to the
‘Collector : .

Provided also that no mortgage, lease or sale under
this rule shall become absolute until it has been confirmed
by the Collector. पर

Every re-sale of immovable property, in default of 99५- Rute 66:
ment of the purchase-money within the period allowed for Fresh procla-
such payment, shall be made after the issue of a fresh mation before
proclamation in the manner and for the period hereinbefore rersale.
‘provided for the sale. (me ue

Where the property sold is a share of undivided immov- Bengal Act.)
able property, and two or more persgns, of whom one is a He te 67:
«co-sharer, respectively bid the same sum for such property ra tw have
or for any lot, the bid shall be deemed to be the bid of the preference.
co-Sharer. (Rute 1
eh. 11

PART IV Bengal Act]

Appointment of receiver.

(1) Where the property of a defaulter consists of 9 pyite 68:
business, the Collector may attach the business and appoint Appointment
8 person as receiver to manage the business. of receiver

far business.

(2) Attachment of a business under this rule shall be
made by an order prohibiting the defaulter from transfer-
ring or charging the business in any way and prohibiting
all persons from taking any benefit under such transfer cr
charge, and intimating that the business has been attached
under this rule. A copy of the order pf attachment shall be
‘served on the defaulter, and another copy shall be affixed
ona consp icuous part of the premi: wh which the business ,
हैं; gare on and on the ०५ | of the Collector’s

५ i


Sex. IE 292

Rule 69: Where immovable property is attached, the Collector

‘Appointment may. instead of directing a sale of the property, appoint a

for immov. Person as receiver to manage such property.

able property

[s.28, Madras

Act.] [s. 159,

Bombay Act} :

Rule 70: (1) Where any business or other property is attached’

Powers of and taken under management under the foregoing rules,

reciver. the receiver shall, subject to the control of the Collector.
have such powers as may be necessary for the proper
management of the property and the realisation of the
profits, or rents and profits, thereof.

(2) The profits, or rents and profits, of such business
or other property shall, after defraying the expenses of
management, be adjusted towards discharge of the arrears,
and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the defaulter,

Rule 71: The attachment and management under the foregoirg

Withdrawal rules may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of

men." the Collector, or if the arrears are discharged by receipt
of such profits and rents or are otherwise paid.

{s.34. Madras
Act) PART V
Arrest and detention of the defaulter.

Rule aa (1) No order for the arrest and detention in civil pri-

show cause.” SON of a defaulter shall be made unless the Collector has
s-29(1), (4a) issued and served a notice upon the defaulter calling upon

tes & (ic), him to appear before him on the date specified in the notice

Bengal Act.]_ and to show cause why he should not be committed to the

fs 48, Par, Civil prison, and unless the Collector, for reasons recorded
ladras Act.) in writing, is satisfied—

(3) that the defaulter, with the object or effect of
obstructing the execution of the certificate, has
after the receipt of the certificate in the Collec-
tor’s office dishonestly transferred, concealed, or re-
moved any part of his property, or

that the defaulter has, or has had since the receipt
of the certificate in the Collector’s office, the means
to pay the arrears or some substantial part thereof
and refuses or neglects or has refused or neglected
to pay the same.

(b

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1),
2 warrant for the arrest of the defaulter may be issued by
the Collector if the Collector is satisfied, by affidavit or
otherwise, that with the object or effect of delaying the
execution of the certificate the defaulter is likely to abscond
or leave the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Collector.

(3) Where appearance is not made in obedience to a
notice issued and served under sub-rule (1), the Colltetor
may issue a warrant for the argest of the defaulter.



293 1 Sex. Ik

(4) Every person arrested in pursuance of a warrant
of arrest under sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (3), shail be brought
before the Collector as soon as practicable and in any event
within twenty-four hours of his arrest (exclusive of the
time required for journey):

_ Provided that, if the defaulter pays the amount entered
in the warrant of arrest as due and the costs of the arrest
to the officer arresting him, such officer shall at once
release him

When a defaulter appears before the Collector in Rule 73:
obedience to a notice to show cause or is brought before Hearing.
the Collector under the preceding rule, the Collector shall fs. 29 (2),
proceed to hear the Income-tax Officer and take all such Bengal Act]
evidence as may be produced by him in.support of execu-
tion by arrest. and shall then give the defaulter an oppor-
tunity of showing cause why he should not be committed
to the civil prison.

Pending the conclusion of the inquiry, the Collector Rule 74:
may, in his discretion, order the defaulter to be detained Custody pen-
im the custody of such officer as the Collector may think ding hearing.
fit or release him on his furnishing security to the satisfac- हर 29 GY
tion of the Collector for his appearance when required. ™™8* ct]

(1) Upon the conclusion of the inquiry, the Collector Rule 75:
may make an order for the detention of the defaulter in Gilet. of
the civil prison and shal] in that event cause him to be a

arrested if he is not already under arrest: £5298

Provided that in order to give the defaulter an oppor- A*-
tunitv of satisfying the arrears, the Collector may ४96! fore
making the order of detention, leave the defaulter in the
custody of the officer arresting him or of any other officer
for a specified period not exceeding 15 days, or release him
on his furnishing security to the satisfaction of the Collec-
tor for his appearance at the expiration of the specified
veriod if the arrears are not so satisfied.

and.
ngal

(2) When the Collector does not make an order of de-
tention under sub-rule (1), he shall, if the defaulter is under
arrest, direct his release.

(1) Every person detained in the civil prison in execu- Rule 76:
tion of a certificate may be so detained,— Detention in
and release
from prison.
(a) where the certificate is for a demand of an amount {s. 51, Bengat
exceeding fifty rupees—for a period of six months, Act]
and

(b) in any other case—for a period of six weeks:
Provided that he shall be released from such detention—
(i) on the amount mentioned in the warrant for his

detention being paipl to the officer-in-charge of
the civil prison, or हि

i


Seu, Tk

Rule 77:
Release.

fs. 30, Bengal
Act.]

Rule 78:
Release on
ground of ill-
‘ness.

[s. 32, Bengal
Act.J

Rule 79:
Entry into
dwelling-ho-
‘use.

[s. 47, Bengal
Act)

294

(४) on the certificate being otherwise fully satisfied,
or cancelled, or

(ii) on the request of the Income-tax Officer or of
the Collector :

Provided, also, that he shall not be released from such
detention under clause (1) or clause (iii) without the order
of the Collector.

(2) A defaulter released from detention under this rule
shall not, merely by reason of his release, be discharged
from his liability for the arrears ४ but he shall not be lable
to be re-arrested under the ificate in execution of which
he was detained in the civil prison.

(1) The Collector may order the release of a defaulter
who has been arrested in execution of a certificate ppon
being satisfied that he has disclosed the whole of his pro-
perty and has placed it at the disposal of the Collector and
that he has not committed any act of bad faith.

(2) If the Collector has ground for believing the dis-
closure made by a defaulter under sub-rule (1) (0 have been
untrue, he may order the re-arrest of the defaulter in execu-
tion of the certificate. but the period of his detention in the
civil prison shall not in the aggregate exceed that authoris-
ed by the preceding rule.

(1) At any time after a warrant for the arrest of a de-
faulter has been issued, the Collector may cancel it on
the ground of his serious illness, _

(2) Where a defaulter has been arrested, the Collector
may release him if. in the opinion of the Collector, he is
not in a fit state of health to be detained in the civil prison.

(3) Where a defaulter has been committed to the civil
prison, he may be released therefrom by the Collector, on
the ground of the existence of any infecticus or contagious
desease, or on the ground of his suffering from any seri-
ous illness.

(4) A defaulter released under this rule may be re-
arrested, but the period of his detention in the civil prison
shall not in the aggregate exceed that authorized by this
Schedule.

For the purpose of making an arrest under this Sche-
dule—

(a) no dweiling house shall be entered after sun-set
and before sun-rise ;

open unless subh dw oe house or a portion there-
of is in the og¢cupan the defaulter and

(9) no outer door of a di jing house shall be re

or


295 Sex,

other occupant of the house tefuses or in any way
prevents actess thereto; but, when the person exe-
cuting any such warrant has duly gained access to
any dwelling house, he may break open the door
of any room or apartment if he has reason to

believe that the defaulter is likely to be found
there;

(९) no room, which is in the actual occupancy of a
woman who according to the customs of the coun-
try does not appear in public, shall be entered into
unless the officer authorised to make the arrest has
given notice to her that she is at liberty to with-

draw and has given her reasonable time and facility
for withdrawing.

_ The Collector shail not order the arrest and detention Ranle Bo:

in the civil prison of— है माफ
हि ‘women oF
minors etc,

8. 33, Bengal

Aci (s. 48,
{b) any person who, in his opinion, is a minor or of ras Act.}
unsound mind.

{a) a woman, or

PART VI

Miscellaneous Otters dee
३, + med te be
Every Collector or other officer acting under this Sche- ating judi-
dule shall, in the discharge of his functions under this cially.
Schedule, be deemed to be acting | judicially within the है| ty Bengal
meaning of the Judicial Officer’s tection Act, 1850. 18 of 1850.

Every Collector or other officer acting under the provi- gute’ 82:
sions of this Schedule shall have the powers of a civil court ower ५० take
for the purpose of receiving evidente, administering oaths evidence.
enforcing the attendance of witnesges and compelling the

है 42) Bengal
production of documents. ct]

No certificate shall cease to be in force by reason of Rute 83:

the death of the defaulter. mtinuance

t certificate.

. 42, Bengal

If at any time after the 15508 of the certificate b’; the ct) 84:
Income-tax Officer to the Collector the defaulter dies, the ocedure on.
proceedings under this Schedule (except arrest and deten- death of
tion) may be continued against the -legal representative of defaulter.
the defaulter, and the provisions of this Schedule shall Kap Bengal
apply as if the legal representative were the defaulter. "

(2) An appeal from any original order passed by the Rule 85:
Collector under this Schedule shall lie to the revenue au- Appeals.
thority to which eppeals ordinerily मो against the orders of ed St, Bengal

relatin;

the Collector under the law land revenue of the
State concerned.


Scx, IL 296

(2) No appeal shall He from any order of the Collectcr
which is, under any rule in this Schedule, conclusive.

(3) Every appeal under this rule must be presented
within thirty days from the date of the order appealed
against.

9 of 1908. (4) Section 5 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, shall
apply to appeals under this rule.

(9) Pending the decision of any appeal, execution of the
certificate may be stayed if the appellate authority so di-
rects, but not otherwise.

{s. 52, Bengal (6) No appeal} shall lie from any order passed on appea?

Act] under this rule.

Rule 86: Any order passed under this Schedule may, after notice

Review. to all persons interested, be reviewed by the officer who

{s. 54, Bengal made the order, or by his successor in office, on account of

Act] mistake or error either in the making of the order or in
. the course of any proceeding under this Schedule in which

the order was made.
Rule 87: Where any person has under this Schedule become

Recovery surety for the amount due by the defaulter, he may be pro-
[s. 50 Maa- ceeded against under this Schedule as if he were the de-
ras Act faulter.
Rule 88: Whoever fraudulently removes, conceals, transfers or
Penalties. —_ delivers to any person any property or any interest therein,
[s. 58, Bengal intending thereby to prevent that property or interest
Act.) therein, from being taken in execution of a certificate, shal!
6 be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under
45 of 1860. section 206 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.

Rule 89 : (1) When-a defaulter is arrested or detained in the civil
Subsistence prison, the sum payable for the subsistence of the defaul-
allowance. tor from the time of arrest until he is released shall be

ule 78: | १
Rule iH borne by the Income-tax Officer.

Bengal Act. (2) Such sum shall be calculated on the scale fixed b:’
the State Government for the subsistence of judgment-
debtors arrested in execution of a decree of a civil court.

(3) Sum payable under this ruie shall be deemed to
be costs in the proceeding:

Provided that the defaulter shall not be detained in the
civil prison or arrested on account of any sum so payable.

Foes, 90: The Central Board of Revenue may prescribe the form

{(Contrast) to be used for any order, notice, warrant, or certificate to
5 oy Bengal be issued under this Schedule.

Rule 91: (1) The Central Board of Revenue may make rules.
pore’ rule, Consistent with the provisions cf this Act, regulating, the
{s. 39 Bengal Procedure to be followed by Collectors and other officers
Act.) t

acting under this Schedule.


297

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the genera-
lity of the power conferred by sub-rule (1), such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely—

{a) the manner in which any property sold under this

(0)

Schedule may be delivered:

the execution of a document or the endorsement of
a negotiable instrument or a share in a corporation,
by or on behalf of the Collector, where such execu-
tion or endorsement is required to transfer such
negotiable instrument or share to a person who
has purchased it under a sale under this Schedule;

(०) the procedure for dealing with resistahce or ob-

(a)

struction offered by any person to a purchaser of
any immovable property sold under this Schedule,
in obtaining possession of the property;

the fees to be charged for any process issued under
this Schedule ;

(९) the scale of charges to be recovered in respect of

(i)

any other proceeding taken under this Schedule:

recovery of poundage fee;

(g) the maintenance and custody, while under attach-

ment, of livestock or other movable property, the
fees to be charged for such maintenance and cus-
tody, the sale of such livestock or property, and
disposal of proceeds of such sale;

(h) the mode of attachment of a business.

Nothing in this Schedule shall affect any provision of
‘this Act whereunder the tax is a first charge upon any
asset.

THE THIRD SCHEDULE

PROCEDURE FOR DISTRAINT BY INCOME-TAX
OFFICER

[See section 235(5}]

Where any distraint and sale of movable property are
to be effected by any Income-tax Officer authorised for the

purpose, such distraint and sale shall be made, es far as %
may be,

in the same manner as attachment and sale of any

movable property attachable by actual seizure; and the pro-
visions of the Second Schedule relating to attachment and

sale shall, mutatis mutandis, apply in: respect of such dis-
traint and sale. :

Scu. IT

Rule 99:
Saving regar-
ding charge.

Rule a:
Distraint and
[८५

[New)


Table showing the provision in the existing Act and the corresponding provision,

298
Draft Report on the Income-tax Act.
APPENDIX II.

tf any, as propesed' in Appendix I.

Existing provision

Corresponding provision as
proposed in| Appendix I

Secuonr .

Section 2{1)

Section 2(2)

Section 2(3)

Section 2(4)- . . .
Section 2 (4A) « :
Section 2(4B) - 5s
Section 2(5)

Section 2(5A) « .
Section 2(5B)- ५» see
Section 2(6)

Section 2(6A) -

Section 2(6AA).

Section 2(6B) :
Sectiona(6C) - - -

Section 2(6D) -
Section 2(6E)
Section 2(7)
Section 2(7A)

Section 2(8)
Section 2(8A)
Section 2(9)

Section 2(10)

Section 2(11)

Section 2(12)

Section 2(13)

Section 2(14)

Section 2(14A) «

Section 2(15), part

Section 2(15), part -

Section 2(16)

Section 3 . .

Section 4(1)—
Clause (a), part
Clause (०), part .
Clause (5) (४) fee
Glause (5) (8) Sane पल foe

3, The provision in Appendix I hasibeen

distinguish it from the existing Provision)

_ 2०० ९) (८ _

Clause 1
Clause 2(1)

Clause 2(5)

Clause 2(3)

Clause 2(9)

Clause 2(10)

Clause 2(11)

Clause (7०)

Clause 219)

Clause 2(14)

Clause 2(16)

Clause 2(17)

Clause 2(18) and Explasation.
Clause 2(19)

Clause 2(20), items(ijee (vii)

‘and Explanation,

‘Clause 2(23)

‘Clause 2(24)

Clause 2(21)

Clause 2(22), sub. Clauses (i)
and (ii).

Clause 2(25)

Clause 2(15)

Clause 2(27), Sub- Clauses(i) to

(vii)
Clause 2(28)
Clause 5,
Clause 2(30)
Clause 2(31)
Clause 2(92)
Omitted.
Clause 2(36)
Clause 2(37)
Clause 2(38)
Clause 5

Clause 4(1) (०)
‘Clause 4(2)
Clause 4(7) 6)
Clause 4(1) (6)



Clause (6) (iii)

Clause (८)
First proviso
Second proviso .
Third proviso
Fourth proviso -
Fifth proviso
Explanation + .
Explanation 2.
Explanation 3.0...
Explanationg 2...
Section 4(2)
Section 4(3)—

Clause (i), main para :

Clause (४), proviso (2) opening line .

Clause (i), proviso (a) (i)

Clause (i), proviso (a) (ii)

Clause (i) proviso (6), part

Clause (i), proviso (8), part

Clause (i), proviso (8), part

Clause (i), proviso (०)

Clause (ii)

Clause (iii), part

Clause (iii), part

Clause (iv)

Clause (०)

Clause (vi) पु

Clause (via) para. (a).

Clause 4{1) (d)
Clause 4(2)
Omitted, see notes.
Clause 11(4) (४)
Clause 11(4) 6)
Clause 11(4) (से)
Clause 11(4) (iii)
Clause 4(3)
Clause 9(#)
Clause 9(iii)

Clause 4(1) (०) (0 (2)

Clause 1०

Clause 12(1) 6), main para.
Clause 12(1) 7), proviso, part.
Clause 12 (1) (४) (6)

Clause 12(1) (ii) (a)

Clause 12(2)

Clause 12(3)

Clause 12(4)

Clause 12(1) (i), proviso, part,
Clause 12(6)

|. Glause 11(a2) 6)

Clause (via), para. (0) (See Finance Act, 1958) :

Clause (vii
Clause (vii
Clause (ix)

Clause (x) (०)

Clause (9 3}
Clase (४) (0 |,

Clause (x) (4)
Clause (x) (०)

Clause (xi). .

Clause (xia), (See Finance Act, 1958)

Clause (xii).

Clause (xiii) . .

Clause (xiv).

Clause (xiv), main para .

Clause (xiva), ast Prov... kk

Clause (xiva), and Prov. ar

Clause (xioa), Explanation

Clause (०) . kk

Glause (wi). ५. -«- +«- -

Clause (xvii)

Clause (xviia) eo.

Clause (xvid) . . .
20—1 Law Com./58.

Clause 11(22) (४)
Clause 11(26)(é)
Repealed.

Glause 11(15)
Clause 77(7) 6)
Clause 11(6)
Clause 11(3)
Clause 11(1)
Clause 11(26) (ii)
Clause 11(21)

Clause 11(7), items (i) to (0)

Omitted: see notes.

Clause 11(25)

Clause 11(18)

Clause 11(23)

Clause 11(8)

Clause 11(9), opening part.
Clause 11(9) (i)

Clause 11(9) (0)

Clause 11(9), Explanation 2.
Clause 11(10)
Clause 11(5) (i)
Clause 11(16) (i)
Clause 11(16) (ii)
Clause 31(16) (&)


Clause (x0
Clause (xix) 9. “*५
Claue(x) 1... 9 9. -
Clause (xxi) st
Clause (exif). ५. “*५
Last para, part. |
Last para, part \. . .

Section g4—

Clause.(@)@) ee

Clause (a) (i) to.
Clause (a) (iff) 2 *-:
Clause (a) (v) 9. *-
Clause (6) 2 9... -
Clause (c) 2. el
Section 4B (a) .
Section 4B(3) . .
Section 4B). et
Sections)...
Section 5(1A), earlier part.
Section 5(1A), latter part.
Section 5(2), earlier part .
Section 5(2), latter part
Section §(3), earlier part
Section 5(3), latter part वि
Section 5(38)
Section 5(4), earlier part
Section 5(4), latter parc
Section 5(5), earlier part.
Section 5(5), latter parc. .

Section 5(5A), earlier part.

Section 5(5A), latter part

Section 5(6) . . . .
Section 5(7), words “for the purposes

Section 5(7) (i) - oe
Section 50) i). *+/ *-

Section 5(7A), main para, earlier part
Section: 5(7A), main para, latter part.
Section 5(7A), Explanation :

Section 5(7B), carlier part -
Section 5(7B), latter part - .

Section 5(70), main para.
Section 5(7C), ist Prov. ५...“
Section 570), and Proviso :
Section 5(8) . see

Sectin5sA 9...

Section6 . . . . .

Section 7(1), main para, part
Section 7(1), main para, part
‘Section 7(1), main para, part

Clause 13(16) (iii)
Clause 11(19)

Clause 11(5) (ii)

Clause 11(27)

Clause 11(20)

Clause 12(6)

Clause 12, Explanation (a)

Clause 6(1) (०)

Clause 6(1) (6)

Clause 6(1) (०)

Omitted; see notes.

Clause 6(2)

Clause 6(3)

Clause 6(6), part.

Clause 6(6), part.

Omitted as unnecessary.

Clause 127

Clause 128(1), part.

Clause 131(1}

Clause 128(1), part.

Clause 131(2)

Clause 128(1), part.

Clause 128(2)

Clause 128(3)

Clause 129(1)

Clause 131(3) (a)

Clause 131(4)

Clause 131(5)

Clause 131(6)

Clause 129(4)

Clause 135(7), 1st para.

Omitted; see notes.

Clause 129(2)

Clause 129(3)

Clause 132 (1)

Clause 132(4), main para,

Clause 132 (4), Explanation

Clause 130 (2)

Clause 140

Clause 133, main para.

Clause 133, Prov.

Clause 160, Explanation 1.

Clause 130(1)

Omitted, in view of the propo”
sed abolition of the Appellate
‘Tribunal.

Clause 14.

Clause 15,

Clause 1703) |

Clause 17(2) |


Section 7(3}, tst Proviso. ©. = 6. Clause 88(1) (०)

Section 7(1), and Proviso. . =. 0... Clause 213

Section 7(1), झलक, 1... +  -+  - एछाब्् 17(3)

Section 7(1), Expl. 2, main part . . «7. Clause 17{4)

Section 7(3), Expl. 2, Prov. part =... Clause rr(t1)

Section 7(1), Expl. 2, Prov., part ©... Clause हा [सो

Section 7(1), Expl. 2, Prov, part =. =. = Clause 11(14)

Section 7(1), Expl. 2, Prov, Part =. st Clause 298 See also clause
11(13).

Section 72). + -+ -+ - Clase 166)

Section 7(2) (8) व ५ -+ -+ Clause 166)

Section 7(2)(iia), main para. =. =... Clause 16(झ), earlier half.

Section 7(2)(iia), Prov. =. 0... Clause 16 (iii), latter half,

Section 7(2)(). =. ५ + + - Chase 36 (ix)

Section 8, ist Para... ee Clause 18

Section 8, 1st proviso, earlier part. =. =.=, Clause 19
Section 8, tst proviso, latter part =... Clause at
Ssetion है, and proviso Clause 870)

Section 8, ard proviso. 8... , Clause 188. Compare’ clause
87(t1) also.

Section 8, Explanation—

Clause (a), part. ५. *५] Clause 20(1) 6)

Clause (2), lasthines 5... Clause 20(2), main para. part
and clause 40(d), part.

Clause (6), firsttine =. |... Clause 20(2), Expl.

Clause (6), part. + . . . « Clause 20(1) (i)

Clause (6), last lines =. =... Clause 20(2), main para, part

‘and clause 40(4), part.
Section 9(1)— -
Opening para. 5 se, Clause ae 1५
Clause), part. Clause 24(1) (४) (०)

Clause (i), part. ee Clause 24(1) G2)(5)
Clause (ii), main para... s. Clanise 24(1) (सा)
Clause (में), Proviso . . . . + Omiuted, as obsolete.
Clause (कं)... ५ + -+ - - 2906 241) (०)
Clause (iv), main para... Clause 24(1); items (०) to (शक)
Clause (iv), proviso see kk Clause 25
Clause) 6. ees Clase 24(1) 6x)
Clause (जी)... + + Chaise 24(1)(x)
Clause (i) |... + -+ - Rats 241) (xi)
Explanation. =. . wee. Clause 27 (से)
Section 9(2)—
First para. . . . . . + Clause 23(1) '
wtProv. 5 eee Clause 23(3)
and proviso, exccpt last ine. . + Clause 23(4)
and proviso, lastline . =... Clause 2a(2)
3rd proviso Olguss 4(1)(i) and — 24K),
Section 9(3) -  .  . + -+ . Clause 26
Section g(4)(a). + + + -+ -+ 02०७८ २7७४)

अल्व्यं००9५)0) ,..... *«-

se eg Clause 271i) , :
Section 9(4)(c) (See Finance Act, ‘9 पु

+ Clause 27 (०)


Section 10, Sub-section (1) to.

Section 10, Sub-section (2)—
Opening paragraph ws

Clause (i), without the proviso. =

Clause (i), proviso. =. se
Clause (i), without the proviso.
Clause (i), proviso =. we

Clause (iii), main part.
Clause (iii), proviso, part
Clause (iii), proviso, part (last 17 words)

दब (iii), Explanation =.
Clause (iv), part (for buildings)
Clause (ic), part (for machinery ete.).
Clause (iv), part (for stocks eve.)
Clause (०), part (for buildings)
Clause (ले, part (for machinery etc.)
first para, part

Clause (vi), first para, part

Clause (vi), second para., with its clauses
and (०)

Clause (vi), proviso (a) .

Clause (ti), proviso (6), part...

Clause (थे), proviso (6), part (referring
1939 vears).

Clause (vi), proviso (०)

Clause (via), part

Clause (via), part

Clause (vig), part.

Clause (४6), main para. .

Clause (vib), proviso (a) .

Clause (०४), proviso (6), carlier part

Clause (vib), proviso (6), later half.

Clause (vib), proviso last para. .

Clause (vii), first para. + .

Clause (vii), first proviso

Clause (11i), Second Proviso, part.
Clause (vii), Second proviso, part
Clause (vii), Third proviso

Clause (cii), Fourth proviso, part

Clause (ui), Fourth proviso, part

Clause (लो), Fifth proviso .
Clause (i) + - -
Clause (ix), earlier part.

Clause (x), fatter part

Clause (x), main para. soe

(a),(6)

to pre.

Clause 28, opening paragraph

and sub-clause (६)

‘Omitted, as deductions have been.
listed in separate clauses.

‘Clause 3०(०) (0 (2)

Clause 38(1)(०)

‘Clause 30(2) (4)()

Clause 38(1) (0)

Clause 36(3), main part

‘Clause 4०(०) ७)

Omitted, as repeated in existing
section 10(4)(b) : See notes to
Clause 40.

Clause 36(3), Explanation

Clause ३०(०)

Clause 31 (ii)

Clause 36(1)

Clause ३०७)

Clause 350)

Clause 32(1) (i)

Clause 37(1)(म)

Omitted, as obsolete.

Clause 34(1), part
Clause 32/2)
Omitted

Clause 34(2)

Clause 32(1) (के), main para.
Clause 32(1) (iii), Explanation.
Clause 34(2) (i)

Clause 33

Clause 34(1), part

Clause 34(3)(a) Exception.
Clause 34(3)(०), main para,
Clause 34(3)(5)

Clause 32(1)(ie) main para., part

Clause 32(1)(iv), main para.,
part.

Clause 41(2), main para.
Clouse 41(2}, Explanation 2.
Clause ३०1) (४), Explanation.

Clause 41(2), main para. and
Explanation 1

Omitted in view of proposed.
draft for s. 10(a) (vii), 3rd.
proviso

Clause 41(2), Explanation 3.
Clause 36(5)
Clause 30(5)
Clause 38(2)
Clause 96(2), opening pard.


Clause (x), proviso
Clause (xi), main para...
Clause (xi), proviso carlier half
Clause (xi), proviso, latter half
Clause (Hi) |... ५». -  *-
Clause (बी, part. *
Clause (xiii), part. *५

Clause (xiv), first para., earlier part

Clause (xiv), first para, latter part
Clause (xiv), rst proviso :

‘Clause (xio}, 2nd proviso (a), opening tines

Clause (xiv), and prov., (०). «
Clause (अंग, and proviso, (a)(ii)
Clause (xiv ५ Second proviso, (6)
Clause (xiv), Second proviso, (ने
Clause (xi0), Second proviso, (A>

Clause (xi), Second proviso, (०) earlier part

Clause (xiv), Second proviso, (०); latter part

Clause (xiv), Second proviso, (f), part
Clause (xiv), Second proviso, (1), part

‘Clause (xiv), Second proviso, (f) part

Clause (xiv), Second proviso, (8)

Clause (xiv), Fxplanation at the end

Clause (xX). ee
Section 10, Sub-section (24)

Section 10, Sub-Sections (2B) and (2C)

Section 10, Sub-section (3)
Section 10(4), first para

Clause (a).

Clause (6).
Clause () ee
Section 10(44), Clause (०) .
Clause (6) woe
Explanation... «५

Section 10 (4B) (See Finance Act, 1958)

Section 10(5), first para—
“paid” . oe
“plant” पु
Clause (a), main part
Clause (a), First proviso .
Clause (a), Second proviso
Clause (6), main part
Clause (0), first proviso .
Clause (5), 2nd proviso -
Clause (c) #- . .
Explanation, eartiar part
Explanation, latter part .

Section 10 (54), opening line

Chases (०), (0), (0, (४) -

Clause 32(2) 0)

Clause 36(6), main para.
Clause 41/4)
Clause 36(6), First proviso.
Clause 35(1) (4)
Clause 3541) (i)
Clause 33(5) (ii)
Clause 35(1)(i0)

Clause 35(2)(i), main para.
Clause 35(2)(), Explanation.
Clause 3¢(2)(é), opening lines.
‘Clause 35(2) (4) (6)

Clouse 35(9) (8), (०)

Clause 35(2) (iti)

Clause 41(3)

Clause 35(2)(i2)

Clause 35(2)(v)

Clause 42(1), Explanation 1.
Clause 35(4)

» Clause 73(3), part

Clause 74(3), part
Clause 35(3)
Clause 32(5)
Clause 37

Clause 43(1)
Omitted.

Clause 38(3)
Clause 40(a) (ii)
Clause 40(a) (8)
Clause 40(6)
Clause 40(a) (४)
Clause 4० (० (४0)
Clause 4०(० (ii)
Clause 40 (c) Explanation
Clause 34 (2) (io)

Clause 42 (2)

Clause 42(3)

Clause 42 (7) (2)

Clause 42(1), Expl. 3

Clause 42 (1), Expl. ¢
Clause 42 (7) (0), main para
Clause 42 (7) (6), Proviso
Clause 42 (7) (0) Explanation
Clause 42 (1), Explanation 2
Clause 42 (1), main para
Clause 42 (7), Explanation 3.
Clause 28 (मं), opening lines,

part.

‘Clause 28 (i), (०), (6), r (०)


last para,earlierhaif .  . . . — Clause 28 (ii), opening lines,
part.

fast para,latierhalf =. 0... Clause 123 (1), main para.
Section 106) ..... . « - - - Clause 28 Gti)
इल्ट्पंक्राउ० (7). + wees Clause 44५ part

Section +1 ee ke ~ «Repealed.
Section 12 — ee
Subsection (1) . . 6 + - + Clause 58 (1)
Subsection (14)... ess Clause 58 (2) (i)
Subsection (1B). «2. eS Omitted, gs spent.
Sub-section (2) —
main para, part - eee Clause 60 ६)
main para, part - ee -+ - Elause 60 (ii)
Proviso . . . . « Clause 61 fa)
Sub-sections (3) & (4) ~
pat. |. + + ee Clause 6o (मे)
pat. ५» ५५ wee Clause 62(2)
Sub-section (5) —
pat. | ५ ५. - - - Clause 61 (8)
pat. eww Clause 62 (1)
Section 124. se + -+ - Clause 39

Section 1244. www Clause 187
Section 12B
Sub-section(1)—
main para, earlier part. पु . . Clause 45
main para, latter part. . . « Clause 46
ist proviso, part. we. Clause 47 (i)
ist proviso, part . . . . . Clause 47 (ii)
and proviso, earlier half . =. =», Cause 47 (iii)
and proviso, latter half, एक..." Clause 42 (1), Explanation 5.
and proviso, latter half, part. =. =. Clause 42 (7), Explanation 2.
Sub-section (2)—
cpeninglines. =. =. ss. Glause 48, opening tines.
Clause (i) . . . . . « Clause 48 (i)
Clause (ii), pat... Clause 48 (i)
Clause (ii), part... ee. Clause 50 (1) (a)
Clause (ii), part. ee. Clause 57 (०0)
Ist proviso. . . . . . Clause 54
and proviso, part =. |... Clause 57 (1)
and proviso, part.) . 0. Clauses (2)
grd proviso, part =. =. |. ss 018७८ go (1) (है
grd proviso, part =. | ss Clause 50 (2) () (0)

3rd proviso, part... ss Clause 50 (3) (i), part
gtd proviso, part =... ss Clause 5० (3) (9) (6)
grd proviso, part =... se Clause 5० (4) (BY
ghproiso 2 ee Clause 59

Sub-section (3)—
main para, earlier half, part. Clause 5० (2), opening lings.
main para, earlier half, part =. =. 08७८० 5० (०७) (a)?
main pars, earlier balf, part... ‘Clause 50 (3) (0), part.


main para, earlier half, part .
main para, earlier half, part.

main para, latter half

Proviso (s), part. s "9"

Proviso i), part se
Proviso (i), part.
Proviso (if). 0.

Sub-section (4)—

Clause 2). ee

Clause (6) oe
Section 13, main para.
Section 13, Proviso, part ~ .
Section 13, Proviso, part = +
Sectiontg(1) 2 0. ee
Section 14(2) t0(5):— se

For income-tax

Sub-section (2), *«-
Clause (a)

Sub-section (2),
Clause (०५), main pas

Subsection (2), - -
Clause (8)

Sub-section (3), main para.
Sub-section (3), Explanation
Sub-section (3), Proviso...
Sub-section (4)
Sub-section (5)

For Super-tax

Sub-seotion (2) (ea), main para
Sub-section (2) (aa), proviso.
Sub-section (3) .
Subsection (4) 9. + -
Subsection (5) 9. - «-:
Section 15,

Sub-section (1) - . .
Subsection (2) 2. e
Sub-section (24) 2.
Sub-section (3). -
Section 154, earlier part.
Section 154, latter part.

Section 15-B :—

For income-tax
Sub-section (1), main para
Sub-section (1), tst Proviso.
and Proviso (a).
and Proviso (6). *«+
Sub-section (2), main para.
Sub-ection (2), Explanation ..

-Clause 50 (3) (if) (2)

‘Clause 50 (4) (०)

Clause 50, Explanation. .

Clause 50 (2), opening lines of
sub-clause (i). हि

(Clause 5० (०)(४) (6)

Clause 5013) (#, part.

Clause 5० (2) (ii).

Clause 55

Clause 56.

Clause 150 (1), main para.
Clause 150 (1), Proviso.
Clause 150 (2)

Clause 11 (2)

As given below.

Clause 87 (iii)

Clause 87 (iv)

Clause 87 (गे

Clause 82 (1)
Clause 82 (2)
Clause 82 (3)
Clause 83
Clause 84

‘Clause 111, part.
‘Clause 111, part.
Clause 105
Clause 106
Clause 107

‘Cause 88 (1) (a)
‘Clause 88 (1) (5)

Clause 88 (2)

Clause 83 (3) :
Clause 81 है
Omitted.

As given below :—

Clause 89 (1), part.

See “For Super-tax”’, below.
(Clause 89 (2)

Clause 89 (3)

Clause 89 (5)

Clause 89 (6, :


Sub-section (24) 2.
Sub-section (3)

For Super-tax
Section 15-8, Part 2
Section 15-B (1), tt Proviso.
Section 750--

Por income-tax

Sub-section (1) 2.
Sub-section (2), main para.
Sub-section (2), Proviso
Sub-section (3) 5 2.
Sub-section(4) 9...
Subsertion (5)...
Sub-section (6)

For super-tax—
SectimtgC 2 2.
Section 16(1), (a), earlier half .
Section 16 (1) (a), latter half

Section 16(1) (७), main para,
Section 16 (3) (6), Proviso
Section 16 (1), (=

Main para, earlier half.

Main para, latter half 2.

1st Proviso . .

and Proviso, part . . .

and Proviso, part...

3rd Proviso, earlier half .

3rd Proviso, latter half .
Section 16 (2), main para, part .
Section 16 (2) main para, part
Section 16 (2), main para, part.
Section 16(2), Proviso . .
Section 16(3). 5.
Section 17 (1), main para.

Section 17, (1), 1st Proviso, earlier part

Section 17 (1), 151 Proviso, latter part

Section 17 (1), and Proviso.
Section 17 (2), part . .
Section 17 (2),part. .
Section 17 (2), past. we
Section 17 (3), part. .
Section 17 (3), part. : .
Section 17 (3), part
Section 17 (4) -

Section 17 (5)

Omitted, as spent.
Clause 89 (4)

Clause 109 (1), part
Clause 109 (2)
As given below :—~

Clause 85 (1)
Clause 85 (2)
Clause 85 (3)
Clause 85 (4)
Clause 86
Clause 82 (5)
Clause 82(6)

Clause 110, part.

Clause 68

Omitted. See Section 15 A latter
half,

Clause 69(1)
Clause 69 (4)

Clause 63

Clause 64

Clause 66, (०)
Clause 66, (8)
Omitted.

‘Cluase 65 (1)
‘Clause 65 (2)
Clause 8

Clause 59 (1)
Clause 59 (2)
Clause 59 (3)
Clause 67

Clause 124 (1)
Clause 124 (2)
Clause 124 (3)
Clause 124 (4)
Clause 88 (1), opening lines.
Clause 89 (1), part.
Clause 121

Clause 109 (1), part
Clause 110, part
Clause 111, part.

Omitted, as 5. 14 (2) (0) is no)
longer off the statute book.

Omitted, consequent on omission
of section t5A, latter half.
Contrast definition of “average
rate of income-tax” (an
expression wi ot
inthe Chapter ‘on Reb es).


37

Section 17 (6), opening lines, part. Clause 125, opening tines
Section 17 (6), opening lines, part, (words “‘incid- Omitted

ing super tax”)
Section 17 (6), clause (i), 2 2

Clause 125 (०)

Section 17 (6), clause (ii), main para. =. =. Clause 125 (6), main para
Section 17 (6), Clause (fi), Proviso. =. =. Clause 125 (8), Prov.

Section 17 (7), part... Clause 126

Section 17 (7), part. 5 |... Covered by clause 126
Section 18(2). | sek. Repealed

Section 18 (2), main para. =. =... Clause 20६ (1)

Section 18 (2), Proviso =. ss, Clause 201 (3)

Section 18 (2A), earlier pat =. |. Omid, as repeating existing
Section 18 (24), latter part 5 =... Clause 701 (6)

Section 18 (2B), main para. =... Clause 201 (2)

Section 18 (2B), Prov., part =. =... Clause 205 (1), part

Section 18 (2B), Prov., Part =. =... Clause 205 (2)

‘Section 18 (2B) Prov., part (te: order by Income- Omitted, as unncesary.
tax Offi 7

Section 18 (3),mainpara . . =... Clause 202 (a)

Section 18 (3), Prov... Clause 205 (1), part

Section 18 (34), main para. =... Clause 202 (6)

Section 18 (34), Prov. =. =... Clause 205 (1), part

Section 18 (3B), main para. =. =... Clause 204 (1), main para

Section 18 (3B), 1st Prov. . |.) . (18७७८ 205 (t), part

Section 8 (3B), 2nd Prov. =... Clause 204 (1), Prov.

Section 18(3C). . se. Clause 204 (2)

‘Section 18 (3D), main paras... Clause 203

Section 18 (3D), Prov. =... Clause 205 (1), part

Section 18(4) . 0. + Clause 206

Section 18 (5), main para earlier half, part. Clause 207, main para, earlier
al.

Section 18 (5), main paca, earlier -half, part Clause 246 (1), earlier ttalf

Section 18 (5), main para, latter half, part... Clause 207, main para, latter half
part

Section 18 (5), main para, latter half, part... Clause 246 (1) latter half.

Section 18 (5), 18t Prov. =... Clause 207, main para, latter
half, part i

Section 18 (5), and Prov.,part . =. =. . Clause 207, 1m Prov. |

Section 18 (5), and Prov., Part... Glause 246 (1), ast Prov.

Section 18 (5), 3rd Prov., Part. =. =. = Clause 207, 2nd Prov. |

Section 18 (5), 3rd Prov, part. =. =.=. Cllause 246 (1), and Prov.

“Section 18(6). . - -+ + . . Clause 208

Section 18 (7)... 9७. -+ -+ . .- Cause 209

Section 18 (8)... -. .- Clause खा०

Section 18 (9) 3 + + + Clause 2

Section 18, छक्का... + Clause 212

Section 184 (1) (a), main para,eartier half, part. Clause 215 (1)

Section 18A (1) (a), main para, earlier half, part . Clause 216

‘Section १88 (1) (०), main para, earlier half, part . Clause 217 (0), cartier half
‘Section 184 (1) (0), maain para, cectier half, papti ; Clause 218 (1). i


1. Section 188 (1) (को, main para, earlier half, part ."५
Section 188 (1) (@), main para, earlier half, part“.
Section 18A (1) (०), main para, latter half, part
Section 18A (1) (०), main para, latter half, part.
Section 18A (1) (a), 1st Prov. ५. ५" *-

Section 18A (1) (a), 2nd Prov. 2.
Section 18A (1) (०, 3rd Prov. 2.
Section 8A (1) () ee
Section 18A (2), mainpara ss
Section 8A (2), Prov. 2 see
Section 849) ee

Section 18444). 9७ ७» . -
Section 18A (5), main para partie. cl. (i).
Section 18A (5),main para, part. 9. se
Section 18A (5), main para,part. 5 se
Section 18A (5), main para, pact. =. |“॥“"

Section 18A (5), st Prov. see
Section 18A (5), 2nd Prov. wee
Section 18A (6), main para.
Section 18A (6),1stProv . - ee
Section 18A (6), 2nd Prov. ws ee
Section 18A (6), 3rd Prov. swe
Section 18A (6), 4th Prov .

Section 18A (6),5फ्र Prov. se
Section 184 (7) : . . . . .
Section 18A (8) rn
Section s8A (9), mainpara ws ee
Section 180 (9), Proviso. 0. wee
Section BA (10)... ५ - -

Section 188 (0)... - - +- #/४
Section 188 (19)....."..09७/ 4. -
Sectiont9 6 ee - - -
Section 19A- . . . . . .
Section 20 : . . . पु . .
Section 200A. . . . . . .
Section 21 . पु . . : . .
Section22(t). 0. ee
Section 22 (2) - . . . .

Section 22 (24), part. se ee
Section 22 (24), part . .
Section 22 (3)... eet
Section 22(4) |... ५» + et
Section 22 (5). 5 ee

Section 23 (0) 6 ee
Sectionag(2)- 0 ees
Section 23 (3) : oe

Section 23 (4), main para, earlier half. i.

Clause 218 (2)
Clause 219 (1), main para
Clause 217 (@), latter half

Clause 217 (8)
Clause 219 (1) Prov.
Clause 217. Expl.
Clause 218 (3)
Clause 219 (2)
Clause 220 (1)
Clause 220 (2)
Clause 220 (3)
Clause 221
Omitted, as spent
Clause 222 (1), part
Clause 222 (1), part

Clause 2 (33) ix.

definition
“regular assessment”.

Clause 222 (2)

Clause 222 (1), part

Clanse 223 (1), part

Clause 223 (1), part

‘Clause 223 (2)

Clause 223 (3) है

Omitted, as the वानी proposed.
for S. 18A (6) main paraj appli-
¢s the rule contained in the
Prov. for all cases.

Clause 223 (4)

Clause 224

Clause 225 (1)

Clause 282, earlier half.

Clause 282, latter half;

Clause 226

Clause 227

Clause 228

Clause 200 (1)

Clause 166 (4)

Clause 167

Clause 166 (1)

Clause 166 (2)

Clause 143 (1)

Clause 143 (2)

Clause 143 (3)

Clause 80

Clause 143 (4)

Clause 146 (1)

Clause 146 (5)

Clause 147 (1)

Clause 147 (2)

Clause 147 (3) i

Clause 148 (1) t


Section 23 (4), main para, latter half, part
Section 23 (4), main para, latter haif, part

Section 23 (4), Proviso. *+>

Section 23 (5), opening lines

Section 23 (5) (०), main para.

Section 23 (5) (a), 1st Prov.

Section 23 (5) (०), 2nd Prov.

Section 23 (5) (०) grd Prov. *

Section 23 (5) (6)

Section 23 (6)

Section 23-4—
Sub-section (1), part पु
Sub-section (1), part 5.
Sub-section (1), part
Sub-section (2)
Sub-sections (3) to (7)
Sub-section (8)...
Sub-section (9).

Explanation 1—
Clause (a)
Clause (5){i), main para
Clause (0) (0), Proviso
Clause (Yi?) 2 *#-
Clause (6)(iii), main para, earlier half

Clause (6) (iii), main para, latter half, part
Clause (8) (8), main para, latter half,

Clause (6)(iii), Proviso.

Explanation 2—
Section 23B(1), eartier part
Section 23B(1), latter part .
Section 23B(2) .

Section 23B(3) . .
Section 23B(4) . tee

Section 2385). 5
Section 93B(6). 5 we
Section 23B(7). . se

Section 23B(8) .

Section 24(1)—~
mainpaa. ww
tst Proviso . . .
and Proviso, earlier half. .
and Proviso, latter half. .
Expt...
Expl. 2

Section 24 (2)—
main para, part soe
main para,part . ५
main para, part . . .
main para, part woe

Clause 193 (2), part

Clause 192 (6)

‘Clause 193 (2), part.

Clause 189 (1), opening tines:
Clause 189 (1) (i) and (if)
Clause 189 (2)

Clause 189 13)

Omited, as unnecessary
Clause 19०

Clause 165

Clause 113 (1)
Clause 113 (2)
Clause 118
Clause 114
Repeated
Clause 115
Clause 116

Clause 117(t), part

Clause 117(1), part

Clause 95(1), part

Clause 117(1}, part

Clause 117(1), part -
Clause 117(2), main para
Clause 117({2), Explanation.
Clause 95(2), Proviso

Clause 120

Clause 145(7)
Clause 145(2)
Clause 145(3)
Clause 145(4), part
Clause 145(7)
Clause 244

Clause 245

Clause 145(5)
Clause 145(6)

Clause 73(1)
Clause 74(1)
Clause 78/1)
Clause 76(1)
Clause 28, Expl 2
‘Clause 42(6)

Clause 7312
Clause 7314.
Clause 74/2;
Clause 74(4-


Proviso(a)  - ५ -+ - - Repeated.
Provise (0), part - Clause 73(3), part.

Proviso (6), part + Clause 74(3), part.

Proviso (c}, earlier part. |, Clause 762).
Proviso (¢),latter part. tase 78(2)(8).
Proviso (४) se - - - छल 99.
Proviso). ek Clause 79,

Proviso (f) + +. -+ -..- Omitted, as obsolete,

‘Section 24, (2.4)
‘Section 24, (2B)

Clause 75(1).

part है ५ +« - - Clause 75(2).
part है ५ +« -+- Clause 7563).
Section 24(3) : se -  - Clause 164.
Section 244(1), main para, earlier half =. Clause 184(1).
Section 24A(t), main para, latter half, part... Clause 184(2).
Section 2gA(+), matn para, latter half, part... Clause 184(3).

Section 24A(1), Prov. : +» Omitted, as unnecessary in the

draft as framed.

Section 2gA(a) . + eg Clause 184(4).
Section 2gB(1), pare... Clause 168(1),,part,
Section 2gB(1), part . : + Clause 168(6).
Section 2gB(1), part. =. |, Clause 16845).
Section 4B’). | ५ + .. Cause 168(2), part.
Section 2gB(3) . + + + Clause 168(2), part.
Section 25(1), part. . . . . » Clause 185(1).
Section 25(t), part. + . . . « Clause 185(4),
Section 25(2), earlier part ५. . . . + Clause 18513).
Section 25(2), latter part . पु + Clause 281.

Section 25(3), part. + Clause 13(1).
Section 25(3), part (applicable to income-tax) . Clause g1(s), part.
Section 25(4), part... + Clause-13(2).
Section 25(4), part (applicable to income-tax) Clause 91(1), part,
Section 25(4), Proviso (a) . . . . + Clause 100.
Section 25(4), Proviso(s) . . . . Clause 13(3).
Section a5(5) - - we. Clause g(a).
Section 25(6) . . . . - Clause 322,

Section 25.\(1), main para, earlier part . » Clause 181(2), part.
Section 25A(1), main para, latter part +. Clause 181(9).
Section 25A(2), Proviso. . . + Clause 181(2), part.
Section 25A‘2), main para, part + 5 Clause 180(4).
Section 25A(a), main para, part » Clause 181(4), (a).
Section a5A(a), main para, part... =. Clause 181(4), (6) part.
Section 25A(a), main para, part. =. =. Clause 1814/6).
Section 25A(2), Prov. = 5 ss, Clause 181(4), (6) part.
Section 25403)... Clase 18167).
Section 26(1) © ss. Cause 194(1).
Section 26(2), main para. | =... Clause 180(1).
Section 26(2), Prov.earlier half. =. =. , Clause 180(2). ‘
Section 26(2), Prov.tatterhaif . . =. =. Clause 180(3).

Section 26A(1). 6 eek. Clause 1911


Section 26A(2), pact .
Section 26A(2), part .
Section 26A/2), part.
Section 26A/2), part .
Section 26A(2), part .
Section 27 . oe
Section 28(1), main para
Section 28/3}, Prov. (a)
Section 28(2), Prev. (6)
Section 28(1), Prov.()
Section 28(:}, Prov.(d)
Section 28(2)..
Section 28(3)
Section 28(4)
Section 28(5)
Section 28(6)
Section 29 .
Section 30(1), main para
Section 30(1), 1st Proviso.

Section 30(1), and Proviso .
Section 30(1), 3rd Proviso

Section go(1A).
Section 30(2), part
Section 9०9), pat.
Section 30(3) . .
Section 31(1), carlier part.
Section 31(1), latter part
Section g1(2) . .
Section 31(2A) .

Section 31(3}, opening tines

Section 31(3), main para, clause(a)
Section 31(3), main para, clause(6)
Scetion 31(3), main para, clauses (०), (4) and (०)
Section 31(3), main para, clause (/)

Section 33(3), main para, clauses (2) and (4)

Section 31(3), 1st proviso.
Section 91(3), and proviso .
Section 31(4)

Section 31(5)

Section 32

Section 33(t), part
Section 33(1), part.
Section 33(1), part.
Section 33/1), part
Section 33(2), earlier part .
Section 33(2), latter part.
Section 38२8) ५;

3ul

Clause 191(3).
Clause 191 (4).
Clause 397 (5).
Clause 191 (6).

Clause 192(1).

Clause 151.
Clause 280(1).
Clause 280(3) (a).
Clause 280(3)(6).
Clause 280(3}(c).
Clause 280(2).
Clause 280(4).
Clause 283(1).
Clause 284.
Clause 283(3).
Clause 283/2).
Clause 163.

Clause 254.

Omitted, as under the draft
Proposed for existing section
46(1), penalinterest runs with-
‘out any specific order by the
Income-tax Officer.

Clause 255,
Omitted, in view of section 23 A.
as amended uptodate.

Clause 256.
Clause 257(2).

Clause 257(3).

Clause 257(1).

Clause २5811).

Clause 258(3).
Clause 258(4).

Clause 258(5).

Clause 259, opening lines.

‘Clause 259(1)(a), part.

Clause 259(1) (a), part.

Clause 259(1)(c), part.

Clause 259(1)(6).

Clause 259(1)(c), part.

Clause 259(2).

Clause 258(2).

‘Clause 275, part,

Clause 258(7). \

Repealed.

Clause 260(1), opening lines..
Clause 260(1)(a),
Clause २6०(1) (6).
Clause २61 (1), part.
Clause 260(2).
Clause 261(1), part.
Clause 261(2), part.


312

Section 33(3) . = = sees Clause 262, part.
Section 334) - - - - -+- - - Omnitted.
Section 393(5)  - . . . . . . Clause 275, part.
Section 33(6) - - - -+ - - - Omitted.

- Section 33A(1), main para 0 +. Clause 272(1), part.
Section 33A(1), proviso(a), part. =. =... Clause 272(5)(a), part.
Section 3387), proviso (a), part. =. =.=. Clause 272(5)(6), part.
Section 33A(1), proviso (6), part. 9. =». Clause 272(5) (¢), part.
Section 33A(1), proviso (6), part. . =». Clause 272(5) (4), part.
Section 33A(1), proviso (०) + 4 es Clause 272(3).

Section 33A/2), main para, part. =. =.=. Clause 272{1), part.

Section 33A(2), main para, part. =. =.= Clause 272(4).

Section 33A(2), tst proviso (a), part . ©. «=. Clause 272(5)(a), part.

Section 33A(2), 1st proviso (a), part. —. +, Clause 272(s)(d), part.

Section 33A(2), 1st proviso(s) . =. =. =. Clause 272(5)(c), part.

Section 33A(2), 1st proviso(e) . . Clause 272(5){d), part.

Section 33A(2), 2nd proviso =. =. =. SS.  Clause 272, Explanation 1.

Section 3A(2), Explanation =. =. ~~. Clause 272, Explanation 2.

Section 33A(3). - 4s Clause 272 (6).

Section 3B(t)- ee Cause 27341).

Section 33B(2). 6 ee. Clase 273 (2).

Section 33B(3), part.» sss Clause 260 (3) (4).

Section 33B(3), part. =... Clause 261 (1), part.

Section 5594), part. . =» ss. Clause 262, part. .

Section 33Biq), part. ee Omitted.

Section 34(1), 1st para, clause (a), part =. =. Clause 152 (a).

Section 34(1), tst para, clause (a), part ==. =, Clause 153, part.

Section 34(1), 1st para, clause (80), part |. "9. Glause 152 (6).

Section 34(1), tst para, clause (8), part =.=. Clause 153, part.

Section 34(1), 2nd para, part =. =. =. Clause 157, paragrapli below sub-

clause (5).

Section 34(1), and para, pare. . . . Clause 154(1). हु

Section 34(1), and para, part =. =. =. Clause 155, (1) opening lines and
. para (a), opening lined.

Section 34(1) 2nd para, part =... Clause 155(1) (6).

Section 34(1), tst proviso, clause (i) . . —. Omitted, as obsolete.

Section 34(1), 1st proviso, clause (1i), earlier half . Clause 155(1) (a) (iii).

Section 34(1), 1st proviso, clause (i), latter half, part Clause 155 (1) (०) (ii).

Section 34(1), 1st proviso, clause (i), letter half, Clause 155 (1) (@) (1)
part.

future yoars.

Section 34(1), ist proviso, clause (iii, part... Clause 154(2).

Section 34(1), 1st proviso, clause (मं), फट... Clause 157(1).

Section 34(1), 1st proviso, clause (iif), part... Clause 157(2).

Section 34(1), 2nd proviso . . . . « Clause 155(2).

Section 34(1), 3rd proviso. =... Clause 158(1).

Section 34(1), Explanation. =. =. =. ~—.- Clause 152, Explanation.

Section 34(14). - sees Onnitted, as obsolete.

Section 34 (18). . =. -+ -_ - Omitted, as not applicable for
future years. ;

Section 34(1€). 5. ss ss Omitted, as not applicable for

1


Section g4(:D). =. ses Omitted, as not applicable for
future years.

Section 342). | -. - -+ + Clause 158(2),

Section 34(3), main para, part... =. =. Clause 160 (1) (2).

Section 34(3), main para, part. =. =.= Clause 160 (2) (6) (i).

Section 34(3), main para, part [relating te asses- Replaced by clause 160 (2) (a).
sment under section 34(1) (a) }

Section 34(3), tst proviso. 6 e ५... Clause 160 (2) (4) (if).

Section 34(3), 2nd proviso, earlier half ५... Clause 160 (3) (i).

Section 34(3), 2nd proviso, latter half, part. . Clause 356.

Section 34(3), and proviso, latter half, part. .- Clause 160 (3) (it).

Section 35(1), main para, part . 9. =~. Clause 161 (1) (2) and (8).

Section 35(1), main para, part... «Clause 161 (1) (¢).

Section 35(), main para, part. 9... Clause 161 (2).

Section 35(1), main para, part... =». Clause 161 (7).

Section 550), st Prov. 9. 0. ~ «Clause 16 (3). हि

Section 35(1), 2nd Proviso. . .  . « Omitted, as not applicable for
future assessment years.

Section g5(2) - ee Omited, का the Teil is

Sectiong5(3) - - - -+- sts Clause 161 (5).

Section 35(4) - ५. ses 09७८ 161(6).

Sectiong5(5) - - sees Clause 162(1).

Section 35 (6) - - =» + ss Omitted, as not applicable for

: future’ assessment years.

Section 357). - ५.५... es Omnitted, as not applicable for
future’ assessment yeags.

Section 35(8) - = sss Clause 162(3).

Section 35(9) - - ests Clase 36264).

Seetiongs(to) - +++ Omitted, a8 not applicable fox

Section 35 (11) (See Finance Act, 1958) . - Clause 162(5).

Section 36. 0s et Repeated.

Section 37(1) - . . . . » Clause 136(1).
Section 372). 0 ५. -+ - -+ - Clase 137.

Section 373)». st 0७४६ 196(2)-
Section 374) - + + sss Clause 13665):
Sectiong8 =. se Clause 198.

Section 39 . . . . . . « Clause 139.

Section 40 (3), part - . . . . « Clause 169 (1) (ii).
Section gos), part... s+ Clase 170 (1) part.

Section 4o(1), pat. 0. +._+ Clause 17001), part.
Section go). see Clause 17303) (4).
Section 41 (1), main para, part. 9. ++ Clause 169 (1) (#)-
Section 41(1), main para, part... = + Clause 160 (1) (fe).

Section 41 (1), main para, part. =. =» = Clause 170(1), part.
Section q1(1), main para, part... ++ Clause 170 (1), part.
Section 41(1), 1st Prov., earlier balf, part. -- Clause 174, opening part,
Section 41(1), ist Prov., earlier half, part. Clause 174(2), part.
Section 41(1), 1st Prov., latter half. . «Clause 174(a), part,
Section 41(1), and Prov. 2 9 ५ . +++ Clause 175. :
Section 41(2) 2. ee + Glaus 177, part. '

i 1


Ble

Section 42(1), main para, earlier half.
Section 42(:), main para, latter half, part
Section 42(1), main para, latter half, part.
Section 42(1), main para, latter half, part
Section 42(1), 1st Prov. 6 ee
Section 42(1), and Prov. 2 ee
Section 42(t), 3rd Prov. - ese
Section 422). + - -:
Section 42(3)

Section 43, mainpara | ee
Section 43, 1st Prov.

Section 43, 2nd Prov.

Section 43, Explanation

Section 44(1). part (See Finance Act, 1958)

Section 44 (1), part (See Finance Act, 1958).

Section 44(2), Part (See Finance Act 1958) -
Section 44 (2), part (See Finance Act, 1958) -
Section 44(3), part (See Finance Act, 1958) -
Section 44(3), part (See Finance Act, 1958) -
Section 44(3), part (See Finance Act, 1958) -
Section 44(3), part (See Finance Act, 1958) -
Section 4gA, carlier part. 0. ee
Section 44A, latter part - . . .
Section 448 (1) . toe
Section 448 (2), earlier half, part

Section 44B (2), earlier half, part
Section 4B (2), latter half .

Section 44B (3), earlier part.
Section 44B(3), latter part. ee
Section 44G. . . . . .
Section 44D.
Sub-section (1), part - . .
Sub-section (1), part... es
Sub-section (2), part... ee
Sub-section (2), part... ee
Sub-section (2), part. . . .
Subsection (9). 00-0) ee
Subsection (3) = 6 + -+- -
Sub-section (5)... et
Sub-scction (6). 5 + -+- -
Sub-section (7) (@) 5s

Sub-section (7) (0) 5 es
Subsection (7) () set

Sub-section (7)(4) 6 ss
Subsection7() 6 ee
Subsection (8). - ee
Subsection (9). 5 2 +e

Clause 90), main para.

Clause 169 (1) i).

Clause 170 (1), part.

Clause 177, part.

Clause 183.

Clause 171(2).

Clause 171(3).

Clause 95.

Clause 9{#), Expl.

Clause 173(1) (०) (5) (०-

Clause 173(4), Prov.

Clause 173(2)-

Clause 173(1), Expt.

Clause 186(1), opening lines and!
‘sub-clause (a).

Clause 196(1). opening lines andt
sub-clause (a).

Clause 186 (3), part.

Clause 196 (3). part. ५

Clause 186(1) (6).

Clause 186(3), part.

Clause 196(1) (5)

Clause 196(3), part.

Clause 182(1).

| Clause 182(8).

Clause 182 (3) -
Clause 182 (4), part.
Clause 182(5).
Clause 182(2).
Clause 182(4), part.
Clause 182(6)
Clause 182(7).

Clause 96(1) (a).

व Clause 9616) (f), part.

Clause 96(1) (6). *

Clause 96(6) (०.

Clause 96 (6) (f), part.

Clause 96(2).

Clause 96(3).

Clause 96(4).

Clause 96(5) -

Clause 96(6) (a).

Clause 96(6) (4).

Omitted, in view of 5, 23A ar
amended uptodate,

Clause 96(6) (4).
Clause 96(6) (¢).
Clause 96(7).
Clause 96(8).


335

Section 442--
Sub-section (1)
Sub-section (2)
Sub-section (3)
Sub-section (4)
Sub-section (5)
Sub-section (6)

Section 44F—

Sub-section (1)
Sub-section (2)
Sub-section (3), main para
Sub-section (3), proviso
Sub-sertion (4)
Sub-section (5)
Sub-section (6)

Section 45, main para, part

Section 45, main para, part

Section 45, 1st Prov. (printed with the main para)

Section 45, and Prov
Section 45, Expl.
Section 46(s)
Section 46(1A)

Section 46०)... . . -
Section 46(3) & (4). . .
Section 46(5)

Section 46(5A), 1st paragraph past...
Section 46(5A), 1st paragraph, part 2.
Section 46(5A), and paragraph. . .
Section 46(5A), 3rd paragraph

Section 46(5A), 4th paragraph

Section 46(5A), 5th paragraph .
Section 46(5A), 6th paragraph. ६
Section 46(6) . oe
Section 46(7), main paragraph

Section 46(7), tst Prov. eee
Section 46(7},and Prov. 2. wk

Section 46(7), Explanation, earlice half
Section 46(7), Explanation, latter half, part .
Section 46(7), Exptanation, Iatter half, part .
Section 46(7), Explanation, latter half, part

Section 46(8) . . *#« .
Section 469)... - - -
Section 46(10) coe ee
Section 46A(2) so. .

‘Section 46A(2), main paragraph .
Section 46A(2), Explanation ef ०
21—1 Law Com./58.

oan अर

‘Clauss 97(1).
Clause 97(a).
Clause 97 (5)-
‘Clause 97 (6).
Clause 97(8).
Clauses 97(7) and 279.

Clause 97(3), part.
Clause 97(3) part.
Clause 97(3), part.
Clause 97(4)-
Omitted.
Omitted.
Omitted.
Clause 229 (1).
Clause 229 (3).
Clause 229 (5).
Clause 229 (6).
Clause 229, Expl.
Clause ago.
Omitted, as under the draft for
Geo Prepon withput any
order.
Clause #30(1).
Clause 235(5).
Clause 235(2).
Clause 235(3)(i)-
Clause 235(3)(#).
Clause 235(3) (#2),
Clause 253 (3) (9).

Clause 235(3)(iii).
Clause 236.
Clause 242, main 9474.
Clause 242, Prov.
Omitted. See ist =
proposed.
Clause 242,
Clause 2gt(2).
Clause 235(1).
Clause 243.
Clause 237.
Clause 238.
Clause 239.
Glanse 241(1).
Clause “ata
Clause 241, Exp


Section 46A(3) .
Section 46A(4) -

Section 47 .
Section 48(1) . 6
Section 48(2)

Section 48(3)

Section 48(4)

Section 48A

Section 49

Section 4gA

Section 4988

Section 49B(1), part .

Section 49B(1), part.

Section 49B(2) .

Section 490

Section 490--
Sub-section (1). +
Sub-section (2)
Sub-section (3).
Sub-section (4).

Explanation
Section 49.
Section q9F —. .

Section 50, main paragraph
Section 50, 18t Prov. .
Section 50, and Prov.
Section 50A

Section 51, opening lines
Section 51(a) 2 we
Section 51(5) 2 ke
Section 51(c). .
Section 53 (४)

Section (०0... -  -
Section 51, last part .
Section 52 . . .
Section 53 . . .
Section $4(1) -

Section 54(2), earlier part .
Section 54(2), latter part.

Section 54(3)—

Clause (a). -

Glause (6).

Glau). . -

Clause (7)... 9... *«-
020३८ (०)

Clause (f)

Clause(s) oe

316

Clause 241(3).
Clause 241(6).
Clause 240.
Clause 247.
Clause 250.
Clause 248(1).
Clause 251.
Repealed.
Repeated.
Clause 92.
gievealed.
‘Omitted, in view of redraft of
ion 3.
Clause 246(2).
Clause 246/3).
Clause 94.

Clause 93(1).
Omitted, as spent.
Clause 93(2)
Omitted, as spent.
Clause 93, Expl.
Clause 253.

Clause 248(2).
Clause 249(2).
Omitted, as spent.
Omitted, as spent.
Repealed. :
Clause 285, opening lines,
Clause 285(¢).
Clause 285(e).
Clause 285(5).
Clause 285(c).
Clause 285(a).,
Clause 285, last part.
Clause 286.

Clause 287.

Clause 141 (1).
Clause 141(2).
Clause 288(1),

Clause 141(3)(a).
Clause 241(3)(b).
Clause 141(3)(d),.
Clause 141(3) (6).
Clause 741 (9) (७).
Clause 141 (9) (8).
Clause 341 (3) 0).
‘Clause 141(3) 09):
Clause 3413) (0.


Clause (i)
Clause (j)
Clause (4)
Clause (1)
Clause (m)
Clause (n)
Clause (0)
Clause (p)
Section 54(4) -
Section 54(5) -

Section 55—
Main paragraph
18t proviso
and Proviso
Section 56

Section 564—
Sub-section (1), opening fines .
Sub-section (1), Clause (४), part
Sub-section (1), Clause (i), part
Sub-section (1), Clause (if)
~Sub-section (2).
Section57 9...
Section 58, Sub-section (1), part
Section 58, Sub-section (1), part

Section 589 - we
Section 58A : . .
Section 5986)... 4. -
Section 58B(2) . . . .
Section 58B(3) toe
Section 588A). wl,
Section 564)... 9.

Section 580(1), opening tines
Section 58C(1)(a), main paragraph

Section 58C(1)(a), Proviso. :
Section 58061) (8), main paragraph
Section 58C(1)(5), Proviso. .
Section 58C(1)(c) 6 se
Section 580(1) (४), main paragraph
Section 580(1) (4), Proviso. .
Section 58C(1)(e) - . :
Section 58C(1)(f) 2 -

Section 580(0) (9), earlier part.
Section 58C(1)(g), latter part,
Section s8C()(,
Section §8C(2). 0. wl.

Section 58D . . 2.
Section 58E www,
Section §8F 5 ew,
Section 58G(1), earlier part. 2

r
‘Section 58G(1), latter part. t

Clause 141(3)(2).
Clause 141(3}(m).
Clause 141(3){o).
Clause 141(9)(9).
Clause 141 (3) (9)-
Clause 141(3)(7).
Clause 141(3)(5).
Clause 141(3)().
Clause 141(4).

Clause 288(2).

Clause 98(1), main paka.
Clause 98(3). :
Clause 104.

Clause 99.

Clause 108(1), opening tines,

Clause 108(1)(i).

Clause 108(3).

Clause 108(1) (ii).

Clause 108(2).

Repeated.

Clause 102(5).

Clause 102(०).

Clause 200(2).

Clause 305.

Clause 289(1).

Clause 289/25.

Clause 289(3).

Clause 289(4).

Clause 301. ;

Clause २90, opening lines.

Clause 2g0(a). :

Clause 291(1).

Clause 290(6).

Clause 293(2).

Clause 290(c).

Clause 290(d).

Clause 291 (3) (0)

Clause 290(¢).

Clause 290(f).

Clause 290(g).

Clause 291(3) (०).

Clause 2go(h)

Clause 292.

Clause 291(4).

Clause 294.

Clause 295.

Omitted, as covered
clauses. (13) and

Clause ag7(h).  ”


Seetion 586(2)" ee
Section 586(3) soe
Sectins@8H 6 we
Section 988. ee
Section 580)... . -
Section 5852). 9. -
Section 5833). - -
Section s8}(4)- ee
Section 58J(5) ...-. *-
Section 58K. - . .
Section 58L 2 wwe
Section 58M. 0. -
Section 58N 2 2.
Section 580 :
Section 589, main paragraph
Section 58P, Proviso. 9.
Section 58Q 2. - -
Section 58R, main paragraph, part
Section 58R, main paragraph, part
Section 58R, niain paragraph, part
Section 58R, 1st Prov. .
Section 588, and Prov.

Section 585(1) .

Section 58S(2) . :
Section 58T .  .  . -
Section 58U 5 . . .
Section 58V.. «6
Section 59 . . . .
Section 60(1) 2 we

Section 60(2), for income-tax
Section 60/2), for super-tax
Section 60(3)

Section 60A —. . . .

Section 62(1), part. . .
Section 61(1), part...
Section 61(1), part. . .
Section 611), part...
Section 61(1), part. + .
Section 61(2) (3) fo
Section 61(2) .
Section 61(2}(iii) *-
Section 61(2)(i0) 6

Section 61(3), main paragraph, part
Section 61(3), main paragraph, part
Section 61(3), Prov...
Section 62 . . . .
Section63 6 2 + -
Section 641) 2 we

338

Clause 296.
‘Clause 297(1).
Clause 298.
Clause 300.
Clause 299(1).
Clause 299(2).
‘Clause 299(3).
Clause 291(5)-
‘Clause 2g9(4)-
Clause 302.
Clause 303.
Clause 304.
Clause 318.
Clause 306.
Clause 307(1)-
Clause 307(2)-
Clause 308.
Clause 309.
Clause 310, main paragraph.
Clause 311, part.
Clause 311, part.
Clause 310, Prov.
Clause 312.
Clause 313.
Clauses 314 and 166(3).
Clause 315.
Clause 316.
Clause 329.
Omitted as obsolete. See exist~
ing S. 60(3).
Clause go.
‘Clause 112.

Omitted as inapplicable to fu~
‘ture assessment years.

Omitted, as not required for fu
ture assessment years.

Clause 324(1).

Clause 324(2), opening lings.

Clause 324(2)(i).

Clause 324(2)(i).

Clause 324(2)(0), part.

Clause 324(2)(ii).

Clause 324(2) (ii).

Clause 324(2), Expl.

Clause 324(2){0), part.

Clause 324(3).

Clause 324{4), main para...

Clause 324(4), Prov..

Clause 325. -

Clause 320.

Clause 335(0).


Section 64(2) oo
Section 64(3), main paragraph
Section 64(3), rst Prov. 2
‘Section 64(3), and Prov. earlier part
‘Section 64(3), and Prov. latter part
‘Section 649), 3rd Prov...
‘Section 64(4)
‘Section 64(5)
‘Section 65 . .
‘Section 66{1}, main paragraph, part
‘Section 66(1), main paragraph, part
Section 66(1), Prov...
Section 66(2)
Section 66/3) :
Section 664). - - -
‘Section 66(5), part. se
Section 66(5), part
Section 666). we
‘Section 66(7), main paragraph -
Section 66(7), proviso. *
Section 66(7A) .
Section 65(8) . *«-
Section 66A(1), main paragraph
Section 66A(1), Proviso...
‘Section 66A(2} - oe
‘Section 664 (3), main paragraph
Section 66A(3), 1st Proviso, part
‘Section 66A(3), tst Proviso, Part
Section G6A(3), 2nd Prov.
‘Section 66A(4) . .
Section 67 . .
Section 674
Section 67B -
Section 68 पु . .
Schedule
Rule 1. पु पु . .
Rulez. 2. &
Rule ३ - .
Ruleq. - - - -:
Rule 506)... . we
Rules). . -
Rule 5(iii) Loe
Rule s(iv) ee

Rute 5(v)
Rule 6, carlier half, part

Rule 6, earlier half, part

Rute 6, fatter half

Rulez. 2 - - -
छाल 6, छबबव.. ५. *५
Rule,8, छब्०्2. 9. ५ -
Rute 9 foe ke

Clause 135(2).

Clause 135(3), main para.
Clause 135(3), २४ Prov.
Clause 195(4)(2)
Clause 135(4)(6)-
Clause 135(5).

Clause 135(6).

Clause 135(7)-

Clause 326.

Clause 261(1), part. ५.
Omitted.

Omitted.

Omined.

Omitted.

Omiued.

Clause 263.

Clause 265.

Clause 266.

2. Rule 70) (1), Fie

Clause 273, part.
Clanse 267(2), part.
Clause 261(2), part.
Clause 278(2).
Clause 264(1).
Clause 264(2).
Clause 268.

Clause 269(1), main para.
Clause 269(1), Prov.
‘Clause 273, part.
Clause 274.

Clause 269(4)-
Clause 327.

Clause 276.

Clause 328.
Repealed.

Rule 1, First Schedult.

Rule 2, First Schedule.

Rule 3, First Schedule.

Rule 4, First Schedule.

Clause 5(1) (g). >

Rule 7(1)(i), First Schedule.

Rute 7(1) (iii), First Schedule,

Rute 7(1) (iv), First $ohedule.

4०

Rule 5, opening lines, First Sche-
dule.

Rule 5(b), First Schedule.
Rule 5(०), First Schedule.
Omitted, as not required.
Rule 6(1) First Schedule.
Rute 6(2), First Schedule.
Clause 44, part

1, Ttis understood that there are;no compasfey carrying on dividing societie} or asseae-

ment business.


326

NOTES ON CLAUSES
Cuaprer I
PRELIMINARY

Notes to clause 1.

The word “Indian” has been omitted in consonance
with the recommendation made by the Commission in res-
pect of other Acts, and in conformity with recent legislative
practice.

Notes to elause 2,

The words “unless here is anything repugnant in the
subject or context”, appearing in existing section 2, have
been retained, in view of the opening lines of section 3,
General Clauses Act, though recent Central Acts use the
formula “unless the context otherwise requires”.

1. Agricultu- Till recently there was a conflict of judicial opjnion

ralincome. yegarding the interpretation of the word “agriculture”. In
the latest pronouncement of the Supreme Court’, all the
decisions have been reviewed and the conflict in the judicial
pronouncement resolved. Hence it is not necessary to ex-
plain what is meant by “agriculture”.

2. Annual Since existing section 9 has been broken up, in the
value. draft, into various clauses, it appears useful to have, this,
definition pointing to the relevant provision. है

3. Appellate No change has been made in the existing provision.
Assistant Co- Only, it has been placed before the definition of ‘assesgee’.
. Approved Since these two expressions occur frequently in the

uperannua-
ton ta ‘te, Act, a reference has been made to them here.

5. Assessee. The existing definition of ‘assessee’ has been rep! i
in the draft by a more comprehensive definition, so to
include all the possible categories of assessees, i.e., {i) a
erson who is himself liable to pay the tax on incomd be-
longing to him, (ii) a persop able to pay tax.on indome
belonging to another person, and (iii) a person who is deem-
ed under the sections of the Act to be an “assessee” or! “as-
sessee in default”.

Wherever necessary, drafting changes have been i
in the substantive provisions (particularly in the Chapter
entitled “Liability in Special ”) to bring out the result
that any person on whom a एबी ility to pay tax ९६९, 19 im-
posed by the Act, becomes an: assessee. It is hoped that
the definition of ‘assessee’, as drafted, when read with] the
substantive provisions, will cover all cases of vicarious: lia-
bility falling under any of the following categories :-+

(1) One person’s income included in another's tota} in-

come-vide existing sections 4(2), 16(1)(c), 16(3),
44D, 44E and 44F, as well as section 42(2).

1 CLT. vs. Raja 320 Saha 1 2 ४. T.R. 466. abso
CLT. vs. Jyoti Kens 0०४0४. (1957): अर: Foot and Kanteshwar oo vs.
C.-T. (1957) 32 LTR. 58. | 1;



उश

(2) One person liable to be assessed as representing an- =
other person under existing sections 40, 41, 42(1).
and 44B(3).

(3) One person ceasing fo exist, and thereupon ano-
ther becoming liable, to be assessed for or to pay
tax for which the former is liable—vide existing
sections 24B, 25A, 26(2), Prowiso and 44.

(4) One person liable to pay (without the formality of
assessment) tax normally payable by another—vide
existing sections 18(7) and 46A(2) and (3).

(5) Cases where procedure for recovery of tax may be
applied against one person, (who is not himself the
assessee) for tax saa ane from another—vide
existing section 46(5A) 5th para and also draft
Second Schedule, Rule 87.

(Existing section 8, 3rd Proviso and segtion 58-U need |
not be specifically dealt with Here).

Since the definition of “assessee” is made comprehen-
sive, the words ‘or other person hab te to pay such tax, |,
penalty or interest” occuring in existing section 29 have
been omitted in the draft'. This will remove the difficulty
created by a decision of the Madras High Court’.

A definition of assessment, as including re-assessment, whe
has been inserted on the lines of the Canadian Income-tax "Ff"
Act’.

This is new. Though the Act uges the expression “as- ye Asses.
sessment year” there is no definition of that expression ™fAt year,
anywhere in the Act. We have, therefore, included a defi- ।
nition which conforms to the existing practice. In the In-
come-tax Acts of other countries, e.g. Ceylon, there is a {
definition of ‘assessment year’.

This is new. Instead of giving an elaborate aa Average
to arrive at the average rate wherever it becomes necessary, 1; °
we thought it more convenjent and conducive to clarity
to add a definition. This is' based on sub-section (5) of
existing section 17. . :

Mention of earned income relief has not been made in
the definition, in view of the ‘fact that the provisions of the
Act relating to earned income relief have now Become ob-
solete. Since successive Finance Acts for the last two years
have not provided for this relief,.it would seem to be the
confirmed policy of Government to abélish earned income
relief. |

This is also a new provision intgnded to arrive at the Average rate
average rate of super-tax; (compare the definition of “ave- कु supertax.
rage rate of income-tax” referred to above).

come-tax.

1 Vide draft clause 163.

2B. Alfied vs. Addl. LT.O., (1956) 29 1-7.
vs. CLT. (1958)33 1.T.R. 466. i}

4 See the (Canadian) Income-tad Act., sath fection 139(1)(4).

... 708 See also Abdul Kasim


& Business.

10. Capital
asset,

it. Central
of Re-

venue.

12, Commis.

sioner.

13. Compa
ny.

14. Co-opera*
tive Seciety.

35. Director,
Manager,
Managing
Agent.

16, Director
of Inspec-
tion.

17. Dividend.

18. Earned
income.

322
No change has been made in existing section 2(4).

Item (iii) of the existing definition, which excludes “any
jJand from which the income derived is agricultural income’ न
has been redrafted and replaced by the words “any agricul.
tural land in India”. The general scheme of the constitu-
tional provisions relating to taxation is to exclude agricul.
tural land from taxation by the Union, and it would,
therefore, be in conformity with that scheme to express
this exclusion, not in terms of “agricultural income” but in
terms of land. Agricultural land which has been cultivated,
say, for 5 years and then remained fallow for 2 or 3 years.
during which it is sold, would, under the existing definition,
attract capital gains tax. This anomaly will now be remov-
ed by the proposed redraft.

No change; it corresponds to existing section 2(4B).
No change; it corresponds to existing section 2(5).

There is no substantial change in the draft, which fol-
lows the existing definition in section 2(5A).

2s? change; it follows the existing definition in section
).

We have included in the existing definition [sec. 2{8A)]
the word “Director” also, and we have substituted fot the
“Indian Companies Act, 1913", the “Companies Act, 1956”.
To make the meaning clear, we have also introduced the
words “in relation te a company”.

No change; it corresponds to existing section 2(6).

There is no change in the existing definition in section
2(6A), except that we have added another explanation to
the effect that the accumulated profits “shall include all
profits of the company up to the date of distribution or. pay-
ment referred to in this clause”. :

The reason for this alteration is this. In the cage of
Girdhar Das and Co. Ltd. vs. C.1T.', the Bombay pigt
Court observed that in this section, “accumulated pe its”
have been used in contra-distinction to current profits In
our opinion, the intention of the legislature was to in¢lude
the current profits also in the definition; and to make this
clear we have made the proposed alteration.

We have adopted the existing definition [section 2(6AA)J
with the following changes. To make the meaning of clause
{b) clear, we have split it up into two clauses and number-
ed them as (b) and (c). The existing clause (c) is renum-
bered as clause (d). We have added an explanatiqn [ explanatign to

~ LTR. 82. 4 |

3. 997 3


323

overcome the difficulty introduced by the Madras High
Court in Mari Muthu Nadar v. C.1.T.'

No change; it follows the existing definition in section 19. _ Firm,
2(6B). partner and

partnership.
We have included in the existing definition other pro-
visions which treat income as deemed income for the pur- 20 Income.
pose of the Act.

The Act uses at several places the lengthy expression
“income, profits and gains”. To sim scat the matter and
to avoid repetition, we have included fits and gains” in
‘the definition of income, and throughaut the Act we have
used, as far as possible, the word “income”. Suggestions
have been made that we should give an exhaustive defini-
tion of income. 1६ is not possible to do so.

The provision within the brackets in existing sub-
clause (iii) (relating to the meaning of “person having sub-
stantial interest in a company”) has been transposed as an
explanation.

Item (vii) of the existing definition of income relates
to the profits and gains of imsurance business carried on
by a mutual insurance association or by a Co-operative
Society. What is described ag “profits and gains” in this
item is, in fact, merely a surplus. The definition simply
artificially extends the conception of income so as to cover
‘such surplus. The existing words “eamputed in accord-
ance with Rule 9 in the Schedule” imdicate this clearly,
when read with existing rule 2(b) of the Schedule. An
attempt has been made to bring out this aspect still more
‘clearly in the draft.’

No change, in the existing definition in section 2(7). 2% jgcome

We have revised the definition of ‘Indian company’, in 22. Indian
the light of the Companies Aet, 1956, and the abolition of Company.
the distinction between Part A and Part B States. The
existing position relating to companies registered in the
State of Jammu and Kashmir is retained.

No change; it follows existing section 2(6D), and has 23. imapect
been placed after “Income-tax cer”, mission-

cre!
No change; it follows existing sebtion 2(6E), and has 24-lInapector

been placed after “Income-tax Officer”. ae Income-

1 (1986) 3० 1.1.1९. 670. For the corresponding provision in the U. K.
Act, see Section 525(1) last para, of the Income-tax Act. 1952.

2 For a general discussion of the “position regarding mutual insurance
associations, see the recent Privy Council case of English and Scottish Joint Co-
operative Wholesale Society Lid., v. 14 icudttral a ‘ax Cammissoner (4948)
2A. 8. R. 295. See also 1. 1. 1. C. Re 1918, par. 126, page $4, an
compare section 121, Australian Incoa etc. Amt, 1936-1953.


25. Magistra-
te.

26. Non-resi-
dent.

27. Person,

28. Prescrib-
ed.

2g. Previous ५

year.

go, Principal

cer.

31. Public

Servant.

32. Register-
im.

33. Regular

Assessment. _

324

Under the existing definition, second-class magistrates
specially empowered by the Central Government are also
authorised to try offences under Act, and in the State
of Jammu and Kashmir the State Government may autho-
rise a Magistrate of the second class to try offences under
the Act. We are, however, not in favour of second-class
Magistrates trying offences under the Act, and we have
therefore, confined the power to first class Magistrates
throughout India. Incidentally, this will lead to simplifica-
on of the definition and uniformity.

The Act uses various phrases for a person who is not a
resident of India. For the sake of uniformity, the. phrase
“non-resident” has een used in the draft wherever practi-
cable, and has been defined here.

The definition of “person” in existing section 2(9) has
been amplified.

The existing definition includes (a) Hindu undivided
family and (b) a local authority. The General Clauses Act,’
defines “person” as including a company or association or
body of individuals whether incorporated or not. The
charging section (section 3) of the Income-tax Act enume-
rates the units for taxation as “individual, Hindu un ifivided
family, company, local authority, firm and other ia
tion of persons, or the Partn ers of a firm or the mpmbers
of the association individually”. Section 4 of the Act refers
to a “person”.

Tt seems desirable to have a comprehensive definition
of the word “person” in the Act so as to cover all entities.
mentioned in~

(i) the existing definition, [s. 2(9)}, :
(ii) the, existing charging provisions [sections 3 $nd 4},
an ||

(iii) the General Clauses Act.

The definition has therefore been amplified on thd above

lines’.
1
No change, vide existing section 2(10).

The expression is defined separately in Clause 5,

No change, vide existing section 2(12). i

No change, vide existing; section 2(13).

No change, vide existing section 2(14). :

The expression is at prasent defined only casually in

the Act in S. 18A(5). Since the expression occurs in some
sections, it is desirable to pl&e its definition in this ¢lause.

~ on . a —_—__
» Section 3(42), Genedal Clauses At.
* See also notes to clabse 3.


325

The definition refers back to the. proposed clause’ 34. Resident.
which reproduces S. 4A with modifications. .

The definition is new. Wherever bpth income-tax and 35- Fax.
super-tax are intended to be covered, thé simple word “tax”
would be sufficient. The substantive provisions in the draft.
therefore, use the word “tax” wherever. convenient, and
it has been defined here.
No change; vide existing section 2(15), first para. 36. Total
inconie.
The existing definition in section 305) (second para) 37: Total
is reproduced with one change. ‘The existing words “except world inco~
income to which............ this Act does not apply” are not me.
happy and have been replaced by more appropriate words
which bring the wording in line with existing section 4(3).
; yi ist i ५. 38. Unregist-
No change; vide existing section 2(16). x sd ina
Existing section 2(14A), defining the expression “tax- Taxable ters
able territories”, has been omitted in the draft, as the use Mtori¢s.
of that expression is no longer necessary and can be con- .
veniently replaced by the word “India®*

Craprer It .
BASIS OF CHARGE
Notes to clause 3.

Sub-clause (1)—

(1) The word “person” has been substituted for the
words “individual”, “Hindu undivided family” etc. and the
definition of “person” is being widened? for the following
reasons :—

(a) As already explained’. the comb ined effect of the
definition of “person” in section 2(9) of the Income-tax Act
and section 3(42) of the General (181 Act is that a “per-
son” includes (a) Hindu undivided fami ly; (b) local autho-
rity; (९०) company; and (d) assbciation ‘or body of indivi-
duals whether incorporated or not. No specific mention has
been made of corporations other than ¢dmpanies included
within category (0). :

The problem which has troybled the courts is whether
such corporations are within: the cm ging section. It
can be met by the suggested @mendmpnt by introducing
the word “person” in the ion. Ig ‘Commissioner of
Income-tax, Madras vs. Salem ‘District’ Urban Bank Ltd."
a co-operative bank was treated as an individual by an

3 Clause 6.

+ As assessments for the period prior to the Commencement of the new
Act will continue to be governed by the exsting Act, there will be no need to
tay down separate periods for the various “fo

+ See notes to clause 2 definition of * . |

$ (194० 8. LTR. 269.

Hy


326
artificial interpretation of the word “individual”. Similar-
y , in Commissioner of Income-taxr, Madras vs. The Bar
‘ouncil, Madras', a bar council and in the Baronetcy case*
a corporation sole, were treated as individuals. It seems
desirable to make the position clear.

(0) There is also the problem of private religious
trusts in favour of deities or mutts which are treated as
artificial jurisdical person in law, vide existing 5. 41. The
point for consideration is whether it is proper to bring
them under “individual” by a strained construction or whe-
ther it would be more appropriate to include them under
“person”. These difficulties can be solved if we adopt the
word “person” in S. 3, the charging section. It may be
noted incidentally that in the existing 5. 3 it occurs only
in the expression “association of persons”.

{c) All the foreign Acts employ the term “person” in
the charging section, and it is better to resolve all doubt
about the chargeability of particular classes of persons by
using the comprehensive term “person” in section 3.

(2) The next point for consideration is the,difficulty
noticed in sustaining the legality of the recovery of the
tax on the current income under S. 18 and 188. The charge
created under section 3 applies to the income of the pre-
vious year, while the provisions of sections 18 and 18A
apply to the income of the assessment year also. To meet
this difficulty a proviso has been added on the lines of the
€eylon Income-tax Ordinance to cover the provisions of
the Act relating to charging the tax in particular cases in
respect of income, profit and gains of a period other than
the previous year. This will cover 5. 24A, 25(1) and 448
(3) of the Act, whereby the income of the assessment year
itself is made-chargéable at the rates: prescribed by the
Finance Act of the assessment year.

Sub-clause (2) is intended to make it clear that there
is some kind of liability to pay tax in cases where tax is
‘deductible at source or payable in advance. It seems desir-
able to make a reference to this obligation to pay tax in
advance etc. in the charging section itself, so as to bring
out more directly a position which is implied in existing
sections 18 and 18A.

(3) After the phrase “in respect of the total income
of the previous year” the words “or years, as the case may
‘be” have been added. Under the definition of “previous year”
in the existing section 2(11} a person may have separate
previous years in respect of each separate source of in-
come. The proposed addition is intended to meet such
cases’.

1 (1943) 71 1.1. 8-४. .
> Currimbhhy Ibrahim Barenetcy Trust. vs. 6. 1. ह., 5 7. T. C.n484 (Bombay).
3 Gf.CIT vs, Sooumiamurthy (1946) 114 LT. R. ¥05.

i pt



327

Notes to clause 4.

(1) The income of residents and non-residents been
dealt with separately for the sake of seach and
clarity.

(2) The first proviso to S. 4(1) has been omitted, as it
concerns the assessment year 1939-40 and is now unmeces-
sary.

(3) The second proviso to S. 4(1) relating to persons
not ordinarily resident should be omitted, as it is proposed
to abolish the category and the exemption granted in res-
pect of such persons’. If, however, the provision is to be
retained, it can be kept as shawn in the relevant clause
on the subject’.

(4) The third proviso to section 4(1) concerning the
exemption for unremitted foreign income upto. Rs, 4,500
has been transferred to the clause relating to income which
does not form part of total income.’

(5) The fourth proviso to 5. 4(1) relating to residents
who are not resident in two out of three preceding years
has also been transferred to that clause.‘

(6) The fifth proviso to S.4(1) relating to exemption”
for foreign income of residents who deposit tax etc., with-
in three months (where the fourth proviso does not 90019)
has also been transferred to the clause relating to jexclu-
sions from total income, after omitting portions which have
become obsolete.’

(7) The words “by or on behalf of” have been used in
respect of foreign income received in India [vide draft
sub-clause (1), (a), (9), (e), (0 and (g)] to cover cases
where the income is receiveti not by the assessee Himself
but by any other person on his behalf.

(8) Explanation 1 to S.4(1) has been incorporated in
draft sub-clause (3), .

(9) Explanation 2 to section 4(1) is transferred to the
new clause relating to deemed income’.

(10) Explanation 3 to S.4(1) has also been trangferred
to that clause’.

(11) Explanation 4 to existing S. 4(1) relates to income
which accrued in a Part B State or merged territory be-
fore the extension of the Income-tax Act thereto and is

1 Vide notes to draft clause 6.

* Draft clause 11 (4) (Iv).

+ Vide draft Clause 11 (4) (i).

५ Vide draft Clause 11 (4) (ii).
* Vide draft Clause 1} (4) (iii).:
© Vide draft Clause’ $ (ii).

+ Vide draft Clause है (iii).


328
brought into any other part of India after the extension

of the Indian Act. These provisions, it appears, have be-
come almost obsolete. :

The Explanation provides that profits accruing in a
merged territory after 1-4-1933 shall be chargeable under
section 4(1) (b) (ii) only if such income. is remitted into
another part of India other than the merged territory. Para,
8 of the Merged States (Taxation Concessions) Order, 1949,
enacts that Explanation 4 would not apply if the assessee
was not a resident in at least three out of six assessment
years viz., 1943-44 to 1948-49. Even in the case of persons
who were resident in at least three out of six years, Ex-
planation 4 would not operate, if the income had been
assessed under the State law on accrual basis and had also
been included in the total income for rate purposes {under
section 14(2)(c)]. Thus, Explanatjon 4 to ‘section 4(1) would
apply only in the case of persong who were resident in In-
dia in at least three out of six assessment years 1943-44 to
4948-49 and whose income accruing in the State has escap-
ed assessment either in the State or in India.

The Explanation should therefore be omitted. If, how-
ever, it is deemed to retain it, it should appear in a simpli-
fied form. Draft sub-clause (1), {e), (f) and (g) have been
drafted to indicate how the Explanation should be incor-
porated. The language has, however, been altered so as
to make the provisions easy of appli cafio' mn. The existing
Explanation uses the words “taxable ६९ itories” and the
definition of these words in S.2(14A) dods not show in
clear words the background in whick the special provisions
relating to merged territories and Part B States were in-
troduced. The provision has now bees so drafted as to
relate it to the assessment year with effect from which the ,
Indian Act was extended to merged territories and Part B
States. A provision may be inserted in. the Miscellaneous
Chapter to guard against the possibility ‘of any income be-
ing taxed twice—once under the existing Act and again
under the provision as proposed.

(12) Existing section 4(2) is transferred to the new
clause on deemed income’.

(13) Existing section 4(3) forms the subject-matter of
a separate clause dealing with income which does not
form part of total income’. :

Notes to clause 5.

The definition of “previous year” has been embodied
jn a separate clause, since it is a lengthy one. No change
of substance has been made, but drafting changes have
been attempted to achieve simplicity, and to state the po-
sition regarding various situations separately. Further, the

Hh

3 Vide draft clause 10. : ii
© Vids deaf clauses 11, 12 and 13,


provision at present centained:in Rule 5{i) of the Schedule,
regarding insurance business‘ has been brought here for
the sake of comprehehsiveness. .

Notes to clause 6.

(1) The clause relating to category “not ordinarily re-
sident” has been retained in the draft but is recomménded
to be omitted in order to simplify the law. This recom-
mendation was made by the Income-tax Investigation 'Com-
mission’ and also by the Taxation Enquiry Cofumis-
sion’. The only difference in the taxation between न
son who is ordinarily resident and not ordinarily Tei dent
is relating to the foreign income, and provision for Heter-
mining the tax on foreign income in the case of a persdn not
ordinarily resident is contained in second proviso to section
4(1). But for this difference, both of them stand dn the
same footing for the purpose of taxation. The retention of

persons not ordinarily resident as a separate category is
unnecessary. . i

'
न t

(2) The condition for residence in the case of a person
who has been in India witl the four preceding न
has now been somewhat hn te so as to require the
presence of the persdn in indi ia for at least thir rs in
the previous year. The ambiguity caused by the phrase
“otherwise than by an occasional or casual visit” in| ‘the
existing section 4A(a) (iii) will now be avoided.

(3) Section 4A(a) (iv) of the Act, authorising e In-
come-tax Officer to teat a mn as a resident if he fs “sa-
tisfied” that the person, bath: id arrived in India during the
year, is “likely to rémain” for not less than three lyears,
has been omitted, as it gives. a vague discretion to the In-
come-tax Officer. The words “has maintained”, in egisting
section 4A(a) (ii), hdve beey rer

18०९९ in the draft by the
words “causes to be, maintafyed”, which express the in-
tention better.

(4) Draft sub-claise (4).+This is new and has nm in-
serted to make pro’ npsion fod fixing the residence rc “per-
sons” who are not individudls, Hindu undivided f. ilies,
firms, associations of compahies. |

(5) Draft sub-clause (5).—This is new. In C.1.T. ws. Sa-
vumiamurthy’, the Madras High Court has held thak since
there can be a se} an prev Bus year for each cet ४९९ of
income, the residen¥al status of the person has 215९ to be
TEESE nen determin

with reference to each such pource,
As this procedure

1 be culmbersome and entail complica-

1, 1948.

1954, Vol. 1h, ९७.४४
» (1986) 14 LTR. 185. 14४01



tions in practice, the newly added sub-clause provides that
a person who is resident for one source of income shall be
treated as resident for all such sources’.

(6) Existing section 4A(c), latter part, dealing with
the determination of the residemce of a company on the
basis of its income in India, is proposed to be omitted, since
such test does not appear, to be a proper one. (After the
draft was Pigpared the Finance Act 1958, by section 4,
has omitted it).

(2) Draft’ sub-clause (6)—Though the category of per-
sons not ordinary: resident is recommended for abolition,
the existing special provisions applicable to such per-
sons are retained in the draft. (For example, see section
4(1), 2nd proviso, See also sections 42(2) and 44D, which
treat such persons on the same footing. as non-residents).
These sub-clauses will. therefore, be useful for the pur-
poses of the provisions just referred to.

Existing section 4B (c) which provides that a com~-
pany, firm or other association is ordimarily resident if it
is resident, has been omitted in the draft, as unnecessary.
The distinction between “ordinarily resident” and “not or-
dinarily resident” is significant only when there is a pos-
sibility of an entity being resident and yet not ordinarily
resident. In the absence of anything to the contrary , a resi-
dent would have to be regard as ordinarily resident, and
no express provision is necessary for the purpose.

Notes to clause 7.

According to section 4(1) the chargeable income of
every person whether resident or non-resident includes in-
come “which is deemed to be received” in India in the
previous year. There is, however, ne enumeration at
any one place of these receipts which: are deemed to be
received in India in the previous year. This clause mere-
ly collects together the relevant provisions, without effect-
ing any substantial change in language’.

(The deemed income referred to in section 18(4) (tax
deducted at source) will be dealt with in the clause corres-
ponding to that section, as it merits special treatment.]

Notes to clause 8.

It seems desirable that all provisions relating to
income “deemed” to be of a particular year, or deemed
to be received in a particular year should appear in pro-
ximity to each other. Hence a part of section 16(2) has
been embodied in this clause. No change of substance has”
been made.

“TA pile commendation wat de by ch theome a Tar A anmilar recommendation was by ho Una tax Investigation

Commission. (1948). vide its Report. 7249-14,
1 ६०1: Se Reo Pam Tae a ४०४७७



331
Notes to clause 9.

According to section 4{1) the chargeable income of a
person whether resident or non-resident includes income,
profits and gains which “are deemed to accrue or arise to him
in the taxable territories” in the previous year. Income is
deemed to accrue-or arise under various provisions scat-
tered all over the Act. All these provisions which deal with
income which is deemed to accrue or arise in India have
now been grouped together,

The changes made are all of a drafting nature, and
are intended to remove ambiguity and simplify the expres-
sion, पु

Sud-clause {i)—The words “sale......... of a capital as-
set in the taxable territories” in the existing section 42(1)
are stightly ambiguous, since “in taxable territories” can
be read either with “sale” or with “capital asset”. To re-
move this ambiguity, the word “situate” has been added
atter “capital asset”. (It is not necessary to make any such
addition in the earlier phrases referring to business con-
nection etc,, since the language there does not end itself
to any ambiguity.)

The words “that part of the operations”, in the existing
section 42(3) have been replaced by “the operations”, for
two reasons; first, the word “that” in the existing section
is not happy, since it is not followed by any pronoun, and
secondly, the existing words are not in symmetry with
the opening words “in the case of......... all the operations”.

As to the meaning of the word “operation”, see the
decision of the Supreme Court, in the Anglo French Tex-
title Co,, vs. C.LT.

. Sub-clause (ii}—-An attempt has been made to simpli-
fy the language, by omitting unnecessary words such as
“if payable in the taxable territories Wherever paid”, The
substance is not affected by the deletion of these words,
since the proposition sought to be enacted is only this, that.
salary earned in India is deemed to accrue or arise in

ndia.

Notes to clause 10.

This embodies S.4(2). The seqtion is based on @
double fiction. While the income of the non-resident
husband and is treated as the income of the resident wife,
it is also treated as income which is deemed to accrue to
her in India.

The provision has been embodied in the draft, with
a slight verbal change (see the words “or on her behalf”
which have been added to make it comprehensive), ' |

“Twsoaltko.
22—1 Law Cous./58


332
CHAPTER UI '

INCOMES WHICH DO NOT FORM PART OF
TOTAL INCOME

Notes to elause 11.

(1) This clause deals with the various kinds of income
excluded in computing the total income of an assessee.

Simplification has been sought to be achieved by the follow-
ing devices:

(४) re-arrangement of the various clauses of section
4(3) so as to bring out their common features (e.g.,
existing section 4(3) (x)(b), section 4(3) (xiv) ete.
have been placed in proximity to each other, as
they deal with income of foreigners or employees
of foreign Governments, etc.)’;

(ii) analysis of the essentials of each clause, and their
restatement in a form that can be easily followed;
eg., vide the draft sub-clause’ dealing with casual
receipts and the draft sub-clause’ relating to
local authorities;

(iii) incorporating in the draft clause, provisions re-
garding exclusions from total income at present
contained in other seetions of the 8०0 ५ -

{iv) omission of obsolete provisions;
(०) general simplification of language.

(2) Provisions relating to income from property held
on trust for religious or charitable purposes, and income
of religious and/or charitable institutions has been' dealt -
with in a separate section on account of its importane¢e’.

Income of a business chargeable under the Act of 1918
and discontinued after the commencement of the pfesent
Act is, under section 25, sub-aections (3) and (4), exdluded
from total income. This has been dealt with in another
separate section‘.

(3) The changes made by the Finance Act 1958} have
been given effect to at the appropriate places.

(4) The changes made are mainly of a drafting ie
designed to simplify the expression as explained in| para
(1) above. The following sub-clauses, however, deserve
special notice, as the changes made there are not purely
formal :— ई

2 €. g., Vide clause 1) (5) to (9). ‘
3 Clause 11 (3).

३ Clause 11 (22).

+ ८. g. Clause 11 (11) tg (14).

+ Sey draft clause 12, |

© See draft clause 35. :f



333

Sub-clause (7).—Items {ii)- to (v) of this sub-clause
correspond to sub-clauses (b)-to (e) of section 4(3)(x) of
the existing Act. The reqpirement that the recipient
must not be an Indian citizen is contained, at present, only
in two sub-clauses of section 4(3)(x), Sub-clauses (9) and
(9) relating to Consuls etc., and Trade Commissioners do
not mention it. In the draft, however, this has been made
applicable to all cases, for the sake of uniformity.

Sub-clause (8).—In the existing section 4(3)(xiv), the
exemption is conditional on the stay of the-emph oye of
a foreign enterprise for a period not exceeding in ag-
gregate “ninety days in any year”. The words “any year”
are, in the context, vague. Tt has, therefore, been made
clear that the stay should not exceed ninety days in the
previous year, and it should not have exceeded ninety days
in any financial year prior to the previous year.

There is no reason why this exclusion should be avail-
able to Indian citizens. The Provision has therefore been
altered so as to confine it to foreignera.

°

Sub-clause (9).—It seems desirable to extend the bene-
fit of this clause to services rendered by a foreigner even
before the actual commencement of the business. Explana-
tion‘ is intended to achieve this object.

Sub-clause (15).—“Wholly and necessarily” has been re-
placed by “wholly and exclusively"; ef. existing section
2(2)(iii) as redrafted.' The object is ‘to liberatise the al-
lowance. See the recommendation of the U.K. Royal Com-
mission on the Taxation of profits and income~’.

Sub-clause (17) and (24).—-These correspond to certain
exemptions enjoyed, at present, under a notification issued
under section 60. In view of the importance of the subject-
matter of the exemptions, they have been included in the
draft sub-clauses,

Exem; prion fr members of Nepalese. Forces [Existing
clause (xi)}.—This has been ines There are no Indian
State Forces now, and there is no mentber of the Nepalese
Armed Forces now serving in India.

Sub-clause (18).—This item will, of course, have to be
omitted if it becomes obsolete by the time the new Act
comes into force.

Notes to clause 12,

1. This clause is based on section’ 4(3)(i) and (ii) of
the Act. There are~ certain anomalies which we have
noticed in the existing provision and we have attempted in
the proposed draft to put an end to such anomalies as far
as possible. पु

eee

> 3 Vide also notes to draft clauses 15- eae नी

3 U.K. Royal Commimoin on the Txation of and Income, Final
Report June, 1955, (Crd. 9474). ghge 47, pat.


Ks

2. Before the Amendment Act of 1939, there was in
the Act only the provision which corresponds to the exist-
ing provision in 4(3) (i), main A sabe The instruction in the
Income-tax Manual issued by the authority of the Govern-
ment of India at that time was, that the word “property”
in clause (1) does not bear the restricted meaning that it
bears in section 9 of the Act, but includes securities or
business or share in a business. In view of the recommien-
dations made in the Income-tax Enquiry Report, 1936" (to
give statutory effect to this practice, subject to the condi-
tions to be observed by the business) an amendment was
introduced by adding clause (via) which was as follows :—

“Any income derived from business carried on, on be-
half of a religious or charitable institution, when the in-
come is applied solely for the purposes of the institution
an

(a) the business is carried on in the course of the car-
rying out of a primary purpose of the institution,
or

(b) the work in connection with the business is mainly
carried on by beneficiaries of the institution.”

(After the amendment in 1939, the Government chang-
ed the instructions in the Manual, expressing the view that
in the case of business, the conditions laid down in clause
69) should be fulfilled before exemption could be grant-
ed).

3, The meaning of the word “property” in clause (i)
was judicially considered and it was held that it includes
even business if the business was subject-matter of a trust,
This was the view taken in Charitable Gadodia Swadeshi
Stores vs. C.LT., Punjab by the Lahore High Court’. Deal-
ing with the contention that the word “property” in clause
(i) does not include business. their Lordships of the Lahore
High Court held that the two clauses were intended to
apply to different situations and that the word “ roperty”
in clause (i) was wide enough to include all kinds of pro-
perty including business, It was also pointed out that
clause (ia) deal t with a business conducted by a religious
or charitable institution without any reference to trust
whatever. In an instructive judgment, Din. Mohammad J.
in that case also pointed out the distinction betwegn an
institution and a trust. He held that an_ institution
may be religious or charitable and may still not
be held under trust. Clause (ia), according to
him, does not in any way subtract anything from the sub-
ject and provides immunity for a certain kind of business
which in the view of the legislature had not already been

rovided ‘for. From this decision it follows that “where
Business, which is property within the meaning of ¢lause
(i). is impressed with the character of trust, the income
from such business is altogether exempt and it is not obli-
gatory that in the cage of such business the conditions laid

—"T page 6, 1 T. Bnquiry Report, 1996 (abo known as Ayers Copaniittee
PGB ULTRA MR ee, ns



335

down in clause (ia) should be fulfilled. {Clause (ia) thus
applies to a different situation, namely, where there is an
institution and that institution carries on business which
is not subject to a trust. In such a case the requisites of
the section must be complied with. The income must be
applied solely to the purpose of the institution and the
charitable or religious institution must also fulfil the con-
ditions in sub-clauses (a) and (9), As to the distinction
between an institution and a trust, see also the discussion
in a recent Privy Council case, and Gunn’s commentary
on the Australian Income-tax Act.*)

4. That “property” in clause (i) ineludes business has
been well established not only by a decision of the Judicial
Committee’ but also by the latest pronouncement of the
Supreme Court in J. K. Trust Case’. This aspect there-
fore does not present much difficulty. (The difficulty as
ta in which set of circumstances clauge (ia) applies still
remains, though the view in Gadodia Swadeshi Stores*
case has subsequently been followed and confirmed by the
High Courts of Allahabad‘ and. Bombay’.

5. In view of the recommendations made by Din.
Mohammad J. in Gadodia’s case and by the Income-tax In-
vestigation Commission [Report (1948) at pages 56-57,
paragraph 131] the legislature in 1953 [vide the amending
Act of 1953 (Act 25 of 1953)] converted clause (via) into a
proviso to clause (i), and by subsequent legislation it was
made clause (9) of the proviso to clause (1) (vide the
amending Act of 1955). -The object of this legislation was
to restrict the operation of clause (i), where the property
consisted of business impressed with the character of trust,
by applying the limitation imposed by elause (b) of the
proviso’.

But in carrying out this object, the immunity which
was granted under clause (ia), (as it stood before 1953),
in the case of business carried on by a religious or charit-
able institution and not subject to trust, was negatived.
The linking up of old clause (via) to clause (i) had the
effect of tak ing away the separate exemption granted by
clause (ia). In other words, the conversion of clause (ia) in-
toa proviso has led to the opposite result of depriving the
benefit (limited though it be; i which: was intended to be

wo er
‘Minister of National Revenue vs. Trusts and Guarantees Co, Lid. (1932) 4A.

BE, R. 149 P, 0. 506 also 1. M. G. A. vs, F, ८. of T. 1926} 37 CLR. 351 at
pp- 360, 361.

3 4th edition, p. 114, para 292. .

3 Tribune case, (1939) 71. T. R. 415 P. C26 1. A. २41.

4 [1957] 32 LT.R, 535 (Bombay H. C, on remand [1958] 33 1.1.8. 32).

* (1944) 121. व. ए. 385. :

“CET. vs. Radhaswani Satsang Sabha. (1954) 25 1. 7. 8. 472.
5.5 3. 2. Teun vs. C. 1. T., (1958) 331, 1. ४8.३२.
ox ad Report of the Téxation : ‘Consitilésion, (1958-1934). Vol. 11,

paragraphs 2 and 3, page:



336

conferred by clause (ia) on charitable and religious instit-
tutions which carried on business which was not subjected
to trust (provided they fulfilled the conditions laid down
in paragraphs (a) and (b) of that clause). We think that
this result was not intended by the legislature. If the
intention is—as undoubtedly it has been from 1936—to
impose restrictions in the case of business whether carried
on by a trust or by a religious or charitable institution, the
intention should be clearly stated in the Act. But the im-
munity itself need not be taken away. In order to avoid
the anomaly the clauses should be so drafted as to bring
about the real intention of the legislature, and this we
have done in the proposed draft.

6. Incidentally, it may be noted that the legislature
really wanted the conditions contained in paragraph (b)
of the Proviso to apply not only to cases where budiness
is carried on by the institution, but also where the business
was the subject-matter of a trust {i.e., even if there was
no institution). This object has also not been properly car-
ried out, and some redrafting is desirable on this point
also. On this assumption, it has been made clear in the
draft that the restrictions in paragraph (b) of the Proviso
will apply to both the cases.

7. In short, the redraft makes clear the two points that
fequire clarification, namely :-—

{i) Exemption under section 4(3)(i) is (in the case of
@ business) subject to the conditions given in; Pro-
visio (b), irrespective of whether the busingss is
carried on by a trust or an institution.

{ii) The exemption is also available to instituti not
subject to trust, (subject to the same conditk jons).

8. For the sake of clarity, a. trust carrying on a busi-
ness is dealt with separately in draft sub-clause (2), and
draft sub-clause (1) is confined to other properties, , vide
the draft Explanation thereto,

9. Besides this important change, the following points
may also be noted :— :

(a) The phrase “religious or charitable purposes!’ oc-
curring in the existing Act has been पा by
the phrase “charitable or religious pur; ”, to
give more prominence to charitable purposes,

(9) The existing section 4९3) (1) opens with the words
“subject to the provisions of clause (c) of ‘sub-
section (1) of section 16”. The limitation expres-
sed by these words has been retained in draft sub-
clause (1), but it is to be considered whether there
is any sound reason for this limitation. The effect

of the iar in q ie dai to be that af nin
cases of jer for itable purpose in-
come of the assets is regarded aq the


337

transferor’s income.’ It would be more consistent
with the spirit of the law if snch income were ex-
cluded from total incéme, at least so long as the
income is applied for a charitable purpose. The
words “subject to the provisions of clause (९) of
sub-section (1) of section 16” deserve to be delet-
ed.

Notes to clause 13.

Section 25, sub-sections (3) and (4) provide for two
things. One is the exclusion from total income of income
of certain businesses, and the other is the right to claim
substitution of the income of the year of discontinuance
etc., in place of the last year’s income.

The first part (exclusion from total income) has been
~ embodied in the e present clause, with the language simpli-

CHAPTER IV -
COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME

Notes to clause 14.

1. This corresponds to séction 6 of the present Act.
The opening words of the section, have, however, been mo-
dified so as to’make it clear that the section merely classi-.
fies the chargeable income into different heads for the pur-
pose of computation of total.income, That section 6 con-
cerns itself with classification and seqtions 7, 8, 9 etc. with
computation is clear from the discussion in Kothari vs.
CLT. and in United Commercial Bask Ltd., vs. C.LT.

2. Item (c) relating to “Income from property” has
been changed into “Income from House Proj nperty”. Sec-
tion 9 is essentially concerned with' House Property and
the description now adopted will clearly in Scale the .
nature of the head.

Another variation in the present section is the men-
tion of the head “Income from ot! Her, sources” after the :
head “Capital gains”, indicating that “Income from other
sources” continues to be the residwary head as hereto
fore.

3 These words were introduced in 1953 in pursuance of the recommenda-
tion made by the Income tax Investigation, Comission; see its Report (1948),
para 129, page 56. :

4 See notes to clause 91 for comments on the retention of existing section
25 (3) and (4).

3 (1951) 20 LT.R. 579.
4 (1957) 32 LT.R. 683.


Notes to clauses 15 to 17.

A—Sniaries: Simplification of the present section 7 has been at-
tempted in the following ways :—

6) only the substantive provision Specifying the
charge in respect of “salaries” paid or payable by
an employer has béen dealt with in the main
clause’.

(ii) the extended meaning given to the expression “sa-
laries” is omitted from the substantive clause and
separately defined in the interpretation clause:

Gili) similarly, instead of mentioning the different types
of employers’in the substantive part, the term
“Employer” alone has been used. a definition hav-
ing been given separately to cover the various
types;

{iv) the permissible deductions are placed in a separate |
clause;

(v) the present Explanations about “perquisites”
(Expln. 1) and “profits in lieu of salary” (Expin. 2)
have been placed in the interpretation clause.

हे 2, Provisions dealing with income classifiable as salary,
scattered elsewhere ‘in the Act, have been collected
together, e.g., draft clause’—dealing with notional payments
from provident funds etc.

3. The existing section makes a distinction between
salary which is “due” to an employee and other selary
“paid” which is not due to him. The former is taxable on
“due” basis whether actual payment has been made or not,
while the latter. is taxable on the basis of actual payment.
This aspect is more clearly brought out in the present draft.
(See the decision of Calcutta High Court in Bhuban Mohan
Banerjee vs. C.I.T? though in an earlier decision’ it was
held that an amount due in one year could be taxed in a
Jater year in which it was received).

4. Arrears of salary would, at first sight, appear to be
delayed “payments” for amounts which had already ac-
crued “due” in the year or years in which the employee
had rendered service, Looked at from this angle, they do
Rot present much difficulty.

But the arrears of salary which call for specific treat-
ment are those where services are rendered in a past year
but the quantum of payment to be made is not determined
till the year of receipt of the amount by the employee in a
subsequent year, or where the emoluments of the post are
revised or a promotion is made retrospectively. In these
cases it will be difficult to include in the regular original
assessment the arrears sanctioned and paid subsequently,

1 Clause 15.

* Vide draft clause 17 (2) fyi) ana (vi.

9 (1956) 29 LK.R. 229, 286. P

* Ushareni Roy Choudhorané, Ya re. (1918), 10. J.T:R. 199.


since in many cases the determination may take years. It
would also not be possible to keep the assessment pending
until such determination is made. The Departmental prac-
tice has been to include such arrears in the total income
of the year of receipt. Relief is afforded against the hard-
‘ship involved in the taxation of the lump-sum by means of
an order under section 60, sub-section (2), the effect of
which is that the arrears are attributed to the periods to
which they should reasonably be related. Assessment in
the year of receipt is in accardance with the decision of
the Caleutta High Court in Usha Rani Roy Choudhurani’s
ease’.

The recent decision of the Calcutta High Court in
Bhuban Mohan Banerjee’s case,’ however, contains obser-
vations which may be taken to mean that a salary pay-
ment made in a subsequent year would still be taxable
‘only on due basis in the first year. The decision does not
create any difficulty if the word “due” is interpreted as
relating to the point of time when the amount is actually
quantified by the employer. On this view the claim for
relief under section 60(2) may not be admfssible. But
if it is intended that such amounts should be related to
the back years and subjected to tax under section 34, diffi-
culty may arise in the initiation of such proceedings be-
cause of limitation. It can even be argued that these are
not cases of escapement of income, there being no omis-
sion or commission by the assessee or by the Department.
There will be further difficulty for the employer in the
matter of making deduction of tax at source, and some
‘confusion is bound to arise as to whether the tax so deduct-
ed at the time of payment should be' given credit for the
year for which the assessment under section 34 is supposed
to be made. -

On the whole the present Departmental practice seems
to be a reasonable compromise and is fair to the assessee
.and the Department. It is fair to the Department because
the complication of section 34 is avoided, and even when
an, order under section 60(2) is passed the consequential ad-
justment of tax is made in that assessment itself and not
by reopening past assessments. It is fair to the assessee,
because if the amount were to be treated as due only when
it is paid, the question of relief under’ section 60(2) would
not.arise, while the Departmental practice ensures that the
assessee is to be in the same position as if he had been
taxed in the respective years after spuead-back of the ar-
rears to the relative period.

There may, of course, be cases when the assessee will
be worse off by the arrears being related back than ‘when
he is taxed on the arrears. This will happen when the ar-
rears of salary are received after retirement or after rever-
sion from a higher post. In those cases the assessee will not
apply for relief under section 60(2) an@ no action is taken
‘by the Department itself under section ($4 or otherwise.

०१ (1942) ITT, 8. 199.
3 (1956) 29 1. T. R. 229,286. »--



340

In view of the position discussed above draft sub-clause
(c) has been added to deal adequately with arrears.

__ 5. Section 60(2) was placed on the statute book at 2
lime (in the year 1930) when the chargeability of salary
was not on “due” basis but on “receipt” basis, under sec-
tion 7 as it stood then. Accordingly it continues to emp-
loy language appropriate to a higher tax burden in conse-
quence of the employee “receiving” a payment as salary
in arrears or for more than twelve months. This contin-
gency will not arise on the present “due” basis of taxation
on salary.

It is, however, proposed not to make any changes in
that section, since the section will be useful in so far as
it gives relief in respect of lump-sum payments received by
the employee and treated as profits in lieu of salary under
explanation 2 to section 7(1 p It may also be useful in
view of the fact that.a provision for charging arrears not
already taxed has been added in the draft.

6. A few minor points also deserve notice: These are
as follows :—

(i) Draft sub-clause 16 (४) :—The provision relating
to deduction for entertainment allowance has been ‘made
more logical in one respect. Where a person was in receipt
of entertainment allowance at a lower rate before 1st'Aprif
1955, his claim for deduction will not be totally forfeited,
but will be reduced to that previous lower rate. The pre-
sent section 7(2) (ii) does not make this clear.

The changes made by the Finance Act, 1958, hava beerr
given effect to.

(ii) Draft clause 16 (iv) :—The allowance for expenses
incurred by an employee in the performance of his duties
has been made exclusive not only of entertainment allow-
ance (as at present), but also of the allowance for expenses
for books ete. and conveyance allowance. The existing pro-
vision; section 7(2) (iti), does not include these latter cate-
gories. The chan, ge has been made in order to make’ the ,
provision comprehensive.

The wording has also been changed so as to make it
precise. The word “neéessarily” has been omitted, as it
is unduly restrictive. We have followed the language of
existing section 10(2) (xv). :

It may also be pointed out that the Royal Commission
on the Taxation of Profits amd Income (United Kingdom)
examined the corresponding. provision in the U.K. Act
(Schedule E or old Rule 9)' and has recommended that the
allowance should be made liberal’. It has proposed the

“Now see the U. K. tapome-tax Act, 1952, Ninth Schedule, Rul Lee

3 Royal Commission on ४०३१ of Profits and Income, Final >
June 1935, (Cond. 9474), Page 41 149. . “f



“ML

wording “all expenses reasonably incurred for the appro-
priate performance of the duties of the office or employ-
ment”, This, the Commission has pointed out, would re-
move the complaint that the legislature imposes upon
those in employment a narrower form of allowance for
expenses than it accords to persons deriving a private in-
come from their own efforts. The wording suggested by
the Royal Commission is worth consideration as an alter-
native.

(iii) Draft clause 17(1) :—The definition of “employer”
as now adopted includes a foreign Government, reference
to which is not to be found in the present section 7. It is
for consideration whether the mention of foreign Govern-
ment as employer is acceptable. It has been suggested that
by such inclusion the assessee will not be subject to any
heavier tax burden but on the other hand may qualify for
relief under section 60(2) which will be advantageous to
him. The possibility of an employee of a foreign Govern-
ment being required to make an actual payment of tax (on
“due” basis) without actually receiving the salary will
not arise, because section 7(1), 2nd prowiso, lays down that
where tax is deductible at source, the assessee shall not be
called upon to pay the tax himself unless he has received
salary without deduction. How far the procedure for de-
duction (section 18) will be enforceable against a foreign
Government will also be a matter for consideration.

{iv) Draft clause 17(2) :—Htem (ii) relating to annui-
ties has provoked some discussion. It has been suggested
that annuities paid by the Government or local authorities
should be taxed as salary irrespective of whether the payee
is an employee or not. This cannot be accepted, as it goes
against the basic scheme of the section.

Notes to clauses 18 to 21 8 Interest
The existing section 8 is naw covered by four clauses,' o securities.
The first clause relates to the charge, the second relates
to deduction, the third relates to deductions in the case of
banking companies and the last clause relates to amounts
not deductible.

Clause 18

The word “receivable” in the present section 8(1) has
been interpreted to mean “received”.’ This decision has
been given effect to and the wotd , Tecetved ” has been subs-

tituted for the word “receivable” in draft clause to
make the intention clear.
Clause 19

This clause and draft clause 21 incorporate the subs-
tance of existing section 8, first proviso. The language of

+ Clauses 18 to शा.

* Seth Lalbhai Dali upatthal . 0. 1. 71 1. 1. 8. 33. Thbagareja
“Chettiar va. CLF. Madras, (1953) tt aa es
मे :


342

the present proviso is involved’. A rough analysis will
show that it deals with three things :—

(i) Allowance for realisation expenses and interest on
money borrowed for investment;

(19) Exception to the allowance at (i) above, in respect
of interest payable outside the taxable territories;
an .

(iti) Counter-exception to the exception at (ii) above,
for interest for which tax is deducted at source or
an agent can be appointed under section 43.

In the draft. therefore, the proviso has been split up.
Item (i) above has been incorporated in this clause, while
items (ii) and (ii) have been embodied in a subsequent
clause.

The provisos to existing section 8, which exclude cer-
tain items of expenditure incurred for realising interest
ete, do not express the exclusion as “deductions”. Since,
in the draft. these have been treated as deductions, it is
possible that the deductions might, in a particular case,
exceed the total gross income. In such cases, the excess
will be treated as a loss. We do not think that this result
should be avoided. Deductions under the head “Interest
on securities” should be tréatéd on the same lines as de-
ductions under other heads; if the income is a loss, it should
be dealt with as a less under any other head.

Clause 20

This embodies the Explanation to section 8, recast in
form so as to make it less complex and state the, various
aspects distinctly. :

Clause 21 मु

Item (i) gives effect to the latter part of section 8. first
Provisp (see notes to the clause relating to deductions,
above

Item (ii) is new. The Madras’ and Bombay' High
Courts have held that expenditure pertaining to interest
on tax-free securities is not deductible, while the Nagpur
High Court has taken a contrary view in C. P. and Berar
Provincial Co-operative Bank Ltd., vs. C.LT.*. Effeet has
een given to the view taken by the Bombay and Madras
High Courts.

Item (iii) is also new and seeks to make it clear that
interest paid on money borrowed for investment in tax-
free securities is not deductible.

+See the criticism in “United Commercial Bank Ltd.

24 1. T.R. 425.

3 Madras Provincial Co-operative Bank's case (1942) 10 1, 7. R. 490,
> 3 Brick Coroperatioe Bank Lid. ve. C.5.T. (2949) 77 7. TR. 489.,
4 (1946) 341. TORQ 5. - Sonne



Notes to clause 22 to 27

Section 9 of the existing Act has been split up into
separate clauses’. The title of the head has been charged
into “Income from house property”, because the section
deals only with that property and not any other immove-
able property.

In the draft, after having stated that the annual value
is the basis of chargeability, the expression “annual value”
is defined. The basis of computation of annual value in the
case of a tenanted building and in the case of owner-
oceupied building is set out separately’. The main drafting
changes are the omission of provisos and re-arranging the
section on a more logical basis. An interpretation clause
has been added.

The detailed changes made in each clause are explain-
ed below :—

Clause 22

The head has been changed into “Income from House
property” as already explained. In the expression “bona-
fide annual value” the words “bona-fide” have been omit-
ted. The section defines only “annual value” and not
& “bona-fide annual value”. Section 9(2) also uses “annual
value” only. Moreover the words “bona-fide” do not in
any way make the meaning clearer.

Clause 23

Sub-clause (1) :—The sub-clause corresponds to sec-
tion 9(2) and no change has been made.

Sub-clause {2):—This is new. It seems desirable to
embody some rules in the Act to furnish guidance in deter-
mining the annual value of tenanted property. The draft
sub-clause tries to set out the consi erations to be
borne in mind in such cases. The sub-clause, of course,
does not purport to be exhaustive, and refers only to fac-
tors of importance.

Sub-clause (3) :—~Deals with property occupied by the
owner. The first para sets out, in a simp! ie form, the provi-
sion contained in section 9(2), first proviso for reduction
of the annual value. The form has been changed in order
to avoid all ambiguity. The second para corresponds to
the last line of section 9(2), first proviso. The existing sec-
tion provides that the annual value shell not exceed 10
per cent. of the total income of the assessee. Now the
total income of the assessee will naturally include income
from such occupied property. The calculation of the an-
nual value thus becomes a complicated mathematical pro-
blem (see formula below). It will be evident from _ the
formula given below that the annual value so calculated
comes to 6/55 i.e., roughly 11 per cent. af the other income
of the assessee. The draft, t Perefore, provides that this
11 per cent, shall be taken as the annual value. No addi-
tional liability is saddled on fhe assegsee,

+? Clauses 22 to 27. :
5 Vide dame as.

Bae. :

G. Income
from house
property.


344
The formula referred to above is derived as undpr :—

Suppose AV is the annual letting value of the self-oc-
cupied property. Now, according to section 9(2) firgt pro-
viso, the annual letting value ie., AV is 10 per cent. of the
total income ; or in other words the total income is ten
fimes | the annual letting value. Thus the total income’ is

If Y is the other income of the assessee, then—

Total income 10AV=Y+(AV—AV/6)

ie, 60 AV =6Y+(6AV—AV)

ie, 60 AV=6Y+5AV

ie, 60 AV-5AV=6Y

ie, 55 AV =6Y

ie, AV=6/55Y

ie, AV=10°9 per cent of Y (roughly 11 per cent). -

Sub-clause (4) :—This corresponds to section 9(2), 2nd
proviso. The following changes have been made—

(i) the word “occupied” has been replaced by “a¢tual-
ly occupied” at all places, since the proviso is
meant only for cases where, the property, though
occupied, is not actually occupied by the owner;

(४) the case where the property remains un-occupied
for the whole year and the case where it remains
un-occupied for a part of the year have been dealt
with as separate items, for the sake of clarity, and
the formula for computation of annual valup in
the latter case has been defined in clear language.
The existing expression “computed proportiqnate-
ly” sounds, abrupt and does not fully express what
is intended.

Clause 24.

Sub-clause (1), Item (i):—This corresponds to section
9(2), 3rd, proviso. The existing provision is defective in
form, because it brings about in a roundabout way p re-
sult which can be sta’ directly. The gist of the clause
is that in the case of ७ tenanted property, one half of the
municipal taxes should be deducted. This need ndt be
expressed in the form of a “deeming” provision (as s. 9(2),
3rd proviso, clause (a) appears to do) regarding the tenant's
ability, followed by a provision (clause (9) of the provi-
so) for deduction if the tenant’s liability is borne by’ the
owner.

The draft seeks gop remove this rng tn ee The provision
has also been made simpler removing the ref to
the law authorising fax etc., as It


mhay be added here that as a general rule, such laws make

the tax payable wholly by the owner. and not by the ten-
ant.

Item (४) :—The existing section 9(1) (i) has been
split up into two parts (a) where the property is occupied
by the owner and (b) where it is occupied by the tenant.
The two parts have been dealt with separately since in the
jatter case the annual value has to be reduced by the one -
half of the deduction for municipal taxes. The expres-
sion “reduced annual value”, has been, therefore, used for
the purpose; it has been explained in the explanation at
the end of the clause. It is also made clear that the existing
allowance of the one-sixth of income is in respect of re-
pairs,

Item (iii) :—The existing provision, section 9(1). (ii),
is ambiguous, since the words “not exceeding one sixth of
such value” can be read either as upplying to the “differ-
ence” or to “rent”. This has been avoided by splitting up
the sub-clause. The Proviso for assessment year 1951-52
has been omitted as spent.

(As to “reduced annual value”, see notes under item
(ii) above).

Item (iv) :—No change has been made in the exist-
ing provisions [Section 9(1) (iii)}.

tem (०) :—Existing section 9(1) (iv), has been split
up into four items (v) to (viti) for clarity. The proviso is
transferred to a separate clause’.

Item (vi): —See notes to item (v) above.

Items (vii) and (viii) :—See notes to item (v) above.

Item (ix)—No change has been made in the existing
section 9(1) (२५).

Item (x)—The percentage for collection charges, as
prescribed by rules, has been embodied in the Act itself.
(As to the expression “reduced annual:value” see notes un-
der item (ii) above).

Item (xi)—Verbal chan, i have been made to im-
Prove the language. (As to expres¢ion “reduced annual
value” see notes under item (ii) above.)

Item (zxii)—This incorporates the: substance of the
notification providing for dedyction of irrecoverable rent.
Explanation :—(See notes.under item (ii) above).

Sub-clause (2)—This gives effect to the principle con-
tained in section 9(2), 2nd Proviso, last line, putting it in
2 more conspicuous form. ; & more conspicuous form. jg

3 Clause 25.


D-Profits and

Clause 25.

The amounts not deductible have been put in one
clause.
Clause 26.

This clause reproduces the provisions of sub-section (3)
of existing section 9 without any change.
Clause 27.

Sub-clause (i)—reproduces the existing provision in
section 9 (4) (a).

‘Sub-clause (ii)—reproduces the existing provision ix
section 9(4) (b) with the addition of the words italicised
as even a part of a building such as a flat may be allot-
ted on ownership basis, as very often happens in Bombay.

Sub-clauses (iii) and (iv)}—The definitions of “annual
charge” and “capital charge” have been taken from _ the
decision of the Supreme Court in New Piece Goods Bazar
Co., Ltd., Bombay vs. C.I.T., Bombay.

Sub-clause (v)—gives effect to the change made by
the Finance Act, 1938.

Notes to clause 28.
.. Section 10 of the existing Act, relating to profits and

gains of busi- gaing of business, profession or vocation is cumbersome in

Ress etc.

form and illogical in arrangement. It_is proposed to split
up the section, so as to deal separately with the charging
provisions, deductions, amounts not deductible, and provi-
sions in the nature of interpretation.

The opening clause’ deals with the charging provi-
sions and enumerates the various categories of income to
be classified as profits and gains of business. In order to
make the enumeration exhaustive, the provisions at pre-
sent contained in section 10(5A) for treating payments re-
ceived for termination of managing agency or other agen-
ey etc. as profits and gains of business, have been trans-
ferred to this clause as. sub-clause (ii). For the same rea-
son, the provision in existing section 10(6) regarding in-
come of a trade association rendering services to its mem-
bers has been transferred to this clause as sub-clause (iii).

Draft Explanation 1 is intended to clarify the position
regarding classification of profits of managing -agency, and
does not mark any departute from the present practice
Draft Explanation 2 incorporates the Explanation 1 tp sec-
tion 24(1), as it should be appropriately placed here.

Notes to clause 29.

This clause gives the general scheme of arrangement
of the sections in the draft dealing with profits and’ gains
of business etc. The object is to give a bird’s-eye view of

३ (3950) 18 1, 1, R. 5168. 0.

4 Clause 28. ee



BEd

the main provisions and to enable the reader to know at a
glance how they are arranged. The inspiration for this
kind of arrangement is d ed fram the U. S. Internai
Revenue Code.

Notes to alause 30.

This clause deals with deduction for rents, repairs and.
insurance charges for buildings.

The expression “building used for the business” has
been used throughout the whole clause for uniformity (as
in the existing Section 10(2) (iv) and (ix); in contrast to
“building in which business is carried on” used ia section 10
(2) (i) of the existing Act).

Draft Clause (a) {(i}—Collects together the deductions
allowable for premises used for the business, where the as-
sessee is a tenant.

Cases where, only a part of the premises is so used,
have been dealt with separately."

Draft clause 30(a)(ii)—Deals with the deduction for
repairs to a building, where the assessee is not a tenant.

Draft clause 30(b).—Corresponds to section 10(2){ix),
earlier part. Cases where only a part of the premises is.
used for the business, are dealt with separately.°

Draft clause 30(c)—-needs no comments.

Notes to clause 31.

This clause collects together the deductions for repairs,
etc., of machinery, plant, etc. and does not need any com-
ments, as the changes made are verbal and consequential
on the scheme adopted in the draft.

Notes to clause 32.

Sub-clause (1)—The various allowances in the nature
of depreciation have been grouped together in this clause.
To simplify the clause and make it brief, the conditions for
depreciation allowance have been dealt: with in a separate
clause’. In the interest of clari ty. the various classes of as-
sets have been dealt with separately.

Draft clause 32(1) (i) & {iis Tos ther exhaust the first
para of existing section 100) (vi). second para of
section 10(2){vi), beginning wit “and :where......... ” and
ending with the words “cost thereof to the assessee” has
been omitted, as its operation is limited tp the year of erec-
tion of a building erected during the assessment years 1945-
46 to 1955-56.

3 See draft clause 38 (1).
3 3०८ draft clause 38 (2).
3 Vide araft clause 44.

23-1 Law Com./58


348

As regards the Proviso to existing section 10(2}{vi),
clauses (a) and (c) of the proviso have been transferred to
the draft clause on conditions for depreciation’.

Clause (9) of the proviso has been transferred te the
Chapter on Aggregation of ingome and Set off of loss, being
relevant thereto.

Item 32(1) (i#)—See notes under item (i) above.

Item 32(1)(iit)—Existing section 10(2) (via) has been
simplified as follows :—

(i) The main proviso finds a place in clause {iii) while
the second parenthesis (for exclusion of extra allowance for
double shift working) has been framed.as an Explanation;
this will avoid interruption in reading.

(ii) The first parenthesis—containing the words
“(which shall be deductible in determing the written down
value)” has been omitted. Since clause (via) now forms
part of “depreciation”, the allowance will naturally be de-
ducted in determining the written down value under exist-
ing section 10(5) (b).

(iii) The time for the allowance—ending on_ the
315६ day of March 1959, has been transferred to fhe clause
relating to conditions for depreciation’. If this deduction
‘becomes obsolete by the time the new Act comes into force,
it may be deleted.

Clause 32(1)(iv)—The propositions embodied in sec-
tion 10(2)(vii) are these :—

1. A loss on the sale of an asset is allowed as a deduc-
tion. “Loss” here means the difference between the
written down value and the sale price when the
latter is lower than the former;

2. A profit on such sale is counted as income. “Profit”
here means the excess of the sale price over the
written down value. (If the sale price exceeds even
the original cost, then such excess is a capital
gain.)

3. In the case of asset not sold, but discarded, eto., the
place of sale price is taken by its scrap value, as increased
by insurance moneys, etc., if received.

Of these propositions, No. 2 has nothing to do with
deductions, and relates to income by way of balancing
charge.

An attempt has been made to simplify the section so
as to embody these propositions in,a simple form. Simplifi-
cation of the section has proceeded on the following lines: —

(i) Only the “Loss” aspect has been dealt with here.
The profit aspect (2nd, 4th and 5th provisos) has been. dealt
with in a separate clause relating to deemed profits’.

1 Vide draft clause 34 (1) and 34 (2) (iii).
3 Vide draft clause 34 (2) (ii).”
3 Vide draft clause 41 (2).



349

(ii) Unnecessary repetition has been avoided. The 3rd.
proviso and the main para of section 10{2)(vii) have been
combined in the draft in clause 32(1) (iv), since the princi-
ple is the same.

Much of the existing 4th proviso repeats parts of the
3rd proviso. The draft clause 32(1) (iv) expresses the prin-
ciple behind these two provisens in such a manner as to
render repetition unnecessary in the draft for the fourth
proviso’.

(iii) Simplicity in expression in general has been at-
tempted. For example, the 3rd proviso at present says that
where insurance. etc., moneys are received, then the amount
by which the difference between the written down value
and the scrap value exceeds the amount of insurance
moneys is allowed as a deduction. This merely embodies
the simple proposition (vide proposition 3rd above), that in-
surance moneys are added to the scrap value.

Thus—the existing formula is—

Written down value minus scrap value minus Insu-
rance-Allowed deduction (Shifting “scrap value”, this be-
comes) .

Written down value minus (Scrap value+Insurance)=
Allowed deduction.

The draft adopts the second formula.
Sub-clause (2)—needs no comments.
Notes to clause 33.

Existing section 10(2)(vib) has been incorporated here.
An important change has been made with reference to the
year in respect of which the development rebate is to be
allowed. The existing section allows it only for the year of
acquisition or installation; but it seems desirable to allow
the rebate in the next year, if the ship or machinery is ac-
tually put to use in the next year.

The proviso to existing section 10(2){vib) has been
transferred to a separate clause rélating to conditions for
depreciation and development rebate’.

The changes made by the Finance Act, 1958, have been
given effect to.

Notes to clause 34.

Sub-clause (1)—The provisos to section 10(2) (vi) and
section 10(2)(vib) of the existing Act lay down that the de-
duction under these clauses is to be allowed only if the pres-
cribed particulars are furnished. The draft embodies this
requirement and extends it to deductions under existing
section 10(2)(via) and 10{2}{vii) also, since these cases
should stand on the same footing so far as the point urtder
discussion is concerned.

3 Draft clause 41 (2).
4 Vide draft clause 34 (3)-



350

Sub-clause (2)—Item (i)—Is new. It embodies a provi-
ston contained at pregent in the rules [vide Rule 8, First
and Second Provisos, Indian Income-tax Rules, 1923], as
to depreciation for user for part of the year.

Item (ii)—Incorporates the limitation contained in the
last line of existing section 10(2) (via). If the deduction it-
self becomes obsolete, this might have to be deleted.”

Item (iii)—Corresponds to existing section 10(2)(vi),
proviso (९), under which the aggregate allowance for de-
preciation should not exceed the original cost. The existing
section applies to the allowances under section 10(2) (vi)
and 10(2) (via) only. The draft will cover section 10(2)
(vii}, also, since it could not have been the intention of
the legislature to exelude that allowance from the rule
that the aggregate of such allowances should not exceed
the original cost.

Item (iv)—Where an asset is sold etc., in the previous
year, the allowance under section 10(2)(vii) will be suffici-
ent and there will be no need for an allowance under.exist-
ing section 10(2)(v:) or 10(2){via). The draft provisian has
theretore been added to avaid a double allowance. Since
the draft was prepared, the Finance Act, 1958, has also in-
corporated this provision in the Act. But it would seem
that “furniture” should not be subject to the restriction em-
bodied in this clause, since existing section 10(2) (vii) does
not apply to furniture. The draft retains “furniture” in
view of the Finance Act, but the matter requires to be con-
sidered.

Sub-clause (3)—A part of existing section 10(2)' (vib),
as amended by the Pinance Act, 1958, has been incor orat-
ed here. The changes are mostly verbal and cons¢quen-
tial; but an important point which requires to be mdntion-
ed is, that, the words “and if any such ship, machinery or
plant is sold.. 7, occurring in the latter half of the
proviso to existi ection 10(2(vib) have, in the draft, been
taken as applicable to ali ships etc., in respect of which
development rebate has been obtained, and not confined to
the ships ete. to which clause (b) of that proviso applies.
This wider interpretation seems in consonance with section
35(1L) (as inserted by the Finance Act, 1958) which is appli-
eable to ail ships ete.

The provisions contained in existing section 10(2B) and
(20) have been omitted in the draft. It is understoad that
Government does not want to enforce these provisions for
the future; in any case. the changes made in existing sec-
tion 10(2)(vib) render these provisions superfluous, at least
so far as development rebate ts concerned.

1 See also ‘ast para of gotes to clause 38. |
3 Sec also notes to draff clause 32} (ii)


351
Notes to clause 35.

Sub-clause Al)}—Item (i) needs no comments. Items
Gi) and (iii) represent section 10(2) (xiii), which has been
braken we for’ clarity. Item (iv) corresponds to section
10(3) (xiv), relating to allowance for capital expenditure
on scientific research. For simplicity, the bread principle
for allowing such expenditure as a deduction, embodied in
existing section 10(2)(xiv), first para, earlier portion, has
been embodied here. The rest of the provisions of section
10(2)(xiv), and its provisos deal with (1) detailed conditions
and provisions for deduction, or (ii) rules regarding profit
on sale of the asset or (ii) interpretation. These have been
dealt with separately.’

Sub-clause (2)—Item (i) & Explanation—These cor-
respond to the existing provisions in section 10(2)(xiv),
first para and first proviso, An attempt has been made to
simplify the expression and make it direct. No change
ras been made in the substance. As the allowance is
granted in both cases (i.e, whether the expenditure was
incurred before or after commencement of business), it
will suffice to say so. without making separate elaborate
provision for the two cases.

The draft Explanation states the first Proviso in a
different form, which is positive.

Item (ii)—needs no comment, except that the affirma-
tive provision in existing section 10(2})(xiv), 2nd Proviso
(a) (ii), has been made to precede the negative provision
in section 10(2)(xiv), 2nd Proviso, (a)(i). The deduction
allowed under this item takes the piace of the 1/5th in item
(i). This is made clear in the draft.

Item (iii) Language has been simplified.
Item (iv)—Needs no comments.

Item (v)—Correspondens to the earlier portion of sec-
tion 10(2)(xiv), 2nd Proviso (e). The Iatter portion has
been transferred to the interpretation clause.’

Sub-clause (3)—needs no comments. The contents of
the Explanation to section 10(2) (xiv), have been transfer-
red to the interpretation clause.’

Sub-clause (4}—needs no comments.
Notes to clause 36.

Sub-clause (1}—deals with deductions for insurance of
stocks and stores.

Sub-clause (2)—Item (i)—needs no comments except
that the wording in the existing section 10(2){x), proviso,
has been sought to be improved. The existing phrase, “the

1 Vide draft ol (2) and draft cl 103) afl ॥2(5) respectively.
+ ye 2775 70777 777 19) MR ”
ज Vide draft clause 42(5). |


352

amount is of a reasonable amount” unnecessarily repeats
the word “amount”.

Item (ii}—This is new and has been added to help an
assessee to get a deduction where bonus is paid in pursu-
ance of any award of an industrial or other tribunal even
if the amount is not reasonable, that is to say, even if the
conditions in the existing section 10(2) (5), proviso. are not
Satisfied.

Sub-clause (3)—corresponds to existing section 10(2)
(iii). The proviso has been transferred to the clause on
amounts not deductible’, in order to simplify the sub-clause
and make the arrangement logical.

Sub-clause (4)—Section 58R, first para, which pertains
te the deduction of the contribution of an employer to an
approved superannuation fund, should really find a refer-
ence amongst deductions, and has therefore been referred
to here. :

Sub-clause (5)—needs no comments.

Sub-clause (6)—corresponds to existing section 1009)
oo? for bad debts. The changes made are explained.
/ELOW > —

Opening lines—Instead of the words “bad and doubtful
debts” the words “debts or parts thereof that are estab-
lished to have become bad debts” have been used. The
word “doubtful” is unnecessary and does not add anything
to what is conveyed by “bad”,

Item (i)—A condition has been added that the debt
must have been taken into account in computing the in-
come for an earlier year. This follows section 11(1)(e) of
the Canadian Income-tax Act and section 63(1)(a) of the
Australian Income-tax Act.

Item (ii)~The requirement expressed by the words
“not exceeding the amount actually written off” etc. ap-
pearing at the end of existing section 10(2) (xi), first para,
has been given here the shape of a condition.

First Proviso—This embodies the latter half of the
existing proviso. [The earlier half of the existing proviso
deals with “profit”. not “deduction”, and is therefore trans-
ferred to a separate clause*.]

b Second Proviso~is intended to meet a case like
this :—

A debt is written off in the accounting year 1957-58. At
the time of the assessment for that year, the Income-tax
Officer does not allow it as a deduction, on the ground that
it is not yet established to have become a bad debt. But
when the assessment for a subsequent accounting year, say
1958-59, takes place, the Income-tax Officer has no: doubt

Draft clause 4o(a) (i).
* Draft clause 41(4).



353

left as to its irrecoverability then. The debt will be treat-
ed as a bad debt for the account year 1958-59, and the mere
fact that it was written off in an earlier year should not
bar the grant of a deduction.

This result could have been brought about by suitable
words in draft item (ii) also {e.g., by adding “or earlier
previous year” there). But a proviso has been preferred in
order to avoid obscurity.

Notes to clause 37.
This embodies section 10(2}(xv).

The existing section uses the words “not being an al-
lowance of the nature described” elsewhere; the word “al-
Jowance” has, in the draft, been replaced by the word “ex-
penditure” which is more appropriate in the context.

Notes to clause 38.

Sub-clause (1)—The limitation contained in existing
section 10(2), Proviso, regarding deduction for rent where
a part of the premises is used as a dwelling house, has been
incorporated here in para (a). Similar limitation regard-
ing deduction for repairs, contained in existing section
10(2)(ii), Proviso, has been embodied in para (b).

In draft para (a), the annual value of the part used for
the business has been mentioned, in preference to the an-
nual value of the part used as a dwelling house men-
tioned in the existing section, as the former seems to be a
more direct way of stating the rule.

The words “as the Income-tax Officer may determine”
do not occur in the existing section 10(2) (ii), proviso, but
have been added in draft para (b) to make the matter clear
and to have uniformity (Cf. existing section 10(2){i), Pro-
viso).

See also notes below under sub-clause (2).

Sub-clause (2).—Existing section 10(2) (ix), provides
for deduction for land revenue etc. and says that the deduc-
tion is for that “part” of the premises which is used for
the business. The provision for deduction has already
been dealt with in the draft clause on deductions. The
present draft sub-clause deals with the limitation regard-
ing “part”.

The provision has been made more elaborate, on the
lines of existing section 10(2)(i), Proviso (See notes to
sub-clause (1) above}.

{Logically speaking. draft sub-clause (1), for section
10(2) (3) and (ii) Proviso (for deduction for rents and re-
pairs where a part of the premises is used as residence)
should also be framed on the same lines as draft sub-clause
(2). The existing provision op these points is confined to
cases where a part is used asia “dwel fire house”. It does

i |


354

not deal with a case where the part is used not as a dwel-"
ling house but for some other purpose not connected with
the business. However, no [2 has been made in this
Tespect in draft sub-clause (1), in order to avoid any al-
teration in tax liability.)

Sub-clause (3)—carresponds to existing section. 10(3).
The word “wholly” has been replaced by the word “exclu-
sively”. It has been held’ that the words “not wholly......”
mean that the building is not used exclusively for the
purposes of the business, but for other purposes also.
(These words, the court held, have nothing to do with
the period of user during the previous year.) The draft
gives effect to this decision.

The section has also been made more elaborate by
providing that the Income-tax Officer is to determine the
amount with reference to the extent to which the user was
for the purpose of the business.

It must have been noticed that the Act does not deal
with all cases of partial user in the context af deduc-
tions.

User may be partial in point of—

(i) Space, i.e., only a part of the building is used for
the business;

{ii) purpose, i.e., only some of the purposes of the user
are business purposes; or

(iii) duration, i.e,, the building is used only for a part
of the previous year.

(Moreover. there may be. partiality both in point of
space and time, time and duration, and so 07.)

The Act deals with (i) and (ii) only, and that too
only for certain kinds of deductions. It does not deal in
so many words with (iii). The draft also does not gp be-
yond the Act, except that an earlier clause’ embodjes a
provision contained in the rules regarding user whith 1s
partial in point of duration.

Notes to clause 39.

No change has been made in cxisting section 328.

Notes to clause 40.

This clause collects together all amounts~not deduc-
tible in computing the profits and gains of business, etc.
The scheme adopted is to proceed from the general to
special. Thus, rules common to all assessees come, first
{para. (a)], while those applicable to particular kinds of
assessees are placed after them. 4

2.1. 7. vs, Dalmia Gefnent Led. (1945) 73 UTR. 435. H

3 See draft clause 34(2) की. 1 |

H
. t

‘



355

Para (०)--

Item (i)}—An attempt has been made to simplify the
language. The last 17 words of the existing section 10(2)
iii} Proviso, relating to interest paid to a partner have
‘been omitted, as para (b) of present draft clause will
cover it.

Item (ii)—needs no comments.

Items (iti) & (iv)—need no comments except that
slight verbal changes have been made to secure clarity.

Para (b)--Needs no comments.

Para (c)—The words “expenditure or” have been add-
‘ed in item (ii) in order to make it clear that moneys ac-
tually spent (by a person having a substantial interest in
a company) are also excluded from deductions.

Para (d)—embodies the last line of clauses (a) and (b)
of the Explanation to existing section 8. The bar against
double deduction of such amounts has been embodied in
the draft for that section,’ but has been repeated here in
order to make the list exhaustive.

Notes to clause 41.

There are provisions scattered at various places in
‘section 10, enacting that a certain amount shall be treated
as a profit of business and taxed accordingly. An attempt
has been made here to collect all of them together.

Sub-clause (1)—~Needs no comments.

Sub-clause (2)—~is an attempt to state in a simple form
the propositions embodied im the second and the fourth
provisos to section 10(2){vii). The second proviso is con-

ined to assets which are sold and bring profits, while the
fourth proviso deals with assets which are discarded etc.,
and bring profits. The draft sub-clause (read with the
-draft Explanation 1) combines both these, cases.

It must, of course, be noted that the existing fourth
proviso is highly involved in language, and does not dis-
close easily the rule that is to be applied. But there can
be no doubt that the true rule is ‘Shs that if the scrap
value plus the amount of insurance moneys etc., exceeds
the written down value, then the excess is taxed as a
business profit to the extent to which the original cost is
not exceeded.

The proviso as drafted is faithful to this rule. More-
over, it avoids the ambiguity arising from the existing
‘words “so much of the excess as doeé not exceed the dif-

alae ise ती8 व्यय vaio (a bb between the original cost ang.the written down
value less the scrap valud’. [1५ higuity arises by

< Draft clause 20(ii),



356

reason of the fact that the word “less” can be read either
with (i) excess, or with (ii) difference, or with (iii) written

down value.}

The following analysis of the fourth proviso is intend-

ed to show how each pai
in the proposed draft.

Existing section.

. “Provided futher... . the 1.
difference between the
value and the scrap value no amount
Shall be allowed under this clause.”

s

. Hand so much of the excess shail be 2.
deemed to be profits”.
3: “and so much of the excess as does 3.
not exceed the difference between the
original cost and the voritten down value

rt of the proviso has been dealt with

सिल्क incorporated.

‘The itulicised words are unneces-
sary, since deduction is allowed only
where the written down value isnot
exceeded. (Sce existing Sce. 10(2)
(vai), 3rd Prov.)

Incorporated in the} present draft
sub-clause (2)

Vhe cue rule behind the italicised
words has been incorporated in a
simplified form inthe present draft

less the scrap value.” sub-clause (2), as already explained

in the notes.

The function of draft Explanation 1 has been explain-

ed above. Draft Explantions 2 and 3 do not need any com-
ments.

Sub-clause (3)—needs no comments. The changes
are only verbal. The words “whether during the conti-
nuance of the business” have been added in order to clarify
the scope of the provision, on the lines of the existing sec-
tion 10(2)(vii), 2nd Proviso.

Sub-clause (4)—The addition of the words “or part of
debt” is consequential on the draft adopted for the main.
para of section 10(2)(xi). Other changes are verbal.

Notes to clause 42.

This clause groups together all provisions in the na-
ture of the definition or interpretation, relevant to profits
and gains of b@siness etc.

Sub-clause (1)--
First para—needs no comments.
Explanation 1—needs no comments.

Explanation 2.-Existing section 10(5) (९) provides that
in the case of an asset acquired by the assessee by gift or
inheritance, its written down value shall be the written
down value in the case of the previous owner or the market
value (whichever is less), The provision thus appears as
a part of the definition of “written down value”; but it
would be more appropriate to place it as a part the
definition of actual cdst. What is intended is the fixation
of a notional} figure of actual gost and not a notional re


357

of written down value as such. The written down value
of an asset is an amount that is constantly diminishing, and
cannot be frozen at the figure of written down value of
the previous owner, as the existing section purports to do.
The real object is to invent an “actual cost” (because a.
person acquiring property by gift and not paying anything
for it does not, actually, incur any cost).

The provision has therefore been placed as an Expla-
nation under the definition of actual cost, with suitabie
verbal changes.

Explanation 3: The only change made in existing sec-
tion 10(5)(a), lst Proviso, is to add, after the word ‘busi-~
ness’, the words ‘profession or vocation’ to make the pro-
vision comprehensive. (Cf. existing section 10(5){a), 2nd
Proviso).

Explanation 4: Existing section 10(5)(a}, 2nd Proviso,
has been transferred to the definition of actual cost, sirice
it pertains to that topic. A few verbal changes have been:
made to simplify the language.

Explanation 5: This is based on section 12B(1), 2nd
Proviso.

Sub-clauses (2) and (3)—need no comments, except
that it is made clear that ships are included in “plant”.

Sub-clause (4)—is new. The word “received” has been
sought to be defined on the lines of the existing definition
of “paid” in section 10(5), first para, so as to cover not only
cash receipts, but also receipts according to the method of
accounting. The definition is, of course, confined to the
OA dealing with profits from business [e.g. section
-10(2 .

Sub-clause (5)—Corresponds to existing section 10(2)
(xiv), Explanation.

The only change made is in item (iii)(b), where, at the
end, the words “business of that class” have been chang-
ed into “all businesses of that class”, on the lines of para
(a) of the same item.

Sub-clause (6)—needs no comments.

Sub-clause (7), Para (a)—The provisos to existing sec-
tion 10(5)(a) have been shifted to the definition of “actual
cost”, for the reasons given above in the notes relating to
draft sub-clause (1), Explanations 3 and 4.

Para (b) and Proviso—need no comments.

Explanation 1—Corresponds to the second proviso to
section 10({5)(b). The form has been changed. The exist-
ing provision says that in cases of succession to business,
the actual cost referred to in the main part (definition of
“written down value”) shali be the cost to the predecessor
in business. The effect of ted is, th Majo of th down value
that would have been 80०] in the of the predecessor


£—Capital
gains.

358
in business will be regarded as the written down value of
the asset even in the hends of the successor. This effect has

been sought to be brought about more directly in the 'pro-
vision as drafted.

_ Explanation 2.—is based on section 12861), 2nd pro-
viso.

Clause (c)—of the existing definition of written down
value has been shifted to the definition of “actual cost’—
See notes above relating to draft sub-clause (1), Explana-
tion 3.

Explanation 3.—embodies existing section 10(5), Ex-
planation, latter half, without any change. .

Notes to clause 43.

This is a new clause. There is some doubt as to whe-
ther the residences constructed for employees are buildings

‘used for the purposes of the business or not. The adminis-

trative instructions appearing on page 447 of the Income-
tax Manual, 10th Edition, are as follows: —

“Buildings belonging to the owner of a business
and used by him in order to house his employees are
buildings used for the purpose of business where the
occupation by the employees of property owned by the
employer who carried on a business is subservient to
and necessary for the performance of their duties. In
any other event such buildings would be chargeable
under section 9 irrespective of the fact whether any
rent is paid by the employees or not.”

The instructions. which appear to be in accordance
with the strict legal position, are sought to be codified
by this clause.

Notes to clause 44.

The provisions regardin, g insurance business, comtain-
ed in the existing Schedule, have been placed in the draft
First Schedule, but Rule 9 of the existing Schedule has
been placed here in view of its importance. [For a defi-
nition of “mutual insurance company”, see the $outh
African Income-tax Act, 1941, First Schedule, para 2(7).]

Notes to clause 45.
General—

Existing section 12B has been split up into several sec-
tions in the draft, in order to facilitate its understanding.
The charging provision comes first, followed by the year
of charge and mode | ah tion of the gains, Di Le
provisions for fixing eost'fof the asset follow next, and
provisions, in the na! of iption come at the e:



Draft clause 45—The changes male are verbal only.
The existing words “the tax shall be payable” have been
replaced by the words......... “shall be chargeable to in-
come-tax” as in other sections. The words “save as other-
wise provided” have been added merely as a drafting im-
provement.

The existing reference to the date 315६ March, 1956,
has been omitted as obsolete.

But it has been made clear that the transaction must
have been effected “in the previous year”. Though this
might amount to a repetition of a provision already con-
tained in the Act, namely, that income chargeable as capi-
tal gains is deemed to be the income of the previous year
in which the transaction took place,’ still such clarifica-
tion appears to be useful in the main section also.

Notes to clause 46.

This clause fixes the previous year to which the income-
should be related.

Notes to clause 47.

Existing section 12B(1), 15६ proviso, and earlier part of
the 2nd proviso, have been combined together. The latter
part of the 2nd proviso really appertains to the definitions
of “actual cost” and “written down value” and is placed
there.

Sub-clause (i)—needs no comments.

Sub-clause (ii)—The existing provision reads “any dis-
tribution ............... under a deed of gift”. The term “dis-
tribution” may not, it is apprehended, cover a gift to a
single donee. It has, therefore, been replaced by “transfer”.
The words “deed of” have been omitted, so as to include
oral gifts.

Sub-clause (iii)—The existing provision requires that
the subsidiary company should be “registered under the In-
dian Companies Act, 1956”. (Before its amendment in 1956,
the wording was “registered under the Indian Companies
Act, 1913”.) Obviously, however, the intention is that the
subsidiary company should be an “Indian company”. The
wording has been changed acdordingly. {It may be noted,
that the existing wording wo@ld, if construed strictly, ex
clude companies registered under a pte-1956 law, and this”
narrows down the scope. On the other hand, it would slight-
ly widen the scope by being: silent qbout the. registered
office being in India—a requfrement ‘mentioned expressly
in the definition of “Indian comfpany”.)

Notes to clause 48.

Sub-clause (1)—Item (i)+The wards “wholly and ex-
clusively” have been substituted for the existing word’
“solely”. This will secure uniformity in language with
ne aha pea provisions, e.g., exigting segtion 10{2}{xv).

1 See existing section 12B(1), main fers tater ahi



360

Item (ii)—Existing section 12B{2)(ii) speaks of “the
actual cost to the assessee of the capital asset” (with
certain inclusions and exclusions) being deducted from the
consideration. But there are cases where “actual costs” is
replaced by written down value, e.g., see existing section
12B(1), 2nd proviso. In some cases, it is replaced by the
fair market value, see section 12B(2), 3rd proviso. Further.
the amounts to be added to the actual cost (as representing
improvements) vary in various cases, according to the date
of acquisition of the asset etc. In order to cover all these
cases, it seems desirable to use some convenient expression
to denote the deductible cost. The expression “statutory
cost” has been used for the purpose. The manner of arriv-
ing at the statutory cost is dealt with separately for the
sake of simplicity.

As to the amounts spent on improvements (additions
and alterations), they have not been mentioned in the draft
in the present clause, but have been dealt with elaborately
in the draft clauses to follow,’ explaining in detail what is
“statutory cost” in various situations. The reason is, that
the date after which the improvements should have been
made will vary in various situations. To take an example,
where the fair market value of the asset on 1st January.
1954, is substituted under existing section 12B(2), 3rd pro-
viso, it is only improvements made after Ist January, 1954
that can be taken into account, and it would not suffice to
say that improvements made after acquisition by the as-
sessee will be added to the actual cost.

Notes to clause 49.

This clause enumerates the various modes by which a
person might have acquired a capital asset which he sub-
sequently transfers for consideration. The various modes
enumerated in this section are contained in section 12B it-
self and are grouped in the clause for the purpose of clarity.

In the following clauses’ the method of calculating the
statutory cost of the capital asset is laid down.

Assets for which depreciation allowance is admissible
have been dealt with separately. The rules for depreciable
and non-depreciable assets differ; e.g., (i) in the case of de-
preciable assets, the written down value is taken as the ac-
tual cost in ordinary cases; (ii) even where the assets are ac-
quired before 1-1-1954 and the market value on that date
is substituted, subsequent depreciation has to be adjusted
in the case of such assets.

Item (iv)(d) of the draft clause uses the words “revo-
‘cable or irrevocable trust”, since there is no reason for differ-
ventiating between the two:

3 Vide draft clauses 50-51.



361

Notes to clause 50.
General—

The cost of an asset to be allowed for the purpose of

computing capital gains can be described as made up of the
following ingredients :—

(a) The basic amount. This is (i) cost of acquisition or
(ii) written down value or (iii) in certain special
cases, the fair market value on a certain date.

(0) Addition for expenditure on improvement to the
assets.

(०) Reduction for depreciation.

(d) Adjustment for profits assessed or losses deducted
under section 10(2)(vii), 3rd and 4th provisos.

Items (८) and (d) are not applicable to non-depreciable
assets,

The existing section mentions all these ingredients while
dealing with the normal situations covered by section 12B
(2)(ii) and 2nd proviso, but does not do so when dealing with
certain special situations. In the draft, however. it has been
considered desirable to make the provision for each situation
elaborate and to state all the applicable ingredients.

Scheme—

The scheme adopted in the clause is to deal in separate
sub-clauses with the mode of statutory cost according to the
mode of acquisition. (The modes of acquisition have been
classified in a preceding clause).

Sub-clause (1)--

Para. (a)--the words “cost of acquisition” have been
substituted for the existing words “actual cost”, as being
more appropriate. Incidentally, the expression “actual
cost” might give rise to the impression that the definition of
that expression in section 10(5) is applicable here also.

As to the expression “cost of improvements” see the
interpretation clause at the end of this group.

Para. (b)—The existing section creates a slight diffi-
culty in understanding it, because it combines two things
in one, namely, (1) where the capital asset became the
property of the assessee before 15६ January, 1954, and (2)
where it became the property of the previous owner be-
fore the Ist January, 1954. The draft separates these two

situations and deals with them separately for the sake of
clarity.

The existing provision requires that the fair market
value should be “proved” to the satisfaction of the Income
tax Officer. This requirement has been omitted, as it is im-
plied in all proceedings before the Income-tax Officer.

3 Bee draft-clause ¢9 and no‘es therete,


362

Sub-clause (2) and subsequent sub-clauses—do not need
any detailed comments. The various ingredients constitu-
ting the statutory cost have been embodied,’ here.

Notes to clause 51.

This relates to the determination of statutory cost of
depreciable assets. The expression “adjusted” has been coin-
ed as a short expression to convey the profits assessed and
losses deducted under existing gection 10(2)(vii), 3rd and 4th
provisos. It has been defined in the interpretation seetion
pertaining to this group of sections.’

We think however, that it would be more convenient
to adopt a simple formula for arriving at the actual cost
instead of the elaborate provisions now contained. Either
the market value on the date of acquisition if acquired be-
fore 1-1-1954 or the market value on 1-1-1954 at the option
of the assessee may be adopted, whatever be the mode of
acquisition. In other cases the market value on the date
of acquisition may be taken. Adjustments may be made
to arrive at the statutory cost.

Notes to clause 52.

The verbal changes made are consequential on the. pro-
visions for arriving at the cost of the asset as re-drafterl.

Notes to clause 53.
This is new.

Where a capital asset is given in exchange, the gonsi-
deration received by the assessee wil) itself be an asset (i.e.,
in kind and not in cash). Some rule for estimating the
value of such consideration appears to be necessary. The
draft clause takes the fair market value of the asset re-
ceived by the assessee, as the basis.

Paragraphs (a) and (b) are intended to deal with cases
where the transaction is not a pure exchange of asset, and
the assessee receives or gives something (usually money) in
addition to the thing received or given in exchange.

Notes to clause 54.

This deals with the case where the consideration stated
in the deed of sale ete. is low.

An important departure has been made from the exist-
ing provision. Existing section 12B(2), 1st proviso, applies
to cases where the transaction is entered into with a person
‘directly or indirectely’ conne¢ted with the assessee. This
does not appear to be necessary and has been omitted.

1 See notes above “ Geneyal”. ;
* The elaborate ct “i 2 8 (3), Proving oF pro T for
improvements are regarded winapplicade ior depreciable assets,


363

The draft clause has. further, been limited to cases
where the actual consideration is not correctly given in the
deed. The power should not extend to cases where the
consideration, though law, has been correctly recited in the

le

Notes to clause 55.
The question of transferring this te the chapter on
“Exclusions from Total Income” was considered, by us, but
we thought it more appropriate to- retain it here.

Notes to clause 56.

No change of importance has been made in existing
section 12B(¢4) (b).

Notes to clause 57.

“Adjusted”—Existing section 12B(2), 2nd proviso says
that in the case of depreciable assets, the cost of the assets
(४.९, the written down value) has to be adjusted by losses
deducted or profits assessed under existing section 10(2)(vii),
3rd and 4th provisos. Even in cases where the fair market
value on a certain date is substituted, this deduction has
to be made.

In order to avoid the necessity of repeating the words
“diminished by losses and increased by profits” frequently,
the substantive draft clauses’ for calculating the statutory
cost use the short expression “adjusted”, and the present
clause seeks to define it.

“Cost of improvement”.—Existing section 12B(2)(ii)
says that the actual cost of an asset shall include expendi-
ture of a capital nature on additions or alterations to the
asset. Even in cases where the actual cost is to be replaced
by the fair market value as on a certain date, improvements
subsequent to that date have .to be taken into account.

In order to avoid the necessary of repeating the lengthy
expression “expenditure of a capital nature” etc., the sub-
stantive draft clauses use the short expression “cost of any
improvements”, and the present clause seeks to define it.

The existing provision, section 12B(2)(ii), last lines,
specifically excludes expenditure deductible under other

eads.

Notes to clause 58.

Clause 58

This clause deals with income taxable under the resi-
duary head “Income fom other sources”. Sub-clause (1) ६

F+Income

‘om = Other’

embodies the general principle, while sub-clause (2) lists sourtes.

some specific items deserving special mention.

1, Vide draft clauses 50-51.
24—1 Law Com. 58



364

Sub-clause (1)—The language adopted is in conformity
with that adopted in the draft for the other heads (९.9..
Salaries). The words “which may be included in his total
income” have been omitted, as unnecessary. Under exist-
ing sections 3 and 4, it is only income forming part of “total
income” that is subject to tax. . Therefore the words “which
may be included in the total income” are to be read into
each section dealing with a head of income, and need not
be repeated in every section.

Sub-clause (2)—Item (9) needs no comments.

Items (ii) and (iii) are, in form, new; but sub-sections
(3) and (4) of existing section 12 imply that such income is
taxed under the residuary head. This implication has been
made express in the draft.

Section 12(1B) is omitted, as it is not relevant for as-
sessments to be made hereafter.

Notes to clause 59.
Existing section 16(2) provides for two things :—

(1) The proposition contained in the earlier partion,
providing that a dividend is deemed to be the income of the
previous year in whieh it is paid, credited etc.

(2) The provision for grossing up of dividends coftain-
ed in the latter part and proviso. १

The proposition at No. (1) above has been embodied
in a separate draft clause, being one of the clauses! deal-
ing with deemed incomes. )

The provision at No. (2) above forms the subject-rpatter
of the present draft clause. )

Sub-clause (1)—is introductory in nature.

Sub-clause (2)—The grossing up of dividends is 4 diffi-
cult procedure. The question of requiring companjes to
deduct tax from dividends can be considered, on i lines
of S. 184-186 of the U.K. Act-and sections 43 and 49 pf the
Ceylon Act. The recommendations of the Taxation En-
quiry Commission on the subject’ may also be seen.)

On the assumption that the present provision : to be
retained, sub-clause (2) attempts to state the rule rpgerd-
ing grossing up in the form of a formula. The existing
section states the rule in an indirect manner; the w ding
“such amount as would, if income-tax etc. were deducted
therefrom, be equal to the amount of the dividend “qreates
some difficulty in actua] application, because it beging with
an unknown. The draft formula, though appearing com-
plex on account of symbols, is not so difficult to ant iy.

"Vide draft clause 8. | ~~ 7

“7. 8. 0. Report, vot fe cue Faragraphs 18-25, pages [156-158
i



365

The draft expresses the meaning of the clause in the
form of a simple mathematical formuja. (The method of
adopting such formula is not nove] and is to be found in
the South African Income-tax Act.)

The formula is explained below :—

5 If G is the amount as grossed up, D the amount of the «
net (i.e. actual) dividend, and R the Tate of income-tax ap- °
plicable to the company expressed as a percentage, then,
the existing rule is that—

R
G - (७ x= =D
400
.
GR
ie,G minus —— = p
100
R By transpo-
ie, D = GI -— ing left and
te Dm os -् seat oe
D side,
in G@ = by: trang;
ie, G = & | pry
a a
100
ढ = - : (Siafpliea) 39
100—R .
Now G is composed of the net amount of the dividend,
plus the increase; हु
100xD
iesG@ = D + Increase =
R है !
100D fe posing
or Increase = ---- -»D )
100-R -
Now, if D on the extreme right hand is expressed in
terms of fraction of 100-R, then,
100D D (1००- R)
Increase = का हे
100—R 100—-R
100 D ~[100D—RD)
ie., Increase = |= >>
100—R ‘“
RD
ie, Increase =
100—R

Therefore the gross dividend is the actual dividend plus
the increase so arrived at. .

Sub-clause (3)—This is based on the existing proviso to
section 16(2). The expression ‘fi been replaced in
the draft by the expression a on h is more appro-
priate in the context. {


366

Notes to clause 60.

Deductions (pertaining te income from other sources)
have been made the subject-matier of a separate clause, as
has been done in the case of income under other heads, e.g.
profits of business.

Item {i)—needs no comments.

Item (ii)—Existing sections 12(%) and 12(4) provide that
where machinery etc. is let on hire, the assessee shall be
“entitled to allowances” in accordance with the provisions
of section 10(2), clauses (iv) to (vii). Now, these clauses of
section 10(2) provide for two things :—~

न (1) Deductions for certain expenses, depreciation and
loss on sale;

(2) Charging of tax on profits on sale, destruction etc.
of assets (Section 10(2)(vii), 3rd and 4th provisos).

Logically, therefore, section 12(3) and 12(4) are to be
construed as adopting not only the provisions for deductions
but also those for profits, in the clauses referred to. ~

The provisions for deductions are incorporated in the
draft item under discussion. The words “so far as may be”
have been added, since these provisions may not fit in word

- by word in respect of income from other sources. Other

verbal changes are consequential on the scheme adopted
in the draft for existing section 10(2)(iv) to (vi).

So much of section 10(2){vii) as dedls with the charging
of tax on profits arising from sale etc. has been emibe i
in the separate draft clause to follow, entitled “Profits
chargeable to tax”. oo

Item (iii)—Instead of the present wording “solely for
the purpose of ...............” the words “wholly and exclu-
sively” have been used, to secure uniformity with the lan-
guage of existing section 10(2)(xv).

Notes to clause 61.

Amounts not deductible have been dealt with separate-
ly in this clause.

Sub-clause (a)—Item (i) needs no comments. In
items (ii) and (iii) minor verbal changes have been made
on the lines of changes in the corresponding provisiops for
income under other heads, (¢.g. see the drai ft for eaisting
section 10(2)(iti), Proviso). po

Sub-clause (b)—Section 12(5), in part, provides that the
provisions of existing section 10(4A) apply to income from
other sources as they apply to income from business. Since
section 10(4A) relates to amounts disallowed as deductions,
this part of section 12(5) finds a place here.

The rest of existi fs sectig 1, 12(5) is incorporated jn the
clause, to follow, dealing with profits chargeable to tpx.
ie


367

Notes to clause 62.
Sub-clause (i)—needs no comments.

Sub-clause (2)—See notes under draft clause entitled
“Deductions”.

CHAPTER V

INCOMES OF OTHER PERSONS, INCLUDED’ IN
ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME

Notes to clause 63.

Existing section 16(1)(c) deals with two kinds of trans-
fers: (1) transfer of income only, without transfer of the
corpus, and (2) revocable transfer of the corpus. In order to
prevent the two kinds of transfers being mixed up, it is
considered desirable to separate the two into two sec-
tions.

The draft clause under discussion deals with the first
kind of transfer. The existing section uses the words “set-
tlement or disposition” and then goes on to define these
words as including, besides other things, “disposition” (see
second proviso). For the sake of brevity, only the word
“transfer” has been used in the draft throughout the group
of clauses incorporating section 16(i)(c). The word ‘trans-
fer’ has been defined separately.

The existing section contains the words “from assets re-
maining the property of the settlor or disponer”.. These
words do not easily convey the exact meaning. The obvi-
cus intention is to refer to a case where there is no trans-
fer of the property from which the income arises. This is
made clear in the draft.

Provisos 1 and 3 to the existing section 16(1)(c) are
framed in wide language so as to convey the impression
that they are applicable to transfers of mere income also.
But since transfers of mere income (that is, transfers co-
vered by the draft clause under discussion) fall within the
section “whether revocable or not”, it seems incongruous
to give any definition of “revocable” in respect of such
transfers. It could not have been the intention that if the
transfer of income is itself irrevocable, then the section will

not apply. The first and third provisos should therefore. .

be confined to transfers of corpt us, being revocable. The cor-
responding draft clauses’ ac¢ordingly narrow down the
scope.

Other changes are verbal.

Notes to clause 64.

One or two verbal changes have been made, which
do not need any comments.

1 See draft clauses 65, 66.


368

Notes to clause 65.

The existing provision, ie., section 16(1)(c), third provi-
so, applies only to “settlement or disposition”. It does not
mention “transfer”, but obviously all transfers of corpus
are also covered by the proviso, since the main para. of
section 16(1)(c), latter part, speaks of “revocable transfer
of assets”, and the proviso is intended to save certain trans-
fers which, though revocable, are not revocable for a
certain period. Hence the draft mentions transfers. पर

Sub-clause (1)—The existing provision speaks of a set-
tlement ete. which is not revocable during the life-time of
the “person”. This “person” is obviously the transferee (see
the opening line of the existing section 16(1)(c) which be-
gins with “all income arising to any person”). This has
been made clear in the draft in para. (a). In the case of a
transfer by way of trust, the transferee, that is, the person
to whom the income arises, is in theory, the trustee, but in
substance the beneficiary. This has also been specifically
provided for in the draft.

Sub-clause (2)—The verbal changes made are conse-
quential. . ’

Notes to clause 66.
The small verbal changes made are consequential’,

Retransfer of “income”, mentioned in the existing sec-
tion and also in the draft, will be applicable where, though
the transfer is of corpus, the income is retransferable or
resumable.

The definition of “settlement or disposition”, contained
in the second proviso, has been replaced by a definition of
transfer. The definition of “settler or disponer” confain-
ed in the existing second proviso, does not seem tp be
necessary. The intention behind the definition, probably,
was to clarify that in the case of a settlement by two or
more persons, each of the settlors is regarded as a settlor.
It is unnecessary to have such a provision by way of
specific definition.

Notes to clause 67.

The words “being a male” have been added after “an
individual”. The reason is, that the provision in | tion
applies only to males as is now settied by the Supfeme
Court’.

Item (ij—The existing sections 16(3)(a) and 16(3){b)
both begin with the words “so much of the income”. This
is provided in the draft clause, opening lines, by the words
“all such income”, and repetition in the item corresponding
to section 16(3)(b) has been avoided.

See notes to draft clause} 63 बढ, Tt
3 6.7.77 us: Sodro Devi “? 39 im 615 5.0.


The significance of section 1663) lies in the principle
that the income of one person (wife, ¢hild etc.) is regarded
as the income of another persqn. In other words, the income
arising to A is attributed to B. This has been brought out
directly in the draft by commencing each item with words
“to his wife” etc. (The existing items begin with words de-
noting the property and not the person).

The words “her husband” have been replaced by “such
individual” for the sake of precision.

The words “of which” a person is a partner, have been
replaced by “in which”, as being more happy in the context. _

Items (ii), (iii) & (iv)—See notes to item (i).

Item (v}—-The existing section 16(3)(b), while speak-
ing of “minor child”, does not exclude the case of a married
daughter. But an exception should be made for married
daughters here also, as has been made by the existing sec-
tion 16(3)(a), item (iv), since there is no reason for not
having the same provision in both the cases. The words
“not being a married daughter” have, therefore, been ad-
ded in the draft.

CHAPTER VI

AGGREGATION OF INCOME AND SET-OFF OR CARRY
FORWARD OF LOSSES

Notes to clause 68,

Incomes on which income-tax is not payable have been
dealt with in a separate Chapter. Since such incomes form
part of the total income for purposes of rate etc., this clause
states“that rule clearly.

Notes to/clause 69.

Sub-clause (1)~Existing section 16(1) (०), dealing with
the method of computing the share of the partner in the
income of the firm, presents some difficulties. In the first
place, the words “increased or decreased respectively by

is share in the balance of the profits or loss after the
deduction of any interest, salary, commission or other re-
muneration payable to any partner, in respect of the pre-
vious year” create some ambiguity, as it is not clear whe-
ther the words “after the deduction” are to be read with
“his share” or with “balance” or with “profits or loss of the
firm”. Secondly, the words “increaged or decreased res-
pectively” leave some scope for improvement and simpli-
fication. Lastly, the section is a bit involved. An attempt
has, therefore, been made to recast the provision and state
the mode of computing the share step by step.

The direction to deduct interest etc. payable to any
partner, contained in the existing section, is obviously
necessary, in view of the fact that existing section 10(4)(b)
disallows the deduction of any payment by way of interest
etc. made by the firm to a al hat section 16(1)(b)
does is to authorise this dedgction positive provision,
when computing the partner’g share. | | पु


370

The existing expression “profits or loss” has been re-
placed by “total income”, which is more precise.

‘The word “paid” has been used in paragraphs (a), (b),
(c), instead of the existing word “payable”. The word has
been defined in the clause. This will secure uniformity
with existing section 10(5).

Sub-clause (2)}—This clause is new aod is intended to
make it clear that the classification of income under the
various heads as given in existing section 6 is applicable
to the share of a partner, in the same way as it applies to
the firm. In other words, just as a firm’s income can be
classified under “Income from house property”, “Income
from business” etc., similarly, even after the apportion-
ment of the income to the partner, the amount apportion-
ed to a partner is classified under various heads.

Sub-clause (3)—This is new. It gives effect to a deci-
sion of the Bombay High Court’ which holds that interest
paid on money borrowed by a partner and utilized by him
for investing as capital in the firm is allowable as a deduc-
tion in computing the partner’s total income, in so far as
the total income comprises his share in a firm’s income.

For the sake of comprehensiveness, it has also been
made clear that 10 other deduction is allowed in respect
of the share.

Sub-clause (4)—Existing section 16(1)(b), proviso, has
been reproduced in this sub-clause. Strictly speaking, this
provision should be placed along with provisions for 5९
off. However, it serves a useful purpose as indicating
that there is scope for set off. It has therefore been
allowed to remain here. The words “in accordance” would,
of course, make it clear that a partner’s right to set off
is not absolute, but is subject to the provisions of exipting
section 24.

Notes to clause 70.

This clause is new and is intended to give effe¢t to
the legal principle that unexplained cash credits appe: and
in the books of accounts of the assessee are assessable as
income’.

Under the decision of the Patna High Court cited,
above’, such cash credits are treated as the income of the
financial year preceding the assessment year, as the abses-
see eould not have opted for any other previous year for
such items. We have by this clause definitely laid down
that the previous year to which the income represented
by such cash credits could be related is the previous yeat
for which the account books are maintained and the cash
credit is entered.

1 Shanti Kumar Morarjee V.CIT ne erITR-69.
ACL CLT. Vs. P, Darolia ‘& Sons-(19p9) 27-11 R ~515(Patna High Cust).
See also page 557 of Kanga and Palkhigak, 1958 Edition,
| 11



371
Notes to clause 71.

This is new, Investments not appearing in the books
and not explained satisfactorily are made assessable for
the financial year in which the investments have been
made.

Notes to clause 72.

This is new. It deals with set off of a loss from one
business against profits under any othier business,’ The
principle is well accepted by courts', and has been codified
for the sake of comprehensiveness.

Notes to clause 73.

General--The scheme of section 24 of the existing Act
has, in the draft, been altered by a redistribution of its pro-
visions. The existing section deals separately with—

(1) set off in the same year, ahd
(2) set off in succeeding years.

But an alternative method of arrangement of the pro-
visions would be to deal first with set off of losses, whe-
ther in the same year or in succeeding years and then
state the exceptions in both cases. This would give to a lay-
man a complete picture of what is to be done with regard
to the losses sustained by him. The draft, therefore, pla-
ces the provisions contained in the existing section 24 in
separate sections in the following order—

(i) General provision regarding set off in the same है
year and set off in the succeeding years;

(ii) special provisions regarding speculation losses;

(iii) special provisions regarding set off of losses under
capital gains;

{iv) special provisions for registered firms;

(v) special provisions for unregistered firms assessed
as registered firms;

(vi) है ecial provisions for partners of unregistered
irms; हें

(५४) change in constitution of firms; and

(viii) submission of returns in respect of losses.

Sub-clause (1)—-As already explained above, the gene-
ral rule relating to set off. whether in the same year or in
succeeding years, has been dealt with in the beginning.”

2 Anglo-French Textile Co Ld... CIT 4 (1953), L 82. For other cases
__ séeKanga and Palkhivala’s commentary n the ‘had 1998 Edn., 9. 322.
2 Draft clause 73. ! 1


372

Sub-clause (1) states the rule relating to set off in
the same year (from one head to another). The existing
expression “loss of profits or gains” is slightly inappro-
riate, as it speaks of “loss” of “profits”. It has, therefore,
een replaced bythe words “net result is a loss......... ”
The words “subject to the other provisions of this Chap-
ter” have been added in order to make it clear that there
are special provisions regarding firms, capital gains, specu-
lation losses etc. which appear in the subsequent clauses.

Set off is allowed, not with reference to the previous
year, but with reference to the assessment year. Previous
years may be different according to the source of income,
but the {ncome-tax Officer is concerned only with the as-
sessment year for which the loss is to be computed. This
is the position for carry forward also. Suitable verbal chan-
ges have been made on this point in the draft clauses
concerned.

Under the existing law a loss arising under any head
is to be set off against income under the head “Capital
gains”. Now it is well understood that the taxation under
the head “Capital gains” is at a lower rate than the taxa-
tion under other heads, by the operation of existing section
17(6). The result is, that an assessee is forced to set off
a loss against capital gains. He thereby obtains-a reduc-
tion of his taxable income which does not fetch the . same
benefit as it would have fetched if the set off had beeh con-
fined to other heads. For example, if a loss of Rs. 2,000
under the head “Income from property” is set off against
capital gains, then, assuming that the tax on capital gains
works out at 10 N.P per rupee, the reduction in tax which
the assessee would obtain by such set-off would be Rs. 200.
While, if the assessee is to set off the loss only aoa st in-

- come other than.-capital gains, then, assuming that the rate
of tax under other heads is 25 N.P per rupee, the reduc
tion in tax which the assessee would obtain by suth set
off would be Rs. 500. It would seem that there is rio rea-
son for driving the assessee to a course which causes pe-
cuniary loss to him. It may be noted that in the converse
ease when a loss is sustained under capital gains, thejasses-
see is not allowed to set off the loss against any. other| head,
vide existing section 24(2A). The position regardin, प्‌ off
against income under the head capital gains has therefore
been altered on the lines indicated above. The necessary
changes have been made in the draft sub-clause undé¢r dis-
cussion, and the draft clause corresponding to existing sec-
tion 24(2A) has been made comprehensive so as to embody
the law relating to set off of'a loss under other head
against capital gains, and vice versa, with the change dis-
cussed above.

Sub-clause Ser rafting changes have been mage on
the lines of the ges * in existing section | 24(1).
See notes to sub-cla 0) ive.


373

The words “had no other head of income” ‘have beeen
replaced in the draft by the words “had no income under
any other head”, in order to make the intention clear that
carry forward of the whole less is allowed because there
is no income against which the loss could be set off in the
year in which the loss arose. .

Section 24(2), Proviso (a), has been already repealed.

Section 24(2), Provisos (c), (9) and (e), are dealt with
in succeeding clauses.

Section 24(2), Proviso (7), has been omitted, as its ope-
ration was confined to assessment years which have all ex-
pired. .

Section 24(3) is being transferred to the Chapter on
Procedure for Assessment.

Sub-clause (3)—Does not need any comments'.

Sub-clause (4)—Carry forward of losses is allowed for
8 maximum period of eight years now [See the amendment
made by the Finance (No, 2) Act, 1957]. Sub-clause (3)
embodies this rule. In the existing Act (as amended in
1957), the words “but no loss shall be so carried forward
for more than eight years” appear as a part of section 24(2),
clause (iii), This causes an ambiguity as to whether the
limit of eight years is to be counted with reference to the
carry forward referred to in section 24(2)(iii) or whether
in counting eight years the year of first carry forward
under section 24(2){ii) is also to be counted. The latter *
construction is, obviously, what was intended. In order to
make this clear the limitation has been placed in a separate
sub-clause. . :

Notes to clause 74.

General—Speculation losses have been dealt with se-
parately in this clause. .

Sub-clause (1)—The expression “speculation business”
has been substituted for the expression “business
consisting of speculative transactions etc.”, since the draft
clause relating to chargeability of incbme under the head
*“Profits and gains of business etc.”* makes use of the ex-
pression “speculation business”.

Sub-clause (1) relates to the veny previous year in
which the loss was incurred and is baged on the first pro-
_Viso to existing section 24(1).

Sub-clauses (2) and -(3) and (4)—The carry forward
and set off of speculation losses hag been dealt with here.
The clause has been made self-contained, for the sake of
convenience, though this has necessitated a slight amount
of repetition."

+ As to the correct interpretation this Ry see now Aluminium
Corporation of India vs.C.1.T. West कक AR. 49) Cat. 404.

* Draft clause 28, Explanation 2. }
* See also notes to draft clause 73 (@).


374

Notes to clause 75.

The ‘changes made are verbal and do not need any
comments. Notes ६० the main clause dealing with set off’
explain the drafting changes made in the existing section
24(2), and the draft clause under discussion has also been
framed keeping in view those changes.

As already explained in the notes to that clause, the
position regarding set off against capital gains has been
dealt with comprehensively in this clause. :

Notes to clause 76. ,

Sub-clause (1)—does not need any detailed comments.

Sub-clquse (2)—The prohibition against carry forward
by a registered firm, contained in existing section 24(2),
Proviso (c), earlier half, has been embodied in this clause
with a few drafting changes explained below.

The existing provision refers to the loss of a registered
firm “which has been apportioned”. These words are mis-
Jeading; in the case of a registered firm apportionment is
compulsory and universal, and no question of confining the
provision to a loss which “has been” apportioned can arise.
The language has, therefore, been slightly altered, and the
words in question omitted.

As a matter of fact, it is not necessary to have any pro-
vision at all to the effect that a registered firm cannot
carry forward its losses. The reason is, that when the loss
of A is apportioned between B and C, it no longer subsists
as the loss of A, and the question of its carry forward by
A should not arise. The proviso is, however, useful by
way of clarification, particularly in view of the pr canna
nature of the provisions for assessment of firms and part-
ners in the Act, and has, therefore been retained.

The prohibtion is presumably applicable to the carry
forward and set off of losses under capital gains also, and
the draft has been framed on this assumption.

Notes to clause 77.

Existing section 24(2), proviso (d), says that when an
unregistered firm is assessed under existing section 2: a '5)({b),
its losses shall “also be carried forward and set off ‘under
this section as if it were a registered firm”. This is not an
accurate way of stating the position. A registered firm is
never allowed to carry forward its loss [see yrandl sec-
tion 24, sub-section (2), proviso (९), earlier half), and |there-
fore, to say that the loss may be “carried forward as if
it were a registered firm” is meaningless. The language
has, therefore, been altered.

Notes to clause 78.

General—The second proviso to existing section 24(1)
consists of two parts, the earlier part dealing with unregis-
tered firms and the latter part dealing with registered firr registered firms.

3 Clause 73 @. poo I



375

This clause deals with unregistered firms, while registered
firms have been already deait with’. .

Sub-clause (1)—The existing provision, for unregistered
firms, says that the loss of the firm shall be set off only
against that income of the firm and not againt the income
of any of the partners. When analysed, this gives the fol-
lowing propositions :—

(1) The loss of the firm shall be set off only against the
income of the firm. This proposition has been se-
parately dealt with in the draft, though it follows
from the principal provision in the draft’ ie, any
assessee is entitled to have loss under one head set
off against the income under ary other head. That
provision applies to unregistered firms, just as it
applies to the other assessees.

(2) The loss shall not be set off against the income of
“any of the partners”.

What is really meant is that where an assessee is a
partner in an unregistered firm and his share is a loss, the
Joss cannot be set off against his other income. Draft sub-
clause 2(a) embodies this proposition.

Sub-clause (2)—As to para. (a), see notes above. As
para, (b), minor changes have been .made. .

Strictly speaking, this provision is also unnecessary.
The main provision in section 24(2) applies to all assessees,
including unregistered firms. Therefore, any loss incurred
by the firm is to be carried forward in computing the
firm’s income. The question of its earry forward in a
partner’s income cannot arise. The provision is, however,
useful by way of clarification, as it emphasises the propo-
sition that a partner in an unregistered firm cannot claim
a separate set off and that all that is allowed is the collec-
tive set off available to the firm as a whole.

Notes to clause-79.

This clause does not need any detailed comments, ex-
cept that the draft makes it clear that the limitation im-
posed by the existing section applies in respect of set off
under existing sections 24(1) and 24(2A) as well as under
section 24(2) and section 24(2B).

Notes to clause 80:

A part of existing section 22, sub-section (2A), has been
incorporated in this clause, since it is germane to the set
_ Off of losses.

The limitation should apply not only to carry forward
under existing section 24, sub-section ¢2), but also to carry
forward under existing section 24, sub-section (2B). This
has been made clear in the lear in the draft.

3 Draft clause 76.
* Draft clause 73 (1).


376
CHAPTER VII
INCOME ON WHICH NO INCOME-TAX IS PAYABLE

Notes to clause 81.
General—

1. It should be remembered that exemption from tax
is totally different from exclusion from total income dealt
with in Chapter III. In the latter case the income excluded
does not form part of the total income, while in the former
case it forms part of the total income but no tar is payable
thereon though for other purposes such as rate, etc., it con-
tinues to be part of the total jncome.

2, Exemptions from income-tax strictly so called can be
classified as follows :—

(i) Exemption enjoyed by an income which, though it
forms part of the total income, is not subjdct to
tax. (Such income would count for determining
the rate; but once the rate is determined, the in-
come is not itself taken into account in calculating
the quantum of tax).

(ii) Sums on which rebate of tax is allowed at the ave-
rage rate of tax. ,

3. The existing Act does make a distinction between
categories (i) and (ii) above. But the distinction is
obviously necessary. The draft, therefore, deals with the
two categories in separate chapters.

4. In the draft, exemptions which are really in the
nature of rebates in respect of expenditure have been placed
under category (ii). पु

5. The case of earned income relief presents som¢ spe-
cial features and has been discussed in the notes to: the
clause relating thereto.

6. Exemptions in respect of super-tax have for the sake
of clarity, been dealt with separately in Chapter on
super-tax. Hl

Clause 81. Existing section 15A, earlier part, has |been
embodied in this clause, with minor verbal a

The latter part of the section has of course been pmit-
ted, as it becomes obsolete in view of the recent legislative
practice not to provide for earned income relief.

The earlier part has however been retained here, :leav-
ing it to the Government to omit it if it is decided perma-
nently to abolish earned income relief.

Notes to clause 82.
The clause does not needjamy comments.


377

The exemption from super-tax has been dealt with in
the Chapter on super-tax.

Notes to clause 83.

The clause does not need any comments.

The exemption from super-tax has been dealt with in
the Chapter on super-tax.

The question of providing for grossing up of dividends
of co-operative societies [on the lines of the provision for
companies—existing section 16(2)] has-not been considered,
as the provision in respect of companies has itself provoked
a lot of controversy.

Notes to clause 84.
The clause does not need any comments.

The exemption from super-tax has been dealt with in
the Chapter on super-tax.

Notes to clause 85.

Existing section 15C has been emboriied in this clause.
The few verbal changes that have been made are explained
elow :

Sub-clause (2}—The conditions specified in existing sec-
tion 15C(2) are cumulative. This is clear from the existing
language and has been made still more clear in the draft.

Sub-clause (6)—Existing section 15C(6) uses the ex; pres
sion “financial year”. This has been replaced in the draft
by the expression “assessment year” w! ich is more appro-
priate.

The existing sub-section speaks of the four “assess~
ments” immediately succeeding. What is meant is, the
four “assessment years”. The draft makes this clear, An
assessment made in a particular year is not necessarily
identical with that assessment year, sinte sometimes an as-
sessment is made Jate, after the assessment year has expir-

The exemption from super-tax has: been dealt with in
the Chapter on super-tax.

Notes to clause 86,

This merely reproduces ex{sting seption 15C(4) and as
the subject matter is different it is made a separate section.
Notes to chause 87.

Items (i) ‘and (ii)—The sqcond amd third provisos ‘to
existing section 8 have been embodied ‘in these items with

slight verbal changes. The expression “receivable” has
been replaced by the ward “received”.

— 7 पाूतृात [पप्पू

2 Compare draft glause 18.



378

Item (iii)—embedies existing section 14(2){a), with
slight verbal changes.

Item (iv)—deals with the exemption contained in exist-
ing section 14(2)(aa). The existing wording is slightly
involved. An attempt has been made in the draft to sim-
plify the expression by making a few verbal changes, and
splitting up the provision into clauses.

Item (v)—does not need any.comments.

CHAPTER VIII
REBATES AND RELIEFS
Notes to clause 88.

General—The provisions contained in the existing Act
which are in the nature of rebates of income-tax on cer-
tain expenditure have been collected together in this
Chapter. (The discussion at the beginning of notes to
the previous Chapter explains the scheme adopted in the,
draft in respect of exemptions from tax.)'

Sub-clause (1), paragraphs (a) and (b)—These deal
with rebate in respect of life insurance premiums. The
following drafting changes have been made—

(i) The words “in the previous year” have been added
in the draft for existing section 15(1), for the sake
of precision.

(ii) The existing section 15(1) speaks of sums paid “to
effect” an insurance, but when speaking of deferred
annuities it uses the words “in respect of” a con-
tract, for a deferred annunity. For the sake
of uniformity, the e pression “to effect” has, in the
draft, been used for both the cases. See items {i}
and (ii) ef paragraph (a).

(iii) While sums paid as ordinary premium might be co-
vered by the existing. words “to effect” an insu~
rance, sums paid for the purpose of keeping alive
a policy or preventing it from lapsing may hot be
covered by those words. In the draft, tl fore,
the words “keep in force” have been added both
in respect of insurance and in respect of contracts
for deferred annunities. See items (i) and ii) of,
paragraph (a) and also paragraph (b).

Sub-clause (1), paragraph (c)—The words “in the pre-

vious year”, have been added to secure precision.

The words “provided that the sum so deducted shall
not exceed one-fifth of the salary”, existing in section 7,
sub-section (1), First Proviso have in the draft been re~
placed by the words “in so far as the sum so deducted

TV See notes todrat dase एज भ्णा एन |
‘ |
j :

‘



379

does not exceed one-fifth of the oar Sa Where the deduc-
tion exceeds one-fifth of the galary, existing language
would, if construed strictly, exclude the deduction in tote.
THe obvious intention, however, is to Emit the exemption

to one-fifth and not to completely disallow the exemption
in such cases,

The limit of one-fifth genfained ined in the existing section
has been repeated in the 5 but, dince existing section
15(8) has been amended recently (vide Finance No. (2) Act
1957) so as to raise the limit ynder that section from one-
fifth to one-fourth, it would be desirable to make a corres-
ponding increase in the limit under existing section 7(1)
First Proviso, also.

Sud-clause (1), paragraphs (9) & (९), do not need any
comments.

Sub-clause (2)—Existing section 15028) has been split
up for the sake of simplicity Further, the negative form
of the existing provisions has been converted into a positive
ene, vide the opening lines. :

The words appearing at the end im the existing provi-
sion, “and which is not the sum actually assured” really
indicate a benefit over and ahove the assured sum. This
is made clear in the draft. The exi wing * words “either ४९९
fore or after death” unnecessarily in e the length of
the provision; the words in the draft. “under the policy” *
will meet both the situations, (2t is cigar that the existing
words “which is to be or may be recejved” are to be con-
fined to payments made by tke company under the policy.

The existing words “either by the. person ‘paying the
premiums or by any other person” hi ats been replaced by
the words “by any person”, for simpligity.

|
Sub-clause (3)—Existing spetion 16(3) has been re-
produced here in a simplified form. =.

The existing sub-section docs =
sums exempt under section 58R for
ing the maximum aggregate that can
effect of the words at रा e end, of 58R, main para,
“in the case of an employee be’ treated for all the purposes
of this Act as if it were a sum.to whit .the provisions. of
section 15 apply” is that the employee's: contributions are
also to be counted for the es of Séction 15(3). For
this reason, sub-clause (3) @ refetence to all the
sums exempt under any item of the ft clause, which
will include sub-clause (1) (व) also.

Notes to cleuse 89.

General—What the Act contemplates in section 15B
is really a rebate (at the ave ifn Plage ia respect of tax.
The provision has, therefore, pl in the present
Chapter on Rebates. हे

05०1 Law Com./s8



The First Provise to existing section 15B({1) has been
dealt with in the Chapter on Super-tax, where the exemp,
tion for super-tax in respect of donations has been dealt
with separately’.

Sub-clause (2)—does not need any comments. .

Sub-clause (3)—The changes made are all verbal and
consequential on the scheme adopted in the Act in respect
of exemptions.

Sub-clause (4)—does not need any comments, since thi
changes are minor and verbal. न

Sub-clause (5)—The existing section 15B(2) requires
that certain conditions should be fulfilled by an institution
or fund to which the section applies. Condition No. (iv)
contains the word “or” at the end and is followed by con-
dition No. (७), It is not clear whether the last condition
No. (v) is an alternative to condition No. (iv) only, or whe-
ther it is to take the place of all the conditions (1) to {iv).
Since condition No. (iii) contains the word “and” at the
end, it can be argued that conditions Nos. (i) to (iv) are to
be taken together and condition No. (v) is to be taken sep-
arately. But this does not seem to have been the inten-
tion; the result of such construction would be to eliminate
a very important requirement, namely, the requirement in
condition No. (i) that the income should be exempt under
the category for “Charitable Institutions”. The first three
conditions should be fulfilled by all the  institutigns or
funds, while the fourth and fifth conditions are alterna-
tives to each other. This intention has been brought out
in the draft by combining the contents of existing condi-
tion No. (v) with condition No. (iv).

Condition No. (i) at present requires that the institu-
tion should be one “the income whereof is exempt under
clause (i) of sub-section (3) of section 4”. But in, cases
where an institution has Ro pro perty, the application of
this condition becomes difficult. The wording has, Ithere-
fore, been slightly altered. Further, institutions though
not strictly fal! fn under section (4) (3) (i), such as univer-
sities or educational institutions not existing for jprofit,
should be regarded as standing on the same footing as
purely charitable institutions, and they have, thefefore,
een included in the draft (just as their income been
exempted—-See the draft clause inserted on the "ab. ject.
Institutions depending on voluntary contributions . have
also been included in the draft. t

Existing condition No. (iv), when mentioning univer-
sities, requires that they should be established by law, but
when speaking of other educational institutions recognis-
ed by or affiliated to universities, it does not add the re-
quirement that the university should be established by law.

3 Vide draft clause 109 (2). न
3 पीकर clause 11(24). |


~
381

The intention, obviously, is to require that the affiliating
or recognising university must itself be established by
Jaw. This has been made clear in the draft.

Sub-clause (6)—does not need any comments.

The exemption in respect of super-tax has been dealt
with separately in the Chapter on super-tax’.

It would be conducive to simplicity and wili lessen the.

work of the administration, if a provision is made for the
issue of a certificate (after enquiry by the Income-tax Offi-
cer or the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner having juris-
diction over the institution or trust) that the institution or
trust satisfies the conditions of this section. Donations made
to such institutions or trusts will automatically be entitled
to the exemption if the other conditions of the section are
fulfilled. This would obviate enquiry every year by differ-
‘ent Income-tax Officers before whom the exemption is
claimed by donors in different jurisdi¢tions.

Notes to clause 90.

The existing provision is confined to “Profits in lieu
of salary”. In the draft it has been extended to “Perqui-
sites” also. Perquisites may sometimes be in cash, and the
provision might be useful in such cases.

The power to grant relief in respect of super-tax has
been dealt with separately in the Chapter on Super-tax’.

Notes to clause 91.

Existing section 25, sub-sections (3) and (4), deal with
two things :—

(i) total exemption for income of the year in which
a business is discontinued or succeeded to, and

(ii) substitution relief, whereunder, the income of the
year of discontinuance or succession can
be substituted for the income of the immediately
preceding year.

The first concession has béen already dealt with in a
previous chapter;’ the second conce: ssipn has been dealt
with in the clause under discusgion. A few drafting changes
have been made in order to secure clarity.

As to the position concerning super-tax, see the Chap-
ter on super-tax.‘

2 Vide draft clause 109.

3 Vide draft clause 112.

4 Vide draft cluase 1g in chapter TIT.

3 Vids dealt clause 100. io


The provision embodied in the draft is applicable only
to a business assessed under the 1918 Act. It is for ¢onsi-
deration whether this concession is at all necessary after
the lapse of such a long time’.

CHAPTER IX
DOUBLE TAXATION RELIEF
Notes to clause 92.
This clause does not need any comments.
Notes to clause 93.

The following drafting changes have been made in
the existing sections—~ -

(i) The word “previous” has been added before! the
word “year”, since residence is defined with refer-
ence to previous year.

(ii) The existing words “country with which there is
no reciprocal arrangement” have been replaced by
the words “country with which there is no pgree-
ment under sectio: {49A]” for the; sake
of precision. The jprocal arrangement” !refer-
red to in the existing section could only be an
agreement under section 49A. 7 H

(iii) Sub-sections (2) and (4) of existing section 49D
have been omiitted, as their operation is now | pent.
(iv) Suitable words have been added at the end of

sub-clause (1) to cover a case where the Indian
rate and the foreignrate are equal. ;

Notes to clause 94. fo.

i
Existing section 49C(1) aontains a reference to ce
49. But section 49 has been repealed by the Income-tax
and Business Profits Tax (Amendment) Act, 1948 (| of
1948). The reference to se¢tion 49 has, therefore; been
omitted in the draft. 1

No other change has been made.

CHAPTER X
PROVISIONS AGAINST AVOIDANCE OF T.

Notes to clause 95. — H

Sub-section (2) of sectidn 42 has been ended with
a view to bringing out what was really intended. The ob-
ject is to catch the income of the resident where & busi-
ness is carried on between a resident and a non-residdnt and
the profits of such business are camouflaged in such, a way

2a Gate किन- in dhe Report pfltbe Income-tax Ini
siom (1948), pages 153-1554 paragra; ad



383

that the resident receives-either no profits or less than nor-
mal profits. In such a case the Income-tax Officer — has
to determine the true profits of the resident attributable
to such camouflaged transactions. This is now brought out
clearly in the draft.

The existing section says that the income of the non-
resident shall be chargeable “in the name of the resident
who shall be deemed to be.. .. the assessee”. These
words have been replaced in the draft by the words “and
include such amount in the total income of the resident”.
This verbal change has been made for the sake of unifor-
mity, and for emphasising the true construction of the sec-
tion as explained above.

Notes to clause 96.

The existing section 44D relating to transfer of assets
to non-residents is considerably involved in its expression.
It is difficult to understand the section as a whole and its
grammatical structure without. some effort.’ The section
has been slightly recast on the:lines of section
412 of the U.K. Act.’ The important ‘points of difference
between the existing section ahd the @raft clause are ex-
plained below :—

(1) Sub-sections (1) and (2) of the existing section 44D
repeat the words “transfer of assets by virtue or in con-
sequence whereof, either alone or in conjuction with asso-
ciated operations, any income hecomes_ payable”
etc. This condition precedent Be transferred in the
draft clause to the opening lines, thus gaving the repetition
appearing in existing sub-sectien (2).

(2) The existing section 44D(1) g that a transfer
of assets must be one whereby “any Income which, if it
were the income of such persdn, woul be chargeable to
income-tax” becomes payable to a nom-resident. This re-
quirement of potential chargegbility ig thus applicable to
the income arising from the transfer. In the draft, how-
ever, it has been removed from that ee and shifted to

the income over which the rqsident power to enjoy
[See draft sub-clause (1) (a)]. iThis ¢ is in-harmony
with the more important change di: d below under
item (5).

(3) In existing section 44D(1), the reference to asso-
ciated operations occurs only in the béginning of the sec-
tion, that is, the portion referring to a; transfer whereby
certain income arises. This reference: is. not repeated in
the subsequent portion dealing. wih acquisition of rights
by the transfer. In other rds, the rights giving the
power to enjoy certain income must, at present, flow from

ज१ For a criticism of s.:412 of the U.K. Act cotresponding to s. 44D of

our Act, see p. 31h at. ¥029(5) of tee of the Royal Commission on
the Taxation of Profits and Incame (Fi )

110 a
* U.K. Incomestax Act, 1952. Cf. ए K. ron 18०५ 1996, Sections8.. :



384
the transfer itself. Under the clause as drafted, however,

these rights might flow either from the transfer or from
its associated operations.

(4) The words “in consequence of which” occurring
for the second time in the existing section 44D(1) have
been omitted in the draft. These words related to “rights
जज in consequence of which he _has.........power to
enjoy”. It seems sufficient to have the words “by virtue
of” in this context.

(5) Under the existing section 44D(1), the income to
be taxed as the income of the resident is “that income”,
that is, the income earlier referred to as arising from the
transfer to a non-resident, which the resident has power
to enjoy. Thus, two ingredients are réquired for taxing
the income at present: (i) the income must arise froth the
transfer, and (ii) it must be income which the resident has
power to enjoy. The draft clause, however, makes ah im-
portant departure here. All that is required in order to
tax an income is that (other conditions being satisfied),
it must be income which the resident has power to enjoy.
Under the draft it is not necessary that the taxable income
should coincide with the income arising to a nonpregdent
from the transfer. Thus the power to enjoy must arise
from the transfer, but the words “power to enjoy !such
income” have been replaced by “any income of a norfresi-

nt”.

(6) The existing section 44D(2) suffers from one im-
portant flaw, fn that it does not state how the sum referred
to therein is to arise. The section says: “Where any peng
receives or is entitled to receive......... any sum paid by
way of loan etc......... such iscome shall......... be deemed
to be the income” of the resident. One would have ex-
pected the section to say, like sub-section (1), “whem any
person by means of any transfer............ receives any jsum”
etc, The draft sub-clause at (b) makes it clear tl be it the
capital sum must be one “the Payment whereof is any
way connected with the transfer”.

This is merely a condition to be satisfied. Whati is to
be charged to tax is a different matter, discussed ip the
next item. i

(7) The existing section 44D(2) says that “such idcome
shall be deemed to be the income” of the resident.! It is
with some effort that one is able to locate the income to
which this word “such” is applicable; it is the 10001 he be-
coming payable to a non-resident under the transfer.’ This
has been expressed in a more inielligible form in the
dratt.

(8) The length of the existing section 44D(2) has been

reduced in the draft, by replacing the words “any sum
paid therwise Poca separ income”, by ithe words ‘capi
tal hich has tely defined in draff sul
clause (0). : |


385

Notes to elause 97.

_ Existing sections 44E and .44F have been combined in
this clause, and certain important changes of substance
have been made as follows:—

{1} Existing section 44E(1) applies where the owner
of the securities, having agreed to sell or transfer the
securities, “by the same or any collatoral agreement”
agrees to buy back etc., the securities. In practice, however
it is difficult for the Department to prove that there was
an “agreement” to buy back the securities. Moreover, as
a matter of substance, it does not appear to be necessary
to insist on the requirement of “same or collatoral agree-
ment”, The object of the séction is to prevent avoidance of
tax, and the provision should extend to all cases where
the transaction of sale and re-purchase of securities results
in such avoidance. The of the section has, accord-
ingly, been extended in thea raft [see sub-clause (1)].

(2) It has, however, been made clear in the draft that
the provision in the existing section 44E will not apply :f
there was no avoidance or if the avoidance is not sys-
tematic; see draft sub-clause (4) which mentions sub-
section (1) specifically.

(3) Existing section 44F, operative part, deals with the
cases where a person transfers securities before the dec-
laration of the dividend, thus shifting the right to receive
the dividend to another person. The operative part of this
section has been incorporated in draft sub-clause (3). An
important departure from the existing section has, how-
ever, been made; the existing section provides for appor-
tionment, vide sub-section rc latter ‘half read with sub-
section (3). Under it, only the income attributable to the
period upto the transfer is de¢med to be the income of the
transferor. Under the draft, however, the income for the
full year will be deemed to be the income of the trans-
feror, vide sub-clause (3), last line. Since the provision
is intended to stop avoidance, it should go the full way.

Existing section 44F(2) applies it where-the avoid-
ance is “more than 10 per cent of the amount of income-
tax” for the year. This requirement has been omitted ia
the draft, in order to make the provision against avoidance
more stringent.

(4) While the operative portion of section 44F thus
finds a place in the draft, the machinéry provisions in sub-
sections (4), (5) and (6) of that section have been omit-
ted. The notice under section 44F(1) will now be covered
by draft sub-clause (7).

Apart from these important ch: , the other change ee
are of very minor nature and ne ced no comments. e
existing section 44D(7)(c) relatin; हू to dividends deemed to
have been distributed to a pel 2 omitted in view
of the form in which section! 23A 8! after its amend-
ment in 1959. . i ‘


386
CHAPTER XI
‘SUPER-TAX

Notes to clause 98.

Sub-clause (1}~The following drafting changes have
been made :— i

___ 1. Drafting changes made in the charging section for
income-tax (section 3)-have been followed in drafting this
clause also. Thus—

(i) the — word “year” has been replaced by “agsess-
ment year”,

(1) after the words “previous year”, the words' “or
previous years”, have been added,

(iii) the enumeration of various classes of assegsees
(“individual", “undivide led family” etc.) has been .
replaced by person”, .

(iv) a proviso has been added to deal with cases ere
tax is charged in the year of income or Seat ected
in advance.

2. The words “save as otherwise provided in this \ ct”
have been added to make it clear that the charging .p a
sion is subject to Sther provisions, e.g., provisions fof re-
bates etc. Cf. the words “in accordance with and subject
to the provisions of this Act,” in existing section. 3. °

3. The words “a Central Act” have been replaced by
“any Central Act”; Cf. existing section 3, पु ;

Sub-clause (2)—does not need any comments.

Sub-elause (3).—The existing section deals only
the case of a firm assessed wnder section 23(5)(b). E
more frequent case of a firm which is actually registered
has not been treated elaborately in the section. The draft
Sub-clause sets out the positiok comprehensively.

The second proviso to existin ig section 55 is transferr
to a separate clause’, under the group of clauses degling
with income not forming part af total income for super}tax.

. Notes to clause 99. i
The changes made are consequential on the chapges
™made in existing section 55, main para. LF
>1 7. As regards earned: income the language of the draft
elauses on the subject -will suffiee to exclude existing ‘sec-
tion-15A.for super-tax’ . ~ . vs toe

* Vide draft clause 81 read Wil 4७० fu ran



Kid
- Notes to clause 106. हे

This corresponds to the proviso {@), appearing below
existing section 25(4). :

The existing provision says that the provisions of sec-
tion 25(3) & (4) shall not apply to ‘stper-iax’. The word
“super-taxy has, in the draft, been replaced by the words
“determination of total income” etc. which are more ap-
propriate. .

Notes to clause 101.

This is new. Interest on income-tax free securities is
chargeable to’ super-tax. It is fair that reasonable sums
spent on realising such interest, and interest paid on mo-
ney borrowed for investment in such securities, shall be
allowed as deductions. (Cf. existing section 8, ist Proviso,
earlier half.)

The provision becomes particularly necessary in the
‘draft, because so far as the computation of total income
for income-tax is concerned, the draft clause for section
8 contains an express prohibition against deducting such
sums,

Notes to clause 102.

Sub-clause (1)—Existing section 58(1) has, in the
raft, been split up into two: ‘The general rule that the
provisions for income-tax shall apply 80 the charge etc. of
super-tax has been stated in sub-clause (1), while the ex-
ceptions are dealt with separately in sub-clause (2).

The words “save as otherwise provided in this Act”,
added in the draft, point to draft subeclause (2) and are
also intended to make it cleay that there might be cases
where a provision is applicable to income-tax only, ९.५५
existing section 49C(1).

Sub-clause (2)—Existing section 5$(1) excludes seve-
‘ral sections of the Act in relation to guper-tax. Most of
these sections are, in the draft, placed ther in the Chap-
ter on Income on which no ip income-tqx is payable or in
the Chapter on Rebate and Relief of i jcome-tax. It would,
therefore, suffice to say that these two chapters do not
capply for super-tax. :

So far as sections not confained a) these chapters are
concerned, they have been mentionefi ‘in. the draft sub-
‘clause under discussion [except section 58G(2) as to which
see discussion below]. .

Section 58G(2) has been mentioned in existing section
58 as one of the excluded sections. But really speaking, the
SG Reeth 044 e a AP कई of it applies for super-tax afso. What section
S8G(2) provides 48 that the accumulated balance in an an-
‘proved superannuation fund 1 be jadéd from’ the

1 Vide draft clause 21 (ii) and (iii). =



total income and exempt from income-tax. This does not
apply in terms for guper-tax; but section 58G(1), earlier
part, says that such balance shali be exempt from super-
tax. This “exemption” from super-tax has, under the sche-
me adopted in the draft, to be treated as exclusion from
total income’. Therefore the ition regarding the ba-
lance in question is the same, Poth for income-tax and su-
per-tax, when section 58G(2) is read together with section:
58G(1), and there is no point in saying that section 58G(2)
does not apply for super-tax.

The words “Save as expressly provided in the
Chapter” are meant. for cases where a provision in the
super-tax Chapter (e.g., clause regarding exemption of
donations from super-tax) expressly refers to the condi-
tions specified in the corresponding clause for exemption
from income-tax.

Existing section 58(2) will be dealt with in the Chap-
ter dealing with Collection and recovery of tax.

Notes to clause 103.

This clause, which is new, has: become necessaty in:
the scheme followed in the draft, which deals separately
with income-tax and super-tax. The object of the clause
is merely to facilitate the application, for super-tax, of
certain provisions contained in the sections dealing with
avoidance of tax. Those provisions. as reproduced in the
draft, use the expression “income-tax” only and hence it.
becomes necessary to repeat them for super-tax.

Notes to clause 104.

General.The existing provisions for exemptions from
super-tax say that super-tax “shall not be payable” .in res-
pect of the income in question; or that the income | shal!
be exempt from super-tax. This appears like an cf emp--
tion from tax. not an exclusion from total in-
come. But it seems that. in the case of super-tax,’ the
exemptions should be treated as cases of exclusions: from
total income (except in cases where section 17(3) express”
ly directs the exemption to be treated as a case of sbate).

Though section 16(1) says that “in computing the
total income” the exempted incomes are to be included in
the total income, and though section 56 would apply 8९०-
tion 16 for super-tax also, still section 16 has to 9७६ con-
fined to cases dealt within section 17(3), The draft, there
fore, treats such exemptions as exclusions from total in-
come. Drafting changes have, wherever necessary, been
made to carry out this scheme. .

[80 far as the sections expressly referred to in exist-
ing section 17(3) are conceraed, they have to be tteated
as cases of rebates] , ascasesofrebates} ४ >उ(3७3िोऊ।_<3<_3>|+|3+3+13 33ऋ+ऋ|_

3 See notes to draft ८३७३८ 104.
|! ३
| i



Clause 104

The words “profits and gains” have been replaced by
the term “income” which is more precise, The provision
is, obviously, applicable to all income and not only income
from business. Other changes are comsequential on this
change and on the scheme adopted in the draft to treat
exemptions from super-tax as exclusions from total in-
come.

Notes to clause 105.

The verbal changes made are consequential on the
scheme adopted in the draft to treat exemptions from
super-tax as exclusions from total income’.

Notes to clause 106.

This clause does not need any comments, since the
changes are only verbal and consequential.

Notes to clause 107.
The changes are verbal and consequential.

Notes to clause 108.

General.—Existing section 56A, sub-section (1), item.
(ii) says that one of the conditions for ‘availability of the
exemption under the section is that the income of the In-
dian company (which pays the dividend) “would have
been exempt under the operation of section 15C if the pro-
visions of that section had been applicable thereto”. ke is.
not clear from these words how much of section 15C is
to be read into section 56A. In the infetest of clarity, it
seems desirable to incorporate, in section 56A itself, what~
ever conditions are to be borrowed from section 150,

The question, therefore, that arises next is, what part.
ef section 15C spould be repeated in section 56A? Section
15C requires the following conditions to be fulfilled :—

1. The profits must be derived from an industrial un-
dertaking to which the section applies (sub-sec-
tion )-

2. The profits should not exceed 6 per cent per annum
on the capital employed in the undertaking (sub~
section (1) ).

3. The undertaking must not be formed by the split-
ing up or reconstruction of a business already in.
existence (sub-section (2), item (i)).

4. The undertaking must not be fermed by the trans-
fer of a building etc. used in a business carried om
estore the Ist Apri}, 1948 (sub-section (2), item

1).)«

+ See notes to clause 104-

a - oe


390

5. The undertaking must begin to manufacture’ arti-
cles in India within 13 years from the ist April,
1948 or extended periéd when allowed by the Cen-
tral Government (sub-section (23, item (ii)).

6. The undertaking must employ a certain number of
workers (sub-section (2), item (iii) ).

7. The exemption must not have been withdrawn by
the Central Government (sub-section (2), item
(iii) Proviso).

8. The exemption is applicable only to the assessment
for the previous year in which manufacture com-
menced and for the four immediately succeeding
assessment years (sub-section (6) ).

Taking these conditions one by one, it seems that con-
‘dition No. 1, is applicable for section 56A only to the ex-
tent to which it is introductory, as intended to draw atten-
tion to 5. 15C(2). (Section 56.8 does not require that only
dividends attributable to profits derived from a particular
undertaking should be exempt.) Condition No. 2 cannot be
applied for S. 56A, as the intention of section 56A is to
confer an exemption in addition to that enjoyed by ghare-
holders under section 15C(4). Condition No. 3 is appli-
cable for section 56A, but since section 56A, sub-section
(1), item (ii) speaks of “the Indian Company”, the ¢ondi-
tion has to be translated in terms of the Indian Company.
Condition No. 4 is applicable, but the mention of the 1st
April 1948 is irrelevant for the purpose -of section; 56A,
which seeks to give a permanent exemption. Condition No.
5, being of a temporary nature, cannot be appli for
section 56A, Condition No. 6 is applicable. Regarding con-
dition No. 7, the intention probably seems to be dis-
regard any such withdrawal of exemption and to apply
section 56A to all companies otherwise governed by, the
applicable part of section 15C, even if in a particulat case
the exemption under section. 15C has been withdtawn.
Condition No. 8, being of a temporary nature, cannbt be
applied to section 56A, which does not confine the exemp-
tion to a particular period.

i
In the draft, therefore, the ingredients of 5९८४०, 150

have been embodied only to the extent indicated of the

discussion above. :

As already stated, the applicable conditions of s fas
15C(2) have, in the draft, been treated as conditions: to
be fulfilled by the Indian Company and not by 10 indus-
trial undertaking. Consequential changes have been

in language.

Sub-clause (1)—Item (i}-The cumbersome . Tigt of
items has been removed to a separate sub-clause, : thus
simplifying the language of seation 56A(1)(i).

Item (ii)—The g@neral nptes at the beginning bbove
may be persued.

ade


382
‘Sub-clause (2}—-does not need any comments.

Sub-clause (3)—The commodities ‘in question have
béen referred as “items”—a ward used’in the existing sec-.
tion 56A(2} at the end. No other comments are needed.

Notes to clause 109,

No detailed comments are needed.

Notes to clause 110.

Stfictly speaking this exemption skould in the case of
supertax be treated as an exclusion from total income,
but in view of section 17(3) it had to be treated as a
case of rebate’.

Notes to cleuse 111.

This clause states the rule in existing section 14(2)
(aa) as read with the Proviso.

The exemption has, for purposes of super-tax, to be
treated as a case of rebate [S. 17(3)}, though similar ex-.
emptions have been treated. for super-tax, as exclusions
from total income’.

Notes to clause 112

The clause does not need any detailed comments. The
words “in relation to” will indicate that the substance of
the relief is the same, both in income-tax and in super-tax.

Notes to clause 114. :

General—Existing section 23A, even after its amend--
ment by the Finance (No. 2) Act 1957, is lengthy and is
difficult to follow. An attempt.has been made to break up
the section and distribute its de with in several clauses..
The scheme adopted is to begin with ‘the operative provi,
sions and then to take up provisions in the nature of inter-.
pretation. :

Clause 113-—-This reproduges 5. 23506). Simplification
of the provision has been sought to be achieved by splitting
it up into two sub-sections, so. that the main provision ap--
pears separate from the req otra fi posing a duty on.
the Income-tax Officer to ९०7 rn cegtain criteria.

‘
The lengthy expression “total indome............ as Tre--
duced by”, which is followed by a sat it of the deductions,
has been replaced by the shorter expiession “distributable
income” (defined separately)’. This hag enabled the simpli-
fication of the various clauses of 5. 238(2) also.
—— Or Oh
1 Gf. notes to draft clause 104. H 1
3 See draft clause 118.



The lengthy expression “a company whose buninese
consists....... ...n the dealing in or holding of investments
ceceeeee ” has been replaced. by “investment company” (de-
fined separately)’, which has simplified the draft for Ex-
planation 2, Clause 6) also.

The changes made by the Finance Act, 1958, have been
given effect to. °

S. 23A, in effect, taxes undistributed profits and is thus
aimed at a maximum distribution of profits. It is difficult
to sustain, side by side with this section, the provision
which has been included in recent, Finance Acts for tax-
ing excessive distribution of profits. The provision*in the
Finance Act aims at encouraging the minimum distribu-
tion of profits and goes ill with section 23A which encour-
ages the maximum distribution.

Even the Finance (No. 2) Act 1957, First Schedule,
paragraph D, second Proviso, clause (c), though it does not
directly tax an excessive distribution, is subject to this cri-
ticism; because on that part of the dividends which ex-
ceeds 10 per cent of the paid up capital, there is an in-
direct tax expressed as a reductien of the rebate otherwise
admissible. This indirect tax goes on increasing with the
percentage of the dividend in relation to the capital. The
higher the dividend, the lesser the rebate and, therefore,
the higher the tax.

In other words, while the Finance Act provision acts
-as an incentive to smaller distribution, 5. 23A acts as an
incentive to higher distribution of profits. It would be
desirable to drop the system of taxing excessive distribu-
tion of profits introduced*in recent Finance Acts, at least
in relation to companies to which section 23A applies.

Notes to clause 114.

The changes made are verbal and consequential on
the shorter expressions “distributable income” and — “in-
vestment company” adopted in the draft for S. 23(1).

Notes to clause 115.
No detailed comments are needed.

Notes to clause 116.

The existing provision has been split up into sub-
-elauses (a) and (0) for simplicity.

Notes to clause 117.

Sub-clause (1).—In paragraph (०) the negative words
“not a private company” have n replaced by the -posi-
stive words “a public company”. While the definition!
3 See draft clause 119. जा २०२२ OOS



‘public company in the Companies Act is itself a negative
one, it seems unnecessary to repeat that negative concept
in the provision under discussion. .

In paragraph (b) item (iii), the existing words “less
than six persons” have been replaced by “five or less per-
sons" in order to help the understanding of the provision
by removing the negative. It must, of. course, be noted
that the provision, even as redrefted, retains the negative
words “at no time during the previous 7 rear, जी, The
reason is, that the provision is inte! to be satisfied in
respect of each and every block of share capital; the po-
sition regarding holding of shares should be such that
any five or less persons cannot have the control of any
bunch of shares carrying more than 50 per cent of the
total voting power.

The method of computing the number of persons has
been included in a separate sub-clause for the sake of
simplicity.

Sub-clause (2)—As already stated, the method of com-
puting the number of persons has been separately includ-
ed in this sub-clause. The provision has been split up into
paragraphs (9) and (b), and an Explanation, for simpli-
city. .

Notes to clause 118.

The expression “distributable income” has been coin-
ed and used in the draft for the operative portion of of S. 23A,
sub-section (1) and also in the draft for sub-section (2).
The expression has been defined in thjs clause. The only
change of substance made is the additian of sub-clause (c),
whereunder amounts paid as donationg and exempt from
tax under existing section 15B will be excluded from the
distributable income. This has already been the practice
under a decision of the Central Government.

Notes to clause 119.

This clause seeks to define “investment company”, an
expression used in the draft at several places as a short
substitute for the lengthy expression “company whose
business consists” etc.

Notes to clause 120,

Though the existing definition of “statutory percen-
tage” is complex, the complexity is due to the complicated
nature of the provision in substance. Improvements in
form would not have reduced the complexity and have
not, therefore, been attempted, except -that in item (iv),
in sub-clause (a), the words at present appearing at the
end “whichever of those ‘xprsed mater” have, in the draft,
been shifted above and as!“the greater of the
following”. if }


394
CHAPTER हा
“DETERMINATION OF ‘TAX IN CERTAIN SPECIAL
CASES

Note} to clause 121.

The main provision of existing section 17(2) has beer
embodied here, with verbal charges italicised, to state the
tule in an exact and accurate manner.

Notes to clause 122.

The clause is new. Reference is made to the provision
contained in existing section 58G to make the Chapter self-
contained.

Notes to clause 123.

General—Existing section 10(5A) provides for two
things. The earlier portion deems compensation etd. paid
to managing agent etc. to be profits ap nd gains of
business, and has been incorporated in the draft chap-
ter on computation of total income. The latter portion gives
the method of computing tax on such income and hat been
incorporated here, दि

Sub-clause (1)—While the tax on the compensation
etc. is to be dealt with in the special manner provided for
by the section, the tax on the remaining part of the income
has to be calculated at the (average) rate applicable to the
whole of the total income. This has been made clear fin the
draft, by stating the position. separately for the two kinds
of income.

The Explanation is new and is intended to steed ith a
case where a firm, though assessed as an unregistered firm
in the assessment year, was assessed as a registered firm
in any of the three preceding ‘assessment years,

Sub-clause (2)—is new. it seems desirable to pi fete
for a rebate to the partner of a registered firm whete the
firm is in receipt of the compensatign etc. in question. There
is no such provision at present.

i

Notes to clause 124. {

The provisions of section 17(1) have, in the draft,
put into four sub-sections, for simplicity. These deal
{i) the basic provision, i
(ii} the option given to the non-resident, and the|time-
limit therefor,

(iii) the consequences of the option, and
(iv) power to extend the time-limit for the option,

When using the expression “tax”, the words “including
super-tax” have beet per tax t 138 the definitjon of in
the draft, includes tax. |



Sub-clause (1)—does not need any detailed comments.

Sub-clause (2)}—The opening portion of existing section
17, sub-section (1), Ist Proviso, been simplified by stat-
ing directly the date 30th June, and omitting the reference
to the assessment year ending on 3ist March, 1952, which
has become obsolete. .

Sub-clauses (3) & (4)—It has been made clear that any
option exercised under the present Act will continue to
have effect for the purposes of the new Act also. Conse-
quential changes have been made.

Notes to clause 125.

The substance of existing section 17(6) has been in-
corporated in this clause.

The process of calculating tax has been split up in two
sub-clauses, for simplicity.

The existing words in 5, 17(6)(ii), “on the whole....... .
income-tax equal to the amount which bears to the income-
tax” etc. have, in the draft, been replaced by a mathe-
matical formula, to make the provision easy to understand.

It is presumed that, in calculating the income-tax on
the amount of capital gains, the total income is to be re
duced for purposes of rate also. Hence, when explainin;
the symbol Y, the words “had the total income so reduce
been his total income” have been 390९9.

The proviso to section 17(6) (४) has in the draft been
split up into two clauses. .

Clause (i) states the minimum amount that can bé
taxed.

Clause (ii) embodies the rale relating to the maximum
tax to be charged. Where the capital gains do not exceed
five thousand rupees, the tax will obviously be zero when
this clause is applied (see the words “if any”), and it be-
comes unnecessary to deal specifically with such a case, as.
has been done in the existing section.

Suggestion—It would be logical if a provision is made
in the Act to the effect that ¢apital fins are completely
excluded from the total income for the purpose of super-
tax. This would simplify the form of provision con-
tained in existing section 17, sab-sections (6) and (7),

Notes to clause 126.

Section 17(7), even after its amendment by the Finance
(No. 3) Act, 1956, refers to super-tax dnly and is not easy
to understand.

The draft seeks to state the position clearly. The re-
duction of the total income by the amount of capital gains
is presumably effective for ei 1420] rate also, as
is shown by the words “ on its total income” even
‘in the existing section. This been more cldarly
in the draft in sub-clause (b). | |

26—1 Law 0०७./58.


396
CHAPTER XIU

INCOME-TAX AUTHORHIES

Notes to clause 127.

No comments are needed.

Notes to clause 128.

General—Existing section 5 is very lengthy and does
not deal systematically with the various matters relating
to Income-tax authorities. The section has, in the draft,
been split up into a number of clauses and the clauses
have been so arranged that each topic’ is dealt with sepa-

“rately in the following order :—

(i) appointment,

(ii) control,

Gii) jurisdiction,

(iv) powers and duties of the Income-tax authorities.

Clause 128.—The scheme adopted is to deal in separate
sub-clauses with appointments by the Central Government,
appointments by the Commissioner and appointments of
ministerial staff by Income-tax authorities.

Under existing section 5(3), latter part, the appoint-
ment to class II Income-tax Officers and Inspectors'of In-
come-tax is made by the Commissioner, but the number
is to be sanctioned by the Central Government. This is the
statutory provision; but in administrative practice the
sanction of all these posts can be made by the Commis-
sioner. The language has, therefore, been altered to com-
form to administrative practice, vide sub-clause (2).

Notes to clause 129.

Provisions relating to control of Income-tax authorities
have been brought together in this clause.

Sub-clause (i)—needs no comments.

Sub-clauses (2) and (3)—The expression existing in sec-
tion 5(7), “For the purposes of this Act” appears unneces-
sary and has been omitted.

Sub-clause (4)—It has been made clear that an Inspec-
tor of Income-tax is subordinate not only to the authority
under whom he is appoin' work but also to any, supe-
rior authority. ( )

1