LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED TWENTY — SECOND REPORT

ON

FORUM FOR NATIONAL UNIFORMITY
IN LABOUR ADJUDICATION

DECEMBER, 1987


Tel. No. 384475

LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

SHASTRI BHAWAN
“nm NEW DELHI

DA DESAI .
it
aman December 9, 1987

My dear Shri Shiv Shanker,

Continuing the series on decentralisation of administration of. justice, lam happy
to forward today One Hundred and Twenty-second report of the Law Commission
on ‘Forum Fer National Uniformity In Labour Adjudication’.

As you have by now become aware that the task of recommending judicial re-
forms was assigned to the Law Commission in February, 1986. The terms of reference
for the proposed commission to deal with and recommend judicial reforms were sent
to the Law Commission with a request to accord top priozity to this assignment.

The Law Commission appreciating the anxiety of the Government of India to
accord priority to recommending reforms in judicial system which as some analysts
say is on the brink of collapse, topic-wise reports are being scnt to you and your
predecessor-in-office for more than a year. Undoubtedly the Law Commission
is fully occupied with this work alone but it hopes to deal with all items before its
term expires.

The present report deals with the question of introducing and setting up a fo-
rum having All-India jurisdiction developing an All-India perspective dealing with
labour laws simultaneously excluding the jurisdiction of High Courts and retaining
one appeal to the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution. As this re-
port deals primarily with the setting up of such a forum for dealing with labour

ws, it is in the fitness of things that the Department of Justice establishes direct
liaison with the Labour Ministry so that they may have the benefit of the report. The
element of urgency in this request lies in the fact that according to the media
report, Labour Ministry is engaged in recommending comprehensive amendments
to Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, The recommendations herein contained can
become an integral part of it and it may not be treated in isolation. I would
request you to look into this aspect at your éarliest convenience.

With regards,

Yours Sincerely,
Sd/—

(0.0. Desai)
Hon’ble Shri P. Shiv Shanker,
Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi.

Encl : A report.


CHAPTER I
Cuapter IIT
Ciraprer IIT
Cuapter IV
CHAPTER V

REFERENCES
APPENDIX I
APPENDIX II
APPENDIX IIT

APPENDIX IV

APPENDIX V

APPENDIX VI

CONTENTS

Introduction .. न . न .
Present Structure

Approach of the bodies in the past to this question
Approach and justification

The forum, Its Format, Jurisdiction and personnel
manning the same

Working Paper
List of Industrial and Labour Laws

Part A : La Pendency in Supreme Court as on
1-10-1987 under Article 136 :

Part B : Number of Regular Hearing of Non-Consti-
tutional Labour Matters pending in Supreme Court
as on 1-1-86—Age-wise

Pendency of casesin the High Courts—Statement in
reply to unstarred question No. 1793 in the Lok Sabha_

Statement of cases under Labour Laws pending in}
High Courts oe oe

List of Labour Laws indicating the provisions regar-
ding settlement of disputes and appellate authorities

हु (४)|

PAGE

ily
13

16
21
22
29

31

31

32

34


_ CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION

1.1. One of the tasks assigned to the present Law Commission is to study
measures for judicial reforms and to recommend innovative suggestions, inter alia,
with a view to decentralise the system of pain inis| tater of. juste , amongst others,
by estalishing other tiers or systems within dicial hierarchy to reduce the
volume of work inthe Supreme Court and the High Courts. One of the ways
indicated in the Terms of Reference in the Context of Studying Judicial Reforms -
is to devise specialist tribunals as envi: in Part XIVA of the Constitution
for expeditious resolution of causes visage controversies coming before generalist
courts, including Supreme Court and the High Courts.

1.2. The Law Commission submitted a Report recommending setting up of
Central Tax Courts for dealing with causes and controversies under Direct Tax
Laws, Indirect Tax Laws, and Export and Import Regulations}. In that Report,
detailed analysis has been made for decentralisation of monolithic system of
administration of justice as operating in India today. Conceding that at the trial level,
there are specialist courts and tribunals dealing with disputes arising under different
sets of laws, the High Courts enjoy the Constitutional power of judicial review over
decisions of all the specialist courts and tribunals. There was thus a fusion of specia-
list and generalist court work at the High Court level as also in the Supreme Court.
The fall out was that at the High Court level, all sorts of causes and controversies
of specialist nature were dealt with by non-specialist Judges. The need for decentra-
lisation with a view to providing specialist appellate level bodies has been reasoned
out in that Report and in continuation of those reasons, the present report deals
with the questions of suggesting an all-India forum for bringing about uniformity
jn the matters/disputes arising under numerous labour laws.

1.3, The need for setting up specialist courts and tribunals has been felt in
almost all common law countries. The movement to specialised jurisdiction is thus
common to many parts of the workd. The various industrial jurisdictions which have
existed in Australia throughout the present century are unique’ in character’,
The Tax Court and Emergency Court of Appeals in America are specific examples
of specialist courts. Not that this method of setting up specialist courts by decen-
tralisation of administration of justice is without a caveat. The protagonists of the
specialist courts assert that knowledgeable Judges would not need to be educated
about how the instant dispute fits into the broader corpus of law. Asa consequence,
specialist Judges could resolve questions faster and perhaps more ‘correctly’ without
as much effort on the part of counsel to teach them the law. Further, specialist Judges
could devote more time to individual matters without the press of other business.
Limiting certain acts of litigation to a single specialist court would ensure uniformity
and predictability and allow lawyers to settle more disputes without resort to all the
courts. In sum, efficiency and predictability are said to result when.a court hearing
dispute works constantly with the law to be-applied®. The opponents of specialist
court assert that setting up specialist court would result in isolation and less research
and scrutiny of the arguments if certain class of cases are withdrawn .from judicial
mainstream‘. There is a tendency in the Bar to treat spécialist courts as inferior courts
regardless of their place in the judicial hierarchy. Members of the Bar are less prone
to accept judgeship in specialist courts. This fear in Indian condition is wholly
unwarranted.

1.4. Decentralisation of administration of justice has taken place by setting up
numerous types of specialist courts. The known specialist courts in Australia are :
(1) Children’s Courts, (2) Family Courts, (3) Industrial Courts, Commissions and
Boards, (4) Small Claims Courts and Tribunals, (5) Coroner’s Courts, (6) Licensing
Courts, (7) Warden’s Courts, (8) Land and Environment Court, (9) A Local Govern-
ment Court, (10) A Market Court, (11) Miner’s Courts, etc5, Requirements of infor-
mality and expertise provide an adequate support to such specialist courts. This is
in contrast with the impression of Jaymen about ordinary courts as excessively
formal and lacking in expertise.

1.5. A rgform movement is in process to modernise court structure and
administration and to achieve additional court related objectives around which
some consensus has developed.6 . .


2

1.6. Since a demand for specialist court for dealing with disputes arising under
labour laws, as distinct from general civil jurisdiction courts, is founded on the
assumption that while the courts of general civil jurisdiction would take the contract
as it is, the formal approach would be inconsistent with courts set up to resolve
disputes between the employers and workmen where the approach is what ought to
be the contract. To some extent, it was also a response to the mounting case law pro-
blems in generalist courts. As work proliferates, lawyers ate getting increasingly
specialised. In America, solo practitioners have largely joined partnerships, solo local
firms are being su plemented by national firms. If that be so, the inter-relation bet-
ween the Bar and the Bench can be established by providing more specialist courts

‘with knowledgeable Judges of the special nature of the disputes coming before the
specialist courts. One’s possible response to this greater specialisation amongst
Judges is that while no one advocates the demise of the generalist judiciary,
complex cases requiring technical knowledge and an insight into the inter-relation
between the parties and the nature of /is are not always handled well by Judges with
no expertise in the particular area of law involved.

1.7. Judges dealing with disputes mader numerous labour laws must be
equipped in humanities, social sciences, need for socio-economic justice, unequal
position of parties to the dispute, the national economy, goals of planning and
the shape of future society which the Constitution envisages. In short, they must
have knowledge of all aspects which will help them in balancing the individual need
and the social good.

1.8. Law reform to be effective must reflect the views of those likely to be affec-
.ted by the change suggested as also the society at large, which is vitally interested
in the development of law as an instrument of social engineering. In order to reach
the interest groups concerned with administration of labour laws in this country, the
Law Commission drew up a comprehensive working paper to which a short
questionnaire was added in the hope that the attention of those interested in the
discussion would be focussed on the specifics with which the Commission would
deal in this report. It may appear that the tentative approach of the Commission
in the working paper undergoes refinement when the Teport emerges. This
should be so in the very nature of things because it shows the impact of suggestions
received, discussions and deliberations heard and the recent literature dealing
with the subject. For proper appreciation, the working paper is annexed to this
Teport as Appendix 1.

1.9, The Law Commission is also happy to record that central trade unions,
employers’ organisation and various other interest groups positively responded to the
working paper and the questionnaire and we owe.a debt of gratitude to them in that

helped us in formulating our recommendations. A measure of consensus has
laid the foundation of this report.


CHAPTER II
PRESENT STRUCTURE

2.1. Ina power-ridden society divided into segments, one capable of excercising.
powerful authority over the other, conflict of interests would inevitably surface. It is.
inherent in the very texture of society. In an industrial society where means of pro-
duction are privately controlled, maximisation of profit is the only desired end.
This, to some extent, legitimises exploitation of those who are unequal in the matter
of contracting with those who employ them. Let no one be beguiled that out of humani-
tarian consideration or in order to be fair and just, some rights were conferred on
the labour force. In fact, it is a trite saying that labour law such as the one that can
be found in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, was not enacted as a measure of
socio-economic justice but it was in fact a law and ordei measure. Where interests
clash such as the employers’ keenness to pay the least and labour’s keenness for pay-
ment which can keep body and soul together, the clash of interests would tead to
confrontation which, in turn, would lead to direct action impinging upon production.
In the First Five year Plan, it was observed....:

“Answer to class antagonism and world conflict will arrive soon if we succeed

in discovering a sound basis for human relations in industry. Economic progress

is also bound up with industrial peace. Industrial relations are, theref re. not

+ a matter between the employers and employees alone but a vital concern of the

community which may be expressed in measures for the protection of its larger
interest.””.

2.2. This realisation grew as a consequence of according high priority to economio
development by laying down a strong: infrastructure: for industrialisation of the
feudal Indian society. Till then, and especially commencing from the days of the
Second World War, the State machinery was geared to avoid direct action which may
impinge upon production—unham pared production—first for the war effort and
then for the planned development of Indian society.

2.3. Rule 81A of the Defence of India Rules, the precursor of the Industrial Dis-
putes Act, 1947, empowered the appropriate Government to intervene in industrial dia-
putes by compelling the parties to go to compulsory adjudication by prohibiting strikes
or lock-outs during the pendency of adjudioation proceedings and tor a period of two
months thereafter. A blanket ban was imposed on strikes which did not arise out of
genuine trade disputes.® “A process of conciliation, with arbitration in the background,
is substituted for the rude and barbarous of strike and lock-out. Reason is to
displace force: the might of the State is to हट व peace between industial combatants
-as well as between other combatants; and भी in the interest of the public.”* On the
termination of war, the rule was due to lapse effective from October 1, 1946; but was
kept in operation by the Emergency y Powerg (Continuancs) Ordinance, 1946. Simu-
Itaneouly, Industrial Employment (S ders) Act, 1946, was enacted providing
for framing and certifiying of Standing 0 ders covering various aspects of service
conditions with a view to compelling a ployers in industiral establishments to
prescribe with sufficient precision the conditjons of service under them and to make
the industrial employees aware of those itions. On the advent of the Constitu-
tion, under Part IV thereof, the State, meaning thereby all limbs of Government,
had to strive to promote the welfare of! the people, by securing and protecting के as,
effectively as it may, a social order in which justice, social, economic and_politi
shall inform all the institutions of the natiogal life. The State had, in particular, to
strive to minimise the inequalities of incomé'and endeavour to eliminate inequalities
in status, facilities and opportunities, not oaly amongst individuals but also amongst
groups of people residing in different area or engaged in different vocations (article
38). The State had, within its limits of aconqmic capacity and development, to make
effective provision for securing the right to work, to education and to public assistance
in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement, and in other cases of
undeserved want (article 41). The State was required to make endeavour to secure,
by suitable legislation or economic organisation or in any other way, to all_workers,
agricultural, industrial or otherwise, work, a living wage, conditions of work ensuring
a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and social and cultural

3.


4

opportunities (article 43), The State was required to take steps, by suitable legislation
or in any other way, to secure the participation of workers in the management of
undertakings, establishments or other organisations engaged in any industry (article .

2.4. As the Constitution envisaged a society governed by rule of law, the State
had to enact numerous legislations to translate into reality the promise in the Pre~
amble that the State shall secure to its citizens, justice, sccial, economic and political
and equality of opportunity. Law was to ensure socio-economic justice to labour,
transforming their position from being a factor ofp roduction to partner in industry.
Through the instrumentality of law, the unequal bargaining power of the labour
was to be strengthened so as to avoid direct action, confrontation, or conflict and
to ensure peace and harmony in the industry which was a rrerequisite for higher
production and thereby improving and ameliorating the economic position of the
labour force. Exploitation by the powerful industrial employers of the workmen
had to be eschewed by enacting numerous iegislations, which would help in
avoiding confrontation and impel parties having apparently conflicting interests to
negotiate and resolve their disputes. With this end in view, the Central Govern-
ment enacted roughly about 51 legislations since 1947, a list of which appears at
Appendix II of this report.

2.5. The underlying assumption in all these enactments is that once law is enacted,
legal sanctions are created, machinery for its enforcement provided and viclations
are dealt with, peace and harmony would reign in the industry. The word “peace”,
as used in this context, should not mislead anyone. “Peace” does not im nply slavish
subjugation imposed upon the weaker sections by the more powerful ing its
own terms. ‘Peace, in the profound sense of the term, is not a mere negative con-
cept of the avoidance of strife, but a positive idea of the fruitful co-operation of
all for the fullest possible development of each.”10

2.6. Law, to be an effective instrument of change for social transformation
and for rendering socio-economic justice, must have sanction behind it, and must
compel obedience. In its effective implementation, the expectation from the law
must be wholly fulfilled, otherwise law itself becomes an instrument for further
exploitation. The laws fer improvement of the conditions of labour employed
in various industries provided for promoting arbitration by consent of parties,
failing which by compulsory adjudication, with a further power to compel obedience
to these provisions by declaring strike or look-out illegal after an order for com-
pulsory adjudication is made.

2.7. To appreciate this position adequately, a brief reference to the provisions
of Industrial Disputes Act would become necessitous. The dictionary clause defines,
amongst ethers, eppropriate Government” on which power to make a reference
for compulsory adjudication is conferred. Section 3 envisages setting up of a works
committee consisting of representatives of employers and workmen engaged in the
industrial establishment charged. with a duty to promote measures for securing
and preserving amity and good relations between the employer and the workmen
and, to that end, to comment upon the matters of common interest or concern. and
endeavour to compose any difference of opmion in respect of such matters. The
State of Gujarat, in the application of section 3, has also introduced sections 3A
and 3B providing for joint management council and prescribing the functions of
the council. One can safely say that these provisions are a non-starter. In fact,
for a long time the operation of section 3 was stayed by an injunction gianted by
the Supreme Court of India. Section 4 envisages appointment of conciliation
officers. Section 5 deals with setting up of boards of conciliation and section 6
empowers the Government to constitute courts of inquiry. Section 7 confers power
to constitute one or more labour courts. Such labour court ‘will have jurisdiction
to adjudicate industrial disputes relating to any matter specified in the Second Sche-
duls to the Act. Section 7A, which was introduced in 1956, conferred power on
the appropriate Government to constitute one or more | industrial tri punals for
adjudication of industrial disputes relating to any matter specified-in the Second
Schedule’ or the Third Schedule. Section 7B, which also was introduced in 1956, ©
conferred power on the Central Government to constitute National Industrial
Tribunal for adjudication of industrial disputes which may involve questions of
national importance or are of such a nature that industrial establishments consti-
tuted in more than one State are likely to be interested in, or affected by such disputes.


5

Section 9A, which was introduced by the same Act of 1956, obliged the employer
to give a notice of change if it is intended to effect a change in the condition of ser-
vice applicable to any workmen in respect of any of the matters specified in the
Fourth Schedule. Section 10 confers power on the appropriate Government to
refer any industrial dispute that exists or is apprehended to a board for promoting
settlement or toa court of inquiry of to a labour court or to a tribunal, as the case
may be, for adjudication. Sub-section (5) of section 10 confers _ Power on the ap-
propriate Government, while making a reference of an industrial dispute for ad-
judication, to include in the reference such establishment, group or class of estab-
lishments, whether or not at the time of such inclusion any dispute exists or is ap-
prehended in the establishment or group or class of establishments. Section 22
prohibits strike in a public utility service without giving to the employer a_ notice
of strike as provided therein. Section 23 puts a general embargo on strike and
lock-out during the period of preceedings before a 14000 court, tribunal or National
Tribunal and for a period of two months after the conclusion of the proceedings.

2.8. A brief resume of these provisions will show at a glance that effective power
was conferred upon the appropriate Government to intervene in an existing in-
dustrial dispute or to interdict a threatened situation to compel the parties to 1e-
sort to adjudication and to avoid direct action. .

2.9, The award made by the authority empowered to adjudicate the industrial
dispute is binding on the parties subject to the power of the appropriate ‘Government
under section 17.

2.10. Labour Courts, industrial tribunals, National Industrial Tribunal, all enjoy
the power cf compulsory adjudication. Their awards enjoy finality. The statute
does not envisage any appeal over the decision of the aforementioned fora.

2.11. Since the advent of the Constitution, the awards of the aforementioned
fora can be questioned, by writ of certiorari, prohibition or even mandamus invoking
the constitutional power of judicial review conferred or the High Court under artiole
226 and the Supreme Court under article 32. In the absence of any appellate fora,
as a matter of course, a large number of awards are challenged either before the
High Court or before the Supreme Court of India. Thus, High Courts and the
Supreme Court, while exercising extraordinary jurisdiction under the Constitution,
have for all practical purposes become appellate fora.

2.12. The twin purposes underlying the enactment of Industrial Disputes Act,
1947, were to provide mode and machinery for arbitration/compulsory adjudication
between two segments of society amongst whom conflict af interest was inherent as
also to arm the State with power to effectively intervene in industrial disputes which,
if left to the warring parties to settle by direct action and confrontation, would
certainly hamper and thwart economic regeneration of the nation. If the industriat
disputes are sought to be resolved by the force of might, there was a distinct possibility
of chaos and anarchy in the Society. The Industrial. Disputes Act, 1947, is, in the
opinion of the Supreme Court, a benign measure which seeks to pre-empt industrial
tensions, provide the mechani¢s of dispute-resolutions and set up necessary infra-
structure so that the energies of partners in production may not be dissipated in
counter-productive' matters and assurance of industrial justice may create a climate
of goodwill. Industrial peace is a national need and, absent law, order in any field
will be absent. Chaos is the enemy of creativity sans which production will suffér.
Thus, the great goal to which the 1.0. Act is geared is legal mechanism for canalis-
ing conflicts along conciliatory or adjudicatory processes.) The emerging concept
of welfare state, which was in the ajr:since independence, implied an end to exploi-
tation of workmen and they were to be ensured a living wage, decent conditions of
work and dignity of Iabour. Some legal mechanism was necessary and one under-
lying the Industrial Disputes Act is ‘geared to conferment of regulated benefits to
workmen and resolution, according to sympathetic rule of law, of the conflicts,
actual or potential, between management’ and the workmen. Its goal is ameliora-
tion of the conditions of workers, tempered by a practical sense of peaceful co-
existence, to the benefit of both—not a neutral position but restraints on /aissez
aire and concern for the welfare of the weaker lot’.!2

2.13. With the pace of industrialisation, numerous labour courts and industrial
tribunals had to be set up throughout the length and breadth of this country. Hach
-forum was having power to make awards with finality attaching to it. What was


6

inherent in this situation was that conflicting awards, decisions and approaches
would emerge. An approach to the High Court under article 226-227 of the Consti-
tution would, at best, bring about some uniformity at the State level but the High
Courts inter se differ. The situation was agonising for industrial establishments
having inter-State operations or having production units in more States than
one and being subject to jurisdiction of different High Courts, Ultimately the matter
had to be taken to the Supreme Court which was both dilatory and time consuming.

2.14. The situation herein discussed attracted the attention of the law makers
“which, in a welfare state, cannot afford to look askance at industrial unrest and
industrial disputes”.15 The law makers, being aware of a need to provide uniformity
in the matter of conditions of service and benefits which the workmen may enjoy
as a consequence of industrial adjudication, enacted Industrial Disputes (Appellate
Tribunal) Act, 1950. The establishment of Appellate Tribunal having all-India
jurisdiction was thus a natural response to the need for a measure of uniformity of
underlying principles and norms to govern the awards of the different Industrial
Tribunals. Accordingly, the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950,
was put on the statute took. It provided for constituting a Labour Apeltate Tribunal
for hearing appeals from the awards or decisions of Industrial Tribunals in aecor-
dance with the provisions of the Act. Section 7 of the Act conferred jurisdiction on
the Appellate Tribunal to entertain an appeal from any award or decision of In-
dustrial Tribunal if— ' 5

(व) the appeal involves any substantial question of law, or

(6) the award or decision is in respect of any of the following matters,
namely :—

@ wages,

(i) bonus or travelling allowance,

(iii) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension
fund or provident fund,

(iv) any sum paid or payable to, or on behalf of, the workmen to defray
special expenses entailed on him by nature of his employment,

(») gratuity payable on discharge,

(vi) classification by grade,

(vii) retrenchment of workmen,

(viii) any other matter which may be prescribed.

Practically the entire gamut of industrial relations was covered and any award
on any of these aspects would become appealable to the Appellate Tribunal. Even
if the award does not cover any of the aforementioned items, an appeal can still
be entertained by the Appellate Tribunal on ‘the footing that the appeal involves a
substantial question of law. Almost all awards became appealable to the Appellate
Tribunal. Undoubtedly, the Tribunal having all-India jurisdiction and an all-India

‘spective could, by exercise of its appellate jurisdiction, bring about uniformity
in the matter of industrial relations which otherwise would have almost developed
into a law of jungle because of conflicting awards by different tribunals including
those having jurisdiction in the same State. .

2.15. Somehow, this Appellate Tribunal incurred the wrath of the leading national
organisations of workmen. As it was inherent in the situation, the haves, i.e., the
employers, were financially well off and could afford the luxury. of litigation. They
preferred numerous appeals to the Appellate Tribunal and, according to workmen,
there was inordinate delay in the disposal of thése-appeals whereby the implemen-
tation of awards was held up and thereby prolonged the litigation. The workmen
with their weak staying power could ‘ill-afford such delay-while on the other hand
the employers protracted the litigation by casually preferring appeal and abused the
inherent tendency of every judicial process, namely, delay. Undoubtedly, what was
then considered the prolongation of the litigation by the Appellate Tribunal taking
roughly about two years on an average in deciding appeals has now boomeranged by
its abolition. There was also a feeling among the workmen that the Appellate
Tribunal, being manned by the retired Judges of the High Courts, disclosed a tilt in
favour of the management disclosing a class bjas, compounded by the lack of


7

knowledge of industrial relations. Crass legalistic approach and lack of commit-
ment to social justice in deciding appeals further accentuated the feeling of the work-
men and a near unanimous demand was voiced for the abolition of the Labour
Appellate Tribunal. This found its echo in the Statement of Objects and Reasons
accompanying the Industrial Disputes (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions)
Bill, 1955, which inter alia made provision for abolition of Labour Appellate
Tribunal? It was therein stated that : “There is a large volume of criticism tha
appeals filed before the Appellate Tribunal take a long time for disposal and in
volve a great deal of expenditure which the workers cannot afford.” The employers-
on the other hand, contended that the Appellate Tribunal has introduced consider-
able uniformity in the basic principles underlying industrial awards and was buil-
ding up sound case law on industrial relations. They asserted that an appellate
forum was a necessary adjunct of compulsory adjudication and its abolition, while
retaining Industrial Tribunals and the method of compulsory adjudication, would
again usher in a jungle of conflicting awards. Ultimately, in a democracy, the voice
of numerically stronger section prevailed. Shri K.K. Desai, formerly Labour
Minister, said during the discussion on the Industrial Disputes (Amendment and
Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill, 1955, that : ‘It is not that justice is not being done
but the workers should believe that the justice is being done to them as expeditiously
as possible and, therefore, the Appellate Tribunal is going’. No factual data was
supplied to the Parliament as how much delay an appeal to the Tribunal entails.
At any rate, it was stated in the Statement of Objects and Reasons accompanying
the Industrial Disputes (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill, 1955,
that Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950, be repealed while conceding
that the Appellate Tribunal had achieved some uniformity in the basic principles
governing awards of Industrial Tribunals but the consideration of future uniformity
had to be balanced against the requirements of speedy settlement of industrial dis-
putes.44 Even though no formal enquiry was made, it appears that on an average
the Appellate Tribunal took two years to dispose of an appeal before it. There-
fore, the execution and implementation of the award was postponed at best by pre-
ferring of the «: real by two years. When it was pointed out that some uniformity
was necessary in industrial relations which the Appellate Tribunal brought about,
it was conceded that the Supreme Court would certainly take care of it in future.
“On that note, the Labour Appellate Tribunal was formally abolished in 1956.

2.16. Since the abolition of the Labour Appellate Tribunal, award of the Labour
Court and Industrial Tribunal is challenged either by invoking the jurisdiction of
the High Court under articles 226-227 of the Constitution or by special leave petition
to the Supreme Court of India under article 136 of the Constitution. Even oc-
casionally they are questioned by a writ petition under article 32 of the Constitution
to the Supreme Court of India. Article 141 of the Constitution provides that the
law declared by the Supreme Court shall be binding on all courts, including tribunals
and Government, within the territory of India. Qbviously, therefore, Supreme
Court can bring about uniformity in the matter‘of industrjal relations. .

2.17. Industrial disputes occur very frequently. There are a number of statutes
which, directly or indirectly, deal with industrial relations. Numerous laws have
been enacted fdr ameliorating the conditions of service of industrial labour. All
these statutes provide'a fruitful ground for litigation. Undoubtedly some of the
statutes provide a mechanism and forum for-resolution of disputes under the statute
as well as an appellate forum. However, the desirability of introducing unifor-

ity in industrial relations throughout the length and breadth of this country must
be kept in view. On the abolition of the Labour Appellate Tribunal, that function
reverted to the Supreme Court. Now if the Supreme.Court can deliver the goods
expeditiously, the raison d'etre for this report may disappear. If Labour Appellate
Tribunal could have justified its existence’ and continued to be alive, it would not
have become necessary to think anew about the subject. There was, of course,
one primary defect in the Act setting oP the Labour Appellate Tribunal. Un-
questionably, the Tribunal under the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal)
Act, 1950, was a Tribunal within the meaning of the expression in articles 136 and
227 of the Constitution. The Appellate Tribunal held sittings in various States.
The constitutional outcome of this situation was that each High Court within
whose jurisdiction the Appellate Tribunal held a sitting would have jurisdiction
under article 227 to examine the legality and correctness of its award. A piquant
situation arose because of this position. _ While all the decisions of the Labour


8

Appellate Tribunal would be binding on the Industrial Tribunal and Labour Court
and the expression “Industrial Tribunal” was widely defined by section 2(c) of the
Act, yet once the High Court had jurisdiction to interfere, different High Courts
took irreconcilable view and the national uniformity again got disturbed and dis-
rupted. While setting up Labour Appellate Tribunal having all-India jurisdiction,
it was then not considered advisable to ex¢lude the jurisdiction of the High Court
which can now be done under article 323B(3) (d) of the Constitution. This glaring
lacuna proved counter-productive in as much as while the Labour Appellate Tri-
bunal was intended to bring about uniformity in industrial relations by bringing
different awards of different tribunals to a common denominator, yet the High Court,
in exercise of its extraordinary jurisdiction, could successfully disrupt the uniformity
leaving it again to the Supreme Court to re-introduce the same.

2.18. Thus the question looms large whether the faith reposed in the Supreme
Court to bring about uniformity throughout the length and breadth of this country
has been fulfilled. - Under successive plans, the pace of industrialisation accele-
rated, and as its necessary corollary. the industrial disputes multiplied. Public
sector in this respect behaved almost in the same manner as the private sector and
there was phenomenal proliferation of industrial disputes. Conflicting awards
multiplied emergence of industrial disputes. The Supreme Court, with its widest
possible jurisdiction, had to deal with this large number of awards by different
Industrial Tribunals and even conflicting decisions of the High Courts to bring about
a semblance of uniformity in the field of industrial relations. If the Supreme Court
had done it expeditiously, no further question could have been raised. But the
phenomenal backlog of cases in the Supreme Court has considerably thwarted the.
disposal of labour cases by the Supreme Court which alone could bring about uni-
formity. The greater the delay in disposing of labour cases, the greater the pro-
portionate rise in industrial disputes year after year; and the delay in disposal of
labour cases by the Supreme Court is gradually increasing.. Appeals under the labour
laws not involving any constitutional interpretation that are coming to the Supreme
Court by way of special leave petitions under article 136 are pending from the year
1973 and the total pendency is 690 as on Ist October, 1987. (See Appendix I1I—
Part A). 953 appeals under labour laws were pending as on 1-1-1986 (See Appen-
dix I1I—Part B). By the end of 1985, the pendency of cases under the labour laws
in the High Courts, except four High Courts, namely, Madras, Calcutta, Madhya
Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir, aggregated 10 14,818. (See Appendix V). Some
of these matters are over a decade old. Is it to be assumed that during this period
of ten years, no industrial dispute of a similar nature arose anywhere else? Can it
be kept pending for ten years till the Supreme Court finds time to pronounce its
decision on it which may be binding on all Tribunals and Courts so as to bring about
uniformity in industrial relations ? Some instance of a revealing nature may be
set out here. A wage board for revising emoluments of. working and non-working
journalists under Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Condi-
tions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955, was set up under the
Chairmanship of Mr. Justice Palekar, retired Judge of the Supreme Court in June,
1975, The wage board gave its award on 12-8-1980. It was challenged by some
newspaper establishments in the Supreme Court in the year 1980. The writ petition
is awaiting disposal in the Supreme Court. In the meantime, a new wage board has
been constituted on 11-7-85 under the Chairmanship of Bachawat, J.. The award
of the present wage board will supersede the earlier award which is under
challenge. What guidance will the present wage-board get from the Sup-
reme Court in this situation ? There is such inordinate delay in disposal of all cases,
including cases under the labour laws, coming before the Supreme Court that the

*. faith reposed in it that it will expeditiously pronounce its verdict and help in in-
troducing uniformity has been belied. And, in the absence of the Supreme Court,
on the abolition of the Labour Appellate Tribunal, all the labour courts and In-
dustrial Tribunals almost enjoyed finality of their award save under some State
statutes. The result is a tremendous lack of uniformity in the awards of the In-
dustrial Tribunals and multiplicity of litigation and proliferation of industrial dis-
putes which very often threaten industrial peace and harmony dislocating the goal
set up in the plan documents.

2.19. Industrial sickness has acquired a high visibility. Thousands of units
are closed. Textile industry, the fulcrum of the economic activity of Gujarat, is
in ruins. Thousands of workmen have been rendered jobless. Can the situation be
remedied by a judicial pr, say, quasi-judicial process ? The entire enquiry in this


9

behalf is for the Ministry of Labour to undertake. Only one limb of it can be exa-
mined here, namely, to devise a machinery for bringing about uniformity in industrial
relations by setting up a body having an all-India perspective and jurisdiction below
the Supreme Court so that industrial strife can be minimised.

2.20. There is almost near unanimity on the question of providing a forum
having an all-India jurisdiction and perspective to which an appeal may lie or
which may also enjoy some original jurisdiction so that much desired uniformity ia
industrial relations can be brought about. Since the abolition of the Labour Appellate
Tribunal, numerous awards were challenged in the Supreme Court by invoking juris-
diction under article 136. Deeades after, appeals arising out of the special leave
petition were heard. Time, on-an average, of two years taken by Labour Appellate
Tribunal in disposing of an appeal before it has paled into insignificance’ when one
views the delay in the Supreme Court on which the protagonists of the abolition of
Labour Appellate Tribunal reposed faith for expeditious disposal of cases under
the labour laws so as to provide the much needed uniformity. Truth has dawned
upon them that the Supreme Court will not be able to deliver the goods. In fact,
Supreme Court was not meant to be a regular forum for appeal. Even when article
136 confers jurisdiction of widest amplitude on the Supreme Court, yet it was to
be exercised to deal with legal formulations of general public importance. It was
a cryptic saying that even where a point of law is of vital importance to the two
parties to the dispute, that by itself would not be sufficient to invite the Supreme
Court to entertain the special leave petition. Every question of law cannot be clo-
thed with the garb of an important question of law. Not only the question of law
must be important but it must be of general public importance vital to the community
which alone would permit the Supreme Court‘to entertain a petition for special
Teave. Undoubtedly, this jurisdiction of widest amplitude was conferred on the
Supreme Court so that, without being trammelled by technical arguments as to
want of jurisdiction it can reach every nook and cranny to render justice where
rank injustice appears to have been perpetrated. But in a country of India’s dimen-
sions and its litigious traditions which have acquired a high visibility -profile, 5
if the Supreme Court, merely on the feeling that there is some injustice to the
party by an award of the Industrial Tribunal, agrees and undertakes to examine the
same, it was inherent in the situation that the delay in disposing of the cases coming
before it would be inordinate and would accordingly be counter-productive. That is
the present situation. Therefore, there is a revival ey the demand of an appellate fo-
rum over the Industrial Tribunals having an all-India jurisdiction. In a well-ordered
judicial system, it is considered absolutely essential to provide for one appeal as of
right with safeguards of a further possible appeal by leave in appropriate cases.
The International Labour Organisation had recommended that workman whose
service isterminated must have a right of appeal to a neutral body.!® Supreme Court
cannot be a forum for regular appeals as a matter of right. Therefore, an intermediate
appellate forum is the need of the day. There is a renewed interest in either devising
such a forum, if not the revival of the Labour Appellate Tribunal.

2.21. The first Law Commission recommended that ‘the Legislature should
provide for an adequate right of appeal in labour matters either by reviving the La-
bour Appellate Tribunal or by empowering the High Court to hear appeal in suitable
cases.17 Empowering the High Court to hear appeals in labour matters would be a

. Temedy worse than the disease. The High Court did enjoy the jurisdiction to enter-
‘tain a writ petition against the award of the Industrial Tribunai or even the Labour
Appellate Tribunal. The outcome is there for everyone to see. The problem got
further accentuated. .

2.22. The representatives of the All-India Trade Union Congress, while conced-
ing in principle the setting up of an all-India forum for entertaining appeals against
the award of the Industrial Tribunal, simultaneously submitted that the jurisdiction
of the High Court should be excluded. It even went to the extent of suggesting that
the writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court may be excluded. That would be rather
inappropriate. It also expressed an opinion that statute setting up such a forum
must provide a time-limit within which the appeals coming before such forum must
be ‘disposed of.

2.23, The Indian National Trade Union Congress was of the opinion that at least
one appeal should be allowed either to the special Bench of the Supreme Court or to
the revived Labour A) Appellate Tribunal. In any event, the INTUC was in the fore- _
front for demand of the abolition of the Labour Appellate Tribunal, which, having. :


10

seen the developing scenario, has reconsidered its stand and is in favour of an
appellate forum having an all-India jurisdiction and perspective.

2.24. The Law Commission approaches the problem from two different angles .
The Law Commission is primarily interested in decentrialisation of administration of
justice with a view to reducing the burden on the High Courts and the Supreme Court.
Simultaneously, it is of the opinion that matters arising under the labour laws require
specialist knowledge of industrial relations, humanities, social sciences, goals of
planned economy, targets of planning and, ‘above all, the attainment of the goals of
the Constitution as hereinbefore set out. As pointed out earlier, if lawyers are becom-
ing increasingly sp2zialised, such as labour lawyers, tax lawyers, patent lawyers, even
tort lawyers,why should this specialisation be not reflected in the judicial fora and
hierarchy ? The notion that most people want the black-robed Judges, well-dressed
lawyers and panelled court rooms for the resolution of disputes isa myth. People
with problems like people with pain want relief and they want it as quickly as possi-
ble.18 This report aims at attaining all the three objectives, keeping in view the
present depressing and distressing situation.


+ CHAPTER वा
APPROACH OF THE BODIES IN THE PAST
TO THIS QUESTION

3.1. The Law Commission submitted its Fourteenth Report on Reform of Judi-
cial Administration in September 1958. By that time, Labour Appellate Tribunal
was already abolished. The Law Commission, while examining the inflow of work in
the Supreme Court, took special notice of the fact that the Court had to grant special
leave to appeal against decisions of various Labour Tribunals. It was noticed that in
the year 1956, as many as 257 special leave applications against decisions of Labour
Tribunals were granted, out of which 140 such applications were allowed. The Commi-
ssion was of the opinion that the situation created by these large number of appeals
admitted in labour matters causes concern in two respects. The first effect noticed was
that it clogged the work of the Supreme Court notwithstanding the recent increase
in its strength and secondly, that the disposal by the Supreme Court was not
equal to the rising institution with which it was faced. According to the Commission,
these matters have in a sense been forced upon the Court inasmuch as the Court could
not refuse to entertain appeals against the decisions which appeared to be arbitrary
and capricious and made in disregard of well-accepted principles of law and natural
justice. According to the Commission, a large number of applications for special
leave in these matters made to the Supreme Court synchronised with the abolition of
the Labour Appellate Tribunal. The situation of which notice was taken was that
against the decisions of the Industrial Tribunals, no appeal lay to any forum. Accor-
dingly, in most cases, a petition for special leave was filed in the Supreme Court
contending that the decision was unjust and arbitrary. The fact that the relief under
article 226 of the Constitution by the High Court would be by a writ of certiorari
which would permit the High Court to set aside the. award/order of the Industrial
Tribunal ; but the High Court cannot make its own decision and substitute for that
of the Tribunal, the rush to Supreme Court under article 136 was inevitable. Having.
noticed this situation, the First Law Commissin was of the opinion that :

“It is, therefore, imperative that the Legislature should intervene and provide

for an adequate right of appeal in these matters. Such a right of appeal could

be provided either by constituting Tribunals of Appeal under the labour legisla-

tion itself or by conferring a right of appeal to the/High Court in suitable ०8४८४ ३1१

3.2. It may be recalled that the situation noticed by the Law Commission in 1958
was the emerging scenario on the abolition of the Labour Appellate Tribunal and the
situation had not deteriorated .to the extent it has now. The latest situation is more
depressing. The figures tell their own tale. Let them speak for themselves—14,82,450.
(Appendix IV)—as per the information given to the Parliament on 18-11-87. One
aspect that unfortunately escaped the notice of the Law Commission was that
on the abolition of the Labour Appellate Tribunal, the awards of the Industrial
Tribunals scattered throughout the length and breadth of this country had finality
subject to constitutional remedies. There was no body at an all-India level which can
provide uniformity in this matter—a function discharged by the Labour Aj
Tribunal. The awards of the Industrial Tribunals on questions of wages, Sppellate
allowance, retirement benefits, different allowances, if not brought _to some common
denominator, were likely to introduce -gonflict and chaos. Uniformity in this behalf can
only be introduced by an Appellate Tribunal having an all-India jurisdiction and a
national perspective. Conferring appellate jurisdiction on the High Court over the
awards of the Industrial Tribunal would not only not have improved the matter but
the much desired uniformity would be shattered. The lack and absence of uniformity.
surfaced itself on the disappearance of the Labour Appellate Tribunal.

3.3. The Government of India constituted a Commission, chaired by Justice P.B.
Gajendragadkar, Cheif Justice (retired) of the Supreme Court, for a comprehensive
review of various matters connected with labour. One of the important aspects ‘dealt
with by it is the power of the State to intervene in the settlement of industrial disputes
commencing with the Trade Disputes Act, 1929, and ending with the Industrial Dis-
putes Act, 1947. Conceding that the ultimate legal remedy for the settlement of an
unresolved dispute is its atference to adjudication by the appropriate Government,
the Commission observed that during the last twenty years, the adjudication machi-
nery has exercised considerable influence on several aspects of conditions of work and |

Ht


12

labour-management relations. It was noticed that ‘adjudication is dilatory, expensive
and even discriminatory as the power of reference vests in the appropriate Govern-
ment’. It was also of the opinion that by and large. ‘it has failed to achieve indust-
tial peace’. The Commission felt that disadvantages noticed by it may have been
over-stated. It indicated that greater scope should be given to collective bargaining.
Ultimately, it recommended the setting up of an Industrial Relations Commission
at National and State levels for settling disputes broadly covering matters listed in
the Third Schedule to the I.D Act. The broad set up of the Industrial Relations
Commission and the method of appointment of the ident and the Judicial and
Non-Judicial Members of the Commission was indicated. The procedure for settle-
ment of disputes was chalked out. The Commission was to replace Industrial, Tri-
bunals and National industrial Tribunal. Labour Court wa’ to be set upineach State
to be presided over by Judicial Members and appeal over the decision of the Labour
Court in certain clearly defined matters may lie to the High Court within whose
jurisdiction the Court is located.2° The recommendation remained unattended.

3.4. The National Labour Conference held on 17th and 18th of September, 1982,
appointed a Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Sanat Metha, the then Minis-
ter of Finance and Labour, Gujarat, inviting it to examine important industrial rela-
tions’ issues, one of which being machinery and forafor resolution of industrial dis-
putes. This Committee took note of the fact that a National Labour Conference had
practically approved the recommendations of the National Commission on Labour
for setting up of Industrial Relations Commissions at the Czntre and State level for
resolution of industrial disputes. The Committee recommended that the new legis-
lation dealing with iadustrial relations must provide for setting up of independent
Industrial Relations Commissions and the constitution, set up, qualifications of
Chairman, Members and the subordinate officers and staff shall be on the same lines as
given in the recommendations of the National Commission on Labour. It recommen-
ded setting up of Standing Labour Courts to work under the overall supervision of
the Industrial"Relations Commission and they would deal with disputes relating to
rights and obligations, interpretation and implementation] of award etc. Reading
the Report as a whole, it appears that the Industrial Relations Commission at the
Centre as well as State level was to have original jurisdiction.

3.5. On receipt of the Report of the Committee chaired by Shri Sanat Metha, the
Standing Labour Committee formulated the infra-structure of the legislation to be
introduced in this behalf. The State level industrial Commission was to have an-
appellate jurisdiction over the orders and decisions of the Labour Courts. The Indust-
tial Relations Commission at the Centre will have both original and appellate juris-
diction. .

3.6. Commencing from the setting up of the Labour Appellate Tribunal in 1950
upto the recommendations of the Committee chaired by Shri Sanat Metha, and conse-
quent upon its recommendations, the infra-structure drawn up by the Standing Labour
Committee unambiguously converge on the view that there has to be a forum atthe
national level having both original and appellate jurisdiction which would enable that

body-to introduce an all-India perspective in the matter of industrial relations. Of

_ hecessity, such body must be composed of such persons having intimate knowledge
of labour problems, economic planning, just and fair distribution of wealth, socio-
economic justice and legal formulations as would enable it to dispose of matters
expeditiously and effectively. It also clearly emerges that the jurisdiction of the High
Courtin labour matter hasto be abolished. to avoid the confusion arising from
different High Courts taking different view in matters of common interest. The
present approach is that apart frpm the advantages herein indicated, this new set up
will help in reducing the workload in the High Courts and the Supreme Court, be-
cause the jurisdiction of the High Court in labour matters will be abolished and the
jurisdiction under’ article 136 of the Supreme Court will be sparingly exercised, as a
specialist body with an all-India jurisdiction has examined the matter. This is the
justification, if one is needed, for the present approach.



CHAPTER IV
APPROACH: AND JUSTIFICATION

4.1. The Law Commission was required to study measures for judicial- reforms
and make recommendations, inter alia, on the need for decentralisation of the system
of administration of justice by setting up of a system of participatory justice’ with
defined jurisdiction and powers in suitable areas and centres; and establishing other
tiers or systems within the judicidl heiraichy to reduce the volume of work in the
Supreme Court and the High Courts. This twin objective set out in the Terms of
Reference in the Context of studying Judicial Reforms must influence, and has
considerably influenced, our approach. पु

4.2. On the question of participatory justice, the present Law. Commission
has given cogent, convincing and extensive reasons for modelling justice. system
on participatory basis. In the Report on Gram Nyayalaya*, while reco: mmending
a novel body for resolution of disputes emanating from rural areas, the Commission
extensively examined the need for replacing the existing model of State courts bya
forum manned by lay justices catering to the need of participatory justice, Panch

stem, both at regional and caste level, had the trappings of participatory justice.

There is a tribe cailed Nandiwala with a habitat on ‘the South-Eastern
Border of Maharashtra. It is a Scheduled Tribe. Like the Greek City states,
the whole community constitutes into a body to render justice. The delibera-
tions are guided by one who is called Guru, an outsider. The entire tribe
participates in resulving disputes arising between the members of the tribe brought
before it. Where the entire -tribe participates in resolving a dispute, it is the
most ideal model of participatory justice. : But practical consideration outweigh
the ideal. Therefore, many local areas had their regional Panch and some castes
had also their caste Panch. The Law Commission is not unaware of the tyranny
of caste Panch. At present, only its. feature of patticipatory justice is being taken
note of. Magna Carta inctuded a demand for Peer’s justice. If the Judge is not
some black robed elite but a man of his own level of his locality, aware of his-own
traditions, talking in‘his own language, he would inspire greater confidence ia the
litigant. Under the imperial rulers, the entire. justice system underwent ‘a transfor-
mation and the judicial power of the State. came to be exercised by State courts.
At was a non-participatury model. Slowly and imperceptibly, while this non-parti-
cipatory model introduced an’ aura of outward respectability, it failed to gene-
tate the confidence in consumers of justice. This non-parti¢ipatory model ‘over a
course of time became very formal, legalistic, professionally manned, dilatory,
technical and prolix. Its. rigid rules of procedure, its deliberations ina foreign
language and its highly technical approach rendered justice illusory. A yawning
chasm developed between those who-have to render justice and the consumer of the
system. Therefore, patticipatory justice with many of its advantages already dis-.
cussed in earlier reports. has guided the deliberations of this Commission’
virtually. dictated the course. As pointed:out; even the Terms of Reference require
the Law ‘Commission to recommend setting up of a system of Participatory justice
with defined jurisdiction and powers in suitable areas and centres. * a

4.3. The second object influencing the approach of the Commission in’ this
behalfis to introduce decentralisation in the system of administiation of justice. There
are two distinct advantages of decentralisation of the system of administration of.
justice. To briefly mention them, they 816 : specialist courts in contra-distinction to
generalist courts, and consequent expeditious disposal of cases and controversies:
coming up befoye the Tribunals manned by specialists. 2

4.4. Industrial disputes, in the interest of the‘parties concerned, the society at
large and the public, must be disposed of as expeditiously as possible. Adjudication
of industrial disputes is quasi-judicial in character. While some legal: formulations
would certainly enter the adjudicator’s verdict, by and large industrial adjudication
requires the appioach guided by consideration of socio-economic justice in its:ex-
tended meaning. The industrial adjudicator has to keep in view the Directive
Principles of State Policy which require him to so mould his decision as.to be able to
effectively eaforcs thz Directive Principles of State Policy relating to socio-economic

हे 13
~ 88-M/J(D)89MofLI&CA—2


14

justice and elimination of inequality in status and income. The approach is dic-
tated by constitutional goals and objects. Anyone gajcying the power of industrial
adjudication must have adequate knowledge of, apart from other things, norms of
socio-ecdaomic justic:, indusirial relations, economic planning and ailied subjects.
One need not be dyed in the wool in legal formulation to be an accomplished and
. efficient adjudicator. Depending upon the technological advancement of the con-
eeraed jadustry in whica the dispuie has arisen, the adjudicator may have to acquire
knowledge of technology or may have to seek assistance of assessors who may be
well-versed in the subject. °

4.5. Lt, therefore, a body for industrial adjudication can be devised in which, apart
from those coaversant with legal norms and formulations, there are other partici-
‘pants who are well-versed in economic planning, industrial relations, norms of socio-
economic justice and allied subjects, not only the ideal uf participatory justice would

, bg achieved but this inter-action amongst such adjudicators would cértainly help in
expeditiously resolving the industrial disputes. Therefore, labour - adjudication is

+ an area .in which system of participatory justice with defined jurisdiction and powers

can be effectively introduced.

4.6. The sacond object sought to be achieved by this approach is to provide for a
. fier or system within judicial hierarchy, which would ‘certainly include quasi-judicial

hicrarcay, to reduce volume of work in the Supreme Court and the High Courts |

: 4.7. Article 226 of the Constitution confers power on the High Court, through-
out the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, to issue to any’person
“gr authority, including in appropriate cases, any Government, within those territories
direction, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus,
‘prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any.of them, for the enforcement of
‘any-of the rights conferred by Part III or for any other purpose. Article 227 confers
on every High Court the power of superintendeiice over all courts and ‘triburials
1 throughout the territories in relation to. which it exercises jurisdiction. Article'227
has been so interpreted as to confer on the High Court the power of judicial review
_. over the decisions of the tribunals functioning in the State for whichthe High Court is
“set up. In the absence of an intermediate appellate forum, against almost alf the
awards of the Industria] Tribunal and the orders of the Labour Court which are not
subject to appeal under any State statute, writ petitions are always filed in the High
Gourt-ciogging up the work in the High Court. Péndency as on 31-12-85 of matters
under labour laws High Court-wise is tabulated in Appendix V. Compared with the
taformation supplied by Ministry of Justice, the,pendency is higher as per statement
attached to Appendix V.

4.8. Article 32 of the Constitution confers jurisdiction on the Supreme Court to
issue directions, orders or all prerogative writs for.the enforcement of any of the
rights gonferred by Part III of the Constitution. Article 136 confers jurisdiction on
the Supreme Court to grant special leave to'appeal against any judgment, decree,
determination, sentence or order passed by a tribunal in the territory of India. Thus,
All the awards of the tribunal can directly be: questioned in the Supreme Court by a
petition for special leave to appeal. And numerous matters are filed inthis manner

(Appendix II).

4.9, After the High Court decides the matter,-a petition for special leave to appeal
"against the decision of the High Court can be filed in the Supreme Court under
article 136. As pointed out earlier, an appeal is admitted by the Supreme asa
‘matter of- right where it is pointed out that there is a conflict amongst decisions of
various High Courts or two High Courts have differed on.the same point. Cofiflict
in approach in dealing with labour matters amongst High Courtsis not unknown.

4.10. Article 323B in Part XIVA of the Constitution confers powers on the appro-
priate Legislature, by law, to provide for - adjudication or trial by tribunals of ean
disputes, complaints or offences with respect to alf-or' any of the matters specified in
clause (2), which, inter alia, includes industrial and. labour disputes. Entry 1A in
the Concurrent List reads : ‘Administration of’ justice; constitution and 61 gan ना
sation of all courts, except the Supreme Court and ‘the High Courts’. Entry in

. the Concurrent List reads : ‘Trade unions; industrial and labour disputes’. Entry
HA, read with entry 22 in the Concurrent List would enable the Parliament to
enact a law for setting up of a tribunal as contemplated by agticle 223BQX) f for
adjudicating industrial disputes, both with original as well as appellate juris n.



15

If such a tribunal is set up having jurisdiction: at an all-India level, it will develop
an all-India perspective. Its decision could be questioned under, article 136 before
the Supreme Court only. In order to avoid the unfortunate experience of an omis-
sion while setting up the Labour Appellate Tribunal, the law setting up a tribunal,
1 as herein conceived, must also simultaneously provide for excluding the jurisdiction
of all courts, including the High Courts, excep! the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
under article 136 with respect to all or any of. the matteis falling within the jurisdiction
of such tribunal as contemplated by article 323B(3)(d). Once the tribunal, as
herein conceived, is set up, it will provide for a forum for participatory justice in..an
area where it is sorely needed and simultaneously. it will bring in the missing. al 5
India perspective and would certainly reduce the volume of work considerably i
High Court and proportionately in the Supreme Court. These objects have infive:
and guided the approach of the Law Commission in devising such a forum.



CHAPTER V

THE FORUM, ITS FORMAT, JURISDICTION AND
PERSONNEL MANNING THE SAME

5.1. To have a comprehensive view of the new mode! herein to be indicated and
to appreciate its functional adaptability, it would be advantageous to briefly refer to
the existing mcdel devised by the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, for resolution of
industrial disputes. पर

5.2. Section 7 of the I.D. Act envisages setting up of Labour Courts for adjudi-
cation of industrial disputes relating to any matter specified in the Second Schedule
to the Act. The qualifications prescribed for a person to be eligible to be appointed
as the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court are such as would almost make it an
impelling necessity to select persons from civil judiciary and therein lies the poten-

+ tiality for spill over of all the technicalities, dilatoriness and formal approach quite
evident in administration of civil justice. To be a Presiding Officer of a Labeur Court
one has to be either a Judge of the High Court, sitting or retired, or has been, for a
period of not less than three years, a District Fudge or Additicnal District Judge,
or has held any judicial office in India for not less than seven years, meaning thereby
sitting or retired members ofthe subordinate judiciary, or has beer a Presiding
Officer of a Labour Court constituted under any of the - State statutes for a period of
not less than five years. It would merely add to the length of this report if one were
to refer to all those State statutes prescribing qualifications of eligibility for being
appointed as Presiding Officer of Labour Court. In sum, they are such as would
only make members of the State civil judiciary eligible for being appointed with the
same undesirable consequences. The subject matter of jurisdiction of the Labour
Court is referable to topics set out in the Second Schedule of the I.D. Act. By and
large, they involve day-to-day conditions of work in industrial establishments and -
indicate the grey areas where disputes might arise. .

5.3. Section 7A confers power on the appropriate Government to constitute
one or more Industrial Tribunals for the adjudication of industrial disputes relating
to any matter specified in the Second Schedule or the Third Schedule. Sub-section
(3) prescribes qualifications for being appointed as -Presiding Officer of a Tribunal.
To be-eligible, one has to be either a sitting or a retired Judge of a High Court or
District Judge or Additional District Judge for a period of three years. The criticism
hereinbefore set out will apply mutatis mutandis to the present situation also which
tends to perpetuate the hold of the judiciary dealing with administration of civil
justice over Labour Courts and Industrial Tribunals.

5.4, Section 5 of the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950; pres-
cribed the qualifications for a member of the Labour Appellate Tribunal. The app-
roach was the same. The qualifications were that ‘the member, to be eligible for
being appointed, is or has beena Judge of a High Court, or is qualified for appoint-
ment as a Judge of a High Court, or has been a member of an Industrial Tribunal
for not less than two years’. The only opening made here for entry of persons other
than members of civil judiciary was in favour of a practising advocate.

5.5. Way back in 1973, a Committee appointed by the Government of Gujarat,
known as Labour Laws Review Committee, took notice of this situation when it
observed as under :— :

“The Judges so drawn from the civil judiciary do carry with them their life-
long experience of administration of civil and criminal justice. Undoubtedly,
they were the officers who had the perspective and objectivity of a Judge and
their experience had taught them to look each dispute or problem coming be-
fore them from an objective standpoint. While administering socio‘economic
justice in Labour and Industrial Courts, this approach may not be very help-
ful. The principal object of the labour laws is to smoothen the passage of
State, having sole object of maintaiping law -and order, to Welfare State.
For achieving ideal of a Welfare State, fourdation of which is socio-economic
justice, new norms of industrial relations have to’ be formulated, shaped and
enforced. Targets set out in various Five Year Plans have to be kept in view,

“16



17.

In other words, social philosophy of. the day is to be fully imbibed and given
legal form by devising norms of socio-economic justice. The officer. must have
training and aptitude to understand how persons consigned to miserable oxis-
tence are lifted and taken to tolerable existence, if not wholly civilized existence
which should be the ideal........ The Judges who have worked for their whole
active life in civil judiciary undoubtedly, with notable exceptions, may not be
able to rise to the occasion and stand up to the requirement. No attempt has
been made over a quarter of a céntury to create Labour Judicial Service.”"**

5.6. As the first step, this Committee recommended that retired Judges or those
about to retire from civil’ judiciary should not be inducted in the Industrial and
Labour,Courts and Industrial Tribunals.

5.7. One of the grounds in support of vociferous demand for abolition of Labour
Appellate Tribunal was that the Judges manning the Tribunal were mostly drawn
from the cadre of retired High Court Judges and, therefore, by habit, temperament
and tradition, they were prone to be technical, formal and non-responsive to the -
demands of socio-economic justice. Assuming that the demand for abolition of
Labour Appellate Tribunal was an immature reaction of some persons annoyed by
the slight delay in disposal of appeals by the Tribunal, the fact remains that those
who had spent their whole active life in courts administering civil justice are prone
to be precedent-oriented, technical, traditional and impervious, if not blind, to the
utter inequalities of parties appearing before them when functioning as members of
Tribunals set up to resolve industrial disputes. If in their journey through life as
Judges, they were accustomed to find out what the contract is and sincerely believed
that parties must be held to their own contracts, it would be expecting too much
from them to say that when taking up an industrial adjudication they will be looking
at the unfairness of contracts and devise what contract ought to be, that is, what
‘ought to be a fair relation between the employer and the workmen. This historical . ©
perspective is to be kept in view while devising a forum for resolution of industrial
disputes, both at the State level and national level.

5.8. To sum up, three aspects have emerged from the preceding discussion and
historical review since 1947 till today. In the abseace of an all-India body having
jurisdiction to reconcile conflicting awards of Labour Courts/Industrial Tribunals
so 85 to frame a consistent noteworthy industrial jurisprudence within the perspec-
tive of Part IV of the Constitution, contradictory, conflicting and irreconcilable
industrial relation norms have emerged. ‘Secondly, the expectation that Supreme
Court of India will supply this lacuna by providing quick unit ity has been wholly
belied. Thirdly, industrial adjudication cannot operate purely in a legal frame-
work devoid of humanistic touch. It requires understanding of constitutional goals,
humanities, social sciences, economic planning and national and international
economic developments.” In short, it is thus a field of specialist study and, therefore,
must be a concern of specialist court. Finally, the fundamental consideration govern-
ing industrial adjudication being industrial and harmony creating fruitful
environment for economic advancement of the nation, the adjudicator must have
vision and capacity to move in that direction. Qver a period, industrial adjudication
has developed all the trappings of civil litigation bringing in all its imperfections,
limitations and disadvantages. A bold and innovative approach must dictate the
choice. The solution lies in providing a system of participatory justice. Industrial
adjudication is an area where a system of participatory justice with defined
jurisdiction and powers can 03 introduced with: advantage ‘which will remove the
ills so far noticed and set out above. A

5.9. At the base level, a Lahour Court, as contemplated by. section 7 of
LD. Act, is functioning. It is generally a one man Tribunal, mostly manned by
members drawn from civil judiciary. At this level, drawing upon our experience
in the Report on Gram Nyayalaya fa, it is necessary to introduce. a participatory
model. The Judge of the Labour Court should be assisted by two lay Judges drawn
from the rank of workmen and employers. " Today, the Labour Court has all the
trappings of a court administering civil justice. It is desirable to transform the present
model of Labour Court, which is formal and legalistic, to an informal and parti-
cipatory model. The jurisdiction of the Labour Court covers items set out in the
Second Schedule of the 1.0. Act. A reference to Second Schedule will show at a
glance that subjects therein set out are better dealt with by inter-action of all the


18 .

three. members constituting the Labour Court. The Labour Court can examin
the: propriety or legality of an order passed by an employer under the standing
orders. It can examine the implications and interpretations of standing orders.
Matters covering these items cre generally of a simple nature. Item No. 3 in the
Secord Schedule deals with ‘Discharge or dismissal of werkmen including rein-
statemer.t of, or grant of relief to, workmen wrongfully dismissed’, The bulk of
litigation in this field arises from discharge or dismissal of workmen and claim
for reinstatement or other ancillary relief, such as, compensation for retrenchment,
back wages wherc-reinstatement is ordered, ancillary benefits if reinstatement is
ordered after a long time. It is here that interaction of a lay Judge coming from
class. of workmen with one coming from employer and a third having a legally trained
mind would produce a result which would be more or less very satisfactory. Item
No. 4 provides for withdrawal of any customary concession or privilege. Those
who are working either as trade union leaders or in employer’s association would
be well conversant with what are customary concessions and privileges. Item 5 deals
with illegality or otherwise of a_strike or lockout. It apperas crystal clear that the
matters set out in the Second Schedule are such as can better be dealt with by a
participatory model.

5.10. Industrial Tribunals have to be set up by the appropriate Government in
exercise of the powers conferred by section 7A of.I.D. Act. Central Government
can'set up a National Industrial Tribunal in exercise of the power conferred by section
78 for the adjudication of industrial disputes which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involve questions of national importance or are of such a nature that
industrial establishments situated in more than one State are likely to be interested
in, or affected by, such disputes. Sub-section (2) of section 7B provides that a Natio-
nal Industrial Tribunal shall consist of one person only, to be appointed by the
Central Government. By and large, this one man National Tribunal is generally
presided over by a retired Judge of the High Court or.of the Supreme Court. This
model has been tested since 1956. Most of the awards of National Tribunals
have been questioned in the High Courts and the Supreme Court. A new thinking
and departure from present day set up is necessary in this behalf. A participatory
model, both at the National and State level, replacing the National Industrial Tribu-
nal.and Industrial Tribunal respectively, would ‘certainly be a step forward and
hopefully result-oriented. Let it be made crystal clear that in this behalf we are
not writing on a clean slate. National Commission on Labour has examined the
advisability, desirability and the feasibility of introducing Industrial Relations Commi-
mission,* both at the State and Central level. Sanat Mehta Committee,** as
late as 1982, endorsed the recommendation of the National Labour Commission.
The subsequent meeting of the Standing Labour Committee accepted the recommen-
dation of Sanat.Mehta Committee. We are influenced by this recommendation
not only for all those reasons which appealed to those august bodies but also for the
additional reason that the model of participatory justice can be conveniently intro-
duced in the field of industrial adjudication. Jt would effectively help in decentrali-
sation of administration of justice which is at present monolithic.

5.11. Industrial Relations Commission herein envisaged canjalso come under the
generic term ‘Tribunal for Adjudication of Industrial Disputes’ and these recommen-
dations can be effectively implemented by law passed for this purpose in exercise
of power conferred by article 323B of the Constitution.

5.12. It needs to be re-emphasised. that the Industrial Relations Commission,
both at the Central and State level, would be providing a model of participatory
justice.

5,13. The additional advantage would be the consequent reduction in the work-
load in the High Court and the Supreme Court betause the jurisdiction of the High
Court to deal with matters falling within the jurisdiction of the Industrial Relations
Commission should be excluded. .

4
5.14. The Industrial Relations Commission at the Central and State level would
be composed of a President. drawn from the rank of'a retired Judge of the Supreme
Court for the Central Commission and a retited Judge of the High Court for.the
State Commission. There will be an equal number of members drawn from the rank
of. union leaders and employees! organisation constituting the Commission. It
must be made specifically clear that these memters need not have a degreeinlawora _


19

‘background of légal training as essential qualifications. They must, however, tave
adequate knowledge in the field of industrial relations, management of indwétfies,
economic planning and industrial, fiscal and monetary policies of the Governihiént
of India.

5.15. The Industrial Relations Commission at the State and at the Centre will
have both original and appellate jurisdiction. Appeal against the decision of the Lab-
our Court purely on an important question of law will lic to the State Industrial Rela-
tions Commission. The appeal shall be heard by a Bench of three Judges; one of
them must be a judicial member, the other two non-judicial members. All industrial
disputes at present falling within the jurisdiction of Industrial Tribunals shall fall
within the jurisdiction of State Industrial Relations Commission and the reference
should be made to it by the State Government as appropriate Government under
section 10 of the 1.0. Act. All matters which could have been referred to the
National Industrial Tribunal shall fall within the jurisdiction of I.R.C. at Centre.
It shall be heard by such number of persons as may be decided by the President of the
Cominission. The I.R.C. at the Centre will also have appellate jurisdiction over the
awards and decisions of the I.R.C. at the State level but. the appeal will be limited
purely to the important questions of law to be stated specifically at the time of admis-
sion of the appeal.

5.16. The members of the I.R.C., both at the Central and State level, will be
appointed by the Central and State Governments respectively in consultation with
National Judicial Service Commission to be set up as recommendzd by the Law
Commission in its 12151 Report. The Act setting up such Commission may as well
consider conferring power of conciliation oa LR.C.

5.17. The terms and conditions of setvice of th: Presidznt and mz2mbers of
1.R.C. at Central and State level shall be determiazd by the Central Government in
consultation with the National Judicial Service Com nission,

5.18. Arrangement for effective training of the members to be appointed to
the Commission shall be made by the Government, in tun: with the scheme of
training recommended by the Law Commission in its. 117th report. ’

5.19. The law setting up I.R.C. shall provide, amongst others, for exclusion of
the jurisdiction of the High Court in cach State from dealing with matters which
fall within the jurisdiction of the I:R.C. at the State and Central level. The Labour
Court shall be outside’the superintendence of the High Court and shall be brought
within the superintendence of the State I.R.C.

5.20. Inthe event of a dispute amorgst the members constituting the ,Commi- हु

ssion dealing with a particular matter, the decison of the ‘majority will prevail. In

the eveat of conflict between decisions of State 10५० Commissions, the matter -

can 03 withdrawn by the I.R.C. at the Centre to be decided by it. The decision of the
E.R.C, at the Centre will be binding oa all State I.R.Cs. dnd Labour Courts.

5.21. The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article 136 over decisions of
the LR.C. at the Centre will remain intact.

5.22. Today there are roughly around 51 statutes passed by Parliament dealing
with industrial labour (Appendix I). Some statutes have provided for setting up its
own machinery, original and appellate, for resolution of disputes arising under the
statutes. An attempt is made to tabulate various authorities functioning under these
statutes. The Table at Appendix VI also shows the appellate body to which an
appeal can be preferred against the decision of authority having original jurisdiction.
To illustrate, under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, the dispute can originally be
brought before the controlling authority and the appeal would lie to the appro-
priate Government. This is a quasi-judicial adjudication. To avoid the charge
of bias and administration taking over quasi-judicial function, the appellate juris-
diction under each statute must be conferred on I.R.C. at State level. The Table at
Appendix VI also sets out the authoritigs competent to take cognizance of offences
under these statutes. In-order to simplify and specialise, it is necessary to confer
jurisdiction to try offences under these statutes on the Labour Courts. Similarly,
the appellate authority must be the State LR.C. That would provide for all labour


20

aws being dealt with by specialist jurisdiction courts. It would be a step for rationa-
lising the laws, the procedure and the forum. When it is reconimended that a
law will have to be enacted to set up LR.C. at the State and Central level, that very
opportunity should be seized to provide for what is herein indicated about the forum
for taking cognizance of offences under the labour laws as well as one State appellate
forum under all those laws.

We recommend accordingly.

Sd./-
(D.A. DESAD
Chairman

Sdy- .
(V.S. RAMA DEVI)

Member Secretary’

NBW, DELHI, dated
the 9th December, 1987.


REFERENCES

1, LC, 115th Report on Tax Courts.
2. James Crawford, Australian Courts of Law, p. 260,

3. Ellen R. Jordan : Should Litigants have a,chaice between specialised Courts and Courts of
General Jurisdiction ? 66 Judicature, 14-17 (1980:

Ibid.
James Crawford : Australian Courts of Law, pp. 251~253.

H. Ted Rubin, The Courts, p. 208.

First Five Year Plan Document, 9. 572.

Report of the National Commission on Labour, p. 56, para 6.48.

HLB. Higgins : A New Province for Law and Order.

10. Quoted in the Report of the Labour Laws ReviewCommistee, Gujarat Stato, 1974, p. 6, para 28.
11. Life Insurance Corporation vs. D.J. Bahudar,(1981) 1 SCG315.at 334-335:
12. Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board vs, Rajappa, (1978) 2.SCC 213 at. 232.

3. Dayabhai Raachhoddas Shah vs. Jay.ntilal Maggnlal, 1973 Lab, & IC 967.

14. B.S. Narula, The Abolition of Labour Appellate-Tittinal, 272—279.

15, Rajiv Dhawan : Litigation Explosion in itdia. *

16. LL.O, Resolution No. 119 of June 1963,

17, L.C.I. Fourteenth Report, 9. 283.

18. Chief Justice Burger ofthe Supreme Court of America in his famous speech “Arbitration, Not”
igation”.

(9. LCL, Fourteenth Report (1958), Vol I, ppy 5051.

20. National Labour Commission, Chapter 23, 98788 23.61 to 23.65. +

21. L.C.L, 114th Report, Chapter ID. हु

22, (1974) Report of the Labour LawsReview Conagaitter, p. 20, एल्लाए4..4.-

23. Report of the National Commission on. Labour, pp, 332-335, paras 23.61 to 23.65:
24. Sanat Mehta Committee Report, para 2: 1.2.

21
88- .{J(D)89MofLI&CA—~3


APPENDIX I
(Para 1.8)

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
WORKING PAPER
(QUESTIONNAIRE)
ON
FORUM FOR NATIONAL UNIFORMITY IN LABOUR ADJUDICATION

QUESTIONNAIRE
Introduction :

The Government of India had resolved to set up a Commission to study,
examine and recommend judicial reforms. One of the terms of reference was :—

“The need for decentralisation of the system of administration of justice by—
(iii) establishing other tiers or systems within the judicial hierarchy to reduce
the volume of work in the Supreme Court and the High Courts”.

While examining this aspect, it was indicated that provisions contained in Part XIV
A of the Constitution permitting establishment of tribunals may be kept in view.
The ultimate aim was to translate the object underlying article 39A of the Constitu-
tion into reality. Article 39A provides that ‘the State shall secure that the operation
of the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of.equal opportunity, and shall, in
particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any other
way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen
by reason of economic or other disabilities’. 5

2. Ultimately, the Government of India assigned this task of studying and re-
commending judicial reforms to the present Law Commission. Accordingly the Law
Commission drew up a comprehensive programme of restructuring justice delivery
system in all its limbs,

The Law Commission has by now dealt with litigation emanating from rural |
areas, structuring and strengthening subordinate judiciary in States, setting up an all-
India judicial service as envisaged by article 312 of the Constitution, imparting trai-
ning to members of the judiciary at all levels and setting up Central Tax Court-

. for both direct and indirect taxes as well as for resolving disputes in the field of import
and export of commodities. The twin objects, behind re-structuring judicial system
are to make the justice delivery system resilient, effective, time-bound, inexpensive
and deprofessionalised so as to reduce arrears and to remove the backlog of
cases. cate second object is to make access to justice easy, inexpensive and non-
technical.

3. Even in the hoary past it was felt that the Civil and.Criminal Courts, as operat-
ing in this country since the colonial days, would be ill-equipped to deal with labour/
industrial disputes in which the approach is to expand distributive justice. Integral
to this was the other belief that a developing country like ours can ill-afford the luxury
of confrontation in commerce and industries which affects production and retards
development and therefore, it must have an effective machinery for resolution of

- labour/industrial disputes. Compulsory. adjudication was devised as an alternative
to strikes and confrontation. Ignoring the earlier stray efforts, such as Employers
and Workmen (Disputes) Act, 1860, the Indian Trade Disputes Act, 1929, Bombay
Industrial Disputes Act, 1937, the first major step was taken by enactment-of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The provisions of the 1947 Act did not seek to confer
any specific benefits on the workmen but it merely provided a forum for adjudication
of industrial disputes by conferring power on the Government to compel the parties
to avoid confrontation and to resort to adjudication. Broadly stated, it was an act
for industrial arbitration. Some later amendments to this Act did confer some speci-
fic benefits on the workmen and also imposed some liabilities on the employers.
For the present purpose, this part is hardly relevant.

22


23

4. It may be mentioned here that a number of States have enacted legislation for
acquiring power to compel parties to resort to industrial adjudication and to curb
the strikes. Some of them, such as the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, are quite
comprehensive in character. Some others, like the U.P. Industrial Dipsutes Act.
more or less adopt the Central Act as a model. In this questionnaire, the scheme of
the Central Act is kept in view. - The questionnaire has a very limited aim, namely
to devise a forum intermediate between labour Courts/Industrial Tribunals on the
one hand and High Courts/Supreme Court of India on the other so as to remove the
jurisdiction of High Courts and interpose a tribunal with all-India jurisdiction. The
enquiry is related to term of reference extracted jn para 1.

5. Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, was enacted to make provision for investigation
and settlement of industrial disputes. ३६ envisages setting up of a Labour Court
for adjudication of industrial disputes relating to any matter specified in the second .
schedule (Sec. 7); Industrial Tribunals for the adjudication of industrial disputes
to any matter as specified in the second or the third schedule, and for performing
such other functions as may be assigned to them under that (sec. 7A); National
Tribunals for adjudication of industrial disputes which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involve questions of national importance or are of such a nature that
industrial establishments situated in more than one State are likely to be interested
in or affected by such disputes (sec. 7). It also envisages setting up of Courts of
Enquiry for inquiring into any matter appearing to be connected with or relevant to
an industrial disputes (sec. 6). It further envisages setting up of a Grievance
Settlement Authority for settlement of industrial ‘disputes connected with an
individual workman employed in the estblishment. (sec. 9C).

6. Section 10 confers power on the appropriate Government as defined in the Act
to refer any industrial dispute which either exists or is apprehended to a Board, Court
of Inquiry, Labour Court, or an Industrial Tribunal, as the case may be, for adj-
udication thereof. Section 10 (1A) confers power on the Central Government to refer
an industrial dispute of the nature thereig spetified or any matter appearing to be con-
nected with, or relevant to, the disputes to a National Tribunal for adjudication. Sub-
section (2) of section 10 obligates the appropriate Government to refer an industiral
dispute to a Board, Court, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case
may be, where the parties to such an industrial dispute apply in the prescribed manner.

Body, to which a reference is made, shall adjudicate upon the dispute and give
an award. The award has to be submitted to the appropriate Government and the
appropriate Government has to publish the same within thirty days from the date of
its receipt. न“

7. The scheme relevant to the provisions for adjudication of an industrial dispute,
would show that there is no provision for an appeal against an award, by a Board,
Court, Labour Court, Industrial Trib or FR ational Tribunal. It is assumed that
the decision by any of the aforesaid bari orities Would be flawless and acceptable to
the parties whatever be the outcome of the dispute . In all other jurisdictio rity
every decision can be appealed aghinst. ‘will be an appeal on facts; there will be
a second ‘appeal on a question of Jaw; there will be an appeal to the Supre me Court
of India under article 136 of the Constitutidn..Even under such socially beneficent

. laws such as for introducing agrarian réformss, the relevant statutes provide for one or
two appeals. It is only in the field of labdur aftiudication that the statute under which
adjudication could be or ordered did not provide for any appellate forum. Now there
is a considerable body of legal opinion that where the statute setting up an administ-
rative or quasi-judicial tribunal does not provide for an appellate forum, the decision
of the tribunal is challenged in the High Court invoking article 226 of the Constitution.
Petition is generally entertained on the speciobs plea that there is no alternative efficac-
ious remedy. Extending this principle to the situation where the statute provides for
an appeal or revision, the High Court raises tA question whether alternative remedy
under the statute is an efficacious remedy. re the statute levying tax provides for
an apeal against the decision of an assessing aythority and makes deposit of assessed
tax, a condition precedent to the entertaining of appeal, the Supreme Court has held
that the alternative remedy is not efficacious or adequate. Same view was adopted

1. Hinyngtlal Harilal Mehta vs The State Main Pradesh, (1954) SCR-1122 4६ 1128,
t pot :


24

while examining the scheme of Employees State Insurance Act. It was observed that
High Court was right in holding that the remedy under the Act should have been
pursued before approaching the High Court under art. 2261.

The fall out of a total absence of any provision for appeal under Industrial Dis-
putes Act may induce an instinctive reaction and art. 226 may be freely invoked. What
is the fall out ? The fall out is that every award of a Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal,
or a National Tribunal, one can question in a certiorari proceeding before the High
Court under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution and before the Supreme Court
of India under article 136 of the Constitution. The more ugly feature of the fall-out is
that where a preliminary contention is raised that there reference is either incompetent
or bad in law, a writ of prohibition is sought under articles 226 and 227 before the
High Court or under article 136 before the Supreme Court. Occasionally, article 32
was invoked on the specious plea that such invalid and illegal proceedings contravené _
the fundamental right of the employer to carry on any occupation, trade or business
guaranteed by article 19 (1) (g). And cases are not known where the High Courts and
the Supreme Court have entertained the writ petition at an interlocutory stage and
stayed further proceedings with the result that a final adjudication of the dispute suffer-
ed inordinate delay. The Courts while entertaining such proceedings indicated that
in the absence of a corrective forum in the form of an appeal, it is inevitable
for enforcement of the Rule of Law that extraordinary jurisdiction conferred by
the constitution has to be invoked.

8. The powers that we were not unaware of this distinct possibility since the
introduction of the Constitution. Accordingly, in the year 1950, Labour Appellate
Tribunal was set up under a statute called The Industrial Disputes (Appellate
Tribunal) Act, 1950 providing for an appeal against the awards of the Labour
Courts/Industrial Courts #in respect of specified topics.

9. The Labour Appellate Tribunal had two-fold function to perform :—
(@ It would be a correctional forum against human fallibility; and
(i) it would bring about a national synthesis in conflicting and differing
awards all over the country.

It was all the more necessary in the case of industrial establishments
having inter-State operations. The establishment of Labour Appellate
Tribunal was, in fact, a natural response to the need for a measure of
uniformity of underlying principles and norms to govern the awards of
different industrial tribunals for maintaining industrial peace and sta-
bility in the interest of un-interrupted production.

10. Somehow, this Labour Appellate Tribunal fell foul with the workmen.
A country-wide movement voicing its grievances against the Labour Appellate
Tribunal swept the country. The movement received its powerful support from the
Indian National Trade Union Congress. The governing consideration in support
of the demand for abolition of the Labour Appellate Tribunal was, according to
the standards of those days, the inordinate delay in the disposal of appeals with con-
sequent prolonged litigation and hardship. The award may have given some mone-
tary benefit. As soon as the eniployer appealed, ordinarily interim stay would
follow; the staying power of the workers being weak, they could il-afford the ex-
tended period of litigation while the employers used the appellate forum witi a view
to thwarting the aspirations of the workmen and exhaust them. Experience of
working of courts and especially superior courts in India that any legislative pro-
cess becomes a hand maid of the wealthy and the financially affluent section of
the society and a tool for unfair use of courts. Another argument was that the ad-
judicatory process with an added appellate forum would thwart trade union activity
and convert the trade union office into a solicitor’s forum thereby weakening the
trade union movement. The battle cry as it appeared then was that where the ap-
pellate tribunal reversed the award by which some monetary benefit was granted,
it.left bitterness and led to mutual recrimination widening the gulf between the em-
ployers and the employees and thereby threatening industrial peace. Different Cen-
tral Trade Unions articulated different approaches ir this behalf, but the cry was
common that the labour appellate tribunal should be abolished. One of the grie-
vances voiced on behalf of the Indian National Trade Union Congiess was that the

313 हि अत Kumar Sarkar and Other vs. Epele Rolling Mills Led. and Others, (964) 6 SCR


25

personnel manning the Labour Appellate Tribunal was drawn from the cadre of
retired High Court Judges who. in their active days, had hardly dealt with labour
matters and wete ill-equipped .o deal with distributive justice or social justice, as
the’ case may be, and because of their training and up-bringing, their approach was
mechanical ana legalistic. Probebly, the Fult-Bench formuta on Bonus fuelled the
fire. Avoiding going into the various objections to the continuanc: of the Labour
Appellate Tribunal, the on: that was 10 be in the forefront was that the delay it
entailed in finally implementing the award, and adding to the uncertainty of the situat-
jon. The voice of the labour prevailed and finally the Labeur Appeliate Tribunal was
abolished in September, 1956, The situation returned to square one as it existed prior
to the setting up of the Labour Appellate Court. Every award, both at the intermediate
and fizal 5६883, more ot less, came to bz questioned before the High Court under
articles 226, 227 aad before the Suprem2 Court under article 136 and also under
article 32 of the Constitution.

11, What is tae preseat position 30 years after the abolition of the Labour Appel:
late Tribunal? {f delay in resolution of disputes by continuing it before the appellate
forum was widcly reseated so as to strive for abolition of the appellate forum, then the
situation at pieseat is, to say the least, atrocious. Inthe Supreme Court of India,
953 matiers under the labour laws are pending as on 31-12-1985 and they ranged from
1971 to 1985. The dispute which has come before the Supreme Court in 1971 and which
is pending here for 15 ycars must have started before the Labour Court at least five
years before, if it has not come via the High Court and if it has come via the High Cout,
10 years befoer 1971. Calculating either way, the 1971 disputes pending in the Supreme
Court of India must now be pending for over 25 years. Similarly, the labour matters
pending in 18 High Courts, at the end of the years 1982 were 5766. The figures avail-
able for seven High Courts upto and inclusive of December 31, 1985 would show pen-
dency at 10,233. Pendency has doubled within three years. It is difficult to workout
an acceptable detailed analysis and the duration of their pendency. In any event,
the duration must be not less than five years excluding the time taken before the
adjudication forum. Reverting to the grievance that the Labour Appellate Tribunal
took about two years for deciding the appeals coming before it, which was considered
atrocious as to call for its abolition what would one say about the present situation
where the matters are pending with the High Court and the Supreme Court for
over decades? Those who were votaries of abolition had also reposed faith in the
Supreme Court to bring about expeditious disposal and national conformity.
What a shock for them ?

12 Two ug'y features of the system have surfaced. There has. been a
general tendency to avoid the High Court and to rush to the Supreme Court
because Labour Court/Industrial Court is a tribunal whose orders and awaids are
judicially reviewable by the Supreme Court of India under article 136. But even
if the matter is taken to High Court, the delay is inordinate. Industrial disputes
affecting individua's, such as dismissal, termination of service, punishment for
misconduct, individual monetary benefits, are dragged on to the High Court and
the Supreme Court not with 2 view to get effective justice, but to force upon a
weak adve-sa-y namely the workman an unjust compromise keeping in view that
the staying power of the wo-kman is limited. Two cases in this connection may
be illustrated? हर

*In Goyal’s cas2 the एव] was suspended from the service of Bank of Baroda
in July 1965. He sought a reference under sec. 10 of the I. D. Act which was given.
The t-ibunal held the reference invatid ona flimsy ground. The S. C. in 1978 held the
reference valid and remanded for award on merits. This award was challenged and
the matter was brought to Supiem2 Court. Reinstatement was granted on 18-7-1979
and stayed. Finally he went back in service in 1983 i.e., eighteen years after his
suspension.

11 the second case of Shambunath Mukherjee facts are more gruesome. His
name was struck off the rolls on January 19, 1966. Till he died on May 30, 1984 he
was chasing a mirage of justic: through the labyrinth of High Court and Supreme

art.

1. Shambhunath Goyal vs. Bank of Baroda, 1978 2 SCC 353.
Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd. vs. Shambu Nath Mukherjee, 1984 Supp. SCC. 534.


26

13. The second feature of an appellate forum with an ali-India jurisdiction was
that by its awards, it can bring about a measure of uniformity in the norms of in-
dustrial relations and formulate principles for guidance of the Labour Courts and
Industrial Tribunals. On the face of it, the High Court cannot bring about this
uniformity because its jurisdiction is confined to the State in which it operates. While
there ate a number of big industrial undertakings which have Inter-State operations,
there ate also monopolies tike the Life Insurance Corporation, General Insurance
Corporation, which have all-India operaiioris. Similarly, there are such cartels
as Bharat Petroleum, Hindustan Petroleum, etc. which fall within the category of
industrial employers and are subject to conflicting awards by Labour Courts/In-
dustirial Courts operating in various parts of the country and subject to the jurisdic-
tion of local State Governments. This is not conducive to the healthy growth of
norms of industrial relations. Further, these industrial undertakings with Inter-
state operations find themszlves subject to varying awards introducing a certain
amount of differential treatment amongst its employees.

14, Can the Supreme Court fill the bill of providing a sort of uniform norms
of industrial adjudication applicable all over the country, that was the expectation of
votaries of abolition of Labour Appellate Tribunal. Let it be made clear that the
Supreme Court was never conceived as a Court of Appeal. It was a body witha
very wide plenitude of jurisdiction to correct some glaring of errors involving mis-
caitiage of justice, or constitutional provisions. It cannot function as a Court of
Appeal in the sense in which a Court of Appeal functions. It is, therefore, inevitable
that a body having an all-India jurisdiction operating at a level below the Supreme
Court which can bring about uniformity in industrial relation norms, and whichcan .

provide asort of uniformity in dealing with disputes in industrial undertakings
wing Inter-State operations.

15. The National Labour Commission, after having viewed at close quarters the
vacuum created by the abolition of the Labour Appellate Tribunal, recommended
setting up of an Industrial Relations Commission, both at National level and
State level. It: recommended the continuance of Labour Courts and recommended
an appeal over its decision to the High Court.! With respect, a decision by the High
Court over the award or the decision of the Labour Court, would hardly be helpful
in bringing about uniformity at national level. The High Courts differ and again the
Supreme Court is made to intervene to resolve the conflict and in this process,
the delay is inevitable. हे

Ul
16. Even before the National Labour Commission dealt with this aspect, the
Law Commission of India examined this aspect. The Law Commission, having
taken note of the pending appeals inlabour matters on the file of the Supreme
Court observed :— :

“These matters have, in a sense, been forced upon the Court, inasmuch as the
Court could not refuse to entertain appeals against decisions which appeared to
be arbitrary and capricious and made in green dof well accepted principles of
law or natural justice. It will be noticed that a large number of applications
for special leave in these matters made to the Supreme Court synchronise with the
abolition of the Labour Appellate Tribunal, The new labour legislation constitu-
tes tiibunals against the decisions of whith no appeal lies. Not unnaturally,
therefore, in most cases of unjust or arbitrary decisions, there are applications
for special leave to appeal to the Supreme Court. The aggrieved party approaches
the Supreme Court because the jurisdictionof the High Court under article 226
is too narrow to afford relief in these mattess. Under article 226, the High Court
can only quash an order made by thesetribunals, but cannot make its own deci-
sion and substitute it for that of the tribugal. The High Court, would, generally
speaking, quash these orders only jin cases of excess of jurisdiction or an
error of law apparent on the face of the regord or a contravention of the princi-
ples of natural justice or the like, It is, therefore, imperative that the legislature
should intervence and provide for an adequate right of appeal in these matters.”

17. The High Courts and the Supreme Gourtare under a great pressure of torren-
tial inflow of work. When the Court tries to control one branch of litigation, the other
goes out of control. The High Court is unable to provide a Labour Bench round the
year. So also, the Supreme Court. The unedifying outcome is that the longest delay

1, Report of the National Labour Commission on Labour, Chapter 23 para 23.63 to 23.66,

pp. 31; 5


27

occurs at the Supreme Cout level, comparatively less at the High Court level and by
and large, there is expeditious disposal before the Labour Court Industrial Tribunal.
This reverse phenomenon clearly indicates that the abolition of the Labour Appellate
Tribunal was short-sighted measure. If there was any legitimacy in the grievance about
the personnel manning the tribunal, the sensibie solution was to deal with the
manpower problem but not put an end to the body itself.

18. The Law Commission is of the opinion that the time has come to review the
situation in all its aspects. The High Court and the Supreme Court would go on enter-
taining matters because the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal may commit errors.
Though the jurisdiction of High Court is narrow, the matters are dealt with as if these
courts are hearing appeals . Cases are not unkown where the awards are interfered
with under the pretext that the findings are perverse and the delay is horrendous. To
illustrate, some matters questioning the correctness of Palekar Award in the
matter of wage structure between the journalists and the newspaper employers
are still pending in the Supreme Court even though Bachawat Panel has already been
set up and staited functioning about a year back. One would stand aghast
at the idea that till Bachawat Panel finalises its recommendation, those affected by
the Palekar Award are not certain as to what Would be the outcome of the delibera-
tions of the Supreme Court of India. A remedial measure has become inevitable.

19. Th: Law Commission, in its search for expeditious disposal and liquidation of
backlog of caszs, has a tentative plan to. recommend an Industrial Relations Commis-
sion having an appellate jurisdiction over the awards of the Labour Court/Industrial
Triburals. This Commission can sit in benohes. It will have an all-India jurisdiction.
Efforts will b> mad2 to provide manpower imbued with notions of social justice,
industrial relations, norms, peace and harmony in industry, avoidance of. class
conflict, growth of industrial prosperity, etc. The Law Commission, therefore, reque-
sts you to please answer the questions set out in tht annexure to this introductory एड

and submit the same on or before 15th March, 1987, to the Law Commission of India.


ANNEXURE

QUESTIONS

Are you in favour of an Appellate forum having all-India jurisdiction over awards
of the Labour Courts/Industriat Tribunal ?

If the answer to the first question is in the. affirmative, would you suggest the
nature and format of the forum ?

Would it be advisable to revive the Labour Appellate Tribunal ?

What measures would you suggest to expedite hearing of appeals before such an
appellate forum ?

What will you consider to be the yardstick for selecting personnel for such an
appellate forum ?

In whom the power to select personnel may be vested ?

Would such an appellate fcrum be invested with power to grant interim stay of
the award unconditionally or always subject to conditions or ne such power
should be conferred. पु

(You may kindly keep in view sec. 178 recently introduced in the Industrial
Disputes Act by Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1982, which provides for
payment of full wages to workmen pending proceedings in higher courts.)

What, in your opinion, should be the time-frame fcr disposal of appeals ?
Would you be in favour of every awaid being made appealable or the appeal may
lie only on a question of law on the analogy of section 30 of the Workmen’s
Compensation Act, 1923, cr Sec. 8 wf the Industrial Disputes (Appellate
Tribunals) Act, 1950 ?

Are you in favour of a total ban on entertaining any appeal at the interim stage ?

. If the forum, as herein indicated, is set up, should the jurisdiction of the High

Court under articles 226, 227 be retained or abolishgd ? You may consider
article 323B of the Constitution in this behalf.

28


wee

er awe

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

17.

18.

20.
21.
22.

23.
24.
25.
26.

27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

32.

33.

- APENDIX Il
(Paras 2.4/5.22)
LIST OF INDUSTRIAL AND LABOUR LAWS

Apprentices Act, 1961.

Beedi and Cigar Workers (Conditions of Employment) Act, 1966.

Beedi Workers Welfare Cess Act, 1976.

Beedi Workers Welfare Fund Act, 1976.

Boilers Act, 1923.

Bonded Labour System (Abvlition) Act, 1976.

Children (Piedging of Labour) Act , 1933.

Cine-Workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employment) Actg

Cine-Workers Welfare Cess Act, 1981.

. Cine-Workers Welfare Fund Act, }981.

Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1947.

Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous: Provisions Act, 1948.
Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.
Dangerous Machines (Regulations) Act, 1983.

Dock Labourers Act., 1934.

Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948.

Emigration Act, 1983. .
Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952.

. Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948.

Employers’ Liability Act, 1938.

The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986.
Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959.
Equa{!Remuneration Act, 1976.

Factories Act, 1948.

Fatal Accidents Act, 1855.

Industriai Disputes Act, 1947.

Industrial Disputes (Banking and Insurance Companies) Act, 1949.
Industrial Disputes (Banking Companies) Decision Act, 1955.
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946.

Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951.

Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of
Service) Act, 1979.

Tron Ore Mines, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mi fe
Cess Act, 1976. ines Labour Welfare

Iron Ore Mines, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mi
Fon ore Mine e Ore Mines Labour Welfare

29


34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.

4
42,
43.

45.

47.
48.

49.

51.

30

‘
Limestone and Dolomite Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1972.
Maternity Benefit Act, 1961.
Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1946.
Mines Act, 1952.
Minimum Wages Act, 1948.
Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961.

. Payment of Bonus Act, 1965.

Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
Payment of Wages Act, 1936.
Personal Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Act , 1963."

|. Plantations Labour Act, 1951.

Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1976.

. Trade Unions Act, 1926.

Weekly Holidays Act, 1942.

Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service)
and Misczllaneous provisions Act, 1955.

Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages) Act, 1958.

. Workmen’s Compénsation Act, 1923.

Collection of Statistics Act, 1953.


पके th

Parr A

(Para 2.18)
LABOUR PENDENCY IN SUPREME COURT
AS ON 18% OCtOwRR, 1967
UNDER ARTICLE 136
Labour
Year tees ——
Ready ‘Not Ready Total
oe _ ~ ~ QoQ @ कि
1973 3 } १
19% 3 : ३
1975 2 ‘ H
1976 5 i है
1977 हि? पु छा 32
1144 1 8 2
19% 3 a B
So 7 B x»
1981 2 2 4
ie a 23 ao
1983 oe #
ies 04 का a
bes 2 # a“
1986 is Hy
1987 06 6 a
Form 198 wm @o
Paat!B
Paras 2.18/4.8)
Namnber of Reguter hearing of Nen-Constitutional Labour matters pending in Supreme Court
‘a8 ०8 1-1-86—Ago-wise
Year Labour
1969 z
1970 3
1971 3
1972 apt
1973 6
1974 4
1975 ’
196 “
1977 xs
1978 a
1979 121
1980 re
1981 8
1982 a
rd i
1984 128
1985 u 388
Foul 959

31


APPENDIX 19
, Para 3.2). ;

‘Statement in reply to parts (a) & (b) of the Lok Sabha unstarred Question No. 1793

’ for 18-11-87

- Stamper I .
Pendency of cases in the-High. Courts arratged in descending order

= Name of High Court No.of cases
1 Allahabad =. wooo - . 288060

2 Madras . . . . . 187250

3 Calcutta ae os on ae os 156447

4 Bombay ae os we जन जे 133245

5 Kerala © a 120890

6 Andhra Pradesh 86137

7 Delhi 1 काश
8 Kamataka O6TAL

9 Patna . 56904
1. 10. Madhya Pradesh . . . व 53888
TAL Punjab & Haryana. a” कर . 53568
12. Gujarat a न . os a 52623
13° Rajasthan’ . 48921
14 Orissa . कि fe 37884
15 Jammu &Keshmir “ . . 35945
16 Gauhati . . . . "न 17880
17 Himachal Pradesh. er 8820
18 Sikkim . हु हु कर . 36
Total =. 89%

ee ee

Ason

31-12-86
31-12-86
30-687
30-6-86

31-12-86
31-12-85
31-12-86

31-12-85
30-6-87

31-12-86

* 31-12-86

30-6-87



APPENDIX V
(Para 4.7)
(Para 2.18)

Statement of caser under the Labour Laws pending in High Courts from 1977 to 1985

‘Name of the High Court 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985
1. Bombay - -. 1169 1346 1308 1078 7184 — 2697. 3061 3226
2. Sikkim .. - 7 जे 5 ~
3. Himachal Pradesh ne ee 5 12 ee
4. Orissa .. - - ना 37 76 15 13 301 1345 174 80
5. Pama .. a” -. 136 180 173 245 350 - 462 471 534.
6. Punjaband Haryana =... 0 + S23
7. Delhi. . व 681 674 83 842 761 — 830 885 900
8, Kerala मन +. = 234 214 290 356 300 615 66. 895
9. Gujarat हु ०. कं 54 151 146 233 637 96 1410 1991
10. Madhya Pradesh कु पु >>
11. Gauhati . व तभी ना ना 47 & 70 15 25 32
12. Jammu & Kashmir . _ 49 - ~
13. Allababad मु +. 627 60 66 685 1119 1166 1289 1675 191
14. Andhra Pradesh +. ता 324 367 503 730 69 753. 916 1285
‘15. Madras = + 114 736 वा 105 1332- —  -  --. -+:
16. Rajasthan a” ++ —= 192 280 363 341 635 174 258: 363 7
17. Karnataka बन + ना 434 579 468 735 508 1432 2381. 1960
18 Calcutta 1 HG 3716 444 334 6311 _- कक +
कण... आह जाए अछ 6337 झऊछ 5796 1IAMS 13603714818 |

ANNEXURE TO APPENDIX IV .
Matter under Labour Laws pending in ihe High Courts (as supplied by lRagtt, of Sastice)

Pending as Instituted duri Disposed of during Pending as o¢
on 1-1 the year 1985" the year महंगी
33545 8262 . 4557 17252 ©



सकता vi
Para 5.23)
List of Labour Laws indicating the provisions regcrding settlement of dispates and appeilate authorities

51. ‘Name of Act Provisions Authority deciding Provisions Appellate Authority Cognizance
Authority 4 ली

1 2 3 4 5 6 7

A A सका _ = a — _ —_— ——- —
1 Apprentices Act, 1961 2०0) Apprenticeship Adviser 20(2) - Apprenticeship Council न
2 Beodi and Cigar Workers (Conditions of Em- 4 Competent Authority 5 ‘Authority. specified by -
Poymend) Ak Ie  ( " ihe State G

Beedi Workers Welfare Cess Act, 1976 — - _ - -

3
4. Beedi Workers Welfare Fund Act, 1976 _ - _ - -
5. The Indian Boilers Act, 1923 6 Inspector 19 Chief Inspector . _
6 The Bended Labour System (Abolition) Act, 10 District - = Cr. P.C. provisions are attracted
; a Execative i
~ oc
ne + : Tadiclal Magistrate
7 The Children (Pledging of Labour) Act, 1933 — ~ _ a ~
8 Cine-Workers and Cinema Theatre Workers 4 Conciliation Officer — न Revisional ith the High Court
(Regulation of Employment) Act, 1981. 5 Tribunal No court should take cognizance of offence
except on a complaint made with permission
of State Government

9 Cine-Workers Welfare Cess Act, 1981 ता _ _ _ =
10 Cine Workers Welfare Fund Act, 1981... — “
11 Coal-Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 147 — ~ ~ oo _

12 Coal-Mines Provident. Fund and Miscella. — = . — _ _
Provisions. .


13 Collection of Statisties Act, 1953

34 Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition)
Act, 1970.

45 Dangerous Machines (Regulation, -uct, 1983

16 Dock Labourers Act, 1934

17 Dock Workers (Regulation and Employment)

at
A

18 Emigration Act, 1983
wy Provident’ Funds’ and‘ Miscella-
Pee Provisens Act 1932

~~ क9 Benplogees’ State Insurance Act, 194

Banployees’ Liability Act, 1938:

‘The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regula-
tion) Act, 1

a

2

s fication of Vacancies) Act, 1959. Nowe
2S The Factories Act, 1948

6 Fatal Accidents Act, 1855. +

8.6
8.5
3

8. 15
3. 58

3c
$. 34

S.17

Registring Officer
Controller

Inspectors

8.23

S4A

Appellate Officer

State Government

Central Government

No prosecution will be made without tho
permission of the Statistics authority.

Prosecution may be launched with the pre-
vious sanction of the Inspectors.

Complaint by the Controller will be taken
coghisance by tl

No prosecution except with the previou
sanction of the Inspector.

Cosnisance of offence on the} report of the

Offiences under the Act are cognisable S. 26

Prosecution with the previous sanction of ©

Cea rovident Commissioner.

No court inferior to that of Metropolitan Ma-
gistrate shall try the offence.

No prosecution shall be institute’ except with
Permission oi the officer a
Government

Do,

St


APPENDIX ¥1—concid.

7 2 3 “4 ; 6 7 pe
30 Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) S. 5(2) Certifying Officer 8. 107 Prescribed Authority No prosscutina (3 03 fiuached except with

Act, 1946, the sanction of appropriate Govetnmeat
au Tadustries (Devlopment and Regulation} Act, ता - - =- _
32 The Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regula-  S. 7 Licensing Office: 5. 11 Appellate OF oar _

Employment and Conditions

vice Act, 1979.
33. Iron Ores Mines, Manggneso Ore Mines and = — न - = ~

‘Chrome Ore Mines Labour Welfare Cess Act,
34° Iron Ore Mines, Manganese Ore Minss and — नर - -

Chrome Ore Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act,
35° Limestone and Dolomit: Miass Labour Wel- _ _- — _

fare Fund Act, 1972. : .
36 Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 5. 14 Inspector _ —_ Cognisanzs of ofa: with th: previous

. permission of [n> 2ctar.
97 Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund, Act; 1945S. 5- Inspector - Ad -- _ =
ministration
38 Mines Act, 1952 5.5 ‘Chief Inipoctor - ना जे
Inspector .
39 Minimum Wages Act, 1948 $. 19 Inspactor S. 20 Comissioner for Work- =
है men’s Componsation.
40 Motor Transport Act, 1961 S.4 Chief Inspector जे — Prosecution to be launched with the previou*
“a Inspector दर sanation of Inspector.
41 Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 8.27 Inspector गा - io court ‘shall take cognisance of
except with the permission of Labour Com.
- missioner.
42 Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 8.3 Controlling. Authority 5.7 (7) Appropriate government . —
$7 Tnspector

9६


43 Payment of Wages Act, 1936

44 Personal Injuries (Compzasation Insurance)
Act, 1963.

45 Plantations Labour Act, 1951

$. 15 4

5. 34

46 Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of 5. 8

Service)
47 The Trade Unions Act, 1926

~ 48 Weekly Holidays Act, 1942

5.3

8.7

49 The. Working Journalists and other News- —

(Conditions of Service)
डिक Provisions Act, 1955. >

99 The Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates —

of Wages) Act, 1958.
St The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923

$. 19

ur Court or Indus-
trial Tribunal or
missioner for Workmen's
Compensation.

Registering Officer
Inspectors

Registrar of Trade Unions

Inspector

Commissioner for Work-
men's Componsati

22-B4/1(D)89MofLJACA—1,000-27-80-45-GIPS

5. 17

$.3-C

S.11

S.30

Court of Small Causes in

Presi
Distt. Court elsewhere.

Prescribed Autaority

High Court in Presiden:
towns or Principal Gul
Court of Original Juris-
diction elsewhere.

High Court

Town and

Cognizance of the offence will not 03 take
unless made within 6 months. S.

Previous sanction of Registrar is necessary
for prosecution.

No tion shall be instituted except by

with the the previous sanction of a Com-
missioner, and no Court shall take cognizance
of any offence unless complaint thereof is
made within six months of the date on which
the alleged commission of the offence came to

knowledge of the Commissioner.

Le