NG रु
way
wama

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-THIRD REPORT
ON

DECENTRALISATION
OF ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE:
DISPUTES INVOLVING CENTRES OF
HIGHER EDUCATION

JANUARY 1988


D.O. No. 6(2K1)/88-LC . Tel. No, 384475
विधि आयोग
‘DA. Desai Law COMMISSION
Chairman भारत सरकार' *
हे GovERNMENT OF INDIA
wreat waa,”
SHASTRI, BHAVAN
नई दिल्‍ली

New. DEH
January 15, 1988.

My dear Shri Shiv Shanker,

Almost covering up major part of the terms of reference formulated by
the Government of India for studying judicial reforms, specifically concentrating
inter dlia on decentralisation of administration of justice, I am happy to forward
today One, Hundred Twenty-third Report of the Law Commissjon on “ Hits -
tralisation of Administration of Justice: Disputes Involving Centres of Hig
Education”. “

By now you must have taken cognizance of the known fact that the task of
recommending judicial reforms was assigned to the Law Commission in Feb-
ruary 1986. Giving up the idea of setting up a separate Judicial Refor
Commission and simultaneously assigning the task to the Law Cornmission, be
Government of India desired as per the letter of the then Minister for Law and
Justice to accord top priority to this assignment. हज

The crisis in justice delivery system has acquired high . visibility. The
Law Commission could, therefore, appreciate the anxiety on the part of the
Government of India io accord top priority to recommending radical reforms
in judicial system from bottom to top. Accordingly, the Law Commission
drew up its own perspective plan touching various factors which have contributed
to the present malaise in the justice delivery system and proceeded by separate
reports to deal with each such factor. The approach of the Law Commission
was moulded to be in tune with article 39A of the Constitution which requires
‘the State to ensure that the operation of the legal system promotes justice om
a basis of equal cpportunity, and shall, in particular, provide free legal ‘aid, by
suitable legislation or schemes or in any other way, to ensure that oppin tunities
for seeking justice are not denied to any citizen by reason.of economic or other
disabilities’. To translate this goal into action-oriented programme, the justice
system as at present operating must be rid of four corroding factors namely:
dilatoriness, prolixity, formalism and unbearable cost. The reports submitted
herebefure and the one in continuation have kept in focus the goal.

Décentralisation by providing specialist tribunal would reduce delay, cost
and techno-formal approach. On this assumption, the present report deals with
specialist tribunal for disputes arising in the field of education which cover very
wide area. It along with other infer-limbed reports when implemented, would

0


di)
achieve the desired goal of reducing the inflow of work in the High Courts and

tho Supreme Court, which is one of the goals set by the Government as part
of the judicial: reforms.

I 88४७ therefore to request you to set up a special cell to study these
Teports as integral to reclaiming the judicial systerh which is under unbearable
burden and pressure by the backlog of cases as having almost become dysfunc-
tional.

The Law Commission would be interested in knowing the action-oriented
Programme of the Government for implementing these reports.

With regacds,

Yours sincerely,

(Sd.)
(0. A. DESAI)

Hon'ble Shri P. Shiv Shanker,
Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,

Shastri Bhavan,

New Dethi.

“Encl : A Report.

Copy to: Shri H. R. Bhardwaj,
Minister for State for Law & Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhavan,
New Defi, —


LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA, 123rd REPORT

S.No. Page
{ 13
2 14
3 4
4 15
5 7
6 17
7 18
8 18
9 19

10 pal

1 25
12 Annexure 27
134, 28
14. +» 29

15 32

1, 35

11

18. ». 3

ERRATA
Para Line
4.10 2
4.13 14, 15
4.13 6th from
below
3.2 23
5.3 3
5.7 8
3.8 last line
5.9 10
6.1 6
75 1
References 20
2 3
2 10
4 5
13 13
7 5
21(०) 4
21... 2nd [rom below

For
which

proceed'ng;

Read
which
proceeding

recommending. recommending,

varisities
much
giong
Chancellos
must
manner.
level

All

Ab il,
aavisory
due
mattu
study

oven

Indja

varsities
such
going
Chancellors
must b>
manner,
level.
All,
April,
advisory
clue
amatter
stay
even.

Indian


CHAPTER = I—Introduction .

CHAPTER — IIl—Has a case for change been made out?
CHAPTER IIf—-Data collection and its inadequacy

CHAPTER IV—Existing Infrastructure for resolution of disputes at

University level
CHAPTER V-—The Debate
CHAPTER VI—The Approach

CONTENTS

CHAPTER VII—Conclusions and Recommendations
REFERENCES पु पु + . . . . . . -

ANNEXURE—Working paper on decentralisation of administration of
Justice: Disputes involving centres of higher education

@


CHAPTER I
INFRODUCTION

1.1. Continuing the search for identifying areas where decentralisation of
monolithic justice system can be effectively introduced, this report seeks to
take a significant step in that direction in an area which has in recent years
acquired high visibility profile because of numerous disputes arising in that
area and landing into courts. Since the advent of independence, there has been
tremendous upsurge in the thrust for higher education. Institutions providing
professional courses in specialist branches, such as, medicine, engineering, agri-
culture, and science and technology in general, have multiplied many times.
However, the demand for admission to such professional courses far outweighs
the availability of seats. There is keen and ferocious competition in obtainmg
admissions in such institutions. Consequently, numerous disputes arise  bet-
ween the institutions and the candidates seeking admissions, between university
and such institutions, and even between the Government and those seeking
admissions. In the absence of a specialist forum, these disputes are taken to
civil courts at ail levels, including The High Court and the Supreme Court of
India.. The courts, because of their clogged dockets, have not been in a posi-
tion to accord top priority to these disputes. Consequently, these disputes di
on and create more problems. The Law Commission, therefore, in its search
for specialist tribunals, focussed its attention on different types of disputes aris-
ing in the field of education with a view to finding out whether the resolution
of these disputes in the field of education requires any specialised training, the
expediency of its early disposal and, consequently, reducing the pressure on
the High Courts avd the Supreme Court.

1.2 The Law Commission accordingly issued a working paper (Annexed
hereto) with a questionnaire annexed to it on March 9, 1987, and gave it wide
publicity. The working paper was sent to universities, teachers’ associations,
students’. 2ssociaticns, Univesity Grants Commission, Association of Indian
Universities, etc. Wide publicity was given to the working paper in print
media.

1.3. The response of the affected interests in the tield of education was
very encouraging. The Association of Indian Universities circulated this
working paper to all the universities with a request that every university may
discuss the working paper in 2 one-day seminar in which all members of the
university community may participate and forward their recommendations to
the Law Commissicr. As a follow up action, the Association of Indian
Univessities organised a seminar on May 2, 1987, at Delhi. More than 61
Vice-Chancellors including Directors and Heads of various Departments of the
universities participated in the seminar. The seminar took each question from
the questionnaire annexed to the working paper and responded to it. For-
warding the recommendations of the seminar, the Secretary of the Association
of Indian Universities informed the Law Commission that the President of
the Association of Indian Universities, Prof. G. Ram Reddy, has set up a
working group to study the matter in depth and establish liaison with the Law
Commisison. Amongst others, the seminar endorsed the Law Commission's
Proposal to set up a Central Educational Tribunal which should deal with
alleged miscarriage of justice involving concerned Governments, universities
and-teachers and students in the universities and colleges. Such a tribunal,
according to the seminar, would provide an all-India perspective to educa-
tional problems and, te this end in view, a multi-level and integrated judicial
system should be designed in such a way that the objective of decentralisation
of administration of justice is fully realised. On the composition of the -tri-
bunal, the Seminar expressed itself unequivocally saying that it should com-
prise. of eminent educational administrators, Vice-Chancellors, Professors and
Judges. It expressed an opinion that all disputes pertaining to educational mat-
ters should be under the purview of the tribunal. However, property matters
should. be dealt with by civil courts. The seminar was of the view that such
a, tribynal would be able to tackle educational disputes expeditiously which will
go a Jong way in ensuring peace in university campuses and contribute to

1


2 One Hundred Twenty-third Report

academic standards. A working group was set up to follow up this important
matter with Law Commission, University Grants Commission, Government of
India, etc. The Association of Indian Univesities promised that it woukd
collect information pertaining to educational disputes of universities and colleges
pending with various courts. Numerous other bodies representing affected
interests responded to the working paper of the Law Commission. Even though
there was near unanimity in favour of setting up a Central Educational Tribunal,
as tentatively described in the working paper, a dissent was expressed sae rad
university teachers and associations of university teachers. Their ay

was that such a tribunal would be oveg-shadowed by retired Vice-Chancellors
and administrators in the Education Department and it would fail to inspire
confidence about its integrity, impartiality, efficiency and capacity to fairly re-
solve the disputes.

1.4. The Law Commisison immensely benefited itself from this comprehen-
sive debate on the topic under discussion. With this acquired knowledge, it
would be advantageous to first consider whether decentralisation in the acmini-
stration of justice iti the field of education is necessary. Would it be helpful
both to the disputants and the society in general? Would it assist in speedy and
fair resolution of disputes in the field of education? Should the forum be a
participatory one? At what level should it operate? What must be the criteria
for selecting the personnel to man this tribunal? Who should be the appointing
authority? In answering these questions, the Law Commission must bear in
mind the objections raised by certain affected interests and must convince itself
that there are dational and ane answers | ‘0 the, dissent filed and that the
experiment wo far outw the suppo: lisadvantages. Thereby, the
Commission must allay their apprehensions. Be by

CHAPTER II
HAS A CASE FOR CHANGE BEEN MADE OUT?

2.1. The first question that must engage the attention of the Law Commis-
sion is whether any case is made out for setting up a specialist tribunal for
dealing with disputes arising in the field of education. The answer to this ques-
tion lies in ascertaining the nature of disputes and the technical knowhow neces-
sary for their speedy, scientific and fair resolution. This aspect must be ex-
amined in the lizht of the fact whether a mere legalistic approach disclosed in
Jaw courts would be adequate to bring about a scientific, sensible and just
tesolution of these disputes. Would a specialist tribunal be more competent
than State courts to deai with this problem?

2.2. The Law Commission in its just preceding report' has, while recom-
mending setting up of Industrial Relations Commision at the Central and
State level, given extensive and adequate reasons for setting up specialist tribu-
nals. These reasons will, mutatis mutandis, support the approach in this report
about setting up a specialist tribunal for problems in the field of education. It
would be merely adding to the length of this report if all those reasons are
reiterated here. One of the guiding considerations of the Law Commission is
that such specialist tribunals are less formal, less technical, speedy and resuit-
oriented. This is part of a significant social movement uimed at reforming the
legal system. Institutions such as the police, prisons, legal services, therapeu-
tic and educational agencies have been given aid to expand their गत,
broaden seivices and develop new alternatives for coping with disputes.? ther
all these actions actually lead to improvements remain problematic, as more
often than not, the problems tackled are rooted in the structure of society
while the soluticns build up existing pillars of these structures.’ It is beyond
controversy that the justice system has become too complex and unresponsive
to meet community needs. Efforts are being made in the directions of sim-
ptifving ind streamlining court structures and procedures. However, there is
another effort of vital importance of which a note must be taken. Attempt must
be made to remove disputes from the court entitrely by taking them to less forma}.
more responsive forums. The current movement for delegalisation, simptii-
cation and informality has been directed at a wide vartety of activities ranging
from simplifying procedure to decentralisation of administration of justice.


One Hundred Twenty-third Report 3

2.3. Ht is, therefore, necessary to examine whether disputes arising in the
field of education are such as would necessitate specialist forum to be manned
by people imbued and acquainted with the problems of education. The impor-
tance of education may be noticed by reference to a specialist report in this
behalf. It says:

“Education has always been important but, perhaps, never more so in man’s
history than today. In a science-based world, education and research are
crucial to the entire developmental process of a country, its welfare, progress
and security. It has characteristic-of 2 world permeated by science that
in some essential ways the future shape of things is unpredictable. This
emphasises all the more the need for an educational policy which contains
a built in flexibility so that it can adjust to changing circumstances.”

2.4. Consequent upon the report of the Kothari Commission, Government
of India declared the national policy on education in 1968 which marked a sig-
nificant step in the history of education in post-independent India. It aimed
to promote national progress, a sense of common citizenship and culture and
to strengthen national integration. It laid stress on the need for a radical
reconstruction of the education system, to improve its quality at all stages, to
give much greater attention to science and technology, the cultivation of moral
values and a closer relation between education and the life of the people.* Since
tae adoption of the 1968 policy, admittedly there has been 2 vast expansion in
the educational facilities in ali branches of education all over the country. In
Jamwary कह Government of India announced that a new education Policy
would. be formulated for the country. A country-wide debate ensued. After a
careful study, National Policy on Education—1986 was announced in May 1986.
At is founded on a national perception that education is essentially for all and
this is fundamental tc 2ll-round development, material and spiritual. It was
aecepted that education has an acculturating role. It <efines sensitivities and
perceptions that contribute to national cohesion, a scientific temper and indepen-
dence of mind and spirit—thus furthering the goals of socialism, secularism and

enshrined in our Constitution.’ With this laudable aim in view,
the policy deals with education at all levels. It is assumed that while int
menting the new policy, basic changes will occur in management systems. © ee.
need to equip students with the ability to cope with them is felt. The policy
eovess education in early childhood, elementary education, secondary education,
vocationalisation, higher education and setting up of rural universities. The policy
aims at providing facilities for technical ond management education. This com-
Prehensive policy has also taken note of the management of education itself.

Central Advisory Board of Education has to play a pivotal role in a com-
prehensive developmental programme of education as outlined in the policy state-
ment. The policy also envisages setting up of Indian Education Service as an
af-India service. The policy envisages setting up of State Advisory Boards of
Bduestion as also District Boards of Education.

23. Education was a topic in the State List at entry No. 11. By the Consti-
tation (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, the entry was deleted and ‘Educa-
tion’ was inserted at entry No. 25 in the Concurrent List. During the inter-
Between 1968 and 1986, there was a massive expansion of educatiopal
throwing up numerous disputes in the field of education. Surprisingly,
the National Policy On Education—1986 has not taken note of this phenometial
rise in disputes in the field of education and has not suggested any alternative to
the existing mode of resolution of disputes in this behalf. The omission may
not be accidental. It may have been assumed that the change in the pattern
of education would, by itself, be sufficient to eliminate the disputes. It is a
consummaticn devoutly 10 be wished.

nereincicn The expectations from the welfare State in the field of education as
*€ set out, coupled with explosion of population, a keen and unqueach-
ed thirst for higher education, the slow pace of coming up of educational institu-
tions commensurate with the demand for them and a highly competitive society,
all combined to make entry in educational institutions from kindergarten to the
tep professional courses very very competitive and not within the easy reach of
everyone seeking the admission. This has provided a fruitfal field for Tising
‘eresdemtio of disputes in this field,


4 One Hundred Twenty-third Report

2.7. There is another factor which accentuated the ptoblem of which note
must now be taken. Indian society was both feudal and hierarchical in charac-
ter. At the lowest end of the spectrum were the Scheduled Castes and Sche-
duled Tribes, the victims of exploitation for thousands of years. Socially speak-
ing, they lived in semi-slavish condition and had been denied entry both to ser-
vices and educational institutions by the upper crust of the society. They were
the victims of discrimination. Independent India cannot tolerate such a. situa-
tion for a day. While undertaking to transform a feudal society into an. egali-
tarian one, one of the limitations on State’s power was that it shall not discri-
mimate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race. caste, sex, place of
birth or any of them. To dilute this constraint, sub-article (4) of article 15
conferred power on the State to enact laws or make special provisions for the
advancement of any socially and educationally . backward classes of citizens
or for members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The power
was thus conferred on the State to undertake affirmative action even if by mea-
sures, apparently discriminatory. for the advancement of members of Sche-
duled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and socially and educationally backward
classes of citizens. Armed with this power, a number of States enacted laws
or made special provisions for reservations of seats in favour of members of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and socially and educationally backward
classes of citizens. This started a chain of litigation commencing from 1951
and down to 1985. What must be the percentage of reservation for different
classes of people for whom it can be made within the parameters of article 15९4)
was a policy decisicn, the choices and options being covered by the availability
of seats and the demand from members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes and socially backward classes of citizens? Soon after the enforcement of
the Constituticn, State of Madras issued an_ order reserving seats for admission
into medical colleges on communal lines. The Supreme Court struck down the
order as being violative of the fundamental rights and rejected the submission
-that the order is in iraplementation of the Directive Principles of State Policy by
observing that “the Chapter on Fundamental Rights is sacrosanct and not liable
to be abridged by any Legislative or Executive act or order except to the extent
provided in the appropriate article in Part III. The directive principles ......

te conform to and run as subsidiary to Chapter on Fundamental Rights”?
Nemerous disputes on the question of reservation, both about the power to
reserve, the class in whose favour the reservation was made and the percentage
of reservation, landed in the courts. Only some may be referred to here just
to give a glimpse of the nature of the controversy which would indicate «the
expertise required to deal with the same.

2.8. The reservation in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
more or 1655 remained! unquestioned. But when the State, in exercise of. the
power by articles 15(4) and 16(4), started making reservation in edu-
cational instittutions and public services of seats in favour of socially and educa-
tionally backward classes of citizens, the challenge surfaced. Initial ay h
was to treat a caste label_as an insignia of social and educational bac! किक
ness. This was questioned on the ground that caste alone cannot be the sole
determining factcr for determining the social and educational backwardness of
the. members of a particular caste. The court foresaw the danger in treatin,
caste as the sole criterion of determining social and educational backwardiess:
A suggestion was also made that a ‘means test’ be also applied. As the-reserva-
tion in favour of a caste or a class would cut down the area of seats available on
open merit competition. the court suggested that the Government must strike a
reasonable balance between the claims of the backward classes and the claims
of others.” Proceeding along this line of thinking while considering that the
caste of a ru of citizens may be a relevant circumstance in ascertaining their
social backwardness, it cannot be the sole or dominant test in that behalf. Addi-
tionally the criterion of ‘means test’ can also be validly applied.” Noting that
the expression ‘caste’ is not used in article 15(4) and contrasting it with the
comprehensive expression employed therein, namely, ‘socially and educationally
backward clases of citizens’, a view was expressed that the expression ‘back-
ward class’ cannot be used as synonymous with ‘backward caste’ or ‘backward
community’, Realising that members »f a caste may not be treated as back-
ward class merely because they belong to a particular caste, it was pointed out
that the members may, in the social, economic and educational scale of values
at a given time, be backward and, therefore, are entitled to affirmative action.
The development of law on this line shook the progonents of canvassing. caste


One Hundred Twenty-third Report 5

alone as the basis for determining backwardness.’ Moving a little backward, a
view was expressed that in India there are numerous castes which are socially and
educationally backward and to ignore their existence is to ignore the realities of
life? State of Andhra Pradesh prepared a list of backward classes, more or
less employing the caste test. When challenged, the court found that the caste
mark is mereiy a description of the group following the particular occupations
or professions referred 10 by the Commission which drew up the list. Looking
et the report, the court said that the caste remained the criterion for determining
social and educational backwardness". The wheel moved the full circle when
it was said that mere poverty cannot be a test for determining backwardness be-
cause in India, except for a small percentage of the population, the people are
generally poor-—scme being more poor, others less poor. The ‘means test’ got
shaken." An aticmpt to make reservation in favour of people coming from rural
areas was held to be unconstitutional on the ground that it cannot be said as a
general propesiticn that rural areas represent socially and educationally back-
classes of citizens.* The debate continued with unabated ferocity whether
reservation on a caste label alone can stand the scrutiny of article 15(4). A
realisation grew that the problem of determining who are socially and educa-
tionally backward classes is undoubtedly not simple. Chartering a central path
which will keep not only the debate open and the inflow of disputes in the
courts, it was observed that it may not be irrelevant to consider the caste of a
group of citizens claiming to be socially and educationally backward.* If total
abolition of social and economic inequalities was to be aimed at, it has to be
realised that social backwardness is not the cause but the consequence of economic
backwardness. Even a man coming from castes which are generally designated
as depressed classes, if he is economically well-placed, he would never suffer
social backwardness. Therefore, elimination of economic inequality may be
aimed at in translating the promise of article 15(4) into action.” .

2.9. A dispute with a diferent facet but inter-related with the question of
reservation cropped up. The question was whether consistently with the consti-
tutional values, admissions to medical colleges or any other institution of
higher learning situate in a State can be confined to those whc have their domi-
cile within the State or who are resident within the State for a specified num-
ber of years or can any reservation in admissions be made for them so as to
give them precedence over those who do not possess domicile or residential
qualification within the State. irrespective of merit. Condemning the whole-
sale reservaticn made by some of the State Governments on the basis of domi-
cile or residence requirement within the State or on the basis of institutional pre-
ference far students whe have passed the qualifying examination held by the
university or the State excluding all others not satisfying this requirement re-
gardless of merit, the court held that preference to local residents may not be
an anathema if the reservation is partial. Having regard to all circumstances,
the court fixed an outer limit at 70%." It may be interesting to recall at this
stage the debate on clause 5 of para 8 of justiciable fundamental rights, as pro-
posed by the Advisory Committee of the Constituent Assembly. It would ay
that there was a germ of ‘sons of the soil theory’ in the debates themselves. An
amendment was movec tc clause 5 by Shri Mahavir Tyagi which would have
permitted the State Government to give preference over others to such citizens
as are bona fide domicile residents of its own territory. He said that his real
intention was that, as far as possible, the administration of a Province should
he run by officers and employees who are residents of that Province; otherwise
the residents of the Province shell not be able to enjoy self-Government.” To
some extent. this found an echo in the judgment of the court when it felt that it
would not be constitutionally invalid to grant partial reservation to the tune
of 70% in favour of those having domicile qualification.

2.10. Even after this herculean effort by the court to find a workable norm
and viable solution on the question of preference in admissions so as to avoid
future disputes, the exercise has either proved futile or is still open ended. After
upholding reservation to the tune of 70%, the court thereafter gave a direction
that an all-India entrance examination be held to fill in 30% of the non-reserved
seats for MBBS course and 50% open seats for post-graduate courses. Either
the Indian Medical Council or the Central Government were directed to hold a
single all-India based examination common to all medical colleges with centres
in different States. Further. direction was gived that admission must be grattted

2-1 M of L & 3188


6 One Hundred Twenty-third Report

to various medical colleges in the country on the basis of comparative evaluation
of marks obtained at such examination having regard to preference expressed
by students for any particular State or university and speciality or specialities in
case of post-graduate courses. These directions were given in the year 1984.
Further directions were given on May 1, 1985.” A direction was given that
the judgment must be implemented from the academic year 1985-86. It appears
that the Indian Medical Council and the Central Government failed to take any
steps to implement the judgment. A direction was given to the Indian Medical
Council to come forward with a positive scheme for holding all-India entrance
‘examination for regulating admissions to the minimum 30%, of non-reserved
seats for MBBS course 2nd 50% for the post-graduate course. Difficulties
were experienced in implementing the directions and the matter was again
brought before the court." The court gave further detailed directions as per
order dated 215 July, 1986. To conclude this point briefly, the scheme has
still not been implemented.

2.11. One can confidently conclude how the pendulum is moving back-
ward and forward keeping those affected interests in a confused state which
would necessarily encourage disputes coming to courts. What havoc such dis-
putes may cause may be illustrated by two cases. Admissions to medical colleges
in the State of Kerala were decided on the merits acquired at a common test.
For the academic year 1981-82, a test was held and admissions were given on
the merits acquired at that test. This came to’be challenged in Kerala High
Court and the method of holding the test and assigning merit revealed numerous
infirmities. The Kerala High Court gave certain guidelines in this behalf. The
matter landed in the Supreme Court,” which suggested a formula in this behalf
which, amongst others, provided that 50% of the examiners shall be from out-
side the State. The result of the entrance examination on the basis of centra-
lised evaluation will be declared by a certain date and admissions will be granted
on the basis of such result subject, of course, to the reservations already made.
This approach reveals that the local examiners could not be fully trusted.
The charge, therefore, of unfair practice in evaluating examination re-
sults was impliedly accepted. The order of the court was pronounced
on January 28, 1982. The test was to be held on 27th and . 28th
Feb., 1982. The result of the test was to be announced on or before 2nd
March, 1982. Admissions were then to follow according to the merits keeping
in view the reservations. The net result was that the first two semesters of
1981-82 were not available to any student. The students lost one year. The
nation was denied services of incoming doctors by one year. The university
lost credibility and fees. These are ascertainable losses. The second instance
is still more glaring. Admissions to P.T.C. course in Gujarat by those who failed
to secure the same for the year 1980-81 were challenged in the High Court of
Gujarat. Those unsuccessful in obtaining admission were the petitioners. State
of Gujarat was the respondent. Those who had secured admission on invalid,
illegitimate and illegal grounds were not impleaded as respondents. The High
Court struck down the admissions as being invalid and illegal. Those who had
secured admissions filed a separate bunch of petitions questioning that they had
been denied the opportunity of being heard as they were not joined as respon-
dents in the earlier petition and they were directly and adversely affected by
the decision of the court. They were heard and their petitions were dismissed
and they came over to the Supreme Court." By that time, one full year had
expired and the examination at the end of first year of the two years’ P.T.C.
course was due. Under interim orders of the court, they were allowed to appear
at the examination. Ultimately, even though it was held that their admissions
were invalid and illegal, nothing more could be done except saying that they
may not be given preference for admission to second year course.

2.12. Digressing a little to draw attention to other set of disputes arising
in the field of education, it may at once be stated that the disputes arose out of
policy decisions taken by the Government or by the universities. In order to
defeat the: charge of arbitrariness in granting admissions, the authorities concerned
with admissions will have to prescribe some objective standard applicable to

| seeking admission. Those seeking admission must have opportunity to satisfy
the standard and must have access to the system by which satisfaction of the
हि (कक is arrived at. When applicants seeking admission came from different
Uhiversities, they cannot be merit listed by reference to their achievement at


One Hundred Twenty-third Report 7

the qualifying examination held by each university. A common test therefore
had to be devised. In order to be more obiective, it has to be a written test.
Such a test has been prescribed for admission to various disciplines. Occa-
sionally Government and sometimes universities added viva voce test and final
merit list was prepared in accordance with total marks obtained at both the
tests. Viva voce suffers from the vice of subjectivism and is open to the charge
of nepotism and even indulgence. Indulgence manifests itself in myriad terms.
To a candidate who is a favourite, very simple questions may be asked. Some
marks are reserved for personality evaluation. What appeals to one may not
appeal to another. Thus there is tremendous clement of subjectivism in these
matters. The moment viva voce test was introduced, the same was challenged
in courts. The Government of the State of Mysore prescribed that 25% of
the maximum marks for the examination of the optional subiects taken into
account for making the selection of candidates for admission to engineering
and medical colleges shall be fixed as interview marks, simultaneously laying
down the criterion for allotting marks in the interview. One of the conten-
tions canvassed before the Supreme Court of India was that the system of selec-
tion by interview and viva voce examination is illegal inasmuch as it enabled
the interviewers to act arbitrarily and to manipulate the results and, therefore, it
contravenes article 14 of the Constitution, The contentions failed." The challenge
later on took a different form. The bone of contention was the total number of
marks reserved for interview—in other words, from no interview test to the
assignment of the total number of marks at the interview test. he underlying
apprehension throughout was the utter subjectivism of viva voce test. This was
sought to be demonstrated by urging that if there are numerous candidates to be
interviewed and hardly three minutes ate assigned to each, what evalualtion or
assessment can be done passes comprehension. The State of Tamil Nadu had
in the relevant year assigned 75 marks for interview test. An attempt was
made to show that those who fared well at the written test went down in the
viva voce test and vice versa. Even though an apprehension was voiced
that 75 marks allotted for interview ere on the high side and it
would be appropriate for the Government to re-examine the ques-
tion, the court did not invalidate the selection on this ground. — Every
such observation went on further complicating the matter. Reitecating that the
State has power to prescribe an interview test and observing that it cannot be
regarded as so defective that selecting candidates for admission on the basis
of oral interview in addition to written test must be regarded as arbitrary, the
court did express an opinion that allocation of more than 15% of total marks
for the oral interview would be arbitrary and unreasonable and would be liable
to be struck down as constitutionally invalid.” Repeating the earlier criticism
that oral test is a farce, a new limb was added to the controversy by saying
that the court would not be able to ascertain favouritism because what ques-
tions were asked and what answers wete given are not recorded and, theret ‘ore,
even though unfair advantage is given, the same escapes the scrutiny of the
court.” The State of Jammu and Kashmir was repeatedly dragged to the court
year after year and almost every time the court interfered with the admissions
granted by it. Therefore, for the academic year 1982-83, a direction was given
that while deciding admissions to Regional Engineering College, the Committee
must prepare questions in advance and put them in envelopes, keep a cassette
recorder for preserving primary evidence of answers given and maintain other
records. Even then the admissions were questioned.” The Supreme Court
called upon the State to produce cassettes recording answers and the questions
kept ready in advance. The records were produced for the court’s inspection.
The court was satisfied that if questions are drawn up in advance and the can-
didate is asked to pick up the envelope, the charge of discriminatory and unfair
treatment can be avoided. The record of the answers given in the voice of the
candidate wou!d put the matter beyond the pale of controversy. But how much
time, money, energy and avoidable litigation are spent into these disputes can

be gauged.

2.13. A different type of controversy altogether in the field of education
arises while determining the adequacy of experience or qualification, wherever
it is prescribed as an essential onc. Two persons having post-graduate qualifi-
cations in the field of medicine were selected by the Public Service Commission
of a State. Their selection was questioned on the ground that the post-doctoral
expetience in some foreign hospitals would not satisfy the prescribed requirement.


8 One Hundred Twenty-third Report

The High Court, in a writ petition, quashed the selections. The Supreme Court
while restoring the selections observed that the court should keep in view the
twilight zone of interference in appointment to posts requiring technical experi-
ace made consequent upon selection by Public Service Commission, aided by
experts in the field, within the framework of regulations framed by the Medical
Council of India. When, thus. a selection is made by the Commission aided
and advised by experts in technical experience and high academic qualifications
in the specialist field probing teaching/research experience in technical subjects.
the court should be slow to interfere with the opinion expressed by experts
unless there are allegations of mala fides against them.’

2.14. While numerous cases Janded in the court questioning the grant or
refusal of admission to Medical and Engineering Colleges, a few iflustrative
cases are referred to here to show the inordinate delay in disposal of cases result-
ing sometimes in getting unjust enrichment by a mon-deserving person. Without
dilating upon the topic itself which has been discussed herein, the first case to
which attention must be drawn involving gross delay in disposal is the one in
which one Vishan Kumar Agarwal applied for admission for the degree of M.D.
(Physiology) in October, 1974 and his result was not declared on the ground
that he was ineligible for admission. In October, 1983 he finally got his result
declared and got the degree and in this period of nine years. he was without a
degree which he had earned and having not been awarded, he could not get the
benefit out of it.’ Some students claiming to be eligible for admission to Post-
Graduate Course in Kashmir University in July, [980 were told in August, 1984
that they are not eligible." In 1981, some students applied for admission to
Post-Graduate Medical Course and having failed to obtain the admission moved
the High Court and obtained interim relief for provisional admission. When
the petitions finally came-up for hearing in Supreme Court in 1985, the court
declined to interfere with the question of legality of their admission on the only
ground that they had already completed the study during the interregnum. The
court accordingly directed that the provisional admission of such of these peti-
tieners who had obtained interim relief by way of provisional admission should
be regarded as an admission of final validity entitling them to consequential
benefits including appearing at the examination for obtaining degree.* The last
in the line is the case in which the court reached the affirmative conclusion that
the petitioners were noi eligible for admission but as they w admitted under
the interim orders of the court, the court observed that because of the fault
of the Principal of the Engineering College, these petitioners who were otherwise
ineligible should not suffer and allowed the petitioners to continue their studies
in the respective Engineering Colleges in which they were granted admission.
Admission was sought in the academic year 1981-82 and the matter was finally
disposed of in May, 1986." The cases briefly referred to above are merely
illustrative and not exhaustive.

2.15. Indian Council of Agricultural Research is a Society registered under
the Societies Registration Act. It is comprehended in the expression ‘State’ as
uged in article 12 of the Constitution. Its two subsidiaries, viz.. Indian
Agricultural Research Institute and Indian Veterinary Research Institute, enjoy
the status of deemed. university. There were numerous skeletons in its cup-
boards exposed by the suicide of Dr. V. H. Shah leading to the appointment
of a Committee under the chairmanship of Dr. Justice P. B Gajendragadkar
to investigate in its affairs. Things appear not to have improved very much
thereafter, even though it made extensive recommendations including restruc-
turing of it. Numerous complaints were voiced by the members of the faculty
of ICAR and its affiliate—Indian Veterinary Research Institute. The dispute
dragged on for a number of years commencing from 1972. Absolutely frivolous
objections raised by ICAR contributed to the delay in disposal of the case.
Ultimately it was found that the stand taken by ICAR was unjust and unfair and
relief was granted in the year 1983.° Highly talented agricultural scientists
were made to suffer injustice and languish in rancour for a period of over a
decade. Agriculture, being of primary importance in the national economy, such
a deplorable state of affairs arising ot of an absence of machinery for speedy
resolution of disputes is likely to cause national 1055.

2.16. Very recently, the country suffered a prolonged suike by university
tegchers and teachers of colleges affiliated to universities. The dispute related
to the revised scales offered to them. The sttike lasted for more than two


One Hundred Twenty-third Report 9

months. It was undertaken at the commencement of the academic year. Is it
not necessary to devise a forum for resolution of disputes which must be resorted
to before direct action is undertaken?

2.47. The direction in which wind is blowing can be ascertained by re-
ference to section 9(1) of the Telugu Universities Act. 1985 (Act 27 of 1985)
which provides that Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh shall be the Chaneellor
of the University. Power is conferred on the Chancellor to appoint 2 Viee-
Chance'lor from out of panel to be drawn up by a committee comprising (i) a
nominee of the Chancellor: (ii} a nominee of the Government (headed by the
Chief Minister}: and (iii) a nominee of the syndicate. Indisputably Chief Minister
will decide who should be Vice-Chancellor.

2.18. The university, though is expected to be an autonomous body, in
the ‘absence of financial autonomy, merely enjoys paper autonomy. An incident
occurred in one State where the grant of a university was not released even though
the condition precedent for the same, namely, raising of the examination fees,
was fully satisfied. It is reported that the Vice-Chancellor had to threaten to
take the matter to the court. This raises the vital issue of State contro! over vniver-
sities. .

2.19, Disciplinary jurisdiction over the students and the members of the
faculty of the university and the affiliated colleges is another area where numerous
disputes arise. In one case in Gujarat, when an invigilator caught an examinee
resorting to unfair practice and made him leave the examination hall, the next
day he appeared with a stay order of the court restraining the authorities of
the examination centre from preventing him in appearing at the examination.

2.20. A Vice-Chancellor, who, of course, has relinquished the post of
a leading university in the Capital, in an off the record chat. related an incident
which is worth recalling. He said that he has taken disciplinary action against
a member of the faculty, who has rushed to the court and obtained an injunction.
The matter, according to him. is now being delayed deliberately so that the
delinquent officer would await the expiry of the term of the Vice-Chancellor and
then seek for an unfair compromise. His agony was against such stay orders.

2.21. The Vice-Chancellor of Aligarh Muslim University has given in-
formation to the Commission about the writ petition filed by Mohd. Abbas
Zamir who, though according to the Vice-Chancelior, was not eligible to appear
in the examination, was allowed by an interim order to appear at the examina-
tion. According to the university, Mohd. Abbas Zamir ‘was expelled from
the university on Sth January, 1981, for a period of four years for indulging
in acts of indiscipline, creating Jawlessness and assaulting teachers in gross viola-
tion of the rules and regulations of the university’. Thereafter, he filed nume-
rous petitions and ultimately succeeded in appearing at the examination.”

2.22, Numerous cases of mismanagement of collegiate institutions by
management bodies suriace frequently. The statute setting up universities pro-
vides for conferment of a supervisory jurisdiction on the universities
over such affiliated institutions. Amongst others, the power to constitute and
reconstitute governing body on the proof of mismanagement is conferred on the

ersity. Bihar University directed the re-constitution of the governing body

of the Rajendra Prasad College, Chapra. This was challenged. The Supreme
Court, while setting aside the order of the University, expressed an opinion that
autonomous bodies which set up colleges and thereby he'p the progress of higher
education are generally run by disinterested persons and it is of some importance
that the autonomy of such bodies should not be unduly impaired. It was con-
ceded that the university, while granting affiliation, may impose conditions which
will enable university to exercise powers of supervisicn, yet when a dispute
arises, the university should respect th: autonomy of the colleges and reconcile
the same with the supervisory powers of the umiversity which are intended to
be. exercised in order to make the functioning of the affiliated colleges efficient
and: progressive.” But when it came to ingerfereace by the university in the
established mismanagement of minority institutions, the court, while conceding that.

the ight to manage minority institution does-nét imhere the right to mismanage,


10 One Hundred Twenty-third Report

yet was loathe to interfere. The regulatory measures framed by the wniversity
for the purpose of regulating the appointment and domicile of teachers in minority
institutions were held to interfere with the autonomy of minoriy institution.”
The hands off attitude of the court went to such length that the teachers and
employees of the minority institutions were denied equality in the matter of
remuneration with their counterparts in educational institutions similarly situated.
Recently the court lifted the veil of the minority institutions and extended such
basic benefits to its employees, directing that they cannot be discriminated against
and the principle of equal pay for equal work will equally apply to पीटा.

2,23. The yardstick applied for determining the status of institutions claim-
ing to be minority institutions has not been uniformly applied. Aligarh Muslim
Universiy was held not to be a minority institution on the ground that it was
brought into existence by a parliamentary statute.” On the other hand, educa-
tional institutions set up by followers of Arya Samaj in Punjab were treated as
such.’

2.24. A Vice-Chancellor, in the hope of getting an assignment for six
years, though the statute prescribed tenure of three years, resigned from the
State Assembly and was appointed as Vice-Chancellor of Maharshi Dayanand
University at Rohtak. As the renewal of the term was not forthcoming, he ap-
proached the court for a mandamus calling upon the university to renew his
term. In the meantime, the State Government issued an Ordinance fixing the
age of Vice-Chancellor at sixty-five years. He also challenged the validity of the
Ordinance. The court directed the Chancellor to renew the term basing its
finding on the doctrine of promissory estoppel."

2.25. Very recently a dispute arose between the Haryana Government
and Vice-Chancellor of Kurukshetra University. The Vice-Chancellor wanted
to proceed on medical leave on full pay and reimbursement of medical expenses.
The same was rejected by the Chancellor who is none other than the Governor
of the State. Has the Vice-Chancellor any forum where he can get relief?

2.26. It thus becomes manifestly clear that numerous different types of
disputes in the field of education land in the court and remain unattended for a
long time causing dislocation in the teaching schedules and occasionally generate
a disturbed environment in the halls of education, The conclusion, however,
is inescapable that the disputes arising in the field of education are numerous.
They are not resolved in time. The delay causes distress and hardship to many.
The system suffers. And, as pointed out earlier, there is national loss. The
case, therefore, for speedy disposal of educational disputes does not need any
more justification.

CHAPTER पा
DATA COLLECTION AND ITS INADEQUACY

3.1. At the outset, it must be confessed that the effort to collect up-to-
date data relating to the number of matters pending in courts at various levels,
the time spent in litigating processes, the cost involved in processing the litigation
and its overall effect on educational institutions is an uphill task. The Associa-
tion of Indian Universities, New Delhi, had taken the task to collect the data
and to furnish it to the Law Commission for its consideration. The Commission
is awaiting the information. But it cannot standstill. From a study under-
taken to assess the impact of litigation on university autonomy, keeping in view
the magnitude of litigation to which the universities are exposed, some information
is available. The study covers four universities. Allahabad University was
impleaded in 124 writ petitions, 15 appeals and 56 civil suits between 1969 and
1980. According to the Registrar of Kerala University, roughly 70 to 100 cases
challenging actions of the University were currently on the file of the Kerala
High Court. The Madras High Court Advocates’ Association estimated that
the High Court receives about 20 matters per year involving universities. The
figure given by the consulting attorney of the university was approximately 300
potential and actual legal cases during the petiod of four years prior io 1981.


One Hundred Twenty-third Report I

The Pune University had about 60 cases by the end of 1980. These statistics
pertain to the matters brought before High Courts. But numerous cases are
led in subordinate courts also, of which it is difficult to gather information.

3.2, Some scanty material is available relating to expenditure incurred
by a few universities in litigation. To illustrate, Pune University had provided
in its budget an amount of Rs. 5,000 in the year 1975 in expenses on fees payable
to lawyers. By the year 1981, the provision had to rise up to Rs. 20,000. In
fact, it is pointed out that an amount of Rs. 30,000 had to be paid to a firm
of lawyers at Bombay in one case. Kerala University exceeded its budget allo-
cation of Rs. 30,000 for fees payable to lawyers even before the expiry of the
fiscal year 1981. There is thus a constant struggle for allocation of scarce
Tesources of the university to unproductive litigation costs. It is difficult to
assess the time spent by university officials cooling their heels in courts to the
detriment of university administration. As far back as 1966, a serious grievance
was voiced in a Conference of Vice-Chancellors that multiplying litigation im-
peded their ability ४0 maintain discipline on campuses.“

CHAPTER IV

EXISTING INFRASTRUCTURE FOR RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES AT
UNIVERSITY LEVEL

4.1. Numerous disputes arose between the universities and their karamcharis,
universities and their members of teaching faculty, universities and students,
bial from disputes with the Government and the Vice-Chancellor. When the

ites arose between the universities and their karamcharis, an attempt was
made to find a firm set up under the labour laws for resolution of disputes.
Questioning the power of the Government to make a reference in exercise of the
power conferred by section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, in respect
Of disputes between universities and their karamcharis. it was contended that the
activities of the university cannot be comprehended in the expression ‘industry’
as defined in section 2(j) and, therefore, reference was incompetent. This conten-
tion found favour with the courts because, in its view, education seeks to build
up the personality of the pupil by assessing his physical, intellectual, moral and
emotional development. They found it incongruous to speak of this educational
Process in terms of industry. It was held that education itself is not within the
scope of the Act.“ This approach held the field for a period of one and a half
decades with the result that a forum for compulsory adjudication of disputes
with a view to preserving harmony and avoiding confrontation in the educaticnal
institutions was made unavailable to the karamcharis of the university, leaving
them the only option to resort to direct action. During the interregnum, the
dynamics of emerging scenatio necessitated a radical rethinking. A question
was posed as to what is strange in regarding education as an industry. The
answer was its respectability, its lofty character, its professional stamp, its clois-
tered virtue which cannot be spoiled by commercial implications and the raucous
voices of workmen. Negativing all these inhibitions, the court held that the rea-
lists have now asserted “in the cultural field, educational managements depend
so much on governmental support and some of them charge such high fees that
schools have become trade and managers merchants’. The court concluded
that, ‘with evening classes, correspondence courses, admissions unlimited, fees
and Government grants escalating and certificates and degrees for prices, edu-
cation—legal, medical, technological, school Jeve! or collegiate —is riskless trade
for cultural entrepreneurs and hapless nests of campus (industrial) unrest. Imagi-
Dary assumptions are experiments with untruth.”© Approaching thus, the court
overruled the earlier judgment in Delhi University case.

42. The decision in Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board case.
which overruled numerous earlier decisions disclosing an elitist approach founded
on unwarranted assumptions, however, generated a fierce debate in the society.
The court rejected those unwarranted assumptions in holding that Government
and charitable hospitals which render, service without any intention of earnii
profit, liberal professions like the office of solicitors. clubs like Madras Gym-
Khaga Club and Cricket Club of India, Khadi and Village Industries. Board
and education are not comprehended. in thé expression ‘industry’ as defined in


2 One Hundred Twenty-third Report

section 26), In the process, the court overruled as many as seven earlier judg-
ments. This radical stance of the court so much upset a former Chief Justice
of India that ‘Industrial Disputes Act was intended to resolve matters not bet-
ween employers and cmployecs in “grotesquely inflationary latitude’ (as the learned
Judge expressed himself} but in the setting of capitalist. system, which cven a
tyro knows, led to fight between the owners of land and means of production
Qn the one hand and the wage earners on the other.” He was so much worried
at the lengthening of the list of industry by court’s judgment that, according
to him, it will come to an end when the enthusiastic but fallacious and populist
judicial activism gets tired. Ultimately in a democracy, pressure groups do
succeed when those chagrined by the overruling of the earlier judgments end
support to a demand that the Parliament should set right the matter by denud-
ing the effect of the judgment which overruled earlier judgments.” Accordingly,
Government of India introduced a Bill, styled as the Hospitals and Other Insti-
tutions (Settlement of Disputes) Bill, 1982, in the Parliament. That it has still
not been processed further effectively supports the earlicr statement, namely,
Pressure groups often appear to succeed. By the Bill, the Government of India
wanted hospitals, educational institutions. institutions owned or managed by an
organisation wholly or substantially engaged in charitable, social or philanthropic
activities, institutions engaged in khadi or village industries and every institu.
tion engaged in any activity of the Government relatable to the sovereign func-
tions of the State, including all activities carried on by the Departments of the
Central Government dealing with defence research, atomic energy and space,
to be excluded from the operation of the Industrial Disputes Act and to be
governed by the Act which may come into force after the Bill is passed by the

ament. The proposed Act cnvisaged a Grievance Settlement Committee
or a Consultative Council or a Local Consultative Council to be set up, which
will have jurisdiction to settle disputes between the employer and workmen ‘of
the employer of such institutions governed by the Act. As the Bill has not
‘became Jaw, the machinery therein envisaged has not come into existence. How-
ever, to the extent the decision in Bangalore Water Supply holds the field,
provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act are available to the employees of all
‘such institutions provided they fall within the definition of workman.- The
situation at present is wholly unsatisfactory.

4.3. Some States have enacted statutes providing for setting up of tribunals
for the adjudication of disputes or differences between the teachers and the
management of any affiliated college or recognised institution or between the
waiversity and members of its teaching faculty. Some illustrative cases may
be examined. .

4.4, Section 42A of the Poona University Act. 1974, provides for setting
कक of such tribunals. A tribunal was actually set up by an order dated 28th
.. 1979, and it became operational from Ist March, 1979. A retired District
and Sessions Judge was appointed as the Presiding Officer of the Tribumal.
Broadly stated, the jurisdiction of the tribunal. as spélt out in section 428, ex-
tended to the disciplinary matters between teachers and karamcharis of the
salted college and university on the one hand and the management of the
affiliated college or university on the other, as the case may be. This tribunal
was to have only an appellate jurisdiction over the decisions of the disciplinary
committee set up under the university statutes,

4.5. There are parallel provisions in statutes sctting up Shivaji University
gnd. Nagpur University and similar tribunals have been sct up with almost
identical jurisdiction covering the same subject matter.

4.6. There is also an Educational Tribunal set up by the Government of
Gujarat almost on the same lines.

4.7. It is necessary to recall here that every Act setting up a university
makes provision for setting up a domestic disciplinary tribunal for deciding
disciplinary matters. The educational tribunals set up by the States generally
api appellate jurisdiction. It is not the intentidp of this report to deal with

is ary tribunals set up by the universities oi r the Act under which they
are Set up. In fact they are to be retained as root fora. :


One Hundred Twenty-third Report 13

4.8. Educational tribunals set up by the States have by and large very
limited jurisdiction. More or less they deal with disciplinary matters relating
to the members of the teaching staff or the karamcharis. They have no jurisdic-
tion over disputes involving students, examination malpractices or where the
dispute is between the university and the State Government. By and large,
these tribunals are manned usually by retired Judges belonging to the cadre
of District and Sessions Judge who, one can say with no disrespect, would have
no experience of the administration of universities and the problems encountered
by them.

4.9. The decisions of these tribunals are subject to judicial review by the
High Court. The area of interference by the High Court would certainly be
restricted because ordinarily the High Court, in exercise of the power of judi-
cial review under articles 226-227, would not interfere with findings of fact
recorded by the tribunal. These tribunals, to some extent, enjoy the confidence
of the teachers of the university and of affiliated colleges. Available informa-
tion shows that tribunals for Shivaji and Poona University set aside the order
of discharge of teachers and directed reinstatement in 32 out of 63 cases brought ,
before आधा."

wn Before we conclude on this point, it would be fair to point out that
there is a body of opinion जाला views with certain amount of trepidation
justice rendered by tribunals. Tribunals are indisputably proliferating. The Law

Commission, in its pursuit for decentralisation of monolithic administration of
justice in this country, has tended to support the tribunalisation of justice.
Even outside the periphery of the recommendations of the Law Commission,
tribunals have been operating in India since a long time. To illustrate, Income
Tax Appellate Tribunals came into vogue on 25th Jan., 1941. Then there is
a Customs, Excise and Gold Control Tribunal. There is a Railway Rates
Tribunal. There are Industrial Tribunals. Very recently Administrative Tri-
bunals under Administrative Tribunals Act have been set up to deal with dis-
putes between the Government and its employees. Undoubtedly, these tribunals
enjoy the judicial power of the State. Their decisions are subject to judicial
review by the High Court under articles 226-227 and the Supreme Court under
articles 136 and 32 of the Constitution.

4.11. Before the relevant question is posed whether tribunalisation of justice
diminishes the value of justice compared to one rendered by courts, it is neces-
sary to point out that in U.K. alone, there are as many as two thousand tri-
bunals operating in various fields subject to the supervision of the Council on
Tribunals. The Council on Tribunals was first set up under the Tribunals and
Inquiries Act, 1958, which was repealed and replaced by the Tribunals and
Inquiries Act, 1971. The principal functions of the Council are: (a) to kecp
under review the constitution and working of the tribunals; (90) to consider and
report on such matters as may be referred to it from time to time; and (0 to
consider and report on administrative procedures. Administrative law and ad-
ministrative justice require strict compliance with not only prescribed procedure
but by and large the procedure must inhere principles of natural justice. A
compliance with an established procedure and a speaking order would at least
have the tendency to disclose how the decision making mind has worked in
reaching the conclusion and at any rate the decision has to be plausible. The
Council thus co-ordinates the work of different tribunals and its role is found
to be important in impartial dispensation of justice by tribunais. The Council
is not without its critics in that it has been said that it is the toothless lion and
its opinions are often ignored by the Government. It has no participatory role
in drafting legislation for any new statutory tribunal. At some later date, Law
Commission will have to plan a report on a body having supervisory jurisdic-
tion for proliferating tribunals.

‘4.12. Returning to our country, it must be pointed out that tribunals have
never been looked upon with disfavour generally. In fact, functioning of the
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal has been admired by many tax experts. Even
then there is undoubtedly a tilt in favour of courts and against tribunals.

413. Why this element of suspicion creeps in needs not only examination
but the criticism must also be properly and effectively met or it must be accepted.
Courts of law, in contradistinction to tribunals, are generalist courts, Tribuauls

3—1 M of L & J/88


14 One Hundred Twenty-third Report

can be said to be specialist courts in a limited sense. The apprehension is not
to tribunals taking over the function of the courts but the apprehension stems
from the fact about the conticl exercised over the tribunals by the Government,
about the manner, method and power of appointment of personnel manning the
tribunals, and by and large their independence from governmental pressures.
The fasciculus of articles bearing the heading ‘TRIBUNALS’ comprised in Part
XIVA of the Constitution envisages setting up of tribunals for adjudication of
disputes, complaints or offences with respect to matters set out in article 323B(2).
The items set out therein cover a large area. Examining the scope and ambit
of article 323A, which enables the appropriate Government by a suitable legis-
lation to set up service tribunals for dealing with controversies relating to condi-
tions of servive, including the vexed question ct seniority of the Government
employees, the Supreme Court observed that such tribunals may save the courts
from the avalanche of writ petitions and appeals in service matters. The pro-
ceeding: of such tribunal's can have the merit of informality and if they will
not be tied down to strict rules of evidence. they might be able to produce solu-
tions which will satisfy many.” Later on, when the Parliament enacted the Ad-
ministrative Tribunals Act. 1985. its constitutional validity was questioned and
upheld with certain observations by the Constitution Bench’ of the Supreme Court
of India." The court did not disfavour tribunalisation of justice but only con-
centrated its attention on areas which permit tribunals to be looked upon with
a certain amount of suspicion. Aftcr observing that judicial review is a basic
and essential feature of the Constitution and. therefore. no law passed by Parlia-
ment in exercise of its constituent power can abrogate it or tike it away. the
court proceeded to observe that Parliament can set up effective alternative insti-
tutional mechanisms or arrangements for judicial review without dispensing w:th
judicial, review itself. Approaching the matter from this angle, the court ob-
served that the Act provides for another mechanism instead of the High Court
which would be exercising the power of judicial review with a view to enforcing
the constitutional limitations and maintaining the rule of law. It was further
observed that if, by law, the jurisdiction of the High Courts under articles 226
and 227 is excluded and which is permissible, the law must not create a void
but set up another effective institutional mechanism or authority and vest the
power of judicial review in it, The law did pass the test of constitutionality
subject to certain amendments which the court indicated. Thus, tribunalisation
of justice, simultaneously excluding the jurisdiction of the High Court, was not
looked upon with disfavour. The real test to be kept in view is that the tri-
bunals would be courts’ substitutes and, therefore, it must not be such as to
give an appearance that the court justice would no more be available. On the
contrary, instead of the general'st courts, such tribunals will have special experts
manning it. The tribunals having jurisdiction over specified areas can be manned
by specialists in the ficld and, therefore, it is likely to acquire relative speed
and informality of procedure in resolution of disputes. The crux of the matter
is not that tribunals are substitutes for courts but it is as to who mans them
and what procedure would be followed and whether it would be: totally free
from Governmental control. Once care is taken to ensure non-encroachment
into these grey areas, tribunal justice may be found to be more acceptable, wel-
come and effective than the generalist court justice. While recommending.
therefore, a tribural for reso'ving disputes in the field of education, the Com-
mission would point out what effective steps must be taken on the question of
selecting personnel for manning the tribunal, the procedures to be followed by
tribunal and its insulation against governmental interference or interference by
affected interests.

CHAPTER V
THE DEBATE

5.1 Interests directly affected by the subject matter of this report being a
highly vocal segment of our society. in order to avoid the charge of Tushing into
something without giving an adequate opportunity to such affected interests - to
participate in the tentative thinking of the Law Commission, a comprehensive
working paper, to which a questonnaire was annexed, was drawn up and given
wide publicity on March 9, 1987. It was given to the print media and copies
were despatched to the Association of Indian Universities with a request to com-
“municate the same to all the universities. The working paper was also sent to


One Hundred Twenty-third Report 15

the University Grants Commission, to every university and to the teachers’
associations about which the information was available. The Association of
Indian Universities publishes a weekly joarnal, styled as “University News’. In
its issue dated March 23. 1987. the salient portions of the workin: paper were
published for the benefit of wider audience with a request to send the sugges-
tions on the various issues raised in the pzper latest by April 30, 1987.% The
Vice-Chancellors of various universities, to each of which working paper was
sent, were requested to communicate the working paper to the association of
teachers of the same university as well as to the associations of karamcharis of
the university and the association of students of the universivy, inviting them to
submit their views to the Law Commission. The print media also published
a gist of the working paper. Public intimation was given that anyone interested
in the subject is welcome not only to write to the Law Commission but can ask
for copies of the working paper. The Association of Indian Universities also
requested the Vice-Chancelk lor of each university to hold a one day seminar
to discuss the working paper and to forward the views to the Association as
well as to the Law Commission.

5.2. The Association of Indian Universities took a lead in this behalf and
organised a group discussion on May 2, 1987, on the working paper issued by
the Law Commission. The panelists at the discussion, aiaongst others, included
Chairman and Member Secretary of the Law Commission, Prof. Yash Pal, Chair-
man U.G.C., Prof. G. Ram Reddy, President of the Association of Indian Univer-
sities, Prof. Moonis Raza, Vice-Chancellor, University of Delhi, Prof. S.K.
Aggarwal, Vice-Chancellor, Agra University, Prof. M.V. Mathur, foriner Vice-

५ University of Rajasthan and Member of Fourth pay panel, Prof
Rais Ahmed, former Vice-Chairman of U.G.C.. anc Shti G.B.K. Abuja,
former Vice-Chancellor. Undoubtedly, one or two amongst the panelists
were not able io remain to present. More than 61 Vice-Chancellors
including Direct and Heads of Departments atiended the discussion.
There were certain heads of institutes who 3150 attended the same. Jt was
an in-depth discussion, all pervasive in character, accompanied by scintil-
lating analysis and simultaneously unravelling the present distressing situation
in the area of resolution of disputes in the field of education. Vice-Chancellor
after Vice-Chancellor supported the proposal. There was near unanimity be-
cause only one Vice-Chancellor opposed the proposals made by the Law Com-
mission in its working paper. The President of the Association of Indian Uni-
versities, Prof. G. Ram Reddy, Vice-Chancellor of Indira Gandhi National Open
University, who presided over the group discussion, emphatically said that the
proposal mooted for setting up a Central Education Tribunai was ‘just the
medicine needed’ to rejuvenate the varisities. He proceeded in the same vein
and expostulated that if you can make the Government appoint such a tribunal,
you will be doing a service to university education’. The detiberations at the
group discussion were widely reported. in newspapers, genetally under the banner
heading ‘Experts Find Indian Universities Sick’ riefiy. “experts and Vice-
Chancellors favoured setting up of Central Education Tribunal’ The group
discussion examined each question appended to the working paper and tried to
give its point of view on each question. The journal of the Association carried
the summary of discussion in its issue dated May 11, 1987." Immediately
ter, the Association forwarded to the Law Commission the :ecommenda-
tions of the Vice-Chancellors participating in the group discussion organised by
the Association of indian Universities for the consideration 07 the Law Com-
mission. Briefly stated, the Association appreciated the initiative taken by the
Law Commision in regard to decentralisation of administration of justice per-
taining to disputes involving centres of higher education. Ail the expert pane-
lists and Vice-Chancellors endorsed the Law Commission’s proposal to set up
Central Education Tribunal which would deal with alleged miscarriage of justice
involving concerned Governments, universities, teachers and students in the
universities and colleges. They were of the opinion that the internal system
of removing grievances and solving disputes should be made fully operational
and the tribunal may take up only those cases which have gone through the
university system for removal of grievances. They agreed with the working
paper that such a Central Education Tribunal would provide an a!l-India pers-
peétive to problems in the field of education and, with this end in view, a
multilevel and integrated judicial system should be designed in such a way
that the objective of decentralisation of administration of justice is fully realised. |
‘On the composition of the tribunal, they were of the view that the tribunal

1



16 One Hundred Twenty-third Report

should comprise of eminent educational administrators, Vice-Chancellors, pro-
fessors and Judges. In constituting the tribunal, they said, utmost care should
be exercised in choosing persons of high integrity and the tribunal should be
assisted by a strong secretariat. They were of the opinion that while all the
disputes pertaining to educational matters should be under the purview of the
tribunal, property matters should be dealt with by the civil courts. They
unanimously felt that the tribunal would be able to tackie educational disputes
expeditiously which will go a long way in ensuring peace in university campuses
that contributes to academic standards. As a follow up action, they resolved
to set up a working group to further make concrete suggestions in this behalf to
the Law Commission. Such a group was set up under the chairmanship of Prof.
G. Ram Reddy. The group submitted various suggestions.

5.3. The group recommended that the Law Commission's model for univer-
sity tribunal is generally acceptable. | They classified the disputes in which
universities are involved on the basis of the respective constituencies affected.
Broadly, according to them, the problems can be grouped to fall into three
categories, namely : —

(1) student problems—admissions, rustication, copying, etc.;

(2) problems of teachers and administrative staff—seniority, promotion,
service conditions, etc.; and

(3) problems concerning Vice-Chancellors, the relationship between the
university and the State Governments, Chancellors regarding matters
of finance and other issues of policy.

The resasons which support setting up of usiversity tribunuls, according to them,
include: --

(a) the over-crowding of courts—this is a matter which has, rightly and
naturally, engaged the attention of the Law Commission. — This,
however, is relevant to universities only so far as they want speedy
disposal of educational disputes;

(0) the delay in disposal of cases which is the cause of much confusion and
uncertainty in universities;

(०) The need for specialist attention when dealing with matters concerning
education. The absence of such element in judicial decision-making,
which has been strongly portrayed in the Law Commission’s working
paper, has resulted in avoidable confusion; and

(d) the desire of preserving the autonomy of the universities.

Referring to the existing grievance handling machinery in most universities for
students and staff, it was pointed out that the participation of the same hierarchy
in the complaints context as in the original cause (admissions, copying, rustica-
tion, etc.) or their various levels and texts or inter-action have taken away the
appearance of objectivity and impartiality from the process. According to them,
the student seeks a neutral body which will give him a decision on the merits
of his case alone, regardless of extraneous  personal/professional/hieratchical
factors. This is enough justification from the point of view of the Law Com-
mission for setting up a Central Education Tribunal. The group suggested a
three-tier grievance hardling machinery. At the grassroot level, it was sug-
gested that every university should provide a grievance cell or forum for students
for dispute settlement. This cell or forum should be independent of the university
hierarchy and should comprise of people who are conversant with problems
relating to education and who fulfil the aspiration for justice not only being
done but being seem to be done. After voicing their apprehension for tribunals
being set up as substitutes for courts, it was suggested that there should be
regional and central tribunals which would hear appeals from university level
grievance-handling machinery and the central tribunal would furnish a second
Jevel of appeal. If this is undertaken, according to them, the High Court jurisdic-
tion would become redundant and only one appeal to Supreme Court under
article 136 would survive. On the question of composition of the tribunal, they
adopted the norms enunciated by the Supreme Court in Sampath Kumar’s case.”
According to them, both the regional and central tribunal would have two


One Hundred Twenty-third Report 17

independent wings—one for students’ matters and the other for teachers’ and
katamcharis’ matters. The power to appoint personnel manning the Tribunal
must be vested in much a body as would inspire confidence in the selection of
pérsonnel but the matter has been left at that without specifying in what body
the power should be vested. At any rate, one can read between lines to say that
the power should not be vested in the Government. On the question of jurisdic-
tion of the tribunal, they were of the opinion that the issue concerning the rela-
tionship of Vice-Chancellor with the State Government, matters of finance, the
relationship of the university with the UGC, the relationship between the Chaa-
cellor and the Vice-Chancellor are matters of policy and, therefore, models
based on the Press Council and Bar Council should be considered to meet the
need. They also expressed an opinion that a code of conduct for Chancellors,
Vice-Chancellors, State Governments and Central Government should precede
the setting up of the forum, to be called “Collective Ombudsman”.

5.4. The debate at the group discussion as. well as the recommendations of
the participants in the group discussion and the recommendations made by the
group set up by the participants as a follow up action have been extensively
examined in this report for one specific reason that Association of Indian Uni-
versities represents a vitally affected interest and has taken keen interest not only
in the working paper issued by the Law Commission but on all relevant aspects
relating to the subject matter of this report.

5.5. Apart from the Association of Indian Universities, the Commission
received replies from Registrars of the universities, Deans, Heads of Depart-
ments, Chairman of the Centre and Directors, Ministry of Education, Govern-
ment of India, and UGC, teachers, a Judge and advocate, Association of Non-
teaching Employees and others. It would not be proper to dissect the replies
statistically but the broad current of thinking appearing from them should be
referred to. Barring some teachers and teachers’ associations, there has been
not only appreciation but general agreement with the proposals mooted im the
working paper of the Law Commission. A few teachers have also broadly
agreed with the proposal but made certain further suggestions to curb the appre
hension that such tribunals would be over-awed by Vice-Chancellors with whom
generally the teachers have the disputes. The body, according to them, would,
therefore, be biased in favour of the Vice-Chancellors and, therefore, the
universities. Two associations of karamcharis have generally supported the
tentative proposal set out by the Law Commission. It is not necessary to
re-state the reasons which have appealed to those who have broadly accorded
their approval to the proposal.

5.6. It is absolutely necessary to highlight the objections, apprehensions
and reservations of those who are opposed to the proposals of the Law Com-
misssion. Again avoiding the statistics, the objectives and grounds for reserva-
tion common to those who disfavour the proposal may be looked into.

5.7. The first and the foremost reservation stems from the fact that tri-
bunalisation of justice simultaneously removing the shield of the High Court
would adversely affect the quality of justice. The members of the teaching
faculty of the university and karamcharis of the university voiced a fear that
they are the victims of university authorities and in the absence of the shield
of protection of High Court. their position would be very vulnerable. The
genesis of the apprehension is not in the concept of tribunal but in the com-
position of the tribunal—an aspect which the Law Commission is giong to
seriously look into. And the second limb of the apprehension is as to who would
enjoy the power to appoint the personnel to man the tribunal. Avoiding any
repetition, let it not be forgotten that justice at the hands of specialist tribunal
has found favour with the apex court in the country. If judicial review is not
taken away, then instead of the High Court, there can be any other forum or
mechanism or authority in which power of judicial review can be vested by the
Parliament.* In fact, there is a body of opinion current in the country that
specialist tribunals, in comparison to generalist courts, would be better suited
to resolve disputes requiring specialist knowledge of the field of activity in which
disputes have arisen, to resolve which tribunals can be set up.

5.8 The second limb of the apprehension wes that the proposed Central
Education Tribunal would be dumping ground for retired Vice-Chanceliors,


18 One Hundred Twenty-third Report

Judges, bureaucrats and others, and that their appointment will be attributable
to political largesse. Care will be taken in this behalf to find a body in which
power will be vested to select the personnel for manning the tribunal. But it
would be wasting the accumulated experience of the senior citizens of the
society, such as, retired Vice-Chancellors, Judges and even bureaucrats, if their
services cannot be utilised in the field in which they have some ex, pertise. In
fact, Law Commission is at a loss to understand why there is such a feeling
of distrust against retired Judges. Article 128 of the Constitution confers power
on the Chief Justice of India with the previous consent of the President to re-
quest any person who has held the office of a Judge of the Supreme Court to
sit-and act as a Judge of the Supreme Court. If so appointed, he can deal with
cases pending in the Supreme Court. If a retired Judge can be thus trusted to
deal.with cases in the Supreme Court itself, the Law Commission is at a loss
to understand why he cannot be trusted to use his expert knowledge and rich
experience by being appointed to a tribunal. In the past, there are illustrious
cases of retired Judges being recalled to work in the Supreme Court and no
grievance has been heard in this behalf. Article 224A makes an identical pro-
vision for utilisation of services of a High Court Judge to work in the High
Court. This very reasoning should mutatis mutandis apply to retired Vice-
Chancellois, men of eminence in the field of education and even bureaucrats.

5.9. Whe next grievance entertained was that there is not enough workload
to.warrant establishment of such a tribunal and, consequently, the establishment
of the proposed tribunal would be an uneconomic venture. This raises a vital
issue of expenditure on administration of justice. It is at present being treated
as non-development expenditure. A radical re-thinking is absolutely necessary in
this behali. A society without a system of efficient administration of justice
in a parliamentary democracy is inconceivable. Expenditure on justice is a
social overhead in a developing country. And diversification and decentralisa-
tion of administration of justice may necessitate specialist tribunals in certain
well-defined areas where even if the workload is aot sufficient, tribunal must
set up so as to relieve the congestion and burden on the generalist courts, to
be ise, High Courts and Supreme Court, thereby achieving the more desired
result of speedy and expeditious disposal of disputes, avoiding strife and tension
in the society. Every confrontation certainly adds to disharmony and __ strife
in the society, the genesis of which is ordinarily in an unresolved dispute.
Therefore, this workload argument need not be given importance. There is an
additional reason not to attach any worthwhile importance to it for this reason
that full statistical material is not available in this behalf.

5.10. There is a third limb to this aspect of the matter. The proposed
tribunal is likely to be invested with an expansive jurisdiction. The courts at
at present hardly deal with disputes between the university and the Govern-
ment, the disputes arising out of the appointment or non-appointment of Vice-
Chancellors and the disputes between Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor which
are proposed to be brought within the purview of the tribunal. At present
these disputes ordinarily do not reach the court and those affected live with
them. The worry on account of non-availability of enough workload disappears
forthwith.

5.11. One more grievance has been voiced. It has been emphatically stated
that the moment you remove the shell of court protection and introduce a tri-
bunal, it would not be long before it is politicalised and would lose its credi-
bility. This apprehension is attributable to the lack of knowledge about the
body in whom the power is to be vested for selecting personnel for manning
the tribunal. In a ore man, one vote, one value society, there is hardly an individual
who has no political views. Intelligent political views is a barometer of awake-
sing in the society. Holding political views does not make a man, a politician.
The situation referring to politicisation cannot be wished away but’ must be
protected against.

5.12. The balance sheet of advantages and disadvantages emerging from
the debate clearly tend to indicate that the balance tilts in favour of positive
approach. The anticipated apprehension should not be ignored but care must
he taken to see that it does not materialise. Therefore, the Law Commission
must proceed to examine its own proposals now on merits.


One Hundred Twenty-third Report 19

CHAPTER VI
THE APPROACH

6.1. Since the British consolidated their hold over India, in order to com-
plete their conquest they introduced numerous institutions in this country model-
led on parallel institutions in U.K. One such field in which the entire English
model was planted was legal justice system in India. Numerous laws were en-
acted, most of which were copybook reproduction of the statute on the same
subject as in U.K. Once the laws were enacted in this manner. the machinery
for enforcement of laws as also forum for resolution of disputes arising
the enforcement of laws followed in the wake of the legal system. The justice
system in this country was almost a replica of British courts. It is unnecessary
to go into the parallelism save and except saying that the British model of
court of justice was a State-appointed Judge in a court set up by the State
exercising state judicial power. Appellate forums were created more or less on
the fines of U.K. Court of Appeal and the Privy Council fulfilled the role of
‘the House of Lords for the appeals from colonies. This model made almost
a compelling necessity of following British precedents without question.

6.2. Since the advent of independence til] today. with minor variations the
same models are operating. There are State courts at the grassroot level. There
are district courts enjoying original as well as appellate jurisdiction. There
are High Courts at State level having both original and appellate jurisdiction and
the Supreme Court is at the apex of judicial pyramid.

6.3. It is universally accepted that this system has become dysfunctional,
ineffective and is unable to deliver goods. This situation has been analysed
threadbare by the present Law Commission in its first report.” Therefore, the
Law Commission was in’ search of a new model. The search for the model
had to satisfy primarily two objects for which the Law Commission was asked
to.recommend judicial reforms. The first and important one was to introduce
decentralisation in the monolithic administration of justice. Secondly, to devise
participatory models wherever it is possible. The Law Commission accordingly
devised a participatory model which is fully set out in its reports. The
grounds ani the reasons which appealed to the Law Commission to recommend
such a participatory model simultaneously introducing decentralisation in the
administration will mutatis mutandis apply here and, therefore, it would be: idle
parade of familiar knowledge to recapitulate them here. 7

64. Briefly stated, the approach of the Law Commission is that where
specialist knowledge is a pre-requisite in resolution of disputes arising in a cer-
tain area, the forum for resolution of disputes must not be monolithic, State
set up judicial courts but a Participatory mode! wherein specialists having re-
quisite knowledge of the nature of the disputes arising in that field may inter-
act with judicial personnel in the resolution of disputes. Experts’ association
would make available their expertise in the resolution of disputes. And by that
very fact, the resolution of disputes could be expeditious and effective. The
Law-Commission, having examined various suggestions made to it in the debate,
is fully convinced that disputes which arise in the field of education do require
Specialist knowledge for their resolution. It is further convinced that such dis-
putes be excluded from the jurisdiction of generalist courts, including the High
Court. Let it be stated clearly, specifically and confidently that by and large
there was unanimous support, including the one from the Association of Indian
Universities, a body representing all the universities of the courty, for such a

‘participatory model. The divergence of opinion is on the question of the cons-

titation of the forum, not the model. In other words, there was near unani-
‘mity that the forum for resolution of disputes arising in the field of education
must be participatory in character. Thete was equal unanimity in opinion that
once such a forum is devised. the jurisdiction of generalist courts, including
that of the High Courts, should be excluded.

6.5. The approach must also indicate the direction and specify the method
by which the Government of India can, if so minded, implement the किन
mendations made herein, This report is a link in a chain of reports submi


20 One Hundred Twenty-third Report

by the Law Commission in fulfilment of its assignment of recommending com-
prehensive judicial reforms. In the debate. it was pointed out that subject of
‘education’ is generally dealt with by States and in the absence of the topic
of ‘education’ in article 323B. the Central Government would not have power
to undertake any legislation to set up the educational tribunal envisaged in this
Feport and recommended as part of it. Indisputably, article 323B. which enu-
Merates the topics on which appropriate Legislature may, by law, provide for
edjudication or trial by tribunals of any disputes, complaints or offences, does
not specify ‘education’ as one such topic. After pointing out this aspect, it was
asserted that even if the Law Commission were to recommend setting up such
a tribunal, the Union Government to which it submits its report would be, in
the absence of power. incapacitated from implementing the recommendations
in the report and that the report would be an exercise in futility. :

6.6. The task of recommending exhaustive and comprehensive judicial re-
forms for saving the justice system from utter collapse has been assigned to the
Law Commission. The primary aim of this report is to take one more step
in the direction of recommending judicial reforms. The Terms of Reference
for Studying Judicial Reforms assigned to the Law Commission specify that the
Commission may suggest other tiers or systems within the judicial hierarchy to
reduce the volume of work in the Supreme Court and High Courts and with
this end in view may recommend the matters for which Tribunals as envisaged
in Part XIVA of the Constitution need to be established expeditiously. Judi-
cial reforms aim at reforming the system of administration of justice. Prior to
the enactment of the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act. 1976, which
came into force on Jan. 3, 1977, entry 3 in the State List read as under:-—

“Administration of justice: constitution and organisation of all courts ex-
cept the Supreme Court and the High Court. officers and servants of the
High Court: procedure in rent and revenue courts; fees taken in all courts
except the Supreme Court.” .

Since the amendment, the words “administration of justice: constitution and
organisation of all courts except the Supreme Court and the High Court” were

Simultaneously, effective from the same date, by the same amendment
Act, entry 11A was introduced in the Concurrent List which reads as under:—

“Administration of justice: constitution and organisation of all courts ex-
cept the Supreme Court and the High Courts”.

Again, entry 11 in the State List prior to the aforementioned constitutional
amendment read as under:-—

“Education, including universities, subject to the provisions of entries 63,
64, 65 and 66 of List I and entry 25 of List III”.

Since the amendment, entry 11 in the State List has been omitted and entry. 25
in the Concurrent List. which prior tothe amendment provided for only ‘voca-
tional and technical training of labour’, has been re-enacted as under:-— ~

“Education, including technical education. medical education and universi-
ties, subject to the provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I”.

The original topic ‘vocational and technical training of labour’ is retained.

6.7. Having referred to the entries, let it be pointed out that if the Parlia-
ment desires to enact a law which, in pith and substance, deals with the ad-
ministration of justice in its various manifestations, entry 11A would clothe
Parliament with power to enact such a law. The matter does not rest here. If
the educational tribunal herein recommended in respect of disputes in which
universities are involved apart from other educational institutions and primarily
deals with the topic of education. the subject being in the Concurrent List, Par-
Hament will be competent to enact the law dealing with the topic of resolution
of disputes arising in the field of education in discharge of its obligation to
provide for administration of justice. Briefly, a combined reading of entry 11A
and the amended entry 25 in the Concurrent List would unquestionably clothe
Parliament with power to enact the legislation for setting up the tribunals dealt
with and recommended by this report. In this view of the matter, the absence
9f the topic of ‘education’ in artic's 3238 is of no consequence.


One Hundred Twenty-third Report 21
CHAPTER शा
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1. Approaching the matter with an open mind, free from bias or pre-
judice, and after taking into account the arguments for and against and pros
and ‘cons of all aspects, the Law Commission is convinced that in the larger
interests of the justice system as well as in the interest of the centres of edu-
cation and in public interest, a separate and specific model for resolution of
disputes arising in the field of education is the felt need of the time. Once such
a forum is to be devised. the Law Commission, in order to be comprehensive
in its recommendations, must set out its structure. composition, jurisdiction and
the authority invested with power to make appointments of persons who will
be manning the tribunals.

STRUCTURE

72 The Law Commission is of the opinion that a three-tier structure
would be necessary for effectively handling all sorts of disputes in the field
of education. The three-tiers would include the grassroot level, State level and
an all-India level.

7.3. Dealing with the question of structure, it must at once be stated that
the proposed Central Educational Tribunal is not to replace the grievance hand-
ling machinery which each university must provide for settling the disputes
arising between the university and its students, university and members of its
teaching faculty, university and its karamcharis as a forum at the grassroot level.
It must be easily and expeditiously accessible and must be of such a nature as
to inspire confidence among the disputants coming before it, Therefore, as the
first step, every university must set up a grievance handling forum. It must
be of a participatory mode} inasmuch as all the affected interests in the univer-
sity should be represented in it, the access to which must be unimpeded by aby
technicalities. It must follow principles of natural justice. It must handle dis-
putes expeditiously. It must give reasons for its decision. The Law Commis-
sion need not suggest any specific model. The model to be devised by each
university must answer the aforementioned minimum requirements. The most
important thing a university must provide is that the disputes coming before it
must be resolved within a reasonably short time, not exceeding in any case six
months.

7.4. Broadly stated. the grievance handling machinery must be in a position
to deal with admissions to the university and affiliated colleges, malpractices
at examinations, disciplinary action 2gainst students and even students’ com-
plaints against the members of the teaching staff or even such problems as in-
adequacy of facilities for effective educational programme. This forum must.
have a separate wing for dealing with the disputes between the university and
members of its teaching faculty as well as between the affiliated colleges and
teachers employed therein. covering all aspects of general conditions of service
but excluding pay scales, dearness allowance and other perks.

7.5. The next tier in the verticat hierarchy must operate at the State level
At one stage, the Law Commission was not impressed by the suggestion that
there must be a State level tribunal. But it was said that for easy accessibility,
a State level tribunal is a sine qua non. It was apprehended that otherwise all
the petty disnutes dealt with by grassroot level tier will land into the Central
Educational Tribunal and unnecessarily clog its dockets. This approach dis-
closes sensitivity and logic. Therefore, even though the working paper issued
by-the 1.99 Commission did not envisage a State level tribunal, the national
debate supports setting up of such a tribunal, Accordingly, every State shall set
up a State level educational tribunal. It will have both original and appellate
jurisdiction. Where vital matters of policy are involved affecting teachers, stu-
dents and university administrators, the matter can be brought before the State
Jevel educational tribunal enjoying original jurisdiction. What the Commission
has in mind is this. There are numerous universities in 2very State. Vige-
Chanbellors of these universities try to co-ordinate their activities. Even. shen

4-1 M of L & 3/88


22 One Hundred Twenty-third Report

there are problems where the university administrators on the one hand, teachers
on the other and students on the third hand in respect of. common problems
may not be able to arrive at a solution, such as, the date of examination or
postponement of the same. Such problems can be brought before the State Edu-
cational Tribunal. This approach would help in removing areas of frustration
and every potential dispute can be the subject matter of discussion and satis-
factory solution.

7.6. The State level tribunal will also have appellate jurisdiction over the
decisions of the university level grievance handling forum.

7.7. At the apex level, there should be a Central Educational Tribunal or
National Educational Tribunal, whatever name befits its status and position. The
national level tribunal will also have both original and appellate jurisdiction.
Appeals against the decision of the State level tribunal would lie to the national
level tribunal. Its original jurisdiction would be extensively set out under the
heading ‘jurisdiction’ in this chapter.

COMPOSITION

7.8. This is a grey area. The reservations against the proposal of the Law
Commission to recommend setting up of tribunals stem from the possible com-
position of such tribunals. Largely, it is not the model that is objected. The
apprehension is that the tribunal which will replace courts would be manned by
people who would not inspire confidence. This condemnation in advance is
unwarranted. But the apprehension behind it must be take note of. Undoubte-
diy, it is true that the tribunals would replace courts and they will operate under
the umbrella of the Supreme Court supervising their function under article 136
of the Constitution. Even then, undoubtedly, the jurisdiction of all courts up
to the level of High Court would be excluded once these tribunals as herein
envisaged are set up. As the jurisdiction of all courts up to the High Court
is being excluded, the caution uttered by the Supreme Court in recommending
the composition of these tribunals must not be lost sight of. To recall, it has
been said that judicial review is the basic and essential feature of the Consti-
tution and it cannot be dispensed with. However, it was conceded that if the
judicial review is not being dispensed with, it will be within the competence
of Parliament to substitute in place of High Court another alternative institu-
tional mechanism of arrangement for judicial review provided it is not less effi-
cacious than the High Court. In order to provide for such a forum as an alter-
native to the High Court, it was suggested that what is needed in a judicial
tribunal which is intended to supplant the High Court is legal training and ex-
perience. Accordingly, the court struck down clause (c) of section 60) of the
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985." To inspire confidence in the tribunal, the
court suggested that the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Administrative
Tribunal must be cither a District Judge or an advocate who is qualified to
“be a Judge of the High Court. The court directed that such amendment must
be carried out to make the provision constitutionally valid. The Law Commis-
sion has kept this suggestion in view while recommending the composition of
the tribunal.

7.9. It must be conceded that the composition of the tribunals must ins-
pire confidence amongst the disputants coming before the tribunal. But merely
providing for appointment of judicial members would defeat the other end in
view of the Law Commission. namely, that of replacing the generalist courts
and to associate specialists with the tribunal. The tribunals have to have the
character and composition of specialist courts. Both these objectives must be
fulfilled while determining the composition of the tribunal.

7.10. Accordingly, it is recommended that the State level tribunals should
have as a Chairman a sitting or retired Judge of the High Court and two other
Members who are eligible for being appointed as High Court Judges. The re-
maining two must be from the rank of former Vice-Chancellor and an eminent
professor. The tribunal would thus consist of five members.

7.11. The Central/National tribunal must also reflect the same features. It
must have as its Chairman a sitting or retired वी of the Supreme Court of
India, two other members who are eligible fon oe Z appointed as. Judge of


One Hundred Twenty-third Report 23

the Supreme Court of India. the remaining two must be from the rank of dis-
tinguished educationists, former Vice-Chancellors and administrators who have
deajt with the problems of education and eminent professors.

7.12. It is needless to say that both the State level tribunal and the national
level tribunal must have a secretariat of its own.

7.13. The strength of the State and Central/National Educational Tribunal
herein indicated is to be observed in the first instance at the time of commenee-
ment. Depending upon the workload and other incidental requirements,
the strength may be increased commensurate with the workload, but retaining
the essential features of the Tribunal in the matter of composition. To be
precise, selection fron: any ‘one sector need not be disproportionately heavy
compared to other sectors. It must also be clarified that the Tribunal need not
sit en banc, but can sit in benches with this pre-requisite that one of the mem-
bers of the Bench must of necessity be a Judicial Member.

JURISDICTION

7.14. The jurisdiction of the State level tribunal has been specified a little
while ago. The national level tribunal must have orizinal jurisdiction where
vital policy questicns may be examined. In this respect, the working group
set up by the Association of Indian Universities has expressed an opinion that
‘issues concerning the relationship of Vice-Chancellors with the State Govern-
ment, matters of finance, the relationship of the university with U.G.C., Vice-
Chancellor with Chancellor, etc., are matters of policy’. It suggested that
models based on Press Council and Bar Council could be considered to meet
the need. In the view of the Law Commission, even policy matters on which
a difference of opinion emerges depending upon its State Jevel coverage or
national level coverage can be brought before tl fis State level tribunal or national
level tribunal, as the case may be. Just to illustrate the point, one may pro-
fitably refer to the recent all-India teachers’ strike which lasted for about two
months. It may be that the view of the Government of India was that the strike
was not justified. It is equally possible that the teechers believe that a raw
deal has been done to them. These are not individual grievances. There
may be different shades of opinion on policy matters. But ultimately, there
is confrontation which implies there is a dispute and which can be resolved.
The national level tribunal can be invested with jurisdiction even with matters
of policy. To take une more illustration, gradually a grievance has developed
that in the matter of selection of Vice-Chancellers. ceitain unhealthy practices
have developed and this reflects upon the selection whi ultimately devalues
the office of the Vice-Chancellor. Undoubtedly, there 3 body like the Uni-
versity Grants Commission. But the national level tribunal by and large re-
presenting affected interests and presided over by a highly trained judicial mind
can be trusted to lay down guidelines in the matter of selection of Vice-Chan-
cellors. Similarly, in the near future, 2 proposal to set up का all-India
educational service may have to be seriously considered. The probiems in
setting up such a service can be well sorted out by the national level tribunal.
Even the code of conduct which is suggested by the Association of Indian Uni-
versities can be drawn up by the national level tribunal. Such jurisdiction of
widest amplitude must be conferred on the national level tribuna).

POWER OF APPOINTMENT

7.15. Both the State level tribunal and the national level tribunal would be
manned by judicial and non-judicial members. It is easy to locate the centre
of power for recommending appointments for judicial members.

7.16 The Law Commission has submitted a comprehensive report for
setting up of a National Judicial Service Commission. That body is going to
have an effective voice in the appointment of Judges in regular hierarchy of
courts at all levels. Therefore, that body can be confidently trusted to make
recommendations for appointment of judicial members of the State level and
national level tribunals.


24 One Hundred Twenty-third Report

7.17. With regard to the appointment of non-judicial members, the Gover-
nor, in consultation with the University Grants Commission, will appoint non-
judicial members of the State level tribunal. Similarly, the Presileat of India,
in consultation with the University Grants Commission, will appoint nun-
judicial members of the national level tribunal. This method of appointment
will allay any apprehension in this bebalf.

7.18. Looking to the expansive jurisdiction conferred on the State-level
and national level educational tribunal, there is going to be enough workload
at both the levels. However, it is also necessary to transfer all pending
matters in all courts, excluding the Supreme Court, to the tribunals that may
be set up. Therefore, all education matters pending in all courts, exchiding
the Supreme Court, shall stand transferred to the respective tribunals having
jurisdiction in this respect.

7.19. Education is a social overhead in a developing economy and, there-
fore, the expenses of the State level tribunal shall be borne by the State Govern-
ment and of the national level tribunal by the Union of India.

7.20. The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of india under article 136
temains unimpaired by the changes herein indicated.

7.21. We recommend accordingly.
(D. A. DESAI)

Chairman
(V. S. RAMA DEVI)
Member Secretary

NEW DELHI,
January 15, 1988.


One Hundred Twentysthird Report 25
RBFERENCES

LCI 122nd Report.
Roman Tomasic and Malcolm M. Feeley, Neighbourhood Justice,

~ p. (ix).

31.

32.
33.

Ibid., p. (ix).

Report of the Education Commission (Kothari Commission), 1966, for-
warding letter of Shri D.S. Kothari dated June 29, 1966.

National Policy On Education — 1986, p.1.

Ibid., p.3.

State of Madras Vs. Champakam Dorairajan, 1951 SCR 526.
M.R. Balaji Vs. State of Mysore, AIR 1963 SC 649.

T. Devadasam Vs. Union of India, AIR 1964 SC 179.

R. Chitralekha Vs. State of Madras, AIR 1964 SC 1823.

> Triloki Nath Vs. State of J. & K., AIR 1961 SC 1.

. A. Periakarutipan Vs. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1971 SC 2303.

}. State of Andhra Pradesh Vs. U.S.V. Balram, AIR 1972 SC 1375.

. Janki Prasad Parimoo Vs. State of J & K, AIR 1973 SC 930.

. State of U.P. Vs. Pradeep Tandon, AIR 1975 SC 563.

., KS: Jayusree Vs. State of Kerala, AYR 1976 SC 2381.

. K.C. Vasanth Kumar Vs, State of Karnataka, AYR 1985 SC 1495.

. Dr, Pradeep Jain Vs. Union of India, AIR 1984 SC 1420.

. CAD, Vol. पा, p. 448.

. Dr Dinesh Kumar Vs. Motilal Nehru Medical College, All 1985 (3) SCR

. Dr, Dinesh Kumar Vs. Motilal Nehru Medical College, AIR 1986 SC 1877.
. State of Kerala and Another Vs. Kalaprakkal John Andrew and Others

1982 (1) SCALE 530.

. Smita Jonbhai Master and Others Vs. State of Gujarat and Others, 1981 (4)

SCC 542.

. Supra ref. 10, at 1831.

. Supra ref. 12 at 2307.

. Ajay Hasia Vs. Khalid Mujid Sehravardi, 1981 (1) SCC 722 at 746.

. Nishi Maghu Vs. State of J & K, 1984 SCR 95.

. Kaushal Kumar Gupta Vs. State of J&K, AIR 1984 SC 1056.

. Dr. N.C. Gupta Vs. Dr. Arun Kumar Gupta, 1979 (2) SCC 339.

. The Principal, King George Medical College, Lucknow Vs. Vishan Kumar

Aggarwal & Anr. AIR 1984 SC 221.

Dr. Muneeb Ul Rehman Haroon & Ors Vs. Government of Jammu &
Kashmir State & Ors., AIR 1984 SC 1585.

Hadibandhu Rautarao & Ors. Vs. State of Orissa, ( 1985) 4 SCC 47,

Rajendra Prusod Mathur Vs. Karnataka University and Anr. AIR 1986
SC 1448.

| Dr. Y.P. Gupta Vs. Union of India and Ors. AIR 1984 SC 541.
35.

Sarvesh Narain Mishra Vs. Vice-Chancellor, Aligarh Muslim University,
1982 (2) SCC 363, and an Order dated Fuly;27, 1987.


26

One Hundred Twenty-third Report

36. Bishweshwar Dayal Sinha Vs. University of Bihar, AIR 1965 SC 601.

38.

39.

Al.
42.
43.

45.
46.

47.
43.
49.

50.
51.

82

53,
. Zerox copies of extracts from leading national dailies.

SARA

59.
_ 60. LCI 114th and 122nd Reports.
61.

|. St. Xavier's College Vs. State Gf Gujarat, AIR 1974 50 1389; followed by

‘All Saints High School Vs. Government of A.P., AIR 1980 SC 1042.

Frank Anthony Public School Employees Association Vs. Union of India,
1986 (4) SCC 707.

Aziz Basha V's. Union of India, AIR 1968 SC 662.

DAY College, Jallandhar Vs. State of Punjab, ATR 1971 SC 1737.
Hardwarilal Vs. G.D. Tapase, AYR 1982 Punjab and Haryana 439.
Times of Iadia, Dec. 15, 1987, p. 15.

Elizabeth C. Wright, “Court and Universities: Impact of Litigation on
University Autonomy”, 1985 Vol. 27 JILI p. 35.

Vice-Chancellors’ Conference, September 1967, New Delhi, UGC Report,
p. 43.
University uf Dethi Vs. Ram Nath, AYR 1963 SC 1873.

Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board Vs. Rajappa, 1978 (2) SCC
213 at 266.

M. Hidayatullah, former Chief Justice of India and former Vice President
of India, in his Foreword to the Third Edition of the Law of Industrial
Disputes by Mr. O.P. Gupta.

Ibid.

S.P. Sathe, College Tribunals in Pune and Bombay: A Survey, 1981,
Monograph submitted to the ICSSR, Western Regional Centre, Bombay.

K.K. Datta Vs. Union of India, AIR 1980 SC 2056.

S.P. Sampath Kumar Vs. Union of Indie, AIR 1987 SC 386.
University News dated March 23, 1987, pp. 5-10.

Times of India dated May 4, 1987; Statesman of the same date.

Patriot dated 370 May, 1987.
University News dated May 11, 1987, pp. 12-13.

|. SP. Sampath Kumar Vs. Union of India, AIR 1987 SC 386.

Ibid., at 389.
LCI 214th Report.

३.0. Sampath Kumar Vs. Union of India, AYR 1987 SC 386.


One Hundred Twenty-third Report 27

Tele No.: 384487 Telegram: LAWCOM
(Para 1.2)
ANNEXURE
Immediate

No. 6(2) (3)/87-L.C.
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Shastri Bhavan
(Floor No. 7),
New Delhi-110.001.

March 9, 1987.

To

Subject :—Working Paper on Decentralisation of Administration of Justice:
Disputes Invoiving Centres of Higher Education.

Sir/Madam,

The Law Commission of India has been entrusted with the task of studying
previa. की ting judicial reforms inter alia . with a view to find cut the need for
ion of justice by establishing other tiers or systems within the judi-
cial hierarchy. In pursuance thereof, the Commission intends to undertake a
study of the need to have a Central Education Tribunal to deal with causes,
controversies and disputes involving concerned Government, universities, pro-
fessors in the universities and affilieted colleges and students, with comprehen-
‘sive jurisdiction to dea! with disputes involving the aforesaid parties. Accor-
dingly, the Law Commission has drawn up a Working Paper containing inane jues-
tionnaire for this limited purpose and is interested to have the views of all imeéres-
ted persons/bodies on the subject. A copy of the Working Paper is enclosed.

2. The Commission would. therefore, request you to convey your views
on the questionnaire sc as to reach the Commission early, and in any cate,
not later than 30॥ April. 1987. The Commission would alsc 9७९ gratefaly tf
copies. are made and distributed to the concerned teachers associations, students
assodiations and other academic bodies with a request to directly transmit their
views to the Law Commission. हु

Yours faithfilly,

{Sd.)

(५.5. RAMA DEVD
Eacks.: As stated.


28 One Hundred Twenty-third Report
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

WORKING PAPER
ON

DECENTRALISATION OF ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE; DISPUTES
INVOLVING CENTRES OF HIGHER EDUCATION

The task of devising and recommending judicial reforms for which a

ite Commission was to be set up was later on assigned to the Law Com-

mission with a request to give top priority to the same. Amongst the various

terms of reference drawn up for the proposed Judicial Reforms Commission,

the one with which the Law Commission is primarily concerned in this Working
Paper :eads as under :—

“}. The need for decentralisation of the system of administration of
justice by—-

(i) establishing, extending and strengthening in rural areas the insti-
tution of | ‘Nyaya Panchayats’ or other mechanisins for resolving
disputes;

(ii) setting up of a system of participatory justice with defined juris-
diction anc powers in suitable areas and centres; and

(iii) establishing other ticts of system within the judicial hierarchy to
reduce the volume of work in the Supreme Court and the High
Courts.”

The choice may be dictated by term No. 2, which reads as under: —

“The matters for which Tribunals excluding services Tribunals) as envise-
ged in Part XIVA of the Constitution need to be established expeditiously
. and various aspects related to their establishment and working.” .

2. The judicial system in this country is a highly centralised and integrated
from bottom to top. The constitutional power of issuing prerogative writs
ferred on the High Courts by article 226 of the Constitution and on the
Court of India by article 32 of the Constitution has tended to make
Court an institution in which all sorts of disputes converge. The
Courts, in charge of administration of civil and criminal justice, enjoy
ite and revisional jurisdiction under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
bres Code of Crimina} Procedure, 1973, respectively. The High Courts also
enjoy original jurisdiction under special statutes like the Companies Act, 1956,
Patents Act, 1970, and Designs Act. 1911, etc. It also enjoys aavisory jurisdic-
tiog under various tax Jaws such as the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Gift Tax.
1958, the Wealth Tax Act, 1957, Customs Act, 1962, and the Central
Excise and Salt Act, 1944. The decisions of all quasi-judicial tribunals are
subject to judicial review by the High Court in exercise of constitutional power
of issuing high prerogative writs. Even administrative decisions are subject
to review within the narrow confines of jurisdiction as well as violation of
tal rights. The fall-out of the various jurisdictions which the High
Courts enjoy has been torrential inflow of work in the High Courts. The deci-
sions of the High Courts are questioned before the Supreme Court in exercise
of the jurisdiction conferred by article 136 of the Constitution. The mounting
arrears in the High Courts is causing untold anxiety. As many as 13,23,719
cases were pending in the High Courts as on 30th June, 1985 and over 1,66,319
cases were ding in the Supreme Court of India as on December 31, 1985.
Out of 13,2: 2719 cases pending in the High Courts, 2,32,492 cases were pending
over five years and 32.794 cases were pending over ten years.’ In fact, the
unmanageable backlog of cases and the inordinate delay in the disposal of cases
attracted the attention both of the suffering, litigating public and the Govern-
ment of India. These two ugly features of the present day justice system have
provoked a strident demand for judicial reforms.

At

E

1, Source ; 3ist Report of the Estimates Committee of Lok Sabha, pages 39-40


One Hundred Twenty-third Report 25

3. The Law Commission, on being requited to deal with the malaise in
the administration of justice, concentrated its attention, first on the litigation
emanating from rural areas, An extensive working paper was prepared -and
published by the Law Commission of India devising a participatory model of
justice for disputes emanating from rural areas. After a national debate, a
detailed report has been submitted in this behalf.

4. The Law Commission was of the tentative opinion that the centralised
system of justice where every nature of dispute tends to land in the High Court,
would never be able to meet the requirement of easily accessible, inexpensive,
informal, expeditious justice. Some decentralisation was inevitable. One can
take due from Chapter XIVA of the Constitution introduced by the Constitution
(Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976. The object underlying introduction
of Chapter XIVA in the Constitution was to empower the Parliament to enact
a law for setting up tribunals for various special kinds of disputes. This power
was acquired to achieve the avowed object of decentralisation of the system of
administration of justice.

5. With a view to carrying the process of decentralisation a step further,
the Law Commission recommended National Tax Court Sinultanecusty remov-
ing the advisory jurisdiction of the High Courts. The Law Commission was
further of the opinion that some more decentralisation would not’ only reduce
the pressure on the High Courts and the Supreme Court of India, but would
permit association of experts with tribunals set up for resolving disputes of
a specialist nature. The twin objects behind this approach is not merely ligh-
tening the burden on the High Courts caused by torrential inflow of work from
various tribunals, but also to achieve the object underlying article 39A of the
Constitution, namely, to provide equal opportunity in the matter of access
to justice. Such specialisation would inevital ay reduce Jong-winding arguments
and assist in expediticus disposal of causes and controversies which, in turn,
would reduce the cost of litigation. While conferring extensive power of issuance
of high prerogative writs on High Courts under article 226 of the Constitution
and all-enveloping superintendance over all courts and tribunals under article
227 of the Constitution, it was assumed that a High Court Judge would be.
able to deal with not merely civil and criminal cases but also cases requiting
such specialised knowledge as tax references, labour disputes, educational dis-
putes, et el. While it may be that the Judge of a High Court may, in course
of time, develop capacity to deal with all kinds of specialist disputes, yet it
cannot be gainsaid that in this process, long time would be spent in familiarisiig
oneself with specialist knowledge. Further, there is a system of rotating judges
in all branches in High Courts. Specialisation in this background is not possi-
ble. Inevitably, every time the bench is changed, even with regard to the same
nature of the dispute, arguments will start over again and all available precedents
will be cited ad infinitum.

6. In the old days. a Member of the Bar could accept any brief without
any attempt at specialisation. But as the law became more complex, and the
litigating techniques became more comprehensive and judicial approach acquired
more scientific overtones and the precedents poured in, slowly specialisation
appeared in the legal profession. However, it was assumed without justification
that no specialisation is necessary for a High Court Judge. The. recruitment
to the High Court is from two known sources: —

(i) Elevation to the Bench from the Bar; and

{ii) Promotion from the rank of district judge.

By the very nature of the jurisdiction enjoyed by a district judge, he’ has
little or no opportunity to deal with constitutional matters, tax matters lébour
matters, and disputes involving corporate laws. It may be that, in course of
time, he may acquire working knowledge of all these laws, but long time-will
be spent in becoming wholly familiar with the same. And during these forma-’
tive years, he will be subjected to all sorts of arguments which, before a spécia-
list, will have no piace. Similarly, a Member of the Bar who has specialised:
in one branch will have to acquire knowledge of other branches. It is, there~:
fore, undeniable that specialisation would certainly be conducive to better ad-
ministration of justice helping in overall improvement of speedy di posal - ef,
causes and controversies which tend to reduce backlog of cases which is the
bane of the present day administration of justice.
S—1 M of L &0188



One Hundred Twenty-thied Report

7. The next question, therefore, is how do we provide for specialisation?
The Law Commission found a tentative answer in the decentralisation of the
system of administration of justice. Imbued with this idea, the Law Com.
submitted 2 comprehensive report dealing with setting of National
"ax Courts simultancously abolishing jurisdiction of the High ‘Courts. This
will achieve decentralisation and grant a measure of relief to the High Courts.
Carrying further this very process, the Law Commission issued a Working
Paper and a questionnaire on January 27, 1987, for a debate in devising a
fotum for national uniformity in labour adjudication at a stage midway between
the Labour Courts/Industrial Tribunal at base level and the Supreme Court
of at the apex. simultaneously abolishing the jurisdiction of the High

I

it

re

8. The approach as discussed in the just preceding paragraph was indi.
cated the introduction of Part XIV-A in the Constitution by the Constitu-
i ‘orty-Second) Amendment Act, 1976 which enabled the appropriate
Legislature to provide for the adjudication or trial by «tribunals of any disputes,

सिन्हा ts or offences, with respect to various matters enumerated therein.

Ia Objects and Reasons accompanying the Bill, it was stated that “(to
veduce ths mounting arrears in the High Courts and to secure the speedy dis-
करिए service matters, revenue matters and certain other matters of special

in the context of the socio-economic development and progress,

it is considered expedient to provide for administrative and other tribunals | for
dealing with such matters while preserving the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
in regard to such matters under article 136 of the Constitution.” This envisages
selting of tribunals with all-India jurisdiction for matters of special importance.
Disputes involving universities would qualify for being considered matter of
importance. It would achieve the twin objects of specialist treatment,
speedy disposal, all-India outlook and decentralisation of judicial administration.

§

9. The present working paper accordingly concentrates on a new set of dis-
Petes requiring specialist knowledge to deal with, which have prominently figured
im the High is in the last decade. Numerous disputes land in the High Courts
igwolving the Universities on the one hand, and the alumni on the other, or bet-
ween the Universitics and the teaching staff as well as ministerial staff. Almost
allied to the same are the disputes involving University and the Government in
the matter of affiliation of colleges, autonomy of the University, firancial inde-
of the Universities, appointment of Vice-Chancellors and similar dis-

ol 7 in this behalf are of recent origin. But as years rol] by, they tend
to '. पु

10. The thrust for higher education is growing at an accelerated speed
every year. As the demand for seats in institutions of technical learning such as
engineering, medicine, agriculture, etc., is increasing, the area of conflict is widen-
ing. The situation becomes acute when the Government in discharge of its obhi-

under Article 15(4) of the Constitution reserves certain number of seats
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the scheduled
castes and the scheduled tribes. Article 15(4) provides as under:-—

“*15(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall prevert
the State from making any special provision for the advancement of any
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.”

Jn order to give opportunity to the members of socially and educationally back-
ward classes of citizens or members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes,
to advance and intermingle with the mainstream of life, Government reserves
Certaia percentage of seats in institutions of technical education and higher edu-
cation in favour of members of such classes. To that extent, the seats available
for emtry on merit get reduced. The competition gets accentuated. Further, the
member of seats in such institutions have not expanded or proliferated in rela~
tiga to the demand for such seats. All these contribute to a keen tussle for ac-
quiring ® seat in such institutions. This tussle more often leads to confrontation
cases. Practically, for over the last tem years, admissions to

cofleges and engineering colleges have landed in the High Courts and the

i

1. Added by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, 5,2


One Hundred Twenty-third Report 3t

Supreme Court of India. Frankly, the courts are ill-equipped to deat with these
disputes expeditiously and with a sense of urgency. A brief resume of the im

partant decisions of Supreme Court and High Court would bear out whet is
stated herein above.

11. There are numerous decisions of the Supreme Court of India and High
Courts bearing on the question of admissions to Professional institutions, more
especially the Engineering and Medical faculties. There are decisions also deal-
ing with the policy of reservations in favour of the members of socially and

jucationally backward classes and Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes,
It is not proposed to discuss all the decisions in this working paper. Only some
will be referred to highlight the tentative approach of the Law Commission that
disputes involving University Administration, admission to university courses,
disciplinary proceedings against university teachers, cannot be dealt with effectively
like’ the run-of-a-mil], small petty legal squabble, the decision im such disputes
must be informed by the wider perspective of role of education in a
country, discipline in the formative years, future leadership and enthroming of
vatues. If handled differently, it is likely to cause dislocation in the University
administration.

12. To begin with, a reference to one such case would be instructive. There
were two vacancies in the cadre cf Professor of Medicine in the State Medicat
Colleges in the State of U.P. As both the posts were within the purview of the
State Public Service Commission, the Commission advertised posts inviting ap-
plicaticns from eligible candidates, the eligibility criterion having been set out
out in the advertisement itself. The Public Service Commission selected two
persons for the aforementioned two posts. The selection was challenged by one of
the competing candidates inter alia contending that the selectees did not satisfy
the éligibility criteria inasmuch as they lacked the requisite teaching experience,
which was one of the minimum qual ‘fications. The matter was argued before
a single Judge of the High Court who upheld this contention and the view of
the eared Judge was affirmed in the appeal before the Division Bench. In
other words, three Judges of the High Court came to the conclusion that the
selectees did not have the requisite teaching experience. Two appeals came to
be preferied to the Supreme Court. Reversing the two decisions of the High
Court, the Supreme Court observed that:

“when the selection is made by the Commission, aided and advised by ex-
perts having technical experience and high academic qualifications in the
specialist field, probing, teaching/research experience in technical subjects,
the court, should be slow to interfere with the opinion expressed the
experts unless there are allegations of mala fides against them. It etd nor-
mally be prudent and safe for the courts to leave the decision on academic
matters to experts who are more familiar with the problems they face than
the courts generally can be. Undoubtedly, even such a body, if it were ta
contravene rules and regulations binding upon it in making the selection
and recommending the selectees for appointment, the court in exercise of
extraordinary jurisdiction to enforce Rule of Law, may interfere in a weit
petition under article 226 of the Constitution. Even then, the court, whife
enforcing the Rule of Law, should give due weight to the opinions expressed
by the experts and also show due regard to their recommendations on which
the State Government acted. If the recommendations made by the body of
experts, keeping in view the relevant rules and regulations, manifest due
consideration of all the relevant factors, the court should be very slow te
interfere with such recommendations.”

However, the courts, especially the High Courts and the Supreme Court of India,
are flooded with disputes involving technical considerations and the courts en-
tertain and occasionally interfere which disturbs the administration of the Uni-
versities. It may be pointed out here that universities are expected to be autono-
mous bodies set up under State statutes and are required to provide for planning
of education, organisation of the body, staff requirements, direction and deve-
lopment of education and keeping in touch with the hitherto unexplored areas
of performance, vigilance and co-ordination with other universities. It also must

1. Dr. M. C. Gupta vs. Dr. Arun Kamar Gapta (999) 2 SCC 339.


32 One Hundred Twenty-third Report

have its own management structure, forum for resolving problems arising out of
affiliation of privately managed colleges, management of university departments
its relations with the students and its relations with the State Government espe-
cially in the matter of financial autonomy. Universities cannot be modelled for
their internal management as well as to mect the expanding horizons of know-
ledge on profit-oriented corporate approach. The rapidly developing political
and economic situation and trends in other countries have indicated that the
university has also an obligation to the larger community in addition to its func-
tions of teaching the young and conducting research’. If such is the role of
universities, the disputes arising in the field, of activities of the university cannot
be adequately dealt with by purely legalistic approach generally visible in court
rooms. Yet, in the absence of a specialist forum, the disputes involving univer-
sities land in the courts.

13. As pointed out here-in-before, since there is a great rush for admission
to professional colleges, especially engineering and medicine, the universities, in
order to forestall any charge of nepotism or subjective preferences, proceed to
introduce a written entrance test and would regulate admissions according to the
merit disclosed by the test. The written entry test extends equal opportunity to
every one taking the test to establish his/her merit. This test was challenged on
the ground that a test prescribing proficiency in technical subjects cannot be
ordered by the Government. At best, it can be done by the Academic Council
of the University. The Court held that the Government which run the colleges
had the tight to make a selection out of a large number of candidates and for
this purpose, the Government can prescribe a test of its own, which was not
against law? Some of the Universities prescribe writien test as well as viva voce

test. The viva voce test was challenged on the ground that the questions and
answers being oral and the view about personality being highly subjective, it
must be rejected as arbitrary and untenable. The court undoubtedly negatived
the argument. However, in the same case, the court observed that once the order
prescribing criteria for admission laid down the objective criteria and entrusted
the matter of selection to the qualified persons, the court cannot obviously have
any say in the matter‘ However, at a later stage, the controversy developed about
the total marks assigned for viva voce test in relation to written test. In some
cases, it was found that those who performed well in the written test went down
in the merit list on account of their inadequate performance in viva voce test
Once this ugly feature developed, the courts again interposed by observing that:

“When there is deterioration in moral values and corruption and nepotism

are very much on the increase, allocation of a high percentage of marks for
* the oral interview as compared to the marks allocated for the written test

cannot be accepted by the court as free from the vice of arbitratiness.”*

The largest number of cases that flooded the court year after year commencing
from 1951 till now centres round the policy of reservation of scats for members
of socially and educationally backward classes of citizens, Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes. It would again not be worthwhile to refer to all the deci-
sions save a few. In order to establish clear cleavage of opinion on a policy
decizion between Executive and Judiciary, one may refer at once to the
earliest decision in which the Supreme Court struck down the classification
in the Communal G.O. of Madras founded on the basis of religion and caste
on the ground that it is opposed to the Constitution and constitutes a clear viola-
tion of the Fundamental Rights guaranteed to the citizen. The court while reject-
ing the submission on behalf of the State that the reservation was prescribed
to give effect 10 Directive Principles of State Policy as envisaged in Part IV of
the Constitution, ruled that the Directive Principles of State Policy have to con-
form to, and run as subsidiary to, the chapter on Fundamental Rights.’ As the

. Dr. AH, Hommadi, University Administration in Developing Countries.

1
2. State of Andhra Pradesh vs. Narendra Nath, AIR 1971 SC 2560, and the view therein
expressed was re- affirmed in Ajay Hasia vs. Khalid Mujib, AIR 1981 SC 487,

3. R. Chitrale kha vs. the State of Mysore, ATR 1964 SC 1823.
4, Ibid. page 1831

5. Ajay Hasia vs. Khalid Mujib, AIR 1981 50,487.

6. State of Madras vs. Champakam Dordirajan (1951) SCR 525.


One Hundred Twenty-third Report 33

State. in the discharge of its Constitutional obligations increased the percentage
of reservation, the courts got into deeper mire of these Policy decisions. Evea
though article 15(4) uses the expression, ‘socially and educationally backward
classes of citizens’. Caste was taken as a label indicative of such backwardness.
The courts interposed saying that caste cannot be the sole or dominant test. to
determine social backwardness of groups or classes of citizens, while conceding
that the classes of citizens who are deplorably poor automatically become socially
backward. The criterion for determining social and educational backwardness
was confined to caste-tag. Then the court further proceeded to decide what ought
to. be the fair percentage of reservation;) and observed that any reservation above
50% would not be fair or constitutionally valid, As the dispute repeatedly reised
its-head in courts, it became necessary to draw a distinction’ between caste and class
and a set of objective principles for ascertaining social and educational backward-
ness. This approach of the court was reflected in a later case in which the majo-
rity decision upheld the validity of the orders made by the Government of Mysore
in respect of admissions to engineering and medical colleges and observed that a

ification of backward classes based on economic conditions and cccupations
is not bad and does not offend article 15(4) of the Constitution.

The caste was considered to be a relevant consideration but cannot be the sole
or determining factor.’ The pendulum swung the other way round when the court
fell back on caste as a tag for determining social and educational backwardness. It
said that there was no gainsaying the fact that there are numerous castes in this
country which are socially and educationally backward. To ignore their existence
is to ignore the realities of life.* If social and educational backwardness is deter-
mined by the membership of a caste, obviously, it will have to be presumed that
every member of the caste is socially and educationally backward. The assumption
is not well founded.‘ In view of the vacillations of the courts, both with regard to
the caste test and means test, one State made an order that cultivations of land
the size of whose holding was below the prescribed minimum must be treated as
sovially and educationally backward and eligible for reserved seat. The court
struck it down.’ Similarly, reservation in favour of rural areas was held to be
inipermissible on the ground that poverty in rural areas cannot be the basis of
clagsifieation to support reservation for rural areas.” Reservations in favour of
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes have, more or Jess, been upheld on the
ground that the political democracy was merely a means to an end to set up
social democracy by which it was meant the social fabric resting upon the prin-
ciple of ‘one man, one value’ which would require total abolition of social and
economic inequality.’ To conclude on this poist, as Jate as 1985, a Constitution
Betich of the Supreme Court delivered five different opinions which have not help-
ed in improving the situation.*

Every State has its own local problems and has to provide for their satis-
factory solution. Every State takes policy decisions and ultimately, the policy
decision is interfered with by the courts. The State of Jammu & Kashmir, in
order to rectify the regional imbalance in the allocation of seats for admission
to the medical college, made reservation of 80% seats without identifying the
areas suffering from imbalances. The court declared the reservation unconstitu-
tional under article 14.९ Similarly, the State of Tamil Nadu, failing in its attempt
to give preference on the basis of residence in the State, adopted a novel method
of creating units for admission to the medical colleges in the State. The units
comprised various undergraduate colleges. The intending applicants were asked

3, -MLR. Balaji Vs. State of Mysore (1963) Supplement|l SCR 439.

3, R. Chitralekha Vs. State of Mysore, ATR 1964 SC 1823,

3, A, Periakaruppan Vs. State of Tamil Nadu, ATR 1971 SC 2303.

4, State of Andhra Pradesh Vs. U.S.V. Balraim, AUR 1972 SC 1375

5,” Janaki Prasad Perimoo Vs. State of J. @ K., AIR 1973 SC 930.

5, State of U.P. V3. Pradeep Tandon, ATR 1975 SC 563.

1, Akhil Bharatiya Soshit Karmachari Sangh Ys. Union of India, AIR 1981 SC 298.
*, KC. Vasant Kumar Vs. State of Karnataka, AIR 1985 SC 1495.

*, Nishi Maghu Vs. State of J. & K.,.ATR 1980 BC 1973,


34 One Hundred Twenty-third Report

net to apply for any of the units but were advised to apply to that unit which
was near to their place of residence, as far as possible. The umitwise preference
was challenged as being violative of articles 14 and 15 on the ground that the
State’s. action was discriminatory in character, The challenge met with the

wal of the court and the order was struck down.' Occasionally, some re
derved seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes were claimed by converts
to’ Hinduism which claim was rejected by the court om the ground that a convert
trast be accepted by the other members of the said caste and admitted withia
their fold: It 15 not intended to cover all cases but the specimen herein referred
te would show the divergence -in the views even im the matter of policy decisions
Between the Executive and the Judiciary and it is notorious that the judiciary
takes time to render its decisions and the whole ‘policy gets aullified after years
leaving 2 number of victims who suffer on account of this uninformed judicial
intervention.

14, In all cases of judicial intervention, assuming that it is right and jesti-
fied; tetief could never be given to those who came to the court in search of
relict and to whom the court lent its helping hand. In Kerala, some years back,
a common entrance test was held for admissions to the medical colleges and on
the results being declared, numerous writ petitions came to be filed in the High
Court ‘of Kerala alleging nepotism and rampant malpractices. The High Court
Gf Kerala was convinced but could not give the relief to the petitioners except
saying that it would give certain directions for voiding malpractices in future.

‘matter came up to the Supreme Court and the entire iest. its results and

admissions based thereon were sct aside. Now those who were admitted and
whaee admissions were found to be invalid lost the year and those who would
have been entitled to admission but did not get them could not be given benefit

of.one year. This is a national loss without corresponding national gain.

. 15: Bven im the matter of disciplinary measures, the situation is far from
satisfactory. Numerous cases have come to the court questioning the decision
Of the University Authorities imposing punishment. Two of them may be refer-
red 80. 88 examiner appointed by one University in Gujarat allegedly so mani-
prilated. tic marks that the gold medal in the subject could be awarded and was
infact awarded to his own student. An inquiry revealed the misconduct and after
giving the concerned professor an opportunity to explain his conduct, the
University Authorities imposed punishment of withdrawal of his recognition as
a University teacher for a period of a few years. This decision was questioned
by the. professor in the High Court. The High Court desired the University

Awtaprities to te-consider the quantum of punishment. The Executive Com-
mittee of the University, after considering the weighty observatioas of the High
Court, reiterated its earlier conclusion. The High Court, in exercise of its extra-
ordinary jurisdiction under article 226, interfered with the punishment leaving
open’ an unanswered question whether the High Court in exeicise of its cxtra-
ordinary jurisdiction can tinker with the quantum of punishment imposed by a
body like the University.

The Aligarh Muslim University expelled about 13 students for a period
vasyimg from five years to the rest of the academic session, after a det
enqeisy and notice. The charge was that the studeats on whom punishment
war: ‘and several others mobbed the lodge ef the Vice Chancellor,
manhandled him and threatened him with his life. Some of the students from
amelimst the cxpelled students approached the High Court of Allahabad, a
division bench of which after detailed analysis and examination of the points
raised in the petition, dismissed the same. The petitioners before the High
Court then approached the Supreme Court under article 136. The court did
not decide the appeal on merits but imposed a working solution which left both
sides partly dissatisfied*

16. Occassionally, right to claim registration for postgraduate degree exami-
nation in the specialist branch of the post graduate medical colleges is brought
to the court. Experience shows that the Court would admit the matter and

1, A. Periakaruppan Vs. State of Tamil Nadu, ATR 1971 SC 2303.
3, Principal, Guntur Medical College Vs. Mohan Rao, ATR 1976 SC 1904.
3, Sarvesh Narain Misra Vs. Vice-Chancellor A.M.U., AIR 1992 SC 843.


One Hundred Twenty-third Report 35

grant interim relief. The grant of interim relief would be morc or less in terms
Of pemnitting the petitioner to attend classes. Now, it is well known that in the
specialist branch for post graduate degree, the seats are very limited. and they
are directly linked to the available facilities. One more student participating in
the courses imposes an additional burden on limited resources. In this fashion,
such an outsider taking classes under the orders of the court would fmish all the
semesters. He is permitted to appear at the examination under the orders of the
court. The feeling is that those who can afford to fight court ‘cases can enjoy
undeserved benefit of occupying a seat to which one is not entitled.

17. There are numerous other heads usder which disputes involving
universities are brought to the court. They drag on for years. Im fact, one
Vice-Chancellor narrated an interesting anecdote. He said that he has taken dis-
ciplingry action against a professor and the matter is pending in the court with
a stady order and it is likely to be continued till the term of office ‘of the Vice

expired. Thereafter, some injudicious compromise may be worked
out. Is this a satisfactory situation?

18. University administration is a dynamic subject because of its philoso-
phical and methodical implications. It is philosophical because it is a way of
thinking about extremely complex systems such as mangement sciences and edu-
cation? A sound, efficient and well-planned university administration program-
me is very for a stable and meanimgful higher education growth and
development in the developing countries. Moreover, a systematic university
administration programme will not only contribute to the best development of
the, higher educational system, but will also help the development of education
a8 a whole with a strong filial generic relationship between higher education
and general education. University administration must cater to the supervision
of performance programme of the professors, development of faculties of the
students, preseriped admission standards, a continuous reform of curriculum
so as to keep it up-to-date, updating the library and arranging workshops and
seminars. This requires specialist 170१४ Disputes involving universities
have, therefore, to be handled not by a purely legalistic approach but keeping in
view the obligations of the universities to the society and to the nation. Therefore,
both from the point of view of specialist app approach in the matter of resotving.
disputes involving universities and decent ation of administration of justice
with a view to reducing the pressure on High Courts and the Supreme Court, it
is time to devise a forum with all-India jurisdiction in which all disputes invol-
ving universities and its affiliated colleges may be brought for their resojution.

19. The jurisdiction of such a centralised tribunal must be all enveloping.
It must include disputes, controversies and causes involving universities, ‘their
financial autonomy, appointment of Vice-Chancellors, their administrative fun-

ctions, their inter-relation with the State Governments, their inter-relation with
affiliated colleges, admissions, disciplinary proceedings, ef al.

20. The composition of such a tribunal can be tentatively considered. One-
third members may come from. the cadre of Vice-Chancellors and former Vice
Chanceliors, and the rest comprising of few legal academics, judges who have
functioned in the High Courts, a few professors and retired officers who have
worked in the Ministry of Education. It can sit in benches at various places.
The jurisdiction of ali courts including the High Courts to deal with disputes
falling exclusively within the jurisdiction on such a tribunal must be ousted.
Only an appeal to the Supreme Court of India under article 136 can be pre-
ferred against any of the decisions of the tribunal.

21. The issues which would arise for consideration in this behalf may be
briefly set out:—

(a) Should there be a central educationa) tribunal to deal with causes,
controversies and disputes involving concerned Government, uni-
versities, professors in the universities and affiliated colleges and stu-
dents, with comprehensive jurisdiction to deal with disputes involving
the aforesaid parties?

2 A. H. Mommadi. University Administration in Developing Countries, page 25.


36 One Hundred Twentythird Report

(0) Would such a tribunal provide an all-India perspective to educational
problems which to-day it sadly lacks in view of the fact that education
has more or less remained a State subject even after the amendment -of
Entry 25 in the Concurrent List?

(c) What ought to be the composition of such a tribunal? Should it include
educationists, Vice-Chancellor, present and former, Government ser-
vants who have dealt with problems of education, lawyers and judges
who have worked at the High Court level and oven social activists?

(d) Would it be conducive to improving administration of universities if
the jurisdiction of the High Courts to deal with such disputes is abolished?

(०) Would decentralisation of administration of justice brought about by
establishing such a tribunal achieve the desired result of expeditious
disposal of such disputes so as not to render university administration
stagnant?

(0 Would such a tribunal help in reducing the area of conflict between
the State Government and the university in the matter of appointment
of Vice Chancellors, affiliation of colleges, internal autonomy ‘and
financial autonomy? है

(8) Would such a tribunal help in introducing undisturbed atmosphere in.
universities for pursuit of excellence?

(h) Keeping in view the fact that all sorts of corrupt influences have redu-
ced the credibility of examination system, would such a tribunal help
in restoring credibility?

(i) Would the tribunal help in resolving disputes about admission to: pro-
fessional colleges which is a recurring phenomenon?

The Law Commission seeks the co-operation of university administrators,
teachers, students, India Association of Universities and thc University Grants
Commission in this behalf and every suggestion will be highly apreciated. a

MGIPCBE—S2—1 M of L & J/88—7-12-88—1000,