LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED TEWENTY FIFTH REPORT

ON
THE SUPREME COURT - A FRESH LOOK

1988


Tel. No, 384475

विधि आयोग
LAW COMMISSION

भारत सरकार
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

शास्त्री भवन
SHASTRI BHAWAN,

79. A, DESAI नई दिल्‍ली
Chairman NEW DELHI

9.0. Wo. 6(2)(5) 188-LC
May 11, 1988.

Shri Bindeshwari Dubey,
Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,

Shastri Bhavan,

NEW DELHI.

Dear Shri Dubey,

Restructuring court system was an integral part of reforming
justice system, a task which was assigned to the present Law Com-
mission by the Government of India as per the letter of the then
Minister for Law and Justice. Any structure to be internally
sound and externally long lasting must be constructed from the
foundation. Accordingly, the Law Commission commenced its
research on the justice delivery system as in vogue in rural areas and
Tecommended setting up of Gram Nyayalayas, a participatory
model of justice.

Moving vertically upward in the judicial hierarchy, the Law
Commission submitted a report on the working and functioning of
the High Courts, bearing the heading “The High Court Arrears—A
Fresh Look”. Obviously, the next step was to deal with the
Supreme Court of India.

The Law Commission has critically examined the functioning
and working of the Supreme Court of India. The litigation explo-
sion stares into the face and unless dealt with by adopting radical
measures, the situation is likely to go out of hand.

I am, therefore, happy to forward herewith 125th Report of
the Law Commission, named, “The Supreme Court—A Fresh
Look”.

@

1--0 Mof L & J/88


(ii)

The report takes note of the various factors which have contri-
buted leading to the present malaise and effective steps that can be
taken to improve and retrieve the situation. It is hoped that the
recommendations made in this report would be implemented in
letter and spirit forthwith because the situation cannot brook any

lelay.

Any further deterioration might need a surgical operation for
which the portent is indicated in the last chapter to which I feel
compelled to draw your attention.

With kind regards,

Yours sincerely,

(Sd.)
(D. A. DESAI)

Encl: A Report


Chapter ¥
Chapter II

Chapter वा

Chapter IV
Chapter V

CONTENTS

Past Efforts . . . . . . . .
Present Situation. . . . . . .

Causes for Delay and Past Attempts at Remedial Mea-
sures

Recommendations

Portent .

Notes and References

Appendix 1
Appendix IL

Appendix III

Tables. + . . . पु
Graphs ,

Letter from Law Commission to the Chief Justice of
India Dated January 19, 1988 . .

(iii)

Page


CHAPTER 1
PAST EFFORTS

1.1, Except an inveterate optimist. one would shudder to attempt to examine
the crisis-laden situation in the Supreme Court and suggest even a modicum of
reform. Numerous attempts in the past by knowledgeable and brilliant law refor-
mers have met with a resounding failure. On the contrary, every such attempt
had the dubious distinction of adding to the malaise. Therefore, one would
shudder to enter in this no-win situation. And yet human ingenuity demands
that failure may be confessed and yet after kecping in view all the past attempts.
one must strive to find, if possible, an invigoratingly new solution in the fond
hope that the intractable problem cannot be beyond the human reach. This
report is a step in that direction.

1.2. Before the Law Commission can formally make some suggestions which
may help in improving the situation, if not wholly solving the problem, it must,
with advantage and consideration, look at th: past attempts and briefly recall

them so that a fallacy of repetition can be avoided and a refreshingly fresh
outlook can be developed.

1.3. In the scheme of Indian Constitution, Supreme Court has a vital role
to play. The Constitution-makers themselves had very high expectations from
the Supreme Court when they conferred upon it the jurisdiction of widest
amplitude. Avoiding comparison with the House of Lords in UK. or the
Supreme Court of United States. it can be said without fear of contradiction
that the Supreme Court of India enioys the widest jurisdiction. including the
novel jurisdiction hitherto not enjoyed by any court system in any country
of having original jurisdiction to grant relief in case of violation of funda-
mental rights. And the right to move the court itself is guaranteed as funda-
mental right. Without enumerating varied jurisdiction under the Constitution,
such as under articles 32, 7. 131, 132, 133, 134 and 136, various statutes
have provided for appeal to the Supreme Court. This expansive jurisdiction
was further expanded by the Supreme Court itself by conferring upon itself
the epistolary jurisdiction and added to it the jurisdiction enioyed by enter-
taining social action litigation. By this varied and varieeated jurisdiction,
16 Supreme Court of India has now been designated as Supreme Court for
Tdians, In this transformation from being Supreme Court of India to Supreme
Court for Indians, the institution had to pay heavy price of facing mounting
and unmanageable litigation. The problem has not surfaced only recently.
Wey back in 1955, when the first Law Commission was set un. amonost cthers,
by its terms, it was requested ‘to review the system of judicial administration
in all its aspects and suggest ways and means for improving it and making
it speedy and less expensive’ Dealing with this term of reference. the first
Taw Commission. after noticing that the jurisdiction enjoyed by the Supreme
Court is ‘the widest and the most varied jurisdiction among the highest courts
in the Commonwealth and Anglo-Saxon countries”. concentrated its attention
on the inflow of work in the Supreme Court disproportionate to
the output and the mounting arrears. It was convinced that. having regard
to the average disposal of the court per year. it would appear that despite the
increase in the strength. it may not be able to clear the existing volume of
arrears. Amongst its recommendations dealing with the Supreme Court, atten-
tion was focussed upon improving the conditions of service of the Judges and
apolication of greater strictness in the matter of admission of criminal appeals

1
2—10 M of L & J/88


2

and petitions under the labour laws and introducing a stage of preliminary
hearing in the matter of petitions under article 32 of the Constitution. The
Commission entertained a pious hope that the situation may be watched for
some time to evaluate the outcome of recommendations and the increased
strength of the Judges. The diagnosis offered by the 14th Report and the
remedial recommendations made for improving the situation were watched
with baited breath.’ To be precice, the situation considerably deteriorated and
the periodical upward revision of the Judge strength of the Supreme Court failed
to make any dent on the delay in disposal of cases and reducing mounting
arrears. Conceding that ‘whenever decisions are to be made in accordance
with general, public and positive norms by third party mediators or adjudicators,
some time must necessarily be consumed in arriving at authoritative and,
hopefully, just decisions. Which time-costs are reasonable and which are unrea-
sonable, is a matter for both value-judgment and empirical analysis’ Yet it
cannot be gainsaid that a system devised to do justice between contending
parties who resort to the system for resolution of their disputes must be able to
resolve the same within a reasonable time and with reasonable costs. Both
these aspects were eluding the Supreme ‘Court.

1.4, The Law Commission in quick succession examined the Code of Civil
Procedure,’ Criminal Procedure Code,’ and repeated the performance.’ Of
course, these three reports did not strictly deal with the Supreme Court itself,
yet it is appropriate to mention that the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in
matter of criminal appeals got slightly enlarged by introduction of section 379
in the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973. which provided that ‘where the High
Court has, on appeal, reversed an order of an accused person and convicted
him and sentenced him to death or imprisonment for life. he may appeal to
the Supreme Court’. This provision has to be 16796 in the light of article 134
Prescribing appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in regard to criminal matters.

1.5. Article 133 of the Constitvtion as it was originally enacted granted a
right of appeal to the Supreme Court depending upon the valuation of the
subject matter of the dispute. An appeal would lie to the Supreme Court if
the value of the subject matter of the dispute in the court of first instance and
in dispute on appeal was and is not less than Rs. 20.000. An appeal also
ld lie to the Supreme Court if the Hieh Court certifies that the case is a
fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court. This provision, in its operational
stage, led to anomalous results. If a petition is filed in the High Court invoking
its jurisdiction under article 226 of the Constitution with an averment that the
value of the subject matter is dispute is Rs. 20.009 or more, the High Court
would none-the-less have jurisdiction to dismiss this petition in Timine. yet will
have to grant a certificate in view of the language of article 133(1) as it then
stood. Numerous appeals, which according to the view of the High Court can
be styled as frivolous, were being filed in the Supreme Court because of the
value of the subject matter of the dispute. In a republican Constitution, it was
incongruous to grant a right of appzal merely depending upon the value of the
subject matter of the dispute. Functionally translated. it would mean that a
tich man can have his dispute brought right to the Supreme Court and a poor
man. whose subject matter of the dispute is valued below Rs. 20.000. will be
denied that right. Of course. those were the halcyon days of reverential attach-
ment to fundamental risht to property. However. the Law Commission, dis-
turbed by the mounting crescendo of arrears. undevtook the examination of
the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in matters.” It was of the
opinion that the minimum limit of Rs. 20,000 fixed in 1950 at the time of the
enactment of the Constitution was too low in view of the fall in the value of
the rupee and that, therefore, small property disputes only on the valuation of

w



3

the subject matter landed in the Supreme Court and that the Supreme Court should
not be troubled unless a much larger amount was involved. Though the Law
Commission started an inquiry with a view io raising the minimum value of
the subject matter of dispute for purposes of appeal to the Supreme Court, it
ultimately recommended that this value approach is anachronistic and must be
dropped and that article 133 should be so recast as to permit ‘an appeal to the
Supreme Court from any judgment, decree er order ia a civil proceeding of a
High Court if the High Court certifies that the case is a fit one for appeal to
the Supreme Court’? This report was submitted in October 1971. Soon there-
after, the Law Commission was reconstituted,

1.6. On the reconstitution of the Law Commission, Government of India
requested the reconstituted Law Commission ‘to examine the same matter fur-
ther regarding suitable amendment to बाल 133 of the Constitution so as to
abolish the basis of valuation as conferring a right of appeal on a litigant.”
The Law Commission agreed with its predecessor that the test of pecuniary
value has become irrelevant and, therefore, sub-clauses (a) and (b) of article
133(1) deserve to be deleted. The Commission accordingly recommended that
article 133(1) of the Constitution should be amended so as to read as follows:—

“(i) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, decree
or final order in a civil proceeding of a High Court in the Union ter-
titory of India if the High Court certifies—

(i) that the case involves a substantial question of law of general
public importance; and

ii) that in the opinion of High Court the said question needs to
be decided by the Supreme Court.”.

The recommendation of the Law Commission was accepted by the Government
of India and article 133(1) was amended as recommended, by the Constitution
(Thirtieth Amendment) Act, 1972, with effect from February 27, 1973. The
amendment was of a restrictive nature in the sense that the attempt was to
narrow the inlet through which appeals on certificate from the High Court flow
to the Supreme Court. As hereinabove indicated, when the pecuniary value
basis was operational. the High Court. while dismissing a petition in limine
had no option but to grant the certificate. Since the amendment, the High
Court, if it dismissed the petition in limine, it would not ordinarily grant the
certificate because if the case involved a substantial question of law of general
importance, the High Court would not, dismiss the petition in jimine, and if
after full-dress hearing the petition is dismissed, the High Court ordinarily
would not come to the conclusion that the second condition is satisfied that
in the opinion of the High Court the said question needs to be decided by the
Supreme Court. Therefore, this was the first attempt to narrow the noose through
which cases flow to the Supreme Court.

1.7. However, the amendment of article 133(1) did not have the desired effect
in as much as the wide jurisdiction enjoyed by the Supreme Court under article
136 remained untouched.

1.8. Again the Law Commission, while comprehensively dealing with Civil
Procedure Code." did not touch upon the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.

1.9. By the year 1974, the arrears in Supreme Court had acquired notoriety
and high visibility profile. ‘Al sensitive judges and lawyers have been
feeling an increasing concern about the problem of growing arrears in the ad-
ministration of justice. Delay made in the decision of cases at all stages in-
evitably Jeads to accumulation of arrears and these arrears have now assumed


4

& somewhat alarming dimension’. Thus spake the Law Commission focuss-
ing its attention on structure and jurisdiction of the highest judiciary. Before
formulating its sccommendations, the Law Commission issued a comprehen-
sive questionnaire and elicited information from all interest groups. After hav-
ing closely examined the same, and being ably aided and assisted by the then
Chairman of the Law Commission who himself was for long years a Judge of
the Supreme Court and retired as Chief Justice of India, it made its recom-
mendations. Only those may be dealt with here which deal with the problem
of arrears and the delay in disposal of cases. The important recommendation
was that article 134(1)(c) of the Constitution should be amended so as to res-
trict criminal appeals to the Supreme Court by certificate to cases where the
certificate by the High Court is to the effect that the case involves a substantial
question of law of general importance which needs to be decided by the Supreme
Court. The Commission did not recommend any amendment in respect of
appeals to the Supreme Court by special jeave under article 136 of the Consti-
tution. Some change was recommended as regards the procedure in respect of
writ petitions before the Supreme Court in respect of trial of disputed ques-
tions of fact or the issue of aa int.rim orders in such petitions. The Commis-
sion was opposed to the creation of special service courts for trial of service
matters as also creation of zonal courts of appeal. Therefore, the major re-

commendation was with regard to the eligibility for preferring criminal appeals
to the Supreme Court.

1.10. Within a period of five years, the deteriorating situation in the supe-
rior courts attracted the attention of the Law Commission. It dealt with delay and
arrears in High Courts and other appellate courts.” It is unnecessary to spend
any time on this report because it does not deal with the problem of arrears
in the Supreme Court.

1.11, During all this exercise it was felt that one of the important causes
which contributes to the delay in disposal of cases and thereby enhancing the
arrears was the delay in filling in vacancies in the Supreme Court and the High
Courts. On a reference by the Government, the Law Commission examined
the method of appointment of Judges and made certain recommendations."
No change was suggested in the procedure as at present prescribed for appoint-
ment of Judges of the High Courts and Supreme Court. The important recom-
mendation was that process for filliag in the vacancies must start right in ear-
nest and every attempt should be made to avoid delay in filling in the vacan-
cies. Since the report, no change in the method of appointment is visible and
the delay in filling in the vacancies has become disturbingly longer."

1.12. Having examined all peripheral approaches and recommended steps
for retrieving the situation in the matter of arrears and delay in disposal of
cases occurring in the Supreme Court, the Law Commission, unable to escape
its responsibility for suggesting radical remedial measures for expeditious dis-
posal of causes and controversies coming before the Supreme Court, embarked
upon a novel idea: whether the Supreme Court deserves to be split into two
separate divisions, namely, Constitutional Division and Appellate Division. The
approach was likely to be of a radical nature and, therefore, the Law Commis-
sion issued an extensive questionnaire. It must be confessed that the response
to the questionnaire, especially from the organised Bar. was very hostile. One
can appreciate this hostility if. after conceding that the management of court
dockets have reached a stage where impossibility is the word often repeated,
yet the organised Bar did not come out with any specific concrete alternative
suggestions for improving the situation and avoiding the split in the identity
of the Court. The Law Commission, recalling that in the earlier report, Zona)


5

Court of Appeal was not favoured by the Law Commission, yet, having regard
fo the developing distressing situation, posed a question whether the Suprente’
Court be replaced by a Constitutional Court dealing exclusively with constitu-
tional matters and establishment of a Court of Appeal as the finat arbiter of
disputes of Jaw other than constitutional ones. The Law Commission also
took note of the pungent criticism that the decisions of the Supreme Court
create road blocks in the way of improving the conditions of the tillers of the
soil by blocking zamindari abolition statutes commentators say that, in the
present day Supreme Court as it is functioning, persons of humble origin or
low economic status were unlikely to get justice or be appointed as High Court
Judges so that the elitist character of Judiciary may undergo a fundamental
change. The most radical and far-reaching recommendation made by the Law
Gommission was that it was ‘desirable to create, within the highest court in
the country, a machinery of a specialised character for constitutional adjudica-
tion—which is what a Constitutional Division envisages’." The recommendation
accordingly was that the Supreme Court of India should consist of two divisions,
namely, (1) Constitutional Division, and (2) Legal Division.” The Commission:
spelt out the jurisdiction of each Division and the method of allocation of casés
to the two Divisions. It also dealt with the composition of the proposed Cons-
titutional Division and made detailed recommendations in that behalf.

1.13. If this recommendation had been implemented in letter and spirit,
probably situation could have been very much retrieved. The present report
does not derogate from the recommendation made in the 95th Report. Non-
implementation of the report leaves one guessing as to whether the split is
obnoxious in any manner. In fact, the Supreme Court itself has recently
‘strongly advocated the creation of a National Court of Appeal leaving the
Supreme Court to deal with constitutional matters only. A petition was filed
by Bihar Legal Support Society complaining that while the rich and affluent
can persuade the court to hear a case against a policy decision taken by the
court even if it be at unearthly hour, yet, in the name of policy decision, the
poor and the underdog are kept away from the doorsteps of the Supreme Court.
Occasion for filing the writ petition, as appears from the judgment, was that
‘a Bench of the Court sat late at night on September 5, 1986, for considering
the bail application of Shri Lalit Mohan Thapar and Shri Shyam Sunder Lal
and that the same anxiety which was shown by this Court in taking up the
bail application of these two affluent gentlemen must permeate the attitude and
inclination of the Hon. Court in all matters where question relating to the
liberty of citizens, high or low, arises and that the bail application of small
men must receive the same importance as the bail application of big indus-
trialists’. Responding to this contention, a Constitution Bench, presided over
by the then Chief Justice, noticed the clogged dockets of the Court which lead
to such court practices as adumbrated hereinbefore and suggested a remedial
measure that ‘it would be desirable to set up a National Court of Appeal which
would be in a position to entertain appeals by special leave from the decisions
of the High Courts and Tribunals in the country in civil, criminal, revenue and
labour cases and so far as the present apex court is concerned, it should con-
cern itself only with entertaining cases, involving questions of constitutional law
and public law’.* (Emphasis supplied).

1.14. This observation of the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court
presided over by the Chief Justice lent a powerful support to the recommenda-
tion of the Law Commission made in the 95th Report. Now if on the earlier
occasion there was some visible hostility from the Bar against the suggestion
for splitting the Court into two divisions, none is heard since the judgment. The
institutional response of the Supreme Court is thus in favour of splitting the

3—10 M of L & 1/88


6

court. The Government must, therefore, develop the necessary will to give
effect to it; otherwise, an impression is likely to be formed that where a slight
resistance comes, the will to deal with the recommendation of the Law Com-
mission withers away forthwith. The present Law Commission accordingly
lends its firma support to the recommendations made in the 95th Report as a
step in the sight direction, being comprehensive in character to make a dent
which hitherto any other recommendation has failed to make in the backlog of
cases in the Supreme Court.

1.15. In its continued search for solution, the Law Commission once again
tried to suggest one more remedial measure for dealing with the developing
situation in the Supreme Court. It appears that the Law Commission was of
the opinion that unending oral arguments unaccompanied by written briefs con-
sumed too much time of the court, leaving very little time for effectively deal-
ing with more cases which has a notorious tendency to pile up arrears. The Law
Commission accordingly submitted a report dealing with oral and written argu-
ing with more cases which has a notorious tendency to pile up arrears. The Law
Commission at that time did not favour total elimination of the oral arguments.
Neither the Government nor the Supreme Court appears to have implemented
the recommendations made by the Law Commission.

1.16. It is at this stage that the present Law Commission, charged with
a duty to examine and recommend comprehensive judicial reforms, commenc-
ed its search from the grassroot level and moving upward has now reached a
stage when it proposes to deal with the Supreme Court. Incidentally, the Law
Commission, after having studied in meticulous detail previous reports and re-
commendations, reached an inescapable conclusion that pandering to the system
will not improve the situation. There will have to be radical alteration in
the system itself. It is not necessary to recall the various reports submitted
by the present Law Commission save and except saying that detailed recom-
mendations have been made to the Government for decentralisation of admi-
nistration of justice by creating special tribunals: to deal with specialist cases
which hopefully would have some impact on the inflow of work in the Supreme
Court.” Having thus a comprehensive view of what has been suggested _ till
now and what has been attempted up till now, the present report briefly deals
with the situation and would attempt to tackle the problem of arrears and delay
from one more angle hitherto not recommended.


CHAPTER वा
PRESENT SITUATION

2.1. Constitution-makers, while conferring very wide jurisdiction on
the Supreme Court of India, possibly may not have envisaged the torrential in-
flow of work in the Supreme Court. Undoubtedly, while conferring jurisdiction
of widest amplitude, they must have visualised that the Court would exercise
jurisdiction with restraint and wisdom never forgetting the fact that it is neither
a court of appeal nor a court for redressal of every legal wrong. The Supreme
Court of India was to be an apex court, especially dealing with important cons-
titutional issues and acting as a sentinel on the qui vive. Conferment of wide
jurisdiction was referable to the keen desire of the Constitution-makers that in
case of miscarriage of justice, the Court, without being handicapped by any
procedural juggernaut would be able to reach the area of injustice and to redress
the wrong. However, it was implicit in the conferment of jurisdiction that it
would be exercised with restraint and wisdom, more or less influenced by the
doctrine of candour. These limitations on exercise of jurisdiction self-imposed out
of wisdom were treated as sufficient to so control and regulate the inflow of work
that it was assumed with confidence that the Court will be able to keep under
‘control the inflow of the work and manage the dockets and render justice by
developing a system cheap, expeditious, informal and easily accessible. The
mandate of article 39A would be its load star.

2.2. Was the assumption justified? In the glow of first flush of freedom from
colonial rule and repatriating home a distant court (Privy Council) available for
fina] adjudication in the matters in the form of Supreme Court of India, coupled
with growing awareness of fundamental rights with conscious commitment to
power of judicial review and availability of relief against administrative /execu-
tive injustice, opened the flood-gates of litigation. The Constitution-makers hope-
fully believed that the Supreme Court of India, manned by seven Judges excluding
the Chief Justice of India, would be able to effectively handle the incoming liti-
gation. What was overlooked was factors such as colonial structure of legal pro-
fession, cumbersome and technical rules of court procedures, long unending oral
arguments, inordinate delay in making judicial appointments and total non-avail-
ability of modern court-management techniques, all of which have combined to
create a monstrous figure of arrears, simultaneously causing long delay in disposal
of causes and controversies coming before the Supreme Court of India. The
problem has assumed such serious dimensions that it poses a serious threat to
the very existence and credibility of the system. Even though the mounting arrears
attracted the attention of the State and the Law Commission, the situation is
deteriorating with the passage of time. This has led to the present situation being
described as ‘The Courts in Crisis’! In the year 1986, the then Chief Justice of
India, with considerable pain and anguish, stated that the judicial system in the
country was almost on the verge of collapse” And statistically speaking, situation
since then has further deteriorated.

2.3. Conceding that the problem of arrears and delay is not unique only in
India but is also raising its ugly head in all countries where Anglo-Saxon juris-
prudence is in vogue, a Study Group appointed by the Chief Justice of U.S.
Supreme Court in 1972 to examine the problem of arrears observed that the work-
load was rising to a level far beyond the capacity of the Justices to satisfactorily
deal with the cases selected for hearing. The 1973-74 term of Supreme Court saw
a new high of 5,079 cases on its dockets with 3,876 disposed of and the balance
of 1,203 were carried over to the next term and it may recalled that the U.S.

7


8

Supreme Court may dispose of a case without assigning reasons in a written
opinion. The 1983-84 term saw the institution of 5,155 cases out of which 4,162
were disposed of, with full written opinions handed down in 163 cases only, the
remainder being disposed of either per curiam or by memorandur orders.’ The
problem in the House of Lords is not that acute. Even then, it is not possible for
it to dispose of all cases which come to it, its jurisdiction being largely appellate.
Coming home, the situation is vastly different.

2.4. The workload has been increasing in the Supreme Court year after year
and, barring very few exceptions, the pendency has hardly decreased, The statis-
tical information from the Supreme Court is available under four distinct heads.
Matters which are already admitted, ie., where leave to appeal is granted or
which have come by certificate from the High Court and are styled as final hear-
ing matters provide one head of information. Petitions for special leave filed in
the Supreme Court directly provide another head of information. Miscellaneous
cases provide the third head of information. Petitions under article 32 of the
Constitution provide the fourth head.

2.5. The Supreme Court was set up on January 26, 1950, when the Constitu-
tion became operational. The situation at the close of the year 1950 was that 771
matters under the head Final Hearing were pending, which figure has risen to
80,837 by the close of the year 1986. The increase is roughly by 1000%.

2.6. In order to have a realistic picture of rising crescendo of work, it would
be advantageous to examine the situation at the end of every decade since the
setting up of the Supreme Court.

THE FIRST DECADE (1951-60)

2.7. The sanctioned strength up to the year 1956 was Chief Justice and seven
other Judges. In 1956, the Judge strength was raised from 7 to 10. An attempt
to tackle the problem of arrears was made by raising the Judge strength. It hardly
made any significant impact on the ever-rising graph of mounting arrears (See
Graphs I and JI in Appendix IJ). The available information is tabulated. (See
Table I in Appendix I). Gleaning through the Table, it transpires that there was
perceptible reduction in pending matters for final hearing during the years 1952
and 1953 but thereafter every year the arrears piled up higher. In fact, during
this decade, the arrears quadrupled. During this very decade, the first after the
advent of the Constitution, the filing of petitions under article 32 complaining of
violation of fundamental rights gradually decreased. The tabulated information
in this behalf is revealing. (See Table II in Appendix 1). This has been graphically
demonstrated in Graph III. (See Graph वा in Appendix 11).

2.8. Turning to the institution of petitions for special leave under article 136,
it transpires that the institution markedly increased from year to year which would
be revealed by the tabulated information. (See Table वा in Appendix I), The
graphic description would be revealing. (See Graph IV in Appendix II).

2.9. During this period, the miscellaneous matters increased from 512 in 1955
to 3,194 in 1960. It thus appears that in the first decade, the Court could hardly
manage the inflow of work with the result that the arrears started mounting up.

THE SECOND DECADE (1961-70)

2.10. During this period, the situation took a tum for the worse half-way
fhrough the decade. In the first four years of the decade, the disposal of fiaal
hearing matters exceeded the institution making a dent in the arrears but from


9

1965 onward, the situation, considerably worsened. The arrears took quantum
jump in the year 1967. Presumably, that was the decade in which the cases of
L. C. Golaknath v. State of Punjab‘ and R. C. Cooper v. Union of India* were
heard by a Bench of 11 Judges in each case leaving few Judges to deal with other
work. The arrears multiplied by two and a half times, This would be revealed by
the tabulated information. (See Table TV in Appendix I and Graphs V and VI in
Appendix 1).

2.11. Similarly, during this very period. the institution of petitions for special
leave rose by two and a half times as would be manifest from the Table (See

mele V in Appendix 1). This is graphically described in Graph शा, Appendix

2.12. Institution of writ petitions also simultaneously increased. It may be
recalled that at the commencement of this decade, in the year 1960, the Judge
strength was revised from 10 to 13, excluding the Chief Justice. The impact of
‘the additional available Judge strength in the matter of disposal was felt in

the years 1961, 1962 and 1963 but thereafter the Court could not cope with the
institution.

THE THIRD DECADE (1971-80)

2.13. The institution, the disposal and the mounting arrears showed no res-
pite and the trend during this decade was almost similar to the earlier two de-
cades. The emerging scenario during this decade is tabulated. (See Table VI in
Appendix I and Graphs VIII and IX in Appendix II).

In fact, the arrears rose by nearly 400% or quadrupled. Again, during this
period, in the year 1977, the Judge strength was revised from 13 to 17. One
noteworthy event that occurred during this period was that pursuant to 45th
Report of the Law Commission, Article 133 of the Constitution was amended
by the Constitution (Thirtieth Amendment) Act, 1972, by which the right to
reach the Supreme Court on account of pecuniary value of the subject
matter in dispute was taken away, hopefully expecting that frivolous litigation
depending only on value of the subject matter in dispute would be eliminated.
The hope appears to have been belied because there was no visible respite in the
matter of rising arrears. Nor the increased Judge strength made any difference.
The situation had become so alarming that massive effort was necessary to deal
with the situation. The arrears were sufficient to alert everyone worried about
the overload of justice institutions and its possible breakdown. Two attempts,
one, to narrow the nosal through which large number of cases flow into the
Supreme Court and two, raising the Judge strength in their combined effect,
‘thardly made any dent on the situation. In the meantime, Parliament enacted
Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1970,
which gave a fillip to the inflow of criminal appeals to the Supreme Court. It is
necessary to mention here that during this decade, famous fundamental rights
case, Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru v. State of Kerala and another* was
heard by a Bench of 13 Judges leaving practically none to attend to other cases.
All these factors were responsible for 400% rise in arrears during this decade.

2.14. Apart from the rise in cases awaiting final hearing, there was rise in
the institution of petitions for special leave and petitions under article 32 com-
plaining violation of fundamental rights. Whenever institution of special leave
petitions rise, miscellaneous matters rise simultaneously.

2.15. A short period development which contributed considerably to the
fall in the number of disposal of cases may as well be studied. By the Constitu-
tion (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, articles 1444 and 226A were incor-
porated ia the Constitution. Article 144A provided that the minimum number of

4—10 Mof L & 3/89 :


10

Judges of the Supreme Court who shall sit for the purpose of determining any
question as to the constitutional validity of any Central law or State law shall
‘be seven. Article 226A denied jurisdiction to the High Court to consider the
constitutional validity of any Central law in any proceedings under article 226.
Article 144A had the inbuilt tendency to delay the disposal ef cases because
more Judges were engeged in hearing some specific cases which could have
been heard by smaller Benches. Later on, article 144A was deleted.” However,
during the period it was on the statute book, it made its own contribution towards
rising arrears.

THE FOURTH DECADE (1981-87)

2.16. The graph of arrears went on rising steadily and continuously during
this period. This can be illustrated by the tabulated information (See Table VII
in Appendix I and Graphs X and XI in Appendix 11). It must be made clear
that while the figures in the last column of the years 1981-86 do not include the
number of miscellaneous cases pending, the figure in the last column for the year
1987 includes figures of special leave petitions, final hearing matters and miscella-
neous cases. To be precise, the Annual Report for the year 1987-88 of the Minis-
try of Law and Justice, Government of India, furnishes official information about
the pendency in the Supreme Court as on 31-12-1987 as follows :*

S.No. Name of Court Position No. of
as on Cases
Pending

1. Supreme Court

(i) Regular hearing matters. . . « 31-12-87 39,316

(ii) Admission matters. . . . न Do. 51,315
(iii) Miscellaneous matters . . . . . Do. 85,117
Total . . . . . . . 1,75,748

2. High Courts. . . . न . « 31-12-86 14,95,814

To further buttress the inescapable conclusion that year after year, the graph of
arrears in the Supreme Court is relentlessly rising, it may be stated that at the
end of the year 1983, 1,36.313 matters were pending in the Supreme Court; by
the end of the year 1987, the figure rose to 1,75,748,° meaning thereby that in a
span of five years, the arrears rose by roughly 40,000 cases.

2.17. Apart from the continuous rise in the quantum of arrears year to year,
the more disturbing fact is that the cases, after having been brought to the Supreme
Court, are not disposed of for over a decade. This will be clear from the infor-
mation tabulated hereunder:”

Pendency Position — Supreme Court of India

As on Regular Regular Regular
hearing hearing hearing
matters matters matters
pending over pending over pending over
3 years 5 years 10 years

1 1-88 पु पु : : 27,014 16,852 3,811

a ee See ee



il

It is frightening to note that when a case is pending over 10 years in the Supreme
Court and recalling the fact that even High Court takes sufficiently long time to
dispose of the case. the case, since its commencement in the court of original
jurisdiction, must be pending over two decades. If anyone in search of justice
has to wait for full two decades, that jtself is sufficient to confess the failure of
the system.

2.18. During the period 1981-87, two cases occupied the Court for unduly
long time. The challenge to the National Security Act, 1980," occupied the
Court's time from the Ist week of December 1980 to almost the commencement
of the summer vacation in May 1981. Similarly, in what has come to be known
as Judges’ case,” a Bench of seven Judges heard the case from August 4, 1981,
till practically the end of the year. A good number of Judges being occupied in
hearing only ‘one case or a couple of allied matters has the inbuilt tendency to
push up the arrears.

2.19. Another significant development during this period is the rise in social
action litigation and the advent of epistolary jurisdiction. Numerous letter peti-
tions were received by the Supreme Court as well as large number of social ac-
tion litigation were commenced. Disposal of these urgent cases kept back the
hearing of the regularly admitted matters waiting final disposal, pushing up, to
some extent, the arrears.

2.20. An extensive survey of the handling of causes and controversies by
the Supreme Court of India during the period of its existence raises serious
doubt about its future. The situation is day by day becoming more and more
complex defying easy solutions. The problem of arrears in the Supreme Court
has disturbed not only the Supreme Court but the Government of India, the
legal profession and the academe. The Law Commission has also repeatedly
focussed its attention on this none-too-likeable situation. The improvement is
nowhere in the sight.

2.21. The situation becomes so depressing that very recently it provoked a
Bench of the Supreme Court to almost shut the doors of the Supreme Court to
those litigants invoking its jurisdiction under article 32 of the Constitution which
confers guarantee to move the Court for enforcement of fundamental rights.
Petitioners approached the Supreme Court of India for the issue of a writ in the
nature of certiorari for quashing an order issued by the Deputy Assessor and
Collector of the Assessment and Collection Department of Municipal Corpora-
tion of Delhi. The Court proceeded to dispose of the petition without expressing
any opinion on the merits of the case, reserving liberty to the petitioners to file
a petition, if so advised, before the High Court under Article 226 of the Cons-
titution. In approaching the matter in this manner. a poignant observation of the
Court deserves mention:

“This Court has no time even to dispose of cases which have to be
decided by it alone and by no other authority. Large number of cases are
pending from 10 to 15 years. Even if no new case is filed in this Court here-
after, with the present strength of Judges, it may take more than 15 years to
dispose of all the pending cases.” emphasis supplied).

Earlier another Bench of the Supreme Court while rejecting the petition leaving
it to the petitioners to approach the High Court under Article 226 of the Cons-
titution had observed that: “as it is, more than ten years old Civil appeals and
Criminal appeals are sobbing for attention. It will occasion great misery and
immense hardship to tens of thousands of litigants if the seriousness of this
aspects is not sufficiently realised. And this is no imaginary phobia.”" The parties


12

who approached (he Supreme Court were advised to go to the High Court be-
cause the dockets of the Supreme Ccuri are so clogged that till the turn cf the
century, the present backlog of cases cannot be cleared. Has the solution aay
merit? The situation in the High Courts is far more depressing than im the
Supreme Court. The situation can be gleaned from the information tabulated
below:*

High Courts
Year Pendency Instituted Disposed of Pending at
at the during the during the the end of
beginning year year the year
of the year
1985 . हु : ~ = 12,51,945.. 7,31,543 6,05,698 13,717,799
1986 . . . + 13,77,790 Not Not 14,95,814
available available
1987 o 6 ee 14,95,814 Do. Do. Not
available

The situation in the High Courts appears to be comparatively worse than in
the Supreme Court. If the Constitution-makers conferred original jurisdiction on
the Supreme Court to grant relief where one complains of breach of fundamental
Tights, can it he denied on the short ground that the Supreme Court is usable to
manage its own dockets and direct the parties to approach the High Courts where
the situation is disturbingly depressing? Can litigants be pushed from pilfar to
pest? The solution to the problem does not lie in shutting the doors of the
Gourt. There was a sharp reaction from the Supreme Court Bar Association
to the approach of the Supreme Court in declining to entertain the petition on the
ground, amongst others, that it has no time to deal with the cases. The solution
has to be found somewhere else.


CHAPTER IIT

CAUSFS FOR DELAY AND PAST ATTEMPTS AT REMEDIAL
MEASURES

3.1. Diagnostic effort unquestionably reveals that the system is sick almost
beyond repair. There is no one who cannot say that the disease in the form of
backlog of cases and delay in disposal of them has eaten into the vitals of the
system and each limb is sick, the sickness becoming visible in the form of huge
backlog appearing like malignant glands. Numerous persons and bodies have
offered their own analysis of the causes that induce sickness. A brief reference
to the same would not be out of place.

3.2. Everyone directly or indirectly connected with the justice system has
been depress:d by the delay and the chocking congestion in the Supreme Court
with pending cases crying aloud for disposal. This. by itself, is likely to lead to
disarray in the functioning of the constitutional Government: to wit, numerous
decisions of the Government are being questioned in the Court and during the
pendency of the matter, interim relief is granted by the Court, bringing the
governmental machinery to a standstill and throwing the whole constitutional
mechanism out of gear. The Courts have stayed, by their interim orders, collec-
tion of taxes to the tune of Rs. 4.090 crore. This aspect may he viewed in the
background of deficient financing and leaving budgetary deficit unfilled. The
functioning of the court has affected the quantity and quality of justice available
to citizens. The court has become vulnerable and the credibility and reputation
of judicial process is at stake. Delay in delivering justice invites in brief the
wisecrack. Editorially expounded:

“Okay, blind, but why so slow?”

3.3. Laws’ proverbial delay in many lands and throughout history has fur-
nished a theme for either a tragedy or a comedy. ‘Bleak House’ by Charles Dic-
kens is a parody on justice system and the satire on the laws’ delay has been
universally acknowledged. It was a comedy. Hamlet summaries the seven bur-
dens of men and puts the laws’ delay fifth in the list. It is part of a tragedy.
Similarly, Chekov, the Russian, and Moliers, the Frenchman, have composed
tragedies on the theme of laws’ delays. Gilbert and Sullivan have satirized it in
a song. This may indicate that the problem is an age-old one and people live
with it. The question is of the dimension. now it has acquired, Regardless of the
antiquity of the problem and the difficulty it presents, the interest groups have
time and again suggested some remedial measures. if not to solve the rroblem,
to make it manageable.

3.4. The Law Commission composed of eminent lawyers and outstand-
ing Judges, while dealing with the arrears in the Supreme Court, felt that the
unattractive conditions of service were largely responsible for not attracting the
outstanding talent from the Bar and, therefore, ‘an effort should be made to tecruit
distinguished members of the Bar directly to the Supreme Court Bench by invit-
ing them to accept the appointment at a time when they can look forward to a
fairly long tenure on the Bench’. While not recommending any increase in the
emoluments of a Judge of the Supreme Court, the Commission recommended that
the ‘pensions payable to Judges of the Supreme Court should be increased......... 3
It also incidentally observed that a continuous supervision should be maintained
over piling up of the arrears so that, if necessary, ‘a decision can be reached on
the need for further increasing the strength of the Court’ It hopefully believed

13
5-10 Miof L & 3/88


14

that these suggestions would in the long run bring down the arrears. The causes
thus identified are a possible inadequacy in the Judge strength of the Court and
presence of not requisite talent being appointed to Supreme Court because talent-
ed people find compensation for Judgeship unattractive and inadequate.

3.5. As the time passed. another ugly feature came to surface which was one
of the primary causes for mounting arrears. The one cause held largely responsible
for the malaise is the inordinate delay in filling in the vacancies in time in the
Supreme Court. To give a graphic picture, an attempt has been made to convincing-
ly establish that there is inordinate delay in filling in vacancies. Information has
been collected for years 1981-86 in this behalf which has been tabulated (See Table
VIN in Appendix 1). An arithmetical approach would show that the delay im fi-
ing the vacancies caused a loss of 8,419 mandays during this period. If the vacan-
cies had been filled in without unexplained delay and avoiding loss of mandays,
the Court would have been able to dispose of 25,678 cases which would have
lowered the mounting graph of arrears.

3.6. This aspect has been examined in depth and vividiy described by the
Law Commission.‘ The picture becomes curiouser when it is recalled that since the
advent of the Constitution, there has been an upward revision in the Judge strength
of the Supreme Court commencing from 7+1 in 1956 to 25+1 in 1986, yet this
has remained a paper exercise because while strength is augmented, the newly-
created posts are not filled in for years. To illustrate that point. let it be made
clear that the last upward revision in the Judge strength of the Supreme Court
‘was effective from 9th May. 1986," yet for a period of nearly two years, not a
single post from the additional strength has been filled. In fact, as of today,
there is one vacancy in the earlier strength still remaining unfilled. Upward
revision of Judge strength is founded on a certain assumption that the present
Judge strength would not be able to cope with the inflow of work and to effec-
tively deal with the arrears. Therefore, one way of solving the problem is to in-
crease the strength of Judges. If the increase is worked out scientifically in the
manner of disposal of cases by a Judge per year and thus a certain figure is
arrived at, not filling in those vacancies would unquestionably mean that the
inadequate strength continues to be inadequate notwithstanding the fact that
there is an upward revision of strength. Merely passing legislation for upward
revision of strength by itself is hardly of any consequence. The moment upward
revision of strength is sanctioned, steps must be taken to fill in those newly
‘created posts immediately so that the assumption behind upward revision of
strength is scientifically worked cut.

3.7. It must at once be conceded that Judges of the Supreme Court are over-
worked and not filling in the vacancies imposed an unbeatable burden on those
who are in position, Monday is reserved as admission day and, on an average,
50 special leave petitions/writ petitions are listed for admission before each
Bench generally comprising of two Judges. This may entail reading of over a
‘thousand pages. For the next three days, on an average, 10 to 15 matters are
listed for admission as also a continuous running Board is assigned to each
Bench listing final hearing matters. When these matters are heard, the judgments
thaveé to be pronounced. And ordinarily, in the Supreme Court, the judgments
are prepared at home. This method entails heavy workload on Saturday-Sunday.
Again on Friday, good number of matters are listed for admission and the Judges
have to work hard on Saturday-Sunday for preparing their opinions plus appro-
vitg the judgments of the colleagues circulated for opinion. There is little time
left for the Judges to read and investigate on their own behalf. This intolerable
burden of work provoked a former Chief Justice to say that failure on the part
of Government to fill in the vacancies has operated as an act of cruelty to the
existing Judges to carry on intolerable burden.’


15

3.8. There is a divergence of cpinion on the question of upward revision of
Judge strength. There is a body of opinion that if the Judge strength is revised
very high and the Judges in the Supreme Court sit in Benches of two, inevi-
tably there will be conflict of opinion and the quality of justice would suffer.
There is an element of truth in this approach. There are others who believe that
the situation has become so disconcerting that even if there is a risk in increa-
sing the Judge strength very high, the risk will have to be run. Undoubtedly,
proponents of both the views emphatically assert that the vacancies should be
filled in as early as possible.

3.9. It may be pointed out here that this failure on the front of making
appointments to fill in vacancies has been the subject matter of numerous Gis-
cussions. On the earlier occasions, a pious hope was expressed that the vacan-
cies should be filled in as early as possible. That hope remained unfulfilled.
Consequently, the Law Commission was obliged to look at the problem afresh
and, avoiding platitudinous observations, an effective remedy was suggested to
deal with the problem of expeditious filling in of vacancies. It would be legi-
timate to hope that the concerned Government will take adequate effective and
expeditious steps to fill in the vacancies.

3.10. An analysis of the causes for delay in disposal of cases and conse
quently piling up of arrears has been done by a legal academe. He is of the
opinion that conceding that looking to the legal system which makes inevitable
a certain time consumption for arriving at authoritative and fair decisions, ‘we
must approach the problem of the overioad in terms of institutional factors,
which, by their very nature, can be changed with a view to enhancing expedition
as an aspect of equity’? He categorised the factors contributing to inexpedition
in at least four categories: (i) Government-caused delays, (ii) court-caused
delays, (iii) Bar-caused delays, and (iv) litigant-caused delays. Under the head-
ing ‘Government-caused delays’, he adverted to the delay in filling in vacancies
and failure of the Government to make realistic assessment of the judicial man-
power needed for maintaining an efficient and a just justice administration. He
has also analysed causes for delay in the trial and first appeal level courts but.
as this report deals with the Supreme Court, it may not be necessary to refer
to the same in detail, Under the heading ‘Court-caused delays’, he suggested
drawing up a manual of court management for all level of judiciary and that
there should be a training programme for the judicial officers. He also advo-
cated holding of seminars to understand the new and comparative methods of
court management. Under the heading ‘Legal profession-caused delays,’ he
states that inequitable distribution of work coupled with forensic habits contri-
‘bute to the escalation of time taken in disposal of cases which tend to enhance
arrears. Under the heading ‘Litigant Caused delays’, he poses a question whe-
ther greater litigiousness, which has become evident since the advent of the Cons-
titution, shows an increasing rights consciousness and access to law.”

3.11. Shri H. M. Seervai focuses his attention on the Supreme Court: Its
Working and the Problem of Delay." His analysis reveals various causes which,
according to him, have contributed to the present situation. Briefly stated they
are that the statement of case is unnecessarily dispensed with by the Supreme
Court and outline of arguments is not an adequate substitute for a well-drawn
statement of case. Another reason advanced by him is that the Judges gene-
rally, and the Judges of the Supreme Court in particular, intervene too much
in the case. The third reason, according to him, is that unless the Judges have
clear head, sound knowledge of the law, the gift of simple and clear speech and
the gift of attentive silence and avoiding wrangles with the coumsel, the delay
im disposal of cases is inevitable. One more reason, according to him, is that


16

some Judges have a bias for certain causes such as labour law cases. According
to him, the Judges must be value free, value neutral. because the Constitution
of India has no fixed “philosophy” or no fixed “values”.” The next cause, accor-
ding to him, for the delay is the multiplicity of concurring and dissenting judg-
ments.” The panacea recommended is to follow the Privy Council and the House
of Lords without question. Total absence of accountability of the judiciary as
an important factor has not met with his approval.

3.12. The steps taken by the Supreme Court its:!1 «0 expedite disposal of
cases may now be noticed. They are as under. In the year 1978-79 a Committee
was set up by the Chief Justice of India to suggest ways aud means to tackle
the proviem of arrears. It is not known whether this Committee submitted any
report. As the spectre of mounting arrears was haunting, amongest others, a
full Court meeting of the Judges of the Supreme Court, presided over by the
then Chief Justice in the year 1983, resolved to specify some matters which can
be disposed of by a single Judge of the Court. The importance of this decision
may be appreciated in the light of the provision that ordinarily every matter
coming before the Supreme Court has to be heard by a Bench consisting of not
less than two Judges nominated by the Chief Justice." The incongruity of this
provision can be visualised from the fact that in the High Court, numerous
matters are disposed of by a single Judge but if a petition for special leave
to appeal is preferred against the decision of a single Judge of the High Court,
the same has to be heard as hereinabove indicated by a Bench consisting of
not less than two Judges. Therefore, the full court specified matters which can
be heard by a single Judge in the Supreme Court. To attain the object under-
lying this decision of the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court, in exercise of the
power, conferred by article 145 of the Constitution, 10 regulate generally the
practice and procedure of the court, framed a proviso to rule 1 of Order VI,
which reads as under: हु

“Order VII, rule 1.—Subject to other provisions of these rules, every cause,
appeal or matter shall be heard by a Bench consisting of not less than two Judges
nominated by the Chief Justice:

Provided, however, that the following categories of matters may be heard

and disposed of finally by a Judge sitting singly nominated by the Chief
Tustice:’

(1) Special leave petitions arising out of the decisions or orders of a
single Judge of a High Court or of a member of a Tribunal sitting
singly,

(2) bail applications,

(3) applications for substitution other than those falling under rule
1(15) of Order VI, हु

(4) summons for non-prosecution,
(5) applications for exemption from paying Court-fees,

(6) applications for extension of time for paying Court-fees or for
furnishing undertaking, bank guarantee or security,

(7) applications for disposal of an appeal in terms of a compromise

(8) applications for withdrawal of special leave petitions, appeals or
with petitions.”*


17

The rule-making power conferred by article 145 of the Constitution is condi-
tional in that the Court can frame the rule with the approval of the President. The
President accorded his approval to this rule. The rule became operational from
30th July, 1983. A period of five years has rolled by and yet it is a matter
of regret that the rule is not implemented. If this rule was implemented, ins-
tead of 8 Courts hearing admissions on Monday, 17 or [8 Courts may be hear-
ing the same and the turn ovt wiil be multipled manifold. It is not possible to
discern with accuracy the reasons behind reluctance to implement this rule.
Presumably the Supreme Court Bar Association has resisted the implementation,
though in a discussion with the former Chief Justice of India, he asserted that
the Bar has veered round to cooperate in implementing the rule. The unfortu-
nate fact remains that the rule is not implemented. In fact, in fairness to the
Court, it may be pointed out that the Supreme Court itself claims to have taken
some steps to tackle the problem of arrears. These steps may be listed: —

“(i) Matters involving common question of law are grouped together and
listed in groups so that they can all be disposed of together.

(ii) In most of the matters, printing of the appeal record is dispensed with,
which saves a lot of time and expenses of the litigants. In criminal
appeals, counsel for the appellant is required to file cyclostyled record to
save time, which would otherwise be taken in getting the record printed.
so that the matter could be heard orally.

(iii) To save the Court’s time, Hon’ble the Chief Justice is taking mention-
ing matters, which takes about one hour on cach day. after the Court
hours. (Now discontinued).

(iv) Supreme Court Rules have been amended empowering Hon’ble Judge
in Chambers and the Registrar to dispose of certain types of matters
which have previously been listed in the Court. This has been done to
save the Court’s time.

(v) Specialised Benches re-constitued by Hon'ble the Chief Justice and par-
ticular types of matters are assigned to such Specialised Benches for
quick disposal.

«wij Computer technology is soon going to be introduced in the Supreme

Court. which is expected to help reduce the backlog of cases consider-
ably.

qvii) Recently, Hon'ble the Chief Justice has directed that the counsel in
each matter should file written arguments, if the arguments are to take
more than five hours on each side. The oral arguments on each side (sic)
are thus restricted to five hours unless the Court feels that more time
is to be given to the counsel, in which case a maximum of ten hours
are given for oral arguments to the counsel of each side. The length
of oral arguments by counsel of both the sides has thus been curtailed
with a view to securing quick disposal of matters.

(viii) The Court Administrator-cum-Registrar, who is a senior judicial officer,
has been appointed very recently so that in conjunction with the present
two Registrars, there can be a re-organisation of the working of the
Registry and improving its techniques and efficiency.”.*

3.13. As against these effete steps to deal with the situation, very recently
the Supreme Court has enlarged its jurisdiction by holding that a writ petition
can lie to it under article 32 against its own judgment between the same parties.
Commenting on this judgment, a national daily stated that “The Supreme Court


18

judgment in the Antuiay case is likely to open the floodgaies for appeals against
its own judgments when previously there was a finality about them”?’ This

recent judgment of the Supreme Court is in teeth of a nine Judges Bench judg-
ment wherein it was held that “it is impossible to accept the argument of the
petitioners that judicial orders passed by High Courts in or in relation to procee-
dings pending before them, are amenable to be corrected by exercise of the said
jurisdiction’, namely, by a petition under article 32 of the Constitution. If a
judicial order passed by a High Court cannot be corrected by a writ petition
under article 32 to the Supreme Court, that judgment is a greater authority of the
proposition that a judicial order passed by the Supreme Court cannot be the
subject matter of the writ petition to itself under article 32 and more specifically
between the same parties. Avoiding any comment on the judgment, it needs
to be pointed out that every decision of the Supreme Court would now be amen-
able to a petition under article 32 of the Constitution and, therefore, it is im-
possible to foresee with certainty the torrential inflow of litigation. It further
needs to be pointed out that while on the one hand the Supreme Court declined
to entertain a writ petition under article 32 of the Constitution even where it was
competent” yet on the other had it opens its own gate so wide by a hitherto
unknown jurisdiction encouraging persons to approach it to question its own
decisions.

3.14. While discussing the causes, the remedies offered have also been ad-
verted to. It is an undeniable fact that nothing so far recommended has even
remotely improved the situation. It is, therefore, inevitable that drastic remedies
will have to be prescribed to reprieve the situation before the situation gets
totally out of hand.


CHAPTER IV

RECOMMENDATIONS

4.1. In the search for solution for the unbearable load of arrears under which
the Supreme Court is functioning, the Law Commission studying the problem of
judicial reforms approached the Chief Justice of India, by a letter dated Jan-
uary 19, 1988 (See Appendix II), requesting him to assist the Law Commission
in the scientific analysis of the problem so as to churn out effective remedial _
measures. After drawing his attention to the earlier reports,' he was informed
about the report submitted by the present Law Commission, especially dealing
with decentralisation of administration of justice by suggesting specialist tribu-
nals eliminating the jurisdiction of generalist courts. The Law Commission then,
in the form of an approach paper, pointed out its tentative thinking on what
ought to be done to effectively deal with the situation and which can be done
without much effort expeditiously.

4.2. All those who concentrated their attention on the functioning of the
Supreme Court and the problematic of arrears were convinced that one of the
principal causes largely responsible for accumulating arrears is the inordinate
delay in filling in vacancies in the Supreme Court. A few days back the Minister
of State for Law and Justice replying to a question in Rajya Sabha stated that
9 vacancies remained unfilled in the Supreme Court. He further proceeded to
state that the selection of judges involved consultation with the concerned constitu-
tional authorities. He stated that it is not possible to indicate any definite time
for filling up the vacancies? If the sanctioned strength of the Supreme Court is
26 including the Chief Justice of India, the information supplied reveals that one-
third of the vacancies have remained unfilled for over two years. Whatever may
be the causes for this gross delay in filling in the vacancies, it is unthinkable that
such long time may be required to be spent in filling in the vacancies. Accord-
ingly, the Law Commission was convinced that even with the utmost sincerity,
which can never be questioned, the root cause for this disturbing situation niust
be traced to the procedure for filling in vacancies. The Law Commission accor-
dingly drew the attention of the Chief Justice of India that it has recommended
a new forum for appointments to Supreme Court and High Courts.’ That report
is with the Government. It has been placed on the table of both houses of Par-
liament. The Law Commission then proceeded to point out that the recommen-|
dation for substitution of a different forum for dealing with judicial appointments |
may take some time before it becomes operational. In the interregnum, it would
be dangerous to shut one’s eyes to the prob'em of arrears.

4.3. It has been statistically established that there is inordinate delay in
filling in vacancies. Therefore, an urgent step is neczssary to deal with it forth-
with before long term decision is taken in the form of setting up a new forum
for judicial appointments. In the letter, it was pointed out that the vacancy
occurs on retirement or death of a Judge in position. Death is such an uncertain
event that one cannot foresee it and rationally deal with it in advance. But
retirement is known in advance. In the past, pious observation was made that
process for filling in the vacancy must start considerably in advance before the
actual date of the retirement of a Judge which would cause the vacancy. There
is no response to this suggestion and the situation remains unchanged. There-
fore, a proposition was put for the consideration of the Chief Justice of India
that hereafter whenever a Judge reaches the date of his retirement, he should
not quit but from that day onward, unless his successor is ready to take over,

19


20

the provision contained in article 128 of the Constitution must be invoked. In
other words, the Judge so retiring should continue to function us one whio is
requested under article 128 to act as a Judge of the Supreme Court till such
time as his successor is ready to take over. This will ensure no impairment of
the Judge strength of the Court even for a day. A possible critique of this
suggestion was also pointed out specifying the rational answer to the same.

4.4. The second tentative proposal of the Law Commission centred round
the effective use of the retired Judges of the Supreme Court who since their retire-
ment have settled down in the capital. The advantages of effective usc of this
accumulated pool of talent were also specified. The letter aiso contained a
request that these tentative suggestions may be implemented till such time as the
permanent solution in the form of setting up a new forum for judicial appoint-
ment becomes operational. A request was made to Chief Justice of India as head
of the judicial administration of the country and gravely concerned with the
malaise in the system to respond no: only to this tentative suggestion but also
some mere which he may think of making on his own after consulting his colle-
agues. The Chief Justice of India has not thought it fit to respond to this letter.
The loss undoubtedly is of the Law Commission. But a body with a time-bound
programme cannot indefinitely wait. It is also legitimate to infer that possibly
there was no serious objection to those suggestions.

4.5. The Law Commission is of the opinion that the long term permanent
solution of this problem of filling in vacancies lies in effective implementation
of its report recommending a new forum for judicial appointments. During the
interregnum, it is absolutely necessary to implement the two suggestions which
are recommended herein.

4.6. The delay in filling in a vacancy has the inbuilt tendency to impair
the Judge strength of the Court for such time as the vacancy is not filled
in and the mandays lost by not filling in the vacancies in time invariably
result in further piling up the arrears. Continued unimpaired Judge strength
of the Court is indispensable to the proper functioning of the Court. This
report is not concerned with finding out causes responsible for the delay in
filling in the vacancies. It has been dealt with in the earlier report succinctly
and fully. But til! such time as effective steps are taken to fill in vacancies
expeditiously, it is recommended that the retiring Judge shall continue to be
in position till such time as his successor is ready to take over. This sugges-
tion has two distinct advantages: (i) the Judge strength will remain unimpair-

ed, and (ii) the highly experienced Judge would be available with his हा

pertise to deal with the causes expeditiously because a newly appointed Judge
takes time to acclimatize to the working in the Supreme Cou-t. Unques-
tionably, these two advantages outweigh the critique of the suggestion. One
criticism voiced during discussion was that if the outgoing Judge is one for
whom the Chief Justice has good opinion. he may draz his feet in recom-
mending the successor; but if he is cne who is not so fortunate. he may be
quickly put out of office by bringing in the successor as expeditiously as
possible. This criticism lacks legitimacy for the reason that if expeditious
appointment is generated for the reason herein stated. it would certainly be

te the advantage of the institution. However, the better response to the cri-

ticism is that the vacancies are filled in chronologically so that one so good
may continue, followed by one not so geod. Even when successor for the
next man is appointed, he would take over from the first-mentioned person.
Added to this is the fact that the Chief Justice of India is free from all such
biases and acts only and unquestionably for the good of the system. For
these reasons, the apprehension is wholly unfounded. The advantages far


21

outweigh a possible suspected disadvantage and, therefore, this suggestion
deserves to be implemented forthwith.

4.7. In dealing with the question of arrears, it must be stated that the
sanctioned Judge strength has never been found sufficient to make any dent
im movntiag arrears. As pointed out hereinbefore’, the Judge strength of
the Supreme Court has been revised on four different occasions and at ao
point of time the revised strength has made any impact on the arrears. It in,
therefore, safe to conclude that the existing Judge strength at any given point of
time may at best be able to deal effectively with the current incoming work but
will be totally ineffective in making any dent in the arrears. Therefore, leav-
ing the present Judges strength to deal with the current work, a distinct new
device is necessary to deal with the arrears.

4.8. It is widely known, and not questioned, that some Judges after re-
téement from the Supreme Court settle down in Delhi. Though they may
have come from different parts of the country, when elevated to the Supreme
Court, they may have their own reasons for settling down in Delhi. When
they settle down after retirement in Delhi, they provide for their own rest
dence, telephone and other facilities that they need. These retired Judges
constitute a pool of rich talent which requires to be fully utilized. Before
coming to the Supreme Court, they must have worked in High Court at least
for a period of not Jess than 10 years and they have added to their expertise
by being in the apex court on an average for about 5 years. All through
their active career, they have decided causes and controversies coming before
them. They have sharpened decision-making process which is an asset. Art
of adjudication is in their blood. Court processes and court procedure are
handy to them. They have acquired a certain expertise in dealing with
matters, civil, criminal, tax, labour and constitutional, coming before them.
To repeat, they represent a rich pool of talent. On retirement by superannua-
tion, in view of the provision contained in article 124(7), they are prohibited
from practising before any court or before any authority within the territory
of India. They may do chamber practice but that hardly attracts all the re-
tirees because by aptitude and any way of life, a number of them may not be
interested in entering chamber practice. How to use this unutilized pool of
talent?

4.9. Whenever a suggestion is made to augment the strength of the Court,
a question is always raised about the financial implications of the proposal.
Whenever the Judge strength jis augmented and more Judges are appointed
the question of providing them with residence, perks and facilities and even
extension of building and addition to staff are dangled as prohibitively costly
and the proposals are put in cold storage. The recommendation which the
Law Commission is making takes care of all these possible areas of addi-
tional expenditure.

4.10. To begin with, it is time to frankly annihilate a myth that expenditure
on administration of justice is non-plan expenditure. A constitutional demo-
cracy founded on rule of law cannot develop even economically unless its legal
formulations are in tune with its economic policy which, as the Preamble
shows, must be socialistic in character. This dichotomy between economic
planning and legal formulation has been largely responsible for courts taking
a view different from the Executive in respect of even economic and taxation
measures which necessitated amendment of the constitution on numerous occa-
sions. Without adverting to this aspect at length. one can sav with confidence
that expenditure on administration of justice must be now treated as plan
expenditure.


22

4.11. With this preliminary observation the existing situation may pe given
its due consideration. The buildings available to courts are hardly fully uti-
lized, especially the building of the Supreme Court. Courts assemble at 10.30
and leave at 4 O° clock. Therefore, if some Courts can start functioning at
8:30 A.M. then without spending a farthing on building, additional Courts can
effectively operate in the same building. Library, building facility, staff in the
central ministerial establishment of the court would not need any augmenta-
tion. There will be a slight rise in the expenditure for providing some addi-
tional staff to the additional Courts.

4.12. On these introductory remarks, it is recommended that the retired
Judges, minimum 12 in number, may be requested to sit in four Benches,
each of three, and to take up old civil and criminal appeals. The Chief Justice
of India may draw a base-line, the cases beyond which may be treated as
those available for disposal by retired Judges sitting in Benches. For im-
plementing this suggestion, constitutional amendment is not necessary because
article 128 will effectively assist in implementing this suggestion. It is the
experience of many Judges that the old matters sometimes hang on for not
being even touched for want of time. These four Benches—two dealing with
criminal appeals and two dealing with civil appeals—will handle old matters and
the disposal is bound to be very fast because a number of matters would get
disposed of for want of further interest in prosecuting the same as they are
pending over two decades right from the day of institution in the court of first
instance. The Chief Justice of India, in consultation with the President, may
request such retired Judges residing in Delhi to accept this assignment to begin
with for a period of two years.

4.13. To make this offer attractive, the retired Judges should be paid the
same salary as the sitting Judges and pension should not be deducted. They
have earned their pension. The whole concept of deducting pension on re-
employment has become a disincentive. In fact, in the State of Gujarat, any
retired Judge at any level, when re-employed, gets the salary admissible to
the Judge in position plus his pension. It is worth emulating this wholesome
suggestion and it is recommended accordingly.

4.14. This recommendation can be implemented without amending article
128 of the Constitution which provides that when retired Judges aie requested
to attend the sittings of the Supreme Court, they would be entitled to such al-
lowances as the President may by order determine. The President may as
well determine the same allowance as admissible to a sitting Judge of the
Supreme Court. The practice hitherto followed is, to say the least, wholly
unwholesome because one of the retired Judges who had worked as an ad hoc
Judge informed the Law Commission that the allowance is almost of a daily-
rated workman, a situation unbecoming for a retired Judge of the Supreme
Court.

4.15. These Benches would sit from 8.30 A.M. to 12 noon. The Supreme
Court may itself assemble from 12 to 5 with half an hour lunch because one
hour lunch break is hardly necessary. The administrative supervision of the
Courts presided over by the retired Judges will obviously vest in the Chief
Justice of India.

‘ 4.16. The recommendations made herein are not in supersession of the
recommendations made in earlier reports. Where both can co-exist, all the
recommendations should be implemented. But where they stand in derogation
to each other, those made herein should be implemented because the previous
recommendations may not have found favour with the Government.


23

4.17. The Law Commission wants to reiterate that the recommendation for
splitting the Court into two halves deserves to be implemented" The present
Law Commission has an additional reason for reiterating the recommendation.
The Supreme Court sits at Delhi alone. Government of India, on couple of
occasions, sought the opinion of the Supreme Court of India for setting up a
Bench in the South. This proposal did not find favour with the Supreme Court.
The result is that those coming from distant places like Tamil Nadu in the
South, Gujarat in the West and Assam and other States in the East have to
spend huge amount on travel to reach the Supreme Court. There is a practice
of bringing one’s own lawyer who has handled the matter in the High Court to the
Supreme Court. That adds to the cost. And an adjournment becomes prohi-
bitive. Adjournment is a recurrent phenomenon in the Court. Costs get
multiplied. Now if the Supreme Court is split into Constitutional Court and
Court of Appeal or a Federal Court of Appeal, no serious exception could be
taken to the Federal Court of Appeal sitting in Benches in places North, South,
East, West and Central India. That would not only considerably reduce costs
but also the litigant will have the advantage of his case being argued by the
same advocate who has helped him in the High Court and who may not be
required to travel to long distances. Whenever questions of constitutionality
occur, as pointed out in that report, the Supreme Court can sit en banc at
Delhi and deal with the same. This cost benefit ratio is an additional but

important reason for reiterating support to the recommendations made in that
report.

4.18. ‘The Law Commission in its earliest quest for solution was faced with
unending prolix, long arguments in the Supreme Court covering days and
months, yet it did not recommend total abolition of oral arguments.© Even
though it has been said that arrangements have been- made to curtail arguments
on any one side not exceeding five hours in any given case, this is not effectively
implemented. To take the recent example, an appeal after two concurrent
findings of the Sessions Court and the High Court is being heard in the Supreme
Court by a Bench of three Judges for more than ten weeks.’ Therefore, it is
now inevitable that this reverential approach to oral arguments must yield to
the necessities of time. There are a number of cases which can be identified
by the Chief Justice of India in which oral arguments can be totally dispensed
with. Petitions for special leave which can be admitted without oral arguments
need not be listed in Court but must be admitted by circulation. Those in
which it is necessary to have arguments, the hearing may be confined to a
period not exceeding half an hour. In matters listed for final hearing, the Court
must prescribe the time in advance and strictly adhere to it. The Courts must
be empowered to dispense with oral arguments and insist upon written briefs.

4.19. The Judges of the Supreme Court rightly complain of a very heavy
unbearable work load. Quicker the hearing, larger number of judgments
come to the share of a Judge. A written opinion requires lot of concentration
and very little time is available to the Judges to concentrate on the same. The
situation has the inbuilt tendency to delay delivering judgments. Tt is, there-
fore, now time. to empower Judges to dispose of cases without written opinion.
It would be open to the Bench to pronounce that the appeal is allowed or is
dismissed or the order of the High Court is varied without reasons. Supreme
Court decision being final, it is not necessary for it to give reasons for the
benefit of any other tribunal. The written opinions must be pronounced in
matters involving constitutional niceties or moot points of law which often occur
before High Courts and Courts subordinate to High Courts to ensure continuity
and certainty of law. In all other cases, the written opinions may be dispensed
with and appeals may be disposed of without assigning reasons. There is


wm

nothing novel or radical in this suggestion. Those who are the admirers of
the working of the Supreme Court of the United States must also accept its
way of working. Whereas the Supreme Court of U.S. gives reasoned opinions
in only a few matters, a large number of matters are disposed of without
assigning reasons. To illustrate, in 1983-84 term of the Court, of the 5,155 cases
on its dockets, it disposed of 4,162 with finality. But of those many cases the
Court disposed of, it decided only 285 on the merits, with full written opinion
handed down in just 163 cases (an average number), the remainder being dis-
posed of either per curiam or by memorandum orders [eg., affirmed, reversed
ar dismissed (i.c., vacated)].’ This practice deserves to be accepted and im-
plemented to relieve the unbearable burden on the Judges of the Court.

4.20. The country is fast moving towards 21st century. But its legal pro-
cesses are as antiquated as antiquity can be. Modern technological advances
ave passed by justice system. Apart from more sophisticated software faci-
lity, primary necessity such as telex, was not available in the Supreme Court
ti recently. Computerisation of its Registry, though talked about, has still
net been accomplished. Computerisation of library is a high priority necessity.
The Court’s time is wasted in collecting judgments bearing on the same subject.
A push button system should be available to make handy all judgments on the
same subjects. Cases covered by earlier judgments of the Court must be
grouped together by a computer. Judges should be provided with dictaphone
so that their time may not be wasted in waiting for the availability of a steno-
grapher. These and many other technological advances deserve to be introduced
in the Supreme Court forthwith.

4.21. These are all the recommendations.


CHAPTER V
PORTENT

5.1. Consistent generally with the approach of Law Commissions since
their initiation that a very radical departure from the existing system. is not
recommended, in the opinion of the present Law Commission, situation has
by now deteriorated to such an extent that it is time to utter a warning to
all the affected interests that the next step would be something beyond the
conception of any of those interests. Without repeating what has been stated
that the Supreme Court by the sheer weight of its arrears has reached the
crisis level situation, yet its identity and genius has not been tampered with.
However, what the Founding Fathers of the Constitution foresaw even at the
time of the framing of the Constitution, the same cannot be ignored when
a time has come to take the step envisaged in the Constitution.

i 5.2, Article 124 of the Constitution provides for the setting up of a Sup-
reme Court at the apex of the judicial hierarchy of the country. It was to
be the court of last resort, of course subject to article 32. Jurisdiction of
widest amplitude was conferred upon it so that unhampered by any procedural
wrangle it can stave off miscarriage of justice or redress a wrong. Therefore,
the Supreme Court of India has its own specific individual identity. It has
its own genius. It has its own capability. It can reach any nook and cranny
to undo injustice. But it was expected that it would exercise its jurisdiction with
restraint and wisdom so that it would not be tied down in its own kaets,
including one of arrears, which, as pointed out,’ has compelled the Court to
shut its own doors to the litigants knocking at its doors.

5.3. The Law Commission is fully conscious of the fact that all the aiffi-
culties, troubles and tribulations which the Supreme Court is facing, it has
still a place in the heart of the common men of the country. They look upon
it with reverence. Undoubtedly, the credibility is taking a nose dive on the
only ground of its inability to render justice within a reasonably short time. But
this situation, it is hoped, can be repaired and considerably improved if the
recommendations made in this report are implemented in letter and spirit. If
unfortunately, as the past experience shows, some further indifference is shown
to the recommendations, the Law Commission would not be failing in its duty
to suggest radical measures of a surgical nature,

5.4. Article 32 confers a fundamental right to move the Supreme Court
on the complaint of violation of fundamental rights. The Supreme Court has
jurisdiction and powers to issue directions or orders or writs, including writs
jn the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and
certiorari, whichever may be appropriate for the enforcement of any of the
rights conferred by Part वा of the Constitution. It was assumed that the
Supreme Court at the apex of the judicial hierarchy retaining its corporate
character an identity will be able to meet with the challenges of time. But
the Founding Fathers were men of vision who foresaw that if the Supreme Court
fails and falters, one need not throw up the hands in despair. Therefore,
clause (3) of article 32 was enacted. It reads as under :

“Without prejudice to the powers conferred on the Supreme Court by
clauses (1) and (2), Parliament may by law empower any other court
to exercise within the local limits of its jurisdiction all or any of the powers
exercisable by the Supreme Court under clause (2).”.

25


26

, 5.5. If one Supreme Court with its corporate structure retaining its identity
fails to meet the challenges of time, the Founding Fathers envisioned setting
up_of as many Supreme Courts as the needs of the situation demand, This
is inkerent in clause (3) of article 32. Let not narrow wrangling of interpre-

_ tation permit missing the core of the article. If on any existing court power

of Supreme Court can be conferred, ipso facto the Parliament can create a
‘mew court and confer power of Supreme Court on it. And the germ of it
lies in the earlier reports of the Law Commission? which may permit those
apex court/tribunals to be conferred with jurisdiction of Supreme Court in
~their respective fields. The direction in which the Law Commission is forced
to move is herein indicated. It is hoped the Law Commission may not have
to invoke it.

(72

(0.8. 08881)
Chairman

(Sd)
(V.S. RAMA DEVI)
Member Secretary

New Ds.ut,
May 11, 1988.


NOTES AND REFERENCES

CHAPTER I

1.

क० जब 9 ए हक ४० ७

10.

i.
12.

13.

14.
15.
16.

17.
18.

19,

The first term of reference of the First Law Commission, LCI, 14th Re-
port on Reforms of Judicial Administration, p. 3.

. LCI, 14th Report on Reforms of Judicial Administration, p. 32.

U. Baxi, The Crisis of Indian Legal System, p. 58.
Id, P. 59.

. LCI, 27th Report on Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

LCI, 37th Report on Code of Criminal Procedure 1898. (Sections 1 to 176).

|. LCI, 41st Report on Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.
- LCI, 44th Report on Appellate Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in Civil

matters.

. Id. 9. 7.

LCI, 45th Report on Civil Appeals to the Supreme Court in Civil Matters.
p.l.

LCI, 54th Report on Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

LCI, 58th Report on Structure and Jurisdiction of the Higher Judiciary,
p.l.

LCI, 79th Report on Delay and Arrears in High Courts and other
Appellate Courts.

LCI, 80th Report on Method of Appointment of Judges.
LCI, 121st Report on A New Forum for Judicial Appointments.

LCI, 95th Report on Constitutional Division within the Supreme Court—
A proposal for. para 6.1,

Id., p. 6.3.

Bihar Legal Support Society v. Chief Justice of India and Another, (1986)
4 SCC 767 at 770.

LCI, 99th Report on Oral and Written arguments in the Higher Courts.

. LCI, 114th Report on Gram Nyayalaya’ 115th Report on Tax Courts;

122nd Report on Forum for National University in Labour Adjudication;
123rd Report on Decentralisation of Administration of Justice; Disputes
involving Centres of Higher Education.

CHAPTER II

1.
2.

PINDA RW

10.

Dr. Upendra Baxi, The Crisis of the Indian Legal System, p. 58.

Justice P. N. Bhagwati, former CJI, in his Law Day Speech on
November 26, 1986.

. Henry J. Abraham, The Judicial Process, pp. 187-190.
. AIR 1967 SC 1643.

. AIR 1970 SC 564. ,

» AIR 1973 SC 1461.

. Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977.

Source : Annual Report of the Ministry of Law and Justice for the year
1987-88, Government of India, p. 31.

Ibid.

Source : Information supplied by Minister of State for Law and Justice
in Rajya Sabha in reply to Unstarred Question No. 1646 on 10th
‘arch, 1988.

27


का.
12.

13.

14.
15.

28

A. K. Roy vy. Union of India and another, AIR 1982 SC 710.

ae. Gupta and others v. President of India and others, AIR 1982 SC

P.N. Kumar and another v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi, (1987) 4 SCC
609 at 610.

Kanubhai Brahmbhatt v. State of Gujarat AIR 1987 SC 1159.
Supra note 8.

CHAPTER वा

10.
11.

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

7.
18.

19.

. Colliers Issue, dated June 14, 1952, 9. 129.
. LCI, 14th Report, p. 56.
. Ibid.

Td., 9. 55.

. LCI, 1215 Report : A New Forum for Judicial Appointments, 1987,

Annexure IV.

. The Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Act, 1986.

P.N. Bhagwati, former Chief Justice of India, in his Law Day Speech
dated Nov. 26, 1986.

- LCI, 121st Report.
. Dr. Upendra Baxi, The Crisis of Indian Legal System, p. 64.

Id., pp. 64-18.

uM Seervai, Constitutional Law of India, Third Edition, Vol. I, p.
.

Td., p. 2492, para 25.434.

Id., 9. 2477, para 25.411.

Order VII, rule 1, of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966.
Id., proviso to Order VII, rule 1.

Source : Answer by Hon’ble the Minister of State in the Ministry of
Law and Justice to Unstarred Question No. 1646 on 10th Maroh, 1986,
in Rajya Sabha.

Editorial in The Hindustan Times dated May 3, 1988.

Naresh Shridhar Mirdjkar and others v. State of Maharashtra and
Another, (1966) 3 SCR 744, ( )

See Supra notes 12 and 13 of Chapter IT

CHAPTER IV

1.

NAWPEYLY

LCI, 14th , 58th and 79th Reports.
The Indian Express Delhi Edition 11th March, 1988.

. LCI, 1218 Report.
. Supra note 6 of Chapter III.
. LCI, 95th Report.
. LCI, 99th Report.

Appeal arising out of the assassination of Smt. Indira Gandhi, the former
Prime Minister of India.

8. Source : Henry J. Abraham, The Judicial Process, Sth Edition, pp.
187-190.
CHAPTER V
N 1, (1987) 4 SCC 609 and AIR (1987) SC 1159.
2. LCI, 115th, 122nd and 123rd Report.


APPENDIX 1

TABLE I
Year Pending at Institution Disposal Pending at
the begin- duringthc duringthe theend of
ning of the year year the year
year
1951 . Tn 1602 1787 586
1952. . 586 1465 1672 379
1953 . . 379 1717 1411 685
1954 . . 685 2131 1930 886
1955. 886 211 1807 1190
1956 . . 1190 2337 1955 1572
1957, . 1572 2460 1911 2121
1958 . . 2121 2418 2295 2244
1959 . . 2244 2647 2497 2494
1960 . . 2494 3247 3202 2319
Source : Rajeev Dhavan, The Supreme Court under strain : The Challenge
of Arrears, p. 35.
APPENDIX 1
TABLE वा
Year Writ Disposal _ Difference
Petitions between
under Art. institution
32 and disposal
Institution
1951 686 1000 314
1952. . . 495 521 26
1953. . . . 409 381 128
1954. . . 694 388 306
1955. . . . 446 472 26
1956. . . . 257 124 133
1957. . न 171 214 43
1958 . . . 176 100 76
1959, . 200 135 66
Source‘ Rajeev Dhavan, The Supreme Court under strain : The Challenge

of Arrears, p. 31.

29


30

APPENDIX 1
TABLE Hf
Special Leave Petitions Special Leave Peti- Total excess
(Civil) tions (Criminal) of

Year disposal
= _ — over insti-

Insti- — Dis- Diffe- —_ Insti- Dis- Diffe- tution or
tution posal rence tution posal rence vice versa

95st. . 200 196 —4 467 364 —103 —107
1952. > 248 200 —48 402 424 +22 —26
1953 . 348 232. —116 602 546 —56 172
1954 - 368 4i7 +49 674 698 +24 +73
1955. . 451 411 —40 708 724 +16 —24
1956 . 725 799 474 725 714 +49 +123
1957 » 645 602 —43 646 684 +38 5
1958 + 781 816 +35 760 756 —4 +31
1959. » 753 780 +27 917 900 जया +10

+Excess of Disposal over institution
— Excess of institution over Disposal

Source / Rajeev Dhavan, The Supreme Court under strain : The Challenge
of Arrears, pages 29 and 123.

APPENDIX [
TABLE IV
Year Pending at Institution Disposal Pending at
the begin- duringthe duringthe the end of
ning of the year year the year
year
1961 . पु पु पु 2319 3216 3558 1977
1962 . . . . 1977 3559 3883 1703
1963 . . . : 1703 3757 3290 2170
1964 . पु पु : 2179 4064 4068 2166
1965 . . . . 2166 3930 3814 2282
1966 . . : : 2282 5507 3806 3983
1967 . . पु . 3983 5202 4146 5039
1968 . पु . : 5039 6576 5228 5387
1969 . . : : 5387 7524 6641 6270
1970 . : . : 6270 7106 6272 7104

Source : Rajeev Dhavan, The Supreme Court under strain : The Challenge
of Arrears, p. 43.


31

APPENDIX I
TABLE V
Year Special leave petitions Specialleave petitions Total of
(Civil) (Criminal) excess of

disposal |
Insti- — Dis- Diffe- Insti- _ Dis- Diffe- over insti-
tution posal rence tution posal rence tution or

vice versa
1961. . 1030 954 —16 970 945 —25 —101
1962. ~ 1224 1243 +19 990 1048 +58 +71
1963. «= 1237 1221 —16 952 931 —21 —37
1964. . 1456 1405 "551 1088 1058 —30 —8l
1965. + 1370 1423 —53 996 1021 425 +78
1966. - 1488 1408 —~80 885 864 —21 —101
1967. - 1439 1362 जा 1092 1040 —S2 —129
1968. ~ 1883 1890 +7 1162 1092 —70 —61
1969, + 2503 2287 —216 1144 1252. +108 —108
1970. » 2444 2174 —270 1173 1243 4-70 200

+ Excess of disposal over institution.
— Excess of institution over disposal.

Source : Rajeev Dhavan, The Supreme Court under strain : The Challenge of
Arrears, p. 41.

APPENDIX I
TABLE VI

Year Pending at Institution Disposal Pending at

the begin- duringthe duringthe the end of

ning of the year year the year

year
1971. . : पु 7104 7979 6491 8592
1972 . पु पु पु 8592 9096 6822 10846
1973 . . . पु 10846 10174 8175 12845
1974 . पु . : 12845 8203 8261 12787
1975 . पु पु पु 12787 9528 8727 13588
1976 . मु - 13588 8254 7734 14109
1977 . . पु पु 14109 14501 10395 18215
1978 पु पु पु 18215 20840 17095 21960
1979 . : : पु 21960 20754 15833 26887
1980 . . पु . 26887 26365 16953 36293

Source : Rajeev Dhavan : The Supreme Court under strain : The Challenge
of Arrears, p. 51.


32

APPENDIX T
TABLE शा
Year Pending at Institution Disposal Pending at
the begin- during the during the _ the end of
ning of the year year the year
year
1981 . 36293 31040 18690 48643
1982 . 48643 43510 29112 63041
1983 . 63041 55989 45824 73206
1984 . 73206 49074 35547 86733
1985 . 86733 51592 51078 87247
1986 87247 12708 19118 80837
1987 . 80837 ) 68911* 46132* 175748*
152969* |

*Includes Admission, Regular and Miscellaneous cases.
Source : Information received from the Conference of Chief Justices of the

High Courts/Chief Ministers

and Law Ministers of the States

held at Delhi on ३3151 August—Ist September, 1985 and answer
given by MSLJ to the Unstarred Rajya Sabha Question No. 1646

on 10th March,

1988.
APPENDIX I
TABLE Vi

Statement showing the strength of the Judges of the Supreme Court
fexeinding the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of fndia) from the year 1981 to 1986

No. Year Sanc- No.of Feriod Vac- Period during
tioned Judges ———--—-----—- ancies_ which vacancies
atrength actually From To rem- remained unfilled
of the elevated ained = -————-———-——
Judges to the unfil- Year Months Days
ofthe Bench led
Court

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1. 1981 17 13 1-1-81 14-1-81 4 0 0 14
17 12 15-1-81 27-1-81 5 0 0 13
17 13 28-1-81 29-1-81 4 0 0 2
17 15 30-1-81 31-12-81 2 0 I 2
2. 1982 17 14 1-1-82 6-3-82 3 0 2 6
17 13 7-3-82 31-12-82 4 0 9 25
3. 1983 \7 13 1-1-83 1-1-83 4 0 0 12
7 12 13-1-83 14-3-83 5 0 2 2
17 16 15-3-83 31-12-83 1 0 9 17
4 1984 17 16 1-1-84 24-6-84 1 0 5 24
17 17 25-6-84 31-12-84 Nil 0 6 7
5 1985 7 17 1-1-85 8-5-85 Nil 0 4 8
7 16 9-5-85 11-7-85 1 0 2 3
17 15 12-7-85 16-6-85 2 0 1 5
7 14 17-6-85 — 20-6-85 3 0 9 4
17 13 21-6-85 _30-9-85 4 0 1 10
17 12 1-10-85 28-10-85 5 0 0 2
17 14 29-10-85 31-12-85 3 0 2 3
6. 1986 7 14 1-1-86 8-3-86 3 0 2 8
17 13 9-3-86 9-3-86 4 0 0 1
17 16 10-3-86 6-4-86 1 0 0 2
17 15 7-4-86 14-6-86 2 9 2 3
17 14 15-6-86 1-10-86 3 0 3 7

Souree : Material supplied by Additional Registrar, Supreme Court of India-


Appendix II

GRAPH NO. II
INSTITUTION AND DISPOSAL DURING THE END
OF THE eR (1950-60)



32)

Appendix II .

NUMBER OF CASES

1955
‘A — Institution of Writ petitions YEAR
B — Disposal of Writ petitions


SRRGRER. OF CAMS

‘A— lantinatinn of Special Leave Petition (Civil)
1B — Dispemi of Special Leave Petition (Civil)

C— Inetinntion of Speciat:Loave Position (Crtmteal)
7 -- Disposal of Special Leave Potion (आम


3200
‘Appendix वा

a NO. VI
Jt AND DISPOSAL OF CASES (1961-70)
(Para 2.10).

A — Institution
8 - Digqrest


NUMBER OF CASES

‘A — Inatitetion of SLP (Civil)
8 — Disposal of SLP (Civil)

Appendix II

ad No. शा
INSTITUTION AND DISPOSAL OF SPECIAL LEAVE
वि GIVI, AND CRIMINAL (1961-7)



NUMBER OF CASES BISTITUTED™

3200

का

GRAPH NO. VI
ARREARS IN THE SUPREME COURT (1971-80)
(Para 2.13)



, Appendix IT

SP NO. IX
INSTITUTION AND DISPOSAL OF CASES (1971-80)
(Para 2.13)

1973 974 1975 196 1977 1978
' YEAR A — Institution
B — Dispose


NUMBER OF CASES

320)
Appendix I

GRAPH NO. X
ARREARS IN THE SUPREME COURT (1981-87)
(Para 2.16)



NUMBER OF CASES

3200
‘Appeadix वा

GRAPH NO. XI
INSTITUTION AND DISPOSAL OF CASES (1981-85)
ia 2.16)

55989



No. 384475
APPENDIX पा

(Para 4.1)

LETTER FROM THE LAW COMMISSION TO THE CHIEF JUSTICE OF
INDIA
विधि आयोग
LAW COMMISSION
भारत सरकार
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
शास्त्री भवन
SHASTRI BHAWAN,
नई दिल्‍ली
NEW DELHI
9०. 4. DESAI D.O. No. 3/Chmn/88/LC
Chairman January 19, 1988.
Dear Justice Pathak.

Government of India resolved to set up a Commission, to be styled as
Judicial Reforms Commission, for indepth study of the present justice delivery
system, its short-comings and infirmities and to recommend radical reforms in
the same to make the system effective and resilient to meet the contemporary
needs of the society. It had drawn up its terms of reference. In February 1986,
the task of studying and recommending judicial reforms was assigned to the
present Law Commission keeping in view the terms of reference drawn up by
the Government of India, a copy of the same for convenience of reference is
annexed to this letter. The Law Commission was requested to accord high
priority to this new assignment. Accordingly, the Law Commission concentrated
its attention on this assignment.

Since the reference, the Law Commission has submitted ten reports, the list of
which is annexed to this letter for ready reference.

The Law Commission in its plan of work has reached the stage where it
would undertake indepth examination of the problem of backlog in the High
Courts and the Supreme Court of India, with particular reference to terms No.
161) and 2 of the terms of reference.

In the past, the Law Commission has examined the structure and jurisdic-
tion of the High Court in its 14th, 58th and 79th Reports. 14th Report on
Judicial Administration has a chapter on Supreme Court of India. There was a
radical suggestion of setting up a Constitutional Division within the Supreme
Court in the 95th Report. I can justifiably assume that you are conversant with
the recommendations in these reports. I must, however, state that the 95th Re-
port is not at all implemented, not even printed till today.

The implementation of the recommendations of the Law Commission is
tardy. In fact, more often the recommendations are ignored. Be that as it
may, Government of India evinced a keen desire to introduce radical reforms
in the justice delivery system of this country and, with that end in view, drew
up the terms of reference.

I would like to inform you that the present Law Commission has submitted
ten reports relevant to different terms of reference, three of them, i.e., 115th,
122nd and 123rd, directly deal with decentralisation of administration of justice
by recommending Central Tax Court and eliminating the jurisdiction of the
High Court in tax matters. Similar approach has informed the Law Commis-
sion in recommending Industrial Relations Commission at the State and Central
Tevel as also Central Educational Tribunal at the same two levels to deal with

33


34

specialist topic simultaneously eliminating the jurisdiction of the High Court
in these matters.

The problem of arrears is directly interlinked with the dismal failure on the
front of filling in vacancies in the High Courts and the Supreme Court of India.
I am not aware as to where the fault lies. Fact remains that there is inordinate
delay in filling in vacancies. In this connection I am happy to inform you that
the Law Commission has submitted a comprehensive report recommending setting
up of National Judicial Service Commission.

The Law Commission would examine the problem of backlog intertwined
with the failure to fill in vacancies in the Supreme Court in its planned and pro-
jected work schedule.

I feel happy to inform you about the tentative thinking of the Law Commis-
sion in this behalf with a view to eliciting from you critical response to the same.

In the report on National Judicial Service Commission, the Law Commission
has proposed setting up of a Commission headed by the Chief Justice of India to
deal with the problem of filling in vacancies expeditiously in the Supreme Court
and the High Courts. If implemented, the Law Commission is of the opinion
that it would retrieve the situation to a considerable extent. But one cannot stay
put there. I, therefore, approach you with a request to consider one more sugges-
tion in this behalf.

I was told that a convention has grown up three decades back that till all

the vacancies are filled in, the Chief Justice cannot resort to article 128 of the
Constitution. The convention was established in the background of the fact that

vacancies were filled in very expeditiously. The situation today is depressingly
different. If the convention is respected in the altered circumstances, it would
render article 128 nugatory, which the framers of the Constitution could not have
anticipated. Therefore, the problem can be approached from two independent
angles.

The vacancy occurs on retirement or death of a Judge in position. Death
is such an uncertain event that one cannot foresee it and rationally deal with it,
but retirement is known in advance. Therefore, even if steps are taken consider-
ably in advance to fill in the incoming vacancies, yet if the vacancy is not filled
in the outgoing Judge shall continue to be in position till the incumbent is ap-
pointed. ne criticism voiced against this suggestion is that if Chief Justice
has a good opinion about one Judge, he may not recommend the successor while
someone, not such a hot favourite, may be pushed out by bringing in a successor
as early as possible. This apprehension is wholly unfounded in view of the fact
that the vacancies are filled in according to the chronology it has occurred. The
difference can be of a month or two. But by adopting this method, the Court
would at no time be without its sanctioned strength.

The second tentative suggestion is that in the capital city of Delhi, some
retired Judges of the Supreme Court have settled down after retirement. They
have established own residence as well as their transport arrangement. Article
128 provides that the Chief Justice of India may at any time, with the previous
consent of the President, request any person who has held the office of the Judge
of the Supreme Court or has held the office of a Judge of a High Court and is
duly qualified to be a Judge of the Supreme Court, to sit and act as a Judge of
the Supreme Court. Service of Judges who have settled down in the capital city
can be enlisted. No capital expenditure is involved in view of the fact that no
separate building is required to be established. It is merely a question of adjust-
ing the court time. The retired Judges may be requsted to come at 8.30 in


35

the morning and work up to 12 noon. By setting up four different Benches
of three Judges each, two Benches dealing with old civil and two Benches deal-
ing with old criminal appeals, say, those instituted prior to 1980, they can dis-
pose of as fast as possible many matters and it would be good use of the under-
utilised installed capacity of the Supreme Court building. They have to be com-
pensated by giving them full salary without deduction of pension and pension
equivalent to gratuity. This would entail very little expenditure and would go
4 great way in disposing of old cases which has brought disrepute to the system.
Simultaneously, it would be utilisation of a rich pool of experience of talented
people, physically fit to render to the society which gave them the status. The
convention hereinabove referred to may now be given a decent burial because
it has outlived its utility.

J am not at all referring to setting up one Judge Bench in some matters
because the Supreme Court is already seized up with the matter. This remedy
will to some extent help in retrieving the lost situation arising out of the delay
in filling in the vacancies.

This approach can mutatis mutandis apply to High Courts also.

May I request you that as head of the judicial administration of this country
and gravely concerned with the malaise in the system, to respond to these tenta-
tive suggestions as also to make on your own some new and original suggestions
which may assist the Law Commission in its none-too-easy task.

My earlier experience of writing separate letters to all Judges has proved
to be a futile exercise. I am, therefore, addressing this letter to you with a
request to consult your valued colleagues and to let me have your considered
views as early as possible.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,
(Sd.)
(D.A. DESAI)

Hon’ble Shri R.S. Pathak,
Chief Justice of India,
Supreme Court of India,
Tilak Marg,

NEW DELHI.

Encl: As above.

MGIPCBE—S1—10 M of L & J/gg—21-12-90—1000.