LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED TWENTY SIXTH REPORT

ON
GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC
SECTOR UNDERTAKING
LITIGATION POLICY AND
STRATEGIES

1988


Caper I

Caapter I

Cuapter IID
Cxaprer IV
CHapTer V

Cxapter VI

Cuapter VIL

Cuapter VIL

Notes AND
REFERENCES

ANNEXURE J

ANNEXURE II
ANNEXURE III
ANnexure IV

ANNEXURE V

CONTENTS

Introduction

Government and Public Sector Undertakings as Litigants-view from Courts as a Vantage
point Ce

Welfare State, Wide Discretionary powers and the Era of Administrators
Inquiry, Data and Inference . . .
Contemporary Situation and Suggested remedies by interested groups

Evaluation of the Arrangements arrived at for settling disputes without resort to.

Contributory causes for multiplication of Litigation . . . .

Strategies and policies for Litigation for public sector undertakings and Government

(i)

PAGE

24
29

36
38
40

45

48

59

63


CHAPLER I
INTRODUCTION

L4. The central objective of planning in India, as envisioned in 1952,
was lo initiate a process of development which will raise living standards
and open out to the people new opportunities for a richer and more varied
life. This iviterates the directive principle enunciated in article 46 of the
Constitution that ‘the State shall promote with special care the educational
and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular,
of the Scnedvled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them
from social injustice and all forms of exploitation’. An under-developed
economy is characterised by the co-existence, in greater or lesser degree, of
unutilised or under-utilised manpower on the one hand and of the unexploited
natural resources on the other. A nation, like an individual, has to work
out its inner potentialities by a process of experimentation. One such
experimentation was of economic planning for a transformation of the society
along right ines. That was the genesis of the First Five Year Plan. A
planned economy aiming at the realisation of larger social objectives entails
a vast increase in governmental functions.! The essentials of Government
policy in the sphere of industrial development have been stated in the
industrial Policy Resolutions of 1948 and 1956. The first Resolution lists
certain industries like the manufacture of arms and ammunition, the production
and control nf atomic energy and the ownership and management of railway
transport as being reserved exclusively for the Central Government. In the
case of certain other industries also, such as, coal, iron and _ steel,
aircraft manufacture, ship building, manufacture of telephone, telegraph,
wireless apparatus and mineral oils, the State, including the Central and State
Government and other public authorities, will be ‘responsible for further
development except to the extent that it regards the co-operation of private
enterprise necessary for the purpose. The rest of the industrial field is to be
open to private enterprise, individual as well as co-operative, but the State
will intervene whenever the progress of any industry under private enterprise
is found to be unsatisfactory.2 This led to the enactment of the Industries
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. The principal object of the
Act was to enable the Government to implement its policy for the development
and regulation of industries along the lines stated in the 1948 Resolution
and in the First Plan document.

1.2. It became crystal clear that there were certain core industries
which required a heavy capital outlay and in which the energising factor of
rofit in private sector will have relatively low profile. This led to the
increasing participation of the Government in industrial development which,
in turn, Jed to the question of the appropriate organisation for enterprises
in public sector. The setting up of industries reserved for public sector by
being managed by the Departments of the Government came in for a lot of
criticism. The drawbacks of departmental management of public enterprises
are well known. Successful management of such enterprises requires a great
deal of initiative and power to take quick decisions on the part of the execu-
tives incharge and this can hardly be secured if the enterprise is directly
under a Government department. On the other hand, the extent of autonomy
which can be insisted upon for such enterprises at the present stage is a
matter on which a definite judgment cannot be hazarded except in the light
of further experience. Several of the industrial undertakings directly under
the Central Government have already been organised as joint stock companies
with Board of Directors vested with power of management in the same manner
as in any undertaking in private sector. Recent inquiries into the working
of industrial enterprises in some of the States reinforce the desirability of
organising these enterprises as entities independent of day-to-day govern-
mental control. Accordingly, a policy decision was taken on the recommen-
dation of the Planning Commission at the time of drawing up of the First
Five Year Plan that industrial undertakings under the State Governments
should be organised as joint stock companies and operated on business lines

¢

1


Law Commission of India—126th Report

with the internal management entirely under the control of the Board of
Directors. The main principle to be followed is that such enterprises should
not be subject to governmental control in their day-to-day administration but
should, nevertheless, be accountable to the public which is their ultimate
owner as well as beneficiary.*

State monopolies were to be created in specified arcas of trade, commerce
and industry but it was apprehended that those who would be excluded
from the trade, commerce and industry taken over by State monopoly may
challenge it as being violative of the fundamental freedom  guaran-
teed by article 1901) (8). This apprehension turned genuine
when a monopoly of transport sought to be created by the
U.P. Government in favour of state operated Bus Service was struck down
as unconstitutional because it deprived citizens of their rights under article
19(1)(g).' In order to sustain and protect monopolies in favour of public
sector undertakings from the challenge under article 19(1)(g), Parliament
amended clause (6) of article 19 by the Constitution (First Amendment)
Act, 195i, with effect from 18th June, 1951, by providing that nothing in
clause (g) of article 19(1) shall affect the operation of any existing Jaw in
so far as it relates to, or prevent the State from making any law relating
to,—(ii) the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation owned or controlled
by the State, of any trade, business, industry or service, whether to the
exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or otherwise. Amended clause (6)
of article 19 enabled the State, according to exigencies of the case and
consistently with the requirements of any trade, business, industry or service,
to exclude the citizens either wholly or partially. Such State monopoly,
based upon the theory underlying the amendment, does not appear to be
based on the pragmatic approach, but on the doctrinaire approach which
socialism accepts. The amendment clearly indicates that State monopoly
in respect of any trade or business must be presumed to be reasonable and
in the interests of general public, so far as article 19(1)(g) is concerned.

1.3. These policy decisions led both the Central Government and_ the
State Governments to set up corporations as instrumentalities of the State
and yet, some of them were set up under an Act of the Parliament and some
were registered as Government companies. State monopolies like Oil and
Natural Gas Commission, Life Insurance Corporation and the Industrial
Finance Corporation came into existence. Similarly, State Road Transport
Corporations were set up under Road Transport Corp rations Act, 1950,
and State Finance Corporations were set up under State Financial Corporations
Act, 1951. This is the genesis of public sector undertakings.

1.4. Undoubtedly, even though constitutional challenge to the validity
of State monopolies, also styled as public sector undertakings, failed in view
of the amendment of clause (6) of article 19, these public sector corporations
were potential breeding grounds for conflicts. Two potential breeding grounds
for conflicts surfaced over a period, viz., the conflict between the corporaticns
and their large number of employees as well as the corporations and the
consumers of their goods and services. Occasionally there were conflicts
between two public sector undertakings as well as State and one or more
public sector undertakings. The issue about their status and position in
constitutional scheme figured before courts of law in conflicts between these
public sector undertakings and their employees. The employees of the
Government, both Central and State, enjoy certain protection under the
Constitution. They had the protection of Part III of the Constitution as well
as Part XIV of the Constitution. Even though the tenure of office of persons
serving under the Union or a State was at the pleasure of the President or
the Governor, as the case may be,® yet they cannot be either dismissed,
removed or reduced in rank without following the procedure prescribed by
article 311. Now the employees of the public sector undertakings felt
alienated from the protection of Part III of the Constitution, though the
undertakings themselves were the ‘State’ operating under 8. different garb.
This raised a query as to what is the status and position of these public
sector undertakings in, or in relation to, the constitutional scheme. The
further enquiry was whether the expression ‘State’, as defined in article 12 of
the Constitution, which included, inter alia, other authorities within the
territory of India or under the control of the Government of India, would
comprehend these public sector undertakings which are the instrumentalities


Law Commission of India—126th Report

of the State. Lhe State could have done what a monopoly was required to
do under the garb of a public sector undertaking, either set up as a corporation
under an Act or registered as a Government company as understood in
Section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956. The question raised was what are
those ‘other authorities’ which the founding fathers intended to comprehend
in the expression ‘State’ in article 12, Scanning article 12, it was held that
it ‘winds up the list of authorities falling within the definition by referring to
‘other authorities’ within the territory of India which cannot obviously be read
as ejusdem generis with either the Government and the Legislature or local
authoritics. The words are of wide amplitude and capable of comprehending
every authority created under a statute and functioning within the territory
of India or under the control of the Government of India. There is no charac-
terisation of the nature of the ‘authority’ in this residuary clause and conse-
quently it must include every type of authority set up under a statute for
the purpose of administering laws enacted by the Parliament or by the State
including those vested with the duty to make decisions in order to implement
those laws’.' Developing this line of approach, Electricity Board of Rajasthan
was held to be ‘other ‘authority’ within the meaning of article 12 on the
ground that other authorities in article 12 will include all constitutional or
statutory authorities on whom powers are conferred by laws. It is not at all
material that some of the powers conferred may be for the purpose of carrying
on commercial activities. Under the Constitution, the State is itself envisaged
as having the right to carry on trade or business us mentioned in article
19(1)(g).*__ Despite this clearly cnunciated legal position, Oil and Natural
Gas Commission, Life Insurance Corporation and Industrial Finance Corpo-
ration, all State monopolies, raised the question whether they were ‘other
authorities’ within the meaning of the expression in article 12. That put
into focus the question what is the ‘State’. ‘To some people State is essentially
a class-structure, an organisation of one class dominating over the other
classes’; others regard it as an organisation that transcends all classes and
stands for the whole community. They regard it as a power-system. Some
view it entirely as a legal structure, either in the old Austinian sense which
made it a relationship of governors and governed, or, in the language of
modern jurisprudence, as a community ‘organised for action under legal
rules’. Some regard it as no more than a mutual insurance society, others
as the very texture of all our life. Some class the State as a great ‘corpo-
ration’ and ‘others consider it as indistinguishable from the society itself.” A
note of a salutary fact must be taken. “The tasks of government multiplied
with the advent of the welfare state and consequently, the framework of civil
service administration became increasingly insufficient for handling the new
tasks which were often of a specialised and highly technical character, At
the same time, ‘bureaucracy’ came under a cloud. The distrust of Govern-
ment by civil service, justified or not, was a powerful factor in the develop-
ment of a policy of public administration through separate corporations which
would operate largely according to business principles and be separately
accountable.”!° The question was then posed whether such a corporation is
an agency or instrumentality of the Government for carrying on 8 business
for the benefit of the public and the answer was in the affirmative. Once it
became the instrumentality of the Government, it was comprehended in the
expression ‘other authorities’ in article 12. Applying the same criteria,
International Airport Authority set up under International Airport Authority
Act, 1971, was held to be an instrumentality or agency of the Government
and, therefore, comprehended within the ‘expression ‘other authority’ in
article 12.11 Moving away from the dispute between employees and the
corporation, in a dispute between a registered society which had sct up an
engineering college and the students seeking admission to the same, the status
of society came in for consideration, The court, applying the well-established
criteria, ‘held the society registered under Jammu and Kashmir Registration
of Societies Act, 1898, to be an instrumentality or agency of the State and
the Central Government, and was, therefore, held to be an authority within
the mesning of article 12.'* Departing from the earlier view, it was held
that the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, a socicty registered
under the Societies Registration Act, was not an instrumentality of the State.13
The trend proceeded in the direction of clearly establishing that where a function
of the State was carried on by a body established by the State, it is none-the-
Jess an instrumentality of the State and, therefore, ‘other authority’ within
the meaning of article 12 of the Constitution.* An attempt to distinguish



Law Commission’ of India—126th Report

the case of a Government company, as defined in section 617 of the
Companies Act, 1956, which would mean that it is a company in which not
less than 51% of the paid up share capital is held by the Central Government,
or by any State Government or Governments, or partly by the
Central Government and partly by one or more State Govern-
ments, including its subsidiary, failed when Project and Equipment
Corporation of Sadia Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary company of State
Trading Corporation, which itself was a Government of India undertaking,
was held to be an instrumentality or agency of the State and, therefore,
goveined by Part Il of the Constitution.’ “It is thus now unquestionably
established that either a corporation set up under a statute enacted by
Parliament or State Legislature or a Government company or even a co-
Operative society if it satisfies certain criteria, namely, it is carrying on a
public or Governmental function and is either aided by the State or its
management is captive under the State, then, notwithstanding the form it has
adopted, would be compreherded ia ihe expression ‘other euthorities’ in
article 12 of the Constitution and would for practical purposes be State for
the purposes of the Constitution.

1.5. If the public sector undertakings by and large are comprehended in
the expression ‘other authorities’ in article 12 and are shown to be the
instrumentalities and agencies of the State and hence ‘the State’ Zor all
purposes, consistent, of course, with the purpose for which they have been
set up, they should act like State and when a body is supposed to act like a
State, amongst others, it must be fair and just and rational in its activities,
in its relation to its employees, on the ground that the State is an ideal
employer and its activities must be conducive to the formation and setting
up of a welfare State. The ideal of the Constitution unquestionably is to
set up a welfare State. And, apart from other things, the welfare State must
eschew litigious attitude. This report deals with the problem of litigation
policy and strategy of public. sector undertakings as part of the ongoing
Programme of the Law Commission for recommending basic judicial reforms.

1.6, There is an alternative route which takes one to the same destination.
The goal of setting up a Democratic Socialist Secular State was to be achieved
by concrete steps taken towards implementing the Directive Principles of
State Policy. One of the fundamental assumptions on which a welfare State
can be founded is to so arrange the social order that in it justice, social,
economic and political, will inform all institutions of national life® It is,
therefore, a sate assumption that Industrial Policy Resolutions would have
twin objectives to be attained, namely, to avoid concentration of wealth and
means of production to subserve the common good by distributing ownership
and control of material resources of the community on instrumentalities of
the State which are more or less expected to work on no profit no loss basis.
‘The aims and objectives of the Constitution are clearly reflected in the
Resolutions dated 6-4-1948 and 30-4-1956 laying down the industrial policy
of the State which, amongst other things, required the State to progressively
assume a predominant and direct responsibility for sctting up new industrial
undertakings. Public corporations, State holding companies and State
controlled "societies were chosen as the vehicles for translating this
industrial policy into action-oriented programme. Whatever garb _ they
may wear, their life and soul, bone and blood, is the State itself.
They are limbs of the State and they exist for the sole purpose of running
the huge apparatus of the State industry smoothly and efficiently in pursuit
of the objectives of the State Bolicy They should, however, be distinguished
from a Department of the Government under the administrative control of
any Ministry, otherwise a provision like sub-section (4) of section 32 of the
Payment of Bonus Act, 1965, would create an unnecessary confusion.
National Textile Corporation was appointed as an authorised controller under
section 18A of the Industries (Devel opment and Regulation) Act, 1951, for
reviving a sick unit, called the Model Mills. As the workmen raised a
demand for bonus for the period 1964-65 to 1967-68, it was sought to be
countered by urging that on the appointment of an authorised controller, the
Model Mills is an establishment engaged in an industry carried on by or under
the authority of a Department of the Central Government and, therefore,


Law Commission of India—126th Report

excluded from the operation of the Payment of Bonus Act. Negativing the
contention. it was held that on the appointment of an authorised controller,
only the management changes bul the unit remains by itself a unit irrespective
of the nature and character of management."* “The stand taken by the
employer that since the appointment of an authorised controller, the Model
Mills becomes an establishment in an industry run by a Department of the
Union Government betrays a very narrow outlook and self-defeating attitude
because if the unit becomes a Department of the Government, it may at best
go out of the tentacles of the Payment of Bonus Act but it would be subject
to all the provisions of the Constitution. A clear policy statement was made
that the public sector corporations or companies must run on commercial
principles and in business like manner to achieve the goals and objectives set
for them but eschewing all the private sector tantrums of exploiting workmen.
Tn any view of the matter. as these corporations and companies, have been
held to be instrumentalities and agencies of the State, they are within the
purview of Part III of the Constitution. However, these public sector under-
takings, having acquired the format of a Government company or a corporation,
have more or less betrayed an approach of the private sector when they lost
the battle on the ground of application of Part III of the Constitution. An
alternative was adopted by urging that Part XIV of the Constitution would
not apply to the employees of these corporations and a Government company
on the specious plea that the employees of these bodies are not members of
a civil service of the Union or an all-India service or a civil service of the
State or held a civil post under the Union or the State. The protection of
Part XIV was sought to be avoided by this contention on their behalf. Even
that stood negatived when the courts ruled that these public sector under-
takings will be subject to the limitation on heir power imposed by article 14
in that they cannot act in an arbitrary manner or be guilty of discrimination
and the actions qua not only their employees but even the consumers of their
goods and services will have to be judged in the light of the constitutional
culture." To illustrate, a State Finance Corporation, after having entered
into a contract to finance the project of setting up a five star hotel, backed
out after the project was half through, leaving the victim to the so-called
remedy of a suit for damages for a breach of contract because it was contended
that contractual obligations even of a public sector undertaking, which is an
instrumentality of the State, cannot be enforced by a high prerogative writ.
This last attempt equally failed and the State Finance Corporation, by a writ
of mandamus, was directed to fulfil its obligation of financing the project
within the limits agreed upon.?°

1.7. Keeping in abeyance for the time being the question of treating all
public sector undertakings as being within the comprehension of article 12
of the Constitution, their role as public sector undertakings must be emphasised
by specifically contrasting them with private sector enterprises in contradistine-
tion to which they were brought into existence. The Industrial Policy
Resolution aimed at reducing disparities in income and wealth which were
then existent, to prevent private monopolies and concentration of economic
power in different fields in the hands of small numbers of individuals. _ The
State, therefore, resolved to assume a predominant and direct responsibility
for setting up new industrial undertakings and other service facilities. In
certain commoditics. State trading was to be accelerated; the adoption of
the socialist pattern of society without the word ‘socialist’ being in the
preamble was accepted as a national objective; the economic planning was to
aim at rapid development: and, with this end in view, all industries of basic
and strategic importance or in the nature of public utility services were to be
in the public sector. High capital intensive industries, which the State alone
can undertake without being influenced by the fact of a profit motive in short
term, were also to be in the public sector.

1.8. The ground norms were laid for mixed cconomy. But over a
period, the demarcating line between the public sector and private sector is
becoming dim. If private sector were to imply that the capital for setting
up industrial units will be provided by the entrepreneurs and where the State
financed the project either wholly or substantially. the industrial undertaking
would be treated as one in public sector. then this has become a euphemism.
A survey would show that the so-called private sector undertakings mobilise
their financial resources from the public without the entrepreneur in any way


Law Commission of India—126th Report

becoming personally responsible about the liability to return the money. If
Balance Sheet of any big private sector undertaking is analysed, it will appear
at a glance that those in management. have mobilised all financial resources
from the public, to wit, share capital, loans and deposits from public, bonds
and debentures, borrowing from nationalised banks, Industrial Development
Bank of India, Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India and
such public financing houses, The family controlling the management hardly
has one per cent. or less holding in the capital. On the other hand, a public
sector undertaking is financed wholly by the State or by share capital,
majority of which is held by the State. When the State finances an industrial
undertaking, the resources are provided by the Government from the taxes
levied by the State or borrowings from the market. Thus, financing of both
public and private sector undertakings is done by people at large directly
or indirectly and yet the euphemism survives that a private sector undertaking
is beyond the reach of constitutional writs and enjoys a power which can be
used detrimental to the society. Why? The public sector undertakings, on
the development of law as set’ out hereinbefore, are amenable to the constitu-
tional writs that may be issued by the courts; but not the private sector. To
illustrate the point, it would be advantageous to recall section 25-0 and 25R
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. Briefly stated, section 25-0 imposed
a liability on an employer who intends to close down an industrial undertaking
to serve a notice ninety days before the date on which the intended closure is
to become effective on the appropriate Government. stating clearly the reasons
for the intended closure of the undertaking. The sub-sections of section 25
set out the procedure on receipt of the notice and they are not relevant for
the present discussion. Section 25R provides for imposition of penalty for
closure without complying with the provisions of sub-section (1) of section
25-0. Several employers, including one company Excel Wear, challenged the
constitutional validity of section 25-0 and 25R contending that they violate
the fundamental freedom guaranteed by article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution
in as much as the fundamental right to practise any profession or to carry
on any occupation trade or business inheres the negative right not to be
compelled to carry on trade if the employer does not wish to carry on his trade.
This contention found favour with the Court observing :

“It is wrong to say that an employer has no_ right to close down a
business once he starts it. If he has such a right, as obviously he has,
it cannot but be a fundamental right embedded in the right to carry on
any business guaranteed under article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.”?"

The whole of section 25-O, which merely imposed a liability to give notice
before intended closure, was struck down as violative of article 19(1)(g).
Shorn of verbiage, an employer may close down a business or an industrial
undertaking rendering all workmen jobless for extraneous and irrelevant reasons
and the workmen can seek no relief. The Government is powerless. No attempt
was made to examine the financial structure of Excel Wear. If it was done
and if it was found that the employer who claims an absolute and unconditional
right to close down the undertaking had an investment which can only be said
to be iflustory in relation to the total investment in the project, his right to
play with the lives of thousands of workmen because the undertaking is in
private sector and beyond the reach of the court can be negatived
in larger public interest.” In fact, there is a recent movement by public sector
undertakings to be freed from the yoke of the Constitution. At any rate, the
object, purpose and underlying philosophy towards setting up public sector
undertakings must mould its approach towards its employees, the consumers
of its product and even other public sector undertakings. At any rate, it
cannot afford to develop a litigious culture exhibited by private sector
employers. And yet numerous cases can be quoted where the public sector
undertakings not only brought entirely frivolous disputes right up to the
Supreme Court but delayed the resolution of disputes by raising absolutely
unsustainable, frivolous, preliminary objections.22_ ‘The Indian economic
methodology for abolition of mass poverty and building up of economic self-
reliance is through the strategy of the public sector corporations. Inevitably,
a crop of profound juristic issues claims our attention and demands our
solutions if, as a nation, we are not to halt and hesitate and be bogged down
by protracted litigation exercises’.2* 16 is, therefore, inevitable that not only
the public sector undertaking has to eschew _ litigation but avoid litigious
culture which is the bane of private sector undertakings.**

1-322 M. of Law & Justice/ND/89


Law Commission of India—126th Report

1.9. The present Law Commission charged with a duty to recommend
basic reforms in legal justice system was requested by its terms of reference
to devise ‘the desirability of formulation of the norms which the Government
and public sector undertakings should follow in the settlement of disputes
including a review of the present system for conduct of litigation on behalf
of the Government and such undertakings’. The very term of reference equates
public sector with Government in the matter of litigation and seeks to distin-

ish both from individuals and private sector undertakings who indulge in
Fitigation times without number. This subsumes that the Government and public
sector undertakings must have their own litigation policy and strategies and
they must be devised with a view to encouraging avoidance of litig ation and
settlement of disputes by alternative methods, Litigation is generally believed
to be an unproductive ‘investment both in time and money. Pub tic sector
undertakings and the Government have to conserve the resources, determine
priorities of expenditure by a judicious approach so that unproductive litigation
does not eat away a large chunk of the scarce resources, smoothering socially
beneficial schemes for want of financial assistance. This cannot be done
unless litigation policies and strategies, both by public sector undertakings
“and Government, are worked out keeping in view the end that litigation has
to be avoided at all costs. More the litigation, more the courts and, apart
* from the litigation costs which the State and public sector undertakings bear,
_ the State has also to bear the expenses on setting up courts, providing
personnel for manning judicial posts and other incidental expenses on staff,
oks, buildings, libraries, et. al. Avoid litigation or reduce it at any cost
which would bring down the load on the court system, inevitably resulting in
reduction of expenses on judicial set up.

1.10. The purpose of this report is to lay down broad guidelines on liti-

* gation policies and strategies of the public sector undertakings and the Gov- :

5 ernment with a view to reducing litigation, saving avoidable costs on un-
productive litigation, releasing the energies of officers held up in court work,
reducing load on court system and thus realise the promise of article 39A of

~ che Constitution.

2322 M. of Law & Justice/ND/89


CHAPTER ता

GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS AS
LITIGANTS—VIEW FROM COURTS AS A VANTAGE POINT

igation undertaken or contested
and public sector undertakings.
social overhead in a developing

2.1, The courts’ dockets are clogged hy

! by the Government, both State and Centra
Administration of justice is still not treated as ad in a
economy, and accordingly, investment in adm: ration of justice is generall
insufficient and inadequate. Not only court procedures are of 19
century vintage but even their equipment, namely, court buildings, typewriters,
library and other facilities are also of the same vintage. While resort to
litigation by Government and public sector undertaki is prodigious, when
it comes 10. grants for administration of justice, it is styled as non-plan
expenditure and receives a back scat. This led to a remark that while
Government are stingy on courts and Judges. they are prodigal with litigation.
This betrays a lack of litigation policy either he State or public sector
level. Even though absurd policy resort to litigation cannot be checkmated,
more often resort to court litigation is an escar® route for accountability for
decision. To illustrate, an officer having been satisfied that the claim against
the Government or the public sector undertaking is genuine, yet, to avoid
taking an affirmative decision by a policy of do nothingness, the litigation is
invited. Once the court intervenes, it is assumed that the concerned Depart-
ment or the undertaking should not take any decision and leave it to the
court to adjudicate the claim. The matter does not rest there. The indifference
arising out of a lack of social audit encourages such officer to prefer an appeal
if the decision is adverse and by vertical movement. the matter generally
reaches the apex court. The officer continues to litigate at the cost of the
public exchequer or the corporation itself. A social audit might reveal that
more than half the litigation involving Government and public sector under-
takings is the outcome of irresponsible indifference to the claim made against
it or inability to take affirmative action.t In the absence of any effective
grievance-resolution mechanism, the employees of the Government and the
public sector undertakings freely resort to litigation. The officer who initiates
litigation is so much involved into it that his own work as an empl
suffers. The officer who deals with the litigation on behalf of the corperation ion
equally wastes his time on litigating incidentals. A type of largesse is
distributed in selecting lawyers who receive fat fees for appearing for public
sector undertakings and Government. Till today, no concerted effort hag
been made to devise and lay down litigation policies and strategies involving
the dictum ‘don’t litigate, if necessary, arbitrate’* nor has any attempt been
made to find any alternative method for resolution of disputes involving
Government and public sector undertakings. The whole approach manifests
a kind of drift and its spill over is unmanageable court dockets, unending
litigation and utterly wasteful expenditure diverting scarce resources of the
society to unproductive non-plan expenditure

2.2, The justice system, which hav to carry the load and burden of
unimaginative approach on the part of the Government and public sector under-
takings in the matter of their litigation policics, has often sounded a warning
reminding the Government and the public sector undertakings the expectations
from it especially to eschew litigious culture. The courts have also pointed
out that the fight between an individual on the one hand and the Government
or the public sector undertaking on the other is, by any stretch, an unequal
fight inasmuch as the resources of the individual are limited and the State or
public sector undertakings have unlimited resources to be invested in futile
litigation so as to exhaust and exasperate the individual who has taken cudgels
to bring the matter to the court. The fight was described as one between a
Goliath and a dwarf in such a situation. ‘The civil remedies for administrative
wrong-doing thus depend upon the action of individual citizens. In such an
action, the individual is pitted against the Sta always an unequal cantest.
The individual does not have even the few nrocedural devices that the common



Law Commission of India—126th Report

jaw imports into criminal actions to try to redress the balance. At his own
expense, he must challenge the vast panoply of State power, with all its
resources in personnel, money and legal talent, by a civil action for a declara-
tory judgment or for an cxtraordinary remedy-injunction, writ of mandamus
or writ of prohibition. Aside from the manifold technical insufficiencies of
these forms of action, the financial impediments to such an action are staggering.
As a result of these imp: i the United States, where almost the sole
institutional protection sirative error or arbitrariness is such an
action, usually only gi 15 or individuals who are supported by
large voluntary — associatious been able to carry through litigation.”*
Having said this, it was « -ncluded that in the backdrop of African conditions,
to rely upon such indivic al actions as a primary means of policing adminis-
trative action -is to rely upou s non-existent.* The observation will
apply mutatis mutandis to Incian conditions.

“ to Public Accounts Committee of the
Parliament or to the Parliame has to some extent contributed to this
policy of do nothingacss and the tigation multiplies. More ‘and more
administrative actions direcily aliect the people at large. A lack of credibi
lity about the actions taken by the Government and the public sector unc
takings has also contributed 10 the litigation explosion involving Government
and public sector undertakings. Ordinarily, when in course of commercial
activity, plants or equipme longmg to the Government or public sector
undertaking are sold, ihe co ouxt be reluctant to examine the fairness or
correctness of the decisi © Directorate of a Government company has
acted fairly, even if it falicred in iis wisdom, the court cannot, as a super-
auditor, take the Board of Directors to task. The function, from the point
of view of court, is limited to testing whether the administrative action has been
fair and free from the unreasonableness and has substantially complied
with the norms oi procedure set for itself by rules of public administration.*+
The Chief Justice of In residing over the Bench in the case, observed
that: ‘If public property is dissipa cu, it would require a strong argument to
convince the court that representaiive segments of the public or at least a
section of the public which is di ly interested and affected would have no
right to complain of the infraction of public duties and obligations. Public
enterprises are owned by people and those who run them are accountable to
the people.® It was for tie first time that the jurisdiction of the court was
widened to inquire whether p! property has been dealt with in public
interest because, after the introiuction of the expression ‘socialist’ in the
Preamble in 1976, public prope:iy partook the character of socialist property
and the courts’ interference. thoi very limited in character, has sometimes
worked wonders and, therefore. should not be abhored.

2.3, Lack of ace

2.4, An exercise of ihe sr coaferred by Haryana Minor Minerals
(Vesting of Rights) Act, 1973. the State of Haryana declared its intention
to grant a lease for winning minor minerals. Avoiding the details, it may be
stated that the bids received at the auctions were found to be unsatisfactory
as not procuring an adequate price. After rejecting the bid at the three
auctions, the Chief Minister granted icase to one person who approached at
the price of Rs. 4,50,000 per year, the contract being for five years. This
action of the Chief Minister was challenged by the person whose highest bid
was already rejected contending that the surreptitious disposal of the public
Property has adversely affected public interest and he, as the highest bidder,
should have been given one opportunity after receipt of the letter to whom
the contract was given. The matter reached the Supreme Court of India. In
order to test the argument whether the price of Rs. 4,50,000 per year was
adequate and sufficient to dispose of public property, the highest bidder who
had moved the Court was invited to give his bid in the Court and an auction
followed in the Supreme Court itself leading to the highest bid of Rs. 25,00,000
per year in respect of a contract covering a period of five years. The State
of Haryana would thus get Ps. 1.25.90,000 against the disposal of the property
by the Chief Minister for a pultry amount of Rs 22,50,000. Could this be
rejected on the tenuous olea that neither the wisdom nor the fairness of the
action of the Chief Minister could be questioned in a court of law? The
situation is res ipsa loquitu. The Court, while interfering and allowing the
appeal observed that ore would require multi-layered blind-fold to reject the
appeal on a tenuous giound such as sanctity of administrative action so that



Law Commission of India—126th Report

the State is denied its real value and the respondent may enjoy aggrandised
unjust enrichment. In reaching this conclusion, the Court said as under:

“An owner of private property need not auction it nor is he bound to
dispose it of at current market price. Factors such as personal attachment,
or affinity, kinship, empathy, religious sentiment or limiting (all limit
sic) the choice to whom he may be willing to sell may permit him to
sell the property at a song and without demur, A welfare State as the
owner of the public property has no such freedom while disposing of
the public property. A welfare State exists for the largest good of the
largest number, more so when it proclaims to be a socialst State dedicated
to eradication of poverty. All its attempt must be to obtain the best
available price while disposing of its property because the greater the
revenue, the welfare activities will get a fillip and shot in the arm.
Financial constraint may weaken the tempo of activities. Such an
approach serves the larger public purpose of expanding welfare activities
timarily for which the Constitution envisages the setting up of a welfare
tate.

2.5, The litigation is thus sometimes engendered by failing to perform
duty as if discharging a trust. Power inheres a kind of trust, The State
enjoys the power to deal with public property. That power has to be
discharged like a trust keeping in view the interests of the cesti que trust.
Failure on this front has been more often commented upon by the court
which, if it was taken in the spirit in which it was made, would have long
back energised the Government and the public sector to draw up its litigation

licy. When entirely frivolous litigation reaches the doorsteps of the
Supreme Court, one feels exasperated by the inaction and the policy of do
nothingness evidenced by blindly following litigation from court to court.
Dismissing a special leave Petition by the State of Punjab, the Court observed
that the deserved defeat of the State in the courts below demonstrates the
gross indifference of the administration towards litigative diligence. The Court
then suggested effective remedial measures. It may be extracted:

“We like to emphasize that Governments must be made accountable by
parliamentary Social audit for wasteful litigative expenditure inflicted on
the community by inaction. A statutory notice of the proposed action
under section 80 CPC is intended to alert the State to negotiate a just
settlement or at least have the courtesy to tell the potential outsider why
the claim is being resisted. Now section 80 has become a ritual because
the administration is often unresponsive and hardly lives up to the
Parliament’s expectation in continuing section 80 in the Code despite
the Central Law Commission’s recommendations for its deletion. An
opportunity for setting the dispute through arbitration was thrown away
by sheer inaction. A litigative policy for the State involves settlement of
governmental disputes with citizens in a sense of conciliation rather than
in a fighting mood. Indeed, it should be a directive on the part of the
State to empower its law officer to take steps to compose disputes rather
than continue them in court. We are constrained to make these obser-
vations because much of the litigation in which governments are involved
adds to the case load accumulation in courts for which there is public
criticism. We hope that a more responsive spirit will be brought to
bear upon governmental litigation so as to avoid waste of public money
and promote expeditious work in courts of cases which deserve to be
attended 0.7 :

Nearly a decade has passed since the observations but not a leaf has turned,
not a step has been taken, and the Law Commission is asked to deal with
the problem !

2.6. A little care, a touch of humanism, a dossier of constitutional philo-
sophy and awareness of futility of peurile litigation would considerably improve
the situation which today is distressing. More often it is found that utterly
unsustainable contentions are taken on behalf of Government and public sector
undertakings. Notice under section 80 CPC has become a trap for the
unwary. If those on whom power to take decisions is conferred exercise the
power in a reasonable manner, resolution of disputes can never be said to be
intractable and, in the context of a welfare State. litigation and socially


Law Commission of India—126th Report

beneficent activities cannot co-exist. The public sector undertakings are
inseparably adjuncts of a welfare State.

2.7. The temptation to refer to some more cases in order to convince
even the most rugged that by and large Government and public sector under-
takings are guilty encouraging, pursuing and perpetuating frivolous litigation.
It is not for a moment suggested that private sector corporate undertakings
and even groups of individuals have not avoided _ initiating utterly useless
litigation for unjust enrichment. To take only one illustration, most of the
tax litigation has the avowed object of not only not paying the tax if possible
by raising technical contentions but even if the tax is payable, the attempt to
use the court to delay the payment of tax as long as possible is clearly dis-
cernible. To illustrate, approximately 15,000 cases involving indirect taxes
were pending in the High Courts and the Supreme Court, blocking roughly a
revenue of Rs. 3,816.17 crores.* Similarly, 6,502 tax appeals commencing
from the year 1972, were pending in the Supreme Court of India on June
30, 1986." The tendency to use courts as an instrument of unjust enrichment
deserves to be put down with a heavy hand. And, in this process, the Govern-
ment and public sector undertakings can contribute a lot,

2.8. At any rate, philosophy of welfare State must permeate every action
of Government/public sector undertaking but more often it is found to be
sadly lacking. The workmen employed by the contractors for Asian Games
Project realised that they were not being ‘paid minimum wage prescribed for
construction workers. It is well-settled that minimum wages can never be
denied under any pretext. The court, when its attention was drawn to it,
pointed out that the provisions of labour laws are strictly observed otherwise
the workmen would be comprehended in the expression forced labour’ within
the meaning of article 23 of the Constitution of India, and the situation arose
because the Government did not remain vigilant while paying to the contractors
that they did not observe rigorous requirement of minimum wage laws.!9

2.9, Numerous socially beneficent legislations have been enacted by the
parliament in implementation of the Directive Principles of State Policy
enunciated in articles 41, 42 and 43. One such Act is the Contract Labour
(Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970. The underlying intendment of the
Act is to regulate in the first place but in final analysis to abolish contract
labour. The goal to be achieved is the abolition of contract labour. The
Government and the public sector undertakings must pursuc this goal relent-
lessly. Food Corporation of India was set up under an Act of Parliament,
called ‘The Food Corporations Act, 1964,’ to provide, amongst other, for the
establishment of Food Corporations for the purpose of trading in foodgrains
and other foodstuffs and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto,
The Corporation has numerous depots at various places in India, one such
place being Siliguri. At the relevant time, 464 workmen were attached to
the depot for handling foodgrains. Even though the work was round the
year, they were employed by a contractor engaged by the Corporation. Later
on, Corporation became wise to social accountability and abolished contract
system and brought the workmen on its own roll as its employees. The work-
men had certain standing grievances and served a notice of demand. Forthwith,
exhibiting the culture of private sector, the Corporation re-introduced the
contractor system and fought the tigation brought by the workmen till the
Supreme Court of India where the Court pointed out that the abolition of
the contract system by the Corporation and the introduction of a direct payment
system brought about a basic qualitative change in the relationship between
the Corporation and the workmen and these cannot be altered to the
disadvantage of workmen by the unilateral action of the Corporation. There
are other numerous such socially beneficent statutes, such as, Employees State
Insurance Act and Employees’ Provident Funds Act, Under both these
statutes, apart from the Corporation set up under each statute, the workmen
covered by the Acts also contribute to the coffers of the Corporation. There
can be disputes between the workmen and the Corporation, between the
employer and the Corporation. and between the employer and the workmen.
का all these areas, it is largely found that there is no attempt at settlement
of the dispute but a perpetuation of the litigation. Should the workmen, who
contribute to the coffers of the Corporations for enjoying the benefits to be
extended by the Corporation for which they are set up, be denied the same



18.

Law Commission of India—I126th Report

by spending on litigation involving the workmen themselves? Cases have
come to Court where it was found that for paltry amounts, the matters were
dragged up to the Supreme Court.

2.10. The contractors working on Salal Hydroelectric Project failed to
observe the mandatory provisions of the labour laws applicable to the workmen.
It was found as a fact that the workmen were being exploited by the contractors.
In a_petition before the Supreme Court of India, a direction was given to
the State of Jammu and Kashmir to tighten up its inspection machinery to
see that the contractors discharge their obligations under the labour laws.
Should the workmen be compelled to come to the court, not for specific cause
but for a direction that the labour laws, which are mandatory in character,
be implemented ?!*

2.11. Repeatedly it is pointed out that the indifference of the Govern-
ment/public sector undertakings compels people to come to courts in search
of relief and thereby the Government/public sector undertakings enjoy the
dubious distinction of being the largest litigants in the courts involving a big
draught on public exchequer. Commenting on the absence of litigation policy
on the part of the State, it was pointed out that in the context of expanding
dimensions of State activity and responsibiliy, is it unfair to expect finer sense
and sensibility in its litigation policy, the absence of which in the case before
the court led the railway callously and cantankerously to resist an action by
its employce, a small man, by urging a mere technical plea which has been
pursued right up to the summit Court and was ultimately negatived by it.*

2.12, Echoing this very sentiment, the Kerala High Court pointed out
that the State is no ordinary party trying to win a case against one of its own
citizens by hook or crook ; for the State’s interest is to meet honest claims,
vindicate a substantial defence and never to score a technical victory or over-
tule a weaker party, to avoid just liability or score an unfair advantage
simply, because legal devices provide such an opportunity. The State is
a virtuous litigant (like an ideal employer) and looks with unconcern on
immoral forensic success so that when on the merit the case is weak, Govern-
ment shows a willingness to settle the dispute regardless of prestige and other
lesser moiivations which move private parties to fight in courts. The lay
out of the litigation costs and executive time by the State and its agencies is
so staggering these days because of the large ‘amount of litigation in which
it is involved that a positive and wholesome policy of cutting back on the
volume of law suits by the twin methods of not being tempted into forensic
show down where a reasonable adjustment is feasible and ever offering 10
acceding a pending proceeding on just terms, giving legal mentors of Gov-
ermment some initiative and authority in this behalf. The learned Judge fur-
ther proceeded to observe that :

“{ am not indulging in any judicial homily but only echoing the dynamic
national policy on State litigation evolved at a Conference of Law Minis-
ters of India way back in 1957.”14

2.13. The Supreme Court was constrained to point out that a Govern-
ment company like Central Coal Fields went on disputing the statutory liability
and attempted to protract the litigation by carrying the maffer from court
to court on frivolous grounds.’

2.14, Unquestionably, municipal corporation sct up under a statute is
comprehended in the expression ‘other authorities’ in article 12 and must
consequently, therefore, eschew litigation wherever it is avoidable. A municipal
contractor under the terms of contract was to complete the work contracted
for within a year. It was found that the grant under the head was inadequate
and was insufficient to meet his bill. He was requested to split the work
over t period of™three years and ultimately he agreed to split it over two
years sul biect to the con dition that some extra payment will have to be made
relevant to the increased rates of materials and wages which he may have to
pay. On the completion of the work, the contractor submitted his bill claim-
Ing 20% extra charges over and above agreed to in the contract and the
corporation declined to pay the extra charges. A suit followed and fell into
the Jap of the Supreme Court which held that both under the contract and
in kaw and equity, the contractor was entitled to recover extra charges as


Law Commission of India—126th Report

claimed by him. Obviously this was an avoidable litigation pursued relent-
lessly, disclosing a myopic vision and adding to the workload in the courts.
Tt discloses a case of managerial failure.'®

2.15. Numerous cases can be quoted manifesting an ugly feature that
either two public sector undertakings fight each other or a public sector under-
taking on the one hand and the State or the Central Government on the
other resort to litigation. Is it not necessary that these bodies should have a
standing machinery outside the court area for resolving the disputes irrespec-
tive of the fact that the State and the Central Government may be ruled by
political parties of different hue and colour? A few illustrative cases may
be noted here. State of Rajasthan instituted a suit in the District Court
against the Union of India for recovery of compensation for loss on account
of damage caused to the goods of the State Government. In this case, the
Union of India represented the Railway Administration. A contention was
taken that the suit is not maintainable in view of article 131 of the Constitu-
tion which provides that Supreme Court of India alone, to the exclusion of
any other court, will have original jurisdiction in any dispute—(a) between
the Government of India and one or more States. Suing Railway Administra-
tion for recovering damages for the loss suffered is not a suit comprehended
in article 131. Obviously, therefore, the contention can be styled as frivolous
and yet the matter was litigated up to the Supreme Court which held that the
District Court had jurisdiction to try this suit.17

2.16. Another illustrative case is equally instructive. Special Area Deve-
loment Authority, Korba, is constituted under section 65 of the Madhy: a
Pradesh Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam, 1973, which under [९
relevant law, could exercise powers of a Class I municipality constituted under
the Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1961. Armed with this power, the
Authority levied and demanded property tax which Western Coalfields Ltd.,
a Government of India undertaking, and Bharat Aluminium Company Ltd.,
another Government of India undertaking, resisted on the ground that the
property belonging to these two companies were the properties of the Union
of India and, therefore, shall be exempt from taxes imposed by State or by
any authority within a State in view of the provision contained in article 28
(1) of the Constitution. Does it require long argument to convince anyone
that a property belonging to a Government company registered under the
Companies Act could by no stretch of logic be said to be the property belong-
ing to the Union, notwithstanding the fact that the companies were Govern-
ment companies within the meaning of section 617 of the Companies Act,
1956? If this contention was raised for the first time, one can even over-
look the indulgence into avoidable litigation but there were numerous pre-
cedents such as the one in the Heavy Engineering Mazdoor Union vs. State
of Bihar and APSRTC vs. ITO, and yet the matter was pursued up to the
Supreme Court without success.'8 But there is another and more serious
objection to such type of litigation in that both the appellant and the respon-
dent were public sector undertakings and yet the litigation was pursued with
vengeance spending more money than the stake involved in the matter.

2.17. Even low paid lowest grade employees are not spared the tortuous
litigation, disclosing arrogance and superiority complex of the executive of
the public sector undertaking/Government, almost serving a notice how can
a low grade employee challenge their decision. One Shankar Dass, a cash
clerk in Delhi Milk Scheme under the administrative control of the Govern-
ment of India, was dismissed from service even though the court trying his
case had released him on probation under section 12 of the Probation of
Offenders Act, 1958. The poor clerk deprived of his livelihood was forced
to go to the court and he was pursued from court to court for a period of 23
years. The Supreme Court ultimately holding that the penalty of dismissal
was ‘whimsical’, ordered reinstatement in service with full back wages from
the date of dismissal till reinstatement.’® One fails to discern any Princip le,
object or motive in pursuing such litigation manifesting cruel, harsh, unfair
and unjust treatment of a low paid employee. A humanitarian touch would
have saved the Corporation of paying back wages for 23 years to a man
from whom service could not be taken. Had he been reinstated with a minor
penalty, the clerk would have served and the Delhi milk Scheme would not
have been compelled to fork out money, both on unproductive litigation and
on absent clerk. There is a similar case of a forest guard from Madhya

BB


14

Law Commission of India—I26th Report

Pradesh disclosing same attitude and receiving same critical comments from
the court.??

2.18. Apart from employees in service or in position, the treatment of
retired employees at the hands of public sector undertakings and Government
is far more blameworthy. Two cases will illustrate this point. One Padma-
nabha Nair was not paid his pension and gratuity admissible on retirement
roughly for a period of two years and three months and that too without
any rhyme or reason. Payment of pension and gratuity are measures of social
justice available on retirement when all avenues of income have come 10.8
standstill. In this case, the employee concerned demanded interest by way
of damages on the ground that the amount to which he was entitled has been
uniustifiably withhe!d. The court, having regard to all the facts, directed
payment of interest. That itself is hardly satisfactory. The agony and the
litigation both are relevant factors.**

2.19. The next case draws a more sordid picture of utter indifference
and callousness bordering on vendetta. One Devaki Nandan Prasad retired
after rendeting service for 39 years in Bihar Education Service. Under the
relevant rules he was entitled to pension. But the same was not paid till
1971 when he filed a petition in the Supreme Court of India claiming pension
and arrears. Shockingly, a contention was taken on behalf of the State of
Bihar that pension being a gratuitous payment, the action in a court is not
competent for enforcing payment of the pension under the relevant rules. A
Constitution Bench negatived the contention and issued a mandamus in 1971
directing the State of Bihar to compute the pension and pay the same.2? Des-
pite the mandamus of the Supreme Court, the failure to obey which may land
the person to whom it is directed in a contempt proceeding, for a period of
nearly 12 years, no action was taken by the State of Bihar and the poor
pensioner was pushed from pillar to post. He again knocked at the door
of the Court. The Court noticed that a pensioner since 16 years is knocking
at the doors of the Court of Justice and the Executive in search of his hard-
earned pension and is being rebuffed by those who would meet the same fate
by the passage of time and yet with his meagre resources he has again been
dragged to the apex Court for the second time after a lapse of 12 years during
which the mandamus of the court has been treated as a scrap of paper. Hav-
ing gone isto the facts of the case, the Court directed on April 22, 1983, to
compute the pension and to pay the same by July 31, 1983, failing which
an action in contempt would be initiated. The Court directed Rs. 25,000
be paid to the pensioner as exemplary costs for the callous, indifferent and
whimsical attitude of the authorities.27 The bureaucracy disclosed an attitude
for which Bourbans in ‘history were notorious, namely, they learn nothing and
forget nothing. The same attitude permeated and the poor pensioner had to
come to the Supreme Court for the third time. This time the Court meant
business. A notice for contempt was issued. While disposing of the matter,
the Court observed that it would do no credit to the respondent if the history
of litigation is recapitulated and it would bring the administration of the State
of Bihar inte disrepute. The helplessness of the Chief Minister of the State
who was defied by the bureaucracy was taken note of. Ultimately, the State
of Bihar paid up Rs. 4,34.163 to the appellant and costs.

2.20, 8 still agonising case may be referred to and unfortunately emanat-
ing from the State of Bihar. One Rudul Sah was acquitted by the Court of
Sessions on June 3, 1968. Even after acquittal, he was detained and continu-
ed to be detained in prison for a period of 14 years as if he was an under-
trial prisoner. A writ of habeas corpus procured his release. He contended
that his continued detention was unlawful and that this was in gross violation
of the rules and the Constitution and, therefore, he demanded relief by way
of rehabilitation, reimbursement of expenses and compensation for illegal in-
carceration. The Court, after meticulously examining all the facts of the case,
observed that ‘the Government of Bihar could have afforded to show a little
more courtesy to this Court (Supreme Court of India) and to display a greater
awareness of its responsibilities by asking one of its senior officers to file
an affidavit in order to cxplain the callousness which pervades this case’. As
usual, one lowpaid lower grade jailor was sought to be made a scapegoat for
this criminal indifference. To the claim for compensation, a caveat was filed
that the petitioner may be directed to file a suit if so advised. The Court
rejected this argument as manifesting inhuman attitude. The Court observed



Law Commission of India—126th Report

that ‘the right to compensation is some palliative for the unlawful acts of
instrumentalities which act in the name of public interest and which present
for their protection the powers of the State as a shield. If civilization is not
to perish in this country as it has perished in some others too well known
to suffer mention ; it is necessary to educate ourselves into accepting that, res-
pect for the rights of individuals is the true bastion of democracy’. The
Court directed the State of Bihar to pay to the petitioner in all Rs. 35,000
leaving it open to the petitioner to sue for more damages, if so advised. These
cases be speak not merely a buraucratic mentality but an utter callous indifference
to the process of law and the writs of the highest court, simultaneously not
only manipulating litigation but exposing the State exchequer to make huge
payments which are: easily avoidable.

2.21. When it comes to an oppressive attitude by a public sector under-
taking, it makes no difference whether the victim of oppression is a low paid
employee or a highly paid officer. One A.L. Kalra was an officer employed
by P & E of India Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary of the State Trading Cor-
poration,.a Government of India undertaking. He applied for and obtained
an advance for purchasing a plot of land and a new motorcycle under the
relevant advance rules. There was a default in refund and repayment and
the same was being recovered by deduction from his salary. Yet a discipli-
nary inquiry was initiated against him and he was removed from service. An
appeal to the appellate authority was dismissed. A writ petition to the High
Court met the same fate on the ground that the respondent is not ‘other
authority’ comprehended in the expression ‘State’ within the meaning of the
expression in article 12 of the Constitution. In an appe al under article 136
of the Constitution, it was not disputed that the respondent is ‘other authority’
but a novel contention was put forth. It was urged on behalf of the public
sector undertaking that even if the respondent is comprehended in the expres-
sion ‘other authority’, it would still not be governed by Part XIV of the
Constituticn because an employee of such public sector underatking does not
hold a civil post and, therefore, his removal from service is beyond the reach
of the court. Negativing this contention, it was Pointed out by the court that
not only the inquiry was on a charge which can styled as frivolous because
the entire recovery was made from the salary which was a mode of recovery
prescribed in the agreement granting advance but more appropriately under
the rules prescribing misconduct, the action of the officer would not constitute
a misconduct and, therefore, he inquiry was ab initio void. The Supreme
Court then observed that even if Part XIV of the Constitution is not attracted,
the respondent, being ‘other authority’, would have to act within the four
corners of Part III of the Constitution which includes, amongst others, article
14, which guarantees equality before law and equal protection of laws. The
action for holding an inquiry on an alleged misconduct which was non est
would be a grossly arbitrary act violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
The Court observed that :—

“Failure to adjust the antenna to the operative channel and dipping the
head like a proverbial ostrich in the sand so as not to view the chang-
ing kaleidoscope of the law can alone be said to be responsible for this
trivial matter to be brought to this Court.”?¢

Another improper tendency accepted by litigation undertaken by public sector
undertakings/Government may now be noticed. Assuming that the Govern-
ment/public sector undertaking honestly believes that its action is legally
justified and, therefore, either initiates or invites litigation, surprisingly once
an adverse decision is given, pursuit of litigation vertically through hierarchy
of courts is relentless. This tendency clearly exhibits that initially the view
was not to vindicate a right or a stand but either it was vengeance or superio~
rity complex. A case may be referred to here to justify this statement. An
officer of the level of a head constable in Police Department was dismissed
from service in 1955 for an alleged misconduct of hunting a bull in Govern-
ment forest. The head constable contended that he was not afforded a reason-
able opportunity to defend himself. His suit having been dismissed by the
trial court, the first appellate court held that not only the inquiry did not
give a fair hearing but even the charges in the notice to the delinquent of his
misconduct were very vague. The first appellate court directed reinstatement.
The State was afflicted by a disease called ‘appealititis’ and the State of U.P.
preferred an appeal to the High Court and then took the matter to the Supreme

3—322 M. of Law & Justice/ND/89

15

u


16

Law Commission of India—126th Report

Court, in beth of which the State failed. The litigation covered a period of
27 years whereafter the head constable was reinstated with back wages. But
in the process, he had parted from the world.?7

2.22. Digressing from the line of cases hereinabove discussed, it may now
be profitable fo turn to litigation where a public sector undertaking refuses
to honour its commitment and invites litigation. Gujarat State Finance Cor-
poration agreed to finance a project by giving a loan and later on, for extrane-
ous and irrelevant reasons, backed out. When the loanee approached the
High Court for a writ of mandamus, Gujarat State Finance Corporation adopt-
ed a curious stand by commenting that contractive obligations cannot be en-
forced by a writ of mandamus and if the Corporation has committed a breach
of the contract, the other side may sue it for damages. Rejecting this con-
tention, the court pointed out ‘how the public sector corporation sct up to give
impetus to industrial development of the country, the promise of planned eco-
nomy aimed at job expansion to liquidate the curse of unemployment, achieve
larger production and help in price stabilisation, acts in a manner contrary to
its raison d’etre and becomes counter-productive.’**

2.23. Compensation for victims of accidents is a measure of social justice
inasmuch as the bread-winner may have been killed and the family may have
become destitute. And yet, these compensation cases are almost fought with
vengeance, more so by State Governments whose fleet of buses are exempt
from the liability of third party risk insurance. A bus belonging to Rajasthan
State Road Transport Corporation was involved in an accident which resulted
in the death of a person. His dependants initiated an action for compensation
before a Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal. The public sector undertaking,
namely, the Rajasthan Road Transport Corporation, resisted the claim putting
(orth frivolous objections. The Tribunal awarded compensation. The matter
was brought to the Supreme Court where the Court was constrained to observe
that :--

“One should have thought that nationalisation of road transport would
have preduced a better sense of social responsibility on the part of the
management and the drivers. In fact, one of the major purposes of
socialisation of transport is to inject a sense of safety, accountability
and operational responsibility which may be absent in the case of private
undertakings, whose motivation is profit-making regardless of risk to
life ; but common experience... .discloses callousness and blunted con-
sciousness on the part of public corporations which acquire a monopoly
under the Motor Vehicles Act in plying buses”.

The Judges proceeded to observe that :—

“In the present case, it would have been more humane and just if instead
of indulging in wasteful litigation, the Corporation had hastened com-
passionately to settle the claims so that goodwill and public credibility
could be improved.... It was improper of the Corporation to have tena-
ciously resisted the claim”.?®

2.24, There are many instances of litigation between the Central Govern-
ment and State Government agencies. In one case, the Income Tax Depart-
ment took the view that the income of the respondent Corporation was liable
to income-tax and assessed the respondent Corporation to income-tax for the
assessment years 1958-60. The respondent Corporation filed a writ petition
in the High Court contending that since the property owncd by it and the
income earned by it were the property and the income of the State, it was
exempted from the Union taxation under article 289(1) of the Constitution of
India. The High Court dismissed the petition. The appeal filed by the res-
pondent Corporation in the Supreme Court was also dismissed. The respon.
dent Corporation filed its returns in respect of the assessment years 1960-63
showing its income as NIL. In respect of the assessment of the said period,
it claimed exemption under section 11 of the Income Tax Act, 1961. The
respondent Corporation’s claim for exemption was rejected by the I.T.O. and
in appeal respondent Corporation’s claims were allowed by the Appellate
Acsistant Commissioner of Income Tax. But the appeal filed by the Depart-
ment before the Income Tax Tribunal Bench was allowed and at the instance
of the respondent Corporation, the Tribunal by a common order referred it


Law Commission of India—126th Report

to the High Court. The High Court held in favour of the respondent Corpo-
ration and also granted certificate of fitness for appeal to the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court held that the respondent Corporation was entitled to the
exemption claimed by it both under the Road Transport Corporation Act,
1922 and the Income Tax Act, 1961. This is another patent case of unneces-
sary litigation showing that there is no internal agency/authority constituted to
resolve the dispute between the Government and its agency.

2.25. Is there a lesson and message to be drawn from this extensive
discussion of viewing the litigation undertaken by public sector undertakings/
Government from the vantage point of courts? “The decisions herein discuss-
ed, and they can be multiplied manifold, are merely symptomatic of the
litigious culture recklessly cultivated by bodies such as public sector under-
takings/Government who, under the Constitution, are under an obligation to
manifest constitutional culture in their dealings and conduct. They have under-
taken litigation at the drop of a hat and having tasted blood, the litigation has
been pursued right up to the apex cour. In their case, the public pays the court
fees ; litigation costs as the expenses come out from the coffers of the State
which expression includes public sector undertaking. The officer who either
initiates or defends litigation and then prefers appeals after appeals is never
personally iesponsible for the outcome. There is no social audit of his be-
haviour. Not a single case has been brought to the notice of the court or the
public or even the Public Accounts Committee of the Parliament where an
officer who frivolously pursued litigation was hauled up for his improper
behaviour inconsistent with the duties of his office. Their wrath was visited
upon poor employces or officers and consumers of product are victims of
their oppression. Why? As pointed out earlier, the individual has to fight
litigation ; compared as between Goliath and dwarf, the one enjoys the benefit
of litigating at somebody's cost and the individual pays from his own pocket.
The picture becomes devastatingly cruel where a dismissed employee has been
fought up to the Supreme Court. The employee has lost his livelihood ; he
cannot procure alternative employment ; he has to maintain family ; he has
to procure funds for litigation and wait for the date of resurrection. The
corporation which fights him is economically better placed to tire him
and the courts’ dockets get more and more congested, heaping indirectly greater
financial liability on the exchequer. The depressing feature of such litigation
becomes more manifest when an individual on one side and public sector
Corporation on the other is replaced by Government on one side and public
sector undertaking on the other side or between two public sector undertakings.

2.26. It appears, specially in public sector undertakings, accountability
gencrally is of what an officer does and what he does not do. This had been
brought out in an interview on Sth April, 1987 on the Television, by certain
public and private sector executives. Consequently, the managerial executives
prefer not to take responsibility in resolving the disputes. Because of such
lack of responsibility on the part of the managerial executives, the disputes
between the public sector undertaking vis-a-vis the other parties, which could
have been ironed out with little more endeavour, are allowed to continue
pending in the courts. Even where the cases are decided against the Govern-
ment or the public sector undertakings by the court at the lowest level, the
overenthusiastic Department of the Government as well as the public sector
undertakings choose to prefer appeals to the highest forum with the hope that
their stand may be stamped in their favour by the highest court, irrespective
of the cost and time involved therein. This approach betrays a lack of under-
standing of cost benefit ratio.

2.27. One of the major disadvantages which ensues from the redundant
litigation by and against the public sector undertakings is that the expenditure
required for mecting the litigation expenses add to the cost of the products
manufactured by the public sector undertakings and consequently, the cost of
the products soars high and the profit dips low. The capital output ratio is,
therefore, directly affected because of mounting expenses required to be in-
curred Sy the public sector undertakings on litigation, One Corporation in its
letter pin-points the main impact of the litigation and delays in cases of public

17


Law Commission of tndia—126th Report

sector undertakings. It mentions that there has been an enormous increase
of investment in public sector undertakings in the recent past. As on
31-3-1986, the number has gone up to 225 with an investment of Rs. 50,341
cro-es. During execution of projects cost-over-run due to time-over-run has
become a serious concern for the Government. Profitability of Public sector
undertakings is yet another serious issue to the Government. Litigation and
delays in hearing of cases have also contributed to a great extent leading to a
time-over-run and cost-over-run of the projects as also to the low profile of
plofitability. The money in the coffers of the exchequer is the main source
to meet the expenditure required to be incurred on the litigation by and against
the public sector- undertakings. It is nothing but wastage of precious ex-
chequer’s funds collected through the hard-earned money of the public, utilis-
ed merely for the whims and fancies of certain over-enthusiastic Departments
of the Government and certain public sector undertakings to keep on litigating
for frivolous reasons such as a matter of prestige etc. This also heavily con-
gests the dockets of the court and its graph of arrears rises upward.


CHAPTER IIL

TE, WIDE DISCRETIONARY POWERS AND THE ERA
OF ADMINISTRATORS

WELFARE

3.1. The constitution of India seeks to set up a welfare State. ‘If the
State is to care for its citizens from the cradle to the grave, to protect their
environment, to educate them at all stages, to provide them with employment,
training, houses, medical services, pensions and, in the last. resort, " food,
clothing and shelter, it needs a huge administrative apparatus, Relatively,
littke can be done merely by passing Acts of Parliament and leaving it to the
courts to enforce them. There are far too many problems of detail, and far
too many matters which can be decided in advance.......... There must be
discretionary power. If discretionary power is to be tolerable, it must be
kept under two kinds of control ; political control through Parliament and
legal control through courts’! The legal aspects of all such matters are the
concern of administrative law.

3.2. The laissez faire doctrine implied that Government governs the
best which governs the least. Welfare State to a considerable extent is an
anti-thesis of laissez faire State. The State permeates every activity. Under
the laissez faire doctrine, in England it was believed that until August 1914,
a sensible law-abiding Englishman could pass through life and hardly notice
the existence of the State, beyond the post office and the policeman? From
laissez faire to welfare State, one has to catch the proliferation of the State
activities. And once the State proliferates its activities and touches the citizen
at every point of his life, the administrator acquires a high visibility profile.
Dean Roscce Pound observed that ‘as the 18th and the fore-part of the 19th
century relied upon the Legislature and the last half of the19th century relied
upon the courts, the 20th century is no less clearly relying upon the admini-
stration’.® The situation portends its further projection into 21st century
and many more centuries to come. Expanding activities of a welfare State
brought in agencies and instrumentalities of the State, called public sector
undertakings. Their presence ‘indicate a likely increase in the incidence of
encounter between private individuals and public officials and consequentially,
a greater need for an official authority or authorities to which the former can
resort to for the redress of non-legal wrongs’.*

3.3. Existence of wide discretionary power opens up a potential area
either of its likely abuse or misuse. In either view of the matter, the one
who feels injustice at the hands of administration is likely to seek redress
of his wrong, genuine or assumed, by resort to proceedings before the court
or tribunal. If there is a tribunal, we can grant him relief. Since the inde-

dence, the docket explosion can be largely attributed to the expanding
State activities in the field of industry, commerce, trade, education, medicare,
old age pensions and several others. “These activities of the State confer bene-
fits and occasionally State largesse. The proliferation of governmental acti-
vities as well as the activities of its instrumentalities directly contributing to
the ever-rising graph of litigation at all levels attracted the attention of those
concerned with law reforms. It was noticed that the pattern of litigation in
the last few years revealed that parties think fit and proper to approach the
higher courts: (i) not only for redress regarding governmental acts which
constitute an infingement of legal rights ; (1) but also for redress regarding
governmental acts which, while they may or may not amount to infringement
of a legal right, constitute instances of maladministration. To illustrate, pre-
ventive detention laws confer power to detain without trial and ordinarily
every order of detention is questioned by a petition for writ of habeas corpus
complaining that the detenu has ben deprived of his personal liberty by orders
illegal and invalid or entirely unjustified. This type of litigation raises issue
of infringement of legal and constitutional rights. The power of the State
to arrange equitable distribution of scarce resources and orderly development
and growth of the country confers power of regulatory nature by granting

19


20

Law Commission of India—126th Report

licences. Refusal to give licence or preferring one amongst’ many for a
licence gives rise to numerous litigation complaining of ollicial apathy, op-
pression, unimaginativeness, lethargy or misunderstanding—these and similar
factors are legitimately responsible for the parties seeking redress in courts.”

3.4. It is impossible to envisage an ideal situation where discretionary
power is utilised in such an ideal manner that the exercise of power would
not give rise to some kind of litigation. In fact, the classical constitutional
doctrine was that wide discretionary power was incompatible with the rule of
law.“ Even today, law frowns upon absolute discretion but conferment of
wide discretionary power is inevitable. The only limitation sought is that its
exercise can be controlled by available legal remedies. Even if an effective
regulatory and control machinery is devised, yet use of discretionary power
is bound to give rise to disputes and controversies. Under the Constitution,
articles 32 and 226 confer power of judicial review of administrative and legal
action. The challenge to exercise of discretionary power is by approaching
the court which again multiplies litigation. Therefore, mounting _ litigation
against the Government is interrelated largely with the exercise of executive
administrative powers. They provide the causal connection. “One must note
that Government agencies do not seem to care to scrupulously comply with
the law themselves, while they continually expect the citizen to do so. The
present growth, which is phenomenal, in administrative law and adjudication
is indicative of the fact that discretionary powers are being abused and courts
are continuously embattled with the administration to ensure that they follow
cettain minimum standards of fairness in the exercise of their statutory, dis-
cretionary powers. The standards imposed are indeed minimal. There is
the requirement to give fair opportunity to the parties to be heard; there
is the salutary rule that bias, whether personal or pecuniary, should not affect
decision-making ; there is the rule that reasons should be given by the autho-
rities making a decision affecting the citizen the formulation ‘of these re-
quirements by courts has always been crystal clear ; but the underlying message
is that every attempt be made by the administration to be scrupulously fair,
and to ensure that the rules themselves are tolerably clear. And yet cases in
which violations of natural justice occur in decision-making by _ executive
continue to come up before the courts and their number seems to be on the
increase rather than declining Similarly, for example, government agencies,
when they assume the role of management of public sector industries, are
themselves unable to comply with the minimum rules of labour legislation.”?

3.5. Most of the litigation in which a public sector undertaking/Govern-
ment is a party emanates from an unhealthy attitude on the part of the
administrator not to act consistent with principles of natural justice in exercise
of the power conferred upon him. But what at best are the principles of
natural justice? Briefly stated, they have been put akin to fairness in action.
‘What the requirements of fairness demand when anybody, domestic, admini-
strative or judicial, has to make a decision which will affect the rights of
individuals depends on the character of the decision-making body, the kind
of decision it has to make and the statutory or other framework in which it
operates. In particular, it is well established that when a statute has con-
ferred on any body the power to make decisions affecting individuals, the
courts will not only require the procedure prescribed by the statute to be
followed, but will readily imply so much and no more to be introduced by
way of additional procedural safeguards as will ensure the attainment of
fairness’.® If this is the requirement, no administrator can grudge it. Some
how or other, there is a visible tendency to disregard it. The worst feature
comes in when an administrator does not extend this normal principle of
fairness to one working either in the Department or under him and supports
the so-called domestic inquiry loaded against the so-called delinquent officer.
Board of Trustees of the port of Bombay resolved to hold a departmental
inquiry against one of its officers for an alleged misconduct. Before the
inquiry opened, the delinquent officer submitted a request seeking permission
to engage a legal practitioner for his defence. Even though the Board had
appointed an inquiry officer with a legally trained mind to be assisted by a
presenting-cum-prosecuting officer who again was a legally trained mind to
Tepresent the employer, yet the eminently reasonable request of the delinquent
Officer was turned down and then proceeded with the inquiry, at the conclu-
sion of which the officer was dismissed from service. The victim of such


Law Commission of Indig—126th Report

an inquiry questioned the correctness, validity and fairness of the inquiry by
filing a writ petition in the High Court of Bombay. The learned sin, ke Judge
of the High Court, by his judgment and order, quashed and set aside the
order of dismissal, inter alia, holding that while appointing two presenting
officers. both legally trained, the Chairman of the public sector undertaking
failed to afford a reasonable opportunity to the delinquent officer to defend
himself by refusing him permission to appear through a legal practitioner and
thereby the principles of natural justice are violated. Not satisfied with this
eminently ial and judicious decision, the public sector undertaking, dis-
closing crass wooden-headed approach of a type of legalism not tenable in
the developing notions of fairplay action, preferred an appeal to the Division
Bench of the High Court, which was rightly rejected in limini. The climax
was reached when a public sector undertaking reached the Supreme Court
by way of an appeal under article 136 of the Constitution. Commenting upon
the unfair attitude of the public sector undertaking, the Court pointed out
tht where an inquiry is likely to affect livelihood or attach a stigma to the
person inquired against, the inquiry must be heard according to the principles
of natural justice and one of the requirements would be that if an employer
is assisted by legally trained mind in presenting the case, denial of that op-
poriunity 1७ the other side would vitiate the inquiry.? Every public servant
every time he is teased and threatened or eased out and eliminated on ob‘ique
grounds cannot start a litigation, especially these days when man lives in the
short run and litigation lives in the long run.....- It has been rightly said
that access tc justice is the most human right and in this sense, processual
jurisprudence relating to public sector servants must be designed with an eye
on modernised judicial management. Traditionalism and obscurantism restrict
writ jurisdictions so much, so _ many public sector employees suffer silently
while audacious adventurists fight and win.!°

3.6. The activities of the Government and public sector undertakings
ccver a vast area and proliferate in many directions. threatened action may
not come to its notice till it is initiated. It was assumed that Government
would not indulge in frivolous litigation or would not litigate for extraneous
or irrelevant reasons. In order to give an opportunity to the Government/
public sector undertakings, it was statutorily decided to serve it with a notice
of the intended cause of action so that if the Government/public sector under-
taking desires to remedy the wrong or to reconsider its decision, it has full
opportunity before it is dragged to the court. That was the raison d'etre of
the provisions like section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure or an insistence
by court before issuance of writs like the writs of mandamus to make a
demand for justice and only thereafter come to the court. Over years it is
found that the notice under section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure, rather
than serving the cause of justice by redressal of the wrong, sometimes hastens
an action on the part of the Government to such extent as to force the other
side to resort to litigation for with. An unsavoury practice started from this
by first filing the suit without notice and as soon as the Government appears
and raises the contention, withdraw the suit and file a fresh one, the inter-
regnum being used for purpose of serving the notice but during which period
some interim relief is already obtained.

3.7. Today it is almost a universally accepted view that notice under
section 80 has become a trap for the unwary.1!_ The constitutional validity of
section 80 was upheld on the ground that Government is a class by itself. But
the criticism against the misuse of section 80 had become so pungent at the
hands of court that an amendment was introduced to section 80 in the year
1976 to the effect that a suit to obtain an urgent or immediate relief against
the Government or any public officer in respect of any act purporting to be
done by such upblic officer in his official capacity may be instituted with the
leave of the court without serving any notice as required by sub-section (1)
of section 80. This amendment was necessitated by the unsavoury practice
hereinabove referred to. To what ridiculous length the defence based on section
80 can be carried can be illustrated by pointing out that a suitor served notice
under section 80 CPC for the intended suit but on the last day of the expiry
of the notice he died and his heirs and legal representatives brought the suit
basing the claim on the same notice The Union of India contended that as
the plaintiff and legal representatives themselves had not served the notice under
section 80, the suit is not maintainable. And unfortunately, this contention

21


22

Law Commission of India—126th Report

found fayour with the High Court. Reversing the decision, the Supreme
Court pointed out that the whole object of the notice contemplated by section
80 is to give to the concerned Government and public officers opporunity to
reconsider the legal position and to make amends or settle the claim, if so
advised. without litigation. The legislative intention behind that section is that
public money and time should not be wasted on unnecessary litigation and the
Government and the public officer should be given a reasonable opportunity to
examine the claim made against them lest they should be drawn into avoidable
litigation The purpose of Jaw is advancement of justice.'? In spite of this,
this contention is vigorously pursued. The court was compelled to point out
that as far as possible no proceedings in a court of law should be allowed to
be defeated on mere technicalities..* The court, after referring to the recom-
mendation of the Law Commission™ for deletion of section 80 on the ground
that it has practically outlived its utility and, instead of advancing justice, has
become a trap for the unwary, reiterated the vicw that the section requires to
be deleted." Having reviewed all this case law, the Law Commission again
recalled and reiterated its carlier recommendation to delete section 80.0

3.8. It appears that this recommendation of the Law Commission and the
comments of the Court on the utter futility of a provision like section 80 of the
Code of Civil Procedure have not found favour with the Government, because
at the time of making the amendment of Code of Civil Procedure in 1976,
section 80 was not deleted: only a provision was added to avoid repetition
of the unsavoury practice referred to hereinbefore. It is, therefore, appropriate
to surmise that from the point of view of the Government, the provision has
some use and its retention on the statute book is considered necessary in public
interest. If that is the view, it would be futile at this stage to examine the
question of deletion of section 80 which adds one more limb to the armoury
of unsustainable defences advanced on behalf of the Government. Assuming
that its retention from. the point of view of the Government has some utility,
still it is necessary to denude it of some of its ugly features which can be dealt
with here.

3.9. Before dealing with these features, a review of the steps taken by
the Government for improving the existing system of handling complaints and
grievances may be briefly referred to. Somewhere in June 1964, detailed in-
structions were issued to Central Ministries and Departments for initiating
review of the prevalent system in vogue of handling complaints and grievances
of people vis-a-vis the Departments and Ministries of the Government. Part
of it may be extracted :—

“Tt is the basic proposition that the prime responsibility of dealing with
the complaints from the public lies with the Government organisation whose
activity, or lack of activity, gives rise to the complaint. Thus, the higher
levels of hierarchical structure of an organisation are expected to look
into complaints against the lower levels. If the internal arrangements
within each organisation are effective enough, there should 72 no need for
special ‘outside’ machinery to deal with the complaints. The fact that
there has been growing demand for specia! machinery indicates that the
present arrangements within the Departments are not good enough from
the point of view of giving satisfaction to the public. It is, therefore,
necessary to devise measures that will give substantial satisfaction to the
public in the matter of grievances against the administration.”.

3.10. The instructions have the flavour of a policy statement for avoiding
conflict which carries the germ of litigation. The approach appears to be not
to raise untenable and improper defences merely with a view to perpetuate liti-
gation. The policy ought to be to avoid taking decisions which have the in-
built tendency to force the outsider dealing with Government/public sector
undertaking to litigation. When the Government/public sector undertaking
indulges into litigation which can be styled as frivolous, the litigation can be
traced back to either irresponsible decision or improper motivation for_ the
decision which is likely to be stigmatised as governmental lawlessness, ‘Every
day governmental lawlessness has to be checked by proper mechanisms and
procedures at the governmental level. For example, an official whose action
has been invalidated on the ground of violation of natural justice may be sanc-
tioned through many processes inclusive of some kind of disciplinary action.
Other procedures, with incentives rather than sanctions, may also he thought of.



Law Commission of India—126th Report

The point is that such procedures will decrease the incidence of governmental
lawlessness : it is important to do this both in terms of expedition and equity.
In terms of expedition, surveillance by State over its agencies for their com-
pliance with law, will tend to increase officials’ responsiveness to law and
decrease citizens’ grievances, and thereby judicial workload’.’*

3.11. If section 80 of CPC is still to retain its place in the statute book,
the approach to the notice on behalf of the Government, public officer or public
sector undertaking has to undergo a total and basic change. On the receipt
of the notice, the party serving the notice must forthwith be informed that the
point raised by him is under consideration and a decision will be taken as
early as possible, This should be done keeping in view the injunction of the
Supreme Court that : ‘the legislative intention behind that section, in our opinion,
is that public money and time should not be wasted on unnecessary litigation
and the Government and the public officer should be given a reasonable op-
portunity to examine the claim made against them lest they should be drawn
into avoidable litigation. The purpose of law is advancement of justice. The
provisions in section 80, Civil Procedure Code, are not intended to be used
as booby traps against the ignorant and illiterate persons.1s If this warning
is not hecded, the fate that might befall section 80 is not in doubt. For the
time being, as the previous recommendation that the section deserves to be
deleted appears not to have met with the approval of the Government as deduct-
ed from 15 continued retention on the statute book, it would be better to
denude it cf some of its undesirable features.

3.12. Those in favour of deletion of the section were actuated by the
belief that section 80, instead of providing Government an opportunity to avoid
avoidable litigation, has become a trap for the unwary when it is insisted that
the suit should be dismissed for want of notice. The approach requires to
undergo a total change.

3.13. When a defence is taken that the statutory notice is not served or
that the notice is defective in form, the court should inquire into the conduct
of the concerned Department and the concerned officer to ascertain what steps
they took before the initiation of the legal action to avoid the litigation.
If it is contended that the suit is bad for want of notice, which comprehends
that the notice given is invalid, before non-suiting the suitor by uphol ding the
defence, a detailed inquiry be made that if the defective notice was shown
to have been served, what steps were taken by the Government to remedy
them. If ne notice was given, a further inquiry should be made as to whether
absence of notice has worked any hardship to the Government. This can be
easily deduced from the conduct of the Government/public sector undertaking/
public servant in the litigation itself. What sort of defences have
been taken? Whether the action was defendable at all? Ordinarily,
the party should not be non-suited on the ground of absence or
defective notice but the best that could be done is to award costs to the Goy-
ernment or public sector undertaking irrespective of the decision of the suit.
Such. discretion should only be extended if the conduct of the Government/
public sector undertaking/public officer is fair and just in the prosecution of
the litigation.

4—322 M. of Law & Justice/ND/89

23


CHAPTER IV
INQUIRY, DATA AND INFERENCES

4.1. Competition in trade or commerce has the inbuilt potentiality to
eliminate litigation. Monopolies, on the other hand, have a tendency to litigate
because for the service or goods produced by it, no alternative source is avail-
able and they are in a position to dictate their terms. Accordingly, the inquiry
to collect data on the litigation, litigious tendencies and litigious culture must of
necessity start with monpolies in public sector. Life Insurance Corporation,
Employees State Insurance Corporation, Oil and Natural Gas Commission,
Employees Provident Funds Organisation, General Insurance Corporation of
India, Steel Authority of India, Coal and Gas Authorities, are but few of the
monopolies operating in public sector and are free from the tentacles of compe-
tition. The goods and the services produced by them are of such nature and
variety that people from all strata of society have to come in contact with them
and be subject to their monopolistic overtones. They are unquestionably the
agencies and instrumentalities of the State and are comprehended in the ex-
pression ‘State’ in article 12 of the Constitution. This position is established
by a catena of decisions. If the Government should avoid all avoidable liti-
gation, ipso facto these instrumentalities of the State must inhere the same
culture. The trend being in the opposite direction, the Law Commission
approached them both for furnishing reliable statistical information as also their
approach 10 litigation and the litigation policies and strategies. The Law
Cemmission addressed detailed queries to these monopolistic undertakings and
sought their co-operation both for furnishing reliable data and for understanding
their approach to litigation and whether they have any policy norm for either
initiating or avoiding litigation. The query and the responses furnish a peep
inte the working of these Corporations.

4.2. The Law Commission approached Life Insurance Corporation, a
monopoly which came into existence in 1956, set up under the Life Insurance
Corporation Act, 1956. A copy of the letter is annexed fo this report at
Annexure I. Section 6 of the Act confers a monopolistic status on the Corpo-
ration by transferring all life insurance business to a Corporation sct up under
the Act to the exclusion of anyone else. Keeping in view that policy of
insurance represents a contract, described as contract of insurance, and being
aware of the fact that the Corporation can unilaterally repudiate the contract
by declining to honour its ob! figations under the contract of insurance, the
query centred round: (a) number of claims repudiated yearwise from 1980
onwards; (b) number of suits filed by the party whose contract of insurance
was repudiated yearwise; (c) the stake involved in each case; (d) the
decision of the first court of orignal jurisdiction in each suit; (e) if the
sion was adverse to the Corporation, the number of appeals preferred by
(1) whether second ap peal were preferred by the Corporation; (g) nufaber
of appeals preferred by the Corporation to the Supreme Court of India; (h)
cost of litigation in each case related to the stake involved. A further query
was whether Life Insurance Corporation had maintained an establishment for
legal advice and, if so, expenses of the establishment, payments made to lawyers
not on the establishment and the ratio of such expenses to the total expen-
diture of the Corporation. The Corporation was further requested to state
wrether, and, if so, in how many cases, the view of the Legal Department
was overruled with a view to pursuing litigation. The Corporation was
specifically asked to state the number of cases whether the attitude of the
Corporation in pursuing litigation found disfavour with the court and the
matter had to be withdrawn if it was within the competence of the
Corporation.

4.3. The Corporation conceded that it does repudiate claim by refusing
to honour the claim made under the policy of insurance when it has reasons
to believe that the contract of insurance was entered into by supplying
incorrect, inadequate or insufficient materials and if correct facts were stated,

4


Law Commission of India—126th Report

it would induce the Corporation not to enter into the contract. The informa-
tion supplied by the Corporations tabulated and set out at Annexure II. The
Corporation was at pains to point out that between the period 1979-80 to
1987, hardly 1% of the claims were repudiated by it. This figure of 1%
should not provide a blind-fold because it has to be correlated to the huge
volume of insurance work undertaken by the Corporation as a monopoly.

4.4, The General Insurance Corporation of India, which deals with
insurance other than life insurance, submitted inconclusive and insufficient
information. It may be recalled that the General Insurance Corporation works
through four subsidiary companies and it pointed out as in interim feed back
that out of a total of 11,60,871 claims preferred against its subsidiaries
during the year 1985 and disposed of by it, only 3,012 claims
were repudiated. This was done after obtaining the surveyor’s report
35. required by section 64:UM(2) of the Insurance Act, 1938
which is mandatory in character. The surveyor is one who is licensed by the
Government of India and the repudiation is based on his report, common
grounds being that the loss was outside the scope of the policy or the genuine-
ness of the contract being in question. It specifically pointed out that except
the marine policies, in two other policies there is a term of arbitration to
settle the dispute relating to the quantum of the claim. This term excludes
approach to court and the parties generally resort to arbitration. The Corpo-
ration pointed out that out of a total of —1,31,673 claims accumulated over
the years against only one of its subsidiaries, namely, New India Assurance
Conipany Ltd., as on December 31, 1986, only 7,448 claims were pending
in court apart from third party motor accident claims pending with tribunal,
called Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, which are 17,768.

4.5. The Corporation points out that with proliferating surface transport,
as a consequence of inducement for expanding tourist trade, coupled with
statutory requirement of third party insurance in respect of any motor vehicle,
numerous claims are preferred by the victims of accidents by motor vehicles.
It appears that almost at every district headquarter, a tribunal, called the
Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, has been set up. As on December 1986,
New India Assurance Company Ltd., a subsidiary of the Corporation, was
sued for recovering compensation and the unadjudicated petitions were 17,768.
A plea was raised that Lok Adalats are helping to reduce the litigation but
there is much to be said for that method of settlement of disputes. There is
very little or practically no effort on the part of the Corporation to pay com-
pensation whenever the claim is made and this forces the victims of accidents
or their dependants to approach the Tribunal. Third party risk insurance was
devised as a social justice measure. In a motor accident, either the bread
winner dies or is so injured as to be incapicitated from earning and the
dependants suffer so much that sometimes they are reduced to destitution or

nury, yet the Corporation hardly settles the claim and litigation piles up.
The delay in disposing of claims for compensation ranges over three years
duting which period the dependants of the victims of accidents suffer untold
hardship. In the capital of Delhi alone, there are numerous cases involving
claim for compensation pending for over three years. An employee of Ashoka
Hotel, a hotel managed by Indian Tourist Development Corporation, died in
an accident. His widow and children have preferred claim for compensation
and it is pending over three years. The widow and the children are main-
tained by relations. There is not the slightest effort to relieve the misery.

4.6. The Corporation is absolutely impervious to the provision contained
in section 92A of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, by virtue of which an
amount of Rs. 15,000 has to be paid to the victim of a motor accident irres-
pective of fault liability. In other words, an amount of Rs. 15,000 has to be
paid as a social security measure on the principle of no fault liability. As a
rule, unless the Tribunal compels, the Corporation never pays the same and
the Tribunal hardly gives priority to such application. This bespeaks volumes
about the litigious culture of the Corporation.

4.7. It is hardly necessary to recall the earlier effort of the Law Com-
mission in this behalf. Section 45 of the Insurance Act, 1938, provides that
the validity of policy shall not be called in question on the ground of mis-
statement in the personal statement two years after the issuance of the policy.

25


Law Commission of India—126th Report

But there is a rider that if the insurer shows that such statement was on a
material matter or suppressed facts which it was material to disclose and that
it was fraudulently made by the policyholder and that the policyholder knew
at the time of making it that the statement was false or that he suppressed
fact which it was material to disclose, it can repudiate the policy beyond
the period of two years. The attention of the Law Commission was drawn
to certain difficulties experienced in the working of section 45 and it proceeded
to examine the implications of section 45 as part of its function of revising the
laws of the country. Life Insurance Corporation expressed an opinion that
the period of two years is insufficient to make necessary investigation for
repudiating the claim. After having examined the problem, the Law Com-
wussion recommended that a period of two years should be extended to three
years. It is difficult to give credence to the view of Life Insurance Corporation
4 monopoly. One case will illustrate the point. One man got himself insured
for Rs. 5,000 possibly on getting a job. After a period of three years, he
took out ancther policy of insurance and the amount was Rs. 10,000. A few
years thereafter, he took out a policy for Rs. 50,000. He died within a
period of one year after the third policy was issued but under which risk had
commenced running. The insured died in a hospital and the case record
showed cause of death as renal failure. Life Insurance Corporation satisfied
the claim under the first two policies and repudiated the third one on the
ground that renal failure on expert opinion is attributable to hypertension and
the insured in his personal statement has stated that his blood pressure is
normal and within limits. The legal representatives of the deceased insured
brought an action against Life Insurance Corporation and the Life Insurance
Corporation defended it on an utterly unsustainable defence—supressing mate-
rial evidence in his possession which, if disclosed, would have turned the
tables against the Corporation—and succeeded in non-suiting the legal heirs
of the deceased tili the matter landed in the Supreme Court. When the
matters was called out in the Supreme Court, the Bench asked Additional
Solicitor Gencral who was appearing for the Corporation as to whether before
issuing a policy of Rs. 50,000, the Corporation insists on the examination
of the insured by two experts if the value of the policy is over Rs. 25,000.
Oi the two medical experts, one is a general practitioner but the other is a
specialist. And admittedly, these reports form part of the decision-making
process of the Life Insurance Corporation whether to enter into a contract
or not. In the suit filed by the legal heirs of the deceased, the Corporation,
while defending the action and its stand of repudiating the policy on the
ground of suppression of a material fact which would have affected the deci-
sion of the Corporation whether to enter into the contract or not, did not
produce the report of the two medical experts who had examined the insured
before the issuance of the policy. The Court called upon the Corporation to
produce the documents and the fact therein stated fully justified the personal
Statement of the insured. The whole case of the Life Insurance Corporation
was in fact out from the bottom. The net outcome of this type of litigious
tendency was that the Corporation had to pay for a policy of Rs. 50,000,
Rs.1,74,000 and odd amount, being the interest and costs. Does it behove
the Corporation to adopt this attitude? Does it behove a public sector under-
taking to resort to suppressio veri suggestio falsi and drag the dependants
of the deceased insured from court to court? And having not been satisfied
with this utterly indefensible conduct, the Corp oration insisted before the Law
Commission on an earlier occasion to extend the time in the name of so-called
investigation so as to be able to repudiate the contract.

4.8. Coming to the statistical side of the performance of the Corporation,
it appears that 1,122 claimants out of 6,558 claims repudiated between 1979-
80 to 1986-87 filed suits/writ petitions in the court. The information tabula-
ted in Annexure Il would reveal at a glance that for most of the years, except
for 1980-81 and 1983-84, most of the cases were decided against the LIC
compared to those decided in its favour. Even in the aforementioned years,
the ratio of cases decided in favour of the Corporation and against it were
50:50. It, however, appears that once the case was decided against the Cor-
poration by the court of first instance, ordinarily temptation to prefer appeal
was resisted, implying that the decision of the court of first instance was accep-
ted as correct. The Corporation also pointed out that of the 1,122 claims
filed against it between 1979 and 1987, it conceded the claims of 441 suitors.
4६ would immediately appear that at least these 441 suitors should not have
becn forced to go to the court. The dispute appears to have been raised where


Law Commission of India—126th Report

the claim on an average is of Rs. 40,000, meaning thereby that the claim
is put forward by persons belonging to the middle class. The question, how-
ever, has to be posed in a different manner. Should a monopoly by its liti-
gation policy force the people belonging to lower middle class, economically
ower class and persons belonging to that group who take life insurance policy
with utmost difficulty because they have little cushion and saving is a luxury,
to go in for litigation as the last resort at a time when the benefit is needed
the most? Because of this manifest treatment on the part of the Corporation,
the courts have been constrained to observe that such monopolistic concern
should not stand on technicalitics and the obligation on the part of the State
or its instrumentalities to act fairly can never be over-emphasised.

4.9. The next monopolistic concern is the State Insurance Corporation
sel up under the Employees State Insurance Act, 1948. As the long title of
the Act shows that it was an Act to provide for certain benefit to employees in
case of sickness, maternity and employment injury and to make provision for
certain other imatters in relation thereto, such as industrial sickness, industrial
injury, et al. The Act appears to have been enacted in pursuance of the direc-
tive principles set out in articles 38, 41, 42, 43 and 46. The scheme of the
Act briefly stated is that a Corporation would be set up, known as Employees
State Insurance Corporation, for the administration of the scheme of Employees
State Insurance in accordance with the provisions of the Act. The funding
a contribution by the employees covered by the Act and their
cmpioyers. Section 28 sets out the purposes for which the fund may be expen-
ded. ‘In short, if the employees covered by the Act contribute in’ return for
certain benefits, it would be a travesty of the Act if the contribution of the
workmen are used to defeat the claims of the workmen themselves. The Act
provides for setting up a court, called the Employees State Insurance Court,
for adjudication of disputes arising under the Act. The Corporation has set up
aospitals and medical dispensaries in numerous towns for the benefit of the
workmen. Any employee entitled to the benefit under the Act can approach the
authority and the benctit has to be granted to him if he is otherwise qualified for
the same. In the event of a refusal, he can resort to the court. Against the
decision of the court, an appeal can lie to the High Court on a substantial
question of law.

4.10. A query similar to the one addressed to the Life Insurance Cor-
poration was also addressed to the ESI Corporation. The Corporation informed
the Commission that the litigation cost was 57.72 lakhs during the period
of seven years. It came to light that the Corporation pursued an employer for
reimbursement of Rs. 531 paid to the employee which, according to the Corpo-
ration, was reimbursible for the default of the employer. The approach of the
Corporation appeared to be bordering on ludicrous. No point of law was
involved and when the court pointed out the obligations of the Corporation,
later on it came to know that there were numerous such appeals which were
subsequently withdrawn. Occasionally, the litigation is pursued on a_ specious
plea that a point of law is involved which, if not correctly decided, would
expose Corporation to unjust claims. This is more a facade and camouflage.
If any such issue arises, Corporation being a public sector undertaking can
certainly obtain the opinion of the Attorney General or litigate the matter
before the first court and if the interpretation of law is against it, be done
away with further litigation. ESI Court dockets are equally clogged and the
energies of the employees are fruitlessly wasted in litigation forced upon them
by the Corperation.

4.11. The next public sector undertaking which deserves the notice for
discussion is the one set up under the Employees Provident Funds and Mis-
cellaneous Provisions Act, 1952. As the preamble of the Act shows, it was
enacted to provide for the institution of provident funds, family Pension fund
and deposit linked insurance fund for employees in factories and other esta-
blishments. Obviously, it was for providing social security in old age and in
case of undeserved want. The Central Government was to set up a Board
of Trustees to administer the fund, called Provident Fund, to be set up under
a scheme to be called the Employees Provident Funds Scheme. The funding
programme was to consist of contribution of the employees and the employer.
Way does one contribute to provident fund, especially the one who hardly is
in a position to make his both ends meet? The answer obviously is to provide

27


Law Commission of India—126th Report

for a rainy day and if this compulsory saving is not available when the need
has arisen, the scheme itself comes into disrepute. A case can be cited to
convince the same.” It need not be recapitulated here. It is a truism that the
payment under the provident fund scheme which has become due and payable
is hardly received in time. The litigation on this account is galore. The
information supplied by the organisation has been set up in a tabulated form
(Sce Annexure 11).

4.12. It may be true, as pointed out by the Commissioners of the Scheme,
that most of the litigation is attributable to the deliberate failure on the part
of the employers to remit their contributions and a two-pronged litigation has
to be started: (1) for recovery; and (2) by way of a prosecution. It is,
therefore, said by the organisation that litigation becomes inevitable on account
of the recalcitrant conduct of the employers. Whatever that may be, way has
to be found by the organisation for avoiding litigation, if need be by a radical
amendment in the Act. Otherwise the courts’ dockets get murkier and murkier.

4.13. Assuming that litigation as a whole is unavoidable, an alternative
method for resolution of dispute has to be found. An alternative method could
be of a standing committee representing the employers, employees and the
organisation to which every case can be taken wherever the dispute arises and
the result of it must be binding. Today most of the countries are in search of
non-court forums for resolution of disputes. It is, therefore, necessary for such
ai organisation, which is devoting itself to expanding social justice benefits
to the employees working in industries, to organise such a forum for resolution
of disputes and which must as well as satisfy the employers. The orgat anisation
is triangular in character and all the affected interests must have confidence in
a forum for resolution of disputes arising amongst them. The Law Commission
would certainly devise such a forum for their consideration.


CHAPTER V

CONTEMPORARY SITUATION AND SUGGESTED REMEDIES BY
INTERESTED GROUPS

5.1, Public sector undertakings, in response to the queries of the Law
Commission, have bemoaned the mounting litigation to which they are sub-
jected and feel the pinch of the same. Apart from the costs and expenses of
litigation, the time of some of their officers is occupied in dealing with liti-
gation, leaving them little time to concentrate on the goals for which public
sector undertakings have been set up. This has led to a re-thinking of their
litigative strategies and the panacea which, according to them, would relieve
them from the burden and boredom of litigation.

5.2, The most illustrative case to which the attention of the Law Com-
mission has been drawn is highlighted by the Election Commission of India.
The Election Commission complains that to some extent by their indifference
the courts have contributed to exposing a constitutional body like the Election
Commission of India to mounting litigation. The grievance is that the courts
are either unaware or sometimes ignore strategic legal formulations and consti-
tuiional provisions which, if properly perused and applied, would help in
throwing out litigation at the threshold. To illustrate, election to the Legis-
lative Assembly of West Bengal was due in-June 1982. Eight persons filed a
writ petition against Union of India and the Election Commission and other
respondents directing them not to issue a notification under section 15(2)
of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, calling for election to the
Legislative Assembly until the rolls were duly revised. The petitioners challenged
almost all the provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 under
which seven general elections were held by the time petition was filed and prayed
for interim stay which was granted and subsequently confirmed. The matter
was heard by a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court which pointed out
that ‘the fundamental error from which the writ petition suffers is this: the
fact that revision of electoral rolls, either intensive or summary, is undertaken
by the Election Commission does not have the effect of putting the electoral
roll last published in cold storage. The revision of electoral rolls is a continuous
process which has to go on, elections or no elections’! The Judge in the High
Court who granted interim injunction and confirmed the same, failed to take
note of the most obvious legal position that ‘if an electoral roll is not revised,
its validity and continued operation remained unaffected’ and granted and
confirmed interim injunction on a very nebulous yet wholly untenable ground
throwing the entire electoral process out of gear. The case had to be with-
drawn to the Supreme Court and disposed of so that the electoral process may
not be interfered with. Earlier, the Court had vacated the interim injunction
pointing out that ‘it takes years to build up public confidence in the functioning
of constitutional institutions, and a single court hearing, perhaps, to sully
their image by casting aspersions upon them. It is the duty of the courts
to protect and preserve the integrity of all constitutional institutions which
are devised to faster democracy. And when the method of their functioning is
questioned, which it is open to the citizen to do, courts must examine the
alleg ations with more than ordinary care. The presumption, be it remembered,
is always of the existence of bonafides in the discharge of constitutional and
statutory functions. . .. The petition is dressed up in constitutional attire but,
before us, no counsel tried even to have the feel of it, except Shri Bhola
Nath Sen. We will have occasion to demonstrate how, in a petition of this
nature, no interim relief was permissible, especially in terms of prayer clause
(f), by which the entire election process was brought to a standstill’? It is
in such a situation that one can appropriately utter a warning that ‘wiser coun-
sel would prevail’ with court before exercising power of granting interim
relief in such manner as would throw out of gear the entire election process
on which the democracy is not only founded but nursed.

5.3. Though there are numerous such instances, one more should suffice
to bring home the point under discussion. On January 12, 1983, election to

29


30

Law Commission of India—126th Report

all the 126 seats of the Assam Legislative Assembly was notified to be held
in February 1983. A set of writ petitions was filed in the Guwahati High
Court seeking, amongst others, a mandamus not to hold elections on the
basis of the defective rolls and to defer holding of elections on account of
prevailing disturbed situation in the State. The writ petition was entertained,
though interim relief was not granted. The cases were transferred to the
Supreme Court of India. The Court disposing of the petition pointed out
specifically that the validity of an election can only be challenged in the manner
prescribed by the Representation of the People Act, 1951, and not by way
of a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution implying that the
matter should have been thrown out at the threshold.*

5.4. The Election Commission also pinpointed the failure of the court
while issuing notice to consider whether everyone impleaded as tespondent
should be served with a notice even though the parties joined may be neither
necessary nor, even remotely saying, proper parties. Questioning the election
of the returned candidate, the petitioner in Calcutta High Court impleaded in
his election petition not only the returned candidates but also other unsuccessful
candidates. Over and above them, the Chief Minister of West Bengal, the
Minister of the Transport Branch of Home Department, Minister of Legislative
and Judicial Department, District Magistrate and Returning Officer and
Electoral Registration Officer, were impleaded alleging that they were proper
parties. Notice of the petition was served upon all the respondents. The Chief
Minister and the Ministers claimed in the written statement that the election

petitioner was not entitled to implead them as parties to the election petition
cause they were not candidates at the election and, therefore, they could
not be impl ieaded as parties to an election petition. The Ministers moved a
separate application before the High Court to strike out their names before
the array of parties in the election petition. Even after the correct legal
position was pointed out, the court declined to strike out the names of these
persons holding that they were proper parties to the election petition. These
Ministers approached the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court, after a
review of the provisions of the Representation of the People Act and the relevant
provisions of the Constitution, pointed out that a right to elect or to be
elected or to dispute an election are neither fundamental rights nor common
law rights. These rights are created by the Representation of the People Act
and the rules made thereunder and being statutory in character, the remedies
are limited to those provided by relevant statutory provisions. The Court
held that the concept of proper parties is foreign to an election petition and
the necessary parties who must be pleaded have been set out in the relevant
provisions of the 1951 Act. The Court concluded that no one may be
joined as a party to an election petition otherwise than as provided by section
82 and 86(4) of the 1951 Act. Accordingly, the appeal was allowed and
the names of all those Ministers and others who were not necessary
parties to the petition under the felevant provisions of the Act were struck out
from the array of parties to the election petition.*

5.5. The Election Commission accordingly vigorously canvassed for a
proposition that the court dealing with election petitions must, while exercising
its power to admit a petition, not look at it merely mechanically at the threshold
but should reject petition against those who are not necessary parties to the
petition. The grievance is made on account of the fact that the Election
Commission goes on receiving notice after notice from the High Courts where
it is unnecessarily being dragged to the court exposing it to unnecessary litigation
and avoidable costs. The Election Commission, therefore, stated that in a
socialist welfare State, courts have to assume and should be ever vigilant to
achieving the goals of curbing litigious tendency as also frivolous litigation.

5.6. Another remedy suggested by various public sector undertakings is
that the court should freely exercise the power to compel the parties to resort
to arbitration. The suggestion is that where agreement between a public sector
undertaking and a private litigant incorporates an arbitration agreement, the
court should by its action hold the parties to the contract and force the recalci-
trant parties to arbitration. A second string to the bow was that it is now
necessary to radically amend the Arbitration Act, 1940, to incorporate a
provision therein where, even if the parties to the पा ation did not have among
themselves an arbitration agreement, the court should be empowered to force
the parties in appropriate cases to go to arbitration. This suggestion has


Law Commission of India—126th Report

practically the support of a large number of public sector undertakings who
have responded to the queries of the Law Commission. In this connection, the
Ministry of Communication brought to the notice of the Law Commission a
provision for arbitration in cases involving telephone/telex subscribers and
the Department as incorporated in the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. The
Department complains that despite this wholesome provision, subscribers tend
to rush to the courts initiating action against the Department and the Courts,
oblivious to the statutory provision, tend to take cognizance of the dispute. The
Ministry asserts that a’ standing panel of arbitrators must be appointed and
no subscriber should be allowed to invoke the jurisdiction of the court before
seeking intervention of the arbitrator.

5.7. The National Thermal Power Corporation, a public sector under-
taking, lends its weight to this suggestion for compulsory arbitration. It has
pointed ou: that the Corporation has incorporated appropriate provisions in
general conditions of contracts awarded/to be awarded to various contractors
for settlement of disputes, if any, arising out of, or relating to, the contracts
between them and the Corporation. It then proceeded to point out that the
Corporation always insists on arbitration but even then it is exposed to un-
necessary litigation because the parties dissatisfied by the award of the arbitrator
question the same in a court of Jaw on frivolus grounds and the litigation not
only perpetuates but multiplies. Accordingly, it is of the opinion that a
time has come for radically amending the Arbitration Act, 1940.

5.8. It is unquestionable that interminable, time consuming, complex,
exasperating and atrociously expensive court procedures impelled jurists to
search for an alternative forum, less formal, more effective and speedy for
resolution of disputes avoiding procedural claptrap. The search led them
to the dictum : ‘arbitrate-do not litigate’, However, the way in which the
proceedings under the Arbitration Act, 1940, are conducted and without
an exception challenged in courts has made lawyers laugh and legal philoso-
phers weep. Experience shows and law reports bear ample testimony that the
proceedings under the Act have become highly technical, accompanied by un-
ending prolixity, at every stage providing a legal trap to the unwary. Informal
forum of parties’ choice for expeditious disposal of the disputes has, by
the decision of the courts, been clothed with legalese of unforeseeable com-
plexity which led Edmund Davies, J., in Price v. Milner’ to utter a warning
‘that these may be disastrous proceedings’. A petty labour contractor in search
of his Jabour charges against a multinational was told that, in view of the
subsisting arbitration agreement between the parties, the suit filed by the
labour contractor must be stayed and the labour contractor must be forced
to resort to arbitration by the International Chamber of Commerce in Paris
with application to Yugoslav Materials and Economical Law. On a request
of the multi-national, the suit was stayed with the effect that the Jabour
contractor will have to resort to arbitration by the International Chamber of
Commerce at Paris. The Supreme Court vacated the stay pointing out that
enforcement of the arbitration agreement in the circumstances of the case
itself would lead to miscarriage of justice. In another case, pursuant to an
arbitration agreement, an arbitrator was appointed who gave his award. But
hefore the award could be given, an application was made for removal of
the arbitrator to the High Court but which ultimately came to be rejected.
Against that order, a petition was moved under article 136 of the Constitution
to the Supreme Court of India. The Court, by consent of parties, removed
the first-named arbitrator and appointed another person as arbitrator. As the
new arbitrator directed fresh pleadings to be filed, a petition was moved in
the Supreme Court which had made the appointment of the arbitrator, seeking
a direction that the new arbitrator should commence the arbitration proceed-
ings from the stage where it was left by the earlier arbitrator. The Court gave
necessary directions. When the proceedings were still pending, one of the
parties made an application in the High Court seeking a direction that the
arbitrator may be asked to consider its counter-claim. The jurisdiction of the
High Court was challenged to entertain the application. After some time,
parties agreed to request the arbitrator to consider the counter-claim as well.
Thereafter the arbitrator made the award. One of the parties, the beneficiaries
of the award, directed the arbitrator to file the award in the Supreme Court
so as to make it a rule of the court. This again led to a dispute about
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to entertain the application. A petition

5--322 M. of Law & Justice/ND/89

31


32

Law Commission of India—126th Report

was also moved in the High Court. Ultimately, the Supreme Court, after hear-
ing the parties, made the award a rule of the court.’ Would not the normal
litigation have ended earlier than the arbitration proceedings? It is not for a
moment suggested that the arbitration agreement should not be enforced and
parties must be held to their bargain.

5.9. Cochin Shipyard Ltd., invited tenders for construction of building
dock at Cochi! Tarapore and Company were the tenderers. Ultimately, the
contract was awarded. One of the terms of contract was that a credit in yen
would be made available to the contractor for importing piling plant and
machinery, spares, technical knowhow and hiring of experts necessary for the
work, amounting to about Rs. 2 crores. The credit was not forthcoming.
Accordingly, the contractor requested the Government of India to give neces-
sary clearance to import equipment from other countries where it is available.
Ultimately the contractor made an extra claim consequent upon increase in
the cost of pile driving equipment and technical knowhow fees. The parties
agreed to refer the dispute to arbitration. The points of difference between
the parties were drawn up by the Cochin Shipyard itself. The arbitrator
made an award directing Cochin Shipyard Ltd. 10 pay Rs. 99 lakhs with
interest at nine and a half per cent per annum on account of the increase
in the cost of imported pile driving equipment and technical knowhow fees.
The Cochin Shipyard challenged the award on a technical ground that the
arbitrator cannot decide its own jurisdiction and the dispute was not covered
by the arbitration agreement. The arbitrator entered upon the reference on
June 2, 1976, and the dispute finally ended by a decision of the Supreme
Court on March 6, 1984. And all technical objections were taken by the
Cochin Shipyard Ltd., one of them being that the arbitrator had no jurisdiction
to decide its own jurisdiction, even though the point as to jurisdiction was
agreed to be referred to the arbitrator.®

5.10. Even where parties have a subsisting arbitration agreement, yet
when one party in breach of the agreement resorts to a court proceeding and
the opposite party appears and secks enforcement of the arbitration agreement
by seeking « stay of the suit under section 34 of the Arbitration Act, 1940,
highly technical contentions are raised in this behalf and the matter has re-
peatedly surfaced in the Supreme Court of India. Food Corporation of
India, a public sector undertaking, faces numerous litigation and as soon as a
writ of summons of the suit is received, it appeets through one of its officers
and seeks adjournment of a day or two. A contention is raised that as Food
Corporation of India has taken a step in the proceeding, it has waived its right
under the Arbitration Act.* In this case, the Supreme Court had to overrule
four judgments of different High Courts.

§.11. Therefore, the votaries of arbitration as alternative to court pro-
ceedings must also be influenced by the culture of arbitration. Public sector
undertakings have not exhibited a different culture than the one a private indivi-
dual manifests when in breach of agreement court proceedings are started and
stay of the suit is resisted. The Law Commission would, therefore, keep in
view this oft-repeated suggestion but would like to indicate changes in the
approach while insisting upon arbitration.

5.12. Further, there are numerous dispute prone situations where the
arbitration agreement may not be subsisting between disputants. Also, between
two public sector undertakings, between instrumentalities of the Government
and the Government, and between the Union Government and the State Gov-
ernment, there is generally no arbitration agreement. What litigation policy
must be formulated in the absence of arbitration agreement?

5.13. Apart from public sector undertakings, some individuals also
responded to the queries of the Law Commission. An academe suggested two
alternatives to restrict the inflow of litigation from public sector undertakings/
Government. He was of the opinion that numerous specialist tribunals should
be set up to deal with the litigation in which public sector undertakings are
involved and, in order to put a wholesome restraint on the litigious tendencies
disclosed by public sector undertakings/Government, a litigation Ombudsman be
appointed with expansive jurisdictjon,’°


Law Commission of India—126th Report

5.14. Tribunalisation of justice, even though frowned upon, has been
approved by the Supreme Court of India.!? There is a feeling among some
vocal sections that tribunalisation of justice to the exclusion of the High Court
diminishes the value of justice compared to one rendered by courts. However,
the belief that specialist tribunal has the advantage of rendering speedy and
effective justice compared to the generalist court is gaining ground. There are
as many as 2,000 tribunals operating in various fields in U.K. alone subject,
of course, to the supervision of the Council on Tribunals which was set up under
the Tribunals and Inquiries Act, 1958, but which was comprehensively re-
pealed and replaced by Tribunals and Inquiries Act, 1971. The Constitution
was amended to incorporate Part XIVA enabling the Parliament by law to
provide for the adjudication or trial by administrative tribunals of disputes
and complaints with respect to matters referred to in clause (2) of article 323B
as also with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons
appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the
Union or of any State or any local authority within the territory of India or
under the control of the Government of India or any Corporation owned o¢
controlled by the Government. It is interesting to note that this amendment
was the outcome of a strong recommendation made by the Supreme Court
which may be extracted :

“There are few other litigative areas than disputes between members of
verious services inter se, where the principle that public policy requires
that all litigation must have an end can apply with greater force. Public
servants ought not to be driven or required to dissipate their time and
energy in court room battles. Thereby their attention is diverted from
public to private affairs and their inter se disputes affect their sense of
oneness without which no institution can function effectively. The consti-
tution of service Tribunals by State Governments with an apex Tribunal
at the Centre, which, in the generality of cases, should be the final arbiter
of controversies relating to conditions of service, including the vexed
question of seniority, may save the courts from the avalanche of writ
petitions and appeals in service matters, The proceedings of such tribunals
can have the merit of informality and if they will not be tied down to
strict rules of evidence, they might be able to produce solutions which will
satisfy many and displease only a few.”"?

This view was reiterated by the Supreme Court in which it observed :

“Jn these appeals we have once again to consider career conscious com-
peting claims to seniority which appear so much to dominate the lives and
careers of our civil servants that a large bulk of the cases in this court
relate to the resolution of problems arising out of such claims. So much
of our time is taken up in discovering the precise facts of these intricate
problems that we wonder whether the constitution of a fact finding adminis-
trative tribunal who should invariably be approached in the first instance
will not better serve the cause of successful administration.”1*
However,the cases relatable to the service conditions of civil servants continued
to flood the court. Ordinarily, the dispute was with regard to claim to inter se
seniority when recruitment to a cadre was from more than one source and
these cases consumed considerable time of the Court. The Court by its
decisions also compounded the confusion. The Court had, therefore, to point
out that in order to put service jurisprudence on fair and rational basis, it
would be necessary to reconsider some of the decisions of the Court.14 The
Court reiterated this view.'* And yet the cases came in quick succession. Chief
Justice Chandrachud (as he then was) was constrained to open his judgment
observing : “Once again, we are back to the irksome question of inter se
seniority between promotees and direct recruits”.'* And the irony of situation
was that the contestants before the Court were judicial officers of Delhi.
Reversing the view taken by the Delhi High Court taken on its administrative
side, the Chief Justice, after referring to the decision in the case of A. Janar-
dhan, concluded that even though no two cases are alike, yet the observations
from A. Janardhan extracted by the Chief Justic were not without relevance
to the decision of the case before him. Shorn of legal or judicial jargon, it
meant that even though the law was settled, the disputes rolled in unhindered.
To conclude on this point, even though a view of law was repeatedly reiterated
by the Supreme Court, yet the matter was again put in the lap of the Court
almost raising identical contentions.'’ What is the lesson? Indubitably, the
absence of couricr between court and administrative Departments multiplies
litigation. The Courier by itself may not solve the problem but if the attention

33



34

Law Commission of India—126th Report

is focussed on the latest pronouncements and a grievance resolution machinery
is set up, the Government can successfully avoid litigation. And yet, if some
recalcitrant party persists in doing it, the court can throw him out at the thre-
shold without allowing him to impinge upon the valuable time of the court.

5.15. Ultimately, this led to the enactment of the Administrative Tribunals
Act, 1985. Sub-section (2) of section 14 confers power on the Central
Government to apply, with effect from the dates to be specified in the notifica-
tion, the provisions ‘of sub-section (3) of section 14 to local or other authorities
within the ierritory of India or under the control of the Government of India
and to corporation or society owned or controlled by Government of India
excluding tiose controlled and owned by State. It appears that the relevant
notification has still not been issued with the result that the employees of the
public sector undertakings are not brought within the purview of Central
Administrative Tribunal. It thus appears that tribunalisation of justice has
come to stay. The Supreme Court rejected the contention that the Administra-
tive Tribunals Act, 1985, contravenes the basic structure of the Consti-
tution. It accepted the administrative tribunal set up under the Act as
providing another alternative institutional mechanism or arrangement for judicial
review and it was held to be equally efficacious as the High Court whose
jurisdiction was excluded by the Act.

5.16. Following this line of thinking, the terms of reference relevant to
judicial reforms on which the Law Commission was invited to work, inter alia,
provided to ascertain the matters for which Tribunals (excluding services
fribunals) as envisaged by Part XIVA of the Constitution need to be esta-
blished expeditiously and various aspects related to their establishment and

working.

5.17. The Law Commission accordingly proczeded to identify various
specialist jurisdictional areas, such as, labour disputes, disputes in the field of
education and disputes in the field of taxation of laws and recommended setting
up of national court, as well as various different Tribunals.1*

5.18. The Law Commission also took note of the attempts by the specia-
list Tribunals for disputes arising under the Customs Act, 1962, Central
Excises and Salt Act, 1944, and Gold (Control) Act, 1968. Under the
aforementioned three Acts, Government of India constituted the Customs,
Excise and Gold Control (Appellate) Tribunal in the year 1982, having
exclusive jurisdiction to deal with decisions of the administrative officers func-
tioning under the various services. However, it should not be forgotton that
the decisions of the aforementioned Tribunals can be questioned before the
High Court under article 226 of the Constitution or by way of reference
procedure which merely adds one more stage rather than reducing any.

5.19. It would, therefore, be idle parade of familiar knowledge to advance
all those supporting reasons for setting up various Tribunals, However, let it
not be forgotton that the approach paper relevant to the present report invited
suggestions not for setting up different forum to the exclusion of courts for
resolution of disputes involving public sector undertakings/Government. In
fact, the search is for litigation policy and strategy to be followed by public
sector undertakings and Government, with a view to, as far as possible, avoiding
litigation or resort to courts and to devise a machinery to settle the disputes
amongst contending parties. That cannot be ascertained with certainty by
recommending tribunals involving litigation by or against public sector under-
takings as well as Government. हे

5.20. The alternative suggestion was that an Ombudsman, by whatever
name called, be appointed to whom all disputes involving public sector under-
takings inter se, or between public sector undertakings and Government, or
such undertakings and citizens at large be referred to whose decision should
be final. The suggestion is not a novel one in the sense that the Law Com-
mission has already dealt with this aspect and suggested constitution of an
Ombudsman at the Centre as well as State level for various Ministries empower-
ing him to entertain grievance from any member of public against public
sector undertakings/Government and pleading for appropriate relief. This was
to be an opening to the public having grievances against the Government/
public sector undertakings with no legal sanction behind it. The suggestion


Law Commission of India—126th Report

was improved upon by saying that the Ombudsman, either on a complaint
or suo metu, may examine administrative lapses which the court may be
disinclined to cure. It was belicved that the Ombudsman undertaking investi-
gation of the complaint would, in a large number of cases, be able to set right
the matter by persuading the Ministry concerned to redress the wrong.! It
must not be overlooked that the institution of Ombudsman has been operating
in various countries and the institution is not free from pungent criticism. “May
we not be in danger of establishing more red-tape, more bureaucracy—a
Parliamentary Commissioner and staff, special sections within Government
Departments to deal with the Parliamentary Commissioner and his staff and
perhaps eventually a Parliamentary Commissioner to watch the Parliamentary
Commissioner and all for the doubtful advantage of adding to the existing
machinery yet another watchdog which can bark but cannot bite?”2”

5.21. In public responses to the approach paper circulated by the Law
Commission, a suggestion recommending setting up of Lok Adalats for resolving
disputes between public sector undertakings inter se, and between Government
and public sector undertakings as well as local authorities and other authorities
was put forth. Institution of Lok Adalats started as a voluntary organisation
modulated by the courts for informal resolution of disputes but mostly manned
by members of judicial fraternity. Now it has received a statutory recognition
in Chapter VI of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987. Lok Adalat
can cater to the resolution of simple disputes between individuals such as
Partition of property, Family disputes, maintenance cases, compensation for
victims of motor accidents, et el. These are disputes where an approach of
give and take may result in resolution of disputes. The more and more Lok
Adalats are being convened, its limitations and infirmities are becoming visible.
‘At times, in view of the lack of supervision over its function by any higher
authority, it leads to degeneration in the quality of justice because advertently
or inadvertently many unfair practices creep in’.*! Therefore, institution of
Lok Adalats will have limited utility in resolving disputes between Government
and citizen, between public sector undertakings inter se, and between local
authorities and other instrumentalities of the State.

5.22. The last suggestion was that a tribunal on the lines of Railway
Claims Tribunal being set up under the Railway Claims Tribunal Act, 1987,
for inquiring into and determining claims against the Railway Administration
for loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery of animals or
goods entrusted to be carried by railway or for the refund of fares or freight
to it, for compensation for death or injury to passengers occurring as a result
of railway accident and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto,
may be set up in respect of public sector undertakings. That again assumes
one more tribunal being set up but does not answer the query of the Law
Commission as to what litigation policy should be adopted by Government/
public sector undertakings who have maximum litigation in the court to avoid
avoidable litigation in the larger interest of the nation and to eschew litigious
culture and incidentally to relicve unbearable burden on court system. The
search is for policy भाव strategy of litigation by Government/public scctor

undertakings.

5.23. The public debate, though well participated, has not been able to
throw up any one solution helpful in this behalf. The search must continue.

35


CHAPTER VI

EVALUATION OF THE ARRANGEME
SETTLING DISPUTES WITHOUT R

S ARRIVED AT FOR
RY TO COURT

6.1. It cannot be gainsaid that the mounting litigation to which Govern-
ment and public sector undertakings are exposed has not evoked any response
from them. The attempts so far made to resolve disputes without reference
to courts may now be noticed. Since the public sector undertakings proli-
ferated, Government of India has set up, what is called, a Bureau of Public
Enterprises. The Bureau seems to be something like a co-ordinating body.
The Bureau has sent copies of various circulars issued from time to time speci-
fying the methodology for settlement of disputes involving a public sector
undertaking. The emerging scenario from various circulars focusses upon
arbitcation as a method of amicably resolving disputes involving public sector
undertakings and avoiding recourse to litigation. 10 make this suggestion ope-
rational, the circular recommended that public sector enterprises undertaking
commercial activities should in their agreements provide for arbitration by and
arbitrator to be nominated in the manner prescribed in the circular.” One
method suggested is to draw up a panel of standing arbitrators under which a
designated officer acts as the sole arbitrator. An enquiry revealed that the
system appeurs to be in vogue in the Department of Director General of Sup-
plies and Disposals and Central Public Works Department. It was assumed
that the circular will be implemented in letter and spirit. However, a social
audit by the Public Accounts Committee of the Parliament on the effect of the
circular has been summed up as under :—

“The Committee cannot understand why it has not been possible to resolve
a dispute between two Governmental organisations by mutual consulta-
tion. Instead the parties have had to resort to litigation, thus incurring
avoidable expenditure. The Committee desire that the existing instruc-
tions for settlement of disputes between Government Departments and
public sector undertakings should be reviewed thoroughly and a suitable
machinery evolved for the resolution of interdepartmental and __ inter-
goverhmental disputes.”!

In the light of the Audit Note of the Public Accounts Committee, a review
was undertaken about the litigation policy in the matter of inter-departmental
disputes or where in the case of public sector undertaking and Government
there is a nodal Ministry, an attempt should be made at the Ministers’ level
to resolve the dispute, failing which the matter should be referred to Cabinet
for final decision which must be binding. The litigation in the court has to
be eschewed. Pointing out the nature of disputes involving public sector under-
takings and Government, it was emphasised that regardless of the type of dis-
pute, the concerned Departments and the undertakings must resolve their dis-
putes amicably by mutual consultation or through the good offices of em-
powered agencies of Government, failing which through arbitration.  Litiga-
tion at any cost has to be avoided. The suggestions include the manner of
selecting the arbitrator and the tilt is in favour of bureaucrats. The Law Com-
mission would not be able to subscribe to this suggestion because a charge of
bias against a Government officer is easily entertained and now the Supreme
Court is examining whether such appointment, to be unilaterally made by
the Department, assures principles of natural justice, one of which is that no
one shall be a judge in one’s own cause. The policy statement also frowns
upon appointment of a lawyer as an arbitrator. Being aware of the fact that
mere resort to arbitration proceeding is not an end of litigation, the policy
statement desires a directive to be issued that the award of the arbitrator
should ordinarily be accepted as final unless there is an error apparent on
the face of the record and it is of such a gross nature that a challenge becomes
inevitable. But before doing this, the Secretary, Ministry of Law may be
consulted.

36


Law Commission of India—126th Report

6.2, In the matter of disputes between the Income Tax Department and
public sector undertakings, it was suggested in the circular issued in consulta-
tion with the Central Board of Direct Taxes that in the event of a difference
of opinion between public sector undertaking and the Income Tax Depart-
ment, the procedure therein prescribed must be followed. But the procedure
prescribed is hardly conducive to reducing or eliminating litigation, A fur-
ther suggestions was that the machinery for settlement of direct tax disputes
outside the court may be devised consisting of representatives of Central Board
of Direct Taxes, Bureau of Public Enterprises and the Ministry of Law.
To that a caveat was entered that if Revenue is represented, the concerned
public sector undertaking must also have representation in the machinery.

6.3. A fresh attempt was made as late as 1981 to tackle this problem
by issuing a circular that public sector undertakings and Departments of the
Government in the event of a dispute between them should refer it to the
sole arbitration of an arbitrator to be appointed by the Department of Legal
Affairs. And to facilitate the appointment of arbitrator, a standard form of
agreement was also prescribed and circulated. A suggestion was made that
on the arbitrator giving the award, ordinarily it should be accepted. The
Law Secretary is free to nominate a suitable officer as arbitrator, sup ersed-
ing the ealier directive that the arbitrator should be a serving law officer of
the rank of Joint Secretary from amongst the Joint Secretaries in the Depart-
ment of Legal Affairs.

_ 64. Even with this elaborate procedure prescribed by competent autho-
rity to bring disputes between public sector undertakings and Departments of
the Government to arbitration, the situation has hardly improved because
there is a loophole in the arrangement, namely, that if the dispute involves a
question of law not hitherto decided by the Supreme Court, the matter should
be taken 10 the court. What is a question of law has defied any scientific
definition. Therefore, anything can be twisted into a question of law. This
report would keep in view all these past attempts and considerably improve
upon them to achieve the desired result.

37



CHAPTER VII
CONTRIBUTORY CAUSES FOR MULTIPLICATION OF LITIGATION

7.1, Experience shows, and analysis of reported cases clearly lead to one
conclusion, that the lack of accountability in the officer in whom the power
vests to determine whether to initiate litigation or perpetuate the same by
preferring appeals, is largely responsible for mounting litigation. This attitude
is referable in service matters to eccentric approach of officers siting in
vertical command position and utter non-compassionate attitude towards sub-
ordinates. In the matter of litigation with public, cases are not unknown where
corrupt motives have been at the root of the tendency to continue litigation
so as to exhaust the other side in the fond hope that he/she/it may, out of
exasperation, be willing to grease the palms. There is a third independent
cause generating this tendency to initiate or perpetuate litigation and that is
to avoid taking decisions which, in the current culture, may lead to doubt-
ing the bona fides of the officer who has to take decision. “There are other
multiple causes which contribute to the malaise. It is not possible to explore
the hidden tendencies behind this attitude but which are solely responsible for
multiplication of litigation involving public sector undertakings and
Government. °

7.2. One more cause may be independently examined in this behalf. The
Indian Constitution inheres a social philosophy and is founded upon certain
fundamental values. It has goals and objectives. One of the wel iP recognised
objective of the Constitution is to impart social justice, the guiding spirit be-
hind Part IV of the Constitution. This value system and social philosophy
of the Constitution can be clubbed together in one expression—the culture of
the Constitution. All limbs of Executive must be imbued with this constitu-
tional culture. Every action of theirs must be judged and examined and eva-
uated by the yardstick of constitutional culture. Social justice is one of the
prime facets of constitutional culture. Social justice is imparted not
only by means of an organised movement or by way of any party politics but
many administrators, executives, can also possibly reveal their sense of social
justice at the decision making level while formulating policy on vital issues,
they accomplish a profound change in outlook and thus silently revolutionize
‘authoritative allocation of values’! As in the case of Executive, the Judi-
ciary, an important limb of our political society, has to evolve an activist role.
For years it was not even visible is not an unfortunate reality. However, since
last about two decades, judicial activism has come to the forefront. This acti-
vism must be reflected in the scale of values of Judges evinced by their treat-
ment of the weak, the poor, the downtrodden and against the giants, the un-
equals. The test of the moral quality of a civilization is its treatment of the
weak and powerless.2 This moral quality of the constitutional civilization
must inform all limbs of the Government. ‘In public law we have to evolve
an activist administrative branch with correctional and directional, protective
and pre-emptive, capabilities. Law becomes functional only if it can meet
the challenges of change. So it is that I plead for a constructive public sector
jurisprudence founded upon socio-political realities and geared to the fulfil-
ment of Jarger objectives.”* This constitutional culture abhores futile and
indefensible litigation, especially at the hands of Government/public sector
undertakings. Therefore, it is imperative that policies and strategies should
be so devised by public sector undertakings/Government as to reduce litiga-
tion to the minimum, if not eschew it wholly.

7.3. How much urgent this task is can be revealed by the fact that during
last five years, lakhs and lakhs of cases involving Government Departments
were instituted in various courts of the country and colossal amount has been
invested in this unproductive exercise’ (for figures see Annexure IV). From
amongst public sector undertakings, nationalised banks and financial institutions
have been responsible for a large amount of litigation? (for figures see

38


Law Commission of India—126th Report

Annexure \V’), Every such diversion of funds to unproductive areas like liti-
gation reduces the capability of these public sector undertakings to spend on
socially beneficent activities. The loss is to the poor and the underprivileged
and by their litigating policy, the gain is to lawyers and the disadvantage is of
the court system on which an unduly heavy burden is cast,

7.4. There is, what is called a Department of Personnel, Public Grie-
vances and pensions, which has the nodal responsibility to redress the grievances
which are remediable without intervention of courts. The Department has a
full-fledged Division, headed by a Director under the overall charge of the Ad-
ditional Secretary. This Department confesses that on an average it receives
about 3,000 grievances per quarter from the public. They are processed with
the aid of a computer. After the grievance is diagnosed, which itself may
suggest a remedial measure, they are forwarded for final disposal to the con-
cerned Ministry under intimation to the man who had made the grievance. In
some cases, a follow up action is taken directly by the Department depending
upon its belief it can be handled by the Department itself.

7.5. The Law Commission has come to note that the Government has
resolved to set up a Directorate in the Cabinet Secretariat itself to strengthen
the machinery for redressal of public grievances. Presumably, an official in
the rank of a Secretary to the Government of India would head the Directorate.
In the first instance, the new Directorate would deal with grievances relating
to tailways, posts and tele-communications and banking if the concerned
Department has turned deaf ear to the complainant. The details are yet to be
worked out but the format appears to be of a three-tier set up: one in the
Department itse!f, a monitoring cell and a Directorate at the level of Cabinet
Secretary. The experiment may be evaluated when it is made fully operational.
For the present, the Law Commission can only take note of the wholesome
attempt in this behalf. What would be required would be a total and radical
change in the attitude towards those coming forward with grievances. Expe-
tience shows that generally one who can set right the grievance turns deaf ear
to the complainant and he is not subject to any social audit. In the absence
of social audit, the doctrine of accountability suffers and wide yawning chasm
develops between the maker of the grievance and the one who has power to
redress the same. While suggesting effective measures, this aspect will have to
be kept in central focus.

6—322 M. of Law & Justice/ND/89

39


CHAPTER VIII

STRATEGIES AND POLICIES FOR LITIGATION FOR PUBLIC SECTOR
UNDERTAKINGS AND GOVERNMENT

8.1. There is a marked difference between the litigation involving public
sector undertakings and the Government. The policy and strategy in respect
of them may have to be planned and devised keeping in view this basic dif-
ference. But the goal of the policy and strategy in both the cases must aim
at reduction and, if possible, elimination of litigation involving them. This
Chapter, therefore, deals with public sector undertakings and Government in
two separate and independent parts. In the third part a body for overview
ard general approach would be recommended,

PART 1

8.2. Public sector undertakings are of heterogeneous character because
they are set up with specific goals to be achieved. Commercial banks were
nationalised with a view to ensuring better banking facilities in all parts of the
country, to make banking services available to a wider public especially the
neglected segments of society treated non creditworthy, and allied objects.
Nationalised Banks, financial institutions like Industrial Development Bank of
India, Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India, et el, are under
the overall supervision of the Reserve Bank of India. However, in its super-
visory role, the Reserve Bank of India hardly maintains effective check or
control over the litigious culture developed by these public sector undertakings.
The litigation which the banks either face or initiate arises from their com-
mercial transactions and their administrative policy decisions dealng inter alia
with their employers.

8.3. Manufacture of steel requires coking coal. Coal and steel industries
are in public sector except a body like Tata Iron and Steel Company Ltd. and
mini steel plants. The Coal India Limited and the authorities in charge of
nationalised collieries have also to supply coal to private consumers and in-
dustries. The type of litigation they face is slightly different from what the
banks face. In brief, public sector undertakings rendering service or consumers’
goods face different type of litigation, Different approaches and methodologies
have to be worked out to avoid litigation on behalf of such public sector
undertakings.

8.4. Let it be made distinctly clear that in a constitutional democracy,
litigation cannot be wholly eschewed. Attempts must be to minimise, restrain,
reduce or control the same by vigorous approach disclosing enlightened _ self-
interest to avoid puerile and futile litigation.

8.5. It is undoubtedly true that with all its limitations, arbitration is a
desirable alternative to court litigation. But there are certain inbuilt limita-
tions hindering the access to this alternative forum. To compel arbitration, the
parties must be having amongst themselves a subsisting valid arbitration agree-
ment. Now the public sector undertakings have disputes inter se or with the
taxing authorities. There would be no subsisting arbitration agreement to cover
such disputes. At best they can expand the scope of arbitration when dealing
with their contractors and consumers, suppliers of goods and services to them,
by entering into an arbitration agreement before dealing with them. However
that would at best marginalise litigation but would not avoid it.

8.6. Therefore, the first thing that is required to be done is that the
Government of India must issue a compulsory directive binding on public sec-
tor undertakings that in the event of a dispute between any one or more public
sector undertakings or between two or more public sector undertakings on one
hand and Government on the other, the parties shall refer the dispute to arbi-
tration. It shall be presumed by a legal device, if the parties to a dispute are
two or morc public sector undertakings or public sector undertakings on one

40


Law Coinmission of India—126th Report

hand and Government on the other, excluding the tax authorities, that a valid
arbitration agreement subsists,

8.7. In order to provide tecth and effectiveness to this suggestion, the
Government of India should set up an arbitration panel composed of retired
Supreme Court Judges and High Court Judges from which the parties can
‘gree to the selection of one or more arbitrators and failing agreement, the
appointment will be made by the Minister of Law from the panel. There
must be a fiirly good number of panelists so that the work can be distributed
amongst them. The fees to be paid to the panelists shall be fixed by executive
order in advance and those who agree to accept the fees so prescribed may be
empanelled, There is no dearth of retired Supreme Court and High Court
Judges willing to put to constructive use their experience and expertise for
the national good.

8.8. lf necessary, un amendment to the Arbitration Act, 1940, should
be made which would empower the court before which any public sector under-
taking has initiated litigation without resorting to arbitration to compel the
undertaking to go to arbitration and not merely stay the suit but dismiss the
same,

8.9. The award of the arbitrator shall be final and unless the Minister
of Law permits the challenge of the award on a valid and rational ground, the
same shall not be challengeable before any court.

8.10. In the matter of tax disputes between public sector undertaking
on one hand and taxing authoritics on the other, ordinarily the dispute would
arise before an Income Tax Officer or Inspecting Assistant Commissioner or a
Commissioner of Income Tax or the lowest grade tax officer functioning under
statutes levying indirect taxcs. So far, the law should be allowed to take its
own course. Once the Commissioner decides the dispute, the aggrieved under-
taking may upproach the nodal Ministry under which it is functioning seeking
permission whether the matter should be litigated further at ali. If need be,

an opinion from one of the panelists in the arbitration panel may be obtained |

and that should become binding. If, however, the recommendation of the
Law Commission for setting up Tax Courts' is accepted and implemented, the
matter may be litigated up to the Central Tax Court and must end there.

8.11. Dealing with the disputes between the public sector undertaking
and its employees, every public sector undertaking must set up a Grievance
Gel -composed of management and workmen’s representatives not exceeding
three on either side and presided over by a retired Judge who has functioned
as a Judge of the Supreme Court or High Court or Chairman of the Industrial
Court/Tribunal. Every dispute involving individual employee must be
brought, if need be by amending the standing orders or service rules, before
the Grievance Cell. The decision of the Grievance Cell shall be binding. If
the dispute involves more than one employee but not all the employees of the
undertaking, same procedure has to be followed. Even the disputes as to
seniority, promotion and allied issues must be brought before this Cell. Pro~
motion has long since ceased to be a management function.2 Therefore, the
Grievance Ceil would be competent to deal with the same. In the first instance,
the promotion may be decided by the management but the dispute arising out
of promotions granted or refused may be brought before the Grievance Cell.
The decisions of the Grievance Cell will be binding and if any one, despite this
arrangement and effective implementation, takes the matter to the court, the
court must decline to entertain the dispute.

8.12. Some suggestions have come from the All-India Law Officers
Association but the overall view of the letter leaves an impression that they are
self-serving suggestions in which Law Commission is not interested.

8.13. In the matter of selection of a lawyer for appearing on behalf of
the public sector undertaking, @ panel should be drawn up with fixed fees case-
Wise and only those should be empanelled who are prepared to accept it on
these terms.

8.14. Any officer sanctioning or initiating litigation contrary to the
policy herem indicated and if implemented, must be subject to disciplinary
proceedings.

41


42

Law Commission of India—126th Report

PART II

8.15. The Government, as far as the litigation is concerned, is in a class
by itself. It is the biggest litigant in this country. And one is constrained
to say that for such unmanageable litigation, it has neither policy nor plan nor
direction nor effective method of management. Its policy of selecting law
officers leaves much to be desired because the area of discretion enjoyed by
it in this respect is unmanageably wide. The Department of Legal Affairs, the
Law Commission is informed, handles the litigation on behalf of Union of
India in the Supreme Court, High Courts and subordinate courts also. Attorney
General is a constitutional functionary and he is the topmost law officer of
the Government of India with a right of audience in, every court as also has a
right to address the Parliament under certain circumstances. But by and large
information shows that he has little or no voice in selecting his colleagues.
Similarly, at the State level, Advocate General is the topmost law officer but
he has no voice in selecting a Government pleader or a public prosecutor
attached to the High Court. Some streamlining in this behalf is necessary and
wide discretionary power in the matter of selection of law officers requires to
be restricted and controlled. Judges have more often voiced dissatisfaction
with legal representation of the Government of India in the court and the
Law Commission was left with the same impression while talking with some

Judges. In any event, this report is not concerned with manner and method

of appointing law officers of the Government of India.

8.16. Government of India has one distinct advantage that no litigation
can be started against it, except where constitutional power under article 32
or 226 is invoked, without a notice in writing served two months in advance
specifying various things set out in section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
There are divergent views strongly held on the utility and efficacy of this
statutory notice. Law Commission recommended the deletion of the provision
contained in section 80, CPC.* It appears that this recommendation pending
with the Government of India since 8th May, 1984, has not met with its
ap proval. It is, therefore, safe to assume that Government of India is of
७ opinion that statutory notice has some utility despite some strident and
pungent criticism of the court. This Law Commission would, therefore, re-
frain from expressing any opinion about it. It would formulate its recom-
mendations on the assumption that the requirement of statutory notice con-
tinues to exist.

8.17. It is, however, said that nobody is bound to serve a notice while
invoking the courts’ constitutional power conferred by articles 226 and 32.
This statement does not adequately state the correct legal position. By nume-
rous decisions, the courts have held that when a petition is for a writ of manda-
mus, the Court would insist upon the party making a demand for justice
which, for all practical purposes, would tantamount to notice. Certiorari lies
not only a; gainst inferior courts but also against quasi-judicial tribunals and
against all bodies which have a duty to act judicially or fairly. Challenge
could be to a holding of such tribunal. The absence of notice would be hardly
relevant. The writ of habeas corpus is of such a special nature that to insist
upon a notice is to defeat the writ and disputes involving writ of habeas corpus
are not negotiable before an arbitrator. Let the courts deal with the same. In
the matter of writ of quo warranto where the legality of occupying an office
is questioned, there is enough advance information to Government. Therefore,
no consideration should be given to a submission that in large areas of litigation,
the Government of India does not receive notice.

8.18. Now if Government is served with a notice of demand for justice
or is aware with regard to other writs for reasons herein indicated, two ex-
pectations from the Government are wholly legitimate. What action should
the Government of India or the concerned Department take on a receipt of
the notice or demand for justice or allied method of information? And,
secondly, did the concerned officer enjoying the power to take a decision
on behalf of the Government of India in the matter involved in the notice
make up his mind and determine whether the litigation is inevitable or there
is a way out? At any rate, no action should be taken by the Department
after the receipt of the notice to alter the situation to the disadvantage of the
one giving notice. That would not only be unfair and unjust but would
also clearly violative of the principle on which Government is accorded


Law Commission of India—126th Report

a special status in its own class of not being sued unless a notice is served.
Assuming that the demand in the notice is the one that the Government of
India cannot concede as it is unjust, unfair or untenable or contrary to the
position adopted by the Government of India in the matter, it should be
made obligatory on the officer concerned, on the expiry of two weeks from
the receipt of the notice, to formally write to the person giving notice to agree
to refer the dispute for arbitration to one of the persons on the panel 0
arbitrators. On his agreeing to refer the dispute to arbitration, the terms of
reference will be drawn up and the person ing the notice must be called
upon to choose an arbitrator from the panel or arbitrators drawn up by the
Government of India. The arbitrator, on his willingness to accept the same,
shall proceed to dispose of the dispute. This will put a positive check on the
inflow of unnecessary litigation. Assuming that the person giving notice, to
whom the Government of India through its concerned officer makes an offer
of referring the dispute to arbitration, declines to accept the same, then, on the
suit being filed, the Government of India must appear and make the same
offer again and, by a proper amendment of the Arbitration Act, the courts
must be empowered to compel persons to go to arbitration. This would be
‘an effective check on the inflow of litigation.

8.19. Could the same procedure be followed when constitutional power
of the court is invoked against the Government of India? The answer is
obviously in the negative. On a notice of the court in respect of a writ
petition which is admitted being received by the concerned Department of the
Government of India, it should again apply its mind within fifteen days to
decide whether there is any legitimacy in the demand made against the Gov-
ernment of India. If the demand is legitimate, it must be conceded in the
court. If, on the other hand, the demand appears to be illegitimate or is one
which the Government of India cannot afford to concede or is contrary to
national interest, the Government of India must appear and thereafter, it must
agree to an informal conciliation in the matter by a Judge of the same High
Court or, if the petition is initiated in the Supreme Court, by a Judge of the
Supreme Court other than the one who issued notice, to see whether the area
of dispute is narrowed down. If during this process the dispute can be resoly-
ed, nothing like it. If, on the other hand, there remains a grey area, the
decision of the court should be taken. Ordinarily, the decision must be
treated by the Government of India as binding,

8.20. Turning to the complaints by the employees of the Government of
India vis-a-vis the departmental bosses, the procedure indicated in para 8.11
must be effectively followed. Effective Grievance Cell should be_set up which
must remain active and must be in a position to dispose of the problems
raised by the staff. Where a point of legal formulation without a precedent
is involved and if the Grievance Cell is unable to deal with that point effec-
tively, the concerned Department and the employees involved in the dispute
must agree to abide by the opinion of a member of the panel of arbitrators to
whom a reference on a point of law be made and his opinion invited. The
disputes must be disposed of in consonance with his opinion.

PART III .

8.21. It is equally necessary in the larger national interest of reducing
litigation and curbing litigative culture that a central body should be devised
for having a continuous overview of the different bodies recommended herein.

role of this central body would be of a co-ordinating nature, of devising
ways and means of reducing inter se litigations between Union and States,
between States and States, between public sector undertakings inter se, bet-
ween public sector undertakings and taxing authorities, and lastly between
Government and public sector undertakings on one hand and citizens on the
other. This ne eds planning, strategy and effective implementation of policy
decisions. It must be a body which can effectively curb the tendency to
rush to the court or to rush to higher courts by preferring appeals. In fact,
this body can effectively lay down ground rules which, when effectively follow-
ed, would make a direct dent on litigious tendencies. Such a body can be
appropriately described as Federal Legal Cell composed of retired Judges,
retired law officers, both Central and State, and senior executives who have
worked in public sector undertakings. The function and duties of the Federal
Legal Cell can be extensively drawn up centering round policy and strategy

43


Law Commission of India—126th Report

planning with a view to reducing frequent resort to litigation. It can also
work as a courier between the Executive and the Judiciary. The link till
today is missing and is responsible tor many ills which are otherwise curable.
The Government of India should set up such Federal Legal Cell with appro-
priate terms of reference.

8.22. The multiplicity of litigation is not a matter of concern merely for
Judiciary and Executive. That would be a narrow view of the matter. ‘It is
the concern of the Judiciary because its dockets have become unmanageable.
It is e gually the concern of the Executive because wasteful expenditure and
avoidable misuse of the time of the officers coupled with the tendency to
avoid taking decisions deserves to be curbed. But the third limb of the con-
stitutional democracy, namely, the Legislature, must have equal say in_ this
matter, Therefore, like the Public Accounts Committee, there should be a
Parliamentary Committee on Titigation with power to inquire into every liti-
gation taken by or on behalf of the Government to question the correctness of
the decision with a view to pointing out that care should be taken in future
not to resort to such litigation. Parliamentary Committee can every year
seek detailed information on expenses incurred on litigation by Government,
public sector undertakings, and Departments and  instrumentalities of the
Government, and take upon itself the inquisition of any particular litigation
which was avoidable and yet resorted to. It can inquire whether appeals are
merely being preferred for extrancous and irrelevant considerations. This will
introduce sufficient accountability of the officers in whom the  decision-
making power for initiating and continuing litigation vests. The composition
of the Committee must be a matter of concern of the Parliament itself.

8.23. The Law Commission is of the firm view that if the various sugges-
tions made in this Chapter are followed in letter and spirit, mass of litigation
in which public sector undertakings and Government are involved can be
successfully avoided, thereby reducing considerably the load on courts and on
the justice system.

8.24. We recommend accordingly.

(D. A. DESAI)
Chairman

(५. S. RAMA DEVI)
Member Secretary

New DELHI,
May 12, 1988.


19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
24.

no

Yen away

. Dilbhag Rai Jerry ए. Union of Indi:
. P. 9, Abubacker v. Union of India, AIR 1972, Kerala 103

- Central Coal Fields Ltd. v. State of Bihar, AIR 1985, SC 107.

5 Hyderabad Municipal Corporation v. M. Krishnaswami Mudaliar and Other, AIR

NOTES AND REFERENCES
CHAPTER I

The first Five Year Plan document, p. 11.
Id., p. 422.
Id., pp. 429-430.
Moti Lal v. Government of the State of U.P., ILR (1951) 1 AU. 269.
Akadasi Padhan vy. State of Orissa, AIR 1963, SC 1047.
The Constitution of India, article 310.
Smt. Ujjan Bai v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (1963) 1 SCR 778, p. 969.
Rajasthan State Electricity Board, Jaipur v. Mohanlal and Others, (1967) 3 SCR 377.
Sukhdev Singh and Others v. Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi and Another.
(1975) 3 SCR 619 at 644 (Mathew, J.
Td., 9. 645.
aman Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India and Others,
(1979) 3 SCC 489.

. Ajay Hasia and Others v.Khalid Mujib Sohravardi and Others, (1981) 1 SCC 722.
. Sabhajit Tewary v. Union of India and Others, (1975) 3 SCR 616.

. P. K, Ramachandra Iyer and Others v. Union of India and Others, (1984) 2 SCR 200.
. A. L. Kalra v, Project and Equipment Corporation of India Ltd., (1984) 3 SCC 316.

. The Constitution of India, Preamble.
. Justice O. Chinnappa Reddy, Inaugural Address, vide book titled ‘Public Enterprises

and Fundamental Rights : Basic papers and Discussions of a National Level Seminar.
1984", compiled by Laxmi Narain & B. 5. Murty, pp. 20-22

. Rashtriya Mill Mazdoor Sangh, Nagpur v. Model Mills, Nagpur and Another (1984)
443

Suppl
Supra note 15.

Gujarat State Financial Corporation v. M/s. Lotus Hotel, AIR 1983 SC 848.
Excel Wear v. Union of India. (1978) 4 SCC 224 at 242.

S. K. Verma v. Mahesh Chandra and Others (1983) 4 SCC 214: Goa Sampling
Employees’ Association v. General Superintendence Co. of India, (1985) 1 SCC 206;
Shambu Nath Goyal v. Bank of Baroda, (1978) 2 SCC 353; D. P. Maheshwar
v. Delhi Administration, (1983) 4 SCC "293: — Workmen employed by Hindustan
Lever Ltd. v. Hindustan Lever Ltd., (1984) 4 SCC 392.

Justice V. R. Krishna Iyer, Law Versus Justice, p. 139.
D. P. Maheshwari v. Delhi Administration, (1983) 4 SCC 293.

CHAPTER वा

Ramji Dayawala and Sons (P) Ltd. v. Invest Import, (1981) 1 SCC 80.

Robert Sideman in Wisconsin Law Review, Vol. 1966, p. 999 & 1064, extracted in
Fertilizer Corporation Kamgar Union (Regd.) v. Union of India, (1981) 1 SCC 568
at

Id., 9. 584.
Ibid.

Id., p. 580.

Ram and Shyam Company v. State of Haryana, (1985) 3 SCC 267 at 277.
State of Punjab ४. M/s. Geeta Iron & Brass Works Ltd., (1978) 1 SCC 68,
LCI, 115th Report on Tax Courts, p. 16.

Id, p. 8.

थे 1७४77 Union for Democratic Rights and Others v. Union of India, AIR 1982

. We rkmen, of the Food Corporation of India v. Food Corporation of India, (1985)

2 SCC

- Labourers working on Salal Hydro-Project v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and

Others, AIR 1984, SC 177.
AIR 1974, SC 130.

1985, SC
Union of India y. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1984, SC 1675,

45


46

Law Commission of India—126th Report

18. Western Coalfields Ltd. v. Special Area Development Authority, Korba and Another,
(1982) 1 SCC 125.

10, Shankar Dass v. Union of India, AIR 1985 SC 772.

20. State of M.P. v. Ram Ratan, Jabalpur Law Journal, Vol. 30 (1981) 105.
21, State of Kerala v. M. Padmanabha Nair, (1985) 1 LLJ 530.

22. Deoki Nandan Prasad v. State of Bihar, AIR 1971, SC 1409.

23 Devaki Nandan Prasad v. State of Bihar, (1983) 4 SCC 20.

24. Deoki Nandan Prasad v. State of Bihar, (1984) Suppl SCC 410.

25. Rudul Sah v. State of Bihar (1983) 4 SCC 141.

26. A. L. Kalra v. P & E Corporation of India Ltd., AIR 1984, SC 1361.

27. State of U.P. v. Mohd. Sharif (dead) through Legal Representatives, AIR 1982,
SC 937.

28. Gujarat State Financial Corporation v. M/s. Lotus Hotel Private Ltd, AIR 1983,
SC 848.

29. Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation, Jaipur v. Narayan Shankar and
Another, AIR 1980, SC 695.

CHAPTER III

1. H.W.R. Wade. Administrative Law, Sth Edition. p. 4.
A.J.P. Taylor, English History 1914-1945, p. 1.

Dean Roscoe Pound, ‘The Administrative Application of Legal Standards’, (1919)
44 A.B.A. Report 445 at 446; also see control of Executive Officers of Government
by S. M. Huang, Journal of Indian Law Institute, Vol. 5, (1963) p. 171.

4, Id., 187-188.

5. LCI, 100th Report dealing with Litigation by and against the Government,
6. Dicey, Law of Constitution, 9th Edition, 202,
7
8.

PR

Dr. Upendra Baxi, The Crisis of Indian Legal System, pp. 81-82
. Lloyd ४. McMahon, (1987) 2 Weekly Law Reports 821 at 878-879.
9. Board of Trustees of the Port of Bombay v. 9. R. Nadkarni, (1983) 1 SCC 124.
10. Justice V. R. Krishna Iyer, Law Versus Justice, p. 148.
11. State of Punjab v. M/s Gita Iron & Brass Works Ltd., (1978) 1 SCC 68.
12. Raghunath Das v. Union of India, AIR 1969, SC 674.
13. Ghanshyam Dass v. Dominion of India and Others, (1984) 3 SCC 46.
14. LCI, 54th Report on the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
15. ७. R. Jerry v. Union of India, AIR 1974, SC 130 at 135-136.
16. LCI, 100th Report, Chapter II, para 2.15.
17. Supra note 7, at pp. 82-83.
18. Supra note 12, at p. 677.

CHAPTER IV

1. LCI, 112th Report on section 45 of the Insurance Act, 1938.
2, Mrs. P. K. Kartiyani v. Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, (1983) 2 GLR 927.

CHAPTER V
1, Lakshmi Charan Sen and Others v. A.K.M. Hassan Uzzaman and Others, (1985)
4 SCC 689.
2. A.K.M. Hassan Uzzaman v. Union of India, (1982) 2 SCC 218.

Indrajit_ Barua and Others v. Election Commission of India and Others, (1985)
4 SCC 722.

Jyoti Basu v. Devi Ghosal, AIR 1982, SC 983.

(1966) 1 WLR 1235.

Ramji Dayawala and Sons (P) Ltd. v. Invest Import, (1981) 1 SCC 80.

M/s Guru Nanak Foundation v. M/s Rattan Singh and Sons, (1981) 4 SCC 634.
Tarapore and Company v. Cochin Shipyard Ltd., (1984) 2 SCC 680.

Food Corporation of India v. Yadav Engineer and Contractor, (1983) 1 SCR 95.

0. Prof. I. P. Massey : A Note on the Dialectics of Judicial Review and the Dynamics
of Corporate Management : A Search for the Alternative, vide book titled ‘Public
Enterprises and Fundamental Rights : Basic Papers, and Discussions of a National
Level Seminar, 1984’, compiled by Laxmi Narain & B. S. Murty, p. 77.

11, S. P. Sampath Kumar v. Union of India, AIR 1987, SC 386.
12. Kamal Kanti Dutta v. Union of India, AIR 1980, SC 2056.
13. Harjeet Singh v. Union of India and Others, (1980) 3 SCC 205.
14. A. Janardhana v. Union of India and Others, (1983) 2 SCR 936.

ry

AAP

319


15.
16.
17.
18,

Law Commission of India—126th Report

P. S. Mahal and Others v. Union of India, (1984) 4 SCC 545.
0. P. Singla v. Union of India, (1984) 4 SCC 450.
6. 8. Lamba v. Union of India, (1985) 2 SCC 604.

LCI, 115th Report on Tax Courts; LCI, 122nd Report on Forum for National
Uniformity in Labour Adjudication; LCI 123rd Report on Decentralisation of
Administration of Justice : Disputes involving Centres of Higher Education.

. M. P. Jain, Lokpal and Ombudsman in India.
. Holland, A British Ombudsman, 1962 Soliciter Quarterly 158, also see ‘Control of

the Executive Officers of Government’ by §. M. Huang, Journal of the Indian Law
Institute, vol. 5, p. 182.

+ Prof. I. P. Massey “Conciliation through subordinate courts : A Unique Himachal

Fraesh Experiment”, A paper presented at the All Indian Workshop. sponsored. by
the Law Commission of India, University Grants Commission and Himachal Pre.
desh University held at Shimla’ in June 1987.

CHAPTER VI
154th Report of the Public Accounts Committee, pp. 10-11.

CHAPTER VII

0. P. Gauba, Dimensions of Social Justice, pp. 130-131.
United States v. Murphy, 222, -F, 2d 698 (1955) at 706, quoted by Henry J. Abraham
in Freedom and the Court, p. 4.

Justice V. R. Krishna Iyer, Law Versus Justice, p. 151.

See Annexure IV.

See Annexure V.

CHAPTER VIII

LCI, 115th Report on Tax Courts.
Workmen employed by Hindustan Lever Ltd. v. Hindustan Lever Ltd, (1984)
4 SCC 392.

LCI, 100th Report on Litigation by and against the Government : some Recom-
mendations dated 8th May, 1984,

7—322 M. of Law & Justice/ND/89



ena

D. A. DESAT
Chairman

io. CHMN  TR-7/LC-87 ANNEXURE-1
Telephone No. 384475
See Para 4.2
विधि आयोग
LAW COMMISSION
भारत सरकार
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
शास्त्री भवन,
SHASTRI BHAWAN,
नई दिल्‍ली
NEW DELHI
December 14, 1987

To

Subject: Formulation of the norms by the public sector undertakings in the matter
of, settlement of disputes; Term No. 7 of proposed Judicial Reforms Com-
mission assigned to the Law Commission of India.

Sir,

The Government of India deeply distressed by the malaise in the judicial system
of this country decided to set up a Judicial Reforms Commission around the year
1985-86. Later on it was resolved to assign the task to the present Law Commission.
To pin-point the issues which must engage the attention of the proposed Judicial Reforms
Commission, the Government of India had drawn up detailed terms of reference in
this behalf. The entire work was assigned to the Law Commission of India. Term No. 7
of the work taken over by the Law Commission reads as under :—

“7. The desirability of formulation of the norms which the Government and the
public sector undertakings should follow in the settlement of disputes including a
review of the present system for conduct of litigation on behalf of the Government
and such undertakings”.

The aforequoted term has its genesis in terms No. 1 and 2 which deal with the
multi-pronged drive for reducing the volume of work in the courts generally and Supreme
Court and High Courts in particular.

As you are aware that the dockets of the High Courts and Supreme Court are
crowded largely by litigation related to public sector undertakings. It is therefore
pertinent for the Law Commission before formulating the norms, to get detailed
information on the situation as at present it exists. This letter raises queries of an
urgent nature with a view to equiping the Law Commission of relevant material which
would enter the formulation of norms.

Amongst public sector undertakings : (1) Life Insurance Corporation of India,
(2) Employees State Insurance Corporation, (3) Commissioner for Enforcing and Imple-
menting Employees Provident Funds Act, (4) General Insurance Corporation, (5) Steel
Authority of India Ltd., (6) Oil and Natural Gas Commission, (7) Bharat Petroleum
and (8) Hindustan Petroleum, to name a few are leading Corporations. Even among
those set out above. LIC, GIC, ESI and PF have direct contact large masses of
citizens of this country for the reason that they are State monopolies. These are the
bodies therefore, which should model public sector undertakings. Avoiding litigation
is a primary norm of being an ideal public sector corporation. The trend it has to be
reversed and the Law Commission is going to strive in that direction.

The Law Commission needs therefore your active and participatory corporation
without which the Law Commission would be handicapped in formulating its 10
though it would in no case escape its responsibility of doing it. The Law Commission
needs information of a basic nature which can be supplied by you and you alone.

As you are aware the Law Commission has a tenure existence. It has a time
bound programme. It cannot wait indefinitely. It must pursue its task expeditiuosly
and relentlessly. Therefore before setting out the queries, this is a personal request to
you io ive top priority to this letter and to send the information by 17th January, 1988
the latest.

The information that the Law Commission needs is i your records and therefore
can be immediately and easily furnished.

Whenever the statute under which the body is created like LIC, it has power to
repudiate the contract unilaterally. That is the starting point of litigation because the

48


Law Commission of India—126th Report

moment the claim is repudiated, the other party is forced to go to the courts for
vindication of its rights. This is equally true of ESI Corporation, Commissioners for the
Provident Fund, General Insurance Corporation and more or less all public sector
undertakings.

Please therefore let us have information on queries set out hereunder :—

(a) Give the number of claims which were repudiated yearwise from 1980 onwards.
(b) On the repudiation being communicated, the number of suits filed by the party
year to year.

(c) The stake involved in each case.

(d) The decision of the first or the court of original jurisdiction in each suit.

(९) If the decision was adverse to the corporation, in how many matters appeals
were preferred.

(£) In how many matters second appeals were preferred.

(g) How many matters were taken to the Supreme Court of India.

(17 The total cost of litigation should be stated in relation to the state involved. )

6) The yearwise expenditure on establishment for legal advice maintained by the
corporation including the number of personnel manning the corporation. Please
state the percentage legal expense bears to total expenses of the Corporation.

(Gj) Please state the number of cases in which the opinion of the legal department
was overruled with a view to pursuing litigation. Also state the number of matters
withdrawn when court showed its displeasure.

(k) Any other information correlated to any of the queries raised hereinabove.
Your caoperation and urgent response will be highly appreciated.
Yours faithfully,
” Sd/-
(0. A. Desai)

49


ANNEXORE II
Tabulation of Infomation of certain organisation supplied in reply to the Law Commission of India, No. Chairman/TR-7/LC-87 dated 19-12-1987.

os

1979-80 1980-81 1981-82
QUERIES SET OUT
LIC ESI EPF cic LIC ESI EPF cic LIC EsI EPF तट
Corpn. Orgn. Corpn. एड. Corpn. Orgn.
(a) Number of claims which were repu- 812 623 726
diated yearwise from 1980 onwards.
Q
(6) On the repudiation being com- 121 Not. 125 Not 161 Not g
municated, the number of suits applicable applicable applicable g
the party year to year. a
3
— Se
(©) The stake involved in each case Rs. Not. Rs. Not Rs. Not,
32,355 applicable 32,839 applicable 39,870 applicable डे
(Average) (Average (Average ~
sum assured sum assured sum assured =
of a policy of a policy) of a policy) =
of insu- |
ance.) un
nN»
g
(6) The decision of the first or the 21 Not, 56 Not 40 Not_ =
court of original —_ jurisdiction in favour) applicable (in favour) applicable (in favour) applicable प्र्प
in each suit 5 (against) 45 (against) 48 (against) 3
8
हि - 2
©) If the decision was adverse to Out of, Not Out of Not Out of Not.
the Corporation, in how many adversely applicable adversly applicable adversely applicable
matters appeals were preferred. decided decided decided
2
(In how many matters second By LIC Not_ By LIC Not By LIC Not
appeals were preferred. 3 applicable applicable 2 applticable

(9) How many matters were taken 2 By LIC
to the Supreme Court of India. 7९7 11 2



(b) The total cost of litigation in ‘Not Not, Not.
relation to the stake involved. applicable applicable applicable
(i) The yearwise expenditure on Legal Not Legal Legal Not Legal
establishment for legal advice expenses of made expenses of expenses of made expenses of
maintained by the Corporation _ cases. available 5553 available cases
including the number of per- (except (except है (except
sonnel manning the Coprn. South zone) South Zone) No.=10,695 South Zone) Not
Rs. 1,59,236 Rs. 1,53,831 Rs. 1,83,928 applicable
Please state the percentage lega! % of legal
pense bears to total expense & Sto
९ Corporation. रा
expenditure
=0°39%
() Please state the number of cases Not Not
in which the opinion of the made made
legal department was over- available available
tuled with a view to. pursuing
litigation.
Also state the number of Withdrawn Withdrawn Withdrawn.
matters withdrawn when court by LIC by LIC by LIC
showed its displeasure 16 14
(k) Any other information correlated Nil Nil Nil

to any of the queries raised
hereinabove

LIC—LifeInsurance| Corporation of India.

ESI Corpn.—Employees’ State Insurance Corporation.
EPF Orgn.—Employees’ Provident Fund Coporation.
GIC—General Insurance Corporation.

UD MOT

10185

moday 9टा--शराप fo w

1s


ANNEXURE I—Contd.
Traulation of Information of certain organisation supplied in reply to the Law Commission of India. No. Chaitman/TR-7 LC-87 dated 19-12-1987.

149

1982-83 1983-84 1984-85
QUERIES SET OUT
LIC EPF LIC ESI EPP LIC ESI EFF
Cotpn = Orgn Corpn Orgn Corpn Orgn
(3) Number of claims which were 835 812 903 -
Tepudiated yearwise from 1980
onwards.

(b) On the repudiation being com- 137 Not 149 Not 138 Not.
municated, the number of suits applicable applicable applicable
filed by the party year to year.

(०) The stake involved in each case. Rs. 39,965 Not Rs. 42,290 Not Rs. 39,229 Not
(Average applicable (Average applicable (Average applicable
sum sum sum
assured of assured of assured of
a policy.) a policy.) a policy)

(d) The decision of the first or the 38 Not 34 Not 29 Not

of original jurisdiction (in favour) applicable (in favour) applicable (in favour) applicable
in each suit. 40 (against) 31 (against) 45 (against)

(०) If the decision was adverse to Out of Not Out of Not Out of Not
the Corporation, in how many adversely applicable adversely applicable adversely applicable
matters appeals were preferred. decided. decides decided

26 it 19

(f) In how many matters second By LIC Not By LIC Not By LIC Not
appeal were preferred. 3 applicable 1 applicable 2 applicable

(89) How many matters were taken By LIC By 26 By 36 y LIC
to the Supreme court of India. 1 Against 16 Against 13 By claimant Against 5

(h) The total cost of litigation in Not. Not, Not.
relation to the stake involved. applicable applicable applicable

OD MT

0.02

uoday 49८7--शहप्प्‌ fo u


(i) The yearwise expenditure on
establishment for legal advice
maintained by the Corporation
including the number of per-
sonnel manning the Corpn.
Please State the percentage
legal expense bears to total
expense of the Corporation

G) Please state the numbers of cases
in which the opinion of the
legal department was over-
ruled ith a view to pursuing
litigation.

Also state the number of
matters withdrawn when court
showed its displeasure.

Legal
expenses

of cases
(except
South Zone)
Rs 1,74,655

Legal Not
expenses made
Rs. 7-76 available
lakhs
Nos.-
12,762
of legal

1565

expen
to Admo.

expen-
diture
=0-38%

Withdrawn
by LIC 7

Legal Legal
expenses expenses
of cases) Rs. 11-47
(except Jakhs

south zone) Nos.
Rs. 1,81,143 12,815
%of legal
‘expenses
to Admn
expendi-

ture
=0 50%
No.

made
available

Withd-awn
by LIC 12

Not Legal Legal
mat expenses: expenses:
available of cases Rs. 8-05

(except. lakhs
South Zone) | Nos-
Rs. 1,94,366 12,854

°% of legal
expenses
to Admn.
expendi-
ture
=0°32%
Not
made
available
Withdrawn
by LIC 19

‘Not
mat

available

(k) Any otherinformation correlated
to any of the queries raised
hereinabove.

uodey "I9¢I—IPUT fo uoIssHUWOD MOT

€¢


ANNEXURE II—Contd.

Queries Set Out 1985-86 1986-87 1987-88
LIC ESI EPF GIC LIC ESI EPF  GIC LIC ESI EPF —GIC
Corpn. Organ. Corpn. Organ. Corpn. Organ.
(3) Number of claims which were 923 3012 924 1,31,673*
repudiated yearwise from 1980
onwards.
(b) On the repudiation being com- 169 Not — 12 Not 25,216 Not,
municated the number of suits applicable applicable applicable

filed by the party year to year.

(० The stake involved in each case Rs. Not Rs. Not Not
50,425 applicable — 52,599 applicable न applicable
(Average (Average
sum sum
assured of assured of
a pojicy) a policy)
(4) The decision of the first or the 30 Not, 27 Not Not
court of original jurisdiction (in favour) applicable — (in favour) applicable जन applicable
in each suit. 53 (against) 34 (against)
(c) If the decision was adverse to Out of Not Out of Not Not
the Corporation in how many adversely applicable — adversely applicable ~ applicable
matters appeals were preferred. decided decided
1
(f) In how many matters second Not — By Lic Not Not -
appeal were preferred. applicable 2 applicable = applicable
(8) How many matters were taken By LIC By 14 Net — ByLic By 16 _ - By 17 By 41
to the Supreme Court of India. 1 Against1 Applicable i Against 7 Against 6 Against 228,
BY claimant

*Claims accumulated over the year anc pending with one of the companies viz. New India Assurance Co. Ltd. as on 31-12-1986. Out of a total of Rs. 1,31,673 only 7448 claims were
peding in courts and 17708 were pending with Motor Accidents claims Tabural.

Ss

woday yi97I—PIpuy 17 vojsstumoy MoT


68/N/20nsng 7B MT JO W te 8

(h) How many matters were taken

_ — Not _ _ Not Not |
to Supreme Court of India. applicable applicable applicable
(i) The yearwise expenditure on Legal Legal Not Legal Legal Not Not
establishment for legal advice expenses expenses made expenses expenses: made made
maintained by the Corporation of cases Rs. 8.80 available of cases Rs, 9-78 available available
including the number of per- (except lakhs (except lakhs
sonne} manning the Corpn. south Zone) No. south zone) No.
Rs. 1,81,638 12,728 Rs. 2,40,674 12,737
Please state the percentage to legal % of legal % of legal
expense bears to total expense expenses ‘expenses:
of the Corporation. to Admn to Admn
expendi- expendi-
ture= ture
030% 028%
() Please state the number of cases Not Not Not
in which the opinion of | the — made - - made made
legal partment was over available available available
ruled with a view to pursuing
litigation.
Also state the number of Withdrawn Withdrawn
matters withdrawn when court By LIC By LIC
showed its displeasure. 20
(0 Any other information correlated i Nil 1% claims Nil Nil Nil
to any of the queries raised afe repu-
hereinabove. diated.

yoday 4197I—PIPU] fo uoIssIMUOD MOT

ss


ANNEXURE—II
Tabulation of intimation supplied by the office of the Central Provident Fund Commissioner

1980-81 1981-82 _ 1982-83
7 H endi: पर ied Total
Subject No.of Filed Total Cases decided Pending No. of Filed वर्ण Cases decided Pending No of Oy
cases ri —————— cases 7 th
whe Against. In ‘Total onthe Against In Total 311281 year
31-12-77 year the favour 31-12-80 year दी, ३9
Orgn. of gn. orgn.
Orgn. 7 _ _
4 2. 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 wo ot 12... 13 14 1s 16 7 Us
प्र - ~ 1449
Writ Petitions against 1248 64
the Organisation. 1106
370 54 23
1476 1762
28
198 228 27 313
1248 1449
7 - 4022
Prosecution cases laun- 6229 3786 7161 ° 31434 5069
ched u/s 14 of the 28295
EP.F. & Misc. Pro-
visions Act, 1952 under
E.P.F. Scheme. a
3:
Prosecution cases filed 281 13 1109 449 20... 1538
u/s 406/409 1.9.0.
against un-exempted
establishments* . oo
4 2215
Prosecution cases _u/s 2304 1496. 7077 3453 1696 883:
14 of the Act under
FP. Scheme. - _
~ 5
Prosecution cases _u/s 2218 596. 2656 2709 © (789 164
14 of the Act under

E.D.L. ¥. Scheme, 1976

From 1980-81 to 1985-
86 the data relate to
FIRS filed with the
lice and_ prosecution
Faunched by police in
courts, For 1986-87 the
figure represent only
prosecution launched
police in Courts.

9S

yuoday 449Z]—vipu] fo uossnuMoD कएप


ANNEXURE IlI—Contd.
Tabulation of intimation supplied by the office of the Central Provident Fund Commissioner

1982-83 1983-84 1984-85
Subject _ - >
Cases decided Pending No.of Filed Total Cases decided Pend- No. of Filed — Total Cases decided
“४५:5८ cases. luring ing cases during ~
Against In Total hi Against. In Total on the Against. In
the favour 31-12-82 year the favour of 31-12-83 year the favour.
Orgn. of Orgn. Orgn. Orgn. of Total
Orga. Orgn.
1 19 20 ai 2 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 3435
Writ Petitions against 1917 2342
the Organisation. 608
2525 2943
35. 161 20 6t
163 170 231
196 183
1917 2342
Prosecution cases laun- 4203 6291 2496 5446 26826
ched u/s 14 of the 32300 35728
PF. & Mise.
visions Act, 1952 under
icheme.
Prosecution cases filed 30. 2142 613 6. 2749 832 6
u/s 406/409 LP.C.
against un-exempted.
establishments*
Prosecution cases u/s 1604. 9482 3236 121512196 2391 1017
14 of the Act under
FP. Scheme.
Prosecution cases_ u/s 539 216 713 7599 2196 1639
14 of the Act under 5891
EDL. & Scheme,
1976.
*From1980-81 to 1985-
86 the data relate to filed

cases with the police and
prosecution launched by
police in court for 1986-
87 the figures | represent
only prosecutions laun-
ched by police in courts.

woday y19z7[—vIPuy fo uolsstuuOD MDT


ANNEXURE II—Contd.
Tabulation of intimation supplied by the office of the Central Provident Fund Commissioner
हु 1986-87
हु 1985-86 aa
Ske Cam Peaks Noo? Filed Toul Cases decided Pend- “No. of Filed Total | का _
decided ing cases during नाप ing cases Mee! ‘Against. In Total
the Against In Total on. ue ‘the favour
31-12-84 year the favour 31-12: y Orgn. of
Orgn. Suen Orgn.
a 0४. ||||ऋ+|[ऋ <॒[औ[औ[आऑऔऑआऑफएूएऑञऋञा - ्््ज्ज्ाः
48 49 50
1 36 37... 38 39 40 aL 42 43 44 45 46 41
Writ Petitions against 272 2885 559
the Organisation. 506 3444 _
यार 57 29. 334 36 490 F526 2918
212 2884 ड़
1754
Prosecution cases 181 5155 2434 39990 6350 43956
ched u/s 14 of the 38492
F. & Misc. Pro-
ns Act, 1952 under
F. Scheme.
14 326
Prosecution cases filed 3575 514 17 ३308 191
u/s 406/409 1.9.2.
against un-exempted
establishments
59914089
Prosecution cases u/s 13570 2213 804 13423 2311
14 of the Act under
FP. Scheme.
osu 587 10525
ier the Ag unier 8659 m7 165 8708 2470
ED. 1 heme,
1976.
*From 1980-81 to 1985-
86 the data relate to filed
cases with the police and

Prosecution launched by
police in court for 1986-
87 the figures represent
only prosecutions laun-
ched by police in
courts.

8s

uoday y9¢T—vipuy fo uopsspunuoy Moy


ANNEXURE IV

(See Paragraph 7.3.1)

Tabular statement of quantum of cases filed by or against Govt. of India and expenditure involved during the last

five years

No. of cases filed in

Expenditure incurred

Any other details regard-

Sl. Name of the Deptt/Ministry of
No. vt. of India courts by or against ing lawyers d etc.
“ the Depit/Ministry of ng lawyers engaged ec
Govt. of India during
the last five years
1 2 3 4 5
1. Deptt. of Food, Ministry of 4705 Rs. 2,36,24,990 Except in two cases in
Foods Civil Supplies, Krishi which private lawyers were
Bhavan, New Delhi. engaged, in remaining
cases Govt. Counsel or
Private lawyers on Govt.
Panels of Counsel were
engaged.
2 Rs. 18,94,394 Private lawyers were also

Ministry of Commerce New 4303
Delhi.

engay ged in some cases but
in other cases Govt. Coun-
sels from the panel were
engaged.

3. Deptt. of Health, Ministry of 302
Health and Family Welfare
Nirman Bhavan, New Delhi.

4. Deptt. of Woman & Child By-7
Development Ministry of Human
Resources, Development.

5. Deptt. of Atomic Energy, By-one Against-22.
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj
Marg-Bombay.

6. Ministry of Tourism, New In India-65, abroad-10
Delhi.

7. Ministry of Information and Approx. 500
Broadcasting, New Delhi.

8. Office of Development Com- 60
missioner for Iron & Steel &
Pay & Accounts Office, Deptt.
of Steel, Ministry of Steel and
Mines, Udyog Bhavan, New
Delhi.

9. Ministry of Petroleum and 28
Natural Gas.

10. Ministry of Water Resources. 145

11. Deptt. of Statistics, Ministry 99
of Planning, Sardar Patel Bha-
van, New Delhi.

12. Ministry of Surface Transport 306

13. Deptt. of Mines, Ministry of 913
Steel & Mines, New Delhi.

14. Deptt. of Industrial Develop- 720

ment Ministry of Industry,
New Delhi.

Rs. 2,20,524-00 (exclu- Nil.
ding the fee paid to the
Advocate, (Central Govt,
Standing " Counsel by the
Branch Office Section.)
Rs. 1,78,440 हैं नम Adviser as retaincr

ite Lawyer was enga-
ged by State Social Well

re Board.

Rs. 1,00,000 Panel Lawyer/CGSC enga-
ged.

Rs. 2,77,158 Thirteen Private lawyers
engaged.

Rs. 4-00 lakhs approx Generally Govt. Counsel
engaged.

Rs. 1,37,809 Government Lawyers en-
gaged.

Rs, 2239 Government Advocates
are engaged.

Rs. 2,33,802 65 approx. Govt. Advocates.

Rs. 1,39,224 Lawyers out of the Govt-
Panel cngaged.

Rs. 5,12,978 No. private lawyers are
engaged

Rs. 4,54,841 Standing Counsels of Govt.
are engaged.

Rs. 7,75,549

Engaged Private lawyers
an Govt. pleaders.

59


Law Commission of India—126th Report

1 2 3 4 5

15. Deptt. of Coal, Ministry of 117 Rs. 1,19,638 Engaged Govt. Counse!-
Energy, of the Coal
Mines Provident Fund Com-
missioner, Office of the Com-
missioner of payments.

16. Deptt. of Defence Ministry of 21406 Rs. 1, 32,67,208 (Expendi- Nil.

Defence, New Delhi. ture in respect of 158
cases is not included),

17. Ministry of Environment and 342 Rs. 3,21,614 Private lawyer was engag-
Forests, Paryavaran Bhavan, ed in only one case.
Lodi Road, New Delhi.

18. Ministry of Home Affairs, 916 Rs. 7,59,029 -00 Only five private lawyers
New Delhi. were engaged.

19. SCD-protection of civilrights 7 Rs. 2150-80 -

Cell Ministry of Welfare,
New Delhi.

20. Deptt. of Expenditure Ministry 1193 Rs, 5,59,874 -92 Central Government Stan.
of Finance, New Delhi. ding Counsel engaged,

21. Central Board of Direct Taxes, 43921 Rs. 85-49 lakhs (only in Only in important cases
Central Board of Excise & Cus- respect of Central Board the Department engages
toms, Deptt. of Revenue Mi- of Excise & Customs) private wyers from out-
nistry of Finance. side the Government pa-

nel otherwise the i
partment is general
Tepresented before High
Courts and the Surpeme
Court by Standing Coun-
sels and panel Advocates.
Generally Law Officers
ional Solicitor Ge-
neral, Solicitor General
and Attorney General) or
the Ranel advocates ap-
pear but private lawyers
as Special Counsels are
before High
ourts because it is not
always _ possi for the
Senior Law Officers based
at Delhi to appear before
the High Courts. In the
year, 1986, 28 Special
Counsels were engaged by
the Deptt. before ता
ferent “High — Courts.

22. Department of Economic 470 Rs. 33,205 Generally Government
Af ‘airs, Ministry of Finance. Counsel engaged.

23. Indian Council of Agricultural 670 Rs. 4,45,520 Government/Private lawe
Research, Krishi Bhavan, New yers engaged,

Delhi.

24. Planning Commission, New 21 Rs. 2,650 =
Delhi,

25. Public Sector Banks and Fin-  4,66,716 (One Bank has Rs. 5439-05 (In lakhs) From the pane] maintained
ancial Institutions, - not given figures). approx. (two banks have by the bank.
ment of Economic his, not furnished details).

(Banking Division), Ministr
of Finance.

26. Deptt. of Space, Cauvery Bha- 215 Rs. 1-34 lakh» No private lawyer was en-
van Kempagowda Road, gaged. wy
Bangalore.

27. Pollachi Postal Division, 10 Rs. 5000-00

Department of Posts.

No private Ja were
engaged. Govt. pleas
ders ead is te prosecu-



Law Commission of India—126th Report

61

1 2 है 3 4

28. Department of Company Af- Prosccutions filed under

fairs Ministry of Industry, the Companies Act/MRTP

New Delhi. Act By—in Distt Courts
—60,867 Rs. 1,37,130-00

By or against in High
Courts/Supreme Court

Except in some cases,
Officers of the Department
and Law Ministry handle
cases.

29. Ministry cf Rural Devciopment Figures not available of Docs not maintain detai-

Block No. 1, 6 & 7 Floor, land cases in which U.O.I led account.
CGO Complex, Lodi Road, is made a party 15 Wit Rs, 482-60
New Delhi. Pettions in HCs/SC.

30. Ministry of External Affairs, 35 Rs. 8681 -00
New Delhi-1

31. Legislative Department, Minis- 6 Rs. 1722-00
try of Law & Justice.

32.Cabinet Secretariat (Main) Nil Nil
\trapati Bhavan,
New Delhi.

33. Deptt. of Non-corventional 1 550
Energy Sources, Ministry of
Energy, CGO Complex, Lodi
Roa a New Delhi.

34. Deptt. of Parliamentary Af- 18 Rs. 3,254 50
fairs, Ministry of Parlimantary
Affairs & Tourism, New
Delhi.

35. Deptt. of Biotechnology, 6 Rs. 11,600 -00
Ministry of Science & Techno-
logy, | Tec.nology Bhavan,
New Mehrauli Road, New

Delhi.

36. Election Commission ° of 324 Rs, 2,91,833
India, New Delhi.

37. Council of Scientific & Indus- 389 Rs. 16,912 lakhs
trial Research, Rafi Marg,
New Delhi.

38. Ministry of Programme Imple- Nil Nil
mentation, Sardar Patel Bha-
van, New Delhi.

39. Deptt. of Arts, Indira Gandhi Nil. Nil.
National Centre for Arts, Cen-
tral Vista Mess, Janpath,
New Delhi.

40. Deptt. of Ocean Development — Negligible Nil.
CGO Complex, Lodi Road,
New Delhi.

41. U.P.S.C. ee 783, Rs. 85,201

Except in two cases where
services of a lawyer from
the Govt. panel were uti-
lised, no privaie lawyer
was engaged.

No private lawyer has been
engaged.

Govt. Standing Counsel
engaged.

National Institute of Im:

munology has engaged
Legal Adviser.

Some genior Advocates

engaged.
Private Advocates are
engaged as it is an autono-
mous body.

Nil

Nil

17 lawyers from out of the
panel of Govt. Lawycrs
were engaed in 17 cases.
In two cases, one private
lawyer, each was engaged,
In other cases [०7]
not make a separate ap-
Pearances as unnecessarily
impleaded.



62

Law Commission of India—126th Report

1 2 4 5
42. D.p:t. of Electronics Vigilance 4 Rs. 8,700 -00 L-wyer out of the Gov-
‘Unit, 1.00 Nayak Bhavan, cmment panel
‘New Delhi
43. Deptt. of Fertilizers Ministry Nil. Nil. Nil.
of Agriculture.
44. Deptt. of Power, Ministry of 110 Rs. 74,489 -00 Nil.
Energy, New Delhi.
45. Deptt. of Railways (Railway 1,66,898 Rs. 3,46,52,844 Railways engage empanel-
Board) Ministry of Transport led advocates only, but
engage private lawyers in
exceptional cases.
45. Dep't. of Telecommunica- 9,806

tions, Ministry of Communi-
cations.

Rs. 39,38,000

Engaged private lawyers
in 68 cases.



ANNEXURE V
(See Paragraph 7.3)

Tabular Statement of Quantum of cases filed by or against the Public Sector Undertakings under the Central Government

and expenditure involved during the five years

No. of cases filed in Expenditure incurred

Courts by or against

kings under the Cen-

tral Governmeni during the 5 .the Public Sector Under-
rears 1981/1982/1983-1985/ “takings during the five
1986/1 yrs.

Details regarding lawyer
engaged and other details

1 2 3 4

5

1. Burn Standard Co. Ltd., 10-C, 199
Hungerford Street, Calcutta.

2. H.M.T. Lid., 36 .Cunningham 467
Road, Bangalore and its other
Units,

Rs. 24 lakhs

Rs. 18,47,379 86

3. National Airports Authority 209 Rs, 1,19,185 +50
East Blocks Il & I, R.

Puram, New Delhi

4. H.M.T. (international) Ltd.
is Cunningham Road, Banga:
ore.

By (Rs. 6000) Against

By 3 Against 1
1000) in lakhs

1982-1986(1982 figures (1982-83) Rs. 33-11
aot completely available) (1983-84) Rs. 36-31
ry 921 Against 1293. (1984-85) Rs. 48 -56
(1985-86) Rs. 41-99

5. Food Corporation of India,
Head Qrs., New Deli.

6. Hindustan Fertilizers Corpn. 464
Ltd., 55, Nehru Place, New
i and its units.

7. National Textile Corpn. Ltd.,
Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New
Delhi.

8. Mazagon Dock Ltd., Dock- (1982-86) By 31 Against Rs. 21-97 jakhs
yard Road, Mazagon, Bombay 20

(Re. 21,05,167

14332 Rs, 150-13 (lakhs)

9. Hindustan Cables Ltd., 9, By 23 Against 84 Rs. 2,07,399
Elgin Road, Calcutta.
10. Weighbird (India) Ltd. 4, By 3 Against 15 Rs. 1,35,263 -00

Netaji Subhas Koad, Calcutta.
11. North Eastern Electric Power 12 (witch incldues 5 arbi- Rs, 3.37 lakhs
wCorporation Ltd., Khankhetil, tration cases) plus one
Shillong-1. criminal case.

12. Oil & Naturals Commis- (1982 to 1987) 662
sion, Tel Bhavan, Dehradun.

13. Bharat Cooking Coal  Ltd.,

Rs, 1,44,71,300 for
four years,

(By 186 (including 26 Rs. 36,02,714-90

Koyla Nagar, Duanbad. writ-petitions,) 46 Mi approx.
appeals, Against 649
approx,
14. Neyveli Lignite Corpn. Ltd. 150 Rs, 6-38 lakhs
2.0. Neyveli, Tamil Nadu.
16. Hindustan Teleprinters Lid., By 20 Against 30 Rs, 1,04,000
G.S.T. Road., Guindy, Madras.
16. Bharat Heavy Electricals 1243 Rs. 24,69,207 -97

Ltd., 18-20 .Kasturba Gandhi
Marg, New Delhi in respect of
its 13 units.

Private lawyers engaged.

Private lawyers cngaged:

Nil.

Private lawyers engaged.

Private lawyers engaged,
Private lawyers cngaged.
Private lawyers cngaged,

Distt. Council & Advocate-
and private lawyers

Nil.

Panel Advocates, Central
Govt. Standing Counsel,
Sr. Advocates engaged:

Sr. Advocates and experts
engaged. .
Mainly reputed Private
Jawyers engaged. .

Nil.

63
9—322 M of Law & Justice/ND/89


64 Law Commission of India—126th Report

17, Tyre Corpn. of India Ltd., 19

Jawahar La] Nearu Road,

Calcutta.

(Incorporated on 14-2-84 carry-
ing rights &
two sick (industries.

19 Pyrities, Paosz rates & Crei'-
cals Lt

(४. ‘ommunity
Centre, East of Kailash, Ne
Delhi

20. Central Inland Water Trans-
ort Corpn. Ltd., 4, Fairlie
lace, Calutta,

21 Metallurgical & Enginzering
Consultants (India) Ltd.,
Ranchi.

22. Central Electronics Ltd., 4,
Tadusrial Area,  Sahibabad

23. Oil India Ltd., 17, Parliament
Street, New Delhi

24. TISCO Ujjain Pipe & Foundry 78 Labour cases.

Devas Road, Ujjain,
(M.P.)

25. Instrumentation Ltd., Kota

26. Uranium Corpn. of India Ltd.,
Jodhguda Mines, Singhbhum,
Bihar.

27. Indian Road | Construction
Corpn. Ltd., Rajahouse, Nehru
Place, New Delhi,

28. Cochin Shipyard Ltd., P, 0.
Bag No. 1653, Cochin.

29. Indian Dairy Corpn., Suraj
Plaza II Sayaji Gunj, Baroda.

30. Hindustan Photo Films Manu-
facturing Co. Lid., Indu Nagar,
Udhagamandalam -543005.

31. Bharat Earth Movers Ltd.,
Unity Buildings, J. C. Road,
Bangalore.

32. The State Trading Corpo. of
India Ltd., 36, Janpath, New
Delhi.

33. Mining and Allied Machinery
Corpn. Ltd., Durgapur, (W.B.)

34. Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd.
Pimpri, Pune.

35, Bharat Pumps & Compressors
Ltd., Naini, Allahabad.

36, Hindustan Copper Ltd., Indus-
try House, 10, Covum St.,
Calcutta.

liabilities of

5

3 4
For 11 Against 29 Rs. 90,000
Total No. of cases Rs. 5,26,867

(1933-86-87)

By 79 Ag.inst 78 Rs. 2,43,452
59 Rs, 4.00 lakhs
53 Rs. 7.45 lakhs
1° Rs, 50,545

By 13 Against 15 Rs. 16,40,658 41

charges & Rs.

Rs. 1,700 per quarter &
Rs. 150 for Travelling

{Private Lawyers engaged,

14 [fAdvocates engaged.

(सा.

LPrivate lawyers engaged.

Senior Govt. Standing
Counsel engaged but in
case of emergency private
lawyers are engaj

Private lawyers engaged.

Private lawyers engaged.

Private lawyers engated.

per hearing paid to law-

yer.
144 Rs, 3,64,847 +16

By 13 Against 3 includis Rs. 97,680
GR. Cases filed by Police

Against 12 (including 6 Rs. 78,550 -10
arbitration cases).

Nil Nil

(1932)-10-11-86 By 10 Rs. 1,19,443
Against, 109 Labour cases

85 Rs. 3.61 lakhs

About 110 Rs, 9,96,530

186 (These figures do not Rs, 169-03 lakhs
include cases before arbi-
trators in India & abroad).

128 LRs. 8,50,393 -00
By 45 including 25 labour Rs. 2,41,359

disputes Against
including 96 labour dis-

Putes.
About 55 Rs. 4.71 lakhs
439 Rs, 39,04,000-00

Private lawyers “engaged.

Private la engaged
to meet litigation and
retainer is engaged.

Private lawyers engaged,
Nil

Private lawyers are enga-
ged.

Legal Consultant engaged.

Private lawyers are gene
tally engaged.

\ Private lawyers engaged,
Private lawyers engaged,

Private lawyers engaged,

Private lawyers engaged.

Private lawyers enngaged.

—— न 3ल्‍लतलतननतनऋ२ऋ _ ऋ ऋ १।__त8६न1न त तच_7+्+ानन क्‍ननतातत3त_हत_+..हनबबतहनल्‍नब.ञब-.नह.ैहहतह..0...तहतनतत


Law Commission of India—126th Report

65

1 “2 3 4 5
37. Rural Electrification Corpn. Against 15 Rs. 1,47,803 00 Private Lawyers engaged.
Ltd, D.D.A. Bldg. Nehru for two’ years The Corpn. is unneces-

e sarily dragged to courts

Place, New Delhi.

38 Projects & Dsvelo> neat India. 11 (Includes some of lab- 77,716.00

Ltd., P. 0. Sindri Dhanbad, our cases).
Bihar.

39, Vijayanagar Steel Ltd. 904 (cases for enhanced- Rs. 59,583. 87

Compensation by land
owners whose land has
been acquired for the
Corpn.)

49. Steel Authority of India Ltd., 1497 In respect of USCO

Ispat Bhavan, Lodi Road, PB. Rs. 38,09,000.00
No. 3049, New Delhi & its units

12 i Steel In respect of CMO
namely Indian Iron & Stee In respect of Ci

Co. Ltd., (ISCO) and Central
Marketing Organisation (CMO)
2 i ts. 5597 #Rs.69,19,664.88.

In respect of its other plant ern 48088 cs
SAIL has also conducted
15 international cases
and spent foreign excha-
nge as follows £54,142.86

$24,292.40
41. Rashtriya Chemicals & Ferti- 80 Rs. 5 lakhs
lisers Ltd., Eastern Express
Highway, Bombay.
. Fertilizers Corpon. of 561 Upto 31-3-86
42. हा Lid., 55, Nehru Place, Rs. 29,05,371 53
New Delhi.
in Refineries Ltd., Post By CRY 22 Rs. 2,70,108
8. orbits Nbalamugal, Nerala. Against CRI 65
i i 2,51,850
4. Hindustan Prefab Ltd., By 19 Against 16 Rs, 2,51,
x Jangpura, New Delhi.
Engineering Corpn. 632 and 14 arbitrators Rs, 7,50,669
45. Heavy ant “Roza Road, P.O. proceedings.
Dhurwa Ranchi.
Central Mine Planning & 48 Rs, 3,34,000
“6 Bessigns Institute Ltd., Gond-
wana Place, Ranchi.
i ji मु 882.17
al India Ltd., 10, Netaji 760 Rs. 21,44,
का. Subhash Road, Calcutta.
i Dar- By 238 Against 368 Rs. 90,187.35
& पड़ Sea क177॥ हा 14,181,40-34
1508327.19

.. 1 329 (Does not include Rs. 45,66,217
49. Western Coal fields Ltd., Coal 323 © toc “Baler tax,

Estate, Civil Lines, Nagpur and ५ x

है ids Ltd. Central Excise case Arbi-

South Eastern Coal fiel Central Abie
Tribunals).

i . (1982—31-3-86) 2692 Rs. 54,46,490
50. Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. (1 Includes expenses on
Led.,17, Jamshedji Tata Road, court cases and consulta-

Bombay. tion fees on other matters.

by other parties.
Nil

Mentions that in addition
to the higher rate of
compensation fixed by
courts, the interest on
compensation excecds
even the ¢mount of com-
Pensaiton.

Cases before the Arbitra-
tors, Industrial Tribunals,
Labour Courts and Estate
Officers & conducted by
Jaw officers of respective
plant. For other cases
Counsels from panel of
SAIL Govt. —lawyers/
counsels are engaged CLA
appears before Arbitra-
tors. Govt. Law Offiicers
are also engaged.

Private lawyers on panel
engaged.

Has panel of lawyers:

Private lawyers engaged-

Sr. Govt. counsel as retain-
er Advocates engaged
for labour cases.

lawyers engaged.
Advocates engaged.

Engages Govt. Counsels
and in some cases Advo-
cates.

Do.

Private lawayers engaged,

Law Officers of Govt. and
Advocates are engaged.



66 Law Commission of India—126th Report
1 2 a 3 4 ge
51. Indian Medicines Pharmaceu- By 1 Income tax matter, Rs, 8395 Charter
tical Corpn. Ltd., Mohan Distt Shane’ Accountant
Almora U.P. (Via Ramnagar).
$2. Uttar Pradesh Dvugs & Phar- 3 and also Income Tax, Rs. 43,536 Senior Advocate engaged

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

53.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

maceuticals Co. Ltd., A/3. Salse Tax matters.
Industrial Area. Kanpur Road,

Lucknow.

National Aluminium Com- 125

pany Ltd., IDCO Tower. Jan-

path, Bhubneshwar.

Bharat Dynamic Lid., One plus three pending

Tanchanhagh, Hyderabad. cases. 10 appeals on In-
com: Tax/Sales Tax
matters filed.

The Mica Trading Corpn. of Nil
India Ltd., 137, Patliputra

Colony, Patna.

The Cotton Corpn. of India By 324 (includes 114
Ltd. A'R Bldg 12th Floor, arbitration cases) Again-
Nariman Point, Bombay. ‘st 100.

Scooter India Ltd., Post Bag By 53 Against 235
No. 1, Sarojini Nagar, Luck-

now.

Taz Fertilizers and Ciemicals 170
Travancore Ltd., Udyogaman-

dal, Cochin.

Goi Antibiotics & Pharmaceu- 2

ticals Ltd., E 2, Ramakant
Apartments, Mahatma Gandhi
Road, Panaji, Goa.

Sponge Iron India Lid.. Khanij By 2 Against
Bhawan, 6th Floor, 10-3-311/A,
Castle Hills, Masab Tank,

Hyderabad.

Metal Scrap Trade Corpn. By 29
Ltd., 225-F, Acharya Jagdish Against 117
Bose Road, Calcutta.

National Fertilisers Ltd.,
20, Community Centre, East
of Kailash, New Delhi and its
Units.

Kudremukh, 11, Block, Kora-
mangala, Bangalore.

364

(1981-Oct. 1986)
By 45 Against 54

Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd., 1238

Indian Express Building Dr.

Ambedkar Veedhi P.B. No.
5150, Bangalore and its Factory.

Madras Fertilizers = Ltd, By 11
Manali, Madras. Against 15
R.LC. 29, Mirza Ghalib Street, By 4
Calcutta. Against 38
Hindustan Salts Ltd., Lal 45

Niwas, 21, Ram Singh Road,

P.B. No. 146, Jaipur.

Export Credit Guarantee 30

Corpn. of India Ltd., Express
Towers, 10th Floor, Nariman
Point, Bombay-400021 .

Neelachal Ispat Nigam Ltd., By 1
IPICOL House (4th Fl) Against 1
Bhubaneshwar.

Rs, 18.87—lakhs

Rs. 50824/-(Includes the
payment of Rs. 500/- p.m.
retainership fee paid to
the legal Adviser).

Rs. 3000/- incurred
carlier pending cases.

on
Rs. 10,07,962
Rs. 8,47,539
Rs. 12,20,000

Rs. 500/-
Rs. 1,03,007 00

Rs. 10,70,825

Rs. 14-84 lakhs

Rs. 29-220

175-018
Rs. 2,04,236

Rs. 17,50,825

Re, 8,41,448
Rs. 1,98,454

Rs. 62,162

Rs. 3-59 lakhs

Rs. 10,205 -50

in one case to whom Rs.
35,000 has been given by
way of fee and another
Rs. 15 to 20000 as inci-
dental expenses.

The comapany has engaged.
private lawyers and Govt’s
Counsels. Also made cer-
tain Suggestions.

Advocates engaged.

Advocates engaged.
Advocates engaged.
Advocates engaged.
Advocates engaged.

Private Jawyer engaged.

Private Jawyers engaged.

Private lawyer engaged.

Private lawyers engaged.

Private lawyers and Govt.
Pleaders engaged.

Private lawyers engaged,

Private lewyers engaged.

Private lawyers engaged.

Private lawyers engaged.

Private lawyers engaged.

Private lawyers engaged,



Law Commission of India—126th Repori

1 2 3 4 5
70. Indian Petro-Chemicals Corpn. By 13 Rs. 4-7 lakhs Private 1a ngaged.
Lid., P.O. Petro Chemicals, Against 126 ‘ © lawyers engaged.
Distt. Vadodara.
71. Bharat Brakes & Valves Lid., By 2 (1981 -upto 20-11-86 Private i engaged.
22, Qobra Road, Calcutta.” Against 15 Rs, 89,23 2 ‘vate Jawyers engeged
12, Rites, New Delhi Hotse, 27, 9 Except in Arbitrati
Barakhamba Road, New Delhi Rs 18,000 Tndustrial "Disputes
matters, Private lawyers
engeged.
73. Madras Refineries Ltd., Man- 13 Rs. 46,740 Engaged private lawyers.
ali, Madras.
74. North-Eastern Regional Agri- Nil Nil Nil
cultural Marketing — Corpn
Ltd., Rajgarh Road, Guwahati.
75. Engineering Projects (India) 140 (This _ includes 76 Rs. 2,80,000 Private 1
Lid., Kailash, Kasturba Gandhi case in Labour Courts). vate lawyers engaged
Marg, New Delhi
76. Dredging Corpn of India Lid., By 12 Rs. 3 96 lakhs Do.
“Dredge House’ Port Area, Against 25
Visakhapatnam
77. Mineral Exploration Corpn. 66 Rs. 4,18,559 -85 Do.
Lid., Seminary Hills, Nagpur. °
78. Garden Reach Shipbuilders & By 5 Rs. 8-77 lakhs Do.
Engrs. Ltd., 4/46, Gurden Against 38
Reach Road, Calcutta.
79. Maruti Udyog Ltd., 11th Bloor 246 Rs. 8,69,625 Do.
Jeevan Prakash 25, Kasturba
Gandhi Marg, New Delhi
80. International Aix Ports Autho- 506 Rs, 21,40,198-27 Do.
rity of India, Yashwant Place
Chanakya Puri, New Delhi and
all its Units.
+81. Elsctroaics Corpn. of India By 25 Rs. 84,595 Do.
Ltd., ECIL-Post Office, Against 12
Hydrabab
82. Telecommunications Consul- 8 Rs. 20,000 Do.
tants India Ltd., Chiranjiv °
Tower, 43, Nehru Place, New
Delhi
83. National Hydro-electric Power 103 Rs. 12,32,082 Govt./Private -
Corpn. Ltd., 98 Nehru Place, tes agape Advoca
‘New Delhi.
84. Educational Consultants India 3 Rs. 28,855 Private Lawyers
Lid, Ad/iil,  Safdarjang wyers engaged:
Enclave, New Delhi
85. Praga Tools Ltd., 6-6-8/32, (1981 upto Nov. 1986) Rs. 4,74,923 Do.
Kavadiguda, Secunderabad." 101 Plus 81 Labour cases.
86. Tungabhadra Steel Products 13 Rs. 70,968 Do.
Ltd, Tungabhadra Dam, (includes same labour
Karnat cases).
87. Goa Shipyard Ltd., Vasco-De- By 4 Rs. 22,000 Do.
Gama, Goa. Against Nil
88. Artificial Limbs Manufacturing 335 Rs. 2,49,710 Nil
Corpn. of India, 0. य. Road,
Kanpur.
89. Airline Allied Services Ltd., Nil Nil Estd. only in 1983,
Airlines House, New Delhi
90. Hydrocarbons India Ltd, 26, Nil Nil Nil
Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New
Delhi
91. Hooghly Printing Co. Lid Nil Nil Nil

41, Chowringhee Road,
Calcutta,



68

Law Commission of India—126th Report

2 3 4

5

92.

93.

95.

. Water and Power Consultancy (982-1986)

Rajasthan Drugs Pharmaceu- 12 Rs. 18,725
tical Ltd., Road No. 12, V.K.1.

Area, Jaipur.

H.U.D.C.O., Hudco House, 16
Lodhi Road, New Delhi

Rs. 1,51,445

पु Rs. 6,779 00
Services (India) Lid., 26,
Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New
Delhi.

Indian Railway Construction 16
Co. Ltd., Palika Bhawan ,
Sector XII, R. K. Puram,

New Delhi
(Includes 4 Labour
Semicond ictor Complex Ltd,, cases)

Rs. 1,00,600 -00

Rs. 17,506/-
approx.

” Phase VIIIS.A.S. Nagar, Near’ (Includes 4 Labour cases)

97.

98.

101.

102.

103.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

Hindustan Paper Corpn- Lid, 78

. The Handicrafts and Hand- By 9

Chandigarh

Maharashtra Antibiotics & Against 7
Pharmaceuticals Ltd., L-1,

M.LD.C. Area, Hingaa Road,

‘Nagour.

‘The Mineral & Metals Trading Upto (198386) 1196
(०९097. of India Ltd, PB.
7051, Express Building, Baha-

durshah Zafar Marg, New Delhi.

Rs, 10,000

Rs. 9°71 lakhs
75-C, Park Street, Calcutta.

d 9 Rs. 63,500
Jooms Exports Corpn. of India Against 3

Ltd., Lok Kalyan Bhavan,

11-A Rouse Avenue Lane,

‘New Delhi.

Air India Charters Ltd, Sth Nil Nil
Floor, Centaur Hotel, Bombay
Airport, Bombay.

Bharat Wagon & Engineering 37
Co. Ltd., ‘C’ Block, 5th Floor,
Mouryalok, Dak Bunglow
Road, Patna

Helicopter Corpn, of — India Nil Nil
, Palika Kendra, Parlia-

ment St. New Delhi. Imcor-

porated on 15-10-1985.

Rs. 3-29 lakhs

. Hospital Services Consultancy Nil Nil

Corpn. (India) Ltd., 1, Coper-
nicus Marg, New

Gas Authority of India Ltd., 9
4th Floor, Smarat Hotel,
Kautilya Marg, Chanakyapuri,
New Di

Rs. 36,888

The New India Assurance Co.
Ltd., 87, Mahatma Gandhi Rd.,
PB. No. 969, Bombay (except (II) Labour Personne] 5,47,660 96
in respect of onc Regional matters 18

office).

The Cashew Corpn, of India By 1 Against 9
His P.B. 1019, M.G. Road
ulam, Cochin.

Hoogly Dock & Port Engine- By 1
ers Lid., Martin Burn House, Against 12
12, Mission Row, Calcutta.

Bengal Chem icals & Pharma- By 9 Against 21
ceutical Ltd, 6, Ganesh
Chunder Avenue, Calcutta.

() Insurance claims 4,33,58,845
675

iS

13,100

1,35000

260063 (only four years)

Private Lawyers engaged.

Do.

Private Lawyers engaged.

1982-1986) (Budget fig. Do.
ore es ate 180

Solicitors and — Private
Laywers engaged.

Private Lawyers engaged.

NA.

Private Lawyers engaged,
Legal Consultant as retai-
ner.

Nil

A panel of private, law-

after proper screening and

also consulting Govt. of
India Law officers | viz.
Attorney Gen. Solicitor
General etc.

Panel of private Advo-
cates in cach divisional
offices ० Regional
offices.»

Private. Lawyers - engaged
out of panel of lawyers
maintained by

Soclicitors & Advocates
engaged.

Nil



a ey eee ee

Law Commission of India—126th Report

Sa eee
2 3 4 5

110.

Wi.

112.

113.

114.

15.

116.

1१६4

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

124.

125.

127.

. Indian Corpn., Indian Bhavan, 2830

Bharat Yantra Nigam Ltd. Nil
15,1, Thornhill Road,
Allahabad, U.P.

Hindustan Flurocarvons Ltd., Nil
102, Moguls Court, Bashir
Bagh, Hyderabad.

National Instruments Ltd., By 1 Against 13
1/1, Raja S. C. Mullick Road,
Calcutta.

Tea Trading Corpn. of India By 12 Against 10
Ltd. 7, Wood S:reet, Calcutta. 212 Aga

Triveni Steuctur Tals Ltd. Naini, By 15 Against 32
Allahabad, U.P.

Manganese Ore (India) Ltd., By 294 gainst 55,
3, Mount Road, Extn. P.B. 34,
Nagpur.

Bharat Heavy Plate & Vessels 15
Ltd, Visakhapatam,

Biecco Lawrie Ltd.,6, Mayut- By 9 Against 10
bhanj Road, Calcutta’

Engincet India Ltd., Engineers 20
India House, 1, Bhikaji Cama
Place New Delhi.

The Indian Council of Arbitra- By nilAgainst 01
tion Federation House Tansen
Marg, New Delhi.

General Insurance Coipn. of 108
India Industrial Assurance
Bldg. Churchgate, Bombay.

Andrew Yule & Co. Ltd., By 29
Yule House, 8, Clive Row, . Agni
Calcutta. inst 28

National Jute Manufactures By 39
Corpn. Ltd., Chartered Bank Against 122

Bldg. 2nd Floor, 4 Netaji (Figures exclude cases
Subhash Road, Calcutta. relatable to Labour Co-
urt tribunals & ippeals
before Tax Authorities)

National Film Development By 2 Against 5
Corpn. Ltd., Discovery of

India, Nehru Centre, Dr. Basant

Rd. Worli, Bombay.

The National Newsprint & 22
Paper Mills Ltd, Nepanagar.

Bharat Petroleum Corpn. Ltd., By 214 Against 455

Bharat Bhavan, Ballard Estate
P.B. No. 688, Bombay.

Janpath New Delhi.

Electrons Trade & Technical By 3 Against 10

Development Corpn., Akbar
Hotel Annexe, Chanakyapuri,
‘New Delhi.

not include foreign
tions)

Nil

28,500

2,06,319

1,86,867 (Approx)

9-67 lakhs

2,25,731 +85

1,935,616
57,274

50,000 (Approx)

26,990 25

12,64,520 -00

11,67,869 03

9,31,928 60

60,550

85,918

32 Lakhs

102-07 Lakhs

2-71 Lakhs

69

ncorporated very recen-
tly).

Govt. Lawyers engaged
Private Lawyers engaged.

Lawyers are engaged on
the advice of the company
Solicitors.

Private Lawyers retained.

Nil

Nil
Private Lawyers engaged.

Private Lawyers engaged,

Senior Counsels are enga-
ged through reputed firm
of Advocates and Soli
citors.

Engages Govt. Pi

in Distt. Courts enders
Senior Council in High
Courts & Supreme Court.

Private Lawyers and Firms
of Solicitors engaged

Private Firms of Solici

tors/Advocates engaged’
Retained a i
Retained standing

Advocates/C
od, s/Counsels enga .

Cases are conduct: —
Private Eager फू
own legal
Advocates Govt.
Peder, it
‘Advocates. ons and
Nil.


40

Law ‘Commission of. India—126th Report

1 2 3 4 5

128. Hindustan Organic Chemicals By 49 Against 6 (Docs 11,00912 High Court Advocate on
Lid., Rayani Distt. Raigad, not include cases under retainership of Rs. 2500
Maharashtra. the Industrial Disputes p.m. and also

Act). the assistance of Soli-
citors of Advocates at
outstations.

129. States Farma Corpn. of 202 6,41,026 Private Advocates enga-
India Ltd., Fatma Bhavan, ged in all cases generally
14-15, Nehru Place, New Delhi. Govt. Advocates were

engaged only in two cases.

130. Indian Drugs & Pharmaceu- 268 7,40,615 -00 Cases were conducted by
ticals., Lid. P.B.No. 3816, New Legal _ Retainers/Private

eli. Lawyers. But few cases
were handled by Govt.
Advocates and Attorney-
General of India,

131. Industrial Finance Cropn. By 29 Against 81 (And 62,95,265-90 Private Law 6.
of India, 16, Sansad Marg, intervened in winding Nate TaNvers engage
P.B.No. 363, New Delhi. Up petitions i.e. 26) total

132. Indian Oil Blending Ltd. Pir By 1 Against 1 17,760 Private Lawyer: d
Pau, ‘Trombay, P.B. 8803, 1 ४आआ
Bombay.

133. Hindustan Zinc Ltd. Yashad By 46 Against 138 1,44,098 :50. (Payment Do.

Bhavan, Yashadgarh, Udaipur. made to lawyers was Rs.
275,720)

134. The Elgin Mills Co. Ltd. 11/6, By 24 Against 27 100 3,82,000 Do.
SMT Parbati Bagla Road, Prosecution cases were
Kanpur. filed against "company

under different Acts.

135. Hindustan Vi egetable Oils 153 18,38,172 Do.
Corpn. Ltd. ( into exis-
tence in 1984) Sabzi Mandi,

Delhi).

136. Eastern Coal Fields Ltd., 1375 67,39,783 51 Engaged Solicitors &
,Sanctoria  P. O. Disergarh, Senior Advocate. Has a
Distt. Burdwan. Panel of lawyers for

different courts.

137. Bongaigaon Refinery & Petro- 93 3,41,214 55 Advocates are engaged on
chemicals Ltd., P. हे. Dahali- cases to case basis.
Gaon, Distt. Kokra-Jhar;

Assam.

138. The Southern Pesticides Corpn. 32 75,176 Private lawyers engaged,

Ltd., 10-5-3/2/2, Masab Tank,
Hyderabad.

139. The Lagan Jute, Machinery By 3 Against 2 Around 15,000 Do.

Co. Ltd., 24B, Park Street,
Calcutta.

140. The National Small Industries 371 33,98,659 “81 Has a panel of lawyers,
Corpn. Ltd., Laghu Udyog
Bhavan, Okhla Industrial Es-
tate, New Delhi.

141. Bharat Refractories Lid., P.B. 40 3,08 Lakhs Normally engages Govt.
No. 1, Bokaro Stee! City. Advocates. Private Law-

yers are also engaged in
certain circumstances,
: म *

42. Cardamom Trading Corpn. By 1 Against 1 4,200 Private Lawyers engaged.

142 Ltd., No. 72, Nandidurg Road, Regarding cases in
Extn. Beson Town Bangalore. Soprem treme | Court, Law

Ofhcers of Supreme Court
engaged,

143. National Mineral Development About 30 50,000 (Approx.) बन
Corpn. Ltd. Khanij Bhavan,
10-3-311/A, Castle Mills,

Masab Tank, Hyderabad.
144, Indian Airlines, Air Lines 97 (Approx) 34,60,789 Engaged Legal Advisers

House, New Delhi.

in different Regions on
retainership basis. Also
engages lawyers.



Law' Commission of India—126th Report

n

1 2 3 4 5

145. Orissa Drugs & Chemicals By Nil Against 2 11,646 i :
Ltd. 93, Suryanagar, Bhuba- Gna’ one Private Lawyer
neswar. litigation.

146. Bharat Bhari_ Udyog Nigam Nil Ni
Ltd., 63, Netaji Subhash Road, i Tage egies on वा Sept.
Calcutta. हु

147. Mahanagar Telephone Nigam 1859 2,53,15: i
Lid. Kanishka Plaza, “3rd 2182 pent’ Advocates: enga-
Floor, 19, Ashok Road, New 7
Delhi.

148. Bharat Process & Mechanical By3 Against 15 1,35,263 ici vi
Engineers Ltd., . Chartered लीक मदन 5
Bank Buildings, Calcutta. 82804.

149. Karnataka Antibiotics and 5 32,000 ivat és 82
Pharmaccuticals Ltd.,174, 6th Private Lewyers engrged.
Cross, Gandhinagar, Bngalore.

150. Jassop & Co. Lid. 63, Netaji By 4 Against 21 3-93 lakhs ici 1४६
Subhsh Road, Calcutta: 8 दीन & Privete Adve

151. National Handloom Develop- 1 2,134 50
ment Corpn. Ltd., 10th-1lth Advocate General as
Floors, Vissasn Deep 22, Sta- .
tion Road, Lucknow.

152. The Projects & Equipment 27 8,74,822 i ie
Corpn. of India Ltd. “Hansa- Engages Private Lawyers,
laya’ 15, Barakhamba Road,

New Delhi,

153. Hindustan Latex Ltd., Latex 46 34975 ivate Is
Bhavan, . Mahilamandiram ° Engaged private Icwyers.
Road, ' Poojappura, Trivan-
drum.

154. Northern Coalfield Ltd., Sin- 130 Informati i है .
grauli P.O. Singrauli Colliery, nformation not furnished Information not furnis-
Distt. SIDHI (M.P.). .

155. Indian Institute of Foreign By Nil Against 5 3550 =
Trade, B-21, Institutional
Area, South of IT, New Delhi.

156. Richardson & Cruddas (1972) 70 2,50,000/- i
Ltd., Byculla Iron Work, Y Private lawyers engaged.
Post Box 4503, Sir J. J. Road
Bombay.

157. The Ociental Insurance Co. By 21565 (on an average Data is not maintai Panel ij
Ltd., A-25/27, Asif Ali Road, about 8000-10000 cases आर: oD Advocates, is
New Delhi. are filed annually against 7

है the company),

158. Hotel Corporation of India 31 3,85,000/- &
Ltd., sth floor, The Centaur . i Has two legal retainers.
Hotel, Bombay Airport,

Bombay.
159. Balmer Lawrie & Co. Ltd, By 8 Against 16 4,89,452/- Private lawyers are enga-
ged including. lawyers
rom out of the Govern-
ment panel.

160. The Jute Corporation of India 114 7,42,626/-

Ltd., 1 Shakespeare Sarani, I fs most of cases, fauyers

Caleatia. have ‘been engaged’ Tn
certain circumstances pri-
vate lawyers were also
engaged,

161. Bharat Aluminium Co, Ltd y 17 40,000-00 Has made certai

Against 19 1,25,000-00 tions on procedural eS
1,65,000-00 forms,

162. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. By 45 1,47,339-70 हे :

Against 42 इन 16४ ८४७५



72 Law Commission of India—126th Report

1 2 3 4 5
163. National Projecis Construction 38 Rs. 24,50,957 Private | Advocates are
Corporation Lt engag ter — negotia-
7० ting the fees with them
164. LB. Co. Ltd. 139 Rs. 13,66,500 95 Private lawyers are enga-
including lawyers
‘om out of the Govern.

panel,

165. Ferro Scrap Nigam Ltd. Against 17 752,265 None
66. Hindustan Steel Works ‘inst 39 10,41,941 -70 Most of lawyers

' oD are in Central Govern-

ment panel. HSCL enga-
ges lawyers who are in
the panels of SAIL or
in the panels of nationa-

banks and financial

institutions.

167. Pradeep Phosphates Ltd. 31 cases Rs. 1,04,855/- Engagement of lawyers
is done depending upon
the, merit of cach, Ee

competency of law-
yers to handic such cases
by contacting them direc-
tly. In one of the case
the Advocate-General 01
State was briefed to ay
pear on behalf of the

company.
168. Lubrizol Iudia Ltd. 7 Rs. 40,562/- Private lawyers engaged’
169. Damodar Valley Corporation By 40 Rs. 10,21,361/- Engaged legal Practitio-
Against 145 ner out of the panel on
extreme exigencies.
170. National Thermal Power Cor- 469 Rs. 12,23,031 -87 The total number of
portion. Rel lawyers engaged

luding the lat
om out of Govt. Panel)
to meet the litigation by
or against. NTPC is

127,
171. Power Engineers Training Against 8 Rs. 26,340/- In some cases, private
Society. lawyers of rey

standing were enguued.

GMGIPN 1-322] M. of Law & Jistive/ND/89—4-2-91, 1000