LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT

ON
हे RESOURCE ALLOCATION FOR
INPRA-STRUCTURAL SERVICES IN JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION -

(8 CONTINUUM OF THE REPORT ON
MANPOWER PLANNING IN JUDICIARY: A BLUEPRINT)

1988


‘Val. No. 384475

fair आयोग
LAW COMMISSION
भारत रारकार
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

UCI MEL JF PB शास्त्री भवग,
रच वी he /०९३7/ SHASTRI BHAWAN,
citimee नई दिल्‍ली
- NEW DELI

June 14, 1988,

Shri Bindeshyvari Dubey, .
Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,

hastri Bhavan,
} EW DELNI.

Dear Shri Dubey,

It is my pleasure to ferward herewith 127th Report
of the Law Conmission ef India dealing with 'Resource
Allocation fer Infra-structural Services in Judicial
Administration’.

This report may be read as part of a packaue
comprised in two earlier reports . The first in this
series was the ene en 'Manpewer Planning in Judiciary:
A Blueprint’, being 120th Report of the Law Commission,
by which it, was recommended te revise the Judge
population ratio in next five years. This
recommendation, when implemented, weuld require a ferum
for selecting and recruiting more Judges at every
level. Io was happy to read that part ef the
recemmendatien in that report has been accepted when
the Minister cf State fer Law and Justice recently
announced that the Government of India have resolved to
raise the Judge strength ef the Nigh Courts frem 390 as
at present te 530 in near future. It is enly a part of
the recemmendaticn and I hope the ether part weuld cs
well be implemented soen.

To help the administration, the Law Commissicn
forwarded a cemprehensive report en 'A New Forum for
Judicial Appointments', being 12186 repert of the Law
Commission. New that the Juege strength is expandec,
the setting up of the new ferum, as recommendeé in that
repert, may be accerded high prierity.

When the aforementiened tuo reperts are
implemented, as a necessary corellary, there would ke
expansion of courts at aJl levels as also the
ministerial staff attached to the courts, more ceurt
buildings and allied facilities. The present repert
deals with finding resources fer the  additicnal
expenditure and allocetinn of the same fer infra-
structural services in judicial administraticn.


Tal. No, 384473

विधि प्रायोग
LAW COMMISSION
WUT शरकार
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
शास्त्री भवन,
SHASTRI BHAWAN,
नई दिल्‍ली
NEW DELHI

Fr ESAI
‘airman

. In this report, the Law Commissien has dealt with
the ptreblem ef more court heuses, other expanded
facilities and additional. ministerial. staff for

“expanded 2०७८९ services. Undoubtedly, ‘therefore, a
higher ‘demand will be made on the Exchequer under the
heading ‘Judicial Administration’ beth at the Central
and ‘State level. Being aware of the  reseurce
eenstraints,:. this repert alee 6७०18 with areas where

= thds‘' can be generated to be specifically
earmarked:"for judicial administration. All these
aspects “have been comprehensively dealt with in this

reports : ,

2 wetild; therefore, request te treat ail the three
i + Shetein discussed as @ package and they may be
impleméntéed’ almest simultaneeusly because ene without
,the ether is likely te give a disterted picture.

.

hithiregards, a
* "Yeurs sincerely,
AJ
(D.A. DESAI)



CONTENTS

PAGE
CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION eee 1
CHAPTER If COURTS: THE CHANGING ROLE ove 6
CHAPTER III COURT FACILITIES: MANPOWER AND
है MATERIAL : न्न्न 22
CHAPTER IV FINANCIAL PALLIATIVE FOR THE COURTS 56
CHAPTER V TAPPING ADDITIONAL RESOURCES ... 73
NOTES AND
REFERENCES eee 106
_ APPENDIX I - QUESTIONNAIRE eae 116
APPENDIX II INCOME EXPENSE RATIO SUPPLIED
BY THE STATES eae 118

APPENDIX Iii INCOME EXPENSE RATIO SUPPLIED
BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION woe 121

APPENDIX IV TABULATION OF REPLIES SENT BY
“THE HIGH COURTS eee 129

APPENDIX V (i) STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND
EXPENDITURE (Appendix 1(3)
of 120th Report of LCI) eee 138

APPENDIX V (ii)STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND
EXPENDITURE (Planning
Commission Figures 1981-82). -... 140

APPENDIX V (iii)STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND
EXPENDITURE (Information
supplied by States 1981-82) ... 141


CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

1.1. Ever since men have begun to reflect
upon the relations with each other and upon
vissitudes of the human lot, they have been
pre-occupied with the meaning of justice and
a popular belief has been that justice can
only be obtained through court. That itself
gives : credence, eredibility and
respectability to the court system. But like
any other institution, the system has to
constantly justify its existence. by rendering
the service expected of it. The moment it
fails or falters, the credibility and
respectability devalues. For a functioning
deriocracy», court ‘system, where justice is
obtained even against the State, is 8 pre-
requisite. Therefore, the court system,
whenever it is under an unbearable load,
requires thorough re-examination and its re-
structuring with a view to making it

1
efficient, people and result-oriented.

1.2. The Universal Declaration on Human
Rights provides that:
“Everyone has the right to an effective

remedy by the competent national


tribunals for acts violating the
fundamental rights granted by the
Constitution or by lew.
Expounding the fundamental principles of
justice underlying the Delcaration, the Law
Commission had observed:
"Equality is the basis of all modern
systems of jurisprudence and
administration of justice.... In so far
as a person is unable to obtain access
to a court of law for having'his wrongs
redressed or for defending himself
against a criminal charge, justice
becomes unequal and laws which are meant
for his protection have no meaning and
to that extent fail in their purpose.*.
Failure on the front of providing adequate
and easily accessible courts of justice is
one of the principal causes of popular
dissatisfaction with the administration of
justice. This was voiced way back in 1906 by
Dean Roscoe Pound in his famous speech.” The
dissatisfaction stems from unmanageable
backlog of cases, mounting arrears and
inordinate delay in disposal of cases in
courts at all Ievels - lowest to the highest

- coupled with exorbitant expenses. This has


attracted the attention not enly cf the
members of the Bar, consumers of justice
(litigants), social activists, legal
academics, Parliament, but also the managers

of the court.

1.3. The Government of Incia accordingly
resolved to set up a Judicial Reforms
Commission. Ultimately the task of studying
and recommending judicial reforms was
entrusted to the present Lav Commission. A
comprehensive proposa] for judicial reforms
must dim at making the cyster resilient,
expeditious, informal, “free from procedural
juggernauts, inexpensive and result-oriented,
Article 390 of the Conntitution cet tha goat
in this behalf by providing that the State
shall secure that the cperation of the legal
system promotes justice, on a basis of equal
opportunity, and shall, in particular,
provide free legal aid, by suitable
legislation or schemes or in any other way,
to ensure that opportunitics for securing
justice “are not denied to any citizen by
reascn of economic or other disabilities.
Any one solution cannot attain the cesired
end. A multi-pronged programme Cealing with

each cause which made the system static,


stratified anc oeyond the reach of the conimen
man, hac to te devised 80 that each
contributory faccor can te effectively and

acequately dealt with.

1.4. Vieved from the angle hereinabove
indicated, in its phased programme of
recommending judicial reforms, Lav Commission
amongst others also concentrated on manpower
planning in jucictiacy. In that report, it
was “specifically stated that the problem of
judicial manpower planning has been generally
ignored in Incia's planned development. The
reason simply, amongst others, is that a
developing science of manpower planning has
not attracted the attention of policy opinion
makers in the field of administration of
justice in vnaia.” Law Commission
accordingly recommenced that the Stat: should
immediately increase the present ratio from
10.5 Judges per million of Indian population
to at least 50 Judges per million of Indian
population within the period of next five
years. It was further recommended that by
the year 2,000 India should command at least
107 Jucges per million of Indian population.

Law Commission also made it clear that this

is an interim report on the issue of


recrganisation of Indian judiciary. Its
second report proceeding on this basis will
deal with the tae thod of judicial
appointments. Its third repott will ceal
with the problem on resource allocation tor
bureaucratic and infrastructural services to
judicial administration, including the use cf
computer technology for its modernisation.
This report accordingly is the promised
third repert dealing with resource allocation
for burcaucratic and infra-structural
services to judicial administration. This
report is a continuum of the two earlier
reports” ang al] the three provide a package.
If the recommendations in these reports are

mot Gealt with as a package, the whole

picture is likely to be distorted.


CHAPTER II
COURTS: THE CHANGING ROLE
2.1. "The concept of justice permeates
society. It is a principle that governs the
relationship within an individual family, ana
must equally govern relationships within the
family of nations." "Justice is the hallmark
of courts. Views of ‘justice differ, however,
courts function ina wider justice system
which spans the range from police through
corrections, anc, in the civil sphere tay
touch all citizens. The courts are the
fulcrum of this system. Despite their
serious imperfections, it is frightening to
contemplate a nation without ccurts, a
complex society without a formal institution
to enforce the rules set forth by that
society." It is, therefore, necessary to
strengthen the system. A reform movement is
in process to modernise court structure and
administration and to achieve court-related
objectives around which some consensus has
developed amongst various interest groups
directly or indirectly connected with court
system, such as Jucges, lawyers, legal
academes, litigants and even the Government.

"There is no better test of the excellence of


a Government than the efficiency of its
judicial system, for nething more nearly
touches the welfare and security of the
average citizens than the feeling that he ean
rely on certain and prompt. administration of
justice." Judicial power is the power of
the State. The State has ‘to create
institutions on which the judicial power of
‘the State can be conferred and the citizens
in search of justice may appreach these
institutions. In determining a nation's rank
in political civilization, no test is . more
८९८३ 54 ए९ than the degree in which justice, as
defined by the law, is actually realised in
its judicial administration as between: one
private citizen and another and as between
private citizens ana members of the
Government."
2.2, The expression “access to justice” has
different connotations.’ The road blocks in
the access to justice can be’ high cost,
geographical distance, - adverse cost benefit
ratio and the inordinate delay in search of
illusory justice. The State is responsible
to remove all road blocks in the access to
justice. Accordingly, the State should

ensure that the system is equally accessible


to ali_and. should Jedd to the “£<80168 * ६1६85
4६७ individualiy and: socially or

iG UBER a re fe ; as
(263. Thé concept Of actéss to

tindergone . an important transto ati

Barlier right to accéss t6 | judial
protection meant the aggrieved individual’
formal right to litigate ot deféfid.a) elal
It did not require State action for thele
protection, Their preservation required only ~<.
_that the State. did not allow them to be ,

injured by 7 ate

the. concern of the States :.

“2a Uae ere 1394 Sdbe8 poste.
the State to 86 structite the 18५81 76
system as “६07 शांइ४६७० that its «“opdétdtions
promotes justice, -on ‘a 98218 78
opportunity. To attain, this [६816०

| State had to pass suitable 1691814 ६186

. frame schemes to ensure that opportuni ties.

7

for securing justice are not, denied to any
citizen by reason 6६ &conomic or ड़ other
+ disabilities. Amongst other disabilities,
courts. situated at a long distance trom the’
habitat of the citizens in search of justice’

itself would have a dampening effect on one!s

_ 8


search of justice. This disability can be
removed by setting up courts within the casy
reach cf the litigants and, if need be, by
providing legal aid so that the highly
expensive system may not thwart the urge to
seek justice. "What does it profit a poor
and ignorant man that he is equal to his
strong antagonist before the law if there is
no one to inform him what the law is? Or
that the courts are open to him on the same
terms as to all other persons when he has not

. 6
the wherewithal to pay the admission fee?"

2.5. Therefore, consider’ the question where,
apart from paying the fees for admission, one
has to " travel long distance accompanied by
‘the | witnesses in search of a place for
justice. In our country, the courts are
situated in places which. dre inaccessible in
monsoon except walking the whole “distance.
Which witness would be 80 justice-oriented
that in the vindication of truth he would
accompany the litigant walking all the way to
the court and in the process leave his own
work unattended? For poor people inhabiting
the rural landscape, giving up one's work
means totally denying oneself even a_ morsel

of food.


2.6. Now it is true that recently the apex
court has op:ned its doors to those
improverishea sections of the society who
complain of violation of fundamental rights.
Let it, however, not be forgotton that a
large volume of litigation emanating from
rural areas arises from the enforcement of
gtatutes for which redress has to 76९ sought -
from grassroot level courts. While opening
its doors to the people in custody, victim of
police violence, workers, pavement dwellers,
etc., the limitation on the entry in the
court has to be kept in view in that one has
to complain of violation of fundamental
rights inviting the Supreme Court to
adjudicate upon the issue. But what happens
to those impoverished sections of the society
to whom minimum wages are not paid, who
suffer because of bureaucratic indifference,
who amongst themselves have disputes
concerning property, right of way, possession
of land or dwelling house, et al? “They have
to approach the court at the grassroot level
and these courts are still not exposed to
newly developing culture of ignoring the
problem of locus standi and rendering justice

without being inhibited by a procedure

10


devised in colonial times. "Throughout the
seventies, the Executive made its wish public
that the Judges and courts should be
committed to the Constitution and the promise
of progress and justice within it. Now, led
by the Supreme Court of India, Judges and
courts have shown their commitment to the
rural poor and to the unfortunate under~
privileged. But that can bring in a limited
relief. Undoubtedly, the social activists
have learnt the uses of law as an aspect of
overall struggle on behalf of the dominated
and vulnerable just as Judges and courts
began to take the Indian suffering
seriously." . A major percentage of
litigation hardly involves infraction of
fundamental rights. This litigation emanates
from rural areas. To them, no relief can be
extended in their petty disputes involving
lcng drawn out litigation in distant courts
by either the epistolary jurisdiction or
social action litigation. To them, the easy
accessibility of the court without’ wasting a
whole day denying daily earning, would. be
service of immense valuc. It 18 hore that
neighbourhood justice will relieve the agony

of a large number of litigants. Social

11


action litigation undoubtedly has its own
place in the scheme of things. There is
greater recourse to the courts to solve
problems whereas in the past they have not
been resolved judicially. Sometimes the
Executive or the Legislature find it more
convenient to pass onto the courts the
“difficult or politically embarrassing
questions, though covertly, for example,
Muslim Women's (Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986,
In this approach, the courts undergo a
transformation into 'the problem solvers of
the society'. But, as pointed out
hereinabove, _ this expanded jurisdiction
leaves the underprivileged having petty
disputes about their day-to-day problems cold
and unimpressed, For them, the easy
accessibility means the court providing
neighbourhood justice. Some attempt has been
made in this direction by the present Law
Commission in recommending the setting up of
Gram Nyayalaya, a participatory model of

justice,

12


2.7. In constantly interpreting and re-
interpreting the Constitution to arrive at
the desired socialistic goals, legislations
and their subordinate breed are bound ic
proliferate and, as a result, varying
interests would converge or clash. A
constant resolution of disputes arising from
contrary expectations sought through the same
legislations inevitably increases the role of

courts,

2.8. .Outlay on all sections of activity is
increasing. In every such activity, the area
“of potential conflict related to  right-duty
syndrome exists. Once such conflict becomes
apparent, search for justice is inevitable
and the search leads to higher expectations
of justice. Naturally in a constitutional
democracy, this is indispensable because it
is founded on the doctrine of rule of Jaw.
All this combined to create need for more
courts and more courts means more cutlay on

justice system.

2.9. There is a happy augury that our courts
in India are no longer importing thoughts but
indigenising them which obviously demands

greater facilities for greater number.

13


2.10. Indisputably, the courts' functions
have multiplied manifold. The phenomenon is
not Imited to the Supreme Court only but to
courts at all levels. There is an increasing
demand for a statutory provision requiring
the grassroot level courts also to entertain
social action litigation without the
necessity of establishing violation of
fundamental rights but pointing out injured
interest of a group unable to obtain relief
because of their social and educational
backwardness. This is taken note of when the
Law Commission, in re-structuring grassroot
courts, has recommended for a liaison officer
with a right of locus standi.

2.11. Institutionally, the courts may not
occupy a position of dominance but when
everything else fails, the judiciary is
approached as a last resort to mete out
fairness. The public confidence in the
courts is evident from the fact that the
courts have been asked to _ pronounce on
questions of great public importance, be it
the conduct of the examinations of 83 premier
university in one of the highest medical
degrees or the misuse of power by men in

10
authority and power, pollution of

14


ll
environment by big industrial houses,
attempt by a political party, who
apprehending that success may elude them at

the hustings, sought to defeat the election
process, despite article 329(b) by raising

frivolous and baseless objections in the writ
12

petition, or the dispute between two split

groups of the parent political party

‘ 13
regarding the use of clection symbol or the

party office. This proves, if proof be
needed, that the courts do inspire the faith
that objectivity and impartiality alone can
bring. Even when they are Goubted, it is
their grasp of problem that is questioned,
not -their fairness, , This is one point which
is accepted as final and the steam _ that
injustice creates is often effectively
absorbed by the courts of justice who thereby
act as restraints and pressure outlets which

is imperative to maintain social order.

2.12. Expression of society's moral outrage
is essential in an ordered society that asks
its members to rely on legal processes rather
than self-help to vindicate their wrengs.
To avoid anarchy, fairness he: to be felt to
be done and it is the courts which provice

the systemic outlet. Obsdicnce to lay hes

15


been described as the strongest of all the
forces making ‘for any nation's peaceful
continuity and progress. An institution
which helps to maintain the balance of
society and directs its ordered progress to
the road of development, alas, is sadly
neglected, ignorning the lessons of history
that alternative to peaceful transformation
of society by rule of law is violence. The

courts' contribution in such transformation

is immense.

2.13. The administration of justice is not
regarded as part of the developmental
activity and, therefore, not promoted through
the five year or annual plans. Justice is
thus a non-plan expenditure. Very nominal
amounts are being made available under the
plan cover in Seventh Finance Commission and
Eighth Finance Commission for construction of
court buildings, providing amenities for
existing structuress additional subordinate
courts, including the cost of staffing them.
A time has come to re-allocate expenditure on
administration of justice as plan
expenditure. Economic planning which ignores
legal formulations occasionally meets its

16
Waterloo. Law Commission has accordingly

16


expressed its opinion that expenditure on

s

administration of justice must be treated as
plan expenditure.

2.14. The question which stares into our
face and which ought to be answered is
whether the courts as at present structured
are equipped to deal with increased workload.
As is évident from the pending dockets which
are exploding at their seams, the justice
system is not adequately geared to meet the

new challengés and retain the confidence

reposed in it.

2.15. Delay in disposal of cases’ threatens
justice. The lapse of time ‘blurs truth,
weakens witnecses' memory and makes
presentation of evidence, difficult. This
leads to loss of public confidence in the
judicial process which in itself is a threat
to rule of law. The rising cost of
litigation is attributable to delay which in

turn causes. the litigants to either abandon
meritorious claims or compromise for a lesser

18
unjust settlement out of court.

17


2.16. There is another inherent danger in
not disposing of cases within a reasonable
time but which was sought to be ignored as an
undesirable spill over. One who has suffered
injustice and is unable to procure justice on
account of long delay would sometimes resort
to self-help by force as means of resolving
disputes. This ugly feature of the
dilatoriness of the system is now raising
head as evident from chain murders taking
place in some States. To illustrate, the
houses of Ram Bharosey and Pyare Lal had
fallen out and periodic fueling of the feud
was furnished by the kidnapping of 8 wife,
the stabbing of a brother and the like. The
next flare up was a murder by Rajender
Prasad, son of Pyare Lal He was sentencéd to
imprisonment for life. The accused, after
having served sentence for some time, was
released on Gandhi Jayanti day. On coming
out, he stabbed Ram Bharosey and his’. friend
Mansukh and the latter succumbed to his
injuries. He was again tried’. Numerous
cases can be cited for this sort of chain
reaction, more especially because when the

wounds are fresh, justice is not done.

18


2.17. When the position of the courts, as
the duly authorised arbitrators of society,
is diminished th ough undue delay, confidence
in peace, social order and good Government is
threatened. Congestion and delay not only
affect public confidence in the court's
ability to resolve disputes expeditiously but
also adversely affect the quality of justice
received in individual cases. If a Judge is
acting under unreasonable time pressure, he
may concentrate more on disposing of cases
than on doing ‘justice in each particular
case. Apart from the above-mentioned factors
which are beyond the control of machinery of
justice, there are court-related factors
which contribute to delay and congestion in
the courts. The justice system is not
adequately prepared to meet the new
challenges posed by the case load crisis.
Delay in filling in vacancies has _ been
pointed out as one such major factor for
mounting arrears,” though, strictly
speaking, it cannot be said to be 3 court-
related factor since the delay in the
appointment was invariably shown to be at the
Executive level. Coupled with this,
inefficient case flow management, poor and

unprofessional court management, inadequate


. facilities and insufficient financing have
all severely impaired the ability of the

courts to meet the challenge of rising

erescendo of arrears.

2.18. A limited number of available court
rooms also interferes with the orderly
running of cases. Court management is not
tuned to organisation method improvement.
The court officers lack training in
management and there is absence of integrated
-approach to the administration of the system.
The courts still are managed according to the
antiquated notions and they have no modern
means of communication. Subordinate courts
as a rule have not been given even telephone
connections, Failure to exercise effective
‘case management control by the court is a

major factor for delay.

2.19. There are three basic models for
reducing court delay and expediting justice.
First, making the use of existing court
resources more efficient; second, reducing
the demand for court services and resources;
and third, expanding court resources to meet

the increasing demand for court' services.

The present report seeks to make a convincing

20


case for expanding court resources ० mect

the increasing demand for court services.

2.20. Greater efficiency in using court
resources can be attained by effective and
professional court management and effective
case flow management and introducing modern
technologies in court management. In the
Indian context, with the increasing demand
for court services, coupled with the
expansion of the jurisdiction of the courts
to fields not traditionally within their
domain, it is not possible to reduce the
demand for court services. Even though Law
Commission has suggested the formation of
alternative” specialised fora for resolution
of disputes relating to tax, labour and
educational matters to relieve the burden of
the generalist courts, yet, keeping in view
the increasing inflow of work, there must be
proportional expansion of (court services.
Further, the specialist fora will also
require a proper infra-structure to
facilitate their smooth functioning. In the
final analysis, the efficient use of court
resources will always remain the major method
of court improyement in the absence of

adequate funds to expand court resources.

21


CHAPTER III

COURT FACILITIES: MANPOWER AND MATERIAL

3.1. varied interests cCirectly connected

with court system, though keen to reform the

judiciary, are so pre-occupied with changing
law and procedure that they overlook one very
important area which contributes largely to
the delay in judicial proceedings and
urgently needs reform, namely, the court
facility itself, difficult working condition
of the courts, organisational structure of
the system, faulty distribution of judicial
work, inadequate administrative staff, etc.,
all indicating insufficient resource

allocation, Each aspect may be separately

analysed.
Court Facilities

3.2. If an evaluation were to be made of the
- importance of the role of different
functionaries in the administration of
justice, the top position necessarily has to
be assigned to the trial court Judge. He is
the key stone in the judicial arc. However,
he is the one who suffers the most. The
facilities provided to the subordinate

judiciary are abysmal. These courts function

22


in ola, ill-ventilated, ill-equipped and

insanitary buildings. Often there is no
torndtere worth the name ane ne room oe even
a rest room for witnesses who have come from
long distance and have to cool their heels in
the verandah (if there is one) or either be
exposed to the heat of the summer or cold of
the winter. To illustrate this point, till
the year 1964, the court at Dabhoi in
Vododara District in Gujarat held sittings in
civil jail and members of the Bar attached to
the court met in the lunch hour in the open

space and during the winter in the verandah

ef the civil jail.

3.3. Most> of the munsif courts in Rajasthan
are functioning in rented buildings’ under
constant threat of eviction or be subjected
to rent suits. A rent suit is pending for
eviction from the court premises of 8 court
of munsif at Chirawa. The roof of the court
has caved in as the landlord will not spend
more than Rs.12 per year on repairs, which is
the actual rent paid monthly. 15 courts of
Civil Judge, Junior Division, in the State of
Gujarat, hold their sittings in rented
premises wholly unsuitable for functioning of

a court. More or less similar is the

23


2
situation in other States.

3.4. Apart f£-om court buildings, the
existing court buildings have no amenities.
Sufficient number of cupboards or almirahs
for keeping files and records are not
provided. Files and records are lying
scattered on the floor. Large number of
courts of Judicial Magistrate do not have
printed forms for issuing summons or receipt
books for acknowledging deposit of fines.
Since November 1961, the courts in Ahmedabad
‘rural district headquarters are located in a
building meant for leprosy hospital, far away
from the nearest habitation. Small court
rooms formerly meant for small causes court
in the compound of Ahmedabad city civil court
aré now set apa.t for the use of the Judges
of the city civil court. They are very small
in size, having a choking atmosphere. The
courts in Alwar are housed in old stables of
the erstwhile ruler. The courts at many
places are being held in chambers where
neither the litigants can stand nor lawyers
can argue.” In fact, cases have come to
light where when an additional court is
sanctioned, the existing court room is

divided by a cotton curtain partition

24


Gividing one court room as court

courts. Roth the courts are dist
noise emanating from each. As

glory, on hifurcation of old Ro
the Hiol: Court for the newly

Gujarat State since May 1, 1960,

a building constructed for

hospital. Twenty-eight years

.formation of Gujarat, the High

continues to hold its sittings

building. Gujarat High Court ct
Judges. Now they have 24 J
cengestion defies descviption.

to the Law Comnission's questionn
that the percentane of courts f'n
rented buildings range from i7 ‘to
which have furnished the informat

3.5. The Seve th and the हुए

jon both had yely

ए०
tor aticcation of larger
constructing new covrt buildings
court facilities and upgrading th
in the oxicting courts. the Ei
Commission, analysing the
received by it from the State
that 429 courts were loccted
buildings, was of the opinion,

reflected in its recommendations

25

room for tuo
uried by the
a crowning
mbay State,
carved out
was set up in
children's
after the
Comrt still
in the same
arted vith 5
udges. The
the cesponse
aire reveals
etioning in
2 in States
दि 4
ion.

hth manos
recommended
outlay for
1 eeprndira
e facilities
06701 Finance
information
sovernments
in rented

vhich was

, that ald


the 429 courts should be provided with pucca
Government buildings and specifically
allocated Rs.17.40 crores under this sub-head
at the rate of Rs.4 lakhs per unit.
Simultaneously, it granted about Rs.19 crores
for ‘structural alterations and provision of
facilities to the public and staff in the
existing courts. The situation has hard]y
improved by -the time the Ninth Finance
Commission is deliberating on the subject
inasmuch as it transpired from the enquiries
instituted by Law Commission about. the

‘progress of the implementation of the
aforementionéd award 49 12 States. 12 States
‘replied to the queries of the Law Commission,
4 of which. confessed that the award has not
been implemented and the remainder made: a
perfunctory statement that the work is at a
preliminary stage of progress.”

3.66 The .Law Commission “ iasued. a
comprehensive questionnaite for eliciting
information relevant to various topics under
discussion. The High Court of Uttar Pradesh
in its detailed reply clearly indicated that
there is an acute shortage of court rooms in

the State courts. Of the existing sanctioned

26


strength of the courts 985 - are regular
courts while from the remaining, 427 courts
are held in improvised court rooms, 65 -in
collectorates and 39 in rented buildings.
Some of the buildings which are meant for
tegular courts have, by passage of time,
become too. old and are in dilapidated
condition. The improvised court rooms are
‘very small and consequently affect adversely
“the smooth,: functioning of the courts,
simultaneously ‘inviting “complainté from
members of the Bar and litigants. Whete the
courts are held in buildings meant for
collectorates, the executive authorities are
pressing for release of court rooms.
Similarly, .some: of the owners of rented
premises . in which courts are held = are
requesting for release of.the building in
eccupation -of Judicial Department. “The
overall situation is pretty grim and it is
estimated that over the next five. years,
about 500: éourt rooms are réquired.. The
Eighth Finance Commission has calculated that
taken the requirements of all States
. together, 210 additional courts are required.
This figure has been arrived at by dividing

the pendency im excess of one year's

27


institution by the State's specific annual
disposal per court or two States’ average,
whichever ja higher 3 the report doen 11०४९
provide for additional courts in the State of
Uttar Pradesh but that should not lead to the
facile conclusion that no cases in
subordinate courts in U.P. over one year are
pending. Even though detailed memorandum was
submitted .to the Law Commission in response
to its questionnaire, the High Court did not
refer to the recommendations of the Eighth
Finance Commission, even though admittedly 39

courts are functioning in rented buildings.

3०7५ It वड a truism that for an orderly
functioning Of a court with dignity and
‘efficiency, a standard building having proper
court ‘rooms is a ‘sine: quad :non. There is°an
undying clamour.. for setting up addit#onal
Benches’ of: Allatabad High €ourt. A
Commission ‘was set ‘up by the’ Government of
India to ascertain whether a Bench of ‘the
Allahabad High Court should be set up in
:Western. U.P. Its terme were -éxpanded to
consider such requirement in other " States.
The Commission, . while recommending extra
Benches of certain High Courts, stressed that

the Benches shall not be commissioned unless

28


a functional building, equipped with al} the
modern amenities and suited to the dignity
and prestige of the court, complete in all
respect, is “available for immediate
occupation. According to the Commission, the
Bench should not be inargurated unless and
until adequate funds for properly stocking
and equipping the Judges! library essential
for efficient and smooth functioning of the
Bench are allocated and sanctioned by the
State Government. The report of the
Commission on the need for a Bench of the
Allahabad High Court in Western region of
Uttar Pradesh sets out a cetailed list of
essentials which a High Court building must
necessarily be equipped with in order to
function efficiently. It suggested that the
building should have at least 25 court rooms,
25 chambers for the Judges, 5 fire-proof
rooms for the Judges’ library, a conference
hall of suitable size for the Judges, an
administrative block consisting of office
rooms for Additional or Joint Registrar,
Deputy Registrar, Assistant Registrar,
Section Officers, ete. Sufficient number of
large fire-proof record rooms must form an

integral part of the buildinn, In addition,


the building must have accommodation for 3
Bar rooms, 2 rooms for the Bar library with
an attached reading room and an adequate
number of chambers for lawyers, 2 waiting
halls for the litigants on the model of Delhi
High Court, 25 garages for vehicles of Judges
and other officers, 2 halls for petition
writers, stamp vendors and typists, canteens
for Judges, the lawyers and others, a
dispensary, a post office, a bank, etc.
Apart from all this, there should be 25
bungalows for .the residence of Judges and
flats for the entire staff. There should be
a guest house for the Chief Justice to stay
whenever _ he may be required to go there.
Apart from the necessity of having large
complex of court building with future scope
for expansion, it should be necessary to have
enough land for the lawyers to set up their
chambers or even residential accommodation

because they are likely to shift to the seat
9

of the proposed Bench.

3.8. It is implicit in this suggestion that

a ‘similar plan for standard court facilities

for the subordinate courts should also be

worked out.

30


3.9. In India, the problem of having
sufficient court rooms is of primary concern.
However, whenever the construction of the
court rooms is undertaken, it is essential to
provide for a standard plan in respect of
each level of court. It should not only have
all the requisites proposed by the Commission
hereinabove referred to but care should also
be taken about adequate lighting,
ventilation, power, agcoustics, plumbing
facilities, etc. All the court rooms should
be built to accommodate the need for future
increased volume of litigation. These future
expansion néeds- are being kept in view in
most of the states. It appears that while
expansion in future is kept in view, the
approach is corfined to vacant space near
existing court building not being allocated
for any other purpose. That would disclose
an inadequate approach but the whole aspect
is based on allocation of adequate resources
and in this behalf, one regrets to note that
the existing allocated funds are not properly

11
utilised.

31


Norms for Sanctioning Additional Courts

3.10. Every State has prescribed norms or
guidelines for sanctioning new or additional
, courts. The power to sanction a new or
acditional court vests in the State. The
proposal for the same emanates from the High
Court in view of the constitutional provision
contained in article 235 which provides that
the control over district ccurts and_ the
courts subordinate thereto including the
posting and promotion of persons belonging to
the judicial service of the State vests in
the Niah Com t. ANY the ports up to ane
inclusive of the post of district judge
belong to the judicial service of the State.
As setting up of new or additional courts to
be manned by members beloncing to the
judicial service of the State entails
financial liability, the power to sanction
the same vests in the State Gevernment; but
this power is exercised effectively by the
High Court who appreciates and understands
the needs of the workload and the necessity
of additional courts. Accordingly, the
recommendation emanates from the High Court
and ordinarily the State sanctions the same.

To illustrate, the Gujarat High Court has

32


prescribed workload for each of its
subordinate and district courts. An increase
beyond 25% or the prescribed workload
justifies a claim for a new court.
Information, however, is not available as to
how diligently these specifications are
followed. Apart from the workload which is
the primary eriterion for setting up
additional or new courts, there are other
incidental factors which are also ‘kept in
view, such as convenience of litigants,
availability of buildings for the courts,
residential _acommodation for staff,
facilities for bar and library, distance from
the headquarter, transport facility, school

12
for the children of the staff, etc.

3.11. Excessive workload on any given
court completely disrupts the functioning of
the court. Innumerable cases are fixed every
day and the major time of the court is wasted
in either granting adjournments or re-

arranging the cases with the result that very

Vittle effective work de done की trfat courts
on a given day. Manageable court dockets is
a pre-requisite for smooth and efficient
functioning of the courts. It appears that

the guidelines or norms for setting up or

33


sanctioning additional courts. are nat revised
at regular intervals. They have become
obsolete in some States with the result that
sanctioning of the additional court takes too
long time and if the additional court is
sanctioned after a long delay, it becomes an
exercise in futility because, by that time, a

.

further sanctioning of an additional court
has become necessary. The analogy can be
drawn from ‘the fact that when sanctioned
strength of the Judge undergoes upward
revision but the newly created posts are not
filled in within a-reasonable time and when
they are filled in after a long delay, the
situation has undergone such a change that a
further revision of the Judge strength has
become overdue. This situation applies
mutatis mutandis to the sanctioning of the
additional courts. It is, therefore,
absolutely indispensable that not the
" Government but the High Court in each State
should prescribe norms and criteria for
setting up of new courts and the same are
meticulously followed. There should be no
resistence in doing it under the usual

pretext of constraint on financial resources.

34


Residence for the Judicial Officers

3.12. Providing a residential accommodation
for judicial off.cers is of great importance.
This has to be accorded hich priority because.
of the speed with which process of
urbanisation is taking place, there is an
unbearable load on housing acommodation
available for urban and metropolitan areas.
Consequently, if governmental accommodation
for residence of judicial officers is not
provided, judicial officer has to rent the
premises and the rents being prohibitive, a
decent accommodation goes beyond their reach.
Usually, a judicial officer is transferred
regularly at an interval of three years.
When he is’ posted to a new place, he hardly
knows anyone. In order to secure some
accommodation, , he has to take assistance of
local lawyers. He is thus exposed to the
double jeopardy of being brought under the
insidious obligation of a landlord and a
lawyer. This ‘situation, apart from being
Geplorable, is liable to be abused. The
Seventh Finance Commission took note of this
fact and observed that it is essential for
the independence and fair image of the

Judiciary that Judicial Officer should not be

35


constrained to hire quarter from private
persons as far as possible. Accordingly, in
its recommendations, it sanctioned funds for
constructing residential houses for Judicial
officers. With all this laudable object and
the weagre provision for the same. the
position as it cbtains today pertaining to

the question of the residence of subordinate

. Judicial officers is distressing.

3.13. According to the inquiry undertaken by
the Eighth Finance Commission, out of a total
strength of 7,238 Judicial Officers, 3,819
Judicial Officers, i.e., 52.76%, have been
allotted Government accommodation. The
Commission expressed its considered opinion
that the minimum desirable level of housing
accommodation for: the Judicial Officers
should be 80%. and accordingly it~: granted
Rs.14.94 crores at the rate of Rs.70,000 per
unit हि for additional 2,107 residential
quarters. A 30% extra has been provided for
the hill States.

3.14. Raving regard to the phenominal rise
in the cost of construction of a flat, a

provision of Rs.70,000 per unit irrespective


of the place where the flat is to be
constructed doe: not appear to Se adequate.
To illustrate, Law Commission has been
furnished with information that when some
quarters were built in the year 1987 in
Himachal Pradesh, the cost of construction
per unit was Rs.2.60 lakhs and the
accommodation was a modest one. It is,
therefore, necessary for the Ninth Finance
_ Commission which is at present functioning,
while sanctioning grants for construction of
quarters for Judicial Officers, to take into
-account. a very-important factor of. high rise
in cost of construction and grant adequate
sums. 80 that the desired objective may be

achieved.

3.15. Law Commission, in its search for
adequate information, was informed that while
many states provide reasonably decent
accommodation to most of the High Court
Judges, Andhra Pradesh is one State where 555
* of the High Court Judges were without
Government accommodation. The situation
generally as regards the subordinate judicial
officers, to say the least, is depressing.

In Bihar, 80% of the judicial officers are

37


not provided residential accommodation; and
even .after utilising the grant made by the
Eighth Finance Commission, 42% of the
judicial officers would still be without
residential accommodation. The situation is
equally bad in Andhra Pradesh where 58% of
the judicial officers have not been pravided
cesidential accommodation and in Maharashtra
638 of the officers are without governmental
accommodation. The information does not
clarify the position whether the grant made
by the Eighth Finance. Commission has_ been
taken into account while furnishing
information. Assuming that it is not, then,
even after. the award, 36% of the officers
would still ‘ be without governmental
accommodation.

3.16. On the advent of the constitution,
ever proliferating activities of the State, a
rapid process of urbanisation, a large scale
migration of population coupled with
awareness of rights, all have contributed to
the tremendous increase in the workload of
the judicial system. However, the system
functions without much of a change,
completely devoid of moderen management

techniques and technological advances,

38


neither of which have kept pace with the
increase in the workload. In concise terms,
most courts neec study, structural overhaul

and reform. ‘

3.17. The court system has evolved over a
period of many years and the methods employed
to deal with its problems have been piecemeal
Statewise. There has been. little systematic
planning and development keeping in view the
national perspective. Of course, the Law
Commission has submitted two reports
recommending re-structuring of subordinate
- courts in all the States on identical lines
as prelude to the setting up of Indian

17
Judicial Service as an all-India service.

Staffing Pattern

3.18. To say that increase in the workload
must result in corresponding increase in. the
staff of the court is to state the obvious.
But this obvious is wholly neglected. The
court staff require a special set of scales
to be able to function because court
administration involves duties which are
unique in character. But the courts
generally do not follow any uniformity or

scientific pattern of ‘staff recruitment.

39


While, as pointed out earlier, norms or
guidelines have been prescribed by some
States for setting up additional or new
courts when the workload rises beyond the
prescribed maximum, yet when the additional
court is not sanctioned simultaneously, there
is  disinclination to sanction the increased
staff and the courts have no power even to
create the post of a peon on the specious
plea that it entails financial liability
“which cannot be incurred without the sanction
of the Finance Ministry of the State
Government. To illustrate, in Rajasthan, a
clerk who was required to handle 350 files is
now required to handle 2,000 to 3,000
files. No specific qualifications are
prescribed disclosing the special skill
needed to wo « in court administration.
There is no realistic estimate of what staff
requirement for each section ought to be. As
for example, in Supreme Court, there has been
considerable increase in junior clerical
staff and peons but there is no corresponding
increase in other staff. Such increases have

19
to be looked on as part of overall -policy.

40


3.19. To deal with this aspect more
effectively, the Law Commission solicited
information on the staffing pattern at each
level of the judiciary. ' Host of the States
have submitted the figures of total number of
staff without ‘providing the level-wise
information. Andhra Pradesh and Punjab have
provided the prescribed staffing patterns and
in these two States, the staffing patterns
are almost similar but the strength of the
staff is , higher than what the Finance
Commission allows while sanctioning the funds
for additional courts and their staff. As
for example, in the district courts under the
High Courts ‘of the afore-mentioned two
States, staff consists of 35 members apart
from process servers and attendants.” On
the other hand, the Finance Commission allows
a staff strength:of only nine members per
district court.” The difference is too
glaring -to be missed. The only explanation
one can offer is that probably the district
court workload is far above the prescribed

maximum and, therefore, the additional staff

is sanctioned.

3.20. There has to be a prescribed minimum

staff requirement at each level of the

41


judiciary and thereafter the needs for staff
expansion can be determined scientifically.
At present the courts are not following ‘any
fixed criteria. Most of the States have
replied that the additional staff is employed
1६ the workload is more than the prescribed
Maxima but no scientific formula is being
followed to determine the kind of staff .to be
recruited and the additional staff to’ be
sanctioned. Such ad boc mechanisms cannot
serve the ends of the courts because there is

no fixed criteria for deciding the type of

staff which is to be recruited.

3.21. A detailed study has been made with
regard to the staffing patterns in the Supeme
Court of India and Allahabad High Court. The
study reveals that over years, there has been
-a substantial increase in the strength of
Class IV employees. The situation in other
High Courts may not be different. Ordinarily
in most of the High Courts, after the entry
at the grassroot level, the staff vertically
moves upward by promotion. An employee who
joined as an Assistant and, after acquiring
qualification of stenography, reached the
highest position of the Registrar in the

Supreme Court. Some years back, a _ senior

62


District Judge from the State Judicial
Service was recruited as Registrar of the
“supreme Court o. India. That practice was
discontinued but very recently, post of
Registrar-General has been created and a
judicial officer from the State Judicial
Service of the rank of a District Judge has
been recruited for the post. The method of
vertical promotion rising tp the highest rank
was justified on the assumption that during
this upward journey, these members of the
staff collect lot of experience and become
mature to handle the post at the highest
level. However, because of the upward
movement, 7 they also acquire rigidity,
narrowness of outlook and become . status
guoist. While the institution grows, the
sheer size of the institution demands
‘efficiency, imagination and initiative. This
can hardly be expected from the staff moving
from the lowest to the highest, being totally
devoid of any administrative and menagerial
Bkills outside the court structure teseie. >
3.22. It is notorious that there is no
arrangement for any in-service training to be

imparted to the staff recruited on general

qualifications. In order to raise the

43


efficiency ratio, the staff manning the
courts have to be selected with some special
qualifications and trained in a systematic
manner. This approach necessitates
systematic recruitment with higher prescribed
qualifications, in-service training and
greater degree of specialism. This
specialism has to be linked to the new
technology that might be introduced as well
as to the functional demands. Therefore,
training programme work shop/conferences
should be developed for court executives to
aid in the development of a comprehensive
body of court management theory and of the
standards, qualifications and functions of

court executives.

3.23. It may be of some use to mention that
the post of Registrar, the highest
ministerial officer in the Judicial Service
. Of the State is manned by a senior . District
Judge. The Registrar is also assigned some
non=-contested judicial functions. This role

is admirably carried out by them.

3.24. The complex environmental network,
internal and external, piaces a strain upon

the administrative machinery of the courts.

44


, Atypical demands for management competence
are created that exposure to ordinary
administrative work rarely provides. Courts
are as complex as any organisation in
“contemporary society. An average degree of
“management . success is possible only if
competent managerial skills are brought to
bear on managerial problems.24 ह
कि 25
Nanagement of the System
3.25. As the system functions today, Judges
have also to undertake the management of
‘court and justice system. Judges are trained
in law and through experience become experts
in the process of adjudication and judicial
हि decision-making. When recruited from the
Bar, they have Aittle or no knowlecce of
modern methods ot management of the court and
‘court system. After being recruited as
Judges, no training is imparted in. mocern
methods. Therefore, they lack expertise in
administrative matters. It is perhaps too
much ‘to expect that someone with little, if
any administrative training, exprience or
expertise would acquire skills “without
training to successfully manage a system as

complex as that of our courts. This would

45


imply that Judges are not necessarily the
best candidates to manage the courts single-
handedly.

3.26. If Judges develop a managerial
expertise among their own ranks, then they
are quite possibly the best qualified
individuals to directly manage the courts
_because they are in a position to comprehend
all the ramifications of the system that an
administrative decision might bring about.
But development of managerial skill and
expertise cannot be acquired overnight. And,
forget not, the decision-making process and
stages of adjudication keep Judges very busy.
They hardly have any spare time to acquire
the managerial expertise and if they do
eventually acquire administrative expertise,
they may have hardly time to both administer
courts and continue to exercise their

adjudicative function.

3.27. +Specialisation in court management is
the only realistic solution. The question,
however, is whether it is practically
feasible, given the present strain on
judicial manpower and the unlikelihood of a
large scale increase in numbers. of Judges

appointed. So, the possibility of selecting

46


alternative personnel to manage the courts
should be explored.
Creation of a new professional ~
The Court Execitive

3.28. The Court Executive should be given
control of managing the courts. The person,
of necessity, must be highly qualified. His
areas of exprtise should include, amongst
‘others, broad managerial skills, knowledge of
the structure of judicial system, familiarity
with legal procedures, comprehension oF
computer sciences and data processing
techniques and "skills and personnel
recruitment, selection and- placement. Te
might take considerable time to develop such
a highly qualified and specialist expert.
Nevertheless, in order to p.operly and
efficiently manage an organisation as large
and complex as the courts, it is necessary to
cultivate and nurture such knowledgeablc
administrators. In short, a new profession
would have to be created. Inter-disciplinary
education programmes. could be established to

train individuals as Court Executives.

3.29. The primary responsibility would

remain with the Judiciary to formulate


management policies of the court and it would
then be up to the Court Executive to ensure
that these policies were implemented (under

the supervision and scrutiny of the

Judiciary).

3.30. It thus transpires that, in order to
improve judicial administration, the
utilisation of management consultants and
other experts who can bring their knowledge
to bear upon this subject is unavoidable.
Use of the expertise in meeting preblems of
judicial administration ie indispensable.
Apart from the Court Executive, what is
needed is a ‘National Judicial Centre', which
can form part of the National Judicial
Service Commission (Commisson will not only
be dealing with appointment and training of
judicial officers), for the co-ordination and

development of -

(a) court staff; their conditions of
service;

(0) training procedure for the new
staff;

(९०) standardised court room facilities;
and

(d) recording of cases in computers on
a national regular comprehensive

basis.

48


3.31. Entry of mechanisation and modern
court management systems into court has been
delayed too much. Tape recorders,
dictaphones, zeroxing machines, calculators,
computers, micrphones and whole arrary of
other gadgets, when put to use, will minimise
avoidable court time and economise time spent
in existing methods of administration. The
fossilised court system can be discarded and
“new technology introduced which will quicken
the pace and streamline the assembly line
operation of the case flow.

The Use of sompubers and
ols

Other Technological

3.32. The most sophisticated of the new
Management technology is the computer. The
computers efficiently speed up the court

proceedings.

3.33. Data processing is one of the foremost
uses to which computers are put in an attempt
to ease case backlogs and increase court
efficiency. In planning, for the adoption of
data processing programme “within a court
system, three essential steps must be taken:

(1) It is necessary to Gesign a system
of reporting each step of every case.

(2) It must be determined what

49


electronic equipment is necessary.
(3) It is necessary to have an
adequately trained staff capable of dealing
with the information provided 929 the
equipment. A properly programmed computer run
by skilled operators can produce an infinite
number of comparisons and information which
would enable the courts to better control the

26
eases and thus reduce the backlog.

3.34. The courts which have a great .volut:c
of activity are readily adaptable to data
processing because such a progamme recuc2:
the number of personnel needed to keop court
records current and would eliminate to a
great extent the. bulky filing equioment,
thereby reducing the space needed for record
keeping.”
3.35. Data processing has speeded up the
process of motor vehicle violation in the
traffic courts and, on the civil side, it bas
provided valuable information and statistics
to prevent calendar conflicts for attorneys
and insurance companies in the area.
3.36. Computer can also increase efficiency
in the area of covrt calendaring ४3156

congested and conflicting court calenJars

50


29
cause delay in court proceedings.

Computers can not only be used to improve the
clerical aspect of judicial administration
but also to retrieve case law and statutory
material, the latter being more necessary in
view of frequent amendments of the statute
law.

3.37. ‘The computers in courts offer an up-
“to-now unheard of capacity for analysis and
evaluation of court operations. “ The -use of
computers allows a- systems analysis of courts
and. judicial proéess. systems analysis
examines the operating relationship of a
system's part to determine how will they
operate together, because the system is seen
as the sum of its:parts. At the same time,
systems analysic keeps 8 global or systen
wide perspective while werking on detail.
The parts of the whole system are important
in so far as they contribute to the system's

goals.

3.38.. The ultimate object of the analysis of
a system is to determine its effectiveness.
Effectiveness -is measured by how well it
operates, including such factors as the

Presence or absence of delay between points

51


sain the process. Effectiveness can be
measured according to the workload and cost

to produce that. workload when compared with
other court systems without a systems
examination; it is often impossible to know
whether some parts are duplicating efforts of
other parts or are incompatible with one
another. Systems concept together with the
computers have begun to force long-range
thinking outside daily operations, that is,

planning and research.

3.39. Many courts abroad have found it
worthwhile to computerise their information
system. However, it is essential to remember
that no computer can be brought into a court

“to "solve! that court's delay problems.

Unless the court has a plan to reduce delay,
the court will not be able to tell computer
programmers what information to collect and
what reports to produce. Computers have
often played an important role when they have
accompanied efforts by courts to reduce delay
through active case flow management, but
computers have failed when they have merely
been substituted for planning and hard work

32
needed by the human beings within a court.

52


Court Recoras

3.40. The court records are maintained
according to t.e rules framed oy each High
Court. Generally, the records are placed in
files. The files are given numbers anc then
stored in steel almirahs or most often racks.
There is a provision for maintaining some
part of records for a certain ‘duration and
.some have to be maintained permanently. This
method of storage takes a lot of space which
itself is scarce. Law Commission has
received information from some courts that
for want of storage space, the files and
bastas containing the court records are lving
on the floors. The files are maintained with
locse sheets which can be tinkered with very
easily. Thus, this method of storage not
only exposes the records tc mutilaticn by
insects and pests but also to tampering. No
court in India has introduced any modern
technology for storing court cecords.

3.41. Courts of the last quarter of the 20th
century require modern record systems,
efficient procedures for storing and
undertaking and retrieving information from
these records. It shovld have built in

controls to ensure conficentiality, privacy

53


‘and security of the data being maintained.
It should Have a conscious policy of

34
retention and di:posal.

Microfilm

3.42. The use of microfilm is another method
to effectuate an efficient handling of court
records to make better use of court
facilities and personnel. The advantages of
such a system are several: more storage space
is available for court records; the handling
of court records is facilitated; less danger
of loss or tampering of documents;. and it
allows for more efficient use of court
personnel. = (70 be precise, the microfilm
acts as a security measure for preventing
loss or alteraticn of documents by having two
rolls of film processed. The negative is

immediately provided to State archives and

the positive roll is sent to the court to be
36
filed.)

3.43. Microfilming is adopted for many
courts abroad but its use must be selective
and cautiously judged. Microfilm can also
create blurred, hard to read copy, and

deteriorate with time. The user, therefore,

54


must be informed and discriminating in
applying this technology. There are other
sophisticated tochnologies to preserve court
records, such as introducing filing system
and colour coding to facilitate easy storage
and retrieval, etc. ~° Each court must decide
what is available in the market and what can

best suit its needs.

55


CHAPTER IV

FINANCIAL PALLIATIVE FOR THE COURTS

4.1. It is crystal clear that the available
resources for the courts, both manpower and
material, are woefully inadequate. A
constitutional democracy founded on rule of
law must of necessity provide adequate
facilities for determination of basic legal
rights. Rule of law survives where its
transgression or violation is remediable at
the hands of courts. If the courts are
overloaded and are unable to redress the
wrong quickly and efficiently, it would pose
a threat to the constitutional democracy
itself. Once +the respect for rule of law
deteriorates or disappears, the foundation of
the constitutic..al democracy 6०६८७ shattered.
For its continued health, efficient care
system is a pre-requisite. And the court
system, to justify its usefulness, must be
able to render guick, efficient and just
justice. As already pointed out by the Law
Commission in its interim report on Manpower
Planning in Judiciary ५ the Judge:population
ratio in India is grossly inadequate and
requires to be enhanced at least five times

in next five years. If this recommendation

56


is effectively implemented, new’ courts,
additional qualified staff, streamlining of
staffing patter)., modern cffice equipments
and, above all, attractive service conditions
for the Judges and the staff will be needed
as a first priority. Inputs under all these
heads would require funds and the Law
Commission is conscious that they are in

short supply and not readily available.

4.2. Justice system does not stand high in
the list of priorities for disbursal of
public funds. Expenditure on administration
of justice has still the dubious distinction

of being styled as non-plan expenditure.

4.3. The salaries of Judges of the Supreme
Court of India are- a charge on the
Consolidated Fund of india. Similarly, the
salaries of the Judges of the High Court are
a charge on th? Consclidated Fund of the
State.” The adm:nistrative expenses of -the
Supreme Court, including all salaries,
allowances and pensions payable to or in
respect of the officers and servants of the
Court, are also a charge upon the

Consolidated Fund of Irdia. There is an

analogous provision in r2spect of the

57


administrative expenses of the High court.
4.4, Except the funds charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India or of State, some
additional funds required by the Supreme
Court or High Court for maintenance of its
administrative establishment are required to
be voted in Lok Sabha or State Assembly, as
the case may be. In this respect, the court
_system .is very much at the mercy of the
Legislature because funds which are votable
can be varied each year, Formally, the
budget proposal may emanate from the Supreme
Court or the High Court, as the case may be,
but the nodal Ministry in each case has
hardly made an arrangement for a two way
dialogue in respect of financial and
management questions, After the budget is
received from the Supreme Court of India or
the High Court, amourits in respect of votable
items are re-set by the nodal Ministry. Some
cuts and alterations take place at this end.
The ‘revised proposal is sent to the Finance
Ministry which has its own constraints and
riders and ordinarily what finally emerges
anc is placed in the hands of the Court is
much less than not only what is proposed but

what is the minimal reqtirement. In

58


processing through the Departments which have
no vision as to the essential requirements of
the courts, the whole exercis2 becomes a

bargaining event and.the representative of

“the court, if at all consulted, may be able

to mould the situation both the ways
depending upon his persuasive capacity. The
hard fact that remains is that Judiciary has
very little say touching the power of purse.
And this aspect has consistently thwarted the
growth and expansion of judicial services.
This is a grey area fairly visible in the
matter of relationship between the Executive

and the Judiciary.

4,5. है Since.1973, and especially after the
judgment in  Kesavananda Bharati's case
popularly known as Fundamental Rights case,
followed by the first supersession, the
Judiciary in general and Supreme Court of
India in particular acquired high visibility
profile. The decisions in Sankari Prasad
Signh Dev v. Union of India’ and Sajjan
Singh v. State of Rajasthan’ confirmed the
power of Parliament to amend any Part of the
Constitution including Fundamental Rights

which gave rise to a debate that the Court

accepted the supremacy of the Parliament over

59


Judiciary. Consequently, the Executive
retained its regard for the relative autonomy
of the Judiciary In Kesavananda Bharati's
case, the Court, by a slender majority, while
conceding the power of the Parliament to
amend any Part of the Constitution, ruled
that the basic structure/feature of the
Constitution is beyond the emendatory power
of the Parliament which, amongst others,
includes the power of judicial review. The
Jurists writing on the functioning of the
Court and the viewers of the Court's judicial
process perceived certain threats emanating
from the Executive to the independence of the
Judiciary.” While examining the views
expressed by the Jurists on an earlier
occasion, the Law Commission reviewed the
power and the ,:rocedure for appointment of
Judges to High Court and Supreme Court and,
for detailed reasons stated therein,
recommended a new forum for appointment of
Judges to superior Judiciary. - The underlying
purpose was to make Judiciary self-reliant in
matter of appointments, steffing patterns,
necessary lay out on administration of

ll
justice, et al.

4.6. The Jurists who prize irdependence of

60


Judiciary have always lamented that the
touchstone of judicial independence is the
power of purse which unfortunately it sadly
lacks. Every proposal, except the non-
votable items, which entails financial
liability emanating from the Judiciary can be
implemented only if endorsed by the
Executive. And in the priority of the
Executive in the matter of distribution of
its available resources, administration of
justice is at a much lower rung of the
- ladder. The independence of the Judiciary
‘can be seriously undermined if the requisite
financial resources for its efficient and
independent functioning are not made
available. The arrears piled up at ali
levels in courts, can be partly attributed to
inadequate infra- structural facilities, which
is compounded by lack of adequate and timely
funding. Funding of courts is given little
public attention and much of the Judiciary's
independence is taken away sub silentio.
The tragedy is that when the demands for
grants are voted upon in relation to the
nodal Ministry which includes the budget
proposals in respect of courts, that is,
administration of justice, the members are

‘not given informaton what requirements were

61


advanced by the courts in their budget
proposals and “ow the nodal Ministry has
tinkered with the same, the reasons for the
same, and whether the restoration is
possible. Further, the view of the Judiciary
is not made available to Parliament. The
case generally goes by default in the sense
that the nodal Ministry becomes the final
arbiter in respect of the requirements of the
Judiciary. Apart from being unscientific,
the third most important limb of the
constitutional democracy, namely, Judiciary,
has no say in the matter of disbursal of
funds, including for its maintenance,

sustenance, growth, expansion, etc.

4.7. Some illustrations in this behalf may
prove revealing. The Chief Justice of the
Andhra Pradesh High Court desired that the
staff .of the court be put on par in the
matter of pay scales with their counterparts
in secretariat service of the Executive
Government. Now undoubtedly article 225
empowers the Chief Justice of the High Court
to make appointments of officers and servants
of the High Court. Clause (2) of article 229

provides that subject to the provisions of

62


any law made by the Legislature of the State,
"the conditions of service of officers and
servants of a Hizh Court shall Fe such as may
be prescribed by rules made by the Chief
Justice of the High Court provided that the
rules made under this clause shall, so far as
they relate to salaries, allowances, leave or
pensions, require the approval of the
Governor of the State, meaning thereby the
State Cabinet ~ in actual working, the State
+ Finance Ministry. The staff aggrieved by the
negative attitude of the State Government
filed a writ petition seeking a writ of
mancamus against the State Government.
directing it to implement the recommendations
of the Chief Justice as made under article
229. The submission of the Association of
the staff vas t.at article 22911) read with
rule 19 of the A.P. High “ourt Service Rules
empowered the Chief Justice not only to make
appointment of officers and servants of the
courts but also to prescribe their conditions
of service and the requirement of approval of
the Governor was merely a_ constitutional
formality. The Pigh Court allowed the writ
petition and directed a mandamus to be
issued. On a certificate granted by the High

Court, the matter camo to the Supreme

63


13
Court. The Supreme Court, while in terms

disapproving the approach of the Government
in not accepting the recommendation of the
Chief Justice, on an interpretation of
article 229, held that the approval of the
Governor, as contemplated by article 229, is
not a mere formality but is a matter of
substance. The fall out of the judgment can
be best described by observing that there is
no real independence -if "unaccompanied by
power of purse. To some extent, these
provisions have considerably thwarted the
growth and expansion of «judicial

administration.

4.8. A diametrically opposite view was taken
by the Delhi High’ Court when it ruled that
apart from the constitutional provision, as a
matter of convention, the Executive must
accept the recommendation of the Chief
Justice made in exercise of the power
conferred by article 229 and should not treat
it. on par with the recommendation made by
some bureaucrat. The occasion for making
this observation arose on when the staff of
Delhi High Court long clamouring for equality

of pay with their counterparts in the Centre

and Delhi Administration moved in this

64


behalf. This was venemently opposed by the
Executive. The High Court issued a mandamus
to step up paricy. The Court observed that
the sovereignty of people is reflected in
three limbes of the Constitution - the
Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary.
The Chief Justice is the head of the
Judiciary. When, therefore, he makes a
recommendaticn, the necessary presumption is
that it has been made with a full sense of
responsibility? and circumspection and after
having weighed various public interests as
well.as financial aspects involved. Barring
exceptional circumstances, the
recommendations of Chief Uustice should be
treated _as binding and acceptable. If' the
approval of the Government was withheld or
refused on extraneous or irrelevant
consideration or in an evbitrary or
discriminatory manner, it would amount to
violation of the principles of equality laid
down ४४७ articles 14 and 16 of the

पु 15
Constitution and a mandamus can be issued.

4.9. The Supreme Court Employees - Welfare
Association was long since clamouring for
extending to them the benefit of pay scales

and allowances which were in vogue for the

65


officers and members of the staf of the High
Court of Delhi, the parity to be established
cadre-wise,. The Chief Justice of India had
appointed a Committee which had recommended
that the question of revision of pay scales
of the ,officers and staff belonging to the
Registry of the Supreme Court of India may be
referred to the Fourth Pay Commission, Ina
petition filed by the afore-mentioned
Association, the Court directed by way of
interim relief the parity 38 prayed for and
directed the Union of India to make the
necéssary reference as recommended by the
Committee. The interim relief also entailed
financial responsibility. In. view of the
Court's diréction, the same could not be
demurred on the vlea that the direction had
not the approval of the President as provided
in proviso to article 146(2) of the
constitution. ©

4.10. The principle enunciated in the
aforementioned judgments may be extended a
step further. It is the duty of the State to
set .up adequate number - of courts for
expeditious disposal of disputes arising
between the residents of the State. It is

the fundamental obligation of the State to

66


create courts which can exercise the judicial
power of the State. Failure to perform this
duty may permi a mandamus to be issued to
the State to perform its constitutional
obligation, one such obligation being to set
up adequate number of courts and to place
funds at their disposal so that they, in
their turn, can carry out. the obligation to
dispense justice independently, expeditiously
and effictently. This logically follows from
a view expressed by one of the Judges of the
‘Supreme court composing the Bench, in judges
case. After undértaking a detailed analysis
of the continued neglect on the part of the
Government in ‘not making a proper review from
time to timé* of the number ‘of ‘permanent
“Judges necessary for each High Court and not
‘ making appointment to that extent, he
‘directed that 'the Union Government, “which
has the responsibility of appointing
ह sufficient number of Judges in every High
“Court, should be directed to review “the
atrength of perfanent Judges in every , High
Court, to fix the number of permanent Judges
that should be appointed in that High Court
on the basis of the workload and to fill up

the vacancies by (appointing permanent

67


Judges.... A writ in the above terms shall
be issued to the Union Government',

4.1l. Indepencence of Judiciary is one of
the foremost concerns of the Constitution of
India. A writer on constitutional-law is
of the opinion that independence of the
Judiciary is one of the cardinal features-of
our Constitution. Fearless justice which can
conly emanate from independent Judiciary is a
prominent creed of the Constitution:and 'the
independence of the Judiciary is a fighting
faith of our founding fathers.” Reverting
to the same subject, it was observed that

“the creed of judicial independence is our

constitutional 1 'religion' and if the

Executive imperils ‘this basic tenet, the
. . 20 .

court may do or die". To butteress this

independence, it is now necessary to clothe.
the courts with power.to determine its own
requirements which,. of necessity, must
include the power to set up adequate number
‘of courts and to appoint adequate number of
Judges. If the power o£, purse remains with
the Executive and the financial constraint is
trotted out as an excuse to deny adequate
financial resources for setting up additional

courts, ‘judicial independence becomes a

68


teasing illusion'21 and oa promise of
unreality. The Constitution set up an
_ independent Judiciary and it cannot be that
while it vested it vlth powers over the
persons a.c property of every citizen, it
will deny to itself the consequential power
to determine its own needs as to men and
material. Continued, efficient working of the
‘Judiciary is simply indispensable ’ and
‘easential for the balance of constitutional
power.”

4-12. | The legislative appropriation end

executive -.centrol over finances -cennot be

tted to castrate or cripple the courts

ky refusing or reducing requisite’ grants and
| ro-espropriations. To have the courts under
the fiscel thumb cf the Executive it in
direst vioiation of the sjicit of the
“comgtitwtter The courts are freanently
called upon to pronounce on the acts of those
wne control public funds and, therefore, must
be kept free in such cases withcut fear of
retaliation, open or concealed. If
independence of Judiciary ia to be sustained,
it must possess power over the purse. To
refuse to provide adequate funds to the

courts is to prevent them jrom discharging

ro
v


their constitutional responsibilities and,
therefore, “constitutes an encroachment upon
the exclusive area of the Judiciary.

4.13. While undoubtedly, as pointed out
hereinbefore, at least one of the Judges of
the Supreme Court has expressed a view. that
a mandamus can be issued if the proposal to
open or set up additional. courts is rejected
or negatived on extraneous or irrelevant
considerations but in practical life it is
rather inconceivable that the Judiciary
should seek before itself a writ of mandamus
against | the Executive every time the
situation demands it. A spirit of adjustment
and compromise must inform the ‘ deliberations
in this behalf. | Some workable solution has
to be devised so that the stringent,
occasionally counter-productive, financial
control of the Executive over the courts even

in the face of legitimate pressing needs can

be countered. —

4.14. The Law Commission would like to
suggest a working solution in this behalf.
The Law Commission has already recommended
setting up of the National Judicial Service

25 .
Commission’ for dealing with problems of

70


appointment of judicial officers at various
levels, restructuring Judiciary by setting up
Indian Judicial Service, training of
judicial officers | et al. This body can be
entrusted with additional task of determining
and -; finalising the financial needs and
budgets- of the courts. National Judicial
Service Commission itself may set up a new
body, called the ‘Finance Consul tative
' Committee', which must undertake the task of
periodically assessing financial needs of the
_Judiciary at various: levels and it must have
liaison with the Finance’ Ministry and
ordinarily its recommendations must be
accepted. “ The’ Committee may- consist of - ~
(1) The Chief Justice of India’ in
हे respect of the supreme Court or the Chief
Justice of the High Court’in respect of -the
High Court; . :
(2) Administrative Judge of the -High
Court; ; :
(3). Administrative Officer of the court
in charge of finance; "
हु (4) Secretary, Ministry in charge of
Judiciary; and
(5) Secretary, ‘Ministry -of Finance, -

Department of Expenditure.

71


4.15.  . Ordinarily the budget should be
proposed by the High Court or the Supreme
Court, as the case may be. If the budget is
to be approved, the matter should be referred
to this Committee and it must finalise the
same. This Committee will provide a meeting
* ground for an inter-action and - inter-facing
between the representatives of the court and
the executive branch and by sheer discussion

-and dialogue, consensus can be arrived at.

4.16. Once ‘the administration of courts is
modernised by introducing management experts |
.as Court Executives, trained court staff
aided by modern facilities is provided and
the financial bottlenecks are removed by
setting | ‘Up of Financial Consultative
Committee, large number of problems which
have proved irritants between Executive and
Judiciary will disappear like the morning
dew. Once the irritants are removed, this
apparent confrontation between Executive and
Judiciary would wholly disappear, énsuring
smooth functioning of court and quickening

disposal of cases.

72


CHAPTER V

TAPPING ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

5.1. Under the genus ‘administration of
Justice’, there are two Lroad divisions or
species. Courts for rendering civil justice
is one broad division and the other is
criminal justice system. Undoubtedly,
administration of tax laws, labour laws, land
laws and administrative law are so_ styled
that, broadly speaking, they form part of
civil justice system. The distinguishing
feature between the civil justice system ard
criminal justice system lies in the fact that
civil justice system provides fora for
resolution of disputes between individuals,
between individuals and the State, and- even
between the State and the State where a party
complains of wrong being done to it and seeks
redres. Administration of criminal justice
system partakes the character of a regulatory
mechanism of the society whereby the State
enforces discipline in the society by
providing fora for investigation of crime and
punishment. It is the duty of -the State io
set up courts for administration of criminal
justice. A society governed by rule of law

envisages numerous laws of regulatory

73


charactcr for an orderly development of
society. A breach, infraction or violation

of law is made punishable. To set up courts

‘for trial of offenders who, if found guilty,

may be punished is an obligatory function of
the State. The State must pay the entire
costs of administration of criminal justice.
5.2. In the matter of civil justice, the
State provides fora where citizens aggrieved
of having suffered wrong at the hands of
other citizens or State may seek redressal
either in the form of specific performance ०४ ५
compensation or damages. Parties to a
dispute can choose its own forum by
appointing an arbitrator and conferring on
the arbifrator the power to resolve the
dispute and to make the decision binding.
Parties who can get their disputes resolved
by a forum of their choice need not go to the
court. But parties are not usually 60 well
behaved as to seek out the services of an
arbitrator. being the forum of their own
choice. The State, therefore, sets up courts
conferring on them the power to render
justice, being the power of the State.
Parties to a dispute can invoke the

jurisdiction of such courts. In this sense,

74


the courts render service. Vicwed from this
angle, the levy of court féce has been styled
as, ‘'fee' and not as 'tax' because the dictum
is fee must be commensurate with the service
rendered. Therefore, those who avail of the
services of fora must be ready to pay fee for
the services obtained, If parties go to an
arbitrator, being a forum of their choice, it
is implicit therein that they pay for the
“services of the arbitrator. A Judge
presiding over a court set up by the State is
none-the-less an adjudicator and renders
service by adjudication of the dispute.
Therefore, the State providing for such
service has been enabled to recover court

fecs, That is the genesis of court fees.

5.3. Therefore, the levy of court fees, when
questioned, ‘it must be shown that the levy
has reasonable correlation with the services
“rendered'by the Government. In other words,
the levy must be proved to be a guid pro quo
for the services rendered’. The question
again figured before the Supreme Court . and
the Constitution Bench observed that the
State has no power to 'tax litigation and
thereby to augment revenues and make

litigants pay, say, for road-building or

75


or other beneficial schemes that
2

the State may have*. It is

education
thus

unquestionably established that as far as
administration of civil justice is concerned,
the State renders service and ‘for ‘the
services so rendered, collects fees and there
must be quid pro quo between the quantum of
_service rendered and the fee collected. To
‘some extent, this view was departed from
when, after reviewing the earlier decisions,
the Supreme Court held that ‘there is. no
generic difference between a tax anda fee,
though broadly a tax is a compulsory exaction
as part. of a common burden, without promise
of. any special advantages to classes of. tax-
payers. whereas a fee is a payment for
services rendered, benefit provided or
privilege conferred. Compuision is not the
- hai lmark of the distinction between a tax and

a fee. That the money collected does not go

into a separate fund but goes into ‘the

corisolidated | fund does hot also necessarily
imake’ a levy a tax. ' though a fec must have
relation “to the services rendered, or: the
alivaritages conferred, such relation need not
be -direct, a mere causal relation may, be
enough. Further, neither the incidence of

the fee nor the service rendered need be

76

‘


uniform. That others besides those paying
the fees are also benefited does not detract
from the character of the fee. In fact the
special benefit or advantage to the payers of
the fees may even be secondary as compared
with the primary motive of regulation in
public interest. Nor is the court to assume
the role of a cost accountant’. It is
.neither' necessary nor expeditious to weigh
too meticulously the” cost of services
rendered -etc. against the amount of fees
collected 80-48 to evenly balance the two. A
broad corelationship. is. all that is
necessary. Quid pro guo in the strict. sense
is 79६ - the one and only true index of -a
fee:nor is it necessarily absent ina tax.
“5.4, - Even thrugh’ the demarcating line.
between fee and tax is getting blurred and is
likely “to evaporate in near future, keeping
in view the traditional approach to the
problem‘ of fee and ६०४, ३६ may be stated with
confidence that court fee is levied by the
State for the service rendered by the courts
set up by. the State to ‘the litigants in
_ search. of fora for- resolution of disputes
whose decisions have a binding character | and

are enforceable by execution.

77


5.5. A debate was going on whether in a
country like India, levy of court fees
creates an impediment in access to justice.
The Confercnce of Law Ministers of States and
Union territories in June 1982 set up'a
Committee on the “question of rationalisation
of court fees. This exercise was undertaken
pursuant to a recommendation of the
Consultative Committee of the Members of
Parliament attached to the Ministry of Law,
Justice and Company Affairs for abolition of
court fee. The view expressed was that there
was general agreement at the Conference that
though the objective, namely, abolition of
court fee -was “commendable in principle,
_ keeping in view the financial constraints,
the approach should be to go in for
rationalisation of court fee rather than {ts
abolition. The consensus emerged on two
‘points:~

(i) the really needy person should he
helped and exemfted from paying

court fee; and
(ii) particular types of cases should be
identified for which there should
be either no court fee or a very

nominal court fee.

78


5.6. It’ is in this background that the Law
Commission, while making extensive
recommendations in this report read with its
report on Manpower Planning in Judiciary,

will have to indicate available resources for

larger lay out on administration of justice.

5.7. At the outset it must be stated without
fear of contradiction that the administration
of justice’ in a constitutional democracy
operating under written Constitution and
founded on rule of law in a developing
country is- a social overhead and ‘must be
provided for irrespective of any resources
the service itself may generate. However, in
a country like India cursed with. extensive
poverty, ‘allocation of resources on priority
basis may itself compel necessity for
additional resources where larger lay out “is
recommended on ‘administration. of justice
which may -not find high placement in the
national priorities. Accordingly, even
though administration of justice is a service
which the State is bound to render to its
citizens and that court fees is looked upon
with disfavour, one should not lose sight of

a situation that stares into face that ours

79


is a poor developing country with scarce
resources and its equitable distribution must
answer some prioritics. To assert that it is
the duty of the State to provide for
resources for administration of justice even
at the cost of other competing claims on
account of our attaching very high value to
justice and it being a necessary component of
development, though laudatory and may be an
ideal to be pursued but when one comes down
to earth it sounds as a mere rhetoric because
there are not just enough funds and the
State, even if willing, may not be able to
provide for all the funds essential for
efficient and quick administration of
justice. Therefore, this report seeks to tap
additional ~ resources within the system
itsclE. To do this, four steps will have to
be tdken:-

(a) A review of the existing resource
position and whether anything necessary to be
tapped has escaped;

(b) _A policy decision whether all
users of the system should be charged at a
uniform rate; .

(c) Whether any one is taking an unfair
advantage of the system and, though in a

position to pay more, is not contributing

80


anything; and

(d) Any other source.
5.8. Before 37". exhaustive incuiry is made
with regard to all the four steps, .it is
necessary ‘to point out convincingly that the
State. spends next to nething on

administration of justice.

5.9. Before we assume the responsibility for
indicating * areas where additional - resources
may be generated from the service itself,
namely, administration of justice, it is
imperative to point out that the State today
spends precious little or, to say the least,
practically nothing on the administration of
justice. While more. often a very tall claim
is made that administration of,’ justice ‘has
become a. white elephant and that in -return
for service rendered by it, the cost of
maintainirg service is exceedingly high and
the. cost bencfit ratio works in reverse gear,
there is nothing more misleading than this
statement, and this would become self-evident
from the information discussed here. While
recommending for upward revision of the
‘Judge:population ratio in the Report on
Manpower Planning in’ Judiciary, the Law

Commission utilised the information collected

83


by the Ministry of Law and Justice on the
question of court fees, rationalisation and
relationships. That statement is being
reproduced here with a view to indicate
percentage-wise co-relation between the
expenditure on Judiciary to the total State
tax receipts for the year 1981-82. Barring
Manipur and Trip ura, most, of the States
spend between 0.15%-A.P. to 3.53%-H.P. and
the rest of the States are hovering around
between 1% to 2.25%. Convincingly, this will
“show that administration of justice has
received negligible funds for its upkeep as
well as its growth.” In this report as the
Law Commission is concerned with more
specific - enquiry about expenditure on
- proposed expansion of Judiciary, the
information - supplied by the Planning
Commission when taken into consideration
reveals almost the same state of affairs.”
In our effort to be more precise and
accurate, the Law Commission made its own
enquiry and collected information from the
States directly. Whatever has been made
available has been tabulated in appendix 5

(iii) and one cah confidently say that the

situation has not improved at all.

82


Therefore, the emerging scenario is that
small States like Man¢pur an@ Tripura
spend much more than the bigger States
and more especially like the Maharashtra
State where the receipts are very high
and the expenses marginally the lowest.

One can -‘confidently say that the

‘Judiciary. has received a niggardly

treatment at the hands of -the States.
Let it be recalled that’the finding of
the First. Law Commission was that the
receipt. under the head ‘court fee' was
far. in excess of the - cost needed for
administration of civil as. well as
criminal justice. The .finding was that
the surplus was ploughed in the general
revenues of the state. “On gleaning the
informations collected by” the Law
Commission, it appears that the receipt
from the administration of justice, made
up of court fees and fines, only
partially covers the expenses on the

courts. There has been a _ progressive

83


decrease in the percentage of expenses
covered by the receipts of the courts.
For example, the figures supplied by the
Bombay High Ccurt show that in the year
1978, the receipts of the Court covered
about 94% of the ‘expenses but in the year
1985, they covered only about 48% of the
expenses. Similarly, in Andhra Pradosh,
the receipts covered about 78%: of the
expenses but in 1986-87, they covered
only 54% of the expenses. In Punjab, the
figure has come down from 35% to 208."
At this rate of progrcssive decline,it is
apprehended that after a few years, the
situation will so materially alter that
the court fees as it present structured,
; coupled with the exemptions granted, will

cover only a very small percentage of the

expenses.

850


5.10. Since the 14th Report of the Law
Commission and for years thereafter, it was
generally believed that the court fees and
fines recovered are enough to meet-the cost
of administration of justice. To further
clarify the position, the Law Commission
requested the Planning commission” to supply
the same information which the Planning
Commission readily agreed. However, that
made - the task of the Law Commission all the
more difficult because there was a’wide gap
between the information supplied by some “of
the States and the information supplied by
the Planning Commission... The figures:
supplied “by the Planning Commission show a
much larger percentage of expenses which are
made from the income from the courts. The
explanation for this lies in the fact ‘that
perhaps the States project lcwer figures to
Planning Commission in order to wrangle more
funds. Be that as it may, from the
information “sent by ‘the States and the
Planning “Commission, the Law Commission may
not be in a position to come to any
' definitive conclusion. The. purpose for which
this information was called for cannot ~be

served by the information supplied ४५ some of

84


the States, theugh the Planning Commission
supplied full informaticn from its records.
One inference is, however, inescapable from
beth the sources of information that it is
not possible to cover the expenses” for
administration cf justice exclusively from
the income gencrated by the administration of

justice generally made up of court fees and

fines.

5.11. The Law Commission was taken by
surprise on receipt of the information 1111
the funds generatcd by the administration of
justice are net sufficient tc mect its
expenses even theugh there has been 3 very
Jarge inercase in the institution of cases.
Consequently, the receipts cf the courts must
have also increased but still they have not
kept pace with the rising expenses of the

courts.

5.12. There can be several reasons for this
state cf affairs. One reason may de that
there has been no pro-rata inerease in the
court fee and fines according to the cost of
living index while the administraticn
expenses, including salaries cf Judges) and
staff, dearness allowance and ether

incidentals, including expenses ono

es


additional courts have increased manifeld.
On the income side, ordinarily there is
reluctance tc pay the fines end in an
increasing arva, exemption from court fees is
granted. Further, the increase in judicial
work is under the heading ‘writ petiticn'
where the court fecs have remained static.
With the index rising at regular interval
with + corresponding increases in the shape cf
salarics of the staff and the Judges, the
income under the known two heads gradually
dwindlcs. Some years back, the Minister of
Law and Justice, Government of India,
expressed an cpinion that court fees should
be tctally abolished. But as ‘court fees' is
in the State List, the States did not agree
with this suggestion. If the court fee is
tct2lly abolished, the gap between the income
and ¢xpenditurc cn service is: likely to
furtner widens

5.13. On the cther hand, the receipt under
the hcad 'fines' has its cwn story to tell.
With the medern notions cn the theory of
punishment, more often depending upon the
age, maturity and other aspects ८६ the case
of the accused, he is giveii the benefit of

the Prebaticn which relives him from the

86


ge

obligation of paying fine. This is one
reascn why the inccme under the head ‘Fine!
is depleting. Moreove.,the main penal statute
is the Indian Penal Code ०5६ 1860 vintage.
The value of rupee in 1860 and 1988 if
compared, the outcome may be a shocking one.
Yet the fines as prescribed in the Penal Code
are over 125 years old have remained static
as they are. It is net for a moment
suggested that the fines must be levied
keeping in view the establishment expenditure
cf the ccurts. Fine is a kind of punishment
and must be commensurate with the gravity of
the offence. Having said all that, a fine of
Rs.100 or Rs.500 or Rs.1,000 today has really
no significance. The punitive purpose is
lost when the fines are still imposed at
those’ stagnant rates which now come to very
nominal amount. Therefore, there should be a
realistic revaluation and the fines to be
imposed shculd be increased in relation to
reduction of the value of the rupce over all
these years. Once this is done, there should
be pcricdic revaluation tc climinate the
effect of inflation. Similar exercise may
have tc be taken in respect of rates of court

fees with certain excepticns.

87


2514. As pointed out earlier, there is a very
nominal court feces in respect of writ petitions
and the maximum increase in the litigation is
under this head. This is one cf the additicnal
reasons for receipts of the ccurt not keeping
pace with expenses.

§.15. While conferring writ jurisdiction on the
High Courts and Supreme Court of India, the
expectaticn was that the disputes by these
higher Courts would be solved quickly. However,
writs have piled up so much with the result that
cases coming under other jurisdictions of the
High Court, such as second appeal, first appeal,
revision, criminal revisicns, criminal appeals
and original side matters, are pushed back and
have to wait in qucue for a long time for their
turn tc come. The writ jurisdiction is largely
availed by tax-payers. commercial magnates
industrialists, zamindars and ovrinces - in
short, the haves of the society. And they enjoy
the benefit of this. jurisdiction by either
paying nominal. or practically no court fees at
all, And they appropriate entirely the court's
time, leaving the havenots - the agricultural
tenants, the industrial workers, the urban
property tenants, seckers of maintenance and
cthers - without any time for the recressal of

their gricvanée.

88


Ww

5.16. Is it proper te treat litigants in one
class only for the purpose of availing
ccurts' services? Why should 34 tax-payer
compleining of levy of tax be able to invoke
court's jurisdiction by paying nominal court
fee? Why should an industrial magnate
utilise court's time for redressal of his
suppcsea injustice withcut adequately paying
for the court's services? Why should an
industrial magnate and an industrial worker,
a tenant and a landlord, a zamindar and his
tiller, a maharaja and his subject, a
commercial magnate and “the user of his
product be put on par in the matter of
availing the service of courts? They do not
form a class. They may be litigants. But
amongst litigants, they are haves and if they
want to utilise the service of .“the ‘court,
they must be made to pay for the entire
service. The question which stares into the
face is whether the court's service (what is
meant is civil justice system) should’ be
provided to everyone at the same rate
irrespective of the. nature of the case and
the time spent by the court.

15
5.17. In Escort's case, Justice Chinnappa

Reddy decried the fact that corporate battles

89


¢ were

*
being fought in the courts. He said:

"Problems of high finance and broad
fiscal policy which truly are not and
cannct be the province cf the court for
the very simple reason that we lack the
necessary expertise and, which, in any
case, are none of our business are
sought to be transformed into questions
involving broad leaal principles in
ordér to. make them the concern of the
court. Similarly what may be called the
‘political’ processes of "corporate
demotraty' are sought to be subjected to
investigation by us by invoking the
principle of the Rule of Law, with
emphasis con the rule against arbitrary
State action. An expose of the facts of

the present case will reveal how much

legal ingenuity may achieve by way of

persuading courts, ingehuously, to treat
the variegated problems of the world of
finance, as litigable pubic right
questions. Courts. of Justice are well-
tuned ६6. distress " signals “against
atbitrary action. So corporate giants
do. not hesitate to rush to us with cries
for justice. The court room becomes

their battle ground and « corporate

90


battles are fought under the attractive

banners of justice, fair play and the

public interest. We do not deny the

right of ccrporate giants tc seek our

aid as well as any Lilliputian farm

labourer or pavement dweller though we

certainly would prefer to devote more of

our time and attention to the latter. We

‘recognise that out of the cust of the

battles of giants occasionally emerge

some new principles, worth the while.

That is how the law has been progressing

until recently. But not so now. Public

interest litigation and public assisted

litigation are today taking over many

unexplored fields and the dumb are
finding their voices".

He was constrained to observe that such cases

block the “more worthy cases of lesser men

who have been long waiting in the queue and

the queue has consequently lengthened",

5.18. In this case, oral arguments were
heard in the Supreme Court for 28 - working
days by a Bench of 5 Judges. In effect,
this implies.that this case occupied over 2

months cf the Court's working time which

91


itself is very short inasmuch as the Supreme
Ccurt Judges work 5 days a week and only 182
days a_ year. Ordinarily only ३3 days are
available for final hearing matter because
the rest of the days are utilised for
tackling admission and miscellanecus matters.
Having regard to the time available for final
hearing, 5 Judges heard this case for ever 2
months, at the end of which the Court awarded
cost to the Union of India, the Reserve Bank
of India and the Life Insurance Corporation
of India and, departing from the old rule,
directed not the company in the name of which
the litigation was brought but the persons in
charge cf the company were made liable to pay
a portién of the costs. Accordingly, the
Court directed as under:
"3/Sths cf the tixed costs in ecch case
will be payable by Har .Prasad Nanda,
1/Sth by Swaraj Paul and 1/5th by the
Punjab: National Bank";
To them this was a flea bite because Swaraj
Paul was fighting for salvaging his
investment of roughly Rs. 6 crores and Nanda
was trying to retain control of the company.
And both cf them used the Court for an unduly
long time. It is, therefore, time now to

realise that fairness demands that such

92


By
people who use the Ccurt for vindicating scme
of their supposed rights relevant only tec
beth cf them alone aid not to society should
pay fully for the entire service of the
Court. They .cannot just use the Court by
paying a nominal court fees in the name of
vindicating their supposed ह fundamental
rights. And it is these people who use the
Court the maximum. To illustrate this point,
cne may lock at the length of time spent by
the Supreme Court of India in hearing cases
hereinbefore veferrec tc. Bank
Naticnalisation ‘case was heard for 37 cays,
that is, more than 3 menths, before a ‘Bench
ef 33 Jueges, which was then almost the whole
court as the sanctioned Jucge strength
inclucing Chief Justice was 12, Fundamental
Rights case (Kesavananda Bharati) was heard
for 68 working cays, that is, almost. half the
year or one term of the Supreme court, -by a
Bench of 13 Jucges. The case involving
challenge to National Security Act was heard
by a Bench of 5 Judges from -9th . December,
1980 to 30th April, 1981. Anc Jucges case
(S.P. Gupta) was heard by a Bench of 7 Judges
from 4th August, 1981 to November 16, 1981.

Given the limitec number of working days in

93


tithe Ccurt, it is very clear thot 0 majer
chunk cf the Ccurt's time was takcn up by
e-ses herein menticn. +. Ans amongst these
litigants whe were ptrcminent? And what
claims they were trying to vin’icite through
the use of the Court? A bank magnate, a
zamincar, a mathachipati and a maharaja, all
of ‘whem usec the Court secking tc perpetuate
status guo anc prctecting private property ६०
the cetriment cf the ccmmon men cf India. It
is in this context that a perceptive viewer
of the Indian court scene has observec that
haves come cut better in ccurt pecceedings.
Anc in all this litigetion, the complaint was
viclaticn cf supposec Fundamental right to
property fer which a writ petition was filed
on nominal court fees. It is a travesty of
truth to put on par a litigant coming from
the economically depressed class  ccmplaining
ef viclaticn cf fundamental rights in the
matter of use of the service C£ the ccurt
with (1056 who ccmplain of an erronecus tax
cemanc, whe complain of deprivaticn of
property without cecmpensation anc who
complain cf “cprivaticn cf privileges and
concessicns, in the matter of payment for
services of the ccurt. They 76 nct form a

single class. Ts group them together is to

94


bring unequals on a footing of equality which
is violative of the established doctrine - of
classification. In tne matter of payment for
services of the court, these whe can afford
anc have cushion and who complain of supposed
viclation. of some fundamental right and seek
redressal 0६ grievance must pay for -the
‘entire court service. By entire court/it is”
“meant that not only what expenses the State
incurs on a Judge per day, but also on court
establishment which ०६ necessity must includetcperer wn Hedy
even -depreciation of building and such. other ©

x 7
inputs. .In’every court, it wouid be-easy to

his.
wy

‘take. :

account

establishment . costs . of

little State spends

thing -on. which

case.’ p
rel jet
must be without incurring any liability

paying court fees. This can generate sources
to an. extent where the concept of court fee

95


mu

is fully vimlieated because the foc must 70९
commensurate with the service renverec,
Feinciple of quid pre que which must inform

fee will thus be fully vincicat dc.

5.19. It would be apprepriate tc recall the

view already expressed in this context on oan

earlier occasicn. Law Commissicn recommenced
re-structuring cf courts at grassrect level,
The ccurt was to be a participatcry mcecel,
bearing the name Gram Nyayalaya. Its
jurisdicticn covered mest of the disputes
arising in rural areas. The questicn of
acequate fees cn petiticns ccming before such
nyayalayas enoaged the attenticn cf the Law
Commissicn. While reccemmending a higher rate
ef ccurt fees for the ccrporate and clite
s.ctor who aggrandiz the ccurt tim cn non-
issues, the Commissicn felt thst in respect
ef pruceccdings befcre the Gram Nyeyalaya, no
court fee shculd be levie’ as the court
scrvice woulc be catering to the nee*s cf the
rural pocr. In reaching this ccnclusion,
the Ccommissicn 55 cbserved as unler:-

"In fact, the elite and the ccrpcrate

sector, whe use ccurts fer 8 shiJew

bexinag in rcspect cf issues which are

unreal, heavy court fees sheulc be

°6


levice anc it must be so high as to make
thom pay the entire cost of the court
establishment. There is nothing new or
startling in this suggesticn. Beginning
has already been mace in Califcrnia
(U.S.A.) in this behalf."
5.20. The higher jusiciary is also
increasingly being use. against the
Government with decisive effect in the form
cf interim relief. Litigation is initiatec
cnly for snatching interim relief. The
effect cf interim relief is tc freeze an
issue until it is finally “ispcese of ane
that may happen years later. This is
especially ccne in tax cases. A large number
८६ writs are filec or references are got made
questioning the ccrrectness cf the crcers of
tax authorities. Tf the matter is
entertained, a stay cf further preceecings is
ellcwes as a matter cf ccurse anc the hearing
is helc up for decaces.” There have been
several- cases where collecticn of public
vevenue has been sericusly jecpardisec and
-bucgets of Gcvernment anc local authorities
affirmatively prejuciced te the pcint of
precariousness consequent upon interim orders

24 .
mave by the courts. The Supreme Court,

97


25

Tepreeating this practice , has net

while

heIpe ? in retrteving the eftnation. There

the final

> onumereus cases tn which at

a

hearing years after the stay fis arantes, the

contention has been feunt to be either

frivolous or utterly unsustainable and, in

the precess, fer years the tax recavery js
witheiet any 71 (1661 Isability to

26
‘the Loss. Ry the interim stay,

hele tip
make qer

the Jittaant net only avedits  poying court

focs by inveking the writ Jurisdiction

ceonferre ! on the courts but wins an
27

Te

unteserve:! respite from revenue laws,

aved? such misuse cf ccuft service का all

such eases alee, a methee chente? be devised

to collect higher rate of court foes which

must 10107 @f necessity establishment costs

ef the ccurt. The Law Commission is happy te

recall here thet ne criainality fs clatmecd

for this view dnoemuch as it has the

ef acepting tha view expresse! 899

Tvantaqe

the Supreme Court, namely, that the levy of

court foos shoul? have a bread relationship

with the coet of adminiatration of justice,

that is, thers shew! be हक relationship

the serefces renlere! and the court

29 रन
fees Jevtel. This wrt Gocddec in a case

between

19


whore the ccurt feo was found to be excessive
but this very pesition would no doubt hold
rer conversely alse that is, when the court
1 levie2 is net preporticnate to the

s-ryviecs cbtained,.

5.21. छाल lessen can be learnt cr advantage
Crawn from 0 paralle). The parties’ te -
Jispute insteal oof appreaching a court may
chesse to refer the sispute 10 an arbitrater
chesen by them, Arbitrator acquires
Juristictien by censent cf the parties.
Arbitrater is thus a substitute for a court
ans? woul?) Gischarge functicns cf ० court
nemely resolution cf disputes. Cests cf
arbitration is borne by the parties tc the
a party whem the arbitrater holds

cispute ora

rospensible fer costs.

Lawyers

5.22. It has been succinctly established
hercinbefeore that acministraticen cE justice
is 0 service fer the benefit of the consumers
.f justices. Litiqants are the censumers cf
justice whe, in ferm of payment of court
feos, pay fer the service cbtained from the

court system. Tt is, hewever, a ridcle

99


wrappe:' in enigma that the Jawycfs who make a
living theeugh ceurts ‘le not contribute
anythina fer the upkcep an! haintenance of
courte witheut which their prcefession would
Tack fintifdeation. An anateqy may 00 rseught
frem the case ef seme visiting Cocters whe
are onet employees of the hespital but they
give a ccrtain fee te the hospitel for using
hespital facility. Lawyers pay to the Bar
Couned] fer their enrolment ant nething to
the court. Therefere, it 18 time te devise a
mothe.! by which the lawyer sheuld also
contribute 9 preperticn of their inceme for
upkeep cf alministration cf justice Apart
from the ine me-tax that they may ¢r may not

be) paying.

Unjust Enrichment

5.23. Situations net infrequently arise
where the State ecllects seme levy which ‘is
subsequently declared by the court to be
ultra vires. Levy cf sales tax on certain
items frequently ccmes fer such treatment’ at
the hanes of the court. The Stato has
qIrea-ly eclleectod the levy te which
subsequently 11 is slkwn to be net entitled.

Fairness anc justice. Gemands that it must

100


payer is not
entitled to

refunc the same. orfginal

traceable. The State 158 hot

retain the amount collected undef ihvatid

levy. This problem has confronted the courta

an’ the courts have solvec thik ptcbtem fh

differont ways.

5.24. Section 23 of Punjab Agricultural

Produce Markets Act enables” the Market

Committee te levy cn ad valorem basis fee on

produce bought cr sold by a
The fee

agricultural

license. in a netified markot area.

was raised from Rs.2 per transaction of

Rs.100 ६० Rs.3. This enhancement was

challenged cn the grcund that tho raise 18

not commensurate with the service rendered.
Rench of the Supreme Court

Rs .100

A Constitution
held that increase beyond 8.2. per

lacked justificaticn. The question which

then arcse was: Were the Market Committees

‘ amounts

Or had it

to be permitted to retain excess

which they had already reeevered?
to be refunded to the traders hotwithstanding

the fact that they had already passed cn the

burden te next purchasers? In cthet words,

were the traders to he allowed to get a

refund from the Market Commtttees and

unjustly onrich themselves as ft was tok

101


possible te trac: incividual consumers who
bere the burcon? Section 23A was introduced
in the Act permitting the feealready
roeeived te be retained by Market Ceommittces
an? prevented refine ef the same te the

Coalers whe had alreaty passed on this burden

te the consumers then not traceable, on the

qreun’ that the Morket Committoes, who were

representing the intercsts of consumers and

public, may retain the amount an? use it for

benefit of public from whom this was
oo 11/61 ८ !. The eoustitutdenal valicity cf
section 2A was chotbengect. The Court hela
fhot section 230A prevents unjust enrichment
by moans cf ४! | which the persen
claiming it has one omeralooor equitable
entitlement, Tt gives te the public threugh

the Market Committce what it has taken from

fhe opublic an?’ is cme te it. Tt cces net
29 है
validate an 111०071 levy. In ancther
30
csc ' unpaic accumulations, that is,

refun's due te the ompleyees but net claimed
by them from the company were directed to be
transferre ! 16. toabcur Welfare Fund fer

utilising the sam: fer the wolfare of btabeur

in general.

5.25. Tn adl such cases, the effort has been

102


J
that even tf seme recovery ds shewh te be

Invalfa, refund sheutd net be etdeted dt

favour cf persons whe have ne metal oF

equitable cntdttement be the same and who

would छाए unjust enrfehment in the event

refune हि rieres. Th such a situation, the

Leqistature evised and the ecurt  afEirmed

that oruch fines inetead of being reftinded

mnjust oonrichment he used fer the

tho

giving
benefit «Ff people clesely ernnected with

Activity  coneernes. Rut, in oa comptaxr

seciety, ther cases may come to stthface

where {it fs difficult te trace the ctlathal

payer and alse net possible te use the Samd

the generat public Ak
tn Buch

fer the benefit cf
large involve in atiied activity.

cnses, instead cf appropriating the iteney bo

the State, it can be ttansfetrod ts a (101;

ealled 'Ntudicial Development  Fundt, the

menoy transFerre-| to this Fund ectild be ted

fer providing better public sertleed ft the

court ane fer stroamtlining the rdmihi@ttation

ef ocecurts, Tn appreachthd the thattab Fret

this angle, the Commtasion 15 quiced by the

considetation thot meat eases of the की fuse

onrichment oardae onto ef court preche dita.

Therefore, whit has been wade tvadlabte by

111


the ccurt precess must be utilised for

improving administration of justice.

5

.26. Te conclude, the haphazard manner {ri
which administration of courts 148 | condueted
has ccntributed its cwn mite to the preblem.
The recemmencaticn regarding streamlining of
staffing patterns, intreduction cf management
experts and new technolegy will ensure that
ceurts will be able ta carry out thelr
functivns more efficiently. Its needs at a
particular time will be much more defined and

specific, This ४८७३० reduce the present long

winding process of presenting inflated
estimates and subsequent bargaining arid
wrangle. The introduction | of ‘Pinhance
Consultative Committee! would reduce
bureaucratic bettlenecks, The comptittation of
ccurt ६००४ and fines by realistic assessment
acecrding tc ccst cf living index and the
utilisaticn of alternatives mentioned fer
additional resources wculd help to ease the

financial censtraints.

5.27. On an overall view, this report, read
with report on Manpewer Planning in

25

Judiciary, would constitute a blueprint for

totally modernising the ccurt system with its

104


own solf-Financing aFrandgemenhts.

5.21... We ree mmond acectdindly.

(10.0. DESATS
CHATRMAN

(०.5. RAMA DREVT)
MEMRER SECRETARY

NEW ODELNT,
WUNE + 1988.

105


NOTES AND REFERENCES

CHARTER I

1.

Allen, qucted in Repert of the Labout Lawa Rovjow
Committee, 4 (Government OF CN jzest;, 19711: —

Art. 18, Universal Declaration éf Numiaé Rights
Appreved by the Genéral Assembly of the United}
Nations.

1८1, 14th = Repert 60 Rotorm of Judiftal of . dudiéial

Administration, p. 587. :

. i
Qucted 10 LT. Rubin, The Courts, Fulcrum ef the
Justice System, 208, * ro
LCL, 120th Report on fahpower Planing .| 1! dh
Judichary: A Bluoprint. as पा

Id., pe. 14 ‘

1६.५, ps 3.

LCT, 12156 Repret on A New Forum fat dudidiat
Appcintments. . —

Ler, 120th  Repert — ch Manpower Plahning | in Plahning | in
Tope oeL Lt Bluepetr t_A Blueprint; an 1
1215 76657 Ci B New forum. fot. Judi ¢ial

Appeintments.

106


11.

12.

13.

14.

PIER Lt

H. Ted Rubin, Tho Courts: Fulerum of the Justice
system, xidd. - ~

Ousted in O.P. Mctidal, Changing Aspécts of, Law
an’ Justice, 9.

Id., p. 10.
M. Capelletti, Access te Justico, 6-7 (Beok 1).

Prof,  Vanee of Yalo, as quoted in M.H. Hogkck ०५.
(1978) 3 8८८ Bad 5६ 553.

09... Raxi, Justice and Judicial Intervéntioa
(Mimo). ~

Ler, 114th Repert cn Gram Nyayalaya.
Iz., Chapter VI, p. 39, para 6.20.

i Rag Nilcngekar ov. Drs Mahesh ‘Madhav
6 पाठ वा) 1 sce उठ. न नेतललकईोनओफकषकफककए८फक

Mic. Mchta ov. Union of India, (1987) 1 80९ 398,

lassen Uzzman v. Union of India, (1983) 2

A.K. Hassan U2zamany ete., (1985) 4

The Election Commission ct  tihdta,

The dispute between the ATADMK Jayalalitha and
Janaki Group, The Indian Express, May 11, 1968,
0-1:

107


CHAPTER JT (66716. )
i

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

1५0. 0८116 Nath ov.

8... Shetroot "The Limits of ॥१9७८1६1506, 0॥8 168 4
Expoditious Justice at हि

v. Unton_of उ1013॥ AtR 1970 58 38
nda phataty 9. BEAbs of ह७६३॥६। (£9493) 4

State of Bun Jaby (1909) ह aah

7625
baghay Rac Scindla ७. tintct of tidiay Aff 1691 Ab
816 . जिजजजित जम

Let, 12510 report cn the है।६७॥७ (७0६६ -- A #६6॥॥
book, para 4.10, p. #7

Supra note 1५६

Rajendra Pensad_v. state bf Usbsy (1990) 9 866

ra

श्ठ

LCT, 12156 Report on है Now Forum fcr 0001 6161
Appointmonts es

Supra pete 15 at p. ३6.

108


CHAPTER III

1.

2.

10.

11.

12.
13.

14,

15.

16.

K.E,. Gopinath, "Court Rooms", KLT, 61 (1978).

G.M. Lodha, former Chief Justice of Rajasthan,
Judiciary: Fumes, Flames and Fire, 105.

Id. at 322.
See Appendix IV, 0. 8.

‘Ropert of the Eighth Pinance Conmissior Commission 1984, 81.
Supra ५०६० 4, Q. nm

Memorandum * submitted by the High Ccurt of Uttar
Pradesh, * we हे 7 ‘ :

“Supra note 5.

Bench ८६ Allahabad High Court in Western Regicn of Court in Western Regich oF Western Regicn o:
Uttar Pradesh. है :

Jaswant ‘Singh Commission, Report on the Need for a’
2: 31

Supra note 4, Q. 6(ii).
Supra. neté 6.
Supra nete 4, 0. 6(iv).

Supra nete 2, p. 106.
Report cf the Seventh Finance Commission ef the Seventh Finance Commission, 1978, p.

74. :
Supra note 5.
Supra note 4, Q. 9.

109


CHAPTER III (contd.)

17.

18.

19.

20.

LCI, 118th Report on Methcd cf Appointment te
Subordinate Courts/Subordinate Judt erry Judiciary; and
1iéth Report on Formation cf A India
Judicial Service. 7

Supra ncte 4, 0. 6(i).

R. Dhavan, The Supreme Court Under Strain +The Supreme Court Under Strain १ The

Challenge of Arrears, p. 81.

Information . received in response to the Law

* - Commission's Questionnaire.

21.
22.
23.

, 24:

25.

26.

27.
28.
29.

30.

Supra ncte 5.
Supra ncte 4, 0. 6(i).

R. Dhavan, Litigaticn Explusicn in India, p. 112.

Qucted by G: Gallas, “Judicial Leadership
Excellence : A Research Prcespectus", 12 The

Justice System Jcurnal, 39, 43 (1987).

G.L. Gall, “Efficient “efficient Court _- Management! : Management",
Expeciticus Justice, 107, 11-15:

E. Tennessey, "Architectural an} Electronic
Inncvaticns for Imprceving Ccurt Heuse
Acministrative Efficiency," 6+Suffolk. University
Law Review, 989, 997 (1972).

Ic. at 999.

110


CHAPTER III (ccntc.)

31.
32.
33.
34.

35.

36.

See generally 7, Miller, 0.

Baar,

Administration ii Canada, Chapter 10.

Jucicial

C. Baar, “ihe Use cf Active Case Flew Management

ta Recuce Delay", 5 (Mimec).

Supra ncte 4, Q. 6(iii).
Supra ncte 31 at 236.
‘Supra nute 26 at 1001.

Id., feetnete 81.

lll


\SHAPTER IV

1.

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

10.
ll.

12.
13.

24.

15.
16.

17.

LCI, 120th Repert «on Manpccwer Planning 17
Juciciary : A Blueprint.

The Ccnstitution cf India, article 112(3) (6) .

32.५ article 202(3) (3) -
Ic., article 146(3).
Ic., article 229(3).

R. Dhavan, Litigaticn Explesicn in I in India, 112.

AIR 1973 SC 1461.
AIR 1951 SC 458.
AIR 1965 SC 845.

U. Baxi, Justice anc _ Judicial

LCI, 121st Repcert cn A New Forum fcr Judicial

Appointments.

Supra nete 6.
‘
State cf Anchra Pradesh ve T. Gcpalakrishnan

H.L. Vijh v. Unicon. of India, TLR (1983) 2 Delhi
300. OS -

Id. at 394-395,

शक वह पति दा Tada BEE oe eee ee eyees Welfare Asscclaticn Vv.
Union cf Incia anc Ancther, (198 Scale 124.

S.P. Gupta v. Unicn ८६ India, (1981) Supp. scc

87 at 915-916 per Venkataramiah, J.

Unicn cf Incia_ v. Sankalchanc Himatlal Sheth,
(1977) 4 scc 193.

112


Chapter IV (ccntc.)

19.

20.
21.
22.

23.
24,

25.

26.

27.

Shamsher Singh Singh v. State cf Punjab, (1974) 2 scc

851 per Krishna Iyer, J.
Supra 1०0८७ 18 per Krishna tyer, J., at p. 255.
Supra 1०८९७ 19 per Krishna Iyer, J., at p. 886.

M.L. Jain, “Soluticns regarcing Court Dispcsals
anc Functicns", 71 AIR Journal 89 at 90 (1984).

Id. at 91.

Supra note 17.

“LCI, 12ist ‘Report on a_New Forum for Jucicial
* Appcintments. पु

LCI, 116th Repert on Formaticn cf an All. India

Judicial Service.

६८7, 117th |Report on Training. of -Judcicial
Officers. . TTT

CHAPTER ए

The Indian Mica and Mercantile Industries Ltc. ve

‘The State cf Bihar and Others, AIR 1577 SC 1182.

Gevernment cf Madras ve ppb th Lampang Lamp. _anc.

Municipal. Ccrporaticn cf Delhi v. Mcha. Yasin,

(1983) 3 SCC 229 at 235.
LCI, 120th Report .cn Manpewer Planning in

Juciciary : A Blueprint.
id, Appendix I(3).
See Appendix ४ (i)

Sce Appendix ४ (ii).

113


»
CHAPTER ५ (cnt:.)

9.

10.
11.
12.

15.
16;
17.
18.
19,
20.

23.

22.
23:
24.

- 25.

26.

27.

LC], 4th  Repert em Refurm cf  Jucicial
Avministratin, 404-503. a
See Apponsix II.
Seo Apponitx TTT.

Repert jf the Committce of teu in Law Ministers cn

Octcber 158%.

the

S.360, The Cece cf Criminal Prececure, 1973.

LCI, 124th Reptrt cn The High Ccurt Arrears - A
“Fresh Lock, 41. ree

LIC v. Escorts Ltc., (1986) 1 sce 264

Ic at 349.
Supra ncte 16 <f Chapter II.

Mark Gallanter, Why the 'Haves' Come Cut Ahcacl?:
Speculaticn cn the Limits cf Legal Change: Law_an:l

Sccioty., 95° (1974).

LCI, 114th Repert cn Gram Nyayalaya.

Id., para 6.15, p. 36.

LCI, 115th Repert cn Tax Ccurts, p. 6.

Assistant Cclloctcr of Excisc, Chancer Nagar, West

Bengal vs Dunlcp Theta LEST) MR IS¥S SC उडए ह६ Vi Dunicp In-ia Cts, है
3. a

‘Siliguri Municipality’ v. Amalencu Das, (1984) 2

“Sty 2367
विषय eae es hur Paper Mills Cc. Ltc. Vv. State cf
Orissa, (19 है उप —_—
Unicn “cf Inia v. Cswal Wecllen Mills. Lti.,

(1984) 2 SCC 646;
Amarnath v. State of Punjab, AIR 1985 SC 218.

aia ca
Lehia Machines Lt ve. Unicn c£ Infia, (1985) 2
See 15% a

Supra nete.23, p. 66.

114


»

‘CHAPTER ए (ccntd.)

28.

29.
30.

Sivornpent sf Hadras v. spgoith Lamp anc Lamp 37८
Electrical Ltd., AIR 1973 SC 1924;
Various High Cu.rts have alsc expressed the same
view (See Lady Tanumati Vv. Special Land

Acquisiticn Officer, Ahmedabad, 14 GLR 537)~
“Recently  Bambay High Ccurt has held that
prescripticn cf an upper limit cf court fees . fer
civil cases but ncne. for probate and letters cf
acministraticn cases, where the service rendered
is minimal anc there is far less strain upcn the
rescurces cf the State in terms cf the time spent
cr persons engaged in the performance cf the task,
is viclative cf article 14 of the Ccnstituticn.
The Ccurt fixed the same upper limit fcr prcebate
cases till the rules were revised acccrdingly.
Jycti ov. State, AIR 1988 Bom. 123.

“Amar Nath v. State cf Punjab, AIR 1985 SC 218.

State cf Gujarat v. Shri Ambica Mills, AIR 1974
sc 1300.

115


36

Appendix I
QUESTIONNAIRE

The ennual reports of Judicial administration for
the last five years.

What are thé total annual receipts of the court during
the last ten years on-account of ¢

(a) Court fees
(9) Fines.

What is the break up of-:the annual budget of the

High Courts and Courts subordinate to it in terms of the
salary of the judges,salary of the administrative staff,
office expenses, etc. during the last ten years and the
actual expendtture under various heads during the said

period?

Do the presiding officers have any financial powers?

(4) If yes, to what extent?

(ii) If no, through how many levels/channels the
requisition has to pass to obtain the requisite
sanction? _ :

What is the prescribed present staff strength in the High

Courts and courts subordinate to it (Information may be‘

supplied separately-in respect of courts at each level).
To keep abreast with the inoreasing workload of the courts:

(i) On what basis is the need for staff expansion
considered? Is there any scientific formula for
determining the staff requirement at each level of
the judiciary (officers,establishne nt and_ministerial).

(ii) Is any thought given to the need for the additi6nal
accommodation for the courts, Are the.future needs
and expansions kept in mind while submitting the
proposals? :

(443) How are the court record maintained? Has any modern
technology been introduced to aid and assist the staff?

(iv) What are the norms,if any,being adopted for the
ereation of a.new court at a particular station?

Contd...

Ee


Te

8.

10,

-2-

The Eighth Finance Commission had recommended for
providing additional court buildings, additional
amenities for the present court buildings and
additional quarters for presiding officers for
upgradation of Judicial administration in various
States. How far have these recommendations been
implemented?

What is th: total number of subordinite courts in the
State and how many such courts are functioning in
rented buildings?

How many High Court Judges and subordimte Judicial
officers have not been provided with residential
accommodation? What is the percentage of such Judges/
subordinate Judicial Officers vis-a-vis the total

strength?

What are the financial powers of the Chicf Justice?

(7


WPen ox if

ANDHRA PRADESH

Year Ct.fees + fines expenses % of expenses
covered by ct.
fees + fine

1977-78 4, 29,47, 200 5,49, 12,600 78,27
1978-79 4,65, 24, 700 60,33,69,00 77.10
1979-80 5, 32, 64, 600 703, 40, 700 75.93
” 1980-81 5,99, 77, 700 8, 26,831, 600 72.54
1981-82. 6,56, 03,800 9,84, 31, 700 66,64
1982-83 7,14, 35,600 31, 63, 53, 900 61.39
1983-84 7,64, 77,300 13, 45,32, 100 56.84
1984-85 6,59, 92,500 16, 27,62, 100 40.54
1985-86 9,60, 26,600 18, 09, 30,900 53.07
1986-87 10, 34,81, 500 19, 18,28, 100 53.94
Average 63.6%
; BOMBAY

1978 7, 15, 87, 995 _ 7,60, 94, 956 94.07
1979 7.50, 62, 289 11,94,53,686 ° 62,83
1980 8,99, 64, 029 12,23,36,944 73.50
1981 8,62, 10,979 11,61,85,580 74, 20
1982 8,94, 15,385 1,36, 69}) 701 65.40
1983 7,96,83,221 ° 14, 22, 84, 846 56,00
1984 11, 30, 90, 790 17, 79, 16, 232 63.56
1985 10,31,90,879 21,32,67, 255 48.38

2५85९ je 67.24%

Ny


Year

1976-77
1977-78
1978-79
1979-80
1980-81
1981-82
1982-83
1983-84
1984-85
1985-86

3979-80
3980-81
1981-82
1982-83
1983-84
1984-85

GOWAHATI.

Ct. feestfines

26,02, 100
33, 04, 800
20,55, 300
31,00, 000
2,65, 27, 400
3,43,54,500
2,36, 05, 600

3,04, 26,800

2,09, 52, 914
2,313, 82, 206
2, 06, 89,890
3, 39, 93, 717
4,58, 85, 513
4,68, 0०,520

॥4

Expenses

30, 53, 085
27, 33, 037
29, 08, 752
33, 27, 473
37,43, 000
43, 60, 550
72, 54, 597

72, 71, 383

Average

"4,54, 49, 609
5, 13,37, 727
5, 78,92, 095
6,59, 23, 949
7,59, 55, 528
8,49,55, 617

Average

% of expenses
covered by
che foes
85.2
120.9
70.6
93.16
708.45
787.00

325.3

424.2

a
BQ

326.8

7


Lon y..ap
TOR DRG
JORRARA
JORAARS
JOA5-NG

30९6-07

1977-78
1078-79
1979--RO
JORG. NY
JOR PE
LOC DLR
3003. .व
101१ --.1१७
3077. १6

3016-१7

NADIA PRADECH

Compt Peace

75

0,05५, TIS,

’

3, 0३, . 1, 03

7, 67, 60, 001

PUTTAR
1,04, 26, 256
1, 27, 92, (४४१
1,46, 35, POR
7, 11,827, 6 ml
1, 00, 65,619

०,1१6, 76, OR

1,07, 04, 740

fines

Te penses

7, 76, 13, 0000
8, (१२, 17,000
R62, 22,000

TH, 31, 05, (४४१

’

10), पर, (४५)

17, (1, । ), (0000
2१४७०) ०00

AND. HARYAIA

9,090, 26, 667

3, 17, २, (77
LAN, 06, 271
1,१1०, 0:32, 106

के, 37, 01, 07%

7,277, 770, 071

0 005 1६, 705
220,66, 7695

10, 17,084, 410)

७४ 1 061९

m of expenses

covered hy Cty
fees.

2a,o

33, 39

2,09

21, 4

21. 1.

TAN

39, 11%


i.
2.
3.

All the figures are in Crores,
Figures for 1987-88 are "Latest Estimates."
Figures for 1988-89 are " Estimates",

Source ~ Planning Commission.

21


oy

LORO-R I
PAUSE abe
Ports
11012 06 0 ££॥॥|
IGRAA-8S
3980-36
1क्छट-तए
4007-88 LE
4988-89 E

LORO-B 1
198 | .-02
जतघ 2-1
3085-84
10084.-9%5
1 वह
3030-417
2087 AR

1988-89

Tneone

0,40

0,55
०0.50
0.49
छ, कक

0,50

Expenses % of expenses
“ees govered by income.

8,62 18.09

10, 295 15.3

1.2, (११७ 31, 6 ,
14,04 11.6 ‘
16,72 12.5

18,67 13.6

19,83 9.58

27, 37 8. 5
28.60 8.6

1... E. Latest Estimates.

E - Estimates,

Bihar

Fopenses # of expenses
covered by the
. Ancoine, ...

8, 04 हि ः 4.9
10, 05 0.9
11.46 5.23
12,42 4,50
14,67 3.7
17,69 2.8
20, 26 2.4
20,92 2.3

21.97 2.2

ee


- GUJARAT

“ Income Expenses Mage of expenses
covered by the
~ wee ee ANCOME see

3780-84 Lal 6.06 23, 26
1081-82 1,74 6.76 25.73.
1982--83 1.94 8.09 23.98
Lo83-P4 1,84 10,16 38, . 3

_ 300 4. 0५5 2209 11.80 18.98
Boas. A re 13,46 15.52
106. O7 . Lor 4,/4 1,19 8.03
PNR 1. हल 15, 38 9.36
LONG as) 16.38 9.2

Haryana

a
TGROWP ]} 2,47 2.09 +18.18
Wea pe 3.05 2,50 407
10: 2-1 2.92 2.89 + 1,03
10234 3, 33 3.27 + 1,83
TORS 3५ 03 3,136 , 94,5
गा, AG O68 4,6) 14,7

. 1056-77 0५ 75 4,87 15.4

1कर 7- (५70 5,18 14.4

3089-00 (१,950 85, 33 35, 0

-

[2


Karnataka.

fargo of expensss covered

Income, Expenses. fa 8
7 “पक्ष ENG” LN GONG:

1980-81 0.99 7.20 . 12,8

1981-85 1.19 8५99 ‘1246

Joanna 6504 31.00 4.90
T9RA-84 0.50 11.96 4.18
1984-85 0.59 14.85 3.9

1OR5-RG 1.5 16.91 93.25
क086-87 2.97 18,97 20.92
"7987-88 4.00 93629 17.40
IORR-RO 4.2m 28.79 16.32

Kerala.

1980-81 1.78 5.86 30.37
1981-82 1.46 6.4L 21.84
1982-83 1.54. 729 21.128
1993-34 2.29 8.09 27.42
1984-85 3.56 9.59 37.12
1985-86 1. 67 Inn 19.85
1986-87 2.02 13.74 14.59
1987-88 0.99 IAAL 6.87
198R-29 1.03 15.27 6.74

}24


Madhya Pradesh

Income, Expenses. gage of expenses covered
——__——by_ income ~
JERO-RL 1.00 6.18 25.88
1081-84 2.28 7632 30.46
LAR 2-3 2.08 8,55 24,32
JOR AAR 2. 31 OS 23.05
FORA BS 2.26 10.90 20.73
1925.86 8,42 12, 1.1 28.19
IVER? 2,55 13.04 25.46
1098 7-88 AOA 11,858 ९ 27.59
1088-80 aa) 16,32 25.81
sharashtr a
TOS प्र 11५78 65,87
LOG 1-82 L108 13, 70 80.51
3.982-' 3 13.42 15.09 86.08
9A B-FA 10.50 18.63 56,36
WOE Tie GB89 21.58 31.92
1085-26 13.30 25.50 82,15
loRce 7 14,90 78,765 51.80
1087-88 1150 32,18 45.05
1008 18, 25 27,58 48.56

126


_O_R_T_8_8_A_

& of exponsos covered

Year Jngome, Expense 8.
a by Leola,  ....
LORO-R LT 0.18 2.98 6.04
198 1-82, 0.18 3.25 5.37
13908 2-89 0.37 4.03 9,18
1983-84 0.67 4.89 13.70
JORA-2K 0.66 5, 12,59
1987 ._.896 1.03 6, 36 16,19
IOR87 0.39 8,720 4.79
1987-58 0.59 9, 95 6, 31
1997-59 0५ 652 9.76 6,35
PUN I AR

LOBO-B .. Od 3.80 23,94
LOB 1L-RA 1.5L 4.12 36, 65
LOR 8-83, 1.8 4.82 : 26.55
19K 3-24 1,39 5५49 25.31
1OR4-85 1.50 6, 33 83, 69
1985-86 3.81 6.928 46, 38
+.08/-87 a IG 7.49 42.18
1087-88 2.30 7.86 हि 41.98
19ER-RBO 3.50 Ras 42.42


4980-83
1981-82
1982-83
1983484
1984-85
1985-86
1986-87

2987-88 ,

1988-89

_ 1980+81
1981-82
1982483
1983-84
3984-35
1985486
198 6-87
1987-88
3988-89

-RAZAGLHALNLE
Year, Income. Bxpen ses

0159
0474
116
0493
1,20
1,39
1.44
1.54

1.62.

1,98
2.27
2.53
2.27
3,04

3,57

3.76
3,92
4.31

4476
5s 64
6490
2685
8.98
9497 PH,
12,48
14.04
4,74
PAMIDNADIUL
7.59
9,53 ~
11.04
12.66
24.58
17.16
19.40 ड़
18.70
19,82

% of expenses covered

12,88
18,12
16,81
1184
13136
- 13५94
2५58
40596
20.99

26,08
23.8
22,91
21,8?
20.85
20.80
19,38
20.96
2,74


UID ARL PRADESH

12%

Your, Income, = Bxpensés
1980-8+% 3300 13483
198l-82 3310 15130
1982-83 3127 19489
3983-84 2563 22126
1984-85 2423 25455
1985-86 8176 281911
1986-87 99349 33457
1987-88 5594, 434 66
7988-89... 6178 45.84 हर
ह MEST 88 | 9 & 7.
1980-81 Log * 7.73
1987-82. 1.21 8.90
1982-83 0.90 * 0.1

1983 84 0.92 10.96
1984-85 0.87 179
1985-86 1.04 13,42
1986-87 1.26 15.91
1987-88 3, 28 17.52
3988-89 LY 18.56

Kof expenses eovered
y incomes

874 69
४0426
16.86
1183.
8472
80490
88136 -
23460:
14, 7७!

13,9
12.47
8.90
8.39
2437
7.74
7691
7232
7.24


APPANDIX-IV

(TABULATION OF REPLI2S SENT BY THB HIGH COURS)

S.No. High Court Question No.4
1. Allahabad No. only the 0-7. (4)
DJ ~ HC - Govt.

Govt. generally makes

funds available to

H.C. which makes the (419
funds available to

DJ.
(314 )
(ivy)
2. Andhra Pradesh DJ. - PA. (Ly
(i) Wooden & Steel
furniture - 750
(ii) Maintenance Gaiy
रद: Repair - 5000
(4ii) Vehicle
(iv) Stetioner y - 4000 (411):
(vy Books &

Perio

Other Officers
Furni-ture- 10!

Stationery

dicals - Ful (iv)
Power.

00 under each kind

- 5000.

Que stion 1७०, 6.

On the basis of workload.

No scientific formula. Following staff for eaeh new
H.C. Judge. P.S., P.A. Bench Secretary, 2L.D. Asstt.
2 routine grade Asstt., Jamadar, 2 Peons 2 daily labow.

Acute shortage of court rooms, residences etc. Cts
functioning in improvised courts. Progress held up
because of lack of funds.

Due to shortage of space Bastas and loose files
lying on floor. No modern technology.

Vol. of work and availability of facilities like court
puilding and residence of presiding officer for district
neadquarters, for creation of it at Tehsil में, ७. - Vol. ०
work, building for court and residence. Availability of
lock uz, Malkhana etc, and Educational and other
facilities for the children o@ officers and staff,
facility for Bar, library etc. Problem of Transportation
etc.

No. Scientific formula. .
Subject to mroposal from D.J. if institution is heavy
in any court. Govt. grants if funds available.

Adequate thought given ~ Yes.
?th Plan - 2 crores for subordinate courts.
Proposal of 27.42 crores submitted to State Governnent.

No modern Technology.
Workload 8xpected,

Munsif - 500 main cases.
S.J. - 300 main cases

D.C. - 200 " "

+ Convenience of litigants,
Transport ,Boarding, Lodging
+ housing for court & staff.


Le]

3.

4.

Bombay

Gsuhati

Gujarat

fad ~

Que stion No.4
dean

D & S.J. AND C.U.M.
exercise powers as per’
Delegation of Financial
Power - Rules, 196.

Que stion No.6

ene

(2) IP Bod ent 24 0 formula toad,
considered on the basis of
workload.

(4i)) Yes - for the next 20-25 years,

(141) Records stored in steel almirahs -
treated pe-riodically for pests.

No modern technology.

(4). A/C to workload.
(41) Yes.

(i141 )) No modern Technology.

(iv) On examination of number of case Sy
demand from littgants and advocates
a new Court is creaated,

(4) A/c to workload
(ii) Yes.

(444) As per rules in High Cowt.
Appellate side Rules, 1960.

(iv} If the Sub-division gives rise to
sufficient number of cases to fulfill
the norms of its presiding officer,
distance from the HQ, transport
facility - backwardness of the area,
suitable bar and availability of
accommodation for court and staff.


bNe, State Qvestion No.4, © Question No.6

6. Himachal Presiding Officers of subordinate (4) On the basis of workload
Pradesh. courts, 8. 10 + 2000 on any one पु . r
* item of non-recurring expense. Noe scientific formula, if
नि हे Follow norms set by Punjab for staff
फिव re of oat ar yy an strength, Though in most of sub,
Medical expenses qua the 402 Courts the staff strength not a/c
under them, to norms.
~ Matters requiring sanction of a Gi) Yes.
कक) the head of the dept. are referre (441) No modern Technology.
~ to H.C. for CJ's sanction. Only photostat machines for giving
\ copies of records to litigants,
(iv) No. specific norm - but distance
to be travelled by litigant,
no. of cases etc. are kept in
mind. :
7. Jammu & Ka:hmir DJ - wto the limit of %&. 500 (4) No wiform pattern & no scientific
sy. 0 " " of ४७, 250 formula.
Munsif " " of ७. 100
(li) Generally, but not always.
Gia) 6४ revo” ds maintained in part 1,

rart Ii though now strictly
followed. io modern Pechnolozy.

(iv) ae ““Increas: in litigation and
pendency.
ke Creation is recommended at .
Tehsil H.Q. where courts
havo not been established
so far.


Sco. ___ Stata

8. Karnataka
vs
9. Xerala

Question No, 5

ay

(42)

Gai}

(iv)

eo)

No, 3

¢
a/c to workload and staff
pattern of Secretariat, reauest
for additicnal 70505 only partly
met by the झएए 0 scienticic
formula.

Records split in three parts and
kept in steel almirans.

No noderm sechnmology.

Sverage insuivution af case in
a Taluka. I? nacre “han a certain

mumber ‘han a new court is
recommendac.

Mumsif + JEMC court + 150 sut’
+150 OPC cases in a Taluka.

Civil Judge Court — 40 original
suits and 00) Regular Appeals.

a/e ta workicad after assessment

- py Orgamisation and Method

(422
(७4%)

Department of the Government.
Yase

As ner rules of High Court of
Kerala , 1

77...
उठ modern Tachnology.

GvE____3e suffictent flings.

dations
Ce convenience of Public.


/ 55102 Resort.
lished on

Dasic

fas

LlLCETS.

ibed yardst

eni saticn

regent .
decided on +
~

दि

Ss. But State Govt. 2873ए5 the
proposals . A No. of courts ०6178
neld in mekeshift arrangements
fmds are not given for creating
additional cts offices, chamters

8204

(iii) No modern technology.

(iv) Pendency and yardsticks for
disposal. Govt. meets the
requirement only. partially.


B20. state

Wel

Rajasthan.

Sue stion No.4

Non-recurring
BD = Pade

Pmjab -— wto 35 3000/-
om any one ivtene

3) a/c to workload, certain

‘ua stion ‘No.6.
al

6

also.
Zach Sub. Judge Court to nave 2 cepyist.
If Miles 7500 than an Asstt. shlmad to
be given, Leave reserve Stenotyot sts

in e Sessions Mivicion 5० 20% of *otal
Zaryama - “pio उन 5000/- Judicial Officers.
Senior Sub -udge (५) Yes. The courts and its amenities we
Piniab — wits 1000/- duilt,a/c to norm Ax 2
Zaryana - “Dt XLOC/— Jadges of the court..

‘ (171१0 Yo nodem Technology.

So powers with subordinate (24) No sclentitie Zormula
eiticers

who Zeel handicapped.
Cnly DJ as neads af tent.
nave powers mder Financial
Rules & Service Rules.

(44)

Git)

(एप)

३/९ to workload onl
mot sanctioning the
tc seep pace vith workload. Situatic>
viven. Clerks who is tea. co aandle
260 Mies is nandlin 3 5000-3000

ae

Lae Se

rec

recubcive start

Jery Lid. space. 4% some places she
staf? of the Court sits in the couwrt-
room for lack of space. “vt.

grants very limited amoumt as 967

PWE. Only additional space is xent
vacant for future need. Sovt. very
sloW in giving fumds for axvansion.

As per the cules. The Mies aalntained
with loose sheets whica can ba removed
added easily. No modern Technology.

New Court if cases at a particular
court more than 700. Sut this norm
not foll8wed and 2000-s000 cases are
pendin g at som @ courts.

No thought given to it.


2

5

S.No. State

2, Allahabad.

2. 4ndhra Pradesh

3. Bombay

4. Gauhati

5. Gujarat

6.Himachal-
Pradesh.

Que stjon No. 7

325 lacs granted till 1987-
1988. Works sanctioned in
85-86 are in progress.,

86-87 partially in progress
and 87~88 not been started.

590-70 lakhs granted till
1988-89. To be used for
45 courts buildings

85 ~ amenities in courts.
1A - residential qrts.

1 - court building complete
and 17 are in progress.

ll Residential quarter

Question No.8

Total ~ 1406
Regular Courts ~285

Imprevised 7 °~ 427
Collectorate
Building — ~
Rented ” - 3.
(i) 577. -

(41) lol courts in
94 rented Sulld-
ings

~ 17.5%

completed and 51 in progress.

Amenittés provided in 24
placed g in progress in
30 places.

Award of about 189 lacs —
not been implemented so
far.

Work in progress.

(३); 187

(ii) 5% in rented
puildings.

(3) 426
(44) 2.82

Total +66
Rented building -L

Question Mp,9

०. -
8.0.0. - 53%

| BC- About 6%

mot srovided
accommo dation.
(51 ) 850 - 58%
Zxcluding, 364 taken
ath Lip aU HT anothes

२००, ०७ 2:
330 required.

(4)
(aa)

H.C, 10.87%
870 - 634,

Gay
Giy

H.C. — 20%
830 — 508

(42 H.C. 35%
GL) SIO — 50%

HeCe -
8.3.0. - US


Je

S.No. State

7. Jammu and

Kashxi-r..
8,

Xarnataka
9. Kerala.

10. Madhya Pradesh

il Patna

question 12, 7

Not been implemented so Zar,

at a very preliminary stage
of srocessing.

Some work has been approved
but not ‘mown whether in
accordance with the
recommendations. ‘

award for 22 mits of
court ouilding, work on
i4 in progress. ‘Under
amenities most taken -p
for execution.

Work in progress.

work in progress

Question o.2
(३). 309
Gi) 3

(1) 328
0५) 49

(५) 30
(५) 48 courts ia

Tented ciullding

isz.

Total + 75%
Revenus Devt. 20
Rented Sourts -3.

westion ‘oss.

26 JO without
agcommo dation does 5०6४
give the toval aunber
of she 3703.

3.0. 9.1

370 — 45.5%

350 398
उय0 - 25%

3.c. — None

SJO — 80%

After implementation
of award of Sth
Finance Commission

42% Officers would sot
get accommodation.


S.vo, State Gre sion “Mo .7

Ta.

Punjab

Rajasthan

Eumjab srant in aid not
mace availaole so
recommendation not

i enented,

cyana — grant part of
3 crotes proposed by
ryana jovi. for

denttaR ,works of all
weptts vo be carried out
in 7th Five year Plane

Pin jab .
(i) 213 (22 on
deputation)
231 courts
(41) 6 courts :
duilding
information item 20
out of 12 divisions.

rented

Haryana
(३) 173 (22 on
deputation)
(4i) 12 courts in rented
ouildings (190
from li out of ig
divisions. }

Total ~ 438

iumeticning in very
badly aaintained
buildings and in
Panchayat buildings.
Rented —lo.

we sticn :0,2.

H.C. — None
Pimjab
820 = 17%,



nordal sot pate 01०५ .
|

BIATEMENT OF Recmiprs AND BXPENDTTURS | |

S.No stato take tae  Bapahdleure 8666886
Seto Stake rocel ped on dugialaty oF Beate 88

(rr dn taka) fe ih Takhas apa tity

पं

४->००---->------>->---------- ada
mw AL Bs
Qe Andhra Pradesh 63280 dot 0115
20. Assam 8०66 214 aad? :
3». Bihar 30286 843 2418
46. Gufarat $8777 . 66d 1114 :
5५. Haryana 27001 214 6448
6. Himachal Fradosh 35657 138 4053
Te damm & Kashmir 4995 128 4480
@. Karnataka 50787 914 148
9. Kerala 46634 606 1588
104 Madhya Pradesh 38172 644 1188
11, Maharashtra 125798 1334 1108
12, Manipur 15 36 444044
134 Meghalaya ARG a4 4494
14, Nagaland . 4३6 46 8,48
15. Oriana 4A774. 428 4446
164 Punjab 37K ' 348 6484
176 Rafasthan 27095 831 ' lage
184 Sdkkdm 285 14 481
194 Tamit Madu 62845 878 111
20, Tripura 362 40 1630
214 Uttar Pradesh 626ng 1414 sah
22, West Rengal 51274 «.. 869 PMT.)
236 Andaman & Nicobar 43 8 13,98
24. Arunachal Pradesh 32 है a
25. Chandigarh 21465 144 Sith

‘ ,.. bHedaa

oh

lag


1 2 3 4 5
26, Dadra & Hagar Haveld 12 4 8८33
27. Dolnd 28390 251 0,88
28, GoayDaman & Diu 1980 33 1,66
29, Lakshadwenp 2 3 1.50
30. Mizoram NA, NA. -

31, Pondicherry 1740 26 1.99


31161% ४ 11 )
- Source tps anne! ng Commission 7
#1द0#65४-1 911 «132

"8 AND EXPRNDLITURE

Sito State | ee o Fax Rependd Htd Ber conbaga’
‘ receipts oh {rftctary 6f Stake
1ont—A2 ont] fadaints
(pa dn dakha) || 181018 spat 6H
४188 9
न बा #+ा ४ क+ नकता ना न कऋा कऋ न re ao he न
1. Andhra Pradesh 6३290 1125 viet
2. Assam ROBA 722 bol
3. Bihar 30296 1008 EER
A, anjrat BATT 676 1316
5. Waryana 27091 250 0447
6« Wimachal Pradedh 3567 134 4136
7, Jammi ७ Kashmir A008 125 ahh
BR. Karnataka 50787 8१2 1475
9, Kerala 16634 651 in
10 Madhya Peadesh 49772 142 1188
31 .Maharashtra 125708 1370 1108
17 Manipur 48 29 194,44
13 Meghalaya ARB W 4149
14 Naaaland AG 28 Badd
18.0rdsaa 14771 458 2340:
16.Pan jab - 37691 419 1304:
17,.Rajasthan 27096 864 2408
1A,sdkkim 285 17 (है
19.tamit Made 6821 113 943 650
20 ..Tripite, 462 72 19.88)
21.Uttar “rddesh 62686 1530 23414 |
22 0680 Henant ६1271 Aad 1118 |
23.Andaman ७ teohar tslands 43 - ue |
24,Arunachal Pradosh 32 - “
25 Chandiaarh 2145 - -
26 Dadra & Nagar Haveld 12 - -
27,.Delhs 28490 - -
28.90a,Daman & Din toa पु - -
29 Lakshadweep 2 - -
30..Mi voram 1167 « - co
1740 - ry

31,Pondicherry

thy


S.No

1.
Pe

4a.
5e
6.

9
9.

10.
li.
126
13.
14.
15.
16.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
226
23.
2a.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.
31.

Appondis  ५(111)

Source! Information supplied

by States.

_ STATEMENT OF RECBIPTS AND EXPENDITIRB LLL __

State tax

Expenditute bet dattaga

Stake receipts on judiciary oF tas
1981-82 (1981-82 teceipts
(fs in lakhs) dn lakhs SBont Re
judiciary

Andhra Pradesh 63280 984 1455

Assam 3966 37443 0७434

Rihar 30286

Gujrak 58777

Haryana 27091

Himachal Pradesh 3567

Jammu & Kashmtar 4995

Karnataka 507Aa7

Kerala 36634 579 1.58

Madhya Pradesh 38772 7116 2,00

Maharashtra 125798 1162 0,92

Manipur 15

Meghalaya 486

Nagaland 436

Orissa 14771

Punjab+Haryana 27091 + 37691 537 (पड)

Rajasthan 27095

Sikkim 285

Tamil Nadu 62483

Tripura 362

Uttar Pradesh 62686

West Bongal 51274

Andaman & Nicobar 43

Islands

Arunachal Pradesh 32

Chandtaarh 2145

Dadra & Nagar Haveli 12

10 7111 29396

Goa, DamankDiu 1900

Lakshadweep 2

Mizoram NA.

Pondicherry 1740 i

[uy