LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
CN

COST OF LITIGATION

1988


CHAPTER I

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER IV

NOTES AND
REFERENCES

APPENDIX

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION eee

COMPONENTS OF COST CF LITIGATION
COURT FEE AS A COMPONENT OF

COST OF LITIGATION AND

ITS RATIONALISATION aoe

ANTICIPATIONS eee

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSTIONS/RECONHE
DATIONS = REEORT OF THE COMMS‘
CF LAW MINIS
OF COURT FRE

E

1 OCTOBER 1984. wee

RS OM RATIONALISATICN

PAGE

37
72

77

80


CHAPTER T

IPTROPUCTION

1.1. of the humerous ills with which

judicial system as in vogue in this country

is suffering, the one which has attracted the

attention of all those concerned with courts
and interested in its functioning is high

cost of litigation in Indian courts. So,

when the Government of India decided ६० set

up a Judicial Reforms Commission and later on
assiqned that task to the present Law
Commission, one of the terms of reference
was:

"@. The cost of litigation with a view
to lessening the burden ०1 the
litigants".

That litigation has become a luxury for the
rich is a self-evident proposition. It is a
trite saying that if the cost benefit ratio
is applied to court litigation, more often
the cost far outweiq@hs the benefit flowing
from the litigation. If a survey is made of

those who have causes to be taken to the

court for redressal of grievances but the
prohibitive cost of litigation thwarted them
from undertaking that exercise, the cutcome
of the survey would be revealing.

Occasionally, litigation is undertaken not


with a view to vindicate the wronq or
injustice suffered but as. an egocentric
activity to heap as much harm on the other

ide as possible. In this situation, cost of
litigation acquires a secondary position.
But excluding this class of cases, cost of
litigation is an important factor in
evaluating the approach of the litigant while
deciding to initiate the litigation. The
problem has also to be viewed from the point
of view of the defendant who is dragged to
the court as to what burden of costs will be
heaped upon him in defending his right. Cost
ef litigation has multiple dimensions: (1)
cost to the State in setting up and
maintaining justice system; (2) cost to the
litigant; and (3) cost to the society. In
this rerort, Law Commission 19 primarily
concerned with cost of Llitignition with a view

te lessening the burden on the litigants.

1.2. The burden on the Exchequer for setting
up and maintaining adequate and efficient
justice system has been examined by the Law
Commission. The cost borne by the society

for providing effective and efficient justice

system requires analysis and in-depth


examination, That is outside the purview of

this report. The entire emphasis in this
report is on the cost cf litigation borne by

the litigants.

What are the road-blocks in access to

justice? They are numerous and diverse. 016
cf the impediments in access to justice has
bec identified as the economic barrier

which, in simple terms, means high cost of
2 igation. Tt has become so counter-
productive that numerous litigants, it is
apprehended, may, for want of wherewithal,
suifer injustice, giving up the idea to
appreech the court because cf the prohibitive
cozts. This is not an idle fantasy. Even in

an aiftnent counter, Like America, ‘it is the

mit? ions of eisputes  an7 millions of

disputonts offectively excluded because of

t on, ogiveness of the process that are the

major cosualities. Litigation in the formal

covris is an cxpensive proposition both for
taxpayers and for litigants’. ‘The high
cost of litigation through the courts may

irritate many litigants. But for some it

t matter how

constitutes a tetal bar. No

meritorious the claim or how worthy the


a low income person (as well as many

defence,

in the middle class) will be unable to
3

litigate most cases’. There is a movement

afoot in America for reform that will reduce

the ८05६ of litigation. The search for
reform has exposed the fact that a number of
disputes remain unresolved which is not
conducive to the health and well being of a

society. The reform movement aims at

rendering justice more accessible by making

it less expensive.

1.4. It is agreed on all hands that Indian

situation is worse compared to American
situation because India is a developing
country with large population living below
} erty line. To ulleviate poverty, numerous
Programmes have been undertaken by the State.
These programmes create rights. _ The
awareness of these rights has percolated down

to the beneficiaries. But the existence of

right or its awareness hardly brings any
relief. It is the enforcement of the right
to enjoy the benefit flowing from the right

which is important. The moment you come to

enforcement, the courts come in, and with it

the costs. The inability to bear the costs


makes any attempt at enforcing the right not
worth its while. The programme and the

rights created therein remain a teasing

illusion.

1.5. This disturbing phenomena cf rising
cost of litigation attracted the attention of

the Parliament. While Constitution mandated

that the State shall secure and protect, as

effectively as it may, a social order in

which justice shall inform all the
institutions of national life, there was no
effective provision in the Constitution for

translating this promise into reality.
Article 398 vas introduced in the
Constitution in the year 1976. It provided
that the State shall secure’ that the
operation of the legal system promotes
justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and
shall, in particular, provide free legal aid,
by suitable Jegislation or schemes cr in any
other way; to ensure that opportunities for
securing justice are not denied to any
citizen by reason of economic or other
disabilities. In introducing this article,
Parliament showed its awareness that by

numercus statutes, rights, privileges and


oncessions have been conferred on the

economically and socially disadvantaged
sections of the society but they themselves
are not in a position by their own effort to
enforce these rights or enjoy the privileges
and concessions. And till that is done, it
cannot be said that the legal system promotes
justice because justice system is an integral
part of the legal system of the country. No
one who has aright must be denied the
benefit of it. There must be a forum for
enforcement and vindication of this right.
Access to forum must be unimpeded either by
geographical, physical or economic barriers.
The justice system must be easily accessible
to each and every one from whatever strata of
society he comes. Economic or any other
disability should not become a barrier to
access to justice. Economic incapacity for
enforcing rights must be remedied. It can be
done in two ways: (i) considerably reduce the

cost of litigation; and (ii) extend help by

legal aid scheme wherever it ‘is possible.


it was

1.6. In the doys of lai
assumed that if the State establishes ccurts,
the State has perforned its duty. The

procedure for civil litigation reflected the

essentially individualistic philoscphy of

rights then prevailing. A right of access to

jrcicial protection meant essentially the
aggrieved individval's formal right to
litigate cr defend a claim. Inability to
resort to ccurt to enforce the right was net
rhe

taken to be the concern of the State.

ve with respect to such

State remained pas
rreblems as ability to initiate action or to
defend the action adequately. Such an
agproach is inconsistent with th2 rfhilosophy
of a welfare State, Therefore, article 39A
previded for setting up free legal aid
schemes to at least deal with one component
of the cost of lizigaticn, namely, lawyer's
fees. But i. re are numerous components of
cost of litigation and each will have to be
adeavately and scientifically examined to
Gemarcate arcas where there is enough leeway
for reducing the cost of litigation. The
approach has to be in contrast with the 19th
century approach. Relieving ‘legal poverty'

- the incapacity of many people tc make full

x


us“ of the law and its institutions - was not
the concern of the State. Justice, like
other commodities in the laissez faire
system, was available only to those whc could
afford its cost. Formal, not effective
justice - formal, not effective equality -

was all that was sought. This approach has

to be eschewed.

1.7. A constitutional democracy founded on
rule of law must provide a body for
resolution of the disputes arising in the
society. The disputes may be individual in
character or the disputes may arise out of
conflict of interests between groups. In
either situation, there must be an easily

accessible fecrum for resolution of disputes.

Simmering perpetual disputes would retard the

development and growth of the society.

Expeditious resolution of disputes by an

easily acessible forum would certainly tend
to help development and growth of the
society. The courts are institutions for
formal resolution of disputes amongst
individuals and groups. This forum, in order
to be effective, useful, efficient and
action-oriented, must be easily accessible to

the lowest amongst the lowliest without the


worry of finding wherewithal for access to

justice. And the forum must be able to

expeditiously resolve the disputes so that

the disputes do not continue to simmer in the

society and the disputants may invest their

time in more productive and creative effort

rather than in fighting fruitless litigation.

Therefore, a justice system worth its name

must be easily accessible, least formal, nen-

expensive and ready to resolve the disputes

in a reasonably short time. In its search

for judicial reforms, the Law Commission has
dealt with providing forum which can
expeditiously dispose of cascs within a

reasonable time. The present report déals

with removal of economic barriers in access
to the forum,
1.8.- Incidentally, the report also deals

with a reference received from the Department
of Justice in the the Ministry of Law and
Ju ice. It appears that the Conference of
Law Ministers of States and Union territories
held in June 1982 at New Delhi set up a
Committee tc go into the | question of
rationalisation of court fee. This Committee
prepared a report on rationalisation of court

fee. This report was placed as an annexure


to the agenda itcm on ‘abolition of court

fee’ in the joint Conference of Chief

Justices, Chief Ministcrs and Law Ministers

held at New Del..i on 31st August and Ist

September, 1685. It is stated that due to

paucity of time, the subject was not
discussed in the Conference. As stated

earlier amongst the terms of reference crawn

up, .or a Commission which was to be sect up to

study and recommend reforms in the justice

system, one of the terms was>: "the cost of
litigation with a view to lessening the
burden on the litigants’. Later on,

Government of India decided to assign the
task of studying rcfornms in judicial
administration and to make  reconmendations
therecn to the present Law Cenmission.
Consequently, it was decided by the Minister
of Law and Justice, Government of India, to
refer the report of the Committee of Law
Ministers on 'Rationalisation of Court Fee‘
to the Law Commission for its study and
recommendations. This report would also
dispose of the reference as set out in D.O.
No. 25/4/80/dJus of Additional Secretary,

Ministry of Law and Justice, dated 28/29

April, 1986.

10


CHAPTER II

COMPONENTS OF COST OF LITIGATION

2.1. Before att.mpting to ascertain the

areas where the expenses “re incurred by
litigants in initiating or prosecuting or
defending litigation, it would be worthwhile
to recall the broad heads under which the
litigants have to bear expenditure in
prosecuting or defending litigation. They
may be broadly grouped as under:-

(1) advocates. fees, including the fees
for serving notice wherever it is
necessary;

(2) court fees and process fces;

(3) travelling expenses, etc., of
litigants and witnesses;

(4) costs for obtaining copies of
documents, typing and other
miscellaneous expenses;

(5) costs on account of adjournments;
and

(6) costs payable by the vanquished party

to the successful party.

2.2. Each head may be separately analysed
with a view to spotting areas where the costs

borne by the litigants may be either whcelly

11


eliminated or at least considerably reduced.

The Law Commission is not concerned with all
litigants. Its r_commendations are relevant
for those litigants who can ill-afford the
prevalent costs of litigation and who may be
forced, in the language of article 39A, to
give up securing justice, resulting in denial
of justice by reason of economic barrier. It
is this class of marginal litigants that the
Law Ccmmission has kept in focus while
examining the heavy burden of costs of
litigation, The Law Commission is aware that
there is a class of litigants to whom the

quantum of costs is not at all 8 relevant

factor in pursuing litigation. In fact when
the ~pponent is from an economically
impoverished class, the well-to-do opponent,
irrespective of the ८८3६ of litigation, will
pursue it relentlessly either to tire out the
impoverished litigant or to impose upon him
an unfair and unjust compromise. It is for
this class of litigants coming from the
impoverished segment of society and
designated as economically disadvantaged
class of litigants, for whose benefit rights
have been created or privileges and

concessions have been conferred by statutery

1?


and cxecutive orders but who are denied the

same and are unable to enforce the same
through justice system on account of economic
barrier, that the Law Commissicn is
concerned. Those who have cushion and want
to spend on litigation as a luxury are not
the concern of the Law Commission. This
report may be understood and appreciated by
keeping in focus those litigants from
styled

impoverished segments of cur society,

as economically disadvantaged class of

peo, -«
Advocates Fees
2.36 In assigning the top place to

advocates’ fees as a component of cost of
litigation, the 17४ Commission is influenced
by the fact that members cf the top echelons
of legal profession charge fees for services
rendered by them which is not available on a
comparative basis in any other profession,
In the ccrridors of Bar Association. it is
freely whispered, and without the identity
being disclosed, the Law Commission was
informed, that the top members of the legal
fraternity in the Supreme Court charge more

often at the rate of Rs.1,00,000 per day of

13


four बाते half working hours. A fee varying
from Rs.5,000 to Rs-15,000 for appearing in a
matter set down for admission has _ become
common place; and senior advccates coming
from the tcp echelons of the Par are known to
be appearing in 5 to 10 admission matters per
day on an average. And this fee, cither for
final hearing fer day or per admission matter
does not include conference fee. The minimum
fee for giving written opinion varies from
Rs.5,000 per opinicn to a conference fee of
Rs.5,000 per hour. Ordinarily, big
industrial and commercial houses and
corporations and companies have been paying
and are willing to pay the feces on this
scale. ‘then it s?owly tapers down to a level
where the competition is fierce and the

charges are tie lowest.

204. Payment in the higher bracket is
further encouraged by a peculiar provision in
the Income-tax Act. Section 37(1) of the Act
provides that any expenditure [not being
expenditure cf the nature in sections 30 to
36 and not bcing in the nature cf capital
expenditure or personal expenses of society]

laid out or expended wholly and exclusively

14


for the purposes of the business or

profession shall be allowed in computing the

income chargeable under the head 'profits and

gains of business or profession’. This

provision has come in for interpretation on

numerous occasions before the Privy Council,

Supreme Court, various High Courts and Income

Tax Appellate Tribunal, and expenses on

litigation have been put under the heading
"permissible deduction! in computing the
profits and gains of business or profession.

The cases are a legion to be mentioned here

but a ready reckoner is available. But
practically every class of litigation
concerning the business or profession of the
assessee has enjoyed the benefit of exemption
and without a ceiling. This provision has
pushed up lawyers' feces in cases where
corperations/ companics are involved in
litigation and it has almost become the
corpu. .tions'/companies’ largesse distritution
method. And the largesse is enjoyed at the
cost of the State by reducing the taxable
profit and enhancing the litigation. There
was also section 80VV, which has been deleted
with effect from 1-4-1986 by the Finance Act

of 1985, which permitted deduction of

15


expenses incurred on litigation under the Act
with a ceiling at Rs-.5,000. Shorn of
verbiage, the provision means that one can

fight tax authorities at State’s own cost
inasmuch as cven if the assessec were to lose
the litigation up to the Supreme Court of
India, the expenses subject to ceiling are
deductible while computing the total income
of thc assessce. Such litigants litigating
at State cost have clogged the courts

dockets. Their ability to pay high fees has
so adversely affected the markct of Ilegal
services and culture of legal profession that
others who can ill-afford to pay fees at the
hig! rates are compelled by the environment
to follow the suit and suffer in the process.
Therefore, the question of costs of
litigation tmmay be examined only from the
point of view of the impoverished class of
litigants who suffer dcuble jeopardy in that
they cannet afford to enforce rights by
initiating the litigation for want of
wherewithal and, in the process, suffer

further injustice, namely, denial of rights,

privileges and conccssions.

16


2.56 Petty litigation of simple variety
emanatcs from rurul areas inhabited largely
by impoverished class of rural  pcor. To
them, more than the court fees, the
advocates’ fces/lawyers' charges which have
to be paid in advance set up a_ formidable
barrier in access to justice. For this class
of litigants, there must be व two-pronged
drive to reduce the cost of litigation under
the bh ३3 "lawyers' charges":

(1) The State must prescribe floor. and
ceiling within which only lawyers’
fees can be charged; and

(2) Legal aid schemes which must ensure
availability of legal aid at State
cost.

Both the approaches may be separately

examined.

2.6.6 The Advocatcs Act, 1961, has been
enacted in cxercise of the powers conferred
by entry 26 in the Concurrent List of Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution. . The Act
provides for a monopoly in the sense that
only those persons whose names have been
enrollcd in the State rolls of advocates

maintained by the Bar Council of the State

17


shal] be entitled as of right to practise

throughout the territories to which the Act

extends, as pre.ided in section 30.
Undoubted!y section 32 confers power cn the
court to permit any person not enrolled as an
advocate under the Act to appear before it in
any particular case Both these sections
find their place in Chapter Iv which appears
not to have been brought into operation as
yet. If thus the Act confers a monopoly,
since naturally the monopoly has वा. inbuilt
tendency to abuse its monopolistic character,
the State must have regulatory control over a
monopoly. And such regulatory control may
extend ६० prescribing the floor and ceiling
in the matter of lawyer's feces. Now if by
the Act of Parliancnt, the profession enjoys
a monopoly, indisputably the Parliament will
have power for regulating the conduct of the
members of the monopolistic prefcssion § and-
in exercise of this power, the Parliament can
prescribe the floor and cciling in respect of
fees chargeable by lawyers. Today sky is the
limit. In a welfare State, the State must,
in discharge of its trust to its irpoverishcd
sections of socicty, protect them against a
highly intelligent monopolistic profession.

And now that the legal charges or fees cf

18


lawyers have sky-rockettcd, it is time for

the State to intervene and regulate the

profession by prescribing the floor and

Between the Fleer and ceiling, it

his

ceiling.
would be open to the lawyer to negotiate
fees, But if the litigant were to deposit
the fees at the level cf ceiling in an
account to be maintained by the Bar

Association of which the lawyer is a member,

er (0 appear

it shall be the duty cf the law
for the litigant without any further
negotiation about fers. Ne may decline to
undertake the assignment if either there is a
conflict of interest or his hands are full.
The lewyers describe their legal profession
as a noble profession. As a characteristic

of nobility, this sacrifice is erpected.

2.7. There is an additional reason why the
State must enforce a regulatory measure.
Recently, by the Resolution No. F.&(14)/82~
I.C, dated 4th July, 1985, of the Department
of Legal Affairs. Ministry of Law and
Justice, a Committce was set up under the
Chairmanshiy of Justice Baharul Islam, former
Judge of the Supreme Court of India, to make

recommendations to provide social sccurity

measures to members of the legal profession.

19


The Committce was cf a representative

charactcr jin as much as there were four

Members of Rajya Sabha avd Four Members of

Lok Sabha as Nembers of the Committee over

and above the Attorney Generel cf India,
Chairman cf the Bar Covncil of Ind a
senior acvocake of th Supreme Court,

Chairman of the Lar Council of Nelhi and a

journalist. This Committee was required te
study in depth all the aspects relating to
the measures of social seenrity to be

provided to the members of legal profession
and submit a report together with its
recommendations within the period prescribed.
The Committec issued 2 questionnaire te which
there was a videspreac resionse, After the
internal delib:.aticns, the committee
recommended to provide financial assistance
the extent cf Rs.500 to junicr advocates

te

for S years from the date of enrolment and to

those who have nok completcd 35 years of fac.

Special prevision was recommended for the

advocates belonging to Scheduled Cast
Scheduled Tribes and women lawyers. The
Com: tee also submittesd a draft bill arncxed
to its report. The funcing programme is

evident from the draft Bill. It prevides for

20


a levy cf membership fie as alse levy cf a
stami Cuty on every vakalatnana that a lawyer
£ s in any litisation of such denonination

as may Le prescribed. The amount collected

by the sale of such stamps will form part of
the fund. In effect, mombers of the legal
profession have to be provided financial

assistance by levy of tax in the form of

stamp duty. If the pref ssicn can call upon
the Government to vxercise its taxing power
fer raising a fund to be «xclusivcly used for
the benefit of the members of the legal
profession, ipso so facto the State can enforce
a regblatory measure providing the floor and
ceiling in the matter ci charging of fees.
To a considerable extent, if this
recommendation is implemented. the quantum of
lawyer's charges will go down and it will

have the desired effect of equitable
distributien of legal work amongst various
members of the prefession anc (० reduce
concentration of 10001 work in the hands of

members of the profession to the

few
detriment of a large number of them. These
twin objects can be easily achieved by

prescribing the flcor and cciling in the
matter of lawyer's charges and once the

litigent is willing to pay, he is entitled to


the services of a lawyer as desired by him

within the meaning of article 22 of the

Constitution.

2.8. Even where floor and ceiling in matter
of lawyer's charges are prescribed and
enforced, yet, in a poverty ridden society
like ours; there will still be 2 large
segment of potential litigants in search of
its entitlements who would not be able to
afford even the prescribed charges. For
their benefit, the provision of article 39A
has to be fully made operational. Article
39 rescribes a duty of the State to secure
that it shall provide free legal aid by
suitable legislation or schemes or in any
other way to ensure that opportunities for
securing justice are not denied to any
citizen br reason of economic or other
disabilities. The State is aware of its duty
as nandated by article 329A of the
Constitution. In oréer to translate the
Mandate of article 39A into a functioning
scheme to provide free and competent legal
services to the weaker sections of the
society to ensure that opportunities for

securing justice are not denied to any

by reason of econemic or other

33

citizen


disabilities, Parliament has cnacted the

Legal Services Aut'orities Act; 1°87 [Act No.
39 of 1987], which received the assent of the
President on October 11, 1587. Nearly eight
months have rolled by since the Act has been
put on the statute book but, unfortunately,
it has not been brought into operation. The
reasons for this delay are difficult to
discern. However: it must be stated in
favour of the State and the powers that’ be
that a legal aid scheme under का executive
order is at present functioning. It is a
skeletal (scheme. The scheme has to be all
compicuensive so that anyone in any part of
India who has suffered injustice by denial of
entitlements or deprivation of his rights
must be able without the slighest worry
about his cconomic wherewithal, to initiate
legal action for enforcement of his rights or
to procure his entitlements. The National
Legal Services Authority to be set up under
section 3 of the Act is under a statutory
obligation to lay down policies and
principles for making legal services
available under the ;rovisions of the Act;

frame the most effective and economical

schemes for the purpose of making legal

23


services available under the provisions of
the Act; utilise the funds at its disposal
and make appropriate allocation of funds to

Statc authorities and district authorities;

and to take necessary steps by way of social
justice litigation with regard to consumer
protcction, environmental protection or other
matter of special concern to the weaker
secticns of the society and, for this
purpose, to give training to sccial workers
in) legal skills. When the scheme is made
operational, cven the poorest among the poor
would be able to secure legal aid without the
worry of finding the wherewithal for
acquiring his entitlements and to vindicate
his rights. In fact, expecting the members
of the impoverished class of litigants to go
in search 7 legal aid is itself a tall
ores: The Law Cemmission, being aware of
the fact that the rural poor find it
@ifficult evcn to procure legal aid by
approachine appropriate authorities; has

taken one more step to make the scheme,

whatever that may be, operational.

24


2.0. The largest secticns cf the

eco’ ically anc socially disadvantaged

classes of people reside in rural areas. For

their benefit; a participatory model of

has already been recommended by the

justice
2

Law Commission in August 1986. The report

recenmends sciting up of a Gram Nyayalaya to

be manned by a legally trained Judge and two

lay Judges. Apart from anything else, the

Gram Nyayalaya bas not to wait fer people to

come to it in search of justice but whenever

a @ispute is reported, to assemble at the

site of the dispute and to resolve the same.

Ours being a socicty founded on tule of law

coupled with an adversary system, presence of

lawyer in the process of assisting resolution

of dispute is generally considered
indispensable. Now if the Gram Nyayalaya is

to settle at the situs of dispute, how could

litigants coming from the rural poor class
bring their lawyers to the place where the
dispute has cccurred? The Law Conmission
being aware of this situation has ‘recommended

that to every such Gram Nyayalava, the

District Authority, to be set up under the

Legal Services Authority Act, 1687, shall

assign two lawyers whose services would be


available to vither side in need of lawyer's

services without obligation to make any

payment, If the rural poor are net ४० pay

court fees in their disputcs before the Gram

3

Nyayalaya anc will have services of lawyers
y'

assigned by District Authority under the

aforementioned Act without obligation to
4

pay, one cim confidently say that the two

Major components of cost of litigation will
be totally climinated and the cost of
litigation will perceptibly ge down ० an

extent where it will become wholly bearable.

court Fees and Process Fees

2.10. Court tee has acquired high visibility

prof’: as a comporent of cost of litigation

by the litigants in view of the
the

borne
vocifcrous advecacy for its abolition by
then Law Minister, Mr. Jagannath Kaushal. It
is a complex subject and is, therefore,

separately dealt with in the next chapter.

As regards precess fecs, the simple answer
that the Law Commission would give,in view of
its formulations in the succceding chapter, is
that those who fall in the exemption limit

shall not pay process fee and those who will

26


be liable to pay court fees shall pay process

fee at the rate to be prescribed by the High

Courts.
Travelling Expenses, etc., of
Litigants and Witnesscs
2.11. The present situation is that the
courts of lowest jurisdiction are generally

stationed at the headquarters cf Taluka or

Tehsil depending upon the inflow of work.

Occasienally, a court of lowest jurisdiction

is set up with jurisdiction over 2 to 3

Talukas/Tehsils and the litigants, cven from

the area within the jurisdiction of such

court in search of justice, will have to

travel to the headquarters where the court is

set up. Not only .he litigants will have to

travel to the court very often but, when the

suit reaches the stage of recording evidence,
witnesses have to be taken from the village

to the court and transported back alse to be

provided some snack and food. This weuld

entail heavy cost. Expericnce shows that

after the suit reaches the stage of hearing
and the witnesses are brought, the suit is
adjourned on numerous occasions entailing the
liability to bring witnesses repeatedly ६०

the cc oc. Not only that but even after the

27


cross-exanination of the witnesses has

started, it is n t completed by continucus

hearing of the suit but the suit may be

adjourned with the obligation of the witness

undcr cross-exanination to appear 35 many

times in the court as the court would cxpect

his presence or till such time as it is

that the examination is complete.

recorded
There is one notorious case in the court at
Ahmedabad where the adjourned cross-

examination covercd a period of a decade.

Unless the witness is summoned and the amount
for procuring his presence is deposited, as
required by rule 3 of Order 16, the cxpenses
incur q in bringing witnesses to the court
would not be included in the taxed costs.
Rule 1A of Order 16 permits the party to heup

witnesses present without obtaining the

assistance of the court for procuring their

presence and if they are kept present, the

is under an cbhligation to examine them

court
unless it is said that the cvidence of the
witness is irrelevant or the exercise is for

5
vexation or delay And there is a peculiar

tendency among litigants in our country to

bring a number of witnesses even where parol

evidence has little or no relevance and this

28


invisible component of cost of litigation is
sometimes back-breaking. There is some

scope for reducing cost under this head.

2.12. fParol evidence has its relevance where

parties are at variance on a fact situation
which cannot be established by documentary

evidence, such as suits based on casement.

Whether a particular passage was in existence
and uscd or a passage for water was ip
existence and used over the statutory period
would cntail examination of vitnesses whe
would have intimate knowledge of the
existence of passage or water passage, as the
case may be. Cases are mot unknown where a
large number of witnesses on cither side are
called and examined, Though the Evidence Act
docs not prescribe numerical strength of
witnesses to prov. a certain fact, yet, in
the 356 of proof of execution cf a document
required by law to be attested, it shall be
obligatory upon the person offering the
docunent in cvidence to at least examine one

attcsting witn.ss for the purposé of proof of
6

exccution. The proviso ta secticon 68 would

make it incumbent upon a person offering to

prove a will to examine at least one

29


attesting witness to prove the same but in

all other cases if the document i: registered

according to the provisicens of the Indian

Registration Act, the rigour of scction 68
would be lessened in that the examination cof

an attesting witness will not be incumbent

the person offering such document in

upon
evidence. The tendency. therefore. to
examine a large nembcr of vitnesses to prove
a civen fact requires to be curbed but till
that is donc, there is a way cut to reduce

cost of litiqation undcr this head. Where

examination

once the witness is called, hi
must be completed on the same day. This can

be achicved by two simple methods.

2.13. If the corrt has set down number of
suits fer recording «vidence on a given day
and the (५ u.i finds itself unable to deal

2 ccurt should appoint

with all witnesses tl
a lavytr as a Commissioner directing him to
recerd evidence of witnesses of those whe arc
Erese in the court. this practice is
followcd in the subordinate courts in che
State of Madhya Pradesh. This practice
requires te be universally followed. once
the witness has come in ane the cvidence is

recorded, he/she may ret te called in again

30


and any further investment ता procuring

witnesses will be saved. Necdluss to. say

that in the circumstances herein mentioned,

the costs of Conmissioner shal] be borne by

the Skate.

2-14 Law Commission has however, anether

alternative suggestion which it has already

made in this behalf, If Gram Nyayalayas are

set up as recommended by it, it is incumbent

upon such Gram tyayelayas to visit the site
of dispute vhich by iteclf would offer oa

solrcion, In aonumber of cases emanating
frow rural areas and rcaching th: courts, the
dispute centres round a road cr passage to
the house or ficld to be used Fy men, cart
and cattle. thes disputes are cabroiled in

nical riics and comp lex legal
wlations involving foreign decisions

which fave modulated the law. to aveid all
this complicated and complex approach to a
हवा | cispute, a Gram Nyayalaya, on receipt

of a dispute of this nature, would assemble,
on @ date te sc notitied in advance, at the
site of dispute: witnesses vill be from. the
samc Jocality,; whey will be present; they can

be bricfiyv crauincd, and the dispute can be

reselved age per the decision of the Gram

31


Nyayalaya. This would totally climinate

expenses on trans ort and snack «harges for

It will be a saving in time and
7
money both.

witnesses.

then it comes to urban

litigation, the problem is riot 50 complex

because the courts are in the city and the

witnesses are in the city and they can be

kept prosent without puch investment.

Therefore, if these two suggestiens herein

made are inplement).d, expenses cn transport

and snacks of witness«s as a component of

cost of litigation will be cither wholly
eliminated or reduced to such a level ब5 to

become bcarable.

2.15. In this context. attention must be

drawn to Crder °%7 of the Code cf Civil

Procedure, 1076, which «mpowers the court nat

to grant Frivolous adjournments and in any

case on th. ground of the convenicnce of
lawyer. Provision of Order 717 should be

scrupulcusly followed and this would further

entail reduction in cost under this head,

Costs for Obtaining Ccpies of Docuncnts,

Typing and other 111 52. llancous Expenses

2.16. Documents which are compulsorily

registcrable under the provisions of the

32


Indian R.gistration Act, 1908, are reaisteree

by Registry sct u, under the Act. Copics of

documents can be obtainec on payment of

such

certain charges. 80 tar the wisdem of the

levy may not be scriously qucsiioned because

the Reyistry rendors public service by making

available copicn of cGecunents after any
lenath of time. Rut afler tho copy is
obt cd, when the document is produced in a
80911. “(7 ether proceeding. court fee is

levinble. This should be total), «liminatcd.

Any fee meet Lo a one point procraurme. once

fec is maid for ovtaining copics of documents

which are shown to heve been teaisteres and
arc furnisned hy the

cop ics of whic

the pro@uction of a ecrtified copy

fuqistrs,
cf cuch document necd wot b. subiccted to 9
Leecher livy ci court fee. Therefore, any
such Tovy must bu totatly removed.

osts cn Account of Adiournments

2.17, Whitc cealing vith ‘he question of
cost incurred in paying travelling cxpenses
to witnesses, attention has been drawn to
Order 17 cf the Cede of Civil Procedure

Therefcre, it is not necessary here to

further dilate cn the subjeet save and cxecnt

33


saying that Order 17 must be scrupulously

followed.

Costs payable by the Vanguished Party
to the Successful Party.

2.16. To some extent, this method of

‘compensating the successful litigant may

operate as a check on an utterly frivolous

litigation. Put it is equally true that

sometimes a gcnuine claim may fail because of

non-availability of reliable cvidence, or

occasionally by lapse on procedural front.

To wit, if; in a pending suit, the defendant,

or one of the defendants where there arc more
than one, dics and his heirs are not brought
record within the prescribed time, the

8
suit abates. In such a situation, the claim

on

may be genuin. but gets rejectcd for failure

on procedural front. Cases are net unknown
where a successful litigant up te the Supreme
Court lost the case when in a pending appeal
the heirs wcrc not brought on record within
the ~° scribed time and the court. declined to
condone delay cn the ground that sufficient
cause was not shown for failure to implead
the heirs or the legal representatives ofthe

deceased party within the prescribed time.

34


Even when on account of this technical

failure a suitor is non-suited, costs are
awarded to the othcr side. To deny costs to
a successful litigant may appear to be
unjust. Put this should net detain the
Commission any more because while taxing
cests, it woule have to be ascertained
whether the other side has spent anything on
court fecs and if the litigant is 71. the
exemption limit, nothing vill be taxed under
the hea@ "court feces". Similarly, if legal
aid has been cbtained, nothing would be taxcd
under the head “lawyer's charges". The
remaining expenses would be negligible.
Therefore, the practice of awarding costs to
successful litigant may continue save and
except where the m ttcr should be left to the
discretion of the court when thc successful
litigant is from the affluent section of the
socicty and the vanquished party may belong
to impoverished scction of the society. In
such 8 situation, thc costs should not be
awarded to the affluent successful party.
Put if, on the other hand, the successful
litigant is one coming from impoverished
sect of society, full costs should be

awarded to him against the affluent litigant

on the other sidc. To tilt the balance in

35


favour of justice in such a situation, even

compensatory 6 515 con be warded under

section 35 of the Code of Civil Procedure,

1876.

36


CHAPTER III

COURT FEE AS A COMPONENT OF
COST OF LITIGATICN AND ITS RATLONALISATION

3.1. Entry 3 in State List reads:

"Cf£icers and servants of the High Ccurt;
procedure in rent and revenuc courts; fees
taken in all courts except the Supreme

Court."

‘Court fee? thus is a subject within the

jurisdiction of the State. Article 145 of the

Constitution confers power on the Supreme Court,

subject to the provisions of any law made by

Parliament in cxercis. of the powors conferred by

entry 77 of the Union List, te make rules for

régulating gencrally the practice anc procedure of

the Court with the approval of the President.

This rule-making power intcr alia includes the

"to the fees to be charged
1
im respect of proccedings therein’. Armed

power to make rules as
with
this power under cntry 3 of the State List, by now

10 Statcs, namely, Anchra Pradesh, Gujarat. Jammu

ard Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Keréla,

Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West
Bengal, and the Union territory . of Pondicherry
have enacted their own laws on court fee, The
Commission has come to know that State of Haryana
has enacted its own Court 1-७ net. In cther

States ind Union tcrritorics, the Central Court

37


Fees Act of 1870, as amended from time to time, is

in force.

3.2. Court fee has 98196 95 been a very

controversial subject. At the one end of the

spectrum, there are those who assert that it is a

tax on justice and is incongrucus in a

constitutional democracy. At the cther cnd of the

spectrum. there are these who assert that as far

as the administration of civil justice is

concerned, court fee is a fe. levied for service

rendered and it may imhere th. concept of guid pro

AS extreme proposition at beth ends of

quo.

spectrum,

there is  anerror in both hut when

properly analyscd, cach proposition has an clement

of truth in it. Both the points of view may be

briefly examined.

3.3. Law Commission to which work of recommending

reforms in justice system was assigned by the

Government of India undertook a comprehensive

examinat? of justice system in vogue with a view

to recommending referms in judicial administration

so as to remove some of its ugly and undesirable

features. heunting cost of litigation was

considered an undesirable feature of justice

system bicause it became a barrier in access to

justice. The situation in this behalf was

analysed. Court fec was considered the most


important component of the cest of litigation.

The question wheter the levy of court fee was

justified or not enaaged the attention of the
first Law Commission ‘India is, so far as we
know, the onty ccuntry under a modern system of
Gover »ent which deters © persen who has been

deprived of his property or whose Icaal rights

have been intringed from scecking redress by

he ६. uks Our States

imposing a tax on the romedy

Frovide hospitals which give free treatment to

Fersens whe are physically mentally! afflicted.
~

But if a persen is injured in the matter of his

fundamental or other llega) rights. we bar his

approach to the courts cxcept cn payrent of a

heavy) fcc. The fe which ७४ charge is so

excessive that a civil litigant s¢cking to enforce

his) legal right pays not only the entire cost of

administration of civil justice but also the cost

incurred by the State in prosecuting and punishing
criminals for crimes with which the civil litigant
3

has) no conecrn.' This summed up the approach to

2

court fee in 1958.

3.4. Till the advent of the british rule in
India, levy of court fre was unknewn. Tt was the
British rule that brought in its wake the

regulations which imposcd court fecs. Court fees

appear to have been levied in the 18th century by

39


Madras Regulation TII of 1782, Bengal Regulation

XXXVIII of 1795 and Bombay Ruguiation of 1€02.

Since then it has become 4 regular feature of the

admitistration of justic

3.5. The Preamble te the Rengal Regulation

justified the imposition of court fees on the

groune that it would prevent the institution of

frivolous litigation. It stated that the

‘imposition cf these fees on the institution and

trial of suits and petitions presentcd to the

court is considered as th: best mode of putting a

stop to its abuse without obstructing the bringing
for 8 of just claims.' Macaulay considered this

statement as indefensible and described it, ‘the

most eminently absurd Preamble that was -ever

drawn'. In his minute Gated 25th June, 1835,

Macaulay recorded: ‘If what the courts administer

be injustice, these taxes are defensible or are

objectionable only as being far toc low. They

ought te be raised till they amount to a

Frohibitory duty or rather the courts ought to be

shut up and the whole expense of our judicial

establishment saved to the State. But, if what

the courts administer be justice, is justice a

which the Government ought to grudge to the
4

people??

thing

40


3.6. Subject to Macaulay's caveat, court fee was

conceived as a restraint on frivolous litigation.

However, the States have practically considcred it
5

a source of revenue. The «ver daunting resource

crunch has often provoked upward revision of court
fees, simultaneously pointing a finger to the cover
rising cost of administration of justice as

justification for the upward revision, The Law

Commission, therefore, was constrained to observe,
6
"the fee is no longer a fee, it igs a heavy tax’,

In reaching this conclusion, the Commission was
impressed by the fact deduccd from analysis of
certain decrees sclectcd at randcm that court fces
formed the highest component of taxcd costs. he
Commission, after observing that ‘it is the

primary duty of th State (० provi ic the machinery

for t. administration of justice and on princirle
it is not proper for the Stete to charge fees from

suitors in courts’, procecded to reccommend that

‘even if court fees are charged, the revenue
derived from them should not exceed the costs of
administration of civil justice because the making

of a profit by the State from the administration

7
of justice is not justified’.

3.7. The Taxation Enquiry Commission, after

collecting data for the ycar 1954, reachid a

41


conclusion that crpenditure on administration of

justice is higher than the reecipt from court free

in Part A States and the sam; was the situation in

Part ह Stat tice. Therefore, while in 1654-55

receipt from court fers in Fart A and Part B

States was not sufficient to mect the expenditure
8

on edministraticn of justice ycot in 1958 the Law

Commission found that receipt from the court fees

was higher when compared to cxpenditurc on
administration of justice गाते therefore it
partakes the cheractcr of tay anc not fer.

3.86 The Consultative Comrittec attached to the
Ministry of Law and Justice, at its meckine in

June 1980, set ur 6 Sub-Committer te go inte che
question ० ६ court fees in trial courts. The Svs
Committee in its report recowmended abolition हट

court fees, The recommendation cf the Suk-

Conmittee wee forwarded to the Stat. Governments

for consideration and neccessary action in th
matter Some Statcs opposed abolition of court
fees, Some State Governmerts did not cppose

abolicion as such, but desired that the Government!

of India shovld compensate th: State Government

0

at least to the cxtent cf 508 “Ff Jess of reveruc.

3.9. The excercise was ajain undertaken by a Sub-
Conmittec set up by the Conference of Law

Ministers which submitted its report in Octcber

42


1५84, This Sub-Conmitte did pot recomrend

abolition of court fies but recommended

rationalisation in the structure of ceurt fee,

broadly throuyh reduction in ad vaiercm fre,

exemption of curtain categ series cf litigants and

certain categories of cascs fron payment/levy of

court fce and refund of court fer under certain

circumstances, Anoth.r important recommendation

of the Comrittec is thot the court fir on first as

well as seccend apprals should be 50% of the e

leviable cn the originel suit, whether the appeal

is by the plaintiff or by the c fendant in the

criginal suit. The Committce further reconmended

that the litigants having at annual inecre up to

may be exempted from payment cf court

Re-6,9
fee, If a State Covermment is ir a position to
excnpt litigants having incor higher than

Rs.6.900, it mae Ao ca keepira in vice the overall

impact such an: xcnptien may have As recards

proof of income, an affidavit by th. plaintiff may

be accerptcd. Tt also recomended that if a State
rs

Government finds it feasible to excupt members of

Scheduled Cestes and Schedulcd Tribes as a class

from payment of court fee, it may do SC.

Acccrding to the rcecemm ndation of the Conmittec,
women may be exempted from payment of ccurt 106 in

matrimonial cascs and childrin may be yerptcd

43


from payment of court fees on suits for

maintenance. Referring to the rate of court fee

on writ petitions under articl: 226 of the

Constitution, it recomrenécd that on a writ

petition conrlainine of violation of fundamental

right other than habcas cerpus, the f.e leviable

shouru be Rs. 100 and in tax mattirs Rs.5C0 and in

misce llancous matters Rs.250. Tt eid not

recommend any change in the lcvy of process fees

as such.

3.10. Is the levy of court fee a tan on justice?

The guestion as posed docs not atwit of a specific

straight answer. Acninistration of justice has

two broad wings: (1) civil justice; and (2)

criminal justice. The oblications of the State in

respect of both matcrially differ.

3.11. A socicty governed by rele of law with a

written Constitution and an ingrainea bill of

rights must have regulatory measures called

Statutcs or delegated legislation adopted by
authoritics having tlhe power te do so. Viclation
of rcegulaticn or regulatory measures is gencrally
made punishable. A political socicty, in order to
grow and develop, must have internal peace and
security against external aggressicn. The
internal peace can be cnsured by laws properly

enforced and, when viclated, by imposition of

44

punishment. vo determine whether law is violated
or a contravention was takcn placc. a forum has to


not a service rendered by the Stete but it i
ferformance of soviculon function of the State and

in cnforcement of its duty tc provide internal

peace conéucive to growth and development.
3.12. When it comes to civil dustice, the

approach has to undergo a change. Civil disputes

include disputes between an individual and

individual between individual and groups of

individuals, between group of individuals on one

hand and group cf individuals on the other hand

and between individuals and group of individuals

on cne hand and State on the other, A ovritten

Constitution with an inbuilt chapter en

fundamental rights and division of powers emongst

Fedcration and States provide a fruitful greuind

for disputes ce. «g into exi. tence, Thece

disputes have tc he resolved tecavse a continuons

simincr + @ispete is not conducive to grovth and

development of society. However, when पीट

disputes are between two individuals, say an

employer and an cnployec, a husband and a wife, or

between members of the same family, it is open to

them to choose their own forum te get the dispute

resolved. An arbitrator appointed by the parties

for resoluticn of dispute partakcs the character

of the court because perties agrve to treat its

decisicn binding. The costs of such arbitrator

has to be met by the parties who agree to

Ss

refer


*fees' in a particular case depends on the
subject-matter in relation to which fees are
imposed. In this case we are concerned with
the administration of civil justice in a
State. The fees must have relation to the
administration of civil justice. While
levying ६००७ the appropriate Legislature is
competent to take into account 411 relevant
factors, the value of the subject-matter of
the dispute, the various steps necessary in
the prosccution of a suit or matter, the
entire cost of the upkcep of courts and
efficers administering civil justice, the
vexatious nature of @ certain type of
litigation and other relevant matters. It
is free to levy a small fec in some cases, a
large fee in o ७४७, subject ८६ course to the
provisions of Article 14. But one thing the
Legislature is not competent to do, and that
is to make Llitigants contribute to the
increase of general public revenue. In
ether words it cannot tax litigation, and
make litigations pay, say for roadbuilding or
education cr other beneficial schemes that a
State may have. There must be 8 broad
ccrrélationship with the fees collected and
the cost of administration of civil

10
justice.”

48


Elaburating this position, a Full Bench of the
Gujarat High Cc art, while examining the
constitutional validity of avticle 15 in the First
Schedule of the Bombay Court Fees Act, 1959 in its
épplication to the State of Gujarat, observed that
it is for the State to establish that what has
been levied is court fees properly so called and
if there is any enhancement, the State must
justify the enhancement. Upholding the validity
of the levy, the court examined the broad
relationship between the levy of court fee and the
cost of administration cf civil justice in order
te determine whether it is a fee or a pretence and
not 8 fee in reality. The ratio ot the case is
that the court fee can be validly levied as the
fee is levied for service rendered. The only
thing to be Gxamined is whether there is 4 broad
rejaticonsnip between the levy of court fee and the
cost of administration of civil justice. It
uncuestionably follows that by setting up forum
for rendering civil justice, the State renders
service and is entitled to charge fee for
rendering the service. Therefore, levy of court
feee in civil justice system cannot be dubbed as

tax on justice.

3.13. In a peculiar set of circumstances, the


Supreme Court of India had occasion to pronounce
on the wisdom and rationality of levy ef court
fee, ‘It even took upon itself some day in future
to decide the constitutionality of price for
access to court justice as being either just or
legal. Without cxpressly stating so, the court
possibly gave vent to its feeling by stating that
when court fee becomes a barrier in access to

justice, the constitutionality of the levy is open

to question. But while giving vent to its

feeling, it did not finally pronounce on the
31

subject. The difference between tax and fee has

come into sharp focus by a catena of decisions.
It was once believed that to justify a levy as fee
for service rendered, there must be an element of
guid pro guo and that, when challenged, the
Legislature must ju zify the levy Ly pointing out
the receipt and the quantum cf service rendered.
Translating this dictum into administration of
civil justice, it must be shown that the
expenditure on service rendered by administration
of civil justice must bear close relationship with
the receipt from the court fees. However, this
element of guid pro quo has regently undergone a
change. Undoubtedly, though a fee must have
relation to services rendered or the advantage
conferred, such relaticn need not be direct; a

mere causal relation may be enough. Further,

50


neither the incidence of the fee nor the service
rendered need be uniform. Quid pro guo in the
strict sense is not the one and the only true
index of a fee; nor is it necessariiy absent in a
tax. It would, therefore, be inappropriate to
comparc by statistics the receipt under the head
"court fce' with the quantum of service rendered
evaluated by expenditure incurred in establishing
and maintaining administration of civil justice.

However, there must be some broad relationship

between tie two.

3.14. Those who advocate abolition of court fee
appear to be unaware of the fact that there is a
huge lay out on administration of civil justice.
A developing cou..ry like India, continuously
suffering the resourcc crunc:, cannot afford to
reach the ideal of abolition of court fee in
administration of civil justice. Nor its total
abolition can ever be appreciated. At the time of
the 14th report of the Law Commission, it was
found that the receipt under the head ‘court fees'
exceeded the expense on administration of justice,
though a contrary picture emerges from statistics
obtained from the report of the Taxation Enquiry
Commission, 1953-54. The situaticn today is

entirely different. Even the expenditure incurred

51


on administration of civil justice with the
services available as of today is not reimbursed
from the dreaded levy of court fees. What the
emerging scenario would be, would shock anyone out
of his wits if and when the recommendation of the
present Law Commission to increase the present
ratio of 10.5 Judges per million of Indian
population to at least 50 Judges per million of
Indian population is implemented. Once that
recommendation is implementcd, which of necessity
must have to bc done because at present the
service from administration of civil justice due
to heavy backlog of cases is virtually of no use
to the litigant. Infra-structural services in
administration cf justice will have to be enlarged
sufficicntly making a further demand on the
Exchequer. Therefore, the question of total
abolition cf ccurt fees though it may be ideal
according to protagonists of abolition as such

Gces not merit consideration.

3.15. The whcle approach, however, on court fees
requires a radical change. Emphasis up till now
has been on levying court fees on the value of the
subject matter in dispute or, what is called, ad
valorem court fete. The tan behind the litigation

is cf no consequence in determining what ought to

be the measure of court fees, nor even the social

52


evaluation of the subject matter of court dispute.
The easy and facile approach is: look at the value
of the subject matter in cispute and a graded
percentage of it should be the court fees. This
approach bristles with @ market cconomy concept.
It mcans that if A wants so much relief, he must
pay so much court fees irrespective of whether A
comes from the poorest strata of society or middle
level strata or from the affluent class. In
determining court fees, A is never in the picture.
It is the value of the subject matter in dispute
which is the sole guiding criterion, something
akin to sale and purchase of goods. This approach
~ ignoring the litigant and emphasizing the value
of the subject matter in dispute - has presented a
distorted view of civil litigation. TO
illustrate, for a poor man the subject matter of
the dispute in terms of money value may be very
small, yet may be a qucstion of life and death for
him. On the other hand, a person in affluent
circumstances may have no consideration for the
value of the subject matter in dispute because he
can afford to pay any amount of court fees and
that subject matter of the dispute itse]f may be
of little or no importance. But in both the cases
the present approach of looking at tng value of

the subject matter in disgute, ignoring the man

behind the subject matter, has been the gravamen


dispute. The benefit of total exemption from
court fees may be granted in the following
manner :~
(i) No court fee shall be levied in the
proceedings before the Gram nyayalaya;
and
(ii) Marginal farmers, farm labourers,
unemployed industrial workers and those
whose annual income does not exceed
Rs.12,000 per annum shall be exempt from
payment of court fees.
The Committee recommended that litigants having
annual income up to Rs.6,000 may be exempted from
payment of court fce. It further recommended that
if a State Government is in a position to exempt
litigants having income higher than Rs.6,000, it
may do so keeping in view the overall impact such
@€n exemption may have. As regards proof of
income, an affidavit by the plaintiff may be
accepted, Its further recommendation was that if
a State Government finds it feasible to exempt -
(i) Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes
litigants who have income higher than
Rs.6000 a year; “
(ii) Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes as

a class,

3.18, The exemption from Payment of court fees
granted to litigants having an annual income 0.
ats fF i 1 a


court fee, would form two distinct and independent

classes. fo ignore the difference between an

individual and a corporate body is to ignore the
18

realities of the situation, Obviously, in the

case of companies/corporate bodies, the court fee

must be levied at a higher rate than in the case

of an individual. However, there must be a
rate of ad valorem court fees in all the
should

uniform
States for the simple reason that justice
not cost more in one State and less in another
State, the service being identical. The rate

structure of ad valorem court fee on money suits

may be worked out depending upon the cost of
administration of civil justice and the court fees
payable by those who have the cushion to pay the
same, meaning thereby those who do not belong to

the exempted class.

3.20. It is a sad experience that corporations and
persens belonging to affluent strata of society
use courts for their petty quarrels. In fact,

there is a body of opinion that the maximum

advantage of the writ jurisdiction has been taken
by those trying to evade payment of tax - both
industrial

direct and indirect, corporate and
magnates and members belonging to the affluent
strata of society. And unfortunately, they have

been treated on par in the matter of payment of

57


court fees with the poorest amongst the poor when

there was no exen tion and only the relief from

payment of court fees can be obtained after

declaring oneself an indigent person under Order
33, rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1976.

Now when exemption limit has been raised and when

it is recommended that no court fee is payable in

any proceeding before the Gram Nyayalaya, the
shortfall in income to meet the expenditure on
administration of civil justice must be made good
by levy of higher court fees on companies,
corporate bodies, those seeking relief from
payment of tax and members belonging to affluent
sections of society, that is, those who are in
higher income bracket. What ought to be the court
fees and other charges recoverable from them has
peen fully worked out by the Law Commission and it
would be idle to repeat the same here. That

recommendation may be treated as part of this
report.

3.21. The Committce recommended rate of court, fee
on writ petitions under article 226 of the

Constitution as under:-

(i) Habeas corpus No fee.
(ii) Fundamental rights Rs.100.
(iii) Tax matters Rs.500.

(iv) Miscellaneous matters Rs.250.

58


Undoubtedly the Committee was fully justified in

recommending no ccurt fee on a petition for a writ

And the Law Commission accords

of habeas corpus.
its full support to that recommendation.
3.22. But the Law Commission finds it difficult

to appreciate a levy of court fee of Rs.100 only
when a petition complaining of denial of

fundamental rights is filed. Amongst the

fundamental rights, the citizen has a right to

practice any professicn or to carry on_ any

20

occupation, trade or business. Prople who are

in any profession or are carrying on business
would be able to pay higher court fees for
vindication of their fundamental right, especially
the right to carry on profession. Who generally

invokes this right may be illustrated by reference

to some cases? Excel Wear, a registered

partnership firm, had set up a factory at Bombay

where it manufactured garments for export
employing about 400 workmen. The firm served a
ne’ '€ ‘on the Government of Maharashtra for its
approval of the intended closure of the

undertaking in accordance with section 25-0(1) of

the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The State
Government declined to accord the approval which
led to the filing of the writ petition in the

Supreme Court of India. Should such a concern

59


involvcd in export business and likely to render

400 workmen jobl..s by its unilaceral action be

permitted to file a writ petition on a court fee

stamp cf RS.50 only which now the Committee seeks

21
to revisc to Rs.100? Similarly,

22
Ltd., avery flourishing concern, filed a writ

Lohia Machines

petition in the Suprcome Court, probably paying the
sam amount cf court fee. guestioning the validity

of rule 19A of the Income--tax Rules, 1962 which,

in the event of sucec3s, would have benefited the

company to the tune of crores of rupecs. And yet

the court fee paid was the infinitesimally smail

amount of Rs.50 which, under its recommendation,

could now be raised to Rs.100. Whe Law Commission

is of the opinion that it is too much of an

indetrvence to Litigants who can afford to pay

aducuately for the service they obtain from court.
When the Supreme Court Of India took the vicw that
a statutory corporation or a company registered
under the Companies Act, 1956 is not a citizen
and, thercforc, cannot seek to enforce fundamental
right granted to the citizen by filing a writ

petition, a device was resorted to to make the

company/corporation a petitioner ‘along with one of

its directors. And this device has succeeded.
23

And the giant corporation pays negligible fees.

Therefore, the Law Commission would recommend that

60


when a company/corporation/statutory corporation/a

body composed of tndividuals but excluding trade

unions seek to enforce any fundamental right, the

court fee peyable by it must not be 31658 than

Rs.1,000.

3.23. Sinilarly, where a tax demand is raised and

questioned by way of a reference under the Income-

tax Act or by way of a writ petition, the court

fee leviable shall be not less than 10% of the

value of the demand involved in the dispute. The
approach of the Law Commisson in this behalf is
not 6 treat unequals as cquals in the matter of

court fees. A classification to be valid must be

founded on intelligible differentia and it must

have nexus with the. objects sought to be

24

achieved. Those who use the court service can

be divided into two classes namely: (i) those who

have cushion and who can afford to pay and enjoy

the service of civil justice administration, can

di
be classified separately frontipose who can ill-

efford to Pay for the service. This

classification is based on intelligible

differentia and it has a real nexus to the objects

sought to be achieved namely, removal of economic

barriers from acccss to justicc. In the approach

of the Law Commission, there is no violation,

threatened or epprehended, of article 14 of the

61


censtitution,. The diffcrential treatment in the

matter of payment of court fees between

corperations, companies and bodics of individuals

and taxpayers on one hand काठ others on the other

would be justified on the theory of

classification. Such a view was also. expressed

before the Committce by the Advocates-General of

Kerala and West Bengal who asserted that there was

no justification for extending concessions in the

matter of court fees to the companies. They

advocated differential rates of court fees for

payment by individuals and = corporate bodies/

They were of the vicw that there is no

companies.
25

constitutional bar in so doing.
3.04. The Committce recommended that the court
fre on first as wel] as second appcals should be
508 of the fee teviable on the . original suit,

whether che appeal.is by the plaintif€ or the
26

defendant in the original suit. Now it is woll-

settled that appeal is a continuation of 8 suit.

Jf that principle is applied, it is gravely
doubted whether any court fees can be levied
depending upon the value of the subject matter in
disputes at different stages of the same
litigation. However, since the hoary past, court
fee is leviable on the memo of epfeal also, it

would he a sudden about turn if it is totally

02


abolished. Therefore, subject to exemption clause

as hereinabove st. ted. the Law Commission would
concur in the recommcndatior of the Committee in

the matter of ccurt fees leviable at appellate

stage.
also recommended that the

3.25. The Committee

question of levy of nominal fee on tort cases may

Commission for its
27
examination and recommendation. The

be referred to the Law
naximum
litigation for compensation by victims of tort or
under the Motor

by dependants in case of death

Vehicles Act. Section $2A provides thet where the

death or permanent disablement of any person has

resulted from an accident arising out of the use

of a motor vchicle or motor vehicles. the owner of

the vchicle shall, or, as the ९०६ se may be, the
owners of the vehiclcs shall, jointly and
severally. be liable to pay compensation in

respect of such death or disablirent in accordance
vith the provisions of the scction, This is

styled as no fault liability. Section 928 makes

provision for payment of higher compensation where

the death or injury has bven suffered on account

of the tortious ceaduct of the person in charge of

vehicle and the owner of the vehicle. Section 94

makes it obligatory to insure against third party

risks every motor vehicle before being used in a

63


public place. Section 110 empowers the State

Government to sct up Claims Tribunals where those

entitlcd to claim compensation on account of death
or bodily injury by the use of motor vehicles in

public place may institute their claims. Almost

all the States in India have set up Claims

Tribunals and, with ever expanding surface

transjort, on an average 40,000 persons per year
become victims of motor accidents. The petitions
claiming compensation are filed in large numbers.
3.26. When a victim of a motor accident dies on

बटर it of the injuries suffered by him in the

accident caused by wrongful act, neglect or
dcfault, the wife, husband, parent and child, if
any, of the person whose death shall have been so

causcd are centiti.d to initiate an action for
28
damages. In

Indian conditions, generally the
bread-winncr who is on the move out mects with an
accident and if he dies, the family is rendered
destitute. The wife would generally be e@ non~
working woman and the children may be minors. The
death of the bread-winner would raise the spectre
of struggle for survival from the next day. Now
if dependants of the deceascd are reduced to the
state of destitution and have to initiate an

action for damages and if ad valorem court fces

are levied on the claim for damages, in large

64


numbcr of cas:s, cither the claimants would have

to resort to Oraer 33, rule 1, of the Code of

Civil Procedure or give up the clain. The action

for damages by the dependants of the victim of

accident has to be viewed as an action for social

justice via social security. The principle is of

restitution, These are cascs which invoke all

humanitarian considcrations., A levy of ad valorem

court ६०६5७ would be inconsistent with the spirit

both of legislaticon and the overall humanitarian
consideration that must inform such litigation.
3.27. The Committec has given in a tabulated form

the information received by it from various States

about the levy of court feus on petitions by the

victims of the motor accident claiming

compensation, The lowest is a court fee of

Rs.1.25 providcd for by the State of Punjab and

Union territory of Chandigarh, whatever be the

quantum of damages claimed. In other States, the

levy commences from Rs.10 for any amount to a

fixed fee plus certain percentage on graded scale

in different slabs of compensation. The

suggestions reccived by the Committee were, at the

one सात of the spectrum, total exemption from

court ६९६७ as recommended by the Government of

Andhra Pradcsh to, at the other end of the
spec cum, Rs.200 for claims between Rs.15,000 by

65


Government of Madhya Pradesh and on a graded scalc
29

by Government of iaharashtra. Levy of court

fecs on petitions claiming cumpensaticn filed by

the victims of motor accidents have given rise to

a very nefarious practice of some lawyers sharing

the booty. There are two guiding considerations

why there should be levy of no court fee in the

initial staqe of the petition befere ai Motor

Accident Claims Tribunal, namely, that in most of

the cases, the bread winner is cither dead or has
hes

suffercd permencent disability and the income

stopped and the family is rendered destitute. And

secondly, if court fee is levied, the investment

by legal profession can hardly be avoided.

3.28. Champerty if proved constitutes profession

isconduct, and yet o what extent it has corrcded

the professional cthics may be gauged from a

recent case published in the print media,

justifying the contcmptuous epithet ‘ambulance

chasers’. Once Manibhai Zenabhai of Mahudha,

District Nadiad, Gujarat Statc, met with an

accident in 1980 in which he lost his) right Jeg

and his wife Manguben received fatal injuries and

his son suffered svrious injury. Nanibhai

Zenabhai and his injurcd son cngagid advocate

Dilip Patt! of Nadiad and instituted a claim for
compensation in the Moter Accidents Claims

66


Tribunal, Nadiad. The Tribunal awardcd Rs.59,025

to Manibhai The amount was reccived by his

lawyer and credited it in account No. 5646

maintained in the branch of Rank of India at
Kathalal. Afterwards, in settling account of cost
of litigation and his fees, the lawyer paid only
Rs.3,500 to Manibhai, appropriating an amount of

Rs.55,500 to himself. Claimant Nanibhai called

upon the lawyer to render account and pay up all
the amount deducting only lcqally payable fees.
Failing to get any satisfactory reply, Manibhai
filed e suit through his advocate Raojibha n the

Civil Court presided over by Judge Mr. Mankad = at

Nadiad. victims of accidents become victims of
aggrandiscment because they are unable to pay
court fees for initiating action when 01. the
guentum of damages ad valorem ceurt ६८५ is levied.
These are two vital considcrations why thc Lew
Commission is of the firm opinion that no court
fees should be levied except a token amount of
Re.} on petiticns by victims of motor accidents
before Motor Accidents Claims Tribunals -,
Undoubtedly, when the petition ends in an award in
favour of the claimant, the contesting respondent
should be callicd upen to pay covrt fees to the
court on the amount awarded. But if the petition

is dismissed for any reason, victims or dependents

67


cf victims of motor accidents should not be

required to pay an ceurt fees.

3.29. Recently, Parliament has cnacted The
Railway Claims Tribunal Act. 1007. The Act

cmpowers the Central Government to cstablish a

Claims Tribunal. to be known as the Railway Claims

Tribunal, to exercise the jurisdiction, | rs and

authority ccnferrcd on it by or under the Act.

Section 13 cenfers on the Claims Tribunal all such

jurisdiction, powers and autherity as wore

exercisable before its constitutien by any civil

cenrt or a Claims Commissioner appointcd under the

provisions of the Railways Act, amongst others,

fer compensation for less, destruction, damage,

dcetericration or non-delivery cf animals cr goods

entrusted te rrilway administration for

carriage by railway and compensation payable under

Section @FA ci the Railways Act. Section @2A
specificd liability cf railway adminisr*ration in
respect of eccidents to trains carrying

Anyone claiming compensation may make

59५00. rs.

an application te the Claims Tribunai. Sub-

section (2) of section 16 provides Lhat every such

application shall be in such form and be

accempanicd by such documents or cther  cvidence

and by such fee in respect cf the filing of | such

application and by such other fics for the service

68


er cxceution cf processes ag may be prescribed.

Section 30 vhich onfers power te make rules to

Garry out the provisions of the Act inter alia

Provides that the rules vould prescribe the form

c.  applicction, the dcucements and cthcer  ~vidence

te bo accompanied with such application and fee in

respect ef filing of such application and fce for

tio service cr excevtion of processes under  sub-

secticn (2) cf seetion 16. An cnqguiry revealed

that the Act came inte force in DBeceniber 1987, but

the Roles under the Act have still mot been

framed

3.304 Pet it net be forgettun that compensatien
to victims ef acciscents partakies the character of

social justice or reli. f in case of disablement as

contemplated by 7 7६101० 41 of th Constitution,

For such orolief to be obtained in the form of

secial juscice, if cne is required to pay court
fee ipomansy cares, relicf will be unattaineble.

When the Rules under the Railwoy Claims Tribunal

Act, 1667 ar. frarcd, bepefully, the Law

Commission vould cxpect cither a provision that no

court feo would bu levied or 8 token court fee of

Re.i mey be levitd.

3.31. At the appeal storage, ne court feo shall be
levicd if the appeal is cenfined to 2 claim upto

Rs.1C,000. For any amount over Rs.10.000, a court

हक


foes at the rate ef 5% of the amount involved in

appeal should be levied. Lot it be remembered

here that since the ratienalisation cf general

insurance, in vicw of a statutory provision for

compulsory insurance for third party risk, in

every petition for cempensatien by victim of motor

accident, General Insurance Ccrperation or one of

its subsidiary companies is a party. If the

petition culminates in an eward, ordinarily costs

ere awarded which would include court fees and the

Cencral oTusurence Cerporeticon cr its subsidiary

will have to poy the court fecs. Thereforc, the

maximum court foes would ceme out cf the pocket of

a public sector undertaking. This is alse one of

the censiderations why a differential treatment is

te be accerdced to luvy of court fees on petitions

for compensation by victims of motcr accidents.

3.32. Apart from the claim for compensation by

the victims cof moter accident cr, where death has

occurred, by the dependants of the deceased, in

alm-st all tert eases, the principle is the

principle cf donages for civil wreng suffered.

There might be a claim for damages fer tort of

defamation, trespass, assault, battery, wrongful

confinement and alike. In this clsss of 5ES,

the auestien cf any humanitarian principle

pernvating the litigation docs not arise.

70


Therefore, subject to exemption clause, keeping in

view the individual, ad valorem court fees should

be levied on the claim for damages.

3.33. Subject to the recommendations made herein

departing from the recommendations of the

Conmittec, the rest of the recommendations of the

Committce are deemed to be endorsed by the Law

Commission, The recommendations of the Cc 1६६९९

arc set out in the Appendix for ready refvurence.


CHAPTER IV

ANTICIPATIONS

4.1. The idcal tc be pursucd can be summed up in

onc sentence: economic disability of any kind

shell not preelude a man trom having access to

justice. Whetever strata of the sucicty he comes

from, the affluent or the impoverished, each

should have access tu justice unimpeded by any

kind of economic barricr. Even a developing

socicty may have to formulate this es an ideel.

Tf idcal has to be kept in vicw, he Law

Commission could net have evolved the approach it

has done in this report nor the Committee of Law

Ministers could have backed cut from its 1980

stand cf abolition cf court ६६८8 to 1984 stand of

rationalising the same, The approach of the Law

Commissicn, thvrcforc, is gencrally carthy in this
behalf, being pragmatic and not dugmatic. the
Commission stands on the firm ground of realities

because, in its view, every recommendation that it

makes - and by now they are innumerable in terms
of figures - yet each onc has kept in view the
resource crunch cf oa develeping  scciety. The

Commissicn, therefore, went to the other extreme

cf pointing cut from whcre additional resources

fer 109 cut on administration of justice can be

1
gencrated.

72


4.2. Therefore, the second approach is to take

from where it is available and to cxtend it where

it is nveded. That justifics in this report the

theory cf cushion and the classification based

thercen. hat in fact is theery cf taxation which

permits higher bracket income grcup paying more

tax, theugh servicer cf the State are available

equally 1८ these whe pay and these whe cannet

afford te pay. This larger principle must inform

the oppreech of the Law Commission till such time

ag the State js in a position to tetally abolish

court 10७ irrespective cf the status of the

persen, of the strata from which he :

comes and the gender. The Law Commission

hopes that we will be able to reach this i@ 1 in

nene-tcc-distant future.

4.3. But till then the questicn is what should be

the guiding ccnsideration. And here the Law

Commission's approach deperts from the standard

accepted tilt new, namely, the emphasis on subject

matter cf dispute rather than cn litigant who

comes tc the court. Up to new, behind the

the litigant has been

mountoin of od vi remisn,
made invisible. It is tho litigant whe necds the
serviccs cf the ceurt. It is his appreach to the

subject matter of the dispute, its evaluation, its

plece in his life-style that is tt

~d


materiod. A dispute involving millions ney be of

31111. ero ome value te ne dealing in billions.

Eet oa dispot. ines teing a few rupees m vake oor

Wo > peer omar ocr ane in bone too happy
hbagic approach has

sirem stences Therefore, the

been ६ remeve the mountain cf sd valceromism and

sible litigant visible one he vill

toomerke the ing

he the starting point cf ell conriderotien for
court foes. Theat is th besic eppreach in this
report

ae 11 110 01 fr ther pustifiert pen? The
Dopar tment of Tustice Ministry cf Law and
Justice, whieh  ferwarded the report of the

w Ministers itself provides the

Commit tes cf
rationale fer this coppreoach Alo an incenveniont

ntiocf this country, in

me mont frothy dew. top

1780. ile thon Committee pur ued the ide sd
Law Commiecston could bave been very barpe te be in
tung with them namely, ahelitien of Qreeded court
fees Bob before the Lav Commission 1६] ०0 in,
the Committers ef the Law Ministers realistically

sed othe situction and retained court fees

ape reconmended only ration lication thoreot.

AAS. The Law Commission still pursnes the ideal
but in port. The Law Commissien recommends that

anyene jin reecipt of on inceme up te 5. 12,000 per


annum cr the ether classes spocifiecally set cut in

tho report shell be tetally crempt from payment of

court fee in any matter et any stage of the

proeceding. this is abu lition in foveur cf these

whe descrve it richly. Rut 6 develeping society

necds resources and, thercforc, the ccurt fees and

the service charges cf civil administration have

been considerably raised in respect cf these

rersens whe will not fecl cven the slightest

handicap in access to courts because cf the

reviecd court fees or revised recovery cf court

setvier charges. Te them it iso: flea bite. To

the State it is an jnpertant inlet cf income for

expanding services of administration of justice,
2

as roeccemnmende 1 in some earlicr COports.

Therefore, no cone cen say that the oppreach is

utcpian., And thet as the justification:
46. Be wover¢ the Law Commission would be
extremely hoppy if the State Governments cr the
Government cf India, 78 the case may be, view the

court fers as semething incempatible with, a

soecicty gevernea by rule cf law and would,

therefore, like te abolish it.

A.7. After an inordinate delay cf nearly two

onstitution cf this Ccmmission,

years since the
assistance of five cxperts was previded to this

Commissicn by the Government cof India, cach expert

75


having 7 time span of six months. Fach one of
them ounderteck te werk con different specified
topics pref H.C. Dholoakia, Head « f the Faculty

areja Sayajirac University at Bareda,

tf Bew, Ma
syrced te assist the Cemmissicn by undertoking a
research con the question of feost cf litigation’.
Th Law Conmissicn must express its grateful
thanks fer the assistance received from Prof.

Dholakia, which is hk reby acknowlcdged.

(D.A- DESAT)
CHAIRED AD

,

fora a Pte

(wo 8 RANA DRUTY
MPRRER SECRETARY

1 17] एक

Wie

76


NOVES AND REFERENCES

Chapter I

3. LCI, 127th Report on Resources Allecation for
infrastructur vl Sorvicesin Indiciel Aiministration-
{A Contimrim of the Report on Manpower Planning in

Judiciary: A Blueprint).

2. MN. Cappelletti (Fiite’d, Access te Justice, Vol I
Book 2,p.S15.

3. Ide, p.916.

Chapter IL
(1 6 m x

a For list cf cases whore litiortion expenses have been
held ‘to be deductible, Chaturvedi and Pithisaria, Income
Tax Law, Vol.2,p.1103 (3rd cd, 1983)

26 Wt, 114th Repert cn Gram Nyayrlaya.
3. Id.,para 6.15, p.36
4. Ide, para 6.12,p.35.

5. Mange Ram v, Rriq Mohan and Others, (1983) 4 हट

6५
6. Indian Evideones Act, 1872,Section 6.

Te. 727, 311 4४1 Report on Gram Nyaynlaya,parn 6.6,ppe
30-32.

78. See Order 2?,rules 3 and 4 of the Code of Civil
. Procedure, 1976.

77


Chapter 111

1.

we WIV
oe

6.
7.

8.

oe

10.

31.

12.

13.

14,

15.

Article 115 (1) (f), The Constitution of India.

The Court f (Haryana Amendment Act. 1974.
1८1 , 11 ७1 Repert, Chapter 22,para dah.

Report of the Comntttes of Law Ministers
Rationalisation of Court fee, Octeber 1984, ppe
3-4

To illustrate, in Haryana no court fee stamps wore
leviable under 5 LIOA of tho Meter Vehicles Ast,

1939 fer paymenk cf compensatd क fall 1979 when an
amendment was intreduced providing that an application
for claims cf comronsati:n upte forty thcisand rupees
shall bear court f ef ton rupees ant for any sum
abeve this amcunt the curt feo shall bo cnoefourth
ef the amount charvgcable as att ad valerem fee on the
institutien of vits under court fees Act, 1870
see Rule 227, 00171" Hotor Accident claims Tribunal
(Haryena Soventh amendment) Rules 1979,

Supra note 3, para 6, 0०109

Tdee 1०७१३ 12, p.509

Roport cf the Taxation Enquiry Commission, 1953,
vol.3,p.107.

Proceetinas cf tha moctina cl Consultative Comittee
head on Nov, 32, 1987,

Gevernmont. of Madris v.zenith Lomp and
Electrical Ltd.e, AIR 1973 SC 724.

M/s Contral Coal Fiolds Ltd v M/s Jaswal Coal Co
1980 (Suppl) sec 471

eration of Delhi and Others v.Mohd

Sec 209,

Munciprl Corp
Yasin, (1983) 3

Supra note 3 at 1967 supra note 8,

Icl, 129th Report cn Manpewor planring tn Judiciarys
A Blueprint,

LCI, 127th Poyort on Resource Allocaticn fer
Infraestructural Services in Judicial Administracson =
(A Continuum cf the Popert on Manpower Planning in
Judiciary ॥$ A Rlucprint).

73


Chapter ILI (conta),

16.
347.

18,
19.

20.
21.
22.

23.

24,
25.
26.
27,
28,
29%
30,

Supra 76० 4 secticn VII,para 3,p.40

For justificaticn, see LCI,114th Report on Gram
Nyayalaya, para 6.15,p, 36.

For detadlet reasens and justification see infra note 19,
For a fuller and complete recemmendrtion cn this point,
reference may be made to Supra note 15, Chapter V, paras
5.15 te 5,19 and espectally para 5.18.

Article 19 (1) (वो) The Constitution of India.

Excel Wear v.Unicn «f India, (1978) 4 SCC 224,

Lehia Machines Ltd, and Ape ther v,Union ef India and
Others, (1985) 2 SCC 197,

Delhi Cleth and General Mills v.Unicn of India, (1983)
3 SCR 438.

Supra note 4, para 8.15,pel6e

In¥e Special Courts Bil], AIR 1978 SC 478,
Supra note 4 section VII, para ll, p.41

Age, parr 34, pet3e

Section 1A Fatal Accid nts Adt, 18556

Supra nete 4, prr>> 30,1 and 30.2 at pp.29~31,

Gujarat Samachar Daily published from Ahmedabad
dated June 15, 1988, p.7, eclumns 5 & 6.

Chapter IV

1.

1CI,127th Repert cn Resource Allocation for
Infra-strnuctural Services in Judicial Administration-
(A continuum of the Report cn Manpower planning in
Judiciary : A Blueprint), Chapter v,

1CI,120th Repert on Manpewer Planning jin Jnudiciarys

A Blueprint; 121 , 12156 Report on a New Forum for Judicial
Appointments; LCI,127th Report, supra note 1,

79


fppendix=

REPORT OF THe, COMMITTEE OP LAW MINISTERS ON HATLONALISATION
COURT “EE, OCTOREN 1984

Summary of Conclusions/Recomnendationsi=
Gener

1. Over the years, several States have raise. she ad
Valorem fee on money suits by mony times over whnt was pres.
eribed in the Contral Court Fees' Act, 1870, The rates vary
from State to State and widely in a number of States, A
ceiling of &s.3000 on ad valorem fee 9 money suits was prescribed
in the said Act of 1870, Now there is a ceiling ranging from
४8.10, 000 to &, 15, 000 only in 9 States,
(Peres 4,116.4 and 5,5)

2. The Committee recommends retionalisation in the
structure of eourt feo hroacly through reduction in ad valorem
3 6"  6९०%ए६1 te Pes itigants
ई$48/6 TICE aE hho S FRA PRG ARERR 46 614५7 and petunia
of court fee in certain types of 605९5 ( Para 542
3. Having regard to the level of difference in the socio
economic conditions among States, the Committee fecls that it
may not be practicable to have unitorm rate of court fee
throughout the country in respect cf all metters, (Para 8, %/)
Advalorem Court Fee

4, Keeping in view the financial constraints, the systen o2
levy in court fee on ad valorem besis on money sults and other
items ,such as application for grant of probate/Letter of

administration ond issue 0." succession certificate may contin >
( Para 8, 3)

for the present,

5. The route structure of ad valorem fee on money suits

in differant States may be reviewed and revised so that the
rate tapers from 10 percent in the lowest slab to 1 per cent 3.
the highest slob, It may be left to the Stete Governments to
determine the slvobs for different typering rates, This however
does not imply that where the rate is lower, it rhould be
raised to 10 per cent, The 10 percent ad valorem rate at the

lowest slab is the maximun limit,
(Para 8, 8)
6. Though there is no legel requirement to heve a ceiling

on court fee, it is desirable to have a ceiling in States
where there is no such ceiling, A ceiling of Rs,30,000 on cour"

fee would be appropriate, (Para 8, 12)

teen eapreeeren +S reed

Note The Para Nos, indicated above relate to the
above mentioned Report of the Committee,

80 CONTA,» ,, ७७७» *«


. ce
7. The Committce does hot recommend छाए di‘ rential
rates of court fee as between individuals and comp .ies/
corporate bodies, (Para 8, 16)

8." The rate of court fee on applic tions for grant
of probate/letter of administration may be as under:-

Value of property = =  — Rate of ¢
(a) Contested cases
(i) Upto &.1 Lakh No fee
(ii) Above &.,1 Inkh but not more 1% of the value in
excess of f&.1 lakh

than ७.2 lakhs

(4411) Above ७, 2 Lakhs Fee for छ७,2 lakhs plus
4% to 5 % of the
remainder; (5% being the
maximum); (Tapeting rate
for different slabs to
be determined by State

Governments).

(b) Uncontested cases
(4) Upto &.1 lakh No fee

(441) Above 8, 1 lakh % of the value in
excéss of fs.1 lakh

( Para 9. 8 )

9. The Court fee on application for issue of succession
certificate under the Indian Succession Act, 1925 may be
7 as under:e~
(a) Contested Cases
(i) Upto %,25,000 No fee
(ii) Above Rs.25,000 1% to 5% of the value in
excess of Rs.25,000
(5% being the maximum,
Tapering rate for diffe-
rent slabs to be
determined suitably by
the State Governmen

(b) Uncontested cases

(i) Upto fs.25,000 No fee
(ii) Above 8, 25,000 4% of the value in excess
of ४, 25,000 (Para 9,11)
10. The prescnt system of levying fee on applications for
review of judgment may continue. (Para 10. 3)

41. The court fee on first as well as second appeals
should be 50 pereent of the fee leviable on the original suit,
whether the appeal is by the plaintiff or the defcndant in the

original suit. (Para 10, 8)

81 ०0009. , , «


=<:
12, Litigants having annuel income upto Ps.6,000 may be
exempted from payment of court fee. If a State Governmont is
in position to exempt Litixants having £ncome higher than
&,6,000 it may do so, keeping in view the overall impact such
an exemption may have, As regards proof of income an affidavit
by the plaintiff may be accepted, (Para 12,4)

413. If a State Government finds it feasible to cxempt:

(4) Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe litigants who
have income higher than ७6,000 9 year, or
(44) Scheduled Cnrstes/Schedulcd Tribes as a
class, from payment of court fee, it may do 80
(Para 13, 2)

14, Women may be cxempted from payment of court fee in
matrimonial cases, (fara 14 and 28,2)

15, Children nny be exempted from the payment of court fee
on suits for mrintenance.

16, The recommendation for exempting 15 01 77705 with annual
income limit of fs,6000 would _toke crre of the jnuterosts of most
of the indigent litigants. 77% existing provision for
exempting on indigent person from psyment of court fee and for
reelising the some in cnse his suit fails or is withdrawn or is
dismissed or when it abntes may continue te apply in the case
of indigents, if any, with annual income above k.6,000.

(Para 16.2)
17. The income limit of %&.6,000 per annum recommended by
this Committee (vide parn 12,4) for exenpting litigants fren
paymer.t of court fee woul takc care of tie genuinely neec’
people amongst socially/economically wenker classes.

(Pare 17)
18. The interests of those living in backward States will

be taken care of by the general scheme of exemption ~commended
by the Committee on the basis of income limit. .(P: 2 18)

19, Ecenonienlly hendicapped ameng the physically and
mentally handicepped persons will be taken care of by the
recommendation mede with regard to exemption based on income,

(Para 19)

20, General scheme of exerption bosed on the Limit of
income will largely cover the interests of landless persons,
debtors bringing suits od proceedings under Money Lenders!
Acts, (Para 20)

at. The general scheme of exemption recommended by the
Committee on the basis of annurl income should take crre
of the interests cf most of the agriculturists who need
assistance,

82 contd. cere


vught ot His concerned
ssion my be given by the
situation so demands,

(Para 21)

So far as relict during d
the Committee recommends that ret
State Govermicents 2s and when the

22, (i) It my mot be fair to five any special treatment to
Governnent servants, They should stand on the same

footing as other Jitigents,
(Para 22)

(ii) No ox vaption need be piven to eriployoes as a class
from poynent of court te on matters pertaining
to service conditions,

(Para 32,3)

25, The general exemption का sed on income limit will
beavailable to workers tao as it will be aed tible te others.
2h, All 11 11011 5 who file cages before the Myaya

Panchayats may be exempted from paymentof court fee, if not
exempted alrealy. (Para 24)

25. Tt will not be a practicable propesition to
exempt suits of a givin value fron court fee, (Para 26.6)

1S (ereept Cases dm whieh such aid is

26, 1,८70] sid cone
Biven alse to persons h: ring income of mom. then 6000 a year)
will automatienlly be covered by the recormend: tion made for
exemption based on onnusl inesme init. (parn 27.5)

27. To exeapt a Titigant frem payment of court fee or

te reduce foo on 1 suit for recovery of p sfon of a house
owned by hin even if that be the enly house he has, is not
practicable and Accordingly not recommonded, (Pera 33,2)

Reduce in Court Foe
28, In respect of cases relating to motor accidents

claims, rv rondation is as follows:
(4) The court fee poyable by the claiment before the
Tribunel shoul? bo ७, 10 upte छि,1 Lakh,

(44) If the unt clained «xeoods R41 Iekh, the fee should
be $ per cont of the aveunt in excess of Rs. 1 lakh,

(441) In cases m ntienesd in (ii) above, 50 percent of the
fee may be peid at the time of filing the claim and the
rerinining 50 per cent may be paid after the decree is

passed,

(iv) In calculating the fee payable under (iii) above, the
amount decreed, and not the amount clained (if there be a
differonc. between the two) should be token into
8९९ पाई,  oniteble adjustment may be mode, keeping in
view the Por paid at the time of prefer: ins the claim,

(v) At the = of oppeal, fee should ७ reid on the

anount iffercnee between the Triva 15 oword and the
amount clidmed in apperl, at the seme ३४ : ma
Moncey suit, Bp
¥ Suit (Bare 30,5)
29. In Land acquisition casos, the court may be as under:-

-83-


(4) A nominal fee te be cherged on an application for
refcronee" to the court against the Collector's award,

In appenl against the decision on "refercnee’, 50 per cent
५१ the ad valorem fer as on meney suits to be charged on
the anount of difference between the amount clined and
amount decided by the court. (Para 31.5)

(ii)

Refund/Nemission of Court Eee |

30. , The Schum + of r md of court fee on cascs which are
compromised betwoom the parties outside the court may
be as under:=

Compr ise crises extent of refund of

fee recommended

(a) (3) Before fraiing of

issucs 50%

(44) Bofore recording of
evidence: 25%

(iii) At eny other stage cf
pendency 25%

(७) If the coupremiss is reached 50%
at stage of appeal
(Para 36.4)
31. State Governments may examine other types of cases
y ST
gos and consider

in respeet of which refund is allowed in sone S
whether similar concessions can be piven in their respective

States, if not olready given, ; (Para 36.5)

32. ALL Stake Governvents/Unien Territory Admi istrations
may unuertake a review of aists of remissions in co: . fee
issued frou tine to and enlarge thom, if considered gjusti-
fied. Lists of reni ong notificd vy other States may be of
help in this reparmi, it lists n bo obtaincd/compiled

and circulated to all States/Union pritorivs by the Department

of Justice in the Ministry of Law, Justice and Conpsny Affairs.
(Para 37.2)

Writ, Potitions

The rete of court fec on writ petitions under Article

33.
226 of the Constituticn may be 7s undert=
(i) Habeas Cerpus : No feo
(ii) Fundamental rights : ४७,100
(ia) Tax Matters :  &.500
(iv) Miscollansous natters ४. ७. 250/-

(Para 39.4)

Mi

question of Levy ef neriine. feo on tort cases may

sellanevus Metturs

Ba, The
be referred 16 the Law Coniission for their cxanination and
recommacndation.

(Para 34,2)
35. It will not be practicable to abolish fee on

miscelleneous itcns and therefore fixed court fee as is being
levied at present may cont’nue to be Levicd. However, no
fee may be chafged on applications for cortified copies of
judgnent. 84. (Para 40,2)


With 1. vicw to avoiding difficultics in calculation
ment by litigants when stamps of requisite value
Mnations are pot availble to fixed fee may be

36.
end overp?
of odd den

in terms of whole rupees ce half ruppes.
(Para 41)
37. Introduction of a systes, es a general 1 >, by
uifferent

which court feo mey be realised in instalments -at
Stages of litigation is not practicable in all ceses, The
present system cf realising full court fee at the time of
filling ot petitions/suits/appeals maycontinue unless
otherwise specifically laid down in cases where hardship is
involved. (e.g. claims before Motor Accident Claims Tribunal).

(Para 42,3)
38. The present scheme of levy cf process fee( which is,
strictly speaking not court fee) may continue. (Para 43)
39. ‘The structure of court fee in Stetes/Union Territories

may be reviewed. and revised as may be necessary every ten years,
(Para 44)

85