LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-NINTH REPORT
ON

URBAN LITIGATION
MEDIATION AS ALTERNATIVE TO ADJUDICATION

1988


DeaeDi LAT COMMISSION
Chairman SOVERNM ONT 0. INDTs.
SHAS IRI BH. 7४,

NS) छल

D.O.No .44(1) /86-LC.Pt.I august 8, 1988.

a

Shri B.Shankarana
Minister fir Law anc
G vernment «* Invia,
tri Bhavan,

NOY DoLAL

Dear Shri UJhankaranandc,
As by nv veu must bo

stucying an rec unmending jucicial re*-rms vas assijned

&t the ssont Lew Commission by the Gevernment «f India

in .ebrvary 1986 with a xr “rd pricrity tc the

same. Lcesrdingly, the werk schedule of th: Lew Cemmissicn

was v.odrawn anc study of every term 6 re oronce drawn up

fer the benetit (४ the Judicial forms Ceommissicn was

uncertaken and repert in respect of each vas submitted, The

present rerert deals with ‘Urban Litigati n ~ Mediativn as

alternative t Adjudicaticn'. With th: submission «f the

present rovert, being 129th Repcrt «£ the Law Cemmissicn,

all the terms cf reference in the ecntert of studying judicial

refirms arc cevered sive and oxcept term No.6 relating tc

‘che ro lo of the legol prefassicn in strengthening the system

ef acininistraticn ८4 justice’, By the time c£ the expiry of

the term cf tho present Law Commission, I sincerely hepe tec

submit the repert #n thet last remaining term cf reterence so

as ६ ccmplete the «rk set apart for Judicial Ret-rms

Commissicn.

७ thet the task cf

This report may be read :rith re

cort “saling with
yalaya'! (Nec.114) an

Atha rencerts relating tc

1:11 Incia Judicial cervice'(Nc.116), ' The High Ccurt
Arrears - 4 esh Leck! (Nc 124) and'Bhe Supreme Ccurt -

2 Fresh Lesk! (Ne.125). These reports are inter-linkecd and
inter-c: nnected and, therefore, they h ve ४८ be treated as

a packege which, when implemented, it is heped, weuld bring
abcut rejuvenaticn es the system ० aministraticn of justice
which at przsent is under wrest strain,

I hepe fcr early and expediticus imploment ticn cf
those rem rts.

With rogardg

Y¥curs sincerely,

ot ( 9....ए४5#.1 )


CHAPTER £
CHAPTER It
CHAPTER IIft

CHAPTER IV

CHAFTER V

CHAETER Vi
CHAPTER VII

NOTES AD
REFERENCES

APPENDIX I

APPENDIX II

APPENDIX III

APPENDIX IV

APPENDIX V

APPENDIX VI

CONTE YS
PAGE
INTRODUCTORY coe 1

NATURE OF LITIGATICN IN UREA AREAS 10

HOUSE REUT/POSSESSICi LITIGATION 15
ITIGATICN CTFER THAN CHE UNCER

TEE RENT ACT. coe 54

MISCELLANEOUS SUGGESTICHS ०० 58

REVISIONAL JURISDICTION OF

EIGE CCURT eee 75

CRIEINAL JURISDICTICN coe 82
ooo 86

WORKING PAPER ON REFCHiS IN
URDAN LITIGATICN OTHER THAN
IN METRUPCLITAN AREAS eae 89

WORKSHCPS eee 118

FIGURES RE\EALING THE
PENDENCY OF RENT LITIGATICH
FROM 1920 TO 1985 coe 131

AVERAGE DURATICN OF DISPOSAL -3
OF RENT CASES FRO 1980 TC 19585 ,,., 132

PRE-TRIAL, IN-TRIAL AML PCST~TRIAL
CCORCILIATION PROJECT il TEE SUE-
ORDINATE COURTS IN HIMACHAL
PRADESR ooo 133

STATEMENT REGARDING CITY CIVIL
COURTS IN VARICUS STATES eee 146


CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTORY

l.l. The Indian judicial system ig pyramidic in
character, with courts at taluk level at the foot
of pyramid, moving vertically upward through the
district level where there is a Court of District
and Sessions Judge/City Civil Court in some
cities, a... then further upward the High Court at
the State level. At the national level, there is
an apex court - Supreme Court of India. The
system is one integrated whole. And a rot has set
in at each layer of pyramid. That prompted a
thinking in the Government of India that a
Judicial Reforms Commission should be set up. The
terms of reference of the proposed Commission were
drawn up. Later on the gask was assigned to the
Law Commission. Conscious of the fact that the
system is highly centralised, which contributed to
making the system dysfunctional, the terms of
_ reference included the following:-

“1, The need for decentralisation of the
system of administration of justice by -

(i) establishing, extending and
strengthening in rural areas the institution
of Nyaya Panchayats or other mechanisms for
resolving disputes;

(ii) setting up of a system of
participatory justice with defined
jurisdiction and powers in suitable areas and
centres;


{iii) establishing other tiers or systems
within the judicial hierarchy to reduce the
volume of work in the Supreme Court and the
High Courts.

2.

ae The procedural laws with a view
generally to disposing of cases
expeditiously, eliminating unnecessary
litigation and dGelays in hearing of
cases and reform in procedures and
procedural laws and particularly to
devising procedures appropriate to the
terms envisaged in items 1{(i) and
1(ii).*. पु

Cbvyiot ly where the whole system from the bottom

to top requires to be analysed in depth with a
view, if necessary, to restructure it, the normal
course is to begin from the bottom. Accordingly,
the Law Commission, after having been satisfied
that the system at present in vogue is unsuitable
for resolution of disputes arising in rural areas,
devised a new model - Gram Nyayalaya - for
r ~otnttior of disput 3 arising from rural areas.

unlike the present model, it was to be a different
mode, perticipatory in character where people‘s
direct participation in the administration of
justice would be ensured so as to impart
respectability anc credibility to the system.
Today there is such a yawning chasm between
justice system and the people for whom it is
devised that over a period credibility of the
system is considerably eroded. The participatory

model ~ where people themselves participate in

N


administration of justice ~ would restore
credibility, ensure respectability and impart a

touch of informality in resolution of disputes.

1.2. The next layer moving vertically upward is
‘the one at district level where the principal
court of original jurisdiction is the District
Court. At this level the two streams of civil and
criminal justice merge in the sense that the
District Court is styled as ‘District and Sessions
Court and the Judge presiding over it is
designated as ‘District and. Sessions Judget. The
Constitution vested the control over district
courts and courts subordinate thereto in the High
court,” yet the service up to and inclusive of
District Judge was part of the’ judicial service of
the State. The State had power to legislate about
tnat service in view of pre-anendeu entry 3 of
State List which read, “Administration of justice;
constitution and organisation cf all. courts,
except the Supreme Court and the High Courts,...".
Entry 3 was amended by deleting the afore-
mentioned words by the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976, which simultaneously
provided for inserting entry 118 in the Concurrent
List in the same language. Even thereafter, the
service up to and inclusive of District Judge

formed part of State Judicial Service. While


there are a number of all-India services, such as
I.A.S., I.P.S., I-F.S., 1.2. & A.S., et al, there
is no all-India judicial service. Acticle 312 of
the Constitution, which confers power to set up an
all-India service, was specifically amended to
confer power to set up an all-India judicial
service by the constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1876. The Law Commission,
therefore, dealing with the first intermediate
stage examined the feasibility of setting up an
all-India judicial service to be styled as ‘Indian

3
Judicial Service’ and submitted its report.

1.3. Thereafter the Law Commission focussed its
4
attention first on the High Court and then on
5
the Supreme Court of India.
1.4. One segment o. administratior. of justice,
both civil and criminal, remained to be explored,

that is, the litigation at the urban level. This

report deals with the same.

1.5. The Law Commission issued a comprehensive
working paper (see Appendix I) specifying the
areas of urban litigation where reform is not only
overdue but is urgently needed. In the working
paper, the Law Commission pointed out the
tremendous congestion in dockets in urban centres

on account of litigation explosion with consequent


delay in resclution of disputes leading to certain
unc :sirable developm ts threatening the very
existence of the system. In separating the
problem of urban litigation from the one in rural
areas, the Law Commission is guided by the fact
that till now the present monolithic system of
eaministration of justice offered the same model
procedure
for resclution of disputes by the same proliy,
even though the disputes arising in rural areas
are comparatively simple in character compared to
the disputes in urban areas. A very simple
Gispute arising in rvral area would be dealt with
by the Judge of the civil cr the criminal court,
es the case may be, in the same manner as the
dispute would be dealt with in highly developed
urban arers, with the consequence that a simple
dis,ute remains unresolved for years, nay decades,
causing misery to the disputanis, imposing an
unbearable load on the system and rendering the
system highly expensive. It is admitted on all
hands thet this monolithic approach requires to be
largely abandoned. The State court system which
has been operating in this country since the
advent of the British rule requires to be modified
by inviting people's participation in it.
Therefore, a participatory model has been

recommended for resolving disputes in rural areas.


The working paper invited a discussion whether the
same model with necessary modifications can be of
help and use in dealing with urban litigation.
The working paper also sets cut the nature of
litigation coming to urban courts, the causes for
delay in disposal of the same and tentative

suggestions for remedying the situation.

1.6.6 The High Courts, Judges at other levels,
organised bar and even some litigants responded to
the working paper and either agreed with some of
’ the tentative suggestions made by the Law
Commission or offered their own solution. The
High Court of Jammu ané Kashmir, Chief Justice and
some Juuges of the Andhra Pradesh High court and
some Judges of the City Civil Court submitted
their detailed response to the working paper. The
Hig: Courts of Gujarat .nd Madras and the Supreme
Court of India stated that they had no comments to

offer on the working paper.

1.7. The’ working paper was also sent tc all the
State Governments requesting them to send in their
comments as early as possible. The Government of
Sikkim desired to have a copy of the report of the
Law Commission on Gram Nyayalaya before furnishing
comments/views on the working paper. A copy was
sent but thereafter nothing was heard from the

Sikkim Government. A detailed reply was received


from the Government of Maharashtra. After
pointing out that the Government of Maharashtra

has framed a scheme, known as ‘The Maharashtra

State Legal Aia and Advice Scheme, 19797, it
proceeds to state that it has established Legal
Aid and Advice Boaras at the State, district and
taluk levels. Esch such Legal Aid Board was
required to constitute a Cenciliation Cell.
Anyone secking legal aid may have first to satisfy
the Beard that he/she is entitled to legal aid.

Once the eligibility is established, the case is

referre® to the Conciliation Cell. The Cell
issues notice to the oppesite party and tries to

b

g ebont settlement. Conciliation proceeding

is required to be over within a period of one

month, failing which the matter is presented to
the court for disposal «carding to la. It also
suggested setting up of Lok Nyaya’aya, increasing
the Judge streagth proportionately after taking
into consideraticn volame cf litigation in all
Gistricts in the State. Other suggestions were
the reduction in a@journuents, restriction on the
advocete’s right to appear in certain type of
litigation end, for its own reasons, agrees with

he statement in the working paper that section

115 of the Code of Civil procedure requires to be

Gelcted. The Government of Andhra Pradesh


promised to send at a later date its response to
the working paper but none was forthcoming. The
Government of West Bengal submitted detailed
response to the working paper. It leaned in
favour of setting up a court with two trained
Judges for rent litigation. It leaned in favour
of participatory model. The Government of Tripura
wes not in favour of participatory model as it
apprehended that 'juscicing is a technical subject
which cannot be left to inexperienced, rustic
people in the name of village tradition and
culture’. The Commissioner of Police, Unicn
territory of Delhi, giving his response to the
working paper offered his own suggestions
emphasising the fact that the strength of the
magistrates, prosecutors and investigating
officers should be fixed in relation to the
workload. He was of the cpinion that a number of

offences which ¢ set out in the Penal Code

deserve to be deleted and the procedure should be

recast.

1.8. The Law Commission, with a view to having an
exhaustive debate on the subject, organised
workshops at Delhi, Bombay, Puri in Orissa,
Shillong in Meghalaya and Shimla in Himachal
Pradesh. The workshops were attended by Chief

Justice and Judges of High Courts, Judges of the


district and subordinate judiciary, lawyers, law
academics and others. By the interaction of
verious interest groups at the workshops, numercus
suggestions emerged which would help in
formulating the recommendations. The debate was
thorough and incisive. The workshops generated
immense interest in the subject. This would

become apparent from the names of the participants

set out in Appendix II.

1.9. The materials gathered dnd the information
available to the Law Commissicn is varied and
extensive and would assist in making concrete and

effective recommendations.


CHAPTER II

NATURE OF LITI“ATION IN URBAN COURTS

2ele Whiie the nature of litigaticn
qua. Litywise is undergoing a change,
guantitywise the graph of number of causes
brought tc the court is shooting up. Two
developments have contributed to this
situation. When the country undertook
planning for its economic development as
reflected in successive Five Year Plans, the
pace cf industrialisation accelerated. In
the initial stages, industries were located

in urban areas where electric motive power

and water were easily available. An
industrial undertaking generates local
employment at lvwer levels. With the

prcliferation of industries in urban areas,
ccupled with the lack of employment in rural
areas except as farm labourer which is
dwindling cn the elimination of zamindaries,
process of urbanisation accelerated. People
in search of petty jobs moved in numbers from
rural to urban areas. Housing as an industry
had not developed. There was a body of
opinion that Rent Restricticn Acts have

proved to be a disincentive to development cf

10


housing as an industry. Availability of
accommodation in t ban areas compared to its
demend gradually became scarce. Slums: came
inte existence, In cities like Bombay,
bavement dwellers beceme a regular feature.
The demand cn the availability of housing
acccmmcaation compared to the supply was so
high thet in order te protect tenants from
being exploited, every State enacted its Rent
Restriction Act. Today, the largest
litigation in urban courts relates to rent
and possessiun cf urban dwellings. This is
the majer head under which there is maximum
litigation. The Law Commission in the
course cf its enquiry has collected certain
figures in relation to about 16 States
showing the litiyation under tne. heading
‘Rent and Posscssicn'. Maharcshta leads. The
information in this behalf, which is set cut
in details in Appendix III, will show at a
glance that if litigation under this’ head is
tackled in a scientific manner, the burden
on the court system in urban areas would be

considerably eased.

202. Before the advent cf freedom, when

money-lending -was @ controlled avocation,

11


money suits used to clog the courts. Money
suits comprised <1its for recovery of money
advanced cr suit ० recover the price of
gcous sold. Where money~lending has been 2
regulated business under the 1८८८1 laws, the
litigaticn under the heading ‘Money Suits'
has dwindled, thcugh various devices are
resorted tc tc extricate oneself from the

rigours cf the money-lending regulaticn Acts.

2.3. The next head under which suits used to
be filed were ‘Suits on Mortgage’. The
banking industry prcbably alone is the

initiator of suits cn mortgage.

2.4. The next important heading under which
there is considerable litigation in urban
courts can be apprepriately described as
‘Property Suits'. They include suits for
inheritance/successicn, partition, mainte-
nance, easenents and trespass. The last may

include also the bcundary disputes.

2.5. One more sub-head under which the suits
are filed is ‘Suits on Contracts’. Either
the suits are for specific performance or for
damages for breach of contract cr for

recovery of amount payable under the

12


contract.

2.6. The suits fcr inheritance and partition
have more cr less remained at the same level
but suits for recovery cf damages for breach
of contract cr for injunction or for

specific performance are proliferating.

207. Suits on easements are few and far

between,

2.8. Litigation involving family disputes
such as divorce, judicial separation,
“restitution of conjugal rights, custody of
children and alimony is on the increase.
This is broadly the pattern of litigation in

urban areas.

2.9. The pendency in various courts in urban
areas is staggering. As on ३150 December,
1984, 2,48,845 cases were pending in Sessions
Courts. Similarly on the same date,
77,41,459 cases were pending in Magisterial
Ccurts. As un the same date, 29,22,293 cases
were pending in civil courts of original
jurisdiction end 10,91,760 cases were pending
on the appellate side. The relentless rise
in the pendency may be judged from the

information supplied in a tabulated form

13


hereunder :-

Year-wise positicn in District and Subcrdinate Courts

Year Institution Dispesa Pendency

(1) SESSIONS COURTS

1982 231992 210971 199829
1983** 296192 273976 222045
1984** 296678 269878 248845

(2) MAGESTERIAL COURTS

1982 8077950 7676075 6749813
1983** €595527 . 4826129 7439211
1984** 7940078 7638730 7741459

(3) CIVIL COURTS (Original Side)

1982 2712309 2613670 2625399
1963** 2056298 1888959 2792738
1984** 2143589 2016044 2922293

(4) CIVIL COURTS (Appellate Side)

1982 232364 206736 $45728
1983** 881088 778763 1048053
1984** 1030054 986347 1091760

¥*” Dees nct include figures pertaining to the State of
Sikkim.

{Seurce: Repcrt for 1967-88 cf the Government cf
India, Ministry cf Law and Justice, p.32.]

14


CHAPTER III

HOUSE RENT/PO! 3ESSION LITIGATION

361. The moment one fccuses cne's attention cn
urban litigation, the institution of suits
involving rent and pessessicn of urban property
stares into face. It is a pcst-war phenomena. It
is an inevitable ccnsequence cf ever-rising
urbanisaticn process. It is attributable to the
harsh law cf demand far cutweighing the supply and

its consequences.

3.2. Mere and mere people migrated from the rural
areas to the urban areas in search cf livelihood.
Availability of the jcbs in rural areas was so
scarce that the rural populaticn in search of
petty jcbs migrated ६० nearby cities. Housing
industry did nct ana cculd nct cope with the
mounting demand for housing accommodaticn. Apart
from the emergence cf slums, the pressure con
availability cf accommcdation was so heavy that
unless the greed for thriving at the ८०80 of needy
seekers cf scarce accommcdation is regulated and
checkmated by adequate legislation, the seekers of
accummcedation were likely tc be exposed to
exploitaticn by the cwners cf urban property.
This situaticn led tc the enactment cf Rent

Restricticn Acts by almost all State Legislatures

is


as the subject of 'lanc, including the relnticn of
lanulerc and tenant', is ccmprised in entry 18 cf

the State List.

3.3. A mere lock at varicus Rent Acts wculd shcw
the divergence in apprcach cof varicus State
Legislatures. This was sought tc be justified on
the cne hand by saying that the local Acts reflect
peculiar lvccal situeticns and seek tc mect local
reyuirements and cn the cther hand urged that the
Gegree ८६ prcotecticn must differ from place tc
place relatable to the availability or the
scarcity cf the hcusing acccmmodaticn in the area.
There is nc material or appreciable difference
between the position cf a tenant in a city like
Madras in Tamil Nadu compared tc his ccunterpart
in 4 city like Bombay in Maharashtra State or
Calcutta in West Bengal. And yet the differential
treatment is sc glaring that-‘cone fails to
understand why the Tamil Nadu Legislature wculd
not grant that much protecticn which the
Maharashtra Legislature considered appropriate to

grant.

3.4. To illustrate, secticn 14 of Tamil Nadu
Builcings (Lease anc Rent Ccntrol) Act, 1960,
having the marginal note "Recovery cf pcssessicn
by landélerd fcr repairs or for re-ccenstructicn',

enables a landlord te cbtain pcssessicn by an

- 16


erder cf the Contrceller, if he is satisfied - (a)
thet the building is gona fide requized by the
lanclird fer carrying cut repairs which cannct be
carried cut withcut the building being vacant; cr
(b) that the building is bene fide required by the
landicrd four the immediate purpcse cf Cemclishing
it and such demliticn is tu be made fcr the
Purpese cf erecting a new building cn the site cf
the building scught tu be demolished, Girecting
the tenant tc deliver possessicn cf the building
tc the landlcré befcre a specified date. Sub-
section (2)(a) ८६ section 14 ensures that if
pussession is given for repairs, on the completicn
cf repairs the tenant would be re-inducted in
possessicn, But when it comes tc evicticn on the
ground that pessessicn cf the building is required
by the landlercé for che immediate purpese cf
Gemcliticn, the cnly assurance wiich the landlcré
has “te give to the Contrcller is that he wceuld
substantially ccmmence reccnstructicn within the
time specified. There is nv assurance that cn the
building being reccnstructed, the tenant wcule be
incucted in the building or in part therecf.
Cempare. this previsicn with secticn 13(1) (hh) cf
the Bcmaby Rents, Hctel and Ledging Hcuse Rates
Centrcl Act, 1947, which prcvides that the

landlerc shall be entitled tc reccver pcussessicn

17


cf any premises if the court is satisfied ‘that
the premises consist f nct mre than two flccrs
and ure reasonably and bana fide required by the
landlere for the immediate purpcese cf den lishing
them anc such demcliticn is tc be mace for the
purpese vf erecting a new building cn the premises
scught tc be demolished’. Sub-sectiun (3A) ut
secticn 13 further provides that nc decree for
eviction shall be passed cn the grcund specified
in secticn 13(1) (hh) unless the lanclcrd precuces
at the time cf the commencement cf the suit a
certificate granted by the Tribunal under sub-
section (3B) and gives an undertaking, amcngst
cthers, that the new building shall contain nct
less than ‘two times the number cf residential
tenements, and nct less than two times the flcur
area, ccntained in che premises scught ti. be
Gemolishec. Secticn 178 further provides that
where a decree fcr evicticn has been passed by the
ccurt cn the grcund specified in secticn 13(1) (bh)
ang the work cf demlishing-the premises and cf
erection cf new buildings has been commenced by
the landlurd, the tenant may, within six mcnths
from the’ date cn which he Gelivered vacant
pessessicn of the premises te the lanclcrd, give
nctice tc the landlord cf his intenticn to occupy
as tenant the premises in the new building on its

ccmpleticn cn the ccnditicns set cut in the

18


secticn. An cbligaticn has been cast cn _ the
lardlird tc intimate tc the tenant the date cf
cempleticn cf the ccnstructicn cf the new building
by secticn 170. The landlerd then is under an
cbligaticn to intimate tc the tenant the date cn
which the erection will be cempletec and cn that
cate the tenant shall be entitled tc cccupy the
tenement assigned tc him by the landlcrd. This is
the whcle scheme cf law under the Bombay Act where
possessicn is scught cn the ground cf cemeliticn
cf the building. New the Tamil Nadu Act = alsc
permits evicticn cn the grounce that the, building
is to be demclished but there is absclutely nc
ccuntervailing cbhligaticn con the lLandlird ६८
reincuct the tenant in the new building nor the

tenant has any right to that effect.

3.5. The Tamil Nadu Act did net impose any
cbligati-n cn the landlcerd seeking pessessicn cn
the grcuna that pcssessicn cf a building is
required fcr immediate dem liticn tc reconstruct
and re-induct tenant. This uninhibited right ६८
seek pvussession cn the grcund that pessessicn cf
the building is required fcr immediate Cemcliticn
gave rise tc numercus litigaticns where even
possessicn cf a recently ccnstructed building was
Sscught <n the grcund cf immediate dem liticn.

There was a whle nefaricus purpese behind this

19


move. It is ६ mtcri us fact that when a building
is under c.nstructivn oi intencec t. %e let ut,
the prospective tenants in search «f accummedaticn
give advance l.ans <n the assurance cf securing
acconm dation. If such building is dem lished,
there can be fresh expl.itaticn .f such c.ndum
tenants. Such a nefari.us practice was curbed by
the pri visicn in the Bumbay Rent Act as Celineated

hereinbefc re.

3.6. Numervus matters under Tamil Nadu Act came

befcre the Supreme Ccurt fir p-ssessicn under

secticn 14 cf the Tamil Nadu Act. Possession in
each case was scught by the landlerd ¢n the greounc
that the building is required fcr immediate
dem 1101. 1« The Court tuck netice cf the fact
that unlike .ther Rent Acts, the Tamil Nadu Act

dic mt pr.vice fer re-inductiin «f the tenant

intc the rece wiructeu building. All.iwing the
appeal .f£ the tenants, the Cvurt heic that: “The
age and decrepit c.nditicn .f the building is a
relevant factur amengst several «thers which will
have tc be c.nsidered while acjudicating up:n the
bona fide requirement ८६ the landlcré under that
previsicn (secticn 148) anc might receive greater
emphasis in & case where the enactment, as is the
case here, contains no previsicn fur reinducting

the evicted tenant int.. the new building than

20


where the ec ncernec enactment has such a
provision... In .th 7 words, the aosence .£ a
previsi.n fir re-incucti:n .f tenant in the newly
c.nstructec building is a relevant fact.r tu be
taken int. c.nsideraticn f.r determining the bona
fides <f the landl rc and in sume cases the Ccurt
insistec upon the landlcrc giving an undertaking
thet «n the tenant evicting the premises anc
handing it cver tc the landlirc fcr immediate
demi liticn, the lanélcrd must commence
recc nstructicn within the specified tine and
ccmplete it within a reas: nable time and re-induct
the tenant. The Ccurt crew inspiration from
previsicns cf Rent Acts in <cther States. The
appeals .f the tenants were all«wed वाट the cases

were remanced ti: the Ccntriller.

3076 A grievance can be made that the approach
discloses usurpacicn cf the legislative power <f
the State Assembly. Cunceding that the Judges
have t. interpret law and shuld mt assuine the
rcle cf legislaturs;, yet it is well establishee
that they may legislate interstitially end where
the privisicn is brazen-facecly unfair as is the
cease here, the temptation tc legislate canncet be
thwarted. Where such a situaticn ccmes acrcss,
the Judges de net f.lé up their hands but would

enquire what wulé they have G.ne if they had been


the legislators and te straighten out tie ruck in
the texture and ircn ८६६ the creases.
Said Lore Denning, LeJdei-
“wher a aeicct appears a Judge cannct simply
folu is banas anu biane the draftsiuan. Ee
must set to work cn the constructive task ‘of
finding the intention of Parliament - and
then he must supplement the vritten WOrGs 56
as to give ‘force and life’ to the intenticn
cf legislature. & Guage should ask himself
the gquesticn hew, if the makers of the Act
hac thenselves come across this ruck in the
texture of it, they weuld have straightened
it cut? Be ust then do as they would have
done. A Judge must not alter the material of
which the Act is woven, but he can ané
sheula iron out the creases".
The Supreme Ccurt put its seal cf agproval on this
statement of law. Consciously, and sometines not
sc censciously, this is being done is a fact, and
whatever be the criticism it cannet be wisned
away. Bere so when avoiding tc de it woulé leaé
to manifest itjustice. ° The Law Ccmmission is
conscicus of the fact that tie aforementicneé
ebservation was not approved by the House of Lords

ana in fact it was adversely commented bpon but

thet is haraly relevant.


3.8. Another illustration would rurtner butteress
this position. Delhi being the capital town, the
Delhi Rent Control Act includes some special
features which are absent in rent laws in other
States. *# large number of buildings in Delhi are
either State owned or constructed by Delhi
Development Authority. But apart from the members
of the affluent section of the society who have
built their houses, numerous co-operative housing
societies have come into existence formed by
employees of the Central Government and Delhi
Administration. Most of them while occupying
Government accommodation available to them by
virtue of their office built their houses and
rented them out at very high rents. As if this is
not sufficient, there is a provision in Delhi Rent
Control Act which by itself renders insecure the
possession of the tenant, simultaneously giving
leverage to the landlord to extort higher rent on
the pain of dispossessing the tenant. Section 21
of the Delhi Rent Control Act provides that:
‘Where a landiord does not require the whole or
any part of any premises for a particular period,
and the landlord, after obtaining the permission
of the Controller in the prescribed manner, lets
the whole of the premises or part thereof as a

residence for such period as may be agreed to in

23


writing between the landlord and tenant and the
tenant does not, on the expiry of the said period,
vacate such premises, then, notwithstanding
anything contained in section 14 or in any other
law, the Controller may, on an application made to
him in this behalf by the landlord within such
time as may be prescribed, place the landlord in
vacant possession of the premises or part thereof
by evicting the tenant and every other person who
may be in occupation of such premises.'. The
object underlying this provision was that numerous
Government officers may be posted out of India for
short durations and during the period of their
absence from India, they may be able to rent out
premises with the assurance that on their return
they can evict the tenant without going through
the rigmarole of a sui:. The way in which this
section is implemented has led to numerous extra
legal devices. The landlord invoking jurisdiction
under section 21 gets a decree for possession in
advance. At the end of the specified period which
is usually not exceeding two years, the decree can
be executed even without notice to the tenant.
Section 21 was used by unscrupulous landlords to
let out the premises for the specified period on
the ground that he/she does not temporarily
require the same. At the end of the prescribed

period, the landlord would call upon the tenant to

24


vacate but would renew for a further specified
period the tenancy by the same procedure at an
enhanced rate. Interpreting section 21 in a case
in which a landlady had let out premises by
invoking section 21 in 1968 for a term and
thereafter from time to time continued the
possession of the tenant on a phased lease and
increase in rent, the Court observed as under:

“We can correctly visualise the scope
and sweep of this provision (Section 21) only
in its proper social setting. It carves out
a category for special treatment. While no
landlord can evict without compliance with
sections 14, 19 and 20, does a liberal
eviction policy underlie Section 21?
Apparently contrary but actually not, once we
understanc the raison d'etre of the section.
Parliament was presumably keen on maximising
accommodation available for letting,
realising the scarcity crisis. One source of
such spare accommedation which is usually shy
is potentially vacant building or part
thereof which the landlord is able to let out

for 2 strictly li

iited period provided he has
some credible assurance that when he needs he

will get it back. If an-officer is going on

25


other assignment for a particular period, or
the owner has official quarters so that he
can let ovt if he is confident that on his
retirement he will be able to re-occupy, such
accommodation may add to the total lease-
worthy houses..... Section 21 is the answer.
The law seeks to persuade the owner of
premises available for letting for a
particular or limited period by giving him

the special assurance that at the expiry of

hat period, the appointed agency will place
the landlord in vacant possession."
The Court then proceeded to point out that
‘It is easy to envisage the terrible blow to the
rent control law if section 21 were freely
perrittec to subvert t' 2 scheme of section 14९.
The Court came to the conclusion that if the
landlorc at the end of every specified period
repeatedly renews tenancy under the pretext of the”
accommocation being available temporarily for a
short perioc, then such exercise would be
violative of section 21 and it would be open to
the Controller when warrant for possession is sent
to. enquire whether section 21 was wrongly invoked

and deny the relief.

26


3.9. One more illustration would bring. to fore
the denial of protection to tenant under Delhi
Rent Control Act. section 14, with the marginal
note of "Protection to tenant against eviction',
sets out grouncs, proof of anyone of which would
enable the landlord to re-enter. Right of re-
entry of a landlord in demised premises is made
specifically subject to the provisions of section
14. One of the grounds enabling the landlord to
obtain possession of the demised premises is ‘that
the premises let for residential purposes are
required bona fide by the landlord for. occupation
as a residence for himself or for any member of
his family dependent on him, if he is the owner
thereof, or for any person for whose benefit the
premises are hela and that the landlord or such
person has no other reasonably suitable-
residential accommodation. If the ground herein
specified is invoked by a landlord, he can procecd
according to tne procedure prescribed in Chapter
IIIA cf the Act. This Chapter was introduced by
Delhi kent Control (Amendment) Act, 1976, which
came into force with effect from 1-12-1975.
Section 255 provides that where an application is
made by a landlord for the recovery of possession

of- premises on the grounds specified in section

14 (1) (e),; the same shall be dealt with in

27


accordance with the procedure specified in the
section. Briefly, the procedure specified is of a
summary nature, the peculiar feature of which is
that on the service of a summons of an application
for recovery of rent made by the landlord, the
tenant shall not contest prayer for eviction from
the premises unless he files an affidavit stating
the grounds on which he seeks to contest the
application for eviction and obtains. leave from
the Controller in the manner provided in the
section. The Controller would give leave to
tenant to contest the application if the affidavit
filea by the tenant discloses such facts as would
disentitle the landlord from obtaining an order
for recovery of possession of the premises on the
ground mentioned in section 14 (1) (e). in no other
Rent Act throughout the length and breadth of this
country except the Delhi Rent Control Act, the
tenant is left at the mercy of the court even with
his initial right to defend the action. The law
reports bristle with numerous orders at the
Supreme Court level where not only the Controller
misdirected himself in refusing leave but the same
was upheld in a revision Fetition to the High
Court and the tenant was evicted without a
semblance of defence being heard. Leave to defend

oneself was treated a stage where long orders were

28


written by Controller es if evidence has been ३७८
anda that is required to be appreciated.
Ultimately the Supreme Court had to point out that
“Restrictions on the landlord's unfettered right
to re-entry may be stringent or not 50 stringent
depending upon the local situation. But the
underlying thrust ef all rent restriction
legislations universally recognised must not be
lost sight of that the enabling provisions of Rent
Restriction Acts are not to be so construed or
interpreted as would meke the protection conferred
on the tenant illusory by a liberal approach to
the desire of the landlord to evict tenant under
the camouflage of personal requirement". The
Court pointed out that the procedure prescribed in
section 25B is harsh compared to the normal
procedure prescribed for dealing with application
for eviction on grounds other than the one
mentioned in section 14 (1) (e). “and it would be
surprising to recall here that no appeal was
provide against the decision of the Controller
refusing to grant leave. The Controller was the
final arbiter in a summary procedure of the
destiny of the tenant. The Court further
proceeded to point out that the object anc purpose
of rent control statutes of putting a fetter on
the unrestricted right of re-entry enjoyed by the

landlords with e view to protecting the tenants

29


assuring security of venure, must always inform
and guide the interpretative process of such
socially-oriented beneficial legislaticn. The
tenants in other parts of the country are not
exposed to such harsh procedure almost bolting the

doors of the courts for justice.

3.10. These illustrations amply demonstrate the
neeG for a uniform Rent Act applicable to the
whole country excluding such areas where
inadequacy of accommodation is not a _ problem.
Enactment of Rent Act being within the purview of

the State Legislature, the Law Commission is not
.

undertaking this exercise. However, time is ripe

for formulating a model Rent Act.

3.11. The huge backlog of cases under the Rent
Acts and inerilavte delay in disposal of cases
have brought to fore some uncesirable
éevelcpnents. The pencency enc the ccnsequent
delay in Gisposal of cases under Rent Acts in
various States may be appreciated from the
information herein supplied (Appendix Iv). The
Guration varies from 244 days in a small State
like Sikkim to 5,950 days in West Bengal and 1,359
days in 27 districts of Maharashtra. The figure
Goes not take account of the curation in disposal

of cases in the Bombay’Small Causes Court where

30


reportedly the case is not finally disposed of by
the trial court before the expiry of seven years

from the date of its institution.

3.12. So the question that stares into the face
is whether some peripheral reform in the present
method of disposal of éisputes under Rent Act
would improve the situation or a radical departure
is necessary. There is little scope for
improvement or reform of -the present method.

Therefore, some alternatives have to be found.

3.13.. Responses to the working paper disclose
four distinct approaches:

(1) The suggestion made by the Law
‘Commission itself in the working paper for
response and comment, namely, the same mocel
which the Law Commission recommended ‘for Gram
Nyayalaya. .

(2) The second alternative suggested
was that instead of one Judge or Controller,
whatever be the designation, hearing the
case, a Bench of Judges, minimum two, should
hear the cases and there shall be no eappeal
against their Gecision save and except a
revision on question of law to the “pistrict

Court.

31


(3) The thirc alternative suggested was
that some form of neighbourhood “justice
centres must be set up for resolution of
cisputes uncer rent laws because these
Gisputes have a Local flavour and people, in
the vicinity of the premises involved in
uispute would be better suitec to deal with
che dispute.

(4) Conciliation Court system now

working with full vigour in Himachal Pradesh.
All the four models may be separately examined.

3.14. The covrt system set up by British rulers
has continued to be operative till today with
minor modifications. The model is cof a State
court, presided over by a professionally trained
larver who cnters judicial service. T>is medel is

in vogue fcr over 150 years. This model has

practica:iy bow uysfunetional. The system is
in total ciserray. In the seminar at Bombay, it
was pointed out to the Law Commission that ‘the
gross and unreasonable cCelay in disposal of
disputes under the Rent Act'has given rise to an
uncesirable tendency adopted by some landlords in
utilising the services of members of the
underworld who, by sheer threat and violence,
inculeate such fear in the tenant that he is

forced to leave the premises and the landlord,

32


without the intervention cf court system, regains
possession. Undoubtecl: the service is for a price
and the Commission was tclc that the price varies
accoruing to. the locality where the premises are
located anc the carpet area cf the premises of
which possession is sought. The ‘phenomenon is
thoroughly disturbing and is offered as a proof of

the utter failure of the system.

3.15. Another undesirable feature of the system
that was brought to the notice of the Law
Commission at the same seminar was that the
litigation under the Rent Act has acquired the
connotation of a need-based litigation and that
results in proliferation of litigation from court
to court. To be specific, it was stated with
emphasis at the seminar that it is almost
impossible to get even a minimum accommodation - a
roof over the heac - except for a huge price
styled as 'premium' or paghri, payment and
acceptance of which is illegal and violative of
section 18 of the Bombay Rent Act and yet it is
indulged into freely. A tenant in an action’ for
eviction, even if he honestly believes that the
landlord's petition for possession is genuine, yet

he woulc resist eviction at any cost and if

33


uefeatec, would prefer appeals efter appeals and
when finally threwn out, would resist execution
only ‘because once-cut cf the premises, he has
nowhere to go. This lack cf availability cf
accommodation also contributes to celay in
cispcsal of litigation when the .tenant seeks
adjournment by applying every cevice available to
him. Therefore, it does not require elaborate
discussicn te reach an affirmative conclusicn that
the present model fer resclution of disputes under
Rent Act thrcughout the length and breadth of this
country is a uisaster वादे a dismal failure. The

alternative has to be found.

3.16. Phe first alternative suggested is tc adopt
the medel recommended by the Law Commission where
a professional Judge interacts with lay Judges
fro: the society and bk the interacticn cf beth,
they reach a reascnable conclusion in a short time
and dispese cf the disputes. oCbviously there will
be nc appeal against this decision and cnly a
revision petition will be permissible cn a
questicn of law tc the District Court. It would
be merely adcing to the length cf this report if
the entire mccel anc the method cf making it
operaticnal has tc be discussed ever here. The
only thing the Law Conmmission weulc like to

reiterate is that a de-professicnalisec mcdel of

34


justice delivery system has been gaining
acceptance in a number cf ccuntrics. The
incigencus juristic pctential cf the pecple,
inclucing their cwn sense cf justice, is allcwed-
recm fcr cevelcpment. This can be achieved by
pecple's participation in the administraticn of
justice.” The Law Commission further reiterates
the methcc for crewing up a penal cf lay Justices
anc the mouel cf the constitution of the court
compesec cf a professional Judge and two lay
guages.” The cnly cifference in this case frem
what has been recommenced in the report on Gram
Ryayalaya is that this bouy, which shcult be
styled és ‘Nagar Nyayalaya’, reeca nct visit the
site unless necessary because its seat would be in
the urben areas anc it wculé be Cealing with
disputes in urban crea. where Gistance may nct be
prohibitive. Incidentally it was stated that in
selecting twe lay Judges, attempt must be mace tu
involve the interests affected by decisions under
Rent Act. It was saic that two lay Jucges must be
cGrawn, one each frum the Associations of landlerds
and tenants which have come into existence in
almost every city where a Rent Act is in ferce.
After mature consideration, this suggestion does

not meet with the appreval cf the Law Cemmissicn

35


inesmuch as the experience shcws that bias is
inkerent in such compc.ition cf the ccurt. To
illustrate, some Gecades back, Government cf India
set up @ Wage Board for engineering industry. The
compcsition cf the Wage Board was so planned that
all affectec interests did find a representation
cn the Wage Buarc. Accorcingly, the Chairman of
the Wage Bvuard was a man Grawn from Judiciary.
There were twc independent members, twWc members
represented the “workmen बाद two menbers
represented the employers. The Wage Board tock
about five years tc give an award. “The startling
cutccme was that the wage Beare gave fcur awards:
cne by the Chairman; second by the twe incependent
members; third by the representatives cf the
workmen; and fourth by the representatives cf the
empioyers. This is an eye-opener. The Lew
Commissicn is informed that suck an experience
recurred when the Wage Buarc very recently set up
for working and non-working journalists gave an
award granting interim relief. These experiences
have moulced the thinking of the Law Ccmmissicn in
disapproving the suggesticn cf drawing cne lay
Judge frem the asscciaticn cf landlords and the
cther from the association cf tenants because beth
cf them may not be in a pesiticn tu disabuse their

mind abcut the bias by association.

36


3.17. The second model suggested was that instead
of one Judge, as at present, hearing the disputes,
styled as either ‘Munsif*® or ‘Civil Judge' or
"Rent Controller’, a Bench of two should hear the
cases following the same procedure, and their
opinion stould be final. . No appeal should be
provided against the decision of the Bench save a

revision on a question of law.

3.18. Every statement of known legal position
need not be elevated to the status of a question
of law. The question of law must be such for
which: there is no binding decision of the High
Court to which the urban court would be

subordinate or of the Supreme Court of India. The

question of law has to be specifically stated
whi.2 entectaining the cevision and the revision
petition must be confined to that question of law

alone anc nothing else.

'
3.19. The third alternative suggested was that
Neighbcurhood Justice Centres should be set~- up
where these disputes can be conveniently resolved.
before the enactment of Rent Act, subject to the
provisions of the Transfer of Proprty Act,
landlord enjoyed an unrestricted right of re-
entry. In order to-checkmate the tendency to

informally: use this right, Rent Act usually

37


imposed a restraint on the right of re-entry by
making a provision that on proof of certain
positive and affirmative facts the landlord can
re-enter, otherwise the tenant will have the
protection of statutory tenancy. 016 such
enabling ground to be found in all Rent Acts is
the reasonable requirement of the premises by the
landlord for his own use or for the use of the
person’ for whose benefit the premises are
beneficially held. Litigation for recovery of
possession on the aforementioned ground is
probably the highest in the litigation under the
Rent Acts. Now when a landlord seeks possession
on the ground of bona fide personal requirement,
two incontrovertible facts emerge: (1) that at
some point of time he cid not need the premises
and could let it out for extra income by way of
rent; and (2) that his personal circumstances have
altered so drastically that the accommodation at
his disposal is insufficient to provide for his
needs — and, therefore, he must get back the
accommodation in possession of the tenant. In
resolving these disputes, the court's approach is
to ascertain whether the need is genuine in the
sense that the accommodation at the disposal of
the landlord is insufficient or that his
circumstances have so altered that he must get

back into the possession of accommodation occupied

38


by “he tenant. ‘The siz of the landlo.i’s family,
the increase in the size since the premises were
let 7७८, other changes in the landlord's family _
such es partition betwéen brothers or marriage of
sons: or the increase in the size of the family for
other reasons are all relevant considerations.
Change in the position of landlord such as that
premises were let cut when landlord was in service
and he is about ६० retire and needs the premises
for his own use is equally relevant. Put these
are relatively simple issues. However, experience
shows that numerous witnesses are examined on
either side to establish this simple point. tt is
a waste of court's time. Thos’ in the
neighbcurhood where the premises are situated are
bouni to be aware of the size of the landlord's
famiiv, the changes that have cccurred in the
family, the incompatibility amongst family members
for various reasons and if the dispute is brought
to a Neighbourhood Justice Centre, it can be
easily disposed of rather than a court dealing

with the same,

3.26. Setting up Neighbourhood Justice Centres is
of revrent origin. By 1980 about over one hundred
such Centres have been set up in different parts

il
of united States of America. His counterpart,

though not wholly analogous, is Comrade's Courts

39


in U.S.S.R. An integrated centralised justice
system has become static and there was a demand
for decentralisation of justice system by creating
a complementary system. The .model of such
decentralised system was almost wholly ‘to be
different from the existing system. This thinking
gave rise to the concept. of setting up
Neighbourhood Justice Centres. The departure will
be noticed that while the court has an
adjudicatory approach, the Neighbourhood Justice
Centre would try to reconcile the two parties and
bring them to a common understanding of problems
as far as possible. The utility of the system
lies in the fact that it is believed:
“A good neighbour is someone who keeps to
himself but is there if needed. vou borraw a
cup of sugar (for a party) but you don't
invite them to the party".
Another view expressed was that:
“yeah, I know just about everything in the
neighbourhood, but they're not my friends; I
guess I like to know who they are, but that's
all there is to ie?
The Neighbourhood Centre may consist of three
locai residents and if a retired Judge is residing

in the area, preferably he should be included.

40


Such a locally situated centre holds promise of
being more conveniently located, more considerate,
and much faster in processing cases than the State
set up court systen, Coupled with this 45 the
advantage of an informal, non-adjudicatory style
which would be very appealing. A legislation
would be necessary to set up such centres. It
would not be Gifficult to set up such centres in
urban areas. Fairly well educated local residents
would be available to work into centres. And
their knowledge of local conditions, traditions
and local needs would assist them in an informal
manner to resolve the dispute. And this would

reduce the lcad on the court system considerably.

3.21. The fourth alternative suggested was
introduction of Conciliation Court as at present
in vogue in Himachal Pradesh. It is a model which
can be combined with any cf the other three
models. It may be examined. Available mechanisms
for resolution of disputes are: adjudication by
courts, arbitration, mediation, negotiation and
various blends of these and other devices, such as
Ombudsman cr fact finding inquiry body.
Conciliation is one such method. It has hardly
been put to test save to a limited extent in

labour laws. It is a model worthwhile examining.

41


3222. Parliament envisaged introduction of
corciliation as a mode_ for resolution of disputes
in civil litigation. Order XYVII provides for
suits by or against the Government or public
officers in their official capacity. Rule 5B was
introduced in Order XXVII by the Code of Civil
Procedure (Amendment) Act, 15976. It reads as
under ;

"5-B. Duty of Court in suits
against the Government or a public
officer to agsist in arriving at a
settlement ,~ (1) In every suit or
proceeding to which the Government, or 4
public officer acting in his official
capacity, is a party, it shall be the
duty of the Court to make, in the first
instance, every endeavour, where it is
possible to do so consistently with the
nature and circumstances of the case, to
assist the parties in arriving at a
settlement in respect of the subject-
matter of the suit.

(2) Tf, in any such. suit ‘or
proceeding, at any stage, it appears to
the Court that there is a reasonable
possibility of ८ settlement between the

parties, the Court way adjourn the

42


proceeding for such period as it
thinks fit t enable attemp 8 to be made
to effect such’ a settlement.

(3) The power conferred under sub-
rule (2) is in addition to any other
power of the Court to adjourn
proceedings.".

Identical provisions can ve found in sub~sections
(2) and (3) of section 23 of Hindu Merriage Act,
1955 and sub-section (i) of secticn 9 of the
Family Courts Act, 1984. Though ruie 3B is
limited in its application to a suit to which the
Government or the public officer acting. in his
official capacity is a party, it is time to expand
the coverage of the method cof resolution cf
disputes therein provided to all suits in civil
courts: including tie clai for compensation
before the Motor Accidents Claims Tribural. Rule
5B provides that in a suit to which'it applies, it
should be the duty of the Court to make, in the
first instance, every endeavcur where it is
possible tc do so consistently with the nature and
circumstances of the cage to assist the parties in
arriving at a settlement in respect of tne subject
matter of the dispute. Where the court is of the
opinion that there is a reasonable possibility of
व settlement between the parties to the suit, the

proceedings may be adjourned for such period as it

43


thinks fit to enable attempts to -be made to effect
such settlement. Rule 5B expects the court before
which the suit is pending to itself attempt to
conciliate the dispute. An apprehension was
entertained that if the attempt at conciliation
fails, the presiding Judge whose efforts failed
may be embarrassed in proceeding with the suit on

merits. What is the way out?

3.23. Chief Justice of.Himachal Pradesh High
Court, Justice P.D. Desai, being aware that the
system is over-stretched and bursting at the
seans, with a view to salvaging the system coupled
with a burning desire to make the system result-
oriented assisted by an uncanny vision, has used
this provision so successfully that the scheme of
Conciliation Court framed by him and successfully
operated by him may now be accepted by all courts.
Not confining the conciliation process to the
suits to which rule 58 would apply, the Chief
Justice has made it applicable to.all types of
litigation set out in the stheme under the heading
‘Identification and Transfer of Cases to the
Conciliation Courts". Frankly speaking, hardly
any litigation of civil nature is left out of the
purview of the Conciliation Court. He has not
only successfully worked the scheme but obtained

results which are very encouraging. This can be

44


deduced from the information hereunder supplied:

S. No. Period Number of cases disposed cf cases disposed
of by the Conciliation
Courts.
i. 1-984 to 31-12-84 176
2. 1-1-85 to 31-12-85 1,890
3. 1-1-86 to 31-12-86 4,837
4० 1-1-87 to 31-12-87 6,544

As the scheme is extended to Motor Accidents

Claims Tribunal, durin the period Aucust 1, 1986
to December 1, 1987, the Conciliation Court
disposed of 261 claim cases out of 555 pending
before the Tribunal and the settlements resulted
in distribution of compensation to the tune of
Rs.56,75,056. The results are so encouresing that
the success of the model cannot be put into
question. ‘And in a State like Himachal Pradesh
‘where the concentration of litigation may not be
as high as in Bombay or Calcutta or Madras, the
impact of the system in reduction of litigaton can

be said to be noteworthy.

45


3.24. What is the scheme? Briefly, the scheme
envisages the setting up of Conciliation Court
earmarked for this purpose to which all suits at a
preliminary stage after pleadings have been filed
are transferred. Conciliation Court is presided
over by a Judge other than the one who would have
jurisdiction to try the suit in urban areas where
there is more than one court. At the taluk level
if there is only one court, eschewing any
inhibition of embarrassment, the presiding Judge
of the same Court attempts to conciliate in the

matter under the ‘scheme.

3.25. The Conciliation Court, in order to form an
opinion about the alternative formula for an
‘amicable settlement, - goes through the case papers
and also verifies the facts from the counsel as
well as from the parties to the extent necessary
and endeavours to evolve a fair and Just formula,
acceptable to both parties, for an amicable
settlement of the issues in dispute. The Judge,
with his suave persuasiveness, participates in
this process. The Judge is expected to bring to
bear on the subject his understanding, narrowing
down the area of conflict, persuading the parties
to accept a fair settlement, and is required to

put his concentrated efforts in this behaif. The

46


Conciliaticn Court, in the initial stage of the
Operation of the scheme, got the guidance and
advice of superior judicial officers and now there
is ८ trained cadre of Judges in Himachal Pradesh

who successfully operate the scheme.

3.26. The senior members of the Bar, amongst
others, are invited for personal discussion by the
District Judge, Additional District Judge and
Conciliation Court with a view to impressing upon
them that the project is on trial basis and its
success would materially help in making the system
resilient which had become static. It was also to
be impressed upon them that this approach would
save cost, avoiding the inevitable necessity of
calling witnesses, long drawn out cross-—
examination and unending arguments and all that
goes with a routine litigation in civil courts at
present times. It is open to the Conciliation
Court to frame issues and even try such cases jon
merit or dismiss in default of appearance or
proceed ex parte in appropriate cases but with a
note of caution that the powers of dismissal for
default or proceeding ex parte are to be sparingly
used with a limited end in view of securing the
presence of the parties and their counsel in order
to facilitate the conciliation work. It is” thus

an informal approach uninhibited by the Code of

47


Civil Procedure and informality permeates the
proceeding before the Conciliation Court so as to
help the parties in not taking up hostile
adversorial attitude but try to narrow the
difference and ultimately resolve the dispute. If
the parties agree to a compromise, the same is
recorded eas required by Order XXIII, rules 1 and 2
of the Code of Civil Procedure. The litigation

ends there.

3.27. 77 the event of failure of the Conciliation
Court, the suit is returned either as a whole or,
where parties have narrowed down the area of
dispute, with the narrow area for adjudication by
the court in whose jurisdiction the suit was
filed. The scheme differs from the adjudicatory
process in civil court in the sense that it has an
informal atmosphere and approach of give and take
and appreciation of the point of view of both
sides and even help of senior advocates who. are
not engaged by the parties. As the scheme is
successfully working, it must be accepted as a
modei and the Law Commission is informed that
recently judicial officers of the Rajasthan State
Judiciary supported the introduction of the model
in Rajasthan state.

3.28. While approving the scheme as a whole, to

make it more efficient and effective, it is

48


necesscry to remove the cifficulty experienced by
the Conciliation Cour- in Himachal Predesh in
‘settling disputes between the perties by way cf
conciliction when the parties wo not opgeer in
person before the ccurt. No one, uncer the
¢revisicns cf the Code of Civil Freceuure, 1908,
ag amencecd in 1976, cau be compelled tc appear
before the court. It may be pointed out that an
ex parte Gecree cn merits can be pessed. But that
woula 1०0 help in resolving the dispute by the-
interface between parties. Order X rule 4 of Code
cf “Civil Procedure gives power to the Court to
pronounce the judgment against the party cr ६०
meke any cther suitable order in this behalf only
if the Pleader to the party is unable to answer
any material question relating to a suit. In
other words, & party cannot be créered/directed to
appear in person before the court under existing
provision of order xX rule 4 Code of Civil
Procedure with a view to securing the personal
attendance cf & perty in the court for specific
settlenent. It is, therefore, necessary to
empower the court to deal efficiently with the
absenteeism. This can be done by making the
following emendements in order X of the Code of
Civil Proceaure:-

(i) The following nay be added cs sub-

49


clause (c) immecictely cfter sub-cliuse
{b), cicuse (i) rule 2 of order x of the
Cece cf Civil Procecure:

“hicy require the attendance of any
ty tc the suit cr proceedings,

tc appear in person with « view to

erriving at en amiceble settlement

of the aispute between the parties

ana meke an attempt “to settle the
dispute between the parties
amicably.”

(ii) The following way be added as clause (3)
immediately below cleuse (2) of rule 4
of Graer X Code of Civil Procedure:-

“Vbere ८ party oruered to appear
befcre the court in perscn with a
view tc arriving at an amicable
settlement of the dispute between
the parties, falis te appear in
person before the court without
lewful excuse on the uate so
appointed, the court Lay pronounce
jucgment against brim or make such
erder in reletion to the suit as it
thinks fit".
With these adaiticns, the Law Commission is of the
opinion that the scheme will be very effective and

must be ticde obligatory in cll ccurts, removing

50


the 11%1 (८६1०७ ihat cre to be found in rule 5B of
order MEVIT- in the matter cf application of the
procecure te suits cther than these set cut
therein. In fact, tvwe scheme must apply to all
suits of « civil nature coming before civil

courts.

3.29. Phere is an identical provision in rule 3
cf Order XXXIIA introduced in the Code of Civil
Procedure by the same amending stutute which makes
the procedure therein appliceble to suits ond
brocecdings set out in sub-rule (1). the scheme
Rust mutctis mutandis apply to them also without
any further vcariztion. The schene in its full

cutlines is annexed at Appendix V to this report.

3.30. Ina Seninar/Workshop organised at Bombay,
verious suggestions were made for effectively
dealing with urban Litigation. Benbey presumably
hes the highest concentration of urban Litigation
at all icvels. This will be clear inom the fact
thet in order to recuce the pressure on the High
Court, 5 City Civil and Sessions Court was set up
a Bouboy in the year 1948. Initial sanctioned
strength of Judges was 4. As on April 30, “1988,
37 Judges were in position in the City Civil and
Sessions Court and 53,266 civil suits and 4,944

criminal cases await disposal. Pendency of civil

51


Watters inciuce suits icre then 10 yeers old. To
highlight this jcsitic: it Way be mentioned that
Six States have set uy City Civil Courts. They

Gre Gujycist, Calcutta, Tamil Wecu, Karnatake,

sshtra and Anéhre prodesh. क Chart showing
the jurisdiction cof the City Civil Ceurt, the aree
in which the Court was set up, the initial
senctionea strength cf Judges, present strength of
Juéges, initiel crrears with which it started and

the present arrears will be found ct Appendix VI.

3.31. When these disturbing ficures were
highlighted at the Seminer/Uorkslhop, ८ suggestion

was made whether the court can be empowered to

compel parties to go to arbitration. It may be
recazlleé tat the participants in the

Seminar/Workshoy included a number of High Court
Juages, some City Civil Court Juages and Judges
fron cther ranks, Tie sugygesticn was by a member

ef the Judiciary. As the jrovisicns of Arbitration

Act, 1640 todey stand, befere a yarty can be
forcea te resort te arbitration, there must be a

subsisting arbitration agreement between the

porties cr even in ८ matter ,ending in tie court,
parties can resort to erbitration by consent of
all the parties involved in the dispute. In the
ebsence of an arbitration agreement or in the

absence cf the consent being accorded, the court


is powerless to force parties tc go to
arlitretion. The ducges cleariy were of the
cpinion thet there are numerous cases in which
arbitration woula be = better mode of resclution
of Gis;,ute than a proceeding in the court. The
suggesticn deserves serious consideraticn and
anendment to tbe Arbitration Act may beccne a
necessity. It is net possible to deal with the
suggestion in this report but it would be.
worthwhile toe have व seprate repert on the subject
which the Law Commission, time permitting, would

undertzke.

3.32. Thus we have four different models. They
cannot be said to be exclusive cf each cther in
cheracter. One or two can be sxid to be
cemplementary to esch other, such as the
Conciliation Court model can be introduced with
any other model. Eut the choice has tc.be made
from three models, such as whether the present
system shoulea continue cr whether a Bench cf two
Judges shculd-hear the case or tie participatory
moael must be introduced. After mature
consideration, the Law Commissicn is of the
opinion that the participatory model should be

introduced along with Conciliation Courts.

53


CHAPTER IV

CTUN CTHET TH. 1 CNE Util

R THE RENT ACT

जय 21७५2

Sele (1८७ Lliti lation under Rent Act, which

clogyeu tie Guckets Uf the ccurtys in urban creas,

ken care of, it is necessary tc consider

whether sults other then suits uncer Rent

frising cut of the dispute as

successicn, porrtiticn,

méintenence and suits cn casements,; can be cealt

with oy tie cristing system efficiently; ané within

The suits ccvered the Family Ccurts Act

taken 10६86 of here as & separate furum is

set fer their dispesal end that woule further
cuscG the pressure on civii courts. fhe pressure

“of the litigaticn under tie Rent Act is 50 high
thot “the ccurts are i iable tc fine any time for

litigation cf any ether nature. If the litigation

Wiuer the Rent act is taken एटा by a new

participetcry model, the existing courts would be
eble tc fine sufficient und adequate time fer
suits cf cthur reture hercinsbove nenticned. The

suits invelving & Gispute as tc inh

ritence/
successicn, pertiticn, meintenance are ‘omengst
near reliticns. The Gisputes invclving
inheritcnce anc succession, ccupled with cisputes

erising cut cf wills, are cvcngst generally blecé

ens whe are tue kith one kin cf the ceceasea

54


ene ore inter-relatec, Unacubtcdly scnetimes this
licigation is fcught with vengeance. But it is
Here that the Conciliation Ccu.t system will be
put tu test. If, therefcre, these suits are kept
within the purview of the ccurts as ct present
functioning with an cbligatcry cuty tc set up
Cenciliaticn courts, the rescluticn cf such
Gisputes con be speedily achieved. The
intervention of ccurt brings tc bear its
persucSive power cn the litigants end lawyers
appearing in the matters. Neer releticns cen be
easily persuedea tc take fair anc just end
raticnal attitude. Toat will be the test of
Conciliation Ccurt schene. Thereftre, the Law
Commissicn is cf the cpinion that in respect cf
the scics hereinabcve mentioned, the Conciliation

Ceurt system must be an

gage . ch

gulscry by an

effort ive smendment to the Ccue of Civil Procedure
cn the Lines cf rule 58 cf Order XXVII therecf tc
widen its applic.ticn te encompass suits cf che

afcrementicned nature.

4.2. There remain suits invclving disputes about
ecsement rights as alsc suits either fcr specific
performance cf contract or fcr damages counplaining

breacn cf contract.

4.3. Suits invclving disputes as tc easement

55


rights. are few inc fer beiveen. In congested
cities, especizclly wichin the cld city walled
area, suits ccnplaining cf anfringenent of

easement cf

anc 7ir crcp up, in ccurts.

However, with advance cf town plenning
schemes, tie number is gcing Gown. At any rate,

court will have encugh time te deci with the same

ana ne chunge is necessery there.

4०4० Sinmilariy suits fer specific perfcrmance of
contract cr fuer damages fer breach cf contract can

be taken re with the extra time available tc the

courts if the reccnmendaticns herein made cre

fully implemented,

4.56 It may incidentally be menticnea that suits
raising issues under service jurisprudence used te
crop up in courts. with the estcblishment cf
Central Administrative Tribunal enjoying exclusive
jurisdicticn in this behalf, it is nct necessary

te make ony specific previsicn fer such suits in

pect cf Centrel Gevernment servants. Hcwever,
secticn 4(2) cf the Administrative Tribunals Act,
1565, enpewers the Central Givernment cn ८ request
in this beholf frcm eny State Gevernment tc set up
on Agninistrative Yribunal tc exercise the
jeurisdicticn, powers and «uthcrity under the
Act ° fir the State. The Lav Gimmissicn is cf

must
the cpinicn that every State Gevernment/ take step

56


- - ‘ . . . डे ञ
for setting up Administrative Tribunal under the

Ste


CHAPTER प्र

> LISCELLAFECUS SUGCESTICHS

5.1. Viewing the court procedure ‘2s at Eresent in
vegue in ccurtsS ct Cicse quarters, twc things
energe which cin be scid t.. be tine comsuming +
cuntributing, tc tie Celey in Gisgcscl c£ cases

axiom

pushing Gg arreers in courts,
Consunpticn c£ tine takes plece in recurcing créel
evidence and listening tc arguments beth ct. the

interin. and final stage.

Sole Dealing. witn the consumpticn cf time in
recercing evicence, gubject | tc few excepticns
which are of ७ marginel nature, it is time tc
relieve the ccurts freor the beredcm of acing this

work ané investing its precicus time in this

ctherwise swcidable cxercise.

5.3. Order XVIII rule 4 cf the Cede cf Civil
preceéure, 1908, rrovices tinat the evidence cf
witnesses in attendance shall be taken.crally in
epen Ccurt in tke presence and under the persenal
Girecticn and superintendence of the Judge. Rule 5

provides that in cases in which on cj

alliwea, tie evicence .f each witness shall bes
(a) taken Guwn in the Language cf the court:

(i) in writing by, cr in the presence


ang under the perscnal direction
end superintendence cf, the Judge;
or
(34) éxdu the dictaticn cf the Juage
Girccetly on ८ typewriter; cr
(b) if the Judge, tor reascns teu be

recurded, sc. Girects, reccrded

mechanically in the languzye cf the
Court in the presence cf the Judge.
Rule 8 provides that where the evidence is net
token “down in writing by the Judge cr frem his
cictaticn in the cpen Court, or reccrded
nechanicaliy in his presence, he shall be bcund,

cs the exa

inaticn cf each witness preceeds, tc
make o wemcrandun cf tie substance cf what each
witness depcses and such memcrendum shall be
written and signed by the Judge ind shall: fern
part cr the reccrd. It mey be wentioned that the
expressicis “the Juage Girectly un a typewriter”

cr be mechenicelly reccrded” were intrc duced

by .the emending Act cf 1976. This amendment

auth rised the court to use a tape reccurger which

was trowned upen carlier. Hewever, even if the
tape reccrdcer is t« be used,;.the proceedings shall
take place in the presence cf the Judge.
‘herefcre, even if the tope reccrder is used, tie

time cf the Judge is nct spared for cther work.

Consequently, the pressure cn the ccurt's tine is



net .reGuced even theugh mechanical device can - be:
uses in recording evidcice. However, permitting
the cvicence t« be mechanically reccrded is a step

in ५६१ Girccticn ané deserves tc be agprcobuted.

Sef gecticn 75 ८६ the Cc@e cf Civil Precedure
confers power cn the ccurt te issue & conmissicn,
ancngst cthers, tc examine any witness. The power
is net hedged in by any conditicns. Hcwever,
Order XXVI cf the Cede ८६ Civil Precedure,. 1906,
prescribes ccnciticns under which a ccumissicn can
be issued. Rule 1 cf Order XXVI previces that a
commissicn mey be issued tc examine ६ person 55
witness resident within the 1८८61 limits cf the
jurisaicticn cf ‘the Court in which the suit is
pending if the perscn is exempted in the Ccde cf
Civil Precedure frcem ttending the Ccurt cr is,
from sickness cr infirmity, unable tc attend.
Rule 4 prescribes conditions fcr the exercise cf
pcwer conferred by secticn 75 tc issue ccmmissicn
by providing that a ccmmissiun for examinaticn may
be issued if -
(a) he is resident beyend the lccal limits
cf his jurisdicticn; cr
{b) any person who is abcut to leave such
limits befcre the Gete cn which he

is required tc be. examined in Ccurt; and
(c) any person in the savice of the

60


Government whe cannot, in the opi

the Court, ca .tenc vitheut Cetriment tc
tie public service.
Whe power cco issue ccmmissicn fcr exaninetion cf a

person as < witness is neayed in by the conéiticns

tuus speci1ieuw in ruics 3 and 4 oi Orecr AXVI.

yesc provisions would beruly bel, in decting with
the issue cf saving the Jucges’ precicus time in

recy r-diny evidence.

5 os Ple j_ower conferred by secticn 75 and the

previsicns <ई Order XVITI will heve te be expencea

to & certsin extent cs te he the court in

opycinting « Ccommissivner suc tc reccrd

evidence cf witnesses present in the curt.

56S. Tf on. a given Gay mere than cne suit is
fiacd ter reecrding evicence end witnesses cre
prescnt in ala tie suits, the distinct pessibility
is thet the court wuld act be uble tc reara

eviuence «f ell witnesses cna seme witnesses will

heve te ९. beck far 15 fevlt cf theirs. And the
court aule be <‘ccuzied for tue whole Guy in

rec.rding cvicence - a functicn which can be best

iissicner. GE a Ccmmissicner is

inted t: reecra evidence cf witnesses, it

would scve a let cf time uf the curt and woule

assist it in cincentrcting on disp-sul cf svits.


This @ppears to be the ,urpise uncerlyiny the

च्प६ 1 द॥९110 5. 1७-५७ the 41511:095५ 1:

Court te

varicus rules cr

riseu in Order Xxvr ६1 the Ccde

<€ Civil Friceaure. Rule 1 cf Craerc XXVI .£ tue
ccee Cf Civil , Prececure, we Ohendec by the

High Court, widens the gower cf the

issue ccumission, the only cocneiticn
inpesea@ being that the court tuinks it necessery
s. tc ८६ in the interest ८६ justice cr expedition.
Rule 2 ag it stancs enables the ccurt tc exercise
the jxwer suc mote Rule 4, as printed cut
eariie:, permits the ccurt to issue ccmmissicn
only in the circumstances s,ecifice thercin. AS
far es U.P. is ccncerned, rule 4 has been celieted,
implying that the power cf widest amplitude
conferred by amended rule 1 can be exercised
witneut being bedycd in by eny conditicns. Any
evidence reccrded in cummissicn connct be used in
evidence withcut the consent «f the party against
whem the sane is cfferec, as provided in rule €,
ang the embargc would be lifted nly in the
circumstances sect cut in clauses (a) ana (b) cf
rule &. Ly the amencment made by Allahabad High
Curt, rule 8 has been deleted ana wiiile sc ccing,
the expressicn ‘subject tu the previsicns cf rule
6° in rule 7 cf Crder %”VI have alsc been deleted
ana in its place the wrés ‘eviaence in the suit’

है व
neve beer adacu. The cunuletive eftect .f these

62


anendrents would eneble tire ccurt tc issue
Commivsicn when it is capecdient in the interest of

justice <r pecition tc nemine- any witness.

Properly construed, in the situaticn hercinbefcre
set cut, the court may issue ccmaissicn t. examine
witnesscs in the ccurt. T make the prcevisicn
etfective, it weule be cavantagecus fcr each
ecurt, with the price appreval cf the High Court,
to raw up a panel cf lawyers willing t: work as
Coimissicners fcr reccrding evidence. On the
commencement cf the work c£ the ccurt cn a given
day, the presiding Judye will enquire as tc how
many witnesses erc present in all the suits fixed
rae reccrdGing evidence and then immediately

apeeint aveilable lawyers as Commissicners ana

they will recc rd evidence. Ghis weuld leave the
yresiding Judge time tc deal with all suits
without spendine his tine in the mechanical
exercise vf reccrding evidence. This wceuld
cunsicerably save court's tine and expedite

Gisp.sal cf cases.

5.76 it needs haraly tc be stated that the cust
cf Coumissicn in the circumstances herein
Giscussed shall be ४८४7० by the State for cbvicus
reesens. Ordinarily the (८6९ cf Civil Pricedure
expects the presiding Judge tc reccrd evidence.

He is relieve. cf this duty sc that he can


concentrate nis attention cn uisjosal of cases.

miisissicner vwoule record

Cn his wenait, tbe

evicence, net at tie request cf tie ,arties to the
suit but at the instance cr the Jueye exercising
his suc 1९९५७ powers. wuerefcre, tue Crate must

bear the cost of Commission.

5.0. Long, unending anc repetitive arguments is
the bane of the present Gay justice system.
Illustraticns cf leng drawn out arguments
S,preacing over months have already been ncticed
ang it is unnecessary tc repeat them here.” if
tue stperior ccurts could hardly control and
condone this uncesirable featuie of court
procedure, it woulc be sheer travesty to expect
JUCges of the suberdinate courts to aeal
effectively with 1०८८५ lawyers in (६६:1६ behaif.
Ana in the course of 9 trial, cral arguments are
offered at various stages, incluaing also when-an
adjournment is moveaG and Opposed. Every
application uncer tne Code of Civil trocedure is
hotly contestec. Put the two most important

stages where argunuents consume avoidable long tine

are at the stage cf confirming or vacating interim
relief and at the stage of tinal subwissions after

evidence is recorded. Both stages may be



5५5५० tracer %EXixX rules 1 गाते 2 cf the Cecue of
Civil Erceceaure, ifCe, as amnencec in 1276, confer

power cn the court to grant interim relief of the

mature set cut therein and in the circumstances
prescribed tuerein. it is an unfortunate
e:,erience cf the Judges in the subcrdinate trial
courcs to hear arguments foi and against granting
interin relief spreaa cver days ané months. *Long
arguments have the tenaency to end in longer
orders because the oréer granting or refusing
relief is apreblable™ जाए if the arguments
acvancec are net cealt with, the orcer is

vigoro attacked in the appellate ccurte

*
fnerefore, the Judge tries to cover all arguments

and in the provess writes an unusually long crder.

e Law Commissicn came across a recent case in

which) the Cicy Civil Court at Ahmedabad wrote an
ercer .exntenaing cver hundred pages refusing to
grant interim relief. The experience generally is
thec by the plaintifé moving for relief under
Order XXKIX rules 1 ana 2 cf the Code of Civil

7» वा @x parte order is snatched and

Procedure,
then there is cotal reluctance to get it heard to

determine where the rule nisi should be confirmed

or aischarged, This resistence leacs te varicus
ancillary applicaticns cGiverting the courtis
attenti fren the nain issve. the arguments

generally spread cver a wide canvass anc are heard

65


tor a number cf days. kow this situetion can be

taken care cf by the court itself by granting ex

parte crder liritcs cercain days, say about a
fortnigit, and if the ,laintiff thereafter gails
eitiier to serve the sane to the other sice cr
sicws reluctance to jrcceea in the matter, the
Eule nisi shevla get cischarged automatically by
tie efflux of tine. this will put a pressure cn

the plaintiff te proceed with the matter. If, cn

the other tana, the aefendant shows reluctance to
proceea with the jwatter, the rule can be confirmed
without further arguments. This will put a
pressure on both sides to get the interim reliof£
application disposeé of in a shert tine. The time

limited tc one hour at best may be fixed fer

eit er side. Equaily ime consuming 7उ the final
arguments. #5 a rule, it is never heard from day~
to~-aaye whe hearing spreacs over months. Quis
evil carn be put 8 stog to by insisting upen

written subsissions a

some aspects can be made in the conrt by Li

the cine grantec to each side. With regarcG to the
high Court and Supreme Ccurt, 8 suggesticn to this
eifect has been made by the Law Commission

4
already. It is time to extend this

ceurts subcrdinate to the High Court. For the

weighty consiceration therein mentioned, the Lav


Commission is of the opinicn that the courts must
be erpowered to limit crai arguments to specific
time after written submissions have been furnished
tc the court. This would alse assist the
subordinate courts in writing effective judgments

because written submissions would be handy.

5.10. The adversorial system now ;revalent in our
courts proviues a place cf pre~eminence to the

-meinbers of legal profession. One can hardly think

fe

cf a successful working of adversorial syste in

the absence cf legal experts assisting the ¢arties
in search of justice. This is the first and
grinary role of the members of the legal
professiun. Eut there is a more important and
more ethical role which the members cf the legal
profession have ६० play and that is as officers cf
the court. Their role is as important as, if not
more than, the role of the Judge who woula
ultimately render his opinion. In this sense
lawyers are called the officers ci the court. They
assist in search of truth, in rendering justice
and in imparting a healing touch ६० the parties.
They are performing this dual role. The Law
Commission, however, feels that this is a narrow
and imperfect view of the role cf the lawyers
participating in aéversorial system. It is,

therefore, time to add a third dimension to their

67


role, nenely, accountability ef the legal

piGression tc the scciery.

5-1li. ere is cremencous nmisunderstanaing

oy

art from

be

about tie role cf

egal proftessicn.
the larger yuesticn cf the rele ck legal

Prcoies

icn in a constitutional Gemccracy, even on
a naricwer ;lane as officers of ‘the court invoived
in disjensaticn cf justice, their acccuntability
te the society has not been spelt cut. AS
eificers cf the court involved in the precess of
resoluticn of disputes, they have to contribute to
bring about a satisfactory resclution cf disputes.
ghis is specifically the role cf legal profession
in adversorial system, Instead there is a
tremendous misappreciation about the role when
ccci Sicnally they ar condemned . as ‘brokers
juterestead in jper,etuation. cf cisputes'. A
leaciny Gujarati daily ‘gai Hind: described them
in eaitoriai columns as kajiya dalals. &
_rosecution was launchec against the eaiter,
complaining cf defamation cf the members cf tie
profession. A petition was filec on behalf of the
eciter in the Gujarat High Court jraying for
quasking the yrosecution. vhe court meticulously
exanineds the role of legal ,prefession in tke
mouern society anc especially in India, pointing

out tat the profession has suffered ercsicn in

6६


its status. ~ Ungoubtealy the ccurt alse peeped at

the xr sice ८६ the picture which was described
as brighter sice. Legal ;rofescicn has evokec
high ungent criticism, It is tine

fer the prefessicn tc sit up and reeappraise its
rele in the mocern society and find ways enc means
cf establisiing its accountability to the ecciety.
Tae professicn 199 te lave a re-appreisal cf its
behavicur cua courts, gua clients, their moce anc
jwetiucd of charging tees, their life style, all o£
which enter the verdict abeut the role ct the
profession, One can look upon witi: gride at the
role cf the legal profession in our nevenert fer
inaependence, Eut since the incezendence, even
though one may not like to admit, the profession
has lost its place cf pre-eminence. The strike of
the lawyers in velhi for renths on ené with
balance sheet cf profit and loss to the lecal
Professicn yet to be Grawn up, ccupleé vith the
acrinonious exchange before Vadhwa-Goswami
Committee, would leave no deubt in the mine of
anycne that it dig not cover the profession with
glory. Its net outcome, ene can say with
coniidence, is that as the cases were not being
heard, arrears further jileé Up ana the worst
Surferers were neither. the Judyes ner the courts
ner the lawyers but che litigants, for whom. the

Tiis fall cut reveals

profession claims tc exist.

69


the cctal absence of social aucit and

accountability of the profession to the society.

5-12. Legal protession is a monopclistic
profession. Every mono,cly has an inbuilt
pctentiality of the abuse of its mencpolistic
character. Legai ¢rofessicn has been described as
Icnogclistic in character because unless one is a
member cf the club, entry to which is by enrolment
by Bar Ccuncil composed cf lawyers, one cannot
practise before a court or tribunal. To that
extent, it is a closed door club with eligible
critericn for- entry and the power to grant
acmission vests in the members of the’ profession.
It is thus a monopolistic profession. Therefore,
“in craer to curb the necessary evils of a

honcpoly, it is of primary importance that a

monopoiy must be accountable te the consumers of
its service. In the wicer perspective of
constitutional Genocracy, apart from

accountability to the consumers of justice,
namely, litigants, a profession given monopolistic
character by the society itself must be
acccuntable tc the society at large. It is this

Gimension of the ofession which by sone nethod

must now be highlighted. There can be a multi-
Gimensicnal approach to this aspect. The Law

Coumissicn in this re,ort teuches only one.

70


Apart from litigation involving Government

er a yublic servant a-ting in discharge cf his

cuties, there ere certain statut-s unter which a
right cannot be clained unless & nctice ¢f demande

the person ayainst wick the right

is serv

upen
is clzineé and relief is to be prayec for.
feccion 66 of tie Code of Civil Procedure

prescribes a statutory notice te be serveé in the

Mauner prescribea in the section wheri either a

Gevernient cr a public servani acting in cischarge

ef his cuties is te be sued. Similarly, under the

Transfer of Property, Act, if the landlord wants to

re-enter the jprenises cemised by him, 8. notice
terminating the terancy sas to be served unless
the tenancy bas expired by efflua cf time. This
pesiticn bas hardly undergone a change even after
the introcucticn of Rent Acts. Even when a writ

petiticn is to be filea aying cor

notice making Cemanc of justice has to be served,
Tre concept cf serving nctice ceserves to be
expancea to all potential areas where conflict may
leac to litigation. fhe Law Commission is of the
view that in any litigation exce;t where some
urgent relief is necessary, a notice of denand
must be issuec on behaif cf the person who claims

-€@ certain right cr ielief against another person

whici fi as well include an artificial person or

71


pertese in intrceuucing a

@ jurisvic gersen. vhe

taye of te infori. the cther sice that a

ts

Llit’saticn is center lated enc cite an
opportunity to avoié litigaticn, SE the cther

Sige is nck enamcurec of Litigacion are is willing
te act Fairly ané justly, the notice will put hin
en the guarG that « possible litigation is

hreetencu uniess

parties meet and rescive the

Gispuie.

2 Crdinarily che party seeking to initiate

ay suit or legal ection will approech the lawyer

first. woe lawyer sioula give a notice and in

that nec

ice he must specify that the other side

cf the no

Saovlu. on

ice, nominate his

Lawyer, This must be nade obligatory. crce the
cther sice neminates his lawyer anc replies to the

notice, it must be made statutcerily obligator

both the lawyers +o meet within a ,ericd of

wh sc action car pe

limitation for the suit er legal

expire, by a statutory

will be extended by 15 cays being tue pericd of

ccace witnin which the Lawyers must meet. At this

coling, tue lawyers smovla start appreciating
each otner’s peint cf view, exchange cviuence and

aitenpt ६० tind cut whether a reascnable sclution

cf the -ispute by fair approach ci give and


is ,ossible. hinutes of tie

ting lust be
meintainea. If tie Gispute is reselvea, the

consen

terms must be drawn up and subrmittea tc
the court uncer Crcer XXIII rule 3 of the Ccde of
Civil FProccéure upon which the court must yasS a
consent cecree. If the whele disgute is not
resclved in ccurse of the negotiations at the
mecting but a partial agreement is aciieved, the
same must be recordéca and treated as binding cu
both 515९8... The litigation may start cnly for the
remainder of the cispute. Failure to rescive the
Giz,ute at the negotiating stage may perkit a
litigation to be starteaG but in that event. the
plaint must aver that such an effcert has been made
and the Gocument evidencing the attempt must be
Gisclosed along with the ;laint. The other side,
on being infcrmed that litigation has been filed
must appear without waiting for a sumwons to be
served. fhe ccurt nust then encuire about the
area ८६ dispute not resolved anc refer the matter
tc the Conciliaticn Court. If possible, the
Conciliation Court shoulse persuade the parties to
core to a fair settlement. The Conciliaticn
Court, after having yerusal cf the docuncnts
prepared at the negotiating stage, must ascertain
which party was unjustifiably recalcitrant at the
time of negetiaticn. It must be ascertaineé at

two stages, namely, at the stage of meeting of the

73


lawyers and at the stage when the matter is Gealt
wit. by the Conciliatic:. Ccurt. Ultimutely if the
trial yoes on, the party shown to be recalcitrant
sng aiso shown to be unjust in appreacl. must be
visitea witi heavy cost, inclusive cf the cost of
establishinent Of the court as spelt out by the Law
Commission in its earlier repore.

5.15. To reclaim the glcry cf the profession,
only a winor step is suggested here, If
implerented in letter ana spirit, the Commission
is confident that instead of being accused of
being ‘brokers of disgute', they would acguire the
status of heaiers and solvers of cispute, In
‘order to bringabout this result in a small way,
the Law Commission recommends that on tie nctice
and tne reply being ex hanged, a statutory duty
nlust be cast on the lawyers to meet and either
resclve or narrow down the area of Gispute बाद
regular reports of the achievement in this behalf
must be péblished. hat published report would be
subjected tc social audit which would not only
hel, in imgroving the image cf the profession, but
woula grovide objective evidence of their
contributicn to reclaiming the system uncer

unbcarablie pressure.

पद


LER 7A

CTICi CE HIGH COURT

i. Section 115 cf the Code ८६ Civil sreeeéure,
4.99: confers power on the High Court to call for
the rcecra cf any case which has been decided by
any court subordinate tc High Court and in which
no appeal lies theretc, and if such suberdinate
court appcars ~

(a) to have xercisecd jurisdiction not

vestea in it by law, or
(b) ६०७ have failed to excrceise a
jurisdiction sc vested, or
(८) to mave acted in excercise cf its
jurisdiction illegaily or with waterial
irregularity,
the “igh Court may make such crder in tye case as
it tbinks fit. ह yreovisc has been engrafted to
this section by tie Amendment Act of 1676. It is

not nécessary te reproduce tae same here

GoZ. This jurisdiction is briefly described as
revisional jurisdiction of the High. Court.
Experience tas shown, and no statistical support
reece be given to substantiate the prorosition,
that this revisional jurisdiction has been largely

responsible for. bcoloing up the trial of suits गा

«éelaying the dis,osal cf the suits, The First Law

75


conmissicn in its 14th Report cexanined the
advisability of retention cf the revisional
jurisdiction and recommendea its retention by:
providing certain checks in exercise of the
jurisdiction. While congrehensively aealing with
the Code of Civil Procedure, the Law Commission in
its 2701 Keport reiterated its recommendation in
the léth Report. While re-examining the Code of
Civil precedure, the Law Commission in -its 54th
Report recommended total deietion cf section 115
ef the Code cf Civil Proceaure ebserving that
cften the cause of Gelay in the trial of suits is
entertainnent of petitions for revision, against
intcriccutory orders which invariably resuit in
stay cf proceedings. In fact, in many cases, the
ebject of the partics in invcking the revisional
jur! sdiction of the Hie 1 Court appeared to be to
Gelay the progress ef the roceedings.” The High
Court Arrears Committee expressed the opinicn that
the revisional jurisciction of the Bigh Court
against interlocutory orders siiould be abolished.”
6-3. #8 if this revisional jurisdiction had not
cone enough harm, article 227-of the Constitution
has been so interpretea as to widen the scope of
“réevisional | jurisdiction of the High Court.
Article 227 cf the Constitution confers pewer of

superintendence over all courts and tribunals by

76


the  Higit Court threughcut the territories in
relation to which it exercises jurisdiction. This
Fower cf Stperintenderce has been intecpreted to
confer wicer jurisdiction compared to one
conferrea by secticn 115 Cccue ८६ Civil Procedure

ef correcting any and every error ccm

itted by the
subercinate court through the progress of the

litigation. VWenever a constraint was felt in

ec

enerci cf

revisicnal jurisdiction under section
115 cf the Code cf Civil Procedure, the parties
invokced the wider jurisdiction under article 227.
The State of U.P. amended section 115 of the Code
ez Civil Procedure in its application to the state
by confining the revisional jurisdiction of the
High Court to the suits wherein the value of the
subject matter of dispute was Rs.20;000 and above
cr -uits instituted bef re August 1, 1978; and in
all ctier cases transferrec the’ same to the
District’ Court. Confirming the validity of the
amendnent, the Supreme Court observeé that ‘access*
te justice: alse ing lies finality within reach of
the rich ana the eccr..e.e Judicial reform is
ug to now a tinkering exercise,: not an engineering
preject, but even that little tinkering is
fiercely challenged as litigative anathema by the

5
prefessicn which is unfcrtunate’.

6.4, The Satish Chandra Conmittge differed with

77


the recommendation of the Law Conmissicn and

leaned in favour cf the amendment made by the
State of U.P. it section 115 with some further
expansion of the jurisdiction cf the District

Court.

6-5. Eas the situaticn improved? Tne answer is
obvicusly in the negative. What is the utility of
a revisional jurisdiction cf the High Court or
even cf the District Court against interlocutory
erders? One can appreciate a revision petition
against a final orcer and the expression ‘final
oracr’ shoulc not be the subject matter of another
rouna of litigation, Tie expression ‘final order’
lust mean final Gispesal of the litigation as a
whele in which the order is passed and nothing
further is .require@ to be done by the court
cealing wath the litigation. But when it comes ६०
interliccutory ordérs, experience shows that even a
rejection cf an application fcr adjournment cf a
suit has been the subject matter of a revision
petition, |

6.66 It is generally acccj-ted that anyone

.

interested in delaying the progress of the suit
would make any atglicaticn, though utterly
irrelevant, invite an order and approach the High
Court in revision. Till it is admitted,

aujournment of the suit will be sought on the

7५


Gtcuno that tue orcer cf the ccurt is already
una xr chalience. Tf e.umitted, stay would follow
@s दे acter cf course ang the progress ८६ the suit
woulc be ucla ७६. for years. “he abuse cf . the
erovisich scan be spelt out Ly an illustration.

Croe rule € of the Code cf Civii Proccéure

rm

peevices that the ccure shall cisiiss the suit for

cefauit cf

-@arance of the ;laintiff£ cn the date

when the suit is fixed for tearing. Order IX rule

O

proviues tiiat when the suit is so Gismisscé, the
plaintist may apply for an crder to set agide the
Gismissal anc if le satisfies tre court that there
was sufficicent.cause fer his men-aryearance when
the seit was cailed on for hearing, the court
shail make an creer sctting aside the cismissal
upon terms as to cests. Order XLIII cule 1 clause

{c) confers a right of peal against an ‘order

ae unacr Graer IX rule 9 rejecting an
application for an order ८० set aside the
cismissai of a suit. ghe policy ci the law
apEecars Lo be that if the court whicl dismissed
tLe suit is satisfied that there was sufficient
cause for the nop-appearance cf the plaintiff on
the date fixed fer hearing the suit, it shall sev
asiage the dismissal of the suit and if tie court
does not set aside the order dismissing the suit,

the order of the court rejecting the application


cai, be reviewed by an appeal. This neccessarily

rEnNnceca; ne

imnplics tuat it tie lication is

aigeal would lie. Ane it sicwule be so. If the
oruer cismissing tie ‘suit is net set aside, tie

pieintiif becomes neu~suited. Cherefere, he is

given @ right cf appeal. If, on the cther hand,

the ccurt sets asice the order cistissing the
suit, the matter would preceeed further. the

cefencani cannot then make a yrievance about it.

ericace, hovever, shows that even though the
peiicy cf law as disclosed by 6 ccombineGd reading

Or

9 of Grcer IX ana Order XLIII ruie

lie} is that oniy the oréer dismissing the suit
for acfault ८६ appearance may be reviewed by an
ब, ,cilate court, yet the cefendant ycnerally
gucstions the ccrrectness of the order granting
the sly. dicaticn for setting aside the cismissal cf

tac suit by way cf revision. During the time the

further bearing of tbe suit

will be stayed. Years aticr revision applicaticn

is cismissea which obviously it would be, the suit

weulc again be reviveé ana proceedeu further. खाद

ve beci: c£ten reserted tc. This is
the harn causeaq by cxercise cf revisicnal

jurisciction. The gain is Little hecausc where

interlccutory oraecrs are cf sone cHSCG UENCE;

Grader Kit

T rule i provides for appeal against the

sane. wherefore, uaving regard tc all the

cu


circunstarces cz tic matter and experience so far

~ectea

is cf the view

Tris would

royress cf

anc the ,rev.cus cpinions e
€ryging situation,

that section

ressed anc

the Law Commission

shoula be deleted

interlocutory cruers are concerned.

remeve the stagnating

tus

suit.

Ebase of the


. CHAPTER VII

CKILZINAL JURISLICTICH

Vole While Geaiing with urban litigation, it
wcule be a glaring owissien if seme change is
nck sugygeste. in the present cenrt structure
Gealing with criminal-cases in urban areas.
Unccubtedly when an exhaustive revision of the
tode cf Criminal Procecure is undertaken, the
guesticn of Gealing with criminal Litigation
can be adequately éealt with. Even then
during the interregnum, certain steps can be
taken which weuleé reduce the buraen cn the

criminal courts in urban areas.

7०24 During the British rule and for seme
years after indeperdence, there was a method
of appointing honorary waygistrates tc ceal
with ordinary ruutine criminal cases, such as
violation of municipal law, traffic
regulations, single private complaints and
Matters alike in character. The research
stows that in appointing noncrary magistrates
unger the British rule, the test was cf
loyalty te British regime. The power was used
for extending State largesse. Some title
holders unaer the British regine were

apeointec as honorary wagistrates. Even then,


some of then acquitted extremely well but by
ané large a good number cf them did not cone
“up to expectaticn with the result that the
system came into abuse. And nenesis overtook
it. The system was discontinued. Insteac
full time stipenciary magistrate’s courts were

set up.

7.3. Whe criminal litigation has proliferated
so much and the crime chart is going up at
such a break-neck speed that it is rather
difficult to provide ‘for the system . of
stipendiary magistrates for 311 sorts cf
criminal cases. There is a body of opinion
that large number of offences as’ set out in
the Indian Penal Code cf 1860 vintage deserve
to be deleted consistent with the mores of the
present Gay scciet,. There is a belief that
being guilty of over-legalisation; acase is
mace out for delegalisation. The behaviours
that need to. be decriminalised are those of
homosexuality, prostitution, abortion, bigamy;
et al. This requires an indepth study and the
Law CGomiission has started its research in
this behalf. However, it will take some time
before a thorough probe can be made and a

well-ccensidered report is submittec.
7.4. During the interregnum, the system of

83


appointing honorary magistrate wust be re-
introduced. But departing from the Past
Fractice, a specific qualification must be
Erescribed that cniy those retirec personnel
cf tne judiciary who in their active life
renaereé service as Judges siiould alone be
appointed as honorary magistrates, There are
now nearly hundreds of retired . Judges
available for being appointed as honorary
magistrates. their experience in’ Gecisicn
making, their expertise in dealing with cases,
their sense of justice and fairplay and their
rational appreach acquired over a whole
working life would make them ideal honorary
magistrates. They can be entrusted with any
work which -a stipendiary magistrate can

undertake.

7.5. . Therefore, it is hereby recommended that
honorary magistrates, subject to condition in.
the foregcing paragraph, may be appointed at
once. They shoulé sit in the same courts
where _the regular courts sif in the early
hours of the morning.” Their terns and
conditions of payment can be worked cut and
they will be able to take over all the ola
cases on which they can concentrate, relieving

the buraen on the sitting Judges. This one

84


suggestion would help in reducing the burden:

in urban criminal litigation.

7.6. In preparing this report, the Law.
Cormissicn must acknowledge with thanks the
assistance rencered by hrs. Jyotirmoyee Nag,

retired Judge cf the Calcutta High Court.

ToT. The Law Commission recommends

accordingly.

(D.2. DESAI)
CHAIRMAN

(V.S. RAHA DEVI)
HENBBR SECRETARY

NEW DELHI,

August .8, 1986.

65


NOTES AND REFERENCES

Chapter I
1. 0८7, 11400 Repat on Gram Nyayalaya.
2. The Constitution of India,article 235.°

71८1, 116th Report on Formation of an All India
Judicial Service,

LelI, 124th Report on The High Court Arrears - A
Eresh Look.

707, 125th Report on The Supreme su rome Court - A Fresh

- 86 -


Chapter IIT

1. peketars ee Speaks and Company ०८०० v.Bansilal Sarma and
etc., (1979) 3 SCC 398 at 407. —

|

2. Seaford Court Estates Ltd. v. Asher, (1949) 2
All BR 155 at 164,

3. Ba कार, Water Supply वाव Sewerage Board v.
Rajapa, (1978) 2 ScC 213 at 285. हु

4. §8.B.Noronah ए+ Prem Kumari Khanna, AIR 1980 SC
193 at 195--196,

5. Id. at 197.
6. Soction 144 (7) (७) of the Delhi Rent Control Act,

7. Precision Stecl and Engineering works and Another

anjan Deva Tayal, (1982) 3 SCC

8.* IcI, 114th Report on Gram Nyayalaya.

9. Ibid., for a fuller discussion of the model of
participatory justice, reference is invitcd to
paras 5.6 to 5.9.

10. Inid,., for a fuller discussion cf tho selection fc
empanelling lay judges, reference is invited to p-r.3
5.16 to 5,19,

Tomasic and Malcolm M,.Feclay, Foetus

tige : Lisessment, of an Emerging Idea, (1982),

12. Id, at p.82.

13. Ibid.

14, Indian Express (Delhi Edition),dated 19th Feb,,
1988,p.10. है

- 87 -


Chapter V

1..

B.V.Viswanatha Aiyer, The Code of Civil
Procedure, 4th Edition, Vol. II, pp. 1048-1052
under Order XXVI, rulcs 4, 7 and 8.

107, 124th Report on The High Court Arr: Court Arrears -A

fresh Look, paras 4.12 to 4.17; and

I€I, 125th Report on The Supreme Court - A Fresh
Look, paras 2.18 and 4,18,

See Code of Civil Procedure, Order XLIII,rule
३ (४) « हे

LcI, 99th Report on Oral and Written Arguments in:
the Higher Courts.

Narottamdas L. Shah v. Fated Meg Maganbhai

Sat and आफ ता, AA

Rovabhai and Another, 1984 Gujarat Law Herald 687.

LeI, 128th Report on Cost of Litigation.

Chapter VI
1८7, 14th Report on Reform of Judicial

i.

Adm.

nistration, para 30, 9,429.

LCI, 27th Report on Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
para 57, p.25.

LCI, 54th Report on Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
pp.96-97.

Repert of the High Court Arrears Committec,1972,
para 71, p.67.

Sri Vishnu Awtar ctc. v. Shiv Awtar and Others,
AIR 1980 SC 1575.

B.V.Viswanatha Aiyer, The Code of civil
Procedure, 4th Edition, Vol. I, p.351.

- 88 -