CONFIDENTIAL _
Not for Publication

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

THIRTEENTH REPORT

(CONTRACT ACT, 1872)

MINISTRY OF LAW
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA


CHAIRMAN,
LAW COMMISSION,
NEW DELHI,

September 26, 1958.

Shri A. K. Sen,
Minister of Law.
New Delhi.

My dear Minister,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Thirteenth
Report of the Law Commission on the Indian Contract Act.

2. At its first meeting held on the 17th September, 1955, the
Commission decided to take up the revision of the Indian Contract
Act and entrusted the task to a Committee consisting of Shri
G. S. Pathak and Shri G. N. Joshi.

3. The consideration of the subject was initiated by Shri Pathak
who formulated a scheme for the revision of the Act. The prin-
ciples underlying the scheme were discussed at meetings of the
Statute Revision Section of the Commission held on the 11th March,
the 14th April, the 12th May, and the 10th June, 1956. A draft Report
prepared by Shri Pathak in the light of the discussions was circu-
lated to all the Members of the Commission and their views invited
thereon. The Report together with the views was discussed at a
meeting of the Statute Revision Section held on the 24th August,
1958. Important suggestions made by Members at this meeting were
accepted and it was left to the Chairman to finally settle the Report
in the light of the discussion.

4. Shri Pathak being outside India is unable to sign the Report
personally. But he concurs in the recommendations and has autho-
rised the Chairman to sign the Report on his behalf. Dr. N. C. Sen
Gupta and Shri D. Narasa Raju, who are unable to come down to
Delhi to sign the Report but similarly concur in the recommenda-
tions and have authorised the Chairman to sign the Report on their

behalf.

5, The Commission wishes to acknowledge the services rendered
by its Joint Secretary, Shri D. Basu, in connection with the prepa-
ration of the Report.

' Yours sincerely,

' M. 0. SETALVAD.



CONTENTS
REPORT
Part I
General
Paragraphs
1. Developments in the law since 1872
2. Scope of revision + . .
3-4. Need for codification of supplementary principles
512. Doctrine of consideration
13—16. Doctrine of privity.
17—19. Quasi-contracts . . .
20. Examination of the provisions of the existing Act,

indicating the changes proposed

Part II

Proposals relating to Sections

21—138. Section 1 to 238 . .
APPENDICES
ApPENDIX I. Proposals as shown in the form of draft amend-
ments . : : :

APPENDIX II. Suggestions in respect of other Acts

14-73

7594
95


REPORT
OF
THE LAW COMMISSION

oN

THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872
Part I
General

1. Since 1872 there have been new developments in the Develop-
theory of the law of Contract. The common law of ments in the
England, on which the Indian Contract Act is principally 1872.
based, had its roots in the real property law, which has
been described by Denning, L.J., as being “devoid of moral
concepts like mathematics'.” “Rights and wrongs”. says
Denning, L.J., “did not enter into it nor the redress of
grievances; only words and rules and logical deductions
from them. In those early days land was the most
important kind of property; and the common law lawyers
were so absorbed in the land problem that they approached
other problems in the same frame of mind. They looked
for certainty, and gave justice a second place. In their
ands, the law of Contracts and Torts tended to become
as technical and. rigid as the law of Property'.” In the
nineteenth century, freedom of contract was the governing
principle. As Prof. Keeton? points out, the emphasis, today,
must be placed upon the problem “whether as a result of
unceasing administrative encroachment, freedom of con-
tract will survive at all to any noticeable degree.” Modern
developments in the law of Contract reflect the aspirations
of society in rapid transition.

2. We have noted these modern trends and also studied Scope of
tke views advanced by jurists in various countries as well 'िंमिंए०-
as the changes recommended by the Wright Committee in
England and the New York Law Revision Commission in
America. Besides, there have been numerous judicial
pronouncements on the interpretation of the various sec-
tions of our Act. Sometimes conflicting views have been

2. The Need for a New Equity” in (1952) Current Legal Problems,

¥ Blementary Principles of Jurisprudence, 408,


Need for
codification
of supple-
mentary
principles,

2

expressed and on a few occasions legislative changes have
been suggested. We have examined such decisions and
sought to resolve tke conflict. We have also taken into
consideration the suggestions received from members of
the Bar and the Bench and the general public. At the
same time, our conclusions have all along been influenced
by the consideration that it will not be advisable to
introduce such radical changes as may unnecessarily upset
the concepts which kave become deep rooted in the
jurisprudence of the country and which now form part of
the accepted notions of the lawyer and the layman.

3. As its Preamble says, the Act of 1872 does not profess
to be a complete Code dealing with the law relating to
contracts. The legislature, while enacting this Act, did
not intend to exkaustively cocify the whole of the law of
contract to be applied by the Courts in India’ or even any
particular sub-division thereof. Thus, it has been held?
that sections 124 and 125 of the Act do not lay down the
whole of the law of Indemnity. As a result, on all matters
on which it is silent the courts have had to resort to tke
rules of English Common Law, as principles of ‘justice,
equity and good conscience”. We are of the opinion that
this reliance on the principles of English law to supply the
deficiencies of an Indian enactment is not conducive to
certainty or simplicity of the law. We think it is preferable
to add to the Act the English common law principles which
have been applied by our Courts for nearly a century, so
that it may not be necessary to refer to the English law in
many cases.

The formulation of these principles is thus one of the
objects of the revision undertaken by us.

4. Another aspect of revision arises from the fact that
the law of Contract in India is not contained in the Indian
Contract Act alone and there are a number of statutes
dealing with its various branches. Whitley Stokes was of
the view that all these should be consolidated and
incorporated into the Contract Act*. But the legislative
trend since the enactment of the Contract Act has been in

1 Irrawaddy Flotilla Co. v. Bugwandas, 18 Cal. 621 (P. C.).

® Gajanan v. Madan, A. I. R. 1942 Bom. 302 (303).

3 S. 37 of the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act 1887; S. 16 of
the Madras Civil Court Act 1873 ; S. 26 of Bombay Regulation IV of 1829.

* Whitley Stokes: Anglo Indian Codes, Vol. I, p. 534.


3

the other direction. Not only have separate Acts been
passed on special aspects of contractual transactions, suck
as the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, but parts of the
Contract Act itself have been taken out to constitute
independent enactments relating to particular contracts,
such as the Sale of Goods Act, 1930, the Partnership Act,
1932. On this point, the observations of the Select Com-
mittee on the Partnership Bill are interesting—

“When Sir James Stephen moved the Indian Con-
tract Bill, ke admitted that it was not and
could not pretend to be, a complete code upon
the branch of law to which it related. He,
however, expressed a hope that in later years it
would be easy to enact supplementary chapters
relating to the several branches of law of con-
tract which the Bill did not touch. This kope
has never been fulfilled. In later years it was
found more convenient to have separate enact-
ments for the several branches of the law of
contract e.g., the Transfer of Property Act, the
Negotiable Instruments Act, and the Merchant
Shipping Act. In our opinion, in view of the
complexity of modern conditions, the time has
now come when this process should be
accelerated by embodying the different branches
of the law relating to contract in separate self-
contained enactment’”.

We agree with these observations in so far as they suggest
that special aspects of the law of contract should be dealt
with in separate enactments inasmuch as owing to the
expansion of the law it is not possible to include all its
branches in one statute without making it unwieldy or
cumbrous. It is this consideration which has induced us to
recommend in our previous Report on the Sale of Goods
Act? that the law relating to hire-purchase should be
codified in a separate enactment apart from the general
law of sale of goods. On the same principle, we are of tke
opinion that laws relating to carriers should be codified
and consolidated into one separate statute. The Contract
Act should be left to deal with the general principles relat-
ing to contractual relationship.

“2 Gazette of India, dated the 24th January, 1931, Part V, pp. 31, 32.
१ Eighth Report of the Law Commission on the Sale of Goods Act, 1930,
para, 12, page 4.


Doctrine of
considera-
tion.

4

In this view, we do not see any existing Act which can
expediently be consolidated with the Contract Act.

5. We have devoted anxious thougit to the modern
attitude towards the doctrine of consideration and to the
desirability of its abolition or, at any rate, modification.
This doctrine was borrowed from English Common Law.
According to some eminent English jurists. the law on the
subject requires change. Professor Holcsworth has
described the doctrine “as something of an anachronism'”,
and observed that “the requirements of consideration in its
present shape prevent the enforcement of many contracts,
which ought to be enforced, if the law really wishes to
give effect to the lawful intentions of the parties to them;
and it would prevent the enforcement of many others, if
the judges had not used their ingenuity to invent con-
siderations. But tke invention of considerations, by
reasoning which is both devious and technical adds to the
difficulties of the doctrine’’. Thus remedy, according to
Prot. Holdsworth, is not to scrap the doctrine of considera-
tion but to reduce it to a subordinate place in the English
theory of contract. He suggested, inter alia, that the law
should provide tkat all lawful agreements should be valid
contracts if the parties intended by their agreement to
affect their legal relations, and either consideration was
present, or the agreement was put into writing and signed
by all the parties thereto.

Lord Wright has remarked that the doctrine of con-
sideration in its present form serves no practical purpose
and ought to be abolished’. Sir Frederick Pollock has said
that the application of the doctrine of consideration ‘to
various unusual but not unknown cases has been made
subtle and obscured by excessive dialectic refinement*”.
Equally strong observations are to be found in judicial
pronouncements. In the well-known case of the Dunlop
Pneumatic Tyre 00.5, Lord Dunedin observed:

“T confess that this case is to my mind apt to nip
any budding affection which one might have ha

3 Holdswort : History of English Law, Vol. VIII, 47.
2 Ibid 46,
* The Article ‘Ought the doctrine of consideration to be abolished
from ye'Common Law published in (1936) 49 Harvard Law Review, 1225
1233).
52’ Genius of Common Law, 9.
u L Dunlop Pnenmatic Tyre Co. v. Selfridge and Co., (1915) A.C. 847 (855)


5

for the doctrine of consideration. For the effect
of that doctrine in the present case is to make
it possible for a person to snap his fingers at a
bargain deliberately made, a bargain not in itself
unfair, and which the person seeking to enforce
it has a legitimate interest to enforce.”

6. In America too, the doctrine of consideration has
received severe criticism at the hands of Dean Pound. He
observes:

“It is significant, although we have been theorising
about consideration for four centuries, our texts
have not agreed upon a formula of consideration
much less our courts upon any consistent scheme
of what is consideration and what is not. It
means one thing in tke law of simple contracts,
another in the law of negotiable instruments,
another in conveyancing under the Statute of
Uses and still another thing no one knows
exactly what in many cases in equity'.”

According to him, promise as a social and economic insti-
tution becomes of the first importance in a commercial and
industrial society. A man’s word should be “as good as
his bond” and his fellowmen must be able to rely on the
one equally with tke other if our economic order is to
function efficiently. This is the expression of the moral
sentiment of the civilised society?.

7. The continental countries adopted the requirement of
‘causa’ (which literally means a ‘reasonable cause”) from
Roman Law. But the interpretation of that expression
has given a very wide and elastic meaning to the require-
ment of an agreement enforceable at law. Thus, as the
Privy Council kas observed‘, according to Roman-Dutch
Law, a promise deliberately made to discharge a moral
duty, or to do an act of generosity or benevolence can be
enforced at law. In other words, “the doctrine has become
so broad that it is almost true to say that any agreement
for a lawful object is valid if the parties seriously intend

* Pound: An introduction to the Philosophy of Law (Revd. edn.),

155.
® [bid., 147.
3 Paton, A Text Book of Jurisprudence (2nd Ed.), 354.
* Jayvawickrame v. Amar Suriya, (1918) Ac 869 (875).


6

to enter into legal relations.” Many French writers who
support this view have openly discarded the doctrine of causa
as confusing'. The German Civil Code, similarly makes
no mention of causa and under that Code, every lawful
agreement entered into with the serious intention of being
legally binding would directly produce an obligatory effect.

8. In England, the problem of consideration was referred
to the Law Revision Committee, whose sixth report
appeared in 1937°. The Committee’s general conclusion
substantially accepted Professor Holdsworth’s view, for it
advocated that a contract should exist if there was an
intention to create legal relations and if either the contract
was reduced to writing or consideration was present. It
may be noted, however, that the Parliament in England
has not yet adopted the recommendation of the Law Revi-
sion Committee. In the United States of America, the New
York Law Revision Commission which was constituted at
about the same time as the English Law Revision Com-
mittee, reached conclusions which in many respects were
similar to those of the English Committee.

9. Notwithstanding the foregoing considerations and the
views of eminent jurists, however, we are unable to
recommend an abolition of the doctrine. It has become so
firmly rooted in our concept of contract, that a wholesale
rejection of the doctrine would have the result of over-
turning the very structure on which our Law of Contract
is based and would require a complete and thorough over-
haul of the law. This, in our opinion, is hardly warranted
by the circumstances. Nor do we feel it logically defensi-
ble to provide, while retaining the existing law, that where
a promise is in writing, no consideration should be required.
We have, accordingly, come to the conclusion that instead
of abolishing the doctrine or introducing an alternative to
it, we should make suitable changes in the existing law
whick will have the effect of preventing the inequitable
and anomalous consequences resulting from a_ rigid
adherence to the doctrine. We propose to achieve this end
by adding some clauses to section 25 which now enumerates
the exceptional cases where a contract without considera-
tion is valid.

1 Paton, ibid., 355.
२ Sixth’ Interim’ Report of the Law Revision Committee, 1937, Cmd.
5449.


7

10. Great injustice is done sometimes where a promise
is made which the promisor knows will be acted upon and
which is in fact acted upon and then it is held that such
promise is unenforceable on the ground of want of con-
sideration. A common example of such a case is where a
person agrees to pay a subscription to a charitable insti-
tution with the knowledge that a building will be con-
structed with the aid of the amount subscribed and the
trustees of the charity incur expenditure on the faith of
the fulfilment of the promise. The Law Revision Com-
mittee of England has cited a number of such instances
and the American Restatement on Contract, under section
60 in the Volume on Contracts, also mentions them. In
India, some Judges have upheld such promises on the
ground that they were supported by consideration' inasmuch
as the expenditure was incurred “at the desire of the
promisor”, while other Judges have held that the facts
did not justify the finding that the expenciture was
incurred “at the desire of the promisor” and thus tke
agreement being without consideration was void and
unenforceable’. In our opinion, the former view puts
considerable strain on the meaning of the expression “at
the desire of the promisor”. “A promise, which the
promisor should reasonably expect to induce action or
forbearance of a Cefinite and substantial character on the
part of tke promisee and which does induce such action
or forbearance, is binding, if injustice can be avoided only
by enforcement of the promise®”. In order to set at rest
the above-mentioned controversy and to prevent injustice,
we recommend that an exception be added to section 25 on
lines similar to those suggested in the Sixth Interim Report
of the Law Revision Committee in England. According to
that Committee. “a promise which the promisor knows or
reasonaby should know, will be relied upon by the
promisee. shall be enforceable if the promisee has altered
his position to his deteriment in relying on his promise*”.
We are further of the view that for purposes of this
exception, a promise need not be an express promise but
may be implied from conduct i.e., from acts or omissions.
The words “express or implied” should therefore be adced

1 Kedarnath v. Gorie Muhammad, 14 Cal. 745;
A. 1. R. 1918 Mad. 311.

3 Doraswamy Iyer v. Arunachala, A. 1. R. 1936 Mad. 135.

3 American Restatement on Contracts, 110 (s. 90).
* Sixth Interim Report, para. 50, Recommendation no. 8 (p. 31).

Perumal v. Sendanatha,


The doc-
trine of
privity.

8

after the word “promise” in adopting the above recom-
mendation of the Law Revision Committee.

11. According to tke present law in India, which is the
same as in England, an undertaking to keep the offer open
for a certain time, is a promise without consideration, and
as such unenforceable. In order to be binding, such a
promise must be supported by a distinct consideration.
This rule is a necessary implication from section 5 and
sub-section (2) of section 6 of the Contract Act.

The Law Revision Committee recommended that an
agreement to keep an offer open for a definite period of
time or until the occurrence of some specific event should
be enforceable even where there is no consideration to
support it’.

A similar recommendation has been made by the Law
Revision Committee in respect of a promise to dispense
with or remit the performance of a promise or to extend
the time for its performance.

We recommend that exceptions should be added to
section 25 of our Act in terms of the above recommenda-
tions of the Law Revision Committee.

12. It was suggested to us that it should be made clear
that the performance of a pre-existing legal duty should not
form good consideration. In our view no change is called
for in this respect, for, the cases where suck legal duty
arose out of a pre-existing contract between the promisor
and promisee are fully provided in section 62, as would
appear from the Illustrations thereto; and the cases where
it arose out of contract with a third party is governed by
the existing provisions. We do not recommend any change
in the law on this topic.

18. Closely connected with the doctrine of consideration
is the rule that a third party cannot sue on a contract
though made for his benefit.

In English Law the rule came to be established in the
19th century after the crystalization of the doctrine of
consideration, the first important landmark being the case
of Twedle v. Atkinson* decided in 1861. It has been cate-

1 Ibid.
* (1861) 1. B. & 5. 393.


9

gorically reaffirmed by the House of Lords in Dunlop
Pneumatic Tyre Co. v. Selfridge’. The hardship of the
rule, however, manifested itself early, particularly where
a person was entitled to some benefit under a contract to
which he was not a party. Courts of equity sought to
mitigate the hardship by applying the doctrine of cons-
tructive trust’. But this device necessarily involved a
fiction and in a number of cases the device has failed to
work as the judges insisted upon a strict application of
the fiction’. In quite a few cases, such as benefits under
insurance policies, the Legislature has intervened to
modify the operation of the rule‘.

14. The English Law Revision Committee which exa-
mined the rule in its sixth interim report’, has been
unable to support the doctrine as it stands. The Com-
mittee thus observed—

“The common law of England stands alone among
modern systems of Law in its rigid adherence
to the view that a contract should not confer
any rights on a stranger to the contract even
though, the sole object may be to benefit him*”,

and recommended legislation to the following effect—

“Where a contract by its express terms purports to
confer a benefit directly on a third party it
shall be enforceable by the third party in his
own name subject to any defences that would
have been valid between the contracting parties.
Unless the contract otherwise provides it may”
be cancelled by the mutual consent of the con-
tracting parties at any time before the third
party has adopted it expressly or by conduct*.”

The English Legislature has yet to give effect to the
recommendation. Meantime Denning L. J. (as he then
was) has assailed the rule as to privity of contract as a
comparatively recent innovation’ replacing the more than

2 (1915) A. C. 847 (853).

3 Cf. Grandy v. Grandy, (1885) 30 Ch. 10. 57.

३ Cf. Vandepitte ९. P. A. I. Corporation, (1933) A. C. 70.

8.3 8. 36 (4) of the Road Traffic Act, 1930 (20 & 21 Geo. 5, ०.43)

8. 56 (1) of the Law of Property Act, 1925 (15 & 16 Geo. 5, ०. 20).

5 Sixth Interim Report, para. 41

$ Ibid., par

7 Jn Drive Yourself Hire Co, v. Strutt, (1954) 1 0. 8. 250, 9. 272,


10

two centuries old settled law to the contrary. Though
Denning L. J’s reading of the history of this doctrine has
not possed without criticism', even his critics seem to be
in agreement with him as to the need for giving effect
to the recommendations of the Law Revision Committee.

15. There has been a conflict of judicial opinion as to
the applicability of this doctrine in India.

(a) In some cases? the view has been taken that the
words ‘any other person’ in s. 2(d) which depart from the
English rule that consideration must proceed from the
Promisee neccesarily implied a corresponding deviation
from the English rule as to privity of contract.

(b) The preponderating view, however, is that the
English rule of privity of contract applies to India’,
notwithstanding s.2(d). The rule was apvlied by the Privy
Council in Jamnadas v. Ram Autar’. In Krishna Lal v.
Promila’, Rankin C. J. struck a decisive blow to the
argument based on the language of s.2(d). While conceding
that the clause might be construed as implying a depar-
ture from the corresponding English rule, he observed
that the definitions of promisor and promisee in section 2
rigidly excluded the notion that a stranger to a contract
ean sue thereon.

(c) At the same time, following English Law, a number
of exceptions have been engrafted upon the doctrine by
our courts. Thus, it has been held that a person who is
not a party to a contract may nevertheless sue upon it—

(a) Where the contract implies a trust in favour of
the third party’, whether any property is speci-
fically charged or रण",

(0) Where money to be paid under the contract is
charged on some immovable property’.

2 Vide E. J. P.: Privity of Contract, 70 Law Quarterly Ri > 9. 467.

2 Kindersley J. in Chinnayya vy. Ramayya, 4 Mad. 137 3 Kshirodbehari
v. Mangobinda, 61 Cal. 841 (860).

3 Krishna Lal v. Promila, A. I. R. 1928 Cal. 518; Subbu Chetti v.
Annachalam, A. I. R. 1930 Mad. 382 (F. B.) ; National Petroleum Co. v.
Popatlal, 60 Bom. 954.

4 [. [.. R. (1912) 34 All. 63 P. 0.

5 Khawaja Ma. v. Hussaini Begum, (1910) 32 All. 410 (P.C.): Mukherjea
y.Kiran, (1938) 42 C.W.N. 1212.

& Dan Kuer v. Sarla, A. 1. R. 1947 P. (2, 8.

7 Adhar v. Dol Gobinda, (1935) 40 0. W. N. 1037; Atikalla v. Mobarak,
A. 1. R. 1949 Cal. 174 ; Gulabchand v. Laxminarayan, A.LR. 1944 Nag.46



IL

Several exceptions have also been introduced by s.23
of the specific Relief Act, 1887, e.g., in favour of the bene-
ficiaries under a marriage settlement or compromise of
doubtful rights.

16. That a rigid adherence to the doctrine of privity is
bound to cause hardship is obvious. The present state of
law in India is not quite certain and the particular excep-
tions which have been acknowledged by case-law and
statutes do not cover all cases of hardship and thus
enhance the bewilderment of the layman. As we antici-
pated in our Report on the Specific Relief Act', the
better course would be to adopt a general exception to
cover all cases of contracts conferring benefits upon third
parties and dispense with the particular instances where
the rule of privity should not apply. We consider the
recommendation of the Law Revision Committee best
suited for the purpose, and recommend that a separate
section be incorporated on the lines thereof’.

17. Another major topic which has received our parti-
cular attention and which deserves to be mentioned at
this stage is the subject of quasi-contract, as it is commonly
known.

This subject is dealt with in Chapter V of our Act
under the head—‘certain relations resembling those
ereated by contract’. We prefer to retain the present
title of the chapter because it is more descriptive and
comprehensive than some other expressions which are
also used to indicate relations of this nature, for instance,
‘Quasi-Contracts’, ‘Contracts implied in Law’ and ‘Cons-
tructive Contracts’, This chapter, however, makes an
inadequate provision for the obligations resembling those
created by contract. While referring to this subject, Lord
Wright observed that the Indian Contract Act dealt with
it in a very unsatisfactory manner*. With this observation
we are in agreement and propose to make exhaustive

1 Ninth Report of the Law Commission, para. 53.
3 Vide s. 37-A of.
3 Lord Wright, Legal Essays & Addresses, 9. 53.

Quisi-con-
tracts.


{2

provisions for such obligations and suggest that the
Chapter be made more comprehensive.

18. The best theoretical basis of Quasi-Contract is the
principle of ‘unjust enrichment’ or as Professor Winfield
would prefer to call it, ‘unjust benefit’, This is derived
from the old maxim of Roman Law: ‘Nemo debet locuple-
tari ex aliena jactura’. No man should grow rich out of
another person's loss. In Fibrosa v. Fairbairn’, Lord
Wright said:

“_.....any civilised system of law is bound to
provide remedies for cases of what has been
called unjust enrichment or unjust benefit,
that is, to prevent a man from retaining
the money of, or some benefit derived
from, another which it is against conscience
that he should keep. Such remedies in English
Law are generally different from- remedies in
contract or in tort, and are now recognised to
fall within a third category of the common law
which has been called quasi-contract or restitu-
tion.

Denning L. J. (as he then was), is another exponent of
the doctrine. In Brewer Street Investments Ltd. v.
Barclays Woolen Co. Ltd.*, he said:

“The proper way to formulate the claim is on a
request implied in law or, as I would prefer to”
put it, on a claim for restitution.”

Underlying the law of restitution is the conception
that no one should unjustly enrich himself at the expense
of his neighbour. “The conception of restitution is the

prevention of unjust enrichment”.

It may be noted, however, that as to the precise position
of this doctrine in England there does not seem to be so.

4 (1943) A.C. 32 (6). 1
2 (1954) 1 0.8. 428 (436).*
3 Sir Alfred Denning, Changing Law, p. 655.


13

far a general agreement. Lord Porter, for example,
observed:

“The exact status of the law of unjust enrichment
is not yet assured'.”

According to Professor Glanville Williams this branch of
the law in England is defective’. In the US.A., the law
of restitution has received more adequate treatment as is
apparent from the fact that the American Restatement of
the Law has devoted more than two hundred sections to
the discussion cf the principles relating to the subject. In
India, whenever a case arose which was not directly
covered by any specific provision of the Contract Act,
assistance was freely derived by our Judges from the
English and American decisions.

19. Situation which attract the application of the law
of restitution are so numerous that the categories of quasi-
contracts cannot be said to be yet closed. The difficulty
of an exhaustive statement of principles and of reducing
them to formulas which can be incorporated in a legisla-
tive enactment is obvious. To enumerate the various
principles which create obligations of this type, as has
been done in the American Restatement of the law, is
not the work of a legislator. To compress what is con-
tained therein is an impossible task. We recommend that
the doctrine of unjust enrichment should be accepted and
after making specific provision for well-known cases of
unjust enrichment a separate residuary section’ should be
enacted which will cover cases not specifically provided
for.

20. The other changes proposed by us will appear from Examing
our comments on the provisions of the existing Act, which provisions of
we now proceed to examine in their serial order. the existing

Act, indicat-
ing the
changes

Proposed,

1Reading v. Att. General, (1951) A.C. 507 (513).
*Law Reform and Law Making, p. 71.
*Vide s. 72B, App. I.


Preamble.

Sec. 1.

14
Part II
Proposals relating to sections.

21. As stated earlier', we have sought to make the
provisions of the Act as exhaustive as possible’. But we
are afraid that there may still remain cases not provided
for. Such cases will have to be decided on principles of
‘justice, equity and good conscience.’ But this expression
ought no longer be construed in the narrower sense cf
the rules of English law. It should be given the widest
significance. This, however, is a matter which concerns the
revision of the various State Acts relating to the civil
courts*, which now provide the statutory sanction of resort-
ing to these principles.

Be that as it may, since the revised Act cannot claim
to be an exhaustive code, we do not propose to make any
change in the wording of the Preamble.

22. In section 1, we suggest that the word “Indian” be
dropped from the title of the Act.

In conformity: with the recommendation in our previous
Report, we have omitted all the Illustrations from the
Act. हे 1 ड़

23, Both the expressions ‘usage of trade’ and ‘custom
of trade’ have been used in the Act. There being a vital
difference between the two expressions, it is necessary to
retain both. Usage is habitual practice which is not a
source of law, although it has some legal effects, Custom,
provided that it fuifils the necessary conditions, is a source
of law. The effect of usage, however, is to add a term to
the contract, which either expressly or impliedly was
entered into with that usage in view. The usage, thus,
can be excluded by a provision in the contract to the
contrary*.

24. Another difference between usage and custom is
that usage need not be immemorial*. Usage cannot change
a rule of law, but usage may so affect the meaning of a

*para. 3, ante.

2E.g., Our recommendations as to Bailments, Agency and Quasi-
Contracts.
38, 37 of the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act, 1887; S. 16
of the Madras Civil Court Act, 18733 $. 26 of Bombay Regulation IV of 1829.

Keeton : Elementary Principles of Jurisprudence, 81.

8Dalby v. Hirst, 21 R. R. 577 (580).



15

contract that a rule of law which would be applicable in
the absence of the usage becomes inapplicable. Long
continued usage may develop a rule of law in accordance
with the usage’. Neither usage nor particular custom can
be incompatible with the statute law’. We, therefore,
think that in the last clause of section 1, the comma was
rightly put by the legislature between the expressions
‘nor any incident of any contract’ and ‘not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act’. The latter expression
also governs ‘nor any usage or custom of trade’ also. The
view of the Privy Council in Irrawaddy Flotilla Co. v.
Bugwandas* does not appear to us to be correct. The
section which was read by the Privy Council did not
contain the comma between the aforesaid two expressions.
Furher, Counsel conceded in argument that the words ‘not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act’ were not
connected with the clause ‘nor any usage or custom of
trade’, Usage or custom, whether particular or general.
must yield, wherever in conflict with statute, unless
exoressly saved thereby. “It is a self-evident contradic-
tion to my mind to say that the general law does not
allow the deduction and that there is a universally estab-
lished usage to allow it. A universal usage which is not
according to law cannot be set-up to control the law'”. We
are of the view that usage and custom are operative only
if not inconsistent with provisions of the Act and this
should be made clear by a suitable amendment of
section 1.

25. Our views relating to consideration have already sec.
been explained. The Director of Legal Studies, Law ©
College, Madras, has suggested that it should be exoressly
provited that consideration must be real and of some
value in the eye of law. We think that this quality of
consideration is implicit in the term itself and there being
no doubt on this question, further clarification does not
seem to be necessary.

26. The Director of Legal Studies has also made the Cl. (8).
suggestion that it should be provided in section 2(g) that
agreements of imperfect obligations are not void, but only

2Restatement of the Law on Contract, S. 249 (a), p. 355.
*Keeton : op. cit., p. 81.

518 Cal. 620 (627).

‘Earl C. J. in Meyer v. Dresser, 143 E. R. 1280 (1286).


See. 3.

Section 4.

Sec.

Sec. 6.

16

unenforceable. He has mentioned an unstamped agree-
ment as an instance of such a case. Such an instrument,
which is a record of an agreement, is neither receivable
in evidence nor can be acted upon (Sec. 35, Stamp Act).
Since the decision of the Privy Council in Mahanth Singh
v. U Ba Yi’, the law 15 well established that the expression
“unenforceable by law” does not mean unenforceable by
reason of some procedural regulation, eg., the law of
limitation, but unenforceable by reason of  substaative
law. In view of this, it is unnecessary to introduce the
suggested change.

27. The Bihar Lawyers’ Association has suggested that
‘ond’ should be substituted for ‘or’ before ‘which has the
effect of communicating it’. We have also given due
consideration to the comment of Pollock and Mulla? on
the matter. The learned commentators observed that to
get the sense that an act intended to communicate a
proposal etc., but failing to do so, is not a communication
at all, we should have to read ‘and’ for ‘or’ in the last
clause, We, however, feel that no change need be recom-
mended inasmuch as the existing language has not so
far caused any difficulty in the courts.

28. The Director of Legal Studies, Madras, has express2d_
the opinion that section 4 needs clarification and has
suggested that for the case where a letter of acceptance
is posted and thereafter the acceptor revokes it by a
telegram or another letter and both reach the proposer,
it would be better to lay down that there is a presumption
that the revocation is valid. In our view, this suggestion
does not pay adequate regard to the language of section 5
according to which the acceptance may be revoked at eny
time before or at the moment when the letter comm 1ai-
cating it reaches the party concerned but not afterwards.
We, therefore. find ourselves unable to accept the above
suggestion.

29. No change is necessary in section 5.

30. A suggestion has been made by the Director of
Tegal Studies, Madras, that it should be provided that
the knowledge of the offeror’s intention to revoke, from

2A. I. R. 1939 P. C. 110 (113).
*Pollock & Mulla :” op, cit., 35.


17

whatever source it reaches, is good notice of revocation.
This question was posed and answered by Anson thus:

“Suppose a merchant to receive an offer of a
consignment of goods from a distant corres-
pondent, with liberty to reserve his answer for
some days. Mean time an unauthorized person
tells him that the offeror has sold or promised
the goods to another. What is he to do? His
informant may be right, and then, if he accepts,
his acceptance would be worthless. Or his
informant may be a gossip or mischief-maker,
and if on such authority he refrains from
accepting he may lose a good bargain'”.

We are not prepared to accept the suggestion as we feel
that this innovation in Indian Law may lead not only to
inconvenience but may also open the door to perjury.

31. The Director of Legal Studies, Madras has invited
us to examine section 7(2). In his view, there is no justifi-
cation in the case contemplated by the latter part of the
sub-section for laying down that the proposer must again
write back to the acceptor. We have given due considera-
tion to this matter and we see no good reason to recom-
mend any alteration of the law on this point.

32. It is not clear whether the expression “performance
of the conditions of a proposal” means a complete perform-
ance, or, even partial performance is sufficient. If the
former view is correct the law may work serious injustice
in some cases. A case of such injustice, generally
cited, is that of a person to whom an offer has been
made of payment of a certain sum in consideration of his
completing a piece of work. He nearly completes the
work and then the offer is revoked. The English Law Revi-
sion Committee? has recommended the introduction of the
following rule: “A promise made in consideration of the
promisee performing an act shall constitute a contract as
soon as the promisee has entered upon the performance
of the act, unless the promise includes expressly or by
necessary implication a term that it can be revoked before

TAnson : Principles of the English Law of Contract (19th edn.), 48.
*Sixth Interim Report, p. 31.

Sec. 7.

Sec. 8,


Sec, 9.

Sec, 10,

Sec. 11.

18

the act has been completed.” In order to prevent such
cases of injustice and to clear up the ambiguity in the
language of the section, we suggest that the aforesaid
recommendation be adopted and introduced in section 8.

33. Both proposal and acceptance may take place with-
out express words. Hence the rule that a promise may be
express or implied. The section assumes the existence of
the rule, but does not lay it down. As it stands at present,
it is merely a defining section. We suggest that it should
categorically state the rule.

34. No change is necessary in section 10.

35. There is conflict of authority upon the question as
to how far in the case of a minor’s agreement procured by
him by fraudulent concealment of his age, the Court will
relieve the other party to the agreement from the effects
of the fraud. One view is represented by the Full Bench
case in Khan Gul v. Lakha Singh?. In that case two
questions were referred to for decision:

(i) Whether a minor who, by falsely representing
himself to be a major, has induced a person to
enter into a contract, is estopped from pleading
his minority to avoid the contract?

(ii) Whether a party who, when a minor has entered
into a contract by means of a false representa-
tion as to his age, whether he be defendant or
plaintiff, in a subsequent litigation, refuse to
perform the contract and at the same time retain
the benefit he may have derived therefrom?

Shadi Lal, C. J., delivering the majority judgment held
that— “Tee

(i) Where an infant has induced a person to contract
with him by means of a false misrepresentation
that he was of full age, he is not estopped from
pleading his infancy in voidance of the contract
and that section 115 of the Evidence Act should
be read subject to section 11 of the Contract
Act;

1Sixth Interim Report, para, 50, Recommendation no. 7.
4A. 1. R. 1928 Lah, 609.



coe

19

(ii) a false representation by an infant that he was
of full age, gives rise to an equitable liability.
The Court while relieving him from the conse-
quences of the contract, may in the exercise of
its equitable jurisdiction, restore the parties to
the position which they occupied before the date
of the contract; and

(iii) the doctrine of restitution which finds expres-
sion in section 41 of the Specific Relief Act is not
confined to the cases covered by that section and
rests upon the principle that an infant cannot be
allowed to take advantage of his own fraud.
This doctrine is applicable whether the minor is
the plaintiff or the defendant.

In arriving at the above conclusions, the learned Chief
Justice emphasised that the Court in granting the above
relief does so, not because there is a contract which should
be enforced but because the transaction being void, does not
exist and the parties should revert to the condition in which
they were before the transaction. This is not the perform-
ance of the contract but the negation of it.

36. The opposite view is represented by the case of
Ajudhia Prasad v. Chandanlal' in which Sulaiman, C. J.,
delivering the judgment of the Full Bench, while holding
that the minor is not estopped from pleading that the
contract is void on the ground of his minority, held that—

(i) Where a contract had been induced by a false
representation made by an infant as to his age,
he is liable neither on the contract nor in tort;

(ii) Where a contract of transfer of property is void
and such property can be traced, the property
belongs to the promisee and can be followed;
but where the property is not traceable, the
grant of compensation would be tantamount to
enforcing a void contract under the cloak of an
equitable doctrine.

In both the above cases reference was made to the case
of Mohori Bibi v. Dharmodas Ghose’, where the Judicial
Committee, in a suit by a minor through his next friend

2A.LR. 1937 All. 610..
230 Cal. 539.



Sec. 12.

20

for a declaration that a mortgage deed executed by him was
void and for its cancellation, had arrived at the following
conclusions:—

(i) The question whether a contract is void or void-
able presupposes the existence of a contract and
carfnot arise in the case of an infant;

(ii) sections 64 and 65 start from the basis of there

being an agreement between competent parties;
and

(iii) section 41 of the Specific Relief Act applies to
the case of instruments executed by minors.

37. Pollock and Mulla' have expressed the view that
that judgment of Shadi Lal, C. J., in the Lahore case is cor-
rect and we share this view. Indeed, we have already
expressed our preference in favour of the judgment of
Shadi Lal C. J., in our report on the Specific Relief Act’.
We agree with the proposition that in ordering compensa-
tion, the Court is not giving effect to a contract but is
doing its best to put the parties, so far as possible, in the
position which they occupied before the void transaction
took place and from which one of them was induced to
depart by reason of the minor’s fraud. This view appears
to be more in consonance with the principles of equity and
justice. It appears to us incongruous that while sections
38 and 41 of the Specific Relief Act apply to cases of minors,
the principles underlying those sections should not be
applicable to cases under the Contract Act. We feel that
the Judicial Committee had not correctly interpreted sec-
tion 65 and we are of the opinion that an agreement is
‘void’ or ‘is discovered to be void’ even though the invali-
dity arises by reason of the incompetency of a party to a
contract. We recommend that an Explanation be added to
section 65 to indicate that that section should be applicable
where a minor enters into an agreement on the false repre-
sentation that he is a major.

38. The case of a person who is so drunk that he cannot
understand the terms of a contract and form a rational
judgment as to its effect on his interest would be covered
by the definition contained in this section, and so will be
the case of a sane man who suffers from the above defects,

3Pollock & Mulla, op. cit. 77.
*Report on Specific Relief Act, para. 90.


21

on account of delirium and fever. We think that the sec-
tion is clear and we do not propose any change therein.

39. No change is considered necessary in sections 13-14.

40. The proper function of the Indian Penal Code is to
create offences and not merely to forbid. A penal code
forbids only what it declares punishable. There are laws
other than the Indian Penal Code performing the same
function. We suggest that the words “Any act forbidden
by the Indian Penal Code” should be deleted and a wider
expression be substituted therefor so that penal laws other
than the Indian Penal Code may also be included.

The Explanation should also be amended to the same
effect.

41. There are some cases in which on principles of
equity, relief has been given against a hard and unconscion-
able bargain, even though there was no question of undue
influence involved’. We favour the view taken in Kesa-
vulu v. Arithulai Ammal* that unless undue influence is
proved, no relief can be given on the ground of unconscion-
ableness of a contract.

This section needs no change.

42. No change appears to be necessary in section 17.

43. Pollock and Mulla* have offered strong criticism of
the language of this section and have described it as one
of the least satisfactory in point of form. They have
observed that in sub-section (1) the use of the word ‘war-
ranted’ in a sense (whatever that sense may precisely be)
unknown to the law and in a subject-matter where the
words ‘warranted’ and ‘condition’ have already caused quite
enough trouble, is elementary fault. The learned authors
think that sub-section (2) is obscure and apparently useless
and that sub-section (3) seems to involve confusion
between contracts voidable because consent was obtained
by misrepresentation and transactions which could have
no legal effect, except possibly by way of estoppel because
there was no real consent at all. For the reasons set out
hereunder we do not think that the language of the section
should be changed.

“AE... Kirparam v. Sami-ud-din, 25 All. 284.
236 Mad. 533.
*Pollock & Mulla, op. cit., 127.

Sec, 17-14.

Sec, 15.

Sec. 16.

Sec. 17.

Sec. 18.


Sec. 19.

22

As an illustration of the use of the word ‘warranted’,
Pollock and Mulla' cited the decision of Maclean, C. J., in
Mohan Lall v. Sri Gungaji Cotton Mills Co.*. They illus-
trated the meaning of the expression ‘positive assertion’ by
reference to a Punjab case*. They have also quoted cases
arising under sub-sections (2) and (3). It is clear that no
difficulty has arisen in the application of the section so far.
The grammatical meaning of the word ‘warranted’, viz.,
‘justified’, seems to be fairly clear and we do not think
that in the context this word is likely to be interpreted in
the sense of ‘guaranteed’. Reference to English authorities
on the subject of innocent misrepresentation entitling the
party whose consent was obtained by such misrepresenta-
tion is not helpful. Anson‘ has remarked that the reports
contained few instances of contract held to be voidable for
innocent misrepresentation.

We do not, accordingly, recommend any change in this
section.

44. The second paragraph of the section merely states
what is involved in the conception of a contract being
voidable. Pollock and Mulla* opine that the thought
underlying this paragraph is not really clear and point out
eases in which restitution is not literally possible, for
example, if the owner of an estate, subject to a lease for an
unexpired term, contracts to sell it to a purchaser who
requires immediate possession and conceals the existence
of the lease, the purchaser cannot be put in the same posi-
tion as if the representation that there was no lease, had
been true, or where A sells a house to B and by some
blunder of A’s agent, the annual value is represented as
being Rs. 2,000 when it is in truth only Rs. 1,000. Accord-
ing to the letter of the present paragraph, so say the learn-
ed authors, we may insist on completing the contract and
on having the difference between the actual and the stated
value paid to him by A and A’s successor-in-title for all
time. Obviously, such could not be the intention of the
Legislature. In order to clarify the intention, we suggest
that a qualification be added so that the power of restitu-
tion be limited to the extent considered reasonable by the
Court. In the consideration of this question the Court, of

2 129-130.

Pollok & Malla oP.
24C. 3! 388-3!
sGurrie 2. Rennich, 1836 P. R. No. 41.
4Anson: op.cit., 1!

8Pollock & Mulia: op.cit., 135-136.



23

course, will examine, inter alia, whether it is in the power
of the party against whom the contract is voidable to per-
form it fully.

It should also be provided that if the fraud or misrepre-
sentation is proved but the Court refuses to enforce the
contract at the option of the party aggrieved for some
reason, it would be open to the Court to award compensa-
tion for the injury caused by the fraud or misrepresenta-
tion.

45. The Exception does not apply to active fraud as dis-
tinguished from fraudulent silence and innocent misrepre-
sentation. The ‘comma’ after the word ‘silence’ in the
Exception creates the impression that the word ‘fraudulent’
qualifies both ‘misrepresentation’ and ‘silence’. The correct
interpretation, however, is that the word ‘fraudulent’ quali-
fies only ‘silence’. This is also the judicial opinion', There-
fore, the ‘comma’ after the word ‘silence’ may be deleted.

46. No change is necessary in sections 19A to 22. Sec, 19A-22.

47. Pollock and Mulla* point out that the correct Sec. 23.
expression is the ‘consideration for a promise’ and not ‘the
consideration of an agreement’. Strictly speaking this cri-
ticism is correct. Even the existing language, however,
can possibly be justified on the ground that an agreement
consists of a promise or promises. Be that as it may, we do
not think it necessary to alter the language of the section
in this respect, particularly when we are not aware of any
case in which the existing language has created any diffi-
culty.

48. In considering the validity of a contract in relation
to marriage, the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and the modern
trends in society have to be borne in mind. Under that
Act the bridegroom must complete the age of eighteen and
the bride fifteen years to qualify for marriage. Where
the bride has not completed the age of eighteen, the con-
sent of her guardian in marriage, if any, has to be obtained
for the marriage. Thus, the cases where consent of guard-
ian in marriage of a bride would now be necessary, are
bound to be comparatively few. No question can arise of
any person acting as guardian of a bridegroom among
Hindus. Before the Hindu Marriage Act, the question

1See Niaz Ahmad v. Parshotam Chandra, 53 All. 314,
बुर k& Mulla: op, cit, 154. 2 $3 A 374


24

arose a number of times whether an agreement to pay
money to a parent or guardian of a bride or bridegroom
in consideration of their consent to the betrothal is immo-
ral or opposed to public policy. The decisions have varied
in result. One view' was that every agreement to pay
money to the father or guardian of a girl in consideration
of his consent to her marriage is not necessarily unlawful
and each case should be judged by its own circumstances-
According to this view, such an agreement would be
opposed to public policy only if the parents or the guard-
jans are not seeking the welfare of the girl but are giving
her an ineligible husband. According to the other view,
an agreement to pay money to the parent or guardian of
the minor in consideration of his consent to give the
minor in marriage is per se opposed to public policy*. The
consequence of this view is that in case of breach of agree-
ment to give the daughter in marriage, a suit for damages
does not lie and the money payable to the bridegroom’s
father cannot be recovered. Nor can the amount be reco-
vered by the parent or guardian after the marriage is
performed. But. where the agreed sum has been paid in
advance, the same is recoverable if the marriage is not
performed. We are of the view that such an agreement
should be treated as immoral and opposed to public policy,
and we suggest that in order to resolve this conflict in
judicial decisions, a section should be added declaring that
a marriage brocage agreement, i.e., an agreement to pro-
cure marriage for reward and an agreement for payment
of money in consideration of a parent or guardian’s con-
sent to the marriage of the child. whether major or minor
is unlawful and void.

49. There is also a conflict of authority on the question
whether past co-habitation is lawful consideration. One
view’ is that an agreement to pay the allowance by rea-
son of past co-habitation is really an agreement to com-
pensate the woman for past services voluntarily rendered
to him for which no consideration is necessary. Another
view' is that past co-habitation is not a good consideration
for the promise to pay for it, end that a consideration

1Baldeo Sahai v. Fumna Kunwar, 23 All.
*Kalavgunta Venkata Kristnayva v. Kalavgunta 32 Mad. 185 (F. 8.)
3Dhiraj Kaur v. Bikramajit Singh, 2 All. 787.
“Hussain Ali v. Dinbai. A. 1, R. 1942, Bom, 135.


25

which is immoral at a time, and, therefore, would not
support an immediate promise to pay, does not become
innocent by being past. The Patna High Court' took the
view that a contract to enter into the relation of a protec-
tor and mistress was immoral and unenforceable in, law;
but the case of a contract to compensate for what she had
lost on account of past association with the promisor was
not immoral. The Allahabad High Court? has taken the
view that adultery, in India, being an offence against the
criminal law, co-habitation, past or future, if adulterqus,
is not merely an immoral but an unlawful consideration.
In England, such an agreement is void on the ground that
past co-habitation is no consideration. In the American
Restatement, the law is thus stated:

“A bargain, in whole or in part, for or in considera-
tion of illicit sexual intercourse-or a prdrhise
thereof, is illegal but subject to this exception
such intercourse between parties to a bargain
previously or subsequently’ formed, does’ not
invalidate 107,

We are, however, of the opinion that in view ‘of the
fact that such cases rarely come ‘to the Courts, no specific
legislation on the subject is necessary.

50. The rule laid down in this section presupposes that
the agreement is indivisible. ~ है

In order to make the provision comprehensive, it
should also deal with the case of distinct promises based
en distinct considerations. It is settled in England‘ as
well as in India’ that where there.are such promises and
some of the promises or considerations are unlawful
and they..can. be separated from the lawful, promises or
considerations (as the case may he), the agreement shall
be woid only to the extent of the promises which are un-
lawful or.are based on unlawful consideration.

51. In paragraphs 10-11, ante, we have explained the
changes proposed by us in section 25.

4L. B. Godfrey v. Mt, Parbati, A. 1. R. 1938 Pat. 502.

2Alice Mary Hill v. William Clarke. 27. All. 266. CE. Mt, Mahtab-

unnissa v. Ria Fagat Ali, A. 1. R. 1925 All. 474) 1. '
‘American Restatement on Contract, Val. 25:8 589, 7. 109.

‘Chitty: Contracts, (21st edn.) Vol, 1, 60, . ; !

sDharamchand v-Jhamsa, A. 1... 3991 Nagy 6.

faa rae

Sc, 24.

Sec, 25.


Sec. 26.

Sec. 27,

26

52. The English Law’ on the subject may be stated
thus: A contract which is in general restraint of marriage,
ie., the object or effect of which is to restrain or prevent
a party from marrying any person or which is deterrent
to marriage in so far as it makes any person uncertain
whether he may marry or not, is void. A contract not to
marry any person other than the party to it was held to
be void on the ground that if that party had chosen not
to marry him he was restrained from marrying at all. A
contract that the plaintiff would not marry within six
years was held to be void, there being no circumstance
showing that the restraint was prudent or proper. Prohi-
bition against marrying from among domestic servants
has been held to be valid as the person restrained was
free to marry any other woman. Thus, the prohibition
against marrying a particular person, or persons identi-
fied by names or as belonging to a specified class is good.
Prohibition against second marriage is sometimes held to
be valid?. Whether an agreement in partial restraint of
marriage is void would depend on the circumstances of
each case. There may be circumstances, e.g., ill-health of
one of the spouses, which may justify a contract that a
person shall not marry within a certain number of years.

In Rao Rani v. Bulab Rani’, the Allahabad High Court
has expressed doubt on the question whether partial or
indirect restraint of marriage was within the scope of
section 26. This doubt must be resolved and it should be
provided that an agreement in partial restraint is void
only if the Court regards it as unreasonable in the cir-
cumstances of the case.

55. Pollock and Mulla‘ have remarked that this section
follows the New York Draft Code and have described that
Code as the evil genius of the Contract Act. The Allaha-
bad High Court also observed that “it is unfortunate that
section 27 has been moulded upon the New York Civil
Code and seriously trenches upon the liberty of the indivi-
dual in contractual matters affecting trade’. The present
section does not reproduce the English Common Law and

Laws of England (ard edn.), Vol. 8, 135.
५ Jackson, (1875) 1 Ch. D."399.

A.LR. 1042 All. 351 (353).

Pollock & Mulla : op. cit., p. 224.

SBholanath v. Lachmi Das, 53 All. 316 (322).



27

invalidates many agreements which are allowed by that
law. The section was enacted at a time when trade was
yet undeveloped and the object underlying the section
was to protect the trade from restraints. As Kindersley,
J. observed in Oakes & Co. v. Jackson’. “Trade in India is
in its infancy and the legislature may have wished to
make the smallest number of exceptions to the rule
against contracts whereby trade may be restrained’.”

But today, trade in India does not lag far behind that
in England or the United States and there is no reason
why a more liberal attitude should not be adopted by
acknowledging such restraints as are reasonable not only
as between the parties to the agreement but also as
regards the general public. We recommend that section
27 be suitably amended to permit such reasonable res-
traint.

56. The Government of Bihar has suggested that it
should be enacted that an agreement in restraint of trade
when entered into with the State or the Central Govern-
ment, should not be void. Consistently with the object
underlying the section, we cannot make a recommenda-
tion in favour of such an exception.

57. Decided cases reveal? a divergence of opinion in
relation to certain classes of insurance policies with refer-
ence to the applicability of this section. On examination,
it would appear that these cases do not really turn on the
interpretation of the section but hinge on the construction
of the insurance policies in question. The principle itself
is well recognized that an agreement providing for the
relinquishment of rights and remedies is valid but an
agreement for relinquishment of remedies only falls with-
in the mischief of section 28. Thus, in our opinion, no
change is called for by reason of the aforesaid conflict of
judicial authority.

58. The Government of Bihar has suggested that Ex-
ception 1 be widened by substituting the words ‘the parties
will be bound by the award’ in place of ‘only the amount
awarded in such arbitration shall be recoverable’. We

11 Mad. 134 (145).

°Hirabhai Naroiama Das v. The Manufacturer’s Life Insurance Co.,
16 I. C. 1001, Cf. Baroda Spinning and Weaving Co., Ltd. v. Satyanarayanay
38 Bom. 344 (348-349).

Sec, 28


Sec. 29,

Sec, 30.

28

feel that there is good reason in support of this suggestion
and we recommend accordingly.

»'59..No change is necessary in section. 29.

60. The question has frequently arisen in Courts as
regards the validity of the agreements collateral to wager-
ing contracts. It has been uniformly decided by all the
High Courts, other than the Bombay High Court, that
though an agreement by way of wager is void, a contract
collateral to it, or in respect of a wagering agreement is
not void and suits brought by brokers or agents against
their principals to recover brokerage or commission in
respect of transactions entered into by such brokers or
agents or for indemnity for loss incurred by them in such
transactions on behalf of their principal have been de-
creed, even though contracts in respect of which the claims
were made were contracts by way of wager. Similarly,
it has been held that an agent who has received money on
account of a wagering contract is bound to pay the same
to his principal. In the State of Bombay, however, ‘the
law is different. There contracts collateral to or in respect
of wagering transactions are governed by the Act for
Avoiding Wagers (Amendment) Act, 1865'. That Act was
passed to supply the defects discovered judicially in the
Act for Avoiding Wagers Act, 1848°. Act XXI of 1848
which excluded suits on wagering transactions has been
repealed, but Bombay Act III of 1865 is still in force... Sec-

,tions.1 and 2 of that Act run as follows:

“1, All contracts, whether by speaking, writing or
otherwise knowingly made to further or assist
the entering into, effecting or carrying’ out
agreements by way of gaming or wagerifig, ditd
all contracts by way of security or guarantee
for the performance of such agreements ot’ con-
tracts, shall be null and void; 4nd ho suit’ shall
be allowed in any Court of Justice for recover-
ing any sum of money paid or payable in res-
pect of any such contract or contracts, or any
such agreement or agreements as aforesaid.

3. No suit shall be allowed in any Court of Justice
for recovering any commission, brokerage, fee

“Bombay Act III of 1865,
*Act EXT of 1848.



29

00 reward in respect of the knowingly éffecting
or carrying out, or of the knowingly aiding in
effecting or in carrying out, or otherwise claim-
ed or claimable: in respect of, any such agree-
ments by way of gaming or wagering or any
such contract as aforesaid, whether the plaintiff
in such suit be or be not a party to such’ last-
mentioned agreement or contract, or for recover-
ing any sum of money knowingly paid or pay-
able on account of any persons by way of com-
mission, brokerage, fee, or reward in respect of
any such agreement by way of, gaming or wager-
ing or contract as aforesaid”.

The result is that a contract collateral to or in respect
of a wagering agreement is void in the Bombay State.

61. In England, the Gaming Act, 1892' was passed in
order to render agreements collateral to wagering con-
traets void. Before this Act was passed such agreements
Were not void. This Act was passed in consequence of
the decision in Read v. Anderson?. In that case a betting
agent had made bets on behalf of his principal. After the
bets were made and lost, thé principal revoked the autho-
rity ‘to pay which had been conferred upon the betting
agent. The betting agent, however, paid the bets and sued
the defendants to recover the amounts’ so paid. It was
held that the agent was entitled to recover. Section 1 of
the aforesaid Gaming Act of 1892 runs thus:

“I. Any promise, express or implied, to pay any per-
son any sum of money paid by him under or in
respect of any contract or agreement rendered
null and void by the Act of the eight and ninth
Victoria, Chapter lohe hundred and hine, or ‘to
pay any ‘sum of money by ‘way of commission,
‘fee, ‘reward, or otherwise in respect of any such
contract, or of any services in relation thereto
or in connection therewith, shall be null and
void, and no action shall be brought or main-
tained to recover any sum of money”.

155 & 56 Vict, ०9.
213 Q.B.D. 779.


Secs. 31-36.

Sec. 37.

Sec. 38.

30

62. Pollock and Mulla’ have expressed the hope that
in the revision of the Contract Act, the provision of the
Bombay Act will be incorporated in section 30. We share
the view that in the interest of uniformity of law on this
subject, the salutary provisions of the Bombay Act should
be incorporated in section 30 and we recommend accord-
ingly.

63. No change is recommended in sections 31 to 36.

64. The case of assignment of contracts properly be-
longs to the law of transfer and the Chapter on Action-
able claims in the Transfer of Property Act is the suitable
place for dealing with that subject. No provision need
be made on this point in the Contract Act.

65. There has been a divergence of opinion as to the
true meaning of the last paragraph of this section, namely,
‘An offer to one or several joint promisees, has the same
legal consequences as an offer to all of them’. This diver-
gence has arisen in connection with the question whether
payment by a debtor to one of a number of joint creditors,
operates as a discharge of the debt. One view, whose chief
exponent was White C.J., of the Madras High Court, is
that all the joint promisees get the benefit of the legal con-
sequences, whatever those consequences may be, of an
offer, or a tender, to one of them. But the legislature in
enacting this part of section 38 was not contemplating
the legal consequences of an offer which has been accept-
ed but the legal consequences of an offer which has been
refused. Consequently, it does not follow from the section
that the acceptance of payment by one of several pro-
misees operates as a discharge of the claims of the others’.
This opinion was adopted by a Full Bench in the Punjab
High Court’, and by the High Courts of Calcutta‘, Allaha-
bad*, Nagpur‘, Patna’ and Mysore*. The opposite view 15
represented by the majority opinion in Annapurnamma v.

1Pollock & Mulla: op. cit., 157-258. है है

2In Ramasami v. Muniyandi, (1910) 20 M. L. 1. 709. and in the dis
senting opinion of the learned C.J. in Annapurnamma v. Akkayya, 36 Mad. 544.

1Mathra Dasv. Nizam Din, 41 1. C. 921+

‘Abdul Hakim v. Adwaita Chandra, 22 Cal. W.N. t021.

Shyam Lal v. Jagannath, A. I. R.!1937 All. 527.

*Madheo Singh v. Balmukund, A. 1. R. 1948 Nag. 279.

2Syed Abbas |v. Misrilal, A.LR. 1021 Pat. 27.

eVenkata Seity v. Rangaseity, A.LR. 1952 Mys. 68.



31

Akkayya', in which Sankaran Nair, J. said that it was dif-
ficult to impute an intention to the legislature that the
Promisor was entitled to make the offer, though the pro-
misee was not entitled to accept it. According to this
view, if the promisor was entitled to offer payment to one
of the promisees which the latter was entitled to accept,
the promisor cannot be held liable to pay over again to
the other promisees, and thus one of several payees can
give a valid discharge of the entire debt without the con-
currence of other payees.

Pollock and Mulla’ have expressed agreement with the
above mentioned judgment of White, C. J. That is also,
as shown above, the preponderating opinion in the High
Courts. The English Law is thus stated in Halsbury’s
Laws of England—

“In the case of a debt owing to two or more persons
jointly, a tender made to one of-the joint credi-
tors on behalf of all, operates as a tender to
the all”*.

In our opinion, the apparent ambiguity in the last
paragraph of section 38 should be clarified by adding a
qualification to the word “offer” and stating—

“An offer to one of several joint promisees, which
has not been accepted, has the same legal con-
sequences as an offer to all of them”.

We think that section 38 is not concerned with the
question whether an offer when accepted by one of ‘the
promisees operates as a discharge binding on all the pro-
misees. In order to achieve that result, all the promisees
must concur in the acceptance of the offer.

66. In our report on the Limitation Act* we stated that
the correct view was that one of several creditors could not
give a valid discharge so as to bind the others and had
suggested that the Contract Act might be suitably amend-
ed accordingly. In consonance with that recommendation
we suggest that a separate section’ be added after section
38.

135 Mad. 544.
207. cit. 292.
*Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 8,172.

“Third Report of the Law Commission, para. 27.
SVide s. 38A, App. I.


Secs. 39-40.

Sec. 41.

Sec, 42.

Sec. 43.

.jointokligation. The right was, in Englan

32
67. No change is recommended in sections 39-40. -.' \'

68. It has been suggested that the Indian Law. should
adopt the principle that the discharge of a debt by a third
person is effectual only if authorised or ratified by the
debtor. Pollock and Mulla’ say that it is not clear
that the better opinion is not the other way. We do not
recommend any change by reason of the conflict of views
on this point. The section, as it stands, has not worked
any injustice and we propose to leave it unaltered:

69. No change is necessary in section 42. |

70. The Contract Act treats all contracts as joint and
several. The necessary consequence is that it is not open
to one promisor who is sued to compel the promisee to
sue others. There has, however, been considerable diver-
gence of opinion on the effect’ of a judgment obtained by
the prorisee against one out of a number of promisors.
In the words of the Federal Court?, unlike Eriglish Law,
the Indian Law makes a general liability joint and several,
in the absence of an agreement to the contrary. It
therefore, open to the promisee to sue any one or some
of the joint promisors and it is no defence to such a suit
that all the promisors should have been made parties. We
think that Strachey, C.J., correctly stated the law in
Muhammad Askari v. Radhe Ram* when he said: “The
doctrine now rests not so much on King v. Hoare‘ as on the
judgment of the Law Lords in Kendall v. Hamilton’. As
explained in these judgments the doctrine that there is
in the case of a joint contract a single cause of action which
can only be once sued on ‘is essentially based on the
right of joint debtors in England to have ‘all ‘their
contractors joined as defendants jn any suit to enforce the

before the Judicature Act. by means of a plea i
ment, and since the, Judicature Acts by an,. application
for joinder which is determined on the,same principles as
those on which, the plea in abatement would formerly
have been dealt with. In India that right of joint debtors

Pollock & Mulla : Op. cit, 30 _
*Fainarain v. Surajmull, (1949) 12 Fed. L. J. 216 (225). ''
522 All. 307. '

206. . ba न हे , .
5(1879) 4 A.C. 504. : '


33

has been expressly excluded by section 43 of the Contract
Act, and, therefore, the basis of the doctrine being absent,
the doctrine itself is inapplicable. Cessante ratione legis,
cessat ipsa lex”'. The result is that a decree obtained
against some of several joint promisors remaining un-
satisfied ought not to be held as a bar to a subsequent
action against the other promisors. We recommend that
this result may be incorporated in the Act by inserting a
new section’.

In this connection, we suggest that while revising the
Code of Civil Procedure it should be considered if
it is necessary to introduce a specific provision making it
clear whether a joint promisor can, when sued for contribu-
tion by his co-promisor, resist the suit on the ground that
in the creditor's suit (to which the joint primisor was not
a party) the co-promisor (suing for contribution) did not
negligently or otherwise, set up defences which could have
been legitimately raised to defeat the claim.

71. No change is considered necessary in sections 45 Secs. 45-48.
to 48.

72. In the case of a contract of loan where the borrower Sec. 49-
fails to apply to the creditor to appoint a reasonable place
for repayment he must make the repayment at the place
of the creditor. The Judges in India have, on a number
of occasions, applied the principles of the English Com-
mon Law that the debtor must seek out the creditor. 1t
appears to us that the section applies to a contract of loan
also and the English Common Law doctrine applies only
where the debtor failed to apply to the creditor to appoint
a reasonable place for repayment. This is in consonance
with the decision of the Bombay High Court in Bharumal
v. Sakhawatmal’. An Explanation may be added to sec-
tion 49 incorporating the rule of the English Common
Law.

73. No change is recommeded in sections 50—55. Secs. 50-55.

74. This section marks a departure from the English Sec. 56.
Common Law to a considerable extent and it is neither

122 All. 307 (311, 312).
*Vice s. 44A, App. 1.
4A.LR. 1956 Bom. 111.


Secs. 57-58.

Secs. 57 61.

Sec. 62.

34

profitable nor necessary to examine which of the various
theories underlying the doctrine of Frustration in English
Law are applicable to cases arising under this section.
The Supreme Court of India in the case of Satyabrata v.
Mugneeram' has repelled the suggestion that section 56 is
not exhaustive. The word ‘impossible’ is to be construed
in its practical rather than in its literal sense. It is worthy
of note that the impossibility referred to in the section
was never understood to include what is known as com-
mercial impossibility. We are not aware of any occasion
when in practice the application of the section, as it stands,
has involved any inconvenience or difficulty of interpre-
tation and, therefore, we are in favour of leaving the
section intact

75. It has been suggested that sections 57 and 58 are
superfluous and their subject matter is already covered
by 5.24. Sections 57 and 58 deal with reciprocal and al-
ternative promises. We do not favour deletion of these
two sections.

76. No change is necessary in sections 57 to 61.

77. A controversy has arisen on the question whether
section 62 will apply to a case where the fresh agreement
contemplated by the section is entered into after the
breach of the original contract. The Calcutta High Court
has taken the view that such an agreement can take place
only when the original contract is still capable of perfor-
mance and that the section is a mere legislative expression
in India of the English Common Law’. Later decisions* in
that Court have followed this view. In the Madras High
Court‘, which has taken the opposite view, the opinion of
Kumaraswami Sastri, J. has prevailed’. He pointed out
that the observations of the learned editors of Smith’s
Leading Cases* and the view of Lord Balckburn in Foakes
v. Beer’ show that the rules of English Law as to considera-
tion for variation are not founded on any sound principle.

JA.LR. 1954 S.C.

*Manohur Koyal, v. Thakurdas, 5 Cal. 319.

*New Standard Bank v. Prabodh Chandra, A.1I,R. 1942 Cal. 87.
*Ramiah v. Somasi, (1915) 29 M.L.J.

4N.M., Firm v. Theperumal Chetty, 45 Mad. 180.

Smith's Leading Cases (13th edn.), 338.

9


35

The Indian legislature did not adopt the principles laid
down in Foakes v. Beer, when it enacted section 62 of the
Contract Act. He also pointed out that it was very com-
mon in this country for mediators to interfere after a
breach of contract takes place and effect a compromise
between the parties. We prefer the Madras view and
accordingly recommend that it should be made clear that
the new agreement may take place either before or after
the breach of the original contract.

78. There is no express provision in the Contract Act
on the subject of unauthorised alteration of documents,
Sections 87, 88 and 89 of the Negotiable Instruments Act,
which have, however, adopted the English Common Law
to its full extent, have made ample provision for such
alterations. Naturally, the Indian Courts have followed
the English rule. That rule may be stated thus:

“If a material alteration is made in any instrument
containing words of contract without the con-
sent of the party contracting, this will dis-
charge him from all liability thereon, whether
such alterations were made by a party to the
contract or by a stranger”.

We recommend that this rule be incorporated in a
separate section.

79. What is a material alteration has been the subject
of judicial exposition. “The effect of material alteration
will be the same although the original words of that
instrument be still legible, or although it be not made in
respect of the breach of contract on which the plaintiff
is suing”’, According to decided cases in England, an al-
teration is material which affects either the substance of
a contract expressed in the document or the identification
of the document itself. Alterations are immaterial if
they merely express what is already implied in the docu-
ment or add particulars consistent with the document, as
it stands, though superfluous, or, are innocent attempts
to. correct clerical errors. It has also been established‘

Chitty, op. cit., Vol. I, 302.
Wide 3. 67, 8081...
Foe. Si कद Baking Corpn. v. Lo Lee Shi, (1928 A.C. 181.


Sec, 63.

Sec. 64.

Sec. 65.

36

that alteration by a stranger should not alter the liability
of a party to the contract, where no fraud, negligence or
assent of such party is involved.

These principles should be embodied in the new sec-
tion suggested by us.

80. The Government of Bihar suggest that a new sub-
section should be added to the following effect: “If there
be a breach of any contract, parties thereto may choose
to revive the terms of the original contract”. As we
have accepted the position that a novation can take place
even after the breach of the original contract, it does not
seem to be necessary to introduce the suggested sub-
section.

81. This section deals with cases of actual dispensing
with, or remission of, performance or extension of time.
These acts need not be supported by any consideration. The
section does not apply to agreements to dispense with or
remit performance or extend time. We have already made
a recommendation in respect of such agreements while
dealing with section 25.

82. No change is recommended in section 64.

83. Conflicting views have been taken as to the meaning
of the expression ‘discovered to be void’. One class of cases
in which this conflict has arisen is that of contracts with
munivipalities and with Government which do not comply
with the requirements of the law prescribing the form in
which they have to be executed. The question has been,
whether in such cases when contracts were partly or fully
executed a claim for restitution under section 65 lay.
Courts in India took conflicting views. One line of cases
followed the House of Lords decision in Young & Co. v.
The Mayor and Corporation of Royal Leamington Spat.
That case arose under the Public Health Act which requir-
ed the contract to be in writing and sealed. The contract
had been fully executed by the plaintiff. The corporation
had paid certain sums from time to time but refused to pay
other large sums which were the balance claimed by the
plaintiff. The House of Lords decided that the want of
seal prevented the plaintiffs from recovering the sum claim-
ed. The main ground was that the grant of relief to the

४ 883) 8 A.C. 517, |


37

plaintiff would have the effect of repealing the Act of Par-
liament and depriving the rate payers of that protection
which Parliament intended to secure for them. The hard-
ship of the decision was recognized by Lord Blackburn.
This case was followed in India and the case of Mohori
Bibi v. Dharmodas Ghose' was applied in which the Privy
Council had refused to apply section 65 to a minor’s agree-
ment.

In the other line of cases, section 65 and sometimes sec-
tion 70 was held to be applicable. The hardship in England
was removed by the repeal of the provisions of the Public
Health Act, 1875 and by the enactment of section 266 of
the Local Government Act, 1933*. Messrs. Pollock and
Mulla’ found it difficult to appreciate the application of sec-
tion 65 and section 70 where there was an express statutory
prohibition governing the corporation. They realised, how-
ever, that ‘the above result is not wholly satisfactory;
though it may be an accurate statement of the law and a
certain sense of incongruity remains’. The recent decisions
in India incline in favour of the applicability of section 65
to such cases. The view which has prevailed in the
Calcutta High Court is represented by the decision of
Sinha J. in Ram Nagina v. G. G. in Council' and by the
decision’ of a Bench of that court which upheld the view
taken by Sinha, J. Sinha, J’s decision was followed in Assam
in Dharmeshwar v. Union of India‘. In Madras there has
been a current of decisions in favour of this view’. The
Patna High Court has also followed the view of Sinha J*.

A contrary view, it may be noted, has been taken by
Mukherjee J. of the Calcutta High Court in the case of
Anantha Bandhu v. Dominion of India’.

“I cannot persuade myself to believe that an agree-
ment at its very inception in outright disregard
of express statute or constitutional provision

i पु Vol. 1, 625
*Pollock & Mulla :

4A, 1.R. 1952 Cal 06.

’Ranendranath ए. Dhuliyan Municipality, A.L.R. 1956 Cal. 203.

SA.LR. 1956 Assam 86.

7See the cases. mentioned in Madras Corporation v, Kothandatoni,
A. 1. R. 1955 Mad. 82. As regards the view of the Allahabad High Court
see the judgement of Aggarwala J. in Gonda Municipality v.. Baichchu, A. 1. R.
1951 All. 736 F. 8. (741).

‘Dominion of India v. Priti Kumar Ghosh, A. 1, R. 1958+
"ALR, 1955 Cal. 626 (629).



38

which renders the agreement unenforceable can
be said to be discovered to be void within the
meaning of 5.65, Contract Act. If that was the
intention all that S.65, Contract Act, need have
said is “whenever an agreement is void”, and
not “discovered to be void”.

In consonance with the preponderance of opinion we
recommend that it should be made clear that 5.65 applies
to cases where an agreement is void by reason of non-com-
pliance with statutory requirements.

84. Divergent views have been taken on the question
whether the expression “discovered to be void” covers an
agreement void for an unlawful consideration’. On a con-
sideration of the whole matter, we have reached the con-
clusion that section 65 does not apply to agreements which
are void under section 24 by reason of an unlawful consi-
deration or object. To such agreements the English rule
as embodied in the maxim in pari delicto potior est conditio
possidentis and its exceptions should apply. That principle
has received statutory recognition in section 84 of the
Indian ‘Trusts Act and we have adverted to the rule and
its exception later in this report.

85. The expression ‘discovered to be void’ came for
interpretation before the Judicial Committee a number of
fimes. In the case of Harnath Kuar v. Inder Bahadur
Singh’, the Committee observed: “An agreement, there-
fore, discovered to be void is‘one discovered to be not
enforceable by law, and, on the language of the section,
would include an agreement that was void in that sense
from its inception as distinct from a contract that becomes
void”. In the particular case before them, their Lordships
held that the discovery as to the void character - of the
agreement took place only after the misapprehension as to
the ‘private rights’ of the transferor was realised. Later
in the case of Anand Mohan v. Gour Mohan’, their Lord-
ships laid down that in the absence of special circumstances
to the contrary the “discovery” of the agreement must be
held to have been made at the time of the agreement itself.
This was reiterated in Hans Raj v. Dehra Dun M.T.Co.,*.

ICE. Fijibai v. Nagji, .11 Bom, 693 and Nathu.Khan v, Sewak Koeri,
15 C.W.N. 4०8 (409). : act
3,8 1. R. 1922 P. C. 403 (405). . . oo ५
3.4 1. २, 1923 P. (:. 189 (191).

4.8 1. 8, 1933 P, ८. 63 (66).


39

In Nisar Ahmad v. Mohan Manucha' the Judicial रे
Committee applied section 65 to the case of a mortgage
which failed by reason of the absence of permission of the
Collector under para. 11 of Schedule III of the Civil Proce-
dure Code. It was held that the case was one which fell
within the words “discovered to be void” occurring in
section 65. Again in 1943 on the same facts the Privy Coun-
cil? reiterated the applicability of Section 65 and pointed out
that in the case of a minor’s agreement there is a general
incapacity to contract, while para. 11 Schedule III of the
Civil Procedure Code imposes on a judgment-debtor only
incapacity to transfer property.

_. Though we are anxious to remove expressions which
give rise to a conflict of judicial opinion, we do not consider
it advisable to do away with the expression “discovered to
be void” inasmuch as in particular circumstances, it may
be relevant for the purposes of limitation‘.

86. While dealing with section 11 we have already recom-
mended‘ that a provision may be made in section 65 to
the effect that where an agreement is entered into by a
minor falsely representing that he is a major, the agree-
ment will be one within the purview of section 65. At the
same time we want to make it clear that section 65 should
not have any application to cases of agreements entered
into with persons incompetent to contract with full know-
ledge of their incompetency.

87. In our Report on the Specific Relief Act* while
referring to Privy Council case of Satgur Prasad v. Har
Narain* we have suggested by way of abundant caution
that the principle underlying section 65 of the Contract
Act should be expressly made applicable to voidable con-
tracts where a party relies on the voidability of the contract
and avoids it. This should be made clear by suitable
changes in the section.

88. No change appears to be necessary in sections 66-67. Secs. 66-67.

1A, I. R. 1940 P. (2, 204.
2Mohan Manucha v. Manjur Ahmad, A. 1.R. 1943 P.C. 29 (33).
3Harnath Kaur v. Inder Bahadur, A. 1. R. 1922 P. C. 403 (405).
“Supra, para. 37.

‘Ninth Report of the Law Commission, para. 89.

‘A. I. R. 1932 P. C. 89 (91).


Sec. 68.

Sec. 69.

40

89. The Director of Legal Studies, Madras, has suggest-
ed that the word ‘necessaries’ should be defined. But the
word has been judicially interpreted on a number of occa-
sions and it is not necessary to give a statutory definition
thereof. The word ‘necessaries’ has been held to include
money urgently needed for the requirements of minors
and lunatics and is not restricted to what is necessary for
elementary requirements, such as, food and clothing. It is
now well established that payments or charges connected
with legal matters in which minors are concerned would,
under certain circumstances, come under the head of
‘necessaries’. We think this term should remain elastic
and we are unable to accept the suggestion.

90. This section has been held to apply only to cases
where the plaintiff is not only interested in the payment
but is also actuated by the motive of protecting his own
interest. We think that this idea is sufficiently expressed
by the word ‘therefore’ and it is not necessary to alter the
the language of this section on that account.

There is a conflict of authority upon the question
whether this section covers a case of contribution. One view*
is that it deals with reimbursement, which is different from
contribution, and the person who is interested in the pay-
ment which another is bound by law to pay must be a
person who is himself not bound to pay the whole or any
portion of the money. In other words, ‘being interested in
the payment of money’ connotes an idea different from
‘being bound by law to pay’. The other view’ is that a
person may be interested in making the payment notwith-
standing that he is also liable to pay. In our opinion the
former is the better view, and alterations should be made
in the section to make this clear.

The principle of contribution is not founded on a con-
tract but is the result of general equity on the ground of
equality of burden and obligations. According to Win-
field this principle is a head of quasi-contractual liability’.
There are express provisions for contribution in the Act.

4Sce Jagapathi Raju y. Sadrusanamma Arad, 39 Mai. 795 3 and
Biraj Krishna. v. Purna Chandra, A. 1. R, 1939 Cal. 645.

Ram Lal v, Khirlda Mohini, 18 C.W.N. 113; Bepat Singh v. Shamlal,
A. IR. 1931 Pat. 2343 Vishnu Ram v. Seth Pannalal, A. 1.R, 1937

Nag. 152.
*Winfield ; Province of the Law of Tort, 163.


41

Section 43 provides for contribution in the case of joint-
promisors while sections 146 and, 147 deal with contribu-
tion in case of co-sureties. Many cases of contribution
would be covered by section 70, but there may still be cases
not covered by that section or other Statutes. Some cases
of contribution have been decided on general principles
without reference to section 70'. We think that it should
be made clear that section 69 deals with cases of reimburse-
ment and not those of contribution and effect should be
given to the view which we have accepted as correct by
some suitable change in the language. It is, however, not
necessary to devote a separate section to cases of contribu-
tion not already covered by the express provisions of this
or of other Acts, as such cases will be covered by the resi-
duary section proposed by us’,

91. We are of the opinion, however, that there should be
a separate provision for contribution between joint-tort
feasors on the lines of section 6 of the Law Reform (Mar-
ried Women and Tort-feasors) Act, 1935°. The relevant
part of that section may be quoted hereunder:

“6.—(1) Where damage is suffered by any person as

a result of a tort (whether a crime or not)—
(a) न

(b) . see

(c) any tort-feasor liable in respect of that damage
may recover contribution from any other tort-
feasor who is, or would if sued have been,
liable in respect of the same damage.
whether as a joint tort-feasor or otherwise, so,
however, that no person shall be entitled to
recover contribution under this section from
any person entitled to be indemnified by him
in respect of the liability of which the contri-
bution is sought.

(2) In any proceedings for contribution under this
section the amount of the contribution recover-
able from any person shall be such as may be
found by the court to be just and equitable hav-
ing regard to the extent of that person’s res-
ponsibility for the damage; and the court shal]

1E. g., Nihal Singh v. The Collector of Bulandshahar, 38 All. 237,
38. 728, App. I.
425-26 Geo. 5, ¢. 30.



Sec, 70.

42

have power to exempt any person from liability
to make contribution, or to direct that the contri-
bution to be recovered from any person shall
amount to a complete indemnity”.

Since our law of Torts is not yet codified, our Courts
have to rely on English Common law, but the rules of
common law on the present subject are unsatisfactory and
have, accordingly, been replaced by statute. The provi-
sions of the English Act being consonant with the princi-
ples of justice, equity and good conscience, we should adopt
similar rules by enacting a similar specific provision’ in
our Contract Act, so long as we do not have a_ separate
Code on the law of Torts.

92. This section is much wider than the English Law
and cases not covered by the Common Law in England
would be covered by it. There is a conflict of authority
on the question whether the expression ‘does anything’ in
the section includes payment of money. A Full Bench of
the Allahabad High Court in Sheonath v. Sarju”, agreeing
with Varadachariar, J.’s view in Perumal Chettiar v.
Kamakshi Ammal*, answered the question in the nega-
tive, while the Allahabad High Court in an earlier deci-
sion‘ and the Calcutta High Court? have answered it in
the affirmative. We think that the former view is too nar-
row and the latter one should be accepted. This will neces-
sitate a change in the language of the section.

93. The words “such other person enjoys the benefit
thereof” have given rise to controversy and there are con-
flicting decisions as to their meaning in various Courts,
particularly in the Madras High Court. It has been noted
that the statement of the law contained in Section 70 is
derived from the notes to Lampleigh v. Braithwaite and
resembles the right of the negotiorum gestor under Roman
Law‘. The view contained in one line of cases has been
forcibly expressed by Sankaran Nair J. in Yogambal v.
Naina Pillai’. Basing himself upon English decisions, he
laid down that for the application of section 70 it is neces-
sary that the party sought to be charged must not only
have benefited by the payment but also have had the

Vide s. 694, Ano. 1.

28. 1. 1२, 1913 AML. 220 (232

°A T. R. 1938 Mat. 785.

4Nath Prasad v. Baijnath,"2 All. 66.

®Smith v.”Dinonath Mookerjee, 12 Cal. 213.
"Stokes : Anglo Indian Codes, Vol. 1, 533.
733 Mad. 15(18)


43

‘opportunity of accepting or rejecting such benefit. Where
no such option is left to him and the circumstances do not
show that he intended to take such benefit, he cannot be
said to have “enjoyed such benefit” within the meaning of
the section. He illustrates his view in this manner:

“Where A is himself interested in the doing of the
work there is nothing to show to B that the work
is done for him or that A expects any payment
from him. The Courts will not, therefore pre-
sume that A did the work for B. Similarly
where B has no choice in the matter but he has
perforce to take the benefit, it cannot be said
that B adopts the act or accepts any benefit,
Therefore the Courts will not hold B liable”.

The learned Judge adopted the note in ‘Smith’s Leading
Cases’ where one of the instances of the application of the
rule in Lampleigh’s case! was described as: “Where the
defendants had adopted and ‘enjoyed the benefit’ of the
consideration.” The result was that Sankaran Nair, J. took
the view that the requirements of section 70 were identi-
cal with the conditions imposed by English Law.

The other view has been stated by Sadasiva Ayyar J. in
Srichandra Deo v. Srinivasa Charlu® in which he dissent-
ed from the judgment of Sankaran Nair J. He observed:

“The words of Section 70 of the Indian Contract Act
do not oblige us to import all the restrictions
imposed by the English decisions, upon the
equitable right of a person who honestly does
something for another without an intent to do
so gratuitously, to recover compensation from
that other for the benefit so conferred upon and
enjoyed by that other person*”.

The learned judge followed the decision of the Calcutta

“High Court in Jognarain v. Badri Das‘. It may be noted

that a similar view was taken by the Allahabad High Court

in Dorilal v. Patti Ram’. In the Madras High Court itself,

हा 1.0, दउक हक 18 हु
5.

338 Mad- 235 (245).

“12. 2. 144,
58 8. L. J. 622.



Sec. 71.
Sec. 72.

44

in two subsequent cases' the decision in Srichandra v.
Srinivasa” was dissented from and the view of Sankaran
Nair J. was followed. Pollock and Mulla* have expressed
the view, that Sankaran Nair J. laid down the law correct-
ly. In our opinion, the word ‘enjofed’ imports the idea
of conscious acceptance of the benefit. If the person to be
charged is unwilling to accept the benefit which is thus
forced upon him, he cannot be said to have ‘enjoyed’ it.
The restrictions imposed by English Law are the necessary
consequence of the requirement that the circumstances
must be such that the request necessary to constitute a
cause of action in the case of an executed consideration
may be implied. In India we are not fettered by any such
requirement. In a case, for example, where a co-sharer
makes repairs to an embankment with the result that
there is an increase in water, the other co-sharer may or
May not use the excess of water or he may not be conscious
of the increase. In such a case section 70 would not apply
but if he was conscious of the increase and had used the
water, he should be held to have ‘enjoyed the benefit’. The
position can be clarified by substituting the word ‘enjoys’
by the words ‘accepts and enjoys’.

94. No change is necessary in section 71.

95. This section is restricted to cases of payment or deli-
very by mistake or under coercion. It should be extended
to cover cases where payment or delivery has been made,
as a result of the exercise of fraud, misrepresentation or
undue influence, or where money or delivery has been
obtained by taking undue advantage of the situation of.a
person entitled under the law to protection under the cir-
cumstances. This extension of the section will bring it in
line with the English Law‘.

96. The word ‘coercion’ has not been used in this sec-
tion in the sense in which it has been defined in section 15.
It has been used, in the words of the Privy Council, “in its
general and ordinary sense as an English word and its
meaning is not controlled by the definition in section 15°”,
The contrary view held by some Courts in India has thus
been superseded. In order to remove any possibility of

1Sampath v. Rajah of Venkatagiri, A. 1. R. 193t Mad. 51 and Laksh-
manan v, Arunachalam, A. 1. R. 1932 Mad. 92.
338 Mad.
*Pollock & Mulla; Op. cit. 432
‘Chitty ; Op. cit., Vol. 1, 96.
shayalal v. National Bank of India, 40 1.A. 56 (65)


45

doubt, an Explanation should be added in a suitable to
state that the definition in section 15 is only for the pur-
poses of the Chapter in which that section is contained.

97. To give effect to the Privy Council decision in Shiba
Prasad v. Srish Chandra‘ which set at rest the contro-
versy whether ‘mistake’ in section 72 was confined to mis-
takes of fact or covered mistakes of law also, the words,

“whether of fact or law” may be added after the word
‘mistake’.

98. There is a conflict of authority on the question
whether section 72 will apply to a case where a third party
had acquired interest in the property prior to the
attachment, deposited the purchase money under 0-21, r.
89 C.P.C. to set aside the sale in execution and subsequent-
ly succeeded in his suit for declaration of his right to the
property, and such person would be entitled to a refund of
the deposit so made by him. The High Courts of Bombay’,
Patna’ and Madras‘ took the view that section 72 did not
apply and the money was not recoverable. The High
Court of Madras in later cases*, however, held that it was
recoverable. The decision in Raman v. Kannan‘ is by
Patanjali Sastri, J. (as he then was), and we think that
the law is laid down correctly therein. This conflict,
however, does not call for any clarification by way of
change in the language of the section, because even if the
former view be correct the case would be covered by the
residuary section’ proposed by us, as obviously the case
would be one of unjust enrichment or unjust benefit.

99. Some writers treat actions on judgments as falling
within the area of quasi-contracts. We do not consider it
necessary to make any provision for such cases in Chapter
V. By reason of procedural provisions suits on judgments
passed by Indian Courts are not necessary. Suits on
foreign judgments belong to the subject of Conflict of
Laws, and we have already got certain provisions on this

1A, 1. R. 1949 P. C. 297 (301).

*Narayan v. Amaguda, 45 Bom. 1094; Shanker Rao v. Vadhilal, 57
Bom, 601.

3Raguram Pande, v. Deokali, 7 Pat. 30.

*Kummakutty v. Neelakandan, 53 Mad.

SSatyam v. Perraju, A. 1. R. 1931 Mad. 753; Raman v. Kannan,
8. 1. २, 1940 Mad. 725.

8. 1. ए. 1940 Mad. 725.

‘S. 728 Ay 1


46

subject in sections 13-14 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Hence, it would be advisable to leave this matter outside
the Contract Act.

100. The rule in pari delicto potior est conditio possi-
dentis, with its exceptions, has been followed in Indian
cases and it has also received statutory recognition in sec-
tion 84 of the Indian Trusts Act. To quote one of such
cases' a plaintiff's predecessor-in-title had in 1895 success-
fully executed a benami sale deed of certain property to
the defendants’ predecessor in order to defeat the claim
of a prior equitable mortgagee. This mortgagee at once
sued the parties to the benami sale deed and obtained satis-
faction of his claim with costs. The result was that the
purpose of the sale was defeated. Holding that the plain-
tiff was entitled to a decree for recovery of land, the
Privy Council made the following observations:

“Tf, however, he has not defrauded any one, there
can be no reason why the Court should punish
his intention by giving his estate away to B,
whose roguery is even more complicated than
his own. This appears to be the principle of the
English decisions. For instance, persons have
been allowed to recover property which they
had assigned away .. ..where they had intend-
ed to defraud creditors, who, in fact, were never
injured .... But where the fraudulent or ille-
gal purpose has actually been effected by means
of the colourable grant, then the maxim applies,
‘in pari delicto potior est conditio possidentis’,
The Court will help neither party. ‘Let the
estate lie where it falls.”*
It was further observed that the purpose of the fraud
having not only not been effected, but absolutely defeated,
there was nothing to prevent the plaintiff from repudiating
the entire transaction, revoking all authority of his confe-
derate to carry out the fraudulent scheme, and recovering
possession of his property.

8.84 of the Trusts Act is, however, confined to transfers
of property and may not cover cases of payment of money
or delivery of property for illegal purposes. We are of
the view that it would be better to have a specific provision
relating to such cases.

1 Petherperumal v. Muniai, 35 1. A. 98.
* Bid. 102.


47

The question is whether the provision should be intro-
duced into the Contract Act or the existing provision in
the Trusts Act should be widened to include cases arising
out of contracts other than those of transfer of property.
In England and in the United States, the principle is re-
regarded as a part of the law of contract,

In England, the rule was formulated by Lord Mansfield
in 1775 in the case of Holman v. Johnson! and the Court of
Appeal has in the case of Bowmakers Ltd. v. Barnet Instru-
ments Ltd.,” remarked that the principle has even been ex-

tended since Lord Mansfield’s day. Chitty states the rule
thus: —

“If the illegal purpose has not been carried out, the
law allows a locus poenitentiae to the party who
demands ‘the return of money paid before this
happens. So either party to an illegal contract
may rescind it while it remains executory, and
may recover from the other party any money
which he may have paid to him thereunder,
although, to enable him to do so, he must prove
the making of the illegal contract as part of his
case. But if the illegal purpose has been wholly
or substantially effected or frustrated the law
allows no locus poenitentiae”*

Tn the American Restatement of the Law, the rule has
been thus stated in the Volume on Contract (section 598):

“A party to an illegal bargain can neither recover
damages for breach thereof, nor by rescinding
bargain, recovery the performance that he has
rendered thereunder or its value”.

The doctrine underlying section 84 of the Trusts Act is
obviously different, But the conditions for the application
of the rule are the same in the Trusts Act as under the
vrinciple of quasi-contract and the result is similar. The
extension of the provision in section 84 to include the con-
tractual aspect would result in the advantage of having a
comprehensive provision relating to the subject of frus-
tration of an illegal purpose instead of having two parallel

298 E.R. 1120, 1321,
“"t044] 2 All. E.R. 579 (582),
‘Chitty, Op. cit., Vol. 3, 473.


Secs. 73-4.

Sec. 124.

48

provisions in two separate enactments. The title of the
Chapter of the Trusts Act in which section 84 is included is
also wide enough to admit of the extension, inasmuch as
it does not deal with cases of trusts proper but of ‘Certain
obligations in the nature of trusts’.

We have, accordingly, come to the conclusion that in
our future Report on the law of trusts, a recommendation
should be made for amending section 84 to include the
following proposition:

“Where a person makes payment or delivery of pro-
perty for any illegal purpose and such purpose
is not carried into execution, or the person mak-
ing the payment or delivering the property is
not as guilty as the person receiving the pay-
ment or the property or the effect of permit-
ting him to retain the money or property might
be to defeat the provisions of, any law, he must
restore the benefit to the person making the
payment or delivery of the property”.

101. No change is recommended in sections 73-74.

102. The definition of a contract of indemnity given in
this section is not exhaustive. It deals with only one
class of indemnity and defines only some of the rights
belonging to an indemnity-holder of that particular class.
The result has been that the Courts had to draw upon
“the common law of India, which in this respect, is iden-
tical with that of England”, In English Law, the word
‘indemnity’ is used in a sense wider than that indicated
‘by the definition in section 124. It includes a promise to
save the promisee from loss caused by events or accidents
which do not or may not depend on the conduct of any
person, or from liability arising from something done by
the promisee at the request of the promiser. A right te
indemnity may be created by express contract or by im-
plied contract. In the latter case, the intention to create
the right is based upon the true inference to be drawn
from the facts. There is another class of cases where the
law attaches a legal or equitable duty to indemnify in the
particular set of circumstances. In such cases, the general
principle of law is that ‘when an act is done by one person

फल Lord Wright in Secretary of State v. The Bank of India, AR.
1938 P.C. 191 (192).


49

at the request of another, which act is not in itself mani-
festly tortious to the knowledge of the person doing it and
such act turns out to be injurious to the rights of a third
party, the person doing it is entitled to an indemnity from
him who requested that it should be done’. This state-
ment of the principle is a quotation from Mr. Cave’s argu-
ment in Dugdale v. Lovering' which was approved by
Lord Halsbury, L.C., in the case of Sheffield Corporation
v. Barclay*. In that case Lord Davey observed:

न्ब्न्ग्रन Where a person invested with a statutory or
common law duty of a ministerial character, is
called upon to exercise that duty on the request,
direction or demand of another, (it does not
seem to me to matter which word you use), and
without any default on his part acts in a man-
ner which is apparently legal but is, in fact
illegal and a breach of the duty, and thereby
incurs liability to third parties, there is implied
by law a contract by the person making the
request to keep indemnified the person having
the duty against any liability which may result
from such exercise of the supposed duty. And
it makes no difference that the person making
the request is not aware of the invalidity in his
title to make the request, or could not with
reasonable diligence, have discovered it’,

In the same case, Lord Davey also said, “in some cases
it is a question of fact whether the circumstances are such
as to raise the implication of a contract for indemnity; but
in cases like the one before your Lordships, when a person
is requested to exercise a statutory duty for the person
making the request, I think the contract ought to be
implied”.

We think that this class of cases should be classified as
quasi-contractual. With reference to the surety’s claim
in equity, Prof. Winfield remarked that ‘that redress was
given not only upon express promise of indemnity by the
debtor, but also upon an implied obligation which would

(1875) L. R. C. P. 196.

17905) A.C, 392.

Ibid., 399.
(Ibid., 401.



Sec, 125.

50

fowadays be classified as quasi-contractual’. The lia-
bility in such cases is based upon an assumed and fictitious
request. In Secretary of State v. The Bank of India Ltd.?,
Lord Wright, in reference to the aforesaid statement of
the law by Lord Davey, remarked, “It (the principle) is
often, as in the statement by Lord Davey ............ » said
to be based on a contract implied by law, the request
importing a promise to indemnify the other party against
the consequences to him of acting upon the request. But
in the words adopted by Lord Halsbury, it is said that the
person is entitled merely to an indemnity. The fiction of
a contract implied by law adds nothing, though it may
seem to justify the Court in holding as a matter of law
that the party is entitled to the indemnity on the basis
that the assertion by the applicant of his request is the
offer of a promise to indemnify if the other party acts
upon that request to his damage”?

103. We recommend that the definition of the “Contract
of indemnity” in section 124 be expanded to include cases
of loss caused by events which may or may not depend
upon the conduct of any person. It should also provide
clearly that the promise may also be implied.

Further, a section? should be added in the Chapter on
Quasi-Contracts covering cases where an obligation to in-
demnity may be implied in law.

104. This section deals only with the rights of the
indemnified in the event of his being sued. The indemni-
fied has other rights besides those mentioned in section 125.
There is a sharp cleavage of opinion in the various High
Courts as regards the remedies available to an indemnity-
holder. While some High Courts, e.g., Caleutta,* Madras,°
Allahabad*® and Patna’ held that the indemnity-holder
can compel the indemnifier to place him in a position to
meet a liability without waiting until the indemnity-
holder has actually discharged it or has suffered actual

1Winfield Law of Quasi-Contracts, 116, 117.

2A_ 1. R. 1938 P. C, 191 (193).

8Vide s. 72A, App. I.

‘Prafulla Kumar Basu v. Gopee Ballabh Sen, 1. L. R. [1944] 2 Cal. 318.
5Ramaligna ए. Unnamalai Achi, 38 Mad.

* Abdul Majeed v, Abdul Rashid, A. 1. R. 1936 All. 598.

"Chuni Bai Patel v. Nathu Bai Patel, 22 Pat. 655.


51

loss, the Lahore High Court', the Judicial Commissioner
of Nagpur® and the Bombay High Court? (in earlier cases)
took the view that no right belongs to the indemnified
until the loss occurs. So far as the Bombay High Court
is concerned, Chagla J. (as he then was), clarified the
position’ and since then the Bombay High Court has also
fallen in line with the Allahabad and Patna High Courts.
We are of the opinion that the view expressed by Chagla
J. is correct and should be adopted by the legislature.
Under the English Common Law no action can be main-
tained until actual loss has been incurred. But in equity,
if liability to pay has become absolute, the indemnified is
entitled to maintain an action, even though actual loss
has not yet resulted. It has been judicially recognised
that adherence to English Common Law results in hard-
ships and injustice and, indeed, the Courts of Equity in
England have introduced the above mentioned rule to
mitigate the rigour of the Common Law.

The decisions of the Court of Equity in England pro-
ceeded upon the principle that to indemnify does not mere-
ly mean to reimburse in respect of money paid, but, ‘in
accordance with its derivation’, to save from loss in respect
of the liability against which the indemnity has been given.
These decisions have been followed in India by Judges who
have taken a view consistent with the position in English
Law described above.

The rights and remedies of the indemnity-holder in
equity, have been thus described in Halsbury’s Laws of
England:

beens in equity, the rules of which now prevail in
all Courts, even in the absence of such a special
agreement, the person entitled to the indemnity
may enforce his right as soon as his liability to
the third party has arisen, and, therefore, he may
obtain relief before he has actually suffered loss.
He may, therefore, in an appropriate case, obtain
an order compelling the promisor to set aside a
fund out of which the liability may, be met or to
pay the amount due directly to the third party,

1Sham Sundar v. Chandu Lal, A.1.R. 1935 Lah. 974.
*Ranganath v. Pachusao, A. 1. R. 1935 Nag. 117.
*Shankar v. Laxman, A.1.R. 1940 Bom. 302.
‘Gajanan Moreshwar v. Moreshwar Medan, A.

R. 1942 Bom, 302


Secs. 126-
129.

Sve, 130.

52

or even, when the promisor is under no liability
to the third party, as is the case in contracts of
mere indemnity, to the promisee himself. Nor
is the party indemnified precluded from obtain-
ing relief by the fact that his liability to the
third party cannot be effectively enforced against
him”.

We recommend that on the basis of the position in Eng-
lish Law, as set out above, the rights of the indemnity-
holder should be more fully defined? and the remedies of
an indemnity-holder should be indicated even in cases
where he has not been sued.

105. No change is considered necessary in sections 126
to 129.

106. There is divergence of opinion between some High
Courts as to the right of the sureties to revoke surety bonds
given to Courts. In Bai Somi v. Chokshi’, which was a
ease of security for the guardian of a minor’s estate, it was
held that section 130 was inapplicable and that such a
surety could not be discharged, as the very object of re-
quiring security was to guarantee the minor’s estate against
the misconduct or mismanagement on the part of the guar-
dian. In Raj Narain v. Ful Kumari,t a case under the
Probate and Administration Act, the surety had made an
application for his discharge on the ground that the Ad-
ministrator had been guilty of waste which the surety
could not prevent. It was held that it was open to the
Court to grant the application. In Subroya Chetti v.
Ragammall,® an application by the surety for an adminis-
trator for his discharge, was dismissed on the ground that
no such maladministration had been proved. Thereupon
the surety instituted a suit praying that the Court should
discharge the plaintiff from his guarantees as a surety in
regard to future transactions. The suit was dismissed upon
the grounds that

(1) The making of an order for discharge rnight defeat
the object for which an Administrator is required to find
sureties to his administration bonds;

“Halsbury : Laws of England (2nd edn.), Vol. 16, 15.
Vide s. 125A, App. I.

319 Bom, 245.

429 Cal. 68.

"28 Mad. 161,


53

(2) Section 130 does not apply to a special contract of
suretyship; and

(3) If the section applies to an administration bond, the
surety could, without any action or any legal proceeding
put an end to his liability by giving notice to the Registrar
or to the Court.

In Kandhya Lal v. Manki' the view of the Madras High
Court was followed and it was held that where a person
guarantees that an administrator will duly get in and
administer the estate of a deceased person, there is a con-
tinuing guarantee within the meaning of section 129.

In our opinion the law has been correctly stated by
Sulaiman, A.C.J., in In goods of Dr. Abinash Chandra? It
was held in that case that although it was true that the
surety cannot claim as of right to be relieved of all liability
by merely expressing his intention to do so either by notice
or by a proper application to the Court and, although it is
also true that the case of a surety whose security has been
accepted by a Court, cannot be treated as one falling under
sections 129 and 130 of the Contract Act so as to entitle
him to put an end to the guarantee at his will, yet that is
quite a different thing from saying that the High Court it-
self to which the guarantee is given has no power to
exonerate the surety from all liability for future transac-
tions. This view is in consonance with that of the Privy
Council in Mahomed Ali v. Howeson Bros.’ We recom-
mend that an Exception be added to the section providing
that a guarantee given to the Court cannot be revoked
without the permission of the Court.

107. No change is considered necessary in sections 131
to 133.

108. There was a conflict of authority upon the question
whether a surety is discharged when a creditor allows his
remedy against the principal-debtor to become barred by
limitation. The Bombay, Calcutta and Madras High Courts
took the view that the surety is not discharged; while the
Allahabad High Court had taken a different view. In

131 All. 56.

4A, 1, R. 1932 AIS: 262.
SA. LR, 1926 P, C. 110,

Seca, 131—
133.

Sec. 134.


Secs. 135—
140.

Sec. 141.

54

Mahanth Singh v. U Ba Yi,’ the view of the majority of
the High Courts was preferred. It was held that not every
unenforceable contract was declared void, but only those
‘unenforceable by law’, and that those words tneant not
unenforceable by reason of some procedural regulation, but
unenforceable by substantive law. A mere failure to sue
within the time specified by the statute of limitation or an
inability to sue by reason of the provisions of one of the
Orders under Ctvil Procedure Code would not cause a
contract to become void. It was observed that sections 134
and 139 were merely declaratory of the law in England.

We recommend that an Explanation be added to clarify
this position and the view of the Privy Council be adopte

109. There has been a difference of opinion between the
Madras and the Nagpur High Courts as to the effect of
Debt Relief Acts upon the liability of the surety. In cases
where the creditor proves his debt but the debt is scaled
down by the Board, the Madras High Court? has taken the
view that the surety is liable only for the reduced amount,
while the Nagpur High Court? has held that the surety
remains liable for the whole of the original debt. In agree-
ment with Pollock and Mulla‘, we prefer the opinion of
the Madras High Court, which appears to be more in con-
sonance with justice. This conflict, however, does not
necessitate any change in the language of the section.

110. No change is considered necessary in sections 135
to 140.

111. This section limits the surety’s right to the securities
held by the creditor at the date of his becoming surety.
According to the current English law “a surety has on
payment and not before, a right to the benefit of all the
securities, whether known to him or not at the time when
he became surety, which the creditor has received from
the principal-debtor, before, contemporaneously with, or
after. the creation of the suretyship, and whether or not
they existed at the time when the guarantee was given™”.

1A. 1.R. 1939 P. C. 110. The Allahabad High Court expressly
overuled its. earlier decisions to the contrary in Aziz Ahmed v. Sher Ali
1956 All. 8 (FB)

*Subremania v. Narayanaswami, A. 1. R. 1951 Mad. 48.

*Balkrishna v. Atmaram, A.LR, 1944 Nag. 277.

Pollock & Mulla : op. cit.

*Halsbury : Laws of England (and edn,), Vol. 16, 92-93.


55

We think that the law upon this point should be brought
in line with the English law.

112. The section does not lay down at what point of
time the surety is entitled to have tke creditor’s securities
made over to him wholly or in part, whether at the time
when the debt of the creditor is paid off or when the surety
pays the amount of his guarantee. There is a difference
between the Bombay and Madras High Courts on this
point. In Goverdhandas v. The Bank of Bengal', a surety
had guaranteed an aliquotor a defined portion of past
debt secured by mortgage. On payment by him of the
portion of the debt guaranteed by him, he claimed to be
entitled to share in the mortgage in proportion to the
amount of the debt which he had guaranteed and paid
before the mortgagee had been paid the full amount of
his mortgage debt. This claim was rejected. In
Parvatanen Bhushayya v. Suryanarayana?, the Madras
High Court doubted the correctness of this view. That
Court decided that the surety was entitled to a propor-
tionate share in a security held by the creditor at the time
the surety discharged his liability even though the creditor
was not fully paid. Pollock and Mulla’ opined that the
view taken by the Madras High Court is inequitable and
that the creditor’s right to hold securities until the whole
debt has been paid is paramount to any claim of. the
surety whether based upon section 140 or section 141. We
agree with the opinion of the learned Commentators and
recommend that it should be made clear that the surety
is entitled to have the creditor's securities made over to him
only when the creditor is fully paid off.

113. We think that a comma should be inserted after Sec. 142.
the word ‘misrepresentation’, and the existing comma after
the word ‘creditor’ removed, in order clearly to bring out
that tke section deals with the case of a guarantee obtained
by means of misrepresentation whether the same is
brought by the creditor or by some one else, with his
knowledge and assent.

114. It has been held‘ that this section provides for the Sec, 143.
case of a guarantee obtained by wilful silence as distingu-
ished from mere non-disclosure. The language of tke

315 Bom, 48.
2A. TR. 1944 Mad. 195.

8Pollock & Mulla : op. cit., 551.

‘Balkrishna v. Bank of Bengal, 15 Bom. 585 (591).


Sec. 144.

Sec. 145.

Secs. 146-7.

Sec, 148.

56

section should be brought into conformity with the judicial
opinion.

115. No change is necessary in section 144.

116. Pollock and Mulla! suggest that the words ‘right-
fully’ and ‘wrongfully’ are not felicitous and that they
should be substituted by the words ‘reasonably’ and
‘unreasonably’. We do not agree. ‘Rightfully’ was intended
to convey that the sums paid were such as the creditor
was legally entitled to recover and, therefore, the surety
had the right to pay, and, likewise, the expression ‘wrong-
fully’ was intended to convey that the sums paid were such
as the creditor was legally not entitled to recover, and,
therefore, the surety was wrong in paying the same. We
feel that the expressions used by tke legislature more
fully convey the intended idea than the suggested
expression.

117. Controversy has arisen on the question whether a
surety paying a debt which is barred by limitation as
against the debtor can be said to have paid it ‘rightfully’
within the meaning of this section. We think the affirma-
tive is the correct answer as the rights of the surety arise
not from the liability of the debtor but from the discharge
of his own liability. An Explanation should be added to
the section to make this clear.

118. In appropriate cases the surety is entitled to recover
special damages beyond the sum ke has actually been
compelled to pay. It has been observed? that his right is
not merely a right to stand in the shoes of the creditor but
is founded upon an independent equity.

An Explanation should be added to the section to
clearly preserve this right.

119. No change is recommended in sections 146 to 147.

120. A contract of bailment may 9९ implied in fact or
in law.

3Pollock & Mulla : op. cit., 556.
*Per Stirling J. in Bedeley v. Consolidated Bank, (1886) 34 Ch. D. 556


57
In Queen v. McDonald’, Lord Coleridge, C.J. observed:

“It is not correct as it appears to me, to use the
expression “contract of bailment” in a 5९75९
which implies that every bailment must neces-
sarily in itself be a contract. I do not so under-
stand the definition of the term “bailment”. It
is perfectly true that in almosi all cases a contract
either express or implied by low accompanies a
bailment, but it seems to me that there may be a
complete bailment without the contract. Accord-
ing to all the definitions, as for instance, those
given in Sir Wiiliam Jones, Blackstone & Kent's
Commentaries, it would appear that a bailment
consists in the delivery of an article upon a
condition or trust. It is true, I know, that the
authors of those various definitions go on to
say. that there is a promise or contract to restore
the goods, but this is not, as it seems to me,
the bailment itself, but “a contract that arises
out of it”.

The American Law also recognises a contract of bail-
ment by implication of law. The law is thus stated in
American Jurisprudence: “It has previously been observed
that an actual contract or one implied in fact is not always
necessary to create a bailment; that such a contract may
be implied in law as well as in fact. Where, otherwise
than by a mutual contract of bailment, one person has
lawfully acquired the possession of personal property of
another and holds it under circumstances whereby he
ought, upon principles of justice, to keep it safely and
restore it or deliver it to the owner, for example, where
possession has been acquired accidentally, fortuitously,
through mistake, by an agreement since terminated, or for
some other purpose, such person and the owner of the
property are, by operation of law, generally treated as
bailee and bailor under a contract of bailment, irrespective
of whether or not there has been any mutual assent, express
or implied, for such relationship. Such quasi-contracts of
bailment include what are known as constructive and in-
voluntary bailments”.?

~~ 413 0. 8. 323 (326-27).
36 Am. Jur. (Rev. ed.), Bailments, S, 86,


Sec. 149.

Sec. 150.

Sec. 151.

58

In our opinion, the present definition of bailment should
not be altered. But the case of what has been described as
quasi-contract of bailment should be provided for in a
separate section stating that the bailor and bailee in such
cases must, so far as may be, perform the same duties, and
be subject to the same liabilities and disabilities as if they
were bailors and bailees under a contract express or implied
as provided in section 148.'

121, The Reserve Bank of India has recommended that
the following words be added to section 149: “And the
delivery of ‘documents of title’ to goods by the owner or
with consent of the owner shall be deemed to have such
effect.” We have discussed the relation of section 149 to
‘documents of title’ in our note on section 178, infra. The
suggestion is an obvious corollary to the true nature of
‘documents of title’. We accept the suggestion and recom-
mend that an Explanation be added to section 149 to give
effect to the suggested addition.

122. No change is necessary in section 150.

123. This section embodies the common law rule as to
the liability of bailees other than common carriers and
innkeepers. Common carriers and innkeepers were liable as
insurers of goods; i.e., they were responsible for every
injury to the goods occasioned by any means, except only
the act of God and of the King’s enemies. The English
Common Law with regard to common carriers was partly
incorporated in the Carriers Act, 1865. According to the
Privy Council® the responsibility of a common carrier is
not within the Contract Act and is governed by the Carriers
Act, 1865, and the common law of England.

Carriers by sea for hire are not common carriers with-
in the meaning of the Carriers Act. There is a conflict
of authority as to the responsibility of such carriers being
governed by the Common Law of England or by sections
151 and 152. The Calcutta High Court, in Mac Killican v.
The Compagnie Des Messageris Maritimes des France?
held that a foreign carrier is not a commercial carrier and
that if the contract of affreightment is made in India, the
liability would be governed by the provisions of sections

Aides. 181A, App.1. j
“Irrawaddy Flotilla 20 ए. Bugwandass, 18 1.A, 121 (129).
ALL. 6Cal. 227,


59

150 and 151. The Madras High Court! has held that the
liability was that of common carriers according to the
Common Law of England. The correct view would ap-
pear to be that the proper law of Contract of affreight-
ment is the law by which the parties intended that their
contract should be governed.

We do not, however, make any recommendation with
regard to the law of carriers in this part of our report, as
We propose to deal with that subject separately.

124. The liability of an innkeeper should be governed
by sections 151 and 152. The view of the Allahabad High
Court in Jain & Son v. Cameron? should, in our opinion,
be preferred to the view of tke Bombay High Court in
Whateley v. Palanji.* We do not think that it is necessary
to make any change in the sections on this account, as we
feel that the Courts are not likely to take a view con-
trary to the decision of the Allahabad High Court on this
point,

125. Whether a bailee can contract himself out of the
liability imposed by section 151 has been the subject of
controversy in Courts. In Sheikh Mahamad Ravuther v.
The British India Steam Navigation Co. Ltd.', Sankaran
Nair, J. held (contrary to the views of the other two
judges—White C. J., and Wallace J.) that a contract by
a bailee purporting to exempt himself wholly from
liability for negligence was not valid. This view was
founded on the fact that while there are express provi-
sions for contracting out in a number of other sections
e.g., Ss. 152, 163, 165, 170, 171 and 174 there is no such
provision in 5. 151. This view did not find favour even
in later cases in the Madras High Court® nor was it ever
followed in Bombay". Indeed Beaumont C. J. of the
Bombay High Court thought that it would be a startling
thing that persons sui juris are not at liberty to enter into
such a contract of bailment as they may think fit. He
relied on the absence of an express provision in the Act

1866 Hajee Ismail Sait v. The Company of the Messageries Maritimes
of France, 28 Mad. 400; Kumber v, British India Steom Navigation Co, Lid., 38
Mad. 941.

2ELR. 44 All. 735.

3(1866) 3 B.H.C. Ge) 137.

{LLLR. 32 Mad. 95.

Home Insurance Co. v, Ramnath Co., A.1.R. 1055 Mad. 602.

‘The Bombay Steam Navigation Co. Lid. v. Vasudev, 52 Bom. 37; Lakha-
fi Dollaji ए. Boorugu, A 1. R. 1939 Bom. 101,



Secs. 152-8.

Sec. 159.

Sec. 160.

Secs, 161-
170.

’ Sec. 17%

| Sec, 172-7.

Sec, 178.

60

prohibiting a party from contracting out of section 151.
We accept the majority view as correct. In order to
resolve this controversy we recommend that the words
‘in the absence of any special contract’ be added in
section 151,

126. No change is necessary in sections 152 to 158.

127, Pollock and Mulla' put the query. whether an
express contract not to recall a thing gratuitously lent
before the expiration of a certain time would not be valid.
We think that section 159 is no bar to such a contract. It
is not necessary to alter the language of this section.

128. This section does not provide for the  bailor’s
remedies if the goods are not forthcoming. He has the
remedy for damages against the bailee and also the equit-
able remedy to follow the proceeds of a sale by the bailee
where they can be distinguished either being actually
kept separate or being mixed up with other moneys?.

We consider that a provision should be made for the
remedies of the bailor apart from his rights under the
existing section by adding a new sub-section.

129. No change is recommended in sections 161 to 170.

130. It has been suggested that share and stock-brokers
should be included in the list of lien-holders. But the
suggestion is not warranted by commercial usage and no
inconvenience seems to have been caused by the absence
of share and stock-brokers from the list of lien-holders
given in this section. Moreover, there is a saving provision
by which a lien might be created by an express contract.
We cannot accept the suggestion.

131. No change is recommended in sections 172 to 177.

132. In relation to this section the Law Ministry has
posed the question whether an owner of goods who is in
possession of documents of title to goods can create a

valid pledge by delivery of the said documents.

Pollock & Mulla ; oF cit., 585.
*Per Jessel M.R. in Re Hallet?'s” Exiate, (1879) 13 Ch. D. 696 (710).



61

The difficulty has been created by reason of the amend-
ment of this section in 1930. Before the amendment, “a
person who is in possession of any goods or of any docu-
ment of title to goods” could validly effect a pledge by
pledging such documents. This was the view taken of
the section by the Judicial Committee in Official Assignee
of Madras v. Mercantile Bank of India'. The words quoted
above were omitted in 1930 and the section as it now
stands seems to confer only on a mercantile agent the
right to effect a pledge by mere delivery of documents
of title. It has been pointed out by Pollock and Mulla?
that this is a lacuna in the Act and it leads to the situation
that what a mercantile agent could do, the owner cannot.
Referring to this amended section, the Judicial Committee
in the aforesaid case, also observed that the legislature
when it made the amendment in 1930 did not appreciate
fully the effect of the actual words of the amended
section. 1

It may be possible to argue that notwithstanding the
amendment of the section 1930 the owner’s rights to effect
a pledge of the goods by mere delivery of documents of
title is not taken away. We think it is necessary to remove
any uncertainty that may exist on the point. We have,
therefore, recommended the addition of the Explanation
to section 149, to the effect that the delivery of documents
of title to any goods by the owner or by a person in
possession of the documents with his consent, should be
treated as delivery of possession with the meaning of
section 149. We have further added a sub-section in
section 178, restoring the law as it stood before 1930 and
also retaining the existing section.

We further recommend that the definitions of ‘docu-

ments of title’ and ‘mercantile agent’ be put in section 2
and be not limited to the purposes of section 178.

183. No change is necessary in sections 179 and 180.

Se
व;

०8, 7179

80.

134. The words ‘such suit’ in section 181 are somewhat Sec. 181.

vague. It should be made clear that they refer tc such
suit as is referred to in section 180.

1 TLR. 58 Mad, 181 (P.C,)
2 Pollock & Mulla, Op. cit., 606.



Sec. 183.

Sec, 184.

Sec. 182.

62

135. The definition in section 182 is not exhaustive.
It has to be read with section 186 which says that the
authority of an agent may be express or implied.

136. In Sukumari Gupta v. Dhirendranath,' Pal, J. took
the view that the definition in section 182 seemed to be
somewhat wider than that of English Law, inasmuch as
the definition does not require that the employment
should be by the principal himself. The soundness of
this view has been doubted by Pollock and Mulla’.

The questions raised in this and the preceding para-
graphs would be solved if we combine sections 182 and
186, and we recommend accordingly.

137. Section 183 appears to be too narrow. It is
confined to natural persons and would exclude corpora-
tions. Further, like section 182, it contemplates only an
express appointment by the principal. We propose that
the marginal note to section 183 be altered to read:
‘Capacity to act as principal’ and the section be amended
to provide that the capacity to contract or do any other
act by means of an agent js co-extensive with the
capacity of the principal to make the contract or do the
act which he is authorised to make or do. It would then
be clear that in the case of a corporation an act beyond
the scope of its memorandum of association will be
beyond its capacity.

138. Section 184 permits a minor (as well as a person
of unsound mind) to become an agent as between the
principal and third persons without being responsible to
his principal. There may be cases where an agent may
incur a personal liability upon the contract towards third
persons. But in our opinion an agent who is a minor or
a person of unsound mind should be exonerated from
such liability. According to Bowstead,* the personal
liability of the agent upon the contract of agency and
upon any contract entered into by him with any third
person is dependent on his capacity to contract on his
own behalf. We agree with this view and recommend
that section 184 should be modified accordingly.

1 #. 1. २. 1947 Cal. 643-
2 Pollock & Mulla: Op. cit., 619.
3 Bowstead : Op. cit. (11th Edn.), 15.



63
139. No change is necessary in section 185. Sec, 185-

140. Section 186 becomes superfluous in view of the Sec. 186.
change proposed by us in section 182.

Section 186 should, therefore, be omitted.

141. Section 187 not only defines ‘implied authority’ ‘Sec. 187.
but also attempts to lay down what would be the nature
of the circumstances from which an authority may be
implied. The statement as regards the nature of
circumstances is not and does not purport to be exhaustive.
It omits to specify equally important cases in which
authority may be implied and does not fully make pro-
vision for the circumstances which can lead to an
inference in favour of ‘authority’. For example, this
section does not convey the idea of agency of necessity.
Bowstead’s observation namely, that ‘agency can be im-
plied from the conduct or situation of the parties or
from the necessity of the case’, is more comprehensive.
We are of the opinion that this section needs alteration
so that ‘situation of the parties and the necessity of the
case’, may also be specified as circumstances from which
an authority may be implied, making it clear that some
antecedent relationship must exist between the parties
to justify an implication of agency.

142. Section 189 provides for a case where there is an
already existing relationship of principal and agent and
the authority of the agent is implied from the existence
of a necessity. The section is not concerned with the
case where relationship of principal and agent is itself
created by reason of the existence of necessity. The
English Law on the subject may be stated as follows:

“Agency of necessity arises wherever a duty is
imposed upon a person to act on behalf of an-
other apart from contract, and in circumstances
of emergency, in order to prevent irreparable
injury. It may also arise where a person car-
ries out the legal or moral duties of another in
the absence or default of that other, or acts in
his interest to preserve his property from des-
truction. The doctrine of agency of necessity
has a limited application and, apart from cases
where a person carries out the legal or moral

2 Bowstead : Op. cit. (11th edn.), 5.



Sec, 188.

64

duty of another, is probably confined to cir-
cumstances in which there is a contractual
relationship of some kind, express or implied, in
existence already”.*

An example of such contractual relationship is that of
a carrier. The result of the modification we have suggest-
ed will be that apart from the case where there is an exist-
ing relationship of principal and agent, the law will speci-
fically provide for the creation of such agency from the
very existence of emergency or necessity.

143. A new section may be added after section 187
providing for ‘acts which may be done by means of an
agent’. In English law, an agent may be appointed for the
purpose of entering into any contract for doing any
act on behalf of the principal which the principal might
himself make or do, except for the purpose of exercising
a power or authority or performing a duty imposed on the
principal personally, the exercise or performance of which
requires discretion or skill or for the purpose of doing an
act which the principal is required to do by or pursuant to a
statute in his own person. We think that the omission in
our Contract Act of a provision as to the acts which may
be done by means of an agent should be supplied.”

144. Section 188 is divided into two parts. The first
deals with ‘authority to do an act’, that is, acts in general,
and the other deals with the authority to carry on busi-
ness—an activity consisting of particular kinds of acts. The
first part omits to say that the authority of an agent
includes the authority to do things which are ordinarily
incidental to the performance of the act expressly author-
ised. In other words, the extent of the authority is con-
fined to doing things necessary for the performance of the act
expressly authorised. In our opinion, the first part of the
section should be simplified and the omission mentioned
above should be supplied.

145. In our opinion, the second part of the section may
be modified? to the following effect: Every agent has
implied authority to act, in the execution of his express
authority, according to the usage and custom prevailing in
the market or in the business in which he is employed.

3 Halsbury, 3rd 80., Vol. 1157.
3 Vide's. 187A, App. 1.९
* Videls. 188(2), App. I,


65
146. No change is necessary in seétion 189.

147. The law on the subject of delegation may be stated
as follows:

An agent cannot delegate his powers or duties without
the express or implied authority of the principal. Nor can
there be any delegation where personal confidence is repos-
ed or personal skill required in the execution of the work
so that it can be said that the agent has expressly or
impliedly undertaken to perform the acts personally.

Briefly stated, the exceptions to the above rule are:
(i) Where the employment of a sub-agent is justi-
fied by usage of the particular trade or business
in which the agent is employed, provided such a
usage is neither unreasonable, nor inconsistent
with the express terms of the agent’s authority;

(ii) Where in the course of the agent’s employment
unforeseen emergencies arise which render it
necessary to delegate his authority;

(iii) Where the authority conferred is of such a
nature as to necessitate its execution wholly or
in part by means of a sub-agent;

(iv) Where the act done is purely ministerial and
does not involve confidence or discretion.

Exception No. (ii) as stated above, is already covered by
section 189. The remaining exceptions should be incorpo-
rated in the section.

148. No change is considered necessary in sections 191-
193.

149. Section 194 deals with the case of a ‘substitute’ as
distinguished from the case of a sub-agent. Pollock and
Mulla* think that the language of the section is perhaps
not the most appropriate. We agree and recommend
that the word ‘name’ may be changed to ‘appoint’.

150. No change is recommended in section 195.

151. As regards the provision relating to ratification in
section 196, we think that the proposition laid down by

1 See Halsbury : Op.
cit., (11th edn.), 69.

® Pollock & Mulla : Op. cit., 641.

., Grd edn.), Vol. 1, 169-1703 Bowstead : Op.

Sec, 189

Sec. 190.

Secs, 191-3.

Sec. 194.

Sec. 195.

Sec. 196.


Sec. 197.

Sec, 198,

36०. 199.

Sec. 200,

See. 201.

66

Bowstead' should be added to the section, namely, that
for the purpose of ratification it is immaterial whether the
person doing the act was an agent exceeding his authority,
or was a person having no authority at all.

152. No change is necessary in section 197.

153. Section 198 should be subjected to an exception,
namely, ‘unless he intends to ratify the act, and take the
risk, whatever the circumstances may have been’*

154. For the purpose of ratification it is not necessary
that the principal should have knowledge of the legal
effect of the act or of collateral circumstances affecting the
nature thereof.* In order to make the position clear this
principle may be embodied in section 198 by way of an
Explanation or otherwise.

155. No change is necesary in section 199.

156. The ratification of a contract does not give the
person who ratifies it a right of action in respect of any
breach thereof committed before the time of the ratifica-
tion.! This proposition may be incorporated in a separate
section.”

157. There is a conflict of authority on the question as
to when the business of the agency of a sale of goods is
completed, i.e., whether on payment to the principal of the
price realised by the agent or on completion of the sale and
receipt of price by the agent. The Allahabad" and Calcutta?
High Courts take the former view while the Madras High
Court* has taken the latter view. We are of the opinion
that the view taken by the Madras High Court represents
the law correctly and we consider that agency is determin-
ed when the agent ceases to represent the principal,
though his liability in respect of acts done by him or by his
agents continues. Under the English Law, the agent
becomes functus officio” on the completion of the contract

1 Bowstead on Agency. 1951 Ed., p. 33. oo

2 Bowstead : Op. cit., (11th edn.), 39.
3 Ibid.

3 Ibid. 43.
5 Vide s. 200A of App. I.

® Babu Ram v. Ram Dayal, 12 All. 541 (545).

+ Fink v. Buldcodas, 26 Cal. 715 (725).

® Venkatachalam v. Narayanan, 39 Mad. 376 (378-379).

3 Blackburn v. Sholes, 11 R.R. 723, cited in Bowstead : Op. cit. (11th
edn.), 286


67

of sale. That this was the intention of the legislature
appears to us to be clear from the heading of the sub-
chapter in which the section occurs, which is ‘revocation
of authority’. We do not, accordingly, consider any legis-
lative change to be necessary.

158. This section is not, however, exhaustive of the
cases when the authority of an agent is determined and
agency is terminated. The following should also be
included in the section as circumstahces in which the
authority of an agent is determined:*

(1) Destruction of the subject-matter of the agency;*

(2) The happening of any event rendering the
agency unlawful or upon the happening of
which it is agreed between the principal and
agent that the authority shall determine;

(3) Insolvency of agent;

(4) Dissolution of the firm, corporation or company
where the principal is a firm, corporation or
registered company.

There are good reasons for providing for termination
of agency on the agent becoming an insolvent. The credit
in the market of a person who is adjudicated insolvent is
affected and in many. cases such an agent is not in a vosi-
tion to fulfill the object of the contract of agency. Under
the Insolvency law where a commission agent has sold the
goods and realised the money, such money, on his adjudi-
cation as insolvent, is not treated as trust money and it
goes to the Official Assignee or Receiver.*

159. No change is necessary in sections 202-3.

160. In section 204, the language ‘such acts and obliga-
tions as arise from acts already done in the agency’ is not
happy. The illustrations point to the conclusion that the
intention of the legislature was to protect acts already done
and obligations arising from such acts. We suggest that
the language of the section should be made more explicit.

161, No change is necessary in section 205.

1 Bowstead : Op. cit. (11th Ed.), 286-7.
2 Rhodes v. Forwood, (1876) 1 App. Cas. 256.
> Mulla: The Law of Insolvency in india (2nd edn,), 465.

Secs. 202-3.

Sec. 204.

Sec. 205.


68

Sec. 206. 162. The language uf section 206 has been commented
upon by Rankin C.J. in In re Shaw Wallace & Co.' in the
following words:

“If the phrase ‘such revocation or renunciation’ is to
be taken as referring back to section 205 I con-.
fess that I find no meaning in the section; and
it is at least arguable that what the draftsman.
meant to say is that when there is no express or
implied contract that the agency should conti-
nue for any fixed period reasonable notice must
be given of the revocation or renunciation of,
the agency.”

We think that this criticism should be obviated by
making it clear that the section is applicable only where
the period of the agency is not fixed by contract, express:
or implied.

Secs, 207 163. No change is, considered necessary in sections 207
210. to 210.

Sec. 211. 164. It is not the duty of an agent to adhere to
instructions which are not lawful. This should be made
clear in section 211.

165. According to this section the agent is liable to
account for profits when they accrue during the breach of
the duty enjoined by this section. There is no provision
for accounting of profits in cases where without the breach
of such duty the agent make profits. A section? should be
added providing that if an agent, without the knowledge
of the principal, acquires any profit or benefit from his:
agency other than that contemplated by the principal at
the time of making the contract of agency, he must pay
such profits and the value of such benefits to the principal?.
In case such benefits consist of a bribe or a secret com-
mission the agent is liable to summary dismissal and to
pay to the principal loss actually sustained in consequence
of any breach of duty on the agent’s part induced by the
bribe or secret commission, in addition to the forfeiture
of the commission or remuneration to which he may have
been otherwise entitled. It is desirable to make the
necessary additions.+ पु

3 8. 1. ए. 193 Cal 676 GB.
2 3, 283, App. 1. >

3 Bowstead, 11th Ed., 75.
“ 5, 2168, शत Expl. to's, 220, 899.1.


69

166. This section demands a higher standard of skill than
the English or American law. According to the section an
agent, whether gratuitous or for reward, is bound to possess
skill generally possessed by persons engaged in similar
business and is bound to use such skill as he possesses. In
England, a distinction is drawn between the gratuitous
agent and an agent for reward. The former is bound to
use only such skill as he has, while a higher standard is
exacted in the case of the latter. In the case of an agent
for reward the skill required is not merely that which he
in fact possesses, but such as is reasonably necessary for
the due performance of his undertaking or such as is usual
for the ordinary or proper conduct of the business in which
he is employed.'. In America, the law has been stated as
follows:

*(1) Unless otherwise agreed, a paid agent is subject
to a duty to the principal to act with standard
care and with the skill which is standard in the
locality for the kind of work which he is
employed to perform and, in addition, to exer-
cise, any special skill that he has.

(2) Unless otherwise agreed, a gratuitous agent is
under a duty to the principal to act with the
care and skill which is required of persons not
agents performing similar gratuitous under-
takings for others.’

No injustice, however, appears to have been experienced
by maintaining the higher standard in India and we pro-
pose to leave the section unaltered.

167. No change is recommended in sections 213-214,

168. Two conditions—in the alternative—are annexed to
the right of the principal to repudiate the transaction
where the circumstances mentioned in the section exist.
They are (1) dishonest concealment of a material fact; and
(2) dealing being disadvantageous to the principal. The
English rule does not recognise these conditions. We are
of the view that the logical conclusion of the fiduciary
character of the relationship of the principal and agent, is
that for the exercise of the right of repudiation it should

ज Halsbury Op. cit. (ged edn), Vole, 185.

Sec, 212

Sees. 213-4.

See, 215.


70

be sufficient for the principal to prove that his consent had
not been obtained and that the agent had not acquainted
him with all material circumstances. It should not be
further necessary to establish that there was a dishonest
concealment on the part of the agent or that the dealings
were disadvantageous to the principal. The English rule
is founded upon the principle that the agent will not be
allowed to put his duty in conflict with his interest and,
therefore, he must not enter into any transaction which
is likely to produce that result, unless he has first made
the fullest disclosure of the exact nature of his interest
to his principal and the principal has assented. If there
js no disclosure, the fairness of the transaction is
immaterial and it is avoidable at the principal’s option".
In the Bank of Upper Canada v. Bradshaw*, Lord Cairns
observed: “Their Lordships are desirous in no way to
qualify or to abridge the doctrine of law prevailing in
almost all systems of jurisprudence, that any one standing
in the position of an agent cannot be allowed to put his
duty in conflict with his interests, and they are certainly
not prepared to rest the application of the doctrine on the
amount of the interest, adverse to that of his employer,
which the agent may be supposed to have.”

In America the law is stated substantially in the
following terms:

‘An agent, in dealing with the principal on his own
account in regard to a subject-matter as to which
he is employed, is subject to a duty to deal
fairly with the principal and to communicate to
him all material facts in connection with the
transaction of which he has notice, unless the
principal has manifested that he knows such
facts or that he does not care to know of them*,’

The removal of the two conditions mentioned above
from section 215 will be in consonance with the provisions
of section 88 of the Trusts Act. We recommend accord-
ingly.

Secs, 216-9. 169. No change is recommended in sections 216—219.

2 Halsbury: Op. cit. Grd edn), Vol 419 19
2 (1867) L. R. 1P.C. 479 (489).
3 American Resta:ement of th Law of Agency, sec. 390.



71

170. An agent is not entitled to any remuneration in
tespect of any transaction which is obviously, or to his
knowledge, unlawful nor is he entitled to remuneration in
respect of any transaction entered into by him in violation
of the duties arising from the fiduciary character of the
relationship between him and the principal, even if the
transaction be adopted by the principal. Bowstead appends
an illustration: ‘An agent, who is employed to sell certain
land sells it to a company in which he is a director and a
large shareholder. He is not entitled to commission upon
the sale, even if it be adopted and confirmed by the
principal”.

We think that the Act should have specific provision?
with regard to the non-liability of the principal to pay the
remuneration in the cases stated above.

171. No change is considered necessary in sections 221
to 228. j

172, The rule embodied in section 229 does not apply
where the agent has taken part in the commission of a
fraud on the principal, unless the fraud is committed not
against the principal, but against a third person*. This
exception should be made a part of the section.

173. It is well established that when an agent has made
a contract in the subject-matter of which he has a special
property, he may, even though he contracted for an avowed
principal, sue in his own name. The exception may be
added’.

174. It is also established* that an agent may in his own
name sue for the recovery of money paid on his principal’s
behalf under a mistake of tact, or in respect of a con-
sideration which fails or in consequence of the fraud or
other wrongful act of the employee, or otherwise under
circumstances rendering the payee liable to repay the
money. This rule should also be added’.

1 Bowstead: Op. cit. (1ithedn.), 137 [Art 68), We 4]

2 Vide Expl. to s. 220, App. 1.

3 Bowstead : Op. cit. (11th Edn.), 232
42 Sm. L. C. 378, cited in PoHock & Mulla, Op. cit., 700.

® Pollock & Mulla : Op. cit., 700, 701.
8 Vide s. 230A, App. 1.

Sec, 220:

Sec. 221-8.

Sec. 229.

Sec. 230.



Secs, 231-2.

Sec, 233.

72

175. Sections 231 and 232 overlap. Marriot, J., in the
case of Premji Trikamdas v. Madhowji Munji' took the
view that section 232 was not a repetition of the first part
of section 231 and that it was a qualification of the first
portion of paragraph 1 of section 231, which gives a princi-
pal a general right to enforce a contract entered into by
his agent. According to the learned Judge, section 232
qualifies that general right by making it subject to the
rights and obligations subsisting between the agent and
the other contracting party. Pollock and Mulla? express
their inability to discover any difference between the first
paragraph of section 231 and section 232. According to
them the case is one of inadverence. We agree with the
learned commentators, and recommend that section 232,
being covered by the provision in section 231, be omitted.

176. According to English Law, in cases contemplated
by section 233, the liability of the principal and agent would
be alternative and not joint®., There is a difference of
opinion as to whether the section marks a departure from
English Law. Coutts Trotter, C. J. in Kutti Krishna Nair
v. Appa Nair', held that the English law was intended to
be reproduced in the section and that the third party may
sue both the agent and the principal alternatively or he
can sue any one of them but he cannot sue both of them
jointly. On the other hand, the Bombay® High Court and,
in a later case, the Madras High Court® took the contrary
view that the section created a joint liability. We think
that the section deals with substantive rights and not pro-
cedural remedies, and that the latter view is correct.
Further, we recommend that a provision be made that a
judgment against the principal or the agent, although
unsatisfied is, so long as it subsists, a bar to any pro-
ceedings against the agent or the principal, as the case may
be.

177. We recommend that the English rule that where
inquiry or loss is caused to a third person by the wrongful
act or omission of an agent who is acting within the scope

1 4. Bom. 447.
® Poollock & Mulla: Op. cit. 708.
3 Bowstead: op. cit. (11th edn.), 202.
‘Mad. 900.
5 Shiv Lal v. Birdichand, 19 Bom. LR.
Shamsuddin v. Shaw Wallace & Co., A.1.R. 1939 Mad. 520(523).


73

of his authority, the principal is liable jointly and
severally with the agent, should be expressly provided
for’.

178. It is well established that in cases where the pro-
perty of the principal is disposed of by an agent In a
manner not expressly or ostensibly authorised, the
principal is entitled, as against the agent and third persons,
subject to any enactment to the contrary, to recover the
property wheresoever it may be found”. This rule should
be adopted, together with its exceptions*.

179. No change is recommended in section: 234—237.

180. The rule that agency can be created by estoppel
should be incorporated in a new section‘. That rule may
be stated thus: Where any person, by words or conduct,
represents or permits it to be represented that another
person has authority to act on his behalf, he is bound
by the acts of such other person with respect to any one
dealing with him as an agent on the faith of such repre-
sentation, to the same extent as if such other person had
the authority which he was so represented to have.

181. No change is considered necessary in section 238.

182. With a view to presenting a clear picture of the
recommendations made by us in this Report we have made
alterations giving effect to them in the text of the existing
Act, as shown in Appendix I.

Appendix II contains the suggestions made by us in res-
pect of other Acts.

183. While in Appendix I the changes proposed are
shown in the form of draft amendments to the existing
sections, we would like to make it clear that it
should not be treated as a draft Amendment Bill. It will

1 Vide s. 238A, App. I.

3 Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. I, 211; Vol. 14, 628-9,
2 Vides. 2388, App. I.

$ Vide s, 237A, App. 1.

Secs. 234-75

Sec. 238.


74

be for the official draftsman to draw up such a bill after
renumbering the Chapters and the sections of the Act as
has become necessary by reason of the changes which have
taken place in the text of the Act since 1872.

M. C. SETALVAD
(Chairman).

M. C. CHAGLA,

K. N. WANCHOO,

P. SATYANARAYANA RAO,

N. C. SEN GUPTA¥

V. K. T. CHARI,*

D. NARASA RAJU,*

S. M. SIKRI,*

G. S. PATHAK;

G. N. JOSHI,

N. A. PALKHIVALA.

K. SRINIVASAN,

DURGA DAS BASU,
Joint Secretaries.

New DEL:
The 26th September, 1958,

+ Sen Gupta, Shri Narasa Raju and Shri
i

n the forwarding letter


75
APPENDIX I
Proposals as shown in the form of draft amendments.
[This is not, however, to be treated as a draft Bill.]

Changes in the text of the existing Act have been
shown in italics, wherever possible.

yof 1872, In section 1 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (herein- section x,
after referred to as the principal Act),—

(a) the word “Indian” shall be omitted;

(b) after the words “any incident of any contract”,
the words “if such usage, custom or incident of
contract is” shall be inserted.

In section 2 of the principal Act, after clause (j), the Section 2.
following clause shall be added, namely :—
“(k) The expressions “documents of title’ and
“mercantile agent” have the meanings respec-
tively assigned to them in the Indian Sale of
of 1930. Goods Act, 1930”.

Section 8 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as Section 8.
sub-section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so
renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely .—

“(2) In the case of a promise made in consideration
of the promisee’s performing an act, the pro-
misee’s entering upon the performance of the
act is an acceptance of the proposal, unless the
promise contains an express or implied term
that it can be revoked before the act has been
completed”.

Section 9 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as Section 9.
sub-section (2) of that section, and the following sub-section
shall be inserted as sub-section (1) thereof, namely :—

“(1) A promise may be express or .innptied”. ~

For section 15 of the prinéipal

section shall be substituted,-namely :—
“15. Coercion defined.

Coercion is the committing, or threatening to com-

mit, any act, when the committing, or threaten-

ing to commit, such act is punishable by any

t, the . following sectitirds
a



Section 19

76

law for the time being in force, or the unlawful
detaining, or threatening to detain, any pro-
perty, to the prejudice of any person whatever,
with the intention of causing any person to enter
into an agreement.

Explanation.—Where the coercion is employed in a
place situated outside the territories to which this Act
extends, it is immaterial whether the law is or is not in
force in that place.”

For section 19 of the principal Act, the following
section shall be substituted, namely: —

“19. Voidability of agreements without free consent.

(1) When consent to an agreement is caused by
coercion, fraud or misrepresentation, the agreement is a
contract voidable at the option of the party whose consent
was so caused.

(2) A party to a contract, whose consent was caused
by fraud or misrepresentation, may, if he thinks fit, claim
that the contract shall be performed and that he shall be
put in the position in which he would have been if the
tepresentations made had been true. Where such a claim
is made, the court shall, in deciding thereon, have due
regard to the following considerations—

(a) whether, and if so, how far, the claim is reason-
able; and 7

(b) whether it is in the power of the party against
whom the contract is voidable to perform it
fully.

(3) Where such a claim is disallowed, the court may
award compensation in money for the injury caused by
the fraud or misrepresentation.

Exception.—If such consent was -caused by misrepre-
sentation, or by silence fraudulent within the meaning of
section 17, the contract, nevertheless, is not voidable, if the
party whose consent was so caused had the means of dis-
covering the truth with ordinary diligence.

Explanation—A fraud or misrepresentation which did
not cause the consent to a contract of the party on whom


77

such fraud was practised, or to whom such misrepresenta-
tion was made, does not render a contract voidable.”

After section 23 of the principal Act, the following Section 23A-
section shall be inserted, namely :— ¢ .

“23A. Agreements to procure marriage or pay money
in consideration thereof.

The following agreements are unlawful within the
meaning of section 23—

(a) an agreement to procure the marriage of any
person for reward;

(b) an agreement to pay money or deliver anything
whose value can be expressed in terms of
money to a parent or other guardian-in-
marriage of any person in consideration of
his consenting to the marriage of that person.”

Tu section 24 of the principal Act, the following Ex- Section 24.
planation shall be added, namely :—

“

cplanation.—Where—

(a) there are distinct promises based on distinct
considerations, and

(b) some of the promises are unlawful and can
be separated from the promises that are lawful,
or some of the considerations are unlawful
and can be separated from the considerations
that are lawful,

the agreement is void to the extent of the promises
which are unlawful or are based on unlawful
consideration.”

In section 25 of the principal Act,— Section 25,

(a) in clause (3), the words “or unless” shall be
inserted at the end;

(b) after clause (3), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely :—

“(4) it is a promise, express or implied, which the
promisor knew or should reasonably have
known, would be relied upon by the promisee,
where the promisee has altered his position to
his detriment in reliance on the promise; or
unless


78

(5) it is a promise to keep a proposal open for a
definite period of time or until the occurrence
of a specified event; or unless

(6) it is a promise to dispense with or remit the
performance of a promise or to extend the
time for its performance.”

Section 6. For section 26 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely :—
“26. Agreement in restraint of marriage void in
certain cases.

(i) Every agreement in total restraint of the
marriage of any person, other than a minor,
is void.

(ii) An agreement in partial restraint of the
marriage of any person, other than a minor, is
void if the court regards it as unreasonable
in the circumstances of the case.”

Section 27. In section 27 of the principal Act, for the words “is to
that extent void” the words “is to that extent void, except
in so far as the restraint is reasonable having regard to
the interests of the parties to the agreement and of the
public” shall be substituted.

Section 28. In Exception 1 to section 28 of the principal Act, for the
words “only the amount awarded in such arbitration shall
be recoverable” the words “the parties will be bound by
the award” shall be substituted.

Section 30, For section 30 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substiuted, namely: —
“30. Agreements by way of wager, or collateral
thereto, void.
(1) The following agreements are void:—~

(a) agreements by way of wager (hereinafter in
this section referred to as “wagering agree-
ments”);

(b) agreements knowingly made to further or
assist the entering into or carrying out of
wagering agreements;

(c) agreements by way of security or guarantee for
the performance of agreements referred to in
clause (a) or (09) of this sub-section;


79

and no suit shall be brought for recovering any sum of
money paid or payable in respect of any agreement which
is void under this sub-section.

(2) No suit shall be brought for recovering—

(a) any commission, brokerage, fee, or reward in
respect of the knowingly entering into, effect-
ing or carrying out, or of the knowingly aiding
in effecting or in carrying out, or otherwise
claimed or claimable in respect of, any agree-
ment which is void under sub-section (1),
whether the plaintiff in such suit be or be not
a party to such agreement; or

(b) any sum of money knowingly paid or payable
on account of any person by way of commis-
sion, brokerage, fee or reward in respect of
such agreement; or

(०) ................... ७. anything alleged to be won on
any wager, or entrusted to any person to abide

the result of any game or other uncertain event .

on which any wager is made.

Exception—This section shall not be deemed to render
unlawful a subscription, or contribution, or agreement to
subscribe or contribute, made or entered into for or towards
any plate, prize or sum of money, of the value or amount
of five hundred rupees or upwards, to be awarded to the

winner or winners of any horse-race.

Explanation—Nothing in this section shall be deemed
to legalize any transaction connected with horse-racing,
to which the provisions of section 294A of the Indian Penal

Code apply.”

After section 37 of the principal 'Act, the following Seotion 37A.

section shail be inserted, namely:

“837A. Benefits conferred on third parties.

(1) Where a contract expressly confers a benefit

directly on a third party, then, unless the con-
tract otherwise provides, it shall be enforceable
by the third party in his own name, subject to
any defences that would have been valid between
the contracting parties.


80

(2) Where a contract expressly conferring a benefit
directly upon a third party has been adopted,
expressly or impliedly, by the third party, the
parties to the contract cannot substitute a new
contract for it or rescind or alter it so as to affect
the rights of the third party.”

tion 38. For the last paragraph of section 38 of the principal
Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:—

“An offer to one of several joint promisees, which

has not been accepted, has the same legal
consequences as an offer to all of them.”

tion 38A. After section 38 of the principal Act, the following

w) section shall be inserted, namely: —

“38A. Acceptance of performance by one of several
joint promisees.

One of several joint promisees cannot accept an
offer of performance, without the concurrence
of the others.”

jon 448. After section 44 of the principal Act, the following
w) section shall be inserted, namely: —

“44A. Effect of decree obtained against one promi-
sor.

A decree against any one or more of a number of
joint promisors does not, if it has remained
unsatisfied, and in the absence of express agree-
ment to the contrary, bar a subsequent suit
against any one or more of the other promisors.”

on 49. To section 49 of the principal Act, the following Ex-
planation shall be added, namely:—

“Explanation—In the case of a contract of loan,
where the creditor has not appointed a place
for repayment of the loan and the borrower
has made no application for such- appointment,
it is the duty of the borrower to make the
repayment at the place where the creditor car-
ries on business, or, if there is no such place,
at the place where the creditor resides”.

tion 62 To section 62 of the principal Act, the following
Explanation shall be added, namely :—

“Explanation—An agreement may be made under

this section notwithstanding that there has been


81

a breach of the original contract by any party
thereto”.

For section 65 of the principal Act, the following sec- Section 65.
tion shall be substituted, namely:—

“65. Obligation of person who has received advan-
tage under void agreement or contract that
becomes void or is avoided.

Where an agreement between parties competent to
contract is discovered to be void, or when a
contract becomes void or is avoided by a party
entitled to do so, any person who has received
any advantage under such agreement or con-
tract is bound to restore it or to make compen-
sation for it, to the person from’ whom he has
received it.

Explanation 1—An agreement which is void by reason
of the minority of any party thereto is governed by the
provisions of this section, if the agreement is entered into
by the minor falsely representing that he is major.

Explanation 2—An agreement which is void-by reason - 2८
of non-compliance with any requirement relating: to. form
or sanction of any authority, prescribed by or under any
law, is governed by the provisions of this section”.

पु ‘After section 67 of the principal Act, . the following Section 678
section shall be inserted, namely:—. ... - + (New).

“6745, Material alterations in ‘an instrument con-
taining the contract. पु

(1) Any material alteration .of any instrument tn
which a contract is expressed renders the con-
tract void as against any. one who,is a party
thereto: at the time of making. such, alteration
and does not consent thereto, unless, it. was made
in order to carry out the common intention of
the parties to the contract. _

(2

A party to a contract expressed in an instru-
ment, who asserts his rights’ thereunder, is
bound by the instrument, notwithstanding any
prévious alteration: of “the instrument: known to
* him. stor Teta



82

(3). For the purposes of this section, a material
alteration is one which varies the rights, liabili-
ties or legal position of the parties as ascertain-
ed by the instrument in its original state, or
otherwise affects the substance of the contract
expressed in the instrument or prejudices any
party bound by the contract.

(4) An alteration which merely expresses what
was already implied in the instrument, or adds
particulars which, though superfluous, are con-
sistent with the instrument as it stands, is not
a material alteration within the meaning of this
section.

(5) The provisions of this section shall not apply
where the alteration was made by a stranger
without the consent of, or any negligence or
fraud on the part of, a party to the contract.”

Section 69. In section 69 of the principal Act, for the words “who
is interested in the payment of money” the words “who,
though not bound by law to pay, is interested in the pay-
ment of, money” shall be substituted.

Section 698. After section 69 of the principal Act, the following
cw) section shall be inserted, namely:—

“69A. Contribution between joint tort-feasors.

(1) Where damage is suffered by any person as a
result of a tort (whether a crime or not), any
tort-feasor liable in respect of that damage
may recover contribution from any other tort-
feasor who is, or would if sued have been,
liable in respect of the same damage, whether
as joint tort-feasor or otherwise, so, however,
that no person shall be entitled to recover con-
tribution under this section from any person
entitled to be indemnified by him in respect of
the liability in respect of which the contribu-
tion is sought.

(2) In any proceedings for contribution under this
section, the amount of the contribution recover-
able from any person shall be such as may be
found by the court to be just and equitable
having regard to the extent of that person’s
responsibility for the damage; and the court


83

shall have power to exempt any person from
liability to make contribution, or to direct that
the contribution to be recovered from any per-
son shall amount to a complete indemnity.”
In section 70 of the principal Act,—
For section 70 of the principal Act, the following sec- section 70,
tion shall be substituted, namely:—

“10. Obligation of person enjoying benefit of non-
gratuitous act.

Where a person lawfully does anything for another
person, or delivers anything or pays any money
to him, not ‘intending to do so gratuitously, and
such other person accepts and enjoys the bene-
fit thereof, the latter is bound to make compen-
sation to the former in respect of or to restore,
the thing so done or delivered or the money
so paid.”

For section 72 of the principal Act, the following sec- Section 72°
tion shall be substituted, namely:—

“72. Liability of person to whom money is paid or
thing delivered by mistake or under coercion
or as a result of fraud, etc.

A person to whom money has been paid, or any
thing delivered, by mistake (whether of fact
or law) or under coercion, or who obtains such
Payment or delivery by fraud or misrepresen-
tation or by the exercise of undue influence,
must repay or return it.

Explanation—An act may amount to coercion
within the meaning of this section though tt
does not constitute coercion as defined in
section 15”.

After section 72 of the principal Act, the following
sections shall be inserted, namely:—

“712A. When contract of indemnity may be implied, Sections
72A—B.

When an act is done by one person at the request (New).
of another, and the act, not being in itself
manifestly tortious to the knowledge of the
person doing it, turns out to be injurious to the
rights of a third party, then, in the absence of
express agreement to the contrary, the person


$4

doing it is.entitled to be indemnified by the
person at whose request it is done.

428. Restitution by person unjustly benefited in
cases not expressly provided for, ~

In any case not coming within the scope of sections
68 to 72A, where there is no contract, but a
person is unjustly benefited at the expense of
another. person, the former is bound to restore
the benefit to the latter or to make compensa-
tion therefor.”

Section 124, “For section 124 of the principal Act, the following sec-
tion ‘shall be substituted, namely:—

| «194, “Contract of indemnity” defined.

‘A contract by which one party promises, expressly
. or impliedly, to save the other from loss caused
to him by the conduct of the promisor himself,
rem हाय or by. the-conduct of any other person 6 by
any event not depending on such conduct; is
called a “contract of indemnity.”

Section 125A After section 125 of the principal Act, the following
New). section shall be inserted, namely: —

* 1953. Rights of indemnity-holder.
(0) The promisee in a contract of indemnity acting
within the scope of his authority may, where
a liability has arisen against him in favour of a
third party, obtain against the promisor, in an
” ’ appropriate case, a decree compelling. the pro-
“ misor to set apart a fund out of which the
“promisee may meet such liability or directing
the promisor to discharge such liability himself.
(2) The promisee may institute a suit under this
section even where no such suit as is referred
to in section 125 has been instituted, and irres-
peétive of whether any actual loss has been
sustained by the promisee or not.
नर
1 Explanation—The promisee is not precluded from ob-
taining relief under this section merely on the ground
that_the .promisee’s liability to the third party cannot be
effectively enforced against him”


85

To section 130 of the principal Act, the following Ex- Section 130.
ception shall be added, namely :—

“Exception—A continuing guarantee given to a- 2
court cannot be revoked by the surety as to future
transactions, without the permission of the
court.”

In section 134 of the principal Act, the following Ex- Section 134,
planation shall be inserted at the end, namely :—

“Explanation._For the purposes of this section, the
following do not amount to acts or omissions the legal
consequence of which is discharge of the principal
debtor :—

(i) mere failure to sue the principal debtor within
the time specified by any law relating to limita-
tion for the time being in force;
(ii) inability to sue the principal debtor, arising by
reason of any provision contained in any of the
Orders in the First Schedule to the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908.” 5 of 1908,

For section 141 of the principal Act, the following sec- Section 141.

tion shall be substituted, namely :—

“141, Surety’s right to benefit of creditor’s securitles.

If the debt or liability owed by the principal debtor
to the creditor has been paid or discharged in
full, the surety is entitled to the benefit. of every
security which the creditor has against the
principal debtor, whether such security was or
was not in existence at the time when the con-
tract of suretyship was entered into, and whether
such security was received by the creditor be-
fore, contemporaneously with or after the con-
tract of suretyship was entered into, and
whether the surety knows of the existence of
such security or not; and if the creditor loses or,
without the consent of the surety, parts with _ _
such security, the surety is discharged to the’ “Fe
extent of the value of the security.”

%

In section 142 of the principal Act,— Section 142,

--(a) a comma shall be inserted -after the word “mis-
representation;”


86

(b) the comma appearing after the word “creditor”
shall be omitted.

Section 143, In section 143 of the principal Act, for the words “by
means of keeping silence” the words “by wilful silence”
shall be substituted.

Section 145. To section 145 of the principal Act, the following Ex-
planations shall be added, namely :—

“Explanation 1.—The right of the surety to indemnity
under this section shall not be deemed to pre-
judice his right to recover damages in appro-
priate cases,

Explanation 2—Payment by a surety of a debt barred
as against the principal debtor by limitation, is
6 payment made “rightfully” within the mean-
ing of this section.”

Section 149, To section 149 of the principal Act, the following Ex-
planation shall be added, namely :—

“Explanation.—Delivery of the documents of title to
any goods by, or with the consent of, the owner
has, for the purposes of this section, the same
effect as delivery of the goods”.

Section 157, In section 151 of the principal Act, for the words “the
bailee is bound” the words “the bailee is, in the absence
of any special contract, bound” shall be substituted.

Section 160, Section 160 of the principal Act shall renumbered as
sub-section (1) thereof, and to sub-section (1) as so re-
numbered, the following sub-section shall be added,
namely :—

“(2) In the case of a breach of the said duty, the
bailor is entitled to claim damages and, in the
case of disposal of the goods by the bailee, the
bailor is also entitled to follow the proceeds
wherever they can be distinguished.”

Section 178. (a) Section 178 of. the principal Act shall be renumber-
ed as sub-section (2) of that section, and the following sub-
section shall be inserted as sub-section (1) of that section,
namely :—

“(1) Where the owner of any goods is in possession
of the documents of title to the goods, any


87

pledge made by him by delivery of the docu-
ments of title shall be as valid as a pledge by
him by delivery of the goods.”

(b) For the marginal note to section 178 of the princi-
pal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:—

“Pledge by owner in possession of documents of
title, or by mercantile agent.”

In section 181 of the principal Act, after the words Section 181.
“any such suit” the words “as is referred to in section 180”
shall be inserted.

After section 181 of the principal Act, the following Section
section shall be inserted, namely :— 181A (New)

“181A. Constructive bailment.

Where, otherwise than by a mutual contract of
bailment, one person lawfully comes into posses-
sion of goods belonging to another and holds
them under circumstances whereby he ought,
upon principles of justice, to keep them safely
and restore them or deliver them to the owner,
then such person and the owner have the same
mutual rights and liabilities as if they were
bailee and bailor respectively under a contract
of bailment”.

For section 182 of the principal Act, the following sec- Section 182.
tion shall be substituted, namely: —

“182. Agent and principal defined.

An “agent” is a person having express or implied
authority to represent or act on behalf of
another person, who is called the “principal”.”

For section 183 of the principal Act, the following sec- Section 133.
tion shall be substituted, namely: —

“183. Capacity to act as principal.

Capacity of any person to enter into any contract
or do any other act by means of an agent is,
subject to the provisions of section 187A, co-
extensive with his capacity to enter into that
contract or do that act himself”.


88

Section 184. For section 184 of the principal Act, the following sec-
tion shall be substituted, namely: —

“184. Who may be an agent.

As between the principal and third persons any person
may become an agent, but no person who is not of the age
of majority and of sound mind can become an agent—

(a) so as to be responsible to his principal, or

(b) so as to be personally bound to third persons in
respect of contracts entered into by him-on
behalf of his principal,

according to the provisions in that behalf herein contained”.
Section 186. Section 186 of the principal Act shall be omitted.

Section 187. For section 187 of the principal Act, the following sec-
tion shall be substituted, namely:—

“187. Definition of express and implied authority.

An authority is said to be express when it is given
by words spoken or written. An authority is
said to be implied when it is to be inferred from
the circumstances of the case; and things spoken

. or written or the ordinary course of dealing,
or the relationship in which the parties stand
to each other and the necessities of the case, may
be accounted such circumstances....”

Section 187A After section 187 of the principal Act, the following sec-
New). tion shall be inserted, namely: —

“187A. Acts which may be done by means of an
agent.

An agent may be appointed for the purpose of entering
into any contract or doing any other act on behalf of the
principal which the principal might himself enter into or
do, not being a contract or other act,—

(a) which is to be entered into or done for the pur-
pose of exercising a power or authority confer-
red or performing a duty imposed on the prin-
cipal personally, the exercise or performance of
which requires discretion or skill, or

(b) which the principal is by or under any law re-
quired to enter into or 40 himself”.


89

For section 188 of the principal Act, the following sec-
tion shall be substituted, namely:—

“188. Extent of an agent’s authority.

(1) An agent having an authority to do an act has
authority to do every lawful thing which is
necessary in order to do such act or ordinarily
incidental to doing it in the usual way.

(2) An agent has implied authority to act, in the
execution of his express authority, according te
the custom or usage prevailing in the market,
trade or business in which he is employed.

(3) An agent having an authority to carry on a
business has authority to do every lawful thing
necessary for the purpose, or usually done
in the course of conducting such business.”

For section 190 of the principal Act, the following sec-
tion shall be substituted, namely: —

“190. Delegation by agent.

An agent cannot lawfully employ any other person to
perform acts which he has expressly or impliedly under-
taken to perform, ... except in the following cases:—

(i) where, by the usage of the market, trade or
business in which the agent is employed, a sub-
agent may be employed;

(ii) where, from the nature of the agency, a sub-
agent must be employed;

(iii) where the agent has express or implied autho-
rity to delegate his powers or duties;

(iv) where the act to be done is purely ministerial
and does not involve any confidence or discre-
tion or require any skill.”

In section 194 of the principal Act—

(a) for the word “name” the word “appoint” shall
be substituted;

(b) for the word “named” the word “appointed”
shall be substituted.

Section 188,

Section 190.

Section 194.


90

Section 196, To section 196 of the principal Act, the following Ex-
planation shall be added, namely:—

“Explanation—For the purpose of ratification it is
immaterial whether the person by whom the
act is done is an agent exceeding his authority,
or a person having no authority to act for the
person ratifying it; but an act which is in its
inception void cannot be ratified”.

Section 198. For section 198 of the principal Act, the following sec-
tion shall be substituted, namely: —
“198. Knowledge requisite for valid ratification.

No valid ratification can be made by a person whose
knowledge of the facts of the case is materially
defective, except where such person intends ta
ratify the act and take the risk whatever the
facts of the case may be.

Explanation.—It is not necessary that the person
ratifying should have knowledge of the legal
effect of the act, or of collateral circumstances
affecting the nature thereof”.

Seaton 200A After section 200 of the principal Act, the following
c है section shall be inserted, namely: —

“200A. Effect of ratification of contract in respect of
past breaches.

The ratification of a contract does not give the
person who ratifies it a right of action in respect
of any breach thereof committed before its rati-
fication”.

Section zor. For section 201 of the principal Act, the following shall
be substituted, namely: —

“201. Termination of agency.

An agency is terminated—
(a) by the principal revoking his authority;
(b) by the agent renouncing the business of the

(c) एज the business of the agency being com-
pleted;............

(१) by either the principal or agent dying or be-
coming of unsound mind;....


ot

(e) by either the principal or agent being adjudi-
cated an insolvent under the provisions of any
Act for the time being in force for the relief of
insolvent debtors;

(0) by expiry of the period of agency, if any;

(g) by the destruction of a material part of the subs
ject-matter of the agency;

(h) by the happening of any event which renders
the agency unlawful or upon the happening of
which it is agreed between the principal and
the agent that the authority shall determine; or

(i) by dissolution of the principal, where the prin-
cipal is a firm or a company or other corpora-
tion”.

In section 204 of the principal Act, for the words “such section 2०4
acts and obligations as arise from acts already done in the
agency” the words “acts already done in the agency and
obligations arising from such acts” shall be substituted.

For section 206 of the principal Act, the following sec- section 2¢6,
tion shall be substituted, namely:—
“206. Notice of revocation or renunciation where
there is no fixed period of agency.

Where there is no express or implied contract that
the agency should be continued for any period
of time, resonable notice must be given of any
revocation or renunciation of the agency by the
principal or the agent, as the case may be;
otherwise the damage thereby resulting to the
agent or the principal, as the case may be, must
be made good to the one by the other.”

In section 211 of the principal Act, for the words “ac- section 211
cording to the directions”, the words “according to the
lawful directions” shall be substituted.

In section 215 of the principal Act, the words “if the Section 215
case shows either that any material fact has been dis-
honestly concealed from him by the agent, or that the
dealings of the agent have been disadvantageous to him”
shall be omitted.

After section 216 of the principal Act, the following sec- Section 216A
tion shall be inserted, namely: — (New)

“216A. Agent’s liability in respect of bribes etc.


92

If an agent, without the knowledge of his principal,
accepts or agrees to accept any bribe or secret commission
from a third person, then, without prejudice to the provi-
sions of section 218A,—

(a) the agent is bound to make compensation to his
principal in respect of any loss caused to the
principal by such act of the agent;

(b) the principal may, notwithstanding anything
contained in sections 202, 205 and 206, sum-
marily revoke the authority of the agent”.

Section 218A After section 218 of the principal Act, the following
(New). section shall be inserted, namely: —

“218A. Agent’s duty to pay profits not contemplat-
ed.

If an agent, without the knowledge of his principal,
makes any profits or acquires any benefit from
his agency, other than a profit or benefit con-
templated by the principal at the time of mak-
ing the contract of agency, he is bound to pay the
principal all: such profits and the value of all
such benefits”.

Section 220, To section 220 of the principal Act, the following
Explanation shall be added, namely: —

“Explanation —“Misconduct”, in this section, includes
the following acts of the agent, namely :—

(i) entering into any transaction which is unlawful
on the face of it or by reason of facts known to
the agent;

(ii) entering into a transaction in violation of the
duties arising from the fiduciary character of
the relationship between the principal and the
agent, even if the transaction is adopted by the
principal;

(iii) acceptance of, or agreement to accept, a bribe
or secret commission from a third person”.

Section 229. In section 229 of the principal Act, the words “except
where the agent, being a party to the commission of a
fraud on the principal, omits to communicate any such
notice or information to the principal” shall be inserted at
the end.


93

To section 230 of the principal Act, the following para- Section 236.
graph shall be added, namely: —

“An agent may personally enforce a contract, if he has
a special property in the subjectematter thereof”.

After section 230 of the principal Act, the following Section 230A
section shall be inserted, namely: — N

“930A. Rights of agent where relation resembling
a contractual relation has been created against
a third person.

Where, in any of the circumstances dealt with in
sections 68 to 72B, a person becomes entitled to
any relief, he may personally claim such relief
from a third person, although he was acting as
an agent of any other person in the act or
transaction which gives rise to such relief”.

Section 232 of the principal Act shall be omitted. Section 232.

In section 233 of the principal Act, the following words Section 233.
shall be added at the end, namely: —

“but a decree obtained in respect of any liability
against a principal or an agent, whether the
decree is satisfied or not, is, so long as it subsists,
a bar to any proceeding in respect of the same
liability against the agent or the principal, as
the case may be”.

After section 237 of the principal Act, the following Section 237A.
section shall be inserted, namely: -- (New).

“237A. Agency by estoppel.

Where any person, by words or conduct, represents
or permits it to be represented that another
person has authority to act on his behalf, he is
bound by the acts of such other person with
respect to any one dealing with him as an agent
on the faith of such representation, to the same
extent as if such other person had the authority
which he was so represented to have”.

After section 238 of the principal Act, the following sections
sections shall be inserted, namely: — 238A and

a 238B (New).
“238A. Right of person injured by wrongful act of an
agent.


94
Where an act or omission of an agent acting within
the scope of his authority causes an injury to the
rights of a third person, the third person may hold
either him or his principal or both of them, liable.

238B. Right of principal to follow property in the
hands of third person.

(1) Where any property of the principal is disposed
of by an agent in favour of a third person in
excess of his authority, then, except as other-
wise provided by any other provision of law for
the time being in force, the principal has the
right to recover the property in the hands of
any person.

(2) Nothing in this section entitles the principal to any
right in respect of property in the hands of—

(a) a transferee in good faith for consideration with-
out having notice of the agent’s excess of autho-
rity, either when the purchase-money was paid,
or when the conveyance was executed, or

(b) a transferee for consideration from such a trans-
feree.

Explanation—A judgment-creditor of the agent
attaching and purchasing the principal’s property
is not a transferee for consideration within the
meaning of this sub-section.

(3) Nothing in this section applies to money, currency
notes, and negotiable instruments in the hands of a bona
fide holder to whom they have passed in circulation, or shall
be deemed to affect the liability of a person to whom a debt
or charge is transferred.”

Omission of illustrations.

All illustrations appearing below any section of the
principal Act shall be omitted.

Repeal The Act for Avoiding Wagers Amendment Act, 1865
(New). (Bombay Act 3 of 1865) is hereby repealed.

wee


95
APPENDIX II
Suggestions in respect of other acts
Trusts Act, 1882.

Sec. 84—The section should be amended so as to include
the case of payment of money or delivery of property, as
suggested [Paragraph 100].

Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

Order VIII (or some other suitable place).—The advisa-
bility of a specific provision relating to the defence open to
a defendant in a suit for contribution by a co-promisor,
where the defendant was not a party to the creditor’s suit,
to be considered [Paragraph 70].

GMGIPND—M—79 Law Com.—23-9-58—400