HES

130

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED THIRTIETH REPORT
e
ON

BENAMI TRANSACTIONS -
A CONTINUUM

1988


Tel. No. 384475

D.A. DESAI LAW COMMISSION
CHAIRMAN GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
SHASTRI BHAVAN
NEW DELHI

August 14, 1988.
0.0. NO. 6(2)(3)/88-LC-LS

Shri B. Shankaranand,
Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of India,

Shastri Bhavan,

NEW DELHI.

Dear Shri Shankaranand,

You may kindly recall your letter dated July
22, 1988, by which the Law Commission was
requested to take up the case of Benami
Transactions (Prohibition of the Right to Recover
Property) Ordinance No. 2 of 88 for detailed
examination and give its considered views as early
as possible so that the Bill to replace the
Ordinance may be drafted on the basis of the
recommendations of the Law Commission and get the
same passed before the close of the Monsoon
Session of Parliament. The letter of reference
was received on July 22, 1988. Immediately
thereafter, the Law Commission started looking
into the various ramifications of the Ordinance
including the extensive coverage, if any, that may
be recommended. The Law Commission, of course, as
you know, had the advantage of its,carlier report
(Fifty-Seventh).

Ordinarily, the Law Commission before giving
its considered views, likes to develop a national
dcbate for ascertaining the views of the sociéty
so as to make effective recommendations to be in
tune with the mores of the day.

With the timc constraint, it was not possible
to follow this regular procedure of the Law


Commission, But it is anathema to the Law
Commission to give its views as perceived by it
only. To the limited extent of the time
permitting, restricted debate with some
outstanding personalities, who have made name in
different walks of life, was undertaken. The Law
Commission, to the extent, became well-informed.
After collating all the material, the report has
been drawn up. हु

I have great pleasure in sending this report
today. In order to appreciate the width and
coveragae of the report, I would request you to
place the report of the Law Commission on the
Table of the House while moving the Bill in the
Parliament,

I am reasonably sure that it would help the
Government of India, as stated in your reference

letter, to draw up a comprehensive Bill for
replacing the Ordinance.

With kind regards,

Yours sincerely,

(D.A. DESAI)

Encl: A Report


CHAPTER I
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER III

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

NOTES AND

REFERENCES

APPENDIX I

APPENDIX II

CONTENTS

PAGE

INTRODUCTORY oes 1
THE APPROACH eee 9
THE COVERAGE OF THE STATUTE coe 20
BENAMI TRANSACTIONS AND
MOTIVATIONS FOR THE SAME ooe 35
THE COURSE OF FUTURE ACTION
INDICATED eee 42

ooo 64
COPY OF THE LETTER DATED JULY 13,
1988, ALONG WITH ITS ENCLOSURES,
FROM SHRI PREMBHAI OF BANWASI
SEVA ASHRAM, MIRZAPUR (U.P.),
ADDRESSED TO CHAIRMAN, LAW
COMMISSION coe one 68

COPY OF THE LETTER DATED JULY 28,

1988, ALONG WITH ITS ENCLOSURES,

FROM SHRI S. JAGANNATHAN OF

PATTALIGAL FINAI ASHRAM, TAsIL

NADU, ADDRESSED TO HON'BLE MR.

JUSTICE P.N. BHAGWATI, FORMER

CHIEF JUSTICE OF INDIA AND A

COPY WHEREOF HAS BEEN ENDORSED

TC THE CHAIRMAN, LAW COMMISSION,

AMONGST OTHERS eoe coo 80


CEAPTER I

INTROLUCTORY

1.1. The Presiagent of Inéia, in exercise of
rowers ‘conferred by clause (1) of article 123 of
‘the Constitution, promulgated an Ordinance, styled
as ‘henami Transactions (Prohibition of the Right
to Recover Property) Grdinance, 49६81, being
Crdinance No. 2 of 1988, on May 1S, 1986. It came

into force inmediately on promulgation.

1.2. The Grainance in terms partially implemented
the recommendations of the Law Commission of India

1
relating to benami transactions. It appears thet

the Hinister cf Law, Justice and Company Affairs,
by his letter dated December 20, 1072, invited the
Law Coumission of India to examine the question of
rErohibiting benami transactions. The letter
proceeded to recite 'the problem of property held
benami has been causing concern to the taxing
authorities for some time. The Select Committee
cn the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1669, had
also suggested that Government should examine the
existing law relating to benami transactions with
व view to determining whether such transactions
should be prohibited. The suggestion was

reiterated in Parliament Guring the debate on the

Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1971.°.


1.3. Accepting the reference, the Law Ccmmission
uncertook to examine the matter and let the
Government have the benefit cf its advice cn the
guestion of Prohibiting the practice of holding

Property benami.

1.4. The Law Commission in its report analysed
the nature of a benami transaction, its history as
Bart of Indian legal system and its judicial
recognition and concludec, after reference to the
decision of the Federal court,” that 311 benami
transactions need not be regarced as reprehensible
ana improper and that there is nothing inherently
wrong in it and it accords within its legitimate
Scope with the ideas and habits of people.” It
was, hcwever, further of the opinion that ‘Every
benami transaction is not harmless, Past
experience shows that benami transactions have
often been resorted to for furthering illegal or
Guestionable objects, including the evasion of
taxes, Benami transactions are sometimes aiso
rescrtea to in order to Gefeat creditors.t."
After having examined legal and factual
controversies attending upon benami transactions,
a conclusion was reached as to what steps should
ke in@icated for cither prohibiting or regulating
benami transactions with a view to minimising

litigation. It may be mentioned here that the


guiding consideration of the Law Commission at the
rel ovant time in form ating its recommendations
WaS reaucing litigation in the courts arising from

benami transactions. It quoted with approval the

cbservation that ‘the law permitting and

recognising benami transactions results in a lot
5

ct wasteful litigaticn....', This a-proach

influenced to some extent its ‘recommendations.

1.5. The Law Commission examined three

alternatives, - They may be extracted:

“(i) Entering into a Eenami_ transactions
could be made an cffence;

(ii) A provision may be enacted to the effect
that in a civil suit a right shall not
be enforced against the benamidar or
against 2 thi-d rerson, by cr on behalf
of the perscn claiming to be the real
owner ct the Eroperty on the ground of
benami; a similar provision could be
made to bar defences on the ground of
benani.

(This provision would be based on the
principle on which the existing
Provisions in the Civil Trcecedure Code |
anc the new provision in the Income-tax
Act are based, but coule be wider in

scope and more radical).



(iii) The present presumption cf a resulting
trust in iavour cf the person who
provided the consideration may be
displaced (as in England) by the
presumption of advancement, in cases
where the person to whom property is
transferread is a near relative of the
gerson whe provided the consideration.
(This would bring in the Goctrine of
advancement, so as to rebut the
presumption of resulting trust under
section 82 of the Trusts Act).“.

Ultimately, it was of the considered opinion that
the first alternative was not likely to be
effective and the third alternative, though least
drastic, yet the whole thing would turn upon the
intention of parties and, therefore, the practical
advantage ef such a provision will be its
elasticity. In other words, it would equally be
ineffective and accordingly recommended” the
secona alternative for implementation. In its

view, the refusal tc recognise benami transactions

by denying a forum-for the enfcrcement of rights

based on benami and thereby making the benamidar
the real owner would bring about a cessation of
benami being part of Indian law. It also

recommended certain consequential amendments.


1,6. The repert was with the Government for about
@ u4ecace and a half. Ultimately it appears that
the Government of india resolved to implement the
recommendations ef the Law Commissicn, The
Crdinance more cr less bedily adoptec the draft
recommendation set out under the marginal 70६९
“Recommendation?” with one important variation
that while the Law Ccmmission was of the opinicn
that it is necessary to make an exception for past
transactions, as the provisions of the ordinance
stand, the President appears to have resolved to
make them retreactive. The widespread belief hela
new is that the operation cf the Frovisions of the
Ordinance would be retroactive and even the Past
banami transactions woulé be governed by the
provisicns ef the Ordinance if it becomes
necessary for the parties to such past benami
transactions to either file a suit to enforce any
right in respect .of eny froperty hela benami
against the person in whose name the property is
hela or against any other perscn by or ०1 behalf
cf the person Claining to be the real owner of
such property or defend claiming right in respect
cf any property held benami whether against the
rerscn in whese name the kroperty is hela or
against any cther person, This unGerstanding of

8
the Ordinance nas led to a Gebate in print nedia.


The grievance therein stated is that "such
lecislaticn cannot be enacted with retrospective
effect for the person purchasing benami property
before Hay 158 (date cf the Ordinance) did so
keeping in mind the laws relating to benami
transactions prevalent at that time. How can the
State snatch away his right to enforce his
cwnershiz, of that property?*.

1.7. Since the promulgation of the Ordinance,
while broadGly welcoming the attack on one of the
court articulated institutions protecting
unacccuntedé money, the pendulum has. swung both the
ways manifesting public reaction to this overdue
legal reforn. To cite only a few instances, one
national daily published detailea, analytical and
informative articles under the headings ‘Benami
Revolution may be Stillborn' and 'The Ordinance
can preve self-écfeating’, and the other of
which note may be taken is 'The Benami Ordinance

(1) Another Paper Tiger and (2) Boon for Reducing

11
Tax Burden’. In between, such views as
‘Banishing Benami Holdings‘ and ‘welcome
13
Crainance’ have appeared.

1.6. The Ordinance was promulgated on May 19,
1988. In view of the provision contained in
article 123(2)(a) ८६ the Constituticn, in order to

perpetuate its existence, an Act replacing the


Crdinance will have to be put ‘on the statute book
within a pericd of six weeks from the reassembly
of Parliament, failing which the Ordinance would
cease tc operate. The Parliament has reassembled.
The frocess of replacing the Ordinance by an Act

appears to have started.

19. On July 22, 1988 late in the evening, a
communication was receivec from the Minister cf
Law, Justice and- Water Resources setting cut
therein the circumstances leacing to the
promulgation of the Ordinance. In that very
communication he referred to a communication from
the Minister of Planning and- Programme
Implementation tc the Prime Minister of India
subsequent to the promulgation of the Ordinance
and a decision cf the Government of India to
request the Law Commission tc take up this
question of benami transaction for detailed
examination and to give its considered views as
early as possible so that the Bill to replace the
Ordinance may be drafted on the basis of the
recommendations of the Law Commission and get the
same passed before the close of the honsoon
Session of Parliament. The next three days were
holidays and the office was closed. There was a
certain constraint on the time available to the

Law Commission, both as to its existence as also



६० the time-frame within which a considered report
can be submitted which may help the Government of
India in Grafting the Bill to be moved to replace
the Crdinance. but the letter of the Minister of
Law, Justice and Water Resources, after noticing
that the Law Commission was very busy in
finalising some of the resorts, yet considered
examination of the issue of benami transactions by
the Law Commission very necessary ‘in view of its
importance and the reference of which will be a
very progressive measure anc can go a long way to
curb the proliferation of black money in the
country’. The Law Commission, with considerable
maladjustment cf its work schedule, in larger
public interest offered its services. If the Law
Cermissicn had time at its gisposal as desired by
it, this subject bas such vast dimensicns that an
indepth study coula have been undertaken. But
within the parameters of the reference and the
constraint on time, as detailed a study as
possible with the help of the research staff of
the Law Commission and a limited debate has been
undertaken in preparing this report. Keeping

within the time schedule, this is the report.


CHAPTER I1

THE APPROACH

24-3० - The history ct f£reeccm mcverent bears enough
testimony to the twin 5०१15 promisec cn attainment
ck political inaependence: economic emancipation
ane sccial justice. Even then, while framing the
Constitution ana making the right to property 4
tundanental right, hincsicnt reveals that a crave
errer was ccmmittea in making the right to
property a tuncamental right. Social
reconstruction ana social justice measures, more
or less undextaken in implementation of the
Directive Principles of State Folicy as set cut in
Part IV ot the Constitution, floundered on the
bed-rock of fundamental right to property.
Measures after measures were invalidatec cn the
grouna that they viclated fundamental right to
ercperty. The pendulum swung in cne airection to
such an extent that when the State enacted a
legislaticn for replacing the management of a
company which tne airectcrs had threatened to
close Gown, the Court invalidated the lecislaticn
eon tne ground that the legislation authorised a
Seprivation of property of the cempany within the
meaning of article 31 without compensation and
thereby viclatec the funcamental right of the

company Guarantcec by article 31(2) of the


1
Constitution as it then stood. The right to

property where there was no deprivation but merely
substitution of management thwarted an attempt tc
infuse lite inte an incustrial unaertaking which

had become sick. From Maharaja Kaneshwar Singh's

2 3
case to Womanrac's case via the cases of Subcdh
4 5 6
Gcepal , I.C. Golaknath , R.C. Cooper , Madhav Rao
7 8

Scinaia and Kesavananda Bharati , the funcamental
right to property enjoyed such an impregnable
positicn that it almost nullifiec every attempt at
social justice and social recenstruction. This
resistence to change evoked a sharp reaction and a
demand to abolish the right to property from the
array of Fundamental Rights in Part III of the
Constitution was stridently veiced. The
Protagnosists of priv-te property went to the
extreme length ot saying that what 1s there to
werk in cur Inaien Constitution if the right to
property is not accorded the status of a
fundamental right. They even ignored the warning
given py a tormer Chief Justice of India in ene of
his opinions that it was an error to Place the
right to preperty in the chapter cn Fundamental
Rights. Even when the right to property was
getting entrenched as a reaa block, a view was
€xpressea in a dissenting opinion that: ‘it is

futile to cling to cur notions ot absolute

10



sanctity of individual liberty or private property
and to wishfully think that our Constitution-
makers have enshrined in our Constitution the
notions of individual liberty and private property
that prevailead in the 16th century when Hugo
Grotius flourished ८४ in the 18th century when
Blackstone wrote his commentaries and when the
Federal Constitution of United States of America
was framed. We nust reconcile ourselves to the
plain truth that the emphasis has now unmistakably
shifted from the individual to the community. we
cannet overlook that the avowed purpese of our
Constitution is to set up a welfare State by
subordinating the social interest in individual
liberty or property to the larger social interests
in the rights of the community.*. yet it was
canvassed that unless a human being develops a
sense of belonging, he would hardly be able to put
in «tis best effort to contribute to the national
good cr to the national cake. And unless, it was
said, that the national cake is enlarged, what is
there to distribute by way of social justice ana
what social reconstruction is possible? Private
property from the point of view of these persons
was sacrosanct. Ultimately a nation cannot be
thwarted in its onward march when the right to
property became an insurmountable road block. A

surgical operation for the improved health of the

i


nation became an urgent necessity and right to
pre erty was removed frum the array of Fundamental
Rights by deleting articles 19(1)(f£) and 31 from
the constitution.» The earlier approach led a
jurist to state that in that approach there was
sonething more than self-luminous judicial policy-
making was. at stake and tiiat was, in one phrase,
‘the econonic development of india’.

2.2. At the bottom of all this ambivalence was
the judicial opinion expressed soon after the
Constitution came into force that when Fundamental
Rights and Directive Principles of State Policy
stand in confrontation to each other, the
Directive Principles have to yiela supremacy to
the Fundamental Rights and run subordinate
thereto. The ambiv.clence continued till the
decision in Minerva Mills' case where it was
reiterated that Directive Principles specify the
socialist goals to be achieved and these are to be
achieved without abrogation of fundamental rights.
How this is to be achieved in a_ case of
confrontation is left unanswered? Lirective
Principles were considered by some commentators on
our Constitution ‘the humanitarian socialist
precepts that were, and are, the aims of the

Indian social revolution’, At the other extreme

end was the cpinion by a member of the Constituent

12


Assembly that the, were ‘veritable dustbin of
sentiment ....... sociali, resilient as to permit
any individual cf this Fouse to ride his hobby
horse into ite Read collectively, directive
principies presented a picture of a _ society
toward. which the Government would, by affirmative
actio:., strive tc reach. it was always assumed
that the Government was solely responsible for
transformation of the society and the State was
eapecteu to play a vital role in the welfare of
the pecele. It is true that oréinarily
fundamental rights and directive principles have
tc stand in harmony with each other. But if there
is a confrontation, the fundamental rights of
individuals have te yiela to the greatest good of
greavest nunber as represented by the directive

prirciries.

52«०3« The Law Commission refers to this past
histezy fcc a limited purpese that again it is
Gealiv. vith private property in this report. It,
therefore wants to make its approach clear,
specific ana unambigucus.

2046 Preamble to the Constitution promised that
by effectively using the power conferred by the
Constiteticn on various limbs of the Government,

they will strive to set up-a society in which will

i3


permeate justice, social, economic and political,
anc furnish equality € opportunity assuring the
dignity of the individual. Supplemented by
Directive Principles, all the instrunentalities of
the State were under a constitutional obligation
to strive to promote the welfare cf the Feople by
securing and protecting as effectively as it may a
sccial order in which justice, social, economic
and yolitical, shall inform all the institutions
cf naticnal life. The State shall further strive
to minimise the inequalities in income and
eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and
Opportunities not only amongst individuals but
also amongst groups cf people residing in
cifferent areas or engaged in different
vocations. In order to promote the welfare of
People by transforming the exis+ting social order
into one in which justice, social, economic and
political, shall inform all ‘the institutions -of
national life, amongst others, the nethodology was
that the State shall direct its policy ‘towards
securing that the ownership and control of the
material resources of the community are so
distributed as best to subserve the common good
ana that the cperation of the economic system does
not result in concentration of wealth and means of

18
production to the common detriment.

Ah


2.56 InGia is a socialist State. Cne of the
fundamental requiremencs of a socialist State is
tc previde for social control cf means of
production, The control of means of production by
few individuals results in creating a vested
interest. It becomes in fact the starting point
of exploitation by those whe control the means of
production of these who have to serve the
contrcllers of means of production. Socialist
State would presage an effective social order in
which there would be equitable distribution of the
national cake. Concentration of wealth
represented by property in the hands of few would
be a negation cf a socialist State. Therefore,
the State policy was to be directed towards the
operation of the economic system in such manner as
not to permit concentration ०६ wealth in the hands
of few because such concentration is generally
presumed to be to the common detriment. Power of
wealth is generally put to nefarious uses and its
tremendous concentration must be Geemed to be
anti-social. Therefore, concentration of wealth
has always to be curbed by effective State action,
Property of every sort is a tangible manifestation

of concentration of wealth.

2.6. Ey removing the protection of fundamental

right on private Property, first important step

15



was taken towards removing a road block in
dev>lopmental programncs. The next step was to

curb unlawful and nefarious uses of property.

276 In modern times, the word ‘property' has
acquired an extensive connotation. Land and
anything attachea tc earth is described as
immovable property. Movable ¢roperty comprehends
cash, shares in jcint stock companies, debentures,

fixed deposit receipts, bank accounts, jewellery

ana such intangible assets as fatents and
copyright, the last being described as
intellectual property. Power of wealth may

manifest itself in myriad types of property.
Acquisition of shares would enable a person to
control the company of which shares have been
acenirea by him. Derrsits and other methods of
financing inéustrial activity also allows wide

control of the accivity financed.

2.8. Right to property never belonged to the
category vf what are callea 'natural rights’. It
is a creation of law and the manner in which it is
created, to the same extent it can be extinguished
by law. Where, therefore, a legal system or a
legal formulation or a statutory measure has
extended a1] deserved protection to property, on

the ugly and evil features of property becoming

16


manifest, the statute can withdraw the umbrella of
Frotection. With the developing notions of social
justice, a protection to a kind ०६ Property once
consicered valid and just may be withdrawn on the
ground that the protection itself has become

counter~productive.

2.5. Eenani property is not the creation of a
statute, ~ It acquired legal respectability by
jucicial law-naking. The earliest case to which
reference was made in the earlier report of the
'Law Commission was of the year 1915. Quoting Sir
Geerce Farwell's observation that a benami
transaction, a dealing common to Hindus and
HNoharmecans alike, is much in use in India.
Accorcing ६० him, it was quite unobjectionable and
bas a curious resemblance to the doctrine of the
English law' and tracing the history down to the
later cases, the Law Commission concluded that
benami has become part of Indian law. The Law
Commission recommended that it is time that benami
ceases to be a part of Indian law because it was
resorted to usuaily (but not always) with the
object of concealing the real owner, fraud on
creditors, Gesire to evade taxes as 6780 to avoid

certain. political and social risks. It was in

1573, that is, nearly a decade and a half back,

17


that the Law Commission recommended to the
Governmnent cf India that benami should cease to be
a part of the Indian law. This report was
published and it was a notice to all benamidars as
well as the so-called real owners that Government
Kay contenglate enacting a legislation to put an
end to benami as part cf Indian law. As the
present trend cf thinking is that the proposed
legislation replacing the Ordinance should be
retroactive, a grievance may be made that the
Government should not have acted abruptly without
giving locus penitentia to those who entered into
benami transactions when they were valid and woulc
have no chance to set right their house. In the
opinion of the Law Commission anotice of a decade
and a halt is more than adequate for this purpose

and therefore, it ig not necessary to grant any

such indulgence.

2.16. The assumption that benami transactions
only relate to immovable property does not bear
scrutiny. Benami holders of shares cf joint stock
companies, benami or fictitious bank account
holaers, benami holders of fixed deposits in
companies, nane lenders for bearer bonds issuance
of which was legitimated by a Gecision of the

Supreme Court an‘ encouragement to benami in no

uncertain measure, all these have contributed

18


tccay to defeating cf tax laws, violation of
sccial morality and concentration cf property
standing in the way of development programmes of
the nation. the approach cf the Law Commission
acccrdingly is that benami transactions in respect
of any prcperty, including intangible property
like the patents and the copyright, should be
covered in the propcsed legislation. The
legislation must have extensive application as not
to permit a single loophole for providing an
escape route to any kind of property which can be
hela benani. And the entire gamut of umbrella of
protection to benami must be completely, fully and
effectively folded up. This is our approach and
the various aspects are dealt with in the light of

this approach.

2elie This approach ensures that a withdrawal of
the protection on fundamental right to property,
ccuplea with total denial of any protection of any
legal formulation to benami property, when put in
juxtaposition, would at least go a long way in
eliminating power of wealth as represented by

Froperty to the common detriment.


CBRAPTER IIT

THE COVERAGE OF THE STATUTE

3.1. Age the question of benami transactions has
been examined way back in 1973 by the Law
Commission, the present effcrt is not to re-
examine and re-write everything concerning benami.
In fact this report may be treatec as a turther
continuation ot the recommendations made in the

earlier report.

3.2. The first question that must engage our
attention at once is the wiath and coverage of the
proposec legislation. In order tc encompass
benani transactions concerning various types cf
preperty, the legislation shoula cover both
movable, immovable, tangible and intangible
property. Unfortunately every type of property,
such as land, houses, shares, Gebentures, bonds,
bank accounts, ceposit receipts and negotiable
instruments, is capable of being held benami.
Theretore, it is eqvally legitimate to have an
extensive coverage cf the proposed legislation py

encompassing prceperty of every Genomination.

3.3. The ruck lies in a constitutional conundrum
whether lana, both agricultural and urban, can be
the subject matter of a legislation by Parliament

in view of entry 18 in the State List. This

20


constitutional ccnuncrum Should not detain us in
view of the tact that the proposea legislation in
pith anc substance wouio be covered by entry 6 in
the Cencurrent List. That is te gay the
degislation in pith ana substance woulc be dealing
with transacticns of property or the transacticnal
aspect of property. Therefore, indisputably
Parliament would have Power to legislate on the
topic of Benami Transacticns, whatever be the
nature of the prcperty covered by such

transactions.

3.4. Should the legislaticn be only prospective
or retrcactive is the next important aspect to
which we must address ourselves. The earlier
report of the Law Commission clearly intended the
legislation to be only prospective. It was so
Specifically indicated in the repert. The Law
Commission was of the opinion that ‘the proposed
legislation should net apply to past transactions
because those transactions would have been entered
into aéter keeping in mind the legal position as
uncerstood at present, namely, that the real owner
can always enforce his rights against the
benamigar'.. When the Ordinance was issued, the
past transactions were not excluded from its
operation. In cther words, it was retroactive in

operation,

21


3.5. In the availabie time, the Law Commission
held cialogues with retired Chief Justice of
Inaia, a Sitting Jucce of the Supreme Court, an
eminent jurist, a former Minister cf Law and
Justice and a journalist who hae contributed
analytical articles on tne topic covered by the
ordinance. One of the views expressed curing
this cebate by one of the Participants was that in
the past benami transactions were entered ‘into,
when benami was a part of the Indian law. Benami
transactions came to acquire the legal affirmance

by Jucge-made law.

3.6. Iwo inter-connected questions arise in this
behalf: (1) is there any provision in the
Constitution which wouia put a fetter on the
Plenary pcwer of the Parliament to enact law with
retroactive operation; and (2) would such a

retroactive legislation be invalic for any reason?

3.7. Articles 245 and 246 of the Constitution
conter plenary power on the Parliament and State
Legislatures ६० tegislate on topics reserved for
them in the Constitution, The power of the
Parliament to legislate is traceable to articles
245 and 246 and the enly constraint on the power
is the one mentioned therein, There is no

constraint either in article 245 or article 246 on

22


the plenary power of ‘tne Parliament tec . legislate
ret -cactively in respect of the topics ‘reserved
for it uncer the Seventh Schedule, This plenary
pewer is subject to the provisicns ct the
Constitution. The Constitution is the conclusive
instruaent by which powers are affirmatively
createc cr negatively restricted, ‘The only
relevant test for the valicity of a statute made
under article 245 is whether the legislation is
within the scope of the affirmative grant of power
or is Forbidden by some provisicn of the

Constitution.!

3.6. Therefore, what talls fer consideration is
whether there is anything in the Constitution
wnich puts a fetter on the power of the Parliament
en its capacity to lec‘slate even retroactively.
Democratic culture abhores ex post facto
legislacion. +¢ Scme extent it has been reterred
to in article 20(1). It provides that 'no person
shall be convictea ot any offence except tor
viclation of law in force at the time ot the
commissicn of the act charged as an offence, nor
be subjecteu to a penalty greater than that which
wight have been inflicted under the law in force
at the time cf the commission et the offence’,
Art. 20 (1) prescribes a Prohibition against ex

pest tacto legislation in the fielé of criminal

nN
w


law. Without further dilating on this tcpic, it

can ke ccncludec at snce that ©x post tacto

legislaticn may be violative of article 20, clause
(1), but that article would net come in the way of
Parliament to legislate retroactively in areas
not covered by article 20(1). Shern of
emcellisnment, tne plenary power of the Parliament
te legislate conferred by articles 245 anc 246
does not suffer a constraint against it
legislating retroactively in field cther than
criminal law. Undoubtedly, any legislaticn to be
valid must meet the test of Part III ef the
Constituticn, That is not the problem at present.
The only question that is being Gebated is: is
there anything anywhere in the Constitution which
would either put a fetter or a constraint on the
power of the Parliament to pass a legislation

making it retrcactive in operation?

3.5. Could such a retreactive legislation be
chellenged on the e¢rcounac that it invalidates
transacticns which were valia at the time ot the
entry into transactions? The constituticnal
validity of a statute depends entirely on the
existence cf legislative power and the express
provisicn in articie 13. Apart from that
limitation, the Legislature is not subject to any

3
other prchibition. And it is judicially accepted

24



that the power of the Legislature to ६०६७ law

So

includes a pcwer to pas. it retrospectively. A
Legislature has the power, except in a matter for
which there is prchibition Like the one contained
in article 20(1) of the Constitution, to make laws
which are gresj;ective in operation as well as laws
which pave a retrospective operation. There is no
limitation on the power of the Legislature in this
respect. Essentially it is a matter relating to
the capacity and competence of the Legislature.
Bithough most cf the laws mace by Legislature have
a prospective operation, occasions arise guite
often when necessity is felt of giving
retrospective effect ta the law.

3.10. Retrospective operation of law in the field
of election has been u; held. One Kanta Kathuria,
holding the office cf Special Government Pleader
to re,resent tie ६८०८० of Rajasthan, contested an
election to the State Legislative Assembly and was
aeclared elected. His election was challenged,
inter alia on the ground that he held an office of
profit within the meaning cf article 1$1{1) of the
Constitution. The High Court set aside his
election. During the pendency of his appeal in the
Suprene Court, the State of Rajasthan amended the
relevant provisions of the law declaring that the

holder of the office cf Special Government Pleader

25


was not disqualified from being chosen as, or for
being, a member of the State Legislative Assembly.
The Act was made retroactive and removed the
appellant's disqualification retrospectively.
though there was a Givision of opinion amongst
five Judge Bench hearing the ap;eal, all the
Judges were, however, unanimous on the point that
the Anendmwent Act had removed the disqualification
cf the appellant retrospectively. Hidayatullah,
Cd., observed that it is well recognised that
Parliament and Legislature cf the States can make
the laws operate retrospectively. He went so far
as to say that any law that can be made
prospectively can be made with retrospective
operation excert that certain kinds of laws cannot
cperate retrospectively. Election law is net one
such case.” It is incéisputable that the law
removing benami transactions from Indian law can
be prosgectively made. For the same reason, it

can as well be made retrospectively.

3.il. In the debate, a position emerged that at
any rate a reasonable approach necessitates that
all those who had entered into benami transactions
in the past knowing them to be permissible under
the law should be given locus penitentia ranging
from three to six months, giving time to the real

owner or owners holding beneficial interest in the

26


yroperty held benami to reclaim the property and
thereafter impose a total bar against entering

inte benami transactions in future.

3.12. When the Law Commission dealt with benami
transactions in 1673, ‘right te property" was
Fundamental as set out in articles 31 and
19(1)(£). Validity cf any legislation entrenching
upon the right to acquire, hold and dispose of
property was likely tc be tested on the
fundamental right enshrined in article 19(1) (f)
and coulda be sustained on the cnly ground that the
law inpcses reasonable restrictions in the
interests of the general fublic or for tke
protection cf the interests of any Scheduled
Tribe. It is not necessary to speculate on the
possible outcome of the challenge but one can say
conticently that the law prchibiting benami
transactions could have been sustained in the
interest of general public. That apart, articles
19(1)(£) and 31 both are deleted and, therefore,
the constraint on the power of the Legislature in
dealing with property subject to article 300A has

disappeared.

3.13. Thus, even though the proposed legislation
is nct likely to violate any fundamental right, it

was suggested that even to meet the test of

27


article 14, a rational approach demands that some
time must be giver to these who entered into
benani transactions at the tine when they were
valig according to law in force. The Law
Conmission secs mo justification for further
extension of any time in this behalf. In fact,
the Law Conmission is in favour of making the Act
retroactive to the same extent as the Ordinance
teday stands. Uncoubtedly, benani became part of
Indian law by Judge-made law. Legislature can
always step in to nullify such Judge-made law.
And the Legislature has power to pass such
legislation with retroactive Operation to nullify
the eftect ०६ the judgment. 7०७ illustrate what is
being asserted here, it may be pointed out that
one K.L. Gupta challenged the election of the
returned candidate shri 2.0५ Chawla on diverse
grouncs, inter alia, contending that the returned
candidate incurred an unauthorised expenditure in
eacess of the prescribed limit of Rs.10,000 in
contraventicn of section 77 and thereby committed
the | ‘corrupt practice’ defined in section 123(6)
cf the Representation of the People Act, 1651. In
an appeal against tiie dismissal of the petition by
the Lelhi High Court, the Supreme Court held that:
‘in the first Flace, a political party is free te
incur any expenditure it likes cn its general

Barty propagenda though, of course, in this area

2c


alse sone limitative ceiling is eninently
Gesirable couplea with filing cf return of
expenses ana an incependent machinery to
investigate and take action. It is only where the
expenditure is incurred which can be identified
with the election of a given candidate that it
would be liable to be added to the expenditure of
that {Candidate as being impliedly authcrised by
bint.” The ratio decidendi of the Judgment was that
if a political Farty incurs expenditure for a
particular candidate so as to benifit him, the
expenditure se incurred by the political karty is
liable to be included in the expenditure incurred
by hin on the grounc that it is authorised by

him.

3.14. Quick upon the heals of the aforementioned
cecisicn, the Representation of the People act,
1851, was amended by the Amendment Act of 1974 by
which an Explanation was added to section 77° of
the Act to the effect that notwithstanding any
judgment, order or decisicn of any ccurt to the
Contrary, any expenditure incurred cr autioriseé
in connection with the Ciecticn cf a candicate by
बे political varty or any cther association or body
of persons or by aincividual (otier than tie
Canclcate cr bis election agent) shall net be

ceecnea to be, ana shali 110६ ever be ९०1९७ to have

2५


been, exyenditure in connection with the election
incurrec or authcrised by the cancicate or by कर
electicn agent for the purgoses of the sub-secticn
(underlining is curs). The language ८६ the
Explanation leaves no room for Goubt that it would
be retroactive in Operation and if it is so, the
effect of the eecision in K.L. Gupta's case would
be nullified, This retroactive Operation of the
expressicn was Challenged even though the
Amendment Act cf 1974 was inserted in the Ninth
Schedule. The Court in Indira Gandhi's case.
unanimously uphele the validity cf retroactive
Creration cof the explanation added to section 77.
There are a number of other decisions supporting
this view. Rule 5 of the Central Civil Services
(Temporary Service) L:les, 1265 provided that the
Services of temporary Government servant who is
hot in guasi-permanent service shall be liable to
termination at any time by a netice in writing
given either by the Government servant to the
@ppointing authority or by the appointing
authority to the Government servant, The period
cf notice shall be one Month. It was settled by a
catena of decisions that paynent in lieu of
hetice must be forthwith i.e, simultaneous. In
cruer cf termination cf service must

aniec, in tne absence ct notice, with a

30


Fay jacket for one month. If there is Cichotomy
between the two i.e. both the acts were net
simultaneous, the crder weula be unsustainable.
Subscquently, a proviso was added to rule 5 and
brought into operation retrospectively with effect

from Nay 1, 1965 and the retrospective cperation

9

cf the rule was held valid .

3.15. Therefore, it is unquestionable that save
the inhibition prescribeé in article 20(1) of the
Constitution, there is no constraint or fetter on
the plenary jower of the Parliament to enact a
legislation making it retroactive in operation.
If it is permissible, the Law Commission sees no
justification for not making it so, nor for giving
any locus Fenitentia to those who had entered into

the transaction in the past.

3.16. Having given adequate reasons Supported by
the decisions of the highest court that the
plenary power of the Parliament to legislate is
net subject to inhibition that Parliament cannot
retroactively legislate, it must further be spelt
out clearly that any such inhibition, if read,
would hinder the effectiveness of the Parliament
to transform the society by rule of law. The
Executive and the Legislature are under a
constitutional mandate to take steps, consistent

with its financial Capacity ané other resource

31


position, to translate inte reality the Directive
Principles set out in Part IV of the Constitution.
Each such legislaticn, to specifically abrogate
the rights of vested interests, to bring succour
and cheer to the downtrodden and underdog would
necessitate legislation impinging upon things done
in the past. Zamindars acquired large zamindaries
by devious methods and obtained the protection of
foreign rulers by having a stamp cf legality on
such acquisitions. If Legislature coulé not
legislate to abolish zamindari save on the pain of
paying compansation because of the right to
property being fundamental then, agrarian reform
measures could never have been passed. No one
can, therefore, be heard to say that when in the
past they did certain things, entered into
contracts, concluded transactions consistent with
the legal position then obtaining, they could not
be divested by Ge-recognising the transactions fer

the purpose cf social reconstruction.

3.17 An alternative approach that emerged in
the debate was that even conceding the plenary
power of the Parliament to enact law with
retroactive operation except in the area excluded
by Art. 20(1), the retroactive operation is likely
to viclate article 14 as recently interpreted in

10
number of important judgments. Ericfly stated,

32


this new dimension of article 14 is that in its
width जप coverage, it is not limited to cases of
Giscriminatory classification but it has activist
magnitude and it embodies a guarantee against
arbitrariness. Nc attempt, it was said, should be
countenanced “tc truncate its all-embracing scope
and meaning for, to do so would be to violate its
activist magnitude. Equality is a dynamic concept
with many aspects and dimensions and it cannot be
“cribbed, cabined and confined' within traditional
and dectrinaire limits. From a positivistic point
ot view, equality is antithetic to arbitrariness.
In fact, equality and arbitrariness are sworn
enemies; one belongs to the rule of law in a
republic while the other, to the whim and caprice
of an absolute monarch.* u It was said that
what has been lawful for over three quarters of a
Century, if invalidated today, could certainly be
styled as arbirtrary and would violate article 14
If the new dimension of article 14, namely,
anything arbitrary is violative of article 14 is
invoked, that approach by itself without anything
more make it regressive and would perpetuate
vested interest which certainly was never
intended. If in the field of property which has
the inbuilt tendency to create a vested interest,

the doctrine cf arbitrariness could be invoked to

33


perpetuate concentration of property, the very new
Gimension of article 14 would effectively deprive
Legislature of any power. And let it not be
fergetten that concentration of property has
always to be effectively dealt with by law.
Therefore, any interpretation of article 14 in
the light of its new Gimension were to deny power
to the Legislature to deal with concentration of
property, the very doctrine of arbitrariness would
perpetuate arbitrariness. Therefore, while
attempting to disburse property for more equitable
distribution in the society, article 14 with its

new Gimension cannot and would not stand in the

way.
3.1€. Therefore, viewed from either angle, the
Law Commissicn is of the firm opinion that the

legislation replacing the Ordinance should 83१० be
retroactive in operation and that no locus
pEenitentia need be given to the persons who had
entered into benami transactions in the past. They
hac nctice of one and a halt decades” to set

their house in orcer. No more indulgence is

called for.

34


CHAPTER Iv
CENAMI TRANSACTIONS ANE
MOTIVATIONS FCR THE SAME
el. Ii legislation were to be enacted en the
lines of the rcinance alone, a legitimate
Criticism would be voiced as to how the State or
tie society at large is benefitted by making an
estensibl: owner a real owner and cépriving the
real owner cf his beneficial interest, both are
parties to a benami transaction, Benami
transaction gencraliy implies that when one
furchases the property in the name ot other, the
ether being a nane lenoer, and the purchaser did
not propuse to transier bencticial interest ६०
him, the name lende: is a benawidar and the one
who advances consiceration is the real owner ano
also cescribed as holcer ot beneticial interest in
the property. It should, however, not be
unaerstcod that penami transaction emerges only
trols a transaction cf sale and purchase of
property. In tact, in modern times ana at least
since the advent cf the Constitution, when
attempts were made to destroy vested interest in
dana by abolition of zaminaari as well as
asciiticn ct estates and simultianecusly making
tne tiller the cwner of the dana, a large scale

benani transactions have come into existence where


the ceéal cwncr ot lanc whose holding weulc exceec
the ceiling prescrit: d uncer agrarian refcrm laws
woula permit the lance te be 1९3८ by the tiller
without transierring ownership rights tc him.
Thereoy, he succeeas in cefeating the agrarian
reform laws ancG perpetuates his holding. To
illustrate, section 57 of the Bombay Tenancy and
Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, provided that on the
tillers' day - April 1, 1957 - the tenant shall
become the owner of the land. The title was to be
transferred by the operaticr: of law and it became
indeteasible subject to some of the provisions cf
the Act. Decaces after the statute was in
opcraticn, a survey in Borsad taluk of Kaira
aistrict of Gujarat State revealed thousands of
concealed tenancies. In the process, the holder
cefeatec socially beneficent legislations - one,
the aforementioned Act and another, the Act
prescribing ceiling cn agricultural holcing. Same
moacus operandi was resorted to when Urban Land
Ceiling Act came into ferce. In fact, knowledge
ef uch situation prcbaply ted the Minister of
Pianning and Progamme Implementation tc state in
his letter Gated May 25, 1988, which led to the
present reference, that comprehensive legislation
May be ecnactcad ‘te effectively checkmate the
transactions in fictitious names cr those in the

nanes of cogs, cats and long dead persons, etc.’.

36


4६2० Benami transaction activities have tnus
encerpassea all areas cf property relationships.
Whatever be the nature of the property, there can
be a bemamii hcleer ct it. An impression,
therecicre, requires te ke remcvec that benani
transactions are generally the cutccome cf sale and

purchase cf property.

4.3. The information so far collated in the
preceding paragraphs woula necessitate a serious
question to be posea and answered. The gucsetion
pesed curing the debate was that the Law

Commission shculd not start with a belict,

acceréing to them not legitimate, “that the
motivation behing benami was always and
necessarily illegitinate. It was said with

emphasis that tenami can be also for legitimate
purposes. An idilustration was given quring the
Gebate that take a case where ‘'A' not only
intensely loves nis wife but also helds the belicf
that she is the harbinger of gooc luck and,
therefore, ‘'A' woulda like te buy the property or
tcansfer the property with him te his wife without
any intenticn of transferring any beneficial
interest. Procecding further, it was said that in
order tc establish his bona fides, '‘A' would

ecntinue to shew the property in nis wealth tax


¥eturn cr in ais income-tax return anc, therefore,
any suggestion that tne transaction wag entereé
inte with a view to Getcating tax laws woule stané
négatived. It was, thercforc, asserted that in
such a casc, te wake wife an owner anc acprive the
real owner ci the property would be irraticnal,
apart from being more illegitimate than the
illegitimate benami transaction itself. The
Commission remains unconvinced. If "8" loved his
witc so intensely and tclicvec hor to be the
harbinger of cood iuck, why eheuld he not transter
the property to her fer 600८ and discicse the
transaction? Such an hypothetical illustration
cannot cenceal the real fact that ordinarily
benami transactions are cnterea into for various
illegitimate purposcs. The primary aim is to
Gcteat the tax laws, such as wealth tax, gift tax
anc income-tex, es 3150 cstate cuty when it was in
force anc which has come back in a different form.
Continuce benami transactions ४601९ have an impact
on the same. Similarly, socially pbeneficont
degislaticns were enactcd both by the Statcs and
the Centre for eguitable re-distribution of
property anc for removing inequalities in income,
simultaneously with status ana opportunity. And
benami were enterea inte with the sole and avowed
aim of defeating the same. Heowsocver. cne may

cislik: this, it cannot bc wishea away.

38



Soke The Law Commicsicn made nuacrous efferts vy
raising the question repeatedly whether there 1s
any area in which if benami transaction operates,
it woule nave the cover cf legitimacy in the sense

of justitiable secial morality and in whicn to
derive unjust enrichment was absent. Though the
Commission strugglee hara, it ९०91 not come
accross any. It way be that the attention of the
Law Commission may have cscaped that rarest of
vars case where benami may be treatea as
legitimate and justificd secially ana cthically
anc consistent with the morcs of the cey, yet the
illegitimate areca or the illegitimat« motivation
behind entcring inte penami transactions is so
wice and so vest that small invisible area of so-
callcc tegitimacy may be ignored. Therefore, the
Law Commission is of the firm opinion that benami
transacticn: in any torm in respect of any kind of
property, tangible. cr othcrwisc, should be covered

within the proposca legislation.

4

a

न Before we conclude on this chaptcr, it is
necessary to point out that certain tax laws have
confirmed legitimacy on the benami transactions
ane cerived benefit in the form of revenue
collccticn from it. Tt was, theretore, said that

if nov all benami tranzactions are invalidated ane

39


iro-

an all-enveloping prohibiticn 35 imposed, the
bevenue daws woule suffer 1055 of revenue.
Retcrence in this connection was made to section
27 of the Income-tax Act, 1962 c<aling with incone
item mouse property. The varicus sub-scctions of
scecticn 27 deal with transfer of property by
husbana to wife and vice versa. It also involves
the case of impartable éstate. The Law Conmission
is unable to appreciate how a tctal prohibition of
benami transaction ana the holder being made the
real owner weule cefcat revenuc laws. If one
escapes, the other pays, and if it is suggested
that the other may not be within the Cragnet of
tac tax laws anc that. both woula oencfit by the
Prohibition and aboliticn of benami transactions.
In the immediate tuture such eéffect may ke
proaucca but the lone term interest woula help in
defending such spurious transactions between
husband and wife. Section 22 may be’ read
accordingly. But it was peintcd out that where
transtcr cf flats is prchibitea cither “by the
rulcs ‘of the co-operative socicty which has built
the ‘flats or by the rules of avthoritics:-like the
Delhi Cevelopment Authority, a Modus’ operandi has
come into cxistente whereby violating the law, the

flat is sold ‘ané the purchasér ‘would “pay thé

amount and take an irrevocable power of’ -attorney

and entcr into possessi¢n.

twas further, said‘ |

Usy



that the provisions of the Income-tax Act have

recognise such transfcrs ance treat the attcrncy
as owncr for thc nurposs of income-tax as per the
provisions of the Finance Act, 1987. If the sole
purpose ci entering intc such a transaction is the
violation ct cxisting law which has been passea
aftcr cue consiccration, it is time that no
recogniticn 1s conicrrea and thc law is allowed to
take its own course. Even in the name of revenuc
4०55, violation ct existing laws cannct be

protcctcd.

4५5५ The Law Commission woule like to make it
very clcar that sonic of the provisions of the tax
laws may become anachronistic because ot the
present appreach of thc Law Commission. This is
inevitable. The tax laws wore cnacted at a time
When benami was a part cf Indian law. Such laws
would have tc cconterm to the changing legal order.
Yct 3 further solution is offered in this behalf

in tho next chapter.

41



CHAPTER V

THE COURSE CF FUTURE ACTION IPLICATED

Sel. Cn the earlier cccasion when the Law
Commission Gealt with the subject of benami
transactions, a very limited attack was directed
against benami transacticns by merely refusing the
assistance of the court machinery ० recover
benanmi property by the real owner. briefly, the
real owner of the property is greclucead from
instituting a suit or bringing an action in
respect of any property held benami against the
benanicar or against any other person. Similarly,
defence based cn any rigkt in respect of any
property held benami, whether against the
benawig@ar or against any cther person, was not to
be permitted by the court. This is the legal
positicn under the Ordinance. A glaring lacuna

appears in this limitea approach.

Sede Let it not be forgotten that the benani
transactions were never entered into between rank
strangers. Generally the relationship between the
real cwner and the ostensible owner was one of
confidence cr they were near blood relations.
When land was transferred with a view to defeating
ceiling laws or socially beneficent legislation,

the benamidar was generally a farm labourer, a


servant cr a rent collector. In some of the
cases, the benamicar was either a wife or a
aaughter or a very near blocd relation.
Encohpassing the entire gamut of benami
transactions, one thing that emerges
unquestionably is that the real owner and the
cbstensible cwner were either in a fiduciary
relationship or blood relationship or close
intimate friendship. Tf such persons were the
parties to benami transaction, as between them, a
litigation was generally not even conceived. The
Crdinance which fellows the regort of the Law
Commission of 1973 merely prohibits ccurt action
at the instance of the real owner against the
benanidar or a defence based छा benami on behalf
of the real owner. If these close intimate
triends/relaticns would not resort to court
proceedings, the Ordinance does not even remotely
affect them or their benami transactions. The
Ordinance will remain *a paper tiger’, ineffective

in every manner. It would be inane.

5.36 Further, in worldly ways it can be easily
circumvented. If the benawidar chooses to re~-
transfer the prcperty te the real owner, there is
nothing in the Ordinance which will come in the
way of benanidar re-transferring the property to

the real owner. Coupled with this is the fact

43


Cc

that even after the Ordinance, there is no
,rohibition against entering into benami
transactions. It is neither made illegal nor
criminal. Therefore, the net effect would be that
even after the Ordinance and even after the Act
replacing the Ordinance is put on the statute
bock, benami transactions can be entered into with
impunity and as and when necessary the Ordinance
or the Act replacing it would be rendered inane by
voluntary re-transfer of property by the benamidar
to the real owner. Should the Legislature
legislate to merely put on the statute book
something which is toothless, meaningless and

wholly empty?

5.4. It is idle to speculate that benami
transactions were entered into without any
specific motivation behind them. And primarily
the motivation was illegitimate. One can go into
the motivation of a benami transaction and one
would discover an attempt either to defeat tax
laws cr socially beneficent legislations or
occasionally to shield money obtained by corrupt
practices used in acquiring property. If such were
the motivations, it would be putting a premium on
dishonesty to treat benami transactions as merely
a problematic of civil law or transactional law.

In fact, under the garb or the pretext of an

44


apparently innocuous transaction, the real Rurpose
end motivation was wholly illegitimate. Now,
undoubtedly, benami was a -art of Indian law. But
when the notion of legality is used to defeat
public convenience, justify wrong, protect fraud
cer aefena crime, the law should permit lifting of
the veil ६० ascertain the reality so as to unearth
illegitimacy behind the transaction

5.5.6 Viewed from this angle, one can confidently
Say that the real/beneficial owner on the one hand
eua the benanidar on the cther were Participes

cri

minis. Eoth of them were Participants in an
activity apparently into a superficially viewed
legal transaction but in reality and in substance
into a criminal activity to shield the real owner
from showing the property as his either in his
wealth tax, income-tax or even the source of
consideration vith which the property was
acquired, The real/beneficial owner and the
benamidar share the same fraudulent intent and the
salie avowed intention of entering inte a
transaction tainted with criminality. Therefore,

it can be said with confidgence that they were
garticipes criminis.
5.6. Ey the operation of the Ordinance, cne cf

the two parties to the illegitimate transaction

cbtains an undeserved advantage. If, as the



Crcinance is understood, any action at the
-nstance of the rea. owner ayainst the benamidar
in relation to the property held benami is
excluded from the cognizance of the court,
obviously for all practical purposes the benamidar
vis-a-vis the real owner would become the owner of
the property. anc pro tanto the real/beneficial
ownership cf the real owner would be extinguished.
te some cxtent this can be termed as unjust
enrichment by the benanidar. Should the law

permit it? That is the substantial question.

5.7. As the Ordinance stands, the benamidar
cannot be deprived of property acquired benami by
the real owner through the assistance of the
court. Benamidar would for all practical purposes
remain the owner an» tiay be able even ६० transfer
a good title, if he so chooses, to sell, mortgage
or iransfer the property. This unjust enrichnent
of the benanidar deserves to be dealt with by an
appropriate ;rovision. One can Graw the analogy
from the provision contained in section 269C of
the Income-tax Act, 1961, which provides that if
any inticvable property of a fair market value
exceeding cone hunared thousand rupees has been
transferred by a person to ancther person for an
apparent consideraticn which is less than the fair

market value of the property and the consideration

4€


for such transfer as agreed to between the parties
-aS not been truly stated in the instrument cf
transfer, the competent authority can start a
pecceeding under section 2690 read with section
26५9 fer the acquisition of such immovable

ra ty. Sections 265C and 26909 on their own

fierce will not apply to ब benaniaar. But an
a@gerovriate legislation may authorise competent
authority under the tax laws to call upon tie
benanidar, the beneficiary of the Ordinance, to
explain how and from where ke had acguired the
requisite fund for acquiring the property and if
it is satisfactorily establishea that he was a
here name-lender without having invested a
tarthing in the transacticn, a proceeding for
acquisition cf the property can be initiated. He
is requirea to be paid nothing because he has
investec n.othince. This approach would to some
extent strike at the illegitimacy cf transactions
and tie acquisition of the froperty would be
juscificé in larger national interest. Apart fron
this, peeple will think twice befere lending their

names.

58. There must be one more string to the bow.
As peinted cut hereinbefore, while the court
assistence would be denied under the Crdinance to

the real cwner te recover the property transferred

47°


penani irew the Scnamicac, nething woule come in
the way of the cenawidar re-transicrring the sae
prcpercy intec vives te the real cwnere
Ckvicusly, when such re-transier takes glace, the
previsicns cf the Gift Tex Act can be invekced it
it is dene withcut censideration or for a
consideration cther than cash cr service rendered
or any apparently named consideration which is not
paid. in such an event, the tax authcrities must
be empowerec by a suitacle provisicn to enquire
intc tne Legitimacy of the transaction. If it 1s
satiscied tnat the attempt is to restore the
propecty to the realyeeneficial owner by a
benamidar, the law shoulda step in and interdict it
from being cone. If the real cwner cannot recover
property anc the cstensible owner has no interest
an the property, oovicusly a provision can be mace
toc acquiring the property without payment of any

consiceration.

5.9. Along wita the aforementicnec two
agproaches, benami transaclicn sheula be
prchibitea py the prepesec statute. Entering into
@ cenami transaction should be wade an offence. )
Thic aspect was examinea by tne Law Commissicn on
an earlier cccasicn. 1६ is not for a moment
suggestea that any prosecution sncule be launchea

gor the benami transactions entered inte prior to

48


the Gate ci the Croinance. That wculc tail on the
couch=stcne ८६ erti-te 20(1) ८६ the Constituticn.
Wnat is suggestec here is that ६६८७ the cate of
tne legislaticn, e prehibiticn snculd be enactea
against entering into kenami- transacticns in
future anc if it is satistactorily estaklishec, a
punishnient shoulda be awarded. There shculd be no
consiccraticn for sucn transacticn. Power ct
wealth, if not curbed, is likely to daestrcy the
pewer ot cfitice. At all times, pcwer cf wealth
enc power ot office stanc in confrenteticn. It is
acsolutely necessary in the larger interests of
the society to have an effective check on power of
wealth. Benami represents a iacet of power of
wealth. It has te be curbed. Therefore, such
transaction in future shcula ve pronibitec and a

previsicn for punishnent shculd be incorporated.

5.16. There wes one suggestion tnat emerged in

the cebate referrec to earlier which needs tc be
cxaminec here. It was said with a certain amount
ck feeling that e€ven after extensive amencment of
hinagu Law ena more scientific ane generous rules
et inheritence under the mohammecan Law, female
heirs are at @ comparative disadvantage in
inheriting the property that snoule otnerwise ccme
to then. 1t was said that some exception shcula

be wace in favour of wite and Gaughter, more


particularly, unmarried daughter, where either the
father or the mothet woulc like to buy a property
in the name of the unmarried daughter or the
husband woula like to buy the property in the name
of his wife. The submission was that they are
such near relations that any element of
criminality cannot even be imagined amongst such
intinate relations. Distinguishing the case of a
son, it was said that he is bound to inherit the
property ef his father and, therefore, no
exception should be made in his case. In view of
the provisions of section 64 of the Income-tax
Act, one is at a loss to understand how is the
wife to be benefitted by becoming a benamidar in
respect of some property, consideration of which
48 paid by the husband and transferred directly in
t.e mame of the wife. The case of an unmarried
daughter May stand on 8 different footing.
However, if any exception is to be made for a
proprty held benami by a wife or unmarried
daughter, in the opinion of the Law Commission, a
presumption should be added that to the extent .the
wite or the unmarried daughter becoming a
benamidar of a property purchased or transferred
by the husband or the father, as the case may be,
the doctrine of advancement, as understood in the

English law, may be incorporated in the Indian law

50


ano the husband or the father, as the case may be,
will not be entitled to reclaim the property on
the ground that either the wife or the unmarried
daughter was a benamidar. This would at least
establish that the husband or the father, as the
case may be, was genuinely interested in
conferring some benefit on the wife or the
unmarriea daughter, as the case may be. Beyond
that, no exception need be considered with regard

to prohibiting benami transactions in future.

Sell. There was one serious submission that there
are provisions in the tax laws and in the company
law which have recognised benami transactions and
which also empower the authorities under the Act
to proceed against the real owner, ignoring the
umbrella cf benami transaction. Numerous sections
were brought to the notice of the Law Commission.
It is unnecessary to reproduce them here. Let it
be made distinctly clear that tax laws were
enactec when benami was .part of Indian law.
Therefore, tax laws have to come up to the level
where benami ceases to be a part of Indian law.
However, even subject to that. position, it should
be distinctly made clear that the prohibition
against benami is between the real/beneficial
owners and the namc-lenders. If the authoritics

undcr the tax laws are satisficd that a device has

51


been entered into to defcat the tax laws, it can
proceca to recover tax demancs ignoring the facade

vf apparent ocr real wuwnership, as the case may be.

“a

oi2. It wos emphatically stated before the Law

Commissi

on that there are provisions in the Indian
Trust Act, 1882, which, en their proper
interpretation, spell out a trust in favour ef the
so-called real or beneficial owner cf property.
Apart from all cther sections, it is worthwhile to
cefer to sections 81, 82 and 94 of the Indian
Truses Act. It may be mentioned that by the
provisions of the Ordinance, section 82 of the
“rusts Act has been deleted. But it has kept

sections 81 and 94 untouched.

5.13. “Section 81 provides that where tue owner of
property transfers or bequeathcs it aui if canner
be infered consistently with the attendant
ciccumstances ‘h* he intended to dispose of tne
beneficial interests therein, the trarsferes ci

legatce must 1010 such property toe the benefit of

the owner or his legal cepresentett
Illustration (a), section 81, reads as under:
"(a) A conveys land to B without

ccnsideration and declares no trust of anv

t
6

part. It cannot, consistently vi

circumstances under which tho trens

mace, be inferred that A intended to transfer

52


the beneficial interest in the land. B holds

the land for th. benefit of A.".

5.14, Numerous transfers of agricultural and
urban land have been noticed wherein. the sole
object of the real owner was to defeat the
agrarian and urban land reform and ceiling laws.
The misuse and abuse of the provisions of the
Trusts Act requires to be more specifically spelt
out. In fact, thc use of the word 'trust' brings
to mind some kind of fiduciary relationship with
confidence in the trustee to act in a manner
useful to the bencficiary. This was the: laudable
object. How it is perverted may be stated. One
Shri S$. Jagannathan, recent recipicnt of Bajaj
Award for public scrvice, drew attention of tho
President of India te the abuse of the - provisions
of Trusts Act for augmenting the nefarious
activities of the landlords who wanted to defeat
land laws. A copy of his communication was sent
by Banwasi Seva Ashram to the Law Commission
pointing out the evil effects of ‘benami
transactions in land in Tamil Nadu by creating a
large mumbcr of fake trusts'. In the list
attached to Shri Jagannathan's letter, he has set
out details of as many as 21 trusts involving
thousands of acres of land. He has also

specifically pointed out the names of landlords

53


who have used the facade of trusts for protecting
‘heir land holdings He has alse given another
list in which benami transactions in thc name of
family members, friends and servants were entered
into to defoat land laws. As the information is
very uscful, the whole of it is annexed to this
report (Appendix I). Similarly, the Law
Commission also received a copy of a letter by
Pattaligal Pannai Ashram dated July 28, 1988, to
the former Chief Justice Shri P.N. Bhagwati
pointing out the misuse of benami transactions in
lana in the name of false or fake trusts for
pscudo-religious services (Appendix II). This
evil is well-known and does not need detailed
discussion. In the view of the Law Commission,
provisions of century old Trusts Act, of 1882
vantage when private property was sacrosanct arc
being abused since the advent of the Constitution
to cefeat the constitutional culture. The
intormation herein supplied is revealing and a
time has come to take cffective action in this
behalf, otherwise all socially beneficent
legislation will mect its Waterloo at the altar of
so-called sanctity of private property. Once the
private property is being used, as pointed out
earlier, to defeat social morality, the

transactional law in respect of it becomes part of

54


public law and must be enforced accordingly.

४.15. Section 82 9. svides that where property is
transferred to onc person for a consideration paid
or providea by another person, and it appears that
such other person did not intend to pay or provide
such consideration for the benefit of the
transfcrec, the transferce must hold the property
for the benefit of the Person paying or providing
the consideration. This section has been dcleted

by the Ordinance,

5.16. Section $4 provides that: 'In any case not
coming within the scope of any of the preceding
sections, where there is no trust, but the person
having possession of property has not the whole
beneficial interest therein, he must hold the
Property for the benefit of the persons having
such interest, or the residue thereof (as the case
may be) to the extent necessary to satisfy their

just demanas',

5.17. The Indian Trusts Act is of 1882 vintage.
It wes the hey day of laisscz faire. Private
property was sacrosanct, Every legal device was
resorted to to protect property. Hence came the
doctrine of the constructive or resultant trusts.
These provisions are anachronistic in character.
They provide an umbrella or shield for defeating

55


socially beneficent legislation or tax
legislation. If A transfers the property, one
fails to understand why he should not transfer the
property including the beneficial interest
therein, If A purchases Property, one fails to
understand why he should not purchase in his own
name unless his intention is ६० keep secret the
source of the considcration Paid by him and that
source may be tainted with criminality.
Therefore, every conception that a transfcr of
property takes place either by purchase or by
transterring without consideration and in the name
cf person who has no interest in the property save
the name-lender, post-Constitution socicty and the
constitutional legality should extend no
Protection to it. Thereforc, all the three
Provisions will have +o go with a sp-cific section

that where a Person is recorded as a holder of

ty, it weuld provide conclusive evidence by
the necessary legal presumption that he is the
full owner of the Property except in cases of
mortgzge which again must be by a registered
instruncnt,. And when it is said that one is a
recerded ewner of a Property, it incluées all
kinds of property. To illustrate one point, if a
Shareholder is recorded as the owner of shares in
tho Register of Shareholders required to be

waintained by the company under section 155 of the

56


Companies Act, it would be conclusive proof that
1.2 is the owner of tie shares and nothing to the
contrary shall be proveable in any proceeding nor
any transfer without consideration shall be

recognised except where it is by gift.

5.18. The last important aspect which must be
dealt with refers to a glaring lacunae in
acministration of civil laws. Where anything done
or omitted to be done is an offence,
acministration of criminal justice requires that
there must be an enforcement machinery and there
must be judicial branch enquiring into what is
alleged to be an offence by enforcement machinery,
The State is vitally interested in peace and
harmony in the society. Administration of
criminal law, theref- re, bresages that there must
be a very c£fective implementation machinery of
laws prescribing offences and punishments for

then,

5.19. In the matter of tax laws, the State is
equally vigilant. The tax laws bring in the
revenue for oiling the Machinery of Government.
The revenue generated by tax laws is available for
carrying on socially beneficent activities of a
welfare State like ours, The usual well-noticed

tendency in the society is not to pay taxes, Few

57


can assert as done by Justice Holmes that: "Taxes
are what we pay for civilized socicty. I like to
pay taxes, with them I buy civilization." Today
the most noticeable tendency is not to pay taxes.
the State, on the one hand, is interested in
generating maximum revenue and tax-payers are
equally interested in paying the least, if not
paying at all. Even when benami was part of
Indian law, tax law and allied laws had taken
recourse in their own way of ensuring due
obedience of the tax laws. Therefore, there is an
elaboratae machinery sect up under the tax laws for

their effective implementation.

52206 However, when one comes to civii laws, in
general it can be said with confidence that there
is nothing like a State machinery for enforcement
ci those laws. Part.es whose rights are affected
by statutes are left to fend fer themselves to get
relief by initiating action before fora set up for
the same. The fora would not act on its own.
Somecne has to move it. Even when it comes to
weaker sections of the socicty, civil laws
ordinarily do not provide for enforcement
machinery. In generaliy referring to civil laws,
the labour laws are not included therein. To take
an illustration, Transfer of Property Act contains

numerous provisions. None can say that there is

58


some machinery for enforcement of the provisions
of Transfer of Property Act. In an orderly
development of society where the emphasis is on
developmental planning for transformation of the
society, it is equaliy necessary to have an
enforcement machinery. The Law Commission would
require an extensive research for suggesting an
instrumentality for enforcement of civil laws.
with the time constraint as has been spelt out in
this case, it is not possible to undertake such
extensive survey. It is equally impermissible not

to touch the aspect at all.

5-21. What is meant by the Law Commission when it
talks of machinery for enforcement of civil laws?
Taking the Eresent situation about benami
transactions and the suggested remedies for their
votal prohibition, ‘one cannot derive effective
benefit from the legislation unless there is some
tiachinery for enforcement of Prohibition against
benani transactions. Assuming that on tae
recommendation of the Law Commission, prohibition
against benami transactions is imposed, if the
benami transactions are not made penal, invariably
people would enter into benami transactions
pecause they have their own benefits. Unless the
real owner and the benamidar fall out or the

enforcement authorities under the tax laws come

59


across a position where tax law is defeated by
benami transaction, no one would proceed to
enquire into the legality or otherwise of tax law
and get it declared illegal. Even under the
socially beneficent legislation like ceiling on
land, enacted with the wholesome object of
equitable distribution of nature's munificence,
namely, land, there is no effective machinery to
checkmate defeating of these laws. Suppose, a
landlord transfers a piece of land in the name of
his own cultivator. For the purposes of record,
the cultivator woule be the owner, The landlore
would benefit by escaping from the tentacles of
ceiling laws and the Cultivator would never be
able to go against the landlord. This was adhered
to when it was said that ‘the real owner may just
depend upon nuscle po er for assertirg his rights.
In fact, much of the lana grab in this country has
been Gone through muscle power and rolitical
Patronage rather than by resort to courts of

law.?.

5.22. Various aspects herein delineated do make
out .a good case for an enforcement machinery of
even civil laws. Now it is not possible to set up
a whole enforcement machinery of inspectors and
Superior officers, The Law Conmission ३5 of the

Opinion that time has come when involvement of

60


voluntary agencies in enforcement of laws would go
a long way to spread constitutional culture of
obedience ८० laws. And if the constitutional
culture spreads, strife and confrontation in the
society would be considerably minimised,
Therefore, a beginning should be made in this case
by authorising recognised non-governmental
organisations being empowered to lay a complaint
before a tribunal - a District Judge in each
district should be declared as a tribunal for the
gurposes of this Act = pointing out the violation,
namely, entering into a benami transaction. The
tribunal must investigate the complaint. Legal
aid authorities must assist the complainant in
performance of his public duty. If the complaint
is found to be frivolous, vaxatious or malicious,
the tribunal would be justified in awarding

suitable compensation to the party against whom

complaint is This is in brief the outline

of the method of enforcement of civil laws.

5.23. Another existing machinery already
cecommended by the Law Commission can be put to
better use even in this behalf. In the report on
Gram Nyayalaya,- the Law Commission recommended
appointment of Liaison Officers attached to Gram

Nyayalayas. For a detailed discussion of their

role, the report may be studied. A duty may be

61


added to the duty list of these Liaison Officers
that in their overall supervision of enforcement
of laws in the rural areas, they must equally look
at violation ot prohibition of benami
transactions. And authority should be conferred
on them to lay a complaint in this behalf before
the District Judge as Tribunal under this Act. A
similar machinery may as well be set up for urban

arcas.,

5.24. Indian Trusts Act deals with private trusts
and trustees of such trusts. However, when it was
found that there is an clement of public trust in
certain types of trusts, the concept of Charity
Commissioner was brought in for supervision over
Management and tackling the irregularities in
public trusts. Most of the States have enacted
their laws for dealing with public trusts which
include both charitable and religious trusts.
However, the private trusts which are controlling
enormous property were left untouched. The
principle of benami resulted in legal concepts of
constructive or resultant trusts. Now that benami
is cone away with, a guestion that faces us is
whether the element of public law should also
involve itself in supervising private trusts? If
this is not done, benami may rear its ugly head in

the form of trusts as pointed out in Appendices I

62


and ii. Therefore, an officer, by whatever
designation called, but partaking the
characteristics of Charity Commissioner may as

well be inve

4 with power to investigate into
the affairs cf the private trusts where such
trusts have afforded a shield and protection to
impermissible benami transactions in future. This
will be one additional method of supervising the
enforcement of civil laws. According to the Law
Commission, all these measures would provide
comprehensive enforcement machinery for the law,

which will replace the Ordinance.

5225. The Law Commission recommends accordingly.

(D.A. DESAI)
CHAIRMAN

(V.S. RAMA DEVI)
MEMBER SECRETARY

NEW DELHI,

AUGUST 14, 1988.

63


NOTES AND REFERENCES

Chapter I

l.

20
3.
4.
5S.

6.
Te
8.

oe

10.

ll.

1071, 57th Report on Benami Transactions, August
1973.

Punjab Province v. Daulat Singh, AIR 1942
LCI, 57th Report, para 1.14.
Ibid., para 1.15.

Hasman Gani Ahmed Sahib v, Vidhadhar Krishnarao Mung
Appeal No 533 of 1968) decided on 171.1069 by Patel
and Wagle J.J, quoted in Para 6,21 ICI,57th Report,

LCI, 57th Report, paras 6.24, 6,26 and 6.27.
Ibid. para 6.33.

Neena Vyas in The Statesman dated 4-6-1988, 'Benami
Revolution May be StillIborn' p.7.

Ibid.
Neena Vyas in The Statesman, Delhi Edition, dated 4th
and 5th June,1988,

K.N.Balasubramanian in Ehe Economic Times, New Delhi
Edition, dated 22nd and 23rd June 1988.

12, Editorial, The Tribune dated 21st May, 1988.

13, Editorial, National Herald dated 23rd May, 1988.

Chapter II

i. hrinivas v. Sholapur Spinning and Weaving
1954 SCR 674.

2. 1952 SCR 89,

3. (1981) 8 8०८ 362,

4. 1954 SCR 587.

5. (1967) 2 SCR 762.

6. (1970) 3 SCR 530.

7. (1971) 3 SCR 9,

&


Chapter II (contd)

8.
9.

10.

ll,

12.

14.
15.

16.

17.

18,
19.

20.
21,

(1973) Suppl. SCR 1,

Hidayatullah, J., in his concurring opinion in
2५0 Golaknath €, see supra note 5,

S.R.Das, J., in his dissenting opinion in Subodh
Gopal Bose's case, see supra note 4,

The Constitution (Porty-fourth Amendment) 8०८, 1978.

Dr Upendra Baxi, The Little Done: The Vast Undone,
1967 Journal of Indian Law Insti ute, Vol.9,p.323
at 383.

vf: Champakam 1 Dorairajan, 1951 sc

(1980) 3 scc 625,

Granville Austin, The Indian Constitution : The
Cornerstone of a Nation, pp. 75-76,

T.i.Keishnamachari as quoted by Granville Austin ibid
The Constitution of India, article 38,

id. article 39(b) and (c).

Anyone interested in the history of development of
law about benar

transactions may see 57th Report
of the Law Commission of India where most of the
cases have been extensively quoted,

LcI, 57th Report, para 1.7.
RK.Garg vs. Union of India (1981) 4 scc 675.

डा


Chapter IIT:

1, ICs, S7t Report, pera 6.29
2. Smt. Indira Nehru Gandhi VY. Raj Narain, (1976) 2

SoRp. 436

3 ‘Id., p. 437

4. Id., p. 438.

5. Id., p. 481.

6. Kanta Kathuria v. Manak Chand Surana, 1°72 SCR 830.
7

8

9

Yonwer Lel Gupta v. Amar Nath Chawla, (1975) 2 808 259

Hote No.2 above.
. Raj Kumar v. Union of India,(1975) 4 SCC 13
E.P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu,(1974) 4 SCC

लि कार Pavarem Shetty Shetty v. sabemetionel Airport futhority
of India and Ors. ,(1

979) 5 SCC 489:

Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, #IR 1978 SC 597;

11. Pee v. Khalid Mujib Sehrawerdi and Ors,
1 90

0 722.
“42, LCI 57th Roport-Put them on notice in 1973. It is a

a published document r-comrending abrogation of benami
transactions.

66


Chepter V

1.

United States v. SB STR ACRE oa rransit
Company, ouoted in Pennington's Compa: QW,

5th Fdition, p. 58, in the context of lifting a
veil of corporate entity to ascertain the reality.

Mc_ Dowell Co. Ltd. vs. Commercial Tax Officer,

(7985) 3 SCR 791 =t 809,

Mr. K.N.Balasubramanian in The Economic Times dated
dune 22, 1988, The Benami Ordinance (T) - Another
Paper Tiger, p. 5, column 5.

L.C.I. 114th Report, on Gram Nyayalaya.


Cable: Banwasi/ Ashram TURRA
BANWASI SEVA ASHRAM
Govind Pur (Via Turra)
Mirzapur (U .P.)

Noe 4809/88-89 Date 13th July, 1988

- 658 -

My dear Justice Desai,

I am enclosing the copy of a letter written by
Shri S, Jagannathan (Sarvoda leader) to the President of
India regarding the Benami transactions of land in
Tamil Nadu by creating a large number of Fake Trusts..
Shri Jagannathan is a consciemceus social worker
long connected with the Sarvodaya and Bhoodan movement
was President of the All India Serva Seva Sangh for
two terms, has lead a series of Satyagrahas to success~
fully distribute temple and trust lands to the landless
in Tamilmadu. He had also made experiments with the
help of NABARD and local banks to transfer land of the
defunct trusts to the landless by way af bank purchase.

I an forwarding his letter to you to seek your
valuable, advice in planning an effective administrative/
legal action for the peaceful transfer of Benami land
to the actual tillers.

I shall be grateful for an early response in the
matter.
With deep personal regards I remain,

Yours sincerely,
Sd/—
( Prembhai )

Justice Shri DA, Desai,


-@-

His Excellency,
The President of India,
New Delhi,

Respected and Dear President,

Sarvodaya Movement, as well known to your Excellency, is
engaged in the peaceful solution of the land problem for
the past 80 years eversince Acharya Vinobaji started the
Bhoodan Movement in 1951 and LAFTI is a registered
organisation of Sarvodaya for a special experiment of
distributing land to the landless poor through bank
operations and Government participation, gm a non-violent
alternative to the conflicting situation in East Thanjavur
due to the concentration of lands in a few hands and the
highe st percentage of landless labour in that area,

But during our search for the peaceful solution of the land
problem we were very much worried and perturbed by the ~
benami transactions ia such a large scale throughout the
country, corroding the socicty to a moral degradation and
economic chaos denying justice to the poor. Corruption
and Benami transaction are twin evils that have eripped
the country to strengulation of all morel values. The
recent ordinance promulgated about benami transaction
(prohibition of Right to recover Property) uplifts and
regenerat&s the Nation to great moral heights,

We submit our gratitude to the President for the ordinance
promulgated at the most opportune time. We welcome whole
heartedly the speedy ponouncement of the ordinance in
order to instal the moral dignity and promote the
economic welfare of the country by controlling and
abolishing the benani transaction. Your bold step
inspite of the Parliament not in session, to take

>०००००९०0


>> Or

fer
et

anne dicte naetion 1 excroise of the power conferred by
giouse (2) of 18 of the gonsti tution will be welcomed bY
533. goction 25 ng Wiss and vinely measure to raise the
econopl¢ standard of the peoples pertioularLy he weaker
section आप Will be penefited as penami daar s+ the posterity.
wir neil ene ordinanc? ag one of wi storie importance for
the promotion nf the welfare ag tne poory if the ordinente
As seriously qoken WD ond implensnted gn the true spirits

However it is our endgeveur to point jut thet there may arise
eome Ch gorepencie s in the ipplenentation of the ordinmnee a8
geverad dsubts and Loqunae witli arise which ols should be
abrendea ७० an the antere st of the publics

ay The sepa tnars who are 63.0 89 #छ91 ations and friends
will never gone forward to exerci 89 their pighnts, yosted on
them bY the ordinances neither this sorvents WLLL have the
QOUrags to claim snair ti grits the ordinance will be null
and yoid bY nowdy oxen el sine sheit pigntse

ey Tao pewsonSs whe ere benefitted by tine ordinance ag
yonan hers nay pot yolens to the eotagery of the poors as
most of then engaged ain professions such 25 Aoctor 8, engineers)
yusine 86 and gneustricl apnecrns ete. There should be 9
elause ०0 tho affect phat the ponomd dhar s pene fitted py the
ordincnes should 9० alow ne poverty line oF otherwise

the Lands of such penant dhe? 8 above the poverty Line should

po taken ower bY ¢he government for adistributich te

jandiess poots |

Therefore the qevornicnt shoud have 8 machinery to ३9275 40
end list out the peneni dhars jn every state in ager मन

ay पूछ olexify among ts penal caer 9 xno sa who | ore 5630४
tae poverty Yins »

vy? f> confirm amersaip for those who ore below tho

poverty ince

oe and to take away vnc syner Lends and ai stribute to the
ZLomdhe 884

eoeeeeTe


न 71 =

3. Besides the benani transactions in individual nanes of
close relations, fricnds ond servants, the other glaring benani
transaction by the land owners to cscape from the Land Ceiling
act is transfer of lands in the nane of religious and public
trusts. The land owners assune the pseude posture of religious
mind and public spirit, just to hoodWink the public and the
Governnent, Such spurious trusts ereatcd in the nanc of schools,
ho spitals dharmashalas etc. should be taken over by Governnent
for distribution to the landlesse

& sample survey teken in lo blocks of East Thanjavur where

LAFTI is operating gathered by public information in the villages,
gone of them verificd py the rceords fron the concerned village
officers, is enclosed herewith for your kind notice. All the
trusta arc only in nance and the trust lands are misused for
their own sclfish ends. The endowment of landed property as
trusts during these days of huge population and when the tillers
are land hungry, is anti people and anti social. Therefore

the lends under all trusts ereated cversince 1947, should be

taken over and distributed’to the poor. |

We feel the ordinance will be a boon to the people for controlling
and abolishing the henwmi transaction in the name of individdabs
and trusts. We hope the ordinance Will have effective clauses
to control and ultinatecly clinina कक - the beneani trensactions
through notification or necessary rulcs there-on ahead of the
parlisnentary Legislative procedures, for the projected points
referred to in our appeale
Thanking you Yours sincerely,

Sa/~S, Jagannathane


*asodaind
पणु३ 2०४0० Joy yuods st जप aTsuts ०

FON °FSTLCTAGsnpuT ue TYyoTiOd Fo
WSUTTUULW Tag Aq poBvuLu cy 09 27०८
(azodoud woy,Zo pus 8एप्णयू FLUR TTT ०४

peto.sT#oy Ssuy इशाएद qTuyqusvscuLy
प+८००० STY otosog *UOTF-ATITNO

GoF posuT mram Asyz oA 4SvUT ATU
*O9SLM SuTAT 229M SpucT oy} प+ए99

- 2L-

STU TITZ ‘aeons qseqt Aum prs od *qondy, UOTPLONPA
Telia Teuqususuuey qsnzy >पा, sgomov G2ZL Teltag Teyqusvsuvy  weTVSuLuLTILy INTOATTH °S
*qsnqyZ oud
Joy ‘juods SuTujoN “suoquen Appucy ' हे qsniy, प०ए३० जाए .
oup Aq poyvaTZ tno ce spurt 24} पाप gaze 00६ IVUPCN NYZNUTSVACUL 418, ९2४५० | op q
"sulk omg ३०:०१ 5पक 40x TUN pTquoyL
9३80७ BuTAT edu 87079... 002 pur yuosy 32700, पर०1३- onpy Tesuvuy.eAdyO,
ue ySnoly, छए7030० 1470० ee SpucT oUuL छण्य50० 50६ zeATyoou AC ए००पए:छ we Te pusus weTtuuyy *८
"sank omy ystd उप | fF oFSLM
SuTAT 772० SpuLt ouy *Saaquow Tp »5ए01१३ .
Aqiweg cya Aq प्रणु३००यकाए० waTg छज्य०० O22 qsniy "जूता अओ प्रय्यार्द..55य05400 op ट
51 13% प्रण[३ - ०000 peTTLod
os At ०1 quods 37 SuTuzON
‘ul ATS v 8७ Suoquow ATTWy "4sndL TeyyZ-ATIAA
aug Aq PCRLATLINO छय< SpuLrT SUL 804०५ 002 uot}. जाए SVUV Tpngusu.g TsnsoumsTuL "b
जज बाय गा धुत कु एटा ek
2 0 TOU . " TON
ene SEO een ee ee तय तत.-त ३80५३ 9प३ FO OWN, SSL TTEA.. MOOT . iB
“AGUA प USTO WOMEN OVE NE EST “0 HAWN in “NE
> NGLIOVSNVEL TWVNEE 4O FunSVN SHL 40 AGAUNS ATdVS Vv 6


ST sd} TMoYD OU WALT oOTBUTS ए su psqylATZ—TNg

*awcu uT ATUO ST
qsnazy eur *SuTuunt ST Azy[noug oN * 8००७०
puct STq Fo asvat ayy szepun auc spurt esouy

sucucAcatds po, ou st azauz
IOUMO PULT BTq Fo osveT uPpun cae put asauz

*oweu UT
ATUO उप SdoTAZAS oTTqnd उठ्ठ sysni} 80 243
पाए ‘AdTIT¢n oTtqnd Auc oz yon *AT TMT
०५३ JOT pOUT.4UTLM ST LTLUSOD “amu UT
Ajuo cstv 94० asnay Sutuutg Aqtweg -Tesupe
pon ABZ ए1०प० ay_ *SUTOTpeul OU PUL 10Z00q ON
spunodwoo euo ATUO ST उयण्पा, *oyLs owcu ATuo
T-gtdsoy ayy *ottqnd ७५३ उठ uado you oue
FUNDS BY} eYCS aU UT ATUO 3गए sysnay ०पा,
*Tooyos उ०प्‌३० Auv 80 *QA0D ०प३ Wous paaTaoau
ul SUOTSS30U0D >०प३० pul sqULuS seTNBer
[ooyos oTuyosz ATod puv Tooyos ysTy ey. sog
d

*asodind uotqvonpe

Aue doy queds 91 SutyjoN *TpnyMTTTy

FO TLTTTd ucfvsezuN eumcu Aq puot put auo hq
pestueul sav SpucT ayy Fo प०1३-% 1३४7० aUZ

a +॒--- ० +-+

~oL-

ysnay, Amy Tnoyg
» 08 एफ्पणएपत "any anqunyyrAtueg

us OY Inkeyzooy

ysnay Ary qTnoyg
TUTCAnYyNIT पा,
89:0० og  +शाण, wWeurdcucd: po,

*oye qsnay weuLMs ypeN
*ysniy, SuTuutg
ATquug ysnay ctcug ~ ped. pa,
*qenay At} TNOYD WT-ATIICA
pus ysnay Teaidsoy
USLULY WETSATTLA ySNIy ५
*oTuyoey ACTION ,
wcuTyqedusin ११४४०), Tooyos ४
usTH LSTSuq St Yons

897०० 008 क+४्णय३ gL ATauey WUNTCATTIVA
83490 gL ३४०००, UuoTZuonpg INTCUL py
8जय50 OG NSCIL TMALUNAITYL TPMT

op "OL

op °6

Tpnyngygd wlutg.iduSiy 89

anqeatty °L

ANTOATTY *9



*spucT Sufofue put ButgvaTtz tno

ST oy put yInog au Aq pequtTodde

ए 49% 9994 yo *84.0 Le ३४०८९ ayy soz
WIND auardng ey} UT SuTpued ST oso
DU} MON *+-21०0० OF YUEM ४ज>प३०-१ UL
*spuct ०9५३ fo qUOWOSeuLM STY peqzULM
vugyep yo Joyjzoug ayy *PULT 3पक
wolf OWOOUT ey} SuTpiZer susyqzouq
9प% usemzoq 9802४ agndstq *SpuLt
BSuTZeucw SLM WLTLATTTI@A ceyzorq

auZ ३४77३ 39५३१ Spe _LUTTLe ३४
IOUZO GUY WLTVATTILA ३८ SUTATT au0
‘szoyjzorqg omy *aTduez ay} woz yuods
Sf} etd ० qoN “UUTIue UT ST eTduez
eu 3nq °4STq snoavSuvyy ‘funiva
“nity, qveu wetodey ut ST purT ज्पा

*sroquow
ATTucy Aq pezZLATZ No 9०० spurt
au, *peuTLeyuTeM ST AazTNoUD ON

‘outa Aue ३० uvucYypeuUy
ON “SI UMO put T 3Tq Aq ascot
UO POFTATZINO Wt SpuLT 244 TIV

*asodand Aaytnoyo Aue a10F
peZTTTyn you pur Sdaequew ATTucy
Aq pepeaTzTNo atu spurt eseuy

*guTuotzouny
ST AIZTNOYUD ON “WAILs duo
B SU peyVATZTMO ००० spurt व्यक TIV

oo

83200 9g

uw O0€

n BOL

s OL

89:0० OLL

* ८ 5

suussep
uy शाप, cuUMYs® pTLA
wuSuTTeasT, weucdeyzux

qsnay, Arp tnoyp
ICVABYZESE TTY,

5३87-09 cucug
-cuuy pITyZLIvAcuOS
ucwmmeATYORCANYYS TIN

°ysntL
AqzTnoyg ucucAyop vue y

°3SnaL
Aaytnoyg ए्प्प्य्पत धरा ए

eg

i ne -- "+-+++

weTeddey

npeunyyvuLdy
FeTCULTY
qJuucsue To,

PUL OOTY

ue 4a
~oyuc he poug
TUICYLYZe
TCYZLUTLY
anqumnyy.vuutYy9

¥

yooTa
AqIayovpedoy °GL

op “a
-op- "EL
op "eb
weuT}yedusun ५५
z ~~]

«


anddnivg “ZL
FugVaugycg "LL

ankdyyedsury “Ob एए०अज्णप्रण्प़ “OL
nqjudteynioy °6 weyoqetTeg *6
nqqednuyytymy *8 FpequerTequn *8
weTesvucuetTqTTg *५ Tacyouvuoog *५
Tpucog *9 TeyyyZzen *9
WUULATITUL *5 anqumatyL *5
TugodueuL *y Teyymreg *
InATITTy °E JFroyouvrsza, °¢
ANTISN °Z yucavyyn *ट
maindvcyyourguey *| weTusuemeAyyUS °L

Hing, uswpoesac tt YNATL wWesvucdtg

*SMOTTOJ Sv s¥NTe

-GL-

qsany, vucyp

47 UT Spuct sey ATTetz asucdooy ytTaddnavy tuys n 00६2 cuuy Fuyednatuy -Op 5 [ट
*sosodund ३४४०३ Tepeygey csucliy »
Auc oF posn YON *SacuUMO PULT Aq poRLaTzing s 02५ TFUTLZZLy oSaystaqy ae AT Quinte y -dp- "02
arqueg .
~op= u OGL UIT-oH Adcwtag WeTLATTV -Op- °6L
51 8044 Aue "80, UoTZ
Joy एोशा VON “WITT जृर्प[ुह ७ sv pazvatyzT ४» OGL -Conpy 8449SH “WLW we [CAT TV -Op- "OL
जा
*asodind ptus ey} sof pesn ST BuTyZoN “aca INTTeN उठ
“TTCypnUesuTTVUMY PLOT एप Tq v Aq pozvatztng » OF yS8any wAvuTAvTpoy -LALUTALTpPIOY -Op- “Lb
*asodund 344 a0F pesn
qou ST ३४यए, ouZ “TUTTIg we:savpung puot *tpuood
puct 3tq ७ Aq peScuvu st puc{t 4suny uy 8029० 0£ 4s vuvypluuy TTeuep, -Turnugnitw, 9४

~ y हा

a NE


- 9L-

(°SAOOTSJO ABUTTTA ०प+ YySnowyZ soSvTTTA

OU} TTY UT pozwsT4soAUT ०१ ०३ DAVY TITM Soanee a)
*soroe 0009 TTY ut svy ATTwey zeuvdoopm yetednzvy jau
OI JO SauVU ?7पक UT uoTZPOVSUeTL

*SQUUAIOS pUv SOATLOT
TULUSq TOUeAaS av day. OSTY

*(uapavpj) yOdouTy 10

uotzduexo SutpTaoud osneto ०प३ Aq +ण Bullt99 puet 742
advos® ०३ fusTALATZINO uTLyULCTY pue ३एए०909 Jo 8०:००

005 ATav90u rade 9य०प३ ३४४०३ छाप apTseg

+80:०० 00६2

ssoassod 03 oTvos गे v yons प्र००पुढ्े sT weuvpeuuy on
*sonjsnt} Suol ITT AacytpTsey 77० susqueu ATTwey

aqeuvdooy,

*qsnay UuvypeUUy vaeMysoqVyUeA एप%८फाया पा,

FO owou ey, UT WeTeYBsTqey ३० patog छ ST ज्यण्पा,

*anyyudday
weandeyzoug
FoINYyAeYyZeans ए पा,
JNTTEN CYL TIAN
indy pueg
TyZNyoueTVANI TUL,
WUTLYYS TqQLVy

TToy Teumsoeduau pung

“antes weuoyyLquiny

oe

.
रा (४1०-४ ५१५७ (- 00

TpnsueTITA "६
INTTLUTTITA 'ट
Tpnguuquas *|.

HNL MI CAMITET पट

*npeuTuyedeug §="°8L
meyyeyesueyzog “Lb
weTeSeucwt Itty “OL

JFauyorTeyyuALsue, = * GL
npeueddeg “HL
antTeuvmmuy "६;

Wnt, wesvucdeg



- LZ =

*twxe पु
हु >००- sezoe oer © APlTASH*L*A -op- -op=
szeah € UT 9३5४४ BuTAT wiey .
pue szequeu ATTwez UT TueuUegG SaTIe ७5५ nfey *H°LtA anddte, anzeanz}TUL v
*wiey 900 pa eATYTNI TezZeg. ao .
pue szequow ATTwejz ut queweg sozoe og Tnpqy *y°x°A INYYORzZ eA weuezzedeben [3
ri ~ te anpueddeg  § Fpuod TeInyANITUL
a vet Tpnbr9A, 7 वि
र्िं 052 Tesueyze TOW, we Tebuewep oon
u 99 weueaequinpT yoota F47ednyzNW
ry 092 Moz6 euTIns

-eg UT pueT oTq2ATzTNO
OGZ ७७०50 yNUOD0D UT एपश्‌
aTQeATSIN D uBALYyquNPT

झट

wu «GG FenyrypnyZng
हे f *rnaefueuL ys®y FO u 08 rnyzue que g
syDoTQ. आठ ut sjZoTd jouw sey ATTwey andktuuny a ge rnueuuy
हु “squeATes pue छए9फप्ण॒यउ ‘Srequow उ 7एणएउ #. 0६6६ anyye Ty
JO sueu 9प+ UT TwWeUSq Torun ere spuPT ITeUy a CIT TAYCIOM,
pue sreujorq छण्यप+ sey ATTWey anktuuny जप 593०0 CG rRmtuuny yoota anzzoy°S
*quemAoTdue ynouzTM 9३३75 sabe [Ta
peureouod eyzy uT aTdoad eyy “*szeah xTS
qzsed ayy Joy 9३5४४ UT PTET ore spueT ayy
pue ‘yuow ,redep enuaAezZ Fo ToI}UOD 9५३
Zepun 95० puet ayy jyuesead yy = *ATINE हि
३५5999705 UOCTPOUNJ 0} PaTTeF प०ए३०४३उ३०वं:००
,gueo Ze6bns ayy *uotzezrodzoo ued 7४०15
au} JO eseaT sy} Tepun ere spueTt oyy
TIv ‘powzoy sem uot}zerodzoo ued zebns
8 pue UOT}PEAT}LTND aued TeHns Jo} sore
0007 eu} paTe}suery pue T[TwW rebnsg e zeAtTeypnw weyyuewetny §rny 0
Peysttqeyse ZeATTeypnW eCerebeATUL*s*A ___sezoe O00p. __,_efesbedtyr*s*h__ weqjebuewryaeder on Te

“Ola SINVAWSS “SUNSTU “SHSEWSW ATIWVS JO SWWN TVNUTAIONE NI NOTIOVSNYUL TWN JO Sa TdWvS

a

st


*pepeaAT}Tnoun utew

“eZ MOU yng UCTLeIOdIOD sued

ze6ns 0} usATH sem pueT stuy
=op=

-op-

-op=
op=

wzejy auo
98 99३४५ ६३109 yng Tweusq Ierun

Jueueg repun
wrez suo se

PazyeATLINO 4nq TWeUueg ZTepun

wzez auo se
Jweueq zrepun

WIeF} suo 89 pozPeATZTNO
' Tweueg Tepun ore spuet sup

93३ ९४३१ Ino pue

sem BuUTAT spueT

*aysem ObUTAT ore

spueT jyUuesezd yy *spuetaj pue
SOATLETIZT ३० sweUu dy UT TueUAag

*aqsem HutAT

5949४ Op ayy [Te Tweueg ur
*azsem

6buTAT are sazoe 05 *szUeAIes
Pue spuatij *seaTzeTeT ३० seweu
Fureuag UT are 592०४ 09६ ०५३ TTY

- gL -

zeATTepnyw

.eCezebedAtyul*s*n

sozoe 00# anzeanityL
592०8 OCT wey zedeyy t6uny
5939४ 08 Juuy Tyuzeareg
sezoe 09 Inyzney weyndepew

seroe

58498

587०8

594०0

582०8

59398
58398

583०8

58290

99०08

GL 2४४1३१३०प० eTeYyes
~eIpueyD *a° wey

009 rekTy

PUTYPZEINYPIS

zepeyy

05 Tapqy AFeYS

O?T qeuueg *wry*y

zeATTepnyw

os eyzeudwems

zeyznoy

oo pomy uteydep

0६ pewyy 199zeN

Aepeuy

Ove pewuy Tnpay

zekeyyerew

Ov yoorey
O9E

2०४1 Tedop efey

Fenbueyzes
Treuew
weremysouley

ankeyz aay

Feyyeuzen

Tnuewuy

Tpnyeueae peg
Fpedweyze Ty
zadtuuny

anyzequr>g

anddte,
weyyederyy

२१५ १४३६-३३ 4

weypnutpnbueueg

FHeAeuINZ7 oy

~op-
tTrucodfesnyynatyy
~op-

-op-

weutz;edebey

=op=
-op=

Tpuocodre panyynaztyL

INITeANITYL
~op-

-op-

aouTz zeEdeben

TebuernunstyL

a

“eT
श्टा
°TT

°OT

°6
+8

*L

a)

°S

-eL-


900 se pebeueu

pozeaty—no

"WIZ
Fureueq repun

-op=

‘wre क 900 se
Jueueg repun

ueaAobue TT
89398 06८ wy ty  Tpedweyzery
. _INTTeN
sezoeogT azedtTepnw efezebeduy Oke rhea
sazoe GL TeTTeduessexzepuns*’s TTeuegg
-e-
a ,

Tpuoodternyynatyy

-op-=

bad)

Pea

“Te

*0%

*6T


"LAND BELONGS TO GOD ie. TO SOCIETY" - GANDHIJI

Pi TTALIGAL PANNAI ASHI \M
(Community Training Centre for Agri. Labour)
Valivalam P.O. 610 207, Thanjavur District,
Tamil Nadu, INDIA,

28th July, 1988

Dear Shri P.N. Bhagavatiji,

Iam glad Shri Prembhai of Banwasi Seva Ashram wrote
to you in connection with our representation to the President
regarding the benami ordinance. This benami ordinance is
just a bolt from the blue promulgated by the Central Government,
Where was the demand for such an ordinance, which will not
have any impact in the society. The Law Commission had
strongly recommended for the Abolition of the benami transfers
and Tamilnadu Government passed by an over whelming majority
Benami Abolition Bill in 1982 which was vetoed by the center
when it was sent for President's assent, The present
ordinance is not for Abolition of the benami transfer but
confirming the illegal transfers of the land owners, by
bestowing ownership to the benamidhars. I£ the benamidhars
is a landless poor below the poverty line, he should be
given the ownership but benamidhars of non=cultivation class
should not be given the ovmership. After all neither the
servant nor the close relation as the benamidhars will never
claim for ownership. The ordinance will be nullified. This
ordinance will be of significance if the Government takes the
responsibility of publishing the benamidhars with the extent
of land, survey number etc. and ownership bestowed only
to those who are below the poverty line.

I had the opportunity to meet our President Shri R.Venkataramanji,

Shri Bhardwaji, the Union Law Minister, and also Mrs. Sheila
Dixit the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, They were
definite that the Government will not take such responsibility
of publishing the names of benamidhars. They are of the

view that only Voluntary agencies like Sarvodaya can take

up the cause of educating and organising the Benamidhars,.

But unless the untill we know who are the benamidhars, it is
not possible to educate or erganise them.

-80-


The most glaring benami transactions in large extent
of land are in the name of false trust, for religion, public
Services eta, Both the President and the Law Minister
Said that the benami trusts cannot come under the purview
of the ordinance. It will have to be dealt with by a
Separate Act.

The Supreme Court a few months before declared 25 benami
trusts created by Bodh Gaya Mahant as bogus and ordered 25000
acreas to be taken over and distributed to the landless. We
have hundreds of such false trusts throughout the country
and a sample survey of few cases in East Thanjavur is enclosed
herewith for your information. I hope some of you who are
interested in the public cause will take up the matter and
file a suit against such benami trust in Supreme Court. We
shall gather more informations of bogus trusts and send you
in course of tine. A press Conference was held at Madras
on 26th July, 1988. Herewith enclosing my press statement
and also what appeared in Indian Express on 26th July. We

expect your carly reply.
With kind regards,

Sa/~
8. JAGAWATEAN

Encls:; aq.

Copies to:

Justice Shri D.A. Desai,
Justice Shri R.N. Mishra,
Prof. Upendra Baxi,

Shri Jose Verghese.

- 81 -


PRESS STATEMENT?

The Benami (Brohibition of Right to recover Property) Ordinance
Sarvodaya Representation to the President.

A People's Movement is the only Remedy

During the early sixties the landlord lobby in the ruling

party manoeuvred to provide all sorts of loopholes and exemption
clauses to escape from the Land Ceiling Act that they managed
to cover up all most all their lands by benami transactions

and the surplus lands to come under the Act was very ce
negligible. Since then the word "Bcnami" is of common usage
especially in the rural partsto signify the immoral transfer

of lands in the names of faithful scrvants, and close relatives
and the worst of Benami is the cheat in the name of religious
and public charitable trusts endowing large extent of lands.

There are hundreds of acres in the name of cducational trusts
but nowhere any trace of educational activities, similarly
lands in the name of choultrics and annadhanas Trusts but
nowhere any form of choultry functioning or annadhanas offered,
all cheat in the name of high sounding noble purposes. Where
is the necessity of choultries and annadhanas; if the Tiller
of the land is given the right of cultivation and enjoyment.

A socicty of cconomic injustices and exploitation abounds with
such enslaving and spoon feeding institutions of charity.

mn :
Herewith a sample survey of Trusts 4g some villages of East
Thanjavur.

Thus the history of Land Ceiling Acts in the country has becn
a hoax of deception and failure.

Tamilnadu was the premier State to bring Benami Abolition Act
in 1982 passed by an overwhelming majority in the State
Assembly. But the powerful vested interests vetoed the Act
when the Bill was sent for the President's assent. Again

in spite of the Law Commission categorical recommendation for
the abolition of Benami transactions, a Benami (Prohibition
of Right to Recover Property) Ordinance confirming ownership
to the Benamidhars was promulgated on May 19th of 1988.

-82-


4égain the powerful influence of fuedalistic class has connived
the promulgation of Ordinance to its own bencfit,

The Benami Ordinance giving legal sanction to the Benami
transactions ultimatcly benefit only the landowners, It is

a well*known fact that the benamidhars neither the servants
nor the close relatives will ever claim the right of ownership
and the status quo will continue, nullifying the Ordinance.

Sarvodaya Movement has appealed to the President of India that
the Government should take the responsibility to publish the
list of Benamidhars in every state and confirm ownership only
to the landless who are below thc poverty linc and the other
benami lands should be taken over by the Government for
distribution to the lan@less.

Sarvodaya has also requested that all the Trusts lands should
be taken over for distribution to the landless, Hope the
Government will provide the necessary legal sanction to this
effect while the Ordinance will be placed before the Parliament
for approval during the ensuing winéer session,

But those “ho are in the helm of affairs of the Government
are of the vicy that only Voluntary Organisations such as
Sarvodaya Movement can educate and organise the benamidhars
to claim their rights over the land.

Corruption and Benami transactions are the two evils strangling
the country to moral degradation and economic chaos. A
Wational Upheavel, organising People's Morchas against corruption
of official bureaucracy in the block, taluk and district
offices and people's non-violent occupation of all benami

lands in the name of individuals and trusts will vitalise the
Nation, with thb raise of the people's powcr, All the
political parties arc after capturing power and counting on
votes, But a People's Movement against the official corruption
and Benami holdings of the:: vested interests is the crying
need of the hour which will surely purify the polity of the
country.

80/-
S. JAGANNATHAN
SARVODAYA MOVEMENT.

-85-


FRESH ORDINANCE ON BEN:.MI HOLDINGS URGED

Express News Service

Madras. July 25: All trust lands, in East Thanjavur
especially, should be taken over by the Government of India
through Presidential Ordinance és the Benami (Prohibition of
Right to Recover Property) Ordinance issued in May 1988: does
not bring within its ambit the ‘benami' ownership by the trusts.
Mr, S, Jagannathan, Chairman, Association of Sarvaseva Farms,
has urged President R. Venkataraman,

In a representation handed over to the President he
pointed out that the Benami Ordinance benefited only the ;
landowners, who had clearly manipulated to vest the ownership
of their lands with their close relatives and trusted servants.
The status quo(of large-scale benami holdings) continued, thus
defeating the very objective of the law.

The President was also requested to advise the Government
to publish the list of benamidhars' in each State, so as to
find out the real owner of the lands? menership must be vested
énly with the landless poor, and the surplus lands taken over by
the Government.

Mr. Jagannathan said that he explained how in the name of
trusts, big landlords had cleverly retained possession of the
hundreds of acres of land, hoodwinking the people and the
Government. These ‘spurious trusts! created in the name of
schools, hospitals, Dharmasalas, etc. should be taken over by
the Government.

A'sample survey" conducted by his movement in East Thanjavur
revealed that 21 aifferent trusts ‘owned’ about 5,800 acres of
wet lands, including 2,300 acreas by a trust in Kumbakonam, which
is alleged to be a benami holding of a Cong.I bigwig.

Mr. Jagannathan, who is a member of the hand for the Tillers'
Frecdom said that he also met the Union Law Minister Mr. Bhardwaj
and Mrs. Sheila Dixit, Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, and

—84—


requested them to make suitable amendments when the
Benami Ordinance was taken up in Parliamcnt during the
coming monsoon session.

Meanwhilc, his movement vould mobilise public opinion
throughout the State so that the individual ‘owners' of
the lands could be persuacded to avail of the Ordinance
and take over the lands, without any fear. He was
also planning to organise an all-party conference in
Madras city sometime in August to chalk out measures
to unearth the benami holdings. :

He said that Tamil Nadu was the pioneer in bringing
the Benami (Land) Abolition Act as early as in 1981,
put the Centre did not arrange for the requisite Presidential
assent to it. Again when the ordinance to end Benami
land holdings was issucd in May 1988, the "powerful
influence of the feudalistic class’ connived to dilute
the law so as to cover only individual benami holdings
and no t trust lands, he alleged.

-85-