LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

| : ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-SECOND

REPORT

ON

Se

NEED FOR AMENDMENT OF THE PROVISIONS OF
CHAPTER IX OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
IN ORDER TO AMELIORATE THE HARDSHIP AND MITIGATE
THE DISTRESS OF NEGLECTED WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PARENTS

1989


A

CHAPTER I

| CHAPTER वा

CHAPTER IIT”

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V —

APPENDIX 7

APPENDIX ITI

APPENDIX III

+ CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION © , 7 गा ee.
QUESTIONNAIRE IgSUEP BY TRE
COMMISSION AND THE RESPONSES EVOKED
BY THE QUESTIONNAIRE cee

‘IDENTIFICATION OF DEFICIENCIFS AND

ANOMALIES IN CHAPTER IX-CF CCDE OF
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE AS PRESENTLY
MOULDEr AND CONSIDERATION OF
MEASURES FOR REDRESSING TEE SANE

STREAMLINING OF THE PRCCEDURE WITH
THE END IN VIEW TO &EXPEDITIOUS
DISPOSAL OF A PRCCEEPING CLAIMING
MAINTENANCE ene

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

NOTES AND REFERENCES eee

STATEMENT SEOWING THE AMOUNT OF
MAINTENANCE AWARDED BY TEE COURTS
DURING THE PERIOD 1°81 TO 187° aS
REPOA4 ०० in TEE CRIMINAL LAW
JOURNAL eee

LIST OF RESPONDENTS coe

CHAPTER X OF CODE OF CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE, 1973 cee

>

60

62

66


A

oOo

DO No.6(3)(7) /88=LC (1S)
- LAW COMMISSION .

M.P.THAKKAR
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Chairman : SHASTRI BHAVAN

NEW DELHI-110001.

To

Shri B.Shankaranand,
Minister for Law and Justice,
Government of. India,
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi.
April 19, 1989

Dear Minister,

The Commission is forwarding herewith its
One Hundreé Thirty—Second Report entitled:

"Need for amendment of the provisions of
Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 in order to ameliorate the hardship and
mitigate the distress of neglected women,
children and pe ents,”

The subject of the report reflects the genuine
and deep concern of the community for the welfare
and protection of the legitimate economic rights of
the neglected wife, children and parents to claim
maintenance under Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. The Commission has undertaken this
exercise suo motu on realising that certain
provisions designed to relieve the distress of the
suffering wife, the helpless children and the aged
Parents unable to maintain themselves, have become
outdated in some respects and are in need of being
attuned to the changed times. And on realizing that
Some of the provisions have created unforeseen and
unintended roadblocks in the way of the persons in
need of maintenance allowance,



“a

“or

-2-

The approach of the Commission has been to
diagonize the ailment and prescribe suitable remedy. -
The Commission has, therefore, examined the anatomy.
of the concerned provisions and identified the
deficiencies and inadequacies which have been revealed
in the course of the working of the provisions.
Having identified the problems, the Commission has
proceeded to recommend appropriate solutions with
a view that the relevant provisions attain their
desired goal. It has been the endeavour of the
Commission to remove the bottlenecks, evolve an
expeditious procedure, and to make the scheme of
the provisions more ,esthetic in the sense of being
more just.

To express the hope voiced whilst concluding
the report, the Commission is confident that the
Suffering and distress of the neglected women,
children, and parents, will be ameliorated in
great measure and they will heave a Sigh of relief
if and when these recommendations are accepted
and acted upon.

With regards,
Yours faithfully,

(M.P.THAKK AR)

ENCL: 132nd Report


* CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

1.1. The profile. The focus cf this report is on
identification and solution of the problems faced
in. recovering an appropriate monthly allowance for
maintenance by the wronged wife (from . the’
husban@) , the neglected children (from their
father), and the helpless parents (from their
children) under section 125 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure, 1973.

1.2. How and why of the exercise. The concern of
the community to ensure that a provision is made
(in the present case, to operate as an economic
umbrella for the women, children and parents) does
not stop short at making of it. It extends to
monitoring the working of the legislation with an
eye on making it more effective and efficacious.
The lesson learnt from the experience of the
working has to be meaningfully utilised in order
to:
, (1) plug the loopholes or lacunae,

(2) remove the gaps,

(3) make good the deficiencies,

(4) harmonise the anomalies, and

(5) overcome the ambiguities.


That is why the exercise is un

te aS a pari

reviewing ané revicing the Central

Aces of significance with the end in view te

update the same tc the neecs ané com; of
the changing society and charging times. 2180

with the aiia streamlining the same to serve the

object

of the experience gainec in the actual working of
the machinery evolveé to solve the yroblems

tackled by the Lecislature.

los. Facets cf the problem.

problem

which the wor

ing cf the provis
the 7666 for re-conditioning are:-
(3, The determination of the right to
maintenance and the cuantur. of the monthly
allowance;

(2) Phe procedural delay in securing a
verdict:

(3) The hardship eryperienced in
recovering the sur awarded by the court: ané

(4) The existence of certain provisions
which result in serious haréshin ane grave

injustice,

The Commission had issued a +;-estionnaire

concerning the principal issues to which a large


number of responses were received. It will be
appropriate to proceed to examine the issues
concerning re-conditioning of the concerned
provisions. after dealing with. the questionnaire

है '
and the responses evcked by the same.



CHAPTER II
QUESTICNNAIRE ISSUED BY THE CCMMISSICN AND THE
RESPONSES EVOKED BY THE. QUESTIONNAIRE

Cn.. the basis of the preliminary study of the
problems arising in the context of section 325 of
the Criminal Precedure ‘Code, a questionnaire was
issued by the Commission. It was sent to a number
of organisations and it was also given press
publicity. The responses evoked by the
questionnaire have been analysed and the position
emerging from the analysis of the responses is

being set out in the context of each question.

QUESTION NO. 1

1. (a) Sec.125 of the Code prescribes a ceiling

of Rs.506/- in awarding monthly
allowance for the neglected wife, child,
father or mother. Has the sum of

Rs.500/- not become unrealistic having
regard to the steep rise in the cost of
living and te consequentia’ inflation
since the ceiling was devised?

{b) Should the ceiling of Rs.500/~ not be
revised upwards from Rs -500/- to
Rs.1000/~ or Rs.1500/-?

Or

Would it be preferable tc do
away with riders like the ceiling on the
quantum of nonthly allowance etc. and to
provide instead thereof that the court
may direct payment of. such monthly
allowance as the court may consider
just, fair, and appropriate taking into
account the need based requirements of
the neglected wife, child or parents
including the need for meeting future
emergency needs of such pezxson on the


et

one hand and the property income and
other resources of the person liable to
Fay such allowance on the other. In
doing so tie court may treat the
realisations of the 5816 or encumbrances
.effected by the person liable to pay the
allowance within two years immediately
preceding the application for
maintenance and during the pendency of
the proceedings thereafter as his
existing assets,

Response. A vast majority expressed the
cpinion that the ceiling should be abolished and
the quantum of maintenance should be left for the
court to be determined in the light of facts and

circumstances of the case.

QUESTION NO 2.

2. The recovery of the monthly amount awarded by
the Court presents numerous difficulties and
Poses several probleris. The awardee would
have to approach the cecurt every time the
person liable to pay the allowance neglects
to make the payment. The awardee woulé have
to engage a lawyer and to incur expenditure
in connection with the payment of professional
fees and other incidental expenses once again
and frequently from time to time if payment
is withheld often. In order to recover the
amount in arrears, the awardee may well have
te spend a few months! allowance. Under the
circumstances, would it not be desirable to
empower the court in its discretion to direct
the person liable to pay the allowance to
deposit monthly allowance for six months or
so in advance in fit cases? है

Response. Ey and large the opinion was
expressed that the person liable to pay
maintenance should be directed to deposit

maintenance amount for six months in advance.

(Note: Some suggested that the concerned person


shculd be directed to make an advance deposit for
a period of one year whereas some suggested that
the pericd should be restricted to three months or
that such order shculd be passed only in case of

defaulters).

CUESTION NO. 3

3. Section 125 contemplates award of monthly
allowance to a person on condition that he or
she is unable to maintain himself or herself.
The expression ‘unable to maintain' has not
been defined. Would it not be Cesirable to
add an explanation to the effect that the
expression 'maintain' covers in its amplitude
not only the expenditure needed for food,
shelter, clothing etc. but alsc the sum
needed for being set apart in order to meet
future emergencies arising cn account of
sickness, unemployment or some other
misfortune?

Response: A vast majority of the respondents
have supported the proposal that it should be
clarified by way of an Explanation in the statute
that the maintenance would cover in its amplitude
not only the expenditure needed for food, clothing
and shelter but also the sum needed for being set

apart in order to meet future emergencies.

QUESTION NO. 4

4. Whether it needs to be clarified by way of
adding an explanation that whilst determining
the amount of monthly allowance not only the
present income of the person liable to pay
the allowance but also all his other
resources such as the property possessed by
him and his interest, if eny, in joint
family Properties should be taken into
account? And also that the gifts made by him
in the twelve months immediately preceding
the institution of the application claiming



the maintenance and during the pendency of
the proceediongs arising therefrom and the
sale Preceeds cr realisations from. the
alienations made during this pericd should be
taken. inte account?

Response: A vast najority of the respondents

have expressed the opinion that all the resources
of the person liable for payment of maintenance

should be taken into account’.

CUESTION NO. 5

5. Would it not be just, fair and appropriate
that the menthly allowance ordered to be
Payable is declared to be a charge on the
Properties of the person liable to make
payment and recoverable also from the Fersons
inheriting the properties by testamentary or
non-testamentary succession to the extent of
the value of such inherited properties?

Response A large number of the respondents
have expressed the opinion that a provision for
creating a charge on t!¢ property or the estate of
the person liable to make payment should be
incorporated in the Chapter pertaining to

maintenance.

QUESTION NO. 6

66 Would it not be just, fair बाद appropriate tc
provide that the amount of arrears of
allowance will stand satisfied only by
actual payment to the entitled person or
upon the court being satisfied that the order
has been complied with by a voluntary
compromise or arrangement in writing
confirmed by the entitled person in Court?

Response: A majority of the respondents have

expressed the opinion in favour of the propesal,


CHAPTER III
IDENTIFICATION OF DEFICIENCIES AND ANOMALIES
IN CHAPTER IX OF CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE

AS PRESENTLY MOULDED AND CONSIDERATION CF
MEASURES FOR REDRESSING THE SAME

3.1. A number of problems have arisen in relation
to section 125 of the Criminal procedure Code,
1273, as revealed in the course of the working of
the said provision, These deserve to be
highlighted and the measures for redressal deserve
tc be considered in order to eliminate the factors
giving rise to hardship and injustice in the

ccurse of the operation of the provision.

3.2. Section 125, in so far as material for the
Purposes of the present discussion, may be
quoted :-

"125(1) If any person having sufficient
means neglects or refuses to maintain-

(a) his wife, unable to maintain
herself; or

(b) his legitimate or illegitimate
minor child, whether married or
not, unable to maintain itself: or

(c) his legimate or illegitimate
child (not being a married
daughter) whe bas attained

majority, where such chila is, by
reason of any physical or mental
abnormality or injury unable to
maintain itself; or

(d) his father or mother, unable to
maintain himself or herself,



a a ie eis

a Magistrate of the'first class may, upon
Proof of such negiect or refusal, order such
Person to make a monthly allowance for the
Maintenance of his wife or such child, father
or mother, at such monthly rate not exceeding
five hundred rupees in the whole,- as such
Magistrate thinks fit, and to pay:the same to
such person as the Magistrate may, from time.-
to time, Girect: है

Provided......

Explanation.....

(2) Such allowance shall be payable
from the date of the order, or, if so
ordered, from the date of the application for
maintenance.*

3.3. ‘The present deliberations centre around
three aspects which emerge from the provision as
it is Presently moulded:-

(1) A magistrate cannot award
Maintenance at a monthly rate exceeding
Rs.500 in the whc'e even when satisfied that
the claim for maintenance at a higher rate is
justified;

(2) A discretion is conferred on the
concerned magistrate to order payment cf the
maintenance allowance either from the date of
the order or from the date of the application
for maintenance; and

(3) In order to enable a wife to claim
maintenance, the wife is required to
establish that she is unable to maintain

herself, as enjoined by clause (a) of section

125(1).


3.4. Ceiling. The Commission has examined, in
the first instance, the problem arising in the
context of the ceiling engrafted in the provision
which disables a magistrate from awarding en
allowance for Maintenance at a rate exceeding
Rs.500 per month. It appears to the Commissicn
that the fixation of the ceiling at the figure of
Rs.50C0 made in 1955, which had been retained in
1673, could hardly be said to be relevant any more
after a Passage of more than 30 years. the
consumer Price index in 1955 was 105." The
consumer price index in 1988 was 972. Thus, the
cost of living index has risen nine times since
the ceiling of Rs.500 was devised. Taking) inte
account this factor, the ceiling would have to he
raised from Rs.500 to Ps.4,500. This aspect bk
therefore, been closely examined by

Commission, 1४ ६! first place, should there 5:

ceiling when the law does not Provide for a iloci=
It would appear to be somewhat unreasonable to du
so. It has not been Possible to ascertain what
weighed with the Legislature in engrafting «é
ceiling in the provision. A research made in the
context of the Objects and Reasons of the Bill
introduced in Parliament and in the parliamentary
debates does not reveal the rationale of this
Provision. It would, however, appear that

possibly the Legislature was desirous wt

10



4

engrafting a ceiling in view of the fact that what
was being provided was a summary remedy by
recourse to a court constituted under the Code of
Criminal Procedure. The recourse to civil court
for claiming maintenance in a regular civil
Proceeding being available to a litigant, possibly
it was considered expedient to engraft a ceiling.
With the passage of time and change in the
circumstances, the situation has undergone a sea
change. Recourse to a civil court has become
virtually out of reach of a wife, child or parent
seeking maintenance, Eecause, the workload in the
civil courts has increased to such a great extent
that a claim for maintenance would remain
unresolved for years in the trial court itself.
It would take more than a Gecade to get the matter
finally resolved through the hierarchy of the
appellate courts in view of the position of
arrears in the civil courts. Under the
circumstances, now a person claiming maintenance
under section 125, Cr.P.c. scarcely approaches the
civil court in order to establish such right in
that forum, Besides, the litigation in the civil
courts has become so costly that a person in need
of maintenance can scarcely afford it. The court
fees, the advocate's fees, the incidental expenses

and the expenses required to be incurred in

11



ea

connection with appeals make it economically
impermissible to approach the civil court. Most
of the claimants for maintenance rest content with
the order of the criminal court exercising
jurisdiction under section 125 Cr-P.C. and do not
make recourse to civil proceedings. Under the
circumstances, the demand of the times and the
demand of the situation is that the remedy under
section 125, Cr.P.C. should be made as
comprehensive as possible. Thus, the conceivable
rationale for incorporating a ceiling has
Gisappeared, Secondly, the very fact that there
is a ceiling operates on the mind of the
magistrate in determining the quantum of monthly
allowance required to be awaréed for maintenance,
It is a psychological deterrent. Since the
maximum ३5 Rs.500, the magistrate tends ६०
determine the maintenance allowance at 50% to 75%
of the maximum even if there is justification for
awarding a larger sum in order to enable the
Claimant to meet the economic needs. And,
finally, having regard to the rise in the cost of
living index, the ceiling has become altogether
irrelevant with a 9008 rise in the inéex in the
interregnum. ‘The need of the claimant cannot even
be satisfied in a small measure by an award of
even the maximum sum of Rs.500 today. The cost of

housing accommcdation has made it impossible ६०

12


get. acccmmodation withcut being required to’ pay
exorbitant rent. and ‘with the cost of articles
of food and clothing having risen so much that’ the
claimant cannot satisfv even the basic needs
without heving to spené a much larger amount for
bare existence. 1६ has also to be recognised that
the incomes cf the workers and the salaried
classes as also of the other sections of the
society have gone up on account of inflation and
rise in cost of living. The resources of the
persons liabie to Pay have been augmented ane@
their economic condition has vastly improved,
This factor kas also to be taken into account in
considering the desirability or otherwise of
retaining the provision as to ceiling. It cannot
be overlooked that ifa ceiling is retained, it
would require «> he revised from time to time
taking into account the inflation and rise in cost
; of living. It would be extremely difficult to
amend the provision periodically, time ana again,
for it would result in investment of legislative
time unnecessarily. The present experience
reinforces this apprehension in as much as the
ceiling of Rs.500 has remained unrevised for 30
years without anyone (including women's activist
groups) even becoming aware of the resultant

anomaly and injustice, When the Commission


awe

embarked on the examination of the issue, two
ceptions «presented “ thenselves before the
Commission, namely,. (1) ‘to raise. the ceiling
taking into account the inflation and the rise in
cost ‘of living,’ and (2) to de away with the
ceiling altogether, leaving it to the court to
determine the quantum of monthly allowance
required to be awarded from case tc case depending
upon the facts and circumstances cf each case.
Having accorded anxicus consideration to the
relevant factors, the Commission is firmly of the
opinion that the apprepriate course would be to do
away with the ceiling altogether by eliminating
the reference to the ceiling (as at present of
Rs.500) engrafted in the said provision.
Consequently,. the reference to the ceiling of
Rs.500 made ‘in the first proviso to sub-section

(1) of section 127 will also have to be deleted,

3.5. The date from which ee ton which the order for payment of ०75९४ for payment of
TO eS OFcOr for payment of
Ronthty allowance by way of maintenance should be allowance by way of maintenance should be

Mace made effective. Sub-section (2) cf section 125,
as at present fashicned, provides that the monthly
allowance shall be Payable fron the date of the
order, or from the date of the application for
Maintenance, if so ordered, by the magistrate,
The provision is capable of being construed as

implying that ordinarily the Maintenance amount is

14



we

Fayable from the date of the passing of the order
disposing ef the preceeding by the magistrate

unlees the n incorperates “an express

direction to the contrary and provides for: payment
of monthly allowance from the @ate of the
institution of the petition for maintenance, In
case the order is silent as to the cate from whict
the order for maintenance is to become effective,
the order would become operative only from the
date of the final créer disposing of the
proceeding. There is no conceivable principle in
Genying the ailowance for maintenance for the
interregnum during which the proceeding ,remained
pending in the court if the right tc claim
maintenance is ultimately upheld at the conclusion
cf the proceedings. १९. provision appears to be
unwittingly loaded against the claimant for
monthly allowance for, the claimant being
interested in an expecitious @isposal of the
matter, the delay in disposal of the proceeding
van scarcely be laid at the door of the claimant.

In fact, indirectly it encourages the person

‘liable to pay the allowance to prolong the

litigation and thereby compound the injustice
resulting to the claimant. The person liable to
pay the maintenance allowance would have a vested
interest in the prolongation of the proceeding.

For, the longer the Gelay, the longer he can

15



retain the amount with himself and keep the wife
er the claimant away from his or her claim. Such a
person would: also have the sadistic satisfaction
cf causing harassment to the claimant with
impunity. Besides, once a claimant has
established that the perscen liable to pay
maintenance allowance has refused or neglected te
Cischaroe his obligation, it would be adding
insult to injury to deprive the claimant cf the
rightful claim by denying maintenance with effect
from the date of instituting the petition. The
right ६० claim maintenance existed on the date on
which the petition was instituted, It did not
come into existence years later, on the date on
which the Magistrate could dispose of the
proceeding. It is a matter of common knowledge
that the workload in courts has increased
tremendously. The courts are not able to dispose
of even vital, urcent and sensitive matters within
बे reasonable time. This reality has to be faced.
It often takes 3 to 4 years to dispose of a
preceeding in the court cf the first instance.
The claimant is in no way responsible for the

Gelay in the disposal of the matter. It is not

fet

the fault of the claimant that the ccurts are
overworked and their dockets are overcrowded, rf

at all, possibly it is the fault of the system.

16



There is: no reason why a wife, a chile or a parent

whe is in need of mal.itenance and is held to be
entitled to claim maintenance under the law shovld
be denied such a rigiit for the interregnum during
which the -application remained pending in the
court of the magistrate. There is, therefore, no
escape from the conclusion that sub-section (2) of
section 125 requires to be amencéed so as to
provide that the amount of maintenance shall be

payable from the Gate of the making of the

application by the claimant.

3.6. Need to set right an injustice arising out

of strained construction of the expression "unable
se Setsinec corstruction of the exp unable
to maintain herselt® in section 125(1) (a) as

3 Fesuit of which maintenance has been denied to

the wife on the grourd that even though she may

not be having any income or earning in presenti,

she is an evle-bcocied or educated woman, she

|

could earn her own living. The provision relating

to maintenance was embodied in section 488 cf the
Code of Criminal Procedure of 1898. The material
part of section 48€ was in these terms:-

"488, Order for maintenance of wives and
children-

(1) if any person having sufficient
means neglects or refuses to maintain his
wife or his legitimate or illegitinate child
unable to maintain itself, the District
Magistrate, a Presidency Magistrate, a Sub-
Divisonal Magistrate or a Magistrate of the
first class may, upon proof of such neglect

17



or refusal, crder such person to make. a

monthly allowance for the aaintenance of his

wife or such child, at such monthly rate, not

exceeding five hundred rupees in the whole,

as’ such Magistrate thinks fit, and to pay

the same ६० such person as the Magistrate”
from time to time directs.”
As discussed in smt, Malan “lv. Baburao 4, - a
comparative study of this provision with the
material part of the corresponding provision
contained in section 125 of the Code of Criminal,
Procedure would show that while in s.488 of the
old Code the condition “unable to maintain itself"
apparently attached only to the child and not to
the wife, in s.125 of the new Code, this condition
has been expresssly mace applicable to the case of
wife. But, this recasting of the oie Code
Erovision dces not signify any fundamental change
in the law and it has been done merely to clarify
and make explicit what was formerly implicit.
This phrase was introduced for the first time in
the Code of 1973 presumably in the context of the
controversy as to whether the separate income of
the wife can be taken into account in determining
the amcunt of maintenance payable to her under
section 468 of the Code of Criminal procedure,
1898. The Pelihi High court” and the Punjab High
court had taken the view that the separate income
of the wife could act be taken into account in

Getermining the quantum of maintenance payable to

the wife. This controversy was ultimately settled

18


8
the Supreme Court in Bhagwan’ putt's case

3७५ ९३३ the Gecisicns or the Belhi and punjab High
Courts. were overruled and the view taken by the
Kerala High court" that the separate income cf the
wife can be taken into consideration was approved.
Since the law had not been settled when the Code
of 1°73 was enacted by Parliament, the phrase
"unable tc maintain herself® was introduced in
section 125(1) (a) of the code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973. But the introduction of this
expression gave rise to a number of unforeseen and
unintended hurdles in the way of a woman in
distress needing maintenance:

(2) Some courts sustained the hyper-
technical plea that in the absence cf an
averment in the petition claiming maintenance
expressly stating that the petitioner-vife
was “unablc occ maintain herself”, the
petition deserved to be rejected without
anything more,

(2). Some courts sustained the plea that
if a wife Claiming maintenance was healthy
and able-bcdied or if she was educated, she
had the potentiality to maintain herself and
that accordingly she was not entitled to
maintenance under section 125 (1) (a).

So far as the first point is concerned, the view



has been reversed subsequently in most of the High
9
Co rts and it dces sot call fer eny remedial

measure; particularly in the enlightened climate

cf the eighties wren courts ‘have been showing
greater awareness of the problems of the women and
have been Cealing with such problems with
sensitivity, Sco far as the second cbstacle is
concerned, the problem survives only in the
context of two High Courts, namely, Karnataka and
Kerala High Courts, The phrase “unable to
maintain herself" has been construcé by these two
High Courts as warranting taking into accovat th
factor as regards her potential or capacity to
earn anc the factor as to whether she has made

efforts to earn for herself. Says the Kerala Fight
10
Courts

‘Again in tiuis casc the petitione: fer
whom maintenance is claimed is aced 22 vears.
She is a fairiy well educated lacy, healthy
ang is wot seated to be suffering from any
illness, €uch a person should be vres
Capable of maintaining herself until
contrary is proved. The burden of pro
that she is not capable of maintaicing
herself is on her and if she fails to adduce
sufficient proof the Magistrate would be
perfectly justified in disallowing her clain
for maintenance. If a person is a minoc
there can be no presumption that he cr she is
able to maintain himself: On both these
grounds the order of the learned First Class
Magistrate is correct and cails for no
interference, The Revision petition is
dismissed.‘

11
The Karnataka High Court has endorsed this iew

and observed:-



‘How it is to be seen whether a
presumption as laid down by the Lahore High

Court in Mahomed var's case (1941-42 Cri Lg -

439) and the Xerala High Court in
Saraswathi's-[(1961) 2 Cri,LJ 640] that a
normal hale and healthy person, may be fairly
-educated ‘aise, is presumed to be able to
maintain oneself, dces arise in this context.
I am constrained to hold with great respect
that the presumption. can only be te the
/extent of concluding that a normal healthy
person may be fairly educated, is capable of
earning. Tt cannot extend to conclude that
such earning would be sufficient to maintain
such a person.

The fact that she has refused to earn
for herself may be taken inte consideration
while considering the quantum of maintenance
that the husband is liable to contribute
towarcs maintenance, as is the view expressed
by the fupreme Court.’

The women in these two States would have to suffer
because their rights would be governed by tne law
as interpreted by their respective High courts.
There is little doubt that if the matter reaches
the Supreme Court, the view is likely to be
reversed. But whether or not such a matter would
eventually reach the Supreme Court and if it so
reaches, whether it would come up for hearing at
an early date is a matter on which it would be
futile to speculate. It is also quite possible
that these very High Courts might overrule the
view by constituting a larger Bench. But then
till this happens, the lower courts would be bound
by the law laid down by the High Court and the
women in these two States would have to suffer

unnecessarily. Such a situation needs to be

21


remedied with a sense of urgency. That is why the
Commission has been const ained to deal with this

aspect which is peculiar to the States- Kerala and-
12
Karnataka, The Bombay #igh Court in vimal's case has

taken a contrary. view on the reasoning unfolded
hereinafter:

‘The expression “unable to maintain” is used in
all these sub-clauses. Sub-section (1) (a) deals
with the case of wife. Sub-secticn (1) (b) is
concerned with providing maintenance allowance to
legitimate or illegimate minor child whereas sub-
section (1) (20) deals with the question of major
child who is, by reason of any physical or menta2
abnormality or injury is unable to
maintain itself. Sub-section (1) (8) deals with
the father or mother who is unable to maintain
himself or herself. In sub-section {c) of Section
125 (1) there is intrinsic aid or evidence
available for construing the expression “unable to
naintain*®, If by this expression the legislature
intended that every able-bodied person who is
otherwise able to earn, is not entitiec to claim
maintenance allowance under section 125, then in
sub-section (c) it was not necessary for the
legislature to say in express terms that the child
who has attained majority will be entitled to get
maintenance only if by reason of any physical or
mental abnormality or injury such a child is
unable to maintain itself. This provision throws
light on the intention of legislature. If the
Provision of sub-section (1)(a) is read in this
context then in my opinion, it is quite clear that

while construing the expression “unable to
maintain "the concept of able bodied person's
ability to earn cannot be imported. The

expression “unable to maintain herself" connotes
the situation wherein it is not possible for the
wife to maintain herself from any other source,
meaning thereby wherein it is demonstrated that
but for the maintenance allowance claimed from her
husband, she has no other source or means of
maintenance.

It is well-known that merely because
@ person is able bodied and does not suffer
from any physical or mental Gisability, he is
not always able to earn. Ability to earn

22



many tines Gerends upon several. other
factcrs, such as, educaticn, experience,
finances, fanily tradition etc, In the
competitive employment market mere physical
ability is not the only qualification
reguired fr cetting a job. in a country
where economic inderendence of the wife is
still a rarity, such a situation woulé never
have been intended by the legislature. As
observed .by the Suprene Court in Bai
Tahira’s case, (1979 Cri. LJ 151), Article 15
(3) has compelling compassionate relevance in
the context of Section 125 ana benefit of
Goubt, if any, in statutory interpretation
belongs to ill-used wife. Protection against
moral and material abandonment manifest in
Article 39 is part of social and economic
justice specified in Article 38, fulfilment
of which is fundamental to the gevernance of
Country. (Article 37).

In Nanak Chand v. Chandra Kishore, AIR
1870 SC 446: (1970 cri ug 522), the Suprene
Court had an occasicn to consider the scope
of word ‘child’ as used in Section 488 of old
Criminal Procedure Code. It was held by the
Supreme Court in the said decison that the
saic word does not mean minor son cr daughter
but the real intention is contained in the
expression ‘unable to maintain itself". Then
in para 9 of the said judgment a reference
was made to the lot of helpless children who

though Major are unable to support
themselves because of their imbecility or
deformity or other handicaps, Then in para

13 of the said Gecision, namely Nanak Chand's
case the Supreme Court observed as under:

“Coming to the third point raised by the
learned counsel we are of the view that
the learned Additional Sessions Judge
and the High Court were right in taking
into consideration the existing
Situation, the situaticn being that at
the time the order was passed Chandra
Kishore was a student of M.Com., and
Ravindra Kishore was a student of
M.B.E.S. "Course",

Thus, while considering the question as to
whether major children were entitled to
maintenance, the Supreme Court took into
consideration “the existing situation” only
and did not consider the said guestion in the
light of their physical ability or capacity

23


to earn. Therefore while considering the
guestion as to whether the wife or child ‘is
‘unable ६९० maint in herself or itself', the
existing situation alone is relevant and if
the wife is not possessed of sufficient means
to maintain herself then it will have to be
hela that sne is unable to maintain herself.'

The Conmission is satisfied that the view taken by
the Kerala and Xariataka High Courts is patently
erronecus and the reasoning of the Bombay High
Court in Vimal's case is unexceptionable. There
is no warrant to inject the concept of
‘potentiality tc earn’ in the phrase “unable to
maintain herself" occurring in section 125(1) (a).
This expression was introduced in 1973 in the
context .of the unsettled position of law as to
whether or not a wife who had her inéependent
source of income sufficient to maintain herself
could even so claim maintenance from her husband.
This is evident frem the repert cf the Joint
13

Committee wherein the rationale for introducing
this phrase has been made explicit:

"In the case of wife, the erder can be
passed only if she is unable to maintain
herself, Having regard to the object behind
these provisions, which is mainly to prevent
vagrancy, there is in the Committee's
opinion, no need to compel the husband to pay
Maintenance to a wife who is possessed of
sufficient means ",

The only ccndition which is required to be
satisfied in order to claim maintenance under

section 125(1)(a) is that the wife has no income

or no adequate income of. her own from which she

24


can maintain herself on the date of the
institution of the petition. Whether or not she
had. the potential to secure an employment and/or
to earn any inccsle vy exerting herself is a matter
within tke realm of conjecture. It is ‘common
knowledge that there is widespread unemployment
and even if the wife makes effort te eecure
employment, she may not be able tc secure a
suitable employment. At times she may nct feel
safe in securing employment even if it is
available, To enter into this arena of
possibilities in order to assess the potential of
the wife would be an exercise in speculation and
woulG unnecessarily’ prolong the litigation and
would defeat the very purpose of claiming
maintenance, The provision is incapable of the
intc-pretation which ha. been placed by the Kerala
and Karnataka High Courts unless cne is unmindful
ef rendering tbe provision otiese and purpeseless.
Since, however, the decision rendered by these
High Courts hold the fiel@ as at present, che
Commission is of the opinion that an Explanation
should be added ६४० section 125 (1) that the phrase
“unable to maintain herself" concerns itself with
the actual separate income, if any, of the wife
and not with the possibility or potentiality of
the wife being able to earn for herself by

securing employment or by exerting herself.

25


3.7.6 Neec for spelling out the critéria for

. Quantification of the amount of maintenance.
Section 125 as at present merely provides for
awarding maintenance to the person entitled there
to but it does not spell out or even indicate the
relevant criteria for determining the quantum of
maintenance which can be awarded to the successful
claimant. This hag resulted in the determination
being made by and large on subjective approach of
the concerned magistrate, It would be virtually
impossible to make a survey of the maintenance
amount being awarded by the magistrates in
different States from time to time by reason of

the paucity cf the econcmic and manpower resources
and the time constraint. An analysis of the

tudgments of the dif‘erent High Courts rendered
the context of section 125 of the Code for the

years i781, 2

1984, 1985, 1986 and 1987
reveals that very meagre amounts were being
awarded to the wife and the chila. In order to
illustrate the point, reference may be made to a
decision’ rendered in 1581 wherein a husband
whose salary was Rs.472 was Girected to pay Rs.50
by way of maintenance for the child, In another
casel6, a husband who was earning a salary of
Rs.600 per month was directed to pay Rs.75 for the

17
wife and Rs.30 for the child. In a 1984 case ,a

26

in



husband with an income of Rs.600 was directed to
Pay Rs.200 ‘by way of maintenance, whereas a
busbanc - a textile cngineer - said to be earning
Rs.3,000 per month was @irected to pay a sum of
18 19
Rs.500. In 1925. a husband with an incore of
Rs.517 was directed to pay Rs.75 per month and in
>
1987, @ husband having an income of Rs.900 was
orcered to pay Rs.300 per month. The reason for
this pathetic state of affairs is apparent. In
Getermining the amount of maintenance, perhaps a
phychclogical factor operates on the mind of the
magistrate which makes him take into account
merely his monthly income and not all his
resources. It would appear that the magistrate
accordingly correlates the monthly allowance by
way of maintenance tc the monthly income of the
husband. It is not realised that apart from the
monthly income, the husband or the perscen liable
to pay the amount would also have properties and
cther resources from which adequate maintenance
allowance can be paid by him. The assets, movable
ané immovable, from which the husband or such
Berson can meet the liability perhaps do not enter
into the reckoning. It is not necessary that the
husband or the liable person should pay only from
his Menthly income keeping his movable and
immovable assets intact. The issue regarding

obligation to maintain his wife or his child or

27



os

his parent having been decided in favcur-of the
Claimant, the obligation need not be dependent on
the size of his income. His other resources and
assets from which he can meet his obligation
cannot be disregarded. It is, therefore,
essential to provide by a suitable amendment that
in determining the quantum of maintenance, not
only the current income of the person liable to
pay the allowance but also all his other resources
and assets as existing on the date of the
institution of the petition for maintenance may be
taken into account with the end in view to award a
sun consicered just and fair to enable the
clairant for allowance to maintain himself or
herself on the basis of the need~based
recuirements of such neglected wife, child er
parents, including the sum required for meeting
future chergency needs of the claimant. It
reguires to be clarified that the need of the
awardee not enly for food, clothing, shelter,
medicines, educational expenses, etc. but also the
need to provide for unforeseen emergencies and

expenses has to be taken into account,

3.8. Deleting onercus and embarrassing fetters

impesed on the wife in order to entitle her to

receive and continue te receive maintenance. For

the purposes of comprehending the issue involved

28



in this part of the discussion, it is necessary to
take a glance at sub-sections (4) and (5) of
section 125(1), which provide:

(4) No wife shall be entitled to
receive an allowance from her husband under
this section if she is living in adultery, or
if, without any sufficient reason, she
refuses to live with her husband, 67 if they
are living separetely by mutual consent.

(5) On proof that any wife in whose
favour an order has been made under this
section is living in adultery, or that
without sufficient reason she refuses to live
with her husband, or that they are living
separately by mutual consent, the Magistrate
shail cancel the order.

The limitation imposed by the aforesaid provisions
on her right to receive and to continue to receive
maintenance, particularly in the context of the
rider that she should not be entitled to such
allowance “if she is living in adultery" works in
an oppressive manner in so far as the wife is
concerned. A wife can be embarrassed to no end by
cross-examination being directed on this aspect.
Questions loaded with insinuations and
embarrassing questions regarding the associations
and movements of the wife may be posed regardless
of whether or not there is substance in the
insinuations. Such course May be adopted with a
view to intimidate the wife and make her abandon
the proceedings or submit to an unjust settlenent.

The wife would fine herself under great pressure

in view of her anxiety to save herself from such

29


preticament and resulf ant embarrassment in open
court’ -out cf fear of social stigma. Even if “a
wife is. living in adultery in the sense .in which
the, _ expression has ‘been interpreted by : the
courts (guilty not only of a rere lapse from
morality but of being engaged in a _ persistent
advlterous relationship), it would be scarcely
possible to establish it in a court of iaw by
leading satisfactory evidence. It would not
suffice to establish that the wife is seen moving
about in the company of a person with whom she is
alleged to have a liaison. Nor wouid it suffice
to adduce evidence about the frequency. of their
meeting or the extent of their familiarity. Much
more would have to be established in order to
succeed in estabiishing such a serious allegation
which it is very easy to make and very @ifficult
tc prove, even if truce. Under the circumstances,
no purpose, other than of causing embarrassment to
the wife ané@ demoralising her, is served by
retaining this part of the provision. It is net
necessary for the present purpose to consider
whether the sexual loyalty or fidelity to the
husband whe on the one hand refuses or neglects
the wife and on the other is free to lead a
promiscuous life on his own can justly be taken

into account for enforcing an obligation to

30


ye

maintain the wife arising out of the matrimonial
bond and recognised by the law. The Commission,
therefore, is of the view that the aforesaid two
sub-sections of section 125 deserve to be amended
by deleting the phrase “if she is living in
acultery" -cccurring in the eforesaid two  sub-

sections.

3.8, Recovery of the Monthly allowance awarded by
Way of maintenance from the person hela liable to

Bay maintenance. The suffering of the wife, child
or parent needing maintenance is in no way
cinriinished either by awarding an appropriate
anount er by awarding the said amount
expediticusly if the claimant is unable to recover
the amount or has to face almost insurmountable
Giiliculties for recove :ing the sane. Chapter IX
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1673 as at
present dces not take sufficient care of this
aspect, There are a number of deficiencies,
anomalies, ambiguities and loopholes, which have
been identified in the course of the working of
the relevant provisions, which call for attention.
The claimant who has successfully secured an order
for payment of monthly allowance by way of
maintenance facés a host cf problems, namely:-

(1) The awardee is required to approach

the court to enforce the order for

31


maintenance every month if an intransigent
person refuses 01 neglects to make payment
regularly. The awardee has to engage an
advocate, approach a court, incur expenses
and invest time in starting a fresh round of
litigation for the purpose of recovery cf the
allowance awarded to him or her and it is net
only once that the awardee has to face such a
situation. The same situation has to be
faced as cfiten as the person held@ liable to
pay the allowance makes a default. It is
unlike the problem of a decree-holder in a
civil matter whose decree would be satisfied
by apprcaching the executing court in one
proceeding. The monthly allowance being
payable from month to month, a default may be
Made every month or every ccuple of months or
on 4 numbex of occasions periodically. मैट
every time a proceeding has to be initiated
to recover the amount which bas fallen in
arrears, which entails unbearable time-cost
anc money-cost to the awardee who is already
in distress. The awardee cannot be made to
Spence a part of his or her life in running to
the advocate and the court indefinitely and
on numberless occasions. This is one of the
most vital issues which demands an

appropriate solution.

32


(2) If, ip the situation in which the
awardee is placed, he or she is unable to

ne approach the court within one year of the

last default, the claim of the awardee
becomes unenforceable by virtue of the first
provise to section 325(3} which reads:

‘Provided that no warrant shali be
issued for the recovery cf any amount
due under this section unless
application be made tc the Court to levy
such amount within a period of one year
from the date on which it becane due.’.
(3) The awardee wife can be obliged to

face another round of litigation if the
husband who has been helé liable to pay the
allowance makes an application to the court
that he is prepared to maintain his wife on
condition of her living with him and that she
refuses tc live with him in the context of
the secené proviso to sub-section (३3) of
section 125, which says:

‘Provided further that if such
person offers to maintain his wife on
condition of her living with him, and
she refuses to live with him, such
Magistrate may consider any grounds of
refusal stated by her, and may make an
order under this section notwithstanding

such offer, if he is satisfied that
there is just ground for so doing.

Explanation:- If a husband has

contracted marriage with another women
or keeps a mistress, it shali be
considered to be just ground for his
wife's refusal to live with him.'.

Thus, almost insurmountable hurdles are placed in

33



the path of the awardee which virtually tantamount
tc conferring on such perscn-a mere paper right

which is, in practice, worth very little.

3.10. First problem. With regard tc the mest
serious impeciment arising in the context cf the
fact that the awardee would have tc rush to. the
court anc ६० ccunse] at unaffordable time-cost,
money-ccst anc effort-cost, the Commission can
think of only one solution. The magistrate
passing the order for monthly allowance shoule be
empowered tc direct the person held liable to pay
the allowance to deposit in advance six ‘nonths'
allowance at the rate ceterminec by him and keep
it Geposited till the order of maintenance holds
the field unless, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, he considers it unjust to do sc in the
circumstances of the case. The concerned
Magistrate, cf coucse, should be conferrecé the
Giscretion to take into account all the relevant
circumstances before passing such an order. If
the magistrate is so empowered, the person held
liable cannct harass the awardee by refusing or
neglecting tc make the payment from month to month
end in time. The concerned magistrate must also
be empowered ६० permit the awardee to withdraw the
amount cue from the Gepositec amcunt in casé cf

cefault on the part of the person held Liable.

34


cars

|

(

The. magistrate must 3180 have the power to Girect
that the payment shculd be made either by
Gepesiting in a bank account opened in the name of
the wife cr ky depositing the amount from menth to
Month in the court cr by remitting it by . money
orcer” as may be convenient to the awarace after
ccnsuiting the wishes cf the awardee. The
Magistrate must also be empowerse tc direct the
employer, if any, of the person hele responsible
tc make a Geduction cf the amecunt of monthly
ailowance from the monthly salary cf the perscn
hela liacle to pay it to the awarcee in the manner
Specified by the learned magistrate. It should
also be provided that wilful default in making the
Geduction will constitute contempt of court.
This solution would ameliorate the distress of the

awardee tc a considerable extent.

3.11.

one problem. There is no good or
substantial reason for precluding the awardee trom
appreaching the court for issuance of a warrant
tor recovery merely because the awardee does not
apprcach the court within one year. In fact, it
results in grave ana serious injustice to the
awarase, for the entire claim gets wiped out if
the awardee is not in a position to apprcach the
ccurt ६०४ physical or economic: or other reasons.

By net approaching the court within ene year of

35


जज

the amcunt becoming cue, tne person held liable
does not suffer any prejudice. There Gces not
appear any purpese or principle in previding that
if no approach is made within cne year, the
maintenance amount in arrears wouic become
irrecoverable. The first proviso tc section
125(3), therefcre, ceserves to be deleted

altogether.

3.12. Third problem . So also there is no good
reason to once again reopen at the stage of
recovery the controversy as to whether or not the
wife is entitled to refuse tc live with the
husband. This question would have been gone inte
at the stage when the right to maintenance was
determined on merits. At the subsequent stage of
reccvery, no useful purpose would be served by
requiring that if the husband makes an offer that
he is prepared to maintain her on the condition of
her living with him, the entire controversy must
be re-opened. The existence of this provision
serves no better purpose than providing a weapon
of harassment to the errant husband in as much as
@ husband can always make an application just in
order to tire out the wronged wife whc has won a
decision in her favour after a prolongec, costly
and unequal battle. The right to maintenance

alreaay determined by the court should ४०६ again

36


be permitted to be jeopardised by enebling the
husband to make such an cffer giving rise to a
further proceeding and turther celay Guring which
period the husband may well refrain from
hencuring the cbligation to pay the allowance, as

crcere€ earlier, This provise (along with the

Explanation), thercfore, Geserves to be deleted

altcgether.

3.13. Neec for conferring right of appeal on the
aggrieved party against the order Passed by the
Magistrate uncer section 225, Cr.P.C. - As at
present, an oraer passed by the magistrate under
secticn 125 is not appealable. The cnly course
open to an aggricved Party is to approach the
revisional court by way of a revision. There are
two reasons why it has now become necessary to
provide for an appeal against the final order cf
the magistrate rendered under section 125,
Cr.P.C., namely:
(1) With the enactment of the
Family Courts Act of 1984, the jurisdiction
to hear proceedings for maintenance is now
vestec in the Family Court (vide sections
7(1)(e) and = 7(2)(a)]. The pending
Proceedings before the Magistrates in places
where a Family Court has been established

will have to be transferred to the Family

37


Court and fresh | -oceedings will have to be
initiated only in the said Court. Against
every tinal aecision renaceree by a Family
Court, an appéal has been provided uncer
section 1६५ cf the Family Courts Act. Under
the circumstances, in the very same State,
there will ke discrimination against two sets
of litigants. Litigants in areas uncer the
jurisdiction of the Family Ccurt will have a
right of appeal against a final order
granting or refusing maintenance, whereas, in
the rest of the State, a similarly situated
titigant will have no such right of appeal.
This will introduce an anachronism. Under
the circumstances, it will be appropriate to
provide for an appeal against an order passeG
by a magistrate exercising jurisdiction under
section 125, Cr.P.C. as well.

(2) The secend reason in support
6# the proposal is that a wrong decision by a
Magistrate will become unassailable on merits
in any forum inasmuch as the scope of a
revision is limited. Hitherto the revisional
court may not have been inhibited in
exercising the revisional jurisdiction on the
premise that the scope of a revision arising

eut ०६ an order under section 125 was wider

38


then the sccpe of a jurisdiction exerciseG by
the court in other matters. But it may not
now be possible to exercise the revisional
jurisdiction in the wider senso having regard
tc the recent cecision ef the Supreme Court
in Pathuma v. लगाया holcing tc the
effectthat findings of fact recerdcd by the
magistrate in a procesding under section 125,
Cr.P.C. are not amenable tc review on merits
in exercise of revisional jurisdicticn.
In the light of these two considerations, it will
be appropriate to provide for an appeal against a
final order granting or refusing maintenance
passed by a magistrate in a proceeding under
section 125, Cr.P.C.

3.14. Protection of the awardee in matters where

the liable person prefers an appeal. The wife,

child or parenc who haz been awarded maintenance
would have no real protection in case the person
liable for payment of maintenance prefers an
appeal. It is, therefore, necessary to provide
that in an appeal by a person held liable ६० pay
maintenance, the appeal will be maintainable only
when it is accompanicd by an affidavit of the
appellant to the effect that he has deposited or
paid all such arrears and will Gepesit future
Maintenance regularly. It may, however, b-

provided that the appellate court may, on being

39


vatistiee that uncuc hardship would be causca te

thc appeliant if he 23 reguired to pay ell the

arrears, in its discretion, extend the time fer

making deposit or exempt the appellant frem making

deposit of any part of the arrears.

3.15. Neeé for creating the office cf

“Maintenance Counsellor" to represent the cause

ef the wife, child or parent claiming maintenance

uncer section 125, Cr.P.C. - The right conferrcd

on a dessrted wife, a neglected child or a

ipless parcnt is of little avail if the claimant
who himself cr herself 13695 to ke maintained has
tG collect sufficient funds tc enakle the
concernsd person to engage an advocate who would
present the claimant's case and presecuts it with
Giligence. The claimant himself or herself woula
be 1n economic distress and it would be extremely
harsh to require the claimant to collect the funds
to pay to the counsel in order that his or her own
necd for maintenance may be satisfied at the
ecenclusion of the proceedings. It is commen
experience that a claimant has te spend pcrhaps
more than one year's maintenance in order to win
an order for monthly allowance by way ot
maintonance at the cenclusicn of the
proceeding. The hardship to the claimant is
compound:d when the said person has to again

approach an advocate and to initiate procecdings

40


for recovery from time te time. Under the

circumstances, the claimant is virtually dcprivec
ef. maintenance allowance for considerable length
fora time in crccr te meet the legal expenses. It
ig no doubt true that with the legal aid schemes
spensorec by the State, the hardship 1s somewhat
mitigatcc. Eut then, when the Legal Aid Committee
makes available the services of some advocate on
the panel, the saic advocate may not bc able to
Cevote sufficient time and attention by rcason ot
the fact that the advocate concerned would be
having his or her private practice बाद would be
requirca to attend to the causes of such clients
in different courts. The remuneration paid by the
Legal Aid Ccmmittce may also not be to the
Salisfacticn of the corcerned advecate. Under the
cyrcumstances, thhhece cause cf the claimant woule bc
servee much beitcr and effectively if the services
of a Maintenance Counsellor attached ६० the ccurt
exercising jurisdiction under section 125,

Cr.P.C., are made availacle te the claimant free

कर

ef ccst as a measure of social welfare and lega
बंध obligation cf the State. An Additional or
Assistant Public Presecutor appointed under
section 24/25 of the Cr.P.C. may be designated as
@ Maintenance Counseller for this purpose with an
obligation to Gevote himself or herself

exclusively to matters of claimants under section


125 with liberty to at_end to other Matters only
when the maintcnance work has becn attended to,
It woulc be desirable, so far as possible, te
appoint women acvocates to cischarge these
tuncticns, Since the Counsellor concerned would
be attached to the concerned court, he would
always bs available and would also be fully
conversant and familiar with the concerned subject
ana = procecure, being engaged in this work
throughout the year. Of course, the services ०६
such a Maintenance Counsellor would be optional in
the sense that the claimant would have a rignt to
engage a counsel of choice at the claimant's own

expense, if so desired.

3.1¢. The right of th wife, child or parcnt who
has been awarded the monthly allowance shculd not
be allowec to be defcated by the liable person
transferring the Properties in order to ¢eprive
the awardce. - An order passed in favour of a
claimant tor maintenance can easily be defeated by
transferring the properties possessed by the
liable person with the end in vicw to deprive the
awardee of the benefit of the order secured by the
awardee cn investing considerable time, money and
effort in precuring the same. The right to
taintenance conferred by the statute would then be

rendered illusery for all intents and purposes.

42


It has tebe realised that, with the change
ja times anc the increase of the workload in
the civil courts which has crossed the breaking
point, thc wifc, child or percent in nesd cf
maintenance cannot afford to have another round cf
litigation in the civil ceurts with any hepe cf
obtaining a final order from the hicrarchy of
ecurts curing the lifetime of such person. The
Ground realities cannot be ignored. A proceeding
under section 125 is the only proceeding which is
ordinarily made recourses to by such a person who
camnot ana does not approach the civil cecurt. The
Proceeaing under section 125, thersforc, virtually
becomes the only proceeding which is resorted ६०
by the person entitled to maintenance. Under the
circumstances, in ord = to miakc the order: of
maintenance ‘real! instead of ‘illusery', it is
necessary to make a provision to the effect that
the monthly allowance ordered to be payable shall
be a charge on the Properties of the liable person
and shall be recoverable from the transferce as
also from the person inheriting the propertics by
testamentary and non-testamentary succession. And
also that the right, title and interest of
any person acquiring a Property from the liable
Persen Guring the interregnum between the date
of the institution of the petition claining

maintenance in the court of the magistrate tall

43



the final order shall be subject to the right of
the awardee to seck satisfaction of the order for

maintenance against such property.

3-17. Need to provide that the ercer for menthly
allowance shall pot stand dischargec or satistied
except by actual payment or with a settlement with
ths imprimatur of tne court passing the orcer for

maintenance. The wo ef the wife claining

Maintenance and other claimants are not over cn
sccuring an order fer monthly allowance from the
court. Not infrequcntly when the proceeding for
enforcing the order is initiated, the awardee is
faced with the plea that the claim has been
satisficd by a compromise or arrangcment arrived
at between the parties after the passing of the
erdec. It provides scope for another round of
litigation and harassment to the awardec, Under
the circumstances, it is necessary to provide that
an order for maintenance will not be treated as
having been discharged or satisfied unlcozs ar
application is made to the court cf the magistrate
which passed the criginal order signed by both the
Parties recording any arrangement or compromise
which might have been arrived at between them.
Such an arrangement or compromis: must be in
writing and must be confirmed to have been arrived

at voluntarily and for good consideration by the

44


awarceé, satisfying the magistrate by appearing

perscnally in the covrt that the arrangement hes

voluntarily arrived at with full
und¢ersiancing . Ana, fer reasons tc be recorded
in writing, the same shail be recorded by the

concern:c magistcets only upon

vo

cing satisfied
that the arrangement is cenuinc, voluntary, fer

geo consiccration and just ane fair.



’ CHAPTER IV
STREAMLINING OF THE PROCEDURE
WITH THE END IN VIEW TO EXPEDITIOUS DISPOSAL
CF A PROCEEDING CLAIMING MAINTENANCE

“eds . Proceedings initiated under section 125,
Ccr.P.C.; in order to claim maintenance -are meant
te be summary proceedings designed in order to
afford swift and quick relief te the claimants
ertitled to maintenance. In actual practice, it
is common experience that such proceedings are not
being disposed of for a number of years, In some
States, presumably on account of the overcrowding
of the dockets, the proceedings take about four
years to be disposed of in the court of the
magistrate itseir.”> By the very nature of the
proceeding, an expeditious determination as
regards the claim for maintenance is of the
essence of the matter. The claimant who is in
need cf maintenance and is entitled to maintenance
under the law can hardly survive for a couple of
years in the hope and expectation of a favourable
Gecision without the economic wherewithal for
maintenance. The need for devising a summary
procedure, which would enable the concerned
magistrate to dispose of the matter speedily, is,
therefore, self-evident. It appears that Chapter
IX pertaining to maintenance does not spell out any

such procedure with an eye on this dimension of

46



the matter. It is, therefore, essential to
incorporate in Chapter IX such a procedure
calcuiated tc sherten the span of the litigation
at the trial court stage. The preblem can by
and large be tackled at three levels: (1)
prescribing a time limit for filing a written
statement or statement of objections coupied with
conferment of the power on the magistrate to pass
an order as prayed on failure of the respondent to
file the statement with the prescribed time limit;
(2) deciding the matter on affidavits with
oppertunity to the other side to cross-examine the
witnesses of the deponents; and (3) requiring the
magistrate as far as practicable to dispose of the
matter within six months after hearing it from day

to day.

402. Filing of statement. - The summons for
appearance issued by the magistrate, with which
shall be annexed a copy of the petition instituted
by the applicant and the accompaniments thereof,
shall require the responéent to file his statement
containing grounds of objection supported by an
affidavit inter alia specifying - (1) the factual
grounds for resisting the prayer for monthly
allowance, (2) the legal grounds for resisting the
claim for monthly allowance,. (3) his monthly

income from all sources in the two preceding

47


calendar years; and (4) without prejudice to his.

contentions as regards his liability to pay
monthly allowance, what amount should be awarded
in case the court reaches the conclusion that the

applicant is entitled to clain the allowance.

4.3. Requirement to file statement of objections
and the conseguences of failure to dc so. the conseguences of failure to dc so. - The

respondent shall file his statement of objections

specifying the aforesaid grounds and furnishing
the aforesaid particulars within 15 days of the
service of the summons. The time for filing the
statement May be extended by 15 days upon
sufficient cause being shown by the respondent.

On the failure of the respondent to file the
written statement or the statement of objections
in the aforesaid teri.s, the court may treat the
averments made by the applicant in the petition as
correct and proceed to pass an order in favour of

the applicant as prayed.

4.4. Evidence on affidavits. - In case the
respondent files his grounds of objections as per
the aforesaid requirement, the court may require
both sides to file the affidavits of witnesses in
support of their respective contentions within 15
Gays. The court may grant a further time of 15

days to the parties in case the parties want to

48


file additional affidavits.

The court may fi an carly date for cross-
examination of the deponents of the affidavits by
the opposite side, and their re-examination, if
any.

The court may thereafter proceed to hear the
arguments and dispose of the matter as early as

possible.

4.5.6 If on the date of hearing, the witnesses of
a party are present for being subjected to cross-
examination and re-examination on the affidavits
already filed , the magistrate shall record their
evidence. However, if the magistrate is unable to
record the evidence by reason of the pressure cf
some part-heard matter or other urgent matters, he
shall appoint an officer of the court as a
Commissioner for recording their evidence so that
the witnesses do not have to come back once again
and the matter is not delayed without the parties

being required to pay any fees in this behalf.

4.66 As far as practicable, a proceeding under
section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
shall be taken up from day to day after the filing
of the objections and shall be completed and
finally disposed of within six months of the

service of the notice on the other side,

49



4-7. Power to enforce an order directing the
liable person to keep deposited six months'
allowance in advance as per the recommendation
made in para 3.10. The purpose of empowering the
magistrate to pass an appropriate order directing
the liable person to keep deposited six months?
maintenance allowance would be frustrated if the
order can be flouted with impunity. Under the
circumstances, it is essential to empower the
concerned magistrate to enferce the order. A
wilful disobedience of such an order by a_ person
who is unable to show, by Gischarging the burden
resting on him in this behalf, that he has no
sufficient means or resources to comply with the
orger even by raising a loan on his properties
shall constitute disobedience of the order of the
court. The magistrate may, upon being satisfied
that the order is being wilfully disobeyed, order
any property of the person guilty of such
disobedience to be attached and sold in order to
recover the amount and may also detain such a
person in jail at the cost of the State for a
period not exceeding three months in order to
secure compliance with the order. The concerned
magistrate may transmit the order for attachment
and sale of the property to a civil court with a
request to enforce the order in the same manner in

which a decree passed by a civil court may be

50



executed. The civil court to which such a request
is addressed shall huve the legal authority to
enforce the order as if it was executing an order

under rule 2A of Order XXXIX of C.P.C.

4.0, Without prejudice to the other modes of
execution, an order for payment of monthly
allowance may also, at the instance of the
awardee, be executed by sending the same to a
civil court for executing the same as if it is a
decree of civil court and the civil court shall

have the power to do so.

4.9. For setting aside an ex parte order under
section 126(2), the magistrate may impose a
condition that the respondent shall deposit the
arrears of monthly allowance ordered to be paid by
him and shall also continue to deposit the same
from month to month with liberty to the claimant
to withdraw the amount subsequent to the final
result of the matter. Section 126 may be suitably

amended with this end in view.

51


rhe

CHAPTER V

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

5.1. In the light of the discussion made in the

earlier part of the report, the Commission is of

the opinion that the law pertaining to maintenance

ef wives, parents and children embodied in Chapter

IX of the Coée requires to be revised by

incorporating suitable amendments with a view to

update the law. And in order to make it more just,

more relevant, more purposeful and more effective,

so as to subserve the purpose of the legislation.

Modification is called for to the extent and in
the manner indicated here below:-

(1) The statutory ceiling of Rs.500

incorporated in section 125(1), which

precludes a magistrate from awarding a

monthly allowance for maintenance at a

rate exceeding Rs.500 in favour of the

wife, the children and the parents

entitled to claim such maintenance from

a person who, having sufficient means,

neglects or refuse to maintain his wife,

children or parents falling in the

category described in clauses (b), (c)

and (d) of section 125(1), deserves to

be removed. Because, it has become

irrelevant by reason of inflation and

52


ro

ed

(2)

(3)

risc in the cost of living since 1955
when the afcresaid figure was embodied
and since imposition of such a statutory
ceiling results in injustice and defeats
the purpose for which the provision has
been enacted. Besides, incorporating a
statutory ceiling which cannot be
updated without amending the law from
time to time is impracticable and
unnecessary. Consequential amendment
will also have to be made 17. section
127(1) by deleting the reference to the
ceiling of Rs.500. (Sec para 3.4).

An Explanation shceuld be added to
section 125(1) that the phrase “unable
to maintain herself" relates to the then
actual separate income of the wife, if
any, and not to the possibility or
potentiality of the wife being able to
earn for herself by securing an
employment or by exerting herself in
future. (See para 3.6).

It needs to be clarified by adding an
Explanation to sub-section (1) of
section 125 that in determining the
rates of the monthly allowance, the

magistrate may take into account not

53


wv

“6

(4)

(5)

(6)

only the expenditure needed fcr food,
shelter, clothing, education of
children, ectc., but also such sum as may
be needed for being 500 apart in order
to meet future emergencies arising on
account of accidents, sickness, physical
Gisability or for any other reason.
(See para 3.7).

Sub-section (2) of section 125 should be
so amended that the order of maintenance
operates from the date of the filing of
the application claiming monthly
allowance by way of maintenance and the
magistrate has no option or discretion
to make it operative from the date of
the magistrate's order awarding
maintenance -llowance. (See para 3.5).
First proviso to section 125 (3)
Gisakiing a wife or claimant from
recovering the maintenance amount on
expiry of one year should be deleted.
(See para 3.11).

Proviso (2) to section 125(3) pertaining
to consideration of the offer of the
person (against whom an order for
monthly allowance by way of maintenance

is claimed) to maintain the wife aftcr

54


(7)

(8)

the passing of the order may be celeted.

(See para 3.12).

Eub-sections (4) ane (5) of section 125,

depriving a wife from claiming

Maintenance if ‘living in adultery’,

should be deleted inter alia as it is by

and large invoked to embarrass and

harass a wife. (See para 3.€).

In determining the amount, a magistrate

exercising powers under section 125 -

(a) may take into account not only the
Fersonal income of the person
against whom the order for monthly
allowance by way of maintenance is
sought but also his other
resources, such as, the property
posses.2d by hin, his interest, if
any, in joint family properties and
the fact that he can meet the
obligation from the corpus of such
properties; (See para 3.10).

(b) may also take into account the
independent income of the wife, if
any. (See para 3.7).

The magistrate passing an order for

maintenance under section 125 should be

empowered to pass an order directing a

person liable to pay the monthly

55


(30)

(11)

allewance to.” deposit the monthly
allowance for a pericd up to six months
in advance in fit cases’ taking into
account the facts and circumstances of
the case. (See para 3.10).

A magistrate passing an order for
taintenance under section 125 shall be
empowered to issue an order against the
employer of the person liable to pay the
monthly allowance determined by hin,
directing such employer to deduct from
the salary of such person a sun
equivalent to the amount of maintenance
determined by him and to deposit the
same in the court within a week of such
Geduction from month to month whenever

it appears appropriate to do so on

account of the failure of such person to
regularly pay the amount directly to the
wife, child or parents in whose favour
an order has been passed. (See para
3.10).

The amount of monthly allowance ordered
to be paid, including the arrears, shall
be a charge on the properties of the

person against whom the order has been

passed. (See para 3.16).

56



Ww

we

(14)

An order for monthly allowance shall not
stand discharged or satisfied except by
actual payment from time to time or with
a settlement with the imprimatur of the
court recording its satisfaction that
the arrangement or settlement is for
gcod consideration, genuine, vciuntary,
lawful and fair, (See para 3.17).

A person eggrieved by an order of
maintenance passed by the magistrate
shall have a right of appeal to the
Court of Sessions. However, when the
appeal is directed against an crder
awarding maintenance, the appeal shall
not be maintainable unless the
appellant deposits the amount of arrears
of mainte: ance from the date cf
institution of the petition till the
Gate of the order under appeal in the
court of the magistrate and produces
along with the memorandum of appeal an
affidavit to the effect that such amount
has been deposited and future amount
will be regularly deposited. (See paras
3.13 and 3.14).

An officer, to be designated as
Maintenance counsellor, shall be

appointed by the State to represent the

57


ye

case of the wife, child or parent
claiming mz.ntenance free of cost as a
measure of social welfare with the
option to the concerned person to
appoint an advocaie of his or her cheice
at the cost of such person, if so
desired. (See para 3.15).

(15) A special procedure for speedy disposal
of the matters pertaining to maintenance
under section 125, as outlined in
Chapter Iv of this report, should be

incorporated in Chapter Ix of the Code.

5.2. The Commission is confident that the
suffering and distress of the neglected women,
children and parents will be ameliorated in great
mcasure and they wil heave a sigh 5 relicf if
and when these recommendations are accepted and
acted upon, and concludes this report on this note

of hope.

(M.P. THAKKAR)
CHAIRMAN

(V.S. RAMA DEVI)
MEMBER SECRETARY

NEW DELHI, DATED THE 19TH APRIL, 1989.

58


Ate

4h

3

lv
2.
3.
4.

10.
ll.
12.
13.

14,
15.
16.
17.
18,
19,
20.
21.

22.
23.

Notes ard References

Appendix III

indian Labour Statistics, 236 (1969)

29: Indian Labour Journal, 1771 (1988)
anctan Labour Journal

8,093, "Effect of Interim Maintenance Order passed
U/s 125 nf the Code of Criminal Procedure", 93 Cr LJ
71 (1987). पु

1981, Cr.L.d. 184 (Kant)
Nanak Chand v. Chander Kishore,AIR 1969 Delhi 235

Major Joginder singh Joginder Singh v. Bibi Raj Mohinder Kaur Raj Mohinder Kaur,

AIR 1960 Punjab 249

prgayan Dutt 00४ neha ety Scag etary Andes, 8e84971 Kor .22;
TRS Cr..d. 164 (Kant)

ve
BEDUL AG, 1

Aijaz Ahmed v.Shahjehan 1_ Begum, 1982 CR.L.J.1022(A11) +
Udaivir Singh v.Vvinod Kumari,1985 Cr.L.0.1923 (All);
Saraswati v.Madhavan, 1961 (2) Cr..7.642 at 644 (Ker)
Abdul Manaf v,Salima,1979 Cr.L.0.172 at 174 and _175 (Kant)
Vimal v.Sukumar, 1981 Cr.U.3.210 at 214-215 (Bom)

Report of the Jeint Committee en the Code of
Criminal Procedure 84111, 1970, -

See Appendix I
Ped ranathan v.Bhargavi_ arejini,1981 Ccr.L.J. 826 (Ker)

Shahzadi Begum v.Mohd Abdul,1981 Cr .u.3.1532 (A.P)

Purna Bahadur v.Santa Bista,1984 Cr.U.J,1145 (sikkim)
K.Narayan Rac v .Bhagyalakshmi, 1984 Cr .L.3,276 (Kant)
Juliet Vasantha vAntomy Marimuthu, 1985 Cr.L.J 1613 (Mad)
Mohd.Shakeel v.Shahana Praveen, 1987 ९४ .L.7.1509 (Delhi)
Shravan Kanwar v-Anjanbai,1985 Cr.L.J 1213 (Bom);
S.S.Maniekam v.Asputha, 1980 Cr.L.J 354 (Mad)

Kasturi v Ramaswamy,1979 Cr.L.3.741 (Maa)

Vimla Devi v.Session Judge & Others, 1981 Cr.L.J NOC 89 (811)

AIR 1986 SC 1436
Supra note 4

- 59 -


1

1981

1982

1985

1984

Note:

Page_

674
690
493
754

826
830
789

1355
1430
1532

485
491
539
1022
1081
1461
1953

2033
2365

99
1146
1297

1522
206
276

APPENDIX I
W- Wife;

Court;
Journal.
Claimants E' Salary
W+ec -

Ww -

Cc -
#+0 -
W+c 472
W+ec -
w+e -

W -

W -

W -
W+e 600

W -
W+e -

W -
Ww+e -

W -

W न

W 3 acres +
W grecery shop
W -

W ~

W 0c

W ~
W+C -

W Inselvent
W + 3C 3000

(alleged)

Tex. Engineer.

में - Husband; . 0 - 0
Sc - Sessien Court; HC - High
All the citations refer tc Criminal Law

hild; Mag.—Magistrate;
Court; SC - Supreme

Anount Awarded
Mag. Session HC
150+150

50

150

100 - 40 (0)

100 (80)

500 50+50 50+50
40+15 - -

150 - न

30 - -

60 - -

= - 150
75+30 - 75+30
-- - 75
20+10 -
30 - 30
50+30 -

30 increased to . 70
500 =

- 40 (प्र earning Rs.2-4

per day).

7 ~ --
300 - —
209 - —_

5 - --
500 - न


का
8

2 985

1986

1987
V

Qlaimants H'Salary

Wo

W+20
W+o

W+o

zee =

5000 Approx.
7

111111

Anount_swarded

Mag. Session. HC
25 ~ 179.20
15 - -
100+75 - _
100 - --
- 150 156
100+50 - -
70 - -
50 - -
- 30@ + 300
100 100 1004+4@ .
50 - 96
- (83127)
200 Cancelled 200 -
125+50 - 125+50
- 150 -
500 - -
100 - -
300+209 - -
- 200+100 -
300 - 300
- 200 -
156 150 -
100 - -
20 - -


a

. Appendix II
List of respondents of respondents :
Judges

1. Justice V.K.Mehrotra,
Chief Justice,Himachal Pradesh

2, Justice S.S.Ganguly,Calcutta™

3. Justice Srinivasan, Madras

4. Justice Ramalingam, Madras

5. Justice S.S.Grewal, Punjab & Haryana

6. Justice Bakthavatsalam,Madras

7. dTustice David Anneussamy, Madras

8. Justice G.C.Mittal, Punjab & Haryana

9. Justice Gopal Rae Ekbote,A.P. (Retd)

10, Justice D -K.Rajepandbare,J.M.F.C. Ahemedpur .
11, N.G.Patel, JM. Sangli |
12, Subhash Kulkarni, D&S Judge, Nanded, Maharashtra
13, Pratibha Upasani, Judge, Bombay City Civil Ceurt
14. S.K.Misra,DJ Pauri Garhwal

15, Radhey Shyam Aggarwal,D.J.Meerut

Advogates

1, B,V.Nagarathna, Bangalere

2. Ashok D.Shah, Ahmedabad .

3. Jeevan K.Mittal,Delhi

4, Ashok Boghani, Bembay.

5. Ramesh Nayak, Bombay

6. Geeta Luthra &Pinky Anand, Delhi

7. Ruma Pal, Calcutta

8. P.K.Ghosh, Calcutta

9. Krishnakant Vakharia «Ahmedabad,

10, Seita Vaidyalingam, Delhi

11, S.K.Jain,Khurja,

12. Khurshid Ali, Hyderabad,

13. Kusuma Mantur, Dhanbad,

14, V.Kulkarni, Dhanbad.

15, Rena Swamy,Delhi.


-2<
16, N.Nosulla Sharif, Bangalere,
17. Rama Arera,Delhi
18. Mridula Rey,Delhi
19. Dr .Kajali Dhar,Calcutta
20, Manjusri Datta,Calcutta
21. Sipra Mazumdar,Calcutta
22. Ajiya Mitra,Calcutta
23. Shyamala Pappu, Delhi
24, Dr Asati Goswami,Calcutta
aw Teachers/Jurists Teachers/Jurists
1. K.P.S.Mahalwar,Rohtak,
2. P.C.Juneja,Rohtak.

8. P.G.Gokual, Lecturer
TMC Law Cellege,Thane,

4, Kamalini Bhamsah, VC, SNDT
Women's University, Bembay.

5. P.M.Bakshi,De7hi

State Law Depts ./Advisory Board Law Depts ./Advisory Boara

1. R.K.Jain, Secy »Chandigarh
Social Welfare,

2. N.Krishnadattin,
Member Secretary
Penhdicherry Legal Aid and
Advice Board

3. Tamil Nadu Social Welfare Board

4. J&K State Legal Aid and
Advice Beard

5. Kerala State Legal and Advice Boar

6. ७1583 Legal Aid and
Advice Board

7. West Bengal Social
Welfare Advisory Board

8, Govt. of Mizeram, Law Deptt.

9. Chairman,Arunachal Pradesh
Social Welfare Advisery Board

10. Disthict Legal Aid and Advice
Committee,Ratnagiri,


11. R.K. Mahajan,
SecretarytLaw) , H.P.

12. Karnataka Social Welfare’
Advisory 808: 1.

13. Asha Das, .
Joint Secretary, Ministry ef Welfare.

14, Haryana Legal Service and Advisery
Committee -(through 9, Diwan).

15. Gujrat State Legal and Advisery Beard.

16, Madras District Cemmittee fer Legal
and Advice.

17. Legal Remembrancer cum Directer ef
Presecutien, CHANDIGARH,

18. Gevernment of West Bengal,
Judicial Department.

1. Guild ef Service, Delhi.
2. Astitiva, Valsad.
3. All India Ceuncil ef Christian Wemen.

4. Stree Seva Mandir, Madras.

5. Mahila Hakk Savankshan Samiti, Nasik.

6. Princess Esin Woman's Educational Centre,
7. Centre ef Cencern far Child Labour,

8. Surat District Bar Asseciation,

9. Jeint Wemen's Pregramme, Delhi.

10. Gujrat State Legal and Advice Beard.
11. I.S.8.T., Delhi

12. Xavier Institute ef Cemmunicatiens, Bembay.
13. Bharatiya Grameen Mahila Sangh, Delhi.

14. Andhra Pradesh Muslim Advecate Forum,

15. Ferum Against @ppression ef Women, Bombay.
16. Shree Mukti Manch, Pune.

17. Centre for Wemen's Studies, Jaipur.

18. Shaila Lohiya Manavlok, Amba Jogai.


है

19.
20.
21.
22,
23,
24,
25.
26.

27.

28,
29.
30.

1.
2.
5.
4,
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14,
15.
16.

17.
18,

19."

-4.

Centre for Women's Develepment Studies, Delhi,
Lakshadweep State Svcial Welfare Beard,
Mahila Dakshita Samiti, Delhi.
Vikasgriha, Ahmedabad,
Coimbatore Bar Association.
Ahmedabad Wemen's Action Group, AWAG.
Bar Council 951 Tamilnadu.
Madras Bar Associatien.
a . conn y

Metropolitan Magistrate's Courts,Dadar Bar
Associatien,

Natiénal Law School, Bangalore,
Feminist Associatien fer Social Action, Madras,
Gujrat State Crime Prevention Trust, Ahmedabad,

GENERAL PUBLIC

Shiv Dayal, Devgaen.

H.C. Kukreti, Dehradun.

Arvind Prakash Rastegi, Badaun.
Raj Kumar, Dehradun.
Raghunandan, Delhi,

N.K. Sharma, Kota,

Dr. Ram Tirth Aggarwal, Delhi.
Jagdish Rai, Bombay,

Ompal Arya, Delhi.

Sushma Rani, Meerut.

D.F. Mehta, Rajket,

H.N. Behera, Cuttack.
L.C. Dhamani, Nagpur.
Karmaehand Saxena, A.P.
Mrs, Billimeria, Navsari.

Shri Digamber Rana, Dehradun.
Shri S.H. Gupta, Bembay,
Shri D.P. Sharma, Meerut,

Shri R.S, Tiwari, Bembay.


Appendix जय
@rder for Maintenance of Wives, Children and Parents

"125, Order for maintenance of wives, children and Parents -
(1) If any person having sufficient means neglects or
refuses to maintain —
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, er
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether
' married or not, unable to maintain itself, or
(c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a
married dauchter) who has attained majority, where
such child is, by reason of any physical or mental
abnormality or injury unable to maintain itself, or
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain hémsélf or
herself,
a Magistrate of the first class may, upon preef ef such neglect
or refusal, order such person to make a monthly allowance for
the maintenance wf his wife or such child, father er mother,
at such monthly rate not exceeding five hundred rupees in the
whole, as such Magistrate thinks fit, and to pay the same to
such person as the Magistrate May from time to time direct:

Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of
a miner female child referred to in clause (b) to make such
allowamce, until she attains her Majority, if the Magistrate
is satisfied that the husband .ef such minor female child, if
married, is not possessed af Su€Sicient means,

Explanation. For the purposes of this Chapter,-

(a) "minor" meaas a persan who, under the provisions
of the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875), is deemed not
to have attained his majority; ‘

(b) "wifet includes a woman who has beem diverced by,
or has obtained a divorce from, her husband and has not remarried.

(2) Such allowance shall be payable from the date of the
order, or, if so ordered, frem the date of the applieation
fer maintenance.


Yh

~2—

(3) If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause

to comply with the order, any such Magistrate may, for every
breach of the order, issue a warrant for levying the amount
due in the manncr provided for levying fines, and may sentence
such person, for the whole or any part of eaeh menth's
allowance remaining unpaid after the executian ef the warrant,
to imprisenment for a term which may extend to one month or
until payment if sooner made:

Provided that no warrant shall bo issued for the
recovery of any amount duc under this section unless application
be made to the Court to levy such amaunt within a period: af
ne year fram the date on which it became due:

Provided further that if such person offers to

‘maintain his wife an condition of her living with him, and

she refuses to live with him, such Magistrate may consider any
grounds of refusal stated by her, and may make an order under
this section potwithstanding such effer, if he is satisfied
that there is just ground for se doing.

Explanation:- If a husband has contracted marriage
with another women or keeps a mistress, it shall be comsidered
to be just ground for his wife's refusal to live with him.

(4) No wife shall be entitled te receive an allowaace from

her husband under this section if she is living in adulteny,

or if, without any sufficient reasom, she refuses te live with
her husbamd, or if they are living separately by mutual consent.

(5) On. proef that any wife in whose favour ag order has been
made under this section is living in adultery, or that without
sufficient reason she refuses to live with her husband, er
that they are living separately by mutual cansent, the
Magistrate shall eancel the order.


Ys

Be

126. Procedure:~ (1) Proceedings under section 125 may be
taken against any person in any district -

(a) where he is, or

(b) where he or his wife resides, or

(c) where he last resided with his wife, or as the case may

, be, with the mother of the illegitimate child.

(2) All evidence im such proceedings shall be taken i the
presence of the person against whom an order for payment of
maintenance is proposed to be made, or, when his personal
attendance is dispensed with in the presence of his pleader,
and shall be recorded in the manner prescribed for summons-
casesi-

Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied the person
against whom an order for payment of maintenance is proposed
to be made is wilfully avoiding service, or wilfully neglecting
to attend the Court, the Magistrate may proceed to hear and
determine the case ex parte and any order so made may be set
aside for good cause shown on an application an applicatiol
made within three months from the date thereof subject to
such terms including terms as to payment of costs to the
opposite party as the Magistrate may think just and proper.

(3) The Court in dealing with applications under section 125
shall have power to make such order as to costs as may be .
just.

127, Alteration in allowance.= (1) On proof of a change in
the circumstances of any person, receiving, under section
125 a monthly allowance, or ordered under the same section
to pay a monthly allowance to his wife, child, father or

mother, as the case may be, the Magistrate may make such
alteration in the allowance as he thinks fit:

Provided that if he increases the allowance, the
monthly rate of five hundred rupees in the whole shall not
be exceeded,


te

-4-

(2) ‘Where it appears to the Magistrate that, in consequence
of any decision of a competent Civil Court, any order made
under section 125 should be sancelled or varied, he shall cancel

-the order or, as the case may be, vary the same accordingly.

(3) Where any order hrs been made under section 125 in favour
of a womam who has been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce
from, her husband, the Magistrate shall, if he is satisfied
that -

(a) the weman has, after the date of such divorce,
remarried, cancel such order as from the date of her remarriage;

(b) the women has been divorced by her husband and that
she has reccived, whether before or after the date of the said
order, the whole cf the sum which, under any customary or
personal law applicable to the parties, was payable on such
divorce, cancel such order, =

(i) in the case where such sum was paid before such
order, from the date on which such order was made,

(ii)in any other case, from the date of expiry of the
period, if any, for which maintenance has been
actually paid by the husband to the woman;

(c) the woman has obtained a divorce from her husband
and that she had voluntarily surrendered her rights to
maintenance after her divorce, cancel the order from the
date thereof.

(4) At the time of making any decree for the recovery of
any maintenance or dowry by any person, to whom a monthly
allowance has been ordered to be paid under section 125, the
Civil Court shall take into account the sum which has been
paid to, or recovered by, sueh person as monthly allowance
in pursuance of the said order.

128, Enforcement of order of maintenance.- A copy of the
order of maintenance shall be given without payment to the

Person in whose favour it is made, or to his guardian, if any,

or to the person to whom the allowance is to be paid; and
such order may be enforced by any Magistrate in any place
where the person against whom it is made may be on such
Magistrate being satisfied as to the identity of the parties
and the non-payment of the allowance due.