LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-THIRD
REPORT
ON

REMOVAL OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN
IN MATTERS RELATING TO
GUARDIANSHIP AND CUSTODY OF MINOR CHILDREN
AND ELABORATION OF THE WELFARE PRINCIPLE

1989


Tel, No, 384475

विधि आयोग
M.P. THAKKAR LAW COMMISSION
Chairman भारत सरकार
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
शास्त्री भवन,
SHASTRI BHAWAN,
नई दिल्‍ली
D.O. No. 6(6)/89-LC (LS) NEW DELHI

To™ August 29, 1989,
Shri B. Shankaranand,

Minister for Law and Justice,

Government of India,

Shastri Bhavan,

New Delhi.

Dear Minister,

The One Hundred & Thirty-third Report of the Law Commission being presented hereby reflects
the anxiety of the community to make amends to the ‘women’ who have not been accorded
equal treatment vis-a-vis ‘men’ ina number of areas so far. The title of the Report speaks
for itself : —

“REMOVAL OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN IN MATTERS RELATING TO
GUARDIANSHIP AND CUSTODY OF MINOR CHILDREN AND ELABORATION OF
THE WELFARE PRINCIPLE”

The exercise culminating in the Report was undertaken svo motu in the context of examination of the
working of the laws relating to recognition of natural guardianship and appointment by Court of
guardians for the person and property of minors, The endeavour of the Commission has been (1)
to remove the discrimination against ‘women’ rooted in the age-old distrust for their ability and capa-
city and emanating perhaps from the complex that ‘women’ are inferior to ‘men’ and (2) to ensure
that the over-shadowing consideration of the community as regards the welfare of minor children
informs the determination of the issue of guardianship in letter and spirit.

{t is hoped that the recommendations made in the Report will be deliberated
upon expeditiously in view of the need to redress the just grievances of ‘women’ and protect the
interests of the minor children at the ‘earliest.

With revards,

Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(५, 7, THAKKAR)

Enel + 133rd Report
0)


Cyapter I Introduction
Cuarter If The Present Law

Cxapter IIL

CONTENTS

relevant provisions to this end

CHAPTER [V

CHAPTER V Recommendations

NOTES AND REPERENCES

(iii)

The need for spelling out some important considerations in the
application of the welfare principle and for amplification of the

‘What’ changes are required to be made in the existing law and
‘Why’? . : . पु पु पु . पु . :

10
15
18


CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION

1.1. it was in the pre-independence and pre-constitution era that women’s
protest against unequal treatment and social injustice took the form of a cry of
anguish-woman, thy name is misery. In the post-independence and _post-constitu-
tion era, the protest h an activist turn and women’s organisations have been
vigorously demanding equality aad clamouring for their rights. The community
has responded positively to their just demands in several spheres. The Legislature
and the Judiciary have also shown awareness of the problem in their t1espective
domains. The Law Commission of India on its part has been making and is engaged
in making endeavours for redressal of the just grievances of women. The
present is yet another step in this direction.

1.2. In the field of growth and development of “women’s rights jurisprudence”
in the post-independence period, even though several legislative measures have been
adopted to accord equal tights to 8 woman vis-a-vis a man, there ate still areas
where the invicious discrimination continues to exist. According to the existing law
in regard to the custody of a minor child (whether a boy or an unmarried girl), the
natural guardians are first the father and thereafter the mother. The question arises
whether the preference to the father as against the mother, notwithstanding the wel-
fare principle, is justified in the light of the provisions of the Constitution which
ordain the State not to discriminate against any citizen on grounds of religion, race,
caste, sex, place of birth, or any one of them. The fact that a woman continues to
be treated on unequal terms vis-a-vis a man cr inferior to a man in regard to the
matter as regards the custody of a minor provides the necessary justification for
considering and recommending revision of the law on the subject.

1.3. The law relating to the custody of children, the law according recognition
to the ‘father’ (in preference to the ‘mother’) as a natural guardian, and provisions
which in effect treat the woman as a second class citizen call foi close scrutiny. Is it
fair to give preference to the father as against the mother, disregarding the basic fact
that it is the mother who suffers physical discomfort for nearly nine months even
before the birth of the child whereas the father experiences no such discomfcit, as
also it is the mother who sactifices her time, other pursuits, and comforts, in bringing
up the child for a couple of years during the infancy of the child who demands cons-
tant attention and affection? Should a woman, a mothcr, even so be considered less
suitable in the matter of custody or guardianship of the person and property of the
minor child merely on account of her gender? There would appear to be no rational
basis for according statutory recognition to such invidious discrimination in the
law of the land. The explanation to account for this anomaly is traceable to the tra-
ditional belief that a female is an inferior being and a male is a superior being. That
such a pro-male bias and an anti-female prejudice should have persisted even after the
ushering in of the Constitution of India on 26th Jan., 1950, is somewhat unfortu-
nate because the constitutional command etched in article 15(1) frowns upon such
gender-based discrimination:

“15 (1) The state shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of
religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.”.

and, as a matter of fact, by implication approves of making special provisions for
reversing the prevalent injustice to women and children vide article 15(3) :—

“15, (3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special
provision for women and children.”.

That is why it has been considered eminently desirable to suo motu examine this issuc
and to make appropriate recommend:tions in order to unload the dice which is pre-
sently loaded against the woman.

1.4. The life-aim of this report is, therefore, to erase the injustice to the woman
in this sensitive area in obeisance to the letter and spirit of the Constitution. And to
this end, the relevant provisions of the Hindu Minority and Gurdianship Act, 1956,
ws also the pertinent provisions of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, and working
of the ‘welfare principle’ aic being scrutinized and suitable recommendations are
being made by this report.


CHAPTER If
THE PRESENT LAW

2.1. Judicial orders as to custody.—The law relating to custody of Hindu minor
children is primarily contained in section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship
Act, 1956, read with section 13 of that Act. Where the court is approached for pas-
sing orders as to custody, section 25 of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, and a few
other provisions of that Act, come into operation.

As 15 well known, orders relating to custody of minors and a few other matters
concerning the welfare of minors also come to be passed when a_ marriage is dissol-
ved or parties to the marriage are given some other relief under the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955. Besides this, petitions of Habeas Corpus undet article 226 or article 32
of the Constitution may also involve questions as to custody. Occasionally, criminal
courts may be called upon to issue directions regarding the custody of minor children.
However, the present Report primarily focusses itself upon the statutory provisions
referred to in the first sub-paragraph of this paragraph.

2.2, Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.—Section 6 of
the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 reads as under :—

“6. The natural guardians of a Hindu mino1, in respect of the minor’s person as

well as in respect of the minor’s property (excluding his or her undivided interest

in joint family property), are—

(a) in the case of a boy or an unmairied girl— the father, and after him, the
mother ; provided that the custody of a minor who has not completed the
age of five years shall ordinarily be with the mother;

(b) in the case of an illegitimate boy or an_ illegitimate unmarried girl—the
mother, and after her, the father;

(०) in the case of a married girl, the husband :

Provided that no person shall be entitled to act as the natural guatdian of a
minor under the provisions of this section—

(a) if he has ceased to be a Hindu, or

(b) if he has completely and finally renounced the world by becoming a hermit
(vanaprastha) or an ascetic (yati or sanyasi)”.

2.3. Section 13, Act of 1956.—Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardian-
ship Act, 1956 must be read with section 13 of the Act which is quoted below :—

“13. Welfare of minor to be paramount consideration.—(1) In the appointment
or declaration of any person as guatdian of a Hindu minor by a court, the
welfare of the minor shall be the paramount consideration.

(2) No person shall be entitled to guardianship by virtue ot the provions of this
Act or of any law relating to guardianship in marriage among Hindus, if
the court is of opinion that his or her guardianship will not be for the welfare
of the minor”.

2.4. Qualifications to provision regarding natural guardians.—It would be seen
that although section 6(a) of the Hindu Mino1ity and Gurdianship Act, 1956 decla-
res! that inthe case of a boy or an unmarried girl, the natural guardians of Hindu
minor are—the father, and after him, the mother, that proposition is subject to two
qualifications, as enumerated below :—

(i) the proviso to section 6 lays down that the custody of a minor who has not
completed the age of 5 years shall ordinarily be with the mother;

(ii) secondly, section 13 (1) lays down that in the appointment or declaration
of any person as guardian of Hindu minor by a couit, the welfare of the
minor shall be the paramount consideration. By sub-section (2) of the same

2
1—325 Min of Law & Justice/ND/89


LAw CoMMISsION OF INDIA—133rd REPORT

section, it is provided, inter alia, that no person is entitled to guardinship
by virtue of provisions of this Act, if the court is of opinion that his or her
guardianship will not be for the welfare of the minor.

Tt is. thus fairly clear that if the case comes before the court, the court must
look to the welfare of the minor and not merely to the legal provisions rela-
ting to guardianship. In this sense, section 6 is subject to section 13. The
extent to which the correct legal position has been appreciated by the courts.
particularly the trial courts, is a matter to be examined later in this Report.

2.5. Guardians and Wards Act, 1890.—We may now refer to the Guardians
and Wards Act, 1890, which is of considerable importance when the matter comes
before the court under that Act, particularly in the form of an application for custody.
That Act, in section 7, provides that where the court is satisfied that it is for the wel-
fare of the minor that an order should be made (a) appointing a person to be guardian
of his person or property or both or (b) declaring a person to be such guardian, the
court may make an order accordingly. Section 17(1) of that Act further provides that
in appointing or declaring a guardian of a minor the court shall, subject to the provi-
sions of that section, be guided by what, consistently with the law to which the
minor is subject, appears in the circumstances, to be for the welfare of the minor.

Section 17(2) of that Act enunciates the factors which the court will take into
account while considering the welfare of the minor. It is needless to state that when
exercising jurisdiction under the Guardians and Wards Act, the court will give para-
mount importance to the welfare of the minor and not to any “right” of a person
to act as a natural gardian of the minor.

2.6. Procedural sections in Act of 1890:—The actual proceedings before the court
functioning under the Guardians and Wards Act czn assume 2 variety of forms. For
the present purpose two sections of that Act are of importence from the procedural
point of view. These are sections 19 and 25. Section 19 is invoked when the petitioner
before the court seeks orders regarding the appointment or declaration of 2 person
as guirdian. Section 25 is invoked when the petitioner before the court, while not
seeking the appointment or declaration of guardiznship as such, desires to obtain
from the court orders as to the custody of a minor. As is well known the concept of
“guardianship” is much wider than that of “custody”. Of course, guardianship in-
cludes custody also, an aspect which incidentally is recognised in the Hindu Minority
and Guardianship Act in section 4(b) when it provides, inter alia, that the word “guar-
dian’ means a person having the care of the person of a minor or of his property
or of both.

2.7. Sections of the Act of 1890 quoted:—For ready reference we quote below
the relevant sections of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 as they stand at present.

“7, Power of the Court to make order as to guardianshi (1) Where the court
is s;tisfied that it is for the welfare of a minor that an order should be
made—

(a) appointing a guardian of his person or property, or both, or
(b) declaring a person to be such a guardian,

the court may make an order accordingly.

(2) An order under this section shall imply the removal of any guardian who
his not been appointed by will or other instrument or appointed or declar-
ed by the court.

(3) Where a guardian has been appointed by will or other instrument or appoin-
ted or declared by the court, an order under this section appointing
or declaring another person to be guardian in his stead shall not be made
until the powers of the guardian appointed or declared as aforesaid have
ceased under the provisions of this Act”.

“17, Matters 10 be considered by the Court in appointing guardian ४-0) In
appointing or declaring the guardian of a minor, the court shall, subject
to the provisions of this section, be guided by what, consistently with the
law to which the minor is subject, appears in the circumstances to be for
the welfare of the minor.

2—325 Min of Law & Justice/ND/89


Law CoMMISSION OF INDIA—133rd REPORT

(2) In considering what will be for the welfare of the minor, the Court shall have
regatd to the age, sex end religion of the minor, the charecter and capacity
of the proposed guardian end his nearness of kin to the minor, the wishes,
if any, of a deceased parent, and any existing or previous relations of the
proposed guardian with the minor or his property.

(3) If the minor is old enough to form an intelligent preference. the court may
consider that preference.

(4) (Omitted by Act 3 of 1951)

(5) The Court shall not appoint or declare any person to be a guardian against
his will.”

19. Guardian not to be appointed by the Court in certain cases:— Nothing in this
Chapter shall authorize the Court to appoint or declare a guardian of the
property of a minor whose property is under the superintendence of a
Court of Wards, or to appoint or declare a guardian of the person—

(a) ofa minor who isa married female and whose husband is not, in the
opinion of the court, unfit to be guardian of her person, or

(b) of a minor whose father is living and is not in the opinion of the court,
unfit to be guardian of the person of the minor, or

(c) of a minor whose property is under the superintendence of a Court of
Wards competent to appoint a guzrdien of the person of the minor”.

“25, Title of guardian to custody of ward.—(i) If a waid leaves or is removed
from the custody of a guardian of his person, the court, if it is of opinion that
it will be for the welfare of the ward to return to the custody of his guardian,
may make an order for his return, and for the purpose of enforcing the order
may cause the ward to be arrested and to be delivered into the custady
of the guardian.

(2) For the purpose of arresting the ward, the court may exercise the power
conferred ona Magistrate of the first class by section 100 of the Code of
Criminz] Procedure, 1882.

(3) The residence of a ward against the will of his guardian with a person who
is not his guardian does not, of itself, terminate the guardianship”.

“41, Cessation of authority of guardian.—(1) The powers of the guardian of
the person cease—

(a) #...............५००००००-००००००००००-०५०० ५५-०० ५५ ५» » ५५»

(६) in the case of a ward whose father was unfit to be guardian of the person
of the ward, by the father ceasing to be so or, if the father was deemed
by the Court to be so unfit, by his cezsing to be so in the opinion of
the Court.”


CHAPTER III

‘THE NEED FOR SPHLLING OUT SOMB IMPORTANT CONSIDERATIONS
IN THE APPLICATION OF THE WELFARE PRINCIPLE AND FOR AMPLIFI-
CATION OF THE RELEVANT PROVISIONS TO THIS END

3.1, Bringing up of a child, providing the physical and emotional needs of
the child, and building up the personality and inner world of the child, to enable
the child to bring out his or her potential so as to enable the child to make maxi-
mum contribution to the welfare of the community when he or she grows up, and
to enable him or her to lead a creative and useful life undeterred by the obstacles
that may impede his or her path, is the obligation and responsibility of both the
parents. It is as much the ‘duty’ of the father as the ‘duty’ of the mother. It is,
therefore, somewhat inappropriate to speak in terms of the ‘rights’ of the father
and the mother when the matter reaches the court and the question of appointing
a guardian or entrusting the custody of the minor surfaces." The court, acting on
behalf of the community, has to resolve the problem keeping in mind the paramount
and over-shadowing consideration as regards the ‘welfare’ of the child. That is
why the welfare principle has been projected in section 13 of the Hindu Minority and.
Guardianship Act as also in section 17 of the Guardians and Wards Act. Refe-
rence to these provisions has been made in Chapter II—vide paras 2.3 and 2.7—.
It will, however, be expedient to extract the provisions for the sake of ready refe-
rence.

3.2. Section 13 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 provides :--

“13. Welfare of minor to be paramount consideration :—(1) In the appoint-
ment or declaration of any person as guardian of a Hindu minor by a
court, the welfare of the minor shall be the paramount consideration.

(2) No person shall be entitled to the guardianship by virtue of the provisions
of this Act or of any law relating to guardianship in marriage among Hindus;

if the Court is of opinion that his or her guardianship will not be for the
welfare of the minor”.

Section 17 of the Guardian and Wards Act, 1890 prescribes :—
“17, Matters to be considered by the Court in appointing guardian :—

(1) In appointing or declaring the guardian of a minor, the Court shall,
subject to the provisions of this section, be guided by what consistently
with the law to which the minor is subject, appears in the circumstances
to be for the welfare of the minor.

(2) In considering what will be for the welfare of the minor, the Court shall,
have regard to the age, sex and religion of the minor, the character and
capacity of the proposed guardian and his nearness of kin to the minor,
the wishes, if any, of a deceased parent, and any existing or previous rela-
tions of the proposed guardian with the minor or his property.

(3) If minor is old enough to form an intelligent preference, the Court may
consider that preference. .

* * * * *

[Sub-section (4) omitted by Act 3 of 1951]

(5) The Court shall not appoint or declare any person to be a guardian against
us will.

The welfare principle has thus received statutory recognition. Since, however
some of the salient and important considerations have not been spelt ‘out very
often, particularly in the trial court, the welfare principle is not correctly interpreted
and applied to the fact situation presented by the case coming up before the court
So often it is only when the matter is brought up to the High Court that the welfare

5


Law CoMMISSION OF INDIA~—133rd REPORT

Principle is applied. The result is that the vitel and sensitive question regerding the
guardienship 2nd custody of the minor rem ins often in a nebulous stite for very
meny years and the custody of the child continues to remein with a person with
whom the custody should not remain in the light of the welfure principle. Besides,
the contesting parties in many of the matters may _not have the resources to take the
matter up to the High Court and the interest of the minor suffers detriment. It
is in this background that the issue regarding the need to spell out some of the
important considerations in the application of the welfere principle in the relevant
statute itself needs to be considered.

3.3. In order to substantiate the point that welfare principle is often not applied
by the trial court, a few of the reported cases may be usefully examined :—

Andhra Pradesh Case

(1) A very recent case from Andhra Pradesh may be referred to beccuse its
facts are peculiar." AHinduwoman obtained divorce ex parte onthe ground of
cruelty and desertion by her husband. Remaining a Hindu, she remerricd &
Christian (under the Special Marriage Act) after the expiry of 6 months from the
decree. The husband got the decree set aside, as passed ex parte without notice.
The woman petitioned the High Court in revision. While this petition wes pending,
the husband attempted to take away the children. The women then sued for an
injunction to restrain the husband from doing so and got an interim order maintain-
ing the status quo. The husband, i.e. the father, then applied for the custody of
3 children (2 boys aged about 13 years and 10 years respectively znd one girl ६8९१
about 12 years) under section 25, Act of 1890. His applicc-tion was allowed by the
trial court, but the mother appealed to the High Court and succeeded. The High
Court held that remarriage with a person from a different religion could not (in
itself) be a negative factor against the mother. In the interest and welfare of the
minors, they should be allowed to remain with the mother. There was nothing
against the mother which prejudicially affected the children.

Rarlier Bombay Case

(2) In an early Bombay case,* also one finds the trial court ignoring the wel-
fare principle. In this case, the application by the father was for his being < ppoin-
ted the guardien under section 19 of the Guardien and Wards Act, 1890, but the
application was treated as one under section 25 of that Act. The boy was aged
about 7 years and had been living with the mother for the last 5 years. The father
had married a second wife. The trial court allowed the application, ignoring the
welfare principle. On the mother’s appeal, the High Court reversed the judgement
of the trial court. In the view of the High Court, the welfare of the child demanded
that its custody should be continued with the mother, as the father hed married
again and the step-mother cannot be expected to be very much interested in the
welfare of the child, and any members of the prior generation who may be living
with the father were also not likely to give the child the required attention and

sympathy.
Later Bombay cases

alater Bombay case°, the father of a boy aged about 2 yezrs cpplied
for हित of the child under section 25 of the Guardians and Werds Act, 1890.
The father had merried a second wife 2nd his zpplication wes allowed by the trial
court, but in appeal, the High Court dismissed it. The High Court held that the
paramount consideration should be the interest of the child rather than the rights
of the parents ond if the mother is ६ suitable person to take charge of the child,
then it is quite impossible to find an adequate substitute for her for the custody of a
child of tender years. Besides this, a step-mother is not likely to give the child the
required attention, love and sympathy.

er Bombay case (of 1959)* it was the mother who applied under
seotin 38 onthe Act of 1890 for the custody of her minor daughter, aged zbout
2-1/2 years. The triel court a plied the welfare principle rather nerrowly and
dismissed the epplicction. It wes left to the High Court, on eppeel, to gront the
mother’s application. The High Court directed the father to hand over the girl
to the mother. It took note of the fact that the father (after the divorce) hed


Law COMMISSION OF INDIA~133rd REPORT

remarried, and that, although the father was living with a large fi mily of the prior
generation, there was a probability of the child being neglected by the step-mother
and by the family. There was nothing to suggest thet the mother wes unfit to have
the custody of the child. Besides this, the mother hed stated on oath that she had
no intention of remarrying. In these circumstances, it wes preferable to give the
custody to the mother.

Delhi Case

(5) In a Delhi case*, the welfare principle was ignored by the trial court but
was applied by the High Court in appeal. The mother of 2 boy, aged about 5
years, applied under section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act for the
custody of the child, but the trial court dismissed her application. The view taken
by the trial court was that the fact that the child was only 3 years old did not mean
that the father could not keep him in his custody; the child was not being suckled.
But the High Court, in appecl, awarded the custody to the mother. Discussing
in detail the welfare principle, the High Court stressed the fect that such a child
needs the most tender affection, the caressing hand and the compe ny of his natural
mother, end neither the father nor his female relations, however close they muy be.
and however well meaning and <ffectionate they may be towards the minor, cen
appropriately serve 2s a proper substitute for the minor’s naturel mother. The
High Court pointed out that in this case the child was of 5 years and the mother
had been rightly endowed by the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act with «
preferential claim in regard to custody. In the absence of special circumstances
which may suggest that the welfare of the minor demanded that his custody
should not be entrusted to his natural mother, the court wes not justified in de-
priving her of the minor child’s custody and in entrusting it to the father.

Another Delhi Case

(6) There is unother case from Delhi.© The mother had cpplied for the cus-
tody of her son aged 3 years, under section 25 of the Act of 1890. The mother’s
application for interim custody was first granted by the triz] court, but later he
reviewed his order on the ground that there was not sufficient zecommodation with
the mother’s parents. The High Court, exercising jurisdiction under crticle 227,
awarded custody to the mother. The mere fact that the mother wes not having eny
income of her own was not a ground to deprive her of the custody of her minor child.
No amount of wealth is a substitute for the mother’s 10068 and the care which she
can bestow on her infant child. If the mother has no independent income for
maintaining herself and the child. the fi.ther cen certzinly be asked far its meinte-
nance, but he cannot use this as a handle to deprive the mother of the custody of the
child.

Gujarat Case

(7) A Gujarat case illustrates the seme situation." The father hid ipplied
for the custody of 2 minor boy aged about 6 years through his sister. and the
application was allowed by the trial court. But the mother's eppeal to the High
Court was allowed. The High Court pointed out that where the question is bout
the custody of a minor, the expression “right” is altogether out of place, wnless
one were to proceed on the assumption that the child is 2 chattel or ६ property of the
parents. Here, the expression is used in the sense of the obligation cast by the
society on the parents. In its formative years, the child needs better care, love.
and affection which can be ignored only at the point of doing great psychological
damage to the personality of the child. Even if the welfare of the child demands
secrifice of the feelings and emotions of the father or the mother, the court would
not swerve from its destination.

Mysore Case

18) {In a Mysore case,* the fither applied under section 26 of the Hi
Marriage Act for the custody ofa girl oged about 3-1/2 years (in the course of rant
dings for restitution). The triel court allowed the application, but, on eppeal by
the mother, the High Court awarded the custody to the mother. The High Court
held that under section 26 of the Hindu Marriage Act,

i 5 i in so for as it relates
the custody of a minor child, the primary and paramount consideration (hough


Law Commission OF INDIA—133rd REPORT

not the sole consideration for the court) must be the- welfare of the minor child.
The question was not so much of the rights of the parents, as of the child’s welf: re.
To take away the child from the mother would place mental strain on the child.

A case from Peshawar

(9) Reference may be mzde here to a Peshawar case because the facts are unique."
The mother had applied for the custody and guardianship of a girl aged about
16 years. The girl, it seems, had been abducted by a Muslim and had embraced
Islam. The girl’s father was dead. She was placed in the custody of 4 Muslim
gentleman by the order of the court, after she was traced. The triel court dismissed
the mother’s application, but the High Court allowed her cppeal. The sole question
for determination was whether her alleged conversion to Islam was a valid reason
for refusing to appoint the mother as her guardian. In the view of the High Court,
welfare of the minor is the first consideration. The term “welfare” includes both
material and spiritual welfare. In the present case, the alleged conversion of the
child did not appear to have been based on any religious conviction arising out of
serious study by the girl but was based on her wish to throw her lot with the man who
was, at that time, undergoing a sentence for having abducted her. The appellate
court therefore saw no justification for refusing the mother’s request for custody
and guardianship of the child.

Punjab Case

(10) The contest in a Punjab case’? was between the uncle of « minor boy
nd the mother. The uncle (presumably :fter the dezth of the father of the boy)
had applied for appointment of guardian of the person end Property of the minor.
The judgment was in favour of the mother in the trial court and, in appeez! also, the
High Court upheld the order on the reasoning thet section 6 of the Hindu Minority
and Guardianship Act, 1956 provides that in the absence of the father, the mother
is the natural guardian of the minors. Accordingly, the custody of the child wes
retained with the mother though she had married a second husbend. The High
Court pointed out that remarriage is not one of the disqualifications under the
Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act.

Rajasthan Case

More recently, we have a Rajasthzn ९६5६7 in which ६150 the trial court
applied the welfare principle narrowly and its decision had to be corrected by the
High Court in appeal. The father had applied for the custody of two children,
ason aged about 11 years and a daughter aged about 14 years. Partly allowing the
application, the trial court awarded the custody of the son to the father. The
mother appealed to the High Court and succeeded. According to the High Court.
the father’s fitness has to be considered, determined and weighed predominantly
in terms of the child’s welfare. If the custody of the father cannot promote the
welfare of the minor equally as, or better than, the custody of {ithe mother, then he
cannot claim an indefeasible right to the minor’s custody under section 25 of the
Act of 1890 merely because there is no defect in his capacity to look after the minor.

Allahabad Case

t. Bindo v. Shyamlal, (1907) ILR 29 Alld. 210, the dispute for
the bay or a minor girl about 10 years of age was between the father of the
minor and the maternal grand-mother of the minor. The mother of the minor had
died when the minor was about 5 years of age and since then the minor was living
with her maternal grand-mother. An application was made by the father for the
custody of the child. The said application was opposed by the maternal grand-
mother on the ground mainly that father had remarried and he was not well off
and that the minor was happy to live with het grand-mother and did not wish to

01० her father. The District Judge, by holding the father’s right to be paramount.
a dan order appointing him as gauardian of the minor girl. On appeal to the
igh Court, the order of District Judge was set aside and the High Court directed
that the minor girl be restored to the maternal grand-mother. The High Court

held as under :— hey is ji fi
“There i suggestion that the materncl grcnd-mother 15 in any way unfit to
Tre tobe a guardian of the ward. She is 2 Hindu lady in good circums-
tances and it is obvious that if:she had not cared for the'child she would: not
2


LAw ComMISsION OP INDIA—~133rd REPORT

have kept the minor so long under her charge. It is true that there is nothing
against the father, but again it is an admitted fact that he has married a second
time and the girl will have to go under the control of a step-mother, of whom
probably she knows nothing. We cannot think that the girl, under these cir-
cumstances, will be so happy as she is in the house of the maternal grand-
mother. What we have to consider is what Will really be for the welfare of the
minor. Weighing all the circumstances we think that it will be more for the
welfare of the minor to live with the maternal grand-mother then with the
step-mother”.

It is thus evident thet the welfare principle has quite often not been
properly eppreciated or has been overlooked by the trial court and the
mother his had to approach the higher court at considerable time-cost and
money-cost. The need for spelling out some important considerations in the
application of the welfare principle and for amplification of the relevant
provisions to this end has, therefore, been clearly established.


CHAPTER IV

‘WHAT’ CHANGES ARE REQUIRED TO BE MADE IN THE EXISTING
LAW AND ‘WHY’?

Mother to have same and equal rights (and not inferior to the father) in respect
of the custody of minor’s person as well as property.

4.1. The most serious infirmity in the existing law is revealed by section 6(a)
of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act of 1956. It is provided by the said
provision that the natural guardian of a Hindu minor in respect of his person as
well as his property, in the case of a boy or an unmarried girl, will be “the father and
after him, the mother”. Thus, statutory recognition has been accorded to the
objectionable proposition that the father is entitled to the custody of the minor
child in preference to the mother. Apart from the fact that there is no rational
basis for according an inferior position in the order of preference to the mother
vis-a-vis the father, the proposition is vulnerablg to challenge on several grounds.
In the first place, it discloses an anti-feminine bias. It reveals age-old distrust for
women and feeling of superiority for men and inferiority for women. Whatever
may have been the justification for ths same in the past, assuming that there was some,
there is no warrant for persisting with this ancient prejudice, at least after the usher-
ing in of the Constitution of India which proclaims the 1ight of women to equality
and guarantees nondiscrimination on the ground ot sex under the lofty principle
enshrined in article 15. In fact, clause (3) of article 15, by necessary implication,
gives a pre-vision of beneficial legislation geared to the special needs of women
and children with a pro-women and pro-children bias. It is indeed strange that
in the face of the said constitutional provision, the discrimination against women
has been tolerated for nearly four decades. As the law stands today, if the father
as well as the mother are equally fit persons to have the custody of the child, the
father will secure the custody of the child in preference to the mother, unless the
child is of the troublesome and inconvenient age of less than 5 years. It is interes-
ting to realise that the British Patliament woke up to this problem 25 yeats before
the Constitution of India came into force, and enacted the Guardians and Infants
Act of 1925 to eradicate this injustice at their end. The preamble reads :

“Whereas Parliament, by the Sex Disqualification (Removal) Act of 1919 and
various other enactments, have sought to establish equality in law between the
sexes and it is expedient that this principle should obtain with respect to the
guardianship of infants and the rights and responsibilities conferred thereby :

Be it enacted ....”.

Section 1 of the said enactment provides that the court shall decide the questions
iegarding the custody of infants without regard to concepts regarding father’s
superior right to custody from the common law standpoint. And like power is
given under section 2 to the mother as the father, to move the court for the custody
of the infant. The status of the mother was improved from time to time under
the British law and finally in 1973, the mother and the father were given equal rights
and authority in relation to the custody, upbringing and administration of the pro-
perty of the children. Section 1 of the Guardianship Act of 1973, which was enac-
ted to amend the law of England and Wales as to the guardianship of minors so as
to make the 1ights of a mother equal with those of a father, provides :—

“In relation to the custody and upbringing of a minor and in relation to the
administration of any property belonging to or held in tru.t for a minor or the
application of income of any such property, a mother shall have the same rights
and authority as the law allows to a father, and the rights and authority of mother
and father shall be equal and be exercisable by either without the other”. (Em-
phasis added).

The history of the law in United Kingdom relating to the custody of a
articularly in its later stages, would go to show two important trends.
‘The first is the gradual equalisation of the parental status of the mother and father
of a child born in wedlock. In the second development, the parental rights of both
mother and father have become less important as the welfare of the minor has

410


Law Comsission Or INDIA~133rd RgPpoRT

reason to be the first and paramount in any litigated issue relating to the custody
or upbringing and administration of the property of the child.

4.3, Tt is thus manifest that the provision contained in section 6(a) of the Hindu
Minotity and Guardianship Act is extremely unfair and unjust and has become irre-
levant and obsolete with the changing times. The concerned provision, therefore,
deserves to be amended so as to constitute both the father and the mother as being
natural guardians ‘jointly and severally’, having equal rights in respect of a minor
and his property. The provision according preferential treatment to the father
vis-a-vis the mother has to be deleted and has to be substituted by a provision accor-
ding equal treatment to the mother on the lines indicated hereinbefore.

The custody of a minor child who has not completed 12 years of age shall ordina-
rily be with the mother,

4.4. As per the proviso to section 6(a) of the Hindu Minority and Guardian-
ship Act, “the custody of a minor who has not completed the age of five years shall
ordinarily be with the mothe”. Till what age the custody of the minor should
ordinarily be with the mother was the question which came to be examined by the
Law Commission of India (LCI) in its 83rd Report presented in April 1980. After
examining the matter closely and carefully, the LCI recommended that the con-
cerned provision should be amended so that the age up to which the custody should
ordinatily be with the mother is raised from 5 years to 12. It appears that for one
reason or the other, this recommendation has not been accepted and acted upon
so far. We are of the opinion that the recommendction made by the LCI in its
83rd Report deserves to be implemented without any further delay. We, therefore
reitcrate the recommendation. We do not propose to give additional reasons of
our own for reiterating the recommendation as we feel that the reasons articulated
in the 83rd Report cannot be bettered. We, therefore, rest content by reproducing
paragraph 6.50, 6.51 and 6.53 of the 83rd Report :—

‘Recommendation for amending the Act of 1956, section 6.

6.50. Taking up the fourth question, we are of the view that section 6 of the
Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 should also be amended so as to
allow the mother the custody of the minor, ordinarily till he or she completes
the age of 12 years. We may state in brief our reasons for this view. The
riod upto the age of twelve represents the formative years in the life of a child.
It is in these formative years that a child develops such qualities as patience,
modesty, honesty, readiness to help and respect for others. The education
that the child receives in these years should be designed to make him or her a
healthy individual of high intellectual and moral standard, capable of playing
an active role in the development of the State and society. Now, it cannot be
disputed that it is the mother’s influence which moulds the character and quali-
tics of a child. Men are what their mothers make them; no fondest father’s
fondest care can fashion the child’s heart or shape his life. It was Napolean
who said “The future destiny of the child is always the work of the mother”.

Need for amendment as to custody.

6.51. Legislative history of the provision in the Act of 1956 relating to custody
is of interest. Though the mother, in regard to her position as a natural guar-
dian, is postponed to the father, yet the Act lays down, as already stated, that
the custody of a minor upto five years shall ordinarily be with the mother.
In the original Bill, the age proposed was three years, but the Select Committee
raised it to five years. Even this enhancement did not satisfy all persons. Some
Members of Parliament felt that the age should be further raised. A lady
member of the Select Committee wanted the custody of the minor to be with
the mcther till the minor attained majority. Another lady member wanted it
to be raised to twelve. The two other male members wanted it to be raised
to ten and thirteen respectively. Our proposal that the age cf custody should
be raised to twelve is, therefore, not new.

Need of mother’s care for child of tender age.

6.53. The child under twelve years of age needs a tender affection, a caressing
hand and the company of his mother, and neither the father nor his family
relations, however close, well meaning and affectionate towards the minor, can
appropriately setve as a proper substitute for the minor’s mother. It should

Al


32

Law CoMMissiON OF INDIA—133rd REPORT

also be borne in mind that physical needs and comforts alone are not enough
for the proper and healthy devlopment of a child. Parental affection is
indispensable for this purpose and in the case of a conflict between the parents
when the child is under twelve years of age, the mother should have a preferen-
tial claim in regard to the child’s custody. It is for these reasons that we have
recommended an amendment of the Act of 1956 as to the age upto which cus-
tody should ordinarily be with the mother’.

We fully and entirely concur with the reasoning reflected in the above-quoted passages
and accordingly reiterate the recommendation that sub-section (a) of section 6 of
the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act should be amended so as to provide
that the custody of a minor who has not completed 12 years of age shall ordinarily
be with the mother.

Amplification of the welfare principle

4.5, In (काल वि, the need for spzlling out some important considerations
in the application of the welfare principle and amplification of the relevant provisions
to this end has been sufficiently made out, In this context, the welfare principle in
section 13 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act and section 17 of the
Guardians and Wards Act needs to be amplified by incorporating four considerations
for being required to be ken into account by the concerned court whilst applying
the principle :—

45.1, Ordinarily a minor not to be obliged to stay with his or her step-mother.—
Whete the father of a minor child has obtained a divorc. and has remarried,
it is desirable that the custody of the minor irrespective of his or her age
shall ordinarily be with the mother. If the custody of the child is awarded
to the father, the child would be obliged to live with the step-mother. In
the first place, the child will have to undergo the trauma of separation from
his or her natural mother. In the second place, the child will have to
make psychological adjustments in order to live with the step-mother.
While it is somewhat unfair to be sceptical about the treatment that a step-
mother might mete out to the step-child, it has to be realized that a psy-
chological fear has come to be associated with the status of a step-mother.
Some step-mothers might be c»pable of tre.ting the step-children with
kindness, compassion end considerztion, But many others may not
be able to do so. In fret, treatment which a child may accept without
much protest from the naturel mother, the child mey not be prepared to
accept from a step-mother. To oblige minor to live with the step-mother
is to make a child undergo 2 treum: tic experience end to meke him or her
suffer from « feeling of being oppressed. It is, therefore, necessery to pro-
vide tha! ordinarily the custody of a minor child should be entrusted to the
naturs! mother and the child should not be obliged to live with his or her
step-mother when the fether hes remarried.

4.5.2.1. Ordinarily a minor female child shall not be made to live with her step-
father—Where the mother hes remerried, to entrust the custody of a
minor fe child to the mother would entail the consequence of the
minor being mede to live with her step-fether. While she would be able
to avail of the netural love ond «ffection of the mother, she would ४150 be
facing the possibility of dameging consequences. The step-fether cennot
ordinerily be expected to have eny real effection end emotional attechment
to the child. More often thin not, the step-fether is likely to consider
the child 55 a necessrry evil or nuisence arising on eccount of his marricge
to the natural mother of the child begotten by her previous husbsnd.
Reports em»noting from the western countries recording instances of the
step-father perpetrating cruelty on the child are too numerous end too
frequent to be disregarded. Apzrt from the physical punishment meted
out to the child, so often the child is subjected to sexual harassment,
The helpless mother is so often rendered & mute witness to such trectment
meted out 10 the child. What is happening in the western countries on a
large scale is ७180 likely to hrppen in India if it is not already heppening.
Under the circumstances, it is desir’ ble to meke provision to the effect
that ordinarily 2 female minor child shall not be made fo live with her
step-fether. The court may consider whether the paternal or meternel
grandparents should be entrusted with the custody of the female minor
child in such cases. It is, therefore. necessary, fo provide accordingly,



LAW CoMMIissiON OF INDIA—133rd REPORT

4.5.2.2, Where the mother alone has remarried.—In such on event, it would be
desirable to provide thit ‘ordinurily’ the minor, even if ६ male child, should
not be made to live with the ‘step-f.ther”. For, instences heve been noticed
where the step-fither ill-tre.ts the child or virtually trects him as an
errand boy.

4.5.2.3. Where both ‘father’ and ‘mother’ have remarried,--{he court may
determine who shall hve the custody of the minor cs between the fi ther
and the mother or the paternal or meternat grond-p.rents depending on
the assessment of the court 75 to whet is considered to be conducive
to the maximum welfare of the minor tiking into cceount cll the relevant
circumstances of the perticular cise,

4.5.3. A mother not to be denied custody oi the minor mainly on economic
considerations.—It is no doubt true th,t in urdvn ६.९७, there cre more end
more working women in the middle cliss Indicn households. But in 2
large number of households, the womzn 95-95 the role of ८ house-wife,
more so in non urban areas. The fict remiins th.t by nd large the hus-
band is economically better pl: ccd in the sense th.t he is employed ina
position where this economic rewerds are fer in excess of the income of
the wife even in cases where the wife is working women, The husband is
ordinarily in more affluent circumste 10९5 thin thi t of the wife. In epply-
ing the welfare principle, the mere f. ct th; t the father is in more «fluent
circumstances vis-a-vis the mother ci nnot be cllowed to outweigh the sum
total of the other circumstinces. Besides, the court cn clweys direct the
husband to pay muinten.nce wllow nee to the children. The factor
regarding the superior economic circumstences of the fither should not,
therefore, be accorded undue weight: A provision in this behalf is,
therefore, required to be mede so that the peremount considerction re-
garding the welfvre of the minor does not get distorted in fevour of the
father’s claim to the detriment of the mother’s ck.im on cccount of the
superior economic circumstances of the fi ther.

4.5.4. The minor's need for the emotional support and the warmth of the mother
should be accorded prime consideration—A mother is by nuture endowed
to impart love and affection to her minor child without h.ving to meke cny
effort. There is a physica! bond between the mother ind the child right
from the time the child w.s conceived. The child lives on the flesh end
blood of the mother till its birth. After its birth, the child is sust. ined by
the mother who feeds the child i nd tends to it. When the child is in phy-
sical discomfort or agony, it is ordin-rily the mother who looks ufter
and comforts it. The mother is ordinurily better-cquipped th. n the fi ther
to impart such emotion | support «nd wermth cs cre esscntiil for the
building up of the b.lonced person.lity of the child. The futher is ordi-
n rily engrossed in his profession or employment or in his cconomic pur-
suits. A father would scurcely hve the time for the child or be in a posi-
tion to build up that emotion | rel.tionship with the child which the
mother can build even if the mother is : ls0 «© working women. In order
to enable the child to develop « well-oriented end bilinced personzlity,
it is essential thet the child is not sti rved of emotion: ] support : nd warmth
which are essential for its growth. Under the circusmtences, this foctor
deserves to be accorded prime consider«tion in resolving issues regarding
custody of the child end a provision in this behe!f needs to be made whilst
spelling out the ingredients of the welfure principle.

4.6. In considering the claim of grand-parents, whether they are paternal grand-
parents or maternal grand-parents is a matter of no consequence.—Very often the
courts are confronted with the question is to whether the p..terncl gr: nd-p: rents
should be appointed the guordicns of the person and property of the minor or the
matesnal grand-parents should be so :ppointed. Juct ८5 in considering the claim
between the futher and the mother, ५. prefercntic! tre: tment wis being + ccorded to
the father vis-a-vis the mother, the pro-melc bi: 5 wes often projected in considering
the question in the context of the gr. nd-p rents is well. It would ¢ppzir thet there
is a psychological complex that the p.ternel gr nd-p-rents should be preferred to
the maternal grand-parents. हे In considering the rivel ऐै-5, whilst applying the
welfare principle, weightage is often zccorded to the ‘paternal’ grend-parents and



14

LAw Commission Or INDIA—133rd REPORT

they are often preferred fo the ‘maternal’ grand-parenfs'. There is no rationa)
basis fordoingso*. _It is, therefore, desirable to make it explicit that the ‘paternal’
and ‘maternal’ grand-parents shall be treated at par having equal claim to be appoin-
ted as guardians subject to the overriding consideration regarding the welfare of the
minor.

4.7. The pro-male bias and anti-female prejudice has been projected in section
19(b) of the Guardians and Wards Act of 1890 as well. It provides :—

“19. Guardian nof to be appointed by the Court in certain cases.—Nothing
in this chapter shall authorize the Court to appoint or declare a guardien of the
property of a minor whose property is under the superintendence of a Court
of Wards, or to appoint or declare a guardian of the person—

@ * * * sor

(b) of a minor whose father is living and is not, in the opinion of the Court
unfit to be guardian of the person of the minor; or

(©) * * * »

The Legislature, inits wisdom, has provided that so long as the father of a
ninor is living and is not, in the opinion of the court, unfit to be the guardian of
the person of the minor, the court shall not appoint or declare someone else as a
guardian of the person of the minor. But then there is no revson why the same
principle should not apply when the mother of a minor is living end is not, intle
opinion of the Court, unfit to be guardian of the person of the minor. If when the
father of a minor is not unfit, no one else can be appointed as guardian of the person
of the minor, why should someone else be appointed as guardian of the minor when
the mother is alive and is not unfit in the opinion of the Court. The interest of the
minor can be safeguarded with as much vigour and sincerity by the mother as by
the father. It, therefore, stands to reason that so long as the “father or the mother”
of a minor is living, and, in the opinion of the Court, is not unfit to be the guardian
of the person of the minor, the Court shall not appoint someone else us the guardian
of the person of the minor. Section 19(b), therefore, requires to be amended on
the aforesaid lines. A consequential amendment will elso be required to be made
in section 41(e) of the Guardians and Wards Act pertaining to cessation of authority
of the guardian. The words “father or mother” should be substituted in plece of
the word “father” wherever it occurs in the said provision.,

4.8. Natural guardian of an adopted son and adopted daughter :—In the Hindu
Minority and Guardianship Act of 1956, a provision has been made for the natural
guardianship of an adopted son who is a minor. Subsequent to the enactment
of the said Act, the Hindu Adoptions end Maintenance Act of 1956 for the first
time hs enabled the adoption of a deughter. Till then, 8 Hindu could zdopt only
a son and not a daughter. In view of the change brought about by the Hindu
Adoptions and Maintenance Act of 1956, it has become necessary to provide for
the n:tural guardianship of both an adopted son and an adopted daughter. As
at p-esent, section 7 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956, provides :—

“7. Natural guardanship of adopted son.—The natural guardianship of an
adopted son who is a minor passes, on adoption, to the adoptive father and
after him to the adoptive mother.”

(Emphasis added}

Vhere is, therefore, a lacuna in section 7 as it is presently worded. In order to apply
the principle of section 7 as regards natural guardianship of an adopted child, it
would be appropriate to amend the provision so es to apply to an “adopted son”
as also to an “adopted daughter” who is a minor. If is also necessary to bring
the section in line with the first recommendation in order to accord 2n equal treat-
ment both to the father as 2150 to the mother. In place of the expression “to the
adoptive father and after him to the adoptive mother”, it would be in the fitness
of things to provide “to the adoptive father and to the adoptive mother jointly and
severally”.

4.9, Inthe light of this discussion, we now proceed to make the recommendas
tions in the next Chapter.


| CHAPTER. V
RECOMMENDATIONS
FIRST RECOMMENDATION
‘Mother’ should have seme and equal (and not inferior) rights vis-a-vis ‘father’.

5.1. The provision contained in section 6(2) of the Hindu Minority and
Guirdianship Act of 1956 (“HMG Act” for short) constituting the father as a
natural guardian of a Hindu minor’s person as well as in respect of his property in
‘preference’ to the mother should be amended so as to constitute both the father and
the mother as being natural guardians ‘jointly and severally” having equal rights in
resp2ct of th: minor. Because, there is no justification for according 2 superior
and preferential treatment to the father vis-a-vis the mother of the minor end because
it violates the spirit and conscience of article 15 of the Constitution of India.

(See para 4.1.)
SECOND RECOMMENDATION

The custody of ८ minor who has not completed 12 years of age shall ordinarily
be with the mother.

5.2. The p-oviso to sub-section (a) of section 6 of the HMG Act deserves to
be amended so thet the custody of a boy or an unmarried girl who has not completed
the age of 12 years (instead of the age limit of 5 yeers as prescribed at p-esent) shill
ordinarily be with the mother.

(See para 4.4.)

THIRD RECOMMENDATION

Spelling out some important considerations in the applicetion of the welfare
principle.

5.3. The welfare pzinciple projected in section 13 of the HMG Act and sec-
tion 17 of the Gu:rdians and Wards Act needs to be amplified and spelt out so as to
make it explicit thet—

(1) where the ‘futher’ has remarried, the custody of the minor, irrespective of
the minor's age, shall ordinarily be with the mother. The minor should not
be obliged to live with his or her step-mother unless there arc exceptions!
circumstances which shall be recorded in writing.

(See para 4.5.1.)

(2) (a) Where the ‘mother’ has remerried, « female child should not be made
to live with her step-father in order to guard egainst possible sexus!
harassment. The Court may consider whether the paternal or mater-
nial grand-p:rents should be entrusted with the custody of the female
child.

(See para 4.5.2.1.)

(b) Where the ‘mother’ has remanied but the ‘father’ has not. ordinarily
the minor, even if a male child, should not be made to live with the
‘step-father’.

See pata 4.5.2.2.)

(० Where both ‘father’ end ‘mother’ have remarried, the court may
determine whether to entrust the gucrdianship and/or custody to the
father, the mother or the grand-pzrents, depending on what the court
considers to be conducive to the maximum welfzre of the minor in
the light of the facts of each case.

(See para 4,5.2,3)

15


16

LAw ComMIssion OF INDIA—133rd REPORT

(3) A ‘mother’ shall not be denied the custody of the minor merely on the
ground thet the father is in more 2ffluent circumstences or that the mother’s
economic circumstances are not as good as those of the father.

(See para 4.5.3.)

(4) In applying the welfare principle, the court 51६11 have due regard to the fact
that the minor needs emotional support and warmth of the ‘mother’ who
is ordinarily better equipped than the ‘father’ to impart such cmotionel
support and warmth which are essential for building up a balanced
personality. °

(See para 4.5.4.)

FOURTH RECOMMENDATION

Grend-parents shall have equal claim in the matter of appointment of guardian
of a minor irrespzctive of whether they are paternal grand-parents or maternal
grand-parents.

5.4. In considering the question of appointment of guardien of the person
and property of a minor end entrustment of the custody of a minor, the circumstance
whether the grand-parents ure from the ‘paternel’ side or ‘materni.l’ side should be
disregarded. The paterne] grend-parents on the one hand and maternal grand-
parents on the other hand shail be treated at par having ‘equal’ claim to be eppoin-
ted in this behalf subject to the paramount consideration regarding the welfare of
the minor.

(See para 4.6.)

FIFTH RECOMMENDATION

Recognizing that not only a ‘father’ but also a ‘mother’ hes a claim to the
exclusion of others to be appointed a guardian of a minor unless considered
unfit by the court.

5.5. Section 19(b) of the Guardians and Wards Act of 1890, which inter alia
provides that the court will not be authorised to appoint the guardian of the person
of a minor whose ‘father’ is living and is not, in the opinion of the court, unfit to be
the guardian of the person of the minor, deserves to be amended so as to accord
equal treatment to the ‘mother’ by incorporating a reference to ‘mother’ zlong
with that of the ‘father’. It should be provided that the court will not be authorised
to appoint the guardian of the person of 2 minor whose ‘father or mother’ is living
and is, in the opinion of the court, not unfit to be the guardicn of the person of the
minor, for there is no rational basis for discriminating between the ‘father’ of a
minor on the one hand znd the ‘mother’ of 2 minor on the other in the context of
this provision. A consequential emendment 2150 needs to be made in section 41(e)
by substituting the words ‘‘fether or mother” in place of the word ‘fe ther”? wherever
it occurs therein.

(See para 4.7.)

SIXTH RECOMMENDATION

Section 7 of the Hindu Minority and Gurdianship Act relating to guardian-
ship of an .dopted son to be amended.

5.6. As zt present, section 7 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act,
1956, is eppliceble in the context of naturel guardianship of en adopted son. In
view of the en ctment of Hindu Adoptions ond Maintenance Act which now enables
u daughter 2150 to be adopted, the afores.id provision requires to be recast so as
to be mede ६ pplicuble ६150 to the guardianship n adopted daughter who isa
minor. So ४५0 the phrase “to the edoptive father nd cfter him to the cdoptive
mother” needs to be substituted by the phrase “to the adoptive father ond the <dop-
tive mother jointly and severally” for the sake of removing the discrimination cgainst
women,

(See para 4.8)


Law Commission OF INDIA—133rd REPORT 17

5.7. We recommend accordingly.

(M.P. THAKKAR)
Chairman

(९. V. ANJANEYULU) (P. M. BAKSHI)
Member Member

(G.V.G. KRISHNAMURTY)
Member Secretary

New Delhi, Dated the 29th August, 1989.


NOTES AND REFERENCES
CuapTer IT
1, Para 2.2, supra.
CHAPTER III

1, Sheela y. Jeevanlal, AIR 1988, A. P. 275, 277, 278 (August) (Mrs. Amareswari
& Bhaskar Rao, JJ). (August) ( re:

2. Bai Tara y. Mohanlal, AIR 1922 Bom. 405,

3. Saraswati Bat v. Shripad Vasanji Ved, AIR 1941 Bom. 103.

4, Munnibai y. Dhanush, AR 1959, Bom. 243.

5. Chander Prabha vy. Prem Nath Kapar, AUR 1969 Del, 283.

6. Narinder Kaur y. Parshotam Singh, AIR 1988 Delhi 359, 361, paras 5 to 7 (Wadhwa J).
7. Sarala y. Anandrai, 17 Guj LR 581.

8. Radha Bai v. Surendra K. Mudaliar, AUR 1971 Mys 69, 70, 71, pures 6—8 (Malimath J),
9. Mansa Devi 5, Makhar, AIR 1936 Peshawar 207 (Middleton, J.C.).
10. Bakshi Ram Ladha Ram vy. Shila Devi, AUR 1960 Punjab 304, 305 (0. K. Mah; jan J.).
11, Gangabai vy. Bherulal, AUR 1976 Rej 153, 155, 156 (५, P. Tyagi, Actg. C. J.).

CHAPTER IV

1. Nirode Barani Debya and Another v. Bholanath Sarkar and Auother, AIR 1915 Cal. 435;
In Re. Gulbai and Lilbai, Minors, 1LR 32 Bom, 50.

2. Satyendra Nath Mattra ¥. Balram Chakraborty, AIR 1961 Cal, 206,

18
GMGIPN-—S 4—325 Min of Law & Justice/ND/89—3-7-91—1,000.