LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ले
ONE HUNDRED TRIRTY-FOURTE :
REPORT i
ke
or
DEFICIENCIES If CERTAIN PROVISIONS
NSATION ACT, 1923
ee

1989



CHAPTER {i

CHAPTER Ii

CHAPTER IIt

५

CONTENTS

RCVISICNS REQUIRING SCRUTINY 2...

ATION

FROVISIONS CF TEE

WORKMEN? 5

1223 REQUIRE

पाए

2



&

LAW COMMISSION

wie. THAKKAR GOVERNMENT CF INDIA
CHAIRMAN SHASTRI EFAVAN
NEW DELHI
70.0. No. F.6(5)/€9-LC (LS) September 28, 1989.
To

Shri £.Shankaranand.

Minister for Law and Justice,

Government cf India,

Shastri

New Delh

Dear Minister,

Tie earlier two reports (13276 and i133rd} were centred
on the wees cf the women. the rerorc being presented
herewith, the 134th report, is focussed on the woes of the
workisen who sustain injuries in the course cf and arising
out of their employment an@ on distress of the
Gependants cf a workman who loses hie life as a result of
such employment injury in an employment of a hazardous
hature specified in the Act. The title of the report is -

“REMOVING DEFICIENCIES IN CERTAIN PROVISIGNS
P THE WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923".

The Commission, in this suo moty exercise, has aimed at
making concerned provisions more purposeful and
benevolent in keeping with the leitmotif of socio-economic
justice which permeates the Act.

The Commission trusts that the recommendations, when
accepted anc acted upon, will ameliorate the plight of the
concerned workmen.

With warm regards,

Yours faithfully,

(M.P.THAKKAR)

Encl; 134th Report.



re

eh oe cancel.

CHAPTER I

INT. “DUCTICN

1.1. cern fo: the workers who sweat for the |
immediate’ benefit of the employer and the
‘ultimate? benefit of the Nation is
undersvandable. There is greater reason for
concern when workers engaged in hazardous
coccupations sustain injuries resulting in

temporary, partial, or permanent disablement or
‘lose’ their lives in the course of and arising
out of such employment. That is the raison d'etre

for the Workmen's Compensation Act of 1923,

1.2. The Act in its entirety was taken up for
revision by the Law Commission of india (L.C.1.)
at the initiative of the Government upon a
reference being made to it. The L-C.I. presented
its report in October, 1974 after the Survey and
scrutiny of the Act as « whole. That is the main
reason why the present exercise has been
restricted to the scrutiny of only some of the
provisions which call for attention in the light
of the felt need to remove the deficiencies which
were noticed, erase the creases which came to

light, enc to update the provisions.

1,3.1, On May 12, 1984, nearly ten years after the

d Report was presented by the

a, the Act


ry

was amended with the evident object of making it
more benevolent. Coverege was exterded even to
workmen whose monthly wages exceeded PFs.1000 (who
were till then not protected by the Act).
Apparently, this was done upon realising that the
plight cf the workman who sustained injuries

cendering him te

Oorarily, pertially, or

permanently incapabie to work, or of the
dependants of a ceceased workman earning Rs.10C0
Fins, could not be less pathetic than that of a
workman earning Rs.1000 or less. A great stride
was thus taken in the area of social and economic
justice by so amending the definition of “workman”
embodied in section 2 in conformity with the

recommendation made in the 62nd report of the

1.3.2. Another measure adopted was that of
Substituting a new section 4 with an appropriate
schedule based on the age of the concerned workman
and a multiple factor to be applied to his monthly
wages for computing compensation. But while

extending coverage to workmen earning monthly

wages of Rs.i000 plus, and defining the quantum of
compensation on the basis of the relevant factor,
a rider was added in the form of Explanation IT
creating a fiction that the concerned workman's

wages would be “deemec” to be only Rs.1000 even if



the wages in actuality were in excess of Rs ५2000.
1.3.3. it needs to be mertioned that the rider

was not niooted

or inspired by the L.C.I- in its §2na Report made

in 1874.

* flown and has

in the course sf ite journey revealed a number of
deficiencies in the existing provisions of the Act
and also the need for improving and updating the

same. Hence this suo motu exercise,

1.5. We hope ana truse that the reconmendations
being made by this report wili ameliorate the
Gistress of the injured workman, and of the
dependants of the deceased workman who loses his
life in he course of and arising out of the
employment covered by the Act. At the same time
these recommendations will not cast any
unreasonable burden on the employer even if the
employer has not made arrangements for ‘self-

insurance’ or insurance with an insurance company.

1.6. We accordingly Proceed to identify the
Provisions which need overhauling and to examine

the issues involved in the present exercise,

ana


lal

CHAPTER IT

PROVISIOUS WARRANTING SCRUTINY

The existing provisions of the Workmen's
Conpensatior Act, examination of which reveals the
need for revision in order to renove deficiencies,

x
Geserye to be extracted fer the sake of ready

reference:-

‘cefinition of “dependant”

Be (4) (8) “derendant" means any of the
following relatives cf a deccased workman,
nancly~

(i) a widow, a minor legitimate son, वादे
unmarried leyitimate daughter, or a widowed
mother: and

(ii) if wholly dependent on the earnings
cf the workman at the time cf his death, a
son or a Jaughter who has attained the age of
1G vears and who is infirm;

ii) if wholly or in part dependent on
the earnings of the workman at the time of
his Geath -

(a) a widower,

(ib) a parent other than a widowed
mother ,

(c) a minor illegitimte son, an
unmarried illegitimate daughter or a
daughter legitimate or illegitimate if
married and a minor or if widowed and a
minor,

1. Tie underlining in the extracted provisions
is net in the text but has been added for the
sake of emphasis.

A CT



"A. (1)

(9) a minor brother cr an unmarried
sister or 8 widowed sister, if a minor,

(e) a widowed daughter-in-law,

(६) a mince: child of a pre~deceased

son,

(9) a minor child of a pre~deceased
Gaughter where ne parent of the child is
alive, or

(0) parent if no
parent of workman is alive;*
P

nhefinition of workman

(1) (n} “Sworkman® means any person
than a person whose employment is
casual nature and whe is employed

Otherwise than for the purposes of the

employer's trade or business) whe is-

(1) ०० ०००००००००००००९००००६०००००००००००८
(ii) "०2० cceseccccronessceaenccsscee”

Amount of Compensation

Subject to the provisions of this Act,

the amount of compensation shall be as follows,

namelys-

(a)

(b)

where death an amount equal to forty
results per cent. of the monthly
from the wages of the deceased
injury, workman multiplied by the

relevant factor;
or
an amount cf twenty

thousand rupees, which=
ever is more;

where an amount equal to fifty
permanent per cent of the monthly
total wages of the injured
disablement workman multiplied by the
results relevant factor;

from the

injury, or

wo



Or

an amount of twenty-four ~fo
thousand rupees, which=
ever is more.

Explanation 1 I. 8११०५००००००००००८०००००००००००००००००
°

Explanation 11 II.~ Where the monthly wages
ef a workman exceed one thousand rupees, 1
monthly wages for the purposes of clause (a) and
clause” (by shall be deemed to 5९ one £hougani

के
Eupees only,

interest and penalty payable in case of default

"GA, (3) Where any employer is in default in
paying the compensation due under this Act within
ene month from the date it fell due, the
Conmissioner may direct that, in addition to the
amount cf the arrears, simple interest at the rate
Of six per cent, Ber annum on the amount ~due
together with, if in the opinion of ‘the
Commissioner there 18 no justification for the
delay, a further sum not exceeding fifty per cent,
of such amount, shall be recovered from the
employer by way of penalty.”

Distribution of Compensation ensation
aT OF Compensation

"8. (1) No payment of compensation in respect of
workman whose injury has resulted in death, and no
Payment of a lump sum as compensation to a woman
Or a person under a legal disability, shall be
made otherwise than by deposit with the
Commissioner, and no such payment made directly by
an employer shall be deemed to be a Payment of
compensation:

Provided that, in the case of a deceased

workman, an employer May make to any dependant
advances on account of soupensat ensation not exceeding
Sevances account गिर est axceeding

an aggregate of one hundre Eupees, and so much of

such ~ aggregate “as does not exceed the
compensation payable to that dependant shall be
deducted by the Commissioner from such

compensation and repaid tc the empleyer,

(2) ०५०००००

(उ) ceneseseccecesceccccce.

(4) On the deposit of any money under sub~
section (1), as compensation in respect of a


ad,

deceased workman the Commissioner shall deduct
therefrom the ३०६०३) cost of the workman's funeral
expenses, to an amount not exceeding fifty
rupees, and pey the s°me to the person by whom
such expenses were incurred, and shall, if he
thinks necessary, cause notice to be published or
to be served on each dependant in such manner as
he thinks fit, calling upon the dependants to
appear before him on such date as he may fix for
determining the distribution cf the ccmpensation.
If the Commissioner is satisfie@ after any
inguiry whi he may deem necessary, that no
dependait exists he shall repay the balance of
the money te the employer by whom it was paid.
The Commissioner shall, on application by the
employer, furnish a statement showing in detail
11 disbursements made,

(5) Cempensation deposited in respect of a
deceased workman shall, subject to any deduction
made under sub-section (4), be apportioned among
the cependants of the deceased workman or any of
them in such proportion as the Commissioner thinks

fit, or may in the discretion of the Commis the Commissioner,
be allotted to any one dependant.

(6)«:«०००5००६४००००००००००००००००

(7) ० ० «०००००००००००००००००००००

Appeals

“30. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Figh Court
from the following oruers of a Commissioner,
namely-

(a) an order awarding as compensation a lump
sum whether by way of redemption of a
half-monthly payment or otherwise or
disallowing a claim in full or in part
for a lump sum;

faa) an order awarding interest or penalty
under Section 4A;

(b) an order refusing to allow redemption of
a haif-monthiy payment;

(2) an order providing for the distribution
of compensation among the dependants of
a deceased workman, or Gisallowing any
claim of a person alleging himself to be
such dependant;


(6) an order allowing or disallowing any
Claim for the amount cf an indemnity
under the provisions of sub-section (2)
of Section 12; or

fe) an order refusing to register a
memorandum of agreement or registering
the same cr providing for the
registration of the same subject to
conditions:

Proviéed that no appeal eal shall lie against any
order unless a substantial question of law is
involved in the appeal and, in the case of an
order other than an order such as is referred to
in clause (b), unless the amount in Gispute in the
appeal is not less than three hundred kupees:

Provided furtherscesssccecccccceccecccessaces

Provided further that no @ppeal by an
employer under Cl.(a) shall lie unless the
memorandum of appeal is accompanied by a
certificate by the Commissioner to the effect that
the appellant has deposited with him the amount
payable under the order appealed against.”.

Withholding of payments pending appeal

"Z30-A. Where an employer makes an appeal under
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 30, the
Commissioner may, and if so directed by the High
Court shall, pending the decisicn of the
appeal, withhold payment of any sum in deposit
with him.” ५

रचा ७४४७-७७


-

CHAPTER III

Belle Undesicability of leaving the matter of

Selection of the beneficiary and alsc the extent

gf compensation in Fespect cf a victim of a fatal

accident entirely to the unguided discretion of

the Commissioner.- Under the Workmen's

Compensation Act, an obligation is i posed on the
emplicyer to deposit with the Conmissioner
compensation as prescribed by the relevant
provisions, inter alia in respect of an injury
caused by accident to a workman “in the course of
ane arising out of employment” which injury
results in his death. The compensation so
deposited has to be paid to the dependants (as
defined in the Act) of the deceased or any of them
in such proportion as the Commissicner thinks fit
or may, in the discretion of the Commissioner, be
alictted to any one dependant as provided by
section @(5) of the Act. The Legislature has thus
invested the Commissioner with very wide and
unguided discretion, The resultant position is
that the Commissioner in his sole discretion -
(1) may select any one or some ef the
dependants to the exclusion of all
others,

(2). may apportion the compensation in such

o


Cpertiorn as Tay Cetermine amongst
such sf the d 3 he cheeses

te select asi

Commi SSioner

Legislature has not

with any guidelines as to when anc in what

cikcumetances he ay select only one cr x;
the cependants to the exclusion ct the others,

Nor have @°yY guicelines been

what properticn apportic

Such ceing the pe » the

uncontrolled ans avbitrary

i:

eficireries cut of the cefined

Fh
o
5
o
6

selection ७
dependarts ape io make appeorticnment ac he ceems
fit. Tre urfortunate consequence 1s that the
dependants are at the total mercy cf the wisdom of
the Commissioner as regards ‘whe' should Share the
compensation amount and, if sc, ‘to what extent! ,
SE Extent

This gives ri

fo a number of anomalies, groblems
ana complications, Such as;
{1} Tre same Commissicner may adopt

different yardsticks from case to case, His

‘ucce=ser in office May evolve his own

t

criteria, again, frow case ts case.
(2) There weulc be a nurber of

Coumissione

S in every State ang the norms or
criteiia applicd by each Commissioner from
case to case would again differ,

(2) No dependant would know whether he

cr she has any right anda, if so, what is his

1¢



me ean

Ae.

»

ox ner right.

(4) Tre preoe a

very lone tise ane

tctally ain the cark

tail the uLtimate conclusion ct the

(53 Even if, eccarc te the

clrcumstances, ons or more cepencants have a

claim, they would have te resort te
further litigation ky way of an appeel, the
ccst ot whice they can 111 afford; if they
are nok satisficd by the Setermination made

by the Commissicner.

It would, therefcre, appear to be cxtremely unjust
and unfair ६० drive the dependants cf a workman
whe has met with a fatal accident te
cesperation, particularly when they would be
recling under the tragedy of the loss cf the

Cread-winner. Under the circumstances, we are of

the opinion that instcac of deaving the entire

matter ० the absolute, uncontrolls¢, and unguicee

discretion of the Commissioner, it would be more

conducive to justice to icentify the bencficiaries
०. entity ८:

anc dcfine their share in the corpensation payable

fo ther.

3.21.2. The Law Commission cf India, in ics Sixty-

second Report om Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923

ll



we

presented
with this
Connission
reproduced

145५7-

compe
matte

in October 1074, had an occasion to deal
Aspect. The recommendation of the
is contained in paragraph 4:7 which is
below:-

It is plain that distribution of the
nsacicn amongst the cependants is a

r entirely for the determination cf the

Col

ssioner and sub-section (5) furnishes no

guicelines to hir.

some
atten.
the ¢

i

(ii

Eolle

secti

(

im our view, it is desirable to insert

guidelines in this regard, Without
pti to be exhaustive we may state that
cnmissioner should take into acccunt >

(i} nearness of relationship - e.g.,
the dependant being the widow,
child or parent of the deceased;

ii) the means of the Gependant and the
extent of his dependence on the
workman;

1) the desirability of not
distribvting compensation amongst a
very large number of persons,-—
which pry leag to its being
frittered away.

We, therefore, recomsiend that the

ving yrovise should be inserted below

on 8(5) £

“Provided that in exercising his
Giscretion under this Sub-section, the
Commissioner shall have due regard to -

(i) the nearness of relationship of the
cependant to the deceased;

ii) the means of the dependant and the
extent to his dependence on the
Geceased;

the desirability of ensuring that
the amount of compensation is not
distributed amongst an excessively
large number of perscns so as to
lead to its being frittered away;
and

be
me

12

oo ae ee een


5.

{iv) other relevant considerations. * mr

3.1.3. The. recommencation in the

terms made
unimplemented till now.
consideration

enacting gvidelines

net acequately sulve the Froblen.

the guidelines which are in

eriticis levelled

Matter of

beneficiaries ané in the matter of

fo twhon!

nearly 15 years

to this probiem.

snivive
have

choosing or

aforesaid
back has remained
We have accerdeé anxious

It appears that

in the aforesaid terms will

Notwithstanding

general terms, the
in the course of the eariier
inasiwuich as the

wide discretion in the
excluding cne or more

apportionment,

te pay and ‘how much’ will remain within

the Sphere of the discretion £ the Conmissioner,

A more fair and jgst sclution would be to identify

the beneficiaries and define their share in the

foRrpensation. That

immediately,

task

must be addressed

should get the compensation and in

3.1.4. JWhe'

‘what fgroportion?' -

which calls for ‘close and careful
Before approaching

most desirable solution,

This is a

the question as

vexed question
consideration.
regards the

it would be appropriate

to broadly outline the present scheme embodied in

Se tae cat,


3.

section &(5) [relating to apportionment amongst

the dependants at the Giscretioi. of the
Commissioner] read with section 2(2) (d) {which
defines the tern “Gependant"] . The emergent

position is as under:-

The "dependants" have been classified into
three groups -

The first croup consists of widow, minor
legitimate son and unmarried legitimate daughter
or 5 widowed mother. A person falling under this
groun is entitled to receive the share of
compensaticn irrespective of the fact whether he
cr she was actually dependent on the workman at
the time of his death or not. In other words, a
widowed mother, a widow, a minor legitimate son
and an unnarried legitimate daughter would be
entitled to the compensation merely by virtue ‘of
such relationship with the deceased workman, In
their case, actual dependency is not the criteria.

In respect of the persons falling in the
second group, namely, a major son or daughter who
is infirm, he/she must be provec to be wholly
dependent on the deceased workman at the time of
death before he or she can be paid any share in
the compensation of the deceased.

The third group group consists of persons related
to the deceased workman who, before they are held

entitled to a share in the compensation amount,

14


Fer to ate ct nena

~

must be shown to be either wholly or in part
dependent on the earnings of the workman at the
time cf his death.

Ang in case no such dependant exists, the

deposited amount to be returned to the

employer as provided by section @(4) of the Act.
The definition of the term “dependant", it
Oo may be mentioned, does not operate to benefit all
the legal heirs ci ६ deceased workman, It embraces

only those relations who, to some extent, depend '

nm him for their daily necessities. 50 much so

that even some of his dearest and nearest ones,

€eG-, sons who have attained majority, married : i
Ao Garghters and illegitimate daughter, whether

Married or unmarried, are excluded if they are not

dependents on tie worke ‘s earnings, wnolly or in

part, Kinship coupled with dependency, is thus

made the sole criterion for a person to fall

1
within the ambit of the cefinition of “@ependant",

3.1.5. It has to be realised that the Workmen's

Compensation Act is a legislation enacted

substantially by way of a social insurance measure Lo i

in order to insulate from economic distress the

oo

1. B.ti, Rabeebullah y, Periaswamy, AIR 1977
Madras 330.

is



Ye

Maa

cepencant members of the family of the workman who

meets with a fatal accident in the course of वादे

arising out or his yrient. whe basic idea is

to prevent s en econonic dislocation in the wake

cf the icss of the bread-winnér and to ensure
continved fretection of the econonic unbreila
which would have heen extended hac the workman not
lost his life whilst serving his employer. It is
not a payment by way of compensaticun on account of
a torticus act. It is a “fault or no fault"
liability created by the statute in order to
prevent the domestic ship of the workman fron
being scuttled on the sudden demise of the
captain. The point which needs to be emphasised
is that the compensation amount Goes not
constitute a part of the estate of the deceased.

The economic assistance which was hitherto being

extencec by the Ceceased workman to his dependants
would now be extended to them in the form of lump
sum compensaticn to be deposited by the employer.
It is apparently for this reason that 100 311. the
heirs cf the deceased workman are treated as
dependants eligible for payment of compensation
under the present scheme. Those whc were not
dependant on the deceased workman or who were ina

pesiticn to earn for themselves have, therefore,

been excluded from the scheme of compensation.

16

i
'



pu

The as at present is rather complex and

con.plicatec as has ween noticed by the Law
Commission in its 62nd Report in paragraph 2.3.

Besides, the scheme dges not defire the proportion

in which the compensation should be apportioned.

under the circumstances, there is good
justification for recasting the scheme, albeit

adhering te the basic idea of extending the

econonic umbrella to those of the nearest kin of

the deceased workman who were Gependant on the

Geceased vorkman, in preference to those who could

be considered to be capable of earning for

themselves (such as major sons) and those who are

not cependent on the deceased by the nature of

things (such as married daughters) «

3.1.66 Fortunately, such a scheme, which takes
care of the afore-mentioned basic idea, has been
enacted by the Legislature in the Employees'
provident Funds ané Miscellaneous Provisions Act
read with the Employees’ Provident Funds Scheme of
1952. The scheme is comprised in para 2(५)
pertaining to the definition of “family” read with
para 70 as regards the payment of accumulations of
a deceased member . It may be profitably

reproduced:~

१2, (5) "family" means-

(i) ‘in the case of a male

17



"70.
whon

member , his wife, his children
whether married cr unmarried, his
éependent parents and his deceased
son‘s widow and children:

Proviged that if a nember
proves thar his fe has ceased,
under the personal law governing
him or the customary law of the
community to which the spouses
belong, to be entitled to
maintenance, she shall no longer be
deemed to be a part of the member's
family for the purpose of this

scheme, unless the member
subsequently intimates by express
notice in writing to the
Commissioner that she shall

continue to be so regarded; and

(ii) in the case of a female
member, her husband, her chiléren,
whether married or unmarrieé, her
dependent parents, her husband's
dependent parents and her deceased
son's widow and children:

Prcovided that if a member by
notice in writing to the
Cconmissicner expresses her desire
to exclude her Husband from the
family, the husband@ and his
dependent parents shall no longer
be deemed to be a part of ‘the
member's family for the purpose of
this scheme, unless the member
subsecuently cancels in writing any
such notice.

Explanation.- In either of the
above two cases, if the child cf a
member or, as the case may be, the child
of a deceased son of the member has been
adopted by another person and if, under
the personal law of the adopter,
adoption is legally recognized, such a
child shall be considered as excluded
from the family of the member;'.

Accumulations of a deceased member, to
payable.-- On the death of a member

before the amount standing to his credit has
become payable or where the amcunt has become
payable before payment has been made -

18



5.

ड़

{i) iia nomination made by the
henuber in accordance with Para 61
subsists, ह००००३००००००००००००००००००००३४ OF

(ii) If no nomination subsists or 1
if the nomination relates only to a part
of the amoun. Standing to his credit in
the fund; the whole amount or the Part
thereof to which the norination does not 4

relate, as the case may be, shall become

Payable “to the members of his fa family in
equal shares?

Provided that no share shall be
Payable to -

(a) sons who have attained
majoritys

(b) sons of 8 deceased son who
have attained najority;

(०) married daughters whose
husbands are alive:

(d) married daughters of a
deceased son whose husbands
are alive;

if there is any member of the family
other than those specified in Cls.(a),
(b), (०) and (a):

Provided further that the widow or
widows, and the child or-children of a
deceased son hall receive between them
in equal parts only the share which that
son would have received if he had
survived the member, and had not
attained the age of majority at the time
of the member‘s death;

(iii) in any case, to which the
Provisions of 215. (i) an@ {ii) do not
apply the whole amount shall be Payable
to the person legally entitled to it.

Explanation.- For the purpose of this
paragraph बे member's posthumous child, if

born alive, shall be treated in the same way
aS a surviving child born before the member's

death." *
(Emphasis Supplied)



चिट

The statutory beneficiaries in whom the
accumulations vest for ‘eing distributed in equal
shares are the members of the family as defined in
para 2(७) with the rider embodied in the proviso
that no share shall be payable to sons and sons of
a deceased son who have attained Majority and to
married Gaughters, or married Gaughters of a
deceased son whsse husbands are alive. It also
takes care of the situation where the designatéd
members of the family do not exist. In that
event, the amount is payable to the person legally
entitled thereto (meaning thereby heirs under the

ordinary law).

3.1.7. There are very good reasons for recasting
the scheme for payment of compensation under the
Workmen‘s Compensation Act on the model of the
Provident Fund scheme (P.F. scheme, for short) of

compensaticn outlined hereinabove which is more

just, equitable, and beneficial. The reasons are:-

(1) What is considered as a gcod
soluticn to prevent economic dislocation of
the family and for securing socio-economic
justice by the Legislature in the case where
a bread-winner of a family suddenly dies in
the course of service [in cases where there
is no nomination under the Provident Fund Act
ance the Scheme] for protection of the
dependant family members of a deceased
employee can justly be considered as good
enough in regard to the dependant family
members of a workman who meets with a fatal
accident in the course of and arising out of
his employment. Whether sudden death is
matural or accidental, consequences are the

20


An

same.

(2) On an analysis of the P.F. Scheme,
it is evident that care has been taken of the
principle which -i:forms the existing scheme
under the Workmen's Compensation Act, namely,
of extending a protective umbrella to the
dependant family members in preference to
those who are capable of making their own
living and are not dependent on others.

(3) Instead of leaving the matter as to
‘whom? to pay and ‘how much’ to the
Commissioner as per the existing scheme, the
model scheme identifies the beneficiaries and
Gefines the proportion in which compensation
is to be distributed amongst them. In the
said scheme, all dependants are entitled to
share equally.

(4) Care has been taken in the P.F.
scheme to ensure that the widow of a deceased
workman and the minor children of the workmen
are by the very nature of things accorded
preference vis-a-vis the other close
relatives by reason of the fact that the
plight and need of the former is obviously
greater than that of the others.

(5) The P.F. scheme unlike the existing
workmen's compensaticn scheme also takes care
of the situation where the deceased workman
happens to be a female, which aspect has
assumed importance by reason of the fact that
now more and more women are being engaged in
employment.

(6) A widower under the existing
provision has to show that he was wholly or
partly dependant on the workman at the time
of her death before he could claim a share in
the amount of compensation, whereas under the
P.F. scheme he has been equated with a
"widow" and he need not prove actual
dependency.

(7) A widowed daughter-in-law and
children of a pre~deceased son under the
existing scheme must be wholly or partly
dependant on the earnings of the deceased,
whereas in the P.F. scheme actual dependency
is not required to be proved.

(8) As per the existing scheme
dependant parents-in-law of a deceased female

21



wy

workman are not entitlee to compensation.
Under the P.F. scheme they have been made
entitied to a share in compensation,

(9) Under the P.F. scheme the
compensation amount éoes not lapse if the
specified dependants do not exist and is in
such an event inherited by the legal heirs.

The P.F. scheme is thus superior to the existing

scheme under the Workmen's Compensation Act.

3.1.8, In one respect, however, the P.F, scheme
taken as a model needs to be improved upon. While
a major son mignt be excluded on the premise that
he must be considered capable. of earning for
himself so that the minors who are not capable of
looking after themselves are preferred to those

who have attained majority, the case of 3

Physically or mentally handicapped major son or
daughter would deserve a Sympathetic

e@ Commission is, therefore, of
eee iS, therefore, of

consideration.
aoisioeration.

the view that such 3 child should not be excluded,

The scheme which is broposed to be recommended,

therefore, takes care of this aspect,

3.1.9. ‘he Commission accordingly recommends thet
the definition of “dependant” contained in section

2(1) (6) of the workmen's Compensation Act, as also

the scheme of distribution as contained in section

8(5) of the Act, should be deleted and shoula

be replaced ४५ proposed provisions on the

following lines by making suitable amendments:-

22


‘Proposed clause (8) of Sub~section (1) of
section 2 in the light of the recommendations

(4) “depenégant means any cf the following
members of the fanily of a deceased
workman:

(i) in the case of व mele workman,-

his wife, his children whether
married or unmarried, his
dependant ferents and his

deceused son's widow and children,

(ii) in the case of female workman,
her husband, her children whether
married or unmarried, her dependant
parents, her husband's dependant
Parents, and her deceased son's
widow and children,

Explanation.~ In either of the above
two cases, if the chile of the deceased
workman or, as the case may be, the child of
@ deceased son of the workman has validly
been adopted by another person, such child
shall be considered as excluded from being
dependant of the deceased workman,

Proposed Sub-section (5) of Section 8
in the light of the the recommendations
SE SE EE LeCommendations

8. (5) Compensation deposited in respect of a

deceased workman shall be dealt with as under:-

23


(i)

rf the Geceased workman has left

dependants an“ their number is mcre than

one, such compensation shall be

apporticneaG amungst those dependants in

equal shares;

Providec that -

(a) subject to the provisicns of
Explanation II to this clause, ne

share shall be payable to sons who

ay
have attained majority on or before
the death of the deceased workman;

{o) subject aforesaid no share shall
shall be payable to sons of a
deceased son who have attained
mujority on or before the death of

3
an
the deceased workman;

{c) no share shall be payable to
marriea daughters;

(d) no share shall be payable to
married daughters of a deceased
son;

- if there is any dependant cther than those
specified in clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d):

Provided further, that the widow or

widows of a deceased son, and child or

children of a deceased son, shall receive

24



between them in equal parts only the share

te
ह which that son would have received, if he had
Survived the workman and had not attained
Majority on or before the death of the
workman,

(ii) If the deceased workman has left only
one dependant, the whole emount shall be

Payable to that dependant,

a (iii) orn any case to which the Provisions of
clause {i) or clause (ii) do not apply,
the whole amount shall be Payable to the
person who, under the law of succession
applicable to the deceased workman,
would be legally entitled to succeed to

ne the estate of the deceased workman on

intestacy.
Explanation I.- Fer the Purposes of this sub-~
section, a workman's posthumous child, if born

alive, shall be tr ited in the same way 25 a child

born before the workman's death who survives
him,
. Explanation II.- For the Purposes of this sub-

section, a son or dauchter whose capacity to earn

is affected by any physical or mental abnormality
or injury shall be treated in the same way as a
son cr daughter who hag not attained majority and

shall not be excluded under clause (a) or clause

25

1



aa

3.1.10. The Commission is firmly of the view that

ec 2S firmly of the जल that
Upon the Act being amended ip terms of the
recommendations and Broposals made hereinabove a
omnes and propose ee aeteinabove a
scheme for compensation in Eespect of a deceased
जल =for — ee SE 3 deceased
workman which is more Just, fair ang eguitable
will emerge.

3.2, Neec to amend section 2(1)(n) to the extent

that it excludes bersons whose employment is of

casual nature from the purview the Act. The
Provision in so far as material reads thus:-
"2(1)(n) workman" means any person

(other than a person whose cmproyment loyment is of a

casual nature and who is FePsoyed ot Rherwise

than for the p Purposes of the emplo employer's trade

or business) who is =

(i)...

(ii)...', (Emphasis added).
So long as the workman is acting in the course of
his employment, a workman who sustains injury or
the dependants cf a workman who loses his life
stand on the same footing as workmen who are
regularly employed, regardless of the fact that
the employment of the victim of accident was of a
casual nature. Since the Act casts the obligation
to pay compensation tc an injured workman, or the
dependants of a workman who loses his life, in
order to mitigate the economic distress and
economic dislocation visiting the workman or his

family, there is no reason why a workman who has

26

50) ty santana


been employed on @ Casual basis Shculd be denied
compensation, Experience shows that such a
defence is Often taken lightly for the Sake of
form and it results in a Protracted
litigation which the injured cr the dependants Of
@ ceceaseg workman can ill-aftorg, Since the
Provision for compensa tion is one which has been
Made with the objective of imposing an obligation
to cempensate on 98 Person, who Carries on
hazardous business for the Purposes of his profit,
for the sake of Protecting workmen who are obliged
(० secure employment in such a hazardous trade or
business Merely te Carn their bread, it would be
unfair to €xclude workmen who have been © mployed
on a casual basis from the benefits of the
benevolent Act on such a Qround, 1६ May have been
CoOnSidereg 4PPropriate in 1923 when the Act was
framed, But, with the Passage of time, in the
Post-Consti tutional era when the considerations of

SOcial Justice inform the Provisions of the

in Chapter ty Point out the direction in which the
legislation has to take steps in order to conform
te the Conscience of the Constitution, such a
Previsicn excluding the casual workmen has become
inappropriate, it would, therefore, be just and

: पु er person
Proper that the words “othe than @ person whose


employment is of a casual nature and who is

employed otherwise than for the purposes of the

employer's trade or business" in the bracketed
portion of the first paragraph of the definition
of section 2(1)(n) are deleted by amending the

provision.

3.3.1. Need to remove the injustice resulting
from treating uneguals as equals by deleting
Explanation IL to section 4. The compensation

payable to the injured workman or the dependants
of the deceased workman is linked to the monthly
wages drawn by him at the time of the occurrence.
However, Explanation II II to section 4 provides that
wrere the wages of a workman exceed one thousand
rupees, his monthly wages for the purposes of
clauses (a) and (b) shall be ‘deemed' to be one
thousand only. In other words, while a workman
earning monthly wages exceeding Rs.1,000 is
entitled to compensation, the compensation has
been delinked from his wages. For the workman
earning more than Rs.1,000, whatever be the
monthly wages, by a fiction introduced by the
deeming provision contained in the Explanation,
the compensation would be computed as if his
monthly wages is only Rs.1,000. Even if his
Monthly wages is Rs.3,000, he would be paid
compensation as if he was earning only Rs.1,000.

28



Evidently, it is extremely unjust and unfair. A

few facts relating te the historical background of

this provision deserve to be stated. Bcfore 1984,

the Werkmen's Corr ion Act did not provide for
compensation to  werkmen earning more than
Rs.1,000. In other words, thcy were not covered
by the Act at all.

National Commission on Labour, in order

to extend coverage to such workmen also, in
paragraph 13.22 of its report, reccnmended as
unders-

"13.22 The monthly wage limit for

coverage under the Act was raised from
Rs. 400 to Rs.500 by the Amendment Act of

1962. The supervisory staff and others
drawing monthly wages exceeding Rs.500 दाद
employed in mines, ranufacture of

explosives and other similar eperations are
exposcd te the same employment hazards as
those within the monthly wage limit of
Rs.500. We consider that all = workmen
including “Supervi ors employee in the

Gscupations covered under the Act should be
eligible” without any wace limit for
compensation for work-injury."

(Emphasis added)

The Law Commission of India on its part, in
its Sixty~second Report, recommended coverage to
such workmen for the reasons reflécted in para

2.333-

"2.33 The above comments for verbali
improvements (with reference to the category |
of railway servants) have been made on the
assumption that the present separate category
of railway servants is to be retained. It
seems to us, however, that this matter itself
requires serious consideration. ° The present
scheme seems to constitute a discrimination
between railway servants and other workmen

29

रु



similarly placod, A railway servant (if he
satisiics certain conditions mentioned above)
is 06६ subject te a maximum regarding the
wages. Others are 50 subject. This
discrimination is difficult to support in the
face of article 14 cf the Constitution and on
the merits, appears to be unjustified. We
are therefore of the vicw that this
discrimination should be removed and like
railway servants, other employces (if they
satisfy the other conaitions of the
aefinition) alse should be brought within
the Act if they fall within the Second
Schedule irrespective ०६ their wages."
3.3.2. Tt will thus be seer thet the Law
Comrission had sade the point that while railway
employces, regardless of whether their monthly
income was in excess of Rs.1000 or net; would be
entitled to compensation, the workmen in other
employments of a hazardous nature who are covercd
by the Act would not ce so covered. This would
intreduce hostile discrimination which would be
obnoxious tc article 14 of the Constitution of
India. Thus, the Law Commission as also the
Naticnal Commission on Labour recommended coverage
for all workmen who were employed in hazardous
cccupations listcd in Schedule II of the Act. ‘The
recommendation was for extending coverage so as to
enable the injured workmen or dependants of a
deceased workman to clain compensation
irrespective of his monthly income (regardless of
whether he was earning more than Rs.1,000 under

the Act). However, when in 1984, the Act was

amended, whilst accepting the recommendation, a

30


riger, not indicated or mooted eitter by the
National Commission on Labour or by the Law

was addes as is evident from a reading

Commi
of paragraphs 2 ang 3 of the Statement of Objects
ang Reasons, which sre reproduced below:-

"2. The Act at Present applies to
railway servants and persons employed in
certain hazardous employments specified in
Schedule II cf the Act and drawing wages not
exceeding Rs.1000/~ per month, The National
Commissicn on Labour had recommended inter

that the wace limit for coverage under
Act may be removed altogether, the Law
Ssion of India, which had reviewed the
Provisions of the Act, had aiso made a
similar recommendation, It is, therefore, now

Preposec to 6० away with the wage limit” for
Coverage altogether. tt is likely to benefit
a large number of workmen who are at present
drawing wages exceeding Rs.1000/-per month,*

(Emphasis added)

"3. Section 4 of the act Provides for
payment of compensation at the rates
Specified in Schedule Iv of the Act. These
rates of compensation were last revised in
1976 and there is a demand for its upward
revision, Further, the amount of
compensation is at present determined without
reference to the age of the workman. This is
not considered fair, It is, therefore, now
proposed to provide for payment of
compensation in terms of percentage of
monthly wages linked to the age of the
workman at the time of his disablement or
death, The Proposed revised rates of

compensation are based on the rates ‘Specified
in the काठ “Convention Soncerning Minimum
Standards of social Security, except that the
compensation Payable “in Hespect of those
drawing wages exceeding Rs.1000/- per month
is” pro, Proposed to be restricted to the™ amount
Payable on the Wages of Rs.1000/- per month."
(Emphasis added)

3.3.3. It needs to be stressed that the rider to

restrict the amount payable on the fictional basis

31

2 ate ate nana


of Rs.1,006, notwithstanding that the monthly
wages of the workman were in excess of Rs.1,000,
was not referable tc tue recommendation cf the
Labour Commission. Nor was it warranted by the
ILG Convention. The artificial pegging of the
compensation by linking it to the deemed wages of
RS.1,000 regardless of the actual wages being in
excess cf Rs.1000 is Prima facie unjust and
unwarranted. Since the scheme of compensation in
Schedule Iv evidences the formula of applying the
Specified multiple to the monthly wages of a
workman (taking into account his age) it is
difficult to justify the discriminatory treatment
meted out to workmen earning monthly wages in
excess of Rs.1000. In para 3 of Statement of
Cbjects and Reasons extr sted hereinabove, it is
declared in no unclear terms that ..."it is now
Proposec to provide for Payment of compensation in

terms of Bercentage cf monthly Wages...".

Evidently the rationale of the formula is to
compensate the injured workman or the dependants
of the deceased workman for the less of monthly
wages of the injured or deceased workman.
Obviously the loss of monthly wages in respect of
a workman earning Rs.2060 would be twice that in
respect of a workman earning ए5 1000. The family

of the deceased workman who was earning Rs.2000

32


would have to be compensated for a loss of that

inagnitude. The greater the loss the greater is
the need for the conipensation. to make good the

s cf

cannot be

monthly 1 the cor

the same as needed to make good the monthly loss

of Rs.1000. to do so would be to treat two

uneguais as equals. An injured workman earning
Rs.2,000 would get the same compensation as an
injured workman earning Rs.1,000, though, such
workman earning Rs.1,;000 would get twice the
amount of compensation as comparec to the workman
earning Rs.500. Similar will be the fate of
€epencants of deceased workmen. Apart from the
fact that the provision in question would be
exposed to the charge of being violative of
article 14, it is difficult to justify it from the
platform of logic, philosophy, or ethics. This
injustice prejudicially affects thousands of
workmen as the wages have been revised upwards
and very many more workmen are in the Rs.1000 plus
range in view of inflation. There is, therefore,
no escape from the conclusion that Explanation II

to section 4 incorporated by Act 22 of 1984 with

fiction that the compensation should be computed

on the basis that a workman was earning Rs.1,000

even if his earning was in excess of that amount,

must be deleted or repealed.

33



3.4. The desirability of amending section 4 of

the Act in order te make it more just and

equitable to the injured workman or the dependants
of the workman who hes lost his life .- Section 4
(pertaining to the amount cf compensation payable
te the injured workman or the dependants of the
deceased workman engaged in.a hazardous occupation
who loses his life), as originally embodied in the
Act cf 1923, has been substituted by new section 4
which has come into force from 14th May, 1984. By
the newly substituted section 4, the original
scheme for computation of compensation has been
replaced by an altogether new scheme. Clauses (a)
and (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the
Workmen's Compensation Act respectively prescribe
Rs.20,000/-.as the minimum amount to be awarded.to
the dependants of. the deceased workman. .and
Rs.24,000/~ as the minimum amount of compensation
in the case of ‘permanent total. disablement.
This) minimum amount was fixed by virtue of the
Amendment Act of 1984.‘ “The minimum wage payable
to a workman ‘as on :3lst March, ..1984-was: Rs.300/-

है . .
per month. The present:r&te of minimum wages with

1. Notification Nos. F.12¢142):/79=MW/Lab.~ and
F.12(165)/80-MW - of Delhi Administration
published in Delhi Gazette. (Extraordinary)
Part IV, dated February 23, 1982.

34



a

1
cffect from May 1, 1989 is Rs.750/-per month.

In other words, there is 150 per cent. increase in
the minimum wages. As a result cf the revision in
the minimur waocs; there is a need tor revision in
thc minimum amount of compensation payable in

h of a workman or in case of permanent

case cf dc
oy total Gisability. Having regard to the rise in
cost of living and the resultant f2il in the value

of monsy and in view of the upward revisicn cf the

minimum wages by 150%, minimum compensation

ceserves ६० bo revised upwards by substituting the
figurcs Rs.50,000 and Rs.60,000 for the figures

Rs.20,000 and Rs.24,000 respectively.

3.5. Rate of interest payable in case of Gelay or
default on the part of the employer to pay the
amount of compensation. - Section 4A of the Act
enjoins the employer to make payment cf the
compensation payable by the omployer in the event
of the death or disablement of the cmpleyce as
scon as it falls due. The secticn also provides
for payment of interest to the injured workman or
the dependant of the deceased workman, entitled to
the compensation, in case cf default. The

proevisicn in this behalf is embodied in sub-

eee

1. Netification No.F.12(1)/88-MW/Lab. dated
April 28, 1985, issued by the Delhi
Acministration, and Times of India, New
Delhi, dated May 1, 1989.

35

(
i
|



hh

Section (3) of section 4A, which is reproduced
below:-

"Where any employer is in default in

Paying the compensation due uncer this act

within one month from the date it fell due,

the Commissioner may direct that, in addition

to the amount of the arrears, Simple le intercst

at the rate of six Per cent per annum on the

amount due together with, if in the cpinion

of the Commissioner there is no justification

for the delay, a further sum not exceeding

fifty per cent of such amount, be recovered

from the employer by way of Penalty."

(Emphasis added).

It will be Seen that the act Provides for Payment
of interest at 6% on the amount due, This
Provision was introduced by Act 8 of 1959 with
effect from June 1, 1959, The 6S Fate of interest
has now become outdated with the Passage of 30
Years since the Provision was introduced. [Tt is
common knowledge that the rates of interest have
risen Sharply, The Law Commission in its 62nd
Report Presented on 15th October, 1974 had in
Para 3.54 recommended that rate of interest should
be increased from 6 per cent. to 9 per cent, -
which recommendation has not yet been accepted,
We are of the opinion that 15 years having
elapsed, cognisance Should be taken of the
presently Prevailing rates, What is more, the
Central Government itself is obliged to Pay
interest at 15% per annum with effect from 1-10-
1984 on refunds Payable to the assessee in view of

amended section 244 of the Income Tax Act, 1961,

36



The Supreme Court has confirmed the award of
interest at 15% in Renade'ts case. There is,
therefore, a sound basis for recommending an
increase in the rete of interest to dependants of
unfortunate workmen who meet with fatal accidents
whilst working for the benefit of their employers,
Under the circumstances, the provision contained
in sub-section 43) of section 4a Feguires to be

modified ४९ Substizuting the words “simple

interest a the rate of fifteen ber cent."

IS [5

Place of the words “simple interest at the rate

Six per cent."

3.6. Modification of the Provision pertaining to
Making of advances to dependants Sf a deceased

workman.- Under the proviso to sub-section (1) of
section 8, an employer is authorised to make
advances on account of compensation to a dependant
of a deceased workman not exceeding an aggregate
of one hundred rupees, This limit was introduced
in the Act of 1923 more than sixty years back. it
is of little use to make an advance cf a petty sum
of one hundred Eupecs in the context of the Steep
fall in the value of the rupee on account of
inflation in the course of the last six decades.

eee

1. L.I.C. ve G.V. Ranade, 1989 (2) 5८०16
ए-499 (p.505), para 55:

37


An upward revision of the existing upper limit of
Rs.100 is, therefore, cicarly and urgently called
for, Instead of recommending thet advances up to
a higher specified amount may be made by the

employcr to the dependants, it appears to us more

t an amount up to

Sppropriats to recommend ६ i

three month's wages should be bermitted to be

advanced ६८ the gcpendants so that upward revision
a aS aust Upward revision

from time to fime may not be necessitated, It is
absolutely necessary to make such a provision with
urgency, for the plight of the dependants of the
deceased workman can be readily envisioned. They
weuld be in Gire straits and in need of urgent
relief in the wake of the sudden and tragic loss
of the bread-winner, We, therefore, recommend that

secticn 8(1) should be emended accordingly.

3.7.1, Need for Making the provision for Payment

of ?funcral expenses! of the deceased workman more
TO TS SEES. OE Ete deceased workman more

humane.- The existing provision in regard to
Payment of ‘funeral expensis' of the deceased
workman who loses his life in the course of and
arising out of his employment is embodied in sub-
section (4) of section 8. In substance, it
authorizes a payment of up to Rs.50 in connection

with funeral expenses which can be deducted from

the compensation amount depesitec by the employer.

38

आओ


It is evident therefrom that -

(1) there is no obligation ६८ pay any
amount for the funeral expenscs of the
deceased workman;

(2) the maximum amount which can be
paid is Rs.50; and

(3) the cmplcyer has the right to
Gecuct such amount if paid from the
compensation payable to the cependants of the

deceased workman.

3.7.2. Whatever be the merits cf this provision
in the first quarter of the twonticth century when
it was enacted, the need for exhibiting more
ccmpassicn and making it more humane cannot be
disputed in the aying decade of the century.

for the last rites of a workman whe has lost his

life in his employment to a reasonable extent?

For the sakc of maintaining gocc relations with
the workmen, but for whom the employer would not
be able to run his hazardous business, if not in
the name of milk of human kindness, the employer
sur¢ly would not mind bearing such expenses. In
any case the community which takes pride in the
socialist professions inscribed in indelible ink
in the preamble cf its Constituticn, and reflected

in the "Directive Principles of State policy"

39

te (न हक ct,



enshrined in Pars IV of the Constitution, cannot

hesitate te impese such an ebligaticn any longer.

3.7.3. It is accordingly strongly recommended
that by virtue cf a suitable amencment of the
relevant previsicns cf the Act it shcule be
Broviced that the Employer May incur the actual
funcral fxpenses ०६ the deceas workman Subject
to an Upper limit ota Sum Equivalent to two
months! Weges if SC desired Sh may pay tc th

a ec . हि .
Widow or the eldest Major son or, an the absence

I

of eny cf thom, to the nearest kin cE the deceased

workman व sum Sguivalent to two months: weges for
the funeral Expenses Of such workman on the very
° It

0.

Say cf the demise cf the workman concerns

should alse be provided that such

Rayment will be over and above the employer's

iiekility to deposit compensation in accordance

with the cther Previsions cf the Act. And that in

penditurc or

case cf the employer's failure to adept any cf the
two alternative ccurscs, Over and above the
compensation amount, a sum equivalent te two
menths' wages shall be depesitid by the employer
with the Commissioner for being paid to the
dependants legally entitled thereto, And that
such amount shall be recoverable from the employer
undcr the Act in the samc manner as the amcunt of

compensaticn required to be deposited by him,

40

5 कक te ate meta


3.8. Need for amendment of the first Proviso

—— ee Sent of the first

#2 section 30 providing that no appeal shall iie
against an order fer payment cf compensation
unless the amount in dispute ig not less than
three bundred Tupees, - The Legislature has, in
its wisdom, engrafted a rider to the provision
relating to appeals arising out of order for
Payment of compensation having regard to the
pettiness of the amount involved, The concerned
Provision reads thus:-

"30. Appeals.- (1) an appeal shail lie to

the High Court from the following orders of a

Commissioner, namely:

(a) an order awarding as compensation a
lump sum whether by way of
redemption of a half-monthly
payment or otherwise or disallowing
a claim in full or in part for a

lump sum;

(aa) an order awarding interest or
penalty under Sec.4-A;

(b) an order refusing to allow
redemption of a haif-monthly
Payment;

(c) an order Providing for the

distribution of compensation among
the dependants of a deceased
workman, or G@isallowing any claim
of a person alleging himself to be
such dependant;

(8) an order allowing or disallowing
any claim for the amount of an
indemnity under the Provisions of
Sub-section (2) of Sec. 12; or

(e) an order refusing to register a

41


& 5

memorandum of agreement or
registering the same or providing
for the registration of the sane
subject to conditions:

Provided taat no appeal shall lie
against any order unless a substantial
guestion of law is involved in the appeal
and, in the cass of an order other than an
order such as is referred to in cl (b),
uniess the amount in dispute in the appeal is
not less than three hundred rupees;

Provided...;
Provided,...". (Emphasis added
The Legislature had considered it appropriate not
to confer a right of appeal when the sum involved
is less than Rs.300. This provision was made in

1923, Having regard to the fail in the value of

the rupee and the erosion which has taken place in

the wake of the inflation over a period of more

than 50 years, the figure of ks.300 has become

irrelevant and out of tune with the realities,

Under the circumstances, in order that the
provision serves some Purpose, it requires to be
modified by substituting the figure of Rs.3,000 in
place of Rs.300 for two reasons. Firstly, having

regard to the steep rise in the Litigation

expenses, the parties are likely to Spend nearly

the amount involvea (Rs.3,000) in contesting the

litigation. Ultimately, no party will gain from
the transaction, Secondly, the appeal has been
Provided to the High Court and the High Court,

being over-burdened with work, the dispute would

42

न जन ate en



remain in abeyance for very many years. In any
case, in view of the changed circumstances, the

figure of Rs.300 in the first proviso to section

30(1) Geserves to be substituted by the figure of

Rs-3,000 by a suitable amendment.

3.9. Employer's obligation to deposit the Payment

of the amount ordered by the Commissioner in

erder to he entitled to prefer an appeal under

section 30.~ The Legislature has in its wisdom
provided that the deposit of the amount ordered to
be paid by the employer in respect of compensation
payable to the workman or to the dependants of
the deceased workman shall be a condition
precedent for preferring an appeal. A reference
May be made to the third proviso to sub-section
(1) of section 30 which reads thus:-
"provided further that no appeal by an
employer under clause (a) shali lie unless
the memorandum of appeal is accompanied by a
certificate by the Commissioner to the effect
that the appellant has deposited with him the
amount payable under the order appealed
against.".
In the proviso, a reference has been made to an
appeal under clause (a) having regard to the fact
that at that point of time no appeal was provided
against an order awarding interest or penalty

under section 4A. Subsequently, by virtue of

section 15 of Act 8 of 1859, which came into force

43

RA...



with effect from June 1, 1959, sub-clause (aa) has
been added to clause (1) which provides for an
appeal against an order awarding interest or
penalty under section 4A. The resultant position
is that while the emplover would have to deposit
the amount ordered to be paid as compensation for
preferring an appeal under clause (a), he will not
be required to make any such deposit in respect of
an appeal directed against an order awarding
interest or penalty under clause (aa) of section
30(1). The same reasoning will apply pro tanto to
an appeal against an order awarding interest or
penalty. If the employee has to make recourse to
recovery proceedings after a protracted
litigation, it will work great hardship. It is,

therefore, desirable that the third Proviso to

section 30(1) be amended by substituting the words

"Provided further the+ no appeal by an employer

under clause (a) shall lie....” by the words

“proviced |

ci shat no appeal by an employer

under clauses (a) and (aa) shali lie unless,...".

we, therefore, recommend accordingly.

3.10. Withholding of amount awarded to the

workman pending appeal preferred by the employer .-

The concerned provision in section 30A is in these
terms:-
"Z30-A. Withholding of certain payments

pending decision of appeal. - Where an

44


employer makes an appeal under Cl.(a) of sub-
section (1) of Sec.30, the Commissioner may,
and if so directed by the High Court shall,
pending the decision of the appeal, withhold
payment of any svn in deposit with him."
Merely because the employer has preferred an
appeal, it would be unfair to deprive the injured
workman or the dependants of the deceased workman
to avail of the fruits of the litigation. The

power conferred on the Commissioner to withhold

payment upon mere appeal being filed is,

therefore, liable to be used in such a manner that

causes untold hardship to the workman. On the

other hand, the empleyer can always obtain a
suitable order of stay from the High Court
provided the High Court is satisfied that there is
a case for granting stay on such conditions that
the High Court may choose to impose on taking into
account the relevant considerations and the facts
of the case before th. Court. Section 30A has,
therefore. become redundant and serves no useful

purpose. Its existence is liable to result in

injustice whereas its repeal is not liable to

cause any hardship to any party since the High

Court can always pass a suitable order of stay if
it is called for by the circumstances of the

case. Section 30A, therefore, deserves to be

repealed.

45

|
|



3.11. Commissioner to decide the Compensation
Tn काम Seeice the compensation

case within Six months, By the very nature of
things, a case relating to compensation under the
Act requires to be Gisposed of with expedition and
urgency, For, delay in such cases will defeat the
very purpose of the legislation, and offend the
Spirit uncerlving the benevolent Provisions of the

Act. It is, therefore, reconmended that the Act
TR REESE Re E€conmended that the ace

shou " i duci

should be amended by introducing a new Provision

Hequiring the Commissioner to Gispose of the

teguiring the WT SE GESpose of the

matter within six months of its institution as far

aS practicable.

to the

3.12. Need for Consequential uential amendments in

— == consequential न = in

statutes where a reference has been Made ६ he
TOS ee SS EEEEECNCe has been made

’

relevant Provisions of Workmen's Compensation ensation Act
Sane provisions of a LOmpensation

as they exist, in Dangerous Machines (Regulation)
Act of 1983 and in the Scheme framed under the
Personal Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Act of
1263, the Provisions cf the Workmen's Compensation
Act, 1923, have been incorporated by reference in
regard to determination and payment of
compensation, If the recommendations being made
under the present report are accepted and
appropriate amendments are incorporated in the
Workmen's Compensation act as it exists today,
there is a likelihood of a serious complication

arising in the administration of the aforesaid two

46



cv

Acts. For, it would not be clear whether the

reference to the Workmen's Compensation Act should

be treated as the reference to the Act as it then

Stood or to the Act as it is amended from time to

time. The legal position in this respect is
extremely uncertain. Under the circumstances, it
woulda be appropriate to make consequential
amencments in the concerned provisions of the
aforesaid two Acts so as to avoid any confusion in
the administration of these statutes, It will be

necessary to amend sub-section (2) of section 22

of the Dangerous Machines {Regulation) Act of 1983

as also paragraphs 2(h) and 17 of the Scheme

framed under the Personal Injuries (Compensation

Insurance) Act, 1863 by Substituting the words

"Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, as amended from

time to time” in place of the words “Workmen's

Compensation Act, 1923°.

3-13. We are wholly convinced and fully satisfied
that amendments to the relevant provisions of the
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, in the manner
indicated hereinabove will result in ameliorating
the distress of the workmen who sustain injuries
and of the dependants of the workmen who lose
their lives whilst serving their masters, to a
considerable extent, We, therefore, recommend

accordingly with the hope that the meritorious

47



cause of the workers will receive

earliest
attention,
(M.P. THAKKAR)
CHAIRMAN
(९५७, ANJANEYULU) (P.M. BAKSHI)
os MEMBER MEMBER

(G.V.G. KRISHNAMURTY)
MEMBER SECRETARY

NEW DELHI, DATED THE 28TH SEPT., 1989.

48