LAW COMMISSION CF INDIA
i

ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-FIFTH
REPORT

ON

WOMEN IN cusTopy

1989


Tel. No. 384475

LAW COMMISSION

M.P. THAKKAAR GOVERNMENT OF [NDIA
CHAIRMAN SHASTRI BHAVAN

NEW DELHI
9.0. No. 6(3) (10) /68/LC{LS) December 14, 1989.
To

Shri Dinesh Goswami,
Minister of Law and Justice,
“Government of India,

Shastri Bhavan,

New Delhi.

Dear Minister,
Re: Presentation of 135th Report.
The Commission as presently constituted has already

presented two suo motu reports targeted at redressal of
grievances of women viz:

"132nd Report entitled "Need for amendment of the
provisions of Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 in order to ameliorate the hardship and

mitigate the distress of neglected women, children and >

parents”

and

133rd Report entitled “Removal of Discrimination
against women in matters relating to Guardianship and
Custody of Minor Children end Elaboration of the
Welfare Principle".

Presented thereafter was the 134th Report designed to
ameliorate the condition of the workmen sustaining employment
injuries and of the dependants of deceased workmen involved
in fatal accidents in the course of employment entitled:-

"Removing Deficiencies in Certain Provisions of the
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923".

The Report being presented herewith, the 135th Report, is
centred on the problems of the 'Women in Custody’. This
report is the outcome of a reference made to the Commission
by the then Minister cf Law and Justice while forwarding a


copy of the report (in two volumes) of National Expert
Committee on “Women Prisoners" vide his letter dated December
13, 1988.

The Commissicn has suggested the addition of a separate
chapter in the Code of Criminal Procedure incorporating the
safeguards calculated to protect the women in custody being
recommended in the course of the Report so that the Police
and Jail authorities, the women concerned in criminal
matters, as also the activist women's welfare organisations
can inform themselves as regards the safeguards, the former,
to comply with the same, and the latter, to enforce their
compliance. It is hoped that the Recommendations, if and
when accepted, will take adequate care of problems of the
women in custody.

With warm regards,

yours faithfully,

(M.P.THAKKAR)

Encl: 135th Report.


CHAPTER I

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER Iv

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER X

APPENDIX I

APPENDIX II

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION eee

CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE:
PROVISIONS CONCERNED WITH WOMEN
IN CUSTODY - DEFICIENCIES
IDENTIFIED AND RECOMMENDATIONS
FORMULATED eee

INDIAN PENAL CODE: SEXUAL
ABUSE OF WOMEN IN CUSTODY...

THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE,
1908 AND WOMEN IN CUSTODY...

PROBATION OF OFFENDERS
ACT, 1958 eae

MENTAL HEALTH ACT, 1987 ...

OTHER LAWS RELATING TO, WOMEN
IN CUSTODY eee

MOBILE COURTS eee

POSITION REGARDING PRISONS

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

RECOMMENDATIONS IN THE’ FORM
OF DRAFT AMENDMENTS IN
VARIOUS ENACTMENTS eee

LIST OF SOME RECENT RULINGS
CONCERNING PRISONERS one

NOTES AND REFERENCES ane

PAGE

36

41

43

52

60

64

69

71

78

95

98


CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

1.1. Genesis and scope.~ This report is concerned
with certain questions relating to women in

custody and has been prepared in pursuance of a
reference made to the Commission by the Ministry
of Law and Justice.

Minister of Law and Justice has forwarded a
copy of the Report submitted by the National
Expert Committee on Women Prisoners at the behest
of the Minister of State, Department of Youth
Affairs and Sports, Women end Child Development.
The Minister of State has requested the Law
Commission to examine the two issues arising out
of the Report vol.I- one issue relating to Nari
Bandigriha Adalats in the nature of mobile
judicial camps (vide para 478 of the Report vVol.1I)
and the second issue releting to the efficacy and
relevance of various legislations having a bearing
on women's status in custody and criminality (vide
para 480.4 of the Report). The aforesaid
paragraphs, namely, 478 and 480.4 of the Report,
read as under:-

"478. In addition to the separate Women's

Courts or Family Courts, it is recommended

that Nari Bandigriha Adalats be held in the

nature of mobile judicial camps as an
immediate modality for rendering speedy

redress tO women in custody. Whereas the
Family Court or Women's Courts can be the


stable permanent mecharism, the mobile
adalats or court is required as an immediate
as well as instant corrective step. Such
camps and courts should be held urgently and
routinely in social welfare and mental health
custodial institutions also to clear the
backlog of pending cases, and to render
speedy justice. The mobile adalats should be
conducted on a district-wise or cluster basis
so aS to cover all prisons and non-prison
custodial institutions. Its objectives
should be to provide speedy justice.

480.4 A critical assessment of the efficacy
and relevance of various legislations bearing
on women's status in custody and their
criminality should be undertaken by the Law
Commission in consultation with other legal
social science and social defence bodies of
repute and their findings should form the
basis for concrete reform by way of
depenalisation, decriminalisation, de-
institutionalisation, etc.".

1.2. Question for consideration.- The letter of
reference quoted above contemplates the
consideration of two issues, one of which is of a
limited character (mobile courts), while the other
is of a more general nature. The question of
creation of separate court for women under-trial
is one which concerns the organisation of the
courts and administrative matters. The request
made for a critical assessment of various
legislations regarding women in custody and their
criminality would involve an examination of
provisions scattered in several statutes, which
are concerned with women in custody, including
women in institutions dealing with mentally ill

persons. It would seem that examination of these


statutory provisions will involve a study of the
following enactments:~

(a) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in

so far as it contains any provisions

concerned with women in custody.

(b) Indian Penal Code, in so far as it deals
with sexual offences against women in
custody.

{c) The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 -
provisions regarding women in custody.

(€) The Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 in
so far as its provisions are silent as
regards any spec:al consideration to be
given to women first offenders.

(e) Provisions in any other law on a matter
within the Union List or the Concurrent
List, which are especially concerned

with the arrest and detention of women.

1.3. Method adopted.- While we propose to deal in
this report with the questions mentioned above, it
would be convenient to take up first an assessment
of various laws relevant to women in custody and
thereafter to examine the suggestion regarding
creation of mobile courts for rendering speedy

redress to women in custody.


CHAPTER II

CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDUR.
PROVISIONS CONCERNED

OMMENDATIONS FORMULATED

2.1. Safeguards in the Code.- The concern of the
law to prevent harassment and exploitation of
women who have had the misfortune of being sent to
prison for a violation of the law is manifest in
the various provisions that the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 has made in regard to the arrest
and detention of women generally, including, in
particular, women accused of an offence. For
eyample, in regard to the search of women at the
time of arrest, the law has taken care to provide
that it shall not be permissible for a male police
officer to search a woman. Then, if an accused
person, whether male or female, is to be examined
medically, some safeguards have been provided
regarding women. Besides this, of course, the
constitutional and legal safeguards applicable in
the field of personal liberty are as much
available to women, as to others.

However, on examining the various provisions
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, it would
appear that on some matters of detail, there is
scope for further safeguards being introduced in

order to provide adequate protection to such


women. Suggestions in detail in this regard will

be made in the next few paragraphs.

2.2. Section 46, Cxr.P.C. 1973: Arrest.- Our law
provides certain detailed rules as to the mode of
arrest by the police or other persons acting in
aid of law enforcement. Section 46 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 lays down that in
arresting a person, the police officer or other
person making the arrest shall actually touch or
confine the body of the person to be arrested,
unless there be submission to the custody by word
or action. The rest of the section is not
material for the present purpose. Dealing with
this section, the Law Commission, in its Report on
Rape and Allied offences, expressed the view
that a provision should be added to the effect
that in the case of women, their submission to
custody shall be presumed unless proved otherwise,
and that the police officer shovld not actually
touch the person of the woman for making arrest.
The recommendaticn of the Commission in this
regard was to add the following proviso in
section 46(1) of the Code:

"Provided that where a woman is to be
arrested, then, unless the circumstances
indicate to the contrary, her submission to
custody on an oral intimation of arrest shall
be presumed, and unless the circumstances
otherwise require or unless the police

efficer arresting is a female, the police
officer shall not actually touch the person


of the woman for making her arrest."
We are of the view that the above recommendation
should be implemented by enacting a suitable
provision.

2
2036 Time of arrest.- In the same report , the

Law Commission examined the question of the time
of arrest of women and expressed the view that
except in unavoidable circumstances, no woman
should be arrested after sunset and before
sunrise, For this purpose, the Commission
recommended the insertion of a new sub-section in
section 46 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, in the following terms:-

"(4) Except in unavoidable
circumstances, no woman shall be arrested
after sunset and before sunrise, and where
such unavoidable circumstances exist, the
police officer shall, by making a written
report, obtain the prior permission of the
immediate superior officer for effecting such
arrest or, if the case is one of extreme
urgency, he shall, after making the arrest,
forthwith report the matter in writing to his
immediate superior officer, with the reasons
for arrest and the reasons for not’ taking
prior permission as aforesaid".

This recommendation also deserves implementation
without delay, in a suitable manner. We would add
a further provision that the report should be sent
to the competent Magistrate also. Incidentally,
we may mention that a provision of the nature

recommended in the earlier report was proposed in

the Cr.P.C. (Amendment) Bill, 1988, clause 9 (now


lapsed).

2.4. Medical exami atio

Sections 53 and 54

Cr.P.C., 1973.- A number of sections of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 deal with medical
examination of the accused. Such examination (as
contemplated by the Code) is of two types. In the
first place, the Code deals with medical
examination of the accused, in order to secure
evidence of crime. Whether or not the accused
consents to such an examination, it can be
undertaken to secure evidence of crime (section
53). The examination is to be done by a
registered medical practioner at the request: of
the investigating agency. Here, the Code makes a
specific provision, by requiring that in the case
of a female accused, the examination should be

done by a female medical practitioner.

2.5. Section 54, Cr.P.C., 1973,.to be amended .-
There is, however, another type of medical
examination contemplated by the Code, where the
accused himself or herself desires such
examination, in order to prove his or her
innocence {section 54). It is in this context
that the Code needs a small improvement. Where a
female accused desires such an examination in

order to prove her innocence, she can avail

herself of the facility provided in the relevant


provision of the Code. But, at present, the Code
is silent as to how ar a woman can insist that
such examination must be done by a female
registered medical practitioner and with strict
regard to decency. It could not have been the
view of the legislature that such a provision is
not needed. But presumably, the matter seems to
have escaped notice at the time when the provision

was drafted.

2.66 Section 54५ €ए.०9.०:०५ 1973: Medical
examination by a woman doctor.- Our

recommendation is that the Code should be amended,

by providing that whenever the person of a female

is to be examined under section 545५ the
examination shall be made only by or under the
Supervision of a emale registered medical
practitioner, and with strict regard to decency.

It is true that when the accused herself requests
such examination, she will also make it a
condition that the examination shall be by a woman
only. Nevertheless the law should, in our view,

itself provide for this safeguard,

2.7. Us. P. Amendment.- Incidentally, we may also
note that section 54 has been amplified in the
State of Uttar Pradesh by U.P. Act 1, 1984, by

inserting the following paragraph:


"The registered medical practitioner
shall forthwith furnish ६० the arrested
person a copy of the report of such
examination, free of cost".

we recommend that this proposition should be
inserted in the Code. Clause 14 of the Cr.P.C.

(Amendment) Bill, 1988 may be compared.

2.8. Intimation of rights.- We have one more
suggestion to make regarding section 54 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, though the
suggestion is not confined to woman. It is
obvious that a person in custody is in need of
protection of the nature conferred by section 54.
But often, the arrested person does not know his
or her rights in this respect. The Supreme Court
has suggested, inter alia, that the Magistrate
should inform the arrested person about this right
in case that person has any complaint against
torture by the police. Besides this, there is
the important question of the general approach
towards custodial torture. Such torture should
not be approached by the Court in a casual
manner . It appears to be useful to add a
suitable provision on the subject. We recommend
that a provision should be inserted in the Code to
provide as under:
"The . Magistrate shall, whether or not
the arrested person makes a request for

examination of the body under this section,
inform that person about his right to such



examination, in order to bring on record any
facts which may show that an offence against
the body has be 2n committed with respect to

such person after he was arrested".
2.9. Section 160, Code of Criminal Procedure,
i973.~ The Code of Criminal Procedure has a long
Chapter on the investigation of offences. This
Chapter, inter alia, gives various powers to
police officers engaged in investigation. In
general, the police can summon any person believed
to be acquainted with the facts of the case and
such person can be directed to come to the police
station for the purpose. But, in the case of
persons below 15 years, and also in the case of
all woman, it is specifically provided in section
160(1), proviso, of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 that they shall not be called to
“the police station for the above purpose, but they

should be examined in their place of residence.

This is an eminently sound provision, but,
unfortunately, there is no specific sanction
provided in that section for its infringement,

5
We shall revert to this point later.

2.10. Section 160(1), proviso, Cr.P.C. 1973:

Examination at the residence.- At present, the
proviso to section 160(1) reads as under:-
"Provided that no male person under the

age of fifteen years or woman shall be

10


required to attend at any place other than
the place in whica such male person or woman
resides".
Although the intention underlying this proviso
must have been that the persons concerned should
be examined in their house, some ambiguity arises
in this regard, because the expression “place”,
employed in the proviso, is not very precise. As
defined in section 2 of the Code, the word "place"
includes house, building, tent, vehicle and
vessel. Now, this definition is inclusive. It
does not indicate very clearly that in the context
of section 160(1), proviso, the word "place" means
the actual dwelling place of the minor or woman.
It is possible that it may be construed as meaning
the locality of residence over which the police
officer concerned has the jurisdiction. It
appears desirable to avoid such a misconstruction.
It may be stated that the Law Commission, in
its Report on Rape and Allied offences,”
recommended that it should be provided that no
male person under the age of fifteen years or
woman shall be required to attend at any place
other than his or her dwelling place. We are of
the view that this recommendation should also be
carried out, by suitably amending the Code of

Criminal Procedure, 1973.

31


Pell. Section 160(1), CreP.c., 1973: Association
of en social work ‘s.- Apart ६2०५ tne above

amendments, t would be pro ४४ to provide that
when 6 yuuuy possun pelow fiteen years or a woman
is examined by the police during investigation, a
relative or friend of such mele person or woman

sod organisation

or a

interested in women and children's welfare should
be allowed to be present. ‘his point was also
ccnsidered by the Law Commission in its Report on
Rape and Allied offences, hich iavoured an

amonénent of section 160(1), Cr.P.C.; 1973 for the

murpose . In our view, such a range is eminently
Gesirable and we recommend chat the follewing

एल जा tion should be incorpor.:ted in th: Code of

Procedure:

“where investigavion the

nantomen. of a male person onder the age of
fifteen years or of a woman is recorded by a

male police officer. elther as first

tion of an offence or in the course of
en investigation into an offence, a relative
ox driend of such male person or woman, and
also a person authorised ky such organisation
interested in the welfare of women or
children as is 1 cognised in this behalf by

Lug State Government by nctification in the


official gazette, shall be allowed to remain
present throughout the period during which

the statement is being recorded”.

2.12. Viciation of section 160,Cr-P.C, and proposed

«Ca- The question of providing

section 166A,
a penalty for violation of the proviso to section
160(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 was
examined by the Law Commission of India, in its
Report on Rape and Allied offences . The
Commission noted, that merely summoning a person
in viclation of this statutory mandate would
presumably be punishable as wrongful restraint
under section 341, Indian Penal Code, which
provides a maximum penalty of imprisonment up to
one month or fine up to five hundred rupees.
This, in the opinion of the Commission, was not
adequate. Probably, a charge under section 166 of
the Indian हावी) Code {public se_vant disobeying
direetion of law with intent to cause injury to
any person) could be made. But, in the opinion o£
the Commission, it would be better to have an
express provision to cover such a violation, and
the provision could be appropriately placed in the
Chapter of the Indian Penal Code on "Offences by
or against public servants". The recommendation

of the Commission, therefore, was that Section


166A should be inserted in the Penal Code, in the
following terms:
"166A. Whoever, being a public servant-
fa) ‘nowingly disobeys any
direction of the law prohibiting him
from requiring the attendance at any
place of any person for the purpose of
investigation into an offence or other
matter, or
(०) knowingly disobeys any other
direction of the law regulating the
manner in which he shall conduct such
investigation, to the prejudice of any
person,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year or with
fine or with both"
It was also recommended that the proposed offence
should be cognizabie, bailable and triable by any
magistrate.
We are of the view that this recommendation
should be carried out, as a preventive measure
against malpractice or acts of indifference which

May create situations of harassment to women.

2.13. Section 416, Code of Criminal Procedure,

1973: Capital sentence ona pregnant woman.-

Section 416 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,

14


1973 provides that if a woman sentenced to death

is found to be pregnant, the High Court shall

order the execution of the sentence to be
fostponee and sav, if it thinks fit, commute the

sentence to imprisonment for life. We think that
the time has come to make commutation of the
sentence mandatory in such cases and we recommend
that section 416 should be so amended. For this
purpose, for existing section 416 Cr.P.C., the
following section should be substituted:-

"416. Death sentence on pregnant
woman.- If a woman sentenced to death is
found to be pregnant, the High Court shall
commute the sentence to one of imprisonment
for life.".

Our intention is that the commuted sentence should
be subject to further remission in appropriate

9
cases.

2.14. Detention in women's institutions: Section

7A, Cr.P.C.; 1972 (proposed).- in regard to the

detention of a woman after arrest, a matter which

requires consideration is the place where she is

to be detained. This question was also examined
10

by the Law Commission in its Report on Rape and

Allied Offences. The recommendation was that if

there are no suitable arrangements in the locality

for such detention, the women should be sent to an

15


institution established and maintained under the
Women's and Children s Institutions (Licensing)
Act, 1956.

We recommend that such an amendment may be
made in the Code in an appropriate manner subject
to adding a rider to the effect that this should
be done wherever practicable, for such

institutions may not exist in some areas.

2.15. Section 432, Cr.P.C., 1973.- We now come
to the duration of imprisonment with special
reference to a sentence of imprisonment for life.
Ordinarily, imprisonment for life works out to
imprisonment for a particular number of years,
and, until the insertion of section 433A in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (by Act No. 45 of
1678), the matter reiained in the discretion of
the Government under section 432 of the Code.
Section 432 empowers the appropriate Government,
inter alia, to suspend or remit sentences,
conditionally or otherwise. Of course, remission:
cannot be claimed as a matter of legai right.
But, in practice, the net effect of remissions
granted by the State Government was such that life
imprisonment came to be reduced to about 10 to 12
years imprisonment. The position was
substantially changed when in 1978, section 433A

found its way into the Code.

16


2:16, Section 433A, Cr.P.C.- Besides section
43>, section 433 of tk Code of Criminal Procedure
1873, provides that, without the consent of the
person sentenced, the appropriate Government may
commmute certain sentences, This power includes:
(a) commutation of sentence of death
for any other punishment provided by the
Penal Code, and also
(b) commutation of a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 14
years or fine. Here again, a convict cannot
demand to be released after 14 years, where
he had been sentenced for imprisonment for
life; a specific order under section 433A is
necessary. पट
But the power has now been expressly made subject
to section 433A of tne Code (inserted in 1978)
which reads as under:- हैं
"433A. Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 432, where a sentence of imprisonment
for life is imposed on conviction of a person
for an offence for which death is one of the
punishments provided by law, or where a
sentence of death imposed on a person has
been commuted under section 433 into one of
imprisonment for life, such person shall not

be released from prison unless he has’ served

17


at least fourteen years of imprisonment".

217. Position of women prisonsrs.- We are

referring to these provisions of the Code in order
co enable us to discuss certain questions
concerning women prisoners. In the case of a
woman prisoner, sentenced to imprisonment for life
(and therefore subjected to the stringent
provisions of section 433A of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1573), is it proper that the law should
insist on the prisoner's undergoing minimum 14
years of imprisonment mandatorily laid down in
section 433A? The non-osbstante clause in section
433A makes it clear that such minimum imprisonment
operates, notwithstanding the power of the
appropriate Government tc suspend and remit the
sentence, We are not, at the moment, concerned
w.th the constitution.i validity of this section,
which has been upheld. Our arxiety is about the
likely effect of this drastic provision on women
prisoners. It appears to us that there will be
many cases in which the categorical application of
this section to women prisoners must cause grave
hardship ~ for example, where the woman's husband
dies suddenly while she is in jail, or where a
young daughter of the woman is now nearing
puberty. A study of the law reports will show

14
that in many cases , the courts have considered

18


it proper to recommend to Government that a
sentence of life imprisonment passed for murder

should be replaced by i lesser sentence.

2.18. P nsideration.~ The point to be

considered is whether women should not be exempted
from the bar imposed by section 433A. we think
that such a step is required in the interests of
justice and can be safely taken without any great
risk to security. Removal of the bar would not
mean that women sentenced to imprisonment for life
will automatically be released at the expiry of 14
yearS or any other period. It would only mean
that the power of the appropriate Government to
grant remission, on the merits, under section 432
or section 433 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
would become exercisable. The appropriate
Gevernment would thr. be free to go into the
circumstances of each case. We find that section

433A nas been heid not to apply to persons

15
convicted under the Borstal Schools Act . In our

view, the same approach should be adopted in
regard to women, particularly because, for women,
prolonged imprisonment may not only affect their
mental health, but may also prejudice the welfare
of the other members of the family.

16
We may mention that in Maru Ram's case , the

19


Supreme Court expressed some uneasiness about the

rigid approach reflected in section 433A.

2.19. Recommendations as to section 433A, Cr.

(Propos

recommendation, therefore, would be that from the
scope of section 433A of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, there should be excluded the case
where the person on_ whom a sentence of
imprisonment for life is imposed, or in respect of
whom a sentence of death has been commuted into a

sentence of imprisonment for life, is a woman.

2.20. Reduction of life imprisonment~ section 432
Cr-PeC.3 A case from Allahabad.- Although the
present Report is not directly concerned with the
Government's powers to remit punishment as such,
it is worthwhile noting the facts of a recent
Allahabad judgment, because those facts illustrate

how situations acise when the sentence of life

imprisonment (which is the least severe sentence
for murder) may still prove to be too severe on
the facts of a particular case. In the Allahabad
case, a mother had committed murder of her
infant son and then herself attempted to commit
suicide, She was aged only 17 years at the time

of the offence. There was no apparent motive for

the murder, which was committed in rage. AS a

20


result of her act, she had 10: only lost her son,
but she had also lost the sympathy of her husband,
wh: refused to keep k.r in his house after this
tragic incident. The High Court, while awarding
the sentence of life imprisonment to the woman,
made observations to the effect that the case was
one in which a part of the sentence of
imprisonment should be reduced by the State
Government under section 432 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1373. This is only one sample
case, illustrating the proposition that, in
particular cirumstances, even life imprisonment
may turn out to be too severe a sentence for
murder. If so, section 433A of the Code needs

18
revision .

2.21 Grant of bail to women: section 437,
Cr Some que~tions relating to bail also

fail to be considered. At present, the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, when dealing with the
question of bail, does take into account the fact
that women deserve special consideration. while
directing the court not to release a person on
bail where he is accused of an offence punishable
with death or with imprisonment for life, the Code
{in section 437({1)] takes care to provide that
this prohibition shall not apply where the accused

is a woman (there are other exceptions, which are

21


19
not material for the present purpose) ° In

general, the courts have taken due note of this
provision and women are not ordinarily denied
bail, even if the offence committed is a serious
one. Nevertheless, the absence of a more specific
provision emphasising the duty of the court to
take into account the fact that the accused is ‘a
woman, can be regarded as a lacuna in the present
law. We are of the opinion that the time has come
to emphasise this aspect, and that it is desirable
to amend the relevant section of the Code of

Criminal Procedure for the purpose.

2.22. Present section.- At present, section 437(1)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 reads as
under:

"437.(1) When. any person accused of, or
suspected of, the commission of any  non-
bailable offen. 2 is arrested or detained
without warrant by an officer in charge of a
police station or appears or is brought
before <2 Court other than the High Court or
Court cf Session, he may be released on bail,
but -

(i) such person shall not be so
released if there appear reasonable
grounds for believing that he has been
guilty of an offence punishable with
death or imprisonment for life;

(ii) such person shall not be so
released if such offence is a cognizable
offence and he had been previously
convicted of an offence punishable with
death, imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for seven years or more, or
he had been previously convicted on two
or more occasions of a non-bailable and
cognizable offence:

22


2.23.

the

Provided that the Court may direct that

tc in clause (i) or clause

a person refe
(ii) be released on bail if such person is
under the age of sixteen years or is a woman
or is sick or infirm;

Provided further that the Court may also
direct that a person referred to in clause
(11) be released on bail if it is satisfied
that it is just and proper so to do for any
other special reason:

Provided also that the mere fact that an
accused person may be required for being
identified by witnesses during investigation
shall not be sufficient ground for refusing
to grant bail if h is otherwise entitled to
be released on bail and gives an undertaking
that ke shall comply with such directions as

may be given by the Court."

Recommendéation.~ Our recommendation is that

first proviso to section 437(1} of the Code

shouldG ke revised as under:

“provided that where the person referred
to in clause (i) or clause (11) is under the
age of sixteen years or is a woman or is sick
or infirm, the court shall direct that such

person be released on bail, unless the

23


court, for reasons to be recorded. considers

“it proper net to release such person on

bail".
2.24 Preqnant woman: suspension of sentence
imprisonment. (proposed section 4506.

While all necessary steps should be

taken to ensure that women in custody are looked
after properly, it also appears desirable ६० think
of certain protective measures as regards pregnant
women, We are of the view that the convicting
court should have a power to suspend the exccution
of any sentence of imprisonment that might have
been passed on a pregnant woman. At present; the
criminal law of the country cives no such
discretion to the court; and we regard this as a
Lacuna in our precedural law. The peculiar needs
of a pregnant woman ought to be taken into
consideration hy the trial court; and the law
should contain a provision, vesting in the court a
discretion to suspend erecuticen of the sentence of
imprisonment (whether it be for life or for a
specificd tern), subject te certain safeguards,
where the person sentenced is a pregnant wornan.

fn brief, our proposal is that at the time of

pessing a sentence of imprisonment fer life or

isonment for a specified term, the court

shenid have power, if the woman sentenced is

ND
i


pregnant, to direct suspension cf execution of
sentence, having recard to-.certain considerations.
the suspension would be operative till the
pregnancy comes to an cnd and -such period
thereafter as the court may specify. During such
period the woman sentenced will be recuired under
a bond to keep peace and be of goo behaviour and
(if the court sc directs) to observe such other
conditions as may be specified. We are also
making previsions as to details of the precedure
to be adopted, for asking or compelling the woman
to surrender. The perioc of suspension of
sentence will not result in the reduction of the

sentence of imprisonment as imposed by the Court.

2«-23« Treatment ox female priscners.~ Apart

from the aendments which we have so far
recommended regarding the procedure to be adopted
in dealing with women in custody at the stage of
arrest, investigation, inquiry and trial, it is,
in orr opinion, also necessary that the sentence
of imprisonment (where such a sentence is imposed
by the court on a woman) shall be carried cut in
the proper spirit. Imprisonment, no doubt,
imposes restrictions on the liberty of the person
sentenced thereto; but it docs not permit cruelty,

harassment, exploitation or other maltreatment of

@ person in prison, nor docs it allow an attitude

25


ef lethargy cr indifference cowards the prisoner.
Even as icgards the restriction of Liberty, a

apeisonment Goes pot justify undue,

w

sentence

unusual, excessive or improper restrxint to the
prisoner. Th stating this jreposition we may be
stating what is obvious or well known, bet there
are occasions when even that which is well known
may have to be given a statutory shape in the
interest of uniformity and certainty, and in order
to make the law on the particular subject

comprehensive.

2,26. Specific proposals regarding female
prisoners: power to be given to High Court.~

Approaching the matter £rom the above angle, we
propose che insertion in the Code of Criminal
Precedure of certain specifie provisions as to
female prisoners. Gur scheme contemplates that
the Nigh Court be vested with the power tc ensure
that the safeguards to be so inserted are complicd
with, and wo regard this provision. as a key
provision which will guide and control the working
of all the remaining safeguards that we recomnmend
in this behalf.

Accordingly, cur first recommendation in this
reyard is that the High Court on the
administrative ‘side should be vested with a power

to direct the Sessions Judges to satisfy

26


themselves that female prisoners are protected and
properly lcoked after in accordance with the
various provisions that we are going to

nCNG ५ Further, the High Court should have

reco)
power to take such measures as may be desirable in
order to move the State Government to take
necessary action (for ensuring compliance with

those provisions).

2.276 Medical examination.~ As regards the

specific safeguards, we propose that a female

on admissien to jail should be medically

ut

risone
examined by a lady medical officer and, wherever
éeened necessary for medical reasons, she should
be kept separately in a female enclosure for such
per'cd as in the opini i of the medical officer
may be necessary. Medical examination of female
prisoners should aiso be made on readmission to
the jail after release for a specific purpose.

While this provision will apply tc overy
female prisoner, some specific provision should be
needed in the case of a female prisoner who is
pregnant. Cur proposal in this regard are as
under:

(i) If the officer incharge of the
medical officer suspects that a fomale
prisoner is pregnant, the female prisoncr

shall be sent to the District hospital for
detailed examination and report.

27


(ii) Th- Lady Medical Officer of
i pistrict Government Yospital to whom the
female prisoner has been referred shall
certify the state of her health, pregnancy,
duration of pregnancy and probable date of
delivery and the special dict, if any, to be
prescribed and other measures to be adopted.

(iii) Gynaecological examination of
the ‘female prisoner shall thereafter be
performed in the bistrict Government Hospital
by a lady medical officer and proper pre~
natal and ante-natal care shall be provided
to the female prisoner; according to medical
advice.

{iv) In cases of advanced stage of
pregnancy, the famale prisoner shall be
shifted to a female ward of the Government
Hospital.

{v} Such a pregnant ferale prisoncr
shall be kert in the’ woman's ward of he
Governmeni: Hospital for not less than fifteen
days after the birth of a child or for such
longer reriod as may be advised by the
Gynaccolcgist.

2.2 fransit of fenale prisoners. Certain

safeguards also appear to be desirable as regards

the transit of Eusale prisoners. Such transit may

be ~
(a) from one jail to ancther, or

(b) for being taken to the court, or
पर

(2) for investigation.
Our recorimendations on the subject are as under:

(1) A female prisoner shall not be
handcuffed बा shall not be required to wear
any fetters or cross-bars during such
transit.

(2) A female prisoner shall be escorted
by the Matron or Female Warden, if required
to leave the female enclosure and such matron
or female warden shall remain with the

nh
oO


prisoner till her return to the enclosure or
release from the jail.

(3) A female relative of the female
prisoner shall be allowed to accompany the
femaic prisoner during transit of the nature
mentioned above.

2.26. Place of betention.~ Tt will be convenient
to include, as a part of the provisions relating
to female prionsers, the new provision regarding
the place of detention of women, to which we have
already made a reference, this being a
recommendation of the Law Commission in its Report
on Rape etc. which, in our view, deserves to be
implemented.

The sist of the proposal is that where there
are no suitable arrangements in the locality for
the aetention of a woman, the woman shall be sent
to an institut.on maintained under the Woman and
Children's institutions (wicensing}) Act, 1656 or
an institution recognised for the purpose by the

State Government.

2.30. Inspection of jails.~ it is common

experience that bare Legislative provisions stand
the risk of non-implementation unless proper
machinery is devised tc oversee their enforcement.
AS a part of such machinery, we recommend the
inspection of jails by a judicial cfficer,

preferably a lady officer (where one is

no
9


available}, to be noninatea by the Sessiens Judge

or, where a Lady udiciai Officer is not
available, a male Judicial Officer accompanied by
6. Lady social worker. At places other than. the

Headguarters of che Court of Session, they will,

at least once in every two months, make a surprise

visit to jails for inspection, with a view to:

{i) providing the arrested femaies an
opportunity tc communicate their grievances;

(iiy ascertaining the conditions in the
jails and verifying whether the recguisite
facilities are being provided ana the
peovisions of tne law {relgting to female
prisoner) being. observed;

(iii) bringing to the notice of the

Sessions Judge lapses, if any, on Lhe part of

e of jails in regard to

female prisoners.
At the Headquarters of the Court of ‘Session, the
Sessions Judge shall carry out similar inspections
cf the jails. ,

The Sessicns Judge shali forward copies of

the inspection reports to the Commissioners of

(or other corresponding officer), the
Inspector-General (Prisons) and the State
Government, and may make such recommendations as
may be required on the facts and in the

citcumstances of the case.

36


If the euthorities fail to carry out the

the Sessions Judge, the matter

shall be brought to the notice of the High Court.

2.31. Gail visitors.- Apart from surprise visits
by judicial officers as sbove, it is desirable
that at stated intervals visitors appointed by
Government also visit the jails. In this regard
our recommendaticns are as under:-

(1) The Central Government cr the State
Government (as the case nay be) should, for
every District or jail, appoint not less than
three visitors for the purpose. Of these at
least one shall be a medical officer and two
shall be social workers, of whom at least one
shall be a woman, whcrever practicable.

(2) Not loss than two visitors (out of
whom at least one shall:be a lady social
worker) should, once ‘in every six months,

make a soint inspection of every part of “the

jail in the District in-respect of ‘which they
have been appointed: Their function will be
to ascertain the conditions prevailing
therein and. to check if the fequisite
facilities are being: provided - and the
provisions of the law are being complicd with

and the directions given by the’ competent

31


court are being carried ovt, regarding woman
prisoners

(3) The visitors shall send the
inspection report to the Sessions Judge for

further action,

2.32. Scope of the provisions regarding female
prisoners: Definition.- These provisions are
meant to apply to every “female prisoner“ - an

expression which is proposed to be defined as
meaning a woman detained in jaii, whether during
investigation, inquiry or trial or after
conviction or under a law providing for preventive
“detention. For this purpose, *Jail” will include
a police lock-up, a prison and a place where
persons are kept under detention under a law

providing for preventive detention.

2.33. Role of courts in regard to prisoners.- it

would be appropriate to make a few observations as
to why, in our proposals, the Sessions Judges and
the High Courts have been invested with certain
important functions connected with the protection
of women in prison. The adminigtration of justice
in a civilised society (we are concerned here
mainly with criminal justice) is a process which
does not begin or end with the criminal

prosecuticn. Its roots Lie much carlicr, and its

32


consequences extend far beyond the court room.
The criminal justice system, viewed properly,
begins with the formulation of a penal statute,
whether it be the Penal Code representing the
general criminal law. or a special or local law
concerned with this or that segment of social
regulation. Enforcement of the legislation so
enacted is undertaken by the police and other law
enforcement agencies, who must act in aid of the
criminal statute, but in conformity “with the
procedure laid down by law. If a prima facie case
of the violation of a penal statute is found, the
matter proceeds to court and comes within the
direct cognisance of the judiciary. Sentencing,
and alternatives to sentencing, loom large only at
the end of the trial. What happens after
sentencing really carries out the objective
underlying the criminal law, though it is
chronologically remote from the trial and much
ence is pronouns ¢. it ois
only because the court has passed a sentence or
ordained any other alternative for the particular
offender that the apparatus of corrections comes
into operation. The court, in its turn,
administers justice by applying and interpreting
the criminal law. The whole is, thus, an

integrated process, though the thread that runs

33


through the entire process is not immediately
perceived by those who see its working only at one
of the levels.

It also bears mention that during recent
years, the ccuvts exercising writ jurisdiction
have increasingly come to be concerned with what
is sometimes called “prison justice". This
Jjurisdiction they exercise usually to enforce
fundamental rights, the most important jbeing the
right guaranteed , by article 21 of the
Constitution. This article guarantees to every
person the right to life and personal libertry, of
which that person must not be deprived “except
according to procedure established by law".
Unfolding the various implications of this
article, and elaborating the quality of the
"procedure" that must be observed before depriving
ay person of per onal liberty, the higher
judiciary in India has discharged the
responsibility orf enunciating various ‘safeguards
which must be complied with. Many of the judicial
decisions on the subject deal with prisoners. In
this manner, courts, which are most eminently
qualified to deal with matters of procedure, have
provided guidelines to law enforcement officials,
as well as to those concerneé with prisons, in

regard to the treatment of prisoners and connected

34


matters, This not only carries out the
constitutional mandate which is obvious but it
also unfolds the nuances of procedure -- an aspect
which is worth pointirj out. 17 this manner, the
nexus between procedure and prisons is made more
and more concrete by judicial decisions. Some of
the important decisions in this area have been
listed in Appendix II. A perusal of these
pronouncements will show that the developments in
this sphere have been intensive and extensive.

We believe that the proposals which we have
made in this report regarding women prisoners,
wherein the primary responsibility is pléced on
the shoulders of the judiciary, would be regarded
as furthering and promoting the approach manifest
in the judicial pronouncements on the subject,
which deal with the treatment to be accorded to
prisoners in the light of the constitutional
requirement of ‘procedure established by law" and
show the essential nexus between courts and

prisons.

35


INDIAN SEXUAL ABUSE
IN CUSTODY
3.1. Sexual abuse and the Indian Penal Code.- We

new turn to tke provisions of the Indian Penal
Code which contain the general substantive
criminal law of India. It is needless to mention
that most of its provisions as to offences against
the human body - to the extent to which these
provisions can ke availed of by persons in custody
- are applicable to all victims, irrespective of
Sex. But the sexual abuse of women has received
specific attention in several sections of the
Code, The most frequently invoked sections of the
Code in this context are section 354 (indecent
assault on women), sections 375-376 (rape) and
sections 3768, 376C, 376D. Some of these will be

referred to in chis Chapter.

3626 custcjial rape.~ One cin note, at the
outset, the special safeguards provided by the law
to prevent harassment, exploitation and | sexual
abuse of women. In regard to the substantive law,
two changes mede in the provisions of the Indian
penal Code relating to rape and allied offences
must be noted at this stage. The Criminal Law
Amendment Act (43 of 1983), focussing its

attention on custodial rape, has, in the first

36


place, made the punishment for such rape more
stringent. For this purpose, section 376 (2) of
th: Code, as insertec in 1983, deals specifically
with rape by a police officer in certain
circumstances. (including rape of a woman in his
custody), rave committed by a public servant on a
woman in his custody as such public servant, rape
by a person who is on the management or staff of a
jail remand home or other place of custody उऊर of
a women's or children's institution, when the rape
is committed in respect of an inmate of such jail,
etc., and rape by a person who is on the
management or staff of a hospital, when the rape
is committed on a woman in that hospital. For
such custodial rape, the minimum punishment laid
down in section 376 (2) is rigcrous imprisonment
up to ten years, which is higher than the minimum
punishment of seven ,ears imprisonment prescribed
for an ordinary case of rape. Of course, in both
the cases, the imprisonment can be for life,

The legally prescribed minimum can be relaxed
by the court for adequate and special reasons, to
be recorded in writing. "Hospital", as defined
in the Code includes, inter alia, an institution
for the reception and treatment cof persons

reguviring medical attention or rehabilitation.

37


3.3. Custodial Sexual abuse.- The second
important amendment made in the Penal Code in 19€3
{so far as is material for the present purpose)
was the insertion of sections 3768, 276C and 376D
to deal with custodial sexual aiuse, not amounting
to rape. These sections (omitting certain
definitions yjiven in sections 376C ard 376D) are

quoted below:~

३375-29. Intercouse by public servant
with woman in his custody.- Whoever, being a
public servant, takes advantage of his
official sosition and induces or seduces, any
woman, whs> is in his custody as such public
servant or in the custody of a public servant
subordinate to him, to have sexual

intercourse with him, such sexual

intercourse, not amounting to the offence of

क्र

shall be punished with imprisonment of

either description for a term which may
evtend te St ears and shall also be liable
to fine.

376-C. Intercourse by Superintendent of

jail, xcemand home etc.-~ Whoever, being the

superintendent. or manager of jail, remand
home or cther place of custody established
by or under any law for the time being in
force or of a women's or children's

institutions takes advantage of his official

38


position and induces or seduces any female
inmate of such jail, remand home, place or
institution to have sexual intercourse with

him, such sexual intercourse not amounting te

shall be punished with

ie Offs

«

imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years and shall also

be liable to fine.

376D. Intercourse by any member of the
a

management or staff of a hospital with any
woman in that hospital.- Whoever, being on

the management of a hospital or being on the
staff of a hospital takes advantage of his
position and has sexual intercourse with any
woman in that hospital, such sexual
intercourse, mot amounting to the offence of
rape, shali be punished with imprisonment of
either descript on for a tern which may
extend ६० five years and shall also be liable

to fine."

3.4. Present position adequate.- It will be noted
that the punishment prescribed for offences under
sections 376B, 376C and ३760, IPC is imprisonment
up to five years and fine. offences which
technically do not amount to rape, or cannot be
proved to have satisfied all the legal requisites

of rape, are taken care of, by these three


sections. The offences are cognisable;

speci

but no arr is to be made without 8 warrant or

without an order o a Magistrate All the

offences are bailable and can be tried by the

Court of Session only. So far as we can see,

these sections have net raised

y problems in
practice so far.

ft may also be repeated that section 376 of
the Indian Penal Code (the main section relating
to rape) itself has been now amended to provide
winimum punishment for custodial rape.

It appears to us that the present provisions
cf the Penal Code designed to deter potential
offenders from committing rape or cognate offences
including subtler forms of seduction or
harassment. are fairly adequate so far as woman in
custody are concerned, In the absence of serious
practical difficulti.s brought to our notice, we
ao not consider it necessary to recommend any

change in these provisions,


CHAP

CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE

4.1. Arrest under the Code.~ In order to complete
cur coverage of nrocedvral laws, we may deal, in

brief, with the Code of Civil Procedure. So far
as we can see, a person can be arrested under that
Code, either (i) when he is a witness who does not
appear in obedience to a summcns issued by the
civil court, cr (ii) is a person in respect of
whom arrest before judgment may become necessary”
because of certain improper conduct on his part
during the pendency of the litigation or (iii) if,
after the passing of a decree against him, he
fails to satisfy the decree, and the decree is of
such a nature that a warrant of arrest can be
issued against him in execution.

4.2. Arrest of women utherwise than in execution.-
Cases cf women witnesses being arrested for
failure to obey the summons can arise in theory,
but, in practice, they are hardly known. The same
applies to cases of arrest before judgment. Hence

4

the first two situations mentioned above possess

no importance in regard to women.

4.3. Arrest in execution.- As regards arrest of
the judgment debtor in execution of a decree,

section 56 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908

41


categorically prohibits the arrest cf a woman in
execution of a decree for money. Theoretically,
wiere the decree is .ot for money, an arrest in
execution is permissible, even if the woman is the
judgment debtor. But such cases are extremely

infrequent

4.4, The resultant position is that arrest of
women in civil process does not seem to present
any practical problems of a serious magnitude
which need attention from the point of view of law

retorm.

42


CHAPTER V

PROPATION OF OFFENDERS ACT, 1958.

5.1. The obation of Offenders Act, 1958.- The

commission would also like to make a few
suggestions as to the release of women on
probation. For the present purposes, it is enough
to describe, in brief, the scheme of the principal
provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act,
1958, which is in force in most parts of India
exceptirg certain areas where release ०1 probation
is governed by section 360 of the code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 or by a local Act (as in U.P).
The Central Act of 1958 reflects the increasing
emphasis on the reformation and rehabilitation of
offenders as useful and self-reliant members of
scciety, without subjecting them to the
de.eterious effects cf jail life, The Act
contemplates release of an Jffender without
sentencing him. The release is of two types.
There may he release of the offerder after

"admonition”™ (section 3) or - which is more

freyuent - there may be release of the offender

on probetion of good conduct (section 4).

5.2. Section 3: release on admonition.- Under

section 3 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958,

when any person is found guilty of having

43


committed an offence punishable under sections
379, 380, 381, 404 67 420 of the Indian Penal Code
or any offence punisrable with impr‘sonment’ for
not more than two years or with fine or with both
under the incian senai Code or any other law and
no previous conviction is preved against the
offender, the Court may release him after due
admenition having regard to the circumstances of
the case, including the nature of the offence and
the character of the offender. . The offences
mentioned in this section cover theft and some of
its aggravations, criminal misappropriation of
property anc cheating committed in order to induce
delivery of property, etc, There is no
restriction as to age or sex of the offender; but
the offence must be of the specified category. It
would be seen that the range of the section is

feiriy narrow as regai.s the offences covered.

on prebation of good

is conferred by section 4
of the Procation of Offenders Act, 1958. Section
4 confers on the court power to release an

effender on probation of agood conduct, if such

found guilty of an offence "not

person
punishable with death or imprisonment for life",
and if the convicting court is of opinion that,

having regard to the circumstances of the case,

44


including the nature of the offence and the
character of the offender, it is expedient to
release him on prob -ion of good conduct. The
release is to be ordered on the offender entering
into a bond, with or without sureties, to appear
and receive sentence when called upon during such
period, not exceeding three years, as the court
may direct, and, in the meantime, to keep the
peace and be of gocd behaviour. The offender must
have a fixed place of abode within the
jurisdicticn of the court, or he must have such a
place cf sbode or place of regular occupation in
which he is likely to live during the. period of
the bond. Before making such order, the court is
to take into consideration the report, if any, of
the probation officer concerned, in relation to
the case. The release order may be accompanied,
if the Court so decides, by a supervision order.
In such a vase, the offender remains under the
supervision of a probation officer named in the

a

order. the period cf supervision is to be
There is no restriction as to age or
sex of the offender in this section also,

provided the other conditions of the section are

satisfied. The offence must not be punishable


really intended to mean “not punishable with death
or with imprisonment for life". In other words,
the section excludes not = only (i) capital

offences, but also (ii) offences for which the

punishment, or one the punishments provided, is

imprisonment for lif

5.4. Section €- offenders under 21 years of age.~

The power of the Court te release an offender on
admonition or probation. as formulated in sections
3 and 4 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958,
i
is discretionary. But that Act, by section 6,
contemplates that in the case of young offenders,
that power must be exercised ordinarily, unless
the Court convicting the offender is satisfied
that having regard to the circumstances of the
case, including the nature of the offence and the
character of the offender, it would not be
desirable to deal wath him under section 3 or
section 4, and if the Court pass7s any sentence of

imprisonment on the offender, it shall record its

reasons for dcing so.

5.5 Sections 21 and 22: JGuvenile Justice Act,

1986.- Section 6, Probation of cCffenders Act,
2

s'mmarised ebove must now be read with the
provisions of the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986.
Under section 21 of that Act, the juvenile court

is authorised (i) “to allow the juvenile to go

46


home after advice or probation” or (ii) to direct
that the juvenile be sent to a cpecial home for a
specified period, Imprisonment in the traditional
sense is out of question for a juvenile offender

juvenile court under the

wc ig tr
guvenile Justice Act, 19¢6. Section 22 of the Act
makes a specific provision in this regard, in sub-
section (1), quoted below:

" (1) Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in any other law for the
time. being in force, no Gelinguent juvenile
shall be sentenced to death or imprisonment,
or committed to prison in default of payment
of fine or in default of furnishing security:

Provided that where a juvenile who has
attained the age of fourteen years has
committed an offence and the Juvenile Court
is satisfied that the offence committed is of
so serious a nature or that his conduct and
behaviour have been such that it would not be
in his interest or in the interest of other
juveniles in a special home to send him to
home and that none of the other measures
under this Act is suitable or
sufficient, the Juvenile Court may order the
juv rile to be pt in safe
in such place and manner as it thinks

shall report the case for the orders
State Covernment.”

2G, Inter-relationship of section 6 with other

Probation Act. It may be noted

1658 is not, in itself, an independent source of
power to release an offender on probation or
admonition. Rather, it draws the attention of the

court to the neea gor exercising the power, if a


perscn under 21 years of age is found guilty cf an
cffence punishable with imprisonment (but not with
imprisonment for lif}, by placing a restriction
on the court’s power to sentence such person to
imprisonment and by requiring the court to record
its reasons for passing a sentence cf imprisonment
on the offender, if the court passes such a

sentence.

5५7« As mentioned above, the power to release an
offender on admonition (section 3) and the power
to release on probation (section 4) are both wide
encugh to cover male as well as female offenders.
But, in these provisions there is no emphasis as
such, on the need to pay special attention to the
desirability of probation where the offender is a
female. Hav ing regard to the problems that have
arisen in the past in regard to females in
custody, it would be worthwhile tao introduce some

such method of achieving this

emphasis would be to require the court ४० take
account of the fact that the offender is a woman
in cases to which the Probation Act applies.
Having regard to the fact that the object of the
Prebation Act is to encourage reformation in
substitution for mere deterrence and to create
facilities for out-cf-jail treatment rather than

incarceration inside. the jail, it would be

48


appropriate if that cbhiective is carried out more

emphatically in regard tc women.

5.8. Suggested amendment of section 3, Probation

enders Act.~ If the above reasoning is

हि

accepted, then section 3 of the Probation of

offenders Act cculd be amended by inserting
4

certain words. The latter part of section 3,

main paragraph, would then read as under:-

8५००८ eeeand the Court by which the person is
found guilty is of opinion that, having
regard to the circumstances of the case,
including the nature of the offence and the
character of the offender and the fact that
the offender is a woman, it is expedient so

to ao. then, notwithstanding anything
contained in any other law for the time being
in force, the Court may, instead of
sentencing him to any punishment or releasing
him on probaticn of good conduct under

section 4, release him after due admonition".

56S, Suggested amendment of section 4(1)
Probation Act.~ On similar lines, section 4(1) of

the Probation Act could be amended by inserting
certain words which would reguire the Court to
have regard to the fact that the offender is a
WOMAN « After such an amendment, section 4(1),
main paragraph, would read as under:-

{1) When any person is found guilty of
having cconmitted an offence not punishable
with death or imprisonment for life and the
Court by which the person is found guilty is

of opinion that, having regard to the


circumstances of the case, including the
nature of the offence and the character of

the offender and the fact that the offender

5

is a woman, it is expedient ६० release him
on probation of “good conduct, then,
notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force, the
Court may, instead of sentencing him at once
to any punishment, direct that he be released
on his entering into a bond, with or without
sureties, to appear and receive sentence when
called upon during such pericd, not exceeding
three years, as the Court may direct, and in
the meantime to keep the peace and be of good

behaviour".

5.10. Section 360, Code of Criminal Procedure,

1973-- In areas where the Probation of Offenders

Act, 1958 does not apply, section 360 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 regulates the topic of
release of offenders on probation. Amendments in
that section could, wherever necessary, be made on
the same lines as those suggested above in the
Probation Act. However, as a matter of
criminological policy, it would be preferable to
bring the whole of India witnin the scope of the

Probation of Offenders Act.


5.11. Juvenile Justice Act.- As regards the
Juvenile Act, 1986 the definition of “juvenile” in
that Act covers girls up to the age of 18 years,

and there is hardly any need to increase that age.

51


CHAPTER VI

MENTAL HEALTH ACT, 1987

€.1

Hental Health

Act,

Women prisoners and the

~ Apart from the arrest, detenticn and

conviction of a person which may lead to custody,
occasions for the imprisonment of women may also
arise where, even though there is no charge of
crime, a woman is kept in detention under
legislation relating to mental health. India has
recently enected the Mental Health Act, 1987. and

aor rence will be made here to such provisions

of that Act as are important for the present

purpose.

602. Aémissi

n to mental institutions.~ The

Mental Health Act, 1987 contemplates the
establishment of psychiatric hospitals and
psychiatric nursing howes, which are the principal
institutions in which persons nentally ill are to
be treated {section 5). Admissions to such
institutions for treatment may result (i) from a
request made by the mentally ill person or his
guardian, or (ii) (even without such request) on
the application of the relative or friend of the
mentally ill person, subject to the observance of
certain medical and other formalities. Patients

admitted under the former category are called

52


“voluntary patients" (sections 16 to 18), while
tne patients admitted under the latter category
are called “patients admitted under special
circumstances" (section i$). Formal admission to

& rsvchiatric institution is effected by a

"reception order, The application for reception
order may be made by the medical officer incharge
of the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing
home or by the spouse or any other relative of the
mentally ill person (section 20).

Section 2(1) of the Act defines a mentally
ill person as meaning a person who is in need of
treatment by reason of any mental disorder other
than mental retardation.

The police is also euthorised to take into

protection any person found wandering at large
within the limits of the police station, where the
police officer has -eason to believe that such
person is so mentally ill as to be incapable of
tekhing care CL iiiocli. Subsequent proceedings

take place before a Magistrate (sections 23 to

A person who is merely mentally retarded does
not, in general, came within the ambit of the
Mental Health Act. The expression “mental
disorder" itself is not defined in the Act but, if
the -nental diserder is of such a nature or

magnitude that the treatment is needed, then the

53


person suffering from it would become a mentally

ill person.

6.3. Keeping in detention.- Feeping a person as
an inpatient in a psychiatric hospital or

psychiatric nursing home is ordered by the
District Court after enquiry (sections 26 to 36).
Usually, it is the order of the District Court
which achieves indefinite detention of a mentally

ill person in an institution.

6.4. Mentally ill persons.- The Act also provides
for the admission and detention of “mentally ill
prisoners’, being mentally ill persons for whose
detention or removal to a psychiatric institution
an order has been made under some other enactment.
The enactments specified include the Prisoners Act
and enactments relating to armed forces, as also
s-ctions 330 and 335 of the Code of the Criminal

Procedure, 1973.

6.5. Visitors: section 37.~ Wwe now come to
specific points concerning mental health

legislation insofar as provisions contained in
such legislatior are material for women patients.
Psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric nursing
homes must have at least 5 Visiters in Lhe scheme

2

of the Mental Health Act, 19 tion 37

दे

provides as under in this regards

54


"376 (1) The State Government or the
Central Government, as the case may be, shall
ppoint for every psychiatric hospital and
every psychiatric nursing home, not less than
five Visitors, £ whom at least one shall be
a medical o cer, preferably a psychiatrist,
and two social workers.

(2) Ghe head of the Medical Services of
the State or his nominee preferably a
psychiatrist shall be an ex officio Visitor
of all the psychiatric hospitals and
psychiatric nursing homes in the State.
(3) The qualifications cf persons to be
appointed as Visitors under sub-section (1)
and the terms and conditions of their
appointment shall be such as may be
prescribed."
6.66 Recommendation regarding section 37--
Amongst the visitors tc be appointed by the
1
Government under section 37, Mental Health Act ,
two are to be social workers. In our view, at
least one social worker should be a woman,
wherever that is practicable, so that suspected
mailpractices against female in-patients can be
looked into and, wherever necessary, suitable

preventive measuces can also be suggested. we

recommend that section 37(1); Mental Health Act,

1987, should be amended by adding, after the words

“two social workers", the words “of whom at least

one shail be a woman, wherever practicable".

6.7. Section 81, Mental Health Act: indignity to

be a.gided.- Section 81 of the Mental Health Act,

19६7 contains a comprehensive provision for


punishing indignity or cruelty to mentally ill
persons. The provision reads as under:-
“Ol. (1) No mentally ill person shall be

subjected du treatment to any indignity
{whether physica: or mental) or cruelty.

(४) No mentally ill person under
treatment siali be used for purposes of
research, unless-

(ij Such research is of direct
benefit to him for purposes of diagnosis
or treatment; or

(ii) Such person, being a voluntary
patient, has given his consent in
writing or where such person (whether or
not a voluntary patient) is incompetent,
by reason of mincrity or otherwise, to
give valid consent, the guardian or
other person competent to give consent
en his behalf, has given his consent in
writing, for such research.

(3) Subject to any rules made in this
behaif under section 94 for the purpose of
preventing vexatious or defamatory

communications or communications prejudicial
to the treatment of mentally ill persons, no
letters or other communications sent by or to
a mentally ill person under treatment shall
be intercepted, detained or destroyed”."

6.8. Section 81. Mental’ Health Act, 1987

2
1987 quoted above ,

Section 8

कफ

is applicable to persons of both the sexes and the

prohibiti of indignity or cruelty should, o
course, take care of harassment of women or
torture also. No doubt, serious harassment of a

sexual nature is not specifically fccussed upon by
section 81. But, then, the Indian Penal Code
(particularly after its amendment in 1983}, takes

sufficient care of serious sexual offences,


including seduction committed by the
superintendents or other officers in charge of
evstcdial institutic s (sections 3765, 376C and
37608 of the Indian Penal code) In this position
it does not appear necessary to expand the scope

of section 81 of the Mental Health Act, 1987 for

the above mentioned purpose,

6.9. Penaity ion $1.~However,

we must note that the penalty provided for the
infringement of section 81, Mental Health Act,
1987 is rather mild. Such infringement appears to
be governed by section 85 of the Act, quoted
below:
"85. Any person who contravenes any of the
provisions of this Act or of any rule or
regulation made thereunder, for the
contravention of which no penalty is
expressly provided, shail, on conviction, be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to si» months, or with fine, which

may extend to five hundred rupees, or with
both".

6.19. Amendment of section 85, Mental Health Act,

recommended.- We have not beer able to discover

any other section of the Act which could be

invoked for dealing with such infringement. Tt

appears to us, that the punishment of imprisonment

upto six months, provided by section 85, Mental
4

Health Act may not be adequate for dealing with

an infringement cf section 81, particularly where

wm
x


5
the victim of the malpractice is a woman. There

is need for ‘a higher ‘punishment, to deal
adequately with subtle forms of sexual and other
harassment in respec. of mentally ill patients.
Our recommendation, therefore, is that in the
Mental Health Act, 1987 a new section (section
84A) should be inserted, in the following terms:

“64A Penalty for contravention of section

8l.- Any person who contravenes the
provisions of section 81 shall, on
conviction, be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to two years, or

with fine which may extend to five thousand

rupees, or with both”.

6.11. International developments.- In connection
with women in custody for reasons of mental ill

heaith, it wou interest to note some
6
of the international .evelopments . The position

has been this stated:-

‘In 1975, in Singapore, the International
Council of Nurses (CN) adopted a resolution
on the "Role of the Nurse in the Care of
Detainees and Prisoners". In the same year,
the World Medical Association (WMA) adopted
its famous Tokyo Declaration on "Guidelines
for Medical Doctors concerning Torture and
other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment in Relation to Detention and

Iuprisonment”.’.
The organisation of other health professions such
as, psychiatrists, psychologists, etc., also

formulated their own codes of ethics in this field

58


at the same time. As a consequence, on December
18, 1682, the United Nations General Assembly
adopted, "Principles of Medical Ethics Relevant to
the Role of Fealth Personnel, particularly
Physicians, in the Protection of Prisoners and
Detainees Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
oz Degrading Treatment or Punishment‘ (for full
text of these codes see Radical Journal of Health,
issue on Human Rights and Health, September-

December, 1988)".

59


CHAPTER VII

OTHER LAWS

Tol. Qther enactments.- The main enactments
relating to women in custody have been dealt with,
in the preceding chapters. These chapters cover
the two procedural codes, provisions of the law of
corrections and the general substantive criminal
law, as also the Mental Health Act. A woman can
be arrested and detained in custody for an offence
under a special or local law also. But, so far as
we can see, such special or local laws would not
be directly relevant to the problems of possible
malpractices concerning women in custody, in the
sense of raising any issues peculiar to women. In
any case, if an offence under a substantive law,
whether general or special, has been committed by
a woman, the procedural machinery which comes
thereafter into operation, in the shape of arrest
matters, would generally be that contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure of 1973, on which ‘we
have already made necessary reconmendations."
72> Prevtive detention.~ Apart from penal
legislation proper, the Indian Statute book
contains several enactments for the preventive

detention of persons suspected of specified

60


prejudicial activities. Women as well as men can
be detained under these laws; and, in theory,
there could be occasions for the exp*oitation or

harassment of women detained in custody under such

laws. Sy ang laiye, nowever, such exploitation
can be appropriately dealt with by the special
previsions inserted in the Indian Penal Code in

1983, in the shape of section 376 (as amended in

1983} and sections 3763, 376C and 376D (as
insezted ia 1263) In this position, we are not

makirg any special recommendation regarding laws
providing cr preventive detention. Of course,
such safeguards as are contained in the
Constituition, or in the relevant enactment, for
the protection of persons in preventive detention,

would continue to be availablee

7.3. becrinnasation and_allied  obiectives.-

We may note that in the suggestion made by the

Necional Bxpert © € on women, it has been

3
indicated that in the context of a critical
examinaticn cf laws relevant to women in custody,
attention may also have to be paid to the need for
¢-penalisation, de-criminalisation and de-
institutionalisation. No doubt, the idea
unGeriying this valuable suggestion is te draw

attention to a consideration of the question how

far the content of the criminal law needs change,

61


in the shape of (i) possible removal from _ the
statute book of offences for which the criminal
law is wet an aprerepriatc inotrument and (ii)
adoption of measures in other respects to ensure
that there may be prevention, at the very
threshold, of the entry of a woman into an
institution of a custodial nature. It is obvious,
that any comprehensive examination undertaken with
the first objective mentioned above will have to
cover the entire criminal law of the country.
This would be a very big undertaking. Although
such an undertaking would be useful in several
respects, its focus would not necessarily be on
women criminals only. It would necessistate a re-
evaluation of every criminal statute of the
country in order to assess whether the penal
sanction is really needed for the offences dealt

with by each statute.

7.4. Cbhjectives to be kept in mind.- The
sheer magnitude of the task would be forbidding.
In our view, the more practical course would be to
bear in mind the above objectives, whenever a
particular enactment is taken up for review, and
to suggest necessary reforms, consistent with the
protection of society and the interest of justice.
we would also like to mention that the changes

recommended by us in this report in regard to

62


arrest, bail and probation shculd, to some
extent J operac as a preventive, i.e., they would

ke2p women out of the custodial apparatus. Those

changes, while not achieving de-criminalisation in

a direct manner, wiil have the effect, at least,

of reducing the number of women in custody.

63


im the reference made to the

ore of the guestions posed for

sideration relates tc mobile courts for the

trial of women prisoners. The suggesticn made in

this regard, in paragraph 478 of the Report of’ the

Mational Expert Committee on Women Prisoners, is

to the effect that "Nari Bandi Griha Adalats

should be established in the nature of mobile
courts, as an immediate modality for rendering
speedy redress to women in custody. Tt has been
stated that whereas the Family Court cr Women's

Court can be the stable permanent mechanism, the

Kobile Adalat or Court is required as an
immediate, as well as instant, corrective step.
The further sug¢estion is that such camps and
courts . should be beld urgently and routinely in

order to clear the backlog of pending casos.

According te the sugge

an, the Mok

should be conducted en a district-wise cr cluster~

basis, so as to cover all prisens and non~
prison scustodiel institutions. The objective
envisaged in the suggestion is to provide speedy

dustice to women in custody.

6.2. Some practical aspects noted.~ While we


appreciate. the spirit underlying the suggestion,

it seems to us that there might be some practical

aspects te be considered if the sugg
be implemented, on the one hand, if the mobile
court is held near the prison wherein women
prisoners are housed, then there would be the
practical problem of transporting the court
personnel, the witnesses and others concerned with

the case, as well as the records. The analogy of

traffic offences would net be guite appropriate.
The gquesticns involved in trials reclating to

traffic offences © extremely simple; ordinarily,

no witnesses are cxamined nd the matter
decided after perusing the report of the traffic
constable on duty. In contrast, in offences which
involve a potential sentence of imprisonment, more
than one witness wiil normally have ° bo
examined. Documents and acticles have to be kept

ready for the trial. Some of these articles wovld

be valuable from the pecuniary peint of view.
few others, while having no monetary value as
such, might be crucial te the case, for example,
weapons, cicthes and other articles which have
been cxawined by forensic scientists. It is also
common experience that. all witnesses are not in

attendance at the same time, so that the Mobile

Court would have to visit the prison more than

once.


€.3. Another complex problem must be visualized

and tackled.- W a female figures as a co-
accused alongwith one or more male accused in a
criminal case triable exclusively by a Court of
Sessions, the trial of the male accused may have

to be पु Bat it will entail examination

parata¢

of the same witnesses ky two different courts.
And the guestion which calls for an answer is how
to evercome a situation where conflicting
decisions may be rendered by two different courts,
for, the ccurts concerned may disagree in
ssessment cf the evidence of identical witnesses

and reach cenflicting conclusicns. tn order to
escape from such व situation, cCasus txishiIn by
Court cf Sessions may be excluded from the purview
of mobile ccurts in case the idea is considered
feasible and desirable otherwise. Of course, the
same problem will arise in cases not exclusively
Court and perhays there is

no solution other than te live with the problem.

triahie by a Sess

8.4. Small number of women prisoners.- Besides

this, the number ot women priscrors under tcial in
a particular district jail or sub-jail whose cases
are ripe for trial, would not be so Large that one
court, sitting the whole day, would be utilised to

dispose cf a large number of .cases. In other

is created, . the

words, if the facility sugges

a
a


proportionate benefit likely to result therefrom
would be negligible. Again, if the idea is toe
combine a number of district jails, there would ke
problems of jurisdicticn and = personnel lt
appears doubtful whether the suggestion will yield
a positively fruitful result wher all the aspects

mentioned above are taken inte cccount.

8.5. Reduction cf number of women prisoners.~

This does not, of course, mean that in this sphere
one should abendon all efforts at improvising the
legal position regarding speedy and smooth trial
of cases relating to women in custody. Elsewhere
in this report, suggestions have been offered for
effecting certain changes in the substantive
criminal law, the law of procedure and the law
relating to mental health institutions. In this
“context, we attach particular importance tc. the
law relating to the grant of bail to women, on
which we have made specific suggestions in the
appropriate chapter. If these sugestions are
carricd cut, then it should be possible to bring
down the number of women in custody; and, if that
happens, the auestion of providing mobile courts
would not survive, even if the creation of such a
facility is regarded as practicable. As far ‘as
possible, the objective should be to see that the

number cf women under-trial prisoners is kept

67


within the

Our suggestion to amend the
2
law relating to probatien should also be viewed

in that perspective. Such an amendment, would

resuit in reducing the number cf women entering

the prison after nviction.



PRLSONS

titutficnai position.- Many of the

iscussed in the Report of the National

a

Committce on Women Prisoners relate to the

actual administration of prisons. and the question
may arise whether any reforms in this regard covld
be considered. By GHAPTRE iDXustration. one can

mention th@QSURVON mReGARING, PRISONS onting areas

where possibilities of harassment, exploitation or
9.1. constitutional position.- Many of the

anncyence to women prisoners in custody may arise:
matters discissed in the Report of the National

(a) Physical protection.
Expert Committee on Women Prisoners relate to the

(0) | Accommodation and sanitary conditions.
actual administration of prisons, and the question

{c) Ehysical and mental health of prisoners,
May arise whether any reforms in this regard could

particularly when a prisoner is likely

to be injuriously affected mentally by

Giscipline or treatment.

a

Scparation cf prisoners of cach sex.

{e) Safety from fellow prisoners.

(f) Solitary confinement,

{g} Treatment of prisoners.

th) Social aspects, such as meetings with
members of the family and triends.

(4) Pomeporary release and parole.

9.2, Mattors within the competence of  States.-

While the topics which have been mentioned by way

62


of vital importance to the weil boing of
prisoners, it will appear that a pretty large bulk
of the subject would fall exclusively within the
legislative competence of States. This is hecause

the cf prisons and prisoners falls within

the Strete Lisk. Fer this reason, necessary

have to be taken by the

We may quote the material part of State
List, entry 4:-

"Ae prisons, reformatories, berstal
instituitions and cther institutions of a

dike nature and persene deiained therein."
This is wide enough te cover prison
conditions. Henco we are not with the

topics mentiened above.

70


PTER X

CONCLUS TORS

Wb RECCMMENDATICNS

In the light of the discussion made in the
earlier Chapters of the Report, the commission is
of the opinion that it is cssential te make
appropriate provisions in order to foreclose
harassment of women in custody and in crder to
protect such women to the extent possible. It is
felt that amendment of cach individual provisicn,
as existing in the Code cf Criminal Procedure, may
not sufficiently serve the purpose. phe
previsions which cail for amendment in the light
of the discussion made hereinbefore are scattered
in different chapters of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, under the circumstances, the
amendments made especially with an eye on
protecting the women in custody from harassment
and avoidable hardship will not come into ftcus if
effected in each individual provision and the
officials concerned may not become fully aware of
such provisions without making a special effort in
this behaif. So also, the women's organisations
and the relatives of the concerred women in
custody may experience the same difficulty in
interming thomselves about the riahts of such
women. gn the Commission's opinion, it is,

therefore, desirable that, as far as possible, the

71


provisions especially made in this behalf may be,
incorporated in & separate Chapter of the Code of

Procedora so that the concerned

so the women's organisations and

the women in custedy ané their relatives, can,

much effort, apprise themselves of the

of such women and the obligations ci the

concerned officials.
For the seéke of convenience, a draft cf the
proposed chapter relating to arrest, interrogation

stody _of women and, incidentally, of

chiidrea) and the prepcsed provisicns embodying

the conclusicns of the Ccmmission being set out

hereinafter. But before doing su, the conclusions

(4) In the event of a woman. being
reauired to be arrested, the pelice officer
concerned shall net actually touch the persoh
of the woman and mey presume he submission
to custody. - This. rcconmendation is being
mado in order that the dignity of the
concerncd woman is maintained. (Paragraph

2.2)

(2) Ordinarily, no woman shail be
arrested after sunset and before sunrise. In
exceptional cases calling for arrest during
these hours,- (1) the prier permission of the
immediatc superior officer shall be obtained,
or {ii) if the case is of extreme: urgency,
then after arrost a report with reasons shall
be made to the immediaté superior officer and
to the Magistrate. (Para 2.3)

(3) Whenever a. woman is medically
examined; the examination shall be conducted
only under the supervision of a female

72


registered medical practitioner, with strict
regard to decency. (Paragraph 2.6)

(4) The ccnceerned woman shall be
informed) abcut her right to be nedically
examined, in order to bring cn record any
facts which may show that an cffence against
her hes been committed after her arrest.
(Paragraph 2.8)

(5) A copy of the repert cf the medical
examination shall be furnished to the woman.
Paragraph 2.7)

(6) A woman shall not, under secticn

60, Cr.P.C., be required to attend for

interrogeticn at any place other than her

dwelling kcuse, and secticn 160 cf the Ccde

should be amended for the purgese. (Paregraph
2-16)

(7) When the statement cf a woman is
recorded during investigation, a relative or
friend c the woman cr an authorised
representative cf an crganisaticn interested
in the welfare of women shall be allcwed’ to
remain present. (Paragraph 2.11)

(६8) Where 3 woman is convicted cE a
offence to which secticn 360, Cr eP.Co
applies, whilst exercising the pewer of the
ecurt to release the cffender con probation cr
on due 2 nition, etc., as exerciseble under
that sccticn, due regerd shculd be paid ४०
the fact thet the c£fender is a woman.
(Paregrazgh 5.10)

(€; The prohibition imposec by section
433A, CreP.C. en the reducticn (by the
Government) cf tue period of impriseonment (of
effenders sentenced ६८ imprisonment for life)
be & mininum peri cf 14 yeers sheuwld not
apply tc a woman. (Paregraph 2.19)

(10) Where a pregnant woman is sentenced
te imprisonment (whether fcr life or fer a
specified term), the court should have power
© direct that execution cf the sentence be
suspended till terminaticn cf the pregnancy
and a specified peried thereafter, subject tc
certain conditicns. (Paragraph 2.24

(ll) The high Ceurt on its

administrative side should have power te
¢irect the istrict end Sessicns Judges to

73


satisfy themselves that female prisoners are
protected and properly looked after, in
accordance with the provisions that we are
recommending in this regard.

‘For ensuring compliance therewith, the
High Court should have power to take
appropriate measures to move the State
Government, (Paragraph 2.26)

The following concrete protective
as regards female

measures are

prisoners

(a) On admission to 1911, aio female
prisoner should be medically examined. If
medically necersary, she should be kept.
feparately in a female enclosure. On each
occasion of readmission to jail after
temporary relerse, the same course should be
adopted (Paregraph 2.27).

(0) Where a fernlea prisoner is suspected
of pregnancy whilct in custody, she shall be
Sent to the nietrict Government Hospital. In
case of advanced pregnancy, she shal} he
shifted to female uard of the Government
hospital (Paraqraph 2.27).

(6) कै. ferale prisoner shall not be
handcuffed or made to vear fetter cross-hars
during transit from one jail to another or to
the court or for investigation. (Para 2.78)
Resides thin, she shall be escorted by the
Matron or Fenale Werden, if she is required
to leave the fenale enclosure. pur ong
transit, a female relative shall be allowed
to accompany her. (Para 2.28)

(d) Where there are no suitable
arrangements for housing women prisonerr,
they should he sent to a suftable institutien
wherever practicable, (Para 2.29)

(7) At places other 1971. Sersioc
headquarters, a judicial officer (preferab
a lady jucicial officer) shall make an
inspection of the jail where the women ir
custody are detained, Such inspection shalt
be made at Least once in every two months and
the District and Sersions Judge may make
appropriate recommendations in the light of
the inspection report. (Para 2.30)

74


At the  Sesstons headquarters, the

Sessions Judge shall carry out such
inspection, The object is to ensure that

measures for the protection of women an
recommended in this report ere implemented,
Copies of these Inspection Reports shall be
forwarded to the concerned officers,
(Paragraph 2.30)

(f) Apart from surprise visits as above,
jails vhere there are women pricomers shall
be vietted by visitors eppointed by the
Governnent, of these jail visitors, one
should be a merical officer and two shenld be
social जातक लत (ef whor, wherever
practicabJe, one shall be a woman). Twa
visitors sheuld visit the jail at least once
in six months and make a report to the
Sessions Judge. (Para 2.31).

(५) These previstons should apply, not
only to women prisoners, but also to women in
custody in police lockups or as detenun under
a Jaw providing {rr preventive detention,
irrespective of whether the woman is kept in
custody during inverttiaation, inquiry or
trial or after conviction ete, (Para 2.32)

(32) AS a conseguence of our
comprehensive recommendation relating to
medical exanination of women involved in the
criminal process, consequential amendment may
be made in section 53 of the Cade of Criminal
Procedure, 1973. (Paraqraph 2.6)

(13) In section 160(1), CreP.C., 1974
(whieh prohibits the summoning of शर्करा,
etc., during investigation by the polices),
certain verbal changes should” he made,
{Paragraph 2.10)

(14) Section 116, CroP.c.  shonld he
amended to make the commutation of death
sentence parsed on a pregnant woman
mandatory. (Paragraph 2.13

(15) At precent, by rection 437(1),
Cr.P.C., 8 restriction fs imposed on the
releanso, on hail, of a person accured of an
offence punishable with death or imprisonment
fer life, bnt the first provino to that suh-
rection rests fin the court a discretion to
releace on bail certain cateanries of 7

of persons

75


(persons below the age of 16 years, women,
and sick an) infirm persens).

the recommendation is that in such
cases, the court shall direct that such
persons shall be released on ball, unlesa the
court, for reasons to be recorded, considered
it proper not to release such person on bail.

(Paragraph 2.23)

(16) For violation of the mandate
contained in section 160(]), Cr.”.C. (which
provides that a person below 15 years or a
woman shall be examined only at his or her
residence), a specific penal provision should
be inserted jn the Indian Penal Code, as
section 166A. (Paragraph 2.12)

(17) In deckding abont release on
admonition of an offender under section 3. of
the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, the
court should have regard alto to the fact
that the of fender = a woran (where the
person convicted is # woman). (Paragraph
5.8)

(1.8) fection 4(1) of the Probation of
Offenders Act, 1958, which empowers the court
to release offenders convicted of certain
offences on probation of goot conduct, should
be amended to provide that in dectding about
such release, the court shall have regard
also to the fact that the offender is a woman
(where the person convicted is a woman).
(paragraph 5.9)

(19) Section 37(1), Mental Health Act,
1987 should be amended so as to provide that
among the five visitors to the institutions
falling within the section, at least one
shall be a woman, wherever practicable.
(Paragraph 6.6)

(20) For punishing the offence under
section 81, Mental Health Act, 1987
{Indignity, etc,, on a mentally 411 person in
custody), a new section 84A should be
inserted, prescribing, for the above offence,
a punishment of imprisonment up to 2 years or
fine up to Rs.5000 or both. {Paragraphs 6.9
and 6.10)

Set out in the Appendix ~ to this Report
are our recommendations in the form of draft

76


plevant enactments, that

af Criminal frecedure

We hopo that ‘these recommendations, if

lemonted, will alleviate the hardshig cf wenen
in custody te दे great extent, we conclude this

repork on this optimistic note.

(M.P. TRAKKAR)
CHATRMAN

(४५०७, ANJANEYULU {P.ti. BAKSHT)
MEMBER NEMBER
NEW DELHI, DAY :



The ftcellowing amendments shuuld te made to
the Code of Criminai Procedure, 1973 by inserting
a new Chapter relating to arrest and custody of

women to be inserted after Chapter XXXIITA:

iia

CHAPTE

SPECIFI

C PROVISIONS AS ५0 ARREST,
AND CUSTODY OF WOMEN AND

450A. Application of the Chapter.- The provisions

cf this Chapter shall, as regards the matters
covered thereby, apply notwithstanding anything to
the contrary contained in any cthee provisicn of

this Code. (See Ch

=

G

- (1) Where a woman is

4505. Arrest cf we .
te be arrested under this Code, then, unless the
circumstances indicate tc the contrary, her

submiss custody on an oral intimation £

arrest shall bo presumed, and unless the

circumstances otherwise require or unless ‘the

pelice officer arresting is a female, the police

t actually tcuch the person cf the

woman for making her arrest. (See para 2.2

~


dable circumstunces, no

ro sunset and before

such unaveideble circumstances

ay

king the arrest shall,

exist, the police officer

by making a written repert, obtain the rior
Y 3

permission of the immediate supericr officer net

below the rank ८ an Inspectcr fer effecting such

arrest or, it the C280 4 one cf cxtreme urgency,

he shail, after ma

g the arrest, forthwith

© his such immediate

report the matter in wri

superior cificer,

with the reasons for arrest and

the reaons for not taking prior permission as
aforesaid and shall alse make.a similar report to
the Magistrate within whcso local jurisdicticn the

arrest has been made. ‘Sce pare 2.3

fe Medic:

imation of women.- (1) ‘The

Magistrate before whom an arrested female is

produced shall, whether or not such female makes a

regeest tor amit ion her body under section

£2 such

any facts

exemination,

which

an offence agai the body

hes been musitted with respect to

female

‘ter hor arrest. (Sec para 2.8).

due course be made



person of a female is to be

ection

section 53 or under 5

and with strict’rccard tc decency.

(3) The registered medical practitioner

holding an examination unde: section 53 or section

54 shall forthwith furnieh to the arrested female

y of the report of the examinaticn, free cf

cost. (See para 2.7).
[This amendment can in due course be made

applicavic to males alsoj

450B. Women. and  chiidren attending fe

investi

tw

A mate person under the age

8

of fifteen years cr a woman shall not be required

te

under section 160 at any place other

or ber dwelling place. ee para 2.10)

nt provise to secticn 160(1), Cr.P.c.
deleted). डा

(2) Where, under this Code, the statement of
2 male persen under the age GE fifteen years or of

ded b

a wonan is rees

pelice officer,

either as first information of an offence or in

ef an investigation intc an offence, a

1९ person or woman,

ed by such Organisation



interested in the welfare of women or children as

nised in this behalf by tae State

by notification in the Official

present

be allcwed to

iod during which the stateme:

ee para 2-11).

4506. Admonition and probatiom under the

where the person convicted by a court is a

woman, the court shall, in exercising its
€iscretion as te release of the offender on

nm (1) cE section 360 cr

probat

relea ter due admenition under

sub-section (3) of that secticen, have duc regard

to the fact that the cffender is a woman. (See

of detention cf women sentenced

ife.- Nothing in section

ere the person cn whom a

sentence of imprisonment for life is imposed, or

in respect of whom a sentence cf death been
cormuted inte a sentence of imprisonment for life,

is a woman. (Sce para 2.19%)

450G. Pregnant and suspension of
impriscnment.- (1) When a pregnent woman is

convicted of any offence and the court sentences

or for a specified

her to imprisonment for



the courc way, if it thinks fit, at the time

e regard being had to the

of passing such sentence

age, Character or antecedents of the offender, the

circumstances in which the offence was committed

and the circumstances cf the an herself

dixect+

of the sentence of

imprisonment in her case shali be suspended

till she delivered of a’ child or the

pregnancy is ctherwise terminuted and such

pericd thereafter, as the court mey specify,
expires, and
(b) that: during such period of

ensien of execution of sentence, she

shall be rele on her ontering 4 bond with

or without suretics ~

fi) to appear and undergo sentence

on the expiry cf such period and,

(ii) in the meantime, to keep the

peace end be cf good behaviour, and te

ebservye such other condi if any,
as the court mey impose.
¥ (2) An order under this section may be made

h Court cor the

ate Court, or by the

Court cf Session when cxercising its pewer of

(3) When an crder has been made under this



ph Court

section in respect of any woman, the H
er the Court of Sessions may, Gn appeal when there

is a cight cf appeal tc such Ceurt or when
‘

exercising its powecs revisicn, set aside or

erost c&

h order in the

modify st

(4) Tho provisions of secticuns » 124 and
373 shall, sc far as may be, apply in the case of
sureties offered in pursuance of the provisions of
this section.

{5) The Court, before directing the release
of a woman under sub-section (1). shall be
satisfied that the woman or her surety, if any,
has a fixed place cf abode or regular occupation
in the place for which the Court acts, or in which

°
the woman is likely to live during the period

named for the observance of the conditions.

(6) ff the Court which convicted the woman

th the woman

or a Court whi could have dealt ५

in respect of her original offence, is satisfied

‘that the n has failed te observe any of the

conditions cf her recognizance, it may issue a
warrent for hr spprehensicn, and after hearing
the parties, revoke or set aside the order of
suspension and direct that the sentence be
executed forthwith for the period to which she has
been sentenced.

\7) Where the period fer which the exeention

of a sentenen nf imprisonment passed cn a woman is

83


eurt under sub-secticn (1)

suspended by the
expires, ~
(a) the woman shall surrender herself to
chat ccurt cr to such cther court as may be
directed by that ccurt in its creer;
(b) if she dces net so surrender
herself, she shall be arrested under a
warrant te be issued by such ccurt; end
(c) the court before which she

surrenders herself, cr the court before

which she is preduced on arrest under its
warrant, @s the case may be, shall direct
the sentence tu be executed fcr the pericd ६८

which she has been sentenced.

(2) Wuere, i respect. ony womart,

execution of the sentence <f iwprisenment has been

suspended under tue provisions of this section,

the pericc of suspensicn shall 1८0 be set cif

inst the term imprisenment impcesed cn hers

end the liability cf such woman te underge
impriscnment in accerdance with the sentence, on
the expiry cf the pericd o suspension cf
sentence, shall remain unaffected by the
suspension. (See para 2.24).

[Compare the decisicn in Champalal ४७. State

ef Maharashtra, AIR 1982 751; (1982)
J » (Contrast secticn 428, CYr.P.C.,

1973)}.

©


4505. Female pris:ners.- he High Court cn its

icy

uinistrative side may direct the Sessicns Judge
to satisfy themselves that female priscners are

stly lsched after, in acccerdance

Ot

with the safeguards contained in sections 45061 tc

such measures @s may be

end may

Gesirable eve the State Gevernment to

toke necessary 7 > eee pare 2.2753

As far as practicable

the following previsicns shall be cemplicd with,

the medical examineticn cf female

anc consequential actic

{a} Gn acmissicn tc jeil, every female

priscner shell be medically examined by a

lau, mecical officer and, wherever é€eemed

necessary fer medicel reascins, be kept

G

arctcly in ८ female enciosure fer such

a5, in the cpinicn cf the medical
Officer concerned, may be necessary.
(5) Every female priscner shall also be

medicrlly exemined on her readmission te jail

efter relesse 2ne bail, parcle or furlcugh,
by a la@y medical «fficer.
(८) Ii the cfficer incharge cr the

ciecl officer suspects that 2 female priscner is

Eregnent, the female prisener shell be sent te the

fer detailed extmination and

trict



report.

4503. Transit.e- (1) A fomale pr

be

(0) yhe Lady Medical Officer of 115
Mtrictk Gocernnent Nospital to whom tho

been referred under

fowale prisoner

clause (०).  ahall of her

health 17001 ५१17: pregnancy and
neath, PREGNANT, peegnancy ane
probable dole of the special

diet, if any, to be preserited and other
aiek ¥ L

measures to be aceptled,
(e) Gynarecelogical enamjination of the

female priscner chal) thereafter be perforned

in the District Covernment Pospiteal by a lady
1 ay 8 आह

medicar offi and
ante-natal the

female priscnsr secording to pediezl advice,

(f) In casos of advanced stage of
pregnancy, the ferale priscrer shall be
shifted to a female ward ef the Government
Boepital.

(व) A pregnant female prisoner referred

to in clause (f) she hbo kept in the women's

ward of the Government Hospital for not less
than fifteen days after the birth of a child
or for such Jonger period ac may be advised

by the Gynaccalogis (seo para 2.27).

lek Bhall not

handcuffed and shot) not be reanired to wear

£6


any fetters or creeshars during hee transit from
one jail ६6 another or for the purpose of being
taken to the ceurt or for investigation,

sorted = by

(2) A female pric

the Matron er Female Harden, if required ta leave

the female enclosure end such matron or fLomale
warden shall remain with the prisoner till her

return to the onclerure cr release fron the 1711.

(3) A female relative of the female prinener
chall be allowed te accompany the ferale prisoner
during her transit frem one jail te another or Cor

the purpose of bejed Laken to the conrt or fer

investigation. (See para 7.28)

450K. Place cf 1601 [0615 Where ao voman is

arrested and there are no snitable arranoercrente in
the locality for keenfpa her fn cuskety in a place

of detention erclociesly woant fer

shall be sent to an institution cefehttched and
maintained for the reception, care, protection and

welfare of women cr children, Jicenerd ender the

Women's and Children's Institutic Licensing)

Act, 1956 or an institution recoanised by the

State Covernment os far ar practteabts except in

cases where any special law requires that she

should he senk to a protective hore or other place
¢

cf detention authoricnd for the pours शी such

special la



General (77४ ००७१९) and the State Covernment and may

bere lat ih

Ss aerny शक fred +
ns as miy be requined on

sue

the facta and in the etranmitances of the case,
(4) Th the antherbejes fait fa ccarry ont the

recanms

pAationg of the seectens dregs, the esther

oh Abe Righ comet

shard ryhk tat nH

for suitable aetten, 2.20)

(1) The

acon. Brppintoos

Central Goverrrent or the Shote Government, an the

case may be, shall, fnr every nietrich or wail,

appoint met deco करता victtera, Of whom at

1

effienr and tea chal

be sncial workers, of eon

11 (० a

woman, wherrver pract

bo Tne winfbtare ent ef chor

(2)

at least ano chatl bea 177

ein erery ateocentic,

ef every part oof the jasl

respect Of 10160 thay have been arpointed, witha
view to arrotafuing in remand to fenala  prisenorn
the conditions prevatting therein and vhethor the
requisite farilitien aro being provided and the
provisions ef the Law era being complied vith and
whether the directions, if any, given by the

Sessions Indes, or the nigh Court er the Supreme

Court, ag the ecra m be, are bated carried o


General (trieens) and the State Cevernmenk and nay

ड़ जता यूज ५ bans be rennire dt en

tha fant ned 1७ tha etrenmstannees af tha enan,

(4) Th the artherttfed fogl te enrrsy ent the
recemmapestiong of tha pearetens Tetas, the आजा! हनन
ehadl be (हवा to ths ne TOF

for suitable retten, (See pars 2.20)

bras (1) The

pnétral Goverpreent or the State Gorernrent, an the

ease may be, shall, fer neers nictrieh or उ7#11,

y thpes yiritera

appnint onat feos a Of chem at

Ie

sk one ehatl boaoa ebfienr and tea 5७51)

be enciat ४ ad} ta

woman, Ubarcrer कृत तहत बेहाल

(2) Met Tees then eat ef har

,
ab Tereto ens oh ban worker, pheay,
fonge dnoeeery cb centbe, papain finer t tan
ef every perth ef the Gat} tn iba  pletriet yy

rerpoct ef chteh thay he

een appointed, witha
yier to preetatuineg do ressyd tay farata priscrors

the conditions pravetding therein and whether the

requinite facilities ars heing provided and the
provisions cf the Vas pra being complied utth and
whether the directions, if any, given by the

Sessions Indes, cr the Wieh Conrt oer the  Suprane

Court, ag ths ese mre Pa, ave bates carried ont,

e


ae

(7) She owfetterg ebsll cand 9 report oof
thein ipercetion te the €acefong gutge, cha eho
Peay edt eneh repert gn the same manner ose has

bean proviced sno ceetion ASAT in recpest of the

pepert है dept esr तो शव ert ode a peetiedal
officer. (eer pora 2.3])
ASOT, pofinitjems.= (1) fer the purpares ar

rections TEM ta 450७ (beth inelpsivey .-
(5) हा तक oprisenear™ peeps के. waran

detctard in ’ whether during

Enveckjqetien, inqweiry oor trial oor after
comtetion ar unter के... dew providing fer

ptoveutivn Cefention, amd

Oa ॥ 08170 imetwtes a colice lorkop, oa
price ant on place phar sa perpane are kept
जता जझर हहच्क पं 6 1 आय mn Var 1 4 for

preventive detention. (een pore 2,727

Certain other amendrents are also necessary
in the Code of Criminal procedure, 1973, as
onder

(1) seckien 52(9) 61 the Code should be

deleted, (fee para 2.60)

[This $e eerceanantial on the changes
काजलीलत be Pees amtat ion NAL) pra. See

propened eection १707 (2) ]


(2) Th onertion 1811) of the Cade

हक काट ले trecedwee. 1970, the proviso gbeut:

pe delate

feon sara Ths

[Coneeqient iad on prenaned soutien
Cr er.

(3) Beetiem Abe of

reviend as

mary
ath

011००
found
har

Tf 9 veesn sentens
to be pregr

comm be we

Whe
featonee
firmer ieonrent for Life™, (Sen para

one

(43 The Five bo preenir tery हट हक 127

1)

Of कील 6४

Criminal Sareinre, 1974

should ‘9s revised ar und

Preevddea that the pepeean res

le ४ see (14)

Lhe sy neds ons

or fm oriath ep tat} YOR eeurk 1
pro

te court

anch person on

PUPUPALTON Ltt

The Trdfan Panel Cete should he amended in the
following monnerse

Tor violation af the pandate  coniagdard


in section 160()), Code of Criminal

Procedure, 1973 (to the cffect that a person

below 15 > woran shall be cxerined

resicence), a specific

E
J
2
I=

penal provision shovld be inserted. The
proposed prevision (section 1664) may be on
the following lines:-
W1G66A. Whoever, being a public servant -
(7) knovingly Cincbeys any
Atrestion of the Jew proebibiting him
frem requiring the attendance at any
pheen of any person fer the purpose of
inventigation inte on offerce or other
matter, or
Cr) kmoving is coher any other

direction 6 iho odew regulating tiv
manner in ochieh be hall conduct sich
invechiortier, te the prejudice of any
person, ehail he punishes vith
inprisenrent for a term which may extend
to one year or with fine or with both",

The proposed offence (section 166A +- IFC)

should be ceqnisable, bnailable and triable by any

Magistrate, [8766 pore 2.12)

DATION Lv

ffonders Act, 37501 should he



eetion Bot the pe oot venders Ret,
yese  (uhich dest) vith che pessr ef the court te
release a cenviet dd of fender on eSranition) sheared
(in its Latter port, pein paragra be anenért,

in Aeciding abort cuch release,

by

the court have regard to the elreumntaness
of the caen, ieecleting the nature of the offance
and the charactor of the offenmler (as at present),

and the fact effenter is a vorman. (se

pora 5.9)

nh
(1) ef the Prabatiarn of of lerdere
Ack, 1958, रह chpoouers the ecirt ६0 pelsace
offonders convieted of certain of fences on

e

batios तू cand fin 1156 orain

paragraph) be arended on the same Jinn as rection
3 617 the Act recommended ty be aeeptled an above,
that is to sey,

to

pera 5.8)

Hoattt

an Lhe


folle

Section 37(3), Nental Neslth Act, 1१07

shoandd@ ba oarende dd है जे. ta provide that
t the > visitors tn the institution ~

within the esction, out of the two

payrbape one

ro]

effenee under aection 22, Mental

foaemirent we to two vears or

fine uplo Es.5000 or both. (fee raras 6.9% ana

ते
a



prensa 75

19

290.

ill.

bea
to

31.

15.

खाए VOT? OT 7०0३८

Loretlief we. 6७०6 of Bitar, (1077) 4
५

7091, 557 हे ciort पु
8.0.0. 777$ ATR 1677 re 1776.

we. शिकारी

2०0५५ (1977) 3

(94115 4 bl Petra.

fre pete eo

Chariest Setbratov. peli
JOA ATO TAS er 1600०
8१६ ० :

Madhos

rotiow, 0 कोरी ef Pabarashtra, (2°72)
ATR 1070 CA १0८४8.

Ge. Meercivhuls ove. Public prsecutor, 2.0.
(197%) 1 sce 249; 777 17677 Pe 429.

rereorog, Public rronecutor, (197%) 4
“50 1070 FO VALS,

ta i urdien of (१1०7०) 1
जज AIR VOTH CO ९४27 (Thie care pas
been relied on in carer regarding prisoners).

Paenainee na Ft
1979 CC DICH, 39

7८005 ve Hers Secretary, ATP

80. (1) fee mt.

Nursainera xKhetoon ve. Siate of Blhar, I-v,
(1980) 1 sce 93.

pherarhty singh vy. Stete ef त.7., (197%) 3
FCC GAS; AIP 1079 SC 1698 Cuarke training).

Peay hee tha be Tee फू, Ope ba en mites ryraeaty 9
x . ar ns 4 ,

SCC AMG; ATR 1080 CC RAT.

Prem Cheekoe ७8५ metht mtenl, (१6१०१) ३ ales,
526; ATP 1070 SO 1635 (Hand-enffed).

Fortl retraoyv. Peih torna.,, ATR WTR fo 1475;
1979 (4) SCC 494.

शीत व] peres uy maths 2 ey FPA ESY De rea,

ATR 1080 FC LSTA (Phveieal protection).


22.

ishore Singh v
525: (12६

isoners).

Nandlal v. State, AIR 1¢€1 sc

esh Kaushik
il, New Delhi,
1 SC 1757.

jiyav. 8

bha Dutt v. Union
AIR 19५82 SC 6.

Pra

ve State of U.P., २2582) 2 एएए
SC 4c,

# (1682) 1 SCC 5457 ATK

Bir v. State cf Biher, AIR 10602 SC 1470;
(3) sco 131.

378.

Sah v.
(mentally

il

Shvinivas ve Lelhi Admn., (1962) 3 SCC 203;
AIR 1282 5८ 1321.

Sheela Barse v. State of Vaharasitra, (19087
4 SCC 373.

4 SC

hathur v. State of Bihar, A&A
(4) SCC oO.

State v. Prabhakar, AIR 1966 SC 424; (1566) 1
SCJ 675 {Freedom of expressicn).

2
रे


arse

Ramesh

Supr.
Prithviraj ¢
(4) SC 772 (

Sheela Barse

(360 867)

hravarti ४.
tervenins

Secretary Chiléren’s AiG
2, 84 AIR 26

हा se

Delhi A

riscners),

Union of India gr 13588 (3) sc


4. $25) Criminal Lew Journal 974
Se Lav Commissicson cf India, 4th Report (Rape
_ 80०76 questions of
edure and evidence),
2i?. and 3.18 (April,
76 Commission of Commission of India, 94th
Report (Rape and allied of fences: sone
questions of substantive law, procedure and
évidencé), page 18, paragraphs 3.24 and 3.25
(April, 1980)
ce Law Commission cf India, 8400 Report (Rape _
and allied fences; some cuesticns of
substantive law, procedure and evidence)
peges 16 and 17, paragraphs 13.4 tc 12.20
80)
हि

2.16, infra.

QO. Law Commission cf India, 24th Report (Raps (Rape

ata" eaItiréd_orrences: sche Guestion of
substantive law, wurecedure nd vidence) ;
wees

pages i4 ané 15, paragraphs 7.9 and 3.10
(April, 71080

lie Ehanbhaji,

12. Waib Singh vs. PESES Se bun ink
Criminal Dew Journal T34

£74) 1 Sec 156६

Ram Vs. Union of a rRoL
(2960) Criminal Law Journal 1440.

Re)
o


14. See fara 2.26;

15,

Law Journal i511 (€C).

Vs. Union of India, A}

80} Criminai Law Journal

pevi Ys. Etate of U.P
“Crimineél caw Journal 64, ALTenabead (४.७५
ance Ne

ic

i

Qe Order 36, rule 1 CPC,

रु Order 16. rule 1013) CPC.

Be Order 21, rules 32 et seg., CPC, read with
section 51, CPC ané order 21, cule 30, CPC.

Seo Para <.1, Supra.

BART

the masculine need not be
section 13, General Clauses

~
घर
Rn
oy)
oa
wn

supra.

ae G-@, Supra.
3. Chapter 3, supra.

9
"


. > SUPER.

Se Para €.8, supra.

Se Radicsi Journal of Health, issue on Euman
ight

December. 158,
"Hecicine at
Economic and

#eonoms <a

PTER Vii

1. Chapter II; supra.

ae Chapter £

Zo Chapter ¥, supra.

Ys, Union of India, AIR 1990 2147,
16 and 23.

1-2. This

applic

amendment

in due course be made
also, .

: Present section 160{1) proviso te be deleted.

a
2
faa