LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-SIXTH
REPORT

ON

CONFLICTS IN HIGH COURT DECISIONS ON
CENTRAL LAWS—HOW TO FORECLOSE AND
HOW TO RESOLVE

1990


Tel. No. 384475
fafa आयोग
LAW COMMISSION

भारत सरकार
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

शास्त्री भवन,

11 SHASTRI BHAWAN,

M. P. THAKKAR नई दिल्‍ली

Chairman NEW DELHI
D.O. No, 6(2)/90-LC(LS) Feb. 21, 1990
To

Shri Dinesh Goswami,
Minister of Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhavan,

New Delhi.

Dear Minister,
Re. Presentation of 136th Report

Forwarded herewith please find the 136th Report of the Law Commission of India bearing the
caption which conveys its contents, viz. : —

CONFLICTS IN HIGH COURT DECISIONS ON CENTRAL LAWS-- HOW TO FORECLOSE
AND HOW TO RESOLVE

This report is the outcome of a suo motu initiative on the part of the Commission which felt
ised by the frustrating situation stemming from the identical Central Jaw being interpreted,
applied, and administered in different and inconsistent fashion in different perts of India as a result
of conflicting judgem< of the concerned High Courts. The resultant Segal ch has created a
situation where similarly situated citizens governed by the same Ceniral Jaw ‘have’ it in one pert
d ‘do not have’ such a right in another pert of the country. This en would
indefinitely if the concerned matter was not carried to the Supreme Ccurt or would
tinue for decades till the law was eventually settled by the Supreme Court even if the matter was
icd to the Supreme Court. For instance. the law as to whether a widow would be entitled to be-
me a full or alimited owner of a property in a particular situation came to be settled in fi vour of the
after about 25 years. And th> law as to whether the widow of a victim of a motor vehicle
n could claim compensation in a given situation came to be settled in favour of the wido'
noarly 20 year:(vide paras 2.14 and 2.15 of Chapter II of the Report). The need for asolution, therefore,
is more evideni. Hence the Commission has endeavoured (1) to evolve a mechanism to nip such
conflicts in the bud and (2) to resolve existing conflicts in a phased manner by recommending legis-
lative clarifications. This report is accordingly being presented with the hope that the gravity and
the urgency, of the situation will be appreciated and the needful will be done as soon as practicable.

continue to obtai

With warm regards.
Yours faithfully,

Sd
Enel : 136th Report. (M. P. THAKKAR)
@


CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER IL
CHAPTER IU

CHAPTER IV

CONTENTS

Introduction. पु . . . . .
Uniformity and the Indian Legal system .
Present Machinery, if Adequate . : .

Identification of some problems arising out of
decisions of different High Courts and suggestions

measures . . . . : . .
CHAPTER V _ Conclusions & Recommendations — - . .
NOTES AND REFERENCES . - . पु . . . .

APPENDIX

Draft of the suggested legislation .

iii)

Pace
. 1
2
. 7
conflicting
of remedial

« 25
. + 28
31


CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION

1.1, Problem under examination—The constitutional guarantee of “Equality
before law” notwithstanding, under the identical provisions of the identical Central
law, cana citizen ‘have’ a legalright in one State and ‘not have’ such aright in
another part of the country? For instance, can a spouse ‘have’ a right to seek
maintenance under section 25(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 in Andhra
Pradesh but ‘not to have’ such a right in West Bengal?! And if identical provisions
of identical Central Acts are interpreted, administered, and applied, in different and
inconsistent manner in different parts of the country, the problem certainly calls for
urgent and immediate attention with the end in view to (1) remove the existing
anomalies in the laws arising by reason of conflicting judgments of the different
Hign Courts and (2) to evolve a mechanism to ensure that such anomalies do not
come into existence in future. Hence the present suo motu exercise.

1.2 Want of uniformity an evil.—It is needless to point out that want of
uniformity in iaw not only impairs the quality of the substantive or procedural law
but also causes serious inconvenience to citizens in general. Those whose business is
to advise persons who consult them on questions of law, find it difficult to give such
advice with confidence where the decisions are conflicting. Those who are entrusted
with the function of adjudicating on questions of law must spend considerable
time in choosing between two or more possible views on a subject which falls to
be considered before them, In this process, there is bound to result considerable
waste of time and energy. That apart, it is not a satisfactory situation that
on a given topic, the rule of law prevailing in one part of the country should be
different from the rule prevailing in another part of the country when the disparity
arises from conflicting judicial interpretations.

1.3. Scheme of the report.—It is against this background that the Commission
has in this report made an attempt to examine the problem and to make certain
recommendations on the subject. In the first few chapters of the report, the
Commission deals with the approach that lies at the foundation of the Indian legal
system and considers adequacy of the present machinery to deal with the aforesaid
problem. Towards the end of the report, a recommendation calculated to resolve
the issue has been made. Besides, the Commission has also considered it proper
existing conflict of significant decisions in the sphere of one important area of law
to bring out th: namely, the major enactments that deal with Hindu Family
law and to make appropriate recommendations in order to achieve uniformity in
law. The Commission hopes to undertake a similar exercise in other areas of law in
a phased manner at an appropriate time in future.


CHAPTER II
INIFORMITY AND THE INDIAN LEGAL SYSTEM

2.1. Unitormity.--t is an elementary, but basic prepositen in the Indian lege!
system thet, es fer as possible, the lew on import: nt topics forming pert of the legal
system should be uniform. A reasonably deep study of the various provisions on the
subject would show that it is an iety of our system to maintain and secure and,
wherever necessary, to restore, uniformity on important points of law. The manner
in which this uniformity is maintained wiil be presently dealt with.

2.2 Source of uniformity. (७. Consiitution and legal system have given pri-
macy to uniformity of interpretation. Sources of such uniiermity are mere than one.
These have their origin in a variety of insirunients, such as the Constitution, scme
statutory provisions, the doctrines of the legal sysiem relating to the operation of case
law, certain historical developments relevant io the subject. the reasons which led
to the appointment of Law Commision and some aspects of administrative law,

2.3 Article 141 of the Constitution.—Article [41 of the Constitution declares
that the law declared by the Supreme Court shall be binding on all courts and
authorities within India. This article, in one of its aepects, is intended to
reinforce the supremacy of the Supreme Court as an instituticn having its sway all
over India, and as putting beyond doubt ihe proposition that iis prenouncements
are paramount for all couris and authorities. But. in another of its aspects,
it is also intended io promote uniformity, Judicial interpretation, whether it be
on a constitutional question cran ordinary questicn cf law. including a judicial
pronouncement on a question of uncedified law, ence it comes from the Supreme
Court, will ensure uniformity for the future all ever India. This may appear to be
elementary, but is of basic importance when one is concerned with the desire of the
Constitution-makers to ensure uniform interpretation.

2.4 Appellate Jurisdiction in constitutional matters and other matters.—The
scheme of appellete jurisdiction of the higher judiciary, as envisaged in the
Constitution, reveals how anxicus the Constitution-makers have been to ensure that
within the country or within a State. there shall be uniformity of interpretation,
as far as possible. For exampie, the right of appeai to the Supreme Court in every
matter which involves an interpretation of the Constiitulicn, shows thatthe makers
of the Contsitution desired that such questions must be ultimately decided by the
highes court in the land. Coming to questions of ordinary civil law, the provision in
article 133 of the Constitution, which gives a right” cl an appeal if there is
involved a substantial question of law which needs to be decided by the Superme
Court, is an indication of the basic premise the: if there has been a controversy on a
question of law and the controversy needs to be decided by the Supreme Court, then
that Court must have jurisdiction to hear and decide the matter. It is thus evident
that the Constitution accords prime consideration to the need for uniformity.

2.5. Appeal by special leave.--It is well known that the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court to grant special leave to appeal under article 136 of the
Constitution is wide engough to permit interference by the Supreme Court when
there is need for such interference, because otherwise the law would remain in an
unsatisfactory condition or would be lacking in uniformity within the country. 4,2,3,

2.6. Access to the Supreme Court.—Before the Supreme Court is called upon to
make a pronouncement on a particular subject, there is the question of access to the
Supreme Court. The need for givng the citizens such access to the highest court of
the land where a question of law is involved wes very much before the
Constitution-makers and supplies the principal rational for those provisions. The
Constitution envisages a right of appeal to the Supreme Court when there is involved.
a substantial question of law that needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.‘ This
right of appeal is not merely for the benefit of the litigant involved in the immediate
controversy. It is also intended to enable the obtaining of proncuncements of
law by the highest court. In this sense, such aright of appeal is intended to benefit the
legal system itself, by advancing and promoting the cause of uniform interpretation.

2


Law Commission of India—136th Report

2.7, Binding effect of High Court judgement.—It is true that a provision man-
dating that the pronouncement of a High Court on questions of law shall bind
courts and authorities within the State is not found in the Constitution. But it is settled
beyond doubt that the pronouncements of a High Court have the same authority
within the State as those of the Supreme Court have throughout India. This follows
from a number of judicial decisions that have affirmed and reaffirmed the principle
mentioned above.

In fact, it is because of the existence of such a principle and it is against the back-
ground of such a principle that section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
formulates the right of second appeal to the High Court in terms of phraseology
which focuses itself upon the invelvement of a question of law. But for this emphasis
onaquestion offaw, an emphasis which the Law Commission of India had an
opportunity of dealing with in its report an the 00968 this aspect could have
escaped attention. But today, it cannot escape attention.®

This emphasis, as found in section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, was
more specifically formulated in the recommendation of the Law Commission which
has ultimately found its place in the section as amended in 1976. The Law Commis-
sion made the following observations as to the rationale underlying the right of

second appeal :

“f-J_ 58. The rationale behind allowing a second appeal on a question of
law is, that ifere ought to be some tribunal having a jurisdiction that will
enable it to maintain, and. where necessary, re-establish uniformity throughout
the State on important legal issues, so that within the area of the State, the
law, in so far as it is not enacted law, should be laid down, or capable of being
jaid down, by one court whose rulings will be binding on all courts, tribunals
and authorities within the area over which it has jurisdiction. This is implicit in
any legal system where the higher courts have euthority to make binding
decisions on question of law”.

“LJ. 59, When a case involves a substantial point of taw, the general interest
of society in the predictability of the law clearly necessitates a system of appeals
from courts of first instance to a central appeal court”.

“As has been observed. “The real justification for appeals on questions of
this sort is not so much that the law laid down by the appeal court is likely to
be superior to that Jaid down by a flower court, as that there should be ‘a final
rule laid down which binds all future courts and so facilitates the prediction
of th: law. In such a case the individual litigants are sacrificed, with some jus-
tification, on the altar of law-making-, and must find such consolation as they

can in the monument of a leading case”.

2.8. Second appeal to High Court.--One can view section 100 of the Code of
Civil Procedure from another angle. The section is based on the principle that wirh-
ia the State, there should be uniformity on questions of law. [i is on this basts
that section 100 gives a sight of second appeal to an aggrieved party if a question of
Jaw is involved and if certain other conditions are satisfied. The basic objective of
this provision of the Civil Procedure Code was considered at some length in the Law
Commission's Report on the Code of Civil Procedure. The Commission teck the
opportunity of analysing the type of questions which should appropr jately reach
the High "Court by way of second appeal. Dealing with this aspect. the Law
Commission had an occasion to observe? :--

“Nature of the question of law regarded as appropriate for second appeal.”

“LJ. 77. We shall indicate very broadly the nature of the questions of
law which we regard as appropriate for submission to the High
Court under section 100 as we propose to revise.

First- and the most important of all is the consideration of uniformity
throughout the State. It is obvious that on questions of law uniformity
must be maintained. In so far as interpretation of enacted Jaws having Statewise
importance is concerned. it is the task of the judiciary to maintain the unity
and the High Court. asthe highest tribunal at the State level, should continue
to have the ultimate authority to establish unity by resolving or avoiding the
possibility of different views in lower courts.”.



Law Commission of India 136th Report

2.9. The above passages show that in conferring @ right of second appeal, the
legal system is as much concerned with the quality of the law, as it is with the
grievance of the particular litigant. Unfortunately, this aspect cf the scheme of
eppeel is nat visible on the surface. Theretcre, it offen escapes notice. But, itis an
aspect of vital importance. The objective of maintaining certainty in the law. and of
awaiding (er removing) want of uniformity is implicitin the provision of the code
its to second appeal, as already stated.*

2.10. “Present position”’.--The unsatisfactory position that can result from
want of uniformity. does not require to be set owt in detail. Even a cursory look at the
condition of the case law on any matter arising by way of construction of statute
or by way of cxpasitian of uncodified law would be enough. Reports of the Law
Commission of India an various subjects in the past have drawn attention to conflict
ol’ decisions, wherever necessary.’ One can also take at random, many more
instances Jrom the case Jaw relatingto any Central Act of general application and
importance, and discover how there exists a want of uaiformity on the interpretation
of so many provisions of that Act. The position is the same, even when are comes to
niles of law not derived trom statute, but based on precedent.

2.11. Doctrine of precedent.—The consideration of uniformity is, in fact, one
of the philosophical justifications for the doctrine of precedent. We are not. at the
moment. concerned with any theoretical exposition of this doctrine. But it seems
necessary Lo draw attention to some aspects of the doctrine. Stare decisis has become
an integral part of onr fas and the doctrines cf precedent and stare decisis seems to
Trave at least three purposes it mind ~~

(1) they provide a basis from which lawyers can advise clients:

12) they avoid additional costs of appeals and unnecessary litigation: and

(3) there ts a danger that in the absence of these doctrines. different courts in
different aveas would apply different principics of taw in the adjudication
of controversies.

The test mentioned object :
legal system.

of direct relevance for the healthy functioning af the

2.12. Law Commission in 1901 Century.—tIt is not merely in the constitutional
or statutory provisions cr uncodified rules relating to precedent that the aspect of
uniform interpretation finds a reflection. One can discern its role as having been
visualised by those who had occasion to deal with the shaping of the Indian Legal
System in the course of the last two centuries or so. One of the considerations which
suppiid the inspiracion for the setting up of the Law Comnrissions ia the 16th Cen-
tury was the desire to secure uniformity of taw. Tt is true that this was at atime when
the stress wis more on removing local variations in the taw as enacted or as followed
by custom, rather than on avoiding divergences in judicial decisions. But the latter
conside“ation was alse within the mind of the authorities. Fer example, one of the
measures of judicial reform achieved in the latter half of the 19th century was the
Tusion of the parallel jurisdictions earlier possessed by two cets जी. 00915 vhich
were fanctioning within and outside the Presidency town eat incenvenience
o€corficting pronouncements of law by the erstwhile Supreme Courts (fer the
Presidency Towns) and by the erstwhile Sudder Diwani Adatats {for areas outside
the Presidency Town) was perceived by those who were entrusted with the task
ot advising in such matters. That is how the High Courts Act. 1861 was bern.
whereunder these pre-existing jurisdictions were combined into one forum which
would lay down the law autoritatively for its awn area.

2.13. Present Law Commission.—Even in the presemt century, the creation of the
Law Commission of India in 1955 was,in part. the result ofa realisation that
wherever a conflict of decisions has impaired the uniformity of law, that uniformity
should be re-introduced into the legal system. It is needless to «tate! that whenever
the Law Contmission has entered into an examination of a particular Central Act. it
has, in making recommendations with reference {0 amendment, sepeat cr revision
ofthat Centrat Act. borne in mind the iced for “reintroducing uniformiiy, if found
to have been damaged by a conflict of decisions or other sources of ambiguity
17 the taw,

1--1५1 Min of Law & fusticesND-9


Law Commission of India—136th Report

2.14. Section 14(1), Hindu Succession Act.-An instance of conflict of decision
which fortunately came to be resolved by the Supreme Court (after atime lag of nearly
25 years) may be referred to at this stage. The case related to section 14(1) of the
Hindu Succession Act, 1956 and interpretation of the words “full owner” occuring
in that section. Section 14(1) of the Act reads as under :---

“(1) Any property possessed by a female Hindu, whether acquired before
or after the commencement of this Act, shall be held by her as full owner
thereof and not as a limited owner.

Explanation —In this sub-section, ‘property’ includes both movable and
immovable property acquired by a female Hindu by inheritance or devise, or at
apartition, orin licu of maintenance or arrears of maintenance, or by gift from
any person, whether a relative or not, before, at or after her marriage, or by
her own skill or exertion, or by purchase or by prescription, or in any other
manner whatsoever, and also any such property held by her as stridhana
immediately before the commencement of this Act.”

obelem that had arisen before the High Courts can be best narrated from
ing paragraph of the judgment of the Supreme Court +1.

“Under the same law (a) in an identical fact-situation, a Hindu widow who
has inherited property in Orissa or Andhra Preadesh would be a ‘limited owner’
and would not become an ‘absolute owner’ thereof, whereas, if she has inherited
property in Madras, Punjab, Bombay or Gujarat, she would become an ‘abso-
Jute owner’. That is to say, in a situation where a Hindu widow regains
possession of a property (in which she had a limited ownership) subsequent to
the commencement of the Act (b) upon the retransfer of the very same property
to her by the transferee in whose favour she had transferred it prior to the
commencement of the Act. This incongruous situation has arisen because of an
interpretation and application of section 14(1) of the Hindu Succession Act
(Act). In the context of the aforesaid fact-situation the High Courts of Orissa
(c) and Andhva Pradesh (d) have proclaimed that she would be only a ‘limited
owner’ of such property on such retransfer whereas the High Courts of
Madras (०), Punjab (f), Bombay (g) and Gujarat (h) have taken a contrary
view and have pronounced thxt she would become an ‘absolute owner’ of sucha
property in the aforesaid situation. We have therefore to undertake this exercise
10 remove the unaesthetic wrinkles from the face of law to ensure that a
Hindu widow has the same rights under the same law regardless of the
fact as to whether her property is situated within the jurisdiction of one High
Court or the other.”

the ope

Ultimately, the Supreme Court held that the widow would be entitled as full
owner in the above circumstances.

2.15, Another illustration of a controvesy which ultimately was resolved by the
Supreme Court (after a time lag of nearly 20 years) may be referred to in this
context.22,

Ingurer’s Liability under Motor Vehicles Act.—Section 96(2) (b) (ii), Motor
Vehicles Act, 1939 was the provision to be consizered. While section 96 of the Motor
Vehicles Act imposes on insurers of motor vehicles the duty to satisfy a judgment
obtained against persons insured in respect of third party 7568, it was permissible
under section 96(2) for the insurer to raise certain defences to the action on specified
grounds. Thus, a defence could be based on section 96(2)(b)(ii) which related to—

“a condition excluding driving by a named person or persons or by any person
who is not duly licensed, or by any person who has been disqualified for
holding or obtaining a driving licence during the period of disqualification”.

(@ Section 14(1) of Hindu Succession Act of 1956.
(b) The Act came into force on June 17, 1956.

(© Ganesh Mahania. v. Sukria Bowa, ATR 1963 Ori 167 : 39 Cut LT 474.
(0) Venkatarathnam v. Palamms, (1970) 2 Andh WR 264.

(e) Chinnakolandai Gourdan ४. Thanji Gounder, TUR (1966) 1 Mad 326 : ATR 1963 Mad 497:
(1965) 2 MLJ 247.

(f) Teja Singh v. Jagat Singh, AIR 1964 Punj 403.

(8) Ramgowd Aunagowda v. Bhausaheb, ILR 52 Bom I: ALR 1927 PC 227.
(h) Bai Champa v. Chandvakaata Hiralal Dahyabhai Sodagar, ATR 1973 Guj 227.
2-191 Min of Law & Tustice/ND/90



Law Commission of India—136th Report

The question that troubled the High Courts, until it was resolved by the Supreme
Court, can be best stated by quoting from the judgment of the Supreme Court:—

“While in some States a widow of a victim of a motor vehicle accident can
recover the amount of compensation awarded to her frem the imuterce
company, ina precisely similar fact-situaticn she would be unable to Co ro, in
other States, contlicting views having been taken by the respective High
Courts. The unaesthetic wrinkles from the face of law require 10 be removed by
settling the law, so that the same law does not operate on citizens differently,
depending on the situs of the accident. The qustion is, whether the insurer
is entitled to claim immunity from a decree obtained by the dependents cf the
victim of a fatal accident on the ground thatthe insurance policy prewiccd “a
condition excluding driving by a named person or persons or by any person who
is nct duly licensed or by any person who has been disqualified for holding or
obtaining a driving licence during the period of disqualification’, and
that such exclusion was permissible in the context of section 96(2)(b)(ii) for
claiming immunity against the obligation ta satisfy the judgments against the
insured in respect of third party risks”.

On the question of the insurer’s liability, the Supreme Court held that the
absolute exclusionary clause had to be read down so as to bring it in conformity with
the substantive provisions of the Act. What emerges from ‘the aforesaid illustration
is that it took about 25 years before uniformity in the law as contained in Secticn 14
of the Hindu © Succession Act could be brought about by the Supreme Court. Till
then the law was being “administered differently in different parts of the country in
terms of the interpretation made by the respective High Courts of concerned States.
Similarly, in the second illustration under the Motor Vehicles Act it tcok nearly 20
years before the law could be uniformly laid down by the Supreme Court. In the
result, a Hindu widow acquired a sight to property in one State but not under another
under the identical All-India-Law. The widow of a victim became entitled to
compensation in one State but notin another under the same law in an identical
situation. Experience, thus, establishes that inordinate delay of nearly 20 years is
likely to be caused if the task of bringing in uniformity is left only to be settled end
laid down by the Supreme Court in appeals as and when the matter is taken up to
the Supreme Court as also establishe: the need for uniformity in law for application
throughout the country.

2.16. Question to be considered the—machinery.—This excursus has been
considered necessary in order to enable us to proceed to the next question. If, as
is the theme of the preceding paragraphs, uniformity of decisions and remedying,
of the inconvenience caused by conflicting decisions is a desideratum, then what
should be the machinery for maintaining such uniformity? Is the existing machinery
on the subject adequate and if not, what new measures should be devised for the
purpose? We shall, at the proper place, give some samples of important points of
law on which there appears to exist conflict of decisions. In that connection, we may
also mention thet there are several questions of law on which such a conffict existed
in the past for a fairly long period, though the same has been subsequently removed,
either by judicial pronouncements of the court. or by legislative clarification made as
aresult of the recommendations of the Law Commission of India or otherwise.
At the end of this report. we shall make appropriate recommendations as to the
mechanism to be introduced for the purpose of maintaining uniformity.



CHAPTER III
PRESENT MACHINERY, IF ADEQUATE

3.1. Present machinery: appeal to Supreme Court.—As regards the machinery
at present existing for the purpose of settling a conflict of views, it primarily consists
of access to the Supreme Court or legislative intervention. Access to the Supreme
Court by way of appeal is, in the very nature of things, sporadic and depends on the
accidents of litig tion. A litigant may or may not appeal to the Supreme Court on a
question of law. Evenif he has appealed on a question of law, the appeal may be
withdrawn by him for his own reasons, or the matter may be compromised or other-
wise disposed of, without a decision, Again, even if the matter comes to be heard and
decided on the merits before the Supreme Court, the particular question of law might
not be gone into by the Supreme Court. Other grounds would have supplied the
material for the final decision. Thus, clarification by the Supreme Court—which
would 92 a very good step—is not actually achieved in every case, because the
process is not designed systematically for the purpose.

3.2. Legislative iaterveation.—Legislative intervention designed to clarify the law
which might have become obscure by a conflict of decisions, isalso not a very
systematic process. The point of conflict may not be brought to the notice of the

2gislature at all. Even ifit is brought to the notice of the legislature, the legislature
may not have the time or the inclination to look into it, because of what are regarded
as more pressing demands. Sometimes, even after the Legislature has looked into the
matter and a legislative proposal has been introduced on the subject, the proposal
may not culminate in actual legislation, because the proposal may not be passed or
the Bill, as passed by the House finally, may not contain the needed clarification.
No doubt, the functioning of a body like the Law Commission brings to the notice of
the Legislature the difficulty caused by conflict of decisions on a particular point.
But th: quzstion of legislative time, inclination and other matters mentioned
above, still remains.

3.3. Need for amendment.—lt seems, therefore, that there is need to supplement
the existing machinery by creating some apparatus that will be designed directly to
seek and achieve uniformity of law temporarily marred by conflict of views. The
cause of uniformity has to be improved by removing the defect in the system, where-
under matters in the nature of conflict of decisions do not systematically reach the
courts (the Supreme Court by way of appeal) or the Legislature (for statutory
clarification), or do not reach either of these agencies promptly and effectively. In
order to deal with the subject in a concrete manner, we are making a recommendction
in this report* as to the machinery that can be devised to achieve uniformity of law.

3.4. Certain specific enactments concerning Hindu Law covered.—It is appropriate
to draw attention to the conflict of decisions that seems to exist on various significant
points concerning certain specific enactments. The present report deals with
enactments which constitute animportant part of codified Hindu Law, viz., the
Acts of Parliament relating to (i) Marriage; and (ii) Succession, that is to say, the
major statutes relating to Hindu Family Law. In due course, the Commission
hopes to take up certain other important enactments also, from the point of view
of settling the conflict of decisions that might have arisen on the subject.


CHAPTER IV

IDENTIFICATION OF SOME PROBLEMS ARISING OUT
OF CONFLICTING DECISIONS OF DIFFERENT HIGH
COURTS AND SUGGESTION OF REMEDIAL MEASURES

4.1, Tne same law cuinot be continued to be allowed to be interpreted, applied
or administered, in different parts of the country in an inconsistent and conflicting
fashion by different High Courts of the cocerned Siates. The conflict ‘may’ in
course of time be resolved by the Supreme Court provided however that it is carried
to the Supreme Court. (The litigant may not have the will or the rescurces to approach
the Supreme Court). Even if the conilici ultimately gets resolved, if may be after a
decade or wo. Existing conflicis must, therefore, be removed by remedial legislative
measures. The stupendous and arduous task can be underiaken ony ina phased
manner. In the present chapter the Commission has dealt with prebiems arising out
of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and the Hindu Succession Act. 1956 respectively.

4.2. Can or cannot a respondent ia _a restitution of conjugal rights petition plead
by way of defeace that the marriage does not subsist? should he or she be driven
to a separate suit? Section 9 of ithe Hindu Marriage Act. 1955 provides
that when either the husband or the wite has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn
from the society of the other, the aggrieved party may apply, by petition, to the
District Court ror restitution of conjugal rights and the court, on being satisfied of the
truth of the statement made in such petition and on being satisfied that there is no
legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree restitution of
conjugal rights accordingly. There is an Exaplanation to the section, dealing
withthe burden of proof of reasonable excuse. There is a contflict of decisions on one
question, nameiy, whether the respondent in the petition fer resiivution can raise
apleain defence, that the respondent had already obiained dissclution of the
marriage according to custom. The High Court of Rajasthan has held* that such a plea
cannot be raised. The reason profiered is thal the Act makes no express prevision for
the adjudication of a claim or defence that the marriage between the contending
parties stands dissolved by a decision by a private forum like the Panchayat of the
tribe. According to that High Court, such adjudication can be obtained only from
the civil court and not from the matrimonial court.

But the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir? has taken a conrary view. Inits
opinion, a petition under section 9 (for restitution) or under section 13 (for divorce)
presupposes an exisiing valid m: ०. The plea ihat no such marriage exists, either
because it never iook piace ७- because it was dissolved under a custom or a special
enactment, is a defence opea to the opposite party to non-sui. ihe petitioner, even if
such a defence has not been specifically provided in section 9. According to this view,
a matrimonial court can, and indeed is bound to, entertain a defence raising a plea as
to non-existence of a marriage or its non-performance or any other legal ground. The
matrimonial cour: must mould its decree or order in accordance with its adjudication
onit. 7 would appear that the latter view is correct. Itis worth noting Ghat section
29(2) of the Hindu Mirsiage Act, 1955 expressely provices that the Act is not 10 effect
any right recognised by custom or conferred by any special enaciment to obtain
dissolution of a Hindu Merviage. Thus, a custom is not abrogaied by the Hindy
Marriage Act, 1955, Incidentally, the Delhi High Court has held that the custom
prevailing amongst Sikh Jats of the Amritsar District to dissolve the marrige otherwise
than under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955is recognised by law, and where such a
dissolution has been made out of court, a subsequent marriage cannot be declared
null and void.* The Comunission is of the view that.—

_ CU) in order to immunize the unfortunate spouse involved in a matrimonial
litigation from the evil of multiplicity of proceedings and

(2) in order Co ensure that all the controversies between the parties are
tesolved by the very court before which their matrimonial dispute is initially
brought.

insiead of driving the parties toa fresh litigation involving incurring of fresh costs.
the court must be expressly empoviered to resolve all the relevant issues so that
‘lis’ hetween parties ends once and for all times,

8


Law Commission of India—136th Report

_ To resolve the coatlict of views and in view of the considerations streesed earlier,
it is recommended that an ‘Explanation’ broadly on the lines indicated hereunder be
added to section 9:—

_“Explanation 2. The Court before which a petition for restitution of
conjugal vights is presented under this section shall have jurisdiction to decide
whether the masriage has been dissolved in exercise of any right recognised by
any custom or conferred by any specialenactment to obtain the dissolution
of a Hindu Marriage, being a right saved by sub-section (2) of section 29.7

4.3 Can one of the spouses who has signed a joint petition for divorce by consent
not withdraw his or her consent before the court passes an order granting the prayer ?

Section 13B of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 provides for divorce by consent:—

"138, Divorce by mutual consent.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act
a pxition for dissolution of marriage by a decree of divorce may be presented
10 th: disirict court by both the parties to a marriage together, whether such
marriag: was solomanized before or after the commencement of the Marriage
Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976, on the ground that they have been living
separately for a period of one yeer or more, that they have not been able to
live together and that they have mutually agreed that the marriage should be
dissolved.

(2) On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six months after the
date of the presentation of the petition referred to in sub-section (1) and not later
than cighteen months after the said date, ifthe petition is not withdrawn in the
meantime, the Court shall, on being satisfied, atter hearing the parties and after
making such inquiry as it thinks fit, that a marriage has been solemnized and
that the avermen:s in the petiion are true, pass a decree of divorce declaring
th marriage to bs dissolved with effect from the date of the decres.”

{Emphasis added]

After thy initial p-tittom for divoree is made jointly by the spouses, the court
must wail for the period specified in the section. It is implicit that the consent to divorce
asrecordad in the initial petition, can be withdrawn by the consenting spouses before
a final order is passed by the courl granting the request for consent decree for divorce.
But can the consent be withdrawn by only one of the spouses? According to one
view, it can be withdrawn, 3,5, However, according to cnother view,” the
withdrawal pplication msde by only one of thetwo spouses Is incompetent and
having once appended the signature as a joint petitioner, he or she cannot sesile
from the consent even though no final order has been passed by the court acting om
ths joint request. Once the signature 5 made and petition is presented, such is
the View, he or she is tied down to the consent and cannot be allowed to withdraw
from the con:tant unilaterally provided une signautre made in token of the consent is
voluntary and not tainied with fraud.

he Delhi as well as the Bombay High Court subscribe to this view. >

4.3.1. Inthe result, in one part of India a spouse who has second thoughts on the
wisdom of consenting to a decree for divarce can retrieve the situation bejol the court
passes the final order, in another part of India he or she cannot do so, though doth are
governed by the same statutory provision of fw. Such a situation cannot be
countenancad by the community, particularly in a matter relating to mariial status, and
the conlict on the point cannot be tolerated. The statute, therefore. deserves to be
amended 50 that the same law has the same gonsequences everywhere in the country.

4.3.2, Which view deserves fo prevail and how to amend the law ?.—Before forming
an opinion on the issue, th> seasoning which has commended itself to the respective
High Courts in support of the two dive:gent views needs to be examined. The High
Court of Delhi which holds the view that consent “cannot? be withdrawi by only one of
the spouses unilaterally reasons :—°

“9. Sub-scetion (2) provides that if the petitions is not withdrawn in the mean-
time, on a joint motion made by the parties not earlicr than six months after the
date of the presentation of the first petition referred to in sub-sec. (1) and not
later thin 18 month; after the said date, if the Court is satisfied after hearing the
parties and after making inquiries that a marriage has been solemnized and the
averments inthe petition are tc, it can pass a decree of divorce. Though
sub-sec. (2) of section 13B envisages withdrawal of the joint petition, it docs not



lo

Law Commission of India—J36th Report

prescribe the procedure for withdrawal of the join petition, / also do uot find any
other provision in the Act or the Rules dealing with withdrawal of a joint’ petition
presented under section 13B(1). However. seviion 21 of the Act provides that,
subject to the other provisions vontained in the Act and to such Rules as the
High Court may make in this behalf, all proccedings under the Act shall be
regulated, as far as may be, by the Code. ‘Thus. ii 15 mevossay tu refer to the
provisions dealing with withdrawal and abandonment of plaint in the Code. Order
23, Rule | prescribes the procedure for withdrawal and abandonment of a suit.
Sub-rule Sof Rule 1 of Order 23 specifically deals with the power of the Cowt
10 permit withdrawal or abandonment of asuit or part of aclaim presented
jointly by one or more plaintiffs. Sub-r, (5) of R. 1. of 0.23 reads thus :

“(5) Nothing in this ruic shall be deemed to authorise the Court to
permit one of several plaintiffs to abandon a suitor part of aclaim
under sub-rule (1}, or to withdraw, under sub-rule (3), ny suit or part of a
claim, without the consent of the ather plaintifts.*

Thus, when the suit ts filed by ४० or more plaintifis, the Court cannot permit one
of the several paintifts to abandon a suit or pari of a claim without the consent
of the ather plaintiffs.

10, Section 13901) of the Act eho contemplates join! presentation of a
petition. [tis similar to asuit filed [0917 by one ur more plaintiffs, Thus Just
av asuit or pert of acim conitatbe abandouced or viithdravn bv ene plaintiff, one
of tic pe to the peiilica camot he peruiticd to withdraw the petition oy
abandon the praper without te conscut of Mie other party. जि other words a
petition presented uncer section 13B(1) of the Act cannot be also withdrawn by
one party unilaterally. OF course, if ihe Court is satisfied that ihe consent was
nol 8 fres coasent eid lt was the result of 10:90, traud or undue influence then it
is 4 different matter becauss i such acase the court is empowered specifically
10 refuse to gran: the dewee. The Legislatuse itreduced section 139 in the
Act by Marriages Law (Amendmen:) Ac. 1976 to provide for a speedy dissolution
of marricge Whoni:is found that the murriogn is irretrievable. The Legislature
provided for an interval cf a period of sixmonths between the first motion and the
second motion in order to afford the parties further opportunity for reconciliation,
{f one party is allowed to withdraw the consent even when other grounds,
namely that the parties continue to live separately and have not been able ta live
together still subsist and recongiliation is aot possible then it will frustrate
the very purpose of ihe eaactment. Very precions time cf one of the parties who
hes waited for over six months for filing the second motion wiil be wasted and
a party who wants to harass and is guilty of abusz of the process of the Court will
benefit, This position is made further c! by inscstion of sub-see. (68) (0 section
23()) of the Act, Under this section, the Cowt is empowered to grant the decree
even in an undefended case if itis satisfied that the averments in the petition
are Irue and the castsentfor tual divorce nas nat been obiai by force, fraud
or undue influence. [1 my opinion, since the second motion as contemplated
in section 13BQ2)} his to be २ joint motion, mn 23 would come into
operation in a case like the present one when one of the parties refuses to join
inthe second motion and the other party has no alternative but to make an
application to the couri fer orders on the petition aiready presented ender
section 138(11 of the Act before the spec! time of 18 months expires. ff
unilateral witdrawal of consent is permitted the Cowi will not be able to pass
a decree in da undefended ease aniter section 23(bb) of the Aci, 1 am Uhus
unable to accept the contention of the leumned counsel for the respondent
that he could unilaterally with!r.w the consent without proving that the
consent was obtained by force, fraud or undue influence.”

(Emphasis supplied]
4.3.3. The sante view is held by the High Court of Bombay 70 as reflected in the

passage extracted from para {1:—

“G1... The above-mentioned cireunstauces would cefinitely show that
the husband has filed the petition along with his wife for a divorce by mutual
consent and that while doing sa, he acied voluntarily. There was no question
of any confused state of mind. Thu», here isa case where there is abundant
evidence to show that at the time when the application was made the husband
and the wife had mutually agreed that the marrige should be dissolved,


- Law Commission of India—136th Report

Similarly, the various circumstances do indicate that-the parties have been
residing separately for more than one year and that there was 10 possibility of
their living together. These are all the requirements under section 13-B for
making a joint application for divorce. Once these requirements are proved,
it would be necessary for the cout to grant a decree for divorce. The fact that
ata later stage either party does not want a divorce would be irrelevant. What is
material is as to whether the above mentioned requirements were existing

when the petition was filed.”
{Emphasis added]

4.3.4, The contrary view that consent can be withdrawn by one of the two spouses
unilaterally is supported by the reasoning unfolded in this passage या
“9. With great respect to the learned Judge of the Punjab and Haryana
High Court we ave unable to agree, that after a petition is signed and filed in
Court by both the parties under section 13-B(1) it cannot be withdrawn by one
of them. The very condition prescribed in section 13-B (2) of the Act namely that the
petitition has to be considered on the motion of both the parties, means, if one of the
parties declines to join the other to make a motion for consideration of the petition on
merits, after six months after the date of presentation of the petition, consideration
of the petition on its merits becomes impossible. Therefore, it is clear that while
it is open for both the parties to withdraw the petition jointly, it is also open
to one of the partcis at her or his option, not to join the other to make a motion for
consideration of the petition, in which event, the Court has no power to
consider the petition onits merits. That is what happened in this case. Therefore,
the learned Judge had no option than to dismiss the petition. In fact as shown
earlier the appellant himself in his objection to the application for maintenance,
has stated so, though he hes contended to the contrary in this appeal.
10. Our view receives support from a Division Bench judgment of this
Court in Krishnamurthy Rao v. Kamalakshi, AIR 1983 Kant 235. In that case
Jagannatha Shetty J., (as he then was) held that the consent, in the context
of passing a decree for divorce, must subsist on the date of hearing. Therefore,
consent given on the date of petition is not final and irrevocable. If so, there was no
necessity for the Legislature to impose the two conditions in section 13-B(2) viz.,
(1) bar for consideration of the petition for a period of six months-and (2) the
consideration of the petition could Le only onthe motion of both the parties.
Therfore, we are of the view that the respondent was.entitled to withdraw the
cosent for divorce given in the petition and when she did so the Court was right
in dismissing the petition, indeed it had no other option.”
[Emphasis added]
4.3.5. Fallacy in the Delhi view.—The Delhi High Court has erroneously drawn
upon the analogy of a civil suit by two plaintiffs which cannot be withdrawn by
only one of the plaintiffs. It has been overlooked that both plaintiffs have a joint and
common interest in seeking a relief against a defendant and one of the paintiffs
cannot abandon the interest of the other. As against this in a joint petition for
divorce by concent presented by two spouses, but for their consent at the stage of
presentation, the interest of the two spouses isin conflict. Thereis no common
defendant against whom they have a joint common interest to seek which cannot be
abandoned by one of them at the cost of the other. This vital distinction has been
overlooked. What is more, the Delhi High Court has not shown awareness of the
insurmountable hurdle presented by section 13B(2) which envisions a joint motion by
both the sides (at least six months after the presentation of the petition) being made
for a decree. Certainly the spouse having second thoughts cannot be compelled to
make a joint motion for decree. There is no.answer to this hurdle. And the High
Court has attempted none. The Delhi and Bombay view is therefore ' altogether

untenable.

4.3.6. Why the Commission commends the view that consent can be withdrawn
by any one of the spouses unilaterally.—There are five good reasons which induce the
Commission to conclude that the view that the consent can be withdrawn even
unilaterally at any time before the final order is passed by the Court as held by the
High Court of Punjab, Karnataka and Kerala (differing from the High Courts of
Bombay and Delhi) :—

(1) Consent of both the spouses must subsist till the passing of the final order
by the Court granting a decree for divorce by consent. No decree by consent
can be passed on the basis of a one-time consent accorded in the past at the
point of time when the petition was signed and lodged. It would be unfair

8


Law Commission of India—136th Report

and incongruous forthe court to passa decree in the face of the clear
assertion by one of ihe spouse: tha: there was no ‘‘consent on his or her
part at the point of time of passing the so-called consent decree” ina
matrimonial matter having serious repercussions on the life and future
status of the spouse who, on further reflection after appending the
signature, has doubts abut the wisdeim of doing sc.

(2) There is no basis in logic or law for freezing the option of the consenting spouse
as on the date of presentation of the petition secking a divorce
by consent.

(3) The legislative mandate embcdied in section | 38(2) compelling the iwo spou-
ses fo wait for six moaths before moving the court, by necessary implication,
provides the clue to the discernible purpose of the provision, > 10 grant
time for ‘reflection’ as also ter possible reconciliaticn pursuant thereto,
viz., precondition enjcined.

(4) The ‘motion for decree for divorce by consent being required to be nude by
“both?” of the spouses cannot be cemplicd with in case one of the speuses is
net prepared to joinin making the moticn. Surely the spouse who io longer
consents cannot be ‘conipelled’ to join in moving a motion for a decree as
enjcined by section 13B(2).

(5) To pass a decree by consent in the lace cf the express asserticn by cne cf the
two spouses that there was no consent at the veally crucial point of time of
passing the final order would be in tot! negation of the letter and spirit
of the law.

The Cominission accordingly has no hesitation in recenmending that an Explenation
be added to section 13 B to the effect thatthe consent of Loth the spouses reflected
in the joint petition must subsist at the point of time when the court passes the jinal
order granting the decree as prayed.

4.4, Should the objectionable or cruel conduct of ove of the spouses subsequent to
the institution ef a petition under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 be open ic exami-
nation or should it ‘hut out of consideration, There is a conflict of cecici
question whsther the ccnduct of a persen शीत the filing cf 2 matrimonial petiticn
can be taken into account in granting relief under the Act. particularly where the
alleged conduct amounts to erne'ty,

Can be examined.

pleadings,
consider:
authoritic

inher initially er by way of amendment, it could net be taken inte
ticn by the court. The learned Single Judge tuck note of the relevant
and, disag-eeing with the contention, cbserved :-

“I have considered these cases, but they only state the general rule whileit
is equally well settled that there are exceptions to this rule and it is cpen toa
court in exceptional cases to take into consideration cvents which may have taken
place subsequent to the filing of the suit and grant relief on their basis where the
relief as claimed orginally in the suit may have become inappropriate by reason
of altered circumstances and where this may appevr te be necessary in order to
shoyten unnecessary liligetion or to subserve the substantial intcre:t cf justice.
Ram Dayal v. Maji Devdiji, ATR1956 Raj 12, which [ followed in Parihar v. parihar,
AIR 1978 Raj i40. Exceptions must be applied in matrimonial cases, in order
to subserve the interest of justice and not to compel the partics te begin another
round of litigation on the basis of subsequent events and allow the precious peried
of their life to go waste. It must be so donc depending, ef course, on the nature
of the case, because it is not only the partics which cre concerned in the case,
but the court has a certain amount of duty and discretion to exercise. The relicf
entirely depends upon its satisfaction. Thit is why, in Chand Narain v. Smt. Saroj,
1975 HLR 494 (Raj): ATR 1975 Raj 88, a fact clicited in crass exeminction,
though not pleaded, was considered as to constitute-cruelty. In Kundan Lal v,



Law Commission of India—136th Report

Kanta Rani, 1979 Mat LR 352 (P&H), the husband in his suit for nullity and
desertion, pleaded an unjustified impotence against the wife, the wife in her
written statement did not say that the false charge of impotence amounted to
cruelty and further did not plead that a report of theft was lodged against her
with the police, but all this was proved on record. It was held that the wife was
justified in her withdrawal from the socicty of her husband. I am, therefore,
of the view that the learned trial judge was justified in holding that he could
take into consideration the allegation of adultery made by the wife at the
time of cross-cxamination and in her deposition”.

This view was reaffirmed 1°, 11 by the Delhi High Court in 1987.

4.6. Ina Himachal Pradesh case, a subsequent allegation was taken into. account
ina case of maintenance.

Cannot be examined

4.7. According to the view propounded by the Allahabad high Court an allegation
in the written statement cannot be examined to afford any cause of action. 1°

The pertinent observations are :—

“Having heard learned counsel for the parties on the merits of the appeal,
I find that it has none. I have already recited in some detail the allegations made
by the husband in his oviginal petition and even indicated that even if all the facts,
stated by the petitioner in his original petition were accepted on their face, no
case whether of cruelty or desertion, for judicial separation or divorce could be
said to be made out against the respondent. The lower appellate court has recited
certain statements, made by the respondent wife in her written statement, while
discussing the point wehether the allegations made by the wife regarding the
husband’s intimacy with his Bhabhi are false and whether they amount to
cruelty in law. Now, I must observe, at the very outset, that a fact in order to
afford a cause of action for any relief, must precede the initiation of the action.
Consequently any allegation made by the wife in her written statement could
afford no cause of action for any relief on the husband’s petition. Therefore, I
do not think that the statements made by the wife in her written statement, could
afford any ground for granting relicf to the husband in the present case and
need not have been discussed by the lower appellate court. With regard to the
facts preceding the presentation of the petition, I agree with the finding reached
on assessment of the evidence by the lower appellate court that none of
them could amount to cruelty and at any rate, the allegation of illicit relations
betwoen the husband and his Bhabhi. which is said to have been hurled by the
wife at him, must be deemed to have been condoned by the cohabitation between
the husband and the wife inthe year 1969, which resulted in the birth of a child
on or about 12-5-1970, after which the parties did not live together.”.

4.8. The Panjab High Court has also sustained the proposition that such subsequent
statements cannot be taken into account.!7

4.9. Why the Commission supports the view that the conduct of a spouse even
subsequent to the institution of a matrimonial petition should be permitted to be exa-
mined.

Inthe considered opinion of the Commission, the conflict onthis vital issue
deserves to be resolved by a clarificatory amendment of the relevant provisions
of law so as to adopt the view propounded by the High Courts which have formed
the opinion that conduct of a spouse should not be excluded from consideration
merely on the ground that th: conduct complained of is subsequent to the institution
ofthe petitionin point oftime subject, of course to the rider that the court may
insist on the concerned pleading being amended to bring the issue in focus. Jf the
subsequent conduct attributed to the concerned spouse is such that it has a bearing on
the matrimonial problems brought before the court, there is no valid reason for refusing
to examine the matter pertaining to such conduct. The court would naturally be
expected to be anxious to do complete justice between the parties and would not
be expected to shut out or exclude matters, otherwise relevant, from examination.
For, refusing to look into such matters is likely to result in being disabled to sort out
the problems in a satisfactory manner or refusing to sort out some problems on
hypertechnical considerations. The court cannot refuse to face facts by closing the
door to the scrutiny of subsequent conduct. A few illustrations will be useful for
3—191 Min of Law & Justice/ND/90

13


Law Commission af India--136th Report

proper comprehension of the issue. Take the case of a husband sceking a deeree for
restitution of conjugal rights. /f subsequent to the institution of the petition, he assaults
the respondent wife or levels accusations of adulterous conduct or starts living with
व girl friend, can such subsequent conduct be excluded from consideration except
at the peril of denying justice to the wife? Would the court consider it fair to
proceed to passa decree for restitution of conjugal rights in favour of the errant
husband by adopting the ‘hands-off- the-subsequent conduct’ stance?

4.10, The law on the subject is, therefore, in necd of legislative clarification
empowering the Court to take into account subsequent conduct and subsequent
events.—The best course, in the opinion of the Commission, would be to insert at
section, say section 218 (la), in the Hindu Marriage Act to the following effect to
be inserted between 218 (1) and 218 (2).

“21B(1a). Subsequent events.—In granting relief under this Act, the court
shall have power to take into account events subsequent to the filing of the
petition, including statements made by a party in the pleadings or in the course of
evidence before the court or in affidavits or otherwise, but the court may, in a
particular case. refuse to do so in the interests of justice until a plea based
on such events is specifically taken in the petition or in the reply thereto, as filed
originally or as amended later with the leave of the court, as the case may be.”

4.11.1. Whether order granting maintenance to a respondent can be passed even
whilst refusing relief claimed by the petitioner and dismissing his/her petition.—.
Section 25 of the Hindu Marrige Act, 1955, confers jurisdiction on the court to pas:
orders for maintenance (on an application made by the spouse), at the time of
passing any decree under that Act, or at any subsequent time. It provides:

“25, Permanent alimony and maintenance.--(1) Any Court exercising
jurisdiction under this Act may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time
subsequent thereto, on application made to it for the purpose by either the
wife or the husband, as the case may be, order that the respondent shall, pay to
the applicant for her or his maintenance and support such gross sum or such
monthly or periodical sum for a term not exceeding the life of the applicant as,
having regard to the respondent’s own income and other property. if any, the
income and other property of the applicant, the conduct of the parties and other
circumstances of the case it may scem to the Court to be just, and any such pay-
ment may be secured, if necessary. by a charge on the immovable property of the
respondent.

(2) Tf the Court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances of
cither party at any time after it has made an order under sub-section (1), it
may, at the instance of either pzrty, vary, modify or rescind any such order
in such manner as the Court may deem just.

(3) If the Court is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order has been
made under this section, has remarried or, if such party is the wife, that she has
not remained chaste, or, if such partyis the husband, that he has had sexual
intercourse with any woman oulside wedlock, it may. at the instance of the
other party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in such manner as the
court may deem just...

[Emphasis added]

Many High Courts have taken the view that this power cannot be exercised where the
petition for divorce is dismissed, because, according to these High Courts, the
expression “decree is passed” is referable only to cases where ¢ decree granting one
of the reliefs under the Act is passed by the court. In other words, in the opinion
of these High Courts, no order granting maintenance can be passed by a court whilst
refusing dny substantive relief under the Act and whilst dismissing the main petition
as aresult thereof.

The High Courts which have propounded this view are:
(1) Caleutta,!s

(2) Gujarat,

(3) Orissa,2¢

(4) Punjab & Haryana?! and

(5) Rajasthan.23


Law Commission of India~136th Report

4.11.2. Maintenance can be granted—the contrary view.—In the High Court जा
Bombay itself, there is a conflict on this point. One learned Single Judge of the High
Court has in 1962 subscribed to the view held by the aforesaid High Courts. But
another learned Single Judge has taken a contrary view in 1987 andheld that an order for
maintenance can be passed in favour of व respondent even in a matter where substantive
relief is refused and thejmnain petition is dismissed. ® Later on, another learned Single
Judge has fallen in line with this view in 1989, 24

4.11.3. The Andhra Pradesh High Court, in its recent jadgement, has held that the
power to grant maintenance under section 25 of the Act can be exercised even where the
suit or petition is dismissed.—The view is expressed that the section does not suffer
from any such limitation as is assumed by the other High Courts, whose decisions are
referred to hereinbefore. A “decree”, in its opinion, means an expression of
adjudication. Regardless of whether the suit or petition is allowed or dismissed,
the order of the Court constitutes a decree and the expression “at the time of passing
any decree” in section 25 only means “at the time of disposal of the case”. And.
according to the Andhra Pradesh view, the power to grant maintenance is ancillary
to the main power of the disposal of the petition2®

4.11.4. How to resolve the conflict?—It would be anomalous and unjust to
interpret the identical provision of the aforesaid Central Act as conferring
jurisdiction on the matrimonial court to grant maintenance & the time of passing a
decree refusing the substantive relief claimed by the petitioner in one State and to so
intespret it that the court has no such power in another State. A statutory clarification
is, therefore, necessary in order to bring about uniformity in the administration of
law in this area throughout the territory of India to which the Act is applicable.
In the considered opinion of the Commission, the conflict requires to be resolved by
accepting the view propounded by the Andhra Pradesh High Courtand. bythe Bombay
High Court in its two decisions of 1987 and 1989, namely, the view that the court exercising
jurisdiction under the Act is empowered to grant maintenance even whilst refusing
the substantive relief claimed by the petitioner and dismissing his or her petition.
The Commission has formed this opinion for the reasons articulated hereinafter.

4.11.5. Reasons.—The five High Courts which have formed the opinion that the
court has no power to grant maintenane in a case where the main petition of the
petitioner is dismissed have been impressed by the argument that when the main
petition is dismissed, it cannot be said that a decree has been passed within the
meaning of section 25 of the Act. Says the Gujarat High Court in Harilal v.
Lilavati® :

“In our view, the passing of an order of’ dismissal of a petition could not be
regarded as the passing of a decree within the meaning of this section. The word
“any” which precedes the word “decree” has been used having regard to the various
kinds of decrees which may be passed under the provisions of the Act. A decree may
be a decree for restitution of conjugal rights. It may be a decree for judicial
separation. [t may bea decree of nullity of marriage. It may bea decree of
divorce. At the time of passing any such decree or at any time subsequent
thereto, orders can be made as provided in the section.

* * *

In ous view, the language used by the legislature in section 25 is such that the
power thereby conferred could only be exercised at the time of passing of any of
the decrees referred to in the earlier provisions of the Act or any time subsequent
thereto. We are supported in this conclusion by an unreported decision of Chief
Justice S.T. Desai and Justice Bakshi given on 28th November i960 in First
Appeal No. 178 of 1960 (Guj). In that case, it has been laid down that Sec, 25
relates only to an ancillary relief which is incidental to the substantive retief that may
be granted by the Court, though the incidental relief may be given to other party”.

[Emphasis added}

11 is this reasoning which has found favour with all the aforesaid five High
Courts and with the learned Single Judge of the Bombay High Court in Shantaram’ s
case2? The contrary view, however, is founded on the following reasoning which
appealed to the Andhra Pradesh High Court,28 viz: .
“The intention of the legislature is clear that inasmuch as the matrimonial
Court has been seized of the matter and has goue into the merits of the
controversy between the parties and knows who had committed the wrong and
whore the justice lay should be empowered to make an order of permanent
alimony. The passing of any decree inchides passing of dismissal of the petition

i


16

Law Commission of India—136th Repott

and the decree may be u decree allowing the petition or dismissing the same. The
words “any decree” take in both kinds of decrees. Otherwise, the words will
not be “any decree” but merely “a decree”. Besides there is no meaning in
allowing the parties to goto some other Court and start back once again atter
they have done it before the matrimonial Court which knows their respective
strength. and can be expected to do justice especially when the Court is one of
the Superior Courts in the Country being a District Court or its equivalent”.

(Emphasis added]

Jn the opinion of the Commission, the Andhra Pradesh High Court has righily
stressed the aspect that an order passed bya court dismissing the main petiticn
constitutes a decree and the expression “any decree” employed by the Legislature
in section 25 is wide enough to cover a decree granting the relief as well as a decree
refusing the relief, fora decree refusing the reliclis alsoa “decree passed by the
court”. The expression “at the time of passing the decree” employed by the
Legislature in section 25 of the Act cannot be equated with the expression “any
decree granting one of the reliefs under the Act.” lithe Legistature intended to
confer the power or the court only whilst granting a relici, the Legislature would have
used the expression “any decree granting d relief” instead of employing the expression
wate time of passing any decree”. The contrary view is an exiremely narrow view
which would prove counter-productive and would defeat the very purpose of
conferring the power on the court to grant maintenance. Because, if the court was
passing a decree giving relief 80 one of the spouses, say, of “restitution of conjugal
rights”, the court would be doing so on the ground that the other spouse has no lawful
excuse for staying separate. in the event of reaching such a conclusion, there
would possibly be no occasion for awarding maintenance in favour of the spouse
found to be at fault whilst granting a decree for restitution of conjugal rights in
favour of the petitioner. So also if the court was granting a decree for “judicial
separation” in fvour of the petitioner, the court would be doing so on the promise
that the petitioner had lawful ground for staying separate from the respondent.
Jn that event also, while passing a deorce for restitution in favour of the petitioner,
there would possibly be no occasion fcr awarding maintenance to the respondent
spouse who wzs found to be ai fault. The same would be the position in
amatter where the court upholds the claim of the petitioncr for 8 decree of nullity,
There would be no occasion to award maintenance whilst upholding the claim of
the petitioner that the marrige wes a nullity, say, on the ground that a fraud had
been practised. Thus there would herdly be an occasion to award maintenance
whilst granting relief to the petitioner and allowing his or ker petition. Surely, the
Legislature was not conferring this power for ornamental purposes when in most
of the cases there would be no cccasion to exercise the power. Regardless of
whether the petitioner was granted, the relicf of a decree for “restitution of conjugal
rights” os “judicial separstion” or “nullity” or whether he was refused such a relief,
the respondent could not pray for award of maintenance. Jn case the petitioner
succeeded and the decree was passed in his or her favour, the respondent, being a& spouse
at fault who had no right to stay separate and claim maintenance, could uot possibly
claim maintenance. In the event that the petitioner failed, since the court was not
passing a decree granting relief, the respondent would not be entitled to pray for
maintenance. In either event, thercfore, the respoident would not be entitled to claim
maintenance. It would mean that such a power could perhaps be exercised only whilst
granting a decree for divorce and inno ether case. Such an interpretation of the
expression “at the time of passing a decree” would, therefore, be virtually iextamouat
to rendering the matrimonial court powerless to do justice by awarding maintenance
even in a case where the respondent spouse was the wronged party and was entitled to
stay separate and claim maintenance. As pointed out by the Andhra Pradesh High
Court, the respondent spouse would have to initiate proceedings under section 125
of the Code of Criminal Procedure or under section 18 of the Hindu Women’s
Adoptions and Maintenance Act. The result would be thet a wronged spouse would
be driven to another court, involving expenditure of considerable time and money and
resulting in considerable misery to the said spouse. It would also be counter-productive
to create a situation which results in multiplicity of proceedings besides distress
to the wronged spouse and divests the court of the power to do justice between
the parties in the very proceeding before the very court. In any view of the
matter, therefore, it is appropriate to resolve the conflict by adding an Explanation
to sub-section (1) of section 25 providing that the power may be exercised regardless
of whether the court granted the relic? claimed by the petitioner or whether the
court refused any substantive selicf undex the Act to the petitioner and dismissed
his or her petition cither on merits or by reason of the petitioner withdrawing the
petition or the same being dismissed for non-prosecution,



Law Commission of India—136th Report

4.12.1. Whether an application claiming maintenance can be entertained only by the
very court which has passed a decree or atso by any other court exercising jurisdiction
ander section 19 of the Act?—Another significant question arising under section 25 of
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, and in zespect of which there are conflicting decisions,
is regarding the court to which an application fer permanent alimony under the
said section can be made. The Punjab & Haryana High Court®® has taken the view that
even if in a petition seeking divorce or any other relief under the Act, a decree is passed
by ‘one’ particular court having jurisdiction under section 19 of the Act, the opposite
party can move ‘any’ court having jurisdiction under section 19 of the Act in order
to seek permanent alimony or maintenance, as the case may be. The High Court
has supported the conclusion by the reasoning reflected in the following passage :—

“Jt is not disputed that the marriage of the parties was solemnised within the

jurisdiction of District Court, Jullundur, both the parties are residing within the

jurisdiction of District Court, Jultundur, although tt is not clear as to where they
last resided together. Therefore, itis clear that even for a petition under
section 25 of the Act, the Jullundur Court will have jurisdiction in this matter.

Adverting la the phraseology of S. 25, stress is being laid on the words “on

application made to it for the purpose”. From these words, it is sought to be

inferred that ‘it’ is the Court which passed the decrec, and that court alone, is
entitled to entertain such application. If this interpretation were to be placed on
these words, it willlead to anomalous results as would be clear from the following
example. Suppose, a divorce petition is dismissed by the first Court and the
dismissal is confirmed by the High Court and ihe matter goes to the Supreme

Court and the Supreme Court grants a decree of divorce. The interpretation

sought to be placed on S. 25 of the Act and onthe word ‘it’ would mean that a

petition for grant of permanent alimony under Sec. 25 cf the Act will have to

be filed before the Supreme Court. Similarly, if the divorce petition was declined
by the first Court, but was granted by this Court, the application for the grant of

permanent alimony will tie to this Court. This is not the scope of either S. 25,

छा conveyed by S. 19 of the Act. Moreover, the opening part of S. 25 shows that

the proceedings may be taken before ‘any’ Court exercising jurisdiction under
this Act and the jurisdiction under this Act is exercised in view of Sec. 19 of the

Act on metters arising under the Act. Therefore, the reasonable interpretation

to be placed, would be that S. 25 og for that matter any other section, should be

read subject to S. 19 so far as the jurisdiction of the Court is concerned unless
there is a specific provision to the contrary in any particular section. Therefore,
ona plain reading of S. 19 and reading it harmoniously with 8. 25 of the Act,
the only conclusion to be drawn would be that even if a petition for divorce

or any other decree, is granted by one of the Courts having jurisdiction under S.

19 of the Act, it may give cause to the opposite party to move for the grant of

permanent alimony or any other relief under S. 26 or 27 of the Act. again the

jurisdiction will be governed by S. 19 of the Act and not merely by the passing

‘of a decree by a particular Court”.

4.12.2. A contrary view has been taken by the Bombay High Court? which is of the
view that section 19 will not apply to an application made under section 25, Hindu
Marssiage Act, 1955, and that no other court except the court passing the decree will
have the jurisdiction to grant permanent alimony. Says the High Court :~-

“The substantive matrimonial relies under the scheme of the Hindu Marriage
Act are governed by Sections 910 13B of the Acti.e. foy restitution of conjugal
rights, for judicial separation, for declaration of a void or voidable marriage.
for divorce on one of the several comtingencies or for divorce by mutual consent
All these substantive reliefs under the Hindu Mapriage Act are to be secured by
presenting a petition before the Court of original jurisdiction as defined under
Section 19 ofthe Act. On the other hand, the applications which we have
discussed above under Sections 24, 25and 26are to be presented during the
pendency of the main substantive preceeding. The application for interim
maintenance under Section 24 has to be presented during the pendency of the
petition for substantial matrimonial relic!. So also applicaticn for custedy
of the child or for maintenance or education. isto be presented when the
substantive petition for matrimonial relief is pending. The wordings of the
opening sentences of Sections 24 and 26 clearly show that the applications are
to be presented in any proceeding under this Act. The wordings of Section
25 are however slightly different. Secticn 25 reads in so far as itis relevant for
purposes of this revision as follows:—

«625, (1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under this Act may, at thetime of

passing any decree or at any time subsequent thereto, on application made to

i7


is

Law Commission of India— 136th Report

it for the purpose by either the wife or the husband, as the case may be,
order that the respondent shall pay to the applicant for her or his mainte-
nénce and support such gross sum. ”

Thus, the application under section 25 has to be presented to the Court
exercising jurisdiction under this Act between the parties in respect of a
substantial relief under the Act. The phraseology further shows that it is that
Court which can pass an order either at the time of passing any decree for
substantial relief or at any time subsequent thereto. It is further clear when
the section says that such application has to be made to it i.e. referring to the
Court exercising jurisdiction under this Act at the time of passing any decree or
at any time subsequent thereto.

Even viewing the case from another angle, it would be seen that the procee-
dings under Sections 24, 25 and 26 of the Hindu Marriage Act are consequential
reliefs to the main or substantial relicls arising out of the marriage petition.
As far as Sections 24 and 26 are concerned, there can be no dispute that they are
to be filed during the pendency of the main proceedings for substantial relief.
In so far as S. 25 is concerned, permanent alimony is a consequential reliet
to the substantial relief of the determination of matrimenial rights between the
parties. The phrase clearly shows that the Court exercising jurisdiction at the
time of passing of the decree or subsequent thereto on an application presented
before it may pass an order granting relief of permanent alimony and
maintenance. The object of the framers appears to be that the Court having
session of the matter relating to substantial relief is also given the jurisdiction to
deal with the consequential relief of permanent alimony.”.

The contrary view of the Punjab and Haryana High Court has been countered in
the following manner:~-

“A contrary view has been taken by the learned single Judge of Punjab and
Haryana High Court in the matter of Smt. Darshan Kaur V. Malook Singh
(AIR 1983 Punj. & Har. 28). According to the learned Judge, Section 19 of
the Hindu Marriage Act is applicable to all proceedings including the application
under Section 25 of the Act as well. He disagreed with the argument that the
phraseology of S. 25, andin particular the words ‘on application made to it for
the purpose’ referred to the court which passed the decree. According to him,
this interpretation would lead to anomalous results. | respectfully disagree with
the said view, inasmuch as firstly the word “petition” in the Hindu Marriage Act
is referred, only to those which are presented to the Courtfor substantial reliefs
in respect of matrimonial relations inter se while the word “application” is used
only for consequential relief’s of interim maintenance. permancnt maintenance
or for custody and maintenance of children. Section 19 of the Act also refers to
“petition” and, in my opinion, obviously to the petition of substantive relict’s
covered by Ss. 9 to 13B of the Act. Further Ss. 24 and 26 from the very nature
of the reliefs to be granted refer to the pending proceedings for the main relic!
and as such have to be filed and presented where the petition for substantive
relief is pending. So also S. 25. which, in my opinion, is a consequential relief
to be granted at the time of passing of any decree of substantive relicf or at any
time subsequent thereto, the application thereunder will have to be filed before the
Court exercising the jurisdiction at the time of passing of any decree or
subsequent thereto.

*

Even the plain reading of the opening sentence of S. 25 shows that the sec-
tion itself fixes the forum for the relief of permanent alimony and maintenance
to be the same Court which is exercising jurisdiction between the husband and
wife al the time of passing of a decrce Jor substantive matrimonial relief or
any time subsequent thereto on an application made to it for the purpose.”

. 4.12.3, Which of the two conflicting views deserves to be adopted?—-The Law Com-
mission is of the opinion that while both the views are plausible, the Punjab view that
an application claiming maintenance or permanent alimony under section 25 of the Act
can be made to ‘any’ court within the meaning of section 19 to which the imain petition
could have been made. is preferable. It gains strength from the (० that the Legislature
has employed the expression “any Court™ instead of employing the expression “the
Court™. In any case, the Punjab view is more conducive to justice in the sense that it
results in alleviating the hardship of a spouse entitled to claim maintenance or permanent



Law Commission of India—136th Report

alimony. The contrary view is likely to occasion great itisery and hardship to such a
spouse. An illustration may be useful to buttress this proposition. Say a husband
obtains an ex parte divorce decree at Bombay. The wife residing at Madras where the
marriage was solemnized will be obliged to go to Bombay to seek alimony involving
time-cost, travel-cost and money-cost which she cannot possibly afford. She may
find it practically impossible to do so. Such would not be the position if she can move
the Madras Court where the marriage was solemnized. Accordingly, the view that
an application for maintenance, ete., under section 25 of the Act can be made to ‘any’
court in which the main petition could have been instituted having regard to section
19 of the Act deserves to be adopted.

4.12.4. Recommendation.—In order to resolve the conflict on the question, in
the opinion of the Law Commission, it would be appropriate to amend section 19,
Hindu Marriage Act, by inserting the words “including an application under
section 25” after the words “every petition” end before the words ‘‘under the Act”
in the opening line thereof.

4.13.1. Whether the court passing an ex parte decree can itself set it aside under
Order 9, rule 11, CPC, or whether the litigant should be obliged to prefer an appeal?—
There is a conflict of decisions onthe question whether or noten ex parte decree
passed under the Hindu Merriage Act can be set aside on cn zpplication made by
the respondent under the provisions of Order 9, rule 13, Code of Civil Procedure,
1973. The view of Delhi ®, Kern: taka ® and Madras 4 High Courts is that the
court passing the decree has the power to set aside but the Gauhati High Court
holds otherwise. The Madras High Court in its latest judgment, concurring with the
views of the Delhiand Karnataka High Courts that an ex parte decree can be set
aside by that very Court, holds:—

“Under 5. 21 of the Act, it has been provided thct subject to the other
provisions of the Act and «Iso to the rules framed thereunder, cll proceedings
under this Act shall be regulated as fares mey be, by the Code of Civil
Procedure. S. 28(1) of the "Act states that all decrees made by the Courtineny
proceeding under this Act shall be appeallable as decrees of the Court made in
the exercise of its originel civil jurisdiction and every such eppeal shall lie to
the Court to which appeal ordinarily lies from the decisions of the Court
given in the exercise its original civil jurisdiction. Encouraged by the provision
so made under S. 28(1) of the Act, learned counsel for the petitioner was
emboldened to contend that the remedy of the respondent was only to appeal
and not en <pplication to set aside the ex parte decree. There is no provision
either in the Act or in the Rules framed thereunder ६६ ० the setting aside of
en ex parte decree passed under its provisions. It is also not disputed that the
Rules framed by this Court do not provide for it. In the absence, therefore,
of provisions in the Act and also the Rules framed thereunder under S. 21
of the Act,.the proceedings under the Act stand regulated by the provisions
of the Civil Procedure Code. In S.21 of the Act, there is no indication that
procedural part of the Civil Procedure Code alone would be applicable and
not the substantive part of it. Prima facie, it would appear thatin the absence
of any restriction to the applicability of the substantive provisions of the
Civil Procedure Code:n application for setting aside the ex parte decree
passed under the Act would lie under 0, 9 R. 13, C.P.C.”

{Emphasis added]

4.13.2. The contrary view taken by Gauhati High Court ® to the effect that an
application under order 9, rule 13, Code of Civil Procedure, for setting aside an ‘ex
parte’ decree passed under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, is not maintainnable is
expressed thus

“Tt is made clear that subject to the other provisions contained in the Hindu
Morrioge Act, oll proceedings under the said Act shall be regulated, cs far as may
be. by the Civil P.C. Therefore, the mandatory provisions of S, 28 (1) of the
Hindu Marriage Act cannot be regulated by 0.9 R. 13 of the C. P.C. for setting
aside an ex parte decree. All decrees made by the Court in any proceeding under
the Hindu Marriage Act also include an ex parte decree. Therefore, only appeal
will lie against an ex parte decree as laid down under the mandatory provisions of
S. 28(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act. An application under 0.9 R.13_C. P.C. for
setting aside such ex parte decree, is not meintainable. The learned Additional
District Judge committed error in law. The order dated 7-2-83 is liable to be
set aside”.

19


Law Commission of India-- 136th Report

4.13.3. How to resolve the conflict.—The consensus view held by Delhi,
Karnataka and Madras High Courts is supported by sound reasons. The Gauhati
High Court has takena very nerrow view without ex-minirg the recsoning of all
the other High Courts. Thcre is no re: son why the litigants in Assam should suffer
hardship and injustice by being obliged to approach the ppelk te court incurring
further time cost end money-cost insteed of seeking the setting side of the ‘ex parte’
decree in the very court. A statutory cl: rificetion is, therefore, required to be made in
order to bring about uniformity of law in the creas to which the Act is applicable.
It is, therefore, recommended that anew section, Say section 28A, should be inserted in
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, on the following lines. :—

“28A.(1) In any casein whicha decree is pressed ex parte ogeinst the
Tesponaent, he may apply to the Court by which the deciee was passed for an
i (६, andif he sitisfies the Court thet summons was nov duly
served or thet he was prevented by sufficient couse fiom appearing when the
case wes called on for hearing the Court shall make en Order setting aside
the decree as against him upon such terms as to costs, payment into Court or
otherwise as it thks fit, end shall eppoint a 009 for proceeding with the case.

(2) No decree shall be set aside on any such application as oforesvid unless
notice thereof has been served cn the opposite 9: rty.”

4.14.1 Whether an appeal against a decree of divorce abates on the death of the
spouse obtaining the decree?—There is a conflict inthe decisions on the question
whether an ippeal agvinst a decree cf divorce or in application made under
Order 9, rule 13, Code of Civil Piocedme, 1973, for setting aside on ex rarte decree
of divorce would ab: te on the de::th of the spouse in whose favour decree of divorce
has been passed. The Bombay High Court ®* is of the view that an appeal against a
decree of divorce will not abate on the death of the respondent pending appeal. The
Karnataka High Court भा has concurred with this view. The following reasons
prevailed with the Bombay High Court * in arriving at its conclusions:—

“Tt may be conceded that the position is not free from doubt, but where this is
So, equitable considerations must preveili nd bearing in mind the nature of the
conclusion, the far-reaching effect of the findings of the Court, both on personal
status end property rights, it is desirable thet the party ¢ ggrieved by the decree
of the trial Court must have the opportunity to have the findings reversed and
this opportunity must be essured irrespective of the death of the respondent,”

4.14.2. A Contrary view that such an appeal would abate has been taken by the
Madras High Court 3१ on the following reasoning :—

“On the passing of the ex parte decree of divorce the meniiege between the
1espondent «nd deceased Roman then stood dissolved andon the death of
Ramanathan, even on the footing thet there hod been no prior dissolution of
moriivge the motrimonial knot was once and for all irrevocably united on
3-6-1984. It is doubtful whethei even in ceses where the Marriage has been
dissolved by death there is a power in the Cc mit to declore that it continued for
some other reasons. It is necessery to remember that a man after the desth can
no more be divorced or secure 2 decice of divorce then he cn be considered to
be married o1 even condemned to de:th. On the devth of the husb: nd, in this
case, the matrimonial knot did not any longer subsist ond thereafter there
cannot be a decree of divorce dissolving the m. rriege. The so-celled question of
stetus on the basis of which the lower appellte Court was inclined to implead
the petitioner as a legal represent: tive does not carry any conviction. In this
case, on the obt»ining of the decree of divorce ex parte, the respondent
became 2 divorcee ond thet stetus wes unalterably’ fixed to her by the
subsequent demise of Ramnathan. It is difficult to understend how end
by wh't process the respondent who wes divorcee on 24-10-1983, when
the ex parte decree of divorce wes pessed nd on 3-6-1984, when Ramanathan
died, could claim the status of 2 widow. This would assume that despite the
decree of divorce dissolving the metrioge, the marriage had continued to subsist
tll the dite of death of Ramenz then, for which thete is no basis whatever in law.
Further, when the meritel knot had been untied by the decree of divorce,
there is no basis whetever for <ssuming thet the matrieg: had subsisted even
therecfter in ordcr to confer the status of » widow on the respondent herein on
the death of Ramanathan. On the facts of this case, it is seen that the respondent
was onlya divorcee from the date of passing of the decree and also on the



Law Conunission of India—~136th Report

date of death of her husband and she cannot lay any claim asthe widow of
Ramanathan unless she can 16501 te some statutory provisions enabling her to
do sc. The Court below was, therefore, in error in holding that the questicn of the
stains of the respondent would make some difference to the Jactual situation
obtaining in this case.”

4.14.3. Why in the opinion of the Law Commission the view subscrited to by the
Bombay and Karaataka High Courts is correct and how to salvage the situation
arising aut of the conflict— A decree jor divorce involves declaration and
adjudication of the status of a spouse. Bui its relevance does not disappear when
the other spouse, say husband, dies. [f the tzerce is unienable in law, the status of
the wife will subsist. In that case she would be entitled to succeoil to the estate of ker
deceased husband in her capacity as his widow. Jf ce appectisallewed 10 abate on the
death of, say, the husband, then even on untenable dectce af divorce passed against the
wife will remain in full force and she will be deprived of her right to succeed to the estate
of her deceased Musband in her capacity as his widow, The view that the proceeding
does not abate is plausible and there is no compu'sion in law or logic to hold
otherwise. It, therefore. stands-te reason, and also promotes the ends of justice, to adopt
the Bombay-Karnataka view that the proceeding does not abate,

4.14.4. Recommendation.—In order to resolve the conflict on this vital issue. it
is desirable to specifically provide in the Hindu Masriage Act by way of amendment
that no appeal against the decree for divercs or wulliy of marrage and no
application mace for setting aside an ex parte decree for divorce cr nullity of
>ge shail abate on the death of the respondent's sponse. This amendment can
yled out by way of the inserticn of a new sub-section as sub-section (5) to
section 28 of the Hindu Marriage Act. 1955,

4.15.1, Can a Matrimonial Conrt pass an order in respect of the personal property
presented at or about the time of marriage to one of the spouses which is iving at the
niatrimonial home.-The conflict of decisions on this point centres on the precise
scope of section 27 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 quoted hereunder :—

“27. Di-posal of sroperiy.— In any preceeding under this Act, the court may
mase such provisions in the decree as ६ deems just and proper with respect to
any property presented, at or about the time of marriage, which may belong
Jointly to both the husband and the wile.”.

A question has arisen under this provision whether the Matrimonial Court catt
pass an order regarding the disposal of property received by a spouse individually as
# present at or about the time of marriage whilst disposing of a substantive
proceeding under the Act. According to Allahabad High Court 7, section 27 does uot
cxehide the jurisdiction or the power of the Court to pass an appropriate decree in regard
to the property which may belong either solely to the husband or solely fo the wife. This
power, in the nature of things, is inherent in the legal proceedings which appropriately
arise under the Hindu Marringe Act. lihas been held that since section 21 of the
Act confers on the Matrimonial Court all the powers of the civil court. by recourse to
section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure which pe.tains ic inhe-cnt powers te make
such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent abuce of the
process of the court, the court cin grant general or other relief which it may think
just and proper under the circumstances established in a given case. Of course, another
learned Single Judge of the same High Court has subsegaently taken a contrary view
evidently unaware of the earlier view 1. Since the earlier view could nat have peen
reversed except bya Jarger Bench,in the Allahabad High Court itself, there is a
conflict on this point.

4.15.2. The High Courts of Jammu & Kashmir®?, ®. Delhi **, Orissa 47
aad Punjab & Harvama 4, 17, “4,49 have dissented from the decision of the Allahabad
igh Court and have taken the view that section 27 excludes, by necessary intendmeat.
is application to the property, which the party seeking a direction from the Court
claims that it exclusively belongs to if.—- It has further held that the court cannot
make provision in respect of the individual property of a spouse in the decree in
exercise of its inkerent powers under section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

4.15.3. How to resolve the conflict?—The rea! controversy centres round the
debate as 70 whether the inherent powers wader section 151 of the Code of Civil
Procedure can be invoked ina petition under the Hindu Masriage Act in order
to do complete justice between the facilities having regard to the fact that section 27
of the Act is not happily worded so as to cover within its sweep incidental dispute?

4191 Min of Law & Justice/ND/90

at


Law Commission of India—I36th Report

ol this nature. The Allahabad view that inherent powers can be invoked to pass
incidental orders on related matters of this nature deserves to be adopted in order to once
and for all putan end to all the legal disputes arising out of their marital tie. Otherwise
the spouse, say, the wife, who complains that the property gifted to her. being her
separate and exclusive property kept at the matrimonial house, is being held back
by the husband wil! have to file a separate suit. Tuking of such a view will result in
anuiplicity of proceedings. more investment of time, costs. and running to lawyers and
courts and another round of litigation increasing avoidable work load in the courts. The
Allahabad view, therefore. deserves to be adopted. Section 27 accordingly needs to be
cmmended and words ‘or exclusi should be added after the words “which may belong
tointh’ and before the words 710 both the husband and wife’, and the Law Commission
recommends accordingly.

4.16.1. Whether section 23 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 is applicable where
there is ouly one male heir of the intestate?.--There is a conflict of judicial opinton
among the various High Courts about the precise scope and applicability of seciion
23 of Hindu Succession Act, 1956 in the con’ext of the situaticn where a Hindu
male or female, dies intestate leaving behind a family comprised of one male heir
and one or more femaie heirs. The question is whether section 23 will be attracted in
such a situation and whether a female heir will be denied the right of partition of the
dwelling house until the male heir chooses to claim partition of his shave therein. The
said) provision runs thus: —

“23. Special provision respecting dwelling houses.—-Where a Hindu intestate
has left surviving him or her both male and female heirs specified in Class I of
the Schedule and his or her property includes a dwelling-house wholiy occupied
by members of his or her family, then, notwithstanding anything contained in
this Act, the right of any such female heir to claim pariition of the
dwelling-house shall not arise until the male heirs choose to divide their
respective shares therein; but the female heir shall be entitled to a right of
residence therein :

Provided that where such female heir is a daughter, she shall be entitled to
aright of residence in the dwelling-house only if she is unmarried or has been
deserted by or has separated from her husband or is a widow.”*

4.16.2. The Calcutta®?,*4 Gujarat, Kerala** and Madras *4, High Courts have held
‘that Section 23 of the Act will be attracted evenin sucha situation anda female heir
cannot claim partition of the dweliing-house until the male heir chooses to claim partition
of his share therein.—The reasoning of the Madras High Court >>, which concurs
with the Calcutta High Court, is unfolded in the passage extracted from ins
judgment:

“...we are of the opinion that the Parliament, while enacting this section
should have felt that the dwelling-house of a Hindu joint family should be
regarded as an impartible asset treasured by the ancient Hindu tenants and as
such the dwelling-house should be allowed to be preserved by the family until the
male heir or male heirs. as the case may be, mentioned in Class I of the
Schedule, opted for dividing the same and to that extent. the Parliament
wanted to recognise the traditions and sentiments so cherished by the ancient
Hindu families from time immemorzial. If the male members choose to divide
the family house among themselves, cr if व single male member chooses to divide
it among the sespective shares or alicnates his share to a stranger. then it would
mean that the contingency has arisen whereby the male members are no longer
capable of preserving the dwelling house. That is why the Parliament hes.
under the section, allowed the female members to claim partition in case the
male members choose to divide their respective shares in the house. At this
juncture, we may point out that the Parliament has noi in any way restricted
the right of the female member to claim partition in the other properties left by
the intestate. In our opinion, so long,’ the male members do not choose to
divide thir respective shares in the dwe..ig house, the dwelling house is ina
way excluded from division, subject to the right of the female members to a share
thovein and th: right of residence of the unmarried female members, etc. While
doing $0, the Parliament should have taken into account th? fact that the female
members afle: पीठ merriage naturally live with their husbands in their houses .
If at the insiance of any such female members, the dwelling house is allowed
to be paviitioned against the wishes of the male hoir, he may be put to great
hardship and be compcl'ed to alienate the house if it is incapable of division,



Law: Commission of India—136th Report

Therefore it was but just that the family dwelling house should be allowed to be
kept by the male members till they chose to divide it, and the female members
should not be the persons responsible for the disintegration and fragmentation
of the dwelling house. In fact, section 23 has been introduced as a special
provision respecting dwelling houses, as clearly seen from the heading of the
section itself, thereby laying emphasis on the preservation of the dwelling
house. It was for these reasons, in our opinion, the Parliament has given the
male members an edge over the female members in the matter of the option for
partition of the dwelling house. But, at the same time, it is significant to note
that the proviso to S. 23 preserves the right of residence of a female heir who is
unmarried or is deserted by or has separated from her husband. or is a

widow.

The Madras High Court realised that great hardship would enure to the jemale
heirs but argued that it was a lesser evil than the resultant injustice to the mate heir:

“We are conscious of the fact that there are certain hard cases where for
instance, the intestate has left only a big mansion inthe form of a dwelling
house and no other property, (and is) survived by a single male heir and one
or more female heirs. In such caseseven though the female heirs are entitled
toa share in the property of the intestate under the Act, such right would
practically be defeated and frustrated since there is no possibility of the single
male heir choosing to divide the sharesin the property of the intestate, and
thus the right of the female co-heirs to have a partition of their shares is
likely to be successfully obstructed for ever. In such cases, the right to demand
partition, vested in the female heir, will be permanently postponed and
ultimately, frustrated. Such hard contingencies would cause great hardship to
the female heirs; but that cannot be avoided. In our opinion, if the view of
the Orissa High Court, followed by Padmanabhan, J. is to be accepted, then,
in our opinion, gross injustice would be done to the single male heir and the
very object with which the section has been enacted would be compietely
nullified. In our view, the hardship that would be caused tothe female heirs
in not being able to cialm partition is certainly relatively less than the injustice
that could be done to the single male member. Despite the above opinion held
by us, We cannot help observing that itis very unfortunate that section 23 is
not very carefully and lucidly worded ina particularity of language, avoiding
the scope of different interpretations. In our view, section 23 deserves
modification so as to avoid difficulties of interpretation leading to divergent
views and consequent anomaly.”.

4.16.3. A contrary viewhas been taken by the Bombay**, Karnataka™ and
Orissa® High Courts. Says Bombay High Court®*.—

“Now, it is true that the object of section 23 is to prevent fragmentation and
disintegration of a family dwelling-house at the instance of a female heir or heirs
to the prejudice of the male heirs. True it is that it is in tended to repeat
one of the ancient Hindu tenets to preserve a family dwelling house as an
impartible asset. It is a special provision meant to preserve and safeguerd a
family dwelling-house, whenit devolves in accordance with provisions of this
Act. It cannot be gainsaid that the female heirs specified in class-T inherit
the share even in the dwelling-house absolutely. The course of devolution of
property under section 8 of the Act, however, is restricted, so far as female heirs
are cocerned, and this restriction is to operate only till the happening of an
event envisaged under section 23 of the Act. Their right is only kep: in abeyance
until the male heirs choose to divide their respective shares in the family house
When the.e are more than one heir of the intestate residing jointly togethers
and forming a joint Hindu family, it is in the fitness of things and as
intended by the the legislature that at the instance of female heirs who are
strangers, their joint abode should not be disrupted and their joint status
impaired. But this object no” ager survives when there is no joint Hindu
family with male members resus.ig together ina family house on one hand, and
female heir on the other. With a sole surviving copercener or a lone male
heir with other female heir or heirs on whom the property (including the
dwellinghouse) devolves as per the provisions of section 8 of the Act and
who all take simultaneously, they are all tenants-in-common. To restrict
their rights in such situation also is mot merely to postpone that restriction.
till the happening of any event (as that event can never occur) but practically
destroy and deny that right for ever.”.



24

Law Commission of India—1361h Report

4.16.4. Why the Bombay-Karnataka-Orissa view that the female heirs should in
such a situation be entitled to claim partition deserves to prevail.—There is no good
answer to the vital point made by the Bombay High Court 10 the effect that if the
rights of the female co-owner who inherits the property along with the male
co-owners is curtailed to this extent thet even if there is no joint family
comprising of male heirs in existance, the female heir cannot claim partition, it
will virtually tcntamount to taking away from the female heir by another hand what
1५ given to her by the Parliament by one hand. The Madras High Court view that
the female co-owner must suffer this injustice lest the male co-owner आ il have to suffer
is in dishormony and out of tune with the constitutional Philosophy of equality
between both the sexes and smacks of a pro-male and anti-female bias. Surely a
Jemale co-owner cannot be denied the essence of the right merely because of her gender
even when the reason for the rule has virtually disappeared in the situation where there is
only one mate co-owner and the argument of preserving the joint family is no longer
available. The anachronism, therefore, deserves 10 be temoved by a suitable
amendment on the lines indicated hereinafter.

4.16.5. How to resolve the conflict?—In order to resolve the existing conflict and
anomaly centering on the interpretation and the scope of applicability of section
23 of the Act, the Law Commission recommends that section 23 be amended by
incorporating a further proviso to the existing proviso tu section 23 ef the Actin the
following terms :

“Provided further that the ‘provisions of this section shall net apply where there
is only one male heir.”


CHAPTER V
CONCLUSIONS & RECOMMENDATIONS

5.1. Conclusion.—The Commission is of the considered opinion that the
anomaly and incongruity arising on account of the identical provisions of the
identical Central laws being construed as having one meaning in some parts of India
and the same having different meaning in other parts of India, by reason of the
conflict of views of the different High Courts, needs to be straightened out for the
sake of achieving uniformity inthe interpretation and application of Central laws
throughout India, and for the sake of ensuring equality before law in this area, two
steps deserve to be taken :—

(1) Removal of existing conflicts by legislative measures calculated to clarify
the law by appropriate amendments in a phased manner, and

(2) To devise a mechanism to ensure that no such conflicts come into existence ox
yemain unresolved in future sa as to obviate the need for legislative
amendments in future.

To this end we make two recommendations:
FIRST RECOMMENDATIONS

5.2, Removal of existing conflicts.—In this context we recommened that existing
anomalies inthe area of Hindu Mayriage Act and Hindu Succession Act are removed
by legislative measures on the indicated lines as suggested in Chapicr IV. As a result
thereof, throughout the country in all the States to which the concerned Central Act
applies, uniformity of law will be secured in the relevant aree, and in all such States
instead of only in some States:

1, The matrimonial court, ina petition for restituiion of conjugal rights,

will have jurisdiction to entertain a defence raising the plea to the effect that the

marriage had already been dissolved as per custom prior to the institution of the
petition.

(See Chapter IV, para 4.2)

2. One of the two spouses who have presented a joint petition for divorce by
consent can withdraw his or her consent before the Court passes the final
order.

(See Chapter IV, para 4.3)

3. The objectionable or cruel conduct of the other spouse ‘subsequent’ to the
institution of a matrimonial petition will be open to examination in the same
proceeding.

(See Chapter 1५, paras 4.4 to 4.10)

4. An order granting maintenance can be passed by any matrimonial court

under section 25(1) of Hindu Marriage Act at the time of passing

a decree regardless of whether the petitioner’s prayer for relief is granted or
. not and regardless of whether the petition is allowed or dismissed.

(See Chapter IV, para 4.11)

5. An application claiming maintenance or permanent alimony can be
entertained by any of the cowts having jurisdiction in the context of section
19 of the Hindu Marriage Act instead of only the court passing the decree.

(See Chapter IV, para 4.12)
6. Alitigant against whom an ex parte decree is passed under the Hindu
Marriage Act can apply to the same court for selting aside the decree on

sufficient cause being shown instead of being driven to an appellate court.
{See Chapter IV, para 4.13)

25


26

Law Commission of India~-136th Report

7. An appeal against a decree for divorce or a preceeding to set aside an ex
parte divorce decree is not considered as having abated on the death of the
spouse obtaining the decree.

(See Chapter TV, para 4.14)

8. Whilst disposing of a substantive proceeding under the Hindu Marriage Act,
the concerned matrimonial court will be empowered to pass appropriate orders
also regarding the individual property belonging to one spouse lying with the
other spouse instead of obligingsucha spouse to undergo enother round of
litigation, and incur further time-cost, money-cost and effort-cost.

(See Chapter IV, para 4.15)

9. The bar against a female co-owner claiming partition of her share in a
dwelling house inherited along with other male heirs will not operate even in a
situation where there is one male co-owner so that her right is not rendered
virtually unexercisable and valueless.

(See Chapter IV, para 4.16)

SECOND RECOMMENDATION

The need for evolving a mechanism for nipping in the bud the conflicting interpretation
at the High Court level and the suggested solution.

5.3.1. The question that requires to be addressed to is as regards the need for
evolving suitable machinery so as to maintain, strengthen and restore uniformity on
questions of law. For, the present constitutional and statutory provisions that are
designed to maintain such uniformity? operate only when the matter reaches the
highest judiciary by way of appeal by the aggricved party or the Legislature finds
time to attend to the conflict of decisions. If one keeps aside certain special
provisions, such as the advisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, one finds that a
point on which there is want of uniformity can come up for decision only when a
litigant invokes the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. In other words, if a litigant
who has failed in the High Court on a question of law cannot afford to go to the
Supreme Court, or does not, for any reason, propose to approach the Supreme
Court, then the ruling of the High Court stands. The conflict of decisions ona
particular point of law will then remain as itis. This is not a satisfactory position.

5.3.2. To allow a conflict of views between High Courts to arise and languish in
comfort for many yeers, even decades, before resolving it ‘if? the conflict is carried
to the Supreme Court and ironed out in due course ‘when’ the matter happens
tocome up for hearing there, is less than an exemplary solution. A much better, much
speedier, and much more satisfactory solution which will systematically address this
problem deserves to be evolved. And suchis the present endeavour of the Commis-
sion,

5.3.3. The contours of the suggested solution are :

(1) When High Court “A” is faced with a problem pertaining to an all-India law
(excluding the Constitution of India) on which High Court “B” has already
made a pronouncement, if High Court “A” holds a view different or
inconsistent from the view already pronounced by High Court “B”, High
Court “A”, instead of making its own pronouncement, shall make a
reference to the Supreme Court. The order of reference shall be
accompanied by 8 reasoned opinion propounding its own view with
particular specification of reasons for differing from the view pronounced
by High Court “B”.

(2) (a) The party supporting the reference may arrange for appearance in the
Supreme Court but will not be obliged to do so.

(9) The said party will have the option of submitting written submissions
supplementing the reasoning embodied in the order of reference.

(० The party opposing the reference shall also have a similar option for
engaging an advocate in the Supreme Court and submitting written
submissions, inter alia to counter the written submissions, if any,
submitted by the other side.


Law Commission of India—I136th Report

(3) The Supreme Court may require the Government of the State in which the
High Courts “A” and “B” are situated to appoint at the State’s cost any
advocate from the State panel of lawyers of the concerned States to support
by oral arguments the view points of the respective High Courts.

(4) All such references may be ‘assigned to a Special Bench which may
endeavour to dispose of all such references within six months of the receipt
of the references in the Supreme Court in view of the inherent urgency to
ensure uniformity.

(5) Ifany SLP or appeal is already pending on the same point from judgment of
High Court “B” or any other High Court, the said matter may be clubbed
alongwith the reference. Any interested party may be permitted to appear
as interveners.

(6) The Supreme Court may return the reference if it appears that the parties
are acting in collusion.

(7) The Attorney Generai may be served with a copy of the referene and he shall
be entitled to urge the point of view of the Central Government in regard to
the relevant provision of the concerned Central Statute, if so desired.

(8) The referring High Court shall finally dispose of the appeal on all points
in the light of the decision of the Supreme Court in regard to the referred
point.

(9) The decision of the Supreme Court in the ‘reference will have no impact or
effect on the decision of High Court “B” in the event of the Supreme Court
upholding the reference in case it has become final between the parties by
reason of the matter not having been carried to the Supreme Court and
he said decision shall remain undisturbed as between the parties in High

‘ourt “B”.

5.3.4. In order to give effect to the aforesaid recommendation, a suitable
legislation may have to be enacted. A draft of the suggested legislation has been
appended for the sake of facilitating the task.

5.3.5. The First Recommendation, if and when accepted, will result in removal
of the existing conflict and disharmony in some areas of law forthwith, and in other
areas of law, incourse of time, ina phased manner. In the result, the evident injustice
occasioned to citizens by denial of equal treatment under the identical provision
of an identical all-India law, will be remedied.

The Second Recommendation, if and when implemented, it is hoped, will result
in nipping inthe very bud such conflicts in the future. And the citizens will be
protected from deprival of equality of treatment under the very same law.

5.3.6. The Commission, therefore, recommends accordingly.

Sd.j-
(M. P, THAKKAR)
Chairman
Sd./- Sd,j-
(५. V. ANJANEYULU) (2. M. BAKSHI
Member Member
Sd/.-

(G. V. G. KRISHNAMURTY)
Member Secretary

New DetHt, DATED THE 21sr Fes., 1990,

27


NOTES AND REFERENCES

CHAPTER J

Cayner (५, para 4.1L in regard 10 oaxisting conflict ou this point in the contest of section
Yof the Hindu Marriage Act. 1

CHAPTER 11

I
3
4

6.
7.

9.

10.
11.

12.

Giirunath vy, Kamlabai, ALR 1955. SC 200, 207, 206.
Ganga Saran y. Ram Charan, (1952) SCR 36.
Balakrishna v. Ramaswami, AUR 1965 80 195, 197.
Paragraph 2.4 supra.

Lay Commission of Lidia, 34th Report (09:
Cauper FF particularly pare bd 58 and 1.

ef para 2.9 infra.
Law Commission of India, Sth Report (Coils of Civil Procedure, 1908), pages 88, 89.
Paragraph 2.7 supra.

See also para 2.13 inira.

See para 2.10 supra.

Jagannathan Pillai v. Kunjithapadam Pillai, (1997) 2SCC $72, 55.

Skandia Insucance Co. ५. Kokilaben Chandravadain, (1987) 2 SCC 654, 657

of Cvil Procedure, 1905), Pages 71—93,
9.

CHAPTER वा

1.

Chapter 1५, infra.

CHAPTER LV

Damodar v. Urmila, AUR 1980 Rajasthan 57.
Rano Devi v. Rishi Kumar, (1981) Hindu Law Reporter 324 (J & K).
Balwinder Singh ७, Gurpal Kaur, AIR 1985 Delhi 14,

N. G, Rama Prasad v, B.C, Vaaamala, ATR 1988 Kara 1७2.

K, Krishoamurthy Rao v. Kamalakshi, AIR 1983 Karn 235.
Marcharan Kaur y. Nacbbattar Singh, AIR 1988 Yann 27.

K.T. Mohan v, deejabai, AIR 1988 Kar 28

Bombay and Delhi. see infra
Smt, Chander Kanta vy. Hans Kuaac

ad another, ALR 1989 Dell 13.

|. Smt. Jayeshree Ramesh Londhe v. Ramesh Baikaji Loadke, AIR 1984 Bom, 302

6. Rama Prasad y. B,C. Vanamala, AIR 1988 Kani, 162.
mt. Pushpa Raniv, Keishan Lal, ATR 1982 Del 107.
Ashok Sharma ४. Sint, Santosh Sharma, AUR 1987, Del 64.
Smt. Savitri v. Mulchand, AIR 1987 Del 52.

. Smt. Shakuntala v. Rattan Lal, (1981) HLR 542 (LP.

Sadan Singh y. Smt. Reshma. AIR 1982 All 52.

. Smt. Jarnail Kaur y. Sarwan Singh, (1979) Mindu LR 415 (P&H.

Minarani v. Dasarath, AIR 1963 Cal 428.

. Kadia Harilal ९. Kadia Lilavati, AIR 1961 Gaj 202.
. Akasam Chinna Babu v. Akasam Parbati, ATR 1967 Orissa 163.

Gurcharan Kaur ४. Ram Chand, AIR 1979 ए & 11 206,
Purshotam ४. Smt. Devakai, AIR 1973 Raj 3.

. Manilal v, Smit. Bhanumati, 1987(1) HLR 229.
. Sadanand ५. Sulochana, AIR 1989 Bom 220.
. 8. Jagannadha Prasad ९. Smt. 5, Lalitha Kumari, ALR 1989 57 8.

. See note 19 supra.

. Shantaram Narkar v. Hira Bai, AIR (1962) Bom. 27.

. Note 25 supra.

. Smt. Darhsaa Kaur v, Malook Singh, AIR (1983) ए& H 2s.
. Jagdish v. Bhanumati,

ATR (1983) Bombay 297.

Note 29 supra.

2. Jang Bahadur v. Smt. Mukia Syal, AIR 1986 Del 422.

28


Law Commission of India—136th Report

33. Irawa v, Shivappa Shiddalingappa, AIR 1987 Karn. 241.

34. Saraswathi Aunnal v. imi, AiR 1989 Madras 216,

35. Anjan Kumar v. Smt, Minakshi Sarma, AIR 1985 Guahati 44,

36. Kamalabai v. Ramdas, AIR 1981 Bombay 187.

37. Iravva vy. Shivappa Shiddalingappa, “ATR 1987 Karnataka 241.

38. Note 36 supra. . .
39. Note 34 supra.

40. Kamfa Prasad y. Suit, Ouwvati, AIR 1972 Ald. 153

41, Santosh Anand v. Anand Prakash, 1930 All WC 157.

42. Surinder Singh v. Manjit Kaur, AIR 1983 J & K 86

43, Anil Kumar v. Smt, Aruna Duggal, AiR 1989 NOU (&K) 63.
. Smt. Shukla v. Brij Bhushan, ATR 1982 Delhi 223.
. 9. Moharajaa v, Chakalayil Kin}, ATR 1988 Orissd 175.
. Surinder Kaur v. Madan Gopal Singh, AUR 1980 Punjab & Haryana 334.
47. Vinod Kumar v. State of Punjab, AIR 1922 Punjab & Haryana 372.
48, Suresh Kumar y. Smt, Saroj Bala, AIR 1988 Punjab & Haryana 217.
49. Dr. Suraj Prakash v. Mohinder Pal Sharma, AIR 1988 Punjvb & Haryana 218.
50. Arun Kumar ४. Jnanendra Nath, AIR 1973 0101७ 232.

51. Surjya Kumar v. Smt. Maya Datta, AIR 1982 Caleuits 223

52. Vidyaben ए. J. N-Bhatt, AIR 1974 Gujarat 23.

53. Madhavan Ezhuthassan v. Vellayyappan, (1981) HLR 594 (Ker).
$4, Janabai Ammal y. TA. S. Palani Muduliar, AIR 1981 Madras 62.
55. Note 54 supra.
56. Anant Gopalrao ९. Jankibai Gopairao, AIR 1984 Bombay 319.
57. B. Bangarappav. LK.T.. Pattanshetti, AIR 1988 Karnataka 174.
58. Hemalata Dei y. Umashankari Maharana, AIR 1975 Orissa 208.
59. Note 56 supra.

CHAPTER V
1, See Chapters 1, Mand वा supra.

29


APPENDIX
DRAFT BILL

THE CONFLICT OF DECISIONS CRESTORATION OF UNIFORMITY) BILL,
1

A 81100 promote the uniformity of law, by providing a machinery for settling conflicts of
decisions amongst High Courts.
1. Short title.--Tais Act may be crlled the Conflict of Decisions (Restoration of Uniformity)
Act, 1990.
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.—
(a) “reference” means a reference made by ihe High Court under section 3, and
(b) “statutory instrument” means a rule, notification, byelaw, order, scheme or form made
under any enactment.
(० “Special Bench” means a Bench to which references are specifically assigned.

3.(L) Conflict of decisions and reference by the High Court.—Where, ona question cf law involved

in a case pending before a High Court being a question to which this section applies, the High
Court takes a view which is in disagreement with the view taken on that question ina judgment of
another High Court (not being a judgment which has been subsequently overruled or superseded by
law), then the High Court shall, before finally disposing of the ‘case, make a reference of the
question to the Supreme Court, in otder that the law on the subject may be settled for the whole of
india.
(2) The provisions of this section apply to 2 question of law—
(a) relating tothe interpretation of a Central Act or of a statutory instrument issued there:
under, or
(09) relating to a subject forming part of the uncodified law of India.
but they do not apply to a question relating to the interpretation of the Constitution or any order
issued thereunder.
4. Contents of order of reference.—The High Court shall, in the order of reference under
section 3—
(७) formulate the que

tion of law referred by it to the Supreme Court, and

(b) state its own view on that question along with its reason for differing with the view of
the other High Court.

5. Proceedings in the Supreme Court.—Where a reference relating to a question of law is made to
the Supreme Court by the High Court under section 3, the Supreme Court may proceed to hear the
reference and determine such question in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

6. Notice to parties ant other persons, Notice of the dite fixed for hearing of the reference
shall be given---

(a) to the parties to the proceeding pending in the High Court out of which the reference arose!

(b) to the Attorney General of India;

(७ if the Sarcem: Court so directs, to the Governments of the States in relation (० which the
4 SHigh Court making the reference and the other High Court with whose view the first
mentioned High Court is in disagreement, exercise jurisdiction; and

(d) such other State Government, person or bodics, if any, as the Supreme Court may think
proper in the circumstance of the case.

7. Arguments and submissions by parties.—(1) A party to whom notice is issued under clause (a)
of section 6 may, if it so chooses, appear in the reference and address oralarguments or make written
submissions to (he Court on the question at issue, including (if so permitted by the Court), argumentg
of subm jsions in reply (o those of any party appearing in the reference.

(2) The Attorney General of India to whom notice is issued under clause (b) of section 6, shall
be entitled to apper in the reference and to address oral arguments or make written submission 10
the court, on the question at issue, including arguments or submissions intended to place before the
Court the views of the Central Government on that question.

(3) Where notice is issued tothe State Government under clause (०) of section 6, the State
Government, through its advocate,
(a) shall appear in the references and address oral arguments (unless dispensed with by the
court) and mike written submissions to the Court on the question at issue; and

(b) shall, if so required by the Court, place before the Court all such material as may Possibly
support the view taken on the question at issue by the High Court exercising jurisdiction in
relation to. the State.

30


Law Commission of India—136th Report 31

(4) The State Government, person or body to which or to whom notice may have been issued
under clause (d) of section 6 may appear in the reference and address oral arguments or make written
submissions to the Court on the question at issue.

8.1) Hearing by Special Bench and consolidation of cases.—A reference may be heard by a
Special Bench oF the Supreme Court, for disposal within six months of its receipt in the Supreme
Court in_ view of the inherent urgency to ensure uniformity.
(2) Where the question involved in a reference is also involved in any proceeding including a
petition for special leave to eppeal pending before the Supreme Court (whether on appeal from 8
igh Court or otherwise), the Supreme Court may consolidate the reference and the proceedings and
hear them together in the interests of justice.

9. Coltusive references.—Where the Supreme Court is of opinion that areference isthe result of
a collusion between the parties, it may decline to hear it and may return it to the High Court.

10. (1) Decision of the Supreme Court.—The decision of the Supreme Court on a reference
under this Act shall be communicated to the High Court which had made the reference and to all
High Courts whose views on the question at issue might have been convassed before the Supreme

rt.

(2) The High Court making the reference shall thereafter proceed further with the case
pending before it, for disposal in conformity with the decision of the Supreme Court.

11. Effect on judgment of High Courts.—The decision of the Supreme Court on a question of
law under this Act shall not affect the finality of any judgment of a High Court in any case as
between the parties to that particular case if no appealhas been carried against such judgment of
the High Court, notwithstanding the fact that the proposition of law laid downin the judgment
may have been overruled or modified by the Supreme Court inits decision.

12. Rules by the Supreme Court.—The Supreme Court may make rules to regulate the
Procedure to be followd in regard 10 references under section 3 and proceedings thereon.

GMGIPN—S 3-191 Min. of Law & Justice/ND/90—Dt. 23-4-91—1,200.