LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED THIRTY - SEVENTH

REPORT
ON

NEED FOR CREATING OFFICE OF OMBUDSMAN
AND FOR EVOLVING LEGISLATIVE — ADMINISTRATIVE
MEASURES Inter Alia TO RELIEVE HARDSHIPS CAUSED
BY INORDINATE DELAYS IN SETTLING PROVIDENT FUND
CLAIMS OF BENEFICIARIES


LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
SHASTRI BHAWAN

NEW DELHI
3
M.P. THAKKAR
Chairman
9.0. No. 6(3)/88-LC(LS)
October, 5, 1990.

To
Shri Dinesh Goswami,
Minister of Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhavan,
NEW DELHI.

Dear Minister,
RE : Presentation of 137th Report.

The suo Motu exercise of a jurisdiction conferred on the Commission—to
undertake post-audit of socio-economic legislation—which has not been exercised
hitherto has resulted in bringing to surface the existence of a sorry state of affairs
in the area of disbursements of provident furd accummulations to the concerned
employees on their retirement or to their nominees/dependents in the event of their
in-service death. A sample survey has revealed that as many as 8707 cases of pay-
ments delayed for a period exceeding 6 months have come to light in 62 public
sector undertakings subjected to survey. 481 Complaints of non-payment received
in response to a press-release issued to collect material revealed information which
cannot but cause distress. And within about 3 months of the Commission taking
up the issue as many as 139 complaints arising in the context of delays ranging up
to 21 years (it is not a typing error, the figure is in fact TWENTY-ONE) were re-
dressed. While removal of the distress of these 139 families is a matter of satisfac-
tion what is much more important is that it has revealed the urgent need for creating
a high powered monitoring agency in the form of an Ombudsman. The sample sc-
rutiny of the records of the defaulting undertakings has on the other hand revealed
the equally urgent need for devising other remedial measures to foreclose such an
awesome situation in future. Hence the 137th report entitled—

“NEED FOR CREATING OFFICE OF OMBUDSMAN AND FOR
EVOLVING | LEGISLATIVE—ADMINISTRATIVE MEASURES
INTERALIA TO RELIEVE HARDSHIPS CAUSED BY INORDIN-
ATE DELAYS IN SETTLING PROVIDENT FUND CLAIMS
OF BENEFICIARIES”
dealing with this vital problem and allied matters is being presented hereby. Having
presented the report the rest must rest with the Ministry. A restless conscience
however impels me to add that even as the report is being finalised, another ins-
tance (vide postscript added to the last Chapter, viz., Chapter VI) has come to light
showing how besides the earlier mentioned complainants nearly four hundred fur-
thermore employees or their family members are being treated with callousness
and the appointment of an Ombudsman as recommended by the accompanying
Report is a matter which does not brook any delay.

With regards,
Yours faithfully,

Sd./-

(M.P. THAKKAR)
Encl. : As above.
()-01


LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED THIRTY SEVENTH
REPORT

ON

NEED FOR CREATING OFFICE OF OMBUDSMAN
AND FOR EVOLVING LEGISLATIVE—ADMINISTRATIVE
MEASURES INTER ALIA TO RELIEVE HARDSHIPS CAUSED
BY INORDINATE DELAYS IN SETTLING PROVIDENT

FUND CLAIMS OF BENEFICIARIES

(i)-v)


Cuaprer I
Cuarter IT

Carter वा
Caper [V

CHAPTER V
Cuaprer V1

APPENDIX A

APPENDIX B
APPENDIX C

Aprenpices DI
& Dit

APPENDIX 8
APPENDIX F

APPENDIX G

Aprenpices HI
to HII

Appenpices 10)

to (VID)

CONTENTS:

Mnmoduction © eee + +
Delays in settlement of Provident Fund dues to the claimants—
Circumstances and Causes identified . .

Magnitude of the problem—Need for creation ofa statutory ombuds-

Other measures commended for expediting payments of Provident
Fund accumulations to the beneficiaries

Problem regarding legal implication of ‘Nominations’ under the
Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act,
1952—suggested solution

Conclusions and summary of recommendations . . . .
Notes and References. . . . . . . .

Letter dated 24-10-1988 addressed to all Public Sector Undertakings
and their Employees’ Trade Unions पु

Letter dated 28-11-1988 addressed to all India Level Trade Unions

Letter dated 28-11-1988 addressed to all Regional Provident Fund
Commissioners .

Statements of pending claims in Public Sector Undertaking . .

Press release dated 20-12-1988. . . . . . .

Statement of Provident Fund claims settled on matters being tackled
by commission . .

Statement of delay involved in disputed cases. . . .
Proforma of return required to be called for from Employers/RPFC

Correspondence with Regional Provident Fund Commissioner,
Calcutta, Revealing unwarranted inordinate delay in nearly 400 cases

(vi)

PagE

25
30
33

34
35

37

45
52
53

56


CHAPTER 1
. INTRODUCTION

1.1. Post-audit of socio-economic legislation pertaining to Employees’ Provident
Funds reveals pitiable plight of beneficiaries and cries for urgent remedial measures—
A jurisdiction being exercised for the first time, ‘post-audit’ of socio-economic legis-
lation (envisaged by clause 1 of the extant ‘Terms of Reference’), has brought to
surface the serious problem pertaining to unconscionable delays in disbursement of
provident fund accumulations to the rightful claimants,

1.2. Result of survey of public sector undertakings highlights magnitude of prob-
Jem—A survey of arrears in clearance of claims arising in the context of retiremen-
or death of employees of 62 public sector undertakinsg made by the Commission
disclosed that as many as 8,707 families were suffering hardship caused by delays
exceeding six months.

1.3. Startling and saddening Picture emerging on survey based on scrutiny of
individual complaints—The complaints received by the Commission pursuant to a
press release revealed a sorry state of affairs in the sphere of the administration of

(1) As many as 481 employees or their beneficiaries had comolained of
delays and delays in respect of further 400 employees had vome to the
notice of the Commission during the course of its investigation. And
a much larger number must be on the casualty list for not everyone would
have read the press note and even from out of them only some would
have responded.

(2) Delays extended up to 21 years in undisputed cases and up to 35 years
plus in disputed cases [See Appendices ‘F’ and ‘G ह4

(3) In as many as 139 cases, the delay extending up 10721 years was appa-
rently and evidently unjustified and most of the claims were settled
(wholly or partly) and satisfied within about three months of the Com-
mission taking up the maters with the respective agencies guilty for the
delays,

1.5. The deleterious consequences of delays—~The distress occasioned by de-
lays in disbursements scarcely needs to be stressed, The problem arises mainly in
the context of two possible situations, An employee’s retirement, or, his death
before the date of superannuation. In the event of his retirement at the fag end of his
working life he is suddenly faced with a frightening scenario. From the very next
month of his retirement his income ceases. On what does he live? He can only
clutch at the provident fund benefits which he can utilise (1) in some venture or (2)
in some income yielding investment or (3) for acquiring some housing accommo-
dation. Or he may need the funds to complete the education or to perform the
marriage of his children. Delay in disbursement would naturally result in an un
bearable predicament. Jn the event of his death, the plight of his widow, children,
or, parents, can be readily visualised. A letter of complain quoted in a judgment of
the Gujarat High Court [P.K. Martiyani vs. RPFCP arising in the context of a
delay of 2-1/2 years in settling the dues of a widow entirely due to the apathy of the
department will help in Visualising her plight more vividly:—

“Tt appears to be ex, pedient in the interest of justice that the letter
dated September 25, 1979 in the Times of India, Ahmedabad Edition,
dated September 29, 1979 written by Mrs. P.K. Kartiyani of Kottayam
which reads as under be treated as a petition invoking the jurisdiction


2

of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India (the clipping
of the said letter is annexed hereto and marked Annexure ‘A’) :

“Sir, —I am unfortunate destitute woman of a backward commu-
nity. My husband Mr. T. K. Thankappan, died of cancer on April 8,
1977 while he was in the service of Gujarat Refinery, Baroda, as 2
painter. He left behind-me and our three children. Life is a struggle
Sor existence in our case as we have no means of livelihood.

My husband was a member of the provident fund family pen-
sion scheme under the jurisdiction of the Regional Provident Fund
Commissigner, Ahmedabad. His account No. is GJ 4951/55166.
Under the scheme, I am eligible to get from the Regional PF Com-
missioner more than Rs. 7,000/- towards the Deposit Link Insu-
rance and an amount of Rs. 150 per month towards Family pension
with effect from April 1977. Ironically, I have not received a single
paise so far from the Regional P.F. Commissioner. The case papers
relating to my claim are being tossed about like shuttlecock between
the PF Commissioner, Ahmedabad and the Gujarat Refinery, Baroda,
under one pretext or the other.

I have been eagerly looking forward to receiving the remittance
from the PF Commissioner for the Jast 2-1/2 years but to my utter
disapointment it has not yet materialised. Somehow or the other
I now fear that 7 will not get a single paisa till I too take my last
breath. As I am keeping indifferent health, struggling very hard to
make both ends meet, I may have to leave behind my three helpless
children sooner or later.

As a last resort, 1am writing this letter to you with a request
to see whether youcan help me to get the dues fromthe PF
Commissioner through your good offices. As you know, Iam staying
thousands of miles away fromAhmedabad. In ‘spite of that I sent my
representative to the PF Commissioner's office twice but his pleadings

Sell on deaf ears. Please help me : God will help you”.

The problem is therefore of profound importance for the employees or their depen-
dents who are suffering presently and are exposed to suffering in future as also for
the community which has evolved the benevolent Project extending the protective
umbrella of provident fund benefits to the employees in order to provide succour
to them.

1.6. Present exercise—The Commission has in this back-drop suo motu under-
taken the present exercise aimed at three main objectives, viz. :—

(0) Bringing to light the magnitude of the hardships suffered by the employees
or the beneficiaries in the context of the delays ranging from 6 months
Plus to 20 years in the settlement of their claims.

(2) Making recommendations in order to evolve a machinery to expedite
settlement of thei: claims And to suggest measures including amend-
ment of relevant provisions of “Employees’ Provident Funds and Mis-
cellaneous Provisions Act, 1952” (Act for short) and the Scheme framed
thereunder in order to foreclose such delays or to keep such delays within
the narrowest time parameters in future.

(3) To identify a serious problem pertaining to legal implications of ‘nomina-
nations’ which not only already exists but has also the potential of visit-
ing the beneficiaries of deceased employees with grave consequences,
and to make appropriate recommendations for resolving the problem,

And what follows is the result of the said exercise,


CHAPTER Ik

DELAYS IN SETTLEMENT OF PROVIDENT FUND DUES TO THE
CLAIMANTS—CIRCUMSTANCES AND CAUSES IDENTIFIED

2.1. Gathering of information from public sector undertakings as regards exe
tent of claims remaining unsettled—With a view to study the problem of delay in the
settlement of pensionary benefits and Provicdnt Fund cases, the Law Commission
on October 24, 1988, addressed a letter (Appendix ‘A’) to all the Public Sector Under-
takings and to the concerned Trade Unions calling for factual information on the
following three points :—

(a) Number of Provident Fund and retirement dues cases pending finali-
sation whether after retirement or death of an employee for more than
six months;

(0) Information regarding the number of Provident Fund and retirement
dues cases which have been finalised and payment has been made to the
concerned employee or his nominee or legal heirs after six months of
his retirement or death, as the case may be, during the last two years;
and

(०) Average time taken in finalising the Provident Fund claims and retire-
ment dues of an employee and payment made to him.

A similar letter (Appendix B) was addressed to all national level trade unions on
November 28, 1988. Information on similar lines was also called for from all the
Regional Provident Fund Commissioners vide letter dated November 28, 1988
(Appendix C).

2.2. Less than pretty picture of Public Sector Undertakings—Some Central
Government Public Sector Statutory Corporations were found to be amiss in mak-
ing disbursements within areasonable time frame as disclosed by the information
furnished in pursuance to the aforesaid inquiry. Statistics gathered by the Commis-
sion are revealing :—

Number of Corporations which have not cleared claims Total number of claimants

for more than 6 months whose claims have been
outstanding for more than
6 months

L Involving more than 1000 suffering employees
2 . . . . . . . + 6833 (368943144)

Tl. Involving more than 250 suffering employees
2 + न . + . . + 757 (4974260)

गा... Involving more than 100 suffering employees
2 . . . . + . . 234 (130-4104)

Iv. Involving more than 50 suffering employees
4. . . . . : . 333 (99496479459)

Vv. Rest
52 550
Total 62 8707 oT

By no means, a very flattering scenario.
{Full details are incorporated in statement at Appendices DI and Dit)

Scrutiny of records—On the basis of the information ithered fro: ic
Sector Undertakings, the R कटा Provident Fund Commissioners and bd 16

Unions, in order to have a study of the problems and to i tify i
causes of delay in the settlement of cases, the Tecords pertaining ‘peas ee

3


4

settlement with the follow:
a team of researchers :

hrce underta lings were studied on the spot by deputing

(i) Central Warehousing Corporation, Delhi office;
(ii) National Project Construction Corporation Ltd., Delhi office; and
(iii) Steel Authority of India Ltd., Rourkela office.

2.3. Causes for devals revealed by study —As 2 rsult of the study carried out
of the responses received from all sources ¢nd the inspection of records carried out
as a sample survey, 8 number of causes responsible for the delay in the settlement
of Provident Fund and other retirement dues cases, came to be identified. These
causes can be conveniently grouped under three major heads, namely :—

(i) causes attributable to the employers;

(ii) causes attributable to the Office of Regional Provident Fund Commis-
sioners; and

(ii) other causes,
2.4. Causes attributable to the employers-—The following causes attributable

to the employers which result in delay in the finalisation and settlement of cases of
Provident Fund and other retirement dues have been identified :

(i) Inaction or indifference on the part of the employer ;

(ii) Stalling settlement of the claim for provident fund dues on the mere
objection of a third party;

(iii) Submission/forwarding of incorrect and incomplete papers to: the Trust
or the Office of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner;

(iv) Non-finalisation of proceedings of inquiry into misconduct of the em-
ployees;

(v) Non-deposit by employers of their share and/or employees’ contributions
of Provident Fund;

(vi) Deployment of untrained sta‘¥;
(vii) Unwarranted insistence on production of a Succession Certificate;

(viii) Unwarranted insistance on the production of ‘No Demand Certi-
ficate’.

2.5.1. Inaction or indifference on the part of the employer—It has been noticed
that many a time the finalisation of cases of provident fund and other Tetirement
dues is delayed due to inaction on the part of the employer. The retiring employee
or his nominee or legal beneficiary submits necessary claim application well in time
but not action is taken the1con by the employer. A general lack of prompt action
has been noticed. The case of Shri M.D. Pandar Bole of Central Warehousing Cor-
Poration will illustrate the point. The intimation regarding the death of Shri Pandar
Bole was received by the Central Warehousing Corporation Employees Provident
Fund Trust on Jan. 1, 1981. No action was taken in the matter Jor more than 5 years
till August 18, 1986. The Trust, on August 18, 1986, called for the service
particulars of the deceased employee from the Regional Office of the Corporation.
The claimants produced a Succession Certificate issued by the Tehsildar some time
in March/April, 1987. The Succession Certificate was not accepted by the Trust
as not having been issued by the Competent Authority. And oa February 10, 1989,
the claimants were called upon to produce indemnity bond, affidavit and Succes.
ion Certificate. The cose was still pending settlement at the time of on-the-spot
study of the record by officers of the Commission in March 1989, Thus, the delay of
Jive years plus during the period January 1, 1981 to August 18, 1986 and again of nearly
2 years during the period May 1987 to February 10, 1989 has been due to the inaction
or indifference on the part of the employer.

2.5.2. Stalling payment on mere objection by a third party—The employers
often stop the payment of the amount of Provident Fund and other retirement bene-
fits on mere objection of a third porty end instead of deciding the 15506 so Taised,
they direct the parties to get their dispute settled from a court of law. To illustrate


5

the point, the case of Shri M. Krishnan of Central Warehousing Corporation can
be quoted. The employee died while in service on March 3, 1988. Intimation of death
was received by the employer on March 4, 1988. The nominees, namely the two
sony of the deceased, submitted the claini forms. While the case was being processed,
the second wife of the deceased on July 23, 1988 raised a dispute regarding the entitle-
ment of the nominees to receive the amount of provident fund. The employers there-
upon in October 1988 directed the nominees to produce Succession Certificate instead
of leaving the objector to file a suit and obtain a stay order if so desired. The case was
found pending at the time of inspection of record in March 1989 by the officers of
the Commission.

2.5.3. Submission of faulty papers by employers—The settlement of cases also
gets delayed due to submission of incorrect or incomplete papers by the employers
either to the Trust in case of exempted organisation, or to the Regional Provi-
dent Fund Commissioner. In this regard the case of Smt. Indrabai P. Desai can be
cited as an illustration. Smt. Desai submitted her claim papers in respect of her
deceased husband on November 15, 1987. According to the RPFC, the papers were
forwarded to the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner on 13-9-1988 but were
not found to be in order. The same were not even attested by the employer, as a
result of which the claim could be settled only in May 1989, i,e., after a lapse of about
one and a half years. Thus for the fault of the employer, the innocent employee had
to suffer hardship unnecessarily.

The employers under the provisions of the Employees’ Provident Funds and
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 and the Scheme framed thereunder are required
to furnish statutory returns to the Office of the Regional Provident Fund Com,
missioner. The returns so furnished are sometimes diefective, incorrect or incomplete
which results in the delay of final settlement of the claims. The case of Mrs. Lily
Joseph can be quoted with benefit in this regard. She resigned from the service
‘of Students Academy, Mahindra Educational Society, Bombay, in June 1985. Her
case could be finally settled only after a lapse of 4 years in May 1989 when the amount
was paid to her. The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner stated that the delay was
due to non-submission of proper returns by the employer. It is understood that a pro-
vident fund inspectorjshould have been deputed to the establishment for securing
proper returns as per standing instructions which were not adhered to.

2.5.4. Withholding payment on the unwarranted ground of pendency of disci-
plinary procecdings—An employee during the course of his service is sometimes
charge-sheeted for an alleged act of misconduct. The inquiry proceedings initiated
are not finalised before the retirement of the employee and are continued even
yond that. Pending such inquiry the claim regarding Provident Fund and other bene»
fits is not settled though it is not permissible to do so under the Act and the Scheme.

2:5.5. Employers’ failure to deposit deductions made from employees’ wages
andjor their own share—Undet para 29 of the Scheme of 1952 framed under the
Employees’ Provident and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, both the employer
and the employee are required to contribute equally, subject to a maximum of
8.33°% towards the Provident Fund. Para 32 prescribes the mode of recovery of the
employees’ share or contribution. It provides that the amount of the employee‘s
contribution shall, notwithstanding the provisions of the Scheme of 1952 or any
law for the time being in force or any contract to the contrary, be recoverable by
means of deduction from the wages of the employee. Under para 38(1) of the Scheme
of 1952, each employer is, within fifteen days of the close of every month, required
to pay the employees’ contribution together with his own contribution as well as
administrative charges, if any, to the Fund by separate bank drafts or cheques on
account of contributions and administrative charges. Sub-para (2) of para 38 fur-
ther provides that the employer shall forward to the Commissioner, within twenty
five days of the close ‘of the month, a monthly consolidated statement, in such form
as the Commissioner may specify, showing recoveries made from the wages of
each employee and the amount contributed by the employer in respect of eacl fem
ployee. Though there is a statutory obligation on the employer to deposit, within
fifreen days of the close of the month, his and the employee's contribution to the
Fund and submit the requsite return to the Commissioner within twenty-five days
of the close of the month, in practice it has been noticed that the ‘employers’ quite
often do not deposit their contribution to the fund regularly and sometime conti-
nuously for months together. They often fail to deposit the ‘deductions made from


6

the wages of the employees. The result is that the cases are not finally settled till
the outstanding amount is received from the employer. To illustrate the point, the
case of Shri R.A. Swami of Narnaul may be mentioned. He retired from the ser-
vices of Jaora Sugar Mills on June 3, 1987. While his own contribution towards
Provident Fund hsa been refunded, only 65 per cent of the employer’s contribution
has been paid to him so far. The balance of 35 per cent of the employer's contribution
has not been paid to him on the ground that the employer has not deposited the same so
far. The case is still pending final settlement though about two and half years have
passed since the retirement of Shri Swami who is helpless in the sense that while he
cannot take any legal steps against the employer, the authoritjes adopt a nonchalant
attitude and do not take the steps which only they can take.

2.5.6. Development of untrained staff by the employers—The staff engaged to
deal with the cases pertaining to Provident Fund and other retirement dues cases
is often incompetent which results in the final settlement of such
cases. Being untrained, such officials are not conversant with the relevant rules on
the subject, as a result of which mistakes are committed in the preparation of the
record, thereby causing delay in the settlement of claims. The case of Smt. Shanti
Ghosh of Calcutta is a glaring example where her claim of gratuity and pension has
not been finalised even after more than seven years. Smt. Ghosh retired as a Teacher
from S.N.N. Girls High School, Calcutta, on February 28, 1982. The school autho-
tities submitted the relevant papers regarding gratuity and pension to the District
Inspector of Schools in 1983. The papers were returned by the District Inspector of
Schools to the school authorities in 1986 with the direction that the claim should be
prepared in accordance with the revised rules. The papers were resubmitted by the
school authorities after preparing them afresh to the District Inspector of Schools.
The Director of Pension, Provident Fund and Group Insurance, West Bengal, again
in 1988 returned the papers to the sghool authorities with objections. The objections
so raised were removed and papers resubmitted by the school authorities in December
1988. The matter was pending with the Director of Pension, Provident Fund and
Group Insurance, West Bengal till June 1989 when it was utlimately settled after
a delay of nearly five years. The school authorities have stated that the reason for the
delay has been mainly due to the untrained staff employed by them which is not con-
versant with the relevant rules on the subject. Thus. whereas delays occur either on
account of the fault on the part of the employer or the fault of the autorities, only
the employees have to suffer for no fault of theirs and they find themselves helpless
in the matter.

2.5.7. Withholding disbursement by unwarranted insistence on succession certi-
Sicate—Para 72(1) of the Scheme of 1952 provides that when the amount standing to
the credit of a member, or the balance thereof after deduction under para 69, becomes
payable, it shall be the duty of the Commissioner to make prompt payment as provided
in this Scheme. Incase there is no nominee in accordance with this Scheme or there
is no person entitled to receive such amount under para 70, the Commissioner may,
if the amount to the credit of the Fund does not exceed Rs. 10,000 and if satisfied
after inquiry about the title of the claimant, pay such amount to the claimant. A
Plain reading of the provisions of para 72(1) shows that the Commissioner is duty

ound to—

(i) pay the amount to the nominee, if a valid nomination subsists; or

(i) to pay the amount to the members of the family in accordance with
clause (ii) of para 70, if there is no valid nomination or if‘the nomination
relates only to a part of‘the amount.

The Commissioner cannot ask either the nominee or the members of the family, en-
umerated in clause (ii) of para 70, to produce Succession Certificate. A Succession
Certificate may be called for only when there is no nominee and no person entitled to
receive the amount under clause (ii) of para 70. In other words the Commissioner may
call for Succession Certificate only in cases falling under clause (iii) of Para 70 and
that too when there is a doubt about the title of the claimant or where rival clai-
mants come forward. Paras 115, 116 शात 117 0 Chapter वा of Manualof Account-
ing Procedure (Volume 1) (Part II), Employees Provident Fund Organisation, read
as under :—
“115, If there is no nominee in accordance with the Employees’ Provident
Funds Scheme, 1952, or there is no person entitled to receive such amonut
under sub-para (7) of para 70 of‘the Scheme, the claim is required to be


7

settled under para 70 (iii) of the Scheme. In such cases the Regional
Commissioner, if the amount to the credit of the Fund does not exceed
Rs. 10,000 and if he is satisfied after enquiry about the title of the claimant,
may pay such amount to the claimant under para 70(iii) of the Scheme.
For this purpose the Regional Commissioner may make reference to the
appropriate state (normally revenue) authorities.

116. Where even after reference to the civil authorities as indicated in the
above paras, there is a doubt about the title of the claimant or where
rival claimants come forward, it would be necessary to call for a Succes-
sion Certificate.

117, Again, in cases where there is no nominee or there is no person entitled
to receive the Employees’ Provident Fund dues under sub-para (ii) of
para 70 of the Scheme and the amount of the claim exceeds Rs. 10,000,
proof of heirship has to be called for. The claimant in such cases may
be advised to produce a Succession Certificate from an_ appropriate
Court of Law. Payment in accordance with para 70 (iii) of the Scheme,
to the persons in whose favour Succession Certificate has been granted
would be valid discharge. In cases where the claimants find it difficult
to produce Succession Certificate and where the Regional Commissioner
is satisfied that the difficulty is genuine, he may refer the matter with
complete details to the Central office. In deserving cases of genuine
distress, the Central office, in consultation with the Central Government,
where necessary, may authorise the Regional Commissioner to make
payments to the claimants on execution of an indemnity bond with
adequate number of solvent sureties.”

Notwithstanding the aforesaid clear provisions on the subject, it has been observed
that the authorities call for Succession Certificate on the slightest pretext even when
the case falls under clause (i) or caluse (ii) of para 10 of the Scheme. The case of
Shri K. Gandhi of National Project Construction Corporation may be mentioned
by way ofillustration. Shri Gandhi who dies on October 17, 1986, had
made the nomination in favour of his two. sisters and one brother. The two
sisters were to get, in equal shares, 50 per cent of the amount, while the
remaining 50 per cent was to go to his brother. One of the nominees, the brother,
had predeceased the employee. On the claim papers having been submitted by the
two sisters, the authorities in July 1988 decided to call upon the claimants to produce
the' Succession Certificate in respect of the whole of the amount. In this case
50 per cent of the amount could have been paid to the two sisters under clause 0)
of para 70. The remaining 50 per cent was to be disbursed in accordance with
clause (ii) of para 70. However, instead of taking such a course, the authorities
called upon the claimants to produce Succession Certificate in respect of whole of the
amount. The case is still pending.

At the cost of repetition, it may be stated that the Office of the Regional Provident
Fund Commissioner is insisting on the production of Succession Certificate on the
slightest pretext even in cases falling under clauses (i) and (ii) of para 70 of the
Scheme. To reinforce the point, it is apposite to advert to /mambhai Vs. RPFC,
whrein the claim of the nominee was repelled by a one word order “rejected” even
though 70 succession certificate could have been insisted upon. Says the High.

‘ourt :—

“4, An examination of‘the record also reveals that the applicant as required.
to obtain a sucession certificate in support of his claim though ultimately
his calim was rejected. The document placed on record goes to show that
the applicant had to incur an expenditure of more than a thousand;
rupees. Court fee stamp of Rs. 900 had to be procared for obtaining,
the succession certificate. Some amount must have been expended in
payment of legal fees for obtainingsthe succession certificate. Not less:
than a thousand rupees must have been spent in this connection. if was
not realized that having regard to the fact that the deceased workman had:
made a nomination under Paragraph 23(1) of the Employees Deposit-
Linked Insurance Scheme, 1976 (quoted hereinbelow) which categorically.


8

provides certificate for payment of the amount due to the nominee,
succession certificate was not necessary. Paragrah 23( 1) reads as under :

“The nominations made by an employee under the Employees Provident
Funds Scheme, 1952 shall be treated as nominations under this Scheme
and the assurance amount shall become payable to such nomince or
nominees.”

It is hoped that the office of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner will guide
the applicants in such matters so that they ere saved froin incurring unnecessary
expendiure. It is also hoped that the Regional Provident Fund Comiissioner will
make an appropriate inquiry, obtain legal opinion. if necessary, and pass an
appropriate order so that a rightful claimant is not driven to a Court of law
in order to obtain his dues under the relevant provision ofsthe benevolent Act and
the Scheme which have been specially designed with an cye on amelioration of the
workers.

It should therefore be provided in the Scheme itself that succession certificate
should not be insisted upon ia cases covered by para 70(i) and 70 (ii). Only in cases
covered by para 70(iii) and that too only provided there is a bona Side doubt about
the title of the claimant or there is a rival calimant it may be demanded.

2.5.8. Unwarranted insistence on production of No Demand Certificate—
Another cause which occasions delay in the finalisation and settlement of cases is
the requirement as to production of ‘No Demand Certificate’. This certificate is
given by the employer certifying that there are no dues recoverable from the employee.
Even though there is no provision in the Employees’ Provident Funds and Mis-
cellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 and the Scheme framed thereunder authorising the
withholding of the provident fund dues for want of such a cerificate, the dues are
often withheld by proferring this excuse. Again, while the employee is generally
called upon to produce such a certificate after obtaining it from the concerned depart-
ment[official of the employer, the employee is totally helpless if his request is not
attended to for very many months or years. To illustrate the point, it may be men-
tioned that even though an employee (Shri Lalan Kuki) submitted his claim papers
after retirement in April 1988, his case has not been finalised for more than 18 months
or want of ‘No Demand Certificate ’ by his employer [National Project Construction
Corporation}.

2.6. Causes attributable to the Office of Regional Provident Fund Commis-
sioner—The causes which can be attributed to the office of the Regional Provident
Fund Commissioner for dalay in the final settlement of cases, inter alia, are :

(a) inaction, indifference or fault on the part of the office/officials;
(6) shortage of staff;
(c) failure to perform statutory duties;

(4) unwarranted insistence on Production of documents such as Succession
Certificate or ‘No Objection Certificate’.

2.6.1. Indifference, inaction or fault of officials—~One of the major causes for
delay in the settlement of Provident Fund and other retirement dues cases is inaction
or fault on the part of the office of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner.
The matters ordinarily are not given prompt attention. Paragraph 91 of ‘Chapter
वा, Manual of Accounting Procedure (Volume I Part II) of the Employees, Pro-
vident Fund Organisation requires that every effort should be made to ensure that
the claims for final refund of Employees’ Provident Fund dues and other benefits
under Employees’ Family Pension/Employees’ Deposit-Linked Insurance Schemes
are settled within 20 days of their receipt. Various measures have been laid down
in order to ensure speedy settlement of accounts. Such measures are contained in
para 92 Chapter III of the Manual. However, in practice the settlement of cases is
generally delayed. Some cases are settled after several years. The case of one
Shri Iqbal Ahmed of Bangalore can be cited as an illustration. Shri Ahmed served
M/s Road Bird (P) Ltd., Calcutta, during 1972 to October 1981. His case regarding
the Provident Fund and Family Pension was settled in March 1983. The amounts were
sent by the Office of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner vide cheque dated
March 21, 1983 and March 30, 1983. The cheque in respect of the amount of the


9

Provident Fund wos returned to the Office of Regional Provident Fund Commissioner
as there was some clerical misteke therein. Instead of correcting the error and redes-
patching it back to the employee, the Office _of the Regional Provident Fund Commis-
sioner cancelled the cheque in October 1983 and there after no action was taken by
them to pay the amount to the employee.

2.6.2. Paucity of staff—On a reference being made by the Commission to the
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Calcutta, for ascertaining reasons for the
delay in the settlement of cases of ex-employees of M/s Guest Keen and William,
which had ddeclared a lock out in Octobsr 1987, it was reported by the Regional
Provident Fund Commissioner that only two officials were available in his office to
deal with the cases of the ex-employees of the Company resulting in the delay in
settlement of cases.

2.6.3. Indifference or failure of officials to take appropriate steps—Another
major cause for the delay in the settlement of provident fund and other retirement
dues cases is failure on the part of the office of the Regional Provident Fund Com-
missioner to perform the statutory duties imposed upon it under the Act and the
Scheme framed thereunder. The employees under the provisions of the Act and the
Scheme are required to furnish 8 number of statutory returns to the Office of the
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner. The returns so submitted are sometimes
incomplete or incorrect. Due to lack of proper scrutiny, the omissions, ete., in the
returns are not detected. These cone to notice only when a claim is being processed.
The result is that the settlement of the claim gets delayed pending the removal or
correction of the omissions/discrcpancy in the statutory returns. The most glaring
example of such failure (o scrutinise the return is the case where the employer fails
to deposit his share of the contribution towards provident fund. Under para 38(1)
of the Scheme of 1952, each employer is, within fifteen days of the close of every
month, requirvd to pay the employees’ contribution together with his own contri-
bution as well as administrative charges, if any, to the Fund by separate bank drafts
or cheques on account of contribution and administrative charges. Para 38(2)
further requires that the employer shall forward to the Commissioner, within twenty-
five days of the close of the month. a consolidated statement, in such form as the
Commissioner may specify, showing recoveries made from the wages of each employee
and the amouni contributed by the employer in respect of each employee. /f such
returns are properly scrutinised, the Office of the Regional Provident Fund Coemmis-
sioner would immediately detect that a particular employer has not deposited his share
of the contribution in respect of a particular employee or employees. This will facilitate
the initiation of steps for immediate recovery of employers’ share of contribution.
Even if the omission on the part of the employer to deposit his share of contribution
is detected, the Office of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner quite often does
not initiate any action against the employer. The Regional Provident Fund Com-
missioner in the event of default of an employer in making the deposits to the fund
has (i) the power to recover the same as provided under Section 8 of the Employees’
Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, (ii) power 10 recover
damages under Section 14-B of the Act of 1952, and (iii) power to initiate criminal
proceedings for prosecution of the defaulting employer under section 14 read with
section 14AC of the Act. These pewers are seldom exercised with expedition as a
result of which the employees are made to suffer for no fault of theirs and are deprived
of the benefits of the providentfindmerely on the ground that the employers have not
deposited their share of the contribution. The Supreme Court in ORGANO CHEMICAL
INDUSTRIES V. UNION OF INDIA [AIR 1979 SC 1803] had the occasion to
consider the provisions of the Act and the Scheme framed thereunder: The Supreme
Court, after setting out the scheme of the Act in brief, which is principally and mainly
further welfare of the workers who are employed in factories and other establishments
and under which a heavy responsibility is cast on the Regional Provident Fund
Commissionners to sce that the provisions of the Act and the Scheme are properly
followed and complied with, observed :

eee eee This social security measure is a human homage the
State pays to Arts, 39 and 41 of the Constitution. The viability of the
project depends on the employer duly deducting the workers’ contribution
from their wages, adding his own little and promptly depositing the nikle
into the chest constituted by the Act. The mechanics of the system will
suffer paralysis if the employer fails to perform his function. The dyna-
mics of this benficial statute drives its locomotive power from the funds
regularly flowing into the statutory till.



io

३. The pragmatics of the situation is that if the stream of contributions
were frozen by employers’ defaults after due deduction from the wages
and diversion for their own purposes, the Scheme would be damnified
by traumatic starvation of the fund, public frustration from the failure
of the project and psychic demoralisation of the miserable beneficiaries
when they find their wages deducted and the employer get away with it
even after default in his own contribution and malversation of the worhers’
share. ‘Damages’ have a wider socially semantic connotation than
pecuniary loss of interest on non-payment when a social welfare schente.
suffers mayhem on account of injury. Law expands concepts to embrace
social needs so as to become functionally effectual”.

The Madhya Pradesh High Court in NATHULAL V. REGIONAL PROVIDENT
FUNDS COMMISSIONER, Indore, [1984 Lab. I.C. 1438] had the occasion to
consider the question of entitlement of the employee to payment of the entire amount
for the relevant period, that is, his contribution as well as the employer’s contri-
bution on the failure of the employer to credit the same to the fund. The High Court,
after considering the relevant provisions of the Act and the Scheme framed there-
under relying on the judgement of the Supreme Court (quoted above), held as un-
der :—

Coe e een ee We are of the opinion that the stand taken by the respon-
dents is devoid of any substance because the employee, for no fault
of his, cannot be allowed to suffer in this manner as he is entitled to the
payment of the entire amount for the period for which he has put up
his claim in this petition. Obviously, the petitioner had become a mem-
ber of the Scheme in the hope that on retirement he would get all his dues
as amount from his wages was regularly deducted by the employer
and he could have no reason to imagine that the employer igh 110 not have
remitted his contribution so deducted as also the share of the employer
to the said fund because that is one of the allurements to the employee
that on retirement in addition to his own contribution he well get much
more by way of contribution of the share of his employer also because
in such a case he would not get any pension from the employer but has
to depend solely on his provident fund on which his livelihood in future
would depend”.

The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner has appealed to the Supreme Court
against the judgment of the Madhya Pradesh High Court. The Supreme Court
in Special Leave Petition No. 6909/84 on July 3, 1984 has stayed the operation of
the High Court order pending disposal of the appeal. The result is that the employees
continue to suffer and are being deprived of their legitimate right for the failure of
the. Office of the Regional Provident Fuad Commissioners to perform the statutory
duties imposed upon them under the Act and the Scheme framed thereunder. The
case of Shri R.A. Swami, mentioned earlier in para 2.5.5 above can be cited to
illustrate the problem. Shri Swami has been denied the 35 per cent. of the employer’s
share since June 1987 on the ground that the employer has not deposited the same:

2.7. Other Causes—In addition to the causes detailed above, there are
some other causes which result in the delay in the settlement of cases of provident
fund and other retirement dues. These causes, inter alia, are :

(0) Lack of co-ordination and prompt action on the part of various depart-
ments of an organisation or on the part of two offices;

(i) Non-verification of fixation of pay consequent to revision of pay scales;
(1) Dispute regarding correctness of the amount of provident fund; an
(iv) Identification of nominee or legal heirs.

2.7.1. Lack of Co-ordination—The settlement of claims of provident fund and
other retirement dues gets delayed due to lack of co-ordination and prompt action
on the part of various departments of an organisation or on the part of two or more
offices. The information called for by one department/office is not supplied in time
by the other department/office, as a result of which there is avoidable delay and the
employee, his nominee or legal beneficiary has to suffer due to non-settlement or
late settlement of the claim. Few instances may be quoted in this regard. Shri K.


11

Naguri of Guntur retired from the services of A.P. State Road Transport Corpeora-
tion on July 31, 1987, Bis n for provident fund could be finally settled only in
January 1989 for want of rd and reievant information. Shri J.R. Gupta of
Durg had resigned from the serivces of M/s. Advani-Oerlikon Ltd. Raipur on Dec.
28, 1987. His case for provident fund could be finally settled only during June 1989
by the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Indore, for want of information from
the employer as well as Office of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Bombay.
One Shri 5.5. Sisal retired from the services of M/S. Central Warehousing Corpora-
tion on Jan, 29, 1988. The intimation of retirement was given to the Trust on May
31, 1988 after a lapse of about four months. The Trust took action on June 24
1988 calling for information from the Unit where the employee was working. The
Unit sent information in three instalments on July 11, 1988; July 26, 1988 and
December 3, 1988 respectively. Since the information received by the Trust did not
appear to be complete, a Telex message was sent on February 17, 1989 seeking in-
formation in respect of contributions for a certain period and festival advance etc.
advance etc. The lack of co-ordination and prompt action on the part of various
offices, thus resulted in the delay in settlement of the claims. Such a delay could
have been avoided and the employees, their nominees or legal heirs could have been
saved from the sufferings.

2.7.2. Delay in verifying pay fixation on pay revision—Due to pay revisions, the
pay of the employees is required to be refixed, In some organisations such pay fixa-
tions are required to be verified by the auditing authorities or some other autho-
tities. Consequent to the non-verification of the pay fixation, the claims for pro-
vident fund and other pensionery dues get delayed. In this regard, the case of Shri
A.N. Godbole of Vadodara can be quoted as an illustration. Shri Godbole retired
from services of Faculty of Science M.S. University, Baroda, on September 30
1987, His pension has not been fixed though the papers were forwarded to Director
of Higher Education on June 28, 1988 on the ground that the fixation of pay in ac-
cordance with revised pay scales with effect from January 1, 1986, which is required
to be verified by the office of the Director of Higher Education, has not been so
verified so far. The work of ver fication of pay fixation is reported to have been started
in May 1989. The claim is still pending.

2.7.3. Dispute regarding size of accumulated amount—Sometimes there is a
dispute between the Trust/Office of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner
on the one hand and the claimant on the other hand regarding the correctness of the
provident fund accumulations. Such a dispute also adds to the delay in the finali-
sation of the claims.

To illustrate, Shri S.Z. Rehman retired from the services of M/S. National Pro-
iect Construction Corporation on February 1, 1988. The Trust called upon the शहर
ployee to send a stamped receipt of Rs. 11,532.50 p. The employee disputed the cor-
rectness of the amount calculated by the Trust and claimed that the accumulated
amount was to the tune of Rs. 13,.080/-. A break-up of the amount due was sent by
the employee to the Trust on August 23, 1988. The dispute has not been resolved
and the case is still awaiting settlement.

2.7.4. identificaiion of benefciary—Another cause for the delay in the settle-
ment of the claims ir the identification of the nominee or the legal beneficiaries.
Where the employee himself is the claimant. such problem does not arise since the
employer always identifies the claiment. The difficulty arises where the claimant
is either the nominee or the legal benehciary of the emj'oyee. There is nothing eitrer
in the Act or in the Scheme framed thereunder for tackling such a situation. As a
result, different procedures are being adopted in this regard by the concerned autho-
tities, namely, employer, the Trust or the Office of the Regional Provident Fund
Gommissioner, thereby causing delay in the settlement of cases and hardship to the
claimants.

2.8. Having identified the various causes coming to the notice of the Commis-
sion and made appropriate suggesstion, ‘the matter regarding other measures
required to be adopted in this regard is being addressed hereafter in due course.

93-M/J(N)273MofLI&CA—2


CHAPTER वा

MAGNITUDE OF THE PROBLEM—NEED FOR CREATION OF A
STATUTORY OMBUDSMAN

3.1. Material regarding plight of suffering employees gathered—In order to carry-
out post-audit of this Act and the Scheme framed thererunder, the same being a
benevolent socio-economic legislation, the Commission issued a press release on Dec.
20, 1988 [Appendix ‘E’]inviting all concerned who had not received the provident
fund and retiremental dues for more than one year to furnish relevant particulars
in order to apprise the Commission of their plight. The material gathered by the
Commission on the basis of complaints received in response to the press note issued
by it reveals thata lementable state of affairs prevails in the sphere of disbursement
of provident fund accumulations, etc. Out of a total of 48) complaints received by
the Commission, 139 cases were resolved within approixmately three months of the
matter being taken up by the Commission with the concerned authorities. On an ana-
lysis of the data relating to these cases where delay was apparently unjustified, an
extremely unaesthetic picture emerges :—

Extent of delay involved Number of
cases
Maximum 2! years, Minimum 10 years. . . . . . . पु 7
Maximum 10 years, Minimfim 6 years. . पु पु . . . . 25
Maximum 6 years, Minimum 4 years . . . . . . . 15
Maximum 4 years, Minimum 2 years. wee 32
Less than 2 years . . . . . : . . . . . . 60

Total .

(Full details pertaining to these 139 cases are embodied in Appendix

3.2. Categories of cnployers—These cases of delay relate to employers and es-
tablishments (1) covered by the Act and the Scheme (Unexempted as also Exempted)
as also (2) net covered by the Act and the Scheme. The break up is as under :—

Covered Not covered Total
96 43 139

Exempted Unexempted
25 a

{Reference may be made to Appendix ‘F’ for details}

_3.3. Questions which arise—In the background traced hereinabove, the fol-
lowing questions raise their heads :—

(1) Js it just or fair to make a retired employee or the beneficiaries claiming
under a dead employee to wait for many many years (at times more than
10 years even up to 21 years) ?

(2) Is the extant machinery adqauate to resolve the problem ?

The answers to questions No. 1 and 2 are implicit therein. The presnt situation is
infolerable and the present machinery is wholly inadequate. What then should be
jone

12


13

3.4.1, Need for creating a monitoring agency : An Ombudsman—The Com-
mission is firmly of the opinion that the problem has arisen essentially because of
the absence of a menitoring agency to oversee the working of the existing disbursment
muchinery.

3.4.2. It needs to be emphasised that as many as 139 cases were resolved
within approximately 3 months of the taking up of the matter by the Commission.
Two conclusions follow :--

(1) There was culpable apathy to do the needful on the part of the disbursing
authority. Else how were cases pending for 5,10, 15 or 20 years resolved
within nearly 3 months ?

(2) Such व situation would not have arisen if there had existed a monitorsing
agency 19 oversee, goad, if necessary guide, and to issue appropriate di-
rections whenever called for.

3.4.3. The urgent need for creating such an agency, Ombudsman, is therefore
real, and self-evident.

3.4.4. Profile of the proposed office of Provident Fund Ombudsman.

CONSTITUTION AND SET UP
1

Tn order to invest the office with appropriate stature, authority and dignity,
the office shall be created by a Parliamentary statute and be manned preferably by a
retired Chief Justice of a High Court or in any event at least by a retired High Court
Judge who shall hold office for 3 years from the date of taking charge. He shall be
entitled to the remuneration and privileges enjoyed by him immediately before his
retirement.

Il

He shall be assisted by a deputy Ombudsman of the rank of a@ retired district and
sessions judge and by the requisite staff.

प्रा

He shall be provided with a computer to enable him to analyse the data furnished
in the returns and to make his monitoring effective.

POWERS
The Ombudsman in order to be effective should have powers :—

I

to monitor cases of delays in disbursements throughout the territories of India.

IT
to monitor cases of all employers and establishments, viz.,—

(i) establishments covered by the Act and the Schemes;

(ii) covered establishments to which exemptions have been granted under the
relevant provisions of the Act and the Schemes;

(iii) employers and establishments not covered by the Act or the Schemes
such as Public Sector undertakings having their own scheme and other
statutory corporations of like nature.

Il
to act swo motu as also the power to act on the basis of complaints received from em-
ployees or their nominees or the beneficieries under the Act and the Schemes.

Iv

He shall have power to call for information concerning matters where disbursement
have not been made or delayed and to insist on the. timely submission of preseribed
returns.


114

v

He shall have the power to issue appropriate directions to secure compliance by the
concerned authorities to enable him to discharge the duty to ensure prompt disburse-

ment of dues.

DUTIES
T

It shall be the duty of the Ombudsman to ensure that the disbursements of the claims
to retired employees or their nominees or beneficiaries (as the case may be) and others
entitled to claim payment are made promptly and in any case within the time bracket
of six months regardless of whether or not specific complaint has been made to him

by the concerned employee.
Tl

It shall be his duty to invite complaints regarding non-payment of provident fund
accumulation in order to apprise himself of such instances by way of—

(a) advertisements in appropriate regional daily newspapers in English and
in regional languages in all States every six months;

(b) announcements over Radio and T.Y. in all states in English and regional
languages every sizx months.

Tl

To take cognizance suo motu asalso on the basis of complaints received in response
to such invitations or otherwise and to take appropriate steps to secure disbursements
in such cases with promptitude by getting in touch with the appropriate authority.
And seek information as regards the cause for the delay and to issue appropriate
directions to remove the bottleneck and to ensure compliance.

IV

It shall be his duty to call for returns and information regarding claims pending with
the concerned establishments, scrutinize the returns submitted to him, and to take
appropriate suo motu action and to issue appropriate directions to the concerned au-
thorities to ensure prompt paynient to the claimants with the end in view to ensure
that no claim remains outstanding for more than 3. months.

3.4.5. Provisions regitired to be made in order to enable the Ombudsman to ex-
ercise the powers and to discharge the duties—As the Ombudsman will be responsible
for ensuring that Provident Fund and other retirement/death benefits are paid to
the beneficiary as far as possible within three months from the date the same become
payable, provisions to the following effect are required to be made—

(i) Every employer having a provident fund scheme shall furnish a return
[Appendices HI and HII] on a prescribed proforma, to the Ombudsman
every month by the 150 of each month detailing therein the cases of
delay beyond three months, setting out the necessary particulars of each
case, and explaining the causes of delay.

(ii) The Regional Provident Fund Commissioners and the Trustees of Pro-
vident Fund trusts in the case of exempted organisations, shall furnish
a return, on a prescribed proforma [Appendices HI and मात], to the
Ombudsman on the 15th of January, 15th of April, 15th of July and
15th of October every year detailing therein the cases which could not
be disposed of and settled within three months from the date the amount
became payable setting out and explaining the causes of delay. The
Ombudsman will have the authority to issue appropriate directions to
ensure urgent settlement of the claims.

(iii) The Ombudsman shall monitor the cases of delay beyond three months,
the cases of default in depositing the zmount by the employers either
in respect of their own contribution or in respect of
employees‘ contribution or both and shall issue appropriate
directions in this regard to the concerned officer, authority or the em-
ployer. The Ombudsman will have the authority to call for any further


15

information from the concerned officer, authority or employer as he may
deem fit and proper.

(iv) The wilful default or failure on the part of the concerned officer or au-
thority or the employer to furnish requisite return and/or information
which may be sought by the Ombudsman or the failure on the part of
the concerned officer, authority or the employer to carry out the direc-
tions isssued by the Ombudsman within the stipulated time without suffi-
cient cause shall be an cffence punishable with imprisonment of either
description which may extend to six months or with fine which may
extend to Rs. 5,000/- or both. Such an offence should be bailable, cogni-
zable and triable by any Magistrate having the jurisdiction.

3.4.6. Suitable legislation—For creating the office of Ombudsman, it is re-
commended that suitable legislation may be enacted to ensure that the office enjoys
Statutory authority and powers to monitor and to issue appropriate enforceable direc-
tions for settling claims relating to payment of provident fund dues expeditiously.

We recommend accordingly.


CHAPTER IV

OTHER MEASURES COMMENDED OR EXPEDITING PAYMENiS
OF PROVIDENT FUND ACCUMULATIONS 10
THE BENEFICIARIES

4.1.1. Besides the creation of the institution ofan ombudsman as recommend-
ed in Chapter III, certain other measures are also required to be undertaken in order
to cut short, if not totally wipe out, the delays in the settlement of cases of provident
fund and other pensionary benefits and to ameliorate the hardship being faced by the
employees, their nominees or legal beneficiaries due to such delays.

4.1.1A. Employees should be made aware—The delay being caused duc to
non-submission, late submission or defective or incomplete submission of the claim
applications is mainly due to the ignorance of the employees, their nominees or legal
heirs, It is also necessary to minimise the number of cases in which either no nominat-
ion is mde or the nomination made is not reviewed with the change in the circumstan-
ces. The employees generally do not know the necessity of making or reviewing the
nomination. With a view to make the working of the scheme eTfective it requires to be
provided that all employees on becoming members of the fund shall be issued pass
ooks in respect of the monthly contributions made by the employer and the employee.
The pass book should apprise the employees as regards (1) the power to revoke or
alter nominations, (2) conditions for taking loans, (3) essential patticulars required
to be furnished for making claims so that applications are free from defects. This
course will to a great extent reduce and minimise the delays caused due to non-
nomination or non-availability of the nominees.

4.1.2. Withholding payments for reasons not warrnted by law and in violation of
spirit of Section \0—need for remedial amendment—The Legislature has extended
unqualified immunity to the provident fund accumulations from being attached in
respect of any debt inucurred by an employee and has gone to the length of providing
that the said amount shall not be capable of being assigned or charged. The Legislature
has also provided that on the death of an employee, in case there is a nominee, the
amount will vest’ unto the nominee free from any debt or liability incurred by the
employee before his death, subject only to deductions authorised by the Scheme or the
Tules of the concerned provident fund. Nothwithstanding this immunity embodied in
section 10 of the Act, it has been noticed that the amount of provident fund is often
being withheld by the employers pending vacation of residential accommodation
allotted to the employee by the employer. This course is not authorised by law and
is against the very spirit of the Act and the Scheme fiamed thereunder. For, withhold-
ing on such a ground virtually amounts to attachment of the amount in question cr
bringing illegal pressure.

4.1.3. Even though there is no provision in the Act or the Scheme framed
thereunder for withholding provident fund claims on such a ground, the Bombay
High Court in Kareparambil y. Air India*4 refused to grant relief in its writ jurisdiction
to the petitioners, whose amount of provident fund was withheld by the employer
(Air India Corporaton) on the ground that they had not vacated the residential
accommodation allotted to them. The High Court held that in case the Court permits
such employees to seek relief under article 226 of the Constitution, then it would
merely promote dishonestly. It is perhaps not realised that more often than nought it
is not a case of dishonest conduct but a case of helplessness to secure accommodation
in these times of acute housing shortage and steep rise in prices of properties and in
rents. Taking shelter under the judgmentof the Bombay High Court, the employers
withhold the payment of the amount of provident fund till the official residential
accommodation is vacated by the employees. To quote)by way of an illustration,
the Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation, relying on the judgement of the
Bombay High Court, has taken a policy decision not to release the retirement dues
to its employees till the complete charge of all belongings of the Corporation it
handed over by the employ ees. While the conduct of the employees in refusng or
failing to vacate the official residential accommodation or to hand over the charge of
the other belongings of the employer when called upon to do so, cannot be approved

16


17

it cannot be gainsaid that the release and payment of the amount of provident fund
cannot be allowed to be withheld on this ground. Apart from_ the fact that there is
no authority in law for doing so, it would be violative of the spirit of section 10 of the
Act and in’ negation of the legislative intent manifest in the provsion. Besides, in a
sense it would be counter-ptoductive in as muchas it would operate as a hurdle in the
way of the concerned employee acquiring an alternative accommodation with the aid
of the said rescuiccs. So also the insistence on ‘No Demand Certificate’ has no
justification since no deduction can be made from the P.F. accumulations unless
provided by the Scheme or the rules of the Fund. Moreover, the official authorised to
grant sucha certificate is under no obligation or compulsion to issue it urgently or
even within a reasonable time frame. The Commission, is therefore, of the view that
it needs to be provided by way of an Explanation to Section 10 that no part of the
provident fund sahall be withheld by the employers pending vacation of the official
residential accommodation by the employee or pending the production of * No Demand
Certificate).”

4.1.4. Enabling the employee to apply directly to the Commissioner and_incor-
porating a time limit for transmitting the clims to the Commissioner.—Under the Act
and the Scheme framed thereunder the claim for final payment of the amount of the
provident fund is required to be made by the employee, his nominee or the legal heirs,
as the case may be, to the employer for onward transmission to the Regional Provident
Fund Commissioner or the Trust efter verification and attestation. It has been noticed
during the course of on-the-spot study of the records of some organisations that a
number of cases get delayed only due to inaction on the part of the employers A
reference in this regard be made sub-paragraph (5) of Paragraph 72 of the Employees
Provident Fund Scheme, 1952. Clauses (a), (c) and (d) of sub-paragraph (5) para-
gtaph 72, read as under :—

“(a) Every employer shall, at the time when a member of the Fund leaves
the service, be required to get the claim application, for payment of
provident fund in cases specified in clauses (a) to (dd) of sub-pata-
graph (1) of paragraph 69, duly filled in and attested, and to forward
the said application to the Commissioner or any other officer autho-
zised by him in this behalf.

(0) x x x x

(c) Every employer n the death of the member and on receipt of an
applicaton for receiving the amount standing to the credit of such
member, forward forthwith the said application to the Commissioner
or any other office authorised by him in this behalf.

(9) If the applicant is unable to send the claim application through the
the empl or duly attested by him., for any reason whatsoever,
he may forward it to the Commissioner o1 any other officer authorised
by him in thi: behalf, and wherever necessary, the Commissoner, or
any other officer authorised by him in this behalf, may forward
such application to the employer and the employer shall be required
to icturn it within five days of its receipt.”

{Emphasis supplied]

4.1.5. Under clause (d) of sub-para 5 cf Para 72, a claimant is required to submit
his claim to the employer and it is only when he is unable to do so that an application
can be made directly to the Commissioner or the Trust. It has been noticed that
almost invariably when an application is directly made to the Commissioner, the
same is returned to the claimant with the observation that the same should be submitted
through the employer. This leads to unnecessary and avaoidable delay. The Commiss-
ion feels that the provisions contained in clause (d) of sub-paragraph (5) of paragraph
72 should be amended and it needs to be provided that the applicant may send the appli-
cation directly to the Commissioner or the Trust, as the case may be. The amended
provisions may read as under :—

“An applicant may submit his application to the Commissioner or any
other officer authorised by him in this behalf, and wherever necessary, the
Commissioner or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf, may
forward such application to the employer and the employer shall be
Tequired to return it within five days of its receipt.”


18

4.1.6. The amendments as pi oposed hereinabove when introduced will not only
minimise the delay in the settlement of cases due to inaction on the part of the em-
ployers but will also to a great extent remove the blockace in the setilement of claims
caused due to non-vacation of residentic] ccccmmodation and non-production of
‘No Demand Certificate’ by the employees since they will have the right to approach
the Commissioner or the Trust directly.

4.2. Except when prohibited by a couri. payment should not be withheld nierely
because someone else objects—Paragraphs 69 of the Scheme of 1952 provides for the
disbursement of the provident fund amount to the employee while Paragraph 70
provides for payment of the provident fund accumulations in the case of a decease
employee either to the nominee or legal beneficiaries of the deceased as the case may
be. The employer has to process the case in terms of cither Paragraph 69 Paragrph
70. Similarly, the Trust of the Regional Provident Fund Commissicner has
to settle the claim and pay the amount in accordance with the provisions of Paragraph
69 or Paragraph 70, as the-ase may be. Neither the employer nor the Trust nor the
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner can stopsthe settlement of the claim and
payment to the claimant entitled under the Scheme to reccive such amount on an
objection raised by a third party. As pointed out earlier, instances of settlement of
the claims being kept in abeyance 00 mete objection of a third party are not lacking.
there is no provision cither in the Act or in the Scheme framed therein authorising
such a course. The Commission feels that though the piovisions are quite clear,
out of abundant caution an Explanation needs be added under Paragraphs 69 and 70
to the effect that save and except under the orders of a Court, the payment of the Pro-
vident Fund accumulations shall not be withheld on an objection being raised by a
third party and the amount should be paid to the claimant in terms of Paragraph 69
and Paragraph 70, as the case may be.

4.3. Payment not to be withheld on the ground of pendency of disciplinary pro-
ceedings—Pendency of disciplinary proceedings is one ofthe causes for the dalay
in the settlemeng of provident fund claims. The employers normally‘stop proceessing
the claims till thesdisciplinary proceedings are concluded. This course is inconsistent
with‘the provisions of the Act and the Scheme framed thereunder. Even if, as a
result of‘the'enquiry, the’employee is found guilty of misconduct and some amount
is found recoverable fromshim, such amount cannot be deducted from his provident
fund accumulations in view of the specific provisions contained in section 10 of the
Act. Thoughsthe recommendation made by the Commission in 988 4.1.5 above
for the amendment of cluse (d) of sub-paragraph (5) of Paragraph 72 providirg for
direct submissicn of thesclaim applicatioa by thesclaimant to the Trust or the Regional
Provident Commissioner will tc a great extent minimise the delay caused on ‘such a
the Commission feels that it aeedy to be clarified by way of an Explanation under
section 10 that the amount of provident fund accumulations stall not be withheld on
the ground of pendency of disciplinary proceedings.

4.4. Withholding of P.F. dues on account of empiayer's jailure to deposit his own
or the employee’s share already deducted from their salary : P,unishing the employees
for the crime of the employer and for the gross negligence of the department—The
object of the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952,
is to make some provisions for the future of the worker after he retires or for his de-
pendents in the cae of his early and untimely death. The Act and the Scheme framed
thereunder have made adequate provisions and the Provisiodent Fund Commissioners
have been given adequate powers to see that the provisions thereof are properly
complied with and that the share of the employee deducted from his salary/wages as
also the shere contributed by the employer is credited to the Fund account so that on
retirement of the employee or in the casc of his untimely death while in service, his
dependants, are immediately benefited. It has been noticed that in a number of cases
the settlement of the claims is delayed on the ground that the employer has failed to
deposit his contribution or the employee’s share in the fund account. In this regard
the office of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner cannot escape blame. There
is inaction and failure to perform statutory duties on the part of the office of the
Regional Provident Fund Commissiner. As pointed out earlier, under paragraph 38(1)
of the Scheme of 1952, each employer is under a legal obligation to pay the employees’
contribution together with his own contribution, to the fund by separate bank drafts
or cheques on account of contributions. Paragraph 38(2) further provides that the
employer shall forward to the Commissicner, wthin twenty-five days of the close
of the month, a monthly consolidated statement, in such form as the Commissioner
may specify, showing recoveries made from the wages of each employee and the


amount contributed by the employer i
submitted are sometimes incompicte or

ct of each employce. The returns so
irrect. Due to lack of proper scrutiny in
the Office of the Regional Provident Fund Comm ionci’, the mistakes or omissions
are not note cd. These omissions, ctc., are detected ony when a claim is processed.
If there is & proper ond regular scrutiny of the return submitted by the employers then
the cases where the cmployers have nct deposited their share of the contributions can
be easily detected and action can be teken by the Regional Provident Fund Commiss-
ioner foi the recovery of such amount well in time.

4.5.1. The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner in the event of the default
of an employer in making the deposits in the fund, has the following powers under the
Act of 1952 as amended by Act No. 33 of 1988 :—

(0) Power to recover the amount under section 8;

(ii) Power to recover damages under section 14-B, not exceeding the amount
found inarrears ;

(ii) Power to initiate criminal proceedings for the prosecution of the defaulting
employer under section 14 read with section 14AC of the Act.

(iv) Power to recover from the employer of establishment inter alia by seizure
and sale of his properties under revently added sections 8A to 8G of the
Act.

Inspite of the specific powers so conferred upon the Regional Provident Fund
Commissioner, such powers are rarely exercised promptly and timely as a result of
which the employees suffer due to no fault of theirs. It is pertinent to note that
every employee employed in or in connection with the work of a factory of other
establishment to which the Scheme 1952 applies is required to become a member of
the Fund. The requirement of being a member is mandatory. No employee can refuse
to become a member of the fund and to contribute a part of his wages, minimum
compulsory contribution being 8.33 per cent. of the wages, to the fund. Therefore,
it is all the more essential that his rights and interests should be protected and he
should not be made to suffer for the fault of others. It was mainly for these reasons
that the Madhya Pradesh High Court in Nathu Lal’s case held that whole, of the
amount becoming due to an employee in his provident fund must be paid to him
irrespective of the fact whether the employer has deposited his share or not. However
as pointed out earlier, the operation of the judgment of Madhya Pradesh High Court
has been stayed in appeal on July 3 1984. Whether or not the High Court decision
is ultimately upheld by the Supreme Court, it appears to be unjust and unfair to make
the innocent and helpless employees suffer for the fault of the employers to make the
deposit and for the fault of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner in failing to
take immediate and promptaction against the defaulters in accordance with law.

4.5.2. The Commission is of the opinion that the Act and the Scheme requires
to be aiiiended by incorporating a provision to the effect that the P.F. dues of an
employee payable to him on his retirement or on his becoming eligible to recover the
dues otherwise or to this nominee or beneficaries under the Scheme on his death shall
not be withheld on the ground of failure of the employer-to deposit his own share or
the employee's share deducted from his wages or both—There is more than ample
Justification for doing so, viz.,—

(1) Under the Act and the Scheme an obligation has been imposed and the
power and legal authority to ensure (and enforce) compliance has been
vested exclusively unto the P.F. authorities.

(2) The employees have not been invested with any power or authority to secure
compliance. They have no weapon, machinery or means to do so under-
law and the totally helpless even when the authorities on whom the powers
are conferred are guilty of wilful failure or culpable negligence to dis-
charge their duties and to take appropriate steps under the law promptly
and effectively. There is therefore no rational or moral justification to
make them suffer.

(3) The Act and the Scheme has been enacted as a social security measure for
the welfare of the workers and cannot authorise deprivation of the fruits
of the beneficial legislation for no fault on their part.


20

(4) The law authorises deduction from the wages of employees (which re-
present the hard earned earning by the sweat of their brow) on the-
Tepresentation and assurance implicit in the Act and the Scheme that
their future will be taken care of. Instead of paying more wages to enable
the employees to make savings on their own. the law authorises deduction
from their wages and imposes a corresponding obligation on the employers
to make their contribution as provided by the law. And the P.F. organi-
sation is statutorily enjoined to effectuate the intendment and purpose
of the law as an administering agency. For the failure of this agency.
the employees cannot be penalised.

There is also another significant aspect which deserves to be stressed in this
context. A Special Reserve Fund was created on September 15, 1960 out of the
Reserve and Forfeiture Account of the fund to help outgoing members or their
nominees/heirs, where an employer of unexempted establishment has failed to pay
the whole or part of the provident fund contribution due to the fund. The terms of
assistance from this fund have changed from time to time. As per the decision of
the Central Government dated March 10, 1965. the assistance is available to the
extent only of employees’ share of contribution recovered from his wages by the em-
ployer but not paid to tne fund plus interest thereon. No part of the employers, contri-
bution, not received in the fund, is to be paid out of this fund.

Ht appears that till the issuance of the orders of the Central Government on March
10, 1965, even the employers’ share, which was not received in the provident fund
account, was also being paid out of the reserve fund to the employees. The reason
why such employers’ share has been excluded from the assistance to be rendered out
of the Reserve Fund vide orders dated March 10, 1965 is not known. The Madhya
Pradesh High Court in Nathu Lal’s case has specifically held that the RPFC is bound
to pay the whole of the amount of the fund to the employees irrespective of the
fact whether the employer has failed to deposit his or employees’ or both the
shares of the contribution.

The 36th Annual Report of the C.P.F.C. for 1988-89 (see page 44-45) shows
that a very large sum of Rs. 159.02 crores was lying at the credit of Forfeiture Account
out of which only a sumof Rs.2.50 crores was transferred to Special Reserve Fund.
Only Rs. 23.79 lakhs were paid to employees from this Account. The huge amount.
of Rs. 159 crores plus can be utilized for this purpose. So also the surplus adminis-
trative charges, inspection charges and penal charges of Rs. 11.69 crores under
EPF and FPF Schemes and Rs. 14.99 crores under the Insurance Scheme as per-
the aforesaid 36th Report can be utilised for the purpose of satisfying claims arising
in the context of past defaults. And for future defaults, there can be no excuse since
now, by the newly added provisions of sections 8A to 8G inter alia empowering the
officers of the organisation itself to recover the arrears by seizure and sale of the pro-
perties of the defaulter if there are arrears remaining unrecovered, the department alone
is to blame. YT WOULD BE EXTREMELY UNFAIR FOR A WELFARE STATE
TO MAKE THE EMPLOYEES SUFFER FOR THE FAULT OR FAILURE OF
THE P.F.ORGANISATION:

A provision in this behalf is required therefore to be specifically made in sub-para (1)
of paragraph 72 of the Scheme of 1952. The words “irrespective of the fact whether
any part of the employees’ or the employers’ or both the contributions have not been
paid into the Fund by the employer’ tare required to be added in sub-para (1) of para-
graph 72 after the words “it shallbe the duty of the Commissioner to make prompt
payment as provided in this Scheme” and before the sign and words.) In case there
is no nominee.” and to make it retrospective.

In case it entails some financial burden on the organisation, it may be possible
to neutralise this burden by making slight increase in the tiny administrative charges
which are presently fixed at 0.37% of the wages under the EPF Scheme and 0.01 %
for the insurance Scheme or by imposing a very small charge generally on all the
establishments covered by the Act which may be recovered along with every instal-
ment of the employer’s contribution in order to constitute a sort of an insurance
pool so as to provide the financial resoutces to meet this obligation. A provision
may also be made making negligence on the part of the concerned officers to take
urgent steps under the Act and the Scheme to recover arrears from the employer
“serious misconduct” entailing dismissal or removal from service so that the concerned
officers discharge their duties honestly and diligently. हु


21

d by non-warranted insistence on Succession Certificate—
roquent cause for the delay in the settlement of provident
das to production of a Succession Certificate even though
the law to be produced (see para 2.5.7). The employers
< the production of a Succession Certificate whenever a
1 beseficiaiies of an employee. The Regional Provident
7 st is bound to pay the provident fund accumula-
of a deceased employee in terms of Paragraph 70 of
2, thet is, to the nominee in case there is a valid nomination or
i ination to the family members of the deceased as defined
ph 2 of the Scheme, read with the provision to clause (ii) of
5. Ju case there is not valid nomination and no family
deceased employee, the amount of provident fund is then payable
son legally entitied to it. As observed earlier (para 2.5.7), the Succession
ate can he called for only in cases of genuine difficulty falling under clause
(iii) of Paragraph 70 ci the Scheme. Besides, it is only the deciding authority, namely,
the Regic t Func Coramissioner or the Trust, who can call for the pro-
duction 0 Certiiicate. The employers cannot stop processing the cases
aad call for production of a Succession Certificate.

1.6.2. Ii so far es the calling for a Succession Certificate by the Trust or the
1 kicnit cund Commissioner is concerned, though specific instructions
contained in Paragrapas 115, 116 and 117 of Chapter IM, Part 11 of Manual of
yunting Procedure (Vol. 1, i:mployees’ Provident Fund Organisation, such
ons are not heing stricily complied with and it appears that a Succession
te is bei Hed for in a routine manner even in respect of the cases falling
clause (१ Paiagraph 72 of the Scheme of 1952. The Commission recom-
inends that the instructions contained in Paragraphs 115, 116 and 117 of Chapter 3
of Manual of enting Procedure (Vol. 1) should be incorporated in the Scheme
of 1952 itself so as to give it statutory shape, and specifially provide that save and
except in the cases falling under clause (iii) of Paragraph 72 of the Scheme of
1952, @ Suecessioi Certificate shall not be called for.

4.7. Shortage of Staff—One of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioners,
namely, tic Regional Provident Fund Commissioner of Calcutta, has mentioned
shortage of staff to be one of the reasons for the delay in the settlement of provident
fuad claiir

. No further information was supplied as to whether at any time a demand.
by him to the Central Office for the augmentation of the staff strength, and,
it thoveof, The necessary staff strength of all the officers of the Regional
a Joners is required to be reviewed and augmented, wherever
necess“i'y, keeping in view the ever-increasing workload in such offices.

4.8. Lack of cv-ardination and prompt action on the part of various Depart-
ments of an organisation or on the part of two offices also causes delay in the settle-
ment of pi

ovident fund claims. It has been observed that the correspondence calling
for adgitio,

atormation, cic., by one office from another office is not being attended
c {sce letter quoted in para 1.5). The Commission feels that
with the setting up of the institution of Ombudsman, the problem being caused
due to lack of co-ordiaation and prompt action on the part of various authorities
will be minimised to a great extent.

4.9. Non-verification of pay fixation.—The settlement of the provident fund
claims and other retirement dues also gets delayed due to the non-verification of
the pay fixetion. The case of Shri Godbole (para 2.7.2) is a glaring example of
such a case. The Commission feels that some time limit should be fixed within which
the pay fixation consequent upon the revision of the scales or any other eventuality
which necessitates the refixation of pay and wherever such fixations or refixation
are required to be verified by the Auditing or other authorities, should be so verified.
No employee can be made to suffer for the failure of the concerned authorities in
carrying out the necessary verification. In this regard, it is felt that time-limit of
3 months would be quite reasonable for carrying out the necessary verifications and in
case for any reason the necessary verification cannot be completed within the stipulated
peried of 3 moniiis, the employee must be granted interim relief by settling his claims
regarding provident fund or other retirement dues on interim basis within 15 days
trom the expiry of the period of 3 months.



22

4.10 Payment of undisputed portion of claims—Sub-paregraph (2) of paragraph
72 of the Scheme of 1952 specific provides that if any portion of the amount
which has become payable is in dispute or doubt, the Commissioner shall make
prompt payment of that portion of the amount in regard to which there is no dispute
or doubt, the balance being adjusted as soon as possible. A similar duty is cast upon
the Trust in the case of exempted organisations. In spite of the specific provision
in this regard, instances are not lacking where in the case of a dispute regarding the
correctness of the amount due, the authorities have failed to pay even the amount in
respect of which there is no dispute. the provison as contained in sub-paragraph (2)
of Paragraph 72 should be strictly complied with and the failure to do so should be
treated as “major misconduct” entailing punishment’ including dismissal from
service or reduction to lower rank.

4.11. Identification of beneficiary—Another gencral problem with which the
claimants are facedand which also adds to the delay in the settlement of pro-
vident fund claims is the difficulty of identification of the nominee or legal benefi-
ciaries of a deceased employee. Paragraph 82 of Chapter III, Part IT of Manual of
Accounting Procedure (Vol. 1) of ‘the Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation
provides that the claim application should be attested and forwarded by the employer
under whom the member was last employed and if a member is unable to send the
application either through the employer or duly attested by him for any reason what-
soever, he may forward the claim duly signed in the presence of. any one of‘the autho-
tised officers detailed therein and attested by him. This provision does not solve the
problem. Since the claim applications are to be forwarded and attested by the‘em-
ployer, and they insist upon specific identification of the claimant. It may therefore
be provided in the Scheme itself that a photograph of the claimant attested by any
one of the persons specified in para 82 of Chapter IT of‘the Manual of Accounting
Procedue of Employees Provident Fund Organisation will suffice. In so far as the
identification of the legal heirs is concerned, it needs to be provided that any one of
the persons detailed in paragraph 82 of Chapter III of Manual of Accounting
of‘the Employees Provident Fund Organisation enclosed along with the claim appli-
cation should suffice and no other or further identification of the claimant would be
necessary or insisted upon.

4.12. Need for cultivating sympathetic attitude with desire to assist the claimant.—
So often claims preferred by the claimants are rejected in an arbitrary fashion exhibi-
ting total back of sympathy for the claimant in distress and sensitivity for his or
her suffering. These remarks are more than warranted in the light of the observations
of the Gujarat High Court in Jmambhai v. Regional Provident Fund Commissioner: —

“3. A few observations regarding the working in the office of the Regional
Provident Fund Commissioner are called for having regard to the facts
revealed by the present petition. The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner
has passed a one line order rejecting the application of the petitioner
without examining the matter in depth, without holding any inquiry and
without considering the question with the seriousness that it deserves.
It ought to have been realised that the claim was being made by a nominee
of a deceased workman and by the very nature of things, he could not
be expected to incur legal expenditure in order to secure his claim. Such
matters are required to be dealt with sympathetically and in the right
spirit, that is to say, informed with a desire to be helpful, There should
not be an anxiety to reject without a close scrutiny and drive the applicant
to seek relief in a Court of law. If the Department were to function in
this manner the whole object of the benevolent legislation would be
defeated. Rejecting the application is the last thing that the competent
authority would be expected to do and not the first thing on the slightest
pretext. Before rejecting the claim the competent quthority would be
required to afford an opportunity to the applicant in regard to any
aspect which, in the opinion of the competent authority, creates a hurdle
in the way of the applicant who is entitled to the amount standing at
the applicant who is entitled to the amount standing at the credit of the
deceased workman. If necessary, the competent authority could also seek
legal advice in order to re-assure himself. But, in any case, he must not

"Je in a haste to reject the application as has been done in the ‘present case
without holding any inquiry and without examining the matter closely and
carefully.”


23

We accordingly recommend that a provision should be made obliging tite competent
quthority—

(1) 16 examine the claim of a claimant carefully and sympathetically in
depth with the anxiety to afford relief, if possible, instead of evincing hurry
to dispose of claim by rejecting it.

and providing that

(2) no claim shall be rejected without hearing a claimant and passing a reasoned
order, a copy of which shall be served on the claimant free of cost.

(3) gross negligence or callous indifference shown by any officer resutling in
unwarranted delay in making payment to a claimant should be treated as
serious misconduct liable to entail dismissal or removal of the concerned
official from service.

4.13. Exempted organisations—There are two types of exempted organisations.
One class of exempted organisation is the organisation to which though provisions
of Act of 1952 are applicable, the Scheme framed thereunder is not applicable. Such
organisations are permitted to frame their own Schemes. Such types of organisations
are exempted under section 17 of the Act of 1952. Though such exempted organisations
are free to frame their own schemes and such schemes are normally framed on the
lines of the scheme of 1952 framed under the Act, there is no specific provision in
the Act requiring such exempted organisations to get the scheme framed by them
approved by the Central Provident Fund Commissioner with an eye on incorporating
the safeguards provided by the Act and the Scheme therein. The only requirement
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 17 of the Act of 1952 is that the bene-
fits allowed to the employees of the exempted organisations should not be less
favourable than the benefits being allowed to the employees to whom the Scheme of
1952 is applicable. The Law Commission feels that a specific provision should be
incorporated in the Act of 1952 making it obligatory for the organisations exempted
from the operation of the Scheme of 1952 under section 17 of the Act 10 obtain
specific approval of their schemes from the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner
concerned from the aforesaid stand point.

Another category of exempted organisations are those to whom the provisions
of the Act of 1952 are not applicable either by virtue of section 1(3) or section 16
of the Act. To quote as an illustration, Entry No. 12 of Appendix 1 to the Act of
1952 provides that the provisions of the Act shall be applicable to all trading and
commercial establishments engaged in purchase, sale or storage of any goods
including establishments of exporters, importers, advertisers, commission agents
and brokers and commodity and stock exchanges but not including bank or Ware-
houses established under any Central or State Act. One of such organisations is the
Central Warehousing Corporation. Since this Corporation is not governed by the
Act of 1952 and‘the Scheme framed thereunder, it has framed its own regulations
Shown as “The Central Warehousing Corporation Employees Provident Fund
Regulations 1962”. Though primarily the provisions contained in these Regulations
are similar to the provisions contained in the Scheme of 1952, there is a major de-
parture in so faras the question of payment of interest on Provident Fund accummu-
lations is concerned. Under paragraph 60 of the Scheme of 1952, the interest on
provident fund accummulation is payable up to the end of the month preceding the date
on which the final payment is authorised irrespective of the date of the receipt of
the claim from the claimant concerned. In other words, even if it has taken
10 year in the settlement of the claim, the claimant is entitled to and is
paid, the interest for the period for which the case has remained unsettled.
On the other hand, Regulation No. 14 of the Central Warehousing Regulations, 1962
provides that interest on all sums standing in the books of the Fund to the credit of a
subscriber shall cease on the day onwhich he leaves the service of the Corporation
or on the date of his death, whichever is earlier. Under the Regulations governing
the employees of the Central Warehousing Corporation, if the amount of the provi-
dent fund accummulation hasremained unpaid pending the final settlement of the
claim, the employer or the Trust will not be liable to pay any interest. The interest
which the employer may earn on the amonut belonging to the subscriber will go
to the employer himself which will result in unjust enrichment of the employer.
If such a provision is allowed to ramain, the possibility of employer intentionayly
delaying the payment to the claimant and thereby earning interest over the money
which does not belong to him cannot be ruled out. The Commission is of the firm


24

opinion that the provisions similar to the one contained in Regulation 14 of the Central
Warehousing Corporation Employees’ Provident Fund Regulation 1962 virtually
authorising denial of interest from the date of leaving the service of Corporation or
death, whichever is earlier, till the end of the month preceding date of final payment
should be deleted forthwith and substituted by a provision similar to the one contained
in paragraph 60(2)(b) of the Scheme of 1952. Further, Regulation No. 15(2) of the
Central Warehousing Corporation Employees Provident Fund Regulation 1962
provides that subject to the directions of Executive Committee, the whole or any
part of the employers’ contribution together with interest credited in respect there of
may be deducted from the total amount standing to the credit of a subscriber. Such
deduction can be made if the employee has been dismissed or removed from employ-
ment in pursuance of disciplinary proceedings taken against him or if the employee
has voluntarily left hisemployment within 5 years of his entry into service other-
wise than on account of ill-health or other unavoidable causes. The corresponding

' provision contained in the Act and the Scheme has already been deleted recently.
Regulation 15(2) must also accordingly be repealed or deleted. Regulation 15(3)
Surther provides that the employees’ share together with interest shall not be payable
except with the approval of the Managing Director. Both these provisions are, on the
face of it, opposed to the policy under which the Employees’ Provident Fund and Miscel-
laneous Provisions Act, 1952 and the Scheme framed under it came to be enacted.
Section 10 of the Act clearly provides that the Provident Fund accummulations
shall not be subject to any deductions or attachment, etc. Moreover, neither any
guidelines nor any limit has been prescribed for the deduction of the Employees’
share by the Executive Committee. The matter rests entirely in the discretion of the
Executive Committee. Such unlimited and unguided discretion cannot be said to be
proper and legal. The provisions contained in Regulation 15(2) and 15(3) of the Central
Warehousing Corporation Employees’ Provident Fund Regulations, 1962 and such
similar provisions contained in the Regulations. pertaining to other organisations
to which the provisions of the Act of 1952 are not applicable are required to be deleted
so as to bring the employees of such organisations at par with the employees of other
organisations.

4.14, Holding of Lok Adalats.—When a sizeable number of claims have re-
mained unsettled, it may be desirable to hold a ‘Lok-Adalat’ for setting the claims
on the spot at the site of the establishment in order to relieve the distress of the
claimants. Such a ‘Lok-Adalat’ should be properly publicised in advance so as to

, make the claimants aware of the programme. Individual notices may also be served
on the claimants by the employer and/or the provident fund organisation. Matters
would in such an event come to a head and all concerned would be seized of the
problem and placed under spotlight. And there would be concentration on the
solution of the problem. The Ombudsman shall have the power to direct the holding
of such a ‘Lok-Adalat’ Whenever considered necessary, desirable or expedient to
do so. Failure to comply with his directions should entail penal consequences. The
solution of the problem will become easier and quick redressal of grievances of
the suffering claimants may become possible if such a course is adopted. The Ombuds-
man or his deputy may remain present personnaly at the sitting of the said Lok Adalat.

We recommend accordingly.


CHAPTER V

PROBLEM REGARDING LEGAL IMPLICATION OF ‘NOMINATIONS’
UNDER THE EMPLOYEES. PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLA-
NEOUS PROVISIONS ACT- 1952—SUGGESTED SOLUTION

5.1, In respect of nominations made under the life insurance policies—there
was a difference of opinion between different High Courts as to whether the nominee
was entitled to the amount payable under the policy as a beneficiary in his own right
to the exclusion of the heirs of the deceased assured or whether the nominee was
merely a person authorised to make collection on behalf of the legal heirs of the
deceased assured. The issue has been settled by the decision of the Supreme Court
in Sarbati Devi’s case [AIR 1984 SC 346}, which upholds the latter view, namely, that
the nominee is merely empowered to collect the amount for the benefit of the legal
heirs. Before the Supreme Court rendered its decision and settled the legal position
in the context of the interpretation of the relevant provisions of the Life Insurance
law should be clarified by virtue of an amendment so that a nominee became entitled
to the amount payable under the life insurance policy on the death of the assured as
a beneficiary in his or her own right. The Government has neither accepted the re-
commendation nor rejected the recommendation. Thus, the law, as at present is 85
per the delacration made by the Supreme Court is Sarbati Devi’s case.

5.2. A similar question has arisen in the context of the Employees. Provident
Funds and Miscellaneous Provsions Act [Act for short]. The Scheme of the said
Act is altogether different. A crucial provision in the said Scheme is contained in
section 10(2), which in terms provides that the amount payable under the Act and the
Scheme would vest upto the nominee. The question that has arisen is this :-—

When a nomination is made by a member under the Employees’ Provident
Funds Act and the Scheme in respect of the amount standing to his
credit in the Fund (which nomination is intended to be effective on the
death of the memberbefore receiving that amount), does the nomination—

(i) merely confer on the nominee the right to collect the amount, or

(ii) does its effect go beyond that, and the nominee can claim that he
is the beneficial owner of the amount received by him ?

In the former case, the nomination has the effect merely of discharging the Employees
Provident Fund authorities, etc., but it does not confer a beneficial title on the nominee
so as to exclude the beneficiaries as specified in the Scheme. In the latter case, the
nomination has a more positive effect and makes the nominee the absolute owner of
the amount paid to him or her in his or her own right.

5.3. Conflicting views of High Courts—The Calcutta High Court has held that
the amount exclusively vests in the nominee and the legal heirs have no tight therein,
Distinguishing the provisions contained in section 39, Insurance Act, the High Court
held :-

&]3, ne the status of a nominee under the Provident Fund
Act is completely different from his counterpart under the Insurance Act.
The most striking difference about the status of the nominee under the
two Acts is clearly discernible from S. 10(2) of the Provident Fund Act
quoted earlier which expressly provides that the amount standing to the
credit of a member of the Fund at the time of his death shall vest in the
nominee and it shall be free from any debt or liability incurred by the de-
ceased or the nominee before the death of the member. From S. 10(2)
it is abundantly clear that immediately upon the death of member the provi-
dent fund money becomes part of the asset of the nominee whereas under the
Insurance Act after the death of the assured the money continues to be his
asset; and the money which was standing to the credit of the member
becomes free even from the debt or liability incurred by the nominee
before the death of the member, Only because the money vested in, and
thereby became the property of the nominee after the death of the meraber


20 ‘

such 8 provision was required to be incorporated ss, otherwise, being
estate of the nominee. it Hale to bs cituched f
incurred by him prior to af te memby
under the Provident Pur 5 >
Ac, t gets a right to the me 1; male clear by the provisions
of paras 61 and 70 of the Scheme quoted earlier.”

5.4. On the other hand the Andhra Pradesh and Deliti8 !gh Courts relying up-
on the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in Sarbati Devi's case9 have held that the
nominee of a provident fund has only the right to colleci the amount and that such
a right does not confer an absolute right on him to receive the amount to the exclusion
of the statutory beneficiaries.

5.5. The Andhra Pradesh High Court has largely adopted the approech that
the position under the Employees’ Provident Funds end Miscellancous Provisions
Act’ 1952 is the same es that in respect of a nomination ueder section 39, Insurance
Act. For the purpose of the Insurance Act. the Supreine Court in Sarbati Devi v.
Usha Devi’, his held that the nominee docs not become bercficial owner. Corres-
pondingly, (according to the Andhra Pradeh H igh Court) the nominee under the
Employees’ Provident Funds Act, also docs not become a beneficial owner. Im con-
trast, the Calcutta High Court has pointed out that the statuiory ian guage in the case of
the Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Aci, 1952 is different
from that employed in section 39 of the Insurance Act. In perticilar, because of the
words “vest in the nominee” used in section 10( 2) of the loyees’ Provident Funds
Act of 1952, it must be held that immediately upon the death of the iv the provi-
dent fund money becomes part of the assets of the nominee wheres, urder the Insurance
Act, after the death of the assured, the moncy continues to be his asset. This is also
made clear (according to the Calcutta HighCourt) by the provision of pares 61 and 70
of the Scheme. It may be mentioned that the Andhra Pradesh H igh Court does not
seem to have noticed section 10(2) of the main Act and as rece rds paras 6] and 70 of
the Scheme, that High Court does not construe the words ht to receive” and
“become payable” (used in the Scheme) as indicating an intention to confer bene-
ficial ownership. There arc a few other provisions of the Aci and the Scheme, dis-
cussed in the two judgements. But for the Present purpos.. it is not necessary to
enter into their details.

5.6. The preferable vicw—Thus, by reason of the conflicting decisions regarding
the rights of 2 nominee under the Act of 1952 and the Scheme framed thereunder,
the question arises as to which of the two views needs to be ६ ‘cepted. The view taken
by Calcutta High Court appears to be correct on an overall interpretation of the
relevant provisions ० ntained in section 10(2) of the Act of 1952and paras 61 and 70 of
the Scheme framed thereunder for the following reasons :—-

(i) Section 10(2) of the Act of 1952 specifically provides that any amount
standing to the credit of a member in the furd or of an exempted employee
in a provident fund at the time of his death and. payable to his nominee under
the Scheme or the rules of the provident fund shall, subject to any deduc-
tion authorised by the said scheme or rules, vest in the nominee. (Emphasis
supplied). There is no such or similar provision in the Insurance Act, 1938,

(ii) Para 61(3) of the Scheme of 1952 places a restriction on the right of a
subscriber in making a nomination. It provides that if a subscriber has a
Samily at the time of making the nomination, the nomination shall be in
Savour of one or more persons belonging to his family and that any nomina-
tion made by such member in favour of a person not belonging to the family
shall be invalid. Moreover, para 61(4) of the Scheme of 1952 further
provides that if at the time of making the nomination, the subscriber has no
family, the nomination may be made in favour of any person(s) but such
nomination shall forthwith be deemed to be invalid if ‘subsequently the subs-
criber acquires a family. There is no such restriction in the Insurance
Act, 1938. Under the said Act, 2 nomination can be made in favour of
any person. In other words, under the Insurance Act, an assured person,
whether or not he has a family at the time of making the nomination,
can nominate any person to receive the amount of the Insurance Policy
and such nomination remains valid till the same is specifically cancelled
or revoked by the assured or on the nominee predeceasing the assured.
The difference between the two provisions isnot unintentional. The


21

Legislature appears to have enacted the two provisions differently with
a specific object. The object is that under the Act of 1952 since the
nomination is restricted toa member of the family, such a nominee
should be entitled to the amount of the Fund absolutely and to the
exclusion of others; whereas under the Insurance Act, a nomination
canbe made in favour of any person, such nominee should reczive the
amount for the benefit of all the legal heirs.

(iii) The proposition that a nominee under the Act of 1952 and the Scheme
framed thereunder gets an absolute interest in the amount of the Fund
to the exclusion of others, is also supported by the provisions of para
61(2) of the Scheme which says thata subscriber,may in his nomination

- distribute to amount that may stand to his credit in the Fund at his own
discretion. The concept envisaged by this provision establishes beyond
doubt that the nominee(s) would get the amount absolutely._ This provi-
sion cannot be interpreted to mean that the subscriber is to distribute
the money between the nominee for further distribution among the legal
heirs. As anillustration ina givencase a Sxbscriber nominates his two
sons and further provides that both such nominees shall get half share in
the amount of the Fund. One of the nominees predeceases the subscriber.
A question would arise as to what would be the effect of one nominee
pre-deceasing the subscriber. Whether the surviving nomineer will get
the whole amout or whether the nomination as a whole would become
ineffective ? The answer to this situation is found in para 61(5) of the
Scheme, which provides that if the nominee predeceases the subscriber, the
interest of the nominee shall revert to the subscriber who may make a fresh
noamintion in respect of such interest. Therefore, in the case taken as an
illustration, in the event of one nominee predcceasing the subscriber,
only half share of the deceased nominee will revert to the subscriber.
Undoubtedly, a subscriber is at liberty to concel, revoke or modify but
then the nominee, whoever he may be, ultimately acquires an absolute
interest in the amount of the Fund.

(iv) The proposition that a nominee will take the amount of the fund absolutely
to the exclusion of other heirs also finds support from the provision of para
70(i) of the Scheme, which permits nomination in respect of a part of the
amount of the Fund. If a nominee was not to get any absolute beneficial
interest, the Legislature would not have provided for a nomination in
respect of a part of the amount. There is no such corresponding provision
in the Insurance Act, 1938.

The provisions contained in pares 61 and 70 ot the Scheme read with sec-
tion 10(2) of the Act of 1952 87010 be read as an exception to the personal
law regarding succession govering the subscriber. This is evident frem
the bare provision of para 70. Under these provisions the amount is
required to be paid to ihe nominee(s) if there be a nomination. In the
cases where there is no nomination the amount is to be paid to the member
of the family of the subscriber in equal shares. Through the children—sons
or daughters—majors or minors—married or unmarried—are included
within the definition of the word “family” in Cl. (g) of para 2 of the
Scheme, under the proviso to para 70 (ii) of the Scheme, major sons,
major sons of a deceased son, married daughters whose husdands are
alive and married daughters of a deceased son whose husbands are alive,
have been specifically excluded and they are not entitled to any share in the
amount of provident fund in spite of the fact that they are members of the
family of the subscriber and the legal heir under the personal law of suc-
cession. Further clause (iii) of para 70 of the Scheme provides that
in case there is not person entitled to receive the amount under clause (i)
or clause (ii), then the amount is to be paid to the persons legally entitled
to it, i.e., legal heirs according to the personal law of succession. The
provision of clause (iii) also supports the view that para 70 of the scheme is
to be read as an exception to the provisions of personal law regarding
succession. In other words, the provisions contained in paras 61 and 70
of the Scheme read with Section 102) of the Act, prescribe a mode of
succession altogether different from the mode provided under the Pperso-
nal law of succession governing the subscriber.

5.7. The Calcutta view would appear to be correct in view of the lan; ge,
content and intendment of section 10(2), And para 61(3) of the Scheme ot F195

93eM/J(N)273MofLJI&CA.

‘©



Zo

provides a clue to this object by providing that if the member has a family, then the
nomination should be in favour of & person belonging to the family, as defined in
para 2(g) ofthe Scheme. Moreover, the common man or women would perhaps
justifiably assume that the nominee would be beneficially entitled to the said amount.
Understandably so because the desire of the person covered by the Act in making nomi-
nation might well be to extend a protective umbrella to the person in whose welfare
he is most concerned in the unfortunate event of his or ier demise resulting in rendering
destitute such a persen who was economicaly dependent on the employee covered by the
Act. From ail points of view, therefore, the Calcuita view would apper to be more
persuasive.

5.8. Need to end the uncertainty and settle the ‘aw urgently—The resultant posi=
tion as it obtains today is that whereas one High Court proclaims that the provident
fund amount ‘vests’ absolutely upto the ‘nominee’ as a beneficiary in his or her right
another High Court folds to the contrary to the effect that the nominee is a mere
collecting agent on behalf of the ultimate beneficiaries under the law. Till the Supreme
Court resolves the controversy in case there is an appeal and it is not withdrawn as
settled, the uncertainty will continue to persist. As tne matters stand today even if an
appeal reaches the Supreme Court and is disposed of on merits it may take more than
a decade. The consequence would be :—

(1) In some States the nominee will get the provident fund amount as an ab-
solute beneficiary. In other States the nominee will have ouly obligation
to act as a collecting agent. The same law will thus operate differently in
different parts of India and benefit different persons.

(2) The employee making the nomination himself will not know what he is
doing and who will bencfit by making the nominatin and his purpose in
making nomination is likely to be defeated depending on the uncertainty
as tohow the court will construe the legal consequences of nomination.

(3) Neither the nominee nor the other members of his family will know who
is the rightful claimnt fur years together and will not be able to utilise
or epmloy the funds.

(4) Nominee and other family members of the deceased are likely to be locked
in a decades-drawn litigation.

(5) Instead of the funds providing succour to the family it will perhaps make it
incur huge litigation costs.

5.9. It would be counter-productive and result in defeating the benign goal of
the benevolent Icgislation to counieiance such a situation. How can a situation be
tolerated where there is uncertainly as to'who will benefit by ‘nomination’ on the

rt of the maker of the nomination, the members of the family in distress as also the
interpreter and administrator of law ? A satisfactory solution has therefore to be
found and found with a sense cf urgency. .

5.10. Suggested soluticn—On an anxious considcration of the issue, it appears
that there are three options :—

First option seems to be to take a satutory provision in the Act and the Scheme
to the effect that the ‘nominee’ would become an sbsolute beneficiary in his or her
own right.

rie

Sécond option that suggests itself is to makéa statutory provision to the effect that the
nominee’ will be entitled to collect the amount in question for and on behalf of such
members of the family [2s defined by Para 2(g) of the Scheme) for the purpose of being
disbursed amongst such family members as are'specified or dealt with in para 70 (ii)
of the Scheme. In other words, payment will be made to the ‘nominee’ for the benefit
of the very persons who would have been even otherwise entitled to be paid under the
aforesaid provisions of the Scheme in case there was no nomination. An without the
necessity to produce a succession certificate.


29

पा

Third course which commands itself is to make a statutory provision enabling an
employce to clearly state in writing in the very application making nomination either
that he wants that “the nominee shall take the amount absolutely in his or her own
right’ ur that the “nominee shall collect it and pay to my family members entitled
thervio under para 70 (ii) read with para 2(g) of the Scheme”.

‘ihe Commission is of the opinion that the third option would appear to be just
and isir and would be preferable in as much as the employee would be fully aware
and conscious of what he is doing by making the ‘nomination’ and the cons2quences
thereof. 5

5.11. On giving anxious consideration to all the relevant aspects, it appears
possbile to evolve a formula which would satisfy the demands of social justice and fair-
ness besides according due weightage to the desire of the employee concerned. The
solution which strikcs as eminently satisfactory is this. A statutory provsion may
be made to the effect that the amount payable under the Act and the Scheme will vest
in the nominee who will be called the ‘‘beneficiary-nominee” unless the concerned employ-
yee has named some person as a “‘collector-nominee” for the specific purpose of collect-
ing the amount on behalf of the members of the family as defined in Para 2(g) for dis-
bursement as per para 70(ii) of the Scheme. In other words, it would tantamount to
giving an option to the workmen concerned who can name either a beneficiary-
nominee or a collector-noimnee upon the significance of such nomination being ex-
plained to him. He may be required to express his option in clear terms stating that the
nominee will be a beneficiary-nominee and not a collector-nominee or vice versa. The
same formula can also be evolved in respect of life insurance policies and the recom-
mendation by the Law Commission in its 82nd Report may be reiterated with this modi-
fication.

5.12. Nomination under life insurance policies—While it is outside the scope of the
subject matter of this report it may not be in appropriate to suggest that a similar
formula can be adopted in respect of nominations under life insurance policies in the
‘context of the recommendation made by the Commission in its 82nd report
presented more than a decade ago on 2nd February, 1980. -

5.13. For, even in respect of life insurance policies, the public at large is per-
haps unaware of the true 168८1 position. Many of the persons seeking the protection
of insurance policies may well be labouring under the misconception that the nominee
would become an absolute beneficiary in his or her own right. The same would be the
case with regard to those who are covered by the Act and the Scheme. It is, therefore,
essential in the intercst of ail concerned tuat the position of law is settled. As has
been recounted earlizr, the Commission has already recommended amendment of
the Life Insurance Act with a view to meking a nominee a person in whom the bene-
ficial interest would vest to the exclusion of other heirs. Since, however, no decision has
been taken on the recommendation of the Law Commission, the matter is still not free
from vagueness in the sense that tie members of the public may not be fully aware
of the implications of nominations and the import of the decision of the Supreme Court
in Sarbati Devi's case. That is why the course suggested in para 5.12 read with para
5.11 hereinabove deserves to be dopted.

We recommend accordingly.


CHAPTER पा
CONCLUSIONS AND SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1. Conclusions

Provident Fund and similar benefits flowing from the Act! and the Scheme and
Schemes framed by the exempted establishments and Public sector undertakings
have been designed to extend a protective umbrella to the concerned employees so
that on retirement they themselves or in the event of their in-service demise their
dependants do not find themselves in a situation of helplessness similar to the one
faced by passengers of a boat thrown overboard on a stormy sea without a life boat.
The very Fie-purpose of these provisions would be practically defeated if the disburse-
ments due on retirement or death of the concerned employees are unduly delayed.
In this perspective the Commission undertook a survey of the delays in disuburse-
ments of these benefits. And delays, unconscionable, have been uncovered in a very
large number of cases in the course of the said survey.

The plight of the retired employees whose main source of income has totally
dried up on retitement and the distress of the dependants of the deceased employees
(the bread-winner of the family) who are suddenly faced wtih starvation particularly
when the protective umbrella of provident fund and other benefits is kept back for
a long time (sometimes decades) is of such magnitude that it calls for urgent remedial
action.

IL
The urgency for such measures is writ large on the face of the problem since _
the limited sample survey made by the. Commission restricted to 62 public sector
undertaking has revealed that as many as 8707 families are suffering on account of

delays in this area alone. (See para 2.2. and Appendices DI and DI). And thousands
of other families may be suffering likewise. an

And that

whereas unwarranted delays ranging upto 21 years have come to light in the course |
of scrutiny of 481 complaints received bythe Commission from out of which 139:
complaints have been redressed within about 3 months of the Commission taking up the -
issue with the concerned authorities, the Commission is firmly convinced that it is:
imperative to adopt remedial measures withowt any loss of time. पु

6.2. The Commission hereby recommeds—

I
CREATION OF OMBYDSMAN AS OUTLINED IN CHAPTER III

By enacting a statute, a high powered office of Provident Fund Ombudsman
invested with powers—

(a) inter alia to seek information from all employers/establishments
Provident Fund Schemes regartln ing claims for payment of provident fund
accumulations ete. pending with them for more than three months and to
issue appropriate directions for settlement of the pending claims and to
enforce compliance therewith should be created.

(b) Such employersfestablishmg gts ia Il be under a statutory duty to subi
returns tegatding pending te et the prescribed time. ” ९४

(०) He should be armed with 17777 iction to monitor delays in distursemer ¥
provident funds dues etc. in establishments (exemped as well as unexempredy
covered by the Act and the Scl 8 as well as public sector undertakings
and other establishments Having Provident Fund Schemes not covered by’
the Act.

30


31

(d) The essential obligation of the Ombudsman will be to identify cases of
delay in all aforesaid areas and spheres on the basis of the scrutiny of
returns or otherwise and to ensure prompt disbursements by suo motu
issuing appropriate directions and taking follow up action to secure comp-
liance.

Coupled with

the obligation to invite complaints regarding delay in disbursements to the rightful
claimants by recourse to public media and to redress their grievances by issuing appro-
priate directions and taking follow-up action to secure compliance with his
directions.

And also with

the obligation to isswe appropriate directions to obviate delays in regard to all other
cases in general based on his experience or otherwise considered expedient by him.

वा

The Ombudsman may be required to submit an annual report of the working of
his office, indicating problems faced by him and making such recommendations as may
be deemed necessary by him for stereamlining the administration. His report may be
placed before the Parliament within six months.

गा

The Ombudsman may direct the holding of a Provident Fund ‘Lok Adalat’ for
settlement of the pending cases perodically or as and when considered appropriate,
necessary cr expedient by him in respect of any particular estblishment or class of
establishments and the concerned officers shall be ० Btized to comply with his directions
at the peril of penal consequences. The Ombudsman himself or his delegate may remain
present for the purpose of supervision at such ‘Lok Adalat.’ (SEE ELABORATE
RECOMMENDATIONS AS MENTIGNED IN CHAPTER IV)

Iv

The relevant provisions of the Act and the E:P.F. Scheme should be amended as
set out in Chapter IV by inter alia providing in substance to the following effect :—

(1) Disbursement of provident fund and similar benefits should not be with-
heldon the ground that—

(a) the concerned employee has not vacated quarters allotted to him (se-
(b) the concerned employee has not produced no demand certificates
(see 2.5.8 and 4.1.3);

(०) the concerned employee has not produced succession certificate except
in the cases covered by clause (iii) of paragraph 70 (see 4.6.2.);

(d) someone has objected to the payment to the nominee or the beneficiaries
as defined by the Schemes to whom the authorities are bound
to make payment unless prohibited by a court of law from doing so
(see 4.2.);

(०) adisciplinary proceeding is pending (see 4.3);

(0) employer has failed to deposit the deductions made from the employee's
wages and or his own contribution (see 4.5.2).

(2) The Department shall not reject any claim without close scrutiny in-
formed with sympathy and without’ passing a reasoned order after hearing
the claimant (see 4.12).

(3) Gross negligence or callous indifference shown by any officer resulting in
unwarranted delay in making payment to a claimant should be treated as
serious misconduct liable to entail dismissal or removal of the concerned
official from service.


32

(4) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PAY ALL OUTSTANDING PAST
CLAIMS WITHHELD ON THE GROUND OF DEFAULT OF
EMPLOYER TO DEPOSIT HIS OWN OR EMPLOYEES CONTRI-
BUTIONS FROM ITS SPECIAL RESERVE FUND AS INDICATED
IN PARA4.5.2 OF CHAPTER IV.

And also adopt other measures indicated in Chapter IV.
v

To make a statutory provision enabling an employee to clearly state in writing
in the very application making nomination EYTHER that he wants that “the nominee
shall take the amount absolutely in his or her own right” OR that the “nominee shall
collect it and pay to my family members entitled thereto under para 70 (ii) read with
para 2(g) of t he E.P.F. Scheme.” And to amend the relevant provisions as suggested
in para 5.11 so as to make the nominee an absolute owner or a collecting agent as
per the desire of the nominator,

VI

Regulation 14 of Central Warehousing Corporation Employees Provident Fund
Regulation, 1962 regarding denial of interest from due date till actual payment should
be ‘deleted’ WHEREAS provision requiring payment of interest till the end of the month
preceding the date on which the final payment is authorised should be ‘inserted.’ So also
Regulations \5(2) and (3) regarding ‘forfeiture’ should be ‘deleted’ and all similar
Schemes that may be existing in statutory corporations and other exempted or un-
covered establishments should be similarly modified. (see 4.13).

THE COMMISSION RECOMMENDS ACCORDINGLY

POSTSCRIPT

Even as this Report is being finalized, the Commission has been apprised of the
appalling fact that about 400 employees ke West Bengal are being subjected to un-
warranted delay on account of the apparently callous indifference of the office of RPFC.
This has come to light in the context of the complaint of gross delay of as many as
4 years (nearly) which has caused considerable distress and anguish to one Parsuram
Singh, a retired employee of National Iron & Steel Co. (1984) Ltd. He has been made
to suffer for nearly four years without any justification. When information regarding
his complaint was sought from the Company, it was brought to the notice of the
Commission that there were nearly 300 similar employees who were similarly suffering
on account of the apathy of the RPFC#and that the Company on its part had even written

1 @ letter on 18th Jan., 1989 to the RPFC inter alia stating that the employees were
being subjected to misery and some of them had even died. To quote the relevant ex-
tracts :—

(6) about 500 provident fund final claims are lying pending in your accounts
group Howrah, since long;

(ii) the concerned members are reported to the under-going tremendous
Sinancial hardship and are often agitating before us;

(iii) some of them already been EXPIRED WITHOUT ANY TREATMENT
and proper diet;

(iv) indignation of the Provident Fund beneficieries seemed to be such as it
appears that outgoing members/their nominees may at any time resort
to the unrestful atmosphere;

(२) We have ALREADY SPECIFICALLY DEPOSITED their provident fund
dues to your office for necessary settlement;

(vi) I feel and fervently pray to your goodself to look into the matter of early
disposal of the stated claims to mitigate their untold misery and to avoid
Further IR. problem in our organisation. (Emphasis added).

Yet the RPFC appears to have done nothing for nearly 1-1/2 years till own.
When the Commission addressed the RPFC on 21-12-89, payment of Rs. 37,500 due
to Parsuram Singh was made by a cheque dated 1-1-90. This payment was made by a
cheque dated 1-1-90. This payment was made within 11 days of the Commission’s


33

letter but nearly 4 years too late. And 1 the Commission pursued the matter with
the RPFC, he confessed that 400 such 5 were pending and were being processed.
Evidently the RPFC has sat tight on the funds belonging to the employees without
qualms for nearly 1-1/2 years ever. after the Company called the attention of the RPFC
to the helpless employees plight. And even now the matter is merely being ‘processed’.
For THIS UNPARADONABLE CALLOUSNESS, THE RPFC’S OFFICE
ALONE APPEARS TO EE RESPONSIBLE. [The entire correspondence is appended
to this report and marke) Appendices I(1) to (V1)}. THIS PATHETIC STATE OF
AFFAIRS EMPHATICALLY UNDERLINES THE URGENT NEED FOR
IMPLEMENTING THE RECOMMENDATION REGARDING CREATION OF A
STATUTORY OFFICE OF OMBUDSMAN WITHOUT ANY LOSS OF TIME:

We close this report on a note of anguish being struck in the context of the
awareness sparked by the realisation that thousands of similarly situated helpless
employees oi their dependents must be suffering in silence for very many years.
Needless to stress with all the emphasis at our command that the matter brooks no
delay.

Sd/-

(M.P. THAKKAR)

Chairman

(Y.V. ANJANEYOLU) (P.M. BAKSHI)
Member Member

Sd/-
(G.V.G. KRISHNAMURTY)
Member Secretary

New Detui, DATED THE 20TH SEPTEMBER, 1990.

NOTES AND REFERENCES

1, Aan ox Martiyani १. Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Ahmedabad & Anr., 1983(2)

2... Imambhai v. Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, 1982(1) GLR 581.

3. Organo Chemical Industries v. Union of India, ATR 1977 SC 1803,

4, Nathulal v. Regional Provident Fuds Commissioner, Indore, 1984 Lab. 1.C. 1438,

4A. Kareparambil Theyyan Lakshmanan v. Air India, 1986 (1) CLR 138.

5. Imamdhai Guiamhusein Shaikh v. Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, 198211) GLR 581 at
p. 583-584, para 3.

6. Smt, Usha Majumdar v. Sint, Smriti Basu, ATR 1988 Cal. 115.

7. Shaik Dawood v. Mahmooda Begum, AIR 1985 AP 321.

8. Smt. Om Watiy. Dethi Transport Corpn., New Delhi, 1988 Lab. 1.0, 500 (Delhi).

9, Smt. Sarbati Devi v. Smt. Usha Devi, AIR 1984 SC 346.

10. Shaik Dawood v. Mahmooda Begum, AIR 1988 Cal. 115.

11. The Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952.

12. Para 70(ii) and 2(g) of the Employees Provident Funds Scheme.


APPENDIX-A

No. 6(3)/88-LC (LS)
Government of India
Ministry of Law and Justice
Deprtment of Legal Affairs
Law Commission
Shastri Bhavan, 7th floor,
New Delhi-110 001. .
Dated 24th October, 1988,

To
All Public Sector Undertakings
and their Unions. ना
Supsect : Judicial Reforms

Sir,

The Law Commission of India has bee as signed the task of revising the system
of Judicial Administration in the country with the end in view to streamlining the
system and eliminzting the delays. It is in this context that this letter is being sent.

The Law Commission would, therefore, like to undertake a detailed study of the
cases of Provident Fund and retifementidue$ which are pending finalisation, whether |
after retirement or death, for more than 6 pn and the Provident Fund cases which
have been finalised and payment’ has yen, nade to the concerned person after 6
months during the last 2 years, with a view to #volvingan efficacious and speedy system.
It is therefore, essential for the Commission to get the detailed information on the
under mentioned points with a view to eqhipping the law Commission with the
relevant material. The in formation sought’ for is of a basic nature which,can be
supplied by you and you alone as it is available in your records.

en

to please give priority to this letter and ‘se nf cone factual information indica icated
on the following points within fifteen days fom the date of receipt of this letter :—

(a) Number of Provident Fund apd ree irement dues cases pending finlisation
whether after retirement or death of an employee for more than 6 months.

(0) If possible, please give information regarding number of provident
fund and retirement dues ad hich have been finalised and payment
has been made to thé concerned employee or his successor after 6 >
months of his retirement or death as the case may be, during the last 2
years. i

(©) Average time taken in finalising the Provident Fund claim and retirement
dues of an employee and payment imade to him.

Your Co-operation and urgent responje will be highly appreciated,

The Law Commission hasa time-boynd jrogramme. You are, therefore, requested

Yours faithfully,

Sd/-

R.L. KHURANA)

Joint Secretary and Law Officer.

i

j


APPENDIX-B

No. 6 (3)/88-LC(LS) Part III
Government of India
Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Legal Affairs
Law Commission

Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi, the 28th Nov. 1988.

To
All Trade Unions.

Subject : Judicial Reforms
Sir,
The Law Commission of India has been assigned the task of judicial reforms in the

country with the end in view to streamlining the system and eliminating the delays.
It is, in this context that this letter is being addressed.

2. The Law Commission would, therefore, like to undertake a detailed study of
the cases of provident fund and retirement dues which are pending finalisation, whether
after retirement or death, for more than six months and instances of cases where
there has been inordinate delay in such cases, in the past two years with a view to
evolving an efficacious and speedy system. The Commission would appreciate very
much, if you will be good enough to extend your cooperation by furnishing the
necessary information and giving appropriate feedback to enable the Commission
to undertake this assignment. The Commission accordingly requests you to furnish
the detailed information on the under-mentioned points with a view to equipping the
Law Commission with the relevant material

3. The Law Commission has a time-bound programme. You are, ‘therefore,
requested to please give priority to this letter and send complete factual information
indicated on the following points within 15 days from the receipt of this letter :—

(a) Number of Provident Fund and retirement dues cases pending finalisation
whether after retirement for death of an employee for more than six
months.

(b) If possible, please give information regatding number of Provicent Fund
and retirement number of Provident Fund and retirement dues cases in

which there has been inordinate delay which have come to light during
the-last two years.

(c) Average time taken in finalising the Provident Fund Claim and retirement
dues of an employee and payment made to him.

Yours faithfully,
Sé/- _
(R.L. KHURANA) *

Joint Secretary and Law Officer.
35


APPENDIX-C

No. 6 (3) 88-ILC(LS) Part वा
Government of India
Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Legal Affairs
Law Commission

Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi, the 28th Nov. 1988.

To
All Provident Fund Commissioners.
Supyect : Judicial Reforms.
Sir,
The Law Commission of India has been asigned the taks of judicial reforms in the

country with the end in view to streamlining the system and eliminating the delays.
It is, in this context that this letter is being addressed.

2. The Law Commission would, therefore, like to undertake a detailed study of
the cases of provident fund which are pending finalisation, whether after retirement
or death, for more than six months and the provident fund cases which have been
finalised and payment has been made to the concerned person after six months during
the last two years, with a view to involving an efficiacious and speedy system. The
Commission would appreciate very much if you will be good enough 10 extend your
cooperation by furnishing the ncessary information and giving appropriate feedback
to enable the Commission to undertake this assignment. The Commission accordingly
Tequests you to furnish the detailed information on the under mentioned points with
a view to equipping the Law Commission with the relevant material.

3. The Law Commission has a-time-bound programme. Your are, therefore,
requested to please give priority to this letter and send complete factual information
indicated on the following points within 15 days from the Teceipt of this letter :-—

(@) Number of Provident Fund cases pending finalisation whether after retire-
ment or death of an employee for more than six months.

(0) If possible, please give information regarding number of Provident Fund
cases which have been finalised’ and payment has been made to the con-
cerned employce or his successor after six months of his retirement or
death as the case may be, during the last 2 years.

(©) Average time taken in finalising the Provident Fund Claim of an employee
and payment made to him.

Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(R.L. KHURANA)

Joint Secretary & Law Officer.
36


APPENDIX-DI

Information supplied by Public Sector Undertakings regarding pending Provident Fund|Retirement
8,

dues cases in response to request dated 24-10-8

s. File Name of the organisation Nos. of
No. serial No, pending PF/
irement
cases from
100 and above
1 2 3 4
1 56 Steel Authority of India Ltd,, New Delhi ~ . पु 3689
2 75. Bharat Cooking Coal Ltd., Dhanbad + . . 3144
3 50 National Textile Corporation (Guj.) Limited, Ahmedabad. 497
4 13 Heavy Engineering Corporation Limited, Ranchi 260
3 44B Hoogly Dock and Port Engineers Limited, Calcutta 130
6 78 Indian Oil Corporation, New Delhi . + . 104
7 72. Burn Standard Co. Ltd., 10C Hinduford Street, Calcutta 99
8 54 Oil and Natural Gas Commission CPF Section, Dehradun . 96
9 63 Hindustan Newsprint Ltd. Newsprint Nagar P.O. Kottayam
Distt., Kerala . 9
10 9 Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi . . 59
Wn 64 National Jute Manufacturers Corporation Ltd., 4, Netaji
ish Marg, Calcut पु 47
12 69 Neyweli Ligr Distt, Poel’ Limited, P.O. Neyveli-607801, “
13 70 Triveni Structurals Ltd., Naini, Allahabad . पु . . 41
14 48 Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited, New Delhi . 39
15 28 Jessop & Co. Ltd., Calcutta . 30
16 62 Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited, Nagour 27
17 14 Pyrites, Phosphotes & Chemicals Ltd. . . . 25
18 73 The Fertilizer Corporation of India, Nehru Place, New Delhi 24
19 36 Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd., Bombay . . . 21
20 19 Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Forest & Plantation Develop- 20
Corpn. Ltd., Port .
2 29 Tyre Corporation of India Limited, Calcutta =. . . 16
2 30 Projects & Development India Limited, New Delhi. . 15
23 35 Hindustan Copper Limited, Calcutta ee ee un
24 38 The Shipping Corpn. of India Ltd. Bombay =. . . है
25 42 Air-India Employees Provident Fund, Bombay . . . 1॥॥
26 46 The Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited, Cochin . वा
27 53 Hindustan Photo Films Manufacturing Co. Limited, Oota-
camund . . . . uy
28 4 National Projects Construction Corpn, Ltd., N. Delhi नं 1
29 20 Hindustan Shipyard Ltd., Vishakhapatnam . . . lo |
30 21 Uranium Corporation of India Ltd., Singhbhum, Bihar . 9
31 39 Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd., Koraput Division . . . 9
32 40 Hindustan Acronautics Ltd., Lucknow Division . . . 8

37


38

APPENDIX-DP—contd.

1 2 ~ 3 4
33 57 Garden Reach Ship builders and Engineers Ltd., Calcutta 8
34 59 Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. Ltd., Bombay . . 7
35 60 Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd., Bangalore. + . 7
36 61 The Minerals and Metals Trading Corpn. of India Limited,

N. Delhi . 6
37 41 National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd., New Delhi 6
38 18 Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Bombay 6
39 2. Metallurgical & Engineering Consultants (India Ltd., Ranchi) 6
40 76 Visakhapatnam Steel Project, Vishakapathnam . 5
4L 52. The State Trading Corporation of India Limited, New Delhi 5
42 3 Praga Tools Limited, Secunderabad . . 4
43 1 Electronics Corporation of India Limited, Hyderabad . 4
44 7 Balmer Lawrie & Co. Ltd., Calcutta. 5. वि 4
45 58 National Seeds Corporation Ltd., New Delhi . 3
46 34 HMT Limited Eraakulam . . . . . 3
47 10 Madras Fertilizers Limited, Madras. . . . 2
48 15 Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Barrackpore (W.B.) 2
49 16 Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd., Kanpur 2
50 32 Bengal Immunity Ltd., Calcutta . . . 2
डा 45 Mazagon Dock Limited, Bombay . 2
52 55 Hotel Aurangabad Ashok Aurangabad . . 2
53 65 Hotel Varanasi Ashok The Mall, Varanasi . 2
54 71 Ashok Hotel, 50-B Chankayapuri, New Delhi. 2
55 43 National Instruments Limited Calcutta . . 2
56 Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Ltd., Bombay 1
ST The Mica Trading Corporation of India Ltd, Patna. . 1
58 11 National Film Development Carporation Ltd., Bombay . 1
59 12 Indian Medicines Pharmaceutical Corporation Ltd., Almora 1
60 17 Hindustan Cables Ltd., Calcutta 1
6 22 Cochin Shipyard Limited, Cochin >. 0. . 1
62 ३3. Central Cotta-e Industries Corpn. of India Ltd., New Delhi 1



APPENDIX DI

Information supplied by various Public Sector Undertakings regarding Provideng Fund!Retirement
Dues cases in response to request dated 24-10-88

No. of No. of
cases cases
pending _ finalised
St. Name of the Enterprise finalisa- after six Remarks
No. tion for months of
more than —_retirement/
six death
1 2 3 4 5
1 Bharat Cooking Coal Ltd., 3,144 4111. Non-submission/late submission of
Dhanbad claims, disputed claims, etc.
2. Steel Authority of India Limited, 3,689 2,187 Non vacation of company’s quarter,
New Delhi absfnce of nominee and non-sub-
mission of succession certificate.
3. Heavy Engineering Corporation 260 361 -
(Gujrat) Limited, Ranchi
4 National Textile Corpn. (Gujrat) 497 ~— Gratuity cases for the period prior
Limited, Ahmedabad 10 nationalisation. “Writ Peitition
pending injunction granted — b:
High Court. ¥
5 Burn Standard Co. Limited, 99 297 Most of the cases which are pendii
10-C, Hunderford Street, Cal- are so pending due to non-receipt of
cutta. claims of settlement.
6 Oil & Natural Gas Commission, 96 70 =
CPF Section, Dehradun.
7 Indian Oil Corporation Limited, 104 59 Reasons for pendency :
New Delhi Re. Item No. 3:
(०) Retirement :

—Cases filed by the fates loyees:
in Court of Law challengi
their date of birth/retirement.

—Employee’s request for retain-
ing PF amount with PF trust.

(6) Death :

—Delay in receipt of post-mor-
tem report.

— Non-receipt of Guardianshiy
certificate. P

-Non_ receipt of succession
certificate,

— Non receipt of correct address,

Non receipt of affidavits/
forms.

—Non receipt of death certifi-
cate.

— Continued occupation of
Company’s quarters.
—Related issues being sub-

Judice.
Re. Item No. 4 :
(a) Retirement : Non-receipt of
advanced stamped receipt.
(0 Death :
~ nents how tho lege eae

39


APPENDIX-DII—contd.

40

1 2 3 4 5
— Occupying company’s quarter
by the nominee of the decea-
sed.
—Non - receipt of succession
certificate/affidavits.

8 Mineral Exploration Corpn. 27 129 Non-submission of relevant docu-

Limited, Nagpur. ments such as death/succession
— certificates.

9 Central Warehousing Curpora- 59 96 -
tion, New Delhi

10 Hindustan Newsprint Limited, 79 42. Delay due to defective nomination/
Newsprint Magar P.O. Kottayam non-submission of form No. 13-
Distt., Kerala. Non-submission of non-employ-

ment certificate.

11 Hooghly Dock & Port Engineers 130 — Delay due to P.F. authorities.
Limited, Calcutta.

12 National Jute Manufacturers 47 69 Non-submission/late submission of
Corporation Limited, 4, Netaji claims by concerned employee/
Subhash Marg, Calcutta. legal heirs/nominee.

13. Salkia and Port Engineering - 82 _

Works, Calcutta.

14 Triveni Structurals Limited, 4 29 —
Naini, Allahabad.

15. Jessop & Co. Ltd., Calcutta. 30 40 _

16 The Fertilizer Corporation of 24 37 One case pending in the Court. In
India, Nehru Place, New Delhi. other cases the non-settlement/

delayed settlement is due to delayed
submission of the Succession Certi-
ficates in cases where there is no-
nomination. In some cases the
delay is due to non-vacation of the
official quarters.

17 Bharat Petroleum Corporation 6 54 Delay is mainly for lack of informa-
Limited, Bombay. tion from employees who have

eee esi ase of death, the
non-availability of the nominees at
the given address, a

18 Tea Trading Corporation of - 49 Delay in receipt of claims.

19 Tyre Corporation of India Limi- 16 31 Non-availability of claim/succes-
ted, Calcutta. sion certificate, dispute over nomi-

nation or dispute over minor legal
heirs.

20 ites, Phosphates & Chemica- 25 19 -
ap Limited, New Delhi.

21 Neyveli Lignite Corporation 44 Nil Non-receipt of clearance certifica
Limited, P.O. Neyveli-607 801, in respect of the official ‘oom
South Arcot Distt., Tamil Nadu. modation provided to the emplo-

yees.

22 Andaman & Nicobar Islands 20 23 -

Forest_and Plantation Develop-
ment Corporation Limited, Port
Blair.

23 Hindustan’ Aeronautics Limited, 7 35 Disputed cases and documents
Bangalore.f awaited from nominees,

24 Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals 39 - -

Limited, New Delhi.
25 National Projects & Construc- i 23 Non-receipt of Succession Certifi-

tion Corporation Limited, New
Delhi.

cate/non-receis pt of complete infor-
mation from Units located in the
int areas,



APPENDIX-DII—contd.

41

1 3 4 5

26 Rashtriya Chomicais & Fertili- 21 8 -
zers Limited, Bombay,

27 Mazagon Dock Limited, Bombay 2 26 Non-availability of Estate Duty

Certificate and Indemnity Bond.

28 Projects & Development India 15 11 Non-vacation of company’s resi-
Limited, New Delhi. dential quarters.

29 National Thermal Power Corpn. 6 19 =
Limited, New Delhi. .

30 State Farms Corporation of J 49 Late submission of claii 5.
India Limited, New Delhi, Claim Papers,

31 The Minerals and Metals Trad- 6 17 Non-submission of relevant claim
ing Corpn. of India Limited, Papers inspite of reminders by
New Delhi. registered post.

32 The Shipping Corporation of 11 41. Non-compliance of legal formalities
India Limited, Bombay. by legal heirs in the absence of

nominations,

33 Hindustan Photo Films Manu- YW 8 =
facturing Company Limited,

Ootacamund.

34 The State Trading Corporation 5 13 =
of India Limited, New Delhi.

35 The Fertilizers & Chemicals I 7 For want of nomination, successi
Travancore Limited, Cochin. pentificate and dispute between

irs,

36 Cochin Refineries Limited, - 18 -

Ambalamugal, Kerala.

37 Balmer Lawrie & Company Ltd., 4 12. For want of Succession Certificate,

Calcutta. Nomination in favour a minor.
Pendency of industrial dispute.

38 Hindustan Shipyard Limited, 10 6 Late receipt of claim papers/pen-
Visakhapatnam. dency of court pr DI ‘oveedings or heck
पर plinary proceedings.

9 Garden Reach Ship Builders & 8 7 Non-submission of Succession

3 Engineers Ltd., Calcutta. Certificate.

40 Rehabilitation Industries Corpo- a 13 _
ration Limited, Calcutta,

41 Hindustan Copper Limited, है 1 -

Calcutta.

42 Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, 9 ३ Mon-availability of nominations
Koraput Division. and non-compliance of legal forma-

ities.

43  Elecironics Corporation of India 4 8 For want of legal heir of valid
Limited, Hyderabad, nomination or pendency of the

44 Metallurgical & Engineering matter in court.

44 Metallurgical & Engineering 6 5 Delay is generally in cases of death
Consultants (India) Limited, while in service due to succession
Ranchi. certificate where nomina-

tions are not available,

45 Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, 8 3 Non-clearance of company’s dues
Lucknow, Division, non-vacation of Sompanys quarter,

non-submission of claim papers,

46 Air India Employees Provident वा >-. Non-vacation of residential quar-
Fund, Bombay. ters,

47 National Council of Education - 9 ~
Research & Training, New Delhi.

48 Uranium Corporation of India 9 - -

Limited, Singhbhum, Bihar,
49 Hotel Aurangabad Ashok, 2 6 Late submission of claim forms,

Aurangabad.

a See"


APPENDIX-DII—conid.

42

2

5

50

51

52

53

5S

56

57
58

59

61

62

63

Visakhapatnam Stee! Project,
Visakhapatnam.

Hindustan Petroleum Corpora-
tion Limited, Bombay.

Bharat Dynamics
Hyderabad.

Limited,

Hindustan Aeronautics Limited,
Kanpur.

Hindustan . Paper Corporation
Limited 75-C, Park Street,
Calcutta.

Bengal Chemicals and Pharma-
ceuticals Limited, 6, Ganesh
Chander “Avenue, ” Calcutta
700013.

Praga Tools Limited, Secundra-
bad.

The Mica Trading Corporation
of India Limited, Patna.

Hindustan Prefab Limited, New
i.

Bengal Immunity Limited, Cal-
cutta.

HMT Limited, Ernakulam.
Madras Fertilizers Limited,
Madras.

National Film Development
Corpn. Limited, Bombay.

National Seeds Corporation Li-
mited, New Delhi.

The Elgin Mills Company Limi-
ted, 11/6, Smt. Parbati Bagla
Road, Post Box No. 11, Kanpur

Nil

Nil

Non-receipt of claim forms/doubt-
ful nomination and non-clearance
of dues payable to the company.

(@ In three cases _ outstanding
housing loan not cleared.

(6) In one case corporation’s quar-
ter not vacated.

(© In one case nomination/succes-
sion certificate not available.

(d) In two cases Estate Duty clea-
rance is awaited.

For want of Succession Certificate/
nomination in favour of minor.
Discrepancy in the date of birth.
Non-return of Government party.

No reasons given for pendency.

Delay due to shortcomings on the
part of the employees.

Late submission of legal heir certi-
ficate/dispute Penaing in court.
Non-receipt of the account from
the previous office.

Non-receipt of claim papers.

Late submission of claim papers.

Claim papers not received.

For want of Succession Certificate
and dispute between the successors. -

Nomination in favour of minor and
pendency of disciplinary proceed-
ings.

(a) In two cases succession certifi-
cate called for.

(0) In one case whereabouts of
nominee are not known.

(0) Ia one case the employee retired
on 11-6-87. He wos अप
vide letter dated 11-7-87 to col-
toot his gratuity. The employee
'urned it
jumed up for payment only on

(ii) In the second. case employee
died 1n-3-87, Nominee
ay for yment Tetire-
ent dues With different nares
soiree

= | on sul of
affidavit by her." °F tHe



43

APPENDIX-DIi —conrd.

3

4

5

65

67

70

a

कट

B
4

15

16

77
78

19

Hindustan Aeronautics Limited,
Bartackpore (W.B.)

‘Bongaigaon Refinery & Petro
chemicals Limited, Assam.

Hindustan Cables Limited, Cal-
tutta.

Cochin Shipyard Limited, Cochin

Central Cottage Industries Corpn.
of India Limited, New Delhi.
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited,
Bangalore.

National Instruments Limited,
Calcutta.

Hotel Varanasi Ashok, The
Mall, Varansi.

Ashok Hotel, 50-8, Chanakya~
puri, New Delhi.

Export Credit Guarantee Corpn.
of India Limited, Bombay.
Indian Medicines Pharmaceuti-
cal Corporation Limited,
Almora.

Kuremukh {ron Otc Company
Limited, Bangalore.

Scooters India Limited, Lucknow.
Indian Oil Blending Limited,
Bombay.

Central Coal Limited, Ranchi.

ORMAQUZIMOLLIGCA “एकल ककए एक णए)अइ|

(दर) Ia the third casc employee died
on 11:4-87 without any aemi-
nee. The legal heir applied for
‘succession certificate and on
receipt of the succession certifi-
cate the payment was made on
27-1-88,

For want of Succession Certificate
and delay in complince of legal
formalities.

Vonsreceipt of succession Certifi-
cates,

Late receipt of claim from the
nominec.

Delay for want of claim from the
nominee and for want of Succes-
sion Certificate.

Non-submission of succession certi-

Inone case the amount of EPF has
already been paid. The dispute is
segarding grant of famiy pension.
It is stated that the family pension
scheme has not so far been intro-
duced in the organisation. The
other case is pending settlement
since March, 4986. No reasons
have been assigned for the delay.

For want of Succession Certificate.

Pendency of a civil case in which.
injunction was issued.

—~ No case pending, eowever, the

i

Undertaking has quoted three cases
of delay in transfer of P.F. ac-
counts by the P.F. authorities.
Hany of the cases is affected by the
conditions mentioned below then
the payment is not done till the
legal requirement has been finally
compiled with :~

(a) Cases where claims have not
‘been submitted by the persons
concerned in time.

(0) Cases where there are disputes
over the claims and the money
is claimed by more than one
claimant.

(०0 Cases where there is no nomina-
tion by the emo!
and there is delay in iene
Succession certificate by the I

ir

(व) Cases where the employee con-
cerned has not paid the dues of
the company, if any.



APPENDIX-E
PRESS RELEASE

The Law Commission is examning the delay in payment of Provident Fund and
retirement dues by private enterprises, public undertakings, Trusts operating the
Provident Fund etc. and the Provident Fund Commissioners to evolve an efficacious
and speedy system. Al! persons or their legal representatives or their nominees who
have not received their Provident Fund and retirement dues etc. for more than one
year may kindly furnish full particulars of their cases to Member-Secretary, Law
Commission, Department of Legal Affaits, 7th flodr, ‘A’ Wing, Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi-110 001 as early as possible, so as to enable the Commission to formulate
its views in the matter. -


APPENDIX ‘F”
Tabular statement of pending Provident Fund cases with concerned authorities which have been settled

Co , : हि —
sl. ‘Name ‘of the complainant Date or specific Date on which Period (approx.) for which the matter remained Response to Whether exempted or
No, pana reference nade by compliance reported pending with the concerned. authorities complaint ‘unexempted
‘Law: Commission
to the concerned
authorities (General
reference was made
to the RPFCs on
28-11-88)
1 2 3 4 हु 5 7 6 7
हि Delay involved in settling the PF case above 10 years
1. Sh! LabSingh पु . 12-7489 20-7-89 & 29-8-89  29-8-89--1968=21 yrs 317 unexempted
2 Sh. 8B. Joshi मु . » 19-6-89; 16-2-50 13-7-89 उदही9--1-: -735-16 हाड a 251 Gowt-empleyee covered by GPF
३ Sh. RK. Kolhatkar 3-7-89 12-7-89 12-7-89—19-3-75 = 14 yrs 4 months 274 unexempted
4 Sh. AB. Putandi . . 16-2-90; 26-6-89 —_26-3-90 29-3-89—1-11-75=13 yrs-4:months 214 unexempted/covered
under Coal Mines PF Act.
5 Sh3SN. Mathur. . 14-6-89 29-9-89 10-9-89—Apr. 1977=12 yrs 5 months (Partly settled) 173 exempted
6 Sh. AS, Pathak . . 8-6-89; 9-2-90 1-7-89 1-7-89—30-6-78=11 yrs (partly settled) 151 Municipal Corporation
7 SbJKiKepila. . 86-89 , 25-190 7-71-89 7-7-89—23-9-78=10 yrs 10 months 106 exempted
Delay involved in settling the PF case between 6 to 10
years
8 Sb.K.Ramamurthy  . 10-7-89 19-7-89 10 years 361 exempted
9 पर lo
(482८5 % 19-6-89; 16-2-90.. 30-3-9 9 yrs 11 months 245 unexempted
10 Sh. JP. Patnaik 2. 19-6-89 30-8-89 30-8-89—1980=9 yrs 8 months 230 unexempted
11 कर, 71.0. Kamat. . July 1989 25-7-89 257--89—Nov. 79559 yrs 8 months (partly settled) 328 ‘unexempted
SRP Achari . 16-2-90; 19-6-89 22-2-90 5-4-89—5-2-1980=9 yrs 2 months 197 exempted

>
n


Appanpix ‘F'—Contd.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
13. Sh. M, Subba Rao 12-6-89; 25-1-80  23-6-89 23-6-89—April 81=8 yrs 2months (balance settled) 161 unexempted
14 ‘Sh. 0.0. Patnaik 16-2-90; 19-6-89 1-3-90 दर 1-3-90---1982->7 yrs 9 months 226 govt. service
15. Sh. Perugulu Talpulu 12-6-89; 25-1-90 _23-6-89 12-8-88—22-5-81=7 yrs 2 months (balance settled) 162 unexempted
16 Sh. M.K. Acharya 8-6-89; 25-1-90 20-12-89 20-12-89—1-10-82=7 yrs 2 months (partly settled) unexem pt
17 Sh, Kundan Lal 1247-89 30-8-89 1-5-89—31-3-82-27 yrs 2 months (reg gratuity dues) 338 gratuity case (govt. employee)
18 Sh, A.V. Joshi + 26-5-89 22-6-89 7 yrs delay in issuing PF statements, accouats from
1983-84 onward under process.

71 ‘unexempted
19. Sh. A.K. Ghosh 4-7-89 26-7-89 11-4-89—30-6-82=—6 yrs 10 months 78 govt. service
20 Sh. P.K. Bal . 12-6-89 27-6-89 5-2-89—25-5-82=6 yrs 9 months 6 exempted
21 Smt. S. Bhattacharya 26-2-89 30-3-90 20-3-90—15-6-83=6 yrs 9 months 341 unexempted
22 Sh. HK. Pareek 19-6-89; 16-2-97 _7-7-89 (partly settled) Feb. 1989—July 1982=6 years 6 241 ‘unexerapted

me

23. Sh. Francis «  26-2-90; 12-7-89 16-390 15-11-89--1983-6 yrs 6 months 313 unexempted
24 Sh. ५, Skaria + 162-90; 19-6-89 — 27-2-90 26-7-89-—Jah. 83=6 yrs 6 months 218 exempted हु
25 Sh. P.V. Narayanan «  20-2-90; 3-7-89 8-3-90 22-1-90—10-8-83=6 yrs 4 months 282 ‘unexempted
26 Sh. K.D. Zade 20-12-89; 12-7-89  9-2-90 2-2-90—30-11-83=:6 yrs 2 months 387 govt. service
27 Sh. I'D. Aggarwal . 19-6-89 21-8-89 21-8-89—July 83=6 yrs 223 govt. service
28 Sh. S. Pasayat 28-12-89 22-1-90 21-9-89—1-9-83 6 yrs 430 govt. service
29 Sh. V. Shanmukha Rao . 10-1-90; 29-5-89  16-1-90 16-1-90—1984=6 yrs (balance settjed) 6A govt. service
30 Smt. Shanti Ghosh 26-5-89; 12-1-90  16-6-89 & 5-7-89 5-7-89—1983 «6 yrs 68 govt. aided
31 Sh. B.N. Sengupta न 3-7-89 21-8-89 6 yrs. 275 govt. service
32. Sh. V.D. Sharma 3-7-89; 92-90... 21-7-89 21-7-89—-17-8-83=6 yrs (partly settled) 267 exempted/uncovered


33. Mrs. K.V. Kumari

34 Sh. PJ. Thomas .

35 Sh.S.G. Pagare ,

36 Smt. Sayana Balanna .
37 Sh, A.M. Bhattacharya |.

38 Sh. Jimmi P. Ward Angami <

39 Sh. H.M, Girnare न

40 Sb.S.C.Sarkar 9. .+]
4{ Smt. Muchat oS

Delay involved between 4 to 6 years

26-2-80; 12-7-89  16-3-90 8-8-89—22-11-83-=5 yrs 9 months 314 unexempted
16-2-90; 19-6-89. 13-3-90 & 27-2-90. 26-7-89--19-1-83--5 yrs 6 months 207(1) exempted
14-6-89 25-7-89 13-4-89—Dec. 1984=5 yrs 4 months 180 unexempted
96-89 22-2-89 & 23-8-89  23-8-89-—Dec. 1984=5 yrs 4 months 148 unexempted
13-3-89 28-8-89 330-17--8455 yrs. 2 months (pension/gratuity 375 govt. employee
19-6-89 11-7-89 1-4-89—1984=5 yrs 240 unexempted
8-6-89; 19-1-90  27-6-90; 26-4-90 1-2-90—28-2-85:=5 yrs 109 govt. service

1-2-96 (complainants

it)
19-689; 16-2-90  10-2.90 20-12-89 -4-12-84=5 yrs 191 unexempted
20-2-90; 3-7-89  27-3-90 1-8-89—17-9-84—4 yrs 11 months 259 unexempted

121-90; 8-2-89..... 12-3-90 - 12-3-90—-10-5-85-=4 yrs 10 months 59 unexempted
10-7-89 1-7-89 26-10-88--31-1-84--4 yrs 9 months 330 exempted
16-2-90; 19-689" " 27-2-90 “Y6-9-87—Jan. 83=4 yrs 8 months 200) exempted
19-6-89 12-59-89; 23-8-89 1-8-89—March 85=4 yrs 5 months 232 exempted/uncovered

+ 37-89 3-11-89 3+11-89—Aug. 985=4 yrs 3 months 260 unexempted
12-6-89 & 12-1-90 24-1-90 24-1-90--8-10-85«-4 yrs 3 months 93 unexempted

Deley involved in settling the PF case between 3 to 4
8-6-89 & 19-6-89 21-8-89 1-8-89—10-10-85-=3 yrs 10 months 128 exempted
12-6-89; 25-190 26-6-89 8-5-89—June, 85=3 yrs 10 months 159 unexempted

1 12-1-90; 29-5-89  12-2-90 १. 211-89--15-2-86-3 yrs 8 months 64 exempted
16-2-90; 19-6-89  28-2-90 28-2-90-—30-6-86-=:3 yrs 8 months (partly settled) 229 govt. service
19-6-89; 162-90 27-7-89 31-1-89—1-7-85.=3 yrs 6 months 249 exempted
8-689; 19-689 21-889 24-7-89—30-4-86==3 yrs 3 months “128 exempted

SEDATE एक ,.3.प-पप-प-पयि+ःएयएण।/)।/एण।णए-एणएण/ए

Le


APPENDIX ‘F’—Contd.

1 2 3 4 3 हु 6 7
54 Sh. MukulJain . 9. 26-5-89 5-6-89 5-6-89-—13-2-86-=3 yrs 3 months 14 Unexempted
55 St. K.B. Joshi... 171-905 195-89 1.2.90 3.53 months (ee payment of gratuity, party B Board's employee (gratuity case)
56 Sh.S.L. Sharma... 20-2-90; 13-7-89 14-3-90 Jan, 90~30-11-86=3 yrs 2 months 269 Dues from govt.
57 Sh.M.C.Bhurat. . 0. ३7-89 267-89; 17-7-89. 28-8-89--18-6-86--3 yrs 2 months 297 unexempted
58 Case of 8 members pursued by 23-2-90; 12-7-89 7-8-89; 15-5-90 15-5-90—26-3-87=3 98 2 month—maximum delay 307 Do.

‘Mjs. Pioneer Ltd.

59 Smt.S.B.Tagwile . ,16-2-90; 19-6-89  29-2.90 14-2-90—1-2-86=3 yrs \ 204 municipality/uncovered
60 Sh. Parasuram Singh. . 21-12-89; 12-789 13-289 1-1-90—29-12-86=3 yrs, 392 unexempted
61 Sh Jagan Wath Kapoor. 196-89; 9.2.90 1.8.89 28-2-89—31-1-86=3 yrs (partly settled) 213 exempted

Delay involved in settling the PF case between 2 to 3

पु years
62 Sh.R.C.Rout . . . 2812-89 16-1-90 10-7-89--1-9:86-2 jis 10 months , 417 unexempted
63. ShA.Das SL. 281289 16-1-90 13-7-89—1-9-86=2 yrs 10 months 417 unexempted
64 Sh.Mahodi, =... 86-895 19-689 21-8-89 2 yrs. 9 months 128 exempted
65 Sh.P.K.Gupta . . —. 16-2-90; 19-6-89  2-4-90 31-8-89—23-12-86=2 yrs 8 months हि 198 unexempted
66 Sh.M.K.Kar . 9. , 12-1-90; 29-589 19-2-90 10-5-89—Let, ‘86=2'yrs 7 months (partly settled) 62 exempted
67 Sh.NandLalDaga . =. 26-5-89; 12-1-90 29-689 15-3-89—Aug. 1986=2 yrs 7 months 1 exempted but went into Tiquida-

ion
68 Smt. Kusum Kumari Devi. 12-1-90; 8-289  4-6.90 3-5-90—27-9-86=2 yrs 6 months gratuity only settled 48 uncovered
: PF partly settled.

69 ShPCSaha . |. 146-89; 25-1.90 17-290 29-8-89—1-2-87=2 yrs 6 months 183 govt. service

70 Mts, 8. Sanyal. . - 86-89 12-7-89 2-6-89~28-12-86=2 yrs Smonths 102 unexempted (default concerns
. . employer as wrong number was
given’ a

8b


nm

73
74
15

6

78

हा

82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89

Dr. V.B. Khanotkar
Sh. A.R. Patel.
Sh. J.J. Nimawat .
Sh, Devdas Rao.
Sh. Ram Das .

Sh. Anil Kanti Chakraborty

Sh. B.K. Bhattacharya .

Sh, Abas Mian.

Sh. Anil Aggarwal

Sent, Uma Ajit Sawant .
‘Smt. Kiran Srivastava .

‘Sh, Ramana Gopalan, K.N.

Sh. A.M. Betar .

Smit, Sarojini Aggarwal .

Sh, K. Sarabhachari
Sh. K.N. Dupare «
Sh, Suraj Kumar .
Sh. T.S. Natarajan
Sh. Dwarka Singh

28-12-89; 19-6-89
17-1-89; 9-3-89
20-2-90; 3-7-89
12-7-89; 14-6-89
25-1-90; 146-89

12-7-89

7-2-90; 19-6-89

10-7-89; 28-2-90

16-1-89; 9-3-89;
11-1-90

14-6-89 ©
10-7-89; 28-2-89
28-2-89

19-6-89

37-89

26-5-89

8-6-89; 25-1-90
8-6-89

3-1-89

12-6-89; 25-1-90
7-2-90 3-7-89

12-2-90
17-2-89; 4-4-89
23-4-90
20-7-89

8-2-90
(1. of complainant)

payment made on
22-9-89

7-3-90.

‘compl lainant's 1६.)
6-7-1

1-8-89; 15-8-89

8-2-9; 2-5-89;
3-2-89

1-7-89
27-1-89

14-8-89

27-71-89

9-8-89; 24-7-89
22-6-89
31-8-89; 11-9-89
21-7-89

12-2-90

It. dt. 22-2-90 of
complainant

Nov. 89—5-6-87=2 yrs 5 months
2 yrs 4 monhts
16-1-90—1-11-87=2 yrs 2 months
22-4-89—6-3-87=2 yrs 1 month
20-4-89—31-3-87=2 yrs 1 month

20-9-89—-16-8-87 =2 yrs 1 month

13-1-90~—11-1-88=2 yrs

2 yrs (partly settled)

2 yrs

Delay involved in settling the PF cases in less than 2

years,
1,7-89—31-7-87=1 yr 11 months

17-9-87—2-12-85=1 yr. 10 months
reg. PF dues

1 yr 10 months

Lye 9 months.

1 yr. 9 months.
24-5-89—31-8-87=1 yr. 9 months
11-9-89—7-12-87 =1 yr. 9 months
21-7-89—11-11-87=1 yr 8 months

29-1-89—11-12-87=1 yr 8 months (partly settled)
28-11-89—8-4-88=1 yr. 8 months (partly settled)

242
32

285
337
176

370

235

352

167

unexempted
unexempted
govt, service
uncovered establishment
govt. service

exempted

unexempted

Municipality employee not cove-
red by the Act prove

unexempted

unexempted
unexempted

govt, service

govt. service

govt, service

‘unexempted

bank employee—uncovered
exempted/uncovered
Board’s employee/exempted
unexempted

—_—— ४: :झ::ए:य।य।।  एएए।य। |

oy


ro

AprENnpix ‘F’—Contd.

2 3 4 5 7
90 Sh.J.R. Gupta . 26-5-89 9-6-89 9-6-89—19-11-87=1 yr. 8 months 52 unexempted
‘91 Sh. Surindera Arora. 19-6-89 148-89 1 yr 6 months 228 umexempted
92 Smt.LP.Desai . . . 26-5-89 16-6-89 17-5.89—15-11-87=1 yr 6 months 56 unexempted
93. Sh. K. Naguri +. 105-89 12-6-89 4-1-89—Ang. 1987=1 yr 6 months ४॥ exempted /uncovered
‘94 Smt.T.Rukmani Devi. 28-12-89 12-2-89 22-12-89--15-6-88=1 yr 6 months 416 govt. service
‘95 Sh. Rameshwar Deb. 22-12-89 10-2-90 7-3-89—21-7-87=1 yr 6 months 399 govt, service
96 Sh.Deviah . . . - 26-2-90; 12-7-89. 2-4-90; 17-3-90 22-12-89—July ‘88=1 yr 5 months (partly settled) 302 unexempted
‘97 Sh. TM, Pawar .. 4, «. 8-6:89 30-6-89 31-1-89—1-8-87=1 yr 5 months 120 unexempted
“98 eS 4 members pursued —1-2-90, 14-6-89 7-3-90 , Maximum delay =1 yr 5 months 165 ‘unexempted
‘99 Sh. V.LE.Noronha . | 96.89 232-89 16-2-89-—S-10-87—1 ye 4 months 14 exempted
100 Sh.Y.H. Parekh 2. 24-90 10-4-90 13-]-90—20-7-88=1 yr 4 months 443 exempted
40) Sh. Ri केक : ise 89 295-89--अ-588 «1 yr 4 months 203 unexempted
102 ShB.Pedei |. 12-6-89 47-89 18-2-89—Oct. 8751 yr 4 months 154 ‘govt. service
103 Sh. Subir Ganguly =. 19-6-89 30-6-89 1-5-89-—Dec, 87=1 yr 4 months 205 unexempted
104 Sh. Pandit Patra. 3-17-89 8-8-89 8-8-89—30-5-88=1 yr 3 months (partly settled) 295 unexempted
405 Sh. NB. De 17-1-89 & 20-2-89 8-3-89 7-2-89—30-11-87=1 yr 3 months (partly granted) 79 govt. service
106 Sh. M.K. Jain : 29-5-89; 12-1-90 It. dt. 20-1-90 0... -20-1-90—8/88=1 yr 3 months 49 unexempted
complainant
107 Sh. BK. Aggarwal. 8-6-89 30-6-89 27-4-89—31-1-88=1 yr 3 months 105 unexempted
108 Mrs. Bhabani Roy wife of _—8-6-89; 25-190 14-8-89; 3-8-89 16-12-88—12-9-87=1 yr 3 months “126 govt. service
late Sh. G.D. Roy
109 Mrs. Asha Dinesh Bhapdare 19-689“ 287-89 21-7-89—March 88=1 yr 3 months 254 unexempted
110 Sh. Sumit Aggarwal... 10-7-89 148-89 26-7-89—April 88=1 yr 3 months 332 unexempted
111 Sh. Anantha Krishnan D, .  3-7-89 20-7-89 20-7-89—9-4-88=1 yr 3 months (partly settled) 287 unexempted
112 Sh.ShyamLal .  , —, 29-5-89; 11-1-90 received on -25-1-89-—-30-11-87=1 yr 2 months 35 govt. service
छा of complai-
113 Sh.DD.Crz 5. 211-89 15-1-90 25-9-89—6-7-88=1 yr. 2 months 396 unexempted
414 Sh. BDGoyal .  . -, स्तन TA 25-5-89-—12-4-88-=1 yr. 1 month 2 ‘unexempted


us
116
47
118
119

121
122
123
124

125
126
127

429

130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139

Sh. NachentuRam =.
Sh. J. Nayak . .
‘Sh. Gajanan . .
Sh. 5.5. Pillai . .
Sh. १४.२, Ramachandran
Sh. R.N. Tondon « .
Smt. $. Rauji Desai.

Sh. A.HLI. Shaikh .
Sh. P.K. Mukherjee
Mrs. Chandra Mukherjee

Sh. P.K, Jain . .
Sh. B.C. Bhattacharya .
Sh. P.P. Narayanan.
Sh. Sunil B. Vyas...
‘Smt. P, Kishan Kakade

Sh. Kishan F. Pawar.
Sh. Arun 8, Chajed ५
Sh. Bhawani . .

Sh, Barendra Kumar Nyogi .

Sh. ५.५. Ramana . .
Sh. R. Sivaraman. *«
Sh. Kiran Das Gupta.

Sh. 8.0. Donde. .
Sh. Babu Lal Gupta.
Sh.P.K.Guha .

a

8-6-89

12-1-90; 24-5-89
12-1-90; 29-5-89
20-12-89
22-12-89
26-5-89

10-1-90

14-6-89
10-7-89
9-6-89; 25-1-90

26-5-89

26-5-89; 11-1-90
10-7-89

14-6-89
26-2-90; 12-7-89
17-17-89
3-7-89

9-6-89

12-6-89

3-7-89

19-6-89

26-5-89

20-2-89

17-7-89

3-7-89

22-6-89

24-1-90

19-1-90

2-1-90

23-1-90; 8-1-90
20-6-89; 25-8-89
20-7-90

20-7-89
11-8-89
20-6-89

30-6-89
22-6-89
17-17-89
31-8-89
25-1-90 & 20-4-90
3-10-89

38-89
21-6689
19-6-89
30-8-89
23-6-89
12-6-89
26-5-89

28-9-89

23-10-89

one year (partly settled)
23-2-89—29-2-88=1 yr
2-3-89—31-3-88—1 yr
2--90--20-12-88--1 yr
18-9-89—25-8-88==1 yr
2-8-89—-5-9-881=1 months
20-4-89—2-5-88-=11 months
11-4-89—1-5-88=11 months
3-5-89—-15-7-88=9 momhs
PF 21-12-88—13-7-88=5 months EDIL {LAB
13-2-89—13-7-88=7 months
18-4-89—13-7-89-=9 mooths; FPF—May 1989—
15-7-88—10 months

29-11-88—I-3-88=9 months

20-3-89—1-6-88=9 months

28-2-89--24-4-88-9 months

18-7-89—2-11-88=8 months

Nov. 1989—-20-3-89--8 months
26-7-89—26-12-88=7 months
6-9-88—24-3-88=6 months

4-4-89—19-9-88=6 months

4-5-89—30-12-88=5 months

6-7-89—14-2-89=5 months

23-6-89—23-2-89-=4 months
17-1-89—21-10-88=3 months
15-10-88—30-6-88=3 months (partly granted)
8-9-89—3-8-89-=1 months

17-10-89—-8-9-89=1 month

118

74
54,8 70
386
400

65

43

190
333
146

2

103 ६7

308
186
323
372
281
153
92
277°
255 -
26
88
366
272

unexempted

govt. service

govt. service
exempted/pension case
govt. service
unexempted
unexempted

govt. service
unexempted
unexempted

unexempted

4, unexempted
exempted
unexempted
unexempted
unexempted
unexempted |
unexempted
exempted
govt. service”
unexempted
ynexempted
govt. service
unexempted
‘unexempted

its


52

APPENDIX ७655

STATEMENT OF DELAY INVOLVED IN DISPUTED CASES

Delay

No. of
complaints

35 to 40 Years
30 to 35 Years
25 to 30 Years
20 to 25 Years
1510.20 Years
10 to 15 Years
5 to 10 Years
2 to 5 Years

0 to 2 Years

19
95
142

43



APPENDIX करना

1 specifying, specifying the details of Provident Fund cases involving delay in settlement beyond three

Form required to be filled up by the Employer|Trustees of |Exempted/Uncovered establishmeni
va the Employer: ४ and to be submitted to the

Return submitted by the aforesaid category of employer/trustees for the month of
Name and Address of the Factory/Establishment.
Code No..

Sl Account = Name of the Father’s name Date of Reasons for Specify the. © Whether pay- if there is default Date of Period for Reasons in
f ment of dues in making pay- receipt of which the details for

No. No. epployee in (or husband’s —feaving —_—leaving service category of
block deters mame incase of service e.g. made ment on tt application —_case has been delay in
married women) ment, resig- © whether the date ofthe day of leaving for withdrawal pending settlement
nation, death employee/ leaving service _ service, state of provident commencing
etc, nominee/ where it was extent of delay fund from the date
beneficiary  sorequiredto _from the date of mentioned
be made leaving service in column. 10
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 W 12
‘Signature of the employer
Stamp of the factory/establishmont

६5


APPENDIX ‘H-II?

Form required to be filled up by the employer of Unexempted establishments specifying the details of Employees Provident Fund and other Miscellaneous p rovisions . case . pending with the
employer establishment for compliance with the Schemes involving delay beyond three months and to be submitted to the Ombudsman

Return submitted by the aforesaid category of employer for the monthof-
Name and address of the factory/establishment

Code No.
Extent of delay Detailed Particulars of
in forwarding. reasons for the concerned
H

Commencing from Date of
application of — delay in

Date of Reasons for Specify the i
forwarding appli- the date of leaving receipt of

Sl A/c Name of the Father’s
No. No. member(in  name(or leaving _ leaving category of
block letters) husband’s service service e.g, claimant— cation of claimant service, extent of application
name in retirement, whether under the schemes delay in giving the for with- member/ respect of
case of resignation, member/ (pending on the duly attested drawal of — nominee/benefi- steps in
married . termination, employee/ date of return of _ application (pend- provident ciary (pending col Is 8. 9,
women) death, etc. nominee/ toCommissioner _ ing delivery on lund and on the date of 11 whichever
beneficiary commencing from the date of return) other mis- return) to Com-__ is applicable
the date of leaving for withdrawal to cellaneous missioner com-
service, where it the member, for provisions mencing from
was 80 required to submission to efits the date men-
Commissi tioned in
column 10
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 ii 12 13
Signature of the Employer

‘Name and address of the Factory/Establishment
+ Stamp of the Factory/Establishment

vs


APPENDIX मनाए

Form required to be filled up by the RPFC the details of Employee's Provident Fund and other miscellaneous provisions cases involving delay in settlement beyond thrze_ months
filed wo by specifying f yee and to be submitted to the Ombudsman

Return submitted by RPFC for the month of Serer eee eee reer errr ree’ se eeeeeeens seenee .

Particulars of the Office of the RPFC-
Sl. Name & address Name of the Father’s name or Account No. Date of Specify the category Date of receipt of Period for which —_ Reasons in detai!
No. of the factory/ Grrploveeimember husbands name in of the member leaving of claimant—-whether application for the case has been _ for delay in
lishment to (in block letters) case of married service employee/member, withdrawal of pending/commenc- _ settlement
which case belongs women nominee or Provident fund and ing from the date
beneficiary for other Miscl. on which the
provisions application was
benefits received
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 9 10
7 Signature of the Commissioner

Stamp of the Commissioner.

ss


APPENDIX—I(1)

To

The Secretary,

P.F. Law Commissioner,
Sastri Bhavan,

New Delhi—110 001.

Sus:—Refund of P.F. accumulation of Prasuram Singh, P.F. No. WB/63/471.

Dear Sir,

With reference to the subject cited above it is brought to your kind notice that
I was an employee of National Iron Steel Co. (NISCO) Belur (Howrah) and I have
been retired from service three years back. I submitted my refund application
through F/19 dated 29-12-86 and also submitted reminders time to time.

It is indeed trouble some for me and I have been suffering financially for non-
payment of my aforesaid dues.

But with great sorrow it is expressed that no action has yet been taken from
your end. .

So, I shall be highly obliged if you kindly look into the matter personally.

Thanking you,

Yours faithfully,

Sd/-
(PRASURAM SINGH)
Dated : Clo. Baliram Singh,
Rd. No. 8-E-1/5, New Town,
Burnpur, Dist. Burdwan (W.B.)


APPENDIX I-(I1)

No. 6(3)/88-LC(LS) Part IV-392
Government of India
Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Legal Affairs
(LAW COMMISSION)

7th Floor, ‘A’ Wing,
Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi-1.
Dated : 21-12-89.
Sussect : Non-payment of Provident Fund/GPF/retirement dues in respect of Shri
Prasuram Singh.
Sir,
The Commission has invited through media and newspapers all persons or their
legal representatives/nominees, who have not received their provident fund and
retirement/death benefit, etc. for more than one year, to furnish full particulars of

their case to the Commission so as to enable the Commission to make an indepth
study of the problem and to formulate its views in the matter.

In pursuance of this advertisement, one Sh. Prasuram Singh, C/o. Baliram Singh,
Rd. No. 8-E-7/5 New Town, Burnpur, Dist. Burdwan (W.B.) has addressed to the
Commission his application dated nil in this regard. We énclose herewith a photo-
copy of the aforesaid application dated nil of the said employee for your re! ference
which is self-explanatory.

Since the Law Commission is required to carry out the Post-audit of socio-
economic laws and to take all such measures as may be necessary to harness law and
the legal process in the service of ‘the poor, you are requested to give priority to this
letter and— :

(0) Send concrete factual information pertaining to the complaint of the said
person;
(ii) Your views regarding the said complaint; and
(iii) the cause of the delay;
within 15 days from the date of receipt of this letter.

Your cooperation and urgent response will be highly appreciated.

Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(R. L. KHURANA)

oy


APPENDIX I (Il)

OFFICE OF THE REGIONAL PROVIDENT FUND COMMISSIONER
WEST BENGAL, THE ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS.
44 PARK STREET
13, LINDSAY STREET
CALCUTTA—700 016

Ref No. A/S&C/Misc/Compt/HLO/II Date 13-2-90

To
Shri R. L. Khuramna
Jt. Secretary & Law Officer

- Govt of India

Ministry of Law & Justice

Deptt of Legal Affairs (Law Com.)
7th Floor ‘A’ Wing

Shastri Bhavan

New Delhi-110 001

Sus : fae settlement of P.F. dues in respect of Shri Parasuram Singh, WB/

Sir,
Kindly refer to your letter No. 6(3)/88-LC-Part IV-39 2A dated 20-12-89 for
non-payment of P.F. dues of the above individual.

This is to inform you that a sum of Rs. 37,500 has since been passed for payment
and ite same has been remitted to the member by cheque under No. 615996 dated
1-1-90. -

Your; faithfully,

Sd/-
(A. K. SEN)
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner
West Bengal

58


APPENDIX I (IV)

NATIONAL IRON AND STEEL COMPANY (1984) LIMITED
(A GOVT OF WEST BENGAL ENTERPRISE)

PF/PM/215 Dated 20-5-90
To

The Jt. Sectetary & Law Officer,

7th Floor “A”,

Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi-110 001

Sus : Non-payment of Provident Fund/G.P.U.F./Retirement dues in respect of
Shri: Parsuram Singh.

Dear Sir,
Please refer to your Memo No. 6(3)/88-LC-Part-IV-392 dated 21-12-89.

In this connection we are to inform you that Shri Parsuram Singh an employee
of our Company has retired from his service on 20-10-86 and Management has
forwarded his claim Form No. 19 for his Provident Fund dues tothe Office of the
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, West Bengal, Howrah Local Office 24,
Belilias Road, Howrah on 29-12+1986 and: we have also made a spécific deposit
vide challan dated 21-08-1986 for the purpose. We have drawn your attention in
the above cases vide our letter on previous occasion, the photo copy of which is
enclosed herewith for ready reference.

In this context we are to affirm that about 400 cases like‘the one as mentioned
are pending before the office of Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, West Bengal
for disposal.

We would request you to kindly pursue the said Office for the release of payment
of thesabove said cases along with Sri Parsuram Singh.

Your prompt action is highly solicited.

Thanking you,
Yours faithfully,
for National Iron & Steel Co. (1984) Etd.
Sd-/ है
(P.K. BAKSHI).

Personnel Manager

59


PM/PF/310 18th Jany, 90

To
Mr. A. K. Mukherjee, LA.S.,
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner,
West Bengal, 44, Park Street,
CALCUTTA-16

Respected Sir,

Sus : Non-payment of Provident Fund Dues to out-going emplo; ir
M/s. National Iron & Steel Co. (1984) Ltd. inden Code No Wah,

I would like to draw your kind attention into the subject that about 500 P.F.
Final Claims are lying pending in your Accounts Group, Howrah since long. The

, concerned members are reported to be under-going tremendous Financial Hardhship

and are often agitating before us. Some of them already been expired wi
treatment and proper diet and this indignation of the Provident Fund हनी 4
seemed to be such as it appears that out going meibers/their nominees may at any
time resort to the unrestful atmosphere, though‘we have already specifically deposited
their Provident Fund Dues to your Office for necessary settlement.

In the context above, I feel and fervently pray to your goodself to 1 it
matter of early disposal of the stated claims to mitigate their untold misery ana 0
avoid further I.R. Problem in our organisation.

Your handful co-operation into the matter is solicited.

Thanking you,

Yours faithfully,
for National Iron & Steel Co. (1984) Ltd.

Sd/-
(T. S. DAS)
Personnel Manager
ce.
The Regional P.F. Commissioner,
West

Bengal,
Howrah Local Office, (6th floor)
24, Bellilies Road,
Howrah.
‘The Secretary.


To

Sir,

the

OFFICE OF THE REGIONAL PROVIDENT FUND COMMISSIONER
WEST BENGAL

44, Part Street/13, Lindsay Street,
CALCUTTA-16

. AlSpl{ Misc|Compt.|H.L.O./1072 Dated the 14-2-89

Sussect : Non Payment of P.F. Dues,

Shri T.S. Das

Personnel Manager

National Iron & Steel, Co.

(1984) Ltd. P.O. Belurmath,

Dist. Howrah, Pin-711202 (8, RW)

I am to acknowledge receipt of your letter No. PM/PF/310 da
above subject which is receiving attention. PF: ted 19-1-89 on

Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
DDO

a


APPENDIX I (V)
No. 6(3)/88-LC(LS) Part-IV. 392
Government of India
Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of. Legal Affairs
(LAW COMMISSION)
7th Floor, ‘A’ Wing
Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi-1
Dated : 9-8-90
Sussect : Non-payment of Provident Fund/GPFlretirement dues in respect of
Shri Parsuram and 400 other -cases.
Sir,
The Commission has invited through mediasand newspapers all persons of their
legal representatives/nominees, who have not received their provident fund and retire-
ment/death benefit etc, for more than ond year, to furnish full particulars of their

case to the Commission so as to enable the Commission to make an indepth study
of the problem and to formulate its views in the matter.

In pursuance of this advertisement, one Sh. P. K. Bakshi, Personnel Manager,
National Iron & Steel Co), P. O. Belurmath, Distt. Howrah, W.B. has addressed to
Commission his application dated 20/24-5-90 in this regard. We enclose herewith a
photo-copy of the aforesaid application dated 20/24-5-90 of the said employce/his
legal representatives/nominees for your reference which is self-explanatory.

Since the Law Commission is required to garry out the Post-audit of socio-
economic Laws and to take all such measure as may be necessary to harness Law
and the legal process in the service of the poor, you are requested to give priority
to this letter and—

(i) Send concrete factual information pertaining to the complaint of the said
person;

(ii) Your views regarding the said complaint; and
(iii) The cause of the delay;
Within 15 days from the date of receipt of this letter.
Your cooperation and urgent response will be highly appreciated.

Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(Additional Law Officer)
Encl २ as above

62


APPENDIX I(VI)

OFFICE OF THE REGIONAL PROVIDENT FUND COMMISSIONER
WEST BENGAL THE ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
HOWRAH LOCAL OFFICE
24 BELLILIOUS ROAD

Ref No. A/015/163/A. Cellf/HLO/127 31-8-90

To
The Additional Law Officer,
Govt. of India
Ministsy of Law and Justice,
Depth of Legal Affairs, -
का Floor, ‘A’ wing,
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi

Supsect : Non payment of P.F.: due in respect of Parsuram Singh & others

Sir,

Kindly refer to your letter’No. 6{3) §-LC (Ls) Part IV-392 dt. 9-8-90 on the |
subject cited above. J

In this connection it is to a tl Ee the claim case of Sri Parsuram Singh, hag |

already been authorised & cheque iss Rs. 37,500. Regarding the comphint । .

lodged by the Personnel ee t, Mi. PK. Bakshi of M/s. National Tron & Steet :

Co. (1984) Ltd, it is stated that 400 cases accumuleted in this Office mainly due °
if the being dis off ing ape ihe deposit by the Corapens

of the cases are being dis of i it by 11 Ys |

Out of these a lot of eases have alread: proveteed and the ‘amounts authorisok

A detailed report may be sent to your‘if the A/c Nos. in respect of the involve
persons are made available in this office’ from your end.

to non-deposited of P.F. com

Yours faithfully,
Sdj-
(N.R. RAUT)

for Regional P.F. Commissioner, W.B. Howrah Local
Office

6
93-/709 273 M of LJ & CA—600—9-8-94—GIPS