LAW COMMISSION

OF

INDIA

ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-EIGHTH
REPORT

ON

LEGISLATIVE PROTECTION FOR
SLUM AND PAVEMENT DWELLERS

1990


Tel. No. 384475
fafa आयोग
LAW COMMISSION
भारत सरकार
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
M.P. THAKKAR शास्त्रों भवन
Chairman SHASTRI BHAWAN,
नई दिल्‍ली
NEW DELHI

D.O. No. 6(3)(12)/90-LC(LS) December 20, 1990.

To

Dr. Subramaniam Swamy,
Minister of Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhavan,

New Delhi.

Dear Minister,
Re : Presentation of 138th Report.

Since the terms of reference of the Law Commission commence with the first
term encaptioned “Law and Poverty” and enjoin the Commission “to take all such
measures as may be necessary to harness law and the legal process in the service of
the poor the Commission has suo motu examined the problem pettaining to the
plight of the slum and pavement dwellers facing eviction at the hands of the local
authorities.

The magnitude of the problem can be gauged from the fact that nearly 3.5 crores
of citizens of India live in slums and on payements of metropolitan cities. That is
to say, one citizen out of every twenty five citizens is so afflicted. The slum dwellers
are often denied electricity and sanitary facilities on the ground that their occupation
is unauthorized. And quite often their huts are razed to the ground and they are
evicted by the local authorities without offering them any alternative facility. The
plight of these unfortunate evictees comprising women and children is indescribable.
Some legislative protection needs to be provided to them to ensure that they are not
evicted regardless of humane considetations without offering them an alternative
facility unless it is virtually impossible to do so.

To recommend introduction of this humane concept in Indian jurisprudence has
been the endeavour of the Commission in the 138th Report of the ‘Commission cap-
tioned “LEGISLATIVE PROTECTION FOR SLUM AND PAVEMENT DWEL-
LERS”, being presented hereby.

With kind regards,
Yours faithfully,

(M.P. THAKKAR)
Encl : 138th Report


CONTENTS

Pas
Cuarter I Introduction ©. . se 8 »
CHAPTER IT Profile of slums and slum dwellers in India. . . .
Cuaptes Ii Profile of pavement dwellers . . पु . . . .
CHAPTER IV Present position . . पु . . .
CHAPTER V Provisions in Municipal Acts : .
Cuarrer VI Case For extending legislative protection hee
Cuaprer VIE The constitutional position

Cuarrer VIIE Legislation pertaining to slums—As it is—and as it ought to be
CHAPTER 1X Conclusions and recommendations पु .

Notes and references . . . . +  NR/Il4 28-29
APPENDIX Synopsis of legislation relating to slums . . . + App/120 30-37



CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION

1.1. Harnessing the law for the poor—a suo motu exercise—Can the conscienti-
‘ons members of the community sleep in peace when millions of their brethren and
sisters are denied the comfort of sleeping on the footpaths of the metropolises of India
and that of living in conditions unfit even for mute animals in slums in the neighbour~
hood? The Law Commission having been entrusted under item 16) of its Terms of
Reference “To take all such measures as may be-necessary to harness law and the legal.
process in the service of the poor” deems it to be its duty to address itself to this prob-
Jem by undertaking the present exercise suo motu.

1.2. Scope and target—This report, t herpfore, deals with a problem which has
been prevalent for a long time in India, a pro! which, at some stage or other, must
be seriously tackled by the society, a problem which is not one for mere academic
discussion but is seriously connected with basic needs of human beings. The prob-
Jem is that of persons who are destined to spehd their lives on pavements or slums in
the cities. Should such persons be evicted from the places where they dwell, merely
because, in the eye of the law, their occupation of the premises is unauthorised ?
If the society permits such eviction, should it not provide a reasonably adequate
alternative accommodation to them so that the right to live, guaranteed by ‘the Consti-
tution, carries some meaning for them ? This question has come up before the
courts in India more than once. Generally, while le adhoc relief has been given to
these dwellers, it has not been possible so far to £0 into the heart of the matter. The
Commission believes that the society must ad itself directly to the questions
posed above and consider the question of incorporating, in the statutory framework
of India, a just and workable solution within the limits of the Constitution. An
endeavour has, therefore, been made herein to examine the legal contours of the
problem, to draw attention to the existing provisions on the subject, to suggest 2
solution to the extent to which legislation on the subject is within the competence of
Parliament, and to make appropriate recommendations to relieve the distress of the
suffering compatriots within the practical parameters of law.

1.3. Action by the local authorities—Pavements and slums exist in big cities.
Eviction of dwellers in these premises is normal ordered by local authorities, whe-
ther they are known by the name of Muni¢i al Corporation, Municipal Committee,
Municipal Council, Cantonment or by any o' name. In this report, we propose
to confine ourselves to. the eviction of such persons by the local authorities. So far
as eviction by the State Government is conoccty , generally it takes place under the
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised; pants) Act, either as enacted by the
Centre or as enacted (by whatever name) by the State. Eviction ordered under such
a law mostly relates to individual premisesover whicha private person is alleged to
have established unauthorised or illegal occupation and-it does not raise questions of
social justice of the dimensions that are met with where the actions of eviction 13
taken by the local authorities.


CHAPTER II
PROFILE OF SLUMS AND SLUM DWELLERS IN INDIA

2.1. Growth of slums in India.—There has been a rapid growth of population in
our metropolitan cities, which has resulted in continuously rising density of popu-
lation in an these cities. According to one sind ly 2/1 the growth of slum population
is almost double the growth of urban population in the southern region. It was
estimated some years ago to be around 7.25 million, which represents 16.4 per cent
of the total urban population. In the abové study, 2/2 a table gives the figures of
slum population in the southern région agcortling to the population size of towns as
under :—

TABLE
‘Slum population in southern region
Population size of U.A./Cities/Towns jpolal popela: Shum la- Percentage of
p tion in on narber in CoG) te Cal @)
000 000
a) छ) 6) 0)
Wlakhsandabove 2... 9,119 2,150 22.12
S-l0lakhs | 9. 9. . - 6,361 1,352 21.25
B-Slakhs. ww wk, 2109 392 18.59
I3lakhs. 2. we, 7,470 1,270 17.00
$0000—-1lakh 2. ww. §,707 701 12,28
Below 50,000 2 5 wk, 19,838 1,388 10.81
All sizes coe 4,204 7,253 16.41

(Columns 2, 4 and 6 of the Table arg not reproduged here, as not material).

2.2. Position as per 1981 study—A more detailed study/on the subject has
summarised the position as under :—

“According to the 1981 Censys cajimates, India had a slum population
of about 30 million, Po at tearly one-fifth of the total urban
population of the country. population of India is larger than
the total population of a tk था of countries including Canada
(24.2 million), the Netherlan 7 million), Australia vid million),
Belgium (9.9 million),' Sri Lanka (15.0 million), Afghanistan (16.3
million), Malaysia (14.2 alld in), Portugal (9.8 million), etc.”

These comparative figutes would give some indication of the magnitude of the
problem of slums. .

2.3. Slums—The term “slum” is usually understood as “court, alley or street
of dirty crowded houses”. 2/4 The Report of the Socio Economic Survey of Slums of
Old Delhi states that “The term ‘slum’ should be applied to those parts of the city
which may be unfit for human habitation, either because the structures therein are
old, dilapidated, grossty congested and out of repairs or because it is impossible to
preserve sanitation for want of sanitary facilities, including ventilation, drainage,
water supply, etc., or because the sites by themselves are unhealthy” 2/5. Thus, ac-
cording to this test, the main criteria are—

6) Old state of the structure, or
(ii) insanitariness, or
(iii) unhealthy sites.
Each of these criteria is substantially concerned with the quality of life.

2.4. Position in Bombay—It appears that around 40 per cent of Bombay’s popu-

lation has sought its own shelter in an unconventional है कल 3/4 “There ate the

people who are considered to be illegal occupiers of land and sheltet—the squatters”
2


3

Bombay started slum clearance and improvement as early as 1958. The Slum
Areas Improvement etc. Act was enacted in Maharashtra in 1971, followed by the
Maharashtra Slums Improvement Board Act, 1973. The Act of 1973 envisages
slums as a cause of danger to health, safety and convenience of the slum dwellers
themselves and also of the surrounding areas, and states that until such time as the
slums are removed and the people re-housed, it is necessary to provide basic neces-
sities, such as water, sanitary arrangements, and electricity to them. But, in practice,
the fuct is accepted today (in Bombay) that slums will continue to grow and, owing
to resistance put forward by slum dwellers and the political support, clearance is
not possible. Hence the emphasis has been upon improvement.

2.5. Amenities provided in Bombay—-This is not the place to go into details of
the various programmes in Bombay. But it will be of interest to 1efer to the stan-
dards of amenities adopted in that city 2/7.

‘Standard of amenities

sl. Facility Standards Per capita
No. expenditure
1 Lateine I set for20—25 people. 2. wt 100
2 Wat-r tap 1 Faucet for150people. =. . wt. 9
3. Street light Depending on site conditoins . 5s. 4
4° Pathways Do. 22
5. Drainage (Only within the slums). ५.५ ७» 15

150

2.6. The Madras example—As regards Madras, we have a helpful description
of slum clearance improvement in that city in one of the studies, 2/8 which illustrates
the trend towards slum improvement. The magnitude of the slum problem in
Madras can be seen from the fact, that while slums cover six per cent of the total area
in the city, they contain more than 30 per cent of the population. As of 1980, more
than a million people in this city lived in 1500 squatter settlements. To improve
this situation, the Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board was formed in 1971 and slum
sleatance was followed by slum improvement programme which has been in progress
from 1972.

2.7. Figures regarding slums in India—In a recent study, */*the position as per
1981 Census in India regarding slum has beén thusstated :

“According to the 1981 Census, India had a slum population of 298.89
lakhs accounting for 18.75 per cent of the urban population. Of these
129.54 lakhs were in the twelve. million cities. In other words, the 12
metropolitan cities which held about 26 per cent of the total urban popu-
lation accom:modated over 43 per cent of the slum population.

The larger cities have a higher proportion of slum population to total
population. Slum population accounts for more than 30 per cent of the
total population of the metropolitan cities. In cities with population of
5 lakhs to 10 lakhs, over 20 per cent of the population dwe! 4 in slums.
In towns with less than 50,000 people, slum population is about 10 per
cont.

Among the metropolitan cities, Calcutta had the largest slum population
in 1981 (32.5 lakhs) followed by Bombay (31.57 lakhs) and Delhi (17.30
lakhs).

In 1981, Kanpur had the highest percentage of slum population (40.34)
(80४ by Lucknow (38.83), Greater Bombay (38.30) and Calcutta
5)...” है

2.8. At this stage we would like to quote from N.C.U. Report. १[१९-.
“5.7. Manifestations of Urban Poverty

“5.7.1. Urban poverty manifests itself in many forms. The most visible of
these are:


4

Proliferation of slums and bustees, Fast growth of an informal sector
increasing casualisation and under-development of labour.

Crushing pressure on civic services. High rate of educational depriva-
tion and health contingencies,

Retarded growth of physical and mental capacities. A growing sense of
hopelessness among the urban poor, resulting in rising crime rates and
group violence,

Growth of Slums and Bustees

“5.7.2. The poor cannot afford to pay the growing market prices of pucca
shelter or buy land at the fabulous ‘prices charged near their work-places.
They cannot afford the cost of transporting themselves or their stock in trade
over long distances. They, therefore, settle on marginal lands near their
work-places, which are otherwise considéred unfit for habitation by the non-
poor classes. Examples are river banks, margins of nullas and drainage
canals, marginal rai ways lands and swamps. Their constructions are of
cheap scrap and salvaged material like gunny bags, tarpaulin, scrap tin sheets,
wooden planks etc. The habitat is irregular as it is unplanned. Civic ameni-
ties if available, are minimal. As a result, public sanitation and personal
hygiene break down.

“5.7.3. The growth of slums, is, therefore, a symptom of the inability of
people to procure land and shelter through market transactions, in which they
find themselves out-priced since government has failed to regulate urban land
Tesources in such a way that poor can have equitable access to them. Esti-
mates of slum population vary, but its growth is dramatically highlighted by
some examples. In Calcutta roughly 35 per cent. of the city’s Po ulation
lives in identified slums, but it is estimated that the population 01 all slums,
and squatter settlements is mech higher. According to a handbook of the
National Buildings Organisation (1982-83), 67 per cent. of the households in
Calcutta lived in one-room units. In Madras about 38 per cent. of the popu-
lation lived in declared slums in 1971 and 54 per cent. of the households lived
in one-room dwellings. In Hyderabad, the slum population jumped from one
lakh in 1962 to a staggering 5 lakh by 1981. In Delhi, squatters household
are estimated to have grown from 12.741 in 1951 to 1.13 lakhs by 1975-76.

Increasing Casualisation and Under-employment of Labour

“3.8.3. There is also increasing caspalisat tion of labour and persistence of
under-employment in Urban areas, a ceding to Sarvekshana, in April
1986, the percentage of casual 'labout ini from 13.2 per cent to 14.75
per cent. in the case of males aid from 25|59 to 27.27 per cent. in the case of
females during the 1977—83 period. ‘Tthe percentage of unemployed, as
measured by current-day status during thé same period, increased from 5.35
to 5.45 per cent. for males, although it decreased from 2.11 to 1.72 per cent
for females. Child labour accounts for nearly fifteen lakh workers in urban
areas and continues to constitute about 8 Leia of employed males and about
7 per cent of employed females. Une: yment amongst the educated,
especially graduates, is very high in the age of group 15—29 years. In Madras,
it was found to be 20 per cent of maleek ind 15 per cent. of females (Sarve-
kshana, October, 1986). ‘

“3.9. Crushing Pressure on Civic Amenities
“5.9.1. The civic authorities are findihg themselves increasingly incapable of

Providing civic amenities to the large influx of population within their bounda-
ties. The population being poor, is tnatile to meet the cost of expanding
such services which have to be ‘supported from State grants or taxation of a
narrow base of tax-payers. The per capita water consumption was reported
to be between 16—23 litres per day in slum areas in Bangalore, the number
of persons per tap varying between 40 to 428 in same city. According to
the report of the task foice of t panne to mmission on Financing of Urban
Development, 31.2 per cent. ari he urban population was not covered by sani-
tation services, According to a DDA study of 28,100 squatter households
(1986), a hut of 2.5x3 metres accommodated about persons. About
50 per cent of dwellers were using open areas for defecation, Dirty water
generally accumulated and stagnated by the side of drains,” हु

+ boa


5

These extracts from the Report of the National Commission on Urbanisation indi-
cate the magnitude of the problem.

2.9. Latest projile of slum population—A fairly 1ecent study gives an all India
profile. ४7, According to that study the 1981 estimates identified the slum population
as 32 to 40 million. Of this, the lion’s share went to 12 metropolitan cities which
together accounted for 32% of the slum population (13 to 16 million). A governe

ment study for the estimates of 1990 2/12 is also quoted as undet :

TasLe 2—-Estimates of slum populaton 1990
hb

Category

All Urban

Estimated Slum

Population Population
in Millions Ras in
Millio lions
1981
India . 159.7 32—40
Metropolitan 42.2 10-34
Other Urban . 117.5 18—24
1990
India . 241 45—56
Metropolitan ~ 65 22-25
Other Urban 179 23—31

2.10. Slums in Kanpur—A study regarding Kanpur happens to be available. 2/13

Accordi

to sources close to the Kanpur Development Authority, more than 5 lakh

people still | live in various types of slums in Kanpur city. Again, as per table 4 given

in the study th e types of slums are as under :—

Type of slums Population Percent out
(i.e, slum) of total slurs
population
Ahatas . + 259,552 51.59
Bustees (old slums) 158,511 31.51
Abadis and villages 40,580 8.07
New slums . 44,437 8.83
Above figu res were for the year 1978, and it was also estimated that more than

83% of the
inhuman living conditions.

spaces along the railway line.

lum dwellers in Kanpur were living either in Ahtas or old slums or in

New slums were coming up on road-side and vacant

2.11. The problem of slum dwellers is, therefore, one which ought to exercise
the minds of the administrators and legislators of our Welfare State and of the com-

munity at large.


CHAPTER III
PROFILE OF PAVEMENT DWELLERS

3.1. An analysis of the situation obtaining in regard to pavement dwellers is
contained in a very recent study.3/! The analysis is quoted in extenso here :—

“The pavement dwellers are the houseless families literally living on the
roadsides or in busy stregts in the city and suburbs. Their dwellings are
found in the vicinity of the railway stations, in the areas of commercial
activity, around docks, and the localities in which the local authorities
have provided public baths, latrines and urinals. Several families which
have chosen the Bombay footpaths just for survival haye been living there
for varying durations of time from one to over fifteen years. Some are
born there. They erect temporary unauthorised structures, made up of
plastic, polythene or cardboard sheets tied to a couple of bamboo sticks
without any construction whatsoever. It is easy to put up structures,
but easier to dismantle them especially when the occupants are apprehen-
ded by the enforcement authorities, but that rarely happens. Some
families, perhaps the less enterprising ones, take shelter under rail or
toad bridges, flyovers, culverts or even in the huge cement pipes lying
around in open space untill the pipes are put to use.

They erect a place of residence, they hardly reside init. They live around
it. They have no cooking facilities, no place to take bath or wash clothes
and utensils, no adequate place to relax, no water and latrine facilities,
and not even a residential address. While they have abundant and free
access to the open sky—a facility rarely provided for, a modern type flat
constructions, they are also more exposed to the elements of nature by
way of wind and air, sun and rain. shaps they are among the poorest
of the poor in urban areas. - Although no exact figures are available, the
present figure of the houseless population is likely to be in the region of
two to three lakhs.

The pavement dwellers are a mixed and myriad crowd, quite a few having
landed thete as a result of the pull factors—the attracticn that the city of
Bombay holds for people from other parts of the country. There is also-
a large section of migrants who have been pushed out of their native
place by circumstances such as floods, drought, peverty and unemploy-
ment, but even in these cases, it is equally true to say that both push and
pull factors operate though the degtee may vary.

Most of these dwellers admit that their contact with the more fortunate
neighbours in the nearby edifices is mostly casual, although some say
they do odd jobs for them, like carrying a parcel or two for which they
are paid on the spot. In a few cases, the women folk, dwelling on the
pavements, are employed as domestic help by the nearby residents.

They do not resent their lot, nor do these affiuent sec tions protest about the
squatters with conviction enough to pose a serious threat to their way.
The rich are content to dole out a fev’ coins to the children along with a
few choice invectives. The pavement dwellers in turn are content with
the scraps and crumbs tossed to them by whim, fancy or fear. They are
a peaceful lot otherwise, for they stand to lose their shelter on the pave-
rent if they disturb the affiuent or indulge in flights with their fellow dwel-
S.

Asked whether they were happy and contented with their existing way of
life and were adjusted to it, the data oddly enough revealed that, by and
large, these dwellers were rather satisfied with their lot, though there were
some mixed reactions to be sure.

Pavement dwelling is a deep-rooted malady. Although there are several
poverty groups, the pavement dwellers are the poorest of the poor. In

6


7

sum, the poor living in the chawls are the least poor. Those living in
the slumbs are poorer than the chaw! dwellers. The pavement dwellers

are the poorest of the poor.

Further, the poor do not form a single and homogeneous group whether
they live in chawl, slum or on pavement. Some cof the poverty groups
require very little help, others require massive effort on the part of the
government and other public and private organisations to rehabilitate
them. This is so because the poor include among others, the unemplo-
yed, the self-employed, the casual labour, the aged, the destitute, ‘the
beggar, the physically handicapped, the mentally sick and soon. Though
lack of financial resources is common, each group has peculiar problems,
handicaps and coping methods. To undetrstand the special problems
before planning any rehabilitation programmes a few illustrations are
given as under :

A large number of the poor are able bodied persons. They do not want
charity type of services or temporary relief. They look for avenues
which help them to overcome poverty. They need jobs, want their basic
needs to be satisfied and are concerned about their children’s education
and welfare, Investment in them is likey to be fruitful.

Several self-employed poor possess speclialised skills. They are capable
of producing certain consumer goods which have market. Some self-
employed have acquired technique of selling goods and services. Such
groups can overcome their poverty if they get some help. They need
to be provided with adequate financial resources, faci lities for pro-
ducing better quality of goods and services, and guidance.”

3.2. Pavement dwellers in Bombay—The following extracts from the Supreme
Court judgment of 1986 may be of some interest in connection with the situation
regarding pavement dwellers in Bombay 3/2;—

The charge made by the State Government in its affidavit that slum and
pavement dwellers exhibit especial criminal tendencies is unfounded.
According to Dr. P. K. Muttagi, Head of the unit for urban studies of
the Tata Institute of Social Scienpes, Bombay, the surveys carried out in
1972, 1977, 1979 and 1981 show that many families which have chosen
the Bombay footpaths just for survival, have been living there for several
years and that 53 per cent of the pavement dwellers are self-employed as
hawkers in vegetables, flowers, ice-cream, toys, balloons, buttons,

and so on. Over 38 per cent are in the wage employed category as casual
labourers, construction workers, domestic servants and luggage carriers,
Only 1.7 per cent of the total number is generally unemployed. Dr.
Muttagi found among the pavement dwellers a graduate of Marathwada
University and a Muslim poet of some standing. “These people have
merged with the landscape, become part of it, like the chameleon”,
though their contact with their more fortunate neighbours who live in
adjoining highrise buildings is casual. The most important finding of
Dr. Muttagi is that the pavement dwellers are a peaceful lot, “for, they
stand to lose their shelter on the pavement if they disturb the affluent or
indulge in fights with their fellow dwellers”. The cnarge of the State
Government, besides being contrary to these scientific findings, is born of
Prejudice against the poor and the destitute. Affluent people living in
sky-scrapers also commit crimes varying from living on the gains of prosti-
tution and defrauding the public treasury to smuggling. But, they get
away. The pavement dwellers when caught defend themselves by asking
“who does not commiit crimes in this city.”

In the same judgment the economic aspect regarding pavement dwellers has
been thus dealt with 3/3 :—

One of the major causes of the persistent rural poverty of landless labou-
rers, marginal farmers, shepherds, physically handicapped persons and
others is the extremely narrow base of production available to the majo-
tity of the rural population. The average agriculture holding of a farmer
- is 0.4 hectares, which is hardly adequate to enable him to make both


8

ends meet. Landless labourers have no resource base at all and they cons-
stitute the hard core of poverty. Due to economic pressures and lack of
employment opportunities, the rural population is forced to migrate to
urban areas in search of employment. “The Economic Survey of
Maharashtra” published by the State Government shows that the bulk
of public investment was made in the cities of Bombay, Pune and Thane
which created employment opportunities attracting the starving rural
population to those cities. The slum census conducted by the Govner-
ment of Maharashtra in 1976 shows that 79% of the slum-dwellers be-
longed to the low income group with a monthly income below Rs. 600.
The study conducted by P. Ramachandran of the Tata Institute of Social
Sciences shows that in 1972 91% of the pavement dwellers had a
monthly income of less than Rs. 200. The cost of obtaining any kind of
shelter in Bombay is beyond the means of a pavement dweller.

Some of the facts regarding hutments and pavements in Bombay has been stated
in the Supreme Court judgment in these words8/4 :—

In answer to the Municipal Commissioner's counter-affidavit, petitioner
No. 12, Prafullachandra Bidwai who is a journalist, has filed a Tejoinder
asserting that Kamraj Nagar is not located on a foot-path or a pavement.
According to him, Kamraj Nagar is a basti off the Highway, in which the
huts are numbered, the record in relation to which is maintained by the
Road Development Department and the Bombay Municipal Corporation.
Contending that petitioners 1 to 5 have been residing in the said basti
for over 20 years, he reiterates that the public has no tight of way in or
over the Kamraj Nagar. He also disputes that the huts on the foot-paths
cause any obstruction to the pedestrians or to the vehicular traffic or
that those huts are a source of nuisance or danger to public health and
safety. His case in paragraph 21 of his reply affidavit seems to be that
since the foot-paths are in the occupation of pavement dwellers for a long
time, foot-paths have ceased to be foot-paths. He says that the pave-
ment dwellers and the slum or basti dwellers, who number about 47.7
lakhs, constitute about 50 per cent of the total population of Greater
Bombay, that they supply the major work force for Bombay from menial
jobs to the most highly skilled jobs, that they have been living in the
hutments for generations, that they have been making a significant contri-
bution to the economic life of the eed and that, therefore, it is unfair
and unreasonable on the part of the State Government and the Muncipal
Corporation to destroy their homes and deport them: A home is a
home wherever it is. The main mh me of the reply-affidavit is that “The
slum dwellers are the sine qua nan of the city. They are entitled to a
quid pro quo”. It is conceded expressly that the petitioners do not
claim any fundamental right to live, at least to exist.

Such is the plight of pavement dwellers in Bombay.


CHAPTER IV
PRESENT POSITION

4.1. Scope of the Chapter—tIn this Chapter, it is proposed to examine the present
position in law as to the eviction of slum dwellers and pavement dwellers. The most
important judgment on the subject is of 1986, which we shall examine presently.4/1

4.2. The Supreme Court case from Bombay (1986)—In the Supreme Court judg-
ment which was pronounced 4/ with reference to the Bombay Municipal Corporation
Act, 1986 the writ petitions portrayed “the plight of lakhs of persons who live on
pavement and slum dwellers in the city: of Bombay” and who were described (in the
Judgment) as constituting nearly half the population of the city. There were two
main groups of petitions. The first gtoup:related to the pavement dwellers, while
the second group related to pavement and Basti or slum dwellers.

4.3. Petitioner’s contentions—The petitioners had asked for a judgment to the
effect that they could not be evicted ftom their Bastis and squalid shelters without
being offered alternative accommodation. ‘They relied for their rights under article
21 of the Constitution. They did not contend that they had a right to live on the
pavement. Their contention was as under :—

(i) They had a right to live वन] 1 of the Constitution);

(ii) This right could not be crest sd without the means of livelihood;

(iii) For exercising this right and for seeking the means of livelihood, they
had no option but to flock fo big cities like Bombay which provided the
means of bare subsistence;

(iv) They chose a pavement or a slum which was nearest to their place of
work. “Ina word, their plea is, that the right to life is illusory without a
right to the protection of the mgans by which alone life can be lived.”;

(v) The right of life can be ae away or abridged, only by a procedure
established by law. ‘This procedure has to be fair and reasonable, so as
to satisfy the requirements of article 21 of the Constitution. The proce-
dure prescribed by te Bombay {unicipal Corporation Act or the Bombay
Police Act was arbitrary. हु

(vi) The petitioners also relied on the right to reside in any part of the country,
being a right which is guaranteed by article 19(1)(0) of the Constitution.

4.4. Contention of the parties—The co: iver of the Bombay Municipal Corpo-
ration (one of the respondents) was that whatever be the compulsion, the petitioners
had no fundamental right to squat on of ito construct a dwelling on, a pavement,
public road 07 any other place to which the public had a right of access. Certain
other points were also canvassed, but they fre not material for the present purposes.

4.5. Judgment of the Suprame Court—After examining the above contentions
and the relevant constitutional provisions and after quoting certain sociological
literature relevant to the points at issue, the judgement of the Supreme Court#/3 laid
down a number of propositions. The important propositions are summarised in the
succeeding patagraphs.

. 4.6. Article 19(1)(e)—The, Supreme Court held that the right conferred on
citizens by article 19(1)() of the करा ution to reside and settle in any part of India
could not be read so as to confer a lice to.encroach and trespass upon public pro-
perty. This contention of the petitiqners, therefore, failed.

4.7. Article 21 of the Constitution and the power of—Certain aspects of the |
article 21 were considered. Section B(w)'and (x) of the Bombay Municipal Act
define “street” and “public street” to include a highway, a footway or sabe ssage On
which the public has the right of passage or access. Under section 1) of the
Act, all pavements and public streets vest in the Corporation and are under the con-
trol of the Commissioner. The'court held that in so far as article 21 of the Constitu-
tion is concerned, no deprivation of life (either directly or indirectly) is involved in
the eviction of the slum and pavement dwellers from public places. The court

9


10

observed that the Municipal Corporation is under an obligation, under section 314
of the Bombay Municipal Act, to remove obstructions on pavements, public streets
and other public places. The Corporation did not even possess the power to permit
any peison to occupy a pavement or a public place on a permanent or quasi-perma-
nent basis. The petitioners had not only violated the provisions of the Bombay
Municipal Corporation Act, but they had also contravened sections 111 and 115 of
the Bombay Police Act. These sections prevent a person from obstructing any other
person in the latter’s use of a street or public place or from committing a nuisance,
Section 117 of the Police Act prescribes punishment for the violation of these sections.

4.8, Removal of obstructions and natural justice—The judgment then dealt with
section 314 of the Bombay Municipal Corporgtion Act 1888, which authorises the
Commissioner to remove, without notice, certain obstructions. The court took-the
view that the procedure should be reasonable:and this implied the requirement of
notice. Examining the implications of th is section, the court expressed itself as
under regarding the pavement dwellers :—4/4 |

“But, though we do not see any jistification for asking the Commis-
sioner to hear the petitioners, we ede to pass an order which, we
believe, he would or should hi ve |, had he granted a hearing to
them and heard what weidid. } = of the opinion that the petitioners
should not be evicted from the pavements, footpaths or accessory roads
until one month after the congt 1011-01 the current monsoon season,
that is to say, until October 31, 1 In the meanwhile, as explained
later, (a) steps may be taken to offet alternative pitches to the pavement
dwellers who were or who happen eat be censused in 1976. The offer
of alternative pitches to such pavemgnt dwellers should be made good in
the spirit in which it was made, thogh we do not propose to make it a
condition precedent to the remdval of the encroachments committed by
them.”

(a) See paragraph 4.11 infra,

4.9. Kamaraja Basti Pavement dwellers—As regards the “Kamraja Basti”, the
above direction was not to apply, because ‘the affidavit of the Municipal Commis-
sioner showed that these hutments, (400 in all), were never regularised and were
serious traffic hazards.

4.10. Slum dwellers—The court then addressed itself to slum dwellers (para 53
of the judgment) and took notice of the following factual situation :-—

“The affidavit of Shri Arvind V. Gokak, Administrator of the Maha-
rashtra Housing and Areas Developritent Authority, Bombay, shows that
the State Government had taken a decision to compile a list of slums
which were required to be removed in public interest and to allocate,
after a spot inspection, 500 acres of vacant land in or near the Bombay
Suburban District for resettlement of hutment dwellers removed from
the slums. A census was accordingly carried out on January 4, 1976 to
enumerate the slum dwellers spread over about 850 colonies all over
Bombay. About 67% of the hutment dwellers produced photographs
of the heads of their families, on the basis of which the hutments were
numbered and their occupants were given identity cards. Shri Gokak
further says in his affidavit that the Government had also decided that the
slums which were in existence fora long time and which were improved
and developed, would not normally be demolished unless the land was
required for a public purpose. In the event that the land was so fequired,
the policy of the State Government was to provide alternate accommoda-
tion to the slum dwellers who were censused and possessed identity cards
The Circular of the State Governinent dated February 4, 1976 (No - SIS
176/D-41) bears out this position. In the enumeration of the hutment
dwellers, some persons occupying pavements also happened to be given
census cards. The Government decided to allot pitches to such’ persons
at a place near Malavani. These assurances held forth by the Govern-
ment must be made good. In other words despite the finding recorded
by us that the provision contained in section 314 of the Bombay Munici-
pal Corporation Act is valid, pavement dwellers to whom census cards
were given in 1976 must be given alternate pitches at Malavani though
not as a condition precedent to the removal of encroachments committed
by them. Secondly, slum dwellers who were censused and were given,



11

identity cards must be provided with alternate accommodation before
they are evicted. There is a controversy between the petitioners and
the State Government as to the extent of vacant land which is available
for rescitlement of the inhabitants of pavements and slums. Whatever
that may be, the highest priority must be accorded by the State Govern-
ment to the resettlement of these unfortunate persons by allotting to
them such land as the Government finds to be conveniently available.
The Maharashtra Employment Guarantee Act, 1977, the Employment
Guarantee Scheme, the New Twenty Point Socio-economic Programme,
1982, the Affordable Low income Shelter Programme in Bombay Metro-
politan Region and the programme of house building for the economi-
cally weaker scctions must not remain a dead letter as such schemes and
programmes often do. Not only that, but more and more such program-
mes must be initiated if the theory of equal protection of laws has to take
its rightful placc in the struggle for equality. In these matters, the de-
mand is not so much for less Government interference as for positive
government action to provide equel treatment to neglected Seg ments of
society. The profound rhetoric of socialism must be translated into
practice for the problems which confront the State are problems of human
destiny.”

4.11. Final order in the Bombay case—The final order of the court in the Bombay
case was as under :—

“To summarise, we hold that no person has the right to encroach, by
erecting a structure or otherwise, on footpaths, pavements or any other
place reserved or earmarked for a public purpose like, for example, a
garden or a playground; that the provision contained in section 314 of
the Bombay Municipal Corporation Act is not unreasonable in the cir-
cumstances of the case; and that the Kamrai Nagar Basti is situated on
an accessory road leading to the Western Express Highway. We have
referred to the assurances given by the State Government in its pleadings
here which, we repeat, must be made good. Stated briefly, pavement
dwellers who were censused or who happened to be censused in 1976
should be given, though not as a condition precedent to their removal,
alternate pitches at Malavani or at such other convenient place as the
Government considers reasonable but not farther away in terms of dis-
tance; slum dwellers who were given identity cards and whose dwelli
were numbered in the 1976 census must be given alternative sites for their
resettlement; slums which have been in existence for a long time, say for
twenty years or more, and which have been improved and developed will
not be removed unless the land on whcih they stand or the appurtenant
land is required for a public purpose, in which case, alternate sites or
accommodation will be provided to them, the Low Income Scheme Shelter
Programme which is proposed to be undertaken with the aid of the
World Bank will be pursued earnestly; and, the slum upgradation pro-
gramme (SUP) under which basic amenities are to be given to slum dwel-
lers will be implemented without delay. 1n order to minimise the hard-
ship involved in any eviction, we direct that the slums, wherever situated,
will not be removed until one month after the end of the current monsoon
season, that is, until October 31, 1985 and, thereafter only in accordance
with this judgment. If any slum is required to be removed before that
date, parties may apply to this Court. Pavement dwellers, whether
censused or uncensused, will not be removed until the same date viz.
October, 31, 1985.”

4.12. The question of alternative accommodation—It will be seen that in the
above judgment, while the aspect of alternative accommodation has been dealt with,
the order requiring allotment of alternative accommodation seems to have been
based on certain assurances given by the State Government. The court did not re-
gard it as mandatory in every case. This is'fairly clear from the fact that the court
made an elaborate note of the assurance recorded in the affidavit of Shri Arvind
Gokak. The judgment thus remains inconclusive on this aspect. It is this aspect
which we propose to take up in a subsequent Chapter 4/5.

‘

4.13. Tamil Nadu Slum Act. The Tamil Nadu Areas (Improvement and Cl.
earance) Act, 1971 (11 of 1971), section 11, came up for construction in another
cse,a before the Supreme Court. 4/6 This Act has to be read with the Madras City


12

Municipal Corporation Act, 1919, sections 220 and 222, and the Tamil Nadu Land
Encroachment Act 1905, section 2. In the writ petition before the Supreme Court
in the Tamil Nadu case, the petitioners had asked for a mandamus restraining the
respondents (the State of Tamil Nadu) from evicting the slum dwellers and pave-
ment dwellers in the city of Madras, without providing alternative accommodation
to'them. There was also prayer for a writ to direct the provision of basic amenities
like water, drainage and electricity to slum dwellers. It was alleged that the State
Government was pressing to evict the dwellers of about 450 huts situated on the Canal
Bank Road near the Loyola College. As the Supreme Court was satisfied that the
Government had adopted a liberal policy towards the slum dwellers, no writ was
issued. However, a direction was given not to evict the slum dwellers before 31st
December, 1985. Decision in the Bombay Pavement Dwellers case 4/7 was declared
as governing these writ petitions also.

The relevant statutory provisions in the Madras case as summarised in the
judgment of the Supreme Court were as under :—

The Tamil Nadu Land Encroachment Act, 1905 provides by section 2 that
all public roads, streets, lanes, paths, etc., are the property of the State Government.
The Madras City Municipal (Corporation) Act, 1519 contains provisions in sections
220, 222 regarding encroachments on public streets. The Tamil Nadu Slum Areas
(Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1971 was passed in order to make provision for
the improvement and clearance of slums in’ the ‘State. Section 3 of the Act contains
provisions for the declaration of an area as a slum area if, inter alia, such area is
or may be a source of danger to the health or safety of the public by reason of the
area being low-lying, insanitary, squalid or oWer-crowded. Section 5 of that Act
empowers the prescribed authority to direct that no person shall erect any building
in a slum area without its previous permission in writing. Chapter IV of the Act
contains various provisions for improvement of slum areas. Section 11(a) provides
that if the Government is satisfied that the most satisfactory method of dealing
with the conditions in a slum area is the clearance of such area and demolition of
all the buildings therein, it may by a ce ation declare the area to be a slum, clea-
rance area, that is to say, anarea to be cleared of all buildings in accordance with
the provisions of the Act. The proviso to that gection, which is important, requires
that before issuing such notification, the Gove dament shall call upon the owners of
lands and buildings in such slum area, to show cause why such a declaration should
not be made and that, after considering th¢ cause, if any, is shown by such owners,
the Government may pass such orders as jit nfay deem fit. Section 29 of the Act
provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, no person shall, except with the pfevi anh permission in writing of the pres-
cribed authority, institute any suit or (आन 8 for obtaining a decree or order
of eviction of dn occupant of any building;or fland in a slum area, or execute such
decree or order if it is already obtpined. ©

4.14, Right to shelter—Recently the Supteme Court, while dealing with the
Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) 8० 1976, sections 20 and 21, had occasion
to deal with the human need for shelter.4/8 |

The observations of the Supreme Court in graphs 9 and 10 are as under :—
“9, Basic needs of man have ttadit Honaly been accepted to be three —
food, clothing and shelter. The right to life is guaranteed in any civilized
society. That would take within its sweep the right to food, the right
to clothing, the right to decent environment and a reasonable accommo-
dation to live in. The difference between the need of an animal and a
human being for shelter has to be kept in view. For the animal it is the
bare protection of the body; for a human being it has to be a suitable
accommodation which would allow him to grow in every aspect—phy-
sical, mental and intellectual. pe Constitution aims at ensuring fuller
development of every child. ६ would be possible only if the child
is in a proper home. Itis not negessay that every citizen must be ensured
of living in a well-built comfortable house but a reasonable home parti-
cularly for people in India can;evem be mud-built thatched house or a
mud-built fire-proof accommodation.

“10. With the increase of population and the shift of the rural masses
to urban areas over the decades. the ratio of poor people without houses
in the urban areas has rapidly increased. This is a feature which has
become more perceptible after independence. Apart from the fact that


13 ~

people in search of work move to urbgn agglomerations, availability
of amenities and living conveniences also attract people to move from
rural areas to citics. Indusfrialigation is equally responsible for concen-
tration of population around igdustries. These are features which are
mainly responsible for increase in the homeless urban population. Mil-
lions of people today live on the :pavements of different cities of India
and a greater number live animal-like existence in jhuggis.

4.15. Other judgments—There are a few other judgements of the Supreme
Court“, 4/0 relating to eviction, but,they are not material for the present purpose.

‘4.16. Gujarat case Interim Order—In a Gujarat case interim mandatory in-
junction was gtanted by lower court against पाला dwellers for eviction from pub-
lic roads. Interim order was passed by the: trial court directing the eviction of hut-
ment dwellers. It was held to be not justifidd. The plaintiff had no prima facie case
whatsoever, so:as to override the rights and interests of numerous citizens. No doubt,
the hutment dwellers were occupying the piblic roads in contravention of some sta-
tutory-provisions. But, according to the High Court, to evict them, would endanger.
their very “right to exist” and would enc h upon theis fundamental right to life.
On the one side, there was a question of ite a and death of the hutment dwellers and,
on other side,‘there was the question of unéeonomic user of the plot by the plaintiff.
The Court was duty bound to protect the liv¢s of the vast majority of the poor people,
as against the profits and comforts of a few individuals. Thus, the balance of conve-
nience was held to be not in favour of the: fiaiouitt and an interim mandatory order
directing the authorities to remove enctoachments from public roads could not be
passed. 4/11,

4.17. A recent Gujarat cuse‘of 1989—4t_ may be mentioned that ina recent
Gujarat case, which involved thé Muni rib can te a of Bhavnagar, one of the
questions considered was as to the actin that can be taken by a Municipal Corpo- ~
ration against alleged trespassers on | ig Streets. 42 In that case, it was con- |
tended that the land in question. was a public street and the petitioners had no right
to use the same and they could be rem@vesi by the Municipal Corporation. Exami-
ning this contention, the High Court (per' Ravani J) stated the legal position in
these terms :—

: i
“The petitioners may ०४५1, vel cae legal right to occupy land of the
public street. At-the fn iwould be in the position of. unauthorised
occupants. Therefore, at the highest
who have committed. civil trespass. But trespassers also have a rij ight to
be dealt with in just, fair and reasonable manner. They cannot be re-
moved in high-handed, ruthless and inhuman manner, much more so
when the authorities were restrained from taking action by a Court of
competent jurisdiction.”
4.18. Earlier Gujarat case laying down certain propositions—In an_ earlier
case, 4/13 the Gujarat High Court (per Ravalny 1) has indicated what is just, fair and
reaonable procedure in such type of cases, in these terms :—

“(i) The respondent-Authotities shall not take any action of removal
of the petitioners from the business premises occupied by them without
affording them an opportunity of being heard.

ii) Such opportunity of being heard would also include :

(a) notice in writing 10 be served upon each of the occupant, cal-
ling upon him to show cause as to why he should not be removed
from the place in question;

(b) the occupant concérned shall be afforded an opportunity of
leading evidence in response to the notice; and

(c) the occupant concerned shall also be afforded an opportunity
of being heard in person either by himself or through an Advocate;

(iii) In case the respondent-Aythorities, after the enquiry as stated

hereinabove, come to the cor “ae that the occupant concerned is

required to be removed from th¢-place, and any decision adverse to the

occupant is taken, the same|s} not be implemented for a period of one

month from the date of conimutication to the occupant.
93-M/J(D)274MofLJ&CA—2

t they may be described as persons . -


14

(iv) The order that may be passed by the’ respondent-authorities shalt
be served upon the occupant preferably by registered A.D. post. The
same shall also be sent by an ordinary post under certificate of posting.
and the order shall also be affixed on the premises in question.”

4.19. Reasoning in 1989 case—The heart of the reasoning in the Gujarat case
of October 17, 1989 lies in the following passage, occurring towards the end of the
judgement in paragraph 14 :

“14, Would a citizen be not within his rights to assert that if a smuggler,
a murderer or tax-evader is entitled under the provisions of the statute
to say that his property be not attached without issuing seizure memo
and without recording panchnama, I am an honest person doing lawful
business and I am compelled to use public street out of sheer necessity
and therefore please do not T¢moye my property without making note
thereof and without recording :Pan¢hnama ? While doing so all that a
citizen claims is equal treatment. Jn. all earnestness his claim is that I
am poor little Indian. Before you rob me of my belongi treat me on
par with smugglers, black-marketeets, profiteers, tax-cvaders, 105, murderers
and dacoits. We think that the:clajm is just and Proper and no authority
exercising powers under the Constitution and a valid statute would be
justified in denying this, legitimate ain We are of the opinion that
whenever there is no statutory prdvisions prescribing just, fair and
reasonable procedure for rem ceca: of obstructions on public street, the
procedure which is meant for seizure and removal of property
under the Criminal Pro¢edure ( should as far as possible.be made
applicable to the removal of such alleged obstructions from the land of
public street. Whenever it is shown that such procedure is not followed,
the action of the authorjty will ha i be labelled as unjust and arbi-
trary. Therefore, the submi: sfion ॥ ithat the petitioners have no right to
occupy the land and therefore ¢ be removed has no merits and
the sams cannot be accepted.“ |” :

4.20. Conclusion—The courts have cventy y been making a humane approach
to the problem within the limitatidns ai meters of the extant law. But the
law at present does not afford adequate protection to the slum and pavement dwel-
lers beyond making it incumbent on the ¢oncerned authorities to afford them an
opportunity of hearing. The need for imposing an obligation to provide the slum
dwellers with an alternative accommodation or dwelling site is therefore a felt need
of the times. '


CHAPTER V
PROVISIONS IN MUNICIPAL ACTS

5.1. Provisions in Municipal Acts—The Commission notes that in many of the
Municipal Acts, there is a provision for the removal of “articles” deposited in cer-
tain places, and for the removal of osbtructions. Often, it is in exercise of the powers
conferred by these provisions that the Municipal Corporation takes action, with or
without notice, to remove the articles and obstructions and adopts other consequen-
tial measures to forcibly evict the occupants of the premises in question.

5.2. Provision in the Bombay Municipal Act—The provisions of the Bombay
Municipal Corporation Act (3 of 1988) on the subject of removal of encroachments
from pavements and public streets came up for consideration before the Supreme
Court in the well known pavement dwellers’ case. था These provisions (so far as
material for the present purpose) areas ynder :—

. N
“Section 312. Prohibition of structures or fixtures which cause obstruction
in streets. (1) No person shall, except with the permission of the Com-
missioner under section 310 or°317, erect or set up any wall, fence, rail,
post, step, booth or other structure or fixture in or upon any street or
upon or over any open channel, drain well or tank in any street so as
to form an obstruction to, or an encroachment upon, or a projection
over, or to occupy, any portion ef such street, channel, drain well or
tank”.

“Section 313. Prohibition of deposit. etc. of things in streets. (1) No

person shall, except with the written permission of the Commissioner—
(a) Place or deposit upon any street or upon any open channel,
drain or well in any street3 (or in any public place) any stall, chair
bench, box, ladder, bale or:other thing so as to form an obstruction
thereto or encroachment thereon.”

“Section 314. Power, to remove without notice anything erected deposited
or hawked in contravention'of séction 312, 313 or 3134. The Commis-
sioner may, without notice, canse to be removed— . .

(a) any wall, fence, tail; post, - step, booth or other structure or
fixture which shall be erected or set up in or upon any street, or upon
or over any open channel, drain, well or tank contrary to the pro-
visions of sub-section v of section 312, after the same comes into
force in the city ण in the stiburbs, after the date of the coming into
force of the Bombay ‘Municipal (Extension of Limits) Act, 1950
or in the extended subrubs after the date of the coming into force
of the Bombay Municipal Burther Extention of Limits and Schedule
BBA (Amendment) Act, 1956.

(b) any stall, chair, ‘bengh, box, laddre, bale, board or shelf
or any other thing whatever' placed, deposited, attached, or suspensed
in, upon, from or to-any place in contravention of sub-section (1)
of section 313;° '

(०) any article whatsgever hawked or exposed for sale in any
public place or in any public street in contravention of the provisions
of section 313A ‘and asy véhitle, package, box, board; shelf or any
other thing in dr on which such article is placed or kept for the
purpose of sale.” :

By section 3(w), “street” ingludes a causeway, footway, passage etc. over which
the public have a right of passage or 20458.

५ 5:3. The following extracts 2 ake ffom the Delhi Municipal Corporation "6
ct, — :

“320. (1) No person shai eae with the permission of the-'Com-

missioner granted in this f, erect or set up any walt, rail,
post, step, booth or other whether fixed or movable or whether >
15 ९० whet


16

of a permanent or temporary nature, or any fixture in or upon any street
or upon or over any open channel, drain, wall or tank in any street so
as to form an obstruction to, or an encroachment upon, or a projection
over, or to occupy any-portion of such street, channel, drain, well or
tank.

(2) Nothing in this section’ shall apply to ‘any erection or thing to
which clause (c) of sub-sectioa (1) of section 325 applies.”

321..(1) No. person shall, .except . with the permission of the Comm-
missioner and on payment of sych:fee'as he in each case thinks fit, place
or deposit upon any street, or upgn any open channel, drain or well
in any street or upon any publi¢ plage any stall, chair, bench, box, ladder
bale or other thing whatsoever: so as to form an obstruction thereto or
encroachment thereon.

(2) Nothing in sub-sectiom:(1) applies to building materials.”

“322. The Commissiontr njay, without notice; cause to be removed—
(a) any stall, chair, ladder, bale or other

soever, placed, ai, bya projected, attached .or peor in,
upon, from or to aay place inicontravention of this Act;

(b) any article wi ayked or exposed for sale on any
public street or' in 10% in contravention of this

Act and any vehicle, a ee x or any other thing in or on which
such article is placed.

5.4. Provision in the U.P. Municipalities Act —Section 265 of the U.P.{Munici-
palities Act, 1916 is another example of a provision which deals with obstructions.
It is enough to quote sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of section 265, which read as un-

“265. Obstruction of street. (1) ‘Whoever without the writtén per-

mission of the cd i +
(a) causes or allows any cP » with or without an animal
harnessed the than oy stand so & pb, cause obstruction
in any street longer necessary for loading or unloading
or for taking up or setting do ‘passehigers, or

(b) leaves or fastens any. vehifle or animal so as to cause ob-
struction in any street, or

(©) exposes any artitle fér! Whether upon a stall or booth
or in any other ner, Fi] to cause obstruction in any street,

see \agpasited any building materials,

in any street, or
‘sail, post, stall or any scaf-
tin any street, or
ts or causes obstruction to

(d) deposits, or afin,
box, bale, package
(०) erects or sets up any.
folding or any other such
(f) in any manner Will
the free passage of any street.

shall be liable upon conviction which may extend to five hundred

rupees and in case of a rontini ‘breach to a further fine which may

extend to ten rupees for every after the day of first conviction during

which the offender is prqved to! have persisted in the commission of the

offence.

(2) The board shall remove any obstruction refer-
ted to in sub-section Os and. pense of such removal shall be re-
coverable from the offender in manner provided by Chapter VI.
(3) The power exercisable _ a board under sub-section (2) to re-
move obstruction from streets also be exercisable for the, rémoval

by the board of obstruction’ fto} ‘open ‘space, whether vested वी 16
board. or not, which is pot privat property.

5.5. Conclusion—The aforesaid: provisionsiand analogous provisions of simbtar
statutes invest Wide powers which are ust 22 उ4४क 1०7 to for evicting slum dwellers
‘And the slum. dwellers are expg: & tendered 19की०5७.,.. Hence
arises the need for affording them protection to the extent possible in
otder to save them from destitution.



CHAPTER VI
CASE FOR EXTENDING LEGISLATIVE PROTECTION

6.1. Need for appropriate legislation—On 4 survey of the material contained
in the preceding chapters, we have come to the conclusion that if the right to life
is to carry a meaning for the persons dwelling in slums and pavements, its con-
tent must be defined by appropriate legislation. Up to now, citizens have filed writ
petitions, mostly in the form of public interest litigation, for ventilating their grie-
vances in this regard. But it appears to us that this has not proved to be a very satis-
factory method of establishing, or getting a clarification for, citizen’s rights. The
judicial procedure is tardy and expensive, far nobody‘s fault. Ascertaining and en-
forcing the remedy and identifying its precise conditions will depend upon the view
the courts take of the facts and 189 in each case.

6.2. Difficulties—We further apprehend that the courts would also be finding
themselves faced with difficult situations. The reason, we presume, is this. On
the one hand, the provisions in enactments relating to municipalities leave almost
no option to the Municipal Authority except 10. take action for the eviction of un-
authorised occupants of slums and pavements. Qn the other hand, with the expand-
ing dimensions of article 21 of the Constitatign (which are wide but uncertain),
courts realise that life and shelter go together. hout a roof over the head, neither
body nor soul can function effectivel| yi To balance the statutory power of eviction
contained in legislation relating to ae S against the implications of the
tight to life is not an easy task. No doubt, 0० have, within the limitations resul-
ting from statutory law, attempted to give reliefjon some basis or the other. Some-
times they are able to find that Government has even an assurance to help slum
dwellers and on the strength of this assurance, ,effective relief can be given by the
judges. Occasionally, the courts are 4016 to givejtelief resorting to various principles
Tegarding grant or refusal of injunctions or othe discretionary relief. The principles
of natural justice also come to the regcue of fhe ॥ itigant but only to a limited degree

6.3. Paramount need for enacting “ine in roviosions—It is against the back
ground of this judicial scenario that we have ० to the conclusion that the time

8 come to give a statutory shape to whatever remedies or safeguards the country
may wish to incorporate in its legal. systen), for safeguarding against harsh action
in the shape of eviction of pavement and slum dwellers. Our own view is that before
they are evicted they must be offered alternative shelter or site or facility such as sle-
eping sheds like “Rain Baseras” (hereafter all three are referred to as facility for
the sake of convenience) unless it is, in the ¢onsjdered opinion of the State Govern-
ment, impossible to do so or the larger nee terest demands their eviction even
when no alternative can be offered to'them./ It js also necessary to provide for their
tehabilitation in case they are evict¢d, for! the ;whole exercise will be meaningless
if they are eventually rendered roofless withou{ hope of succour. A provision re-
quiring the State Government to Tohabilltte em is, therefore, call fea for. We
Propose to make appropriate recommendations in this behalf hereafter. But protec-
tion against eviction will prove futile if the slam dwellers are not provided with
essential facilities to enable them to Jive asjhunan beings. The need in this behalf
will be examined in the paragraphs to follpw .

6.4. Withholding or denying civic amenities, ‘nd essential facilities, sup, pplies and
services—The slum dwellers in occupation of their units situated within the muni-
cipal limits are so often refused esseatial facilities, such as, civic amenities, sanitary
services, water supply, street lighting, clectricity sup] ply, approach road, etc. Two
grounds are mentioned in order to support st withholding or denying, viz., (1)
that they are in unauthorized occupation of lan@ and/or (2) that they do not make
any contribution by way of municipal tax¢s, efc.

6.5. Is such refusal or denial justified—Thé underlying motive in seeking sup-
port from the fact that the slums have bees raised without authority is more often
than nought to exert pressure on the slum ‘dwellers in order to evict them. Slums
come into existence because of the helplessness of the occupants obliged to seek
shelter in a situation of desperation arising in the context of

(1) extreme poverty,

93-M/J(D)274MofLJ&CA—3 j a,


18

(2) migration from rural areas in order to stave off starvation and unemploy-
ment in the hope to secure some employment—even if that of a fle-
eting nature—and bread for the women and children of the desperate
men-folk,

(3) non-availability of living accommodation even of a wretched condition
in the cities.

Their helplessness should evoke sympathy rather than antipathy. The compa-
ratively better off citizens and the local authorities owe it to their unfortunate bre-
thren and sisters to emeliorate their distress to the extent possible at least out of
humane considerations. They should not, therefore, be denied essential facilities
on such grounds. So long as they have to live, they should be enabled to live as hu-
man beings. Besides considerations of enlightened self-interset also demand the
adoption of this course. If insanitary and uniaygenic conditions prevail -in the slums,
they would be exposed to discases and epidtmics, which may in course of time
infiltrate into the other areas and cause diseases and epidemics to spread in other
areas as well. Civil amenities, sanitary services, water supply, electricity and such
other facilities should not be withheld to the slum dwellers for the aforesaid reasons.

6.6. Need for statutory protection against withholding of essential services and
Sacilities— In order to make the statutory protection of slum dwellers against eviction
meaningful and effective, it is, thetcfore, desitable to provide that a local authority
shall not withhold or refuse to provide any essential supply or service to a slum
dweller without just or sufficient cause or discomtinue or cut off the same without giving
notice to the occupant to set right the fault or defect if an existing supply is sought
to be discontinued or cut off. Minimum two months notice is what is red
so that the occupier gets sufficient time to make good the fault, defect or deficiency
on the basis of which the existing supply or service etc. is withheld etc. For this
purpose, “essential supply or servide” should include water supply and conservancy
and electricity services. Contravertion of thit provision should be visited with sui-
table penalty, as also by suitable remedfa} action by the civil court. Besides this;
since the matter concerns essential writ s, tire should be adequate provision for
the award of interim relief for restoration of supply by the civil court and also for
passing (at the final stage) orders awarding compensation incase of wrongful dep-
tivation of essential service, etc. ‘ हु

6.7. Bodies other than local authorities—Sometimes, such services are provided
by bodies other than municipal corporatiéns dr municipal committees. They should
also be subjected to the same obligations as We have proposed above for local au-
thorities, in regard to the provision of essential services, etc., to consumers in slum

areas.

6.8. Statutory protection to the pavement dwellers—While the plight of the slum
dwellers is considerable, that of the pavement dwellers is much more. They also-need.
Protection against arbitrary deprivation of shelter for the night. Considerations .
or social and economic justice would seem ta demand that the law should | step in
to extend appropriate protection by way. of corporating a suitable and rm
policy on the subject. At the same time, while providing such protection, re; oad
must be had to the fact that there may be overtiding considerations of law and order
of public interest demanding urgent actionjfor their removal on some occasions
or situations. A special provision will have tp be made giving a dispensing. power.
to some responsible authority, say, Commissioner of Police (or other oft icer of
corresponding status), so that the statutoty protection may not result in detriment
to larger public interest. हु

6.9. We accordingly propose to make appropriate recommendations for ‘ns
acting legislation in this behalf in due course in order that aforementioned essgniial :
facilities and services ate not withheld or existihg services are not discontinued either
in respect of the slum area or in respect of the slum dwellers and for affording apr-
propriate statutory protection to the pavement dwellers.


CHAPTER शा
THE CONSTITUTIONAL POSITION

7.1. Whether Central Legislation is competent—It is appropriate to examine the
question as regards the competence of the Centre to legislate on this subject, viz..
proposal to extend legislative protection to the slum and pavement dwellers by way of
providing them an alternative site, accommodation or facility and thereby rehabilitat-
ing them in the event of their being required to be evicted.

7.2. Relevant legislative entries in the Union List—The relevant legislative
entries in the lists given in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution may first be noted.
The union List does not contain an entry directly and specifically applicable to the
subject, except the residue! entry 97—“Any other matter not enumerated in List II
or List वा, including any tax not mentioned in either of those Lists.

7.3. Relevant legislative entries in the Cancurrent List—The Concurrent List
contains the following entries, possibly relevant to the subject :—-

Concurrent List, en‘ry 1.—‘‘Criminal law, including all matters included in the
Indian Penal Code at the commencement of this Constitution but ex-
cluding offences against laws with respect to any of the matters specified
in List I or List Il and excluding the use of naval, military or air forces or
any other armed forces of the Uhion‘in aid of the civil power.”

Concurrent List. entry 2.—‘Criminal Procedure, including all matters inclu-
ded in the code of Criminal Procedure at the commencement of this
Constitution.”

Concurrent List, entry 6.—‘Transfer of property other than agricultural land,
registration of deeds and documents.”

Concurrent List, entry 7.— ‘Contracts. .......-

Concurrent List, entry 8.—‘Actionable wrongs.”

Concurrent List, entry 13. “Civil procedure, including.all matters included in
the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution,
limitation and arbitration.”

Concurrent List, entry 20.— Economic and social planning.”

Concurrent List, entry 23. “Social sécurity.and social insurance, employment
and unemployment.”

In the above enumeration, all the possibly applicable entries have been listed for
consideration. Of course, if none of these specific entries applies, then the Residuary
entry of the Union List will apply, asa last resort.

7.4. Supreme Court case on land.—In order to overcome a possible argument
that the subject matter of the proposed legislation will not fall under the legislative
competence of the Centre in the context of entry 18 of the State List pertaining to
land, 7 It is enough to refer tc a Supreme Court case of 1969. In that case, ?the ques-
tion at issue was a narrow one namely, whether the Centre can legislate to provide for
eviction and rent control, etc., in respect of house accommodation in cantonments.
The Supreme Court answered the question in the affirmative, relying on Union List,
entry 3—“Delimitation of cantonment areas, local-self government in such areas... .
regulation of house accommodation (including the control of rents) in such areas.”*
The control of rent, the court held, would include protection against eviction also.
The Supreme Court rejected the contention that State List, entry 18 “land” would
apply.

In this context, the Supreme Court did take note of the various High Court
decisions us to the interpretation of the entry relating to land.

It was in this context that the court referred to the Bombay case of A.C. Patel
y. Vishwanath 7/3 and then expressed itself as under :—

“The Nagpur High Court in Kewalchand v. Dashrathlal (a) proceeded
on the assumption that the decision in the case of A.C. Patel y. Vishwanath

19


20

Chada (supra) correctly defined the scope of entry 2 in List I of the Seventh
Schedule to the Government of India Act, and considered the nartaw
question whether the relationship of landlord and tenant specifically
mentioned in entry 21 in List If of that Act, which covered the Tequire-
ment of permission to serve a notice for eviction in regulating the relation,
of landlord and tenant, and fell within the scope of entry 21, List II of in
entry 2 in List I of that Act. The court held that it substantially fell in
entry 21 in List II and not in entry 2 in List I. The court did not consider
it necesssy to express any opinion on the question whether the expression
“regulating of house accommodation” included something besides what
Chagla, C.J., had said was its ambit in the case of A.C. Patel v. son con
Chada(b) (supra), but expressed the opinion that the expression

not be stretched to include thé aspect of the relation of landlord and
involved in that particular case. It is clear that, in that case also, a narrower
interpretation of the expresgion “regulation of house accommodation”
was accepted, because it appéars that there was no detailed discussion की |
the full scope of that cxpresi ion. “Similar is the decision of the a
High Court in Babu Jagtanand v. Sri Satyanarayanji Lakshmiji thro
the Shabait and Manager Janund Das (c). In fact, this last case
followed the decision of| the: Bombay High Court in the case of F
Darukhanawala v.. Khamphand Lalchand (d) (supra). On the other hand,
the Rajasthan High Court in. Nawal Mal v. Nathu Lal I) held that the
power of the State Legislat aches legislate in respect of landlord and ten ax
of buildings is to be foundjin Entries 6, 7 and 13 or List III of the Sevent
Schedule to the Constitution, and not in Entry 18 of List 11, and that that
power was circumscribed by the exclusive power of parliament to legislate
on the same subject under Entry 3 of List I. That is also the-view which
the Calcutta High Court has taken in the Judgment in appeal before as,
We think that the decision given by the Calcutta High Court is correct aad
must be upheld.” :

(a) Dashrathlal v. Kewalband, ILR 1956 Nag 618, AIR 1956 Nag
268. :

(b) A.C. Patel v. Vishwanath, AIR 1954 Bom 204.
8, Babu Jagtanand v. Sri Satyanarayanji Lakshmiji, ILR 40 Pat

(d) F.E. Darykhanawala, v. Nawal Mal, ILR 1954 Bom 544.
(©) Nawal Mal ४. Nathu Lal, ILR 11 Raj 421.

bog


21

We are mentioning this judgment to show the limited scope of the entry relating to
“land”, not covering various measures which do not directly touch land.

7.5. Public premises Act.—In a recent case 7/4 the Supreme Court has held that
the Public Premises (Eviction of unauthorised occupants) Act, 1971, in so far as it
relates to premises of the Government, falls under Union List, entry 32 (property of
the Union........ ) and in so far as it relates to lessees or licensees of premises of
Government companies, it falls under Concurrent List, entry 6, 7 and 46. Concurrerit
List, entry 6 relates to transfer of property other than agricultural land, while entry 7
relates to contracts etc., andentry 46 relates to the jurisdiction of courts etc. This
judgment of 1990 is confined to lincenseesior lessees of premises belonging to a Govern-
ment company. On that point, the Supreme Court reaffirmed the view taken by it
in 1989, 7/5 holding that the Public Premiges Act falls in the Concurrent List.

7.6. Social security and rehabilitation.—We now turn to the Concurrent List
entry 23 whichieadsas under :—

“23, Social security and social insurance, employment and unemploy-
ment.”

Besides this, the Concurrent List, entry 27 empowers the enactment of legislation
for “relief and rehabilitation of persons displaced from their original place of residence
by reason of the setting up of the Dominions of India and Pakistan.” It appears that
West Bengal Land Development and Planning Act, 1940 was held to fall under this
entry (entry 27). 7/6

In our view, the proposed legislat.on can be regarded as falling under “‘social security”
on the reasoning that in interpreting Conqurrent List, entry 23, one finds support from
entry 27. The Constitution makers! did!not mention relief and rehabilitation iat

neral in the Concurrent List, and concentrated on refugees from Pakistan, obvio
Because, at that time, that was the Paine ipal problem very much before them.
cannot, however, be gainsaid ४१ at rehabilitation of evicted slum or pavement dwellers
by way of rehabilitation is an: essential component of ‘social security’ in general.

7.7. History of social security.—In this context, it may be desirable to examine
the meaning of the expression “social sequriy.” The concept of social security in 8
wide sense, that is to say, governmental as well as voluntary social security, has a
fairly long history, because thei basic = of social welfare, viz poverty, disal be A
disease and dependence, are af old .ab 5 itself. Initially, religion and philosop!
tended to provide a framework for - luct of social welfare. १7 However, ag
society developed, there arose more syst tic responses to the factors that rendered
individuals (and thus, society at large), vulnerable. Social securty programmes spon-
sored by Government, such as social assitance and social insurance, became promi-+
_hent, While the Poor Laws in many countrfes, including England and Germany, came.
on the statute book as early as the 16th and 17th centuries, the first general social
insurance scheme appears to have been int in Germnay in 1883. The scheme of
Chancellor Bismark (1883), for sickn¢ss 12077 by law, provided to employees (in
defined types of industries), bath medical care and cash benefit, during a period of
sickness, to be paid for out of contributions from both employers and emp! Joyees.

This was followed by a law of 1884 in Germany, making accident insurance.
compulsory and, later, by a law prov viding 12 Pension for all workers from theage of"
70 (1880). Germany’s example! was foll by Austria (1888), Italy (1893) and
Sweden and Netherlands (1901). 7/8 हे

In the United Kingdom, in 1889, Government carried out an enquiry into the
income of 12,000 elderly ersohs का and in 1908, in Britain, pensions at age 70 were
introduced. Later, in the Continent, ‘unemployment insurance was introduced, in
Belgium and France family allowances were provided for.

In the United States, the Spcial Act of 1935 provided federal grants for
public assistance by, the State to the aged ea ind, disabled and dependent chi and
also established a federal old age ingutance scheme and federal financial backing for
State plans for unemployment inburance.*/?, :

7.8. Beveridge Report.—A major 17% on world developments in the field
of social security was the British Go it Report (Beveridge Report, 1942),
which recommended (i) the maintenat ice Of full employment as a Gaponsibility of
government, (ii) family allowance for all children after the first child, (iii) comprehen-
sive health care for the whole population, ahd (iv) a unified natonal scheme of social
insprance run by the State with the safety netofa unified scheme of social assistance.

|
Ht


22

7.9. Social security benefits.—It may be safely asserted that benefits in kind are
also a part of social security which is not expressly or impliedly restricted to ‘cash’
benefits. For example, as already mentoned,7/ the first national compulsory health
insurance scheme introduced in Germany in 1883 represented a benefit in kind, and
was built upon precedents going back many years in the separate German States.

In fact, National Health Schemes throughout the world are of thiee types viz ,?2
(i) direct service approach in which the Government provides the facilities 3

Gi) indirect contract with the providers, in which private hospitals or Ppracti-
tioners provide the service, but the State pays the provider for services used,
and

(ii) reimbursement, in which the patient pays the bill and submits the receipted
bill for reimbursement. The first syst¢m prevails in the United Kingdom,
the second system prevails in Belgium, West Germany and the Nether-
lands, while the third system is widely used in France and some Northern
Europian countries and (to some extent) in Australia and Sweden.

The first category mentioned above shows that benefits in kind have formed a part
of social security.

7.10. Coverages wide enough to embrace benefits in kind.—The Encyclopaedia
Britannica gives the following examples of social sgcurity.

“Thus, social security may provide cash benefits to persons faced with
sickness and disability, unemployment, crop failure, loss of the marital
partner, maternity, responsibility for the care of young children, or retire-
ment from work. Benefits may be pr@vided in cash or kind for medical
need, rehabilitation, domestic help during illness at home, legal aid, or
funeral expenses. Social security may, be. provided by court order (e.g. to
compensate accident victims), by. employers (sometimes using insurance
companies), by central 07 local govérnment departments, or by semi-
public or autonomous agencies. (a).

(a) Encyclopaedia Britannica, Macropaedia (1987) vol. 27 page 427.


23

TAL LL.O. Report.—In 1984, the International Labour Office Report by ten
experts was published 7/12 That report set out the ultimate aims of social security as
under :—~

“Its fundamental purposc is to give individuals and families the confidence
that their level of living and quality of life will not, insofar as is possible,
be greatly eroded by any social or economic eventuality. This involves not
just meeting needs as they arise, but also preventing risks from arising in *
the first place, and helping individuals and families to make the best
possible adjustment when faced with disabilities and disadvantages which
have not been or could not be prevented........ It is the guarantee of
security that matters most of all, rather than the particular mechanisms
such as contributory or tax financing the insurance or service model of
delivery, or the ownership of facilities (public/private, profit/non-profit)
by which that guarantee is given.......... The means should not be
confused with the ends.”

7.12. Provision against want the main objective.--lt would thus be evident that
provision against want is the main objective of social security and that in the context
of the pathetic situation prevailing in the Sphere of failure to provide a roof over the heads
of millions of citizens of India, entry 23, viz., “social security,” has to be construed
by making a broad, liberal, humane, and pragmatic approach and interpretation.

7.13, Residuary power.—It may be mentioned out of abundant caution that if it
is considered that entry 23 pertaining to social security is not applicable, recourse can
in any case be safely made to the residuary power of the Centre to legislate under
eniry 97 of the Union List, viz., “Any other matter not enumerated in List I or List III
including any tax not mentioned in either of those Lists” in as much as neither
“housing” nor ‘rehabilitation of uprooted or roofless citizens upon eviction’ are
specified in either List H or List III.

It would be appropriate in this connection to refer to the N.C.U, Report 7/13
from which we quote :—

“11,6.31 Cohesive legislative support for housing has been lacking, in the
Constitution of India, housing does not find specific mention. However,
in so far as housing for industrial labour is concerned, item 24 of List Ili
(Concurrent List) may be said to cover it because it deals comprehensively
with the welfare of labour. This would place the subject in the Concurrent
List with which both the Union and State Governments are concerned.
The residual powers in relation to the subjects not mentioned in the State
or Concurrent Lists, however, vest in the Union legislature. As such, the
Union Government may be said to be directly concerned with the subject
of housing in general.”

In any view of the matter it cannot be gainsaid that the Centre has the requisite
competence to legislate on the subject in question.


CHAPTER VIII

LEGISLATION PERTAINING TO SLUMS—AS IT IS-- AND AS IT
OUGHT TO BE

8.1. It is somewhat unfortunate that while a number of States have enacted
legislation which has addressed the problem of slums, none of these legislations
touch the core of the real problem of rehabilitating the evicted slum dwellers or pave-
ment dwellers who are roofless and shelterless.

8.2. Slum clearance and slum improvement—The trends—A study of action re-
lating to slums in India shows that there has been a transition from slum clearance
to slum improvement. This is also apparent from the course that various Five Year
Plans took. As has been pointed out, १7 the change was occasioned by several
factors. Not only tie financial outlays were likely to have fallen short of require-
ments if the slum clearance programme was implemented on a national scale, but
also, there was resistance on the part of the population to shifting. The new units
were far away from their work places and were beyond their range of availability.
Land acquisition near the place of work invited intervention at the instance of inte-
rested parties, with the result that the progress was baulked.

Gradually, there arose the minimum needs programme (MNP), whose object
was to maintain basic levels of social consumption of goods to all citizens and to
level up regional imbalances in the distribution of basic social services. This em-
braced, */%inter alia, environmental improvement programmes.

8.3. The existing legislations are essentially aimed at protecting the tenants of
rivately owned structures or chawls which are in uninhabitable conditions. The
Eesislations have presumably been necessitated by reason of the fact that the owners
or landlords of such structures are not interested even in maintaining these properties
in a habitable condition as_it is either unprofitable or unpractical to do so inter alia
in the context of the rent-restriction legislations.

8.4. Some of the factors which operate on their minds can be visualised :—

(1) While building material costs and labour costs have risen by several
hundred per cents, the rents have been pegged at pre-inflation levels. It
is, therefore, economically a losing proposition to spend funds on main-
taining or improving such properties.

(2) If the tenants get exasperated and vacate, the landlord would be enabled
to pull down the structures and sell the land at handsome prices fetched
on account of the dizzy heights attained by land prices.

(3) Some owners may not have financial resources to develop the properties
even if they were desirous of doing so.

8.5. Be that as it may the fact remains that such structures or chawls pose danger
to the occupants/tenants inasmuch as these are liable to collapse and result in loss of
life or are rendered unfit for habitation on account of falling in disrepair and/or
prevailing insanitary conditions giving rise to diseases and epidemics. It is subs-
tantially to overcome such a situation that most of the legislations are enacted, as
will be disclosed by a synopsis of such legislations. (see Appendix to the report).

8.6. So far, so good. But the legislations do not aim at rehabilitation of citi-
zens living in slums which have mushroomed around cities and towns. Such slums
have cropped up mostly on public lands belonging to municipal authorities or on
open unbuilt lands which have been encroached upon by the very poor sections of the
citizens who are roofless and shelterless.

8.7. The community cannot afford to be unconcerned, insensitive or indifferent
to the problem of such citizens without qualms of conscience, particularly as the
Directive Principles of State Policy enshrined in articles 38, 39, 41 and 43 of the Con-
stitution »f India enjoin the community to endeavour to rescue them from their
plight.

24


25

8.8. Itis, therefore, necessary to enact a legislation which will provide them suc-
cour by protecting them from being obliged to treat the open skies as roofs over their
heads or their huts being razed to the ground by civic authorities without roviding
them or at least without making the maximum effort to provide them with alternative
facilities in place of the huts or footpaths from which they are evicted:

8.9. It is such legislation for rehabilitation of the roofless that slum clearance
legislation having a positive perspective and positive thrust must aim at instead of
being contented by legislation protecting them from the privately-owned slums.
And that is the thrust of the legislation Proposed to be recommended by the Present:
report,

930M/3(D)274MofLI&CA—4


CHAPTER IX

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Conclusions

9.1. With nearly 3.5 crores of citizens of India living in sub-human condition in
stums and on pavements of metropolitan cities of India, the rest of the members of
the community cannot sleep in peace with an easy conscience. In any event the
community cannot watch their plight nonchalantly when the slum and pavement
dwellers are evicted by the local authorities without providing them any alternative
facility even from these slums and pavements, so often, razing their huts to the ground
with the help of bulldozers in the course of their slum removal operations.

YW

9.2. The existing slum clearance legislations enacted by different states by and
large focus on protection of tenants of privately-owned uninhabitable chawls, owners
where of are not interested even in maintaining the same in habitable conditions,
inasmuch as these are liable to collapse and result in loss of life and/or are rendered
unfit for human habitation on account of falling in disrepair and in order to remedy
prevailing insanitary conditions giving rise to diseases and epidemics.

Til

9.3. Presently there exists no legislation affording any protection to the slum
and pavement dwellers in the event of their being evicted from these slums or pave-
ments by the local authorities, apart from the fact that there is no social security
scheme designed to rehabilitate them on their'eviction. There is, therefore, a pres-
sing need, in the light of constitutional values, humane considerations and as a
matter of social justice, for insertin; g into our legal system a requirement by way of a
central legislation to the effect that before slum dwellers are evicted by local authori-
ties, it shall be the duty of the concerned local authority to provide alternative site,
accommodation or facility to such evictees, and providing that the pavement dwellers
are not disturbed unless it is inevitable to do so in the context of some emergent
situation.

Iv

. 9-4. It will also be appropriate to provide that slum dwellers are not denied
civic facilities such as water supply, street lighting, electricity, etc., on the ground
that they are in illegal occupation of the land’ on which the slums have come into
existence.

Recommendations
I

9.5. It is therefore recommended that a central legislation be enacted providin;
that notwithstanding any provision contained in any local law, slum dwellers shail
not be evicted without providing to them alternative accommodation by way of a
site for shifting their huts or other accommodation or facility so as not to render
them shelterless or roofless. Such alternative accommodation, site or facility offered
for rehabilitation shall be within as short a distance as may be reasonably practicable,
having regard to the circumstances, of the from where the slum dwellers are
sought to be evicted. In the event of any हि लि as to whether the alternative ac-
commodation, site or facility is within such reasonable distance of the said place, the
decision of the District Judge of the Court having jurisdiction in respect of the con-
cerned area shall be final.

Il
9.6. It appears that a provision absolutely prohibiting the eviction of a slum
dweller etc., unless alternative accommodation site or facility is provide, might not
be workable in practice, and that there should be some Power in the Government to
dispense with the proposed statutory requirement in appropriat cases. In our
Opinion, the best course would be to invest the State Government with the power
to dispense wtth the proposed statutory requirement of providing alternative accom-

modation or facility to the proposed evictee if two conditions are cumulatively
satisfied, namely :—

26


27

(i) the State government is satisfied that It is not reasonably practicable, in
the circumstances of the case, to provide alternative accommodation,
site or facility as envisaged by the proposed provision, and

(ii) the State government further records in writing its satisfaction that public
interest demands that such eviction, resulting in rendering the: occupants
roofless, requires to be proceeded with, notwithstanding the.fact that
alternative accommodation or facility cannot be provided by the goncerned
local authority or the State Government.

Til
9.7. It may also be provided that the protection provided by these provisions
shall apply to all slums existing on the date of the enforcement of the Act and to new
slums which come into existence thereafter provided the said new slums have existed
for at least six months immediately preceding the date of service of the notice on the
occupants for taking action by the concerned local authority.

पु हर Iv 7
9.8, It is also desirable to ensure by law that essential services or facilities are

not denied or cut off to occupants of slums on the ground of their alleged illegal’
occupation. The provision could be on these lines :—

(i) No local authority or other public body, either itself or through any person
purporting to act on its behalf, shall, without just and sufficient cause
other than that the concerned slum dwellers are in illegal or unauthorized
occupation of any land,—

(@ withhold, deny, refuse to provide any essential supply or service to
any slum locality, or

(6) cut off or discontinue any such existing supply or service enjoyed by
the occupant of any premises in a slum area in respect of the premises
so occupied nor shall the supply or service be withheld without
serving on the concerned occupants 2 notice giving clear two
months’ time to comply with the notice requiring the occupant to
remove the cause set out for the proposed action.

(ii) Tf a local authority or local body contravenes the above provision, the
occupier may make an application to the competent civil court, complain-
ing of such contravention.

(ii) If the civil court is prima facie satisfied that the local authority has acted
in contravention of the aforesaid provision, the court shall direct the local
authority concerned to provide or restore the supply pending inquiry.
Such order may be passed without notice but may be confirmed, varied
or vacated after notice and hearing.

(iv) If the civil court, on inquiry, find that any essential supply or service was
denied, withheld or refused to the occupier or if any such supply or service
enjoyed by the occupier in respect of the premises was cut off or withheld
by the local authority in contravention of the aforesaid provision, it
shall make an order directing the local authority to restore such supply
or service.

(v) Without prejudice to the above provisions, the civil court may, in its dis-
cretion, direct that appropriate compensation not exceeding one thou-

sand rupees be paid to the occupier by the local authority if the local
authority had cut off or withheld the supply or service or failed to provide
such service in contravention of the said provision.
For this purpose, “essential supply or service” will include supply of water,
electricity, conservancy and sanitary service, aad street lighting or lighting in the slum
area.

As regards execution of the order passed by the competent civil court for granting
of or restoration of essential supply or service, 8 penal provision may suffice in the
following terms :—

“Penalty for contravention of the aforesaid provision—If any local autho-
rity or any officer thereof contravenes the provisions of section... or


28

contravenes any order passed by the court in this connection, it or he
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three months, or with fine, or with both.”

Vv

9.9. The proposed legislation pertains to eviction by the local authorities. Of
course, this expression, as defined in General Clauses Act, 1897, will cover a variety
of urban and rural institutions of local self government as also Cantonments,

Incidentally, it may be mentioned in regard to Cantonments that the legislative
competence to regulate their powers and functions is vested in Parliament under
Union List, entry 3, which reads as under :-—

“3, Delimitation of the Cantonment areas, Local Self Government in
such areas, the constitution and powers ‘ within such areas of Cantonment
authorities and the regulation ‘of House, accommodation (including con-
trol of rents) in such areas. (a) .

@ See Indu Bhushan v. Rama, Supari, 1969 (2) SCC 289, 292, 293, 294,
296, 298, : .


29

VI

9.10. Need for provision regarding rehabilitation—The Commission is further of
the view that in order that the object of providing of social security in the matter of
housing may be effectively achieved, it is necessary that if a person dwelling in a slum
area is evicted, then the State should provide for appropriate rehabilitation of the
person evicted. Our detailed recommendation on this point may be stated as under :

}f alternative accommodation under the recommendation already made in the
provision proposed to restrict eviction cannot be immediately provided,
the State Government (even if it grants permission for eviction) shall,
within a reasonable period not exceeding one year in any case, make
arrangements for the rehabilitation of the persons evicted in regard to
housing, and in making such akernative arrangement, the State Govern-
ment shall, as far as is reasonably practicable, have regard to the factors
specified in the proposed provision relating to restriction on eviction
without alternative accommodation. है .

Vil

9.11. For pavement dwellers—Stat protection should be extended to the
pavement dwellers by providing that मत है tanding any provision contained in any
cal law for the time being in force, no petson using a pavement for shelter or for
sleeping or taking refuge shall be evieted ‘therefrom unless the Commissioner of
Police or his deputy authorized in this behalf bas recorded his satisfaction in writing
that it is essential to do so for either maintaining law and order or on the ground that
public interest so demands having regard to some special circumstances or to deal
with a situation calling for urgent action in this behalf.

9.12. These recommendations, if and when accepted and acted upon, we trust,
will alleviate the distress of the luckless slum dwellers and pavement dwellers, to the
extent possible by legislation.

We recommend accordingly.

M.P. 1] AR)
 SiAIRMAN

(४. V. ANJANEYULU) (P. M. BAKSHI)
MEMBER - MEMBER

(G.V.G. KRISHNAMURTY)
Member Secretary Member

New DELHI, DATED THE 20TH Decemaer, £990:


Notes and References

Chapter IT

2/1, Muttalib and Mohd Akbar Ali Khan, Public Housing, published by Regional Centre for
Urvan and Environment Studies (1986) page 4, para 1.9.

2/2. Muttalib and Mohd Akbar Ali Khan, Public Housing published by Regional Centre for Urban
and Environment Studies (1986), page 3, para

2/3. Cherunilam and Heggade, Housing in India (1987) page 49.
2/4. Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English.

2/5.. Socio-Economic Survey of Slums in Old Delhi cited in Andrea Menefee Singh, “Poverty and
Slum Dwellers in Urban India—Some Urgent Research and Policy Considerations”, (April—
June 1978) Social Action, page 165.

2/6. Paper on Urban Poverty in India; Policies and Programmes, by the Centre for Environmental
Planning and Technology, Ahmedabad, published in National Commission on Urbanisation,
Report (August 1988), Vol. V, Part 1 pages 59,

2/7. National Commission on Urbanisation Report (August 1988) Vol. V, Part II, page 60.

1
2/8. Paper on Urban Poverty in India : Policies and Programmes, by the Centre for Environmenta
7 Planning and Te cay, imedabad published in National Commission on Urbanisation,
Report-(August 1988), Vol. V Part II, pages 55 to

2/9. Cherunilam and Heggade, Housing in India (1987) page 52.

2/10. Report of the National Commission on Urbanisation (Aug 1988) Vol. II Part IIT pages 94, 95
para 5.7.1 to 5.7.3, 5.8.3, 5.9

2/11. M.C.K. Swamy, “Slums: ruralisation of Urban India” (April, June 1987) Nagarlok 22, 24
2/12. TCPO Ministry of Works and Housing, 4 Compendium on Indian Slums (1985).
2/13. RK Awasthi, “Urban Development in an ‘Industrial City” (April, June 1984) Nagarlok 20

Chapter IIT

3/1. P.K. Muttagi “Urban Poverty : The Bombay Scene (October—December 1988)” 111, 114—
115 Nagarlok.

3/2. Olga Tellis v Municipal Corporation of Bombay, AIR. 1986 SC 180, 201 para 50.
3/3. Olga Tellis v Municipal Corporation of Bombay, AIR 1986 SC 180, 190 para 23.
3/4. Olga Tellis v Municipal Corporation of Bombay, AER 1986 SC 180, 187, para 16.
Chapter 1V

411... Para 4.2, infra.

4/2. Olga Tellis v. Bombay Municipal Corporation, AIR 1986 SC 180 to 204,

4/3, Olga Tellis v. Bombay Municipal Corporation, AIR 1986 SC 180 to 204.

4/4. Id. p. 202 para 51. -

4/5. Chapter VI, infra हु

4/6. K. Chandru v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1986 SC 204.

4/7. Olga Tellis v. Union of India, AIR 1986 SC 180.

4/8. Shantistar Builders ४ Narayan Khimji Totame, AIR 1990 SC 630, 633 paragraphs 9 and 10
(Bench of three Judges Ranganath Mishra, P.B. Sawant and K. Ramaswamy, JJ.) (April issue).

4/9, Karanjan Jalasay Y.A.S.A.S. Samiti v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1987 SC 532.

4/10, Banwasi Sewa Ashram v. State of UP, AIR 1987 SC 374.

4/11, Surat Municipal Corporation v. Rameshchandra Shantilal Parikh, AIR 1986 Guj 50 (A.P
wvani, J.

4/12. Municipal M ipal Corporation ५ Nandumal, Letters Patent
मर No. 246 of 1989, decided by 4.7. Ravaniand J.U. Mehta, 77 (17 October 1989) Gujarat

4/13. ner Marg Cabin Association v. Modasa Nagar Palika, 29(1) : 1988(1) GLR 441 pp. 444-445
para 6.

Chapter V

5/1, Olga Tellis v. Bombay Municipal Corporation, AIR 1986 SC 180,
5/2, Section 320 to 322 Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957).

30


31

Chapter VII
7/1 “18. Laud, that is to say, rights in and over land, land tenures including the relation of landlord

72.

1/6.
7/7,
7/8.
7/9.
7/10.
TAL
7/12.

7/13.

and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and alienation of agricultural land; land
improvement and agricultural loans; colonisation.”*

Indu Bhushan v Rama Sundari, (1969) 2 SCC 289, 298, 299 para 14, followed in Saiyada v.
Hindustan Steel, (1989) 1 SCC 272, AIR 1989 SC 406.

A.C. Patel v Vishwanath, AIR 1954 Bom 204,

Asoka Marketing Ltd v Punjab National Bank, JT 1990(3)SC 417 to 447 (issue dated 13
August 1990).

Savida Mossare v Hindustan Steel Ltd. (1989) SCC 272, affirming L.S. Nair v Hindustan Steel
AIR 1980 MP 106.

Benoy Krishna ए State of West Bengal, AIR 1966 Cal 429, 430, para 5 (D Basu J).
Encyclopaedia Britannica, Macropaedia (1987), Vol. 27 page 421.

Encyclopaedia Britannica, Macropaedia (1987), Vol. 27 page 429, 435, 436.

Encyclopaedia Britannica, Macropaedia (1987), Vol. 27 page 429.

Paragraph 7.7 supra.

Encyclopaedia Britannica, Macropaedia (1987) vol. 27 pages 435, 436.

17777 चु Labour Office into the Twenty-first Century, The Development of Social Secu-
rity (1984).

National Commission on Urbanisation Report, Vol. II, Page 219 (August 1988).

Chapter VILL

81.

8/2.

Paper on Urban Poverty in India : Policies and programmes by the Centref or Environmental.
Planning and Technology, Ahmedabad prints of in ‘National Commission on Urbanisation,
Report (August 1988), Vol. V Part II, page 44.

National Commission on Urbanisation, Report (August 1988), Vol. V Part II, pages 46.47
(Paper on Urban Poverty in India : Policies and Programmed, by the Centre for Environmen-
tal Planning and Technology Ahmedabad).


APPENDIX
(Refer para 8.5)
SYNOPSIS OF LEGISLATION RELATING TO SLUMS

1. The Central Act of 1956—In order to understand the scope of the present
legislation relating to slums, it may be convenient to have a brief look at the relevant
enactments. It may be mentioned that the Central Act on the subject-the Slum Areas
(Improvement and Clearance) Act (96 of 1956)—does not extend to the States, but
extends to all Union Territories except Andaman and Nicobar Islands and the Lacca-
dive, Minicoy and Amin divi Islands. Section 3 of the Act gives power to the compe-
tent authority (that is, the authority appointed by the Administrator) to delare
certain areas as slum areas. Section’4 giveg the ipetent authority power to improve
buildings unfit for human habitation and section 6A gives power to the competent
authority to enforce restrictions onthe erection of buildings in slum areas. Section
7 gives to the same authority power to order the demolition of buildings unfit for
buman habitation. Sections 9 and 10 of the Abt give power to issue a slum clearance
order. Section 12 gives to the Central Goyernment power to acquire land in order to
enable the competent authority to execute works in slum areas, subject to the pay-
ment of compensation. Section 19 न its the eviction of tenants in slum areas,
without the previous permission of the competent authority.

Section’ 19(4) of the Central Act of 1P56 pro provides that in granting or refusing
to grant such permission, the competent authofity shall take into account the follow-
ing factors, namely :— न
(a) whether alternative accommodatiog within the means of the. tenant
would be available to him, ode he were evicted;
(0) whether the eviction is in the interest of improvement and clearance of
the slum areas;
(०) such other factors, if any, as may ‘be prescribed.

2. By section 20 of the Central Act of 1956, an appeal can be filed by a person
aggrieved by the refusal of the competent aythority to grant permission for evic-
tion. Section 20A provides for the restoration of premises vacated by the tenants
in a slum area, who vacate or are evicted, for ‘effecting improvements. Section 208
imposes certain restrictions regarding the rent:of buildings in slum areas, let out to
the tenants after the execution of the work of improvement or after the building
has been re-erected.

. * 3. Objectives of the Central Act of 1956 : aspect of alternative accommodation—It
would appear that the Supreme Court, in one of the Cases decided under the Slum
Areas (imp ovement and Clearance) Act, 1956, had occasion to deal with the ob-
jectives of the Act of 1956 in these terms 4/1 :—

“The Act, no doubt, looks at the prpblem not from the point of view of
the landlord, his needs, the money he had sunk in house and the
possible profit that he might make if the house were either let to other
tenants or was reconstructed and let out, but rather from the point of
view of the tenants whb have: no ‘alternative accommodation and who
would be stranded in the open, if an order for eviction were passed. The
Act itself contemplates eviction in cases where on the ground of the house
being unfit for human habitation it has to be demolished........ (and)
would seem to suggest that the slum dweller should not be evicted unless
alternative accommodation could be obtained for him’.

4. Restoration of possession under Central Af t.—In 1964, Parliament, bya mending
Central Act of 1956, made provisions re; 8 restoration of po ssession of per-
mises vacated by a tenant under the Act and for the rent of building in slum areas
(newly inserted sections 20A and 20B.) Section’ 20A reads as under :--

“20A. (1) Where a tenant in occupation of any building in a slum area
vacates any building or is evicted therefrom on the ground that it was
required for the purpose of executing any work of improvement or for the

32


33

purpose of re-erection of the building, the tenant may, within such time
as may be prescribed, file a declaration with the competent authority that
he desires to be replaced in occupation of the building after the comple-
tion of the work of improvement or re-erection of the building, as the
case may be.

(2) On receipt of such declaration, the competent authority shall by
order require the owner of the building to furnish to it, within such time
as may be prescribed, the plans of the work of improvement or re-erec-
tion of the building and estimates of the cost thereof ‘and such other parti-
culars as may be necessary and shall, on the basis of such plans and esti-
mates and particulars, if any, furnished and having regard to the pro-
visions of sub-section (3) of section 20B and after holding such inquiry
as it may think fit, provisionally determine the rent that would be, pay-
able by the tenant if he were to. be ye replaced laced in occupation of the building
in pursuance of the declaration by him under sub-section (1).

(3) The rent provisionally determined under sub-section (2) shall be
Communicated in the prescribed manner to the tenant and the owner.

(4) If the tenant after the receipt of such communication intimates in
writing to the competent authority within such time as may be prescribed
that when he is replaced in occupaton of the building in pursuance of
the declaration made by him under sub-section (1), he would pay to-the
owner until the rent is finally determined Under section 20B the. renat
provisionally determined under sub-section (2), the competent authority
shall direct the owner to place the tenant in occupation of the building
after the completion of the work of improvement or re-erection of the
building, as the case may be, and the owner shall be bound to comply
with such direction.”

5. Andhra Pradesh Act,—The Andhra Pradesh Slum Improvement (Acquisition
of Land) Act (33 of 1956) provides for the dlearance of slum areas in the State. Sec-
tion-3 gives power to the State to acquire land when the State Government is satisfied
that any area is, or may be, a source of danger to the public health, safety or con-
venience of the inhabitants by reason of area being low lying, insanjtary ofc. .
The atea so declared becomes .a “slum 808", as defined within the meaning 0 ing of
section 2 (f) of the Andhra Pradesh Act. Acquisition of land in such area is subject’
to compensation. The Act makes certain other connected provisions.

6. Assam Act—The Assam Slum Areas {Improvement and Clearance) Act,
1959 (12 of the 1961) (the Act was published in Assam Gazette in May 1961)
mainly provides for the following matters :—

(i) declaration of the slum areag by the State Govérament, on report of. the
authority appointed under the Agt or on other information (section 10);

Gi) improvement of building or land uafit for human habitation, a direction
regarding which may be given by the competent authority (stotion ,11);

(ii) power of the empoweted authority to order the demolition of a building:
which is unfit for human habitation (section 14); a ot

(iv) power of the State Sar scons dso bo tied fron
area.(section 16), wheteafter पका clearance order can be issued (section
17) and measures cal be nfior re-development of the land (section

(v) power of the State ॥ Helens acquire land 1४7 जन शतक tation
from the empowered seg iy, et to enable the authority to execute

nh . lop a clearance area (section

improvements in slu:
19).

है The Assam Act does not appeat tol oonjeein any provision. prokibiting eviction
in slum areas. के bohe

7. The Gujarat Act—The Gujarat A
Redevelopment) Act, 1973 eae the dalla main bro :
(a) power of the State Governnient ito
*. under section 3; . Po pe gy .
@) provision for registration of ‘buildings i dum areas under section 4; .

vement, Clearance and

cottaih areqs 28 sium areas,


34

(©) ‘power of the prescribed authority to restrict erectin of buildings in slum
areas without its permission under section 5;

(d) power of the prescribed authority to require execution of works for im-
provement of slums under secton 6;

(©) power of the prescribed authority to orde: demolition of buildngs unfit for
human habitation under section 9;

(f) power of the State Government, on a report from the Slum Clearance
Board, to declare any slum area to be a slum clearance area under section
11 and power of the prescribed authority to redevelop a clearance area
under section 15;

(g) transfer of land to previous occupants under section 16;

(h) prohibition against eviction of tenants in slum areas without permission
of the prescribed authority under section 17;

(0) restoration of possession of premesis ‘vacated by a tenant evicted from a
building in a slum area under section 18;

(j) exemption of buildings belonging to the State Government or Slum Clear-
ance Board or local authority from the prohibition against eviction under
section 20;

(k) offences by companies, for which provision is made in section 51.

8. Previous occupants under the Gujarat Act—The Gujarat Act (in the Chapter
on Slum Clearance and Redevelopment) contains the following provisions regarding
previous occupatns:—

“16. Rules to provide for transfer to previous occupants.—Subject to the
provision of this Act, the State Government may, by rules, provide for
or regulate the transfer of persons who immediately before the declaration
of any slum area to be a slum clearance area, were occupying lands or
buildings in that area to lands or buildings in any other area or to lands
or buildings in such slum clearance atea after its re-development and the
conditions of such transfer.” हि

9. Alternative accommodation under the Gujarat Act.—Notice must also be taken.
of the fact that in granting permission for evictidn of tenants in slum area, the pres-
ctibed authority is required to comply with section 17(4) of the Gujarat Act, reading
asunder :— है

“(4) in granting or refusing to grant under sub-section (3), the prescribed

authority shall take into account following factors, namely:—
(a) whether alternative accommbdation within the means of the
tenant would be available to lym if he were evicted;

oe (0). whether ‘the eviction is in 'the interest of improvement and

—_ - ‘clearance ‘of the sluin area; 4
(©) such other factors, if any, as may be prescribed.”

10. Restoration under the Gujarat Act—The Gujarat Act in section 18 further
contains a provision for the restoration of possession of permises vacated by.a tenant,

as under :— : 7
: 18. Restoration of, 2107 of premises vavated by a tenant.—(1) Where

a tenant in occupation of any cna in 8 sum area vacates any building

or is evicted therefrom on the, that it is required for the purpose

of executing any work of is ment or for the purpose of re-erection
of the building, the tenant: may, within such time as may be prescribed,

> file a declaration weit: the 0 Trl lguthority that he desires to be re-
"placed int occupation of buil the completion of the work of
improvement or re-erection of the as the case may be.

(2).On receipt of such declaration, the ‘ibed authority shall, by
order, require the owner of the budding to Amish to it, within such time as
may be prescribed, the plans of the Work of improvement or re-erection
5 “of the building and estimates of the E thereof and such other parti-
culars as may be necessary and shall, $m'the basis of such plans esti-
5 mates and ‘particulars furnished, if aby, and having regard 'to the pro-
visions of sub-section (3) of séctiqn 19 800 after holding ‘such enquiry as
it may think fit, provisionally determine. the rent that would. be. pay able
by th> tenant if he were ta be replaces in occupation of the ing in
pursuance of the declaration made by him under sub-section (1),


35

(3) The rent provisionally determined under sub-section (2) shall
be communicated in the prescribed manner to the tenant and the owner.

(4) If the tenant, after the receipt of such communication, intimates
in writing to the prescribed authority within such time as may be pres-
cribed authority within such time as may be prescribed that when he is
replaced in occupation of the building in pursuance of the declaration
made by him under sub-section (1), he would pay to the owner, until the
rent is finally determined under section 19, the Tent provisionally deter-
mined under sub-section (2), the prescribed authority shall direct the owner
to replace the tenant in occupation of the building after completion of the
work of improvement or re-erection of the building, as the case may be,
and the owner shall be bound to comply with such direction.”

11. Madhya Pradesh Act—The Madhya Pradesh Slum Improvement (Acquisi-
tion of Land) Act, 1956 mainly provides, by section 3, for power to acquire land
more or less on the same lines as the Andbra Pradesh Act. A/2. The rest of the
‘Act in Madhya Pradesh contains connected provisions. .

2. Maharashtra Act, 1971—{i) Under the Maharashtra Slum Area (Improve-
ment, Clearance and Redevelopment) Act, 1971 (Act No. XXVII of 1971) the com-
petent authority, upon report from any of its officers or other information in its po-
ssession, may declare in regard to any atea that the buildings in that area are unfit
for human habitation by reason of dilapidations, overcrowding, faulty arrangement
and design of such buildings, narrowness of faulty arrangement of streets, lack of
ventilation, light or sanitation facilities or any combination of these factors, detri-
mental to safety, health or morals. ~

(i) Chapter 3 of the Maharashtra Act provides for slum improvement. On satis-
faction of the competent authority, that au' thority may issue a notice to the owner of
the building for the execution of the work of improvement. If the owner fails to
do so, the competent authority can undertake the work of improvement and recover
allexpenses with interest from the owner as ‘artears of land revenue. However, under
section 6, where the owner has not in his hands ‘sufficient money to satisfy the whole
demand of the competent authority, his liability shall ve limited to the total amount
of the money which he has inhishands.'  -

(if) Where the competent authority ig satisfied thatany building in a slum area is
unfit for human habitation and is capable, ata reasonable expense, of being rendered
so fit, the competent authority may order demblition of the said: building after follow-
ing the prescribed procedure.

(iv) Chapter 4 of the Maharashtra Act is concerned with slum clearance and re-
development. Under section 11, the competent authority has power to declare any
building unfit for human habitation or dangérous or injurious to health, through wide
publicity in the prescribed manner.

The competent authority may also require such buildings to be vacated within the
stipulated period, after the confirmation of: the order by the Administrator, Under
section 12, the Administrator may either donfirm the order in whole or subject to
such variation as he considers necessary; on Fee the . Any person aggrieved
by the order of the Administrator may, wi in six weeks of the publication of the
notice, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal constituted under the Act, and the deci-
sion of the Tribunal shall be final.

(¥) Chapter 5 of the Maharashtra Act deals with the acquisition of land. Under
section 14, the State Government may “ite ino the land of slum areas, after paying the
compensation as laid down in the Act. esis for determination of the compensa-
tion will be an amount equal to 60 times of net average monthly income actually deriv-

ed from such land during the period of the 5 chneccutive years immediately y Preceding
the date of publication of the notice. As per ‘tection 19, the competent authority, on
behalf of the State Government, shall feyment of compensation to the person

entitled thereto. :
(vi) Chapter 6 of the Mahatashtra Act provides for the protection of tenants in
slum areas from eviction. According to sectiog 22, no proceading for eviction should
be taken except with the previous permission 3a writing of the. कट authority.
An appeal 168 to the Tribunal in cartain cases, The decision of the Tribunal shall be
al, ve


36

(vii) Section 24 of the Maharashtra Act provides for restoration of premises
to the tenants. Where a tendnt vacates any building, or is evicted therefrom on the
ground that the building is required for the purpose of 1e-erection of the building,
the tenant may, within such time as may be prescribed, file a declaration with the
competent authority to the effect that he desires to be replaced in occupation of the
building after the re-e1ection of the building. On receipt of such declaration, the com-
petent authority may ask the owner to furnish the plans of re-erection of the building
and an estimate of the cost thereof. Under section 25 of the Maharashtra Act, the
rent after re-erection shall be determined in accordance with the section.

(viii) Chapter 7 of the Maharashtra Act contains miscellaneous provisions like
powers relating to entry and inspection of the building. Further the competent autho-
rity has power to remove offensive or dangerous trade from slum areas.

LEGISLATION RELATING TO SLUMS

13. The Punjab Act—The Punjab Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance
Act (24 of 1961) provides for the following important matters :--

(a) declaration of certain areas as slum areas by the competent authority under
section 3;

(b) power of the competent authority to'require the improvement of buildings
unfit for human habitation (sections 4iand 5);

(©) power of the competent authority to order the demolition of buildings unfit
for human habitation (section 7);' .

(d) power of the competent authority to declare any area to be a clearance
area (section 9);

(७) power of the State Government to acquire land in order to enable the
empowered authority to execute any work of improvement in relation to
any building in a slum area or to, velop any clearance area under
section 12; पु पु

(0 prohibition against eviction of tenants in slum areas without permission
of the competent authority undeg section 19, subject to the exception pro-
vided by section 21 in respect of the eviction of a tenant from any build-
ing in a slum area belonging to the State Government or any local
authority.

“14: The U.P. Act—The U.P. Slum Ateas (Improvement and Clearance) Act
(18 of 1962) makes the following principal provisigns :—

(०) declaration by the competent authority of the slum areas under section 3;
7: (0) power of the competent authority | 120 the improvement of any build-
हु ing in a slum area which ig unfit for 10 habitation or any land in that
1 area-which requires any work.oftimpfovement; under section 4; पा
(० power of the competent authority to drder the demolition of any building
a within a slum area which js i ae suman habitation under section ri
1.७ @)- power ofthe competent authority | fo छ any slum area 40.06 a clearance

पु area under section 10 and to velop the area under section 15;
* @) power of the State Government to acquire land or building in a slum area

or ina clearance area for certain purpéses under section 17;

(f) prohibition against eviction of tedants in slum areas without permission
of the competent authority under se¢tion 23 (there does not भव to be
any exception for Government buildggs) ; and

(g) Power of the State Govdrnment: to‘ notify ary trade as offensive or
abnoxious to the health etc. of Ie fer r sore reading ina slum area,
followed by the power of the cam it authority to direct removal of
such trade etc. under section 27...

15. Tami] Nadu Slum Areas ({mprovemest and Clearance Act, 1971) The
Tamil Nadu Act of 197! relating to gare makes the following main orcas im
- (a) declaration by the State Govergment jof-slum areas under section 3;
: ©) registration of buildings in slum pisatunder section 4, which must be
1. 7... téad.with section 5, empowering thetprescribed authority. to direct ‘that
He Person Shall erect a. building in a slum area without its'previouy

rmission ; :


37

(c) power of the prescribed authority to require execution of works of
improvement in a slum area under section 6;

(d) power of the prescribed authority to order demolition of buildings unfit
for human habitation under section 9;

(e) power of the Govenment to declare any slum area to be a slum clearance
area under section 11;

(f) power of the prescribed authority ta redevelope a slum area under
section 15;

(g) transfer to previous occupants—section 16;

(A) power of the State Government to acquire land in a slum area for im-
provement etc. under section 17;

@) prohibition against eviction of tenants in a slum area without the permis-
sion of the prescribed authority (A/3) under section 29; .

(j) restoration of possession of premises vacated by a tenant as provided
(A/4) in secton 31;

(0 exemption of buildings belonging to Government or Slum Clearance
Board or local authority from the prohibition aginst eviction of tenants—
section 33. न

16. Rehabilitation under Tamil Nadu Act

(a) Certain other provisions of the Tamil Nadu Act are of interest in connection:
with rehabilitation. Thus, section 16, which occurs in the chapter on slum clearance
and redevelopment, provides as under :— 7

“16. Rules to provide-for transfer to previous occupants.—Subject to the
provisions of this Act, the Government may, by rules, provide for. or
regulate the transfer, to persons who, immediately before the declaration
of any slum area to be a slum clearnce area, were occupying lands or
buildings in that area of lands or buildings in such slum clearance area
after its redevelopment and the conditions of such transfer.”

(0) Besides this, it may be worthwhile quoting section. 29(4), Tamil Nadu Act.
As mentioned above, A/5 there. is a prohibition against the eviction of tenants in
slum areas without the previous permission of the prescribed authority. “The grsat
or refusal of such permission is ordered under section 29(3). Section 29(4) provide
as under in the Tamil Nadu Act.— :

(4) In granting or refusing to grant permission under sub-section (3),
the Prescribed authority shall take into account the following owe
namely— हु

(a) whether alternative accommodation within the means of ‘the
tenant’ would be available to him if he weré evicted;

(6) whether the eviction is in the interest of improvemnt and cleerance
of ‘the slum area;

(०) such other factors, if any, as may be prescribed.

17. Restoration under Tamil Nadu Act—Section 31 of the Tamil Nedu Act.
which occurs in the same Chapter provides for protection of tenants in slum areas
from eviction, reads as under :—

“31. Restoration of possession of pren remises vacated by a tenant—(1. 15
a tenant in occupation of any building in a slum area vacates any

or is evicted therefrom on the ome that it was required for the pur-
poses of executing any work 0 ovement or for the purpose of-re-
erection of the building, the tenant.may, within such time as my be pres-
cribed, file a declaration with the:prescribed authority that he desires to
be replaced in occupation of the Building after the completion of the work
of improvement or re-erection ofthe building; as the case may be.

(2)'On receipt of such deceratlon, ¢ the prescribed authority shail, by
order, require the owner of the building to.furnish4o it. within such time


38

as may be prescribed, the plans of the work of improvement or re-erection
of the building and estimates of the cost thereof and such other particulars
as may be necessary and shall, on the basis of such plans and estimates
and particulars, if any, furnished and having regard to the provisions of
sub-section (3) of section 32 and after holding such enquiry as it may think
fit, provisionally determine the rent that would be payale by the tenant
if he were to be replaced in occupation of the building in pursuance of
the declaration made by him under sub-section (1).

(3) The rent provisionally determined under sub-section (2) shall be
communicated in the prescribed manner to the tenant and the owner.

(4) If the tenant, after the receipt of such communication, intimates in
writing to the prescribed authority within such time as may be prescribed
that when he is replaced in occupation of the building in pursuance of
the declaration made by him under sub-section (1), he would pay to the
owner, unitil the rent is finally determined under section 32, the rent
provistonally determined under sub-section (2), the prescribed authority
shall direct the owner to place the tenant in occupation of the building
after the completion of the work of improvement or re-erection of the
building, as the case may be, and the owner shall be bound to comply with
such direction.”

18, West Bengal Act—The West Bengal Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance)
Act, 1972 contains the usual provisions regarding prohibition aginst erection of new
structures in slums, improvement schemes, slum clearance and redevelopment and
acquisition of land in a slum area, The Act extends to the whole of West Bengal
except the areas declared as Cantonments under the Cantonments Act, 1924.

19. Ilegal occupation—It would appear that Central and State enactments
relating to slum improvement and clearance do not give a conditional or un conditional
tight to alternative accommodation to those'slum dwellers who have illegally occupied
the premises in question. Such protection againt eviction as is conferred by these
enactments, is confined to “tenants”, i.e: persons who are presumed to have some
title to their present occupation of the premises by virtue of a lease.

20. Need for local athorities to carry out their obligation—There is some discussion
in one of the papers included in the report of the National Commission on Urbani-
sation, A/6 about the need on the part of the local authorities to carry out their obli-
gation regarding urban development. In this paper, the following recommendations
(So far as is material to the point under congide: ता) have been made :--

“6.7.2. It would be preferable to enact a special act (as was done for the

urban land ceiling act) by Parliament with a provision that the provisions

shall be implemented either by the States or be entrusted to the Municipal
Corporations. The transfer of & share of municipal revenue (it need

not be limited to property tax only) supplemented by a grant from the

. State Government should.form an Account from which normal muni-
cipal service, as lasted in Municipal act as duties and functions) and
economic and welfare functions—all economy to be”properly listed as

>, detailed in the various chapters of this report should be undertaken.

@ The new enactment can be termed—An Act to provide for the provisions

of civic, economic, developmental and welfare services to the urban poor.

The. definitions must include a specification of :
(i) Urban poor;
(i) Economic Functions;
(iii) Welfare Services;
(iv) Civic Services.

- (ii) The Act should provide that. each State/Municipal Body should
provide in the building bye-laws or development control rules, special
provision to govern the schemes of ‘

(i) Sites and Services and Construction thereon ;
i) Low Income Group Housing/Poor Class Housing;”
- No such law seems to have: been enacted.”


References
Aft. Syl rerchad v Administrator for the Union Territory of Delhi, AUR 1961 3.0, 1602 : (1962)
A/2. Para 5 supra.
A/3. Para 16(b) infra.
A/a. Para 17 infra.
A/S. Para 150) supra.

A/6, All India Institute of Local Self Government, Bombay, paper included in N.C.U. Report
(August, 1988), Vol, V Part II, pages 187, 188, paragraph 6.7.2.

39
93-M/1(D)274MofLJ &CA—900—10:9-94-—GIPS,