LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-NINTH REPORT

ON

1991

URGENT NEED TO AMEND ORDER XxXI, RULE 92(2), CODE OF CIVIL
PROCEDURE TO REMOVE AN ANOMALY WHICH NULLIFIES THE
BENEVOLENT INTENTION OF THE LEGISLATURE AND OCCASIONS
INJUSTICE TO JUDGMENT—DEBTORS SOUGHT TO BE BENEFITED.


CONTENTS

CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION पु पु पु .

CHAPTER II RELEVANT STATUTORY PROVISIONS

CHAPTER गा LAW AS IT OBTAINS TODAY IN THE LIGHT OF THE JUDICIAL
DECISIONS . . . पु पु * . . .

CHAPTER IV PRESSING NEED FOR AMENDMENT WITH URGENCY

NOTES AND REFERENCES

PAGE

10


CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

1-1 A dimension of law which speaks in two
inconsistent voices—As the law stands today, a
judgement-debtor or a person claiming interest in
a property sold in execution of a decree desirous
of making recourse to the valuable right conferred
on him under Order XXI rule 89(1) for setting aside
the sale of the auctioned property on making an
application in that behalf accompanied by the amount
prescribed by the said provision is faced with an
impossible situation. Because, he is required to—

(1) make an application “on his depositing
in court” the required amount, that is to
say, on the application being accompanied
by the deposit in court;

make the application within 60 days so that
he can collect the requisite amount from the
Bank (the Legislature being of the opinion
that this process would require a period lon-
ger than 30 days but less than 60 days.

the application which can be made within
60 days along with the deposit must be made
on depositing the amount within 30 days
though the Legislature recognised that more
than 30 days would be needed and has ac-
cordingly enlarged the time for making ap-
plication from 30 days to 60 days.

(2

(3)

1-2 The perspective of the report.—We are, in
this report, concerned with a point arising out of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, relating to the
time for making a deposit which is to accompany an
application to set aside an execution sale. The rele-
vant statutory provisions will be sct out and the casc
Jaw on the subject will be discussed later, in due
course,1/1 At the present stage, it will suffice to state
that the provision with which we are concerned is
resorted to by litigants very frequently in courts and
is, therefore, of considerable practical importance
and unless the discrepancy is removed serious injustice
would ensue to the persons wanting to save the pro-
perty from a forced sale. As our attention has been
called to this discrepancy between the relevant
provision in the Civil Procedure Code 1/2 on the
one hand and the connected provision in Limitation
Act, 1/3 it has been considered desirable to study
the subject and present a report thereon in order
to remedy the Jacuna in the law.

(0)

1-3 Suggestions already made by the Law Com-
mission and in the judicial decisions.—As will be
pointed out later in this report, the need for an
amendment of the law on the point, which is the
subject matter of the report, has been highlighted
nearly 10 years back in the Law Commission of
India’s 89th Report presented on 28th February,
1983 in para 42-35. We quote:—

“42-35 However, we should refer to a connected

provision in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,

which seems to need amendment. Article 127 of

the Limitation Act is concerned with applications,
in regard to which 0-21, R. 92(2) of the Code is
relevant. The period of limitation for an ap-
plication under article 127 is sixty days, after its
amendment (1) in 1976. The application is to be
accompanied by a deposit. The period for making
the required deposit under 0-21, R. 92(2),C.P.C.
is, however, still thirty days. This disharmony
between the two statutory provisions should be
removed. We may point out that the disharmony
has been adverted to in a recent judgment of the

Kerala High Court(2) also. To remove this

discrepancy, we recommend that 0-21, R. 92(2)

of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, should

be suitably amended by increasing the period
from 30 days to 60 days(3).””
(1) Section 98, Code of Civil Procedure (Amend-
ment) Act, 1976,

(2) Dakshayini v. Madhavan, AIR 1982 Ker 126
(June).

(3) To be carried out under 0-21, 1२, 92(2), Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908.

It has also been stressed by the Supreme Court of
India and it seems desirable that the anomaly should
be removed as expeditiously as possible to foreclose
grave injustice to unfortunate litigants.

1-4 Scheme of the report.—In order to present a
clear picture of the subject, it is proposed in this
report first to deal with the relevant statutory pro-
visions and then to discuss the important judicial
Pronouncements pertaining to those provisions,
which discussions will be followed by a consideration
as regards the need for amendment of the law. And
finally the Commission will make appropriate _re-
commendations to overcome the existing anomalous
situation which calls for urgent remedial legislative
measures,


CHAPTER If-

RELEVANT STATUTORY PROVISIONS

2+1 Genesis of the controversy.—The  contro-
versy which is the subject matter of this report arises
from certain provisions of the Civil Procedure Code
and the Limitation Act which relate to applications
to set aside a sale ordered by a court by public auction
in execution of a court decree against the judgment-
debtor. The point relates to the period of limitation
prescribed by law (a) for such an application and
(b) for making the deposit of the amount which is
required to accompany the application.

2-2 In the scheme of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, such a sale can be set aside under the provisions
of Order XXI rule 89 of that Code, quoted below.-—

“89. Application to set aside sale on deposit.—(\)
Where immovable property has been sold in exe-
cution of a decree, any person claiming an interest
in the property sold at the time of the sale or at
the time of making the application, or acting for
or in the interest of such person, may apply to
have the sale set aside on his depositing in
Court,—

(a) for payment to the purchaser, a sum equal
to five per cent. of the purchase-money, and

(b) for payment to the decree-holder, the amount
specified in the proclamation of sale as that for
the recovery of which the sale was ordered, less
any amount which may, since the date of such
proclamation of sale, have been received by the
decree-holder.

(2) Where a person applies under rule 90 to,
set aside the sale of his immovable property,
he shall not, unless he withdraws his appli-
cation, be entitled to make or prosecute an
application under this rule.

(3) Nothing in this rule shall relieve the judge-
ment-debtor from any liabilityhe may be
under in respect of costs and interest not
covered by the proclamation of sale.”

In substance, the application for setting aside the
sale must be accompanied by the required amount.

2-3 Order XXI, rule 92(2), CPC.~So far as the
period of limitation for the deposit to accompany
an application to set aside an execution sale is con-
cerned; it is 30 days, by virtue of the provision con-
tained in Order XXI, rule 92 of the Code of Civil

Procedure, 1908. The material parts of that rule

are quoted below:—
“92. Sale when to become absolute or be set aside.-
(1) Where no application is made under rule 89,
rule 90 or rule 91, or where such application is
made and disallowed, the Court shall make an
order confirming the sale, and thereupon the
sale shall become absolute;

Provided that, where any property is. sold
in execution of a decree pending the final disposal
of any claim to, or any objection to the attach-
ment of, such property, the Court shall not
confirm such sale until the final disposal of such
claim or objection.

(2) Where such application is made and allowed,
and where, in the case of an application under
rule 89, the deposit required by that rule is made
within thirty days from the date of sale, or in
cases where the amount deposited under rule 89,
is found to be deficient owing to any clerical or
arithmetical mistake on the part of the depositor
and such deficiency has been made good within
such time as may be fixed by the Court, the
Court shall make an order setting aside the
sale;

Provided that no order shall be made unless
notice of the application has been given to all
persons affected thereby.

(Emphasis added)

(3)

(4)

6)

Thus, the deposit of the requisite amount whick

must accompany the application must be made within
30 days.

2:4 Compliance within time limit mandatory.—At
this stage it needs to be brought in focus that the
requirement of Order XXI, rule 92(2), relating ta
deposit within 30 days is mandatory as per the pro-.
nouncements of the courts (see VANNISAMI
THEVAR v. PERIAYASWAMI THEVAR, AIR
1917 Mad 176, 177 (DB). 2/1 The court cannot extend
the time, either under section 148 or section 151, CPC
[see MATRANI DEVI v. CHHATHU PRASAD,
AJR 1072 Pat 55 (U.N. Sinha, CJ.)] 2/2 है

ia


2-5 Article 127. The Limitation Act. 1963.—It
will be noticed that whereas the period for making
the deposit under Order XXI, rule 92(2), CPC is
thirty days, the period of limitation for making the
application to set aside an execution sale (which
application has to be accompanied by the deposit
in court of the requisite amount) is 60 days, by
virtue of article 127 of the Limitation Act, 1963 (as
amended in 1976).

Article 127of the Limitation Act, 1963 (as amend-
ed in 1976) reads as under: —

Description of Period Time from

application of which
limitation period
begins to
run
“127. To set aside a Sixty days The
sale in execution date
of a decree, including of
any such application the
by a judgment-debtor sale.”

Be it realised that prior to 1976, the period men-
tioned in Article 127, The Limitation Act, 1963 was
30 days but it was enlarged to 60 days in 1976 by virtue
of an-amendment in the pre-existing law in the cir-
cumstances mentioned hereinafter.

2-6 Reasons for amendment.— The provision con-
tained in Article 127, The Limitation Act, 1963 was
amended by the Legislature by enlarging the time
for making of a deposit on the part of the judgement-
debtor (for setting aside a sale in the execution of a
decree) in view of the experience that the pre-amend-
ment period of 30 days was considered to be insufficient
to enable the judgement-debtor to arrange for the
requisite funds having regard to the fact that banks
usually take more than 30 days to sanction loans and
advances. This is evident from the 3/2 Objects and
Reasons clause of the relevant Bill, reproduced
below;—

“Clause 102 (Amendment of the Schedule to the
Limitation Act, 1963).—An application to set
aside a sale in execution of a decree on deposit
under rule 89 of Order XXI is required to be
made within thirty days from the date of the
sale. Experience shows that this period is too short
and often causes hardship because the judgement-
debtors usually fail to arrange for moneys within
that time. Banks usually take more than thirty
days to sanction loans and advances. In the cir-
cumstances, entry 127 of the Schedule to Limita-
tion Act is being amended to increase the period
of limitation to sixty days in respect of an ap-
plication to set asidea sale in execution of a
decree, ..””.

(Emphasis supplied)


CHAPTER II

LAW AS IT OBTAINS TODAY IN THE LIGHT
OF THE JUDICIAL DECISIONS

३-1 Present position—The net position as
regards setting aside a sale on deposit of requisite
amount resulting from the relevant statutory pro-
visions as they stand after 1976 is as under:—

(i) An application to set aside an execution
sale (which is required to be accompanied
by deposit in court of the requisite amount
to the decree holder and the auction
purchaser) can be made within 60 days
(Article 127, The Limitation Act, 1963)
and

(ii) The deposit of the aforesaid amount has
to be made within 30 days under Order
XXI, Rule 92(2), CPC and the period of
30 days is inflexible as the provision
is held to be mandatory.

3:2 The Anomaly.—Evidently, when amending
the Limitation Act in 1976 it was not realised that
the complementary provision of Order XXI, rule 92
of CPC providing to the effect that a sale would
be set aside on an application for setting aside
the sale being made within 30 days along with the
deposit in court of the appropriate amount also
required to be amended by enlarging the relevant
period from 30 days to 60 days in order to achieve
the purpose of enlarging the time prescribed by
Article 127 of the Limitation Act. Thus, the time
for making the application and the time for making
the deposit which was identical under the unamended
Article 127 of the Limitation Act read with Order
XXI, Rule 92(2) became discrepant in view of the
amendment of article 127. It became 60 days
under the former provision whereas it remained 30
days under the latter provision, The Legislature
upon realizing on the basis of experience that banks
would take more than 30 days to arrange for a loan
and the time of 30 days for making the deposit
was too short, amended the relevant Article of the
Limitation Act (for making the application) by
substituting a period of 60 days in place of 30 days-
However, presumably on account of an unfortunate
inadvertence, it escaped the notice of the Draftsman
while preparing the Bill for amending Article 127,
Limitation Act, that unless a corresponding amend-
ment was made in Order XXI of Rule 92(2), the
purpose of the legislation would be defeated. The

4)

reason is that while the time for making the applica-
tion would stand enlarged to 60 days, the time for
making the deposit (supposed to accompany the
application) would remain unaltered as 30 days.
Thus, notwithstanding the amendment of the
Limitation Act, the judgement-debtor would fail to
have the sale set aside if he was notable to make
the deposit within 30 days which the Legislature
itself thought was insufficient for collecting the
requisite amount and considered it desirable to
enlarge to 60 days on that account by amending
the relevant Article in the Limitation Act.

In brief, as the period for making the deposit
to accompany the application and the period for
making the application itself are now discrepant
and different, an anomaly has arisen.

३-३ Kerala High Court Judgment.—This anomaly
was pointed out by the High Court of Kerala
(Poti, CJ and Bhaskaran, J) in DAKSHAYINI ».
MADHAVAN 30 by making the following
observations :—

“Naturally therefore after that amend-
ment the period available for setting aside
a sale was 60 days. So if a person deposits
the amount as contemplated by 0:21, R. 89
and applies for setting aside the sale he need
make the application within 60 days of the
date of sale. The deposit contemplated under
0.21, R. 89 was to be made within
30 days of the date of sale as provided in
0-21, R. 92(2) of the Code. In cases where
the amount deposited under R. 89 was found
to be deficient owing to any clerical or arith-
metical mistake on the part of the depositor
such deficiency could be made good within
such time as may be fixed by the court. The
deposit contemplated by 0-21, R. 89 to be
made within the time specified in R. 92(2) was
acondition precedent to setting aside the sale.
Evidently the period of 30 days contemplated
under 0-21, R. 92(2) was the period corres-
ponding to the 30 days under Art. 127 of the
Limitation Act as it stood earlier. That
meant that the deposit as well as application
had to be made within 30 days. When this


time was sought to be enlarged Art. 127 of the
Limitation Act was amended. But though a
corresponding treatment was required (00 “21,
R. 92(2) that was evidently lost sight of unless
it be that we assume that the legislature wanted
two different periods, a period of one month
for deposit and two months for application,
which of course does not appear to be, on
the face of it, reasonable.

“Mt appears to us that it is a very clear
2284९ of omission on the part of the legisia-
ture to notice that a period corresponding
to the period specified in Art. 127 had to be
stipulated as a period within which deposit

‘to he made in the provision in 0-21, R.
94(2) of the Code. The consequence now is
that if we read the rule as it stands deposit
-basito-be made within 30 days and application
has to be made within 60 days. In the case
before us deposit and application were made
within 60 days. Deposit was not made within
30 ‘days. Consequently the application
‘G@ands dismissed by the order of the court
Betow. That is the order challenged in this
revision.

«2.--°We can only point out the anomaly
‘at $ay that the law works imequitably, perhaps
‘Wekdute of the omission of the legislature to
notice the need to amend the provision in
Oeder 21, R. 92(2). We can only call the
attention of the Government to the need for
maving immediately for amending the rule
Consequently, while we dismiss this revision,
wo-alert the Central Government to the need
of treating 0-21, R. 92(2) by enlarging the
patied for deposit from 30.days to 60 days to
being it in accord with R. (sic Article) 127
Of the Limitation -Act. A copy of this order
will be sent to the Law Department of the
Geural Governnznt besides furnishing a copy
4p the Central Government pleader for onward
Wwapsmission.””

(Emphasis added)
Apparently, no appropriate notice was taken of
these observations by the Law Department and
no reafeSMt तथा was mooted.
3-4. -‘Gupteme Court Judgment (1986);—Later, in
1986,¢he-fiepreme Court 3/2 also noted the anomaly
and observed as under :—

“2. The failure to deposit the amount

obtails confirmation of sale under Order XXI,_ .

“Pits 916) and thereupon the sale becomes
2-515 व. ७193

absolute. The limitation prescribed for an
application under Order XXI, Rule 89 was
thirty days from the date of sale under Schedule
I, Article 166 of the Limitation Act, 1908, now
replaced by Article 12701 the Limitation Act,
1963. The words “may apply to have the sale
set aside on his depositing in court” etc. show
that not only the application, but also the
deposit, should be made within thirty days from
the date of sale. It is not enough to make the
application within thirty days. Nor is it
enough to make the deposit within thirty days.
Both the application and the deposit must be
made within thirty days from the date of sale.
Article 127 of the Limitation Act, 1963 has
now. been amended by Act 104 of 1976 and the
‘wards sixty‘ days have now been substituted for
the words “thirty days’. As a result of the ame-
ndment, the limitation for an application to set
aside a sale in execution of a decree, including
any such application by a judgement-debtor
under Order XXI, Rule 89 or Rule 90 is there-
fore sixty days now. Such being the law, there
is need for an appropriate amendment of sub-
rule (2) of Rule 92 of the Code. Under Order
XXI, Rule 89 as it now exists, both the applica-
tion and the deposit must be made within thirty
days af the sale. The failure to make such
deposit within the time allowed at once attracts
the consequences set forth in Sub-rule (2) of
Rule 92. This is an unfortunate state of things
and Pailiament must enact the necessary.change
in law.””

The observations 3/3 made by the Kerala High
Court in 1981 were reiterated with approval by the
Supreme Court 3/4 in the following words;—

“3... Fhe learned single Judge has brought
about the inconsistency between sub-rule (2)
of Rute 92 of Order XXI of the Code and
Article 127 of the Limitation Act and suggested
that steps should be taken to remove this
inconsistency. We fully endorse the view
~expressed by the learned single Judge.”

पर (Emphasis added)

The Supreme Court, however, held that the High

Court was justifizd in reconciling th incoasisteacy
and setting aside the sale (100३1 the deposit was
made beyond 30 days but within 60 days.

३55, Later Supreme Court judgment of 1990,
overrubing earlier judgement of 1986;—The matter
agaio came up before the Supreme Court in P. हू,
UNNI y, N{RMALA INDUSIRIES. 3/5 ‘A three-


Judge Bench of the Court overruled the earlier
decision of the court in Basayantappa’s case (supra).
The Supreme Court observed:—

“11, The words of the statutes being clear,
explicit and unambiguous, there is no scope to
have recourse to external aid for their construc-
tion. Nevertheless in deference to the argu-
ments of the respondents’ counsel, we would
refer to the Statement of Objects and Reasons
in respect of Clause 102 of the Bill introduced
in the Lok Sabha on 8th April, 1974 \|Published
in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part Il,
Section 2, dated April 8. 1974] amending Article
127, It states :

“Clause 102 (Amendment of the
Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963).—
An application to set aside a sale in execu-
tion of a decree on deposit under Rule 89
of Order XXI is required to be made
within thirty days from the date of the
sale, Experience shows that this period
is too short and often causes hardship
because the judgement-debtors usually fail
to arrange for moneys within that time.
Banks usually take more than thirty days
to sanction loans and advances. In the
circumstances, entry 127 of the Schedule
to the Limitation Act is being amended to
increase the period of limitation to sixty
days in respect of an application to set
aside a sale in execution of a decree.
This increase in the period of limitation
will not affect the purchaser because five
per cent of the purchase money is
required to be paid to him.

The advantage of the increased period
of limitation will also be available to an
application under Rule 90 or Rule 91 of
Order XXI to set aside a sale in execution
of a decree, In view of the increase in
the period of limitation, confirmation of
a sale will have to await the expiry of the
increased period of limitation.”

(emphasis supplied)

The Supreme Court added in para 15:—

“In the construction of the relevant provisions,
we see no contradiction or ambiguity or defect
or omission. We see no merit in the argu-
ment that Article 127 must override Rule
92(2) of Order XXI in respect of limitation.
_ We view both the provisions as prescriptive
of time for differcat purposes, aed of equal

efficacy and particularity. The maxim.gene-
ralia specialibus non derogant has no relevance
to their construction. Nor does the principle
ia Hezydoa Case [(1584)3 Co Rep. 7a : 76
ER 737] offer any help on the point in issue.
The mischief which the legislature had set out
to remedy by amendment of Article 127 is
what is stated in the objects and reasons
clause. That object was accomplished by
prescribing a longer period for filling an
application to set aside a sale in execution of
a decree. Further more, as already seen. by
amendnent of Rule 92(2) of Order XXI an
opportunity was accorded to the depositor to
make good the deficiency in the deposit made
by him due to arithmetical or clerical mistake
on his part. In no other respect did the
legislature evince an intention to extend the
period prescribed for making the deposit.” -
(Emphasis added)

While overruling the earlier decision on the aforesaid
reasoning, the Supreme Court has d2clared the law
to the effect that while application for se‘ting aside
the sale cat b2 mid2 in 6) days the requisite deposit
has to be made in 30 days.

However, in the same judgnent 3/6, the Supreme
Court has observed to the effect that the need for
amendment exists, Says the court:—

“It would perhaps have been better, more togi-
cal, reasonable and practical, as stated by the
Kerala High Court in Dakshayini v. Madhavan,
AIR 1982 Kerala 126, to enlarge the period for
making the deposit so as to make it identical
with that prescribed for making the application,
and such extended period would have bettéer
served the object of the amendment, namely,
ameliorating the plight of the judgment-debtor,
but such are matters exclusively within the
domain of legislation by Parliament and the
Court cannot presume deficiency and supply
the omission. The legislature did not do mofe
than what it did. It has, in our view, ac-
conplished what it has set out to achieve,
No more or less,’* -

(Emphasis added)

3-6. Is the object of amendment of. Article 127 in
fact served? No. The object of amendment of
Article 127 was to remedy the mischief arising on
account of the fact that Banks usually took more
than 30 days to sanction loans and experience showed
3/7 that judgment-debtors usually failed to arrange

for the requisite loans to enable them to make the...

le

> orem,



deposit in court within 30 days’ time and it resulted
in hardship to the concerned judgment-debtors. The
Law Commission of India in its 54th Report pre-
sented more than 18 years back had also made obser-
vations to this effect. 3/8 It was in this backdrop
that the hardship was sought to be overcome by
enlarging the period from 30 days to 60 days so that
the judgment-debtors could secure the necessary
loans, The hardship was caused because Banks
needed more than 30 days to sanction loans. This
mischief could not be remedied except by granting
to the judgment-debtor or the person interested in
the property concerned enough time to obtain the
funds, Thus the object of amendment is in point of

fact defeated. More than 30 days’ time was not
noeded for making an application to set aside the
sale. Once the ceposit is made, the application
would be made along with it or immediately, for it
is not the drafting of the application which takes
any time. it was needed to enable the judgment-
debtor to obtain the loans from the Bank. Presum-
ably as this dimension of the matter was not brought
into focus, the Court has made the remark to the
effect that the object of amendment was achieved,
Be that as it may, with immense respect and due
deference to the Supreme Court, the fact remains
that the object of amendment is, as a matter of
fact, frustrated rather than achieved.


CHAPTER Iv

PRESSING NEED FOR AMENDMENT WITH URGENCY

4-1. The compulsive case for amendment.—-From
the discussion in the preceding Chapters, it is clear
that in the present state of the law, there is manifest
discrepancy between the provision in the Civil Pro-
cedure Code and the connecied and complementary
provision in the Limitation Act. An application to
set aside an execution sale under the Code of Civil
Procedure. 1908 must be panied by the neces-
sary deposit as provided i: Order XX1, Rule 891)
of Code of Civil Procedure. But the prescribed
limitation periods fer making application and for
making the deposit are different being 60 days and
30 days respectively. In theory as well as in prac-
tice, it is manifestly clear that if an application to set
aside has to be accompanied by a deposit of the re-
quisite amount it is pointless to give 60 days to make
the application if the deposit has to be made within
30 days. It is also pointless because the felt need of
the time rooted in ihe experience is that Banks take
more than 30 cays to i
debtors seeking to avail of th
rule 89, CPC. if deposit
days on account of
ing system +
the applica:
bottleneck arises in a
days, not in drafting the 30 days. That
ig why the law prior to i975 provide for 121
identical period for deposit as well as making applica-
tion. The same pattern was needed to de followed
jn effectuating the intention of the Legislature to
grant 60 days to the judgment-debior to secure the
loan which intention was explicitly set out in the Ob-
jects and Reasons clause.4/!, The a: s, therefore,
manifest and the Courts have been todly stress-
ing it accordingiy.

4-2, Judicial decisions.—As bas been mentioned
above “/2 the courts including the Supreme Court have
pointed out the need for amending the provision in
Order XXI, Rule 92(2), Code of Civil Procedure so
as to substitute “sixty days” for “thirty days” in
Order XXL, Rule 92(2) of the Code.

4-3. Hardship and urgency.—Besides this, inno-
cent judgment-debtors have to उप्र injustice, owing

@

to the fact that because of the inconsistency, the
period for depositing remains unaltered and the in-
tendment of the Legislature to enable them to obtain
the loans so as to make it possible for them to de-
posit the requisite amount in Court to save the pro-
perty from beinz lost to them remains thwarted.
And those who \ave moulded their action on an
interpretation of the law which received the im-
primatur of the Supreme Court in Basavantappa’s
case in 1986 will suffer enormous loss now as the said
decision has been reversed recently in P. K. Unni’s
case in 1990. There is, thus obvious urgency to
salvage the situation before the pending matters are
decided and their fate is sealed against them, not-
withstanding the Legislative intendment to come to
their rescue, reflected as early as in the 1976 amend-
ment of Article 127 of the Limitation Act.

4-4, Recommendation.—In_ the light of what we
have stated above, our urgent recommendation is that
in Order XXI, Rule 92(2), of the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure, 1908, the words “within sixty days” should
be substituted for the wards “within thirty days”. And
the reconnendation should be mad2 applicable to
pending matters aad maiters which have not been con-
cluded in the Courts by giving it retrospective or re-
troactive effect for the reason being mentioned
presently.

4-5. This part of the recommendation is being
made, as the Supreme Court judgement in Basavan-
tappa’s case rendered in 1986 held the field till it was
overruled in P. K. Unni’s case in 19904/3 and the
failure to amead did not result in prejudice to the con-
cerned judgment-debtors till 1990. But, now that
the situation has altered, the judgment-debtors who
have acted on the interpretation of the law which
was upheld even by the Supreme Court in Basavan-
tappa’s case in 1986, will suffer grave detriment and
their fate will be prejudicially affected by the latest
law as declared in Unni’s case in 1990, It is, there-
fore, essential that the amendment should be made
retrospective or retroactive in the sense of making
it applicable to all pending matters not finally com-
cluded by the Courts till the enforcement of the pro-
posed amendment.


We, therefore, recommend accordingly in the justice to the unfortunate judgment-debtors or the
hope that the pressing need for the amendment and persons having interest in the auctioned properly,
of doing so urgently will be realised and serious in- prevented.

Sdj-
(M.P. THAKKAR)
CHAIRMAN
Sd/- $0/-
(५.५. ANJANEYULU) (P.M. BAKSHI)
MEMBER MEMBER
S4/- Sd/-
(MAHESH CHANDRA) (G.V.G. KRISHNAMURTY)
MEMBER Member-Secretary

New Delhi, dated the 4th April, 1991.


16

NOTES AND REFERENCES

Chapter 1

1/1. Chapter 2 infra and Chapter 3 infra.

1/2. Order XXI, rule 92(2), CPC.

1/3. Article 127, The Limitation Act, 1963.

Chapter वा

2/1. Vannisami Thevar v. Periayaswami Thevar,
AIR 1917 Mad 176, 177.

2/2. Matrani Devi v. Chhathu Prasad, AIR 1972
Pat 55.

2/3. Clause 102 of Notes on Clauses, Bill No, 27 of
1974, The Code of Civil Procedure (Amend-
ment) Bill, 1974, published in the Gazette of
India (Extraordinary) dated April 8, 1974 in
Part I, Section 2.

@hapter वा

3/1, Dakshayini v. Madhavan, AIR 1982 Ker
126, 127 (Potti, Ag. CJ and Bhaskaran, J).

3/2. Basavantappa v. G.N, Dharwadkar, (1986)
4 SCC 273.

3/3. Dakshayini v. Madhavan, AIR 1982 Ker 126,

127, Para 2.

513/M/of Law & Justice/93

3/4.

3/5.

3/6.

3/1.

3/8.

Basavantappa v. G.R. Dharwadkar, (1986)
4 SCC 273, para 3.

P. K. Unni v. Nirmala Industries, AIR 1998
SC 933, 936, 937, paras 11-16 (May); (1990)
2 SCC 378.

P. K. Unni v. Nirmala Industries, AIR 1990
SC 933, 936, 937, paras 11-16 (May); (1990)
2 SCC 378.

Clause 102 of Notes on Clauses, Bill No. 27
of 1974, The Code of Civil Procedure (Amend-
ment) Bill, 1974, published in the Gazette ef
India (Extraordinary) dated April 8, 1974
in Part II, Section 2.

See para 21 -40 of the 54th Report presented.
on February 6, 1973.

Chapter IV

4/1.

4/2.
413.

Clause 102 of Notes on Clauses, Bill No. 27
of 1974, The Code of Civil Procedure (Amend-
ment) Bill, 1974, published in the Gazette of
India (Extraordinary) dated April 8, 1974
in Part वा, Section 2.

Chapter III, supra.
(1990) 2 SCC 878; AIR 1990 SC 933.

~