LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ROURTHENTH REPORT
(VOL. I-CHABTERS #-का - oot



| MG Setalvad, LAW COMMISSTON
| enermaa + 1७७७७

5, dor छा, 1
New Delhi-3, ©
" दि September 26, 1958.
Shri Ashok Kumar Sen, ;

Minister of Law,
. Mew Dethi,

: My Dean Mramrie,

: 1 have great plessure in forwarding herewith the fourtectith
: Report of the Law Coramisyion om the Reform of Judicial Adminis-
+ * @ation

The appointment of the Commission was announced by

predecessor in the Lok Sabha on the Sth August, 1955, and the
ere ot the Commission assumed their offies on the bith September,
1965.. The~Commiscion ‘hag gince*been cngaged, among other things,
in investigating the system of jud%tiat sdministratdun ini‘ this county

4 3. For various réasons the inguiry hag taken a longer time than
wee गधा aoftipaled. whit 0 ad atlempt hag been made to

ipto थी the matters cavered by the terms of reference.

obvious reasons, not entered into a detailed examination of cither of
the procedural codes or of the law of evidente with a view to
suggesting amendments, We have confined gurpeleves to indicating
in brosd outline the changes thet would be necessary to make
judicial edministration specdy and less expensive,

4, The decaiied examination and revision of the codes of civil and
«ximinal procedure ig ४ task which calls for considerable time. Suge
8 revision on Lhe basis of our general recommendations

; be undertaken hereatler

$, ‘The manner in which the Commission conducted its invest
ions In this branch of its inquiry has been set forth at Tengt th in

id this purpose was put into the shape of 10108 for a draft report by
‘ the Secretariat of the Commission. A draft report was then pre

ared and circutated to the members The draft was after a fine ©

iscussion settied by the Chairman.

6. I would iike in this connectign to exprees my gratitude to my
colleagues foc the assistance and the cooperation which I have
4 received from them during the course of the Commission's enquiries
and deliberations.

7, I would like to acknowledge the able assistance rendered in
the course of the Commiesion’s intguities and im the drafting and the

- oompletion of the Report by the officers of the Commisaon
Joint Secretary, Shri K. Srinivasan has brought to thig work nat
only a wide knowledge ०१ the working of efvil and criminal courts

510७0 ७४०४७ chapter. The large volume of material collected fbr.


byt also ‘administrative sbility of a high order. Shri 8. M. Meh

the Secret die very work in the field of cit

Be ti ita Ses gob कक अत 27 ne Ce
's @ in

information abd putting into shape various perteof fhe Report

Shri.G. 5, Pathak being outside India ७ unable to sign the
Report, but Ke ¢dncurs in the recommendations and has authorised
foe Chairman to aign the Report on his behalf: Dr. N. ९. Sen
Vv. KT. 1 and Shri 13, Narasa Raju whe are unable te come
own to Delhi, similarly concur in the rerarnmmendations and have
६1४० aut. the Chairman fa gign the Report on their behalf.

9. Dr. N.C. Sen Gupta and Shri ५. K, T. Chari bave signed the
Report aubject to their separate notes which are annexed to the

-- 4), With this Report, the Comission, ‘teat present oo tener
concludes cts labours, The task of revising the Central Acts nf
imporkaoce abd making cute aaah ott tor t

eae on of the Jaw 1,
Géttever, fer fiom he Sro¢k undertaken 5 this
cémmectidn ts stil units tbe cortipletec.

syle Ta ‘hanion, Cepaminakte. 4piteckoowl the un
setae eerie natant tehke nie cee ०८४०

Yours #inrerety,
we. ¢. SerAL VAD:


CMAPTSs vou. t
1. Tattoductory
2 Hittoricel .
3- The Judicial 59४67 .
4 Tudigenou Syste
a. "Te Supreme (0७४५
6. Nigh Courts पु . . .

7. High Courc-—-Origioal side

bit
mu.
ln
an
ke
15.
16,
We
1H.
ay
ro
ale
225
33.

ae

25.
a.

. Adequacy of Judicial Streugth
. Subordinate Judiclery

Saperviden and contrat of eubordina:e courte
Delays in Civil Proceeding?
Jutisdiccion of Civil Conrle . . .

Coutce of renal Cauars - soe
‘Frith of Suits. पु : . .

Civ है et

Corll Appellate Procedure « . .
Ciril Revives « : - . . .
Byecstion of dates - . .
Written Argumtmis  - पु न

‘Suis pgalnst Goyernmeot - *+
Conta

Cours Teas

Tosobyency .

The Lew of evalence

Legal Educedion

The Tat . . . - . +

ay. Lem An: न . -

au.

Law Repons + . - 4
Language - . . ed ‘

Page Ti

I~

It
2e—oF

6+-पप
1 5]

पहा+म्य *
३३-35
25:२३.

78-96
29736:
Boag
BS
te ad
asta:
3074

Dee ad

Sigs
the

if


1—INTAODUCTORY

x ner since Independence, suggestions were mde ia and

cuts: Parlaroent for the (irae Aste ota Law Com-
mussiu Sor exaa.nbig We Geaasl Acts und resqumard-
ing the ines cn which taep should be umended. reviaed or
ccngolida‘erl,

Gn the 204 Dece:uber 1947 Ov. St Hard Singh Geer
meved a rezoluliux in the Conszitrent Agsenibly (Legista-
tive} (30111 ४-1 = che esteblishmen: of a Statutcry Law
Revesinn Commitee to ‘clari हे बयां atte questions of
lw worth re quired el fi. Teealutiun ws,
however, witldrawn by the. Meyer प्रएशण1 un asus
being given oy tle: Luen Live Miniscer, Dr, Aravedxuc, that
Government wralc trey td devise sorne: uther suitable
machinery fie reviging inwa One of tke method by
hich -be work of law sevidior could pe undertaken wis
uted by Dr. Aciordece 20. ए९ a peruanent {ormissior.

wld be entriaved sokely sith the work of rev:sing

ine the les. :

The sdvisab:hty of ae a Law Cenmission wax

agin éhessed ju lus Lux Sulbhe cn the 27th June 1952 hy
it seven 04. cbe Muliin for
sire aa? In the couser of his
fuech wn the pn, the Ghen Law Miutzter Shri ( 0,
Biswas stated the Government reoognix:d that the
work of kecping che lew uptodate vas one of vitat un-

1302९ and he gave an 3१#-॥८००७ that the question would
Be €xacuned by Government and neotasary étepe ¥ould be
wakeo.

Deuwotis for tbe ST

Co 10५ ik of Fu y 1854 ‘the All-India Congress Can-
ruittee: owed chat “a Jew Commission ahould be
uppointad as in En gland ९1202 the ‘laws promulgated

neerly 8 century beck by the Lew Commiszion uf Macuulay
and to advise cn cuvent legidation from time tir treme”.

The genesiz of the eet . Conorriizzion lies in a mron-
official resolution muyed in ithe Lok Sabha on the igth
Toveber 193, 71० sentcnts of that revolution were:

“This Heuse resolveg that a Law Counission be
ap poised to ey 107 ait and mnderoization
of laws, crimira:, civil and revende, aubsiantivr:, prace-
ituwl er ocheneise ana” ४ parti¢y the Civil anrt
Criminal Procedure (४ wmd_the Indian Penal Cods,
he quantum of'case-lag wand tn resolve the

she decisicna of che Hizh Courts on many
points with a +inw Tealise that justice 2४ simple,
speedy, chewp, —_— | बन + 1, |), |

“sHemse af ire People Debar You iif, eis 2692,
ais Mat L—e


fe scxssivn on tris resefution
the 35: December 1854 the Prime
sirlai Nelyu, roade a stazemieng that
accepted the resolution in sc fer ar
Law Commissert war congerned
were kven In “engaged 100081-
Laken towards that und". 3

[nm Line एज्प्रक of
in the Lok Subtu «
Monlstez, Shri Jnws
tay Gueerazent fb:

the za)

and Ee Govern
dering the cieps lo
af 101१ arceptanze b
urderly iru tue Deco!

2, Trongh she
s3suranecs given : 3
vev.aion ard nenier!
४७ etaced in th

“(9 realise’
ebistion
smerely Ly vevisiow
shay qeerauling thi
The prawing accu!
Courts and ued
necessitated edi

mi frag [0.0 ir 002 Tetated fo the
tion 2 Taw3, the usderlyin.
resoluian of

| iusbie

suunup! tear rf the legs out fpepdé
syslerelof adminisrisbtim of jqatiog.- ”
ation ra utrears in che verious|tigh
courtelbix: (1९४९५ 8 situation prsack.
examipution af the orob. . the
thw “‘muacbirery of the
sunk lel -Goyernmen; ६0 ४
ive of Ing propaced Law Ce
it} the subject of the reform oF ji

i the : Ministex. Sari”
the foktiwvitig olettucot .o th¢ Lok
Govadnment of Iria’ i é
eaalotL, ke membership anc che kermp .

eppoint a ).9% Curr
al reterence.

“Sug zectiongd have: 30 , wade from Usne voli .
both in Parl:arogat and byls.ds, taat a Law (7 :
१४908 ehould pointed for revising, cur states
and suggest: ne LI ameans immprovil

ayslem uf Ju:
tea men'hs azo 5
resclusion (2 tit cor tbeoved by Shri Thim
On z
Tezolutior. it

personnel, and Yarious | i détacla,
5. The Gov
to appoint a La
tog membors:--- :

(lr Shri M. 0. Botuivad, -AL

Conarei India have now
ipn vansisting of the:

Tadia (Chaigluan}, & | an 3
(2) Shr LL. ©. Packs, Chief Jyetien Unf
Bombuy High ९. i} :

ms
abbany


3

444) Shei G. KR, Daa, ackirei Jucce co the
Calourta High Cutt,
(i) Shti PL Satyanarwyuns Hao. rovired Judge
vlatran High Court,
6) D:, N 0. Sen Gugle, Advocate, Calestta,

i WOK, T. Chan, Adverete4zeneral,
Madvaz.

19) Shri Natasa Raju, Aavecwbtsenrlal,
Ardara,

(9; Sari 98, WL. Sdn, AdvocsteGisceml,
Punjih,

(i0} Shri G. 8. Pathak, Andvozate, Allahabad,
anc,

(६-1; Shi 0. N. Jessi, Advocete, Bombay,
vA The ‘erm ve? reference to the Covnrissian will

firetiyy, 19 peview the system cf rei Nminsetre~
tien tr. al) its aseel: abd Sugeest waye and means for
impreving .t and osaking it speedy and ‘cos expemtive;

arconaty, to examine Lhe Centr:l Acts of gerersl
apetivaticn and importapee. 3773 recommend the linc on
which chey should co pnoended, revised ceneolidated
ar ctlesuues brought up-te-dace,

4 With regind lo the 123: derm of vecerene, the -
Cauucisaion's inquiry cintu fhe system of judiclal -
administration: will bs comprehenmve and thorough,
including :7 its sn)

(a) the opcratign and) effect of lows, aub-
stantive as wall a3 procedural, with 8 view to
glimitutog wuawesgurs litigation, speeding up the
écepeant of onsen and waking justice Jew expensive;

[10 tar ergentahtton of cyrecs, Seth evil and -
evinninai; " ‘ हु

le) recruitment cf Une judiciary; and

(dj level of th¢ bar aGg of १०६४ edueation.

6, With regard tn ६ 1752 term of reference, tha |
Cs-yunission’s principsl jobiecavta in the revision of
ecisting Jepviniation will be-- |

fe) to sivplity the laws in genera], etd the
peccedurel Jawe in particalar,

- wots —

*Teigred on yest Deconter 796:


4

(0७) x ascorteio if any provisions sre irconsis-
lent with the Constitution amd suggest the neceasary
alterations ur omissnny,

न fe} ln rem
rough’ to light
cutis or otherwise,

emailing and ambiguitles
conflicted dei leis of High

_ (9) *ए soasider 100ज्षों varia’
Siste tor shi:tion in the concurre’ with a view
to rsinwodicung and ॥991244-थे। ६ uricceni.y,

(९) to consolldace Acta pertaiulng tu the same
subject wich mich techninal -evision 8. mop be
fuund vevereary, and

ions introducel
ld a

qf) te aegges. enodifeations wherever neces-
serpy sor cmptomendiny the diveclive principles of
Stave policy laid cea 1७ the Canstitation

# In onder ६७ peelorm ily tase mepenitiewsaly sich
eMvienly. ae Coruowslon will fumedsn in tre
sockorns The first section cunsising of the Cheirman
and the first three members will deal :asinly with the
cugstion of Ihe reform et je aeminisl cali, while
186 séucnd section consisdng of other seven members:
will ke mainly cangerbed wilh stutule law revislon on

in ted above. The tyro erctines, however,
me uti-pperalion with eaet other under
ret [1७ Chinn.

or Clainman of the Commission may at his
discrevior, co-opt as members one or twa practiking
leoryere o¢ 5 Stale in ceder to 3591९ che ९;

juquirtes on that Stave i

8, The Commission ia appainted in che Aral inktgoce
‘pte the end of 318 seadquarters ‘will
be al New Delhi py

4. Shri N. A. Palkhivala war pppolnted a Member of
the Cormmission cn the Ist Ocrcher 1846 in the Stgtite
Revision Section, it having heen decided to give prigtity to
the revision of Use Tadian Imeome-tax Act

In Decamber 1960, ene of the Members of the Commis
sioa Sari G, ऊँ. Dox resigned his Membership of the
mission for ren3zons o¢ health His resignation depriv ofthe
Commrissiaae uf she matute experiauce of a an
eminent member o¢ the Bar and later एएं tho Bench. tt was
with considerable regret that the Cheiruan accepted his
Tesiynmating, Ib may be mueutlwied Liat the Coruuission is
frewls indebted to bits for the prsisteriec he gnve tn the

क्र ताक) ciurdig 10७ pesiod of his association with it,
particularity on octtain importast topics telating to the
Teform of judicial admpin‘stration.



4

Meter Sar G. N. Dag rerigmed trum 14:७४ Comun’ssinny
: ats iyo Reo eho vee all cher prieelpaliy
ge of che Slutule Aevisiin Soedion nf the Commiz-
isyiled ky the Chairman te serve or the Firat
1 eddition te his merous dsiee in Ule Secu
Section ang the invitetlon wae aceevied by J:ir.

3% Allaguzhl woe epuointment wus in Ine tirst instance
myn tha atst 13। 56, Lhe pericd bad .0 be extendas!
frem: time to wow te Sth Septem ore है: ८ ए1%४ of
athe Jarg> field of cu: inquiry.

है. In seoardacer: with our iwsctucui.s ws fave doms-
Awocd 113 Lwe sections. Tae fret section comsiscing vf the
Chairman and ७6 115: thpec snemnbers 1-35 dealt mainky
with Lav questlen of the tabu of judicial udm inistation.
At oyr iouugeeul meeting pele on the १७३ September, 1955
we discused she abjectives ie tert. fTeace and
the partigular hae: en which the Commission whole
ard the two .cecions therenf showld perused; the inital
wines lu he tikes and che procedure (9 >€ followed, in so
fac as the werk of the firsk sective wena ot wer
decided [1) (160 the Zactual p: with whiet the Frit
sretion bad bc: ७1५७1 ehuuld'n the 1८६; inszance be ascertained
delore con dering tae veanodial netyyetes; (2) hat detuiled
trfern:evior on these problems alwuld de collected from all
aie suurses, (3) the mforomtian Aad Leer
collected. 9 compreacsa2 questicnnagite showld he sddres-
sit to ind ७५३: ७ perhst likeby 10 apsuat whe Coot 4130)
their knowledge ond .oxperiancs, sod [) that the
regen mend ists सो: 59 ke decded upon @ler the replies
sire had heen examihed, At the frst mect-
43 beld Gar the 1701 September. 0055 we
dissed (0 sow ms retalby tO thu: ini:
uf juztice co which refitrra was फट and preparé:
cf Ihe topies an whieh! mialectal had t+ ८८
42082 phe requred information had been evilected orem
tle Svste Sovernmen-s, the [ligt Courts and oche: sources,
= detithed questumpiure? coptalning 1: “weeliuhs qnkrar-
ing elmor: ell she aspect: of judiaia! acminietration was
Prepared + the second useting ef this section heli en Ath
Tanuare. 1956 anc was 155 scttied at a moet og of the
fol Cormmission held on the 7th Jannary. Moers than sie
thousand ceples af ‘he quesclorneire were dislributcd
araongst jadividuals tod atsocintivns including the High
wCouris, the Seate Governmeets, Bar Assorlagiwus and o¢ber
-erpanisvtions such as Chasers of Commerce, indlvidual
lawyers end judictal जी था, Althyugh we reeciny. ६ falrly
large rurrkor uf sepiins 19 Ce: queslicnogire we tegret to
cbserve test the resyensc wes not 89 encouraging ae we
had unticiputed.

*Ser 01:४८ (io the Feport.


a

Aca meeting belé jp Bocsbay on che 2151 July, Hid, we
Teview 2d 110 prng-os3 of tho work dows by Lhe frst soctian
c2 uke Cormucssion wll | date with gpecial reference

१. QussEpnes.ce tet had hes
was then freed that in order te
jar. 311 Information en aome of the, weerportant

1९91. 150 Sesh. xert

iS

of she Cov
७६ the ori ;

examine wtres3ee 3: those ofsecs, The conrluriona r
at (nis mee'iny af che Cizt section were enor: oy the
Counmissicny उप ls Tid ment फट hed on the cmat day:

relign af the Canuciesion net st New Delhl
th ard {pth sf 100:706-. 1256 te 1७४".४७८ dirauss:

ch the Questlennagire in the पर «if the
made recelved and formulated. certain
with 2 view to cliuiting opirinn on tagcat
Seugsoct the Ceoarunissicn when o7 cout. These tenia
tive iGeas were placed before a oeeting of the Cal. (०७७॥॥19-
sium. hek:l ua the Nts of October, 1958.

7. Tit exercize cf the disermion verlod in the Chapman
of the Conmmisziua to co-upt one or two practising ५३१७०
of a State in vider td :+४४3: the Commusmion’s mqui
thit Slate, the Chainmnan cripted Lwo members in 2 of
ihe Stulss visttled us excepl Madras whete uri one
menvaer was co-opt! Tre runes of the mexbefs ००
opted are given below

‘Urtak Poapese (AtLamaenr}
(1) Shi Jagéish Swmroop, Advouate, Allahfbed.
(2) का Kiega Narain, Advucate, Apr.

Kanata (evagerans)

3 KO ४७४. Sotyannrayene 190०, Auvtuates
ul of Kerala, Sera lnm.

(2) Shri K, P, At-rahara, Advocate, Emmakulfai

(1)

Mysoac ($# ५०८ छाए)

(3) Shri A, K Semongths Byer, Adjoraie,
Turgcloge, {now Judge Mysate High Qourt}

Sor. N. KL Winil, Ardwayace, Dhacwer.

=

Marmse (Nsueas) *
(] Shi OV. Goprfakrishnas, Advocate,
TinneveJy.

Sho ५. KL ibe Demare H€ the Saute Revisloa 522 7कै ato:
Sock टी



AnuHRi Prana (H=persei)*

(४) 5७6 S Aarosavramy = lysnpiet Advocate,
Secu deers,

(2) Sher MS. Barosekgnére Fn, Acieeuile,
Heevedecabed.

‘Wrst Bawaat (Carevcrait

S, WW. Bowe, Aévocate-Genersl, West
Bar.gs!, Caleutts.

She Ala (hited: Gupta, Adve, Caleutta

5

Bemga (Curae)
(1) 8:५1 8. Jagannadhs Ras, Advecave. Serhampur.
15) Shri ॥. Mahupatra, Advecale-Geseral, Cuthach

Assam: (6 40HATI)
01) Skit Debeshwar Serna. Advocate, Jorhat.
42) Shri SK. shel, Acdvexsaye, Cy:

Bosmast (Bommar)t
C) Sha BR A. Jahgerder, Advocate, Borabsy.
(2) 806 ¥. & Dhelskis, Adivacate, Alvnedahnd

HATASTHAy (70०9-७७)

(2) Sbri C. L. Agarwal, Advocate, Jaipur.

(2) Sbri Chand Mat Latha, Advocate, Judhjgn-r.
(एम: (Caroma)

1) Shri AN. Grower, Advocite, Chardigazh fnew
९७३६ 20:7४ High Courts.

(%) Sari G Th Schgal, Advocate, Jullyrduc

Manura Prapese (Janson)

41) Shri FE. A. (15६16, Advocate, bil
Predesk). :

iri M1 Adhikeri, Adsorste-Geneial, Madbye :
Pradesh. Csbalper. .
mearser.of che Ararurs
at 18०0,

wuomber of tie. Sarat Ree aku Secrlan ”
Me eiccings cz Caleu "

iWadhss

‘ign Stctscv atlen-

sclorehal 105 Fist

$3he M.A ३७८
wm Vilsr Seccan's 4

ss unable 10 alc.

mom Sect. altemd

toe #:#क्रट+ cf che Canimiscion,


Botan (Perea)

Ql) Shri Aghere = Nath Banerjee Acvorale,
Mu:.vhye= (Bihar),

Shri |ulparayan Sinks, Advocate, Bikar ILligh
Court, Patna,

है, Befexs commencing our cour we Teqabsied ail the
Eigh Courts amd the State Governcwas to suggist the
wes oC witnesses of aeveral caluputtes. such 88, (°)
jus officers. (2) cipesentatives of Hat Asaocdations,
(2) represenlatives of the State Governmen's, (4) Heads
uf the palive depertrrents, (5) Chaivmen <f tle Public
Service Coruriasioma, (6) Universicy teachers of law, ९7)
Porame experizaced in she ere ne [5७८ Panchaya:
Courts, (i) represcathives of Aid organisetin: and
19> indivldi:ay wrens. Tha seleclion of Lop witnewes १७
ba examined jn ९६९० State web marie from the lists supplied
“a 0३ by the Migh Cuurca and the Shute CGavernments, Jo
aduliloa, publicity in the press was given lo he vislts जा
she Co: cou fy ६७६ aeadquarcers oF the Hugh Courts.
20 that, in aldélden 10 tie wilrewses proposed by Lhe High
Cours and tr Stete Govermmarils, we were alco able to
cba in each Stale Lie agsistsycc 9% siveral other
witnesses who vlunterred (8 piace kefore us their views
on the problem: in which they wert: particulsry interested,

(2)

8. ॥3 006ए:70०६ 1986 126 गीए४ section of tae Comrsissloa
wummoenced its 15६ of the Headquarters of all ke Slate
Migh Coucts का the purpose of regcesing evideaer of
weilzesses whose opindon could d6 helpial in eur ixak, Wo
examined xn al. 47% 1॥/5५७०६ ५103९ रू are given in
Appesdix 17. ‘The ings of ‘on Cranmtzaign and the

rlaces vsited are shown below:

Sinions Su fags Me. of

Pax conmamced clossd simeaas
vavenioed
Jflababa:! . - %
Emetelen - : af
Gargalort . 35
Matra - . so 3x
Hydeenbod - ue
Peth toe $ co
Come न . + 293-0997 43
Canck - . : Sosy 14
Gwht -  - + + 19+एक्ा cr
. 137-16 3
7०38 7 ay
x
x


9

We generally bekt our sittings ai she centres we
visite: in public,  Ocoetonmlly, bnvwvew it was found
vecensary to balxe the cvidence ए८ some ५ ms itt Guanes
ke Comtmissiu: tad also tne advantaze of infocml
Ge pus with af che Chief Jusdeee and a ecrtain
number of Cuders of the Hi Cuourle on che various
. problems raiaed -६ the Question-sire.

“Frum the Suct January to the 7th January, 1958 ths
First Section a; gin 700६ in New Delhi in a seriis of cueing
da which conclusions were reeched as to rerammendatiins
lo o@ coum to [ioVernmienL These vonelazlous and
recommendations were @eviet! tpn Goully ke the
combized meotings of both the Sections oF the Commission
held m New Delbi or che 24th ard 2617 January, 1955,

13. A deatt Hepo:t ovepared i: ibs lipht of che ronce-
siona wns discussed st a sreelag i lhe 1011 Cocmmixszin

9 Bow Debi un Uae Zard Avy at—ano che Report ax Daalty
settled and approved WS signec at & mceting on the 3018
September, 1025.

oO श्र एकल Wivhiel expressing oc warm
nes ४; Ihé High 00०18, the repceserilasives
cunents enc ए tbe iarge number of indivi-
duale and associations whe at the expense of 1902८: Lime aul
hour curl ८३ derailed aod gabaret¢ repliss in Lhe question
neire and submitted memoranca on various topics. reading
to the adeninist pf juptiog, Wa wenld alee axprese
our deep gtatiluce lo the 30:10 High Cnurtr and thelr
woinisterie. officers fez the velusble copperatinn and
assistance given lo va deeing oar Vitis oO rach Slate and to
the Stato Governments [or the excelicnt arrangements
mace by them for ovr aecomomade'dan and comfuri and ine
the siot w i.



2- HISTORCAL

Fl Lew The systeus Uslus and laws 35
‘a we heave (26.85 shout ont (व:
Na les. than

ing the Let

Commission
मर्यादा (0 auge vfforts of STMtaete is
sckeitnz tts Since then ह. er of enrumittees
have der. appocnted fron time

ticular aspecls sr as is mebdify Ly
needs of hi eemmenily. A =
1५७ wei DUDE: wey corcmittccs is necessary! both
kan luke ॥| पड has beco done us ulsu wo raluate

ths task ‘lure 39.
Tae fest lane Commission was
* Chatter Act of 1833, tu cn gute ‘nto the
ioe. of Conarte und che niatulwe ws. It boxe
there were bebmg udusitiste-nd in tha cTterent pat x
ts]. India sevegul sestoms of law

Miss 05 1835:

ubntr Out coexisting end

erly deveid of wepleleness, yni H
५310019- Tue व inpartant movereent for ‘ps
farsi end ood et IT AS may perl be
tras] to © correspondence Pe ॥०० tok place 10. 07 ६00०७:

v. Sir Copies Metculle and “hr Jueizes of

Tit ochwoy
Lermi: ४७ Corset:

Bengal, in_she course of which a
iving to Sritid; India a compzes: ad defimite re of

ws [0 replace the metley af esahieting lews 21 ze ered
of administra’ on which exieted wher he [East

India Company #:
the greater part of
pretedsc tae १४४७० 76 of thy Act of 183]. Charles
ivr Pregizent एन the Board of (६701, csllerf altent'gn to
fects in the frame of Itc India. Canstl-

Ubrv:
tution. Waa in the aaiuce cf Laws socons
मऊ Ube ili-defined authority and power Eeom which theas

varicus Laws and Reculalloas emuagted; acd the third
was tr angeialou: gad conficting stste ०2 judicelt
which the Lewe were admlinddered™,  Miavau:
devoted a siurl nf speevk 0ए: the srvond re:
the ancertainty af the laws and the ceed for indification
ta srisern unifarcauity end certaiaty, sei: :

5 belizye hat ao cwmanity aver stood so midh in
ner? of a Coce of ‘aw as Dnrlie, snd 1 761५९ alzc?tist
thew never wea a country जा wh eh the wart obight
be so cas’ y emppled. Guar arociple आह this, —

Booker: The Anglctndinn Gores, Verume T. pag
35 AVIL pape 72%,

प्‌



u

uniformity wh

faist have i

wwocan heve ft; diversi
bur. in al cages, एड: ताक के):

Indian Taw Como:timiom was eormpreed of Te धन
Ite जफ़ Memwer. ax Chairmau, and J 1४. dome अं
Macteod, G. W. Andetgou pro F. Millet. ole) servascl: 157६६००--
drawn finm the aresidencie:: ef Caleutls, Madras a

Bombi:y ss momgers, The Coro:tission wis to inguin 1:05

the jurisdiction, powers nd tines cf the existeay courls

of justics and poi'ee csrablisaments and inks lee 2७४0६

and Goeculica af al laws prevailing in any part 0. Bricish

inj and to meke cepolts therosn und 10 sugsee.
tons, Gue vegucd {wring had to the distiscturcy ef castes,
:#4 of migior, erkl the masue:s ind opinions
i aTroog clitcrent samt and in different perix 27
said territories, The Canrrisgiawers were ty 19117
auch instrucsiobes १७ they should receive 7000 Line: Governcr-
Gereral ia Comactl?

3. Pia
and the Crlroaa. Ptueedure Code us leaf zed 10
wore of framing a Code ८ Civ. Cricedure
 uisk ७1४07 the Cornu , bowever.

| ns it was of a
apendows ard diversified charueter and requived = griar
deal cf ime and laryer gorsonne], Mereover, the: nractice
e¢ the Goverserneni of que 5 too 176४9 selerences 70 the
Ceombiission even on ue ons “which might have been
छ९:-9: withint ang au feramue” adéod to the Curomig
sfun’s difficulties kad evoke’ sbarp gretests from Marsulay.*
Tt sppears from ४5५ eaduted wainute of Macuiy thet fo
order to speed up che work on the Penal Code, ७ fifth,
muaber wes sequizeds

4. Aferr Macaulay's oe Toure lave on 1837, tho Cem-.
mission ब्याह 6 wize wo stat barll> an acewunt of:
the absence ७८ 4; suceccor ef eoual vita: 2 id:
perdy ५०४४४! of oxtranepus vb:cumplanies, Ae सजा,

mit in his se to. Indian Law, so(wth-
néarding 3 etrenuous नर wider Macaiey and his
५075. ae 3४१७५ had frached'she statute book before
tae mutioy.! on the words of स्पा भतार Stoghen "The
Adgtun disystevs and “clumps, dlp at in Central Iudiaj
0 १७:६७ the Sikhs{J2rd Bethousie’s auaexstions:

4d and produced {

yp empoctel tg finish the worlr on the Peand Fock al
ance.

“7” 18 waa fele tual
# was worth and 2७ if4

Clodhs der, vel >फ

५५ Migube of Gch Jive 7576. Lada Legiddative
2409 726 3॥ को ogy Nop 25 7 ०. कै. छाया = one Maemubue
20- 55949 .
*Tedia Laginiative Censotraginne, Nv, ५, zoe Jan. 1949.
h
Pape 21.
१६:५७ in Ranki-y jog, ct.



its ssrenath was resiuece 70 one membsr and 5 seccatary
iz. addition to the Law Merober who acted iss ity preel¢nnl.
By Jaraery 1245 :६ har to forage i dey ay well

है व न कलम ४ 1 In spite of d-fticultice 6 ira way the first Cosvsiise‘on
werk, aid remaikakle piomeevirg weak 1. nad te work aspuutt
the background of the 7 72171 eyetem which asc not thes

been pred of its manifold leshaic and dn: -ndiac

sysier, Coll af diversity uni ince thes. ४४.॥:७७। The

eid of a pr-fer: model if hed to ४४४ B consistent system

of Cocvts apé [ave from ५ enn’ me anc i'J-drined

syslee of cud.catuse oa the oné kind, 890 a bewilderag

varirty of 150: ced, Unascertsined or unasemstuisnable

tulys 07 law of deubtful origin and vague azp. ication, na

the other Tang. | Ita chicf canlrizusions wire che érel-

venal Cr $37. the ciratt lsw of Limil:tion aoc
Po Fr of 1442. tu: 30:88 of pleading and peecadure
with Sores af écicainy) indrene: uf नव acd the Lex

॥+ Cem fcr alse

Loe propesels of LEAL, Resides 1.70७0:
cvperted on A@lverse aublects, eg, 3 ial Establishaticn =
nt lie Presicmneses of Hengal) Madras snd Rembay.
Spon Appeals, Review cf Jud, eee ns framed ty Sedsr
Courts. Reperr on Slavery, aid Renwuerstiou cf oficers
of the Courts of Jodicriwen. Tt Lnos 1216 down the Tunda-
Lima oc. which other legisla ora were in werk:

The Se 3, Tae next Charler A
0 पडा ot che Second Lew Cammisiizm 10

-alou. tre cosumnenuaciang of the First Ine. faite Coa misniritt

apd fhe cracls pecposs; Ly thera icr the reform of

30 judicial cetablishyaen’s, Juciciul sreceduze 34.0, the

2 Lida and nb utters. Thix Coumaissiea 2223

mused ॥ Sr John Romilly, Sir Joh

30 aod Mesa: C -. M. Mavlend, J, A, F

zaweins, T हज. Ul? £ was

dlrecteé te addresa ‘toel= im Fhe first instsnce lo the pra-

tiem nf aumalgarcstimn of thr Suprenin ao¢ Siar Cencts

of rach nf ihe presidencies and to devise a simple syteri

८८ pueading arn practice, “omiform as 50 ag axewole
throughers the whole jedriliction"

Foyt this) 7 In is First Report the Commission submitted a gies

oe for the arcalgumatiog al the San rere  Crart at Fort

ahis Witlam with Saddur Dewarny Niuzar.ut A asl Bx

dro, well us eeople ana uniform codes of Civil and Cri

Libel Procedure. appli:able ta =I the courts ia the देह

The Comission submitted plang sce uodes of cc

oa snmewhal sitailar lines for th> Nori, Wustem Provinces

dn ther Thrrd Hepert and for ..adras and Bombay in

Lasir Fourth Beae-t. The Cemméssion'e proposels for tae

amalguamaciza nf che +४४४23> Courts and the Supreme

Cecets were giver etfger lo by the Indiae Tlgh Courin

Act of 1001. Im 10%, dhe Indien Logulaturea epactec the

TGasiicidge 11००७ of Epaia, Volume VI {1993} २, %
318 8: 17 View ९. 95 Soe 20. .

Eeuslded for he epivincepent
ng ane Coder

17४43, Sir Kalwiard



18

Cade of (२० Procedure (¥II cf 1358) aad t
(Nal 1891. The (9८.8 94 Lae Code cf Czazudnal

& 3 ATFAKT PAT

tends to tue High Cenrts by Lette
Seeoml Re
af Lea de.

3 constant

be of great kenvtit +2 chat country”.
sa Teceanmended the: codification
1 81245 xe tae personal -aws of the
Hindas snc the Mohazuredans h derived  thedr
sctburily fram inie respective religivar

४ Puurlh Cams:insi:
aid 1079. The १! ai
५ आ the carat remposed of Lerd Romilly. Si

E asl ey
ang 9४7 In ng? The | Penrta
India sud was co-upozed af Mr,

Justice Turcer of Alistuabad {later
c. [. 20748] snd

wich ihe धाड़ाप् of
acs laid down by

tae Scrond Law Commission
Third 43:00 sULrrutled

Preperty and insurance besides making sue: gescions ler
revieion cf the Crit. Procedure Code of TRHL. OF these
dra’ts only he first bacame law in 1K65. The Thirc
pr Cedi iMied wilh ths: apsthy of the
Gevernnent of indis in taking no action or. their reports
ane 18५ adyuiescesce the Hore auchozilics in this
aitiluce: of Lor Caverncient They nésigaed in 1870 partly
In> these masons and partly #5 a result of 5 controversy
bevecco the Scerctary cf Stqte and the Comeissioners on
she one land aul the Bee 303 India autur ties om th
other, ux i cersin proposals of the Commiasion in Le
draft ज tic Law of Contracc. The Fouzch Commissi:n
was directed 3. resert ov ceptain Bis which hurl already

|( 7८ Oude of 1३15 ४०१ goaded Zour dose deriig dhe
bs eels Wece ute In Tie? and The ‘mt
Cade wos sesise) ७७ 19904 Ly 01: ९३४८५ .॥ RR weil yo, The
a) Ped re Chee TRA कम Tevited खाएं plaid by che र्ण
2972, __ 166८ amd (098.
. ८०-33 Regarr Garé 13th Meaemh:
"Sic ९,

+ ३04 Mc, Tues | ..++॥ ccc

टिक Erle: Me Joba |

sai 2 wreblems
licaliun gra eame to the conclusion Sscane

that “vbat India wents avid Serre f
i il ॥४८ं 99913 ne
wuld Tself छा
And such

पा
Fourth

Suwand hy Robe:t Lawn Ulaler Lord
ies sud Meo J Ml. Macleed हिल,


M4

a prepared “er eodifving “he laws cessing 19 Nego
instruments, Traneier of Jtroperty, Rasemneste and
Hin, o¢ber subjects cud ty wake suggestion, Mie ता
odificauor: af ir mymaining branches 0६ the suoetaniuive
law uf ladia, Tae Comeniatiow:» «umpletee thei
in about ten mouths and submitéec their regert in 1
ta aieerdanze with their एज mendations: ES
ag to Nezel:ask: Insleyments wae
5 réluting to Truss, Treaiste:
were gnacied in 1882.

Ther ३. The system of laws aml jarici:( orgarlgation
Davide. Sstalilisd rx: the Isst century 05 the baals uf Ie cerliez
हु ST + rmmmenganers has continued wth
avions dawn és lew present day. The scopa
uta need for Laatowement particutacl, ia the sphere 61
judiesa. ude h and procedu aes has been felt
hecughknnt this long pevied but {twas caly in dhe: yes
fellowirg the fret Wor.d War thes systemetic efforss were
71232 ty the direction cf redox... .

Rate, (0. The eacllest of.shose efforts was the erecticn df the
Cxcomitrse, SLL lane Rercdien Committee cf 921 ancer the
chairmaagiip of ie Pres‘dart o¢ che Cuincif of Stave.

This Camyittor was gntrueed wilh the tas of ‘orto

e

hw th> congiéeretian’ wf Ive 'Govarnmer: such m (8
11161 ८: cerHration as might be ne ¥
the Acheet attatnetle slardarda ef formal
in she atalute law of the 60.19.
a did some wor 40 the spaere of ६०७३:
some Jtianucies of suketantive law, ¢.y, Sueceszicn! and
Merchant Shippiry. With ube reliement of as sdeond
Presiden. in 1932 cha. Commitee caasid to funedon

_1 In 1923, «abit frome che elf पर ai

of ७८३:
x ser

Bebadur Supra, th Lew “Member of the Vicepny’s
Kanewsive Counel, & + ॥त का (0! was appolnted te 30: ith
the problem ol drlay dn civ-l देख ame? the defects i the
cons ililion of the juéteiasy and the subseartive: and,
Bracedural laws uf tue country, Thle Committe: hp:th
Mr. Sustice Rankin as, Cheirmar wae “to enquire inth the
Operation cad ciects qf the eubetinlve and adjectiveflaw,
whether enacted ७: & nrwise, followed by the enurts mn
Inéiz im Un at of civil suite, oes i ons

Fiterticn (1 mg | the

fer myisicn and
execution of decrees 1), With 2 view 30 ascersain-
ing end cepeirling ether soy and what changes [ind
improversenta shesid ‘be made so ma %¢ provide cor; the
rere zpesty, nonnem.i¢al snd eatis(orhiry despatch a the
buxiviss transected inthe courts ané for chu more epepdy.
TH fogtnry exectition of the process ispucd
Committe: was cxpressly dircrted
(9 irgquire mtu sirengta of judicdal cnr ts
maintained ४४ tt load nees. After a thorough and एज
inquiry 40817 tre vs: proslems the Coraniltte: mbmitted



छः

an exhaustive fepuri रेत 5935. We shel 55५7० occasion te
refer from 1090 to tme to its recomraseduiona ४७५ Lhe
extep. te whiel they were ig.glenented.

Cacimotres
>0 earl

+2 In the yeers precallng indeperidane depen © athe:
Miers weee set toby Uke Come) unl Provir cial
Gove cating २७० ६० 1109 pe Uewlar problem, Amongst
soe Certial Ceunurices inast be mientionet 186 Indu
Kar Onerumittoe एक 1429 था oxemiw the ecwditions of the
Bar in India The report of thie Comusitte> led to the
perp ol che lediaa lar Gonucils Ach ए 1923, Bexlisr
$2! the Stutes cf Bongsl. Binar, Purjal and Unite

rues hed eppoutled spewial curusnittsas ter Iryuirs rig
Use proti at Ine supuratipn of the Jedicisry from the
Kacoutive, Ir Madiss wo quuiuitees were apoelted for
tar diutw Purpose. che fist i 830 wilk &7. Jusciza
t iw ad in Shri ड. Rafah wives

Tes post-independence period witresxd a powerful
ermaand for ६ complele newcien ictlan of the legal ind
1पफटआ' of tle couutry. Not ४-६०२, however, coud

inmudiaicly fellwiy 1047 1.8 orca’.
més proeccupatiou with: cther
peegslby acute. Merlin must,
MF Spoof [17 izh Court Acveazs Committee
० 1849 und the All india Bur Comittee of 1 The
Wigh Uews ऋ, sigh by
“Ar. Tus oe wag pppairizg ta maquite
‘nte and vopors wn the adyisubi igy of curtaikng tae mizh
of appeal wid revi ‘aq extent and p.ethoé of
curtail ck tures thy! wight br adep
. ris, In view of the
Tasteicted cheractct of ‘ts tems of Sererence “he Conuatitcs
ced :tselt ky snaking & few conere.r propecals.

: Ber Commitee wra depoluted in Decem-
lhe thpirmanship of Mir, Custice Dax
slums teferred to it were the decirabilily

ty af ¢ urilled Ber (or Treiizs, thr continuance .
if 1LisPsreast practitioners. the ,
alin ot be 6:03]: syrem of commel and :
and che desirs ofl of a alnyle Har Council, The!
ittee -९0ए॥५0शा् ७८ tHE qi scion oF a anitlad All Indis ;
Gaz cud the ccp-inw.uce of fre dusk ay ystera in the Sombay .
aad Caloulie High Conrta [In regard z: its 12119 recom-*
mendation twe uC ots न, exppercd dissent. .

17. Meauwaile the States of West Bengal’ and Titer 4, Bracal
Pradish appointed seperate: tu-atmltiews in their réspoctive Tee
Statey Go Iepurt on severe] promlems relating to tie fess
Bdminictresicu of justice, (The West Bengal Committca fudiaal Re
appented ir. 1849 under Sep Acthut Tresor Ilarries, then fo} Care
Chiet Justice of Caleulta,: wan erked to report on four fe
apecified sratiers— fit) ret in the ४४३२७ of admittistra-;

w. of jivtics it. Caceutts, * vefsero 45 tho administration;

i. i
:

conthiwaiu:
हि



Coacknica.
tick ६४८८७
ake presses
Law Cane

प्फछांजा..

ik

ef justlen it tue rural urces, [०] refero. of the legul
pencévien and (जी the questions of 51% aid lo indigent
litigavs. The Comwnitlee sebewitte? its rapors im 1851
Tecsuaesidine inter alia the setdayg up of a City Cini] ent
Sessinns Ceucl and made several olaer reecarmendsdons.

tur Pradesh Commitee wee cet up‘
wth one ० ५ Mr. Justat ६. ४. Wanehes.
déring ithe: qaysliea of vefotra fa

hy whe Pruccxs of lira and making justice cheap
exprditt Ths we १६ arencs were falrly
Comuniler ils repere 75
af resommendations, sane cf whiele
mn the fee Jer 11.27 -tnplrretitinien:,

14. Amongs! lun other annwitters coatatiqtte] in the
Stites incu Filo pertiensr problen. १9
May ‘oc made cf the Separation "पा: "
Bombay ules thee ४1४99 of Mr. sice T.okur, and

us
har an WSO wit Mr. Jurtice

Ss we have sean, the wars of the four Ling Com
3 of tie as7 cenvury formed integrated who-e
aunt togetier they aewmuenpkshed the tiss'c it a which the
Firs] Gew Commission wre entrusted but whies. for
reezouz alzsudy explained, it sould det sceomapilina, ‘Their
४ १७७७ Wiricted luwarde Lu ercalivt: of a sn-crdinated
ag ef Qeayls nf Igy and 5 well-defined and as fer ag
possih.n a ynignd system nf rules of law. Deir exnvheais
all 8. was on Indian conditlae: and Indiana a nid
hs

vour, in the word: cf the 1१६0 Law Co 7
as, lo creste a eystem which woud be "३111० komoyrable
ix. Cuveroment and benchcial to the pedple
Their personne. consisted of Syme ut fies

ists a Englgnd, Toeir tisk waz essential

a pierrering nature; ॥ lay prinelpally in disiineating the
browd 6410४ ¢f a system suited to ndian conditions. The
scksequenL ine ulies iota the civersc problams effecting
th> Isgil eng judicigt ystems in the present century wince
all considerably res‘vietest in senpe and charactor,

In cortrast, aur task ds wore in Lhe Datura of improving
and reforming wer prosaint structure of 10% ९21 admbis{-a-
lion in all ia akpects of revising ard soodiZying the ste ve
lew. In favt, ours may well dc cescrived as the drat
quenptehens've inaciry inte our legal system. We are (hits
faced with ६ task cf grenter edtopled ly sud réesponsidility
shan chat waich copttpeled mar predecessors, Ita cdeu-
plesrily is od oF the need for sdjusting the machinery
af law ard juztce t the changed ideolegies embaciok in
our Censcdtaier ited mar rapidly clenging conditions.



&. -VRE JOTHCIAL SYSTEs

1, The powerlu. ag which Fhe system of Courts “775
Ate: Jadivial admixisirstion has ob 9 ४8931 wunybar एज iE
scitizens nesds to be pointed cat, sv thw, :६ may be appre. mheaer
ecdateé chat the -eform of fhe systeta te a 2:90 = vital
imporlanro, not only to the Jawyer and she judge but also
to the State aon] “he: -ivetpge citizen, The smooth and
‘aoeedy operation of the Coiwis of 14% iy escnciai to the
Progress bi the commu om bac growth of ite ecospmic
and itediust rial stitace, .

3. The yasl yolume cf ordinary origitul civil litigation Volaime tnd
ing Ue 1709 dvciee any one wWeac is skoan if the im clo
accompanyitte Tsble L ७७७७ rehuins ७० 1964 We refer to lnmlcc.
10 a2 ordinary civii litigatien ss opposed to dieputes of छ
अत kad, arising under‘ gpecial emactorents or detér-
vaired by specwal quiris. 1७ terme of moner, the ५४-४९ of
‘uch vriimery litigation jexeludiny vares which cannot be-
vatued In terms of muney, of which there 18 ५ dager
Warner) appreswhes che crdev of ome hundred crores of
Tupees it & year Tor: fumbter nf suits instituted in ihe
प्री] 00५८८ exceeds ten lace snd of these, 15219 nine lacs
46 cases involve chprtes ८1998 to sms of yupeez one |
thrusand and below. “be rhajority of thease actions affext
persons tu whom (| sma cf one didusand rupees and -

Iss represent all or 3 :narot parl iW Ukeir belongings. it
would therefure Le wrong co regard them aa petty dilipaion |
hat wirlhy of ennsiderstion. .

3. Thle 1४०५५ dite: not tfke into ४26७-४१ Hee pliate १
prucendiays ir appeal courts, 2७८ age एक it inchote oftpinel (]
proveed.uge befare special ttiburals cuntlituled obser 1 जा
evera. enactnents. Taso special Suals farection mmre *

cr lees in she seme mar as cnt, ‘They de‘ermine

spurs betaeen cvilixen. ua « fod between citizen

बचत the ७. ‘Theiz decisidpa alex! tte rights of pate.

Ia + 3UCL ohusals ope: ae conde led ext [181७४ jurindic-

Gan <0 malters pluned within ther purview. Thelr decdaictin

are 14: subject to appeals dr tins wh.

kna az also sivdect (७ the Serie 10४18
A owery larse Turd) हक रण

Courts vfs 40६ al १7६४८ before
ourels in 01९३ rrmina tle oy + पु

these
4. Rent Control Acts. Latd Retatn memmures and the
‘like ‘deel wile disputes détierottratitie” hy abc agtneres:
<Obstituted fer thal porpuset asad a a
।8९+फ7ह2४:

the furictiona wath wins whee a have tatteh den the:
eridary civil voutts, Mo Bgures “ate ‘avadable to छाए
‘the niimber of persana ए। ‘ fr ste spettial Eppay of
wt

mia.

ais M of Jaw—a 5


is

libgaion kuz having regard ॥॥ due ise-tung resture of
is pisbable that ue numoer excomd.
॥ Utigatinn.

recrut ieglalation,
thoee

ararcest In ordinzey cde:

Pl

‘Table TT gives an ine,
at browgh: Lefore vou
Coroglete iKures < tacee
lavie. In acditlon to tye inmrrenge aumcher o>
ly srougkt kefore the courte an रस larger
॥12:४७७३ by the police cx 0(कए। elépart--

g the ir.vestlgatior of nifences.

>

d facta ४0१ ६५: above Go not, aowever, purliay
४ picsure of Ue unipret af dhe volume al
the ctizen. Beck action canons al
aliif ard « defencant ln tuses
: tL ७( ke tora: ४:
“s 05६ हएए जा unt ४८४७७ cigs ia
wiluesses, Atlee १0-1६ ६1 .७४३७९९ tor dilTerent miephrids-
of disposal such os diapasal expesle, 119:83] or +८॥॥७६१-०ा,
dienngal ov. ७ compromise god cispast w.Lhout core
ats of the narazer cf 5: who apve in
Giny O©@ year as DaTties ard wildesmes io
Courls wewld pe ainvus twenty lacs. The
mal casrs wale excced cigtly 08 JF we
Fue: accent The ०9908: of 921१४: rxumined
: lise and ए 7६४18 ceneertn: it appellate and «he:
Panes ६ [5000 ax exeeth.an ane insulyvency) :४ the
lar courly aué apecial Lritraals, the 700४ ray ezcer.
eyexea whit muy nearly ६७ Ave per ecn., of cher Local
pupulaon of tac (०७1१५. .

Privesdinge 7. In audution to Ian subardinste eric!
ferdone goapcally sprak.ag. origina! 1191६ of causes

wonsticue ‘court cn -he Stare possess epee
rshit, seeaTicd grea. import
The ussurg? ou! baciena. corseipussess pb-ch
we ABS ty a heat extent. aller the
lies, The change al fis stame fer:

TRISTE cr
है 21प्ंडउ' colal; 2
iy coneciaus dt
tilirce ६. hist coat
wd cf his claim ६३५७७
mz of atalus anc wppertunity, Tn the contest yf 2 new
७1५७, the zicizen “clsplays a keorny Use ition
mtractles cf aia new peta sights which one १०७४१
rorapec! Grom him a decuce ago. The attitude

zea bas omen encoura ed by 19 changed gapect
_ Whi. formerly was a १६०
४! ale or the dutgse 0
n of aw anc ordes, bas aor caanzed ints
c argauizatlon ordeging the o
aA izen. “Ihe cunstans ४
Stave with tha everytiay life of the citizer. however: well



28

interticned and beneicial, cumes into tepcated conilic,,
Tea] cr apparent. with the guaranteed dems ard the
citi~n is navurally not content ti) 1.७ आय lke natder
adjudicated upor sy the wourls. Tus, these recent changes
in 00 cucestilul “cial ind एप्रब पाए structure एड
an in¢-eaxing aumber of citizens to tre oontts.

3. 10 wey also he observed that net all cazex
crumainal get dievt:: of wy the Gest Swariug. In a ५
all लव) ss clisguisid of after full नाल, there ave several

j 3 एग eavh of these dates of bear-ug, the parte

nrvasions a5 Tile
lived time 19 2९ cheir evidence cn
(0 days tixec. In sbe result. a 1317. cutpuution of the
ge aumber of the peraiax wie: attene ecuccs have to 60
Se OF 13.0. 6 Leo wa gO,

9, Wokt baz seen sid uberwe: $ enough to shew “he vical 10०6६+ ७
importance of ule srwper functioning of the ccusls ७ he 01 पक
tis sntial welfare Szate tuwards whier we arr "

bows and wibunals whch acmi:
‘wing rele to play.
qd abolish courts end
Not coly urust courts continue
7 J daeve larger ae] ar 19८7295:0 ४ auc
etions ly prrietm. A strenunis eidiyour must
Le mode to ongure the dizcbarye of shoo 2y
nd sc 8& 49 cost che suitoy and che ».



Cagpsearine Srotemant chuntaas Jae auriter on! 021:

Not Jenene |

Tarte I

40g Syore ceoireccs be che sear 2954 In Covet of ordinary crtebad fettatotin

ims Ivapahie = Toca)

verve Tens = Bayeeu Toda)
Sure Bs १७... Re sua Ab. 999 ५ उक्त vfvwlua = Nombte Value of = erwin
acd ind avi und fice (38 90४७
कब, 1ह८.. Si. soa Ra. ava Ha, sooo mry ४७५३४
e
t 7 > 3 + t S 7 wm “re a I
amutbra बस. TIE ars इक... Ey B98 3.923 BIS gow 63324
Atm yak 2,2kR 1,720 3,722, ae} 9५४ 4,5 1% 10 ५ 212 ।
‘Stir re i Ln i ol bee MROLOTAME
er
Bomtay . ajay Jed १011 3835 तब iidey Peres 1,798 97 r2znzua value ot uals
itattent
है... HA. 74.6. NAL aA NA WAL Nas 3954. 2,763,901 a High
. oo
Madhya Fates = 619 STR Soff | amTeS Same 4,800 pa ART tS S47 १३४ 4 Ie ioe
pa
Madris नि हु.तर.. rey छोड 1655 311] Egy 4-abT 729. LESTE 7aFqROR julien,
Mysuce . cs ee ra 15374 6.216 572 aed +? 199 SpTSe LaTaus. “The bpares
७७४५, +२५५
Oniast aus 3,772 2 ६:४०4 WEST tae 458 यह. 24370. 44 %ह3:24+ lee ie
1 Blyevee saul
‘Cochin: sektte
to zhu a
ye weds.
गा ee a ne ee eee eerie Soh Cs] eh brag .
fur .
है amy Peis’ 6,422 अन्‍्जबर 529 R43 gs उठ 4e655 उसस-3 742०... wveihible,"*


Seach. 508 3956 36 6:२३६ 1,663 Uae 2m 18०३3 Test AAA new : बे

a a es

Tray tury - खत 450g wAgte jah ens 2 29 4 250,74 47 once pive che
Gaucho एलतत191 प्र

14.1५ = to.

us दि PEPSI ami

tla Pradey wpe ab54a 2२3:इघ२ fisufay 1S,135 न्ग्न्य्कं Vos Aq NSOFRR AES | Pert C Stites.

Wes Reap. san tands abide qaig 7१9... AOS HS tA 82991 ERIS Te

SHES 21709 :3+रूप्ब Ssec5s ६2196:

mois asart 10275 10,254,293 ै+7855क7

१]


Tams 1

Stamens shuming Je nnmter ej (पाकर! (0:95 manor ssf eicmarad per
ie The Comets of tare ऐ।

मेट4६ caror and she nutiber af ५६00ए2 rhe plitudes ox neve etausund
an the tur 4955

t

andar. . . - - . . . . 3,13,3cr जैउर-काव “Liews wot ircluce «.
Gun und St»:

eo ५» +  + +  *+ + *+ $६+ ३७9०३ 5७0 -- soot

whope . . - . . . . . . ranga4 51३

१1५ . . . - हु न न - . - 1२०5-०४ W443) jag p28 mye age

Moby. 2. + - - न ०] 17 मन]

Cor. . . . . . . . Bie oe

Finals] Prolab. . : - न पु . Bo iy

101५ 511,»  . न - . . . - 795.588 0 है 2.1 194,466 1,२72

क्र: . . *«- se ee . जप 4.879 - बन

Manipur *$.. «६ + + + ६ yz - न

Madhya Bitarat . . . - oe . . $4713 WML? rooted 01221 |

अर्थ सजफलसी।... =>. . - . - eS hd AMD earl 4,64,540

Madan . नि नि नि - - . . Gp,722 PaDhss न 3,732959*


>. «4 «$४ « + + ६ : STs 1,33,557 न eked Teles nes iad devils
Dashes exacuined 1५ Hie
. . 4 पु . . . . - ऊाऊबण . Lopsig Moaxisceates clu:

a *+ ६ ६ * पु] Parad |
Aziusehnin : . - woe
७ - . . ‘ . . न
पुरून्ण<- . न - . - “ WZ IE
ba Se . . . . . - . कक $,04-9377
Vi dhyu £ . . न . . -- oo

Prat Hengl - नि . . . . aaaqatg"? 2,74,000"



focpe uf
uo

पा]
of exining
syst of
Indica
Adina

CLaRics 1,

Gav]

Radice)
cluanges not
DAVERACY,

4—INDIGENOUS SYSTEM

1. The Lex ats:gned to ts of suggesting ways and
fur iingrovemmeut of our present system of AS
adininistralina, does met preclude vs fram 0७15५॥769'
cal or reyolutinnirs mieisung which may moke it
sudahh: ln ou needs. !

५. U1 is raid in some ouarters Lha: the presen: ae m of
administration ef quslice does nat acvord with the: putlyce «il
abe ee ang condtiow:. We are that large e ६ OF
our [7191-७५ 326 literate and live in the BES
conditions deaand, lt a said “a system cl judi Fie

he genius of cur country" pr “eh indigen

Traticm at
uus ४३०७०)व० mren the Utlut Peadeaa Judiciel Aelorms
Commuttee of 195)-51 staual, though by « majority | it "it

rarnol by cenied that tac 7१-॥१४ ७. poiceture and evidenca
waizh they (the Beszish) Samed to cogulaic the wroseepiags
<b evlut, Were in yomm: एश३९४ foreign te our genius end it
Many cases ¢ 19300 8 comveniert hanely bia ch मत.
delay [प्रध्यंर्एः,'

ele un

ogirion 07 these views. The amswer we have
3:86 With 317 950 complete waqnimity tal the ¢ysi xf
fue peeved 11 aut caurtry far nercly men ६०. :४1/२ though
seu tt uls orgua haz grown aod developed in “pdisn
ix nest (97-५9 pooted In the Indlan 3 It
Caclsreay desteutive at 4 ॥
woh to think of a red:cal changc st this stipe of
velcvroeot of our country. It hea 0९९० pomted ow
three wan anve sugpokwel ४ eversiva te ७४. luligen
ven of judicial adm.nbtracign have no. realy applied
ford: to the question. Iz would be vidiculous, it islenid,
] wel(ure State envisaged by our Corstithlion
isself is based JurKely an thy Any-o-Saxon magel to
chink of vemedelling its syster: of j
om ancient practices, adhexcnee to whien :3 totely upeuit-

ghle in meslern स्वाद seu ways of the Wr acs ¥ We
wel, it is ead. think af rejecting moder, medicine an aur-

ger’ wa caytent cureetvez wich whet the ancent:
cud pritlimt

4. Nevertheless, must apt fail to distinguish ie
the cesentsn® prinripleg af our resent sysoem ard iis
diary features १:६० clamsy al curabreus procedur
sheulo cel be Luwotter ax pointed ott ciclier that
charged ww th fasvoning vor laws, have while regardir
English iawe anc inst-tuisna-as g 770021. conzclouskt



a

canting wusly @cberspied ronwld, thew th suit
Incisn lite gni [ndian ons sitempt wee con-
tinted thaousksal ane period of Beitish 2७॥१ ४४-०७ Las au bse

went sszociahon in ga ever-ingrepsing degyre of Lidia
feglelaturs, Indlan Juéses and Indian administrators ix the
mukiay of lawe gud the sdainietration af tustice. It msy
be (921 we have Jeiled lo mete te laws and Blea
ysterns «ine pracedu mins sLficently 1:
our pzazie, To thas extent, po 40७६. racy require modifica.
1:६७ and adjuscment. We have ecdesvoured ic give atter-
Hen ly these prints cl ७ eve bul sugh changes Gin iis be
made within tre framewor of & system suid be aur pre
sel ceaditlens ad ७६९०3, whic ye tas nende ong con
tiocs of a १.७-०।४ cng:

tre adgin‘atre ‘er of juste and th
if ‘ices bp: which the syatern is to be spe
nated. We agvee with the opecewaciqne of 1५6 01:7० Prades
Judital Reform: Corniatteg! that “th: weed cf ihe wr is”
5 add cviderce should be ao siny
available to the rich १७० ihe pees
alike cn] that It my be opomps id effcetive’. Bul. enm-
plificalion cau u of fundmentels and’
eszepticls. Perhaps, as poigted out:in 8 ute cf cleem. a
he -vport of the Comm-ttep, “the teal 1एएसे af tre hear ist
thi onal a pees: of duty, a greaver regard;
६. wanwenicros, groper effimency, im all these enn-+
réa'ied in lhe sdroinistratine of justice.” In any caye whicl-!
ever way our needs ue 1008: at sto be asinea by]
an naictence un whal has rc #u-lad an indigzc ous eyetem!
90 & 8} Meru eliled te lhe genius of oar conmry.

Uewever, ow 2] byicly vteavour i: gather che bie of.

exentials cf such rliggnous system 9७ sxisted In ons findiemoce
ए ta the advent of the Sri ané palit cul that!
:rngen fala af nur aneleng sysuecn ‘wate nol. very different|

Zrom theee ot cur presen syste.

Th is endoulredy ae
desi-akle when we ern ६1:
aboald act he firgtttet है
tration :3 4 matter (२ ६0६
ed 9y contemporery ci
slraclyte. 4: I zi
डोसा fron time to time
danetiomizeg al waclely oe
call fer progtessive 109 जो 00:
syscom and voutrasting it
we mrist alwavs keen 1

|
ab § athdy uf the ‘ash is very!
ity Ie the futurs Huy it
inl acninip-
ra ite advance 39 mauld--

lana a tae extiting social:
staxe to s'aige its needs!
any system which governe Ube:
5 ०णरथ्ाक्रोण<डए0 एंडलज yrouled glsol
जा, .. 1] considering the anciart|
ish the present judiclel syzlec!
iid the differences 15 th: sla]



था
aol saxy li discover the details of the system of

The
ure: -

Whe Hints ft “t 5६ clear

iw [४३४ vere tivo systems cne ul which
Sywem,

ay be Jesegeavel the Hin ». nt Tre aislines of she
hi: gazheved trom. varicue 310:22: पु

५४. Commentaries and B.gesls.

giell us velusble infortut.. bu. ars 10! TWN OCITPTS-
hengive, morepver they 4 fer # Rocat ceal cu regaré to che

de 5. iis nel
ory with recerence
ber derivent

. The secoud eystero may be elyled whe: Mu:
whica was based upon the wistings cf tne M
a priu iD Dsl

cm jurists
countries. This system: ७६3, how-
exclusive ६३७ I Wr couutry. Mast ६.६ dhe

ever, never ihe
Muslim rvlers (lowed i pokey of oor-interventian in civ
wnt peri ind che [née :ustieacions ४ २०:७४

Tim om the one bend cod a H ad 3 oo the ethar, ar betwear
tio Mir
diz somtion of criminal , 0३-९४,
the Muylim led subject (4 siene uxenpticins.
The sexy was not popular with Lae late mess of the
people bul was us vague: शा large purss of che country at

:॥ nf Lh inkmdvetion of the present syetein hase en
we think. uneessany to consider
she Mito aystans 4: the ज्लाएड्राचा। ecard,

lop & The (lrds systeo 3s outlined 43 Ih: law books
ede thre $ 6 (79708. deveopmie Tn ils vatiy besinnings it
wo (६105 Ue teipenal espekire

afgeanlily uf thr: yilage, che caste, ०४ “he
led the pews ay cuurts und they
Jest tribunal: in the cous.ry.
narce. of the soctel str-ctura,

eing ti
These may ka cz.

wshacdawa langely Fun

- Peelurepoles.
‘Syste.

4 ts 101 hinpat Jidis,
wii Law,

Wage 258. ह


er

hy tewritovie] uniz was village which in those days

decble m2acutc of qalenceay. There erse
ed cua, ४२2 such 8 term onli be usplied to
them. of che  । औ। 1 aud the villsze. Thonesh twre
jn fu auth: fir the vic haz tbese eepuisr wilunalk
éecived cher potvers froma the king. such के vinw siiwdy
cétre: ( be rele

lv lie wither will: any certainty (०० mxuct
if ubanals. Colcornoke

meme ¥ a sysan: cf ackswation.
ons teats that bedere revert sauld
medi 4 ts 2९ exha’

2 oTrent 10 ry il it

rOlers were marily cate

amd “he selepton o2 the sutbority of ther
i Atemps were mede fh tam

r (00८15 tlh the Roya) courts ba’. they

tipully because of the deesy of the

regulaz cceurss oust bh
if the evelution cf a complex
aa vl prucdutal rales el ता ovidena ran De any

Popular whanals, 9९ 2७७0१ the vi! SK
cd ters lowg time ard (४:४६ even at tae Gtre of the om
borale ॥ (छठ, ‘iveur cout.nvence

fuuct.ong

cipia

In voxleast ६७ thes: pogular srikwmals, the Royai tribu-
néle were subjucl ५७ frequen: vhunges. Excem. for ths fucl
foal ancient litera wre ६४९४४ o¢ the. King as the evurce of

Tharme 503 ragares wi with the cuoly of pro-
tecting frarma, thare ‘s nothize show that she king pc!
sonally was incharge of the administruticn at Lue law
ust.ce generally thraugn wlivers
Ful फज-॥ 1

cia the popular n-
Lut som: of nice ए100५ duly eeeros 76 1130३ 0
in the Re Trust not alae 0 forgocton that Ihe



अजहर,

E. idence.

Wikre

26

law enforced in lhose days was not, apart from ४52

(५1110 Jaw but फ़३७ mordl aw. (1 wea reper as a
acceg apd religrous thy to Wridicste the Irish ané uphold
the rightewus and pudish the wrony-ueer. . .

10. Uneer the sndien: procedure, rvery person had a
rep af nppenced ६० the judles. tribunals. The ceurd wad
beund 10 hese him 694 lake necessary action. Thee
appeate vo Aave Leen ge wourt 70७ For the iascitution of the
uit, though thers srs provieion fur the payment cf a
snail pecientege of the valks ०८ Uhr claim by the excokesft!
parts. Whas mey be.cullec the ‘uhise ct the right हैं suit
waz checked by eiubopat= rujes insisting ४७ ४: surly fexort

bee ६५९८1 ur 1:७* 1. of vertann odes acvive stops We the
arly. aor, wad ciscougage: comnpst werscns jland-
ing ty paraculer relahucehigs. Hines sod cecalvies: gould
be lunged ca. pecsimds who cama forw and
oafetaded Oo the cribunw vide. ty uf
Le uilicers of the King ८० ७1७ a Fon es

iecused of certa.n specified oflegzes.

11. Rufes also praded wba lollewinp @ plat
i? a wcillen 1४:५5 by dhe detendant. * rei
1 lo a procedure For: clarification of
dispute analogeas to the framing uf issues. is
lowed by che 12393: it}~hich #e-derec was tecorded Yefore
Ute: Seti * gn hy the court waa 7९€६0:९७. |

res slec provided for 2a porse deelsicns +h she
७33 cde of Lhe ८ ai A plaint
waned at gory time berere tae defendans '881-
his sade er. THe cefencsnt hed co mi
auewer ip the presende ७२ uj cornziain: i
be that the 305 ४:

okecurity. The ar:
i dealp: or special pleading
omzciate

sislunt and re
the forma ct an 8002:

2 9-७७ of down in the case of an adm
Sole ese 1७७00 ii 0 other cages, evi
tu be 1#८ by the pat en whom che burden of pruof la;.
Tne expression ct “aarden of proof” wes undecstnof in
practically the een geuse ve i 4 clip. Thakur i
indu. Law of “f omg to the agplication ofjsuch
important privwiples gs tre ceelasien of oral

lacy evidence, the Cac} ie
dire: snd the sitludlon of hearsay evidecce in
sourts. :

12. Wiinessea were examined ky the court in aS
senec of the ‘ah . Pressing alco enlsned top: the
sUnzerinaing of wy ue athe examination of witqesses
The xls lait down taat che judge el

5s: fie Bane, should pe #69 ९
that [58200 ४0४२ evidence of {gait

nant retemizeion.
roms the wu



39

fore soft ९फ ९1200. “There ix 8:४७ u धकु-

400 nd take the exam
of wimeades ane that. ¢uch an Sxémimation coutd he
whe Toug-going character; quile thie war st for
she reason thet nether 2 Dol.te inves! ated agency tel Lhe
t exited in those days.
Unbt she Finda system
pretedure that at presart

0
corncewonted to the inquis:
nbtsins on the eouticent,

13. It aay ke xotked that che mules alo yrovided for ine

pansleediog ot tow, ingal bepoesertlalives ot a decessed hes,
tty.

14, The decision of the माल was pronmunced uome Judgemecs.
afver the conclision of 191 trial, Evan in 1152८ days,
rence in tke quseqyeetcs of 7 judgment un tre
ects efter contest ufd a faikment passed tc pete sens
te heve ceen becnguized.

5, 12 is nos quire clear fron ths sncept books whether #7,
the decis: of the Royal co was Fins] cr was suliject abd Re
7७ 2४ ९७८७० oF appeal it, the vase af 186 declalwis of the "६#.
popular eourls. it sms likely that “bey could have been

ta'cen ir. appesl to the A opal ett, Snfielont iadicae

tions, however, ex.st ‘a sh Uist Wire 8 coust pave it
detniua 9: whieh ihe King Wid 10: gersonsly pert Frye

the mnativer ००: suusnyuentle ke bred शक अप betare bira, Tr
certain cunei lve veattey ebuld be reheerd, pxsibly on

ths .ndsis of new evidence 3 jufumenl mcu.d also be

ect aside un uke crowned nf tend

Wr have attempted only 2 brie! tuvicy

structure
and ©

repealed assertion that the geerunt
eto 1४ justic: fa stien to cuz weds.
धर . nal ons: ti resent syalem omy
be segucderd gx 319 Té ig undo ly 3 version af the
English sercen. uoci ky 30mr Wags 17 suit 107 condi-
tious ७२ English system which.bed developed thraug!
ths centicies wax pried ef its cdcal anocoaling ezd
ceebnieal'lies ard wade ddyptublt to the condivin.s ia
Ineiz. Bul it is ७३५७७ «> sme (nil im its essendals even che
Mt Hintin  syslora codprie i
resisomably-piinded ७ Wak
ist features of 15 Fv ene of fund
wheter Bria or mher, We have
sa features uy Lhe ruley od pleading. tee snarner

plaints were to device:
ah whuse of the ribt of
onder In which Litigedten



MI

Téary evidenar, che cule: (al nvidernce
Une cule thal hearscy evidence should
the prine:ple of the burden 02 oreof. the sro

7 ree 21४ Cuce mim, betty wo tie :: 3

chat had tie ancinnt system been allowed Lp
7, it wnulad have a) छल
Gilevent frac (६8 une thal we [ofow wday.

sy rruch

जता Ves [10 sutcess af ihe cenuecl ays 1६७५
iss scoylar courts, As we haye sen Mags
were founded! on communizy or sare. Taer>
whulin ai haw clcauis by reasan of
a strong evtulsalised system of Government.
Tags was suAicient umto iteclt and manuacd ita swe
without any incrferenve from the King. Phsir

Jue yeapect which people had for
h, 9: 1801, ४:५७ che only 18७ prevalent
The grup siltern et 1| Hie ix ७. naga
wel thelr successful functioning.

The basi he guveeas social awmiecture Hank of #
doy. pallern of (04: 5

tials
Te fect, tha
to the Tainuteay 101 the bwea and
etizon of this coun.ry. Tre ivp’sla
Menwe ard :u che Stazes lurve underta

uf pulllens uf cit: . lerently, if wag anthor
gle lx hil ween Lat January 1353 aad 200 Navatiber
1357 Patlianent had paused mole chur 10798 buncyed cod
f é 913. in the four years 141 ७ L45E. -1॥४५
11-ए७७ gaseed wo chousand five hundred and 81 8-
eu. of which a3 many as “५८ luwndted * and
deull wos land vefour* In tre past-
t wmen: i pasw:d ubout six
addaion gbuul pight
atopa amd रहा ५-1 ४४1४
ated A Welfare 3150
Lon on om Ser wicenuag Zee’
जा! palermo 3 धार ७ के ope pling
Rule af Lav as ty ba evoived by

Med pers

1.
No cne ean assert that ih che
el 071 pri
intr in the

जाता, Ad

५ ५ Acdrers of che Previdmic of ! cb: at che Inenguratco of tat dual
Cow Inscines ! 80::5:७ of chp Indian Fralane April 953, page ६,



19 The sta, chet Gu: pregent sy:
adianizuz-on is unk in second with a

A OF

eushrings be Fiindanenta! Kiuwhcs of chu एज८६-६ ad the
¢ Priaaples of Stine Folxy Bet sary
fuundation for a uew ६: wert How

the gohte wins Hersh 1:
Meas ewer he ८२३:
Of ents. ७ enapesent
prozedusn,

While we icc avare hat chere
His; 80000 iaspaicets Gf Lac 3

in rem. wey
Mm aus) rsd

ley Gegeer ‘our
the plesent and tha: (६.४८.

1२४ extort, AoWwever

arc te
h 496८। on
5039

al jodie’ 8', Presson

stem lon

oy ba tatesree 29 gubeiune: Tse geqius of car Soe
hes Jound exoression in our Cy "1: Whielr gesieg,

oC Abit

छाएएद्७


ज- THE SUPREME COURT

The cole of 1 39५. thr Simaynrywiion vf the Supreme Court ig 1030
che fies at Wus Pointed out, thar jt aad Ike ०४७९३: and the most
इसपर (2००, yarted javisdiction emora the iiglest Courts im the
Commenweilth and Anglotigxon mamtries Apacs! Avom

the width and vuriely of 15 Funccons, it wes Tetui 10

ee Wider urvicte 42 of the 2५.19.11 3.19: ॥ jurisdetion
wus alicngether new to our omnly. It was calted
Lpor. to ४१६०० as ६ proector of the Dundamcn at rights of
vilizen againet 0! tive 8७३८, Ingiclative section Tre
imgertan.e 22 the (प्र: the wphvider of the cule of
lew ene «3 the bulwark te citizen's rights in 3 dere
fc crmatifuliues oxy a ol ef rights wee ome

itpaion एवं India, tre Supreme
| $9 sePoguard = the fundarnéalsi
erties OF lee peeple. An independent
ne Covet as showh ny fhe working of puch
Cucres in oller deroosratic etal cle: will aave ; far-
reaching illuonee 1: ike corstituticnal bistary ‘ant
pregneze 0८ the ३/॥.ए1 uf India ""

<peurdion For the adevuate dischavwe cf 5 accent aad ever
of Sante vib. ities why Cowt bas repeatedly act drfore itseti
“right. ud Sas ५ tas be than was) while

jon that 9 ehtiaen should, before

21.9 Court cmdsr arhole
4 attice 226 in reepecs of
‘of bis Funcamerto 0.४४, observed’ as

the infiingemen
fell:ras:—

“Fhiz Court is thus comalituted the protscar snd
guuraée uF finden rights, 2nd ६ cennos, eou-
isdeatlg  sziJ. che regponsib‘litiny sx: laid upen és,
‘es tbtectake ayplicstons seek:
aga.ost ike iat ungementy of such

The seine vd dudge as Chief Juztice 01 a Iqter
dselmyg Aish censit tore ity of a slatute sald:

tacs ७७ 19 seh
a ol aut of
in & crusader's

“Tf, then, the Courts in this court
iapertert und none ४८८ esay Teel,
any 0२5४२ to Hilt at Tey, ve an.tho

. econ a 2 the 7८: r
blag (92>, ४६५० १. ८. 2. 9.

रह णाप5ात Thapyor =, Slate od Madam, :॥एए 3. 12. 8. gpg! 9, 595

+ x

ottoe Sopreme Court of India



पं 9] कर whee se
o> ॥श7 85
Court

53

Texerutive ayhan test
‘Court fas cau) at Lt

Hecred wile:

आजा libecti.
imuute silegacrds le
annex. oF an indcpondcut and cftic.ent
Wliclery iS 9 ashe qua vou under any
governiers because of the  iatrc-rr
onolne qua.ily aed the sue seadene
éud the proper atuministvacion of jusls
fer gréales uuder a demncratic consiitncion ५
uuelly le desarmine the lez
ve bocie. uc: executve suchozitics as

ining Lae wopertance

ssfequardire the in- Hsin
४९ छा [ग€ू juccuiary. वि

ulation bas एाएशंज:परे 221: of
shall ke azpuinted 1४४९५:
के the Chiel Justice

a हु
Judges of the सि।|#1शका॥
Im tuay deem neevesate. He boldy ofp ~ be atzains

inemuvasn 4 ra pL au the
wl Pariiemenz
ad nf poe!
the

Const tat ure

‘us has

i okyinus that the selection of che Judges vey =
फ a Court af auch plivetul irnportance t+ -
; Iw rutun = वाई be a cespemsctllliy 15 86 nrereclre,
पर The Constiniting of tar Coucl
cox: mK: Louly af the people h
४ end sho TS whole, sitting az :
inutters Gecideé by th> Hip. Cuurts
The Const oat consist of Jucegis
body ara. at lineyer's aed men of vidian. क्र द्वाताओ
f Jud 1 Courte. Such
nd only by tre
ore da Une ge.cetton .
oe -_—__
The Stay of Adoaras ¥. ¥. GL Ma 1952. SACK. p. 590 ar 7५ Gas, |
हा —i



Kay
of -luslges unade w.th an eve solejy te their efficiency ard

€& say thet euch 8 course 198 heen followed’

Frcumal

Diet. ॥ Ghat oWsiiasl aud cry onal cons icere!

Bacnces. nomicking the ५९:४८६.७० Judges. The
¢ vained gruad that tie cumpenerit

wld have, as it were, cupteseasation on
Ti:o' we cal cuveclvve a serelky Stax

पर
ot cOncnanel representation, whieh were vit जाए
हे आता  lendy palilic ky the Brotish, ye २0३६

rely Lost ther influence. Wi pevhacs ig gt ॥ nom:
site? ia the general i .

be fir srr 1. orit: 50:
tedly tric. that fhe कएक्र ६1% aroone the
/ High, Soars has net alwsye found its way:

feum) oene
the उछाल Is ६ thrall, i आएं, incecd,
te baat ए its sh entiticg, t Tay

not ca गंगा: 9:007:6::
mede by ef Jeatee Kaas at the tia

linn af thy

डा: ९-६ Courl ariay dince the
abe > नह High will baer
to be strong ir ticir petsunacl, * + * * Ter come ye!

befere 1937. there waz 3 p> te a
tur. (126, 12 stim ph ५
ng the High (५७715. 17 शिप्टाफ़, if
sinaeinzurentts wil
Aewevrr, dog nut
* ed. > hen>
दाह wall amt injucace tie
Tigh Sent. Tt is nesessary ७161 for

tre High Couma have to TeMmaL
at acs) enjoy 18% condi

selection.
Jet aecalee:

On2 way tura im thie conmecion Gs tir wx
|॥1-78601५ 10 Che Supreme: ot a
‘ fy

w Cost ct iat

'Prececsaps at Se -४२४-७3॥॥ siting ० । ot २०६:
#० Jemmoe 24.15 | 1351 &, 2. pw


38

2६ Covtt Boneh. Ateytion may clan te drawn te
elalurs€ procedure whch ja gone th pugh tezove
Jiriges ae saleced fos the Usiled Slates Guprems Coust.
¢ lage even the repreaenlative institution of the
४., 15 consziicd.'

ican der Assi. ४।

Tow vetection af Genre

yet a dudge of che 5
हंस ता a Sigh Cour: tar al
idvorste ef a Higk ©
« 10 19 Sp ein 0.
1 One of tae
आ7:6 39.0 2७ the evidence
ol ihe ४37. ७॥३ vo
ct Judge lrom che veo
Liva, 411 wes, however, xe
meet ४०01 0७०

the
Ceurt Arach.

WP ooh
so fax

॥॥७::(७/0 cs, it Py

view of apxintag

6 aopoint to he Benen a peveun sb

Eout) oo prevines «judicial ex:
exe

Ling et celired Tle Court sndyex

ou gatishechu y ane that there Nest “or

tq lake rectuite “mmr Ite B

We giver: 050165;

“The uzesent cretkod vf selectre ludges Ire:
1 ef the UL Cuurt. tetind or

Suprewe

cre bit 2 i (॥ :101:
koawn ingeished ToeTaones of the
Ju world 1: . witty oad judyes.*

The wed fur previons julict.L exper‘nnec ७0 the pert
Judge of tac Supreme Courl wis slac atrersed by 9

al
forme- Tadge vf cle Prderad Court

3955 Fal, 43 हक fhe. 289
fl Februcry ८५55- ‘| .

searerican Tia
sued 62. Aci
bp. Te3—T2R,


a6

a कएए एप]
bees pus तो

ey dear
venue nee made ex!

experenee ib Frelewd ane Ine Uniled Suates
te bear out view, ७ Englind, norruilly,

Jidivial cReee without एव आभार
ia lhe [Toited Stules. a large 0756४ of the
arene Court tuive bee chown Loan
suver bald tud:eial ofler. Recertly in
tac Geer J rin hte. Lectures et the
al Penrsyly: Sia kCurar
aces of i '# who have
zo far sat on the Beach
i cf 1B? rears.

id not inrlads she rareers nz
President Truman nm > |
. I these 7 Judes
pefuce: their
. ५ Jisted cases,
331, Story, Taney, Chase, Bradley,
1 Hubs. 116 pobted dul, bat
deves.

Hughes, Brandeis
sul of .he 10 Judges who Juatice
to he the mi. 71501 out ot

Tiere wil aiwags, Jnmite Fran's! ter
a very Tew bien 2: आए time 14 to transact the
442 ‘yusiness tst mene rurmes bes: an Supre-ns Coust,

ma is euiled to the servicer of these rob
i salsfy 11.० latee irzelorant
nal repeesnntatias n> nolitical

हू tke Bench of the Supreme
su. the Bre pppsscs roeepily ln have
<doaomr cHnbtion 1५.8 Hore Mimistec arated in
inkbL tast attempts made tu secure Che appotminaant

stirguished adhvecares to the Supreme Cuurl Ted “not
weseeded, —e sent om ‘«: pint 017 1:81 sucoesciul tawfera
warn a considerable uatyurt. ancl if Fou went suitable and
pelent, apertiel s0d abi: Tudges, tu -nan the Susréme
Caurk, then | ४.1. ६1९४ should have come relutinn ta the
vacnlnws of the suzceestul ‘eyrrs.

tOscainer Geankvo Westy piace

MYDS.
"Lok Sthhe DeLaes Uered.2zoch August, cost Fd, VTE, (६ 3886.


37

pat Love २०४०).६.३६४ ad he y 07 lhe Bar ४-६
10 She salevies paid to Judge. The Ea
> Tndge in oie cruntry ois aso lo retire at .
repersion These ६३८७, lowever,
'; DrevenL Je Suypcurn: 121]
vy carruilneet irom distinguished
ers हा che Nie if ९६08 23 taken te: 01908 cluen ॥॥ the:
ench st sn 386 when they wnul: weve a fairly leng tenure
uit cle Th

wlinne “rer. the Wigh Czaurt Precerence
SU PRC Bemnacally to heve Leen bi Fest
have only 3 alert ctu Lett on lho Migh

Tt 19& crecusstly bean oti 7 k

13. Even 4. servi: ing.
Tadges, Le

. it apprurs 1७ us t
10 "2०1९९ at the ३:

es who vere called ugar. to 0९६५३,
voumg age when th

pt ime Tigi Courts Was live ste
the spacinted 10 the Supsene Ci
hes been well-recen : Lbal seinréy ip net 4 considers.
at ४: makne eppeintmerts tu whi tenn called
seloctioy paste in Guvert service, More weiglity
conaiieraciors rice <b 11210: appointrocnts to 1.16 Suprasce Need ter

(घर, Henin arte! ve एस, tet 19 maxing selertinty from expec
palteting "7४*०:९५.

be fr-getve, &
meine. which

ion, uaity of pexzona whe have retired Longer
or are adqut 19 recive eum the Tigh C a
el the 9:०७ Cave!, kuna resulted In tw ch
aoe levar> on the Seurk. la aur पु
undesirable that & peach wha weuld Frye a abort व्थवप्रात
of office should Se hush px २ Judge cf the Cuunt Tt is
1030श31.0 ३ i ! frilnrests एऐ tie stability uf the judiczal
admizisarsliot of dhe couulry Uriel a Jedge of the Supreme
एज should be able 10 have a tenure ef uitie: nz at least
‘Ino frequent a change cf personnel 1:3४ ils
Lose decisions Jay down the
law p* the fand sud ave Lindi: 21 all the Courts in India,
Certainy :o the law and a continuity i 1: upproneh ६७
sue burie cusstioos aro tandamental requisites ad (1,७४७
tetid fe ce imnpired if judicial persenael is subject w
frequart changes. ‘These: objectives can dest be uchieved,
im our opinion, ny sclec! ew the Supreme Court Judge at
av &er when he would have a vem of का. least ten years
or. thy Beth,



li. - metkmt oF octuring catyer lenare fae
Cudecs eppoinied 13 tbe Supreme Cours would be che
caging a le ave ol celiven emt ५७ eeverly Fears. Such

a courss. it mo, ‘2 urged, would have ‘he |
& Enger tenevre on the Be
Mes vl ruuluvity aad 4
guestics of the vassitg of the eae of
(311 Judes aevses ale. i
‘he sec ni retirement
which, we sre recom:

Ww t

Wigk Curl
६000 ज:७ हु shoud x ed te sixhy-Aye
Varte: laters Judge of a

fr. ubstarce. m chese ceunsties there is no tinned
gi lr che Judges uf the strserier Courts:

<usetion, ve de mot fee’ in
i ayt-ducdl of retirement

४ (७ Je expectation of life ard
7 re satimpocuireas * mietila] capecituess
४ very different fro: x

rie lag Staprene Court 1

t happens in the yast mer.
ILactius 10 136 (hee the 2

Net Pewr
'

olgerv2d earliar in regard to cho
loc the Judyes 857 7०5 vith mate
2116

॥। 4
hie? Justicse of ndis 5
number. 1 curlrast, it meg
tiag the evire bistory of Ine Arericen
ia puss iuel «cf uae urges] ४७0
ve been ar (.: fourlenn Chicé
iu the Culted Scstes aypests to be

muinuity in tae otize of the Cr'r€ lushi
us ty ५53 easetsial in che inary
Ho Ibrrigten.t the eounwy. Hie 10:
ut Of jucitial edstinistratior 5:01ग6प्ते in our
innol be cver-ermphasized. On hin rests (he

Consticatien



”

tien of “lin Lay)ext Coeart ८ the land, the
mm by thie, is whe law of the csurtry and
apesl curr the decisions of the highest rt.
Agarl fun his umetous duties as (ke Chiet
ne curries (1 3 meranra
हु jemiasteatior. of justice
or shown beri ia yiette
12 ७४ persorne. of the
As the ised of the
met prrachiees
बा 4६४८० the

dn the whole of 11९5:
poncerating ४०10२ ir thr
Hick Courls all never

1. +. pl Swath (1९5२ manifoid duties
ons weld reqyir: suroe tine to familiarize
b them. He needs 1.53 ay runnd the cuunty to
she Far and Lar ju persor.nel,
wiwur 3 €22e0tini % ot him bo
dixulasve bis duties. Tr the ark suecezslen to the office:
a> presen. in viugue, a Chief Justior whe aimeedad

in fain d.avizinz (0087 th his acy Luks Leones liabto
0 कि ८१४६ # ve time %ए pr’ force Lhe
४9.४३ and po qiee he zuasiders |:

fe
rf Tuslics whe hag a tenure of five

Jeude: U5 te a related pomt upan wied we have
it has been tae practice Medd af
snzat matin judae us br हरारे Bem
cecatreice of a vacancy.

obyieu s
4. ४8 eeculited by snare =
19.७. ॥ adtice

ieee of abilizy anc. ex,
si-pable 0-

stters that mek arise from tiric to time, a
wt aad personalities and 8557९ all a

the qualifications which ¢> to wake an
Tre considerstintes which mast
to thie offce
| woul govern

udia should ke appr.
: copsider: kas we haye



Abroad.

there wrild ke av cbjectiat tn-
1९ office. But 3 tbat

the ९8६७ ef appomcmen.
Zi Covet. ४१७ such

wee a आप pers
NT 31'ह बा per:
C:

siesbers ef the B:
send,

iPeders. Court)
कहा त्मा
wart were fixed et

The Cursli uthon
Et lace of Ine

5,60) respect
41 cxsuted 016 Supreme Caurt &
wert and ५४९ a greed)

jurisdiction t.2
wed the salary ७- dhe (हा Juatins of the
21 lis. 9,001 ond that of a Judge at Re. 4000:

2s sal Caiel Jusics and Jd
5% oT furoitked
& dueror sa'acias sore fixed aotivitbsabod-
meropzing ००४: of living snd she sizing mit of

५ C
जा edcimor, ta
been

30. We :uay ic this connection lock a7 tLe peeit in
Je Ceive! States ang the Unitei Kis he toby ary

uf the Chief Justice af the Sur eme Court cf the Tilted

Ant passed on the Shot J uly 39%. Tre salaries of, the
vl the Courl were alto ralsed tron Peres)

ly thr: sare Act. 19 the United Kingdom ‘stao
‘he Lord Chancellor, thr: Lend Chie? Jugtioe
end other Jutiges were musnd 1 1950.

Ic gopeats to us that the impericace n€ the judleiat
ofRoe, 7s bleh place In use development of the nation and
" f Ine srork of thr stgeriue yudiciary haye not
ty appree:azed हा sur country It is pertihent

ce: tics t> quete the ॥॥ vations mad? iy’ she
Prive Monister of Sagiund Sie Winelom Churchill whew

luc. in the Hous of Commons 2 Bill for raiking
the somynecislius, of tae Jucgea, He staved:—

vericd Where ewervbody feels the Toor of i
जज: and gripes, whqn Memburs ५ the Fi af



41

ne whole cowie js gripped 12 th
ne: the Wellave 21802: when
, though geetly  enprinees
blizied, anything ut tae 1.750४ए
ry sunk wages Zequives dowoly
Neverthe’ nas, wives
Um 46७९८ Court Jucces,

aye felt dt our ducy to cele: this ipeavbitt slip fie
॥ ६ ak the 110३६ ¢> allow me 2 place

Haris 1र्ब' lew
that time, thay have
Uke fa! in thy pur
In ‘ess chan ¢ne-s’xlh oi wr
We are not propraing to remers 00: to
१" Jewel, Lut vnly 49 repicee 890७: one
fiftzpath cf tirir previous innim3. We ४९१ Musrefn-e,
sctlng w. moderation Stasility is very important in
hr ssilarie 1. ir nel likety Coal adether
20 years छू]. page without acuce aloration, but there
stogle al amy raw bee (ei:ly long (९11००, perlaps.
® generation kefore what we new decide ke altered,
exer ५. २ Abul शत! Dierbaseu.tie
(1 have Unie wevole ३७४७६ io live
ips, should have a reagonsbe

1 ५ don

७१100: strie> snd ri
pasig cm ७४:1१: 10 ५

He based bis फऋणुठफन्न, उंएा aa increase on che nem of
speidence cf che ccd from the

res througout tre free world.

not oly we do justice between ३08
aud ora. Hr itisn—ane this js ore cf the raost
ingertaat functions enmsléevead Leenmyprrhutmitly in
some Jarge paras of the world—hss x de justtee
betoveen che citleens and the State, Tle has to ensue
idmisisiratinn eewerms with the aw, ard to
edjugicate upon the legalizy ef the exenese by the
executiys of 119 powers.

mry Te (मशाब्छद+ Hots हा (2: comems ९७२०5, dara
३०७ (०५ Los.

आय, Coe, 1०60-6६,



#2

onk, those who Fave lel the lide of 3
diylgu: । 9 Snow bhe “abely responsiblity w. i: 2089
upes hin. Le ४४:४४ cars a | gages,
lisve the arsislaoce of 8 but it is on hie
sy that ever in Ukese casos tha heaviest
= © Th other उपाए in winch lhe kuacur smd
forlune of citizens are. «like, Le bas vir sole
‘tp of devision, and » heavy aac दि real he

derei by juuyes cemoinedy the
at Jesvrum, Téelning and charsete-.
here qui litlés ate ret to Ge measured in lerme of

. Shilltrivs aad per हर

They are ut once हार
sla presen’. a contimacus

132"; atirsction “©
६3 in the halauc>
y ६ dk raanet
din beat Ingal brains
i A cavsitry

and ths finest characters

va-onn pr:duce; ami heswily
epoch wi
13:48: +o nea

Minister printed out
J ‘osu. inezcased bry
. te the cevipiet, would
wuite] fa- hf 14%

.. 1:91 ae bis (७८७७5, Lh»

ough 1८ Fueges' salam
eh. artuitl |?

. 10: difference

gome lev gh Gis # vid ता820॥0-

me. f the ctuz “de of
14 Ure way of “ule which his dizles impose Daca
years vended lo be in ingly

coy: “ilze Ke nbisler epplies
‘a end High

Cusct J
wrett taé
vechaced
the

1 amaeel
cls le ६ scall proprelion of

piece
we pewer bed 3
/ ७६ ."४ oeiginally.

Fug. £076. २०
eqigy, Quis. reoatq-


४६ का ने niet oviten) etege in our
Our eonditior3 Cemerd (७1 &
of the tativn pot lneracd
॥ yesilic, Tress overlie
3 10836 वो. Tpperline 76 sutyest ४10६

पा आफ: (प्रात 08:65... Tait
molissize the 22:

“hen itn

of irexzazirg the persica pey sl
Veer es soudilinns which in our
euale ord. irdted uon2alr.

॥ 1 cnoltyr am pes sions “
yerned the Cio
1937 whl hae bern smeaced Stee
s fav ae viing cuz the peu.
~ complicated; by

€ the Sipren

& "

attic आ रब. gee .
9 judge of 3 High pyc TretivEe a pe
We ostk i

3 ser

tec, Peyuisite 51
vees few ol lar Tne:

We cn tas UTausrate
pensiat = Lv reftuwtcn ta

Js praca:

tulys pb

fev maser:
ally cued wud on an ivetage, come t
iu of Le

छा ४16 these pomiars with those pa

the Supreme Court of th ited SI
2s Supreme Cour 7 the

ad Slates dhe prng.o1gs equi

7९४! [01 11!

the par

paid to Heera



a4

Meagee

eis sension 1: whiter Supvesse Court Judacs

The webstr

12173: Niucemerat te a
ITZC income and worp: a jug
ch :.alus ard dignity of tae बीए
he wouid

cae &]
of the Th

ave Teti
tivh afer cha

183३ State has ceama:
॥1 acd wha hae
svoule: Crore any
ons seale ४

rene steers हे. tie
Court ep that
have a> 1६13...36 of ofthe ten yours. Ur ens -
Led ५12९० fom she bar he woul!
when appointed, :: 262५-८७ uf at lease ४०

rey sidetg ald tae
गो, Ube minigun.
art shtuld
Carel Cuctlee 8५
i any,

the view

ave Judge of the =
wast at Rs. 30 and
a servios of 15 peers

Lear ri- DB. ‘The rights 2 ceapret cf Inve cl ubsecee: [100 006
Ye १३९७. '€ sllowsnow) uf the Judges ७९ the Supreme Courl axe
fénge alka auverced by the peovislens of the Government oF
०८:४६. India (Federal Gout) Order, 1937, Arcoording to 1७३०९
rules Ui :95%09709 feave [1:॥0 may be grentad to a Juder
af the Kuprens Court dizing the wel: periad of sevice

in Cie Suprem?: Court is ete yeas cus ef which ix mohthe.
ern be granted :m w.eéierl certitioute and six monthe oa
any otaer gonutel. Gyt che leave slowarce to wih 3
judges is enlilleé is arty py tke male of Re. 1,10 per mengens..

The lau thet a Jucee ता 1७ Suprene Cout enjeys kong
vacations may lx: a goo! zround tor limiting the ) ur
period of 128९७ whieh he 1:9५ wbtain during his ६ ce
office. It 393 dlitcul:, However, woderstand tha m



45

जया pt Teaver uliowuleo praated 10 dy
eve leanght that if a judge beciuwue ent!led
fouve Rilospsnges far ६५! peri ta which he

a i He ig, it appears, ':
(ois metter as worparcd 1७-7७ Hes Cui!
Cea lo leave on an cllowan: ९ ecu] bo 223 colary
0 “trsi. mut] oF bes leave and om stluycuse of
Liergatter, To ease af ८
AilowuAe? Works wt ws Rs. 1.100
750 @3pPedes thi (५ ४७४ ४०३ ei
35 10९ qurtter of tesve lanes
en coyrenancek ४९४ ce

One slawidd
tJeave, Lk

ur

herweun de
13.49 2
11 थम LY 8 texiercy
to शांत & (369. (८ mortinge vec wotk even wher they el
td for # shore ese ald ore uci in a in give
best te ther werk, Tale would ly aifeni bee at
/ ३१:३७ and velucy: of Uneir 13010.3. work. ६०)
sumicceary ta eaypiesize the desira 3 el avnidieg
songequeswers uf shis theater

2. We are, thereines, or the via that ty
9 5 Judge < Tene Cours sl,
ag 1:६2 as threw of | Judge ol Ibe tas (.

: deavie giknwr-
ld Se at 12837 yugy:
ptt.

4. कागज oe pained ach thee in the Uniled Kingdom
care yo 10६०७ regiiclieng gewcrump ७७७ judgra cf the

Court stuf che Corre af Apges’ who constiote the
Supreme Covet cf 70७८: ax in Engis dogs who re
nor well enue 1७ perform lesir tun fot whe Reed
Fas ३०३५ from work 3
and this period eomncs
ting Iheir dulies.
of the judpas ~«
skool kurp ae. Sore. Buch trust ix not abes:
derstand जार absence from werk occurs only
when 7. *2 really meressery,

Rohe ay : “
up further employ the Union etter ani Enel
relivenemt forrid the sulject of a considerulile pody of drocem
ovlderun recorded 9७६६७ ws, Ag we have nazized che ७. er tie
har imzess! co & Sudge of whe Supr Court who हा
i ths shall nol Lheveatter plead n- act
Teast detsre २४७ on.thor! Tr:
Sup-roe Cowl + h Up
cha-cber pirsclies while sume aches have lanad enploy

rar 3a haparsant prgitions amrike dhe Govarrrar: Wo And sharoher
have greve 211 ६15 whedhes rzrtingt chamber praatice utter Petes
nz १5 consistent with the di ef these retired

cuint wich (४८ high traditions which retired

¥e an athe coun ries



ar

29, Tut theve can be mu doutt thet il ix clear'e un
desizable that Supreme Court Judges should tuuk Jcrward
lo ncher Cevernaent employment after their -etiremont,
miekl ix i. purly it # larg numaer ef caucez
Hee! Court and she average citisels 1:४४ well get
the impreezion. that a Judys wha might ‘nok 7orward to
keag emplored by the Guvezumemt ater his retiremert.
work chat Getach:nert al
: aon gascs जा which
8. party. We ave clearly ७२ 104- view thud

12 thts & lendenew tx xAecl tre पल idence
f the judges anc. cnoulé ‘x dlacortirusé. omathsue
iss (0.6).1 0 2 tripe it nf व rapt
reont cilfer hy fac Union ex # Stax of tae Caslrmat
he Unior Publis 8:

Han om
crupformenr
BrCtyary

dena. In Gaz view, 8 is ever muse senes-
wine lire irdegendence of the Supreme Conz
ye $.छाधि। pe wane bias vilage -
g oc curse their
ite 146 :0:४१६:२1-

jusedctivo of le

che gato

diction uf the
c.

turn to sonsider 1:
> the cnutitier of its ८
file. By आएंट 6 33

celia ics reat
eT erce, detrrmnatior, sentence, or
1६८ at toatter passed ०0 cade by ary Court
1 | दा he Penance tt.

:. 12. te ४. Com
av Mor, West Sengal’ expliios the ectent
in ike dollowies vrords:

fo-kiu-rlaw
wl Uk
5श॥

Pt veut Ly cue cutestiiut

ES rs

eo 8९६1. with eecbitrarily or that
hin leo | ir HF Trick
litigar?. shen no tecknice]
ke the Quality of finding cf (23
iy ef lac oxercisé of
intent amd ७119:86 uf
x ot the Court to see
t or perpetrated by
v2 of covyts and trlbunels becouse cerlain liws
hase 9७ ihe dec’aieds oF chese conrty 06 tribunals
final and conclusive. :

TAT 1६ egg¢ 8.0. 9. Ge at 6g, 94. Maan G 1.



a7

This exlensive dis:zerlenery juciediction conferred on
the Supreme Cours has, on the wlole, ७७४3) a 2306 caluvers
provision. whiul te: led Lo the cor’ ection of grave injustice
if. Taany cascs

meercise of the powers of the Supcetne Court js Sqeaeion
Se 136 un criminal matecrs, huwever, २2५०४ poe.

ure
crirnsiderali

In ous of the caries cee which ॥ sefiee 41, Ue
Quart in i 2६६ wel thks 5९0७४ cf its jutiscfeton under
Arsisle 136, १७८7-0४. ७७ bare Jaid dow pls, snztogous
tn thos: Callewed by che Prive Couns? rd 10 | 14

के save lie आह: it theee :nattars, Fazal

x lay down frau
for ¢ructlisy special
were veviewen. ०४ (7९
ov Vhe King* 10 18 suff
r Ole purpase to say chet though we ars und
4 follow len be: cigidly che reason.
Lang adiministracive, whieh simetines
क lay Privy Council ae ot weigh with
(3070 ering! ples ars प्र ४६ Turnist ing,

: t fur ४४012 due diecretion

13

32. Thorer the Court peeseriled ia che beginning of
lesyr in

ts: 1358 है
uy che #॥12॥0/- un wl
-bave in these wattera. Fhe extort of tz
with the dispensetien of erloxual

‘courts kelow vil’ appear Fram some of ६५

In Matesi: Fravad y. Stefe af Utter Proceaht a 1:
servant was convicled uncer section U6L, Indian Penal Cede
anid gente tym: maths rigntous
[0390 -30911:0&0: i «The एशापरड्रेंजा and

sartarre woTe Judge. A ering.
1

The ure, १६०० ५ ४७ 4:६७ * mp SR छा८ Hg

2६८०० Singh ०.
3/,,1,1२, :9८७ Fo
aA.LR. ६:


The ec
UN d>.

Freteéss in
hy

revision seitioa 1५ Lue Higk (७७7 failed Or sppeal by
special lew cu urder article 136 che Supresne Cautt
in desta with the metter observed.’ +? this 4g an
us on specisl Lepve anc ०): i scriouely wrutig
wath the oT fact have cen shown, foz
by ग्रैंड (८4:2८. Cort
€ sentence of [1097:3071:11 riod glremdy

Previa) cave was uranio: wad was
icted to che qaetlim of senlenee ols
Je appeal tke Court aowever  clsetve

“IL is dn. yexsible few un to interfere for ‘le simple
has ५ * * * + + it was wenirtowl in lhe Mish
ta go into che question ७ 1.
witht the power of ths Cf:
the seDteus: aA

In yet anuvler cuvet obs: Segrerie Cunt mdreed the
gentence :७ sof a conviction for forgery ani
st by ¢ public servam.. While nelding
veins duet 10 Wle-fete wish th
cf fact thu: surived at Ly Loth Ike ©
oat that the sentence was exces and reduced it,
ily oxemples of sivvler iuterfereme be the

etiun Under article

हा s
Hic end in the profession that most of
Instters dhoacd of he IF eh Court in
efore the Supteme
प्र

sdlaiving sc lesst a red
the awerd roper sentence 73 8 matter of }:
Slseration the exercise of this giscitinn haw
rena Ls justic::, interfe-snve with. the
sentence & ame Cuert cancer article 124 would
be ahurnul

34 Nolhiny, pathavs, relecte mere leary the nvanner
ii. whivh bar Supreme (0500 haa neve ing aning spacial
leave in etiniaal u.utters thu whe Axures cé agmisbion
of appeals oo 1:05 file of the Court - ४ Sop ears tal owl af
WAT व 0907 Stok जप Huran> pay ४8३४ तीए [४०:४७/-० “yey

hipster. Mate OF Et ८ स्का; ALR igsg 5.0. 7:

1:
६६ शी७६॥। 07६४६ ७. Ste af Bilas AL. asa SC 77४.
AL है, १३५६



2
wa Imeny iy 544 were sppepls westitute) on specie) lone
{vide Table TIT). Ti 13 aot sprprisi ing. that nutaitustending
sted right 02 penta id under articl+ 13
being lookaé upn more 20d mere
‘ape.

the Suprere Te.
ara finul ut of

ivh the Ceouri haa exercised dts [175० Miginoge
130 fa criminal s:atters tga एड 1७१3:
uf same members of the Court

wiegiviugs in |
wdzment, Venkaterama Aiya a

itscT, In a romocity
abserved ws follewe:

3 sbvicus Lal. Eke Intention of the Conatltulion
r an agpenl cn Bis anéer Article 134
ny (9) th) wa In exclude it wider A:tcle 136
ung lt etrengly ssppors “he conclusion reached in
ALR. 193 8.0, 168 thes Eke the Privy Council this
Covert vould aal 1७0० as 3 Bacther miart ud appenl
on Twig it sTiinal cages.”

ey

While cre may nol coe with the srundtiess ef ‘he
ing thet tae p nie of Article 134 11॥ (a) and (७)
> :भप्ट

of exclud a Irom axtlile 136 the powers
lesye 18 afigea] 09 facts, there
wich furlsdiclion Fee ben
Tule 238i hy the Sup:eme Corrt bas
tke phest:ge vi the High Courts as
vimtiog] appeal im the Staves

excreig7n ince
conridsrab'y sh: |
(८

it cert be guineeid thet lhe iote al Constite-
i tora Ihe Bagremse Court गाए a
ot crimiiel appeal ae own by tac
दशा अर: en che Supeeme Court
34. Thet uviecle hae hakeo lu कब *
hay 80710 powie to enterain appcals ire
tiers way gonderred op Goreme
है hy Pazliamenwry ieg isisticn, A Chie? Justice of p
Higk Courl bas vot thie pout of view wich Kreat farne

“The fisislile fevverin used Io attseh ow
fsionz cf Tigh Quurts bas practically dis
appesced. and this aia's some nxtaré unfavourably
a the presize the Hich Ceuwrt Judea:
appeals 20 ३० Privy Council. eapectaily
ween few Unt foe all sractiead
purposes the State IT gh Cou-t-was the ‘inal Court 6६
Suztice, but che vrrsent tendetiry of the Brupreme
Caurl €eemas ta ‘ve ta cbnvert ikelf into 2 revising
Cn ol appeal and ae 106 ony cant desided by the
n Cra:l is lohan to the Supreme Courl. © The

aoe. Aker Baya Kies +. Stove af Sowrsstore, 5... 7956
Ses M of 8



50

seat alse मे nel pechibitive, and ever it the igh
Ceus. refused to ४४:७1 leave Suoreme Ceazt kas
been wating special lepve wa: icle 156 cf the

Jiutlon very Chermtly. ‘Lhe prestige of the
re, been 70जे७ा ८ tc that of
॥। Sessicns छत cure ths

the Say

Teo bY

1. ५.10 act
2 फ comlsrred on Lhe Supers - (.

che Supreme (६: wed be fuiling tt

not act indir etticle 4358 7 of
ca euch तक s+

ferts.

that

uss, ४४०८०: provided icx ।
€ High Curl ae Sales che Finad
imina] matters. teat inter-

Cs matters of

cle 136 ६360८, ne :

ward of seolicdces, Che gra

॥॥ 01 138९३ of grswe gnct

ale ia 8

the dignity
is

“ihe heportance
the Hich Courl
dhe Siprem

prestige
Te Shakes

६3:9८ omni 3५. Anocken fi
pareuce Cnrl's
पाक छा... 19 0: भा of २४08
न जु' upneal 39210 ७: deri

1 <&9७3: fram she
» che आए ot 1८८

0७%६1॥2₹3 has been prepress
3 Mey aa "57 gi
ons of Labust tedoyrals wert
of OMhet, 1397. 144 such 5:

as for agecial leave. in
yon the :तश्नक्त-ज6, [0

Aicns were illnwed,

tod by tlese larg: rumber ct
mali are ern in LWwo
woth af

a no? equal to thr:
Treu®eent 15 faced. Tho prayer asocet, however,
५ tat Jahpur mictlee bei;
एक Py (0००४-९५ nat thy nes
zaelE whut. the Gifurgnt usps of lhe q
arize 170 1637 <poeale arc therefere Anda ic

which
difficult te do


SL

eae Tr. many of chese cares, i ४98
Cowit nes net ४' assliscite cf a properly written
vidgeient such ७६ it काट the
Hop Cen ny

ere agrness :। e dsepreal of Lnduatc:a. matters which
ossentlelle need apeedy diane-as

Ticuz the ‘Court Las made topested ¢fforte 30 पति
110 these 27: iti alurally ther >

arr. a
cor a sease bee toreet upon
che Court contd wot refuse to
us which wopesred to be
OU: 26d aude rich well
flew ov isture] jusaze. Ic w:

re ४7७८ Nuober of appli vr आया

168७९ in tlese ०: 1 घ Tenet syue
inpellate triku-

2 te:kumals

weal iets. = Nui ult-
just oe acbiteary
llenve i the

aprezaches the
४ ike Higa Court
et ir
. ven ouly
cae cribunalze kuz canmot make
13 -६ for hus ef the Leisure!
51२०1. these

it 18,
inter. Alrerative

६.1 1७ che igh
vemMsan to sug-
“he Supreme
din ony aanner,

-
ded, the
॥- 1.७ cat

11. Ue have pet bi
hom cal
Sup

४ 8:70 3€:४:८:४०८। ta death. (441०९
shotid 28 a sixhl af appeal. 10 ike Supreme, Couri, with-
जाई te nec Hoicrtitinste frum the Wigh Cuwsrl, Tees



Hot scot
able,

Dbaracing
Ja:lgretets,

ewggested thal Purli tary legislutionn to this © feet
unde> artigie 134९५; should 06 urwder liken.

4. Ip owr view adequite grounds (0४४९ not been -nace
uul Ser the prescs2d ea ergemen! nf Je right o= appeal.
Even in 08६९३ 1:07 orisd obey elaueee = (a) and «h}
article 13401), the Nigh Court bas Lue poreny ६7 aor ily a
wate ux Git fur appeal to the Sugrems Cuuct «er clatse
(ch. Thre i: nu recson 10 tuppose that sia svhle
accused perso eats
fellizg under as (a) aml (४8) of artic!
ures Tit cams for aptaal are not beinw carded 33 At cases
wander clause (2) of ardete $411). 118८८ i alse the safc-
guard छ md by Lie wide powers ए the Suprem:: Court
which sal not fe¥ ie be sal
Ta:scazriese of

15 bazed on

oe the Supreme Court. We W.

whis view. For overs century such caxr> have been dealt
with by the पे.
af she 2४७ wy i ti
ete is 90 Trasga why Che Fizh Courts shcu'd net
to des] with ach iomgs 93 Lhe ५६01४ manrer,

42. There has been vorsiderekle cencroversy over :the
qmestinn whelher Ube prenetit careti‘uttoual = vrev:sions
which an opinicne to be
delivered by Judyon af मनी Cour. should de
Teplaceé. by ६ prevision malin Wane
Supreme Cuurt le express a andl i
as ased to ke dons be the Jude,
Council, The midtie ता: oe 0009-6६ with

on

K
dingle judmrent :3 advecaced is that:

ul cissewling views ceuovt [sil
॥॥ 16५ itn cniads af Mur lawyers in :
Kt public, cusmutage stter-pts a2 persuade the
Susresas Court -o fsdar cages to go beck upon | tte
sacliee eapteced wiew and cavze Mlculle: and
embarrezahient to the Supreras Court judle-ary

Os: tke ०९२९८ hand, Unt iny portange ot 119९५: »७8 ifs.
moenls hus beet etphasised a: being of great valuc in
deve npmen. af law and ४: Fae Inpal profession. It is geld
thac the mincricy view of today tends very clen ~

view af the maloriy ta
views by thi



st

48. lu the early yoace, mony dissenting judgmenta Rely pre

were colivrricd in che Suppeme Court exorescir gf 01 20355. (7

cesee different and confictng siege. on legal principles.
Even the Judges «ha cyycurred ivercd separate jude:
mente sometime: Teuching tim 36570 cenclusinen on in gitar
ent grounds. lt is nue ve these sepuarute and cl
oxpressiuax of views Id seveal occasions ‘c a Calbore
by suboriinaly (ucts ang mores af the professinn है
appreciale the lay laid dywn by tae Suaremr Court. This
7 its turn lended to considerable wlalnty in the Jaw
laid deewe hy 33131 Gears which wedi stele $40 je bind
iag cn all courts in India

44. Reoeatly, howevey, Use Coyrs bes fevewceyi
practice of dclivering + sipyle

iri + 2: judgment as the judgment

of Lae Court in cases whefe ull he Judges = are seri
and vihen thers 13 6 diffeqace cf qpilien, 4 majority Jude
treat expressing the views of the majarty with ons or
mors dissenting jucpnents. The highest tributals of all
Commenyealt ecurtrics deliver more than ope jade

meat and even concurring Judges express thety views
४ judgmente fone thoy may teach the samé¢ ९00०
The seme pract शिष्य the Saprome Court of
th: "the Judicial Comm:ttee of the Privy:
Council éeive-s one ‘udgyhent beeauge of the peratiar
namine 07 its jurisdi:tion. We are, thernh af Lie view
that ile balance is clearly in-favogr of permitting separate
uni dissenuing judgmerts wherever the Judges fee! euchi
4 course to k2 neccesary. Nreliving, however, whe need
wind tee urlance of a clear dedaitten of the isa ao that
there br na misupprehension a9 to the tron fegal
principles ou the pact of 415 srberd nate = =oeoyrts. the
Court 1-88 already scetted the prowtice of delivering a
In thal

single judgment of the Cqurt in 3 large majority
Al
45. The reed for clearadvieurg opinions ender ० लत 4
143 13 even greater than a clear definition of the
soveraing | te land undee article 141. In dealing with थ॑
Terent reference under angele 149) the Court delivered wf
jajerity opiate with a शाह ॥ ig opinion en one Peta
enly by ome nf the Judge The tt hee, & ww
Appear, epprenieterd tee का छोर of clear answers ta
the questions put te it by the ro ident under articte 14%}

cha Preseat
she 2

शान.

46, In our view no renpitutiomel change is ae a 11२6 chamge
Oecermey,

in the matter of separale- pod disteeting judgments
opinions by the Supreme Cour

47. In view cf the wide jitcisdictian ot a
Supreme Court it would fo tostuctive to observe how
as bees able to cope wilh the ware beforait and f

vreceut state of cts Te Nite ap; at the en of tae
chayler Gihalier statement howe the number cf civil

‘State af the
Court’ kb.


i pectdiiy pren-e Court during
10 2956 and ७॥70 the It ८: भा ४29, 1956.
Tt. We alse append
1 proceeding:
of Tanuats. 1388 according

( ५. slatomten
appeals 203 pettiliees under article

Fareers.
Ae scuilters rainns :
yours 0.0 ave alsc pend
eeals of 1४009 kare ecmatied
t in de
7 oof Supreme Caurl ices net gees उ have ye.
arly 5 sclt Bet ce i
ele adrricted by
RS TADY 4%
lest in
oddition 19 155 baer) & the sypents tharn-
Selves. rust
hive: occupied
On she Ist ८97 9. 1958, nine getiticus coder article
32 pemliny frnm “dod or x: veady — छा
hearin, beer chr teent¥-thtes
rand £33 and * yemrg
1000 weee pac en thal dean,
vi appesl: ng ९०051. 214 . जाप! issues pend-
ingt =retr. 19: so ready lor hesrme. Clic of di
. hundred aud 1 apusuls of 168 which were peud:ns
sa 1931 «1.16 J
tees ‘
mur wt ISAC were lsu en!
Out of che fu: :
to [vs :७ esi ९, ee saty-
far were . All these reedy rasa
ave du. 7 listed, presumably fir writ ७: tine,
Adtgquary fd. oof irk ix Ihe Gupremo (0७८६ dred sug
आरती

ther the 50758 117

the Court
sleeagch of

i on involving a aul:
daw a2 10 i~ interpretation :6 he beard 3 Bench ¢} mo
heme iat vive Judges lae Court ume genésully to 11011 11 21
in lwo Darehes! a CerwpYtutiun' Bench of five Fudgeé nad
a Divisien Beoch consisting of time Judge wate coals



s. Tevently fin
iL the streaceh «

she averngth ww

Cevct ta luacion zirmillarec threr = Dev:sion-,
Beek ot Ive Jucdqes und 1 Benchce of
i and et mine]
now cezmit 9

url peT Si-tnpgh
its Grr ron te

iy

paves indi A

461 uppeals voder
1

ahaprecd of wegetic
ug lis sarees! rate of
1 Le ade.

wpasle of te
aa that

Wy Rule 3 of tre
weela arc ral nucbered
second uss bora ceteived

labour matters ig enacl-
ptidle cheugee iu the
Judee-priwer by
v earing ky a ‘sir.
'€ Judges for article 37 aor!
ing cenveated 1415५": ५ afd atacells-
sto Le disposei cf ny sunk Aenzhss.

Gly th a
ther jnerrising the steenglh.af ce Court

33 (६+ । ics ua lun Sux
de डाए.03&018९प sz foilovr i—

aad =o reziorel eouridsrat.ans
ih We unsking 7 icpiexir ments to


(2) An cifort should be made to recruit distio
guished Tiewkena of che Bar directly to the Supreme
mel Beach by nsiting them to accept the appolnt-
moesit atl a Lie abi hey exc Iuuk Cseward to 3 faie-
ly 1058 tenure 29 the Banch.

{3) In the imtorcsta of ctability of jqdiclal
adrainistration a Judge of the Scpreme Court should
eve a tenure eof al एफ-ो fete esate,

(4} Ct is nol desfvable to raise che retiring age of
Bugrome (७17 duces,

(9) A persom appointed as Chief lustive छा Lidia
Suuld bays a 1७१०६ of ac Least five to seven years

(6) The oraetice of appointing the Benjy -minst
puisne Juder of fh: Suprense: Court as Chiet Justice
of India ia uot desirmalo, Urstead, the mast au‘table
petson whether from the Court, che Ger or Ieoto Loe
Hipt (७७-०५ shod be chosen, .

(3) The pensiona partie w judge oF, (कर
Saepreme Court #oukl be increased ao that a pulse
Fudge who <etirde after werving for 18 yeaca (ipched-
ing secvice as 2 Figh Court Judge) bas « pension of
a? leant 1५. 3,500 २ Chlel Juathe Re. 3.000.

{C) The seagion may “se proportonstely leah for
& ऋण उधर pend af 0२६९.

(४) Tae lewa: privileges of ube Judgea off che
Supreme Court dhow!d be at 10050 ax liberal a3 | those
af the Judge: of ‘the High Court, |

(19) IL is not consistant with the dignity of the
Inépas of the: Supreme @ourt to scart chamber {prae-
tice after retirerpent.

(11) ‘Phe Judges of the Supreme Court =e be
berred from acedpling amy employment umdeq tha
Utusn or 4 Stal |, afler tetirement, ocher th em.
gloyment 39 an Ad गए #udgr of the Supreme Court
umder आए) 128 of che Constitution.

412) It is not neorsstiry to chlarge फिल की

of thr Saprene Court in criminal matters.

६131 ie a h hee exetcive OL the | fre
under article 12M} ज the Cpnatl-ution by the 2
Court in crim! aqmetimas ecrecs fo |


a

injustice, yet the Coupt aight ie: mmore chary of
grontiog speciul leave in euch matters a3 the practice
of crewing epecta! lesve frecly bax a londeney bo
affect uhe prestiye uf the High Connie.

(16) Whe fie of the Supreme Court is being ule
xed with appeals on labour matoers 90७9 relief gnu
be given to taat Court by engbling parties to file
appeals in (heze -natte: cithor (0 the % Cour oF
lia gnewia] sribynal constivated fcr th= vurpree.

(15) No censdtuuonil amemiment is  neresssry
fa the murtter of separate snct dissenting judgments er
Opiviegs being Jelivered by the Suprerae Cinch

:1 may consider the dea’rabtifiy of
|; & stero of 1:९॥४:४037 heering is: article
32 petitians srt oF ardsraing the pewers of 5 single
dadge ar of a Diviswm Bench to geal with contested
incerincetory ard misceliwessus tatters.



TysT

aysa

my. ० -

1944

AYES

3456 पु

7957 ६७०८० ३-% ९७४७-८०. «

Gran Totar . . .

Taare ह

I 1 61-5१ ts Api

A

“1

ia

+!

a छोड Af orate, 17,

tl

Bsmites

at

s

at


fue OL

Anges Cactaditg opocais fond ter abattfain® os! (8-०,
20 ००७४ punuing my cor ! (५० RO SA NS

ही
5

November,

Sitrowrt मै! ए ८ ।,

लन्‍09००९, 8524

Yer the ie year Sang Ie ८: Krwanee

we a ee की
lyse. ee न 257 ts? a8 151 £4) हिह्काल-॥ 106 ६४ aly whoring
nil. . tae Be 6a nt a 05 14 ane का धार TOU,
9983 + . नि bat rita rir 44a m5 f हो
3353 . . . 27F one eis ix hg
tte . . . ay 257 sar
115 . 33? ade ve
1555 7 491 प्र



Varn 1711

Btuenites seating che umber of Uraminul Appeals ni, 409८० af med Gending in tas हैणु७<०० Count of रघ्वॉज गज the years aos 4७ asthe

vennter, ४५

एप्ज for Perting: ar “he

Year testi एज Dsponal uated CD clase a the Bess33
yeu:

-= ३ ३ उठ बह खू£
६0 न 2h 6 aw 3 re arc es i ped
Tus. . % 3 ay Ss 3 leave.
me ee a6 aa 43 7h w
Ws. - : ™ WF 16; rh ”

WH . . पु we agg 6 qc 106
mss) . - 206 52 2k 92 165
m6 . . . ne Tha uA 49 azar" *Pending un 15-4६-३५

74 [AD


Tame IV

Shacemsac suomsigg ee mugndar of penicioms mer ott. 22 of ade Conatiintion imtinuzed, २2900 of and peniting 2० she अशारर 7950 2 1954 ZH whe
Suprenit (ture of Zndia

दर्जा रे ot Inselrore. wal Lisposed of Kanaogs
ths ytar
t 2 3 an 6 r पट

स्फचछ fas bee rye 452

apes . . 452 636 ange wiry 125

1957 any “an Gaz 9 3

305७ +  «- oe aes ant ¥ Me 4

95 4 न ० . bad (111 bes 44 ad

Wis - +« «-: we a2 4 45s

m5 . -> . . . 2% सज़ा sah Lie ae” Viz ON 15-11 19976

8८५६


ay Covet em 4०2०1 पर: मे: वध आए oe rhe tal ey freitétution

गण न uss toxé tos7 Toran,

4 a mn
ie है aa 4m
o 23 te 7 R 53

Qe Sptcal Cave Pr

tae & od ? 4 we rey
६8: Crim3 al. . «० न . न oe ' oo ' a डा
णपबग्ष्ज (Iv Appeals ५ “५ 4 8 ’ ay 142 Ww £8 paz
075४५ Citvioal Appaus . पु . oe os : a as oe 431 य्ब5
> a

Trrasler Le

59


the wend,
Ausgeiute

g Oued 29 perding Irem ७९३
2 le- ort ready

TISk we ea Bae

27 pending Soom

195« op Ol
nol tie, Eu ae
159 4psztle:

ae ee bias Bar be

laze,

¢ appenis 37780

Wat

bat

94 abe

ak af gy¢ ars 2203;
it



$—EGCH COURTS

Scope ol wnesticn of the very heavy arrsam pending :४

eaquiny- 0 Sisk Courts nas tivatex’ a Taye siuuailon eed

sr. Ory, 201 sé the peblic mind & crest don 8 there-

: lu deal Bropdiy ७१.६ J ६ Init ded be
> TMHeREUTeS

é-dying the sialon There 8
nt impeztangs regandag the
av conveniculy In: decks tagather
There “ere special proslems
itz in perligular 38:68. with which we
ih imdeesdval Stat
Agu vesull ul che ~morganigution ef Stairs in ifob,
there pre it present fourleen High Courts in India,
ading the Tligt Cours ot Camme a. Kashmir, तप
cat owe hyncml Judges. The penéency in the High
shown 8 ris “ren, year to
ction period. Tare
Sreb.crn ot arczar., bivae ver, Ss 9 wets secentspbal
form enly iv cettacn Ilgh Coutts. But oven it, the ether
Hw: arcs, trough che arrcais आए acl very bem, ‘tae
have fally Tor shest of what ३ saoule be Pp a
vly -ugulated ccurt.

yer partigy

Treremes ee problen. cf srrese3 im the Aig Coucle gust in
eucks okey views: agalnst tee very Jerge Licreape in
1 3 ‘Re ly
1.01:1०0. ७८ in

Negraal 1% ६.9, (| 9;
ant, हे Ltigutioy, following (४२ €?छादगा'॥। mod
beret of she mvunklry, bag considerably
eli the Cearts, We apy a
1:५ evens of Lhe jacrenyi: der

pezd a aa

Work wider elt al leas, The 232 of'such exaanzina

special [1%- by tke High Coure. Areas Coinnitlee o¢ fax back; 6

Asm LMS A vere reesut exsunple of the vortesmert at ; che
special rariscit on 175 dbo High Court? will br fourd §
liepresertation of the Pispile Auil ky which the [igh

3 13 near appeals frew Ike Graisions of

‘Wotk ander 4. The fundaricatal rights conferved by the Consti
ibe Cami- ud 3७502 to 18: remer 10% pevictesd Cor Jie enfor
“ton जमानत काका) larcels to the inerease in the wnliw ot
work ॥ 1917 Bigh Corks. Appltcaticn: for the enforcespant
of fundsmcnta: rigkts, upplicacions seeking vo reetraio: the

k



65

Iiutive bodies and
(८0817 of laws
ing fics of the High
aver ०६ Came wh
mae
yout
J hovel
rr Une Compuxigy

arin inti:

usurpa.ion of jurisdiction by em

जब challesgi

. 11 1482 to be 0080: ए८06 thal many
443 tbe Courts on the geruret ni

baring Leen orought
ions hive Rot ९४-९५ taker 101 छा Mf Foes.
frecuer ily i: nile ie Foll
the avalable  uchiee
J work. As

Hb Cours. Ti
tuae, Lol hay

CTY Cori 5८: vieer:
specially ditleylt ard aoevel ruimwarr can see) oe 1६७६४५२५ 13:७8:
33 40 -Aipur cur: ८६७६२ ८८ the aecumulation दा ote cic, Courts.

ot have been cuawvace, at any

keizg lowterl wore, The
Tune cvariber ques-
jong the = censs rules

uncer must have con etly ty she olive

experioren gxined ६ Lhe: a uening
fusee of the Covetitutisn. when the effect of the laws
{ jasusdleton upon the High Court: had
Tiell, ॥ ११७७८ haere hora che: duty af
both the: Tigh Courts and the Corcraments 10 have
examined the atale of the requirements of the Hich Courts
3६ 10 theds strength and (9 have taken steps wel] 10 advance
to add tc it kefyre the Courts were seramped by tae cising
tide cf arrssr. That unforte.oately does not epoear to hav>
has che gewvity
Fg fall exteal by thy
the strength cf -he High
‘nas beer increased by che addition ८! ९४:1४ pee
tut wud portly addilunal Judges. Pschacs है Faese stony
, the country woud mot have been Ussuceessial
do wich the problem of arrears in ita pregept acule ss te
stringth,
appear that im come ९४४९१ che Chlef Justloss
nus of Lhe growing ae an .
yurts. dic. maxc an endeavour to chrsir
dee-exenstb for their Courts. - Their effores
seem, owsver, to have bean defeated & baffling prece
cure w ins dy br eee atest’ FI er thes ned for
additional Judges. 1 appears that when the Chief Juetice
of a Hizh Court ए) ०९६ 8 rezoramer.dation for increasing the
31S Law—5



ecengih cf Ue Cowt on the grated of tne inerease ul
work, the maller geek frat to the Stal: ि:
jhen ८७ che Home Ministry wh -5 their
hict 45.५८ uf Incia before re: 8 9 decisiur. ‘Vhs 1
Peak autharity oonpetenk to authorise Lhe weresse an Lae
Se rican is the VPresddiol it appoace जज Lhe pezzons
४1: 115 the pois in che M:nistry hb ttle 02 iS
i se be

sath

Setmed ४0.11 when ३ requess for acditioual
१ ly one Tigh Cour’, lke eropogssl war gar
eect dispurul cf eecond
ard ciyi' :ab<crllameous
wat a | छल criter‘on for determigive the numoer
udges acunssiry for cimesire nf find eppeale. It i
js that suvh मे mtethel ef exemninglicn ४४०० be hope
nd ite nel surprisu.y thas in she ree z
Hish Coins दर een devied पी. the pet
(70:09 195) unwares, she perms, न
५५६९३ of “he

ure of the imaerl uz:
Wr: luxe tae view, 1:
the Chie! Justiog of ६ Hail: snakes a vecuzet Sor the azpaiut
micas of anleiiena. Judges and if the Aeed for such sdei-
tiene) Judges ig sueepted Ey the Chic Jrstier ut ludfis, the
Chief Justice's request ४11310 hn: acended to.

ber judge sdrenoch
a course of action bas
in depleting theae Courts

Not only hus 1236 necessary sddil
withheld aut in
pucsued, vbich
even Mf Ibrir nozeal stra

6. it appemms thet thi: celay in है[*ग्राए vacanzies jn the

‘oct hay ‘seen responsiale in 2 enaslderable meesurss
fer the aceumviatlon of arrears in these Courts. "Tt ined
te be the eraccive in the pusil to select persons appoimted ८७
fit vwearcies ell ahead cf tha rxepréled varancy. co that,
the snesrstor wild take his gem: ineecdintely om Lim pelire
mal of Ris predecessor, Cf late, haweyer, vuiucies have
remained enka ft moaths. We 32२1 ont below a Inw
inatances cf the delays tbat have taken place bevaeen the
uceéurrence of tre vacancy ed 1५5 being तक) op. Situral-
ly, sith delisys haves reauled fn & considerable icse cf Judge
days in the working of the High Costa, aith the necemwal
consequence cf 9 tise ir the eehmme nf thy ae monbleied
work.



९
STEM SRW एफ DELATS IN शयययत्राथ् एए Vacancres TH
‘ib Hea Cauezs or (1) Araavavan, £24 का 1६7६॥ ॥अए० (8) Para,
(u} Avadaprt

Tigre af” Perive ic
Dae ee which gormey :20:भनता:र 5 by =
yours
जाए 2 a

2४-३८ 1970 5 cing
26 T-rysa - : 1-0- 0५५4. 4 ads
poMagea - oe seage2 ag merch,
Saracaues (Add). cesey प्फउ3"बफए०.. बेड sale

३७+31८/९७. ५

3:20: . - Pyraz-ayse
54-19 955 न $-+ 7990
काव-ा 95२ sone 0
P4naa-agss - - . . 14-12 1953

G-seaure

न न 25-8-३श्रठय
3३-8-1950. ४
- oe TIH-11-1054 9 wD AEAT
- «० . se-ticyig |S muvilhs
38०३०॥७५६६... २ ८.
Bred et nd . न . 3३3०$-498:... 3 meeubes

4955 (fide. poss ३८ 13, 1क४॥: जद. | wetke

Tovar =424 moaths
= Pape
- 2 3
me i “० 8 तभ-+त++_+

Bue 9 -+ *थ- apasss 2 mde 5 dope
Rien, ५. ७. “- Sa STG 8 abs BH .ceyS
l-e-1ys . डे . . <4+-२७६४०. ? ७८५5 33 -deys
अं न Mage; की snoolbh 2) dépa
IeaTUSTT 1 ’ : sPethasps 4 mothe (९ 0३%

Tors 25 uumhy coe

“HermMende? for motions) pote “tim caly Coe Ferre |
Judge sanecicce,


Tericigs: foes tg ten ec हा» - फीड. 4 hye
७५-7१५१६०

tase ANT. pests #ए:
कदा:€र :

Sz हि आर thee 30 tye
2 cnn TT

vomerchs 25 aye
13-«०३१5२ 5 एफ 2६ dare
. . zyeissy 14 omen hy 2९ dave

1 Te aye

qr 3 lasa
avenths 3 bys

PDD. peas pon: Byevee 7 एघ्म:उ uy dag
3०-.957. 5 —atihs 15 1०५२

3 कक apy yinted ine ge mutha 3 उैणडड
ne On leave ६:ए।४४जए 73

i rel roireit)
Years Nore
“Veta: ड़ a wT
New
Sree 21; he tee ६. aeckitgs ल्‍>दा919 *< ae Hb dow
by mayen of 00. 307५ ig ayyghly equizaant te
the aascniae ee cz fem 43 meat
Punjab (ay "1176 wos o basa at 2 Juogss fe. oven cue pear.
Pete (3 The ६८७ was toughty

uber co che syne of
५ 1096: 50 cee eles yar

It ix diflest to appreciate, why matters +1

wh eoule ox-

ped: ly be cealt with prior ¢> 1947, 50 that, hardly a
mae: ४1.७३ there: wag 38 appreciable: interval between
the vawction af ४ axrgir lacing

hie seat. should be subject to such great delays az the

We nave act been able to asesrta:n =the
व splixaiekorily. However, it apncars
that a considerable time is leet ir. correspondence between
the authorizes concerned <3 to the fitness of the sersans to.
be appolred A Chiel Suet: of ७ High Court lovkt us that
the celay in ihe appvinttnent of Judgcs vas ja a_ large
mra.ure dicc to whet he called "dispuces 23 to the selection
of the successor". It fs known thas the appointment of am
nal Jodlke oF a High Court was helt up for over a
y by teason of a d‘fference of ovin‘on between:
Justioe cf the Higt Court and che executivo as
to the version Le apynink Whatcyer be the cause, we
are of the view (का guch delays ace imexcucuble und
shoold not uceur



ludxus Bev; xen deputed for si1t-jad
disputes unusual occurrenuce Rive

wt Zrcquent

oy ८ आय 7
fer ‘a jud'eia) ‘ng airy und

> the public acd the Gaverament ic

79 an youl tae High Cour: Juésges hms
vate) ia geatilying, yer Mae frequiaty wath which
: is 1005४ upon then adds 7: te pending diles of
the 1031: (२०४४४

the शतक 2

Tostentes kaye hye preuykt to eur oot: of ibe High
Court Cudres heaving been taken away cir deputstiva lor
ole periods. In ome Ign Court dering a period
‘aye vas aver on depucstio. for as long

ye. Thucgh 24h icepiithy abeer des tay be cay,
eases of Tudses being caked to endertaks other work dusing
ne for a peridd of ३ few veeks cr menths are nct
एव1एशापिएश-

We ave cware that the depulation of High Courc Judacs
t ॥126 of 612 duties ie necessary ih the public
करारा एल tha: lhe aubhiiritipg should
atirky, whea sath duties
ely to take ह substimtial secied of time, to keep up
the sapength of the Cours

neat recer lo an impoctant fauwtor whieh

lating of atrears. We refer io the

neoetion of ‘usutiss. ju@ucial persorncl. We haye
visled all the High Oc 3865 anc] oo all asnds we
beter itis : Lee

spinzinhnests msde vz Tigh Court juéniary during zeccat
us. This ८४: hes been needle by Supveten: rare;
Hie! t Didzes, vetired Judges 112 }’rsoecu-
RU NIscus Topreseutative wexialions of the Bar,
als ind Erato of Taw Coileae. and very
te lrenl peofessiuy wll over thy
2 Governments hac lo admit that

ty, The 81008: untvetuail
the relectans are ursutislartory
1.9 exeeutive infueuce. T+
posceded
caciple and seen 4 have beep made
5 cf political mipedicner cr reglos:t or
Sutne of the members af tne Par
th did mot aceupy the: ¢rent rank in
o che matter of 128०: oq ipment or uf
Practice ६: the Bar, A nizaber af more
bertins appear 2% have bein. ignored

ts thai can stem ongy (7919 unlikignt, ar eseorncaciayl
9 gfounds. Te aweful oor even mare wu-
Jay our Lite summits bi vet nen 10९ in n3porl of person:
Selested Irom the setviews. "Wo are-eoncinecd that ibe

hese are generally Wiser
la Tigh Cours Judas cir Use purdus®. pork,

sirlerably agyrsvatad te a:turdion, (ey (0000


a

views expressed ( us sheny a well-foméed ard ६७:७० publ
disest sfacton at these eppo:utriesds, The obaervszisma
rudy by Chic Justice Kania referred te: by ua elsewlrere
tbat merit 31091 samehd be the basic Zer scleeticn tn the

Biz: Coucl judiciary seepae to have: awe: wompletely over--
-uuked.

The ge 9. The: snlesticn 92 & 9erean on

couecusxces thar: of merit bus faz-reachinz regersns mh i: Judge
. vould neturally nn. cueve frora member? ci the Tar,
wha woudl ke no etcangers ‘ his capac.tr, the full peasur:
of co-gpeval.on which ( needed for chr crppier wlomidra-
६160 of Zustion; सता wuukl a Judge 80 arr: i
have shat aricun: 9 mpaBcenee in hizcself ye
oont~kae lo the ettsicnt snharge of |
eireums since; ae bound to sffact adyermcty -he juuatl
and the qualizy ४- Lhe work turmed ए ty sunk 1 Judge. re
ty aionistic that the lawertng of fudicisl standards mist.
adveccely affeer the ¢lFeinnl उ09:018125(1९७ of fustice. It
Sui. hewn staved in come quarters that the larger tae number
of Judges, ‘hv MMe propertiorn.etc oulpul of work
We are of the | ##0३1321-90. 18 not waded
onary ६९९८-७७ :0.8.. J > what sz 10 have ied to.
tower output cl work "hy JIcdges ic the sppointmcnt uf
pergsonz rhe are 70६ sudst:ctory. Waether a Jedge af ४
High Court is aelected from thr Bar cn fica the servldes,
he shuuld be tre Gteest pezrecn aveilable to hald thot,
9:52 ? this cecdinal proscigte ik overhuuxect ih making
the pointeruel, and person: of inditfzreat ecpacity Are
appointed, ihe werk turned out by gut et zone wilt
maturafly not veme up te che peepee sta . If, there.
lore, there hag been ih forme cases & proportionate! loyer
actaul of work when a larger number of Jodgea
appoinsed, the fal] ता the work ix ५ जीत | us
Hr civsumstance that he pezsons added were not fitted rx
the offive. The inovitabde eflect of apocintment: cf .
character to the High Caves Rameh on che disposal of yeturk
ao: che mouncing arrears 13 obvious.

The Conslitul.an provides 4 Diachinel for the
inter. <f lik Gout Judges in aclicle 27. It ig
Jer ths uppsintmpnt lelig made by the Presi

hors णि बीस zonsultitice with, che Cl f Tustice cf India, ithe
पे Stave aad, in the n! appolptment of a
han the yaar Justice. the Chie€ Justice: of
the High Tnquitics have shown that in tre तक of
all the appointments made to the High Court z
19592, ths aoe tonal procedures
$17 bave hnen followed and that mai

f the pe
appoiilel wich the concurrenve of all the TODS
pen:atation with wham ls required. Some af che perfons
sppoinced have sot he x heen persaas recom=mer जे io
the Chief Justice 92 Tiigh. Court, We were Into: 7
tha. two cf the appolftments ‘to judyerhigs ia the High
Court ef Calenta hadjbesn mide in recent your By



wt

ommrendatinn «f the Chirk Justice
We also beewne awert of 3 very to एप्र#0
Twas gyyomnted iy the High Court Betecl im

AKahaoad ५35 she lea 1:1 Tee Bs ef tuslice
Col. Enesunces
Crsames su

erperduze
mrexciled bw
felluwing mene:

The Caief Justice lorwerde bis recon esi lo Le
Chief Minister whe 2 hs 1008 fiurwards ret nmimrnela-
tion in consulta ior wilh Une Gevereor to 1 XI
omic Afigize in che Central Goverment.
hiet Minlgver dese no. &3)*6 Wi the m4
@ Chie: Justice, ae makes his een recom=e
i: Chief Justia
oprortanity for making क्र क्षाड़ेता (1. cods-
won made by phe Chic Minisler. ‘Fhig practice ia not.
howiner, ‘nesedabl: followed, s¢ shar. £ fuori casey il
happens tees the reconunendatic: roads by the (thief
Minister does Dot turn to the hucwvhedge of 1६ Chief.
Juskce. The vivel reenmicwadatons are then ferrerdc to
+ J J) the
2 Jusdiv: of Ina cdvises the Presifenl a3 to the
i be made. Fhe person recenamencest be thie
ev may be, and. occagianally is, selegtest in
preference to the pertaw recospmendeel कैए she: Chict Justice

Ziven au

12. Ie i+ abviows
Justice in un ex! rer
led ta te: resporsibls
fucicial husimexa of hie Court ay Ju 203&ल्‍#519॥8 apps
1५51९ qualifications, the procedure in i ~syuts, xt (68.
14 the 72, cou the porsahe reconinerded by b.m
ent ested df anciher person whom fhe
eonzide-r unsuitabh, A Chief Justice may thie find such
i person appo noted for a juftweship oF his Court at the
stance cf the Jocal uxecuthve and aginst bis own सर
frresze. He mzy be put :n tie oositior: at heving ta cane
95 the turk of ihe ६7 with Fdses, who ate besnible
GI -rruleting praper zesistence ar are otherwiee -ineicable
The oos:tior woukd ke further agersvated hy fhe knerwledpe

tee

that Lhis prusodure placee the Chief

npon the mi
Tecndection. It ney «
comenne whurt he has
pat favegr im lege hiv to pectmomemd +0607६4% who, he
beieves, would be acceptabld te the FRanulive,

in the th
ly an the?

cly awkwart pdbicion, Thoaeh he ts ‘|
wransaction sf the j



Stizctjoce: 43, The dgwe: ¥
monde with 4६, qs. है
tke conzar- 2 05, Aeweve. .

ee he पिन काका le

H | thon that the Chief Justice af the High
shave Taapened te agttc to tae appocnimere तर the
asulisfactory personnel of which, ae Fy red above, we

have indubiwab’ evidence?
A pesipie 4 The #ap¢lanation, perhaps, jies in what bas seer
explaustiv:. stad tous by the Chief Justice of Ind
“In chien dave in the nalt>r af the aspnintmcnt
ef High Court Cudees. che Caiel Custice of the High
Court dink : prescnderatiyy voice and, venerally
spraking. the vegomoméat.ons coun b
rsraca risponsible fur the wurk'ng of the Hi
vzed to Jn supyert of the (Aiwever, whe
malcers could 3826 im his individ :
Governor haa to ke guided by
ty fut. that nowadays Ure 0५:७४ Minister thinks

be the Uelensining
Justice ix ait half as

# 13 the pact. ondzed, irstsnees ate
E Sustier

lrown v-herm the recoromandation of the ९३:
haz been ‘gucred and eweeneled and that ८ 1:
Mindster hax provaed. This unedifying p-ospect nas

it simn deroorsliz sation ut lz of the

(85७16: ३»
er प्राण" Ey

t
4 uke Chief Juaier, wil]
he wll ke gonved tw di:
lige in heving 13.3. noviinasion uncere-
sumed down. The Chie! Konster now bas
ahard d-rect cr indirect. in tic alter of th: appuirnil.
धन 9 1 Jie Heph Court Beack. The inevitable result
‘vas been thas the Tiigh Court azpucel ments ere pot
elweys mace on ment but or vxtranc :
tivus of cvsinunily. tas%. political a
likrs aad 45) heve a ६:४२ pisy, T
encourages canvassing which. T am srry iy,
becom the order of the dsy. The Chie? Minister
boidu.y $ pinlilial ofhee depende:
lve parte follewregs 7039 well im i ne
way to canvassing, The Thiel Tustice, the
Fané. 2068 nat ald his oFiec on suferanec of any
know: the edverates ard tveir merle
wd a rmecommerdation by Je
fore, sure likely lin he on 18:1६ a’
: made by thre icf Minister +
thee dOrupicaive Ingal

the &जेए८९५7९६.
A Gudge ०2 the Supreme Crurs hes staced as fol.
The osthadgof relection «tsa Take for a lowing

of mersls and stancards’ ‘The hahit cf touting for


high jadiciel office and areducw.g shite itd recone
miea@al.ons frowr this persen af in f te ard thal and
= ‘sing back-ste'r ioLigue for appyivuua is
try 8016. dangers

slaved.
zy (Minister है Je State
inues "६ haye i: newertal wien +
रण] ion, in tesa years 1 छाल, 20 20. “run

st of Une Jucyes appiicled under the ७-7४ ayetem
tave disuopeamd, the independence «f Ire
igo wi) hays dissopecred snd “le High Courts
ed wily Judges who owe their uppolamacnss

a

ered iL a crest or
sof bodemmudence, Fire.
fa Covrt snén:s 0७ Lave Decome

yey |
gwen, lie fuécoship ॥ a A
popes in be ercrked and urovessed for

13. ‘Var Chlef Julie of 9 High Court ज-0 nse be ७६ ७.७ Pruzedure in
procecury Fulewed in hig Sinve in leyard te the Si adel

cm ot ५
॥ Court ०0००७ Ancerdive to hiv, tar cucevion iy tins 5
hotecen the (Shirt Justice erd the
+ प््ढए८३5
aire Vike

ropoaiils #
of such tunferences, .t was zlowr thist [7.4 .::
1 censiderations did affect the mond of the
-executive at the lime o£ the discussion of the rane, We
have uu éoubt tas! in ofher Seates, a eam

procedure is iclowed before iw making of a forml
recornmendatic’: try Lhe Chief Justics, 11 15 10: xurpricucg
theseforr tage tic suncurrence cf the Chief jiistie: has
19

7 id regerd 10 thi: po
be ६४:16 Juslioe surennders
dave che Wisaes né che Chlef ७०

: slate «cf affa.rs ané it is fir con- Kole wLthe
1 is adviasbla and praclicatie: iq Sse exe-

prevent a.tocether the Sus: execativy from haviog a veiow Sy

in the secLon of the High Court Juuges. 1: Esa been “eeswemr.



है.

ky srccle 2
porieetabiu ut unis.

0 right Lo recommend
net bo rnasulteg in due
wis. 1. 20 48४५ be: TeTierbered
juilgesbip is made by the Pre
the executive. Ite ligt .

Cts ane: it is the State:
Bays foc i's tess mec. It woukd,
pnable ४०1 xt allew 1 ag @xmul ive
 Trlerunes tia pesca recormocnded
wis High Court

om
0.।

aster and 1-1 that i
1531 tha Stats exe 3
waatter oof ऋशथार-पा
ihe appotatmeyrt था
whe: 2s Jauagelf she hesad छा.
sl oma air of Ln: ४

[७८७०४ 9 by tice of tne
hile the Chief Jusliog would be the
laste the wcril und pitts nus
Ihen woay be, ane brscuan
ig ie lke peczor reromroeoded wh.ch Lbs
State executive alcarn woukl 3 i ww know aad
ef whiea Lher may 17901 Lhe 16. Tt come be’
Uri. Che lea? posra on sé the person propored. 3 3 character
is acflltesions and thr | ks, which may base
ekle beuiring, Opan his हुआ:
dudye may oot al be within the Enowledae ता ee
Justio: For these reasoms, it. sdeut to us Tessepable aad
necesya7y that where dhe Chief Justi mumends
nessun fox 8 ‘adgeship, the Scate २1३५-०० ५
an opportunity to offre ils comments एज: that 2
‘nendativa. 1: @gpencs to us, bewever. chet iy should
teét ta the (thief Justice एटा where lies the remponstbility al
ie eAcient working of the Court to ०0189: ॥:008 wheche: or
net a persen 13 competent to le & Judge er from which pt
the aoursrs moognied hy the Coortiodon 2 fodge simula
be 3180: 7 fll articular ver The enogu tach
wilh Use local ex: y gent (1-8 information whle® it ey
supply sboull be limited in uther factors such as we hate
mentinned ukove. We ern ilsr: early of the view that it
Soe ghenld nul :+ 0६-02. to the State executive to prepraeta
Cov mare Nene? OF their ews and forward lhe nine ee sub
red some weolnee to the Cuulre, “Ef the State executive di
७६००5... ८11६ the recommerri:ticm of the Chief Justice by reason pt
the ralure mentioned above. it stinild be open to ft to dls
+ With the rcom~uendation ynd  cnqusst the Chibf
te make a fredh recumsendation. -
1 te avoid delays # woud be achdcable the
eof the State shuld ‘vrear: direct to the
28 oF Inesin छे sop of the recommendatiom mage
hy hime x the excouttve af the State. .

Rejoomer’. 4. Having ccrerd ln waal bas eer staced above, it is
Chiel Jue in our vi very essential. that <he hands ०४ the Chint
tix हा making ‘ts recntnmendation should be
बा क्र Insead oof the ¢nnlilulmazl provision

~  reeuultlag 3 cenguléation #ilh tue Chist Justice in the maltcr
of पर apoointment of ae ees, :६ gould reqelte an apport
ment ef ६ fudge be en thm recornerdatinn of the
Chie? Fastin of Lhe mg sa If the Chief Jestict is aaaunpt:

cot fund

Seay 1
anid delar. 1p



18

appoinmocet can be made unis. he recenmeuds

the iear whies the Che® dusice ot present
suuve Rlerlereace and che tenceney ta ent=
Tinpeimive with the exeovt:ve which here been
ewtinnd shove wilt dianpnrar.

790९ Jt may ke asked whetzer the ecveptia
suggestion will not place lac Chie! 3,७15: in a de
al were, Co diclate im eepard 1० th

cd 1७५०८ to aroitriry atub even
the Caet Just.

vf this Aa adc.
init. 8 Roce) sce.

kb tr.
on.
in: order us
४, We Larther propnse,
2 tienal (६. pyle: be amenrled so a3
‘a Rey dive act mene y sansullatier with the Chief Ivétine
of Te ia tua. his <9710५. 01 in the propeaed upp
The Chief Jestice cf India would setural.» keep Ai «J
safcrmed aboul ६६213 suttube for uppointment 10 the Jiwive oe
Beneh at the Ji as vel. as bo the Services aad will ox in
3 pi.ivn te poveat unasciefactory aypu.
nade on thr rcoommendat:on of the Chict
Slates if ever such excasiccs arise,

Ty
emer inl,

erients being
dies ch tat

६1, Tat enanges we propea: have the ९९९: ०: ple ng Bic of
le State excoutiv: in .5r; 908:1100, af It were, af 1: fore ing Pespuse:
the (hiet Justice ०२ the Stabe and the Chief 7७1: of 'रीछ्ापल-
India uf (< views 49०0ए- sha prapused ८।जा1.7:ए6 but leaving
the rcspomisifity ७. che appocotment squaceisy on the:
shoulders of the (hb: wesLless cf “Ju: State ard the Chief
Just es of 89198... Tala, ct appours २२ ta, “8 nowessury. AS
peented oul earcer, ihe rceponsibility for the aficicn!
working cf sac High Crurt reste on the Chief Jumice of
the Cours anc it 80771 nog bey powslble (७ tazust asco kim
a celleayue whom be dess not eunsider cn 05 suficinot y
एज,

22. Ta- relevant portion of Sticke 217 weuld रत chr: Comtiu-

vigbe Une cue codmente we have sagsctted read a6 Saal or
FeLlryweiz wae

“Qi. (2) Zvery Judee of a High Court cask, ke वि

azpninled oy the Presidont by wactant under Ais bard
and eval after ceutubtethin with the Governur nf tre
Stave sod with the concurrence of cie Chic? Justiee oF
lodia, ard io Lhe case of appointment of a Judge other
ise on the: excommucidatio;n of Chief
igh (०३: and shal] hold ५४४९९, in ti
mal or actinu Judge, ox po

yy oll:er cae, unt.! de atiains she

ag of sixly year

33. Tt may oc ceomventont to coal at thia atsge wll. tae अुच्म पाक
turner of Sppoincmen. of Chiet Jusclees uf the State ९८ fe
High Cos, "hat कह a ving Pegerd 40 the ingrreacd 176 |
sibitity which wel oe the Chict Justice j
under the proposed tiene |



Tayeries

of the. hie tne Ch

azquen-

(:४थ [.७-
Bor tom
-waiside

the 8.40,
The cas

76

34 In dealing wich the question of the appoualimeant of
#| १6 of the Suareme: Cows. ve alpeaus
tude referense Ip the im, cot a ८ 409 a
Courl ur:t the qualifica pursenalicy ane. indew ndenee
आ. 6व Ay a yerson oreapylng ३१० >>006 of the
Chief Jusice. A givat disd of Whal was deen stated Lhe
epplies to the Chick Justigas of lhe Stubs Tigh Unitas,

46. Ab poesent lo has dDecome aloes a male ot tnutiny
vw séuitu- ros. Uuigme Judge wo breome wae Chick
on of Lhe State High Court on the retrmment nf the
icf Justice, 11 is 9051005 thal Lhe ssruo0r-n.ost pune
Judge, ever though a siry cumoetlscl judge, May To. le
suiluble lor vlog appointed a Crist Jusine, “A Chief
Justice of the Cuurt. needs, apart frit (७5:९८19] compctence,

६:४8 ५0 shi zs io bs able la
regave the sukord: jadiviacy und win Wat
tu: execudve. In our view, therefurz. on every
acstcy ezearring in the office 07 ths Caict Justice, the
qucelion a? ¢ fit sucecaor ४:७0 be gagcuiurd by lbs Ch 2
wistls of 11: in the light af ne geslifiqulinins reader
jadge shoukd) siweed to th: tice
tary Claiftcations. It .2 eaay Lo
sulsh arise G2 the: over of
:€:3:0[ ७४४ puisme
‘the Cp.
reaper: | nl

praise ja)yes aad th
| ७२ 8#३२०७०७७ of team. work whica
omy ठं. deasatch end .t aivy well

may be otnlliz.s between
We have in ४0६ ozurs> cf our एप:
Rerses at leigh ten instances of High Courte, 1 hee
mimcitions have mn by rsusan of ibe appari of the
36 i 2 feel these

earrencze of the ©
of tly: Chiel Justice of

22 ६७39 of ay
Tae made a
othee ०८ Coiet Ju

Hnee hele us bee s_cyestert
! peaclas bo BP

4 ५1 recommending a person suilzble fer that. aPiee
» ban pressed uyon uz that timetng 3 Chie!
the Sigte will Fave a ७:०५ keealthy
‘] promete &

thief Justice being ३७
dk mry be: me:
fate have b:

roa

in vague sine: “he advent af The (00:96: DLicin.


Ti

27, Oa the clact bead it bus been urged with zom- Asd ect.
le force, that ir would nod br fair, th
porse Serrd of the Etete High Court sh
shut out fous 1.0 cheney it Gowupying the afies of the
Chie? dust rc in their wen Sistas, It ‘a:
TCaCues my pi
Taps sp cinta,
wre 33 Chist Tus
to them.

im thei: owen 5

St would be ey ‘grabh
५. Th Steud, Cae Geom
zetowL that tes पागल / ४7008
maze, आए not marel> by 7:७5फा cf
७1 expmséticn Cf ४॥७४४:७८+५७ te the fire
In every suse of a vacancy in the
lhe senior guieoe ॥
onhy if hé Aa: t?
chief Justice cr
lity of apportilis <
ate Ivy reeson 6 Kee ९९
Agve Hentivicd, Even in cuss w
Fulsas judge ts fil in copy the fie
justice Inn wim ta eave bE
vollue ce avoche: State.

we are of the view, tha
3 nt inlexible practi

cite
BC apevinad we 51.
2 cs Li Bs) I

sé of Ube fall 10 the slandsrds ef vide:try
Ty which jz uncoubtedihy reepencible of rarduing

so k.- Sew the Har,
ers at Ua: Bia
juegos iper remain, ss A hus beer for over
# coutury and more, che mala recruiting ground) for the
(९, wetugh गो
il ver were to
bo altered Tri:
७७ Hur x

2b. Aa Loyertart
C

“Orem Wirry pears age the offer cf 8 judsestip x ६
wretaber of the Bar was sunsidered a high honsur and
tat cuteoirating ager nf Sia csrecr ics a lawyer, A
judge was -rupectrd by the people arg by tha Govern-
nent. Ilis posticn and ३481-38 were reoogpised ir. ic)
ephetts. 8 11:20 days *? ++ every cnr's 4
tovrards th: Court was of eadorati and almos. et
woskh» Tier honour and thy ifs of comparative
cain were considered ecfletent gatmpengation uw balane:
the tinancial 138 vw nigh g xood mrectitiouer r
amepting a

Without coy cerpensitwy borefit or advantage i is
dificuit la porsusde 8 gacd mactitloner to accopt a


@

igesip We Aopy ane tros. ५ with the iaugera-
Mzpubtc the biavur dze to the position and

॥ 3 Hiph Co
fdémbes bf the

( 1७४:४९४५४!॥१ Wl ty sttemythy
the oopes of aroducirR great padhcs may

urt end Supreme Court

nel Me reali;

oh
respeel ke: 30. The hopes expressed by the Ca’
fhe mdwaary howe cul Uren realised. it thi:

separluens ins!
6572 oc the social welfnre Scale
Une deel of 4.1: tiation These
the Stales by petwtas
el aporrsicting
sand those

y है
hindered the pro,

eT Lane.
1 rode,
1 7 Trust play on 3
1:४1 «९ sochil welfare State 17९ ‘oul camo ta "ook
lovin Upne 18%, [cermers ang those hi € 1०७4-९५) ofice
बात remand ५४ autles Loe the erugengs cf che ception,
Ind ay, jadiviel “peinsuncrracuts were
#2६:+९६ aed cormmnenie! open in

mses, The deiline i the eteuderds of the
iavy wos dus te dormegsing respent in
woxesntal cireles for the lawyer cud for ३४३ jugkisl
tdawel utiversa! View ic hat ths wa थे whieh
vl oie cen loved upen it
clez has been the «doubled cauza, not
६ avi paumbérs uf ihe Bar i seeps
puomilisation and 3 lows of

itaelt, wLich bes led to a dgeline
rk. a हए. 27 the Spteme
She judici:ry has heeh affected:

The first (namely, decreszing respect In Geyern-
mentit iss) fy purty psychological कैप: ic impor-
tent. When men avn louxed up 10 sud respected. they
Tiea to the avvastow and Uve ७७ io the ckpectetions
roquited of thom, But, if ther are constaarly smgeted
at and pushed sside while some iorthleaa selfsegying
deni wogue wth Dethibg Bike their erudition aay n-

है| bk

sel? reepeus [0 the ,७142
ia the officiency of taanie
Cart haz described how

ing 25 fal eee pee font be za be
anche), a ef diaguat fow big h offer aly
ehgemilersd utd ommty tind it adi t a0 pat (0 Ir

fewss fort under 44666 apndtdens. +

‘ A distingrished metoser of the Bar exoresed hiwself
thus?

Whitover oruy happen te the future ct the Hi wh
Cort. Government shouk oe to 8 that they

1 9४७ BOR, a


nothing which may bring tse Hich Ceut into dis
repite - . - 1६ net want ९५1७३ the 100025८ in Lhe
(जाट 19 drow zspenions an the Hizk Courl or the
Sunreme Courl. And once it is darw, perhaps, tha
cewsazion would spend amd tre respect that we
dumaad Crom everp ene wll not 2¢ aveLable to thre
Hich © . . . Ou obseryaliine should be made
0७ the ia che and to aissredit the fiigh Conve

connevted with Judictat

admin strain uzecrved a ae '६18 deeper 1+ tf
which gi ie: to ths: छाए ches nur Hig ©

bas 2 aly gure dawn 10 public

चला हु with ‘he wecbod af anpainimenc of Higa एकता!

Judges, he stated (०६६:

"There ig an Insid’ous ame cidzeleled Rtcempt on
the pert of the nxecutive co bring down the brectige
of Ie High Ceut Furie. in the ald days, in al
Tehic fal ute, the High (०४1 tuocge? need to ke
asuigned prominent planee; but aw, they aro tandly
dukesn uty 5900७ of and if umy motor is caken ७६ all,
they are ve raced ti ths backgreuwi 1a the warrent
ef peenéd:atue Urey are (पा being dew.oted, In
६०७ moslte of sronnities they axe far bedinel the raul

Ibi: datoriomiliga cf the externs! trap-
Plugs of the ¢lfce of High Court Judges hus wLlucally,
to | vettein metent, aliens ७11८ 21 wepees for them.
Ail these matters have cortdbuted t» the public feal-
ing te: igh ९:६० udielary is not whal # used to

Thee extreets refleel in sckstauce work 1:7४ bean with
in vatyiag Waya oy a Tatge nemiker of 9 toeases of ऑन
sand expetiones,

31. Though we bave palled stuntion te thig mater in
eomneccen with chr Higz Court jutsiary, the same eben
svatinus upply ५८ the actituée of the evecul.ve towerds the
subordiwle judieary and even the Supremu: Cacet.

32. The causes 02 this attitude of the executive towards conse of
“the igce ic pechaps in the conditions which have the etitoin
spupervened after the enactwert of thu: Comstitution. Appi
ations by fhe citioe: fu enforce giz Iundamenwal righta and
other applicedons tn the Tiga Ceurte by tte chizen under
artic 226 of Ibe Conattaticn ageinet crbitrary admirte-
(४8० एड geion have givent Irequemt «umasion 20 he judiciary
+e pronnunce upon the validity ai Jegialatire actloo and
tae correctners of cecuttve comducs, This, in 4७ burn,
seems tu have crested 87 ecreonecus Rugressicn in the
o¥nds of sur: members ef the legrlalures aud ihe execu
dive chat the judicinry ३४ sitting -॥ judgment as २६ wert
am the propriety cf legilation ate trying t put obstactas



Corstitation rod she pe

enjdined Usd it, 1: becomes the duty of the judiciary
bas Lravelled
tt pltevent ‘hel

The Supreme Cea of ledia lin: found iF necoeary
wide chus acoptx. lowad: Cuncts af
eervedd:"

८ <oimpress previswin for
legislation 23 to ‘le 207 with

७ 97 la: suck ४
net nul of any
in 6 sTusade

ti
cially trae a6 vegaris tle “fundamenzak
lst a¢ 19 which this (eur hos been Ras eva the-

4 छह! on the While Court
bes gral weigh’ te the legisls!ive jue
: ४1 its orn dury lo ६४४: m ally
ube ens! ry rapnzgI-d scatute. FF
zentured ov. theve vinsiows eemmarke tecuyne: it appears
4७ ace bese avageserd in soane quarters thal coarse
‘ew get up are vat Gi sek vlaskes wUk thet
legiaictares in Oar comatey,

Simia- trends have ifcstert themmselycs ‘nthe
‘out they Bot beer eMowed to go un-
|. ferring x such वेवनतजिब्रातए crilicina te
Preside it ct chr Ararrican Bur Azsuciation obsereed:?

“OUT S¥ ६ रा dcverpmert 19 09 sirongor (bog
yur ७८0४६. ana our courts जाए! an stronger then the
४ हज el tse pubtk's cenddepec in ibn.

- . * .

“lhe Arterlear people have nct kosili.ted ज cebulce
werful and populate preiderts who exuck Sut
Lpaeot Lhe courts and e-pevially the: Supreme Court
alle Unied 25, snd ove peop’: ale vt likes
9६ BXEyed Ur oft tke lunatic. But trere
rts ue szzailed hy sensi-
tle e6d iecl.-‘ntentio, cons wa bays let toeir
with Indfvidisa! dectsions tend them into:

+ isin of dhe courts as av, instrument of

sere gore ble |
१४०८७."

5. Ste जे Modes 7. ५. G Rowe, ATR

६. Ly Chere $, Rlyor, on * Dete
Depa) 2ए्केकायाए मैप पाए: at: Pax pens.
in Thy Ttwrtr—M ar 795% PE. Be

The Duty of che:
on Jour, Hrd, 3७६ ९--#५ epee



g / court s¥ztem is not
sure. etryay, vy gpeverserert 5४... None nd air
are prriect Kr. Justice Devid Brewer cf
veme Coust ३8:0 in agit:

16 ta suppose that the Supreme Ceurt
ed or kelpedl oy being spoker of ag
beyond evitle:se.

But there .« #& vast didyrence etree criticism

i "| tive analysis पा asrtigyliar
infneycc, misleading statemenza
A 518 casrertly being | ॥111:3."

Fe moetter General
ino the metikors of the lagislatures पा पंजण
r i T

$ sined
snrial and ecomamie jusdce,
trecdom ard dignity cf she .odvicurl, will tine

ecrcplains of excece of power
the exetulivs, wreuztht to its rotice,
nof Unnse senects at the lighes: level
है. 3900९ a change: in the eiliuds towards the
We tevst chat whet we steved will be apa
azez taken in all <irectior+
error ३७ well 23 sLbweitle
corsspecl te whigh jb is ju
br ar incentive to 8 propes discharye af

erty and R

week alene

dies.

Romane: the sarmbers Je livia

y of Hogs Crust udp es salures

the Bie in ihe fren

प्र Ind br 9 substantlal ¢cmpwics

se02 the fall 10 che ४/०:४७0७- cbs * थ॑ pate.
The: salary of g Tiga 0057 ५७5

AIM chout a lurdred years ago

ef money was lar bi ५

by the ©.
Bu:ubey B:
to Ys (90६ sisted

“larg {she Jucges) desl vich qQuesdon? ef public
and orivate mmapozisuce wiuct:

Law -v

2. 3,00. A laading member cf the
sas in dhe: Jadgvs aslaty



32

wares ol matey. It racy Ia: nyeutioned [91 the work
by a judge requires 8 cechnical eyuip:nert of the
487६६ kind snd the 1.४७ hows ni worl iv. the cours
sequires very great epncontration, It is impuce:ble te
expect a courzel whe makes an in of taclve to
Siften
Tes. ये,
mont svher he -5
ai. 110
‘cr ria vas 389 fox maxing 2 ETovicion Sota Zor
Tirzell and cer big Senile ia thie batiee. 1का! 1:७८
in che salar I Lave suggerted, name
ly. Fs. 3.009, etl cuvolves a very substuntlal 580%:12९
Larter)! oes pouring. But 104६ sicevitiee wand
be road= at the Ggure [ hav= cugg2sted previded 0७.
pension we no Jess thar 9. feusl 1४ per gent ag ike
Tks 10:0० cf aL that I agve stated kefore, 7739
home to the British Gevermrent a3 regay
लाफु। वात ats ॥ फि stutnd in my
show vas beth

nee ein. Fe, 1.200 un ४७1४७
Tt saves nel Li: Siarguvtete 0:

sq hal gut of the monthly salary cf
Court Oudge after payment of 14४९५
éuper-lax), Wasi Fuauer: real atl
noc of B cat, Whies are u2roidable
gets a nes income of ४७०३7 Ra. 14,010
ttle dea thea Rs. 1,200 per troanth ts
her expenses of the vokeep of a family,
chiktewo ited 0 सिक्का if crlhes आदेश एज
; ४18 of expenses, This view was encorsed oy an expert

20 J whe choygal Wa. the jpucdgo’s hi lary
rag.ive. Net only is the smoount far
0 wast thé practitiouzr can egall; ean 31 the
Ais “Biuceyeate for maintaining # deeeat
ving avd diecharging one’s obligatlous 7 bue’e
ehilérun ur sepuses Useir + ४8:५9 ind fl ine
te Consttuont Assamoly Debates, t+ wes admitte) by
10%. Aviedxae tha. the ler wed comdilute vf a Sadge’s
service were unaasraclive.

Ea =
Bar. but
sinderad cf

re have endeavouted tu Juul aul
eeqLizies Lhe ६1५70 of oractice of Leading lawyers in
parts et the country ia the change eonditisns: now
Th apstans 1 yplig in the pr:
the inco:né of dbe lexchoy
॥:. Uhese who by their reputetion
ed an intar-State ar an ak. faa
seed i) uy subs ‘sinlin! measyr2 the.sue
éf Rs. 3.50. 8 ॥ के the position cu mcet of ihe States,
we de ७०1 thirte @onso has geen wade out for
runding an irereasc of the High Court Judge's refome jare,
thong as we eal. pot out laler, thir pinnsians ard leave
condtlens require to be alored

have rstabli
. Joes ne



a3

sé problem of rocruittucnt of judges 1, ७७७७५
deat. wth in places 108 Calzucte anu 20"
voaaly not prastte: Higk Coutt 31९५४प-

९ ह ५७1७ stumld have her salaciea thaw 7 sar: st 3
ulher States. We thick that » 22104:01 ew bu feud Ir ऐश ०७०७
setesting Juczct fram ‘ne mking .uniers ef the Har.

&% Tow bret
140४७ the Bar te bi

Sivh Court Jucges fran
¢ offered (७ promising mocabr-s of ihe -3
Inte 55७8२ ot their . We have ro doukt
sing Javeyer ware prance in growoy and whe is
in a few yeers wo attain the gtilus of i senitur or 4
leader a? the Bar, is nHorsd a julgedhiy at an early stag>
+ » We have at 1९ eu snk
at am early age to tre
iq Himbey Hiyh Cozts whe have
inguishe:l judges Wh
gb te eur moter of
differers. Siates whe !
keen ofettd judgesaips al & lute atage and at ages
wacll not give them 8 sufficion! ouoior af yesta 0४ tre
Berehra 19 ecsiond and who cen dectecs!
them It waz #_राजशढ ए रावत (1४0 1[ these mewibers of
seen offered judecships ol. am nartier ege Chey
pale Free ancspled them.

tasted gut ta
were pet sevprisa:

aa. We Lave “eon cold that a view pveval atnmg the bet ane
appear ting 511 6 1081 & cwerber of dhe Har ly “no 3 ध्यण्था-

innaturr to b perenne

og jidy ucless he kaa rescher
Such a wew is, ir ear 09930, on-
sary lie emp 8. tac in oor coury,
Sar counties, many 7०७0६) judees

8 made in all the Stites acd pvirtica-
ए States af Weel Bengul sod Borabag te induce
of the Bar m asetpr sea outud
2 at 45, Normally १4 lex 1m

good practice ६५ Tost age is bes: riskng jutior und it would
: te induce jira to socept a judgeship wick
prospect cf “arnirg a full aensinn.

br mentioned that apart from what we Nevessity
gave staled, racruitticns 10 the Alen Mourl Hence: from 107 ne maln-
buy woud sot. nolwithstanding the tity nF lncome at PERE
the: Ter aund ah. present auch! diffiedl-i2e :f certain in. makirg
seatdands an: presesveyl ia 11931: mertbers of the Bar to appabi-
३०0. che Berch haye deer. cold (0७७ ia us leest one BE
© cunst: fur ७ udnter of tefusale by metabere
: Shite

Juri yess!
vasener in mH ior rieecberr
u2 the Ber were casited to bepore judges :७ Lie neglect rt
the senior ov lesiding mem Ina ontumalty Worked
High Court. the.senicr pre¢hit-oner . would regard it an

40. 1; may 3



a4

boneur 10 be sited in became a 1५:६८ aol wok) vatoratly
feel alighted if bis jun:ots ure :yyctec in prefeseuce एच २७01
sud be is invited to jeir che Bench Iain nvilal unis

juz fa preference 10 8४९७ ७८15 came perluspe ६3 be mad hy
reason of th: 7९ oF the © dustice: a: tks High Court
fo शाह; का! th. ४ [2106 oF whe conveut.on o vagy be oy
Tee3on of cf Justion's ren: i diag
ayproved by the exccut: Whatever a

26 Just deprecated Nez enlp sews it love lo

atin on uilmeel! bud at degl:oyn २९३६-३०: for the
zk a. che Dar sed coape-ation between ॥1:81)3.

personality af the Chicf Juctioc plays a greul

०४: ७४ Bench irom ste Jligh
in Stulewiha ud Belay.
espect ad the: Gar dine keen able
to induce Terzbe:: oF she Hur ६५ accepl seats on the Bench
37 ६ sactirc

acvoosled Ll. be:ng vaized te sixty-two om sixty-three while
é ४0] ..0८ cf opnxon 36 in favour af its being -aised
as ‘seer printed ort that avert frovo
zis Court appoimed we tar है
rl Judges lave aft Tetuzenwat béen
dtu tae membership oh aitmangship. of
melas sod heave “unction:d cPie ently till tae
formation yathered Ly ६५ s:uswe
that a छह: member af 1९ वर्धा judves ef Coe High Coals
deve Stern ‘mn Hevetomers crepleymore cf
The recent corztitulicne] chaaye
Wwe in ee Sup: etc

oq Tair :छा11॥

emoe Court, The = ‘igur

a expectation of 1116
1

figer in ge
“cee zriton जा

well-tiad> ९ assez of the ७४५०५: पर
tas, one cf the States has एस्ट्यायेए ralsed
ol tt: Gevertusent serviirts genumlly
Yebivlit years. New doubt, we have
in wairek 1४७ 1 eA Curt Judges
876 even the age of OC pears wila
pacity, aniicpaired. ‘These,
We think Mut we are justifed

atthe average oe the

1 cke acl
Temeuikered Uist there 48 ७७ age-l ir 1 ivtiremgut
High Court Jidges ig ०0:22 couste:es and where the gye

17 mxist Dery aire biggher thon sixty-five yoora. So grbat

‘Le abuvative,



95

289-1:0.11 of reurerinnt
evaéldezatinug Isa
igh Court Judges

sod suxprise at the
evailz in our country. Th

aces Unis. clit: ७६७ lurnil
ty-L ve: yours,

chat che raising of t

SBF Of retire Reersiumene
550४ weal by levelling thy age ot * 1 the Sup
ourl Judges wit that of Supreme Coutt -ueipes हे
#6 7० the Suvverne Court Bench.
er are ६10६1 ५०
shesto ६८६५५ 40:07:

wher: that th 37807:५
zh a ६7 ace 10 tae Sug
neeceearily on savantage. If j
seleetad an a younger spe From the High Courl fur 1.
२६७९ eC ber | 1:19 uw sues
sume Courl, ५ उ/&०६ with loag tenures

E zemenz in tie Supreme
2 five years Jor.ger tenure uf ०:
au Jnducensnl High 0 Tuwdg:
Suri Ceart tench 1६

rc the sam2 age of retirenen: 10९
very albatartict cillermace aloo
Cw Corks,
In oonkinn

Bhis may 27969 Doteitl:
judceship of tae Suen & Carel
w as 33 the judvethin of che highest Court
0. 16 pede. lyr
पल parsonarl fer the
Lo service or ४ “Fell hls? cx:
; stuty of a dige 87 सट1%
Rice of 8 Eworeu.e Court
87९५ uyen to do se. We de not
4a crwrdition of

Preveatian
of ranysai-
mR.

a4 ‘Ths course wr Rave gucwested
imacrtert adeizonal advantage of pr
esnvassing ot “camiula
It

er with apacintinente to Ue High (i श्र
7.0: happily tu the same extent is the cies ॥।

on anxious Cusudesatiouer [1 tau ques.

th: Fichcr sze of ret.reren! savulé £2 made स्टेप
ues wei new inertor. 11 appesin fhe a
8३ पह that it Would be inapproprigte ta apply 11 bn the ges ay
&00181.0७४१ jidpe wocld be varying the temms and con- 5५ ॥
dition: on which thay accepted their apyointments, Such



Pent
407८८4-४'

1हट15%% ६८

commented,

Liav= pri-
FLERE,

BE

जगत nave, ७: theiy retirement such as
comand ly wttept emplormert urdtr
have te aunuin uoufecled,

priv leges as 1
tha right to 773
Goverment 7

ae

We Fayn alrrucy

soducated that 11 15 c3senticl that,

0 per a: sith azdoudls tu
The seasion would. of courss, be +
१ 4७:७२३ 9४ 0९४२७ thar a
4 ied for a fll persion 95 eospting ufti

1 ६६: rarls 898 vould have saved gut of hig egreings
> tar in li able ta supplenen It haa

wos. poloted 0७६ chat there is ४
the juces being ekle (७ seve anything
alarey doting he tree af 1.15 ott
that wite venginis x low, the

he cugstion of persion
hav2 referred ६3 the lib
anwlich seasons sre din the United Stetes 850 in the
Kruder, We ska] adver st a later stage to tar
[ए 01 ६7070 4 # rered igh Corl ८ ulge either
(>34:/69: or to practise i pren.s Court.
Ts order thal tie vetired High Caust jas may safle
> live :७ comfort without daring to sek
we would recersmend that the
pension of the Chizf Just zc of a Sluts Bigh ९७०२1 shoul
be fixed cl Rs, 2010 and cl a Puisne Judge st Rs. 1,750 per
nib. In view af Une lunwer tenure office which we
ocurnended, the trinimum orried fur evening che
ray aeucuadn wast it 15 ab presen: ily,
The Locteas> Li the persion *hica we are
reccmmmeading should, we think, meke a subacanticl
yi 42.50 chokes
i ned, rebine at she
oid age of sixcy-flve years. The addidional fmanciat
Thent involved ip live iacocore ef che penédue is In
ecsential, 16 mes aso he pointe, out [६६६ the
3 ७८४ Lo the State sll mov oc subeturtial 33. the
persion wi lke pruri fo: a shorter perfod of years having
tegard 70 the inersased age of retinenzes.t.

tH. In dealing with the rights in respect of leave of
sbecogn of Chi: Supreme Ceast Tudvexs we have cecoms
mended haz chey ahougd 00 at least aa Jibera’ as thuse of
the Hag): Court Sudgeg. The provisions with veyerd wo
leave admpissikle tn High Court Judges ace contained in



IT
Chagler Weel cle :.igh Cour
1

Judging (५७५७1:
Wie नए nut.

high eye 50:52५% bal od

2 lu rommend any change in Lae zmurint of the
to which chey are ‘euti-ls<:. hrreweyet, wrder
Court

fourth of the leagth <f
This is sukject to vartale rest

tal engta of leave 8.
Curcouslp epougn, 1000-28
che ru.es 0:&2७ bis fill slary un.

Hosiim o2 Ra 3267 per enecnh during wk

loaf Isave acerisgible 49 Sir ou full
is difPoult 720 appreciate the reatin fer tke
338 Gaze fre. ace dn his leave. for,

he would vet

duc utd “ocing averse
forst.on uf th k
which such a practice would cause yin £2 ce
1:00. There iz ne reason whe ine rule sg balt Lae 1:#0: adbew-
emg ०६ full allowanges and the reuswining belt un doco
nd net apply whatever Lar ‘angty 7 146
judge becomes entitec, «: thst
y during the gern u: whch
3 200 half his salary di
ed lin nee om 99 ile

gle 220 ct the Cenesilatiut Buriso
Za tetired 5007 ५- # (igh ofter rectree
+ Courl en aber High "ककणा

val: comment aod cisapwwecl,
In level wich the yee
tet ted Supreme Cou:
suruer (+:५५ 1 ar to carey
20126... 9-51 rcngideradions apply w.th
८४ He Coot Judges. As way cemeryed
ta Boraley in tae eoutee of Lae
'0 siven ७२८७३ Ls

€

0 jsdg2s cto practise rilairr én Courts
SIT ह 8307-७2 18 an cxiznme'y retrograde
aflecuing she indesendence sf Lhe
There are big cient avpewring before
॥ jads> ard you vontemmlate “chem as Pour

६ ०3 एप एच. Fa preve: opinior 5

giver. chacsing Rg 10,090 ur Rs 150M) or even
Rs. 20000, Bul uf you g.ve tim cubstantial nengion and
make 3.3 teacher ihuewise: satstaexry there 3 2५५



8a

10 ९3 pract:ze.
my Met pag the 0:९४ aud wath-

niast Tastly regng-

oul cnacpengent judic.ary éemes: survive
68 6 Lace business: is 141 cas 119 pra Stale
319 stoule ४0 lock ir work +>

rind anne hie werk ax 9 jude.
We horyr alreacy oointed sut (98 unden ry
Lining hy vest
bility cf the:r being able to advt:
‘a Sleel | i

nt, it judges are 77 be

Lau Ub int git
1 lace may Fone aite- retirement ta be
ie judpgs the act ae ope islly.

rich Jitizas:
asked +9 al

if They ave prevecus
‘re

Faweme Court yuduns we
of ye ‘

ar फॉ.०40601 as 5.
» 40 Lae Ua.on 1%

service Corzuy.3-
bo Court

"8० cl any stag? ocing sypvinted u
Ceurt.

we the eed uF

Kecolrmen 24. We vay al 105५ रद
foro ac amendment to subclauce ¢¢
14 ।
orvire.

Vie

i i 898 relerenoe 10 the holdiug n° atier
170 the judiclal service of q State, 705 enly would a 024७०


als

10 be agposnted
rena Distriel Mansif ar a Ci
red offices, Luc

ourgare wish 11% presens eemslaiul
ion 32018) of the e-movnl of Int

rast Live 71803 fal
६ that cl a Subsrdi
t

Sn हतउ5 सा:

fi os i 2 लैंड at
vil anpe'lats wowem: Tt iz thus apprrent thet the
43.99 G Tadic Ast, 1934, cnserel

censidgrah 0 rxaprigan > 10
< wee slicibl: fw alevalicn

E
sha. only a ja
ditarens elmzses 0.

ed puch van
5 po.uttoent to ihe Eick.

Iu most of face Bla 4s pues uf Lewel Keon
Lege! Remamberancer, and Sssistait legal

॥
Ine judicial cadre. A
७. Agzistent Legul Rew

sence cf experence gs J iz
ja. icial we wed coder
m eligible fur agpulul

riscee wus corined (0 work 55
a the Hipt Cow’. Bench

i BR
mansif kas 772०७ appointed



so

them fox uppomtmenr lu the
wd haya, in she per-

complicst, Guus
19% and idvised Goverment su these gress

fa, traning very Gero 2111 the Le:
Sigher -lucuGial Ser
casea from cay-teoday, lirméiog
iy ef Winessés and teeching deci
& wilh lwvers auuegcing on cade

: ib ig easen
in ovdar that Tig ile be toc
2 Mourt caould have the २/४]॥:

10८४९ ocr al least ihve y
he would nave exprrint

. ane
vuruhy of
would have

'& expeciouc cf the lis:
४4४2 alsa 3899 ewnerizere ot 5
050 ए जी ws tu: would ke ia everall chexac
Lik eis
काओ कोना एमा. (4) oF
alien 1.६३ He stlene

odtm.astraisn i: /
aad i mary eagcs, एफ
. “egovaTy end +!

रन न
आाइउलाप6.

years cxerzized 13010:

simar cree: oof (16 wecunoulstion
é shall naw preceel te sag-

Ty sro their norm.
wal of whe erreurs.

deveopmen 3 कया hon Ldn

pu the High Couls have in cur

net bern edeouately To expict
urbe: oF Jue rs High Covrt>

th tar vasth: reasey| vilume of

3
mic. (७ ack time co aticenpt the ane
printed एफ; to us bey 0 3enine ceasel, if tere
nea the ngads daocte ant 3:00: 6236 “oak
9 Widen Uke re

le
congesti
remedy is not le blacup Lae coffe bus



12

tal chere‘cre, ऊ ti. Sea Tran its Stength of

vel gtia Iewe. 2: 5६ to be ale

its roving Insbit.- py yeas

Lee Sed weemgur प7-
oyu 25 Dieta.
बाय) che lust

Tal tury

The stat ८५

every Iliph

nade 19 Mepose 01 wh.
1

the arrears cit
nossanal 2 rength
lewiel शक: हट, tu CC’
suggeat chat he maqu.ced stresytk of th>
cate should be fivest in consustatinn
>of shul State and the Chief Justix

be reviewer) ec ar
> wil) be 182९8 ता.

ly courte रा,
itl 40:९0 492 in the werk cf be

qurielear cing
iv its turn, will result

of testing, Wie: ove
1. shard आज में

oO
it Trust

SUARCEE I arn 7, jn nt
ग8*प्राह of things thet canco7 0३ avcidod. Tk ठाफ view, cnly
thase &. whch lave arding fox periods of time
ave Slotld be cigs ax

whe pending 316 01 each cour: to ite sormal wropecstis:
3 the shortest poss‘ble ti In suveesting me:
to desl आह] e thal the pertname:t



High Courts Cxed :
be sud.ciew’ to cral

The numer vl sucr.
09050 of 0७७98
sed im ermal ai 0... wake

ersticn lhe aitenzs in
yo slispusal
= te be Ened

20011,

of za wuentber of ४०८७७) 110६०

for this purpasr shoalg be much ag 1५ enaal- the a!
Netti: ue sleared wiltin & pesod छा hen . “Tae kt
४७७८४ Gre cia I
वर्ण wees.

nicd whould it our
he purpose of  disprsin

an of cuvtert १४70:
he | eriuanent
sore Urs tes
rakes be
th new

ney wu not FLow'd to ८:
ynal

1
which baz arn
Ihe aged
डा eseitie tine, we e Fy
nial yudsee vous! fall amis ॥1 48 ९८0६६
7 the Bar er in the ¢
vite wich Ire

int Sve ab.

whitsnever by cegional
Tacems cuttsiders.

Ox unit ot 0.

apleccior depose oF santos,
ioe the Me ¢ trent
ceu. re. Agr .। ५ oa

Srlentinns trom the Haw 1st nee: ly be of perwns ot
otstaafing mers commending 3 Ictgx practlee who mpy



he ७ pawuniary sieriice ८८३ Te
‘by atesplrg these yudgeshi 3) oftort
16 6 PeLrsuyGe BVisIb.n seu

jueyeshius 26 least for a shevr pi
he duzy. Tair ¢ the Bar sone
ere Shel it 00.५६ ८5०१0 that sec “10.
torn of judges! f 5८: "027985३ sheds cur

ar 2
reyuired et
a] the Swat ©
oe lhe caleo. 3४:
further ariposa:

gor ५1६२

Maw

lvesdy puluot®

rr be ७७१ to the ८७४
७09 the Bur ard the
inembers 4४

to actepl u pusitinn whirb
eon ¢hefe part ही rsay fori ne
tahi: pereoug छा. che nex!
i talev. 57-1
७: ५ these

ing the fitz om
Bevis inue of the
in

9 0७ make compelent Thigh ४
1: ६ suffers rem एशला। ए tne
jencies thal rare rene

should “x
immmedistely inrressed to Ra, 1,000, |: the Stairs
Ceewain Srelus lieve alrtady, ky legislation. cffeeved shi:
1 iT U.cew Stat

filed etter 10३

xe stwnge applies arly 7
Ti che «हो: nnz only sce the Plez of tke
1 1: tas slupzed sick ताज. sppsals
pelew Bz, 10.090/- but fresh gpreak are 211 2४:
inst dectslm. In ४५1०७ fiJed before the nw fey!
am bits force. In whi Elets of Utter Yracesh the



oF

1.ए11: शा oz set appeils is abyut ta '

Tralee if Ing file of firet appesie. It ix, Lhnteftre,
Sates ronseraed shoul enact
oF woule wWeuster apper:
pending om the 01९ of the Hg Cuurt x
and nrévent Cessh appeals of thia
the 1167 Concts. .. 81.4७: ich
Thi 108८६ has 0७0 Benn Raise
ve tw ouderteks e:milar leg
wit. he =lzh Court

:8 Gust 39028.
urbe: oj ius
Wo beave deals
eta’? In auethor

lower appel-

Tig! छः
1608 एएं chic propel ir ठे।

w tha mcgsure:

ibt. Wed
isirrave changes Eki: the

agie Jiuyes,
iz)

Fe at ons. fA Of 1810, tke questior. of varacion: hag figacee. sam
४७३1 prey एच before the 2 eye alul the ine)
HM SOA

Feed

cwerk is su exacting and reqnic-
3 ¢ettsin am. of rexl = and
rin enahlc a cudge to peifovm
noe ure mot peculicr i
nee. mcm
ry Rik aro no
m Iheze enjoyed in Iedia. Thus im
a Judge vf the King’s Tench Tessin
Teximutels 166 deos in the yest cod :७ the
on for Ui days while ‘ne averag: #पैं+2९
of working Cage फ. 3 Fear was aporoxbately THI dpys
uunording tr The Eversbed Cova Tnier ,
पर 1... The ९! ne commended parr in-
ghtern vrurking days. in. effect iat re
Ootempletead only 48 or aparoximately
a Yet 11 is wise: y mistake wo thins
only necessavy for the jurges.
eonsiscenty ard <etreauousl; opposed the
vi the vataliou in order tha: tre judpes 50:श)०
imprtrnl Bar २8 essential
r ges. the bare'cr the
Ser hss to work 2 nas no oly! te
work i Cesc. presente his cae bet he haz 3180 to spgnd



35

४: preparation so log! the: puree’
“6:9४ and at effective as ile Bench
af che need 3 vacsties 93 much 98, if

The quesztlen :।
view uf 1b
wil ave of
Juative today

let ‘96 fosked st abo frem Lae
that the culing down ni

3. 13८2९ he: been cut doe:
0). 10 11115 ul us cl 1111
his. 4 bere siainter-at Thereiore, thc 00७ tesson
: 8 menssex of tbe Bor woud accept ८. judgeship sodas
he hoseyiae 7 jueeoship world eve him a certain
ecatus ard 3890-1७ and wuuld ४.४२ greater laicuve than he
if he: had rortinuot at the Gur. If thie

sate (0 be ice whittled

ture will hays to be manned
amo 1.10 sgiweics or reerniles: है
occupying the second bina tw
आए jigrned ja mating the righls
al jadyes beesuze they realize that tae

The pensies he woule cet

#41 Reverse we voslise thst in the context ef the proacas Tw: hund-
tones, wher all che steers et the nation are cal mt ups f
dee than Lelore, te judges canum lag behind
pe: ote this call. Thertcra, «ime eerieting in
geeticns :3 inevitable. We thinx that a] the High

rarise Pifreck 18 the prep

[00 08९... We wish to make it clear that the worx
thse cae huadred! days shold te: juslisia) work i
७9 aad she working time sheuld ke of five kows. We
say thls hecause 0. sane Hepa Courts. Iv.dzes de not 3.0 2८7
Court and do edyv-inict: “x ar retire
“A: 110 juelgm ५
le be pronounced forchwith by dictat:on In open
sia: of Luar cus: or if a further consi« -
odes i: ed skry should be reserved over the (०२९५:
end. mse lus 1976४: uf weeksny aya के aatuleved. .
कर rach Tligh Cour. to docide koa its vacation
Ter ged.

should be

Gi. We have learnt with quosidgrable mixgiving 3f che ).tgidleron
‘oposel cf Government ta introduce lee statin 5 img dave
vacation of she High Courts. We think that such \\paeitable,
‘atian ywerld be highly objeeciona’le in orinc

would eoust:tute s rerfjous biteslerenye with Ly Oe ade

ence nf lap Tigh Courts ahd a pave cagmachment upen



nit af tks ९५४८1 Jusvizr and the Judges to reguléte
whe 2039 Cow’ 11.45 iegisialinn tay well
mt for other Jrgislation uv fuluce, by
८७ abtermpt mote cad 1७0४ ९८ talecteri:
th the wirking ck ibe High © ot i
wmnpbasiag tha. the inc ne she judiciary ४ Ipdig
ungenls upon the rivengtr, status end prestige cf tne High
Court end nething ७). tor: ४ Une pobliz ur
thik “ha; the (टू: Court: are nothing :nwe chan 8 depart-
went ol Guernica.

8093 be poster aul thal legislating sary
F Lan court fur a certauu numer of dave; it ९:

net prewde for hew much work they sheald do duing
U.use days cs the cuali ४7 shell ६.

४,
greed eensy af the फतेएुरक
E ely and u ively conscisur
1 stotug ave, dignity of their its

far tee
‘ual of

la arrange he.
cue eter ४६ Have ircivess
hog re dy reponse.

Haus

bones wl werk in dine वही Dyas
work. हि

पर im, पड.
Gv aad

the working
cecatd bin :
Luisdgce dy. it

Tt, Jedgor dir
siting tezir

19 enable the jucwes
he users us udvanar. We have

[ F & of reading
vithout a teduetiun py thr bows A
a. The sceepane: ef that recoto:wnda::
would rendar the caving oF thr contbee uf guurt worllng
Ss irootasticek le.



67 The questicn yf the Cours not working on Satucdaye
-bas 8-80 #xuled cow.avent. vd Vaal al a
time whan the conditions in the 0०081 एड vey) every onc

B. diferente Lelwern 1.

cance by executive ofleers or the astbordiacio jud‘siary
and the: superi bdirnsy. The worle vf हू Judge ia the
i the High Cour. cr TRG,
ation for g me TiC” cf four and & 2817 or five h mvery-
Thst .3 4 vecy ६३५०3:७ eur; fic nore taxing than that
lnvo.ved wn wurk of the other officisls mect-cted बाज.
11 sus a
tar Jude>
many (४5७६
Acciding the
the law wh.

3 tu net solely on 7
2 Jucce of the Superior Tl is ct ouly
Sphts wf pucti¢ular parties ‘mat Isyny down
y Wneal the sidzens in the (/.७::४ in that

Slate 6 the vase of 5 Tlizgh Court and la. wtn.c country Not pesat-
Supreme Courl. ॥ iy bat apprepes%
tRE of heavy respoasibility,
his Saturdey

jaz the couse of ¢:
that for Un:
the Jucuy he eupe:
{-cr ta himself to 900 ing
and inforn: bine! of tie lea in connect ith shen.
Those avqueintet with the way ia which she Judges of the
Supreme Cours and the High Comrts vrurle el.uuld be aware
thas Ssturdsys and Sucdays ee noc free due:
Judges. Merl of the adgzs are te be found on Satur
ises situer workioy ir ihe Ubrarny or
ling judameuts in capes : which hearings have
ished. Soroe of then de sétnilar work at sheie cesidencs,
Dievation of fudgr.ents anc lookiog :ato yiepe-s relating (०
work for lhe unsung: week alee eonvurnes the larzev pur:
elu Sunday of these Jeciges.

As we heve gad ckove it shnuld he enough to fx a
target of we hund:ed working days; (एज: the target és
* ed, ib shenecd 3¢ “oft to the (97715 to deride thelr
vuowliis and frre daze.

Rl llowever. mere [-४५०४। adherence a. nu Jlied court
hours it awl ensugh. I hks come to our notice div
~wisits to Lhe mis Tligh Cauct «etrez shat the :

Court Shiuld tive

working ho.Ts ere ast oxeetved aud fliuiges  frequeathy
ing Lcu.

start theiy Coury luz or rise eayHer than the ०1
Aaart rom thr loss of judgeuuwer ouvesoned -hese
fapses. seh is practice lowest the dlgmity of th: Contt in
the public The vuldc: कह! the 14४८८ expact [॥1-
a shove all fzam the Court. We muy refer In this
om to the observations of Chiel Jexare Vander-

“Tac met ivitaliay 1: iv Of ali x: Ihe 18581 and Portuallty.
the layman a-ize ic the youl ube judge lo getting

"Americ. Bar Asanedarien, Touran WA ye हु

15M, of Law— : ह

cour
bilt;?



छा

on -be bene’ in Line ia Tre jurecs agve

४, ane eo dur | lsc

Jame: *
You could hear peal. cf feugluter suneting trea
: when Exe Henor c-vergerd
t half an hea: laten vould strivesty ut
ले ia cha:
3-0४. that

te aad heen -18'४1 ४३ to sc
the jeae: Le erould tell lo 9:

to ac

-उ शए*: असली.

nell vc &४३४४ puny-
(१७11७, ०६८४: var

While ik wy cow 90 10*.3&६3::
Tuadlity हक 1 doe 10 ६४ Is.

1
High Court wh Jw -धःरे
“zh Court ty enethee

by porlawe
ete हु

si astantia] nus
all he States wers

rusher of
ssl of Kensois whe 3८९
akx. pototea oul

ep ance o 3| heve the
00118 se af Tigh ई#ण्तु

. tectirr of

the suns

ould be more
Ax 3 leading,

ipplail sae 1::
kewsage chen these

wud at tonst
le 2OnT.e-

Ssiores Tec prnlauen Commi:


LT
af thas suggestlon os tact these Nigh Cuwis have ex

stage put
related a one ca
vers] 2६३९५ <n .

> ef the High Ceurt ere under
‘orn ons Hy

he cadependence af tv H
ale sxecaive may make

|
rhs whose Cases ८७९४०-७ >€1016 tree. We,
merully vith Lhe wwe for

1 in the diachsrge of their
-‘oporéant. that te pee

consider tast a judges
y cormsedora.
sureliat

42. Wr art. he

enares at 1b
3 base

* by anu Jarge
suf their vip
arzumets ased
su Doeet ६
pas uppoialed (७
lc in chro miirse ।४ कर एिहर
a they are
lent. 11
1 11॥॥- Bur ar
Ty a 5प६-
amend ~¢ bs meevxé from pleer (3 vlace tc keep
70. 10 खाए standards,

wi. A dre ॥
Veuslers cl. over the country weld orduuhliddy greatly See 35
10[9 to break down she dartiers of regionct.sm which wa- erage ut
fortunately hold ३०३६ -० 10७ parts oF lhe cyuntrp, At mpeaiters,

A Curl ledges with free Gnidee

ds



joa

Whe sane tim? we Lave 0 cunsider 1.1010॥/ the offect
whigh she suggested gpeasure weuld have on vecruilraeel
to the ing) 3 Court benely from che Bar 1: ५ Slate Tie ipcal
Bar bas fo> years tightly been ३ veceuising grind for she
High (४७7 “ench 8७9 during 7& Terruimment
from the Rar hee hees vo Lhe inere & Tar 83 WC tut
in the main recruiting ए:०६७व
alrzady dealt eather wth 1
3६७०६. expernnced

ing eclertions of ju the Har and heve sag-
wested rocasures lor maxiog sal'sEuesorp sclesticur Ly
the Bar. Wr fer. (७ tue difticulty 61 reevuiviog leading

men fro et Ga L be greatly sccettlucten, 1: the aceck-
tar दर hip moves पर tw of tranpts
from the + lu cinnthe tate as an ८४3४7:
ineldeal 1६ 1: We ave therefore evease 4 ral

७0.
a ruwmmendation which .s Likely to alfer: adv
cecruilmert of cozpetanl psrstas Ceram lar loeal Ber.

Garside 5, eugeosting elsewhere
stemen. rial Service, which ize
#त्र+ ४९0 Service, Will ntpply rieocbers 13 the hi. ber
vy at af. States 39५ de recruited तर. an All-lidia
basia. $f (013 Pecuaccigecdudinn is spted, it will repult
in a terval nuober of service Judges of thu H.ign Cuprts
being presnes drawn fromcutside the Stale. f+ skould 4180
be possicle, 38 has ai phebed mvenily in come ०83९३, to
recruit a3 judges vormpbers of the Bar tran outsid fe
91910, 1 scmetiues happens in the wmryylor States thal the
local Wir hes 201 -nen of, earltanding statucr wh.» 1G
be invited te Se ludyeg n? tha: Migh Cow Zven in khe
Cagsu:y ०0
Mm sulside the Stax er: vited to
0 alex Tecobucesles! cre the ter.
we very epericl yualifcations
fe froin culade || Se दर
Local ty
ill ar
parse. te the Staves Carm'oz :
imag ले शक for #>pniotzaquls
wart Eram the meyy.berx of the Sar 11: 1 Hew
+3. tis aeped that a: ths runner the sApecta
tetra Recrgenisatinn Commissions 1:७। at lerst
third ०2 Higa Court Jedges would be peross ure
from cutside the Stave will be realized
Tysbness 75. In the eazly Irtlsh cays and Ty recently, the
Seo ic Rritisk ard che Sndian Juagrs meinta: a rule iz

Hodges. tion of 130 9111 ened alegfnccs, dae:
members uf the public and the exe:
sneial 10१61 ons, Tha: as an Oni

2 mux Steely
2 at 2२1७५ and ot

dudges living, 10 the pyards


1h

"their whole “ives * * * * within ऑल and ried limite’!
29 zen oun wer> shroc liépes is guerd iteir inu sudnrust
aad the publi: porOdence is their imparlalls, pa levy
in reference to the executive, that it waz said uf one Hig
Court chat the Chief Jusdee end Judges weeld noe
cprrenes tag preencte ul the Guveroenl Heuse. There
WES ७ ConmueRL . sowas गाव jisltied
anc Was Wo. je otha Agne, there
was 9 conside: sow cpluicds fa E i
thet judges enould temacn in isclation. t

Ares position, <t Was 80 extreme position In the right
seaus2 ther Hobe an satrsmer ecsitinn in
hes directior, would nat ># fn- the geo? of
Stete.“"

की, We have Indeed i
twlel “ay exces
‘vere evoidiag the or
Judges ४३५४ ८:

airs rresbed what Was काव्य of
4९ 4४ का dircesiur, Far it stecdends,
the Gevermuent Heuse,

la troat imybatione from the Govern-
commands.” Newspapers tll us of Chief

Suna, being “granted'™ ryiews by

Tunust few Judgea the old

Nation, 3 large majority sees २४६8५ iren rset ० freely

Talailiy +i. she ovecutive.

Tae allitanc ef 7udges in regacd ६3 conuels wilh tac
seems ale “4 2 vemodletels eltered. It hae
piens for judwis, nowly eppaicted to He bench,
Invite liens entertainment only trora
tl sions bu fem individual menner«
f the Sar und oven from prfvaln witizens. We have been
tod ८ ७ Higk Cow’. Jedga appointed In the Supreme
Coatt Barcel. ertervained ct a party by aa private:
citizen. som? wtudividyel mevabers of the Bar
il a prattice to eblurtain all ipcoroing
id in the evidence hofore us that thee
Rappen -ए Dethi st one time? sve
4 in ncher places.

77. It appesce [0 us ‘het puch bebaviou: by te judges Bhvreat
must 1९६0 46 8 loss oF the zespeet In which the 18 ita 218)
should ke held ty Ihe commepaity. if the public iz to give NT
bevfound respec. tu ‘br 10प 9४2. the gudgez shouhi, by their
enndurt try and deserve it. Not word or deed Shupkd
they give cause for the belief that de not deserve the
pedestal on which we expect the thes 0 to plece them It
aypeams tn vs that not oly the kermance of his ducles
tut cutside the Churt as well, a fui bez to memtain an

Tunsurd, Hae ut

Parliamentary cba: है|
38-39 54% Wet. tts, Col. cote,

at SHE, © 0. Riots, Teco of he Potp'e Debary, एल. दा, Pact EF


102

alonfness ucwundng almeet 2 seld irmpcsed isojatisn To
Mf itt eciinent Statesman, Sir ले. Charchil:

mere cevere atul
fe 3 requires:

A furma ef Life end cowinet 4
Taste died Ubi (४७ हरे erdinany 7
from Jusges ard, Uhrough unswricten, bbe 1009.
i r ४ ६७० Fe ec arid,
a continiunus iapect

pablic activ
de dine Covet ‘Sur be
30-897 whirh th ce demands.
= & eencdal roles al
. ulectes? the

In Mie sited Staves, tae Her,
conduct which sheuld be sai
whet ave been culled che “las
Tre doalges in our 5 a the unetictert

of Cordurt wich is not this Jess alries by
r2acon cl 1. nol beng weitere

‘we lu tue Giguity and
ined, bas Jermulatent?
as af Juadcejal hier".

“8. The now:tlen code af छशहन+७८ which auverng 4
app ie co ol. oR ogreter degree in Lhe
duties ar tne 6008. Ia thr ura ct
velé of some Judges takin >
i 2 eins of trisls, scene’
4 s the tesk of questioning wicnr:
Aly pting Lhe arguments of counsel.
adeyrion cf such 8 cours 10० fei to have 20 unfortu-
tale effect on Ibe: Bar and Une ldgating puislie. Gl bas
brew ise
"A dude whe infatvenss te euch oculd dein
1! caze oF jor frem ihe pu.ul of view of the
Leucate erha wether Fe bred woe oF 1027 comes ००:
ef Ibs sours an exhansted presi.”

आ वा crder to appreciale ocunzel’s
gary unil des:rpsle, « volley of questions
3 1929 1060 the advocate enli:cly uit the
qin bis argume: Vanda mlerrugt is yo.
unusual pertley'ar ¥ im ४४१ of AdrncateJudecs in the
है aad the High Courts. We do #०ए। for, &

that thé Crur’. should net control Lue afer
cements 19 the
ff each
3 lave the ocher
cnere Debates, sleet

Thuug in

cime 10


103

very chem senne cones] indulge 4५७
lig.as ayers wilhiout .nterrygt.nn by

Ihe golden
gent “she

lus ig २० bem ar .
questa cf 4:
seeary to Neem up any

Law deft sbarure | th

ve points st
२85 “Jer

it;
iY Ualivé 5 ४३७ ६७ aver-speskineg Twig:
ie

ix no wel

M 1 1४६ i Role of che
uLusay Js jrdac-power at lis dispoaal > 20719 40 "पड ॥ slices
1 Swill, 19 (४ 0४७७७ ७. 1॥1.॥<

Mes aud sow Judges, judges with
a classes of work and uvhers. A>

(५ whe: ruve not head snsugh teateing pus wii

al worl: and cisike it. The dis; ! of ludge
Trages ct riminal werk 14 ७०७७0 7८ be: slow amd -ingatis- er
fsexry. | i if: Judge far

ions ere beetle
m3 wer dragging on
cable leazth nvfore Judges uraccuslored to
ern.

comp ०:८४ cisregerdad, ax. that rai
uc a cmnsid:
d2ai witk -

19 the: present scate of corngestius वा the 2:6३ La Uae Ti
lz :६ is alse २३३७६ “haz each (20001 savalé sake mn Peed
gs [८ Gaal wiry

‘ WGrl bow ys
3 Catenas ता 10५ Rete 3, ae,


Admnisao-
de duties
w Gy Hi
Cant.

है. oI"
छाक्ष Conrts

4

will be o great si:virg in the aime of tae court = The Ggures
Unit iv: en placed before ua ४४50 that a large oevdent-
age of ruitters admitted—in some ९१३९६ us much iis 70 or
80 per cent—are eventually divymissed. A varofal cxam:-
Sutiwn cl lhese matters at dc admission ewee and the
weodiag cur of cases which have no merit in them, would
sv lead not onky to 8 caving in the judge-power but
‘ nye! nenziderah'h mene to the Ti ta a
strong end Sepable judge dealing i '
afte Su] heaving at the adoissiim stage, cestries the
mile In eases काशी) rowlly deserys & Teconai-

nel be forgatten that ene of che mast
irs whirh 3 High Court parfozm? 3 che
strative duty of Eapervising che Work of cle: guk-
The subordinate judiciery im the State
ean anetion with aMewney only if 19० 14.७७ rious ly
seratnizes the ors of suvcrdinave jwilcial offivere,
ettends wc tae needs of subsrdiwele courls line the
“ston «xf court-houses, the transfer ol jucpis, the
ely of lew docks sud tae like, Onor inquiries have
revew.ce! shi € jnaportance ०८ these Gulies ix net ve l=
read and 1.1 Mey ict: neglected ia seme cf she Fi
Covrls. Iridee, views have beeu expressed in 5076
quersrs ther the High Courts’ funcliim ends with the
diexeal of the cases Bending before Lhum und thet the
supervision of (he hewer judiciary and the ‘impardng of
8 जय ti Line jt | administration in the waole State
br oa watelifu Lav sohordirae courts iq ne

a judyrs, दरार being an overell ecper-
questions py the Courl af a whole It
sopenc3 to us that the laxity gf supervision oy the Heh
Court 3६३ In 8 Taxze rasaaure vonteiiuin t» @ canside:
decine in te ell jeney ७८ Che sybordinate jundiclare,’ in
some of fr: & cs

81. We had cicier povus'an to make a Report’ of tthe
desttakility of the High Court of iu State sitting in bendhes
av differen? places in thc Stato. We then reached cthe
autellsivg Ui lh onftiwieney of the eombalstrationt of
justic: should be the paramoubl considesution fed ope

tris matter amd that fhis comaideration weighed
wheltingly against the creation of benches of the
Cours. The structure and ¢omposition of she 004:
shield su’. te: cwrmitted tp be influenced by political
econsidarations. That thia has hai 0१००४ in the past In
certain. cases can be no valid: gromnd foe thr axtension of
that policy. We are of the view that wa should firmly

~ मुफ्ती Report of dhe Lad 2००००४॥०८,



165

ect our Faw agains: the consitucior or creacior of benenee
Such a couree would lead Lo as) आप[करशितलआ of Cre elficdeney
of the १41४० Court with the ineviabtic couscquence of the
lower'ny of the stundards o¢ adm:nistration of justice
Siuce the Report was made, we have visited ail the peinci-
pal centres where che पाए Cewts alt and the evidence
ziven before us 18६ confirmed us in the view taken by एउ
in that Rep We reaffirrn tae resaos gives. ८00 the
epbdlusisns sided in chat Repart ‘no regard fo th’s
nuestion

82. Ou: vanelusicns cegseding High Courts may he Sean. ॥०७ at
summiaristd £3 foNows '-- icon

UD There Las ini a barge incre of actcers in
[७ Vigh Cow rd disposals have fallen ९:०७ vu?
whol hey eaoule ie in a properly regulated court.

42) ‘The cere can be pest atcribued to the
Increase in batt the nocual werk cf the High Ceu:l
aad ulsn lhe expensien of its apecial jurisdiction yader
various Accs,

_ 48) ‘Tar oerring iaw force ef the Comsltytion bre
2-89 greatly gdded to the work of thu: High Cigrts

(zp (काठ stroreth of the High (Ctcurts was not
अंग in time $> prevent the arrsars trom accumu-
ating,

(5) Any proporale puude by the Chice Justice of a.
Stave lor increasing the etvengut oF lhe High Court,
if il hea the concurvengs of tho Chie? Justice of India.
dlaiad he: eveeptad without detnur or delay.

46) The 8४४ yo arigng frum 3: sho riage of of
judges hae lew ayered by Ebe delagys in maki
Bppdiniinents t> yecancle: as have neared.

7) The feyuent deputaden of Tuduer fir nn
fuciciul work without fhe provision of a substimate is
aleo responsib’r for the पका Courts being under.
manned snd if such dgpekition i likely va last for a
subscancial period of time, arrangements sheald be
tasde to appoin: 4 aubpthute.

(8) Many weulisfietory appointmente kave beea-
made ta the [zh Céurts of polidcal, reyismal and
commenal cr ctaer grpund? with the result that the
fittest mean have oo been appcinted This hag
resulted in a diroinution in the out-fuca cf work ॥ the
dorlgres

(9) These unsatisfactory appointments heye been
made notwithstanding the fect that in the vast
Taajority of cases, appointments hive been concurred.
)७ by the Chief Fare '€ of the Tigh Conrt and the
Chief Justiae of : .


138

(10) (4॥७७ ध्यातठघ with the State sxecuiive ix

pecessucy before spytinin ents are made «: the Tigh
‘url

(11) Woile ct duotid be

1 ३ 93:16 peu: cs
be open to it 10 छाए!
wonetrince cf ie "४1 ane forward 11 to he Core.

wupused (५
the Chlef ust

172० of 3 Hi
ly nn the vecamnient:
ize et thet State anc with the
= Chied Justice of India.

fuisne Jucee sould net be ७७॥॥-
es the Chlef Justics: «unless ae
0 qualification: we ave referred x

poss eres t]

(16) While trere iz no need wa lace i *
Justice of a State shall slwuy
. t whet @ vacsuey arivés in the 09170 of
* Chic€ Justice of & 4:७५ (५310, the fits; person
Fond 6१ gelectec. if necessary fret cucside

Envintment of the Chist Justine of ६8.
Wd ke wish die cof the

10८ स्त5: clon ##पश्चाएप्त्त्ों
0 judictery and the wen:rts to 80106
Taste cecruitmeot ou ths Tigh Court banch

Hl nlwoned eviticism cf de judictiry by
2 persons has adversely allieven ice prerdge

1-4) Tre cxisting salecies of H
tre net ६० inadeysete as 26 delet on:
200६७ 799 Judgasiips, cxorp!. per-ana in Cacetitla and
Rorbay

{203 The d:Mienlty &उ ८७४ by Les lew salsrles of
(६३ ९६४६ 38 couneracced hy nAering judgeclip:. io
“Tig JuTIor Ta2mbera oc (16 Har at i: Comperedvely
early age.

421) Tovrever, indtzcrimiuste
voztabera of the Bar averlockiny ti

alimg % junior
cleias of w:riarg



Id br a convention i tor
Court Juwige skal not decline to
a Buprane Court Tuctye 1 called

vd

vw ct a St:
per usreb wad
Muda at २३, 1.181 poet घ८:॥ Sor 12

(७1) The Jncoes of 1.
ved to twaw
n chey ars
ard lal
Alle wares,

४ AT Court ahesd 18

tor Ihe veriad for
wm fall ‘low u ee:
0. 1 1:जएर था 2०

बणंस्प्व

iim अका:]1 be nuded tab;
Court fruro ance 1९ any empl:
wee Judge et 111: Sopoeme Couct efter
vader the Defense under ,।0 Siste,

Sa: 44 80 (८४1६ of an
reised for at 1220६:

(Sk) The ponent slreacth cf the Hieh Co’
Fhould Ge refined ater te
verant +

25) ‘The डर,
inforva ५ ol tars

ein £ |
99:08 90 $-

Court
te ६:१७

(51) Al] pregne ‘dings
seyeru! the period ep i
ne classiled पक cence

(32) Addl 1 Judges should he spoci.tet Scr he
2९16 pu: * of closring thee arrears w'thir. a period
af 7४८ years.

(309 Sus. Juégiss shold not be divetzed tp the
dispusis! cf eurcent werk "Vans sdditlonil Crdwe
should be appointed from, smongat 106 most comp::tant
persons aasteble a€ tae Ba: ot 1॥ che service.



106

@4) For the gurpoas of euch recruitment the
enbine: pouabry shni ke: ireated ux one unit

(33) fn effcrt should be made io persuade जया
able seni preeting&.ers 10 aocept judgezicps for at
Tease s-ort [मर्डर as के pitblic culy.

(88) sAn art foe Lody prealded cover by tse Chief
Justice cf India shod be crewed 2० oh 1 panel
ol names ul persone auitable fer anpointmen: co the
High Court
137) Legislatioy should be immieciztely andertakeu
dor ravefesdng all Firat Apprala veluzd below
Re 10000 now petdiog ic the (hel Cours c> the
dGste.ct courts.

iy) ‘Pen meazuce2 svt oat in det) Ly us cn the
vil Appeals to mest (1९ situalion सह ते

(39) The avaduble judge-pow:s af the =jzh Courts
should & gered ard used ir an crenomin truoner
by increa ar power uf Single Judges and 1<55एऐंफ
ip ८1८० methods whiea we 1४४९ set vat 2p detail elee-
where.

(40} The Sadess sh
shore bravethes uf ऋछ
tent.

thy The work ef admission shew ४११ enteceted
te sercas snd epscially cutapeteut Jucges.

(44: 0६६०५ choule de gdendtind only after careful
scrutiry,

(42) Tae Ligh (४० should worl: vcr at least 00
devs iu the year, Onoz thid 3 dove, it stould be fpr
sLe छा © to regulate their waca..cus as wey
shisk. Lest. .

(423 Legislation fer reculating the vacacions of the
high Cour's ic wncesivable.

qd be uselened 10 dea) with
whick thoy are mal compe

£45) The Judgee should sil in court and ७७ judicial
wok for at leas. Ove 1:0प्राउ oa cyery working day.

4401 Judes eegld act br creralred to aft fn col
an Satusdavs as theze are net really fre days
them,

(६४7) ‘le Jadges of thr: 80 Courts should act था
ixample of strict punetuslity on the betel:

i448) ‘The prestien of Tetirag ta chambers ter
dintating jadenments o: pininis.cative wotk
ducing 9०३४५ Hours is not ane Je.

($9) 1: 13 10५ dewipsble 20 Aare an yll-Indiy culve
High Court Judges कै ike 21४६ Raat Judges ahould £

easily transferable fegm one Sigh Cour: te acother. ;



lat

meres paiggesed by ts saould
ag Tushzes from various parts of
of one High Court

(51) Mur roan? mip serve ४७ acommnn coctuiting
Zteund 0: the Judges of the High Courts in 1:

(50) The ott
however suFhoc ts or
th: vouncry to the ie

3६९ Zone,

454) Judes should besr in mind that thef office
errosnde fxom them 8 टला: béserve ced reshruint in
Uri sen

¢ 7 rs akould control che heating of
Uru our? Ahey saacld querd taeriselyas aystart interven-
ing too much जाए tu ufter.

(S49 The Higu (७०३८५ Jodyes steculd cwilix: thal
the lesk upsrvienn जाएं, contro. of subardinste
courts, that is, scmimetradve wurk is a very imporlaat
foreach ७९ lew dul ie:

_ (55) Seting un nf benches of che Iligk Court at
di-lerec: cewfves in a State iz uadezlretle.



Tams

andar ॥ Ma Hark Coz of अपण+
3११८

Neate of cerhnig २7४४७:

Cérepanitis:
10

2४४१४ emery

cP ef

mune hee we

yy ABeras ares Panel. Tree

fi : . + to ut

a,
isc का. बह i - 74 234 979
कु 5५ हु wn “yd on at ao am TOS
Por TERS HA. a
itt eS ord wg Tes जेल

$53 US उज4व उस... का. कार. rset

nates Caries she year: ९,

420

3:2५22
205

334i

A) 4#८४॥७७ ५६
Apply 5७1
Apaellars Ont,

(83 Piss 1 pee
they he
Sree.

CF Belts one

she Malayaly
FAC 1401 Oe
Prepurcuny ow

Out


Lrres Panos & wn NA
Spanar Acarars, .

re Ae a aa

on a 15 ye

Cave Herisians 2 Regs Ne eT Naf

Lapaan MER “$13 il ‘ONS
12 we =
नल. a be



TANGH COURTS—oricinat SE
we ms 1. ‘Whe shren rla:tewes Tigh Courts of Co'cutta, Madras
पुराण Pgh and Vomosy ezerciw ord:csry orig! tual evi) judtsdictlon
Coun thwilsin the :nspective rimtte cf the tree presidency town.
whe pres aotre: ९( their orlgivg) jurisdiction ig te be found in
deey 20°" ३६; Indian JT go Courts Act af 1BG% ३०४ in the Litters

in addition ta their erdinary cig ral civil

iaveslite auce

son,

Ie, Gahea, J Cainntla, the 1१०६ limoiaa of the Bich Court's juradic-
on extend o 2 anal but bgay 10201 pars uf the
ie wirrounde: by the Civcu.ar Kaad, Alipore
J oherdeuorteys of the 94-Parganna distrtet, a
icf district although 1४-४8 within tae linaite
Wunitipal Corporate, while [fewreh
7 4 geparate judiclal Getric. has & scepurate

vi. This, in Calcutta there ars -hyce different
and trim'nal jurisdiction: operating ir. different areas
of the same city.

In Madr In Rombsy, tae ordinary orlginsl evil jurladiction jot

aul Benbty, (he Eig Court catered to Grogter Tanbay ox defirnd का

the Greater Uombay Laws snd the Berbay High Cott

डाक, of Cirmils) Act, 1948. In Marirgs also, the

[ urisdieficn pf लिए Hizh Court exleewis over tho

पद पाक limits of -he swunicipal corporaticr. of the एफ
0 ' Mad-a-.

sericne crimes comeuted within their rés-

॥ गया exitld be committed far tifal
2. Inrvais vere mace upon the ordirsry ertzmal citi)

ictistligtinn of the Lhree Nigh Ceacts wth the ae रण

(९-६
129
88 28)
iction in
respect De sb ia of a civil aaluce Bs iW
eeding He. 2,500 1:. vatus Th linic wee ersdusily
oun.il id reazhed Ha. 100) in 1850-51. Ry Maddx

“f it nea beeo ferkher yrized tn Ra, 60,000 po
inal j cticr af thr Miarlraz पर Court -te
14७७ atly ५09 ristters cateeding Re. 50,000 in ०६1६.
Ty. Bomosy. the city civil court fim Greater Bombay cere

aid

Thigh (७८५७1 ly the es
5 city of Madras 38 ०:



वह

i initia‘ly
000 snd was raised 10 ‘Rs. 25,000 with effect from tho

gtvil ecicect was
escabtisied in (क्री in exercise of sir powers given to the
Stole de: 58-५७. 3 <4 the (10७ ९३५० Coml

कदर बा फल eily civil
cours is Ti ovesdings not exceeding
Rs. 10,000 ain types of sults com-

iz) 34: in misinent af
० 2uits mid proceedings
This Chart hics, besa
in yveapect auits and proceedings
ini) pout ul -nertpiugies ce elias des or .
cn buwnovabl> oreperty or suits zatatIng to or arising 0:५ Cwtinwane
of enidnwmetils. 5 et hai
A. A canketwersial curstion relating to adminuistradan af
justice in. che presigency town 12 whether the oripitul
ivll 10112८%1:00 vE Une cheee Tigh Courts skould continue
fore the estab ishmen* of the city
1 eal, as it किसके
Seen, since the ealzblixament of these courts, Views have
aso bes expreszed sdvocecing the tozal abolition. uf vhis
jumsdicdinm. nm onnected with
the exetmine! at weg ino wtick th ite civil cours.
in the taree precidency towns :४४७ fancticned since thew
esliblishment

ic rastricted
गण! in valor,

We have given chie roster nur eathest atcenclen and
have cliviged the op,
and aypelats side
01:

long of leading ॥:४६३३- ७९९४ of the origina)
ix. all the three tyne of (2९८७-५७;
aad Banabay, The opinion amongst the tegel pro-
sa has keen ard is sharp.y divided. Reorcecntatives
ho prachis: on tie ociging. side ax ४३59 the
renec: af the atvorney's arefession have maintsinid
that the continuance of the original civil ‘urisdiclion of

Hi Court is se seals ४ jo the interests cf lkn high
judictel adainwewi:tien ia these ८72१ end fruit
# aud conunercigl commutiilies who form the
gaats or. che nzighna. civ) side of thr High Cuurts
arc in fayuur of ite rexencibn. A rary view baa been
expressed by wyran cf Lhe advocates 3n che appellace side
and bus peacleng in the subundinyts courts im whoec
७ origicwl side la “an anachrotism whieh hai
alnzss snd ४८७१४ hes he abelished

re nporssl Lo the The see toe

4. The atgiinents of parsons whe ix olin

revension of Lhe: ueigine) skle एज: be summed up thys:—

Thi: alruumiserstion cf ustiow in the prea:dsi towme £3
well 3६8 in the mafussil should follow a uniform pellerc.

Hefanen Wommictee for che Stue af ‘yr

Repen,
Beagsl. pag: 5.

ary कह, of Taw—k.


‘Llores. ४० teas on
Rombay ebvusd tis

iy Culonua. Medres 0
ne of heving Ins cases
hay. the ६४00४ guivil:

& ltigsnc £
we txt in Ls
160 same

#" # PIAS
8 Use uns Bled in

High Unuc..
som of admin’

of acmat
९ eoste of Etiza-
col iekterr.
y heavy and
A complalnt

2 ptvcerdyre’

of she Calestta

the S.abe ता
* care]agion

esmanundly
seat puk ८

We lave २६३17: पु
aot the orkgittal elo. orésdietice yf फिर bhrer
z कातत॑ एएर de et fer] then २<&4902
ve Leen shown for Itz ए2:29 0८ &003:.0व19... We are ८०0-
७1 ny odie! pewter of [1.७ Zigh Comets urd ng.
shauli not ce spral. cver casrs which 1: फटी: ast
he ६1.31 ९३.४९ claime yet azo 1: pet!
।. Ibe didpeead of aah ginpeer ian
acion, 8 cthe.ter trioanal is octh mocesdary
at oridciple tras ४7836. been screply:?
ध0 सा; «FT j
B:

Three prestiicuey: =
the ३५६1-1८: 10 th

to demand anifsmity a:
reall,

Sel, ee ६०


ta
‘rase  :8 lavour ७1. 118 rain-
a great devl a! cmphasia thet
4 suit, (or Instance,
: 19 Lae
she court of suberdi-
asked, should
privilege of
Altcer Oe

EXDeseT.

eee 0०८ i vheapar tr
spusite namber 1) fer: eubuail 23 rot?

aroctils everfouk, toe wasic fue. ४४८४1 bas"
by | गा: vps a
uriedicticn of the

l=

mrrusputdiag courts in che o
‘al ae tar जज iu k:eowying bs mind 19 ocar space
tues is tat betler und better
J ib urs wolnssil. ७1.8: lea is
ड Ue Lingents af this off.ci
ET I, the Eeaafic of which th
५ for iver & centurg? Aro we oul. in ide pane
9, be lrwur ule stancacds ef cur ad, stra lt
This femang for a Creer t nat ltewn, as it were.
Htgert an the city to che level ob

341 12 01५१ sore i
ganze in ce repented] «x2
dd (हवा, | easts thal they ws

th pa
recon <f
fo

ing the
i डे ef:

ight avetem and a more cFicient 419:
sheald oe iors bevelliog vp ard sok for मे
udvan 22 Jadicisl efficiency.

88 higher toe. irnen ved co the payrient of she higher wigher aa
uneration woJTi जाए Judge, ५७३ lea) wiv dicgutesi
co sre Ering deck, with in tke motussi, by hier paid

ox ann he juetded ou fru grourds We
nisowhere the pus rieveria: which Stas
ता ef Justice. Thi vies of this
# for ccorowy i the remeneracion of

lieve ackred
make cuz cf
fatobus deur
judges dee
ex lurthisy

that

the: mufiassid
(20011. 110 थी 90३
af fusticg tu destroy अपरुत modela 5:
the three presidency Lenwzis.

a Court in the exercise 02 Its uriginal ¢ivil
Ki 30७3 net ordinarily deal w:th seit un s:mple


Limincer
vf 196 clty
exril cur,

116

Pronates <r murtgages executed by villace agriculturlste
anil wrilien उप्र cad:genats Re boudwy tess ८८ suils [o>
declsracery and aimsbiyucniial relief or geesession of
‘agrlesctatal land or’ Houses ag 10 the mocussi!, A very
large proportien o- thug work partiesiariv in Caleutta and
Rembay conies under compondicus terin “comroental
vaes". ‘Shea: aire clkims for money arising out of the
diuly sransactions of merchanté, bi:akurs, in:ders, large
business and flmanclal (0564, and cocperations, They
पर. ॥0 181 Lhe ennisti~action ef mercantile and vechnical docu-
ments drafted by trained a:turdgys, to Lhe expors ard import
of roerchandisc, 5 cantracts of affreightnenl and currt
oc goads by land, ८1३०५: of instirance, banking, agaucy,
mercantile vaaze. ftnfringeroent of rade marks and like
éleuta High Cour. $648 aru? 3.535 suits
ani iain} side respectively in, (185 and
= the follow:ng classes:

Katze of mat 1955 7936
Scie for menes ac moruble prapeiy
iadudiog coeur bo, 2201 ape
Suite Ger tmavnale property. z 7
Suir fa pectic ८०४०६. w bad
Morar: sais. Tg p
Vemamenresy suas, aed Jo
कब व /टोछ avira हु as
Acluaira!ty »आ 5, : 2
Uther suis, 12 ++3,137
3A 535
—— ——

Theac Rese; jndicate tha: 3 substanral volume o? litigation

surigitcel side: बैन voll फ curr . The
adninistracion reperts of the Madras and iv bn
Ceusts do rot give a similar eldssification ०2 original gults

bus we were -॥:(.01॥#६९ py ४11१७४उउछ४ hat 2 1००७ 11 8७१७
oa the ertgivel side in those glices was of a commercial
nature, It caroot be pobtrovarted ths: the trained agva-
tates ad utlurbeys Who praytze un the original side ‘and
the Judges presid-og op tre ortginal side constituce 3 qhost
17.16: ey saree qulex and Sutisfuewry disposi! of, (he
highky :ntricate ‘iigetion arising in these 1689 “oduspeiat
and cemuercis] eltiea. है

+t be srgped that even if these be se fgcts,
(33४0५ Chat the High Ceuct should try guch
hey cer be doglt with ‘satisfactory Ly a sulGgent
numaber of the judges df the clty ivi] court recruited fron
memes o2 che Bar prosising exe:usivoly on tha ori giti
sir ied having expericnee of thar ८1888 of werk. 7५

sringludes 20 quis tide the Hind Meringy AC,


lt

true only upts a point and if ageealanee is implicit in the
i cours with a Lraited jeriadicticn.
suitable menibers of tag Luc to be
sil court. In. Madras, the prncipel
Judge of the city civ'l vaeet deo senior disleies Judge while
cl! the: uduer gidves are members ef the Stete dudicitl
view. Jn Culuatle ales, the new y established city civ
court bas :udzcr all of whom are digteiet judges. Only in
Bombay, 3 falely large preportion of the judges: of th: cily
evil court :3 frum memnoers a¥ ike Bar. The rest are senior
swt judges.

crestion of the city ci

The ul ३ udge of the clty civil court -७ Bombay is,
however, higner thar tact cf ad:striet judge ‘Nhe peirvival
tudge 13 931 Rs. 2,500 gar month and other jucecs Ra. 2,000
per merth with (he 71#7:4.10041 ovivilege that In the ease of
the sruncipel judge the age ef suparannuation is extended
i: six. years. Even 30, there have feen irstanres in
Dorbay of city civi' court judyes having resigned and
fesu:ded practice on che oviginsl aide acter serving for a
fow years. The difievilies eeperivcges! in recrniLingg suil-
sole members of the Sar to the High Court Bench in
Celeutls ४७४३ Ee:n:bay lo pasticafer have been brought fo
cue notice: and rilerred th by us elseykere पता! problem

8 the ight xy pe cf judges for deailire with cases of
the twoe deseribed al will become mo/e acute if the
nzi gine civil juriseielfnn nf the throes WMigh Courts ix
abelisled and teaistesred to the oft evil ceurts,

lL Gne i:nportant 180: needs elan Lo be retienhercd Reson
that the Jitizept peblig in Culvatta end Bambsy is in PRE
fevour of the revencion of che High Courts’ origin! ८-५7 oduuecia
j jor. because it nas greater confideace In the Algh ommmenity.

ries Clumiracire im West

“Ths

8 some of che
14७6 Conzindttes ant miuaus il 7 thet
execrt onc dosced the cortinuance
7३ jurisdiction for verlous reaeeag. The

tga Ce
Coramittee said:

“We have tried to gorszide: this question uf ०
continuance ar sbolitlon of the Original Sida purely
foto Ue geist oof view uf the .litigurt public and
we Avr ant allcwed euk winds to de inDurncet by
the arebekle effect of our views oo the tolerrsts of the
various ९:98४९३ of Acvarwloy and Altorreys and Soli-
cilors, Practitioners गए scrveurta of ‘ie
sublic ard their Loterests caust be subordinate to th
cnterese oc the Ltigante. We ae approached the
question (1७1 the pxsin’ of viow of efficlency, expedi-
don md expones and Aaving given the 19110 mir most
catcfal consideration we are of inn thes the Origi-
val Side of ihe (ulewte High Court chould not be



rocticol.S.

148

uvolished Ina; shew'd conliwe tu fuuctica
exriisive jurisdiction over asrbeular ¢ i

iriganal coved j
grvter of the Bombay fur stated

‘It croaet br disputed thes (१९ rerlidecnc: wboch
111 public kez in the Hige Count I oelieve it will
anus re प्स-त be cnspired oy Judges waose
wir is act tie lemurs éf the Vigh Court

1

wil ca agile of tae copesition

ronnie o2 Bomaiy. Tae Liigants’ con-
sot the Cnurt os vedected
namibia of ore re from
a single Judem or. the original sidi |.
t ior ippeals 1877 fice fari
which the crigzssal jar:ediesion uf
wei nay Le Danafcrred in toto would cnnsicierih
exceed the appellate work that tow +
cetegory of Kagd vl vo the 0:
caper Tikuaal woud ky ne treuns cA
x either fer Mir lilzgart or for the:

2
aus Cuta:de these towns
‘ach cn ptiaciple, enoulé
tate gulside the chree [४
che Hizk Cir inal
« sxeesding a ceriaia valust om, ery (४
° hin ths bow:d:. of practical

enauze which we

nyul.es addi the hurdsrip and

३९४५५ to ihe hid Courte, cziginal suis
from distaw. mofosst aves? would faz anlweizh the ad-
( Ju: omging? sice aud defsat the Tm
‘xing briaght a9 esr I Ligunl és pereuble.
near. lt bhi: ए:7203! nt the h
town to th:

cable 76६ फ1
१८५.३.७ bz o


ily

18. A Cartber argument advanced i supoett ८1 the
abolition af the erigmal | bun ts thal
आईना]... orn cle <vyyimel sidi: is expensive sud thas the
sos of Jitization था * nal sxle fax neceeds the ose
in the cuurl: of the distrizts जा on Lhe cily Givi (४०७॥1१
सांप civil cous anal
em court fees are paye
nf the काश Cl pa Courkls

The 2d

velay al valnveas court fsea Secerae payable ००७ the orig.ual

/ cenal rr | तब जे stink of bar: city rh Bo
therefore. as tke pavracnt of court fees ar
wilee weusts have Leen Kevught 1.8
॥७ ni ७ Thiggk
che ovisinel tk “tée2 dé. 00% ४८६७९,
1: cen dead uz vo & dednite eomcluzic:

inet the vrininal side on the gr:
coon this &

पु ण्प्ड्प्&
10ह९ज cc invelye ix the Chapter
wesh "7०0६1 :४ए३ thal bus bea

2 actually २5२0७:
the D:atrict Cunr's . TI
on tac 4ppetlale 8 de
७ Use istrict er other

Tarries Corun.tlen's Report iz glen a:
7 aosnit pending 36100: 9 District
ts alleywed amounted by He. 4.RIN wnercas
the case that whe actusl coste ef 13.1१ Jiti
eoplaintile were over Aa. 10109. (3 the
iE
She Soin ilu.

Judge the
il transnirs
nt:

Pa) Side chee 45 + gpl go? taxation and is
krown new ०-५० the cl.ent kad te 1५



im

wares at tbe Appellate Side and ia tae Susecdin
Course there ix no spate of fae fixed by che enurt wlilch.
the client hus to may & the Advevac ar 17 c. ll
30: thevefore be said w-ib wy 51008. of cercsinty
ent on the Original 3.83 arein
ls ४७८७ ३ litpart un she 2Jisteict
(५ -unlly 4206. In aay ९३६०, if Fa

heavy by reavon of the cual sysler
88 iD Minimizing the nets und nol

sywien: Iteslé.!

en
putting an ond te

ie

‘he gajuu view o7aa expressed by the Tevor Harzies
Coxumistee as remerde the Origiual Sice cf whe Calcutca
H.ga Court:

up

७ tbat the cost of likgaliva ne che Ore:

nal Side xceeda chat is: the disvet उतर,
an the Grigi © are subject to etrrt. taxation und
8० Adver we Avliwitur can Te u from his cient

ny + grester then the chste slowed en ta: .
To the rig asi indeed on che Appellate Sicn- ul
she Cours the cars ए liliguveon use very differens frem
Ltn: iets allowed under oer: ‘3.3 Court. xt: is
adroitted en al? hand: th uived Ce Uti-
eante ir bac rn are: ott the Ape lase Side of this
Court kear n> -clatlon whatsoever 76 tha arte] enyt..
i a. It 18 thetefars cx cenely difieull to ser with
ly wl the costs of 8 suit ix the mocussi® or
the rowts ot appeal on the Appellate: Side (८ Lhis
Qoorl rr: The cratg ४ hiwned by Une cules of
thia Cours Tarm a very small Prmtase of the costs
actually creurred ang for whi: che parties are
149०७. "६

The ecete sre >यांदं, ba ho mvenssivt: (४॥१०७३० of te double
so. nt legal pravtotloners requiretl on the original side, So
however, as toc attorney 14 concesned, Slaborste rufles
eo made er the‘texation of cos-3 nn galy छा एकल)
pa do perty bul al leween attorney and लाता
whereas un Lhe cppel’sta ride or in the cistrict ६06 subortin

६ ulus ॥४॥४ fur che taxaticn of 0328 betwqen
advcual ent. In‘ the case of a dixpu belween the
sttorisy coc the ५0५०६ as regarde che Scrmer‘s costs. the
atzorney's bill १६ laid for “nxatiod before the Taxing. Mcger
zod 14.७ atacney can recover frem the client only yen
costs ax are allowed ae 6 Taxing Masler according to the
eg msde by the Hi Ceart in tan! hehe. The High
taurls hieve male rulég reducing che costs from time to
sie. In the Bu'es of the Calcutta High Court, there fp a
provisintt fur taxation op a reéuced sesle in morgage ड्रेस
ft. which the tetsE sum due ‘owerds principal 4०७ pot
exec Ii 4 ard itt suite for porlillvn uf property oot

५ kuper: Yor: ५२, paragepph 7४.
© Sepore pages 10-77.



La

sxCecding Rg, 3.0%) in value. “Che 8४५ of the Somber
Migr जाए 5० 9 step fustcer and prowde for quankication
af coms 41 yetinuw: kiacs af vit and prnccadinga instead
ef ists boing cslcuaced am iteros nf work dune ky tte
attorney. Similarly, :n the texans of posts between party
ad peeaty, the ans atrendzace ¢iCouniel in all matters
Where QhOrneys aavE a Aan ot arabence 376 Yep sllowed
oatnes thi: Suge evcillies that it was a Mh case fer expjoy
menl ef Ven Rute te o° (Cheptar VI of the Bon say
High Court, 1.3] Side Rules contests = long list cf
Iatters dispesed (४ & Cimber sadge in which atrurmess
cir be heave and २७ of Covel fa allientance cae wot
a '20 ai betwres patty aad prety. Tre Madras, h tar
levy of couforrs eo? omluré-r. ७0-८६ foe 1७ the Eigh Coot as

wel] e3 (6 the cy एशछ। coord ६००५ the non-nxistenee of the
dual tyslere, ib args हर ii

He dMoreanm ts the ab aa the
भर if fow.ta 15 the लाए
tginal side of the Hipt २६२

8 Whe ire 7070, thovefore, 1:. 11:60 om socest dan vier Gantt एज
the abolition of uriginal side is cuctilied? on the cmessize
“A ct ewceas! As ३ meter uf fect, with Le
estadlisheen) of che city citdh ७७२३ if Beankey ४०० Madras,

उग्र लय inyol7ing Ra Soni anct Ra, छह, cr less Seve lean

tak Ioan Vhe omigimal cele ot ४५१० Big Sours, ks

ibd eackes, whether the ereaticr of such eourte
confernest 359 Senetit upun the Wtizens or niet is a
Paatler on whieh 112४० ie a cenaiderste difercuu of
vpniog. Pur is the A Indfa Dar Coranittes has punted

out, the podn’ te >र १४०16 is Shit tre cases Rat now Femzir

in th» Bombay High Court and alt in the Marlen Rich

Curt eee of £ yes au fia] valve and the prkee ७

६९४० suils can wel) aifer to Fey tor ae ecient anevice

they parce: $9 have.

if As sunted sarlit-, the difficulty of erehmic prozedurs! (७८-०५
lea aud the ६६३०४ | cel 701 tbs ecete was hicughs to 3tecremn,
ois adiee on tagant by tae atiginal ede of the ९०९७७ tigival ide
High Cyurt, That i & mutes ct fundanental impors- ori ee
immer, The He at Catentty can take seca to pevise mised,
ica Tuleg ४3 (| she clutmy: anc dilatory proceduses muy
he revaoved 89 has been done tn Sladyas and Bombay, We
are, thecefare, xf the cuiniom thef the etgipal side ef the
Calas. Bomar 22d Madras Hi .
thotzied bat sheild pe vetatned,

17. We ५६४७ Incttentallhy referred Ly the chur civil ७८-15 ity था
in the thove teosidents tens wotle de 1 wilh जाए =e,
acighar २ थी jatisdiptun i? Phe High Grats We gre catia.
fit ne disnosd of caste Hot omeeniag Fs, 17,005

tf Conistike had peices: :
ach cours, thes creation
कह aN ७ “री uci "i wil! be 8. Tetrogrede slep 10
abolish chem sltogetasr. There Le, however, a strong



To १४४७-६५

122

rd ६.7 us thee lar
pau suk resulted

oF
९, "आहट ७ व: ५४ १३::: zl
ia tha. court Tt wae azid thot |
the courte bac. conferrent upon the State
1133.1भष:[100 ¢f she
omit sse2 at
rates are now payaile iu. lar हे
wel] 58 cr the 21४ cll cout Phe
107 ४ 15 held vespon
ie osizina! side

hac, Agel costs co
Maéras. With th

lier. This te oy
2 in Bombay) the
Me High (ता

.. jutvsdievion hed cor. है विफल
. te Jutuodsclion uf lie 1119 cu
॥), 1 vas potscde¢ aves oy one or
iremeaced ba about vizht judges when
ved lo Rs, aM Wheat happend
1.0 26 of 106 Cite Civf Court hes thos

as:

a bape ple of papers them: 3911 abuut
हर disovsal. “They ave
rairned Judge है ves
एप 5 ७8:७०: A cf chem. Tarn he
om ‘n tic hors that h> wii) be ५७10
५ the day bet 20 ३६-०4 4 or 9 o'clock
id; Sheen ard (ae foe

cakeg



[७ of the शा Court. a
11310 tu the

Lisqricla: ion
apan che: or gab
th:

: we were told,
Ceverdaent épasuet.

ia Ginihay.

Bccuatley werkexbct sl

ct cru were due macaly
at auch: cf Jzdgss, The contrary view
oveszed repuesendiiie
whe wesw lor 2 restoralian 1:

et waz ines 8236,
was Taised to Re. 24000 33८) fru
ave weeking 1 that ९

he princizal judge 10
(80 cad af _०0.#5.

eivil epore On
Deedes 814 te
rompleint War
a wildden rbe: ju the amxbe
id bern ४० 40:

institutions <i.

ibereesr int 10 The pre
ar: furnished in ‘he
> ceeness] ef

19170 ५४ rip a
to irdicste ९
.. for Ihe
unconteste] ans cantrst-

nn; ba the uly
vil court. The

qnist na rederencas ind cD
tit. Tae audits in the Ab Cour: which
woald 3६ of sioce +एब० Liss 5,000 13 €६161९ oer
more stténlous’s yoricgly ist



tT.
Tas shorty che moerage abepceal af wits per ay 40 che ery खेर eckete

T

i ee ee,
Sits कट: Nenu et

Serial fasts «हे Sule wockinp dave Avrcige vf Avccus: dispmal
1३०. फल (एन45पिच८३ oni s Jirgoad it 3७००५ ning pee cy
frou tr Higk

c x 4 4 a & ? 3

5 Bt wut they v2 ati 15» 4

2 1959 #345 ny, ae “oy a4 +

5 tga 2209 1958 we aus ts <

4 Eads ०७ FoR Wye Bia 4

4 Ose 35559 ४12) far ra :

4 ७७६ U5 wy 135 rs 3

7 asd ree 4, 66 za 4

ड़ ख़ड5ठ उप्थ4 383 we +4 4

9 tar ta ang y he 4

कफ SRST ५537 कस he vs 4

€॥0उल्‍ ८ Jot oe eee
25784

Note.—-This [४00५ lees ७०: jocudy 0७ Sveraze तशश55- per day in respect oo mar es amber Acuilrati vu Ach, 10७७:
(जज) (व दा AC, ५4७ ४७4 tek mange cepmzeyt पर कि 4599एश्र by + 11098 sitting un cheaters
nips 1 [५ Tr Teh,

RI


Tome 11
Cuil teins, diomoor card he Hegh २७००२, fiuivtay Gu exerci

Cromparctune Tesbie choludng ete astiehden's dlapokal anal gxaultncy </' wrigvnal wor 4M 24६ ni

of tke andauzry 0 नेक) cand juctulesion} ami te ywerr 1953, 154 ८०७४ ॥

“ding ar
clse Pecilieys aver

नए for
he sear % eer

ताक]

३०९1६

TEI 2954 ५४55. 44953 dtd 3999 ४५:८२ 29:94 FOSS 1953 Tone ५५७३

Gey दा (०3६... 46 4346 504. Sse 7558 SauT gos खाक 292... 93. 795 26 16. उप. gh 4356 gugh suqy 2044 3412 रज16
कक 478 कण... ee 3520 849 छह 158: तर Cady

wo 1. रा —— g

High Crore. asf 2629 २२५० PIF gpaz epIA Gaze Les By.



Ver,

wil show. however, that the “nerecge की 11.४ 11118-
dicticn of 11८ city civ.| court faz riot led to quicker «lis-
posal uf os: ‘cur tas. om the conlrary, exuscd are
,

१०७ cart 7KpeTi
th the .armne degree
jf the oeul
resuicled. crit

traness ag 11 |
exgament:
६८ Levelland

4८३52 in the |
31.0९ to Ks
anirg ef i

3. 16,000 atid
zeem from chr

¢iztituled be 1: Choy
६. Rs. 10,000 sed
15 pening clispemmé az

इन Routaas,

roatizay Gi aH

ince Frbiuury 1987, its jurisdiction fs wry
Badeas ४४3 sa Bombas, being onty
vuvers in iomenercisl esse. [Et 1७
2re(6] iastitclians ia Sengn] lo
erred was insistent on the! ie पंत

Ra sitag i -
0

t
whier, we have already re


n being aca ६

Court 2 ९;
फ़ाण ux
he aube:

> is u:eperanive taal dass court 2
ved cveu of comuuercial 24.1. upte the value otf
4

cf the curisdielicn cor f-tred cn she
wre rather unfortunate. TI
Hh wits patssxeel

Our recomendations ctu be su.

17: The High Courts 2 (2०:79,
ob

souls? 1 .४-

३. Suen jurinicetion
exceeding Rs 12,000 in +

(3+) The jur:sdiccion of the city ew लाए in
Wadraz and 80:00&५ shoulkt be reduced tu Hs. (0,065


12k

C4) The restricihes epen tae jutisdicton of che
Cu eutta City Civll Court ae to contue:cial causey and
suits sawuld be cbalisked and Uhbet court
empowered) २८ fry Sees of il teas opto 2
value 70: taeeeding Ry. 11,001,

45) All cases pending «७ tk
Calcutta High Ceus |:
छा the: छाए evil लय
falter.



*s-ANBQUACY OF SUDICIAL STARNGTH

4. ६.१७! delaya ave proverbial ane perhaps, as ald as cams ce
law icaclt. Oae 1४३८७ cl them in Terodotue. Crssgbaists lays,
about eri are if present keing loudly voiced in Eurcpe टू गा
1d Arnerica.

<ucayiaiot.

3 In an it is in che -ulemst of Lac Lpanance

State sha. the dspace which go 75 vl १६७३

the law cours fur adjedication, should be ceeded wilain Creel
ible time, &0 a3 to glve ceclainty acud detirizewes

to cipht: eod oklivaticss. 31 the eaune of a trial :s isordl-

astely lenz- anu! oc justice and tne

exuenees ul :9 inercase alike. Delaye (९४011 in wi-

छा 1:€ thle te ०६६: correctly fo vents which

ave faded cm thew unewery, aud fires on theit

है पा over by the cppenenl. liclicof prartec to 80

agst.ere) pac pse of yesrs 199९६ much of ‘ts

anges loti dy infowsunig. Sach

af the ub quity cf the commen: “Justice

lst 18 denied

Get speedy justice doez now wea a 51३ ar nven a
covrary dispensation of justice hy persons rom qualified
emisister it. Waal aus te be sesugeg is that the acter
inst. uf in aunlinersy and the ayplics w the
sos Cntemmined of Le appropriate I+zal pus
wule ner de unduly delayed. Applying these standards,
steal scope for improvement iz che working cf
४. tnuchiniry.

. 41 ig
tL iss Viel ly

Tw

shat the preperation of sc,
Pre peta wl 3 1० : ily

she court. should take sorr

eystem of irish aa था England ina in 15.5. Ce lenices
म full cigtovery of facts Eefare che tty] ‘Vherefure. a iarge Togimicers

fuaber wf omlmiasey zteps, - ४ che serv.ce POUPSS
brings the contend.og 33८65 Logelher, the tiling of
weretlen Jerenis. isspierdnn. iptcrpezatories the giving
lacs, the fling of dauactieals which gre
des'rned to evewte a Coll Cismerry nf Fazts ard prevenl.ng
cuit el issues 59 that the matters for thi
Ae 20.70 3: we ergetellised, have all te
8 age be (010७५

je 1181 of “ready muse
87098 876 esgent.al wo ca cederly starch cor trish. These

SM ४ tla


150

Time |i
i लि १7 li

af the dissute miss. esefore,
The tune 80 teker, will depend
he fate ul the suit. he 1
neg and witnesses. the ्रता [:0$19.1+ al Lue presid-
od zo forth We must nol f: thal bowever
lacts of two cages Brey be, ४५४ rl
3 1udividual atlertica for fs satisfaemry disposi आएं any
“micas prduccion” mechods or i ;

atages. « preoredina of being disposed
vru length af titae, Tircadls speak. theret!
stewed be poestble to lay dncr

inet.tuced.

sari 1 le gesteral coarse 26 fod sial work
regulic contested suit tr a
n af wilkin a sear and
ro within one year and a-hall;
sulte ghou'd ba disposisd cf within three
1:701:5४. Tegular roweskest izppeals [1 dieriet covsls wetan
ngontbe anc rv ¢ époeale in such corrts,

Tires licairs
an

Ja ctusieal
elses,
cE the aces.
three sont :
used. Oriocinal appcals a
be dispared of w 111: (५४० 3:७८0:113 आ-
b
‘1 7. Ne cuubt there 23 some degrse of #४
haa «छा bs हित
bie. thr stardands ut, .t. tae vaturs cf shiwgs, thet

104 fiat the

€&0:001 be ८ Foagver, की
srandarde तक are by
expeticwre ag lan
«(the Staxe

Reus » a. We give below a onmpacilive ‘Table aticwirg the
Bos y duwelies of varlene kind; ef santesed wultora it
J Pires el enuriz in War various States



sored
umiowe Vestas

Fatlastsadie हरकत 2७००

Vall ovat है
2२३५१

489 19s 1ase

(वाटर

WE 335
BC-151

15-492
8023

49.55
Som

OS-399 2 qq . oy 422435
Sabzsy ४-०4

Aver

Vy Sew
5०-३5

Moire mo Bt 297

we

ta:

yt Praha

Oris

ae

हा

45

अदा

Ww

2tT

wt)
fis

ere

mW

zt

He

rel


जय... 79१1. 387. tag aar ays eS oat:

Wa RR कैली आय ऊन. बा पका सा fit

juice |७७॥#७७ Le che Ligh Cmca cf che

Tet


3

७ will be athe thet the figures cf everage duration
vary in different St 2 during differenc years even m
ing, ior example, regular contrsted
‘9 wyurts, Ae gverags duralion Lo Andhra
Pradexi 6 about one year, in Wart Bengal abuut fourteen
snomthe, 01 Madras fourtven mints to tw reste, ie एच:
Fradest 1-1७ 1७ ety! K ropntas, in Or:wsa sixicen to
byanty ononths, in Bormnay अब Gitese tu tweaty-teo
sdtyva Pradesh ten to eleven seerths “Tae
a caLiseted imate In suboréluate judzec”
ecause cage of aigher vslar which are
uta! are we edly teicd te these coats. Thua,
in Andhra Pradash tie sverag? ciralion cf 36७: inte
cmsind suis iu guxecinate judges! courts ranges from
seventeen to Lyerly months, it Madbyo Pradeaa Isuteen
menths, le गा Prederh abou’ coventeed bo
West Borge: cightcen to 4४ ०७-९०
.. 790. Madi ages iwenty ta twenty-four momihe
प्र Kibar aliwat 7ए/2::1ए-10' to tewonty-five menths. Ar
secards the enc caver omatlurs, the: avec»nze duc: tea
Terres from @our to sis uzouths in Medras, four te seven
a3 01 Andhra Jnidesh, si ky seven 01011 in Bihar,
ig (0 sight menths i ala, शो to nine परत, fn
Teayal, four 1८ eleven :ooths yn Asean, eicht to ning
Taambs on Gombay aud sbke Ww Lwelve muarths an Orieas.
11७ aversge ducsten of cogulur civil 2०००४ apnea
belarc diklricl judges vanyes from five co rine mcnchs 17
Benga’, between ten ty fifteen rromlhs in Archre,
fe a eleven tu twenty-brc montas ‘n Medras and
seventcen ५७ lyenty ४४७७ mantis Mm tthe it is cloul ten
months 8. Oite Praise: and shout cight menth: in
Madbya Pradesh. ‘Tar avtiage duratwan af such appesls
६५ the courts ef subordinate 4४४२६ is some at lover than

in the district judges” courts.

8, 36६0 “pres relating "9 average duration do not, kow- sisted.
ever, scoessarily give a cores piguurs uf Chi: state of affairs ing eer
is: Ubrss States. 12 coruparat-vely [enter svits sta disposed
of द्वार ents ure allowed to ramain pending. the

83 0८ severed: duration may he cetalively Jow. Again,

revenily inadtuted awts ama teken up ir prefrecner to
elder 11:75. th:: average durstdan will be lower. It छ not
‘uncontmmen o- the part af the judicial nifloms ७ pive pres
dntenre Le fighter 5013 neglecting the more dificult ones.
in पाए" te sulidty the standards of minimum 01०३४ of
work prescribed ty enme [igh ए०प्रत5. This wil be
evdertl fram the "Table relating to the age of pendenoy of
regular suits in the subordi te coarts in varivas Stains?

The test of average durntion is stil more clalcading
fb nvintina! -natress 93. tu the calculation of it. there eluzye
enter it Fsrac rember of dicgugalg cf petty matter: which
३३७८ cresy Btile time, being disposed of wt ihe fine hearing
ena plea ता guilt, .

a Chapcer om Delays



184

Tt will be nodzed thst in civil rowtlecs Iu: slacwdards tapi.
we haye medicated ae not difles:t of fulilnent ar.
largely our courts sre cot very fer “rem Lhesn slatdards.

We ili give Leow a 1501२ showing the averigs curea-
tics in dare of criminal casc& it, war.uts clexzes of comets
in tay diferent States ducing years LISI—1BG. A

scrutiny of thia ataccment hat barring a few
States, the time Limits iti by ur Sor che 4.spoeal of
ule: ure mel difficult of avhieyew wt.



saris cases of erie dering braver ay:

Tale stresing extirnest Pet otion im duns wf cares

tales oF 24

art 2 2 iz ad
- Io 9 Py BL. fay lnas. 2ieo
Gitar soe ३३ 6286. हठ'डै80 MA gaya 3.0... dzg nO wre lea ie re or
Hodsad . 385५ yu MT 443 en
Me MA NA 3T Bye, 2 2 dase af recein of recur,

tudhyx Praise - rary iz NA. m9 ah MAL
Madrat

pints arza§ cf
soe है
Onn 31128 set .
Punjab oo a u aT qt Mw
एफ: ardere . a5 ad ae 1st Lae

Nove —The Gaures given in uajs “Bayle tave Leen taken [ecw toe vepoies एए the adcnisccacirn, of yastize pablished by the Tigh Courts oO} cle
cemptctive Staten.


19. Hav.ng sugge gested the standard tic
wae). ver.ous ४ Of ; 10181 prane:
conclude? ix th:: courls of the first instance, we 1):
; adauid be cegiurded ७3:
ters whieh have wut
limits prescribed shouldl be trceted 25
» Ths, more than one Fear ७-७ suics isa roatasila
rire chaste abd a hab yar old suils ig gubsadi.
1030» Jidges’ veurts. emall cavee suis “han thee
months” «h2, civil -ppeals वा जाए dhan siz —iatths 31d and
nuezeIsuzous appeals more ‘han thee reonths ald, :aoyld
bs deemed lo be “urreary”

Lite witain

Unforweeate’y. ib agers thai Lia is net the ultitwde
ef some of the Hich Cours. In Bihar, & subnrdinave judi
cial ०१:2९: 1: vet required x expl the defey in the
as 33 sah, coleaa 24 ic theee 5६७७४" clus and
in ‘ala, & swt ia not uw neddered am “ald anit’?
wlll ils duviliog is lies yraer. Buc ou etlitude ts clearly
eppoge:] te the sound admim'stretior of 21 रे
lo be carry

Vig ol ७

below ‘Lubles savwitg geparacelr =
af work dte

courte of maunzifs, subordire ‘
tire various States during the vear .
reouré jane laceepancies iu the fleures
osides, “t age 191. horde possible Coe the
mora “han threc munths” qc

Unlordurcste y,
supplied to us.
tes ba gl
small
sul game other figures so ax 10 €tb.e us ta satiate wile
voline of azreacs in our exarts in the lighl
i ‘. But, we have

hares 9 vel Teures cf various clanws of proceedings
shat a re char pee yeer ld, 8 sccudpy o? which should
give 3 २३179 accurate idea a? thr एंट्री ft 811%32/४3 “in
A comparison of the number of pending pira-
over a yrar old these: Lelow 003 year gives
idex of the volume oF 7 397. the
surehe> of procneriogs mest than a year old, the lergor
06 of atecats, (Ine has 130 tn have regawt in
riliah ty ths toral aureber of perding pruccedings.



Champarasice 2७6८ sihewdhay Wet tersituced,

es
Apa:
Ribor
Houbay
Malayt
Muteas +.

Priedeb +५

far

Kajoctan

Troweurt-
doxluc (Ke

hme Prides
‘Wesr Tengal न

crabs Ti;

Now.

Ma

The ligures green in ॥

aoe
errata. nuine

cauve ir रो

Civil Sane

Instins Dispesele
on

4 :

me ४21 0७]

84.5 ENS

राज... agtud

18143 रडहैग jaa
sqtnz yey

rer? rns

whol S4u5

11] 2529) EF?
aut eta. WG
Tain = syRAcz afisk
5७4 है 120 resis?

Table 120६ heen furnished 10 .

fond sendin oy) evrtuin ule

af
# Dorinve Stwen Ane ie pear 19390:

Tyna
hi

९:
the sews
हे

करी?

04420 उक्त fy
sad: 28 24008
my er fay
24 raps

1 293 fer
STAs Rao

Gerry hang

yaaa sak

ret Anas fit Wo

‘Vigl. (००3७ of che regperlive 5:

eg meses we abet

Feral Cause Sears

1० val,
kere.
fet peor
ns

ciara

1379 प्राण 5056
45h S84
shat aqnz
जप aye
atta m6 ३७.
eat 533
प्म्ब््ण 112२८ yz
Vege 157806 atav

फ्ज्ज्ण्छ

of

one yes

aa!



ef rhe S ere

Andina

Aw.

ख़त . .
Dewray

Madhyt ४ तरह
tAadres . .
जाए (A>

‘Orie soe

Rajutar

“Frmesscar2
Urac Frade
wea Teel,

Hable vnonaieg २४ instisunive, ७॥१७-४८१ and
=r

आम uf
edgy enter i

Missdlaateus Oil caine 7

ivedirng — Inst; ewe

Remarks

Ferm iy मंडे." Aiuawe
ek che ant year far yeas”
year
IR ५ i. 1% ar 3
ane
3
71०
erry 14788 49% e264 1087
10537 उ्ता4 atin 3225
av 24 ELE s2 OA) The fi 507६ rn spins:
sae oraure rs he ca
154 rw 68 AFL re 1955-6,
290 4047 जरहर Haz had
1331 sever १७०4० Late, ३67 way 19७
16165, aor

#769 rky

wT


Fut 7
Beavey .
Macey
Pools 183
Muto. ही
Niyvece (A
Omen. a4
Perujsh -
Roya c 35
Toron-
con
Cashin
ahem ४
Taxlinh 123
ay

Sone Gace 5 हं७

Lewals Delaxe

vs yiren in this Tabse baye byen fy roshod by ०-६ Gilgh Gourts uf tye respsulive Sse

S55
Vez
are
6s

2878 4520 eb hg THF

“hoon मे. dayy rors
47234 Ope eR TG wR

v4) tque Sy a

19७३१

Iaonce

iway2

iS
1H;

283
fou.

ry
वाल्ड

wes

bias



Comparstion Toke chomtine the testes. मो १0202 4०5 panuenty vf cerreth cetone es of ५०४६! 70:00
adrenal canouy Gistet jor tAw 1099 bys

Neme co an +h
the Sate begzaning
ut [te
. year
“1 a
Aglass
Protea: 257
Ansan. . 7a
Ridac . W5
Somtar .
adh
Pradodh . "
. thas

30916 (AD « THOR
My +)
Oris . 43h

Prarie .
० >3 357
‘Trvancoie-

Caydln

४०४१३ रु
Unac

Prick = Tan?
Fer Oral - 2429

rusian

aha
aw

owe
asst

a

vat
As.
may

क्र

जब

Why
f we
wn om
44 344
aie ass
weg, 39
oz a
V4 --
hy 2)
ay 238

डा॥-- ihe जैक xivem this Table Save boc curtfaed Fy che High Carus a!

Abou AvpHla
Uap = पाए
y छ0०
ome germ
&
fgg, we
we 4
Auf Wa
tot 250
a3 ives
Ot oy 3h
33 ett 35
. 3 4
172 12501 vac
eo HM 43k
Rapecive 30:25.

ast

courts af mute ec elias: af

AQ The fps
SE ARROC
c Shulg
relate te rhe
बराक... जाए
ayssue-

(24 12७

orl


Mat of १७६ state

Anikra Prafen +
Ante

Biba - oe
Bombs

ME Jiea Tradeth

"Prayracats-Ceehln
Pe erat (9

Lom eraceh «

Pwuesdeve ए "५६.४6: slaves af aut ye ace t's, vet bh ६221२ eka २५० ct recs of Shak ह१कांट।:. 7:81 कि कर nein: Seats ig
tht peat 1
Tavil Sian उतार ८७ Givi Casen snd wetivous
No. of - *» _—
Offers दि . .
Pemiing Jaxi- Dispa- Rebar fenciug Tosh- — घुस Dolusce
Acth: ctutioy sale se ee a tht iow is — Kougks
began ९८0७ Raye ye Herr Abyre
edn of Ce Cd vac ane
tke roo oy or. oOo oy
Fear Eel
3a yao 27R उठ 3595. घा03... ३47 aja
7 aa 19 as a4 44. डे 08... 750. 30७ t
are bo 91 ta oF s¢ ८65. apy gqh cere +“
अर BS की. हवा. TSM tu ue aOR 50586. ew (AD की Adib,
गा. पर
है. ae 144 03a " का. US 1097 Tieng aa 43 Saar
oat 2g2 coy क्र aa) 294 ya Sig inp INF
1s * 6? 1 se w 33 40 me 2 THs
26 308 34 ty 95 an $7 T2088 Tye m@ 1%
ery 2399 F232. 3499. 7765 उउक'ण a:gazr 755 420 (K) 1जक्तष्यक add,
1. Tadgre.
3M मा आग coy Ea ao ey ag haw
wp gta 643 eas ar TA डाक. Gore 426४. qT

Weer Penge)

ork — he एक phen tate TaBK ७२०६ ४०८७ fatuls hy

Tach Cumin of th sespective

TH


BOSE Pia dent
Aon . .
Alber ,
Bantny

Stata Pradesh

101
Mypott sri.
1.1 * .
1) 1. व

हब जफटबए

Suchin +६पछ५:-1 ,

Uae ytadesh

West Rengw

toh

4८59

2779
az
Ww

7723

$286
i500
4242

“1h

BIg
Thy
ms

2004

1742
7)
4,

3184

अंक

3912

Ath
ms
423,

toy

Al

136

Is

gee
#47

13435

हा
TaRh

240;

tds “Ughls rave 0८५1 fumiliterd ॥५ 1३.६ High CesT गाए उप्हे |. ०९०७ stars,

= in glee alanis? Seas

Kranich

5 3७-७६ ne एड wht

ace green beliuy :
oo 1? nding जा the beginning of
Ihe ys:
as Insindiey - . ¥
1 Dupecwl 2 + ae

bad
ys Btpare rele ta २१%. of

Peeed pf cat | nts= a
cE bul अए

‘pwd of
Doleme i



Géacce.

rae pass =

Aum: echo Stee Aleve cl ily Uden Abo:
ue किट we
wz: amy! vat ghee
ae faz है. दा atm ame gsr, पर. उबक. 335. ad
जज 2 2058. Sua 3. ८2 उतना 55७८ 150: SF एक... 3759 33396 Loo *
S Hoe ee shown
3. 2
Cokin ;Keenla: ee ace? 402 quz ort 1 at om ~
%100॥क० 0४35 « . - . Sete ब्या> उसी 720४ amy 2344. 245 उ ust
१प:५ . de ३251 643 sot --४३७ - (C55
अरभैजाशए8 to 5 bye EN ae 1779. aan J
Gelue न 5 5 29. ty > 4 २:९५ 7 ae OM Be
Taman co. ०»
Raitt ee 19०. 195... 55. 33 Ah4E 350०5 मगर उहीड #आ4 157०. 43h we
Otter "८४७०४ - hisd S993 fie Beso २३३८३ 3470० 1350 1909 494 set aie Paty
Wee Kgl . oid Ln 4. 477 404 17GR Eh Sq. agor auf

a छ-४ध३ 2 Chie Table be
is Bes pa yug Toe pote

Alyb Gait of shes santys Storey

cS
(FS Tagluges (२४५६ pew

Jara. pot pear

हि रू Thy hugirwiog al vee yea

CG) We nevt 0९७ taferualchal ia Maidces uy C peel ng coy ceo weld be pe
paney ॥७ 0५७ zines celating 00 Seeders Ces 01039: br explained. | 1१6 ला
dur + che fay. the the dispesws Ly efnsfer (० the Court एप 13, ४०५७७, ६७ have 90:



144

11 ‘Lukin tke courts of munsifa first, n wh be aoticed,
that Ln atl ¢he Slates, exces in Madbys Pradesh ard
asthan. the judiclal oft ew ahle to kern
Adsquyy ot Hace With che current ins ils. -७ sOrne
meme. Tithe Slates, che  disposs] fas enastaat
i Az regatde the err] cause Ft i
Andhzs Pradech—where it fell abort by tl.zee suits which
rosy be igucre’—Kerala and Weat Bengal, the Oispocals
bave kep> sace wish the juctitutions. Taking next tae
suLordinacé judges’ court, it would ee Sha in 9७ far
i ce excep! dee Aram, Keva-a,
3a Pracdesa and Bejasthan. these warts care als
hfe wc ४९९७ pace with carrent inscitutinns. Likewise,
1८1 catee 53:05 alas. cxeept in Andhra Trades
fysce, Given, Ulier Pradesh and West Be
counts have, on rae woete, been gble ४७७ caps
tions. These facts tend no show, thet except in a few
Starss. Lhe exieting streni eth of mucsis and svberdinsile
fuctpes, seems Lo be. on the whale, adecuate to cope with
the current lic, We dvalt with tai: aspect cf tha
matter in greater dela] ir sua caapters elie with
udividual Szebes,

13, The real ptoticr re

ing ectenlinn iz the (3:४०
९८] 08७ of lke ornding oid ike Stasi, which segm
ube 11.8 accunmulsciona ८.1 sc. 71909 years, Tasing
the runsifs' cuusb inst, of cha tess] nunder of pending
he yuourntage of mere than one veer old suite is

hivty-Fve ix Weat Rengal
wo of old 20:1५ be tl: emurts of sb:
is shxery-two ja Wert Bengal, xialy in

UP, fitty cn Madvas, fitty i, Saha, tortyfeur in ‘orale,
Tm ouh= Slkewnere, we have 355: shows
oodic4 >
jose!
eet,

guile > late muccher 3E mits naz beet. ) end.
ing for many years Thus, chough aie presect <lrengt> af

dicial oMcers migtl, Driadiy speukiow or said to be
पक 8 te deal with the caaceat i'r. irtansive सींग
ta id the 1168 of the Jubss rf these old
which haz assimed aslarmmg pireportions in seveyal

ales

13. The mazaivude ot che pooblier will
A ४८: © romemher that, genesaidy, oul of the
SF ubout sweaty to twents-fv2 per cent
of the eudte ave diaposed cf aiter ful! artal. Thr rost of the
b2 withatt curdesl, ard tne wie cases
secl परत: (Order TH of Creil Peccecure
suils devided es-perte था cn admiscicn
cf tho ela'm anc 3nics exmopromised stter the defender:
has encerad. an sppzyrancs, The wajor patt of ie court:
lime is aaturille Laken by oie disp sai of contested 25362.
We have rot ०९0० able kc obtain detailed dzvres shaving

appear in &



tke dapxal of cases afer full aia un wricas Scates beh ar
during she year 1984. Bre we ७४५ broadly calc the pra- Goer!
a. of 201 त॑ uses 70 be & courth of the tots] nurn=
cases Giesceed of. Evseahere, we ६ hited, chaz -
the uncuntesed cuda are normally cig
Wi theveiore, rightly २४२६ chat the lurge
he OVEr ort year 09 nainiv of
jag co Taind the ri: ich judi.
cia) cheers sere utile li dispose of एट्या7:!
£6, wa have tric culete ir 1४8-
|: that WE oc rerded sreogit
ix प्र the various Stil,
iro euhulinate jadiciare few of f
0 110६ disput uf these old cascx. 00:5४
shows tre avimber ct years t
specal o2 thee “hl une’
ke problem No deunl, these cal-
20०५७ “eters go that the ६5२७
(५ er: on either si But taese satercents ile
a गत cml reaghly coxcet idea of ise
. ae (9 76 met.

be requires fi
geriou3 “arepur

धर courts a’sn, Ukr posi Dl

i lary. OT foarent from the tera ee
Lies which chor separately reine: end elvil work éoaie- 4
dene kr them in warieus States deriag the year शक, ‘ha. 13
thoy kaye beev unab'r te: keep pice avec with tae current



22322 7४८ the riper of Cun y hat woe be token ay (64 eriireag ptromgty af mung a clear off tae erty af wld aaics

Haya! cata १19 ure Nu od mere thin Appritlwole Duygher of yeura puted ta

Nanuet nf the Sate the 3m 4986 cunts one yer rfguk: dhputcof sure tha ont veer alc carey It
26 495! aispeaal, sla oe ei rhe muoasafs deruicd the whole of bet
प्ज-57 Tht tw db? detpnse] ul Liew auies
1 ढ़ | हि 3

Amaia Pak. - suet Saag iar
Amo. ee . ares 2456 पड मन
Bar ee 1] 209 wae e3
umihay . . नि . Ha.

| . - . : 28g35 उ23₹ story 23
Moddys Prdma - . : agai? otdy $208 . O45
3440: * - 37069 9267 ams a4
Mysure - नि . . gus? “oto as; oty
Ors 2. ge agre 3.० cP uk
Bigb 2. ७.“ - - NA

Raine . . . न 34135 #24) yas as
a eC 14h R677 Fong3 an
Weet but. ५... .*॥& iggrsa ahauy 77340 फेक

Nore — The 40015 ७4८10 Colla २ ५० 4 of 10॥ "०६०६ Lave beta Fuminh=d by 137 Ligh Courts nf the :चणए7७,ए१ Stance



Takis rhmaweg Ur geombar of yaors chut oud:d Ae codon Ae theesictng sarah wl intteodigars fucpes ७ dter uff the attenh cf old
a अम्मी

Nilsen ef eepaler suit सु 1 = Mewe than cms yer abel Spprcedn ate Na. ७ Fas
नी 09७४ ली आह और
year old rez wire
a डे | 4 a

Andhra Fulop. - Bet हि ६ 154० zo
Apo ek net ad 644 a6
Moe, aMs 336 ॥फ््ह 22
Were, ee, nea NaA- NA NA.
Breve. se, 343 we ay ma
Mal . . 1 ४ I> 5K 7
1 . 2 2. zm 39 1% 20
Myst. soe, hay 2% 19% og
Oras ५» + - - The 236 Sada a4
एफ. - . - . Ns. NAL NA. Wa.
Lapetiitn . . Se2? है म्प्य्थ् RM at
rem Pride soe ahs 158) apie ptr
West Beaysl - उस $23 4495 v4

Nore—The figures gives, lo canna a ly q bere ben Curcvhe! bs the High Class of thu otanective Scoven,

ork


1°

cmstititiong in most Steves. The infarcr tereststfsle
edleting strength of the (८8५०. jedi: aervine is
equate ५० clea! eyse willy tie current flle, Hy

tisk sogm to fiver
accumwesing in the cowze of the last yen

Tt has co be serembecedl dhol bbe detrtet judge's rele
Jz 2 very zesgorsible ong. Ff f the district
०009 snd wn addiction to
mains imsponsubillty for supervising and contro) li:y
Le diswriet alse rests worn
ly imyertant pact his ducios.  Elas-

hear al pa enphasise the Inpete
were ४८८ £4, jandtnee over tht
Tf the districk 13४० 2 3०९५..+(२७- ४

tux ग्रेप-1&४ cf supervision aod corlesl, ib is
heulé to given self 3: bis judicial work
recanl wend ds am the dirs: ual

incroase of hig ju 7
It ix sbuudsntty cleir, there! ‘ ¥ at th

loval of the cist $ heavily defkleat in strength
ja mister the 519 .९४.

1६ Gur consuzize: on thu staliglac] dats gurreyped by
iis may 0.9४ De UNC न ४11७, im rast of the 8:4183,
Hs isLag strength of Pat st Uke level of
amd suberdicace Fed be (७ uteaghly
adequate to des ॥ thi current fle, Seworaiy, st the
af die rist judara che j.1ieca: rouly deficient io

ly, the :eadeacy
ety 12830 im roost of the States

pearls,

ary. To + Leopeary 0०1२५ brat 7€ azeigned
vely ‘he task cf disposal if the old 50:18.

Ik iz ditfewl fur us te oF
tennxcrary addit-u
foel ther tarre
acne te of He bigter 11112.
in «ll we States. The 72
arrenaneul ieagth will bave to bo delernined having
regard to tes eodi.icns in each State

the sntihes

of ta2 progressive 2०९७ tion of

Slates (3 Lhst, in the past. in, ty ot .
auresen, ७७ ewing volume 2f work, ime stre ‘ag. of the indiciayy
crspevtionale'y  luecreas Tae Satin;

also partly dve to adel‘titga
dhrewo on judicial जाला fry wecent legislation.
The urca of work ta ke cowerrd by the jcdicial +ह1:२९५ asa
been grestiy widened, The Eotployees Stave Insite



i

Act, Displacei Perzons {Compensation and Rebabilits-Inceoowt
ton) Act, 0:७४ Adim:nistrstion of Evacaee Property Act, "oh.
tae Lend Reforms Auly azud जाए Hindu Marrizge Act, are
wome uf 10! Acts which have bro, at 3 iecsh werk to che
fuciciary sven al i froredings vader
these 2 are not 3 13% ar ४४७७ aval the 1071 2181
idem xiel velune of werk whith
omeer tezo . lu thls spectel
work, naturally. Ivads to che ordinusy suits ov appeste
being atvl aade end accumulated. We have referred to
sin coder v¢ emphszize that the statistical data
Furnish yy Che udructrat.ua reports do not ehrare
give a encrect pichare of the work which | jucifeial offices
६ called upon 10 All sue and proceedings cther taan
republic 5४.६1 aml comular + 81641 appeae be oe eusdDed

hr strength of che yubortling per aishene
d out by tho yer:ous Tigh Courts svemiair’e
her adndinbetralan ceports, Tae bY Hirt
igh Covet in its repurt or the court.
954, an she administracion of civil rostice, attetuved tue
हांइट *r, average durstion of cages 3०008 ther things
to “.uavitasls regrouping uf Cus, rings =F Same
Courts vaccut for watt ७० fudges, heavy sesstous ene ei-
ye"? In एच: Seurteesh, yumm after yrar, the
1४४" syoex in sikoréinate
ne. criminal, kas been iacresving rayide
Jy ६.३. le ontifnine 19 the siren! th of judiciary bas no
kept pace with the imezeage in (१ valume of work.
hav> slac poinved out that courts bac frequently in be
kept vasan. fur wart of officers snd tval she -ydicial
atte ers who were Gol ng maglateriat war's were entrusted
yan pnen work with the egsult thet they were umub.n bo
'ए/ए> themzelves 10 seyular trisl work. In Vest Bengal
wisn, Ine High Ceurt has repeatedly referrst to foe
3 subordins courts, tkmagh it do not
5 de specific obsncvations sz to th
(९०३८५ cf tho judie:a? olce- in the annual admin: jon
Cepuirls. In (7933, che aeley in the dizoianl of pending
aascs Wes actbutes! in che gvailabiltty of a leaser number
of offcers than wis necessary. Sinti/pr nbservations acve
been made by Ihe Patna High Cou-t alco.

. uh

J

16 is, therefore, cbuadsacly clear that the i: vy
i ofiesrs hucn rspestadly broegot to the
ori Lice State Govermments U-tuugh the administration
reports ixmued by Che High Course ‘Pha High Ceucta have
also “rom tme co me mede represemtaticns 0७ che poor
ment svexing for an irercase in fhe cadre of the subsrdiaate



150

Obcervartces = 18 In, 1100 Pradecn, the praolen of Ihadequacy of
Foden SereMta received specific attention during the enquiry

लण्ड. COMUe by the Judicial Iteforms Cenunitter. ‘The Com-
Canute, mittee aoeerved:

“As we will show heroatte-, the civil ju y is
uud:r-maaned and consequently overworked. Whee
& Muasif previeudly hinidicd & file of 8567 204 cascs,
1.6 haz new to deal with 4 file of sver yA oasis.
The curmi.ian in the cours of Civ

dees ig ao
better?
fe dealing with luv siseagth of the juéleiary, the Com-
mittee aiated:—

“We mre of the opinion tha. considezing Lue
aunount ०४:७३ ratuce of work that 18 coming before the
clvil courts, the cadre should ‘de subsssnl:atly iuereus-
edo uc 0७:1७ as peesiblc if che armeain, which
ure accumulating fram day to ay, are >> be cleared
off. Tt may alzo Le anentionerd lank besides this tem-
porery phése vf aecutrulated arrears, the work hax
gone ua bets in volume and complexity auc +he old
eadze of civ.) judictel aMcerm wil’ oct ko suficient ta
deal wits the volume «cf work now corung before the
civil pou. Wut is requirecL therefore, 1s 3 parma-
rent increase in gadze and aleo sume inereasr for che
lire heirw to desl with che sctumulated areare
Civil worx haz been falling into atroara year by year
since 1949. This ja due to the fact that after We
entry of Jepen लाए the Wer ard the enactunnt of छ
jarge surter cf mex laws creathig new offences, for
example, under fhe Defence of Inilia Act and Ful:
crimingl work to be dene by Sessiuns Juége? an
Ageistant Seweions Jucpis inercased encrmougly with
tae result chat these officers whe are also [Distries
ducges and Civ'l Jiuiges, were unable to give sfi-
sicat time for tae dispozal of civil work This is clearly
reflected in Use Sguers of pending fie of reywbir आफ
and s.vil ayprals jn the courts of Distrket Judges and
एफ Tuigos ,

“Tt will be: syen, therefore, thal the ताप of
4 suity ‘no 1949 waa almoat deuble of the gum-
Ger ponding in 1982 Same ४ tie muse with appeals.
Tre reason for this ‘3 ukal Chil Jedgea and cu ict
Judees have been bury int dignnaine of criminal ty rk,
wth the revult thet many Civil Courts remdined
tying vucu.t end rumy # time Cir Judges tore
workiag ax Agsiatane Seaskonr Judyrs without doing
279 appreciable civil work. Tho cadre cowl suit un-
fortunetely le itersasrd to cope with lhe ‘ozrassed
exirtnal work th:uwn on Session? and Assiglant
Sezslona Judges in the last five years. Similarly the
insthsson, which waz just shove 4,100 142, hae
boxe *Repoct of the Ura Pesdesh Iota Refroms Crumniies ugg sT
Is



व

gradually increazed and wag just shove 5,900 in 19%
4.6. 9: aicrepsr od about 44) pee cemt :४ civil auits, Ine-
ttrtian of नहा also tose from. just over 3,300 in
1942 te over 4,200 in 1945, but Lhen Jt came down to
7400 in 14144. Evin so, :t is 25 per cent. abeve the
QDgwe for 1942. The reason why (४० sucbet of
sopmils tw. came down since 1945 4s tat 3 umber cf
Munaifs kave had 10 be ‘sept vacant. and = additicnai
Muraifs’ Courts २९४४८ aur. be created anc the Siunsifs
of as much work as they should
nularly, if wi: eempare the Aigures lo
rl, the sate of atiaics will be found

12 be the same."
Praveding furtber, che Comrmi-tes stated :

“Ty recent fimms there haz Seen रा #ए०४। mcresse
in the durstion of came. ‘Td. meverse m duration in
subordinst2 courly wlaved some timc alles te
bepincung ०९ the last war cue, 10 a large extent, Un Ie
Zect that very many new Jaws wer: mitsuduced loac-
tug to new iyo of cages ‘beth in 13४ criminal and
civ courts, The: the transfer of power in 147
leeding to a sho-tipe: in lhe esdre 0८ officors required
fre Ihe chxpagal cf judicial wurk, chil, criminal
and reve! There waa alsn oa ineceawe Jy crimes
and criminal worl: lua ६० the troubles fnllnvrlng in
“he waxe of che parsilion of 247. This led to a sudden
appoiilment o> a large number wf yuu men ६3
७3456 up tre defiziency (7 the caéee with the ja‘tural
result taat the qunlity of Uke officers also deteriorated
(७ & certaln extent. It has sesafed in a good perixs:L
use of the cadre onmpisling of inexperienced offirc-s.
af Ivee than five yeats' ganding. Over and sbmr
this, these 15 nv deubt thas 80 faz oer bbe alministra-
then of civil justin: is comeesned, there 78 am actual
shotlage 2 इज officers to carmy on the day-to-day word,
In old deve a pending fic ४४ 2090 was eonsicered
sxMficient for 8 Munsif ghd wiraever a file went above

», an Add'tional Munglf was provided. In
icuroztetces, :t Was expected -hat 3 zuit would
वाएई last for sure than'six montha tha ye ce che
Mursi?g cour, At tho oresmt lise. a Pending iin
cf 3090-10 400 २५ rot comsidezed too bigh & Mumsif
while some of them heve « pending ‘le af ever 700
in HOG. ln cle cage of Chil Judges 50 weed to he @
normal file ‘ut news’ it #2 generally over 100 and sernc-
cimes oven 2M er KIL Ne «yrden is. Lnerefoce, left
to the offtcer who ‘ixes dites sometimes aix montha
abead end sometimes dates Fave ta te fixed only 197
Ure ixation of dates, Adjeurmment: cannct be aveid-
ed in Liz state cf ckowmstances, Then if the file ct
an officer ts overourcened. he hes to deal vith inter-
Inratcry mutters in a large momber of cases every
eat of dee Utter Pre Judiast Relic Committers, :ugee



Ud sqak ay

462

dss whien एएए. sies oie! of :छंठ tims. The cases al
Sud it is coromnn txpe ce thal wlth
ion of the 28९0 parties pr mote Yollu-
dev.ce and create greater eonplexities. 1६
fipevetivels tecess: setore the rnticr
win ve juzlive collay cars: cf ihn tres
weight ef cctesrs Which campo? 30 clears
increase “he cuieire: o> cial acizere conaider-

ably ce dispose of the work feng unettended.”"

tg 7", R. Misra. छ former Judge of be Allsanbedt [inh
wa 8 Plemesr vi thr (omeasilee made some
1 otise.valions in his mets of dissent

Sudges anc
urgent necd oc making Itee
These steald एड

gs auits and ote
go ura dile af 75 or 80 Civit Judge's molar
Tt Civil Jndyes wre required co do criminal
wers also. extra ofiercs sbuukl be srovided.
far as I am avere the werk in mst af Lie
muck, (७: heavy for & dingle offer ly ex
गा verily. Bost td the ला

01%" and Sessions Judges aad Civit
stan: Sessions .lidges Lax &)90 considersbly
wuevease. Parity owisg lo this teresse cad partly
७०172 to tic faulty ar in whkh it ix arranged

wil work if grea! mated vandipy aach aviid-
akle tn ५ expunge od delay co the pen thes Bo
TONE BS heave hurgen fe mat १६:४७: ov ap pre
maohy lightened br the apgcingr rn: af more alivess,
Cxwvermmeant's chert ive choaap and speety justic:
tn tin: peeple of trate caraot he achieved,'™

1H. Verv cently, the High Court of AUshbabad boi

० Wiis १ mado a relecone: ba the Govesnmens af Uter Pradesh

bn Unor
ia
Prasesh.

emphssiging fhe need for a anasiderable tucreaze in dis
strength oc tes judiea’ efficent

On tor hess of scattedea, the High Conort found thet
i: mot lesz than sixteen districts thete wete sinre than ane
hendeud secsions trials pending, Seme of the courts hed
a3 mary lwo tnundred 10 twe comdred = oend = twemly-
15 pending, and mat of [hoe cages
wers pond: ithout 3 date fee dispca:| having been

i ts wat so heavy thot there +

vauay aceziena trisls jod:idiog (191 for ecTenzes punisk-
atile under sectoon 3804, 895 05 387 in which ne date for
inv cold ve Gael lor ut least a year. In savers] ७६-
॥ pete five huedeed criminal appes’s and teviglune

THepant cf be Urs Prod Judical Relowma Comumiat 19:059:.
we at.



18

sly ait had been pending for

हे a { which ne
wore Pa etn nt af the heavy sessions

sare Than

r |.
[19:७६ were hepl peréme without a date >ड!हए
foal Cor Leéaring,

५ pusitlen vith ॥
civil judges wea equally
four Surdrsd snd twelve anit ble Le a civil jueéRge in
ly bac been pending for three years and
at fcr Fer peers; जाई of shree: tubilred and

in Meerw verily hal lesen oeodioz ft

‘meen pending fcr Iwu Fé
Tu mary erurk
23209 re, gular mm
uot be fixed te:
éjaumed sin
/ shawed thas ne dates
thin ths nex. thres mor
bunésed ul wiaty-ome euits
u Mathura, ca thousand
eniy in Ghaziabad ard olksr placus
had been anj: whe. D2 these. & large swamb
suite hed been g fo: three years and = fir
‘Tne pasitlon with regarc to + [ना wari 20 betler

The foures furnished oy Je High Court sf Allahakac.
State Geycrnment ocford amper suppl Ww the con-
ne reached by tac Jadiai ee of

udges ard
d; fer fual

50:02 of them
Hist cf come of
aispmscl could ke cixed
j uné thov.zeqc,
ja Meer. levered 10४:
three ban¢red

la
eles

Vitkar Prin back &3 952,
practicaly ever cial ५0९९: In that Siac Wa?
thrice 5९ whas it veed in ke [orrnerly.
The 1:6७ Cow azs summed ua the pasion és
ainder:—
“The vxieli

slesngth of qnaielal officers in a
strict is suticicct pe with the tution im
only uine to ten distrieh; ull other districls require
अपार help co thas the disposal shovid not be Less
(2७ ७५४ institution, Eratitutiam c¢ civil suits is
decreasivy, urvely cx the result af a change in use
faa 070 seouur whith suits which wer> previously
instiuted m civil cours are now instituted in revenue
5 consequently. the number of existug 0212श४
in move: di may nullivs “> cope witch the irsita-
tien in future. TE no regavd ie to be hed to this
decrease in th: tution (which has just now becun
1 Es felz), it seems that sus ६1:९६ Lendre: id
ffly 1बी10675 would be requized lo cope with tho in:
waiiust lhe nxislingg ramber of two houdred
ang, ve officers: in wither wands, about cighty-
five officors mor: would he required to Brevent the
arrears inezensins. With the expeced dectcase in
che lnatiouicn the nuraber wouki be Ics, but- some
sddidonsl officers wl he reguired......... tae



im

an, all ocher districts ane officer cr more weuld be
required tecelone att She arravirs. Na less Ukun bwu
aundred. sud seventy five officers would be required
न Use २३४४-08 erpears were te be clanzed of in onc
wel: lu ve cleared off in two years, tre
ed woulk be one hundred

The dures. number of offiwers required ic in tae
court of ICursifs vecause the heaviess arrests ute in
trlabie by a Munsif Rourhly aseut hslf she
er of ullicere vequ.red to clear of the arrears
auld be fiensife, te momber of civil judges re
quired wardd he pbeul hall chit ccf Mia.
numzr of Civil ard Sessions Jucpes,
third.”
‘The Huth Court sresocds w rinte -
the Ceazt 9036 a very grave view of the felay
whiel ८६३७४ ave diaposed of im civil courts 3:
mg aiet. Pap dects co ceetet crt (15 adic dates
Justice thal sessions train (barring shost for
Reaens) take away x yaar unc a hulf fir Gig-
civil suite take mete them a year for dispagsl in
Use triel court. civk apgzale are uot dizpoze¢ of for ten
wad whee yeres and triratmal avpeals 3)#५ take a lony
1:66 Acr disposal. Tae delay in the dixpysal of a sut
appesl w.eans thal he agerievet party ७
ut any redics fur many yeurs. ln muny
nl PS havlly woerthehile tiling a gat in a
sourl for redress. TZ the administration cf ciml
L 4 be xeduced to ५ farce, urgent me:
i> prevent the celiy. ‘the fad जिस
offleers are 98 awe mskinz she fullest use of their
thne and the Ceurt dees nor think they can dissces cf
suimianialby wre wore Fhey wie generally poetic
in attendance and barring a (६४४ isolaled cance they cu
fall day's work cvery dey. The sec mulation af arrears
is dw riustly Lo inadequacy ef efflcers of all grades ani!
the Cours ३-७ ७8७७ Government to take Lats ime
diste ionsideration the queztion of mereasing the
mumbrcs cf ofizeta of all prades.”

The Cnurt further observed:

“Thowe have beew occasions whe there bas been
considerable delay in the cons‘deration of tha proposal
fur Giliay up vacameies in the Lover Judicial Service
aod the Higher Jedicial Servier. Great delay hes
occurred in the Feet instance the Public Serviec
Commission cxamibution lor vernitment of
ates: 1५ ७.७ Tover Jud eda) Seryice in Jancasy, 1958,
bt Goverument 95९0३ fer their appoinawenl were
recelved hy June 1987. The Court oroposed on 2th
Niverther, 1656, dee Gilli पे (मं. ४४४६००४८७ in the
Tlighcr Judicial S@rvico, Government sanctioned: the
nurber of officers 10 be tecrtlted oo 20th April, [938



155
che Selection Cer-mittee sent the List ni Laulldstes to
Geverio:ent an 17th Jude, 1456, wid at was not until on
sith April, 1957 thal Government ixwec orders fn
r apgalmument and pesting. The Court ७४०७-९६ 94
14th Far, 1967, for ze-ermpluyment of relred D:atrict

aml Sesziong Judges and Governmensa apptval waa
received ca ‘th wity, 187."

20. Nor i. is Wantcn neégites to
at the requis ls sues, a feature peor:
Utcar Pradesh.

unin, Use juciciars
te Lhe State c&

at है # (६३००1. High Court ८६ dealing Iodadequacy
with the aeest of :nadequacy cf judltial pessornel aes 2 Lert
opcerved tm Wee
Beagat,

“There Is tadoubred.y ercat conze vi worl in
the subordinais courta and parties iL Alipore.
Only आ ver: | ७७71 of thst congestion mizht have
bear. avoided bul the bulk of 11 was bound to secur snd
5 continie to persist sn leap
६: ७. ७. the eukordinste judiciary is 1
d ry recently the High Court,

ful considerylicm wl 1: us] seeds, rsecueended thal
the etyengts of the er Judicial Servize, inclucing
0 posts comprised shercin, shov'd be rrivd
Le. the State Government afrocd 2
y4memorz. At Alipoxve particularly.
the Adotauna: EYstriel Sudess snd
(75 losing the povrers of Ass'ztart
Tadges is ovntinvowdy intestupted by their
haying tn oieskie over Seagions tril

Tie leazned Clist Justice went on ty observe that in
view of the कार préecace of judistal work, 1. has
been found 1mpzesible tc sparc sadgex for inspection work,
Tle fartier sGrted:

“ne cadre of each of the two Services ‘(The
West Brogal 11:
Brugul Cavill 5:

५0100 00 pr
line preprr,

he umber of deputacian reserve cr
Iligher Judicial Service is 10, that oF
ale Jucgers 9 aud that of Mursiis 1&.

of supalying Ofoen Jor ches
yevatt, naterca.ly toduce:
ole for j-udiciel cvork im the
ene: Tf the fu) हू plement. of Whaingifs mnqvired for
cDavuting all th: M-cnaits (0१:६४ had been privided and
amilerly the strength of the cadre of District and
Additional DMsty.ct Judge? 8& 8136 of the Suberd‘nate
Judges auininined छट the required stoeuyth, the system
might Jisve been worked withoat any difftecky being
caused Lo the: coun “As matters stand, however, till



वक्ष

very 16ए६॥-1५, the numetics) slrengih of the Mums:is
was much less them the mintmem required fnz affirer-
ings wll ४: dovwykoen 1 came ie office I found
2 cow's of Munefs 1०७०७ bern }
६ sithiul ate presiding officer tor 6 cr 9 reave
praltion bez since impre ved to 8 certain extent.
em at che present € courte of Mursts are
Al, uxendire Uh wires ch Alipur Unaars.
it Aspens aud hss secn happening for s

नए pesls wl dep alan

jar of the peruar.
die. Service wire nut sal]
॥1"1-92415 Jud ter save ३> be yreuoed

all ske pir
f 3६ Conficered

ord:r to roake wp tac def.ci
Subu-d.nate Judges. a3 moan:
the inher ailicitt Service.
many Subordinate Jucges fur
he Higher Cvdieal Service
: Ube vanke of the Gubox
wow filled Ly promoting Muos_ls
drain 105 « 0 ॥ किट beady ok .६०१ ५
10902 good by promn-ion, है#५0050 larrs
0305 of judicial ofhcers tram which m
2 ark! therlers  ज्रायाए का thes vx:
ulin vacant. The recruitment ०० jud:cia) officers
this Stace Jes entirely ia the hands of he Slaw
cmimcnt. On account of the Cours’ incister
om Jw Stele Gu arg Lh
¥ Lt wor? recruited rege
nuraxr of Munsily, full esr glersnt Pus
not yet been reached, Gut che officers thus vomie
available gre acill very jurior oticers, e:ther officers
हा बाड़ ia fee yest 20 pwobaiouerg wher
wire net ५: ing. 11 १९ arecletated
promo: a cazge guber cf Subsrdinsee Judges
which bas been पिएं hy the e'rcumstaies has bean
respousible faz tre depletion of officers cf reouitille
standing, available ior work elher as Subordinate
Judges or as Mimsifs. Mansile of a few yesra’ stand
ATS Tew acting ax Subordinate Judges; snd tor ths
ans Which requive senior Munsifa रत o higher
¥ Luvisadi 8, it Was been possitl> % provide
As the whele pressure of deputetions 19
resecye posts and peomoliung la the Tligker Judicial
४ एए ert lhe ranks of Suberdirene Judges .n the
West Bengal Civ:t Service (Judicizd) bas talen an the
tank: af Munsifs. the Court bus been conipeiled by
eheer necessity Lo weduicuw grutud nners from their
etralning ard post (hem in courte for judicial war, so



1597

main unprovided wich pro-

Of the Munsifs recruited
tui, dul all ure

पा oper
§ moriks and

1 undsr
‘o bas bed to be re-posted
i Isger Yotaney. en
ike Court wait cilher in keep che
ifs veran: or to ६0000 pro‘astioners to
The Court bas chowen the altar
becasn 40

meuaping the vaak ul . et Judges,
Mm Tequit2 the cune Lz ef che (9011.
८] foc memaem of 7

¥ |
ter alter the nerds of «ther ae
beer. कार्य ४

measure which is “siled for tore:
sa any other und which will enckle ihe
Tigh Courd ve fill ia vacsocics 0 Use subordinate | aurts
49 ths 1४ 1९४६९ of the radi ath the Higler Jud:cial
service ind che Vreel Beugul NW Servire (Jucecialr
I+ thie sennaigite wumerical हि (५ मे 1९५ ":आफकए058360
by the ॥1:5. A alters staid now fairl? large

of the coticts nf sha lowes. jnvisriiction, iz,
Lube hunsife are etl lying vacaol and w
Mber of = cousts of hoth Sudcrdingte
d Diatrict Judges are, in ‘lu: mijority of
held Ly yiersons promoted to thoge pels
before chey bad acytired Ihr requisite length of
mice §0d, in cetualn cases, by versons whose
qualifications muylit have keen ron: adequate. The
strte uf thing. crennat be a fed, umlews the Ai
Court is provided wit the (al ommn'rmenl of Fizecs
af such scrength taat tot only can २६ keep al the Deals
fled, but it cam ale: ucrord. pramnticn to the higher’
posts only to percomz whb havr geruired the Sequisite’*

fairly Jay



Srme
Conrdinlonay

Failure of
Sea
icyero-
aE,

156

experience ang hve given avidence of the requisile
qealiicstions Tae necessity of adterriny Ube consent
nk Use Executive for che creulus of Additional Suripe-
ships does nos mins: uy apprevickle delay in Lhis State
becavac, we thece is congestion uf werk, 5
been found dstfieult to peeuate the Execut:ve bhi
Addigual Judgeships ave required. Det it is 7: 2
ezersing Add:tiona) Judpeships if ०० cious swe
ance for tilling them by, The sca! d'iviculty ie she:vtage
ot psoxpael anc the Court fads 1: wevle3a ६८ rene
Tocnd the ereasnn of Addstional Judgrships, az 3:
Tmows purfecly well Last wo ofienrs car be found ca
20६8७ ever edd:¢lomal 1 iets.”

:r purpose 15 seproducing ut very great length the
+4 as rade by the High Court cf Allshabad sad
the Chief Juslice cf West Bengal is 10 6 tention to
this grave stali: uf afisira in vegard to th

justiie which prevails in sun: of the Slates. Ir
tye nf 106 States lhe cordition= rel Ith: eo
che Statr Governments and. or those “हा lu:

Gowerament in charge cf judicial ade Unde>
che Cun: latution neisration oC ju

taion anil ८ + atl

y Dinter of ४८०::७ areca [ae cther, & com-
om the ce othe State tn cucty oul itz
to orev sot trainnd aud preaper — ‘ud:cisl
gersomne) for presiding ver the sere The St
sb canrir, even urzc GAmarcial sleingency 88 था.
cy 18७४७) thet ‘lune States have been
gains ॥७। of the Tevenue garend by
outt fens. It le ¢ maler for sercous
wr in eracr by prevent whut aypeara ts
n-rwuinwie ia 7 jucii¢ial
[६८ Cantera’ Govern:

th: Censtituties, be Lt
MP cualtol over ४९:४७ adperts ob || edn:ltdstration in
fhe Siules. This suggestion is mide ¢n che beris that euch
contm,. cxeacised by the Centre wrul: Gerd to prevent
euch devlus:ble candiciens szicing.

a 2 TERRI

५2, Oue should have though; that ihe problem of coat
nual’y zising arters could hava wen easly met hy at ick
and एस 9.11 awayencss cf the sizuetion as it de
aml the imonedlate croatinn af additional caurts ta dea] with
tee nercasing work, It is surpricirg thub 80008 cf the
Slate Govermes's enould have failed tu appreciate their
respnnisib.itv in the meter, notwithslandiog the repeated
wtarnpts यू 95 High Gourts and other authorities to make
the State Governments slive to the true sil-satlen.



lig

93. Having regard ta the delays that inevitably omur Powers to
on account of the: Governmeo: taking i. long fime to
examme in deteli tre propoculs for the creation of craic
iiestiionsl sourls, we wn Ef sae cost thal dhe Tiigh Courts cour.
may be genstuliy empowered by the Male Governments
cule gdditanal courts sihjeel lo certaig 0583 when-
: hey cone:de tat sdail oral work jystlles the ९! ol
covet. As whe High (८५४८ is Tespusible fcr tbe
crilicn cf justicn it the Slate and is ४- a better
५ chan she Scaca Gnvemmocat to ageea3 the reed for
nal court: wo ralieve vongestion of work, it could
wiled ta oxvryise this power satisfacorcy. This,
vw, JL Bin sone measute to coviate the
that creur Stax Governments seictioning
for the ercaion of addiliomal courts.

४३. The Iligh Courts बाण he cistriet 120४9 will bavr Choe

to keep « clog wateh om Lhe dee cf the sebordinate couris ७४४

in some cases ४ Loy ls wi) mv: Lo be ४४६ on SS oR
cuses chet each /2०(6028 ९ (26: showld tuthccay

उ ४:६५ ke expertrd fi uagose ri. Ie cGding th nil, mecescary.
the nature al’ 14069: places and ie conditioas
el werk will. 3 |. It i is found th

officers presiding in sine courts ate avezsurdencd wilt
worl, relief aay be given co them. by a iudsclouz acrange-
went cf the wirk waith would celieve their aurden and
wanster 1141 w tu seme other judicial offiects, Bul the
*n tan the fics may dulicate chat « Te eran ement of
werk wll net be soy and thal wnat le necded is the
slablsbocent of ner evuste. In such cases, it will be the
dy if 1७ sLastiet judge 10 apprise the Jixb Court ef she
. The High Court wewd 1४७ leke prompt ३०५00
veel more cpurls, 1 Lue sewer to do en we f
१ Lave zugcested. 16 Gur view,
1७६२९ such powers in the hands of she Hig’ mrt. Lo ensure
She avribe= ॥ ४७३७४ being kept al the required Jewel wud
८७ prtvert the flex of courts hing loaded with heavy
arresys.

25. 4s svaled cerher. with Ihe ४४७ kefove us +4 is net
possible Cor us In estimate with eny soouracy the strength
of Judicial o-ficers ncvessary in cach Bla 10 cope wi
the convent 11९६ and the ald gewding cascs. These are
mattias whieh sborkl be carcfuily exanxeec by the
.respective Tligt Courts.

26.
Pata
she os

€ would. however, suggest tha: towing tuned
be borne ia mind in cetermining questions ct
acy of tae strengla nf the subordinate: judic-ary.

() The strength uf the eubortnate judiciary
should be sufficient to enable it lo digpiuss 02 xuite,
criminal Llals, appeals. revisions ard other peeecedir ge
within the fimits of time sel nul in paragrashs 5 and 6
sepre.



10

(2) Tie High. (१७ ars should immediately undertake
& careful exumingticn of lin: requirements of the
judienl poracpael of vacipus sassms ia the 1:881 of the
vetywme cf work in 18: subordinate courts.

(Aj The strength of the subnrdi
ot) fined 30 0६४५ :4 will be wuathr,

wh The cadre etreugh of lke judicial snes
should ‘se 04७1 afles nealing dre ellcwance for ‘save,
; Ghpetation vecancie: id also for tbe
int ning xf the judicial officers,
जगा the cadra strere:l is lixed tnobis'go of
tien tequirrmoonte the pregent eacogth of the
vadre should aol oe काझोल्पजे for omeking exesudre
apeainumetils

46) No sourt £3 d to be without a
ding officer; tb : aorratve fincluded
leave anc déautation meerve) 4 unesl anturesewn

adminisraticn
h. fcatires,
dscrve to Keep
tn the adnqyacy oF cial

et the basic rety

ustice.

edditlonal courte
negvssaTy २७. dis
पर #30७[॥ Tir:

30::७7.0७
de ay.

Wi Lhe Bigh Comrts abould be enmposered, subject
43 cama: wits te cmate temporiry additional
tous wherever they consider it reecssacy, Wethuuk
refezcuze २० the Stale Ceernments.

६:७६ The High (फ्राएछ snl इज judges should
ar carefy. tu ४०७ 931 3 sub: 64 Soars is NOt OFeL-
surcened wurk. Wherry tar pendency af
SEE 2 ver’ a, the districl judye ४1९0 redistribute

" 8 18% .tiurrnative, aut “or ar. rdditional
roctt thy erreacz.



1—SUBORDINATE JUDICIARY
PERBORIKL

are, the probijeen Comzecsat

i. As has been 23313 repeatedly ९] ee
ot eMniact jedeial wceiaslrauon, ware: at the ॥९०८। 55,
ef iht superim Grurts oe tae sahnedinate courts, tx Largely moe aeacy,
the orch emo cf linding capable ead cempcter! sadgrs ane
ef a] cf 03805 ewa the
122 clue (0 Le

seing, Lhe
ther pimsy and che igeuee in
10141 Usel the hexeiig tales, perka

id Nave ishen, .f thr rul te
Tow

wv. doy Iy day, cr over a Dard
over seversl n-anths,

ble ently
the marry कई the legal paaetiticnees
aurne a whom alat are octen Ku. alive
evicence and arguio nts st:salet

pe ol form
the ot

103 Fernie’,
ar inexperiznee OF the iuatlaguecy a te
vr]. IIswever well framed tie susstantive
a. sc bhe proeedursl law, uve sreper
a ०६ these (8४४ les lawedy
the ufiierr: prowdirg guet uke ८७.७
1[7%[, we would need udeyca’

> in

upalicer
Tarde ५
tacs? law were om
and cupabbe wel officerz tu epply site adm‘nister thes.
Witheu. su2h pereonual, adnuitisttation af jeatier 1:
ever Se satindaeey

३, Similar views wete expressed by the Cisil Suntice Views of
Commel.ce win summed yp che position i hese words. bance

uate,
“Wimneaae. of sininenee oho epeak antharity
hove in eeepbali farms = expresar! Op.tiOb
defuse thor. delay in the vYorestngs of cavit courts
a ludia is ta a considerable extant dug 7५ wart af any
Soper system in traaing tae Fudgos.

IRIpOR. regs ५४५; pire

361
a:¢ Mo oof Law—ll_


182

4 As we shall pain: ont latar, the problem kas smee
> evown in dimenzions, oecauze there (४ ur. Kaile LesLi-
that th uilacdz al 1७ fud rial 0
che bar other sources have, during
fallen in 3 auoscsncisl degree for varius reseors.
has bern almost the wnanimous view expressed by
ts3eg veloc f thug oby.uus |
५५ > adro‘nistracion 1 oe offerte
tu oncsie preh'rr of p ov iE

a—n of
1-%/11:5, webs
पी une ctpavls Judiucd peesonuel oa si

sulved,
Teefore we can sugeest adequate measurc3 for raising
che Bevel । met छा+ 1 +

९ decline in ‘ts etticiency.

5. Wa have, in dealing with the question of the decllue
of etuacalde at ike bar, dealt at cou: leah wth tbe
led to 1:80 artuatloe. The Yar
levela iz lows Use 4
euind for judicial officer, ft is net surprising
th Gall ax the eMeteney cf che 15;

which bave Led te

4 bre:
upeainz ef varicua other opporvuulties uf empleya¢gnl
surt: crave | teal iw. youn 10019:
All-In a a ether pationg and bas
=. the Bsx of che teent whiek former: ec 10
We have zuzfetted messutes ५.04 we hope
will lead to or:uging back to tha proiescion of few un
ef nur able
them a tr

cling sigan
wsult ie imeraving the celkre
[2 higher jx diciavy
he eevline cin

sud thug 261७9 oo semove one ul ther sou.
ite efficiency
Bepanmon 1... है. A very important clreurostuunte erhich bad led -to
aect Irmer’, '0 yudvial oltienrs be.ng plaozé in charge jat
i wery larg: omumber af 1७०२ ७/७
which hug [0 be laxe crery veer. Ivevease 13 che velustue
nf bolb vivil ard criminal work and Ihe inercasc in the
personnel 2ecesaltate: by the separaliny of the judkeiary
Erom 170 execasive have addec cong derately \ she volume
of recruitment. Hence before us Ehows thet a 7a.
fous blz to fill the -srerecss: num
: ए beow tie requited standards. The readiz
hug heen the enforced recruit-negl pl personas withovs Ue
he Chairman of the
ian 13184 that whi'o 7: a
mary ag scvents-five persons bad 70 be
bg could fied ८२.५ twenty-five yea

perscnos uot really qualified lad to be scrommended
beiuse oF she needs ote Ser’ A senior (१४८1 Juslipe
Stated that the exver! in hig 81550 of the compctitibe



163

exacdnatiovs held al the State level for rovrnitment ta
che jadiciary had keen most discouraging 00 ohaaved.
“Hardly toes any jurior lawyer actually practisiag in the
uThs Gffer hi as a candidate, nor dess any 2resh law
3 to आ। tise, The yeval wejuvily ef [७५७४ ७1७५
apply per whe Lock a Tae degcee yrares ia jo Lut
have singe beeh cmptreyed 46 dome mimMor Deal ender the
Covernernt suck sz posts in the Connerstive of Julc
Rever Iw ined? a Court ef
The scavins chey obtain are truly ro‘sevakle etd che
[7 14७८1 why ४7० eetlon bs ७५5७ frew. amotiga; them
ates thot ng rarn का a sl came Crud

7 Tartber, il weule apoear that in ecyrral
clrulardy in the seulhem a lalrly ferce 7700:
épocintments have sevr 11. 8१ +9 2८13:0318 jucic’a
प्रो 2nd regional provnds. w

resentation २४ oerlain comramilies ०४" verions a

ce tom :
४ ० the stardaréa of threes w
wine: sale free छ ilectitled Seld uf selection uot able to
provide a sufficient number of sa'tible men

wnllueradion, She Tlsguere

faroyrably with the executive (ere
mont 1. is true phat, wenecaly
+ al pay of the judicie! oficers and le
0198 _ ६४एए् ve olfwers sre identi! in 190७ 0:
ever, it bas la te: rerueubered chat the
ly aud Jango, meevuiled at a much
jadictel oflecrs, 7 ४3:४६ था to the

reqnivvd Lo hi: 3 graduate in law ccd

iz 13 also mecessary that b+ shou'd have
६७४०२४ of years lbw Bas. On the
wnat bo the enecui'vc brancaes of
= degree in arte cr svienie  -x,
specking, sefficgien§. In Lhe raul. a arson
४ 1:९ judisis! servec dacs so when de a about
teenlygix ur Lwenly-caven years of ags and cl a 006
when his comewpursiive who. have entered the exequlive
gervice of the Government huve alreaiy sequired a
wrluin semozity in the servi¢e aod have 009:2 70 draw ६
alury. It will -hva be seen theca persun jolilag
I with a lower re-ouncration
cteived if he had entered the
sats earlier, §t has alse ta br
legeer proportion, of superior
posts in tbe fudiesa? eervice promoting: come 1४४३ (०८४२४
to the judic:al oficere, and 8 ferson who has erlered the
zervice as ५ mune:t, sazinting that he is “it ard fuly
padbibied, tikes: much: dum 5; ४१:९४ to become a district
fadus than vould an cqual ripetent deputy cotfertoe
la crach “he position of a } ae Again the judlotal
officer, having marted at a ope bes a shorter span



०
Oct.

grttuoies,

14

of en-yisn (450, the exerudtve officer rnd shiv affects his
pension anc. other retirement benefits.

a important factay which cotrucls from ihe आर
J ॥ sereice ce the jaufecturity

icheial ofwer compsred wth that of
uiicer, Our atterticn draan to thle
fi ‘ny ut emctieaced Chief Justice in the folow'ng
words:

on why cwmziorious एत पाई rut OF ४००:
et gent sh Aes

yeslrate, Under
madisivate le a
S21:

Ibn plesent sysvero.
nf tac Indian Adgeinist: :
B serv while the diewict

judze is a rrsratex of tan higure jadisiz! srevlee whiet.
Ue differerte in the entevory of
bi iz reJeclerd in the

created a i.lle eouscquen: Nur car the ,
thalect judge stlaia the sens: af indepordeass which
ne might heve acequices), if (नए hac not been पा एफ the
acmitliatyve corttrsl of the State Guvarnment in
vagare te his xervice

मु i we ave +० dmpeive the perseane! uf the tabordi-
४, We Taws; lirsl lose measures to extemg or

3 radical wyarure sugeected (9
lo rertuiz the zis] service ortirely by | a-com-
or cwurtinialiun. It was suggesled 0:४८ the
wLsizey could be drawn from such  oonpetitive
; can be
sim iar teste Belg al State level. Thrxier
for these testy would be craduaxy wom 170७ taxen
ivenivel of oractice at the Bar

sbordd he drw away with.

Such a scheme. it wes urged, weulé vesult ‘on bringing:
atic the sudocd judiciary capable young -oén who
now prefer te obtein, immedjzee veraancrative  evri oR

the exocalive brauch of Gevertment and
(1१४26, it 9raa pocoted out,
hs sqboxdnate judiciary tb¢ best
countéy ps s whole, wherens hit
aeoold bi: deewn fram fhe
aie,

an



165

11. 10 suppert 62 these ideas, it wae
wat of a three to five or six ९

wet uf Loe Stytes
ve; A pyrguse.

cated out tht the Bar w «
practice gt the EOIN
entramne :0 the erour.4.

ay she
sl lu: even en Riactigirp al ihe
jax The average orsctitior. Ue Bar ९६७१०. in tht
beri¢d hava any worth while idea « ko ७: prac

Uke Ba: Iu us only the axeeptional ywung mau
favourebiy silaaled uod 92४0४ rer 2
ber of the Bat irteresved on him, ४४|
it all at the Bar ia su short
(4५४१४. ४732० would macvurally nm
“ ७10 Uae = zubordi
dy strive ९७ get

appointccl pet
tae profcssian
shsadvantage of vecru‘ting ¢

al the Bar way eink
०1 ४] |

‘al coray li the wotclugion thet duri
५. five years cf pyactios wt the moofnesil Ber the
Roman detericates move or lee curriplelely.*

Tre (१७1 Justine Commniteve’ eatso win of the ppitusn

sha:

'The rul2 in foros in ceilain provinces recuiring
have practised at 3
ut aceoer fur abe:

beeper rie

Tr most cases, what is us
1:02 she B:
रूह फनी. caembera rf the ‘ant who have fat
sor herdway ir. tie orotessinn. 1६ yi pressed upem ys
uble to attract Te the judiclal service che
four te A Ci बजा sub-

अपर. गाय

emo 3! Ta
1807९ cornpeteut juctcisl cfireze than the ६०-2७.)०७ reeruits
Prue Lhe Bae,

12. Recruitment ce the higher judiviary at. che slitIndin
level .n the manner su.gceated weuld by a powe:lul cnlty-
i sl by eying cst tue mye ६0:72
fn chis connective, attention may

४ 351 Dams de



166

0 the olerrvatisns mede hy the Slates Reerge

rimivden in opard *: the erea cf A

Servivzs, ag ९ major compelliag 1
The Conmisslon cheery eds?

‘The raisur d'etre of creating All india Surviers,
indiw:duclly or In gross, ig thul ८
het of vespomsibalizg ७ ade
tebly Call, muy clrerlicp a ow

_ sent emphesia si segional |
'2 थी! 33७५४ ०0५ 1०53 '८ dh
diy whch wil, only be
ing which emptuises

The cove “f :8 Ae aaninst the views wudicsted above there waz a
fran subat |
Dac Teention -

the syrleg oof seemeent rors
‘sl chat che mazorry of the partleng
Tewgers wha appeared define us us willeeses should
ouprnss Uhemeciven iz. ferour of the retention of this aystem.
Bul we ४६187 had in ity Givogricn expression of views
from several wembers ef the Tigh Co idiciary. It
wee aaic that ix some Stetes, at any rate, the syaterg wt
peceulttut of the muncifs or tevin ु/्य्तेठ suber ante
{rdacs from coc Bar had worked satictactorliy. I> wae ४:६-
gescec that it was not 39 much the el: of wlecticn that
Was at fo yet bad nol yiided good res ells be

प Hiszachory 71८10095 of selecdon :

which malters ate iyeductod ig पार law courts.
point, out aoeve sli tast a young
sorte Yeats at i: Bar would ८1

wwledge . of
0. ७ tee न मे eu
५ 70%. whe |

ca would hee

mere yuite different 10000 thet in whi
imself ap in serpier after eradu

urged that taxing 3 Ziatiuction In. 5
Nit. Was Kot necessarily a proper

al Teer whose wotk ceqttlees, as 2
cal koniveiaige and enpleboe
fer undetslandivg the mins and moaliyes
: It waz pointed cu: chaz in the prac-
mw, men whe -ad takes Honiuice and eamed high
८. 3: che University bad frecuvntly fsiled and
men the kal आ। cach distinction in their acacemic 0६१
hard cise te thes rep.

‘ ze of the Scucé® Reargsnittticn Crremesita, my 232, pass 48
4 *



167

fo: us zo be.pner ६0055 All Tedie
ods, ४5५ We ATE loly uf the claw chaz op SyTpmet

anit the higher judicicey show be rcertited by 5, 0:०1

ai ins afi-Iudia level ६0 55. iG stones

nz graduates to che jr ]0०८+६:०७

2 of

Use higher juéinial servi: अ leaven of

whn wil! set 3 hicher tone and level

aate judic’ary es a whole, 116 poar

pe aL,

15. Te %ऋ-३ uct keen very एप

alrcct Las
rervite.

cecuited 7 purt dite
pattly by prow

Bs from the Sower suberdivate jrdi-

मप्र che lower subo-dingts

uf Lower
char we ahall be sele 195 ans

rdiraty

nding to waupele,

gts Of Uns chigter, deal vith the
'5 we have farmaccd Mm mxard to
the 86० af recruiterent sed tae methed of recruisnent to
yaleg in gach case. 7

Exits ox GRA eRs aN mci gps ue RCCTUINWEST To
Thy Jomeisy Sey

I
alg

17. The designatious aud vemwieritigns af cial she pouicie
51418 v9 State, Mxecpt io Madhya Pras 8७४३, ७.
९48) servise hag been divided into tw E
T Superior Judicia) Service sad the torent ina.
Civi BSecviee (Nudie 9. Brarel). In ‘a Mradesa slong
&1 juulsial oViccrs ० &0फ+::४पंप्रसर: a
ome servi. The Higher or Surerior
2 the pra co ctistrice and vessious jude
rigt und ecssions Juéges, aud 3
Ts cf the status of 8 cietticl jarive ave ecosrally
appoied. aueli ax ths: leg remombrancer, the chief
(10 the chief पद f the ence af sald
oranch'of tha Jedie:u! B VELL
Serving (Judicisl) or the State
(Junior Broacai comprises ४16 pests of
fe gad raieedinale jad; Iu cum view, 17. wotd
be deuicable te तेऊ uwa Tate the ditt ots 10 aneen-
ckbarg. We wuld cecommuecd thal lie hi
lower branches of tae 1५0: Tyive eaculd ke ctignazed
th ples 35 Mtulo “Judicial Servive Clam I and the
State Juciviel Scrvier Claga Il.

ascees uty el diy lige i examine § -he evisling
whir ul Ute judicial wzrvive in eur जया.



fy
in रस
rT
Genera;

Loa
Voringice.s,
db UP.
oad

than,

Fa Uonduy,

1६3

Tnore iz, generally spesking, a uniformity of

॥४।६८० in tre deciensatiana of the posts included in
in Uttar Prades

and Raasikan, additionsl distaet judges cee diviigriatea

“C ard Sezsicne Judzes’* ana .n Jiampay they are
Gesignaet “A: ", Jn Utter’ Pradesh snd
Huy selfs il uni Fi ns Judges" wero ave pad x

much Jowe: salary than diztcict anc ३७६४०४:७- july, iry
fil crimo:nal cases like ६ seasigqns fudge und 7 १,

sid, they Jy wll icivih apprstls which district
Fhua these ९४८. au

hal lhey wc nut enarusted wich
o> admiuistrunive fu The

2 the:r lunetlous with those cf ud
fudkss tod Ure litter Pradech Juciclsl Ret¢ems
ittec to recomumend! whe wofitw She mute of
Jound sessions judges with thet of the uteslricl aad

In Bombay, aceistamt judges inilial'y exergise the

f at axsslunt eoyyione judge aud atte: havlag
pericoce cf crimmma: Work they a:¢ investor
uf @iditangl sessions jueges. Ther
jurisdiction in civ.) appelate work aml ovigisal apyilinie
mack work 18 the same us that uf ४ di aril sessigns
हे 1oapxss oviginag civ: ‘adiction up.o
Tiveit n= Rg. 05,009, but, "७ vructien, Lhey da
any origing| civil werk.

19. Uncer the Code of Crimpul Vrancdace, a cours of
Sursli-ulex: Jor every sresion« ig ia chotge
anal seasious Judges aad assis-
sessions judzee vuay alsn be ippoinisg to exercize
Jurledclica #: une ne mare af such courts. The powens uf

i 1 माह॥९५४ Rec usuelis conferred on sa:bordi-
Tax judges wac belong to whay we grepuisn, shoud be
esl che “Stave Judiztal Servig—Class 1

Additiunal Jistricl

wissint Seaskone Judge",
“Judge 02 che City Civil Court", “tke Chief Presidency
Magistrace" have 3180 been used in tho Constitction.

15 our view, il wold be canvepient to have in the high
judic:e. serviec proposed to be decignated “Slate Jucicn!
Servic. Clase 1", coly two mato deel gna ! ans Name.
जप, cod Ssesions Judge" ang Yur tionml Dict:
and Sessoms Judge". Particulay posts like those of thr:
Fo presidency magisuete aad ofbers bearing speci!
deci znacions be berme on the eames cadre. As we have

TaggarTh PIES 25



163

० chig chapter, a usilurm ecale of vay
rete: | Sate Ju Tee Service Class I (higher
cop, il woul be ezireble , a6 fer as
posts carrespording ७+ she poss of
i sasgion3 jucpes shold be bro-

we 26908 memjored. ‘The

Audigia: Servi:
peer meu
uudsicnal di:
at the Lega
officers uf “ae satus ct 4 district Jace.

Ziver 146 snd Cliey
Brauch 1).

State Jauscial Serview—Claze We ds
ह mf ths 5 Sudie ७. Service du
wil cam iw grades ७२

prageat, 92 ncve lee the magesi2s whose pect Miamsife
dies. venerly speaking, eeceads i mess 20 ५०३॥०३८

1 AAO and i2 suzae of ihe Slates Eke
Madhya Pradezh up ts Ks. 10,699, Becop
lagher prin: af ofiicers ir. “his claze, naw
fudyes: eho have, generally sperking, wol ted
Turisdi lua. Though w a “air number of Statas, the (05. ४-
ans का “Daub? amc che “Sukordinal: Judge’ orevail.
gus other designatiors bre ia use in other Stulex in
waate judges: ge knew simply us
hay, eunzics arc der acted az civi.

Lhe

yudzez on} and sulvtdinave jada¢s ua clvil
judges (3erior In the Punja's, the Sesmation of

ls net

nages—class 1 wo 2”.
“he desiguations of “Subordinax Jvactye™ 2
vogue. 4४1] mu uvé kuown in that te a3 civil
«:ve them come Lac addicdanel disq'id 10:॥ ७5
1 skéie exercise url mnited orizine] pecuniary

z uppeilate power. und on the criminal
nvees of sessions 1718४

21, 11 ४.१७ of the mege or 12४६४ uniform functi
formea ky Ih yadicial niMcers 90 varinusly desiank J
@ think, be edvisabh; .» cim st a stlarmity cf
avsiguativa. There i powever, a fundsamencal difference
iy the cenr-ul staeme af disteibeticn cf jud.cisl oesmess
the imwer grade cf ६

the highe- rade of or
| ‘Tne fret hus jimi

od pent juris

vetule seeoad, generally pe g has walimiterl
perdial? jotisdilam. We would, ans'. |
the Slave Judicial Servi¢e—Clasz 1

judges wha skould be iil fudges ef the
senior ard junior थी Ollcers cormmspnanclay
melas weal: oe deatgnated es chil fudgma पंथ
i oméing im sulocdinate judges
vil pudges (scuier division}.



IMscheds of

4<६५॥॥ oh, 5

Gy <णा: 35०
ithe
emotics-
१४०७५,

‘The robe of
fis Service
Coca

along.

lid

72, [7 Romons “acres ane, dbza Pradesh and‘some
otaer States, dae wwe ६91२8 of civil and criminal judie:ery
vyruled unci an ofiecr of the steme of 3
ed az 9 judicts! magiswale or us $ sub
Tiggistrate. With 19७
gcgaTation of the judiziery fren th
irtegtation oe the cadres cl ८ Tir
090 bet liniaphl haul ia alher Staccs alao. It wid (30७ be
ble to integrate the entize fudiciar 4 criminal,
nto छ cree cadre. Whenever uncyislaricl nowerm: sre con.
L i a its seatycs. i 3 civil (udge

ce ६-९ प्रोए: cesimaced +
ind if hz combines sath the funedons af il 11190 and
Toagister:al funcuins, his desigvalior world ke that of 4
Cive. Tedge [00५5-०7 Division) end a Macister x.

Rexgniniog ned she methots ef recrustment ny:

min the diffrrene Grates, une fuvis ceoscly spen

fattarms. Some Grate. uy In: milaod of a com

Lastion «pro law graduaxs vitlout 185

. sapuionve et the bar while ८६ insi
mer cf reara' experience ul Ihe hi

in
Ke

ssstem af celectlon mide oy the PohFe Service Comoraia
sion ced the seproseritadve of the High Court,

1५4 Ubles Evadesh. West Bargs], Bihar, Rijastbaa:
ami| Assam, the wumeife cre retreuml by a comp
teti by the Pudlic Service Com-nissivn.
pose Lest forms pict oF the examiracion. A Judge
wud or & Tevresertative Cepaeted oy ft, is
azcociates with the Commussign [1 ihe werdnct of tha vine
pure: 12%. A list of ghe successful candidates arranged in
ibe ender vf crit based on the result of -he examination
ic scrvarded to the Govermmeu.. ‘he Linvernment then
ake cppeintmetts from tre list, guy eltest
us_rinwrved for the backward comonnities and
oe Castea.
sh Lu the 8 of Ardhrea Predesh, Bombay, Kera’a,
Whit Pasi sh, Martrag anc (४1253 0 €xettinatlon 14921,
ic candidates ara intersiewed by the siemburs of the
Public : Commission apd a Tlish Court Judgeior a
Pepe ‘ive of the High Cour: The zelectlen of the
eerdidates is wade on thie basie of wueh : ervicey

26, It becurnes negeeary a this stuce to eh pear the

vamment: made by a number of w-tnezzee whn 2p: ed
bere v3 on Ll: role nf ths Publis Service Com ‘om
in the s2lcetion o2 che evhozdiuate judicsry and th
meaner in which M2 functions ave etharged” We shave

Ju lized Us ull (be Stutes. lhe Public Service Commis-
tiie. ule ya. toport fn ibe arlsction citter as the tba
corducting the cxaminaticn waich ‘ally includea a

७0५ vote test cr as iutpaping fie interviews which.
result in the cchoeticn of £:% हम नमक Indeed, afticle


जता

234 of the Constitution provides thut in recruiting persone
other than districl judeos to tre judtets!
Goversnr ois io act inger १४८ “am aecorda:

te to oc entrusted witt:
ubocdinate Judicizey; ०:७३ wavtier
Zz vetisfactorlly discharged by thera

ved ky the wee aways
९ su s0r'di- sgrislaciore,

s3i0n in th> selection of
Tea ee Lunds waves 10 tsxiarevian war ais [IM at
chy @asirmen end gems of the embers ef the Puilis
Service Comyraissions in the varlous Stal, We are cor-
strained to atate taat “Le sersonnel of thesr Public Service
Crmnazriinesis sume (थे the Staxcs was aot auch ag could
ibspire confidenze, from che’ polnts ul view af vite uffigi-
ency oy of Liwartiality. here gpoears to be little doubt
1011. in came oF che Slates sppe: ents to these Commis
siora are wads not on cur
grourds uf gusly आएं Rel et pffilistions. The evidence
#iven by members of the Public Servige Commissinna in
sO%de ०. the Stave: loss erik the Sects ,

eye to bo ir she rezovnsible pur
semoe cf the southern Stites, the iro: lity of tha Com-
mizzicns in meking veleliutx to the judicial servica was
ceritsly yucs.ioncd Some of the Sta Governments
there have. in oxder what ley: roll "5 छ

inequalit:es", “rammed rules deeigned to give opporvunities
of representation + certain coramynities in the Public
Services ip Un:

t appeers thet in these States, the
addit.oh to cundueling orieroinations
for cent dates ta juci inl cthec, raguired x go further and
regulali: the commune? representetign 18 order La xmnothon |
का: the inequslit:es". LL ix nel surprigive thas Com-
tissions when ertru: ith suck 8 task should ९०:७७ in
for adverae crit: ti No doekt.

igneaitly repui @bch, stiong and saserted
that sommurn:l considerations play. denn part in the teeer..
witnems made by them. However,
Hewes of cxpericnced Ipivyers and some of che judges
4 establishe? Leal ihn fon in the public mind
was thet the Comm among other fazec-
tions that of reibrssing ccmmeanal i pecpality in che State

lisi.] Beryice. Indeed, a Chisf Inst anu: of these
States seemed Ly 8 Hmpta tart ahen selec- commuml.
tlen 23 wade: in: jure 11 e Sate should take account considees
6: the alleged ecm-minsl imecuality and that seiewtians
tmoade by thu: [जार Service Commission on tte bacie of
Ten:edying such inequality, should rot be complained of,



be ७ ९००१:७४९७०॥६८७ of she conpti-
| pruvidivis 69. imguee upon the Public Service
Covor-iasione a task c= this sind. odor 10 320 cf the
G alien, Lhe तप. हर the ६७:1८: ७10७ Comendgaiant
eunducting examinations fot appoirtrents jo the
nlon 3:03 of che State. The Conatitution

further ang se gave yfrey
: 2h in Yepard to eafeguurdirg che intrrests of rom
tagite: in sac Prbli: Secviies. It ca not surprising ths
publi. zenfdence iv seme paris of dhe enopty in tbe
Coviraissaime: shoual heave been undermined by cheir कर्ण
been led tc accept #ह a peel ov) Ucerr 2 the Tegalatien,
we il webe, ul communal ceprescatatizn in ‘he jucheial
eervice,

coma] feri.ape net au ineppry: FE by aeTue
seeprmate -o 110 upplivgtina cl whal csm anky २8 descrined pa the
Tihs swiclous deectrine of cemmuruil Lepresencation to the judicial
vas of the Sta. he Conptituticr provides ‘sragdly
1० 10 for equality uf uppo-torszy for all citizenp iv
cuttireant te any uffics eaddes De
the rok ta enable poovi-
Son (०४४७); (६ tate “Cor the recerveidom of
oinzments ur pods in Lavewr oc any backyard cla. uf
ल्‍ ४७. gdoxysately caprewented in tac sere
४ & Slate". [hors ऐश thes 30 wersant 10८ aplir-
jal cache or the vacancies te 16 8116
tte quotas for epeckied commumitics 11
gbyinus that erch & practice would regzalt in destocy-ng
ihe effieency cf the iadivizl service. Yet, we found, at
Zoudmen Shute, ceplaia evnecal rotifestiong in
४ which Iwi the affect of alccating qnotus Ja the
judicial e¢rvl the difisremt cyriemunites in the State,
preaumandly secuectng ५0 ४1२ propa tion of Uncir population
dood,  “Dhie exens +3 herve resylod in Sastastic peeitinie of + he
ists of the Stet, ९०:७८: oue community
‘shad 9. pcrewntage vf 4 in the popamicn, Leing
Tepuriisd wi backward ceucninides. ‘The rescit ef 8 seice-
tior made ६७ 1७४ judleia. afice was thal mundideles kelerg-
eli the so called hagkwtl cudumocitics dat inferior to
t arpa irted to ‘he pimlé in
prefer ac le wutawicr Candidate: 1१ carol teo strofgly
heze Grectcee wah, apert Dum geing Locan-
६४०७ tended to cestere the efficiency ७ the
yudizizd secvize. A pupipetitive tas, 707 indeed any other
4: will '€ mo megpiog if it jaw be worse ‘nM ७०७७॥०:-
nat.on wi ryslem of whet muy be: 28Zed eelactve
comomumal ६४2|॥'2३६0:४४0 7.

20 Whatever tho rauthad =f geleclion edopted. the only
nesorvaliuns Which can ke Ingitinalely वा" are theag in
favom 0३ kackwaril 2 ingentioned ४७ LH(AY af
the Uonsilluzion gad fon, in their crac. served Yeacg

ar


‘Tr |

vik A teusblezowe question which vi:< given rise, in Rote of the
anere than ane Slate, tn some friction ‘setween the Pah (20 Court

Chori ue |
wid peuy at the selection
ee १६०७ teat stage that
h (2४311 iss esl (७८
High Curt judas perti-
ositicn cl a ‘acha'cal

Wd heave & precpea
1 peveorue] rf
anized by geome meé:aber3s of th
sen. Indes 3 metoare ef |
vice Coram ssion wat aed Ser a
का Le State Public Sere.ce Comsaizsic:
iw ig uel & ptover rocthed 4 se-ecting
show'd he boy
es. in a sumiber
e Iligh (१७०1 judge
selection of judicisl ४
sagused ard must on? ths nominzes
uesegled ly his. cel sayues
y a psrdcipating in te tes. In enmer
are co posilun bas heen dFfevenl. it appeace
६ 11.18 lowal number ct marks ollotted to 8 vie 35४८7 Lest
se 0 such 9 mrarnmer til dhe Kich Court ydge'a
tes abity or the bugis o2 the matk:
gi > candidate could se overridden the sen.
bers af cle: Cora:lasion pet uy .o the tast wh
share of the tolal rirks wimald be larga>. in the result, the
j ss vinw wf the eEo:kility of tae candi¢ace docs unt
छः it ig, िटाएतिछ, aot gurprigire Wal Ja there
pirgytrslances che Court jadye: in some ct She Suter
have retused ७ pt ~ था. ecnducting the test. Ag nes
ta have been slu:tdened,
॥६ vole cf he Jade ४४६3
spectator and the JTigt:
derlinud ba eveps much a positien. One
lis connactior d-awy attentlon % 9 Trovision in the
2 Prades cudle:a. Service Reyruitment Rules, 1955,
is 38 follews;
“2 (५५७. The Gavernor may, if he thinks tit, aya
Figh (श्र. to be prreeent at the intr
fed shail advise: the Com-
ints ¢n which the Covamiazivn may
qaue he bot be enall 1207 oe respeuekle for
aefectiou of che catididales
‘yybuhly for the reasons meni .uned above, we found taat
in tw lis vi Asaara, Uttar Pradesh and West Beuxul,



tw

oprenndeca-
ring ४७४८२.

174

she Rex'atrar of che High Courl or tbe Law Sezrocery of
she State 18 5330८. ८६ With the Corin tat these viva
rene tests, ‘The participation of an official of that 3110७
on the selection would matursily bayer thi: cffect o¢ making
ce lecauica! ayyinteoce, needed for tke scioction of the
j of not much value. We ho-d che cefintue
1६ «७ there elim wenn less ता: interviaws
corm part of the method of selaccian, ६ High Court judge
cf experience should he :uvited te participave 19 tre oon
5. Tues els gual kun: a peeeendetating yoiec ix. their
meru't, 17 wil have ¢ be raslzed that Ja sarlicipating ia
these teats, ie judge will cwl be discharging the duties of
bts ove gut will i: leading Fis 1: ssi: ¢ 99 आ। Aonmwed
(whnical adviser in the msk-:ng of the selection

31. Earbnr, we have referred 10 the tvo bread patterns
o1 whies the wetkze) of secrultrsent Lae prureeded. We
have 8:5७ indica’sd, ia nur npotting comarks, जय cenaral
prfe-ense ier 3 compotitive test as a cound raethad af
Seem IL is Levu |, ha Wir method of se nelian ॥9 iriger-
views by (10 Ilex Coart vas given sstisfaccion Mm ४०४०९
States dxe Bea: Em xe have alse: hourd complaints

aoa: ibe werkive of this sveten. in scm2 Staves.

32. 3 तक!" of ites: eed the :धाएवं7-
ence of Icaving the selection cf the jadicisl cadre ertirely
w the 180 Cours, It haz been getd taet the eelection by
the High Court on © ity far the adie
Deal कक | wld oe che idbyl
eed al making fully accepting
the pasilio of tae High Cours vis-q-uis the scendnistratjon
of) ७३३0७ in the State, we fee. a ditGsultg in acumcling (he
meshed cf selection by 1:81 Court juéges at interviews
a3 a aatisfertory usthod for the selectlun of judigict nila
aannci, A larvae number cf the cencidetcs for ini
Survives would o@ Junlue lewpers pracdcing -0७ the crfugsil
whose warl the Tigh Gourt Judga would haya n> 9 ore
tunity af knewdng oc sspescirc.” M xecam: 10 Linie carl
de. hersfe che High Court have to rely largelr

ai 07 leiy wumpeteree and efilibby fern $ ie
inate fudicial oFicors. Further, 8 1:89 Cours judge
juége: Interviewing 3 candidate for fifteen minutes or ball
aa. Four yentd hardly be irk aesitiun lo arriyo at a satis-
fectory conclusion 388 w Aiz fimeas though the be
essived by ceperta fram whe subs:
amcat denl ne Giyersily of npdntan ex's "
nese of these inte-views 38 vests of firmness. It, ct bifre-
quently, hadpens thet 4 candidate wilh sono peesonality
4nd goed manczers ix abl¢ (८ impress tae interviewing judgo
or ‘udges when a man of real merit who is aelf-c ous
and Citidens ‘ails to impress ihore, Thore is marcover the
element, Lowever sen of the wessibii of pera bra
wenaces Eeitig brought’ to bear-on the Interviewing judge
or judges.



175

regard 76 al 1268३ considersticons, we think, Water |
bust retlun fs thal of 9 waite exarnina- Sungstitien

sien which weu.d belo उप alimcuste a large number of py
vandidstes. Such of dhose oh» survive the weilten teste

5 aled किए kn “nlewview which may form garl. af

A gomorl mination has for long benn an

e abiiny fer var.cus occupations

nowy il sheidd Guy morasure 2

५ OL minx Ee mentivesd 19४६ the Civdl Jussice Com- Viet ०: (५७
ve 9190 of the cyinica “that 2 roodified form a: aah
lend ese cdicl “ ~

Very mace tris resnramierdation “wita tac Jess i
ka pevsistant Gpeaparts were male ©... .. that wetent
vartuaticons 3६ s2veral pic 5८९६ Live aul oreo ade: Zev
the est masterlel evailakke I seams hat if camps

is inlrodyeed, eviticism of Unis kind

ir. of tae Nature of the

migitio®. 10 ac held emmin
the cuestion cf the ‘lelé teri in, ™

experieres at the Gar er a peticd of three to five years.
[is uike’nus that subjecting candidate: who acve alresér
aken ७ law deg त॑. %[(४॥ : yer bk the “Bar dn at
Willer, exw. in loge! subjects in the oxdinary
gus will wnt result in & spcistactory sefectlon. T:
young wan ५ bas 5; dia: at bee av rein herd ५
be expected to ५५५०४ sin:r ad avtentinn tr text books and
Taw 10:75 aid “T juecsticn papers of the type usually
sot at [ew exsuninsticns. Even of 1.७ grepiees daemon वी:
such 3 (est, it would noly enable the young levyer with
aE memery /0 scove ketter in the examingtien and not
Q to she fom the ,oung fon with a ६०६१ uptitade for
worl Wha we therefore suggest is a
tical neture. To'quau: the Civil Justice floem-
inssion should be 3616 to test the cen:
जा १९९ Sith law end precedure wil
special reference 7८ 115 or aha 19 छक्का pleadings, 3:छ:श1 ०
clate evidence and write ‘ufgnenix A simple methed
would ke la give Fhe cant records of some decided
casce 16 chowlé then k+ required to dealt che ienases incl
write the judyrocnl, discussing the la¥ including the case
wy applcndle to the facta". The cahdidate may be pro
vided will baze Avls ४०4 low repor!s sq thet ha may oct

‘Repae, pap: 165, bar 9.
Uireg,, pure, (७.
Wedd, [age “33५ Pare 0५

legsl and



196

(०९४ (८: rely on his mescory and have ample orporiu-
«ef verifying Ubn Savy, Thi: canphicusis will al Bi
sauch or. a krowledge of tho lae as on ity eppication

the zid v2 bucks, (८ a even cet of facts. 1: may be pointed

det linal exarn his necuxe are beog hele 12 the
एड का Cor वर्कर. हा. छः. फीह tele
jal ४७६३४. ७६.

36. A (७.७७ apostent quesuym for consderadon te
the .njtherity ta br cavcasted with tan holding of the
We asve alzendy noticed the provisiora ot
८: 82011 07 af ब-3 1७: whiete recuine एएटी-
she Pubic Sarvice Comm’'ssinn in regard to-
a@spuintments ty the subonilmste fud:elamy sad wh:ch
af toning the ८६ Kineredy Lo

Cevnnissiive. Ter छा Diese prei-
nk that the examiradona cay well be con

८ Ceruntss:one provided, how-
ee 71८७ Gani

ah TY

point- ६ 1:07 Court. _ 5 word, we
पद er + be cdv:sable tc take che further precaution
exuminers. oie (he: rulet pure! fed 1॥ Ulae races

thas the exeminer3 should be seinetcd in cas.
2 yowlth the rorecenence of the High Court.
Such a course wll assure the salactior of suitakle ani
set setliay aod yal dug

1. Some very cesporsible witnesses befure 19 gave
expression to che complains thac ovsra‘nore sclected frown
४ the State were apt 70 9€ che subject of infuerce and
bef that 1६ woul be dezirabe to make it ७ rule
Tous Pusstblo wxcumiisers Tram oa:beice फेए
@2po mesos af judgug the correctness of
1. may, huweeer, fe Jucizic.cs ie order to
to have a fair propar-
Slava

Case Er bal We lave musics? chave tae dlvergence of views ia
4९०9 २७. _yzgars, to tne vecilily of a vies 600४ tax. formity part of the
exgniustion. Sperking generelly. it appears tast members
af the Public Sureview: Gomenissie attuch geval irosortanee
10 11 and suck ef them as we have oxa:
thal it baz yielded very setistectory results. On the other
hen, ther: the view gxpingsed Oy mecnbers of the:tegal
profeasion sud of the judiciary. that chese tects give only

3 sunerh and inperfsc. 1: n2 3 cendidate’s merit, Nat
infrequently, bor quindi with wierlaie amine of pro—
senor: id uid and readiness of wit is ssle to show

ul udvantaze in theze tests as compare? with thoes
Thee ging more substut:lial but less shiny qualilies. here is
arrest 8139 the view that theoe tests by reason of the intarigible
e.ements ६0 which they are based make il eaey [७ the
pley of patronage and Sepotism. The possession cf आ
personality is a rnatter पर sebctantisl Importance sh the


i?

enend thiir catia.
३8३50 irsis may coctate satistseccrily, il is racessany
de test Ire ०9175 elicbed ४. Usem should pot है? ¢
0091 :॥ bae clal "एव pt antares in tb
tial proper! ant should

esalt svitk by tlhe arg Ne seqairs-
i i + in MM ७:
ld ॥ scinireure resquiraniet; in WO

# lst Le iogisted up
(Called to odtein ytsnd urarks ६
eth J sscceasful

4 thst reccwitment fer lke Roun -

atid (०0 ताक 2९000 smotig जप fon

Yor 2 10 5 erate st the रतएफारा/तर

Tewaver, 00 5
K

law
Tar and

im orgsr In be aligible
in onacee uf the southern States
they should nave pease. ७० By
Baiag m outs
boncarrod

“No res
97 catlan

in

vont of

‘pci i
osphere of «he «lees cf
puevail should not ne
kl oHux. Oa the cther

clase > Furst kT
ourts warrs virtually practi
J A 10 fadi

5 309 Jef
The only qieetion Jee our ८
Une xegervation 19४ be male an Las
For the m.ttise

tue aze lim! prescribed “souls:
पर मर the exariination fu: reeiusters
A resemritiag ix Ldn.
2 character, Fewover, in ocder (क muke
sterte! servants to ke able 19 enmpct:
groped will, that Jer cirect recruit?

P ६४ salvetanes een oreseribod. ‘his ix clearly
vudecirable, If the misistetsl servants wish to compete ia
those exortinelicns, It ६:07 De opeh to them to do sn aa
385 KM. of baw le



Training}
es2tocl.

178

whe game conditens as:
prachsed a: ibe dur,

"oaw grates wiu kaye

¥iuz regard do she oronsicernti meoloned
1४ wes ibst three ye. i
ved zx one of
७ The

1६" 1६४७५
WeNty ६९७०7.

om t

che opaxttunity of
eur lk - 7५ lve vow

a
his exper nna af ६ Tew
so cf trainiig before he

ing orrse for
st headquarter

५ Ube iripursines ef draining seems
om grcaler than it was thiré;
har the vol:
pace at wheel 3
Uul

ler om and whick may vreven. sin fenm
॥ बताना Juéee. A certain umpun of traune
ic Work of 4 २०५७1 ix als> essential te
c+ Gea: the Her, if 1.6 :४ not

RE ES. pure. TH


४ ६ et a ne Length of

ra vided

1.5 period ot tri we
Pra cles
‘ks anly Ir

Vas
Poh shertz

. idiv vacakiny
ois cumtemmiacel Ra &
st ullucee's sarser Uh
Fra ti
West Benzsl
+ Gesigned ८० Casi ¢ tue 7
self will. (a: ७०:४७। | 21031 acid
Let eudebugh nT ८५४४७. umd (et!
tir vhacge ९). ;
J esevims 70:१० whore duty is to avide there.
wus) crpurl 0... tbe tore

Tom nc

ding reenarimen

the Rar urd le supgenit
«such changes nee

५३५०, 229019119 UP verack २० ie city
~ 11.1: revenye egatirrenl « fir an
He ig first जए

1 ७६.७ Th
बच्बा-5६416५ जा. ४
vive the reveru
which

A.

mis
dot ducaneats like jel@ maps s24 villaze
map. Ilr is ther. sitached ly Titka ce
far 2 owt 5. B duinos iigsrion wwercer
wens 7 msg pu tvod ७. ४०७:
nt in th Giuuk 1110९ where he ४६७:
uds the Renemal back-

Th THtar dreng.

T:
- Hae Kar, 11 Mejrea
i



Tap

Its impect- The iroxxrtarnce ७? walning in revenue work carnot be
ance, overmrpassized A (एच rectuit la ७.७ ‘ust Cannas

alistuchurily tiuschime Ix duties in disposing of civil and
edecuate knowledge aod
31 OL 1.७
1 sun a.
ul revenue snatters is indigpensab.e 10 che salis
sa] of these voatt:rs.

Poles: trai 47. Tar tev ini: followed fy & short ६08०४
wing. of about tera आए with अ vlor cl polwe whew
mui’. vats a0 coports study the Keri: a)
working of tan putee déepietenent vid, spectal recererec wo
i: cul an uf ¢ Ae aequizes 3
wloa hag “© or
derder. In
¢ celee 10 ar argument that scnarucisn ul
m the exe sholll ७1 Se 2keered
eeparsted m. wute ef Lhe
i and ins rising.

. We enpluasize .o that
fy Tuli un geiasiertieree verti
nvyeatigation and powsecus'on cf casos as
Wy Ue Jaditiel officer disperping

ha. ७. dha. view, the ७२१०७
say bhava fo be longer

a-perlod of traning in the judiecat
ent =r dou’ Ubcew anths. Duriag .thig
whe t st assed ta waleh tie | ८७४ ०;

0.०.] and erin . at the district hesd-quation
siren हु ७. tae werk of 09-8७ eiugle cial aad

Aulmir’ + ४५ 11.1: tra
प्य्यक्ह low ऊऊँं।4
izpinanp. ba

ho an aciministrar ve ५४
i 1:५-४|0५/ in the j

गैर praceeda ere

senzure of she
yeturns, th
rt 9७७, the: peegeacaline: of «(९१७६६ une:
eystom of Gis am of protec Tie has ta fac
hhyzelf wits the warking af varins deparumenta [like

: utd, copying department. record room laud
to have a hosaugh kanwleige

~reining is essent.a ly of a practica’ chatacicr.

The period of Leal@irg ray not, however, ne:
proceed in the mde Inseribag akove ana may be
tamgled or vreceed inftwo departinents at the 88:5:


al
ptite ct the

desending (६-५9 ste: eizepcies end canny
nee 38 voll wt che departmen.a mauucerucd,

Le neczssury to send. Le

anging Letweon six ~
‘The 90:70 ari the astare ot the
be .Aj ered free. time 10 7090 arin

We Inca cond.tions ar
44 Ive flees,

hu wever, wish w suas it perfectly clear, Ubet Nev ते

hintd tre .rauing be dispy with cr its Shoceccd
than six mnutas. would of हद

sh as we have el
1 propel; i
whi

exalninaticn I

1: 3५0: $ ps ed, thers +
the selzece? nlluees and their superior ब्योट ०
ii UFatwportart and a mosster mf rautiue. q
न should oe Sntrusted in cur ए :०७ ‘0 be ime
who would make per-udival 21707
reoerts In the Hugh Court ७४७०० she traceeys in fur chalg? office,
ary wknt ef attealiun to a jrdiciat
when train‘ag is ring 1०:१९
pairing tac camo! 14
ry which ce are aiming bs

5: AWK consider Us घ.६-वरा:00 oF the hignet Creates of
qudiciury aed ther roera'ément aad teaming. pga fede

Serher we have sspremed our view that # one

tighar judicisry shoyld be recrusted ‘oy a coro
“ion 80 th> all-indiy level, so ai tx attrac: to
aoulie young xruddutexs fresh orem: tha
os We shall nots procerd te discuss she ! chee

are concor-od at 118५४ swuye cn considering neaeitmeor
ha baye catlior designalod ap lu Stast¢ wo the
I, ®aich Wik corogrige ०८ fasts of Jigar
judges, additional district Judges and ccatsepo: lcaary,
- fillec ०४ officers of the ecatua af a disxcrict
fudge, Thre prals ave al presen; filed par. y by pre
moticn fram t hortlingle judicial cervice whieh we are
ce grating at State Judigial 5९19-0४ Class Tl. and aartly
ct Teeraicment frap:. expetiecved mvecabers of the



182

Th puportign. of direst recruits frum the Bar to
fron Sul

armuuribeg 1७ lity ser t
an found in “Yribay and Kerala, $n 2 ard Dihsr
a rect reerm'ts tro. the Baz avereyge shirty-l:

tus: oromercd cp theae posts veri
The

Peocentage

2:13 ः

बट0/चप Zar

the गरि/ब: te Per cent.
pe al ite ७ fair prepur
६५९५ and

sole, we prapose chat levty por
om mig be 0rd hy prvsuns wae a
veervited by 3 comet! examination vel: at
j= level. Mhese selectee, २०:)

५1111 pst
cc Class II for a pried af year;
y are brought to Stare Jud'ria] Screice (lacs
ef reducing

6 Tedusng ths matiner ag

persons frou. the subordinate J

wa) gesv.ce, Clase 11) fur peer:
These rextucdous hue to b> face?

tislilres cof कीए

vray ine one juts
Har, ‘We have 915%

ne graduatce w
jal cerviee throng
eetioned how the
acter the: 4.
The ¢roblem, tlerezers,
3 13 ta, 63 lt were, the source of recruit al

i, tar acl we will 9¢ wb’ (3 ectract
ant University gvedusles tu ‘he

peers drut (1:९६ #(७/७७ 131

de availible dn og ty
8 Duke 5

on that # substantial
seves for the LAS.
छत take cpciora. pepera
‘nl branches of Sev. we hate nel ben
Abtain ecmpleve Algures, we Eave we lsat that a
- of the vardidates cfferiuz themgeless at
m ose law cvadiaces. Why shod not
we seize the osporsunizy of recruiting sens of them
jal Steevie?

brings 1" 1 Fr satrcerriy
che gervice or fsesiors* judgr ag ser
dream legel practi

(2; Tn moz ef the
Tocris, lar profeds.ond) Judges tells Chee

- reverse is the poaitiou in the Angle


183

én inlets
oreinmle as wed
tyaditina of the

८.४ & Jon, -।7:
: reward 19 Ihe 81
Crees 1:33 secrt
pes Of judges

Reremb.ance

Lowe sllagest is i. gome rezgects FON
1 ndisn Civil Serview ofhcene
euteroa Lae

puss ater Pineda
2 पा
sal ol errisism aad appasi ‘
t officers ul Lae
iare wer hy

Canssquenct
eppusitiva-

ew jadiges have ‘rol vcip.easant tacem

Qertiud Wem cecause of 10७10 assaciativa with our
i 41 bas keen said of tem tet “We

. of them werr: Brisie:s.

the Empize ar te Banek just

“nterparts deJended :t in the yriera_

57. Notertbetand ny af that lise been said agacuat the |
i + 19&9५ mot forges + some of them
Lose judgwrnt. arr reemkered

0६ even to shir day. Even after
lucgea have secupied the ४९370
caf sue cf the Hepa Courts ७:
snslieret whi fu: appsintment tn the
Bene of the Sig.cedae Cecurt.

104 dedcces

amination wif 88 he (i

tel will heve hat
no eeprr'rins: it Lue Bex, in eur vi be acherne we pry
3 care we #श्तांव Lt disaoilities trom which Jue
vil Servic? jucges sullerss: 1५५ becin with. he
bse very olen ue. Lega. qurlitvations ole: than those
had hern ae ८: him ps a pa Irian.

Sey & mamoee re yt
chem su exomutive
iJ kale? taat the res elle af J
जा 1! Wand ५७ the exerutive cide
padicéac: ¢ une. lawever. pro-
i 91 Lew

prem
seevicr 70 she

appoisaracns a the
le were, with a judiviel kins.

3728 80 thal It Indian civ.
ed course of

inte sersricuy,
Ws Iruizing wae contined te routlere percainwic the
rrevermn aed ६३1५8) administria'iet stias, kul wken he



4३

aken over <& lke judicial 505९, genevaly an:
ing iu che.) law was.

Pa onths,

at totermive: | ७८७1७] ieiuir.

Lally
‘o fu: a period
0. be ne doun',
1 19 ४ yidicinl

Lee wit 90326६६09 क ८ ilegree car. be of ६&-881९१:
ue. | & aa gvaduain uited by ७ soropel.tire
j A ०७% of

al worklag of che |
में. wet Dake Bs

riilicd aber a
+ experience
६ und an equaly
she seacli¢n ef

ite yadial oticer ६
be move offective chass the unorrtaia anc ४५७७९:॥०७
he + ei during the course pf 8
s practice Bl. Bar. These and the tuber
tiene referred (0 earlier have led us vw the con-
in the coterns's of Lhe ecHciency of ther subs
6 |2 necessary Isa

Wadicial Servier stead 2e eslak

2 ica brig Laken in the manter ee. dad
212 of the Constitudion. i

40. rumel corstituting the Service cou be
wlecled thzova a combmed comprtivivi: oxirnit(ation
laure x tie Todiay. Adroiniscratiy> Se: unl blver
#।1 परी Services (gr ditiiiass competing ईण the ui diet
Jud nis wll have to Fe law graduates and ‘will
13898 2¢ offer al least two 3p! sim Jaw. ‘The
guandsrdé insi.led upg in Useit cece will br (6 same 23
n dw ease of the 14८:%:७ Adwimistrative and thr: Iwi:
Tare ga Sesvdce. As In Lhe. bee lbs. rogape ७
she rreuine that che caniidsie i
et the view Ihey
p of twenty-one to ६५०४४०

seott: Gf, 2४६ ja the cae of tye acher Alllodiu os

Al
ether 84th o> uns elected for the Ail India Judicial Service क्री ke

lu a perteulst State und will form pars the
¥ tu that State for the cese of thebs sarvice. Hew-

or, i to 1; safer हर. aff-Tadia nukes whiel of
wit) ir [01 lu nation, we suggest that as fea
Use Ineian ful Garvice effieers ehnuld be isllelyed Le

Siates other than tk hs nwn States.

Toainir ce हुए, An uflicw selected for the 30. Judicial 5 igevics
should, in cur view, ke given co ihtgeedye training a

od of tivo years before he starts hia juriicial oaroet. Tie
६39, he weil undergo the tre‘virg thet ‘3 at poset
eon; se.ected for tae Indian Administa-
4 nool. It is essential that

102 a prvi tei

inp ne the: futua: eaximulive officer
and che 471 १६ Gud

॥ ccfisebs shoeld proreed pari


nave found
aauilistra-

orenpersisnl
fudge hiees ott the cadre

edminisvsticn
uuic.a. Servize,
the Inélan

०३.७ <fivere. be ute
॥_ fren: ther collesgurs cf

pend n°
offiecr, in
lien ct ihe
wedge. suck
ac aspects genera prin

és ot i
ficns and tie region

which 36 is alloted. ‘Th
w te cyumlly caeful 13 8 judici
ay, Lowever, suscrat (1$::| rder is Teades
i. no Acmin inar 81-4:%:0९

jus Judicial
like Eeunvoiics
a part.cular refercnee to thr rivil

iny |, iqttedvency, banking and insurance,
uded in the course of insteelion at the

[02.28 of tic
x wotdd, da our
We
this perind nl

3. The trainin, at the indlan Adminisi-ilive Sezvize

Svhorl for s yesr F2euld he Gelawed ky 9 further petlod

re intrnsivi: “rating in the Sato to which she oferr ik

slotted = The nicer will ke subjected In Uus tracoin

side oy side with members cf the subodaale qudleiry

tecrulted 2¢ the St S. We have earlicr prsser-befl Training bo
fh b i Chis period of raini: ing for tj: the States.
ice cficcr in Lhe: Sta

७४६०७ of hic
. we thirk, extend to a period df yg (6
which will inelade a Shree: ता: tralnin g 1b Disteéct,
eveque naitlece. a two months’ training in the 0

five months wider 9 srlvted distridt
vublagecua ts give the officer sens

७ prepared Ly veeting hiva for training

"LU period winder the Goverment Pleader or the
Prosecacer. In order hit : wicer may have

si idea of work in Cue High Cour, we alsa revoromend

thas he: shevuid work as a:bey4l agsistant to a celected Hi

Court judge tor a perfo? of fu months. Durlng a



18C

Jn the Hah petiod be wall be 8०.४ to familiarize bimself |
Con. tl plovedute ८८६15:

ut )७०७४ WIL enable bira to geo an iocimecc

ul । cunplicaved legal EToblems arc
slot wil the Hi us. He would
Ich ७1: mel :४०3५ Sif wors of experienced
'3 ७६ teaming li the Hi gh Court shell
of Wier the
end

Wakao 081 iti a
anayialiate. taves vlc
been cifreod le
superersion 2f the 11 and not the rvenucive. “Mis
अत.) present २० [४ wuld be transformed
_ we hin Line 10 time for disposal. AZter 9 period re
Aga mural yeers haz bren जाता; by Eu az 8
magisrate 1 procreasvely inereas
car be posted 17 Ine cigil skde start
und anki. To gas
nme :udge. wales and munsifs ४०

States, che ०0:0९: will
before he is
inat: judge
udge or ar ascislstu ४६६६1८733 judas ६१ ths
After thee ar 2 Peale exprTicnes 7:

४:1- be fiz for hning pustad 59 9

gern? a che
work a 3 roansif
ri ca ldshe: 0

+ ecle.os we heva proposed, the émelt.ments
athe 15६3-30 Sadist! Ser u

1 higher rervuneceticn when
fe fu

tomes. hewever, a: al
will 36 the sv

to being men nv
These officers will
ver 0० site, Live to he taker



Ag. [t may apyear: actrewhat ungust that ax Cndisu Ani

Judicial et uals a aby position yt 20७ ce
+ sudze in 196 short peviod of about 2.1] dar
16 & yersom becruiled ४३ i. julian civ’
should have fiftecn to oventy years

We die 3.०

Vuioh thal this weed be ens. reserbered

tent the young man wi has p the ४57७३:
ar che Scale leve! ६७७७७ have 17 he had uhasea, attomnts
पट ruler tin .

che wh-Ind:a lewel. IIo har no
2 not

fin-t. Wha
az the all-India
(00६३३ to atrempt

¢ la che gory
every one WLO
Further. ६

# cdminisirasion of the

awl] sessionz judge ts Lee 1.1२ ७४ jodi

४. othe distric. ane is resporesiu.e is
347१: ए७:० 17. थ1] 359। N ally cas one
in inn persone teervized 29 eitesils cin uspi-i: to Teach

lection Leet,

whi rands: 1& दत्त tiqnt

vivo clomenz which we beve ६०४ १

tad utto ‘ke State Jurteca! Service
a

Servias

igth at the bower Ineels is
cent. uw direrly recruitet

aed teonte-fiy2 per cent
vatton, from othe lewer ranks

mirruiled zt che Ate ES
wil be co J
Tewest | :श्षषट। [१0५ vis, af civil judges
will ow made ve State oe

we eligible 'उकादत, धरा है

(,uaprdirac

prep « i
eont, 1:/ I by gromotion 1181

I Jatthv:dinste


I: r
bs suilbly altered 4a th
und Oris: woers th muncher 9९ cis
fs scoall. ५0010 methed of dealing with euc!

raul ‘9¢ to have a combined (७078 for lwo Suates; < big
tate aid 3 ५0311 0४: ६३८८: Sale pring [८७८० Logelber.

80 The sctucas ७. recetitusewt tu de Juger 17०७]
(३०७४ ७६४ 1४७ cos ttaier. cl 10, olletndia Judietal
vet owitl: cimelderabh: uppostiion frum same
eh 1१७ subordinax judiciary and froro ¢erssin
bndies repvesenting the srhorimate judiciary who nate

ja le . L . dhe

“a with this usp
the ४६:६७ the
1

will have
vavh the fave of
vf ke amply comper:
s eTeexT taccot porees? and the
move iuvenaive trading to whiten Shey will be eckjegtdl.

er mbjcrtiun 10 nur prepesal wae
/ sffec the casnces of premoilen
ja) cervice wh.lea pexeors itt dhe Luwer jpdicial
1005. Lbs) ise (1:६2 ceniall
y itl he dep
Tk @ppicturs La ex thal the resc-vation of
Ker cents pngls पर: hin reeruited by prometion pyhich
we puopose will nef gubstantially reduce the past new
ble te subsrdinare, judiciary in the hixhor judi-
hie gel mt helew yhpws the oumber of
e lower {tate judicist service and the ॥1६४०९
service ir. the varlour Sits: during the year



Ser ag jou's by cor Sane Pastis?

हा adeia .

00 zi eventos Salas am Whe yer 3955. ०२४ AS aafoertrion yf

७०६ ४४

Perecrag.
one

Lge
rary

2

we
a3
ns
HOR

ath

o =
HEL

aw

as

caw De ध्थ

9
पड



wi that th? pescoutau: of ocely
J service dante: ७७1७
हे 001 aura wb pias =
Stay 1 will ches spre:
oe ofivors 31: Lh

#न्‍छऋष्य३ |

The posts Sscrve cn the
Soar repigrded

small,

70147, otis

The “pFrine: qeticiary
: affairs which
॥ from priaotlon

densrd

eguliled by sere senior
sat vad ६.७ fo abner,
ghee sade? 20 का

Az Maal only

Servier clement in ceder te achieve our
iz dhe inn acd led che jucicissy but
tatlen ulust 2 cectalt. pesertitage if these: prety

have keen mrss ct ter the increase
of res tts at fhe al India wine. to 8

rebeme of resorm
whole sherid oe
Ite existirg p: >ह ansy But 13682
sTomotion would be “(७७ Alsclwe an 11 nna
+ proper 60९४६,
Sowaga soseryed by a Chief Tusrice in referetien to
ct propusel 1:3: “Td the higher status or lbe Richer sal
हे rent Limited to tno direct reeruits, che usc’

है. aniziam.



121

Will de Unat wo lugher caste al सर 3 wil
Served | ners wi Liat
bende neies
५६ 20 Lt

६६-४:४४
lich is likey te breed u senas
if rots 3.6५ or हब £13."

reed hy us, there
[6९ di rx

Car lec wo any
(7०५7९: + ज्राप्याफॉक ता
in, would ke equal,

pring a

jude of che Higt Cheirs ia 2-99 lange Wak

॥ ६-8 Dae.

TA eornavbut faint objection In-the achem> प0७-भ'' pine ne

be veound that a pevsns, mercited at Waier.t
a Shite vher than his own woud
thr Stu

regionas 191 4
aad

allotted. In
oflicere of the
live
State smn हि
feemed af an
these nffust2 :छ dig:

preted le one
r We have Tot beyn ia

ties hdvirg Hern €xvericmced by
img tieir duviea on this ecuze.



192

Ts hes i.lsn Seon sugsestod that, if cle: emotumeyts
रन: x Cu: Midian Sudiuial Servine are the 53476 ax

ine Endian Adm:nistraty: 5, 4 41: Tove
“candidate: cay profsy the Adin‘eistrat've Services
Jie “olier and other Certrat
2 Te Guallivslinn of है. 2 pa vill nant he
for rome.

Other
obfeicta,

es ere concerned, Luc rem ann
1.] kz lege (het
Se

ce wlan will
allices, 1311:
spondence snaffisred

105०७, we were
State Ihat he kel roet
ee owhe would like be be weusferced frew

ey ut the रावण J'rdicial
४ ota गाडी) Court Judge. the
stented by an uiBenr co the | A

é [708९ रखा 4;
nt alle ar to
I saemle, ke +bi

: 11 nee mag ome able te optch
[६ 7७३ happened that pereors ३7०9
10 ॥2001:3025 180: iter

fron any Ar
did net euccext. -७ baling

plile (७४७९:
9. Thoagh the percedicge
awe have sieqesed cutans a reduced qucta in dome
se Stglus, il 2s, we ocnatder, ¢ fac pregertdeiar, ea
४ la “he s¢neme Of drei है 0४. जा gt 1६ all-
level eaggesit: by ७5. i

Wi. La mes. 27 lie Stoves, the.preseyToed guckBcation,

its In ths hizher judicial service

are ut the
ao Of a practce vl sew: Pears
ik 07 ZeRyy Feues sEould be uniformly

£

am: ag unper age
rdogted In al the


13

7B An our view, it is not necessary to prescribe any No-rabmiag

period of sraining fer persons seerutiind direct from tho Tsar ai?
Im this maconer. Recruits from the Bur, with a sunken

ractice of seven yoars awl ir, many 28828 with much

griytes practice, wlll ordinal be enpletely Jailer
with const arécedice acd Like matters, १ have referred
to this matter as wi fuutd that im ६0000 Scatea the cules
require Foose reecuils १: undergo training For 1 pesia of
ene Feat.

74. An smitysic cf the pay stewelure of the juciciz] Py ey
acrvice in varieus Stites reveals consderuble disparity in of nds
the psy eceles 8२ to 11) फिढ या "70080 end the maxitnum of Diver io
Ihe Scales, (६) leagch uf fhe time-ccavc of Fhe pay, (3) Par scales.
rates of increments. xd (६) the stages uf the efficiency ;
hat. Taking. for exasuple, the cay eceles 1४ taunaifs, the
cunizaim starting seen rangee 19 ween 89, 220 in Bihar
te Aa, 850 in Urter Pradesh. In Ovisei, 9 mursll ata,

a. Re. 286, in Kerala, Mysore, Rejeathsn apd West Bengal
u. He. 230, end ln Andhra Priciesh, Bombay ae Madras at!

Te: 30D | Likew/te. ५७१९ mayiroum of 17 /€&.. 828१९ उछ्काहए५ हे
betwcen T=. 300 in Mysore to Rs. 90 का the: Tunjab and
Ustar Fradesh. Tho-e is 1.8० cumelderable aiffermzc in

the iengti of their pay scales; 119 pag ecsle io Aasm and |
Thar is spresud over twenty enn years add १3 Mysore over
elrven yeues. Apat’. froma diferceens in th:: nmonnt cf
jacrements, tiere ure also differenéees in tae inervals
Lesween facreroents ; Shes tonsils and erbordinare jesiges

in Andhta Prededh and Madras, 20d uukordinale judge in -
Assi get biennial irerenntts, wherese elsewhere oF
yMicial off: ge. annus] inevemea®. One 9190 ig”
considerable gifferensea with tegard ta the: stages at which
the eficieney Ear is cnforied. (o Utter Pradesh. the
rBivieswy bas as 93५7९ aifer tre faurth unt 17 fourteenth
Ferr of serview, 13 Bihar after tha eighth ued the Ceutlescth
year. in Audtr: Veades: and Mecras afceé tho ninth year,
itt Kerel, ang the Vunjab strer the eleventh yoar, and in
West Beng 1 after the (जी und the eichwenth year ct
sntvice. Edsewise, thera ame diterances dn she pay scales
af sthnvdiaate judges. rdditinnal district jucyes, dlslaict
jrilges officeia oF wmrespiadng rank.

: Geairable that ०1723 doing exactly a,
Work und javing precisely the: same Cuplifica. e
id. ; az poss’ ble be paid the sane remangrn-
311 in diffdrent States. There is in our
: the diverse acsles of pay ent

inr-ements 10७ in

६... Watle ९९३१-०४ wth the main causes of tho decline Mamet.
in the stmdacds of Uke subortinate judiciary, we pointed SEs rar
ool, teew ut ficer oc the Swticial branch of the Steve Cici
Serviee is abu disndvantige.to tegard io his eroolaments
In cunparbon with 3 memper of the executive branch,
This ix mainly due to che fact that foncral'y an entrent
373 M of Law-H.



194

iria) corvice starts ist a higher age chan bes
eounter-part 13 lor exeruive branch. Thus, in 558
were prectlee al the Bar is newessi.ry for entry iu: th:
ie, 8 YOUNG aa can cnzer it at Is: cas liest at the age
of pweaty-4.x cr lwenty-ceven. (Joe has thus to muke at
डाप्रष्ड:821101 gntlay in expen re end evend ३८:७६ yeurs in
हु the neressary soecial _quslifcation for the 7
Cm tae other hand, an eptranl te exeuntivo
४.२ need Wot spend moncy o: the in eqeipping hhy-
Entering the serving ipmediately alter graduation
at the aye ul twenty-one. be has o slz:f of five yaar: over
juciei ‘hein ure very welghly roasons for
lary of 9 reerl te 117 jurlie'ph service
st 8 comewhal Fighcor level taan that cf his counter-part
ie che executive srevice, Bul tnfartunalels this pps
3 ho recipnized «We ennsider it 13 deuurubl: sinvet
Aecessacy that. wis people are recruited romewhst later
i: life om pecount af Laedr spocial quebfcatinss, they ought
to oe siaried at i minimum aalary h’pact than that paid
ry gradieves recr‘tlted immediatety all:r eumple-
eb Overs urea, We have alrcedy noticed
110 starting uy of Fadicial offiresk in the several Slates.
Ta cur opinion, the Btartng salary oi mucsht tn ali ito
Sestez, with the excoption of Tttur Pridinsh, 12118 far below
af wkurt, मे our opbdan, should be the mninium adequate
‘ing salacy.

Biennial iin-

ererant pot | ६2: Wer 1500 with come surprix: thet the scalea 02

dalabie. wy भा mursifs and subordinate judges in Andkeu Prodgsh
and Madras and of subordinate Jodgea In Assam srovide
fer brennicl nments, The achems: of kiewnial :ncre
saent. *x not co iInEOe LOU 2७५ it rary appear, Although the
Disrnial merements are dewale the कण] anual incre
Marts. yet il ए:अ5 cies some herdebip ~© the officers
concerned wilhout any susetattial li to the State.
Thus will bs glear Fram the compacethyr: statemeut below
shows the awount payable by way ef salary to &
2 ofcer during the firs: eight years: of hig service
voder the २४७ callervat sealer, ome providiag for snrusl
jocremebls ard the ctrer ‘or idexnial increments:

=

Nie oF peace

Fed कर 2०४७ क



195

‘Tags, during €:हुआ। years of tne service of 8 judicial
oer, ihe Suite Gowermmnert gaging Re. 1200 ie. Rs, 150
per year. Bot fur a fucicisl ocicer the uaditiynal (108
wud tes inces covery alternate yout 195 & great ic
The prircipal object of giving inpremercs ta a publi:
servant २ to crshie alia to mines hip incvesaina resporsi-
18 and expenditure ५४ he grows m ase, The
ciple ef: Sismnial ‘ngremenly dese not seer, lo take
1 8९200] Ysycbological Factors. ro impwuternt in the
cuaintenuiee 07 the effclency a2 ihe services. Avnilal ip-
orer.cuts have bew:. वश a morma) feslure oof tae
Becvice Under the Sta We, therefore. ri: ommend thu
the scelee of pay for it ucicial olives shout tavazavly
priside far exmuel nut blengie. increp-en!s,

43, The preat fesporns* i
aftic called up: E
seme Siales, ws hus beer ocinted aul, Un: eil's juris-
diction extrady up te Rs. 12,000 sad ws & jndiciel 0198151-
vee 97 one firs! cbsas, Whe same ctf cer is campees: w ‘n-
Diet ia sentence of sinprisonment up ta tut: ye Judicial
integrity ié of the: greatest imporlaree Had to expel
bemeoas disch: # Teepons_ble dione co live om Tew
selatins nol eormensur: le with their cfhee rez porsi-
Dulily iv amresdistie aed ignores present day i a
citions, Elweachers, we bave 812८ deali with the

fos which jie! offiesrs, a8 iv class, brave tu faci
matter of +$८९ १ reatdentlal wesammodation 2nd how.
46 wun garts cf the coielry, a very ‘aivh percencage uf
their sslery ५9 be spent lowutds hese reat alone,
“gots ad cinmumstunecs, wi aire vf the

ths il is al prexant
fala a proper ctuudard of iiving ag
homey be em

dutica, We,
5
25 ‘on)- 3—32)--F De -W—M “Whe stale 7४3 ४८४९
la ipread over thirteen yews With an efficiency आए stter oe coer.
Lhe soventit yeur ef tae Heryirs.

#4. Theti: ie et. equaty striking disper'ty i ॥१ Rae? comeeddnme
af pey af subucdinale Judges. In Berrhay, they 295१४ a Jaded.
11120 ot Its. 695 -45- 875; in I ttar Pradesh Re. 751 -25—
950° in Woesore Rs, 907-- 255--600; in Madrw: ead Andara
Pradesh 5M—5U/2—700: in Sear Bs —S072—S 1K
and ‘a ९. they bave & long poy scale oF 83. 3970-2६ -

AB iD TTA S501. Pradceh
डए1 ०1४६ ४90, Fube gare bane
an the + E pay which rang be. n Ra. ७90 to

Bs. 859 in Uttar Peadesh sud Ks. 250 t. Rs, 750 in Rejasthan,
Zp the Pussjab, there is 7० distinetiun between murilfs aod
suborilsale judgvs; there is only une cadre comprising of


136

subrrciinate क्षय who are clanifed a cuburdivate judge
Clazs I to C TY, acvondiag to lie oxceat of tacir pecu-

j yare sll borsr nn pay acale at
Re, M0 |--500- -4(--7290-...813-..-#--0(0--8॥ . -
350. Tt will be ncticwe that ;6 ७ large mucher of States like
Adare Pradesh, Madras, Bibar, Accum acd Oriea, there ic
iderable ovetlsuping in the ay scales of raansile and
reinale pidgse. Thus. in Medrss and Andhra Praciesh
fs rie in the ecole cf Re. 300-700 and subordinate
०८४०७ in the exsle oF जाए TH). L: B.nsr, the ums f'
४५६७७! if He, 220--1छ and the aubnedinate judge's scale ie
Te. GMI hl. Sinalarly, in Assan: munsifs arc i: Ube pay
ecale ot Ra. 1 750 and subordinate judges are ja the
stale (1 Bs. 300i, Likewise, in Orissa, ७४४४४६१३ ete ०७
whe ४ nl Ra 203-78 ard suberdinnte judpes are im be
wale at Mie ) 850 ‘he <€१७०॥ ८८ this उप्रश!1न। ik is
that. 13 ६ as? ig proamuind as a suberiate | hse, he
gem very c fiusnciel advantug:, because all that छू done
ix ly fx bx pay ix the new ३७5९ above the sctwil ‘salary
Ahui he wos pet'ing 58 a mung. = We wey illusrate the
# का Bihar war ०९८ ९७ years of ser

vice gore Re. 4:
ate judge would get cry Ts. 4
The jy other adh
whl yo ime a scale,
39:07 © toad का oF & munrit. In Sinus
Wu: pay scalen of muus-f. aad subordinacs judces
ne che samo iC peamandion of a 7. would merely
Irrourt 3" 2¢ in desipnéliog aulhout cuy orange
in yaraurersiict Promotions wick 35 these ere mercly
suring) 1.4 cat. 1396019 in: fa the officcr tae increased
at reguermainilily waived ‘a mecsésury on elevutinn 10
x higher post

therd nate [एठ 976 secupuwe a very jiipertant peitian
al bi: का, nl i. is

Bi nm of
Apgieals sgenst a 28 ste cenerslly
High Court In mony retilor sub-

3.9 heos civil supeale trazsferred w bli
iwi sewers
("79७ they wy
ale» hear eppeala against nouvictions
taird eles raagishi:'we U[lsewhkerg we
30 :ecory.mended thas they ahowld be isvoswed with
हे ander Ue प्रताक्ष: Sucmesinn. Act,
cuavtroents,

i regard tu use important aature of their
thisk rt upeeagonsbie and :uadvisabe In put
1४ judges om the sae inf [839 ms amet
Fersic i the dv wd lo ६10 is 38 atl.
Btautial, chat to sut:toen. oh the ame srale of yu
mursife ix to igiors eompletely thelr special 6०७० 4



187 :

atton af justice. The bigber degree af their Poy alee of
require 8 agparalion of the sales of pay मम -जु
te jimdge ienc| >ज013:13 so chet wher 4 बां0151 ७० संतान्‍्ण
ds prumoeted 23 a subordivain judge. at snoulé be 5 pro Cum thet
motion for hits, in scatua ae well ॥5 १७ remuneration, a mois

Unless: promociens pre accompanied ty nanilest a:
vantsges, they acc likey to be ‘reated merely लि Ves & mat
af nyutine and can scarcely stimulate: an 2 BL CDEr
upon bs new work wilh greater vigour urd enthys.iasin.
A veel prometion would have the usniatakeble advantage
of! alferdlng aatstactior wo the individual aficers and 8:७०
hancing 11610 morcle. We. therclors, coemameod tha. ४
subordinate judge shosld have am a.together dissinct
scale of pay which shea] ool overlap the ocuneif's ६९३६
of pay.

Hh. er exlst:

tg wey ecelea of auburdinate fagees ard Senied
officers ef garr sy saDke ath HOt comMoensrsate with MY AS
the nature and nitede of lhe werk they are expected

wD pertcrm. Ws 1२९] chat thoy "हाँ te be slaced का a

ceale an below what ia ummdy piven to a senue Class ६

niffiene, thiet 2, Hs. 0(0--+0---10001-..100(--.32-...1ै105. This pay

equly js however Spend iver 15 yeurs and We ide: 201 Ubi

it ३3 destreblo to put a supetdinale judge vrho i3 likes to

be a sevias man cé sdvanced years am auc a long me

seale. Tai scale should themefar be modlficd to Hs TH -
#%0--17९) with a Ieneth of six years The acale of pay besins

at che pect where te munsifa scale cnds We, there-

fore, 1609::॥70203 the abave mentioned vale for civil
judges fsenior division) and che oticers equivalent Lo that

“rank,

h7. Ing lar हे number of ३५४2३, (६४ pay sales of the District
district jucyce have boot sgt ted with the senior scab: in judges
the Indian Admin‘atrative ce viz., Re. 800---80--1700--
FO—LIH- W—1d0h. 18 some Slates 1102 Anéhta Pradesh

and Madrsa thoy ctars ०० Re. 1000. In Mysore, howeres, the

pay wale af a district (०१९९ is Ba. 900-82-1300. aud in
Assam Hs. 030--50--1500/. Kerala, ubvic 8९3९ of in

Bs, 15 se: pay sales 816 10 View toe he Our.

it tas to te remem bored that even in Stales ke Assam

snd Ifvaore the Indian Admimistrative Service cHivers

oe pag al nigher ecufez. The district judge, whe is the Pay Scales

a

७१ the dis tadet कक 35 ए3:0 3 Fensarenygtion 5४:७- एऐ Steet.
santigl'y tesy than Cha paid tp ee head of she distrel ey

caxeaiitive, the eplfercor. ‘eTacmmend thet in these Coltermes
States, the par 5०919 atould be raiced 39 a to 1orsespand
a the Itudiar, Aéministrattve Se-vies sealers nf pay, as has

beun done iu Ihe: Dest of Indio

दस, We may, however, poiut out a practical <iffieutrs Stardag, pay

which Lh members: of the subuxdinate judiciary Five to a Dk is
0... Ewen in Slatcs where the sales of pay of the &*

‘Tict judges are ०८ par with (10९8 gf the Indiay Ad-

istralive Gender, in poll cf tack very few district

ais’



Jo a
sehired

108

iudpes cver veath the maximum of the scale ie. Bs, 1200,
Unetzic. Judge: we Cound, generally relire on 5. lay छाए
ing beiween 2900 ta Aa, LU, This arlsex from ibe
fart thet ua. the cluer cecvices, procaulieas an che
ate extecrcly slow aud are obteined
lied of i हर i Fueters conizibute
usiclil ancien, Fira
on Of bighar poste 10 tac suhocdinate gest:
ike the cmccutive zervite: in

(6512 Eapargin व
0६ the Slules' xrawing wellars aei:vities, there hag ot
bean sani pansisn L: whe Jancgial service, chird’y, un-
lie: the ०: vetvigce, there fe cir: Seuryitment एक
the Bar 1८: the sxtent e¢ 29 15 §0 pec cert to the bighcr
i i service, WK thi: field of promwtion rest reted
ry these causes ‘14 late number of Lie #४०:२४, ६ j
wicer 1 av. qwemeled to he a district 10028. unl] he has
teon in इस from tiftcea ta twenly yoare ar even
iL is possible for an आह Advotaapective

Serv to reteh the makerrara of hea srale viz,
Re 0206, within @ period of 26 years’ servicer, = District
अम्ल canaet ctdavarily track che maxim of his ecale
em accornt of his promotion to bs a + ict judge ai &
Jatez his An indian Ad-nioistrtive
je generally: rscrycted between 21 and 24
yours of age Es ४६४६ ing: the senior c by the seth
yrse of atvice, ne gar. reach Lhe incximum of his scale
at she age of about forty-nine and can eer his maxsrcum
gay for a sériog oF si yeare, Generally, a pevson doex
Ast howe, the judicial scrviec Gil be is at iesen
twenty six or cweateeseven years of age He can. there
fore buve a coaxiteusn nin at twenly+ight year; of
aervice bezove fur peaches the ag nf superannuation.
Within this imparatively short spsn of wélyice, promo
tion: ke tg extraardinarlby 10 ng time for the Beasone
eatlier, Lt a jadicis] oferr is promated 'o be
3 disteict ude at the age of 4) years and :é ho ' stert<
tary of Rs. 900 he will never be shle bu roach Ehe
en of Hs, 1800 and oo his retirement at Ef-y-tive
| be cruwing 8 salary nf Rs. 1900 aly. Bveq 76 the
age of recimmont 16 talsed t2 53 as recommended by os
elewierz 26 will perhaps, be drawing 3s, 150) at the
age of retirement. The improvement in the s¢ale of
salary of d'striet judge: bes, therefors, bear whally
Weeory, There ls nat much tresning is having 0 a ७0978
ie whith pecple camnt osdinarity ree ak ‘she ‘im. It
*3 obvious that me = tmetnhor of tae subprdinste iiicsary
can de appointed a dislriet fudge at sn 38० which woult
ensucr: a service ef twenty gears az a District Judge ax
that he may e¢ach bbe maximum of bls Pay ie, Hs, 130%
We, chereibre, ~vcgmmcernd thet auitablo sajustmonte be
made in fixing the aturfing seary of officers promocat uy
Distriss Judges.
In came Riutes, the effect af late promotions is sought

, 0 be obviated by providing form higher imittal: salary


rerwedcs ETopoTdaned fn theFot pean |
in Oriagk the iv'tial pay of an "td “Hore
Y promod a3 ¢ judge fixed at che sluge ७:

we eshte of pay shove the 10९08 pay in che lewir

the vote vf पा ceemc fer

bared on 50:02 advance i
Th

७ in Borsbay v
in “Ju: inits
ale cannct cxueed (४.
judicial officer shortd d
should cn promt!
minimum n° Le ecale, but
b would correspond (९ his having reached

pap above the or

fl
in Ine lowes ranke. This mouth
ting salar us in the sll-Inciz Servic
pereor on enxcring the stnit scale g2tz ea hic imtal
setary a higher pay than 116 riiobndis of the 1:5९ acale
09०0. 8४ Lo length of bis servtre We have
the: uceomparying Table on the linea of the olb
Inéie Serviog १४: pey indicati the staring salary
of the promotecs from ९०९४ prade jadiclal ers
cher grade. We may, . Ubeal ५
auves Ine oritivcoo. that 9 judi officer she: Ret afty
in length uf sevice. Thus, fa «८1011 Judge = (jurdor
divisor} 15 promoted to the seninz divisiun ar ifs civil
¢ lor.) 3 promoted 82 rick juepe, be
ats Of service he ahould sti) pct the

cacrsar 1५४

bar Pay ares, Pay of Cori] Par of District
Trae service om Judge {Ji 1.46 अंश: and Sessdags
आर Jugs
: eee “+-+-+ नॉन नीााविनना33:7++
4 <



f z 3 + 5
a aa ad To i722
»> an ‘= coco 18to
wv 43 sd Tom haan
4: + १३४५७ 1a my
55 a eC 120 ६79०
an 25 non Tad THe
aa 33 ee 2393 436५
as “" ™ 1993 rice
89. In the case of री किए joted ta the Judiciat

॥१ C'ass I directh trad the Bar, aporopriate rules
may empower fhe State Gavermments vw dix the initiql
101५ 3 at.a suiwble 9५06० in the time stac,
om, tac १०0८: mdat-om of the H: Cour Wr: are
0 = €>शाप्र1.1९ for
Z the importsnt pert the
Ty play ia the adminietration

officers of Lar Jigher judi
of justic: urd haying regard’ to the resp oneib:lity placed
um Lut, it is only fair that they should get Cu: i:
benefit ef che scale of pay alreedy prescribed for them,

90. At this avaze. we may pFoint out that in 8 ouober
of Grates, somewhat Inwer emles af have beet
preserised for the udcivinsal district जि and the
cotvespoodiny post, Tho roason apparently is that jthe
State Governmenss wan: to nave ther work done shecply ly.
Tous in Bombay. there are no lez: than four diftefent
acalez for on छ the higher judicial service. While the
diaries judges ure in the Indian Adnnisualive: Seovice
spule, ussisians judges ge} the scale of Tie, हि १५ 0c,
the ecaief fudge of te small cause ९०1९1 and the
Presidency maginlele are on the 8091९ of 1,00--100--1, 0
and the prosidency magistrates are on the ecale of Re. 11000
1300, The fudge: of the city civil court ४४९ Pi
Its, 3400, and che chief judge Re. 2200. In Ba
Pradesh, edditicnel district Judgnes ace: i thr seals of Ra,
600. 850, which is ultmost equivalent to that of 811-

Zin 11 other SStales, In Uttar Sradesh and
lene fudge oh j are in the sralo of Ba,

V1 3—50—990 respectively. |
scales n= pay फाएा छाए to 8 certain extent the
8 of sukardinate jucges aud mensify, In A3i fos
additional diztrict judges gat Re. 100-.50-..1 180 and in
Bilar Rs. si जी 7,50. The civil end seaslong judges
in Utter Peedesh and Rajasthan, saiolint iudzeq in
Bembay and additimal district judges where 60
peuclicily he: same: joeieial work as a district judge,
execpt thas 3 district jedze has adeniniytretive dutins,
There ig. ve think, no justification for utting them oh a .
pey scale lower than dg
already recommended ithat the Gcate, Judicial Ser rise



wu

Clam 1, sheuld have only one cadre eonsisting, ol district |
judgee and ४0१11 0१४६ disteict tadges. If they sre to be 1.
korne on the same cede, 1| is on-y mppropriate thal they
should be et an tke samme scae of pay. ‘hore would
iecatlon for maintaining s difference
in the pay of olivers doing subslantivily the same wrk.
We therecre recommend Iw: disrorsinuance of stparate
seus of opp for th: addibionsl digtricl jupricy and tae
corresponding puss. There 31058 be onjy cne class of
posts in Judicial Service Clam J with 3 uniform stale of
pay, iat is, Ks, BOC-S9—1.0d—g0 130030 1,600,

91, Our reeemmendstions with rogazd to Ute revision 110००
of pay es cf judicial affecrs will no ८७३७६ regalt in iuplickieos
some cdditicnsl firanc.s. hivden on the States, In the: पाक
‘table act ont 9६1८७ we Rave made an attempt to work Pape
wut che higher expendilure involved in Ike carrying out pay.
af cuz recommietdi-diens. .

"Tew: vinditional expenditure haz been 1:3 cateulated as
Icllown We have Ft arrived at tha average oxponae
invnlycd in the pay stales of judie.al cficcre in sch State
cp the Li.sis af the fallowliy formula

Minimum : (Maxin-uw:—Minimum) + 43 —X yap

X kelng the number of yrara taken fo reach the
euxirium minus five.



Whee of Sie

7

Asti

Assun .
Biber .
Bosboy 5
Fails .

me See
Mausts Sob Judges
ae, Re THT Muah ify, vt . an Re IN Ne. गए. of
Beale of pay cost view) + 0 Mom tas. उप Searls of poy vol ovited | oF wukt per
अं we - tla iter al a. + Sol sea
जाम. \tat yosk wast Judyre
a 3 4 3 G 7 a a w a 1 43
300 Olan S270 Sra tas 54 CTR ४००-४४४-३७ i i cr ta)
&8--402--7००
B50 2AM 25 - 40 te केश L4 NITES 30७--$०२२--२८०० spo gut कडड्ी। 7... (1 >-छरए
/8-..3:--
Bo
Suma! — 345 > 42072 —teq २३३ (+)stpasrS 3९9--15-)9४-30-- 575 9७४" +३+६. 7२ २1 ae
गा Sam FN ante
DE २७-४४ -
29
JU Hie 9 नक्ष 878 84 33६ 1 ४ ०कासी &95--45--075 0३ 9० + ७. HERO
2०«--$३०-- 58-«--
Be
+ Wht कप. थाई Hire 99 Ly tee 43953 fo? 55 70 1357 ४४. [+)81399
ह.9.--३25०>5०० ०



Addithmal “Ipextce Judges or purmpnniiog, pes

गार्ड: बीएड ros of Dy Jee eattyng less them “eral
- Reruns
uf ¢ Ae cum Revive’ iid No Fb
3 cd pot = ay, cost + Uttictrs
> pet Srey
44 ey 16 i] 18 19 » aT
POCO मा . a4g6y 1] (so 1०. 1४०८६ Tht
fa) AD] 26०--०३४--१:5० ३०३० 3317 (43200 है ह opens |
(8) 0] ४४७००३५०-०७४5७० « ब्म्दा उध (+) €७ q (382 i 69,494
«12,
AD] sie I » Hage 3317 (hey We Hats
te} Aner. Jodge—
10द--40-2%, yao tut ian ay (4१2,39:156
(20 we Mra
& Ceher [97185 . 22652
Ine —Je—-1 RO to min) APT a7 C+ osn.pad }
id elie
899-1०-7१००० 993 hd (+2964 89. (+)कपर PEO



wee -- eee an
' > डे 4 5 4 ? हे 5 % mm 73 4
wadrae न ogg yoo yo 00 RD m0 fay HC +ieaeatbo

1४३०॥४२ Pade «

448 572 4-5ig ay ashe tA ccc 25g} ese, का Cyan

Mytom: . + 397--२७--5७७ aes ote FNL 53 Sah ras 577. 970 t3d3 od I -- p
Orton + - TRHTE 4Ja 72 t+ret 46 {ign gto uta Wasa +943 815. (-०,००0
ios
eRe
wee
Pond ०» - pongo mae (ud शक (99360: seems gee mea EHR gt (की,
See ee Se गा
{oa 520—L.
dbp. ps >
धंधा... paren की sft mete {Lipa अनु पउाम tea Sta 2० Ching
59790 द1:-9%-779



Wem BTR 145, 3337 Scam छा... dae dag
रन कु 7" -- न . satiny “Adaiimal § 1%७- ५. ote
BJs. to aus hun teed a, Sits
7 a 1319 10 . aidinax Todos, pecemne
#33-19 4200 ° 3 ae Cire nah then week ° congo 1०७६
- . " न न . 41800. ताकि... Satbecidiarts x
Poy mex,
-- ” न a -- न Lyris GAR ike ७७५ yt MgC co
ddilion®  Seaaca dot scat: ina
CAG 6 q 759 tate 3] aw fj ye teva, che

Inder. 900--३०7५०--०.8 * - wee bee beta arrintd

Ay. cml of post 2

3 1॥ Pusjak these i, oo eepanite
daw of Mumz'ta They att
2 ft -

. Sup Indat ' rr
sempasunle २3 1८३४५ In
Sues ales, Wee Posete
xeued 215 cP223 would be
Sub :udges I dbs pounded
scabs ९०९-40--7०००.


हु ? 5 4 © 6 ? % श्र Ww 1] ™m जड़
Uteer Pradesh. 352 Ira 4 3 ९ 11:37 कण उपर 651. yze tar cy C4 yang
हु B— 20. 7०८७-४४ - 50 -
aye 89
West Beugd =. 290—25—475— ape poe PE iat (1 jr igyor'g २३०--२४--॥७०३ fay 990 $930 hr Iga
E2457

Bon



14
७, CAT RO
Nuwar §O- “L205
2 115 seta,
Ie ०६०७

“4 1 ” ai % *6
om sae Ray Core) anaer
पड 1317 #



Judicial wrk “pi

908 -

We underevand thet such a formula has been adopted by
the Central Ministry of Finance for workin 8५20६ che
averuge cox: uf pusts. l'he average ७०४: af vai pects
thus arrived at hes been compsred with the average ovsl
cl Lan: propuimed puy seales, and 00 the bars ef the difter-
cacy, the extra coxt to the Slate muxirlling 1:
ance of 0६७ iscemmemindona aa 70 pay has
७01 as shown lo column 39 in the Tao'c, We may, hirw-
ever, puitil wal 11:४1. te eclculscions are ७०1४ -Mustrative.
There have been cvosidorable changes in Lhe strength of
juéteial officers Jn a large number of States on account of
the rceent roorgartsitiou, As we have nat got up ta date -
‘ipurns: n! dhe recegeniaed etrengt of subordinate judiciary,
it kag net deer. possible te work ows the orexise a jal
expandityee for every Stete. The calewlatione aro bases
on the staczties ~elating to the slruglh af judivial acere
as Tb ested in LAT

We fuented elsewhere cn the propricly of the
States makirg protits oct cf the court fess levied om the
civil litigant and rade recommendst fir their 15७७७
tlon 30 3A 10 mil ॥& ceceipte (7९0: court 1२९६ equal the
oosl cf the adunivéstratior. of civil justice. It should eot,
therciero, pe ०. (for the States to roccl. the sAriliocul
expendimire ar:sing from the: ‘nereczed 3९3९३ af pry.

4४. 4 disconcerting festur: nf Governzaernt service
which teods, २०६ infrequently ta sap the morale of the
<fce: ic the leck of she recognitien of hiz wotk. This is
trace nt Uke Judizial chan cf ofker servires. ‘The work ef
2 judiciel offlecr ix ५४ wapable af precise evalustion,
tis unlike Le work 02 che axecurive एतएडए whivh needa

ics ax initiative, capsole cf oul 8 aubjcctive

The work of a judge involves duties and pro-
lis whine ate capable cf an ebjcctiv: appreci«
appellate Cow on 3 serutiny af a dozer judg-
era of a judiciel ete”, 11एभ5 9 faltly agvurste
is tupaelky. induzry and knowledge. The
tule a dislrie. oy a [ligh Court Iudge,
covaitty weigh the officer’a chility to
8S 88 TO ९903९ the mtimwm oF i eetieetii~

i ty hit Linke we the host
ool the subordinate shafts
the departments af tho

a
1 (8७; hie eapacity vc!
0 supervisory work uver at

Wi. As ulreadyr expleimed, the judicial set op, ia cote
men with other adroit ‘2 oargenigncions, hea a
1: thy of offcers with —E pl and »eaponal-
bilities, ‘Ihr: eusjorlzy af aig) १ 1154 19 potune-
tion from the ewer ranks. The 'ए ecales 3126 provide
for cilivicacy bare: ig. stages at which an officers abillty
13 examined abd which he (3 peeverted from crossing, unlaw



we
fis work is considered 3atfalastors y oy Use ४७७८: ide 800:०-
Tits. These deviewt ure intended fo encure that posta necd-
ing #प्थ्यांशा capaci ace Allad ondy Ly persue of merit
and ebility. They ace estential ter alisuring that al all
Buzats nf whe ideministradve iaachinery are ¢laced macn of
suitable ability wad rrz:yitite capacity,

to waz hewuvcy universally adroitted, at all centres \=oentic
tod oy us, that this very salutary system of ehecks at हि ए।०४०:१,
18: stages devised for msintainni¢ effi
almost wholly duzcusded i pur:mati
y has vielded place to mere sen:
dem. indesc. 1.४७ iL been the ease

wee denied ta officer, though he
suited te cur. Le ae 4 sod resspiucisitulity 1 super or
peet. Abroast inwar ably ects are sclected for pramotica

Byer Rae: gran] seniority.

%4 Iz should be cbvious chat such 9 practice Is Bord Ths camee-
te affest Ise ता1' साल oF the entice keryier. Whee at often et
whe ie known to be “just good encug! 3 pro‘doted tc 3
pest, it js nt surprising that men of ability and belli
shoulé leze all Incentive to da their best an@ de conte!
with heing sanried wfonst the siren, Only in lowe Slate ed
Borobay, we wees toll that ven affleere i j
were selected to ke assistant judges, prov! 2
played ax exc level of talent. We were net
Ferma af ae Fornilars ia any other
Sale. Chi Lt: ध्वज: Sales, we were ‘uformed
of cacea cf persons ‘eir.g promcted to tho pasts oF district
iti sees. cdzes, nutwithslanding the fect that the High
Courts. etter care2u) corside-ation, had prunencucd em
In he uafit fur suck prosaestious.

A wevice of each judie:a. office: [४ man. Riad of
tsined by the igk Court, This takes tive shave 0३ an arose] लटक है
#:४९७४९व of the svors dene by che officer, with commnntd
४ i iewr (७१ distelet Judge in- the case af

ordingte j “pry an tho ability of the offiewr ta
Fhancite: tis file, (७ capeethy t conduct proceedings
a sense cf responsibility. aad of hid appenach lo wul appre.
station of the legal problems dealt with by bim In ada
tion. the district judge whe insperty Lae eMicr- ubtelas a
vlase snewledgs ef the offeer’s sbiEty te nin the adminis
trative sicn cf . throu: gh ond
or more cf its ucd 389
raiwe’s ats 0770 i 3.
ils mxixls the srastlee of ie Judge कुछ Troovdine their io
sioey oon the javisl wok of Chit जीत, gathered

"तह cf ap apocal of revis on Primm “he ८: ce
rte Taree ncotuents also fozm part of the personel file
a: conOdentisl veport of the officer, There Is 503 avatt-
बीत # valuubie tecord ‘ capmet fet to indicate the
judleia! officar who dea be oo Tmimotinn. Tt is ecteernety
M3 ML of Faw.



कआ।

313

utlort, ४42 Noweseery BG Uselul Lecued 33 teas
ed ax waste gape g welghed ad soled ups
Instesal ja work amd ebility bois g recogni) by quics

rzeictdion yhr 011५ “Lua. ae officer [४६ ix 7 paging
le huey azatiow wirn an aguums aed Ge of arrrars—
a legery ul cacomyten: prodewessnrs wich fe पे orkedt

t2 clear off,

1७0७ of 20,1१1 ०८ Loleraice
wis stronzly criticised oy Shri 1. BR. Mirra
g2 of “he Nigh Court, in his hele no dissens
art al the UD. Sudieta? Pefuesn2 Conanitten:!

yo with whicu eysticmu-isns and
inade. tends ta cake many jedi-
Zack and ineflcient. ५ de: 70: exert
aml oy ty imoroy nck vaey wnuli i
ts punrshec. dud geod

‘whether ¢Mecer
cortilied

uy othemass is cute
11७ weleney ber, is
pire gaw.. uut of ter

i a

४ oprowsted .
ovetlooked that

i
Uys are geleccion prale to ich pl
Le scade on tl xtound not cf sraiosity but of out
EY ४०७२ प्र
F + ° » e .

“The desited ond eas bh

arkervind bby it + #98

sae Comt hecomes .६:"७ and makes it plain te
ures: Juders 109६ ineicleewy and alin aust
nat Ineruted. that cocd werk wil’ yen
and rewarded doaal pork will be cenauved

unceshed
conreni :
and fearless ia 4:
ian? delay _usrioe

पु toast have clic: cwatierd fr pablig
ling sheir 23365 and sfuuls be tirm
alin p with Caree whe try ve: usttuct

nog axe

ww cre éf aulstandiag 3017:
kacwn to 119 steenz ear comorten. १५
lu guide aad supervise the ahardina
Officers.

1; Papa rar ad papery 2, 2३ oA रा.
ine Tre



Sul

Bisiias views wore capromed oy Shri 5. C. Sarkar in flsIn Fey

Judicizt Reforms Comin

“lt ie well koowr thaz

vith very Tare ¢xceplioas
Service gets into ch:
a Nistrel Juice: in

is

its end besa:
of twurss."

“rh + $ cil wool uital~ in meet oF
Btetas haz been drought to our एक. |. ix sure
thal lhe "धक्का whol sez keen called suzomacc prorac-
ysonicriby sheazld Tave poe:
जाए! in charge af

the vequlation

| elsewlere, baw tse chargod cir-
hive sepuled 01 very inferlor
int thes ities anevicns. 1क
grea vigilance in granting pro-
redons far higher pests. As the
ection tas fallen. ws cennot ks wo
nil persunes it 1 !४#ए॥ tid for the
crestey responmbility 2-3 inefie:ence

& judicial officer's cw
uf geeetes recponsib:lity oly ep the

गन
‘bom rests che ultimate reepomsibility for
dunt est jt in the State cannot
tal sspect with irdifererce and as a
goverrne. by certorizy. We, therc-
the poometion ef a Judic:a offtcer
rity, 131 watt the:
Ceurts cnould ke
bus, #7 bile work
it for any other vescon he ic not a
“है उठ क्‍वाद्ञावह्वाएओं silk arialer vespursibilily.

Higk. ९०४० cn
th> prox anim’
sttord t West
mere mitler clr:
 EECurirantd
should b

mate judecia:y like that en aL och

4:७२: yr ur: at Uttar Pradesh. oc that
Btule tac 18 raised Co fifty-e:
for el th Wing tiie subsaee
judiciary.

fe the opurse of stu inquities, we have recelved a com

sideracle body of opinion in Isvour of raising the age
limit ¢F retirerrent of the members of the suberdinute

Aepur: of the West Bengal Fevest

Hint foc
Sccictoess.



212

Basic = judiciary. A 1998७ aajuriiy nf Use memchers of the judicial
lees ave uw. the date of vetlremenl physically and men-
taky #., ४४ ouzaiber of thera ave ve-empluyed try the State
Govermmente as members of various quasi-judicial ttizu-
nels like Industrial ‘tribuiwls, Revenue Tribugals ard
Blection Tribunats. 80076 uf chem sre appointed alse to
admiviztrative pasts. :ए ७ gre of the view thal, 5t a time
waen tere is for 5 member of rewsons g Btowing dewitve

in. oncy, the State (invemment: show.d aol oxo the
cervliees af officers poasenarp lon expecionce ard
nt y of jucgmert merely because they fui sumehesd
che age ul tfly-fiye. It :2 mesezsary that the Scate shoulda

srdeaveur te iuaisain Lhe efficiency of the service by
masking use, as Jong ७४ [0861७ und ta the fullest excens,
cheer: knoweledge, expercetice and apility.

Theer is 9 further veagou 18 sippert ef the yew that
che retsriay ace ehuuld be reiscd. We have alrbedy
i that ct recruitiwent frurn the Har is wenerally
cuaci ut the level of digtrict Judges Sevoval mesuberz of
the Bar decline :+ ucilec the judiciacy e¢ chat evage because
Gty-five. they would ent sarh an
Ht cwoulé, thereferr, help to hid ‘act
the liar, if the age of superannustion

ge linnins The nue laying épan tho aga ef superanrualion ul
fend tire Afte-five yenes wae made long égo un Ue अच्छा एफ: वीजा
१७० on ‘Ja: al ainmen: एटे chet age, ३ person would i ly

avase lo be etivieut. L ving mnditions 2996 sul cf ally

bleed in “his country zince and Use assurapition on zy

» whe rile wae mace ix prohehly net justified Wi nv
ed &६3:४.3101% uF a eud che advance of medicel ecigncs,
the expecta‘ion of life hae ingeewad. Thos, whe mm [193-
‘lis average expectstlen of tife in Indla was 24 in r
Fer wales ied BA-PA Ee for feruales. il td ine
in 1051 ta 35-45 years males and ४1-18 yrurs for

€ ln the 185: geugus repors, It is ai gnificant tain
sal Seeth Ceancil ४ a meeting Geld recprilly

at Banyshee peeved a reaclugion -ee:mmending ed the
Sde of retiremart Cor mudical officers shold be riised, It

st ee 719. छड curly ax 10147 the Ceptrsl
she Pay mended chat the aze limit cil rei
Comm sian 7, etl to Gf arelghe yeurs cor ali Cent
Objects पी. LL was evgposted, that the Tsising cf the age का

10 miki would bur che promotion of the raembers of the sepvice
हि rt wild ए॥ए-8८२ ase denial of opppor-
i ‘Ube ruisidg o£
“will any pewlpurn hy a ४० werner
dicial officers. Nor can is aid to ut
es breuse: the rurpber



213
uitaxt ३० the yodicial service in #

Of persmiy autnuully
ate: is wey eral].

Al wars, ७119७: suicg hal the: question uv bbe age of Inarlicgsd
reticanem: of the eubordisate judickary was linked up eith ith oer
nd ccaditinns of strvieg ih other State services हैं
:9॥७७३॥५७४७.)७४७०७७५१७७५७॥७४४५)५५)५५४
We have ६&/ए९7 anadows conidcracion to th’s point
few wid arti: nanble ७? ४०८९६ :६.

Initially. in “relia stere lear desaarzat.on /परुआ af
150४ छ:६ We 31५5) and executive serviecs o¢ the ocutiry, i
was a time १४७०० Lhe sce officers used to perform
and execucive furelions. It war swt, | ॥७एए01५७५
surprising cha: lhe sare uge uf supersmmeacion applied
tu thee officers. But oy gradual stkges the jucicisl service
has cwow coroe ६5 Le recogntsed ६3 distines frere the: co:
ud adroinistrat: service o2 the State,

peewige rule 1८ pliy angry growlng social welfare State.
“Tn bun vireametauces, there is ne regscn why the age of
“to of members of this service ahowd bays any
reletien with thet in the execulive and aded-

differen

in Eng 1604, che judickal service Loy governcd by its ha?
special nile in regard to cerelumens atid te ege of retire “Bl
श्र फट (४५. Segvanta petine at tha agn nf sixty
the Counts Ueact Judges sd Metropolitan Magis
(11:९१ al seventy-two, In uur country alse che tenure
snd other terms and comd:dens of af Supreme
Court and High Court judges sland nal from those relating
te the paminisiridive cervl °

The qudiclal sezyice sle-wis by itself an the 5648-8४: of she Ses
age of wtirerretl ky (९६567 of the great importance of a fp
kang experience anc s mabnce valid in the jodivisl ctive
The recogniling wf such importance hits ॥5: ॥0६ countries
14: peeswxibe a aruch higker aye. for che riiremicns of
jusicial personnel as gurnpired Wytb that of pcrsunny] in
other servi

There 16 vet arother reusqn whe the question of 4igher exe
te 836 ni trlivescens of the subordinws: judicizry ehould ४४ tearuil
be treated Gifferrnlly frug that in other State Sesvices! mane
Agr rev a judicial) nfficer enter service ab a com:
peraively 1ér age thas 3 roemit te che executive or
adminiatrathve arrvicws LLivrould, therefore, be propet that
th wht aye of a judicial offeer ३७००१ be retatively

that. of an emcewsivo nFicer, so ७५ lo cauble
im ६ -@eve 101 the Eyil mur ser of years if Fe ri:toitet hit
lilnes:. 20d capacity cf werk till ae reaches Furh higher
age



Zia

॥ ~macuend chet the (७ाक्षए॥१0: age of the
age Whe in all States vavulc be raisad to
fil-v-tapl:.. 6: 3 seasure will tard to reise the

lore mead ale cf sho jurlice a: we ate whole. It will
also Ue cpusixeot with our revornmedation vw she
age of e2titeme Figh Court Judges lu sixi, 4.

101. 1k was suggested tha. tl order २० cegure (०६ २
inerchse of 3 suvocdilay yudicic; ventitucd to be. pisyale
sally end reenta by <il, bla coxrimiancs in service Tl ftty
elebt sanale be suade aubjent tu 3 recommendation by ihe
Hégd: Courd te thal rfteet ar 0 ४ eectifigale by a modicul.
board eurtirying his ptysies! tituses. 1: woule mol, we.

i: 2 practie. ble fo: the EGgh (28011. to maxe recom
with vegacd (५ Lhe wental and chysies. Realth
rdivirtus, ¢ucicial orfiext 15 the Stste, Nor slould
ta judicia) ufGver to ge plana ut the merey of
agird 03 the matter of his cout:
i Ze Will ve atu af tb

tial sPicers. State will, Fow-
power 10 covamitisnrly reure an
ion age Int preper rraswDF
High Court.

that

wedi

om the
iieer
marthot

jukci-l tribunal. ४
recto: (४४७७ to या एज बुर a retiring wudvisl oticer ts
: She pavronage off the cxecudve eutnncisies. We

Wweuramerd that ali एएआऊ for whiea a person of

nf a district yd wy obe -teeuied choald be
imeuded in ike eadze of 13116: Judges atd the nonnal
uirement जे such peets should he (रह, inte 0-४४ 3203०

ww in fixing che etrengik of the cadre. Such & course has
we urdersteé, slraady bear adopted fe tee Staves
Andhee Pradesh and Maddizas.

Cox opt 1%. Our ceairly-wide incuitics have Jeft within us a
af deep ewtifaction iLst war civit yudicisry 1 by
४६0५७ Teng free fevact corrupt. Tidiecial ofiers nave ed

jane st-ayed {rete the straight ena rie
21501078 Serv: onip, te phisuse the repu-
1४ asjoyedd by the ‘udiclary as a whule,
2, make is clear that ४१६ (3-0): 00 gait
judiciacy in Slater, where the jwkicioy has
from. the exccative.

ulge, wheckur on the Jerch or ether
1 1 Bil ६ diffteu ¢ ane. He 23 called uoen te acjudicate om,
rips ees of contondine me, Set truth fruta feisahaed, epbold lew
ike rer हवा Tur caase7 art eject the erst; and in deing hs duty, be.
su जानता" wee ३0082 1057. He has to tread a wary path In

ae of the view



गज

au recut fn: any
yurlire ar to wre favs. Ne
not be hex (6 conde! Lizazall
cy ९०): 2] that be -३ npartia. 7
a 19७ tornait wnvados even धां3 pri

u‘der ty

necessity luc at
and sncial
risk oF

pendane:, faurlezasiss, strech bape AN 37९. AUneELy. ७?
ae puh ic can sesort ta bin wilt eoutidems “or the
jlou ef iteic disputes. They the grave respuitsi-
tests LEON hire: in bol the scales 122 Justice
waet patty aud party--und quit. efter one ef the
3६ tan. Slate itee!? -effecte his हा एल manner 01 | I.
है inde 6 18: &€ dizer rlicascy juvere in

e hohe ad be te by

tue pt
ity law ane
Jig woestly ajilies
align. isc, pecynlery jpured n
३र 3० powers प्रवेश che Crit
har lo parvies he & esse 0.
wrony osdets he deteed
igh: either 2c mole ar cn
utert? pazty. Bun. nevertheless 210

aze wall oF gained by out
j suffers ky oe er be

3:४7 lo throw temptat:
1005७ ‘ecaptelans reich!
ficalign in Taves¥ 0: in kiad cr os:
ack te ar Hypace the ‘ 1
एप of roligics. A pamper of
ज आए ah ‘rnate watee dy arr reeded Sout.
ie aoe tu kerp limeell vradectes by

# ated infusrces.

2a jldle a! otiter 1089 oe 'ए: ६. EY Meel tor
$ शा शासक: cotcudecundy 4

We have referrod cloawnerc ५: the 2
७ arid the cxmriligas of serv

sponsicdetion
SST

bo अं;
that 017 civic }
gained ७ segura
styl gut ४४४३ to

acguited
pUMSEF BNC
eort need of impruvetty i
serv.ce gud utber ९००८ tiens. JL us vitel (६:७५ the Sral
showld wie: dae: : 3 oer ४४ a chass chee: the possih'e
eur of teno'stona of any Kod. We are nat seaqgering
caunente af the officers आ८07
chap 0०08 tenyptaviecs would bave



216

fv aticuction for tae judicial afi
monss'ble under any cvtcurnslances. Wat silts ४:७5:
is. tat due cunsicerition 02 the dinpurtance the vworie
done by them should be had .a dics heir remurerstion
aul vider oenditicns of १६०४1 We have alresdy incicated
ebewhers tho extent (4 which the Stute ean 20 in 19.9
fespect without incurring very Leavy finareial purer. We
wut of lke view that athe mon the lines suagested sterglil
be caken wetbout delay

Thit wouie be

Wh. Al he came “ime, we would insist ५७०७ very savers

Some, he action being lok et officers, vba 2४०७१ been Sound
uakec. gullty cf kKisving abesed their posilina to gsi 47%
er 007 benefit In aes where the di esky a

iudicta cffizer hus, :flet prepee inguiry been cstablist ९८,
theze cen Le su otaer method af dealing with him than
lias of थे imiseal,

lurge pewrors cf superinten-
udiciayy anrl in exertise i
Kould be vigilan: lo sea thas juidiat
whore henesty Js nel begund suspicisn जार bat
wesitions ७: greater responsi. ‘Tha iutegttty
sr stinuld penctelly be taken into oonzidars’
erhon ne 2s 1 + higher post. This can{be
if dhe otficdr's repusul.nm amd bene: |
kis है।४८६ are petinfically examewed by
Ceu:t, Ton cite ch Usis bepect of ar officers dydie:
id sufficient alwatien, In ¢ 17067 ct euch vital
» the High Court should net omit to form! «
vonsideved anil भा" 167३६ view. H

ved for
ey denye am
atlimest [1046 peswees,
BRITA. Shy, a

tice: 108. It was suggested, to us that ynti-cerromlan: 2 2
Actcur ip ra cc cha dislrict judze anc sie: mem
mates, af thr liam cuay be appula'ed in cae district tp inveetival+
Notfvec. ttle tases of 1 pogrustion of jurlie’n: officer. 11 is
pen 8 ॥19 पुएच३92९॥1:७. to such a + eae ua
Cr the seibess nf the Ba: a:e ownstionted Judyez cf
jadiciary. lhe reesect apd renfidence wluck lhe juéicd: ry
inspitr xmoag the public: wll be pre vely widerimir et
acocaaure would 3.६७ एक 19 © their Indeped
strong Bar Ls pie aif bes’. shir d that one can =

ar! is: at judge. Hut the Barcaonnt be wil:zed}ln
ol dishonesty against a judge.

Cancel 108. The crimral judiciry in. Steves bere the judie: fs
mn has nec! ern jparated Lom the exxculive, bowever, di
dnck oF Tol (एफ dhe aaus reputatloy for impart ity e9

siv'l judiciary de: We an: inglined to that ‘Jus | is

»1॥:४ (:७-॥- largely fue lo Uno Ise of effective :.3;०0- परांआंध0.. पते ripe ry

froma the dua! control of the exeultys and Lhe judiclary

u iheze wagisiraces . Mew the adminiatrstion alde. Ubpsr

ail Fre "तट 11९ divecl ucmtrel of the Srate Goeckn-

ment, On slée, hay conn nader the control : ७१

an ihdepen: a; jedeinry. in chal. appeale and revi

Zium cheic judgments, fir te the Courts ०: Sessinn 6:



शाः

High Court. The sdeinisizative ३0] apervission cxecnised Ly
ibe Slate Gowrraticel through iss officers over Lae work af
disse sagistzrates, would nyt. appear ta serve to Sto to
narze delorts in the working of the tnacbinery duc lu Ike
disacnesty of the climes. The Hig Court is perhups in 3
Lester oeeition to foom a judgraeot आ this respect 850 it ia
Dowerless to tak> ६७ adecun.stcauve steps whlen would
contro. ox correst che officer, il duihniesity is ba bir

il 11॥॥ this beaneh <f che fudic:ary it 1s vital that
browgh| vader Cir admlolstraive com
ur. «There igs slap in aymace कि ac ut

t: whidiiy ६७३ 101९ 5:09 10 the ८:
jadiciary as haz been che gcacral chwravtecislie of Lh
judiciary. Pecheps. the biend:ng of the two intn 3

cernencuniled! by as, cay Leby tu spree Lae wedi-
tien over the combirec cadte,

1-९ We dv aul tins 4. etesuty Lo arabe a or.
ceeammwndal ures iar Le: sudgucw uf dealings ted. 99- हब! |
tion io che judiciary, 7 will be “cr the 1ही Courl ix each री फपप::/३४
State xc devise appropriate meazite Leaving regatd to the ae. scary.

2 :31[1.घ७8 in dhe Slate.

UNORAL PRUVISIONS

serene uf the previsaiuers of Lhe
Tecrujzoeot and ७१-८० of the

४. el PeMeO4F Case
Lana

istries judgez .] be mai a

[8:0७] जज We Sh Court. 4 रक्षा 3
in ordee lo be ए izidle to be apaointed 8 dis:
to ke an advocate cr ५ pheaday of nut less Laan serves
standing aod reconunended hy the High Cours.

re (4951 dhe upoxcinineents ef persons ofber than

@ Guede

i jadges tn the j cls ] servige are :4 85 dade by
Ine Governor fa accord with rules २8५८४ 35 him
in that ke: ater consultation witb Ine Slate Fublic

a wd they High Cog.ct. Artic.
velales In the eanicn' of the Bagh Court over Liu: subordinale
cuurle arevides, fest trat tha Hizh Court :s to have control
ever all the court: sulucilingls io it including the 3॥>. ०
400८५, und, scoond:y that mich contro. is ty inrlude the
ic Prometion af. and the yrqnt cf Irave xe. pe rons
2 te the :७७..५३] seinticns if 5 31६३२ and solding any !
peat interler wo chal cf a distect judge. हु

235 whisk

112. On qn exancinat.on of (+ कर artictes ef Ja: Cues! १०- diehcultins
Hon, certaw. culicullins of ittenpretacdion would seer to of Inter
arise. Article ५14 provides fér Use apneintment 02 al. judis ४७७५
suct inne! otber 10951: diskrict fudpes. Il veuires that gens २३३
ain‘recn: shall ke map by she Geveruur in yocord-
mee with tae voles nage in “hat behalf after consultaticn

ch tee Pablic Servi com ma:33ion, and with tae High
Coury ‘Ihr language of the grticle does 70: clonrly indicate



vt

te he followed,
lab! Ly

aatessary fet ous 7
ts end nyligations 3.
Genevally speeking, hewever,
che tae Puiblu Sey

she PUTPOEC *।
to sysusiate che 1980 ४ ०7० «
ins 07 max'ng za xc!

rh २७ chr ५-।-०8:६ er

pda
A ०4५ (181 Lominislzation is: 15६७ SI

sins apoeasted to ilu sckorbagte js
one yngecn.menged he ibe “Sigh Cu
isle 238

J. कक arnecaamen! uid. howerir. ‘oc ४॥93९२०३
lc ॥« ४६४७४ ३ to

js ot dae
Tu Lar schom proposed by tx che
wiilive examination whrth with include a

नल 284 as it, stenia vl

ive, eserminetivon, hy

90 down by te Tigh Court.
In .itganzialion cf a High Cour Judge in th
Test Wt a pemprece yom in tne selection ol
अएकंए ८9: afleer.
Guitar lb. There amaears ase (0 be a onficl hetwoem ar
हक 2 1.12 285, Takeng the ete of ॥ purges -७ the judi-
santa. whe ig rive for promotion In the ext aigher
acs whether sUzh ४

“Uke posling sed promotion cl,

juiLeial serviry of 8 State und ho fing any poss intorinr te


“Lae agp
y the er
gurl; a dhe

‘Try tormer *
out

wen nevarth2less wen
she Stax: Ge verrireent.

osuch asina of ubag
Che distrie. jucye २०.08 a k
steurture ef bw diste}

3
y

uf tls .nstractong in regard
. ॥ adminiktulnw. The igh Court
cursive >८ ९0: bly bardicapse! and
stom arrassed ta Lic d of 15 fLavticne if its २
che sompelene: ignuerd. Fumber
ड 0 the judeenil «२
ju ‘fist sot La अं

vr article 239[2). na imeauer ol 2
€ amyuisily kengib cf ¢

od a distvict fuuze uniess he
che Fligh Court L

Hivla ta be 3900.
meaded 1.
jadic.e. cil

1 Tict judye स्वाद पर
गा the escemmendat.an ul the ich Court.

19 The pu:
DF Ginw.ch juleys is ta ४०७
has vorgles zonuel
Ir 1१80 of oct

stings
1% Higt
Stave (५
IL-gh पर Views ०. L arisen in
sur matters a Steves und officers ००1 apsreved by
‘hr Wigh Courl have keen visher pasted ४० certat mced-
i, 38 or pretroted hy the Slate Givernmect. A senius
ble! Justice “1s tat “Twice nave district judges
«.- been ¢raosferneil by the State Goverment +
“Mother Juss. Any refarem La the Cacré and while
they were in 88968 304 such transfor has
th ve 4116 -atcask cf Ending porempori-
This, .u wir yew, is too8 irahle. -
zh Ce would 2 the prope: autherty to decict:
whether a particular olFeer would de su table for bring

ut



a

posted to a parucular place or ७४५७४:
jhe eapacity 1ब che ovficer ar the
tial sdmlvistrs ion im tha disc
mess cannil oe cn a position le dorm a bropcr
these n:atters, It is, Hhrrefoze, necessary hf vat be fp
(101. of ilismect judges shuld be made on the
seconumnndatior of the [ligt Ceur.

Cansalcue 198. The ९०-106 canteo. ever the satetuace judiciary
पर ns Uigludiog the ४५ dges taveil, -0 the iateieals vi she
ele लाए of the adioinistralion of justice, vested in the

पा High Courts. We, lhereforc, yerorr mud शाह, sactable cucu
titulional wieadmens be marie for sho purpoe cl giving
the 11%: Courty powers ‘n -egard ५० che pasling and pacmo-
tien o£ कह: Jade's gucb #3 they ran Poasces गा. Tapa 10
the pusting ancl promollon of inlerlor oAcers.

1198 The quality of the wors cf 8 Judge :a in
ioned by We environmen? in ४:
. talmumber of Stiles are visi
wovlginis fror! judicisl oAicers ur

Alwerce cP

fil

re bition

To equate accu. ihe appalling editions ct coum

Our visite २०४6४ sdbordinat: cou:
star Pradesh od Alipore in, Cal
290 dgebt chap the acroun’s 8!
eu. Thr conditina wf Ube 70:5७ 1:

author have sbeir chau

ar viztisble ‘Th: space a'Intled to
znd members cf tne Har is so ihade
sucerowuing leads vo wackeanlitess, cont} psion
ico-det, Buillings constructed lu suit | the
siqyuuemen's 2 cnurts 900 than ihree-querwts Of a
century ६80 have 10: yeasa deew fownd jnsufBcient } unc
unauite (0: che greatly cepaided nerds of the Cutts of
¥. ४ uot uTvesbal to find three o- “ca: Courts feing
“doa. a ba bling vigils des gard 501 ons Court. Bary

widitionul ralubE shed in Laver yours 37६ held
boonvarion. letoporsry ds
sreewd in (66 campoun che original court beildi 7 or
slzewh rt Crom ¢he: wack of space, the unhualthy
sunidons vt these ol@ structures, the dark, dingy and ॥1-
vonLiecad rures. arokier. (urniture id the general 3100॥1:-
६639 wathur. the prerowea maze them slmost usbt for || हक
necusstion. Wany of ai ७ buildings do net appear to jhwe
clecocd ov whitewashed for yecrs. The fut rf
nudges are experwd bi xetire for tess or wr + in
७४ sittings ate no lanier than rall
icle vit? @ just cheugh तिए atazle grid a = ‘ir.
Many 10७८७ aro withput adequate space for che me bers
of che liar, aed ae लीं ui aryispaee zt all for the litigant
public wud the vrituesses. We understood that im faeny
places there are no fat: ¢ at all che <f2 custo at
Ane meconds of suite whied lie m sed sin boxe? pilef@ up
either in the ७८६ or,in 81 cour; halls. The situation ia



241
sume ni the Bihar courts aug lies dtserioed oy he Clhiet
Juszice of 10७ Slate;
“Mast of the
enamebers and él

Lignal Mumsifs have ऋएशछ:2 The positro
tions like Gagatem che Sub 7 Bia.
mace Jucyes an? Murad are belding cuurls in the
Beta! gal Une Ter Assomacions, A: érbhuogi thet
Lea: systero could set ‘se titre i beenuse the
Chin Court sui, accommodation
My predeceas: pigted the cmutts anc slGees at Tass-
che: Eth las! year ané felt that a
seomsily ‘cr sxlenslou at (9; Civ

(4. mr u 0२ the butdiog projecls
TogaT to ufice and esidentia;
. > otherwise: Lev ey cf che -
Le affected ana tie edmhnstretior. of

vw scatter,”

VAL A court, wheter <b te ८फा of 1 wuncit ७९ ७ maeis-
erate or of # Wist:uet judge. 18 % the ritteen $ Leng

F 5 far tie vundigaticn we 5 rigits हतक
Tlst Wacvefore be Jsouzead um a 9४5०७

aud so as $> inapize mspeci. 4 vourt house need net 13 an
impuaing ४३.5७ kos ए० should ke co constructed and stuat
91९ 14: officer to gerfar:n his lunct
‘This wins be ४

Sead for
inqrove-

+ ng potable and sdequale 7"
5७ Acvey ir the fwe-frew: uf ६0४०
70 एसी vlanring, scoms to be receding moze and :uje
ints Sue Lackgrourd. Maturelly, grebler smphusis bas २५:
be laid vpn expesidil rr on thy ciigetly peoduclive eapects
af the natonal cconcmes But that esn be no Justieelicn
16: Loy ॥(3६४&४ ०४ omil slum bke iecorimodaticn now
२५०७८॥३.। एए । :$ ox
Loin the dislrit on” the 242%, Orreluices
if, the etrcasta of the district $। ee

inerecsed from time to 0:58, ४७1 tue rour'. beitding: bave
fot been enlarged by 3एश wep wdate them, Fer sever] y sais.
ie ve mas have bean ०७५५

street लगाया; In which ६ i
0 #€०७ holding cher courls. These teaking dn -
725 ge (८11 छलका 3 were thus de.cribed By 156
Chie Justice af Lhe ५६४१:
“At dousk af 1095 slugions, ev J ied Hawrah
ihe hot racepten, tre Cuts and tt, aubzidiarx buiidiags "
7 wholly wAdeqeace, hut ३-४7, stmseturalhy
fegter thi vanced छा.0॥5
fouiléings ix 1.1tle short

cls, the cuort hella

aough space for the 3७०६
ty Jesu on judge's table during :। A गा
crgee ard pactice evant tile 2७९०::४ le thr point 02 suffccp
tom, There are ne ecscing: (artlilig anther fur grumgel or

are se: srriall that there 18



Bles ot

न

Phesst
bully

sot agtkaue,

renner.

na Iequete
Ubraci 5

228

1 1.03. Hoga rater for sorpyuse that any serine
done at sue qutroundings. (९ 18 cea ५ yt:
igdiciary sha 1 mais
पड werk ip the ecndit:
plaved ia regard to court 5७ का
avcommedation end गण?

ez of th: 8:2५

Armitled th? srudeauw q
sof tks cour’ premises bul -xoeaieé their bolp-
name cy peoveicn for ace ४5 huikdlags
ible fuusr3, We wees tad vy the Chief de
Goverment of Wit Jesh thes rors
ceutt ‘pila (let a pace 79 ty
al ::५७17:8 of develen: Year Plars
eeusb dae resscrees of tie Stale

है

gut

ep the Centra’
it ७४३5 nol
to ellecate for surely picpeges coy et
४ the Central cr Slate Gewert ८३५ 00

. fe :३ 1.1 ध्यॉफ्राए/: |
0 nckurcinenta of
pemertbars

nuly ure
mater cl picrvicding = oelier
bs very ur (00/ तंज: Hui

wudeys
hovld be dear by & programme phased
I 4530६ in

cave ver?

7265 aysilable to te ju
Dur apparently the Hie: Cugrte aave bol
shic c persuade Governments lo meke raequste pto-
nin the lrudget for the papa. ‘Mae एटा part of
tne, eiyeaded in she bytes is $ the cist of
the Law ltrpic:ts which are applied in every cuure, The
u the matter cf bonke ४ i;

Tacnls +f

8026: ireremied grutt, uti» uecespary for chr purches::
thuse botks, As wating etand. gu gids hare fre-
querilig In 1९1. upon 106 scembers of the Bar 47 soaking
the secossary brinks Pe ints tb therm. I: iz not posite



“2a
Ver, ein ock in & large

re their own uipins fa- she jrdiccal
Si every cciusise whenever Look ree

fee the mm
curaher af vc

It :६ inperscive. , bat each
1 lisrare of 7९51-0/४-॥५ jaw

squterents. It shoul: 1,
preat des! lr make ७ 7050:3220 (९
s shor}! in Gur view be a flrsl

ved by tbe Ecste Gove noice:

We 1395 rafer 3180 to the ad fficnallr:

ubtasain2 evizable : Suwuies 3
Texlat'on 3 a whi reuldarcial मी
were fthke atlolwsen of requsi pigg.

'
ctsived a siep-nothesdy
gaa
nowki¢h 3 tequéethmed house acrupind
pier “Von. that station.
in office
inn

ry
We were |:
raxster to Falng had in jy
fer a fea iapnias, becae lie could no

Tie Cb cf Justies of sh: 3.

vid thal there wre uw Munif x. Pacua
ccoTsmnodalinn (Lae sented howe had
On the sur के + ४७-३७ arn
है) acer: have
120 pre
él unex upul-
1 paying everbitart wert:
cl Judgeg wer
10:४०

4५5

werden: धैजः ६-४ |

ieofs, ‘Where have acon फि-राहक af
cee enlerted ints ursremly
of ०1:07 dere िक|

officers

Vais pre 1“ “ded 5
ment the zequtrerents af isdicis) cfkcoors tor vesiden-
131 weommedacien. Ab २७४-न- 100 "॥0०0५९०३ are ruectasary



Pepe ble
ancowa=d
Cong ate
ste,

‘Need far
auecitl
aie on,

Mem tar
qoopTecal
wapecyigion.

a4

६3 ne constructed and a list cf the srtyeil: has been

suranga in vedere el orurity acd Laz been sent 70 the

Stats Gavenunenta.'
We ste satieled thet sink)
ether Scates.

ecoditions exies in several

15. The proklemn of finding residenotie® aceummindation
tor the judi: a special aspect. Iz is not proper
to piace judicial officers in a position that would compel
them (3 Incar olligaticns fret pumas hu 108७. wel
be liliguate in the cutis. Such 8 sivaacion puta he
inecepernicene uf juci It seems to 05%
th ५ ७.1 ३ > tae (10एएण्यास्फ)
should provide j rom with sultauls seaidences.

cu view c#erne to ०९ taken wm some quozters ibal Peeve
was hardly err | bedwenn le रह ७७]
क्ाइआताफता >छछ्ष) आ। 7 ube tu a yudicisl officer आये
ibe efie:ency ८६ bia work. Such a view is obvicuty
enlrouble. We were wolé o2 cases, woers far ark uf

aiivah'r cesomemediztign within the firencel capacity of
tre officer, Se had Lo re 80 (2४ 37६९ from the locality
in which ecurt wap ai peat over two

hens 2 x lu &४ (७ ame veturn from his wuwet It
is easy to sce thst @ jedicigl ecficer who has to study
Fapers a> bore and wrilr jadamenls 1१७५-७२ esurt sours
vwuuld Bnd ib dient te werk under such conditions. Ln
vile: cases, ofOcers had x pry euch heavy rents that they
were clot left with fuaris 72 rpend on their ०४1९7 uewmasary
royviremertis. UL is lpue thick these cheers ations ky in
a messure co nearly gil Cieverrene cvants. st we
have chready cupleined hew the ju ६8 ail, special
weteutinn in 5]. Yeparé.

225. We had a suketanta जज: no evidence regerding
cerruptisn 1. the ministerial sta% cf the vanets. Ite wae
कक Pil की seit hos excstedl fur a long time. There
aupeat oc he thrae mein rsasces is slate 72 affalrs.
The emolarcerts cf the slifF are ia mat cases Deer the
stsrvetion level The rumker cf che slalk is pgescepeliy
epsux:nz vary inadeqyate Finally, thero is 6 lace of
Steervision cn the pare xf the presiding cfflzcrs. Tt is
thsvelvce inazerateve that the coniidongs of service of te
ill-pard stait shuld be tzaproved sa early 32 poasible. Se
Jradequste Fs '. Fir some ploves that
with the copying anc ether wrick the staff 146: employs
putaidere to a3zlat theta and this can only be done fram
the illegel pains made oy the sath = The sleff should
wre, Le increazed end breuckt wo to the requized

127. Ta: segard to supervision, 4 great Jeal can he fone
y ७७४0-७९ oes, whoch either tarough mexperience
er angietl they oftey fail te da A feeling appeass ie
have grap mong judicial allicurs toast thei flute



225

ly in thes suschaepye of fauiles! Sunctiong: and
islrazive Teatters sce of sxmdary importunne
ox benceth thei: nodce. Sugh 3 vlew is entirely error,
The eficemt werkis: epiack 0:३७६ cael 42 ५
: egr in tak'ng evidence,
ing Fudg-nent, A neenber ०: secsions
imraticn devartments of & court ranlelbite
ly the satefactury «३1१७४ of | cua: Vhe working, al
@ack of these sectins I
adnminisival've eer |
persistent and ९,०६९ #2६६७)४ of 1.
admiaistrat-ve sevciony Lap +0च0:४
boox van Se leld an, ० ४७७11 i
2 Mee cody 101 ixsue 13 praper lime. a copy Tray not be
rod era payment order can he dels: Delers जा
ty ction in chege and zimelsr wate: w
5 आज pares ave udlived ४५ the stearic
impvoper gaia. Tha cus which ४
Offlcer piseicte: in I ve if yh Kory inis!
dive SRL op “he = ee 1२७1 This ७०१00४:-७«१.४
reiine's diseredit. or the jw T comrerned. It lz,
fore of the ४०-८७ -. 1 halo ju ah ect
‘Sily

prend € oticer. Only
working oul Lhe

sections Iron: Us
tnd contol the sll, Jk ig reeessary shat the
Courts shuld uapre: ॥॥ 911 ह!॥.. प्री the
ot a prrivdicel ‘tam uatior af the working cf

rare af the yiaw x an improvement can be Dpt-galon
Ft azcut in che warkigg cf the stat ७. th di Powe

mee courts by a -अ:उछ delegation ff कफ: ol punish. eects
mens te the srestiing ८: uf leaving chem राह sal.

at pesgent ce 0.७ hisads af She ciscrict jedze.

229. IL is also neregsary fo wake steps to tropruve the
quality of the etait af the k i A knewledse of beer ig out traf
necessary for sume mrrrborg of tha staff. Thaic 101९६
| hr nxuminatien ofipleints, and the drafing 4:
and orders A (8686९ cas ubity wl ches
krowledee cf na Tt 2 reeds wv

Klos cwher@ck possible. cx gubjest cl.
aiting in 7020 branche:
raguired to be familiar Lu.
Staves of Andeua Lr:
difficulty: h

cf Weir dities
aad Madras have surmounted
the evperior staff of stbordity
10६1२ spar seew lel +६1301111:
The adoption of o sdntlar or:
a- PUTPOIW.

180 Gaz cecemmendat nna om rae satordu.we jue.
ear. be surunceised as Cullovw:

on,

3 cere sheild rh ae Ptate Judea! Se: vise
Hirvieded 310 two class 833 éonsistug ot the

present Higher Judictat ft is officers hold:ng
SM 36 Law—it.



226

the posta oF cixtect judges ur cther equivelent
posle and Class IT cbmprising ot lwo wiedes of aghast 4
the munaits 870 We subordinale faders.

(2) 1", Slates! whete, the Judiviary hes
Bepersted 00: hd @ exocutWe. the civil and the cz.
nel cud-ciary sh ne iitilled and formed inl
integrsted radre. :

» i .

48) ४ age limit for wgeruitmer in ५०७६ i
aervree eaculd be fzed at thirty years.

‘ue recruitment. shoul! ve trade ow. the पा

my scutiatipn conducted by Whe 1 ic
Service Coxum-issiop. .

character such =f lhe wri of & judgment in i
with the eid cf fhe cuse §apece 3206 1890 books

-. ६ The क्यो लक ya shbuid कक] न
siltation with or Ukr couclgrence of the High Cou

(7) 1६ anay beladvissbie te have ५ 131 proporpion
of the exumiciees ican ouside the Atute.

(४१ There steugd ia be 3 ting 0७००९ «xl, buf ७०
miaznicen should be prescfibed for ta :

63) The exacdbation pect be of a pre

(9) 4 High Coprt Judge shuld be associated pith
che Pu Serviee Uonendagion fer the purposes cr
test and heve a prepunderadng voica] in

413) There ors he jpe resnevalinu ia dhe : are

/dina’ 172५ i for the purpose of (६06
staff fiche 3, ror samaid a higherfage -
“ ped for died. :

(11) Persons go recrufted ahow'd ‘ec givere 32
sive tryinive Car & peciod between 2x mouths te fone
year

for cach Slaw Lin: Qeveronent in consultation
wlsk che Iligh (५ Em

413} The trading. héwevey should foSoss | the
polien get cut in fevas 46-7 49, ante.

(14) The aeining shogidl ander no ein: bec
‘wrtsnes or dispensed with. :

(5) A splits diate judge chould bo a आए :
with the duty af $nparting the necessary traizin,

412) The हर ot thp trating should br sclRlod

hi:



227.
(16) Aw’ all-ledin yJudiciql Service should be
created which should es. forty per ceul of the pasty
ot the strength of the Higher jwdiciary in every State.

(IT) These officers should tw: selected by rueana uf
67 all-Inde. curoveltlye exsmimgtion om she lincs of
Indian Adwmdstrative Bervice exatinatlon.

(13) The candléaved shavid -b: law recut: het
ween Ue ot 21 and 25 agd should be required
19 ules a ee two optional papers in: uw.

eed No minimum period of praccivc wl the Ba:
ba be insissed upon Jo chrir use.

(20) Such offers ahould normally be allotted to
States clhee la their heme Btates.

(21) After selection the oMeers should be Lr
tor a pertod 02 two years.

{22) In the beginning chey siould be trained
acong whk officers af the Ind Administrative

ed

(23) In edd:tion ve the a pee taught vw the
dun Adtuiusivadve Bervice ol 5 like language
५ the pFhoess cf Iae 11:814५ Judie:a. Service skauld
study छा are’ sobjects lie citi] procedure, caopany
Jaw and the like. . .
ver the tradnimg in the Indian Administra.
lege flsoulf be a further peciod
# jacthr Sige for a perled of ore -

{38}

intensive tre

Vea:

(25) The traning should be of the nalure describe
ein pera 03. arte. .

426} After tra‘cing che o3iters wil] be posted as
magisteiss.

27> Acler wiwking as mags istules, mousifs and
sub कट Tadges. thay shoul oy about the ten]:
wise- oud their survisy: te Ipested ay distri, | qed gesginna
judges,
The: emulamengts of {qaian Judjeial Service
officers chould pc tro game fa chose of the Indian
Admn.uwetrative Service. a

20) Or apreincoent as
jadges. however. thew _reaun बा WEE ie छा the
sane 3८91९ 23 ca: of Gate judietal service officers.

(0) These officers should man forty ner cent of
the poste co the Higher Judiclal Servlee.

(al) Tae romuining sixhy per cont chould be filed
hi by piromotian § enh “गन Service ont
by dirsec recruitment And the प्‌ है

: istrict end sessions



288

(32) Thirty pen cen: af whe: posts should be 0-120
dey premium vl officers of the State Judiejal Service
sod thinly per cent by dirrel mecau-timent from tae
Bar. : .

(38) 10 ebe creation of the 19060 Judicial Service
Trads th aloe results ght he dosirkklr to
Teise the satage ०2 veers an all-India basis.

(44) IL its neceséary vw cinliaue drect verruilmmat
fram the tur w. the‘level cf cixtict jueges.
lniveun requirement for such epycint-

pYactic: of nove १६४५७ snd an noper

(36) Cl tx oot necessary In subject such dirket
veeryita ta any aedgjuisy. :

‘hes.

tat ing way of civil uducial officers :9,
generally speak.ny, too “ow.

को) Vhs puwctlte of givng bienmitl increments
ar. the cudiejal servies i> sot desirable

(41) The zug scale cf a cfvil judge (unier 3
should be ed at Re. शशि 25 ethic rnation
~ Gh - 520 ६.2. -४०--१७४.

(4) The pay spiles id subordinate judges sho la
be dustenes froza thet ef mungila and thes? should
no overlapping.

(20) Ter ps

be Ks. 760—30—

suale o2 a subordinats judge sould
0३.

i44) ‘lhe «३७ salary”
5 we adveuce

a Ki be no ditler
3, additional
votkesponding post:

be om the besis af mere semlerity, but only om ab!

(44) Pronicuions in tae judicial service ahould x
‘ly
abu :

‘The vellug sce of maribets 07 subordinate
i dary =bould be saisnd ७ Fifty eight. However,

dugial officers shold ot ba re-emptoyed by Goverh-
mann: after relag .



229

(45) All posts fer whiew an oFicer ol the status
ict judge :उ required should be irehwded -७ the
eaere of dete: [.
be fixed on Iu 23.
(45) Tacugh 16:
fee Cran eo th
th Ee nkeians! usledury tre Slings ७४१५
* hor. separated from the executive.
(ly Na yovwiiy nother than thet of dig
he i ed on 77 आओ <0१0२: whe nea
ef-corruptian.
151) + is not advisable w form snti-cerrup ion
coammittzes rorsiming of che dietvicl judy+ ucut
members cf dhe Bar 0८ oe 0.0 ९:&४७७ ef alleged worrup-
ran of judicial «1. .

Courts should take pertle gar cave
mide jradi-
८:08.

/ S84 ef he Canstilution needs mor-
even appotntmen's ८-८ the subsardinale
‘“ € TANS 02 Aistrbct ings ef 306 made
en tan ceremtrencation of the High Courl पकाड
change will be unnecessary i feecuitment is pede on
he huss of a rempetitive examinadon as suggested by
5.

fd) A-sle 2895 of the Constitution shui! he
to wees in Lae प्र Court the power oF

som uf dislric te
Stutr Cowerawente sould ir rovsylte-
ho ote Tligk Courts deaw up «a phoacd oro-
granoue fer the building if ॥४१॥६ houses,

(56) Tre budze+ ptovis on far tre supply
hooks x: Uo» suburdinate zourcs showld be

(90 Tar is af 110 judietst 3260४ for resi-

dential smmadatiar desewye special atoention ac
the hands of she Stato Governments.

158) The condtiens of
ste cf the subordinale x

11६११

wyice of the rnini
ts sneuld be cerpeuyend.

(Se) Their streugth should be adequave fn onpy
with the work. “a “er

[शा] TLe-gzer powers of panishmart of the mberrdi-
nate atall slid he delegated to the presiding officers
al aonrts,

064) Che etalf ता thr mkordinale courts cnould be
Taher 13 ‘ay aod reovired ta pes a departmental
ezsminstion in ¢het subject,


3३४०७ fer
है,

Mrihecsee
mapecvisdon,

Remews aad

inapectian,

tdirsoven
amadands of
wah,

. in ull opurle—s oe

JO—SUPLRVISION AND CONTROL OF SUBORDINATE
cour ,

we have seen that apart inert
‘crap the main ८४७७८ of x
original or uppellate
ie not the deivclivs edure, But the: failure of tha
arms of judleis] adzvnigl=ution, ibe Bench and the to
10,09७ the preaercbed peocedunt; and the adaption by Lied:
af uneystematic and ee, metheds of work ic
defects are capable of Bring in died by the exore'se of
8 continucns vigilanoe कण the bof the siperior courip—
whirh wil. ensure the adepiior pf proper macthnds of work.

the inadequacy nf 1४315

survey has alxg shown us that when af:
suprrvined, Khe courts th our omaniry cen under the
ing procedure dispose t, precetdinge expeditiously,
is deowonstraccd by Lhe Experiemoe of States where a stfict
system of micthodical age ae obtains. The imp:

2:४1 ie neetl cor pdequgite supervision aml control cal
thareiore be ०४६८-६०: ized, | :

For its wiewnt sia ing, oug system of ar
uf Jurdce depends ० wh: upyn bwo elaments,
Bench ind ise Sar, ic Be of euiek, bul. not ८
juctice can only ce reali od iF Abete (8 coroplete co
Hen bevweru heme 1 elem

2 The metbers ४ 0१ euboxdinate judiciary are
the rigid cen-ril wf 8 hherareby,of supezior courts, in
ing the sigh Court. j¢ soborfiinate cuurcta have perigdi-

४1७५ ta submit p. reporig of the work disposed] of

snd pending disposul dhel+ courts, These reports

suppozeé to be reviews in et hy the superior «a
CK

whien in theit toro a with the duty of
tbl causes ate 90: ecasskAly delayed and that 31
procedural sveps af id explidite the hearing and di
posal o¢ the casas, arc pyumplly'tacen, District judges pre
expecced to inxsect एड undet ther charge ‘from
ta tim: Hlich Ceut JI 5 inspec! the district coprt
and other courts. Theeg 70085 aré preccribed to 8

that subordinase scririe pre vigseart 800 spare mo effoctyjotr
thee part In render justice spespiily.

3. Suoh u gyatem of sup ng ५ eifectively i
smnuld keep sha judiclaty contifmally alive to the ‘at
creansy in the cisposa of work. In some +
ridnimum slauda:ds off work preaxriked and ४'

judicial offlenr nl:ives t 88९, thpt bis wutput ddes not
shect of Ne standard @x4d by, the Tigh Cauct. Ts


23)

fe may be deubterd winter a strict udhecence by quasnti-
tative Fspospi-is Cesitablg in che interests of quality, it,
bas tn be concerned :lat 8 apstem chsupervision and unspec-
thon does retail. 0 judges hut bewg 161 withews che guid
nace or cuttel of Ihe superior authority, The éaksterce
ef uch कप.) is a arlutaty check ¢n lhe vayarice ०६ the
witivudual offierr. .

4. Order sich ceased gerutiny, -. 18 107 0065-09, 6 ॥७२७७६९
Lhaé Jie raajority of yudiejal offcere sbould 1307 gut 1:05 dspocals.
ed uuariicn cf warlg ana Lbak the delay in she 3:8- 1६ oy.
it & certain parcentut: ९( the cans is aot 8 iyo
any Wackness on their para. It is true, that beaver
dency 7c take up eset eases Grsl and छत] ote OE.
18०६... But will (he exernise 9- 30580 strietresa aad

een: vs che sr courts this can bs avoided Untertu-
Tuitels, mary ६०७ ste drives ts 7:39, course by reasons

over which they have 2७ contri], such ga, # beavy file,
absence i) wamessns, सा: of ceadiness of the parliva ard

dol Lhe least important, anpreparedrs of course] as well.

5. We: have refesced जाए: 10 what we have २ ६५७ Onputsative
itetive: Less work, Thowth suck “esq wee 706९085- rec. sate
FE an Leepertarl purppse. a bind reliance mm, te

ick saz Dew: 10७00 to prevail in ceveral Stated T2ez link
is likely to dete! their very purpase. lnsistence merely”
or. tae disposal 10 Bwrber of matters frequently
westdce in (17 te, put anda The fled
kagome elette rnd of of hare fare
matcnrs and wick suv Se Punto Frou. juégo
to judg: It 3.30 often r@ults ta digpussts wilh:rut 8 [sir
or idequste hearing of the cuatters.

0. Cortral nver subortinate course is Drfaeypally enety Metbods of
cised in the Gllewing ways: : iil
44) Submirs.on भी acrutmy vf perivecinal returns}

ib Inspections. — .
lik} Appraisa: of the quahty ct wak ef thq
aubardinats cls af tne Rime of the beariog

apgcals, revisions dad other proceedings by th
super.or ra, H
: i

Meysl nf the Tiph Courts 3398 Paki periodica
3 (om Uns linge 0०७४४ an the sdministeation reports) 2
sefling out she number of cases ingtitaned, seumber of cased ened
dispel of and th: number of mpses pending, to 78 subr
miicted by Jw subendinuut couwcts,; Tavs? eatementy in
este genersy the stave pf the in euch court and
earr’ul zerutiny दा ५६३९ teturns 3 few memtbs, 3

‘how the grviding® officer is locking att
e, Aty inctesse in msthution, or 5४२४४:
in fispomlice 3 जनाब | btu indrensing arcuntlation
work, would be sppal from p broper serulluy af thp 2!ctdtedoe
recurs, aid the disteict judge जा the High Court coul| of west.
thes. atiange Ft a proper de trebution of work well



432

Yer ale Take 0६ arvarge for the posting of addilional ofivars bef
cones Ce 72. 1%। jun gels out offeorntreL’ in the remarks color
cis bar mubthe@i-e le:

expiunad.

ulti uit, if 1 bas Leen pend:ug over
come of the Slates lice Uihar and Keraf
we wete surprised t> learn. toat a suit is mpl cutsidsred
uuless i. i Lwes “० five years old. This is,

a oT ire काका view, 111१ relure sl

vequiry all suils muse Ulan a year vo Se skown as
fits and siso recuire oxgla in, rmgucd 7८ the ca
naive vocaglened tae celay. We wo
fd the Fancin Corsrniflee, 11:0७ the retucts
this pendence; <l sascs according to the your af iastituliut.
This wi) inimedictely fiq attention on aay ferderry tn

naglect be “ati ky faci eawly पापा
ligbler eu ‘
F Slote 44 Madres, there are deainile tiry: limits
cum: Jir its judie preet
{tn cia

meee.

. me पु
» be depoage 02 in tre source ४: iheir inel
1 Su.ts ape expected to be disp
cutis, regula’ 0:७५) zppeal: in distri
nideaienus apperls with!
7 s If these mastcers are not dispreast of with)
the oreseriard dame | mits, Ua: reasonz for the delsy ba’
explamed in the matigtics! relurn. We a a
neni ibe edoptiot of similsr targus and similar
2:07 as ore mes ie all ae ४६1६. ८55. :

phate civil ceurca
ab वा [७ lament. shurain
03 yudyments were peud:tg

cl ;. foklesr. days Crom the
४9७७9 ०: 2, . AT. subordinkte ceutts here to
hil मा
cular «esses in Ww

the rale has not beer odserved

together with an explanation for the delay. Copies ¢f
theze returns tf. irk #आफ with
Ie Mac.brs. Pra

50 preseriby: a7 overall peciad teen ७3५3 10एवा Lge
chow ad the hearing within wh yinetts have to be

| wl Le judgowepl as to be dediveroi, We think
pris aime: ealsacnely omelul aul would, फेम
urs ena, creck umusug: delays in ths delivery एप jude
Tosnts ang toiqn'. of adopted 11 al! States.



233

10, A careful scrutiny of these returns wewld pive a vape 67
very clear Fieruve Of Ure Jediclal grork af suurdisate “ a
cours. It weuld reveal whedher the-presiding offleer haa
4०07: pace wi é institution, whedug cre 19 aso diagosing
ef the Gla ane gresemaoly aches surts, तर merely eltempt-
ing << cisocee of Lighter suite. aod whee: Ju: Las done
the work novmallr cted of a presiding offeer in that
cewrt. dary 13६७ perlix? cl review

17, ane sac?
serve ly. aseta. pul
1

nn n= syon periodical rzturus would Need for
Ose, Letke@s Lewy 31७ (१.13: ria [छै७४:४१७ # try
and a>prosriate inscrucaions are

These
the district 1302२ -0
ter oxpso dating Theva ग्रा जो):

‘ive jutize

Se:ne@ States 11.&क vehurus

inustraaive judge Scr seru-

'€ ६ Jargs uueeber of coum exist, ts well nigh
i

(#00$ ७! । |: jute
te st (७ telirc with tist cf the pre-
आते etek nartdcular imecances of ८४५७४ 10:
relsycd explaetior 1 belne clven for their
worth ul actaling, we upproeiete.
८ besanie monotonous. The 76६७१ १५,
devs ef she Hich Court ov the district mowcts do
ne al ato ॥॥ it ane. the ए6:६ of a
howerer occasio वी प्रा8५ bey by che
& nutslanding werk done
ial otivera ie leet eight of.

Phage that a criligal scrutiny of these
very ltaportent. Such a ge:udny
wade by une ab ruvre of Ube judges
If e4ch a turulmy is persiod syste-
roti lly. the Ihe Court would be in 2 pegitsun net eacky
5< appraye che espacity 0०2 the presicing officer of thi
subs . ze -he coart's fle bet 359 lo
don? euripeetion
wwell in tine Ser the
thint cf wark or for tae postiag cf an udedi-
Tf an :flcer 18 slack iu bis worl, he could
be warned and .f + dees 1:0९ star improvement, he may
wenn tis reclined.

ive a h
sas Tul pupsisole lor the sdminist ५४ Dep tere
judge or jnctges to davote safficient me to Le xecptioy


wn: dlsaruce
led.

Nace of
Ioepectpane

of these veturas, ‘Chete didicyllirs can be overnome qither
by relievimg ihe judge of sore:
by transierriny, it (७ gnother ar by
Fsteigas in the 81708 inte grow
j for the purpode cf sypervinon,
m sige f adopts, 4 us ericamitances shall (96 daty
vf scrutiny be nied ax left to use negisirar २४ Deputy
Regisivir az happens in some Stee: . .

18. ‘The Eizh Cywots shovkd ne vnly pi ay excetul gther:~
७६७ ta che slave of piains dtexlosed by returny, but
insist on the dist-iet. pages vettonaing 4 like lask in regerd
to all malers withuk theic district. 11 should oe made
e dist-iet jndgee ihint the primary 2 गज ity

€ t Jedigial adeaiistralivn of tha: dialsfet ie
“gad teal negiect of the admirisiratve side of thelr
Le considered to be a uecshetior. af their: duty
a degres #3 Mnectlatent judicial work. i

wor’
hn as Err

14, Another mode of excrvistng effeccive 0१९०. | over
ihe worls of the subordim.le gourts is the peraonsl iqspocy
suborssituate arty stud che:r = eb by
or officers, . Ciensrally spcuking, 3 district Judge
pxexeges conlral aver all the ulvit courts ir his cack
and theirestablistménts. In ape of the tutes hke Bojabey
ané Am@hrn Dvadech: where : the judiciary is spapated
frinn tae coroeutlve they aly exercise xim'lar control १४८४
the criminal courty. Elsewhete, the adroirisiraitive trok
over tae etbxinsl ९४६९३ la exercised by district la
trules, it is ncleworthy thet jn Medres, where the epoca:
tive her ben separated 0 op 5 Judiciary, the एका of
disteicl ucagistrate (padicivl) been fetained princgmlly
for the prompose of supervisiod of evindnes Courls |

High Courts sempre hs afi ve Ira:uad detailed jrulee
regarding imspecti ॥ subi sta cxurts by che z

1०८8९. Broadly eerrin: , the rule
tcurls sluuld be i cted bir the district judge
every yesr or at 1288३ cnoc in every two years. Slofarky,
inspertinn of diatrie’s guurt? whet nuher courts of equigatent
rank is expected ve be dam: of High Court Judges.
od imatrurtions ze ven inithe Circulars end the jroles
in remird ७ she joux aapecte of ‘te courte’ Tangtione-
which seed locking isto at २१४ inzpecticn, :

15, The werk it inogpeetiun, te proadly divided -
kesnches—(1} judrclal—this ६४३७३ to the procedure ih the-
Courl aed the sctuali worx of the civil judge, (2)
terlal—this refera to fre ३1७९ ¢ ous of the orders
civib judg, (2) depatmental—this sefers to the
atice of Tegiztere, scocumts, Hes, Bille, and retarna
ate and sturisted in contotrolty wich the ord
ihe: Gavecaroent. {he High Court o Lhe discrict 3 dsc.
What is generally 1 Ger fe, hat before the map fon
heginz, che subordigste colxt. kas to submit ty the:



235

inspeccing officer ve:y detailed info:zngtion about tac
anc olbee raaticom a peorbed form, 17७ detailed
fafocu-ation thus supped forms 100 baa of toc inxpsction
by ube inspecting ciieer. ‘hw judicuw work of the cout
Ja expreted to be inmspeced by the diewiet judge himscil.
He ip expected to cxamuine In deta 1७0 recards ul pending
tues 40 36 to draw che allemtion of the presiding officer
to iustances of dailurs tu izke full advantage af tae faclaciss
provided by the Cryll Proceduce Code far expedil 1g the
cours of tigation. A close examinulicn of chese regards
would indicate whe:her adjournment: have been cranted
bs a fudwial offiess for tne oy pees Of paym:n:L of process
fees or jor taking out a3uTomnpsns Gu eervice on winesses.
or whether aicjuccauents bate been graaced cn aircouas
nf lie Copzegarcdnens ७- the parties or thiir coursel or
whether posting of to ॥८५४७७ cages has 1९४७-६6. in
adjourn: rj. 3139 other causes Of delay which ws
wert and as judge should ३६ abc tn avoid.

16. ix. suraw Stance tiv: eules teguing the judye 7० mais.- fudcial
al y showug ibe work done by him in T¢?-

उप्र cwery diay. ais a very useful ४७९०४ which e-abiea

de inep ect ny oficer to undarsiaad the manser in w

judicial work is being done py che giflcer concerned ind

shuuld ke required to 4 maintained im ail ‘be States. The

other aspects, namely. Ihe romlsverisl and tre departments)

aning +व भार cour, inwWatly inspected by Lhe
In tee of the ii fe whe point out ail irresu-

lavities und defici > commenss t tbe Inspact-
ing officer. The ta #. in his report is exoected
not nly ६७ gcucl out rostakes and inegularitics, ‘nut, ales
ln lay down detailed costructions lor che gurdance oF lhe
21011 judge wre? be sac.bera of the establishment srm-
necred, 301' the securing of improved mocthiids of wark, the
ahoTit-an ef unsuchovisnd prgeiices aod the correction of
PMETRKCS.

17. Noterithslacding, “07: aeons uber wets ted rules framed Neglect af
by the High Cours, it ie d matter of great regret that 24061,
during Ine past 9| § yrars: the importance ef irmpesicn
RE Am af exercising super¢laior. over sukeweinalr: La
haa not beén fully hee = . We are of the view thit
tha Jack of Imyycent and ecicrt ts ५क fvisicn Ingpecdion
aad cea‘rol by the suzerler courts Ba3 been enc ०: lhe
Test (४५७:४४$ cf 116 delays ang Lu: codgeetion ie courts. Tt
Taust be revnecalered that thir aed officers on account
of Lreir peculiar pasilic. 2; oO. 3 forsnlt eters like
execplive cifrera. The only guidance: they can get. ia ftom
their siperiur officers, who ogo assist’ ther in the sccution
of their practic fHeulties 4nty अ। the litre of imapection
of thelr courts = Tr veanls!a latte Tumber of the jurdor
Judle‘al oFigers ४० ne: the benefit! of the maturer expe
rm Us: superi cerg'in the matter af the mannge-
moent of 1:5४ Courts. Alth 4 h the dualrict and eossions
Judges acc directed bo 70209 mapectingg: of the subordinate



ce ax

BART IO.

238

tr olee in bare years, ae the cass nay
Scates thes celdon: ven:pleye (acir sound
ef inspections ७11७) 0४७६ periud = Severdd courts Anvn nat
i for xveums, In tae northern States. i:

thst. a ciswict anc. zeaaions Judge Coes not inspect
4 of ienue Uhr neice का ben or Later

<< Teaso1s why the district jucges have not found it
posstble tu maxe these inspections © “n Like pianner. the
10%| १४: Torr snntis afc ४
dther cubord:uate courts by the
zelvez has swt been as Jreyuen:
We were veld ky one शा lhe Chief

"St ie uncoubtedis tras thik inspuwtion by Hoy:
tcl Une sikorémate Courts ané be the Distries
subordiaante 3 Tuer be Dee
Sa fe tae Tigh Count
sue 02 judi worl tas been
hat Jt baz been found :mp:

dL: che :eepectlon af svburdi

78. che Curt das :eteacly deer
étiou being made, but il tws dixpves-
danger in deirg se Taerg is ४
of the judges. to make
use ying wey from
cx end spending ७:७४ time on

6 Tu

In gee. saz
vrmulay werk.

pection daz is not misused 8५ escape Bram

he presmut indil Certs jo eggurd
clicas work. 13, in our view, “a re ¥ respons ke bor
of low wubesdinate lal machinery to

We may menlic ७.९

Madras Andhra Jrigenl,

le dici:at and sezaicns juéges pacmit-

part 1090७ the vale requiring an qual ing tinct

y gguris. It is, perhaps, crue sha
30317:26 of courts in each dstrles in [hese SI

tae amber of canrts jie sine of the daztzicta 1 30:52 pther
Vu 43 rispections da play. a Ixole in ४०४ proper

oY fhe judiclal adroinistrs the
ing atltepwion and
be ragarcnd as an essotlial duty

ofa distri
lente

zo ang chould: not be rezeardcd an re? minor
compared with jadicie] wor.

13. 1: must iso be mentioned thst therr are e Jaren
ouraber of High Ceart Judges who reen in thik tha the


eat

१४००७ peu: on clese Sspeciinns a unnecessary and causes
acadiess cnlerferenis wich thepr yedicial work.” They ltink
thet the appraisal of weee nf | judicial - r, waen bis
destaung cou up Lefore thea ir angpsai cevision, is
veamgh, Sueh an s ॥7:|०४::१९( anc 18 inven roure
बे आओ eh the existing man: ol aeresta, AC Tang Line
w ७७३0७ ta elape stween the pass.tyy uf a judgment end
itx smrutiny a; the stage ol appesl ar revision. Jeur.tug sae
lonz interval xf 7 de susrdrate
val nanner of
work waick ५ well ripen 01७ an 1९0१7 हूं 70 hebil. Th
क्राजा be avulded by a Jew wet eenub roorde of
efler a curetul ta, ti et an cackor  sliages
juctcis] work is prirgarihy more -creportan> thar आफ
fealive werk, Ue success of judicia’ admin stra‘iun. depends
2h & हएसस: Macssure upon isspeb Luts aed the ander:
of ae docel ciffeulties 64 prainieras wh
frum dis In dil, On the cosaxi
the inspeccing judge, wi: he iz ¢
: 4 ७42४ of the 11! Ce.

i aoris ४. 119७
yer pe clearly व ५ ucht ta light w!
ai ae sulosdmate jndicta! aficer cauics up
ef appeul vor | te supetior gourl. At ha
110 jad ote she #:1 exzems cf ches,

prea ility
avvided. Waen -t

dicig] srosedyre, and Ine varions
tated th guy Kroal exleut and
-h che

iW he
cL 185७8

stage of trial ganm: be c
thet the pesii® ity of delay ie slhaays inter
ayNacr u. any other system ॥| i ay Teplace i,
apparen’ trit the aaly salutfon cun or ls
delare अगर ‘prin. 671 AL
nermul duraticn required fer ‘pi
Tt is ir this sper. chat uapeetion plays a ver
and 7: iz no substilav for it. The xe:
wt Ceart Judge suined yreater
rissa of a lange ramber cf district. Sudges
ing meaperatively inexperig¢hged aad Jacsdag ia ept-fide

व. We rst alsa porut out that :६ छे imps
Court to be laced =!

vasten,
Cnate where une judze
iE: ce sole charge oF the iispec-

li of ccurts in ax many 851 districts « sddition to
desling sith actmintstradve Fork, Te get gunche~ State



Dive units
oc werk
wecerh

mor १६.1.

Yerladxcel
Lngeyius.

* to incieatr 19 the iter

28

inspeciiod work aes donc oly by the Chief Justine. Any
wud: orcuugemens ia-hrund ia be unsatistsctory es the
jud. Ke it question will be unsblo te cevov adequaze time
to these duties wees he 13 largely cr cven wholly Freed
froma judie!e? wors

10 stands ८ reagan Lhot tim court of 8 d.steirl . and
sessinna judge being the highnret nuuct un. the district sould
tuvartably be inspectad by ai judge of the Higk Court not
enly in relating in the jedielal work discharged uy the
district and sessions jedge: hug 480० 20 reepecs of the का:
rust/atlve functiona af the district jucge. This oovipasly
canast be evhieved if the entire work iz vonceutruved ॥ा
one er tw judges hoprever able. ‘Chia d:fieulty has ‘bec
met in sime uf Ue southern States where ili the jydges
af 0.6 High Court sre-entrustad wlth inspection duty. Bach
Turlee is pleced in ¢harge of opt: or more disiriece 10 the
Scste for a period ef one or two years, A) malin Tela.
ing to that district, both judisial and administrative, 3
tarongh Im: tues of che judge in charge uf the digirict
Even such :uatters avs:dmiadons of second appeals or revi~
sicts, ariaing from ome distrigt gn ७: the judge in charge,

of the district bough Lhe fined bearing fee
rent Judge or judges: This arxtigen aT
of the High Court to gi rlowe 211 ictal
atic wrirk.aw itt a pacticul ae district. Further (i
nistrat.ve craters relating to Chel district pass through -hal
judge though the fel srdeseio-s; Le peeeed by tha Judmq

thedwi: ia charge ef that bristle dcainketrstion आएौ tae
Chief Ju-lie ie uddition, gill the judges tke part in
Inspection work, sof imrietz belng rotated among finn
periedcally, We rend the adoption of iis 6:
genere_ly <o all the ale. ¢

21 We accerdin| recone nend that all the ssboz ie
courts should be “he jakly ifapected hy the district Judge

at least once a yer aed dhe: ra courts and at loegt 004
sulinrdiuake court :६ each disteigt he inspected by alBish
Coiet Juctge at ieast once in awe yer. 1

22. Iv *s milial; U:at the eupervisloo of she अर
shee 4 De very thoraugh ani! saould cover atl the
ot the court's functions. The iuspection reports theteiers
Fwuld show a corre pictute of the xtule nf each tourt,
36176 out the defiwtti 118 working and give inst Z0n$
ier Ite vulumszd:mate @fficers for their guidance wt had
octesion To purxct pomeé of the :uspection tererts: and
vevlewa that were made pvcileble ६७ ue in same Staked The
iapresgina lef. upem our miride was, that a Jango hymbet
of thes. were perfgoctory and right well ve been
written By an ineeligert Timistesial officer. “Chey Patled
d:nate officials tho wey ० सा hich
Laer could have avuided umseceagary delaya in the

of caxen and often raed ip the conditions 74 theofice
but gave no informal abopy the judicial side of the;wark



a3

Hy which Un: judic:ai officers had handled is,
wal, that the iaspection reputts xheuld nat cnly
Live out enould औरत be tnatrective,

k, [५६0 Lae “fh fa Court should wk: :
to the ८ judgez. chat the priowary responsi:
euyerv:sion lies an shez. wore Rucp:ised 2 fod that
in the Sisve of Serala the dikir-et judges exere’sed pract:-
cally oo superior y powers over tHe a1: ate courts.
vel ef the work of the subordinate judicial nlloere
is dore by lar Sigh Court ard the 11७1:30 judge merely
<0:59:1९३ and forwards Post office the fpures collect-
ed hy him. He inapacts chi ordinate Courts orby asa
wortince oi the [185 Court. We saeré told that ill posth
ane tvanafars of even itr episterial aud the Lest grade a
Isoded 7७ ky che II'gh Court, We think. that
cet Ute eabucd:ugte courts, the disteiul judge.
bong the men cn the spet, 8 8. 3 unugh better positon thin
the 1:61 Court, ta be able tu xtra selruvely pore
effective cantrn awit supere.on ever the ooucls wilh
hig jurixackon, It cnould ke printed sut to che cistrict
judges tnet tl Ld naz-expect the High Curl to by

the werk of 1 wRich sugh> te be thei: ma‘
ly.

19 point ५1: delays on she part of subordinase courts, wiieh
i, juége hse Isilodity nuitien, lar 228: judze
y have been ६3:93 :६ the disckarge of Six

clear Ryle uf the
atc
for jutge

duty of su

24, Anclaer iuportunt feulas- which 70038 ompbasis २४
is Hin csxul pt persoasl contizgts selween datrics 1
the presiding officers o2 ae Ainits uur 41 in a whole-
same premtice ior dicte.ct ges tp ca] the preskdmg
afflcere aid dizcuss with thee] their problems ard give Vere
guitab’c guidence. Such 8 cling wil weadly asalst the
4isriet judge ip unqers 19 Une er emos of the «>
ordinate vuirts and la éevisihe suitable measures for solv-
ing them. If he feds that 2 pertleder judge is aver-
Durdeosd Le could withdraw some chee (rue bla PTr,
tratsfer them lo others sa re-armnge fae distr >ution
cf work. "४ itt Jue pianer hot anly “se if a Bosi-
(६0०७ ६5 custzuct te prasidiag nficer,’buz ६90 have contrnl
aver the perding Utigation in ell the ance within Ine
4urladictior. .

45 We may sien sever 10 है prectige that areviils — im judisiel
Bombay. Th Bish Conrt hgs Ivcurd ¢ rule ta the extect Conttreare,.
tbat onec ४ Use district judge sleeuld cal < judictal .
smnlerence of the judges subordinate, to him for ciacw
of dowstiul watters nd tor ponsultaton «3 Ue enruii-
tiens uf each zourt The xc hoe pleadee practising ix, the
distrivt wut also wvited ved conterence. The c:vil jnders
“are thus encouraged Lo conm@lt the district judges
whe on their own part againdivealy dpagult the H:gh Court

al
®


7249

on uatters परत ignce uffectung the juciciat ondmints
manor, The distr packs #e truerd 69. enteavour
to cultivar 3 psrscand ee rece with Wa: vil judger
ata sicp lhemaslves aeadly thfora.cd of their nesds ond
of the pt: as ef Law werk ia ther vespertive courts. 4
(0-4: .एए (७३६९ can Ihag make su couleteacs & CCaten.-
ent pbpwrtinty for dtecuszing. the atars of each = gourt
wi-h th necenad, For cxunsining lhe state of
Fis fics uit imng th: presrecs af his work, his
ng other allied metters.

*. teds practice , of u
arallky practice cod 210
Scste? in the रा ५.

4 ज्ञ-50 suggest Urul.
we ता: 19 to the ro

dierinn = 1४८5९
fees our. bw

रन" 010 ef
४" ecu?
1८१12

the
1

- omurts 78 al) dae tote
mm. ww. Urdar the Crimi.
Maszettstes are. inyosina with Fs ४

118«

thal in che absence of
by the sp
heir uewers moy ke whuded. 1४७ ibe de

fs nce 2
Sed fer

exrcsiecs — adm'nixtracive
thé ost rack. ef che Sina-
exzpeeind te inxprul and atet-
We undezand
i jadge alzo acvesior of
Sor ube scops of जे

bee dou

: : ig cuaverved oc the
J euliabn, aclics,

eomiro’ and she
ig de vested cv the

Mawsdeare (jtdiciali «tn ix under ine <
(6७, The Cade has Seen aratiauerl 10 ee
appesls from scvond aad chisl clase mragierales
" 2८. 11 छ to 9|ज ६: i
Whe perfomns lerse pre
it ef this]. ne tries crassa oHich



oa
ate normally triable by a fires class wsnglswwate; a5 811
appellaie snut. be eats appeals from thie ॥४३७४-०४३ of the
second and Ibird clas: magisiralis, and adrainistcal.lvely,
seeviaes tae wors of af] the judicial = miag:straces
functioning an his wueteict, In Asulhra Pradesh in the
inttial ybagics 1: piss o2 diatrics mingisltines: (judicial)
were treated en the vateaun = prevailing iy Madras; bul
aiter the peeing cle = Cenzal An, KXVIut 1H.
amending che Cedr of Critcunal Proceduro, th> Gov
a2 Andhws Pradesh ayclishexd the posta cf d
rates (judicies) and epevinced in their
i i te afford 7:
ra judges. This was ctw. aetong orl
+ dispngzal of apoeals fro the dct.
i ४1९४ whick (9९
fer duelpe dee 4h
suhnedtirs

3813:

wong judge 4०७४७-४००८
is, on accoant of bi y heavy judicial work, 12.19 (0 disteict
Time aaveseary for supecvislog the ‘yobord १६४० IS शी:
aularly 36 be hey 13 80 लाए अल Lie work supreviewy
us well. In fact, we had jure sae ४०४५,
ure cf pelcisl warl: bol
may jodges fra udequute
duties. Il tas koa हैक
supervisory fan
॥ aerlormed ; 186 dictri. “ose strate
(judicial! auch dates “athe atest a नेता of tire. Il ig
ly usore econgroical that these (01765. [nr which
Zerpole time iz vedo cinuld te performet 1
luwar pad off.cer Tike a distr nt
talhes tlian ov a highly paid «i!
Further, we isu appreated thet an addi
ice upseinted ३.0 this purpose, vO vecy
tus and ob axpellete work
‘ a. the week af supery.aing’
susercinate criteival magistrery will auller, We hare
Teferrad lo ths aspect of the Latter wm the chapoer sn
Criminal Apprals

3L. Ja amr viow, it is therefore neoesry acti
enzure ullequate supervision over the caimins] maz yf Bieri
in rulais, detiicl smagiztrales Cudicial) in all Staves. az has कान
bron dine in Macias wad Mera'a La additlun lo inspection किट:
and smervision ef the sabarilinakt Courls tae rlisdciow
Tamistrats, {judicia:| could 3:50 be a firet cies
end @y whe snece Jerportant and difBeut cru.
fémsr i, Adrevnistrat supervise cf the work'aK
the stihorrtin: TIT: एड: 3:15 gyi be pring sally
his bands: ~! 0 the judicial cet up, the >28४00-, juder
would sucitimue lo he the Righest fudiciel authority in che
Diebiel. ‘Thr alvanizge of प्र syzlerm के... deoanstrated

33 छह. of 1४--10.



vad

‘ty the 1६७0, that in the Madrag State where the supervi-
sory duties ate adequalety performed, there mie very fepr
crin-iaal cases moe: than ts7o momths old in Loe megistevigl
courls. 21. my be thonght, however, thut it weuld add to
che oust. od admimiswaliog if s पक 2 magstee Were (०
be appointed fur his pawpose. Lixperleate kas however
saown Lual such additingg) cost le more (१४० compensated,
sulting efficiency. The uz af & system pf

sepervision in reducing qc.ays necds to be apprecia ved.
“Whe Madea; 32 A acrikurg example of its suecess ia allordad by
emmpir. = what happened ॥: the 4६६६0 uf Medres waere 198 system

aes Dente un [06 fer m bong time.

1463 the gumber of crimiral cues pencing री
mere char 7४० months 49 the Trehy district woe
Among thee: wer cus instilclad 19 19851 aml 1962 and
“wo gocnimitta’ crecs af the year 1४६1, Gn Ini: 018 March,
1 af-er separation and 1 fe Tigia cnfovcemant of supse-
uur of Ceo muntas old crimingl cases :श्रत्पे-
ict were only thirteen atuion whe Akh

art magisivate wu uble 10 repors ow the
Bieh Court thal cut of these thirteen omses, eleven. hed
geen disprzu of leaving 0४.7 two, which kaG act be! Ep
टच 11 ot Hay ondsps sued by the Hi
uct.

This remavkeble inaptoveriest was aitvibuted by the
judvee of the [izh Court ant the officons corcemed solely

ce stries ४6७ etfective a 251! cvisioa at the diztriv. leve) ahd
by the High Court, method of eupervision 39 set ut
br bes,
Matin 33 Tre Wigh Cort bpd laid down stundards of
६४४77: TaRximum time whl bh ivérige: crimmel cave 4

Sap tase. The inatruclons iacd by. the Eigh Court lay t a

SFerimi4; Uaat 90 caine Lriakle beam ६ masgictgata alculd be, reacting ir

Rory, ayes tee moths. Siajarly, «yroniltcl proveedings 1

~w he disposed cf within dix weeks and cvusions cases within

Ties rina, HP? Meres. In al. these casas, the time is revkuzed
foe from Whe date: of the epprehensdim of thr: aucused. :

Judicle. $4 Varieus .eturna have: beon prescribed to ene ure: ०४
sary, Hus schedule of tame is adbered to. Every maogustrate

5) diary ahowlng line aulual time spans
éay in cougl work and fui details
actual हक a? werk dufing ihe gay, Recently the Hi
Cour. his directed thab the murpioae of wiltresec का
ed by a प्रपप्न्“ों६३६० in 5 day shogld els find a place in

Ler tn;

पफालाटा> 36. Bule 292[8) of te Marra Crimira’ Rules of 0१०
sromoerys, UC :180$ th SOF courts ahould Iie oarticuiajiv
ugal myer 17 delays Ja lhe trial oc take: In

te seurts. In order to पुर wip the scperior colts
@ stich vrerdance, Rule ie provides for the stb
mésyion cf what are comniaaly known pe “calerdpur?
stavemenks.


243

Hac in he case cf extremely pelly offense every
aecond ard third class magistrate has 49 sebmit 10 the dis
arint 01381 170 4: 10 sobdivisiomal raagisteatc, &
Statens. contain: cettaln p ing ७ every
2888 tried ky alm ‘Th: statémert has te cet cut the dates
of (Ui the clfenre, (2) the report, or complaaL = 9) Hr
arrest, (4) the zefcase en bail, (5) the cémcourweemet of
trial, (bh) the close of the: trial and (7) the sem'erer:.

‘The calendar uatement and the judement has ts be
sco. wilhin too days a* Ube dave oF [05 yudacuen. teu reer
with an csn’anslion tor Ihe delay के the disposal od to
case vac months have elaxced between the
date ६ appl ofthe amyseal snd lie Brel cde
posal of the cass. Similarig, the caletder eatcments of
Gral class nwpiswates are swomitted to the upsicnsy judgs
by lw district mayis.rclu tagether with a copy oné the
judgment in every cage. An oxamitistion of the statement
jwomediste'y shows whether there bas bean any avo‘dable
delay end whether the delay goturved al lhe inwrsli-
gation or al stage Bince the valendar कगार:
are subzcithed welcly for cach case amd court—they
enable the progress cf tases to be watched tore ¢loseis +
(१६8४ oourclidaled monthly gotaros

36, Similarly all magistretes'in a Gictrict nave te suky 140०-६४
tott to the di: o bp the eighth day nf ‘the dtstsmerot,
ctomith a statement af 31 the uel ४८2४ duse by thera पीट गे!
during ‘he maa एप: giving in & conselidkted form
ail their ca’ ar statements (as कि 57 हर Rove) 20866
with an exzp_anation cf she hit v have oceurted. In
these returns they tave: al dhera sepdtatcly — uasds
whieh have neen dspoced of by trasfer to other emurta or -
by a waneler ta the register of pending eases, ie,

Ses Jn wich breceedings heave ae talen onder se¢ton
& Tt.

vi. The igh Court har memitiy directed that these ae ne
tetas shecld be eystemadirally rotlesed and sctutinised a
both by the snbcrvicionel thagtettak: aud by the disteet
Magistrate. The district magistrate 48 pasusulariy tnstnwl-

‘tet in #e¢ that the calendar ststemests of ern which are

shvan as pending in ane agonthiy valement, ard as die

posed of in ihe wert, have been remeived ih his court,

38. Quarterly return: hege to b> acbauittes to the High
Courl hy all oiscrict mepistrates in Form 32 (Adminiers. fence
dive forma) oreeccberi by the High Court, whick ८ ihe Hiab
effect 8 consolidated summery of all tre calendar stale

Tents. Amuhy other thin; theag returns shew the ©
eraye Guretion of 0४६९४, Fhe pendemew m dave af the

Lease on 000, the explpuslius for acley turnisaed b;

mir strates xgethes with thr: istrict maglswal
iw cr cwmarks on the werk:ug of the murs

jet.

ce
alist:


m4

Serating at | ac ‘Phese statemenly were no 0040६ being subraltled
dherice tered. mazistyaies far 4 long number of years, but never-
, during the war ard the pxelevac years the
deacy of ccumini) eae amereczed considerably. Tt is
therefor, tie iusislenice om retams buy ther
ny wal examination a.cu:ipapied by disci-
piir ary in tase, 01 slackncss, oh have brovght
about the satisfagicry klate of the crimiri® = courta now
obvaiilag tn Madras.
For some yruri duclag and imuccivlely after the war
was completely Ineffective 1 wor ऑधाएटा
ny districts hul. in Uze on=  districl 45
niained, Lae stete of werk In the eriotinal
tory’. Repewwrl and sirngent
sustructinng had co ke iggued by lve High Court wilh
L.on districts and sy the Boatd of
iewicts tc: lhe district maps
< oaneétved ‘osistiag wpe close and cHordive amper-
vicien, As a mesull, supervision ० Ceirly effective
Pew of 4, the jué wai . तर
_... ३0, The juderocats whieh very second claes magus
17 15६0७ ambmis -¢ ub dketrict magistnat: along wit his

ender scatemnnt ate perazed ky cha ollie: anc if the
crile ६४३ adopted an crraumuus or - ip.
३ the cisbict amagistrace  certtuls: aad
gu the inferlor maagislra less are esever Pipeerg ile he
dezvs2 the atn.ian of Lhe Higa Court x | judg-aent which
appears unesc ry lw hime zo that the revisional
Powsrrs ol Le + carted il. Por
‘ner. hare gases hive been delaved owing ta che feult of
7 of the calendar slaw-cente
dzaws al ew’. puglslrates are Tepli-
manced by the suballvistons] megistratc er by the district
n:agisate 33 the esse miy os, ios tia other hand dalays
hav rhed owing to the face ef tbe prezecution, [fnr
instance faltze to prodvee witngsis) tne district
(1 व धी़ lhe rater and ऋ a dén.ioflelal
hr duswict syperintendeat of palice drasing his
tote Ta,
wns of first qlaxs risginrates are audjocte!
iT 90740499 nat only by the 0 ४७॥7 magirvate but
rs judge cud appropriaze instrocticue aod
© system vE subsaitting judgments fav
petior vourls hi 1 lear, ous virtue. It
wll net be disposed of wi-hout a judg--
sneet being write, Jt ix canabe however cf acting
mney 11776 ८३श| alot Lis |णो 27320
enaklee the sar inde the qua.izy of the
work of the subordinate magistricy, ana 950. cut ita

defects Ic ओ&1 helps to mate the vévislonal jurisdiction

uatcee ना... Lequary oto che Workin of th-
the: ere few The Ewecurivg >. fag, Pere



m3

affective hy making it ९६३9 for the district magistrate or
sessions judee 49 coke: references sun 0:020.

41. 80 tar ius Use relurees showiog the work 40०८ Ly the
mmegistracy 872 cenocmod, the [n-mer praviies wu ee
delailed stuususy ‘wae urscde orty at the giscri
High Courl war 46089 suppxced to see dhat
Toagstrate had performed bis dulies of saper
ube High Court, the veturma for a district uscd to be 77
hy Pin judge i adsncmstrative chazme of che
cerned. Frequently. aowever, Ur Jud.
mative eure hei 1114 magiericecin of the:
of sobordinaz wourte ang ne ‘ncination for saminisai:
ij । Tn tac result, the work in the district sutfercd
६९7४. 11 ५

Reventiy this les been se. right. ‘The serudny of cll
criminal reiorns 1:34 ven entrusted to oe Judge ib
consideruible aisl iet ane acdimintitretive cepericarc, The
Teturns go in the first instance to the २७३७४ -o acministre
tive charge of che district; but whether or net ke 985
eet abinised Cherny they heverclieless subeniilign ty ६10

Superrinna
छ rhe High
Conte Laver.

level. ct
district
In

yetemat.cally
delay submitted by the magic!
886९5 have ls rity
magistrate has not noticed th: delay, <] fil matgis-
trete's explanation is called for. In ovber ७७:७४, syslumatbe
a. ihe Wigh Court level br a judge faw-fiey

work, ensures that dlawict mazictrates
dety of aeving ५71 छ lke crimine’
cuurts in Ligir districts are werkmg setistactorily.

42. 1६ ॥ perl‘cular court accuroulates arreare owing to 300 tinal
heavy filing the districl mesiztrate and the Eizh Court Ma.
promptly wecve for the appomtment of additional magls-

Triality and sack requests are generally aucepled by Gfovert-
ieee.

40, Inspections are aleo a regular (७४७४६ of rrimind! Impoctioos,
jaieial administration, The district and subd |
magistrate: regularly ios perk all ports In their juri
once a year. Jf Ube conditions पा a particular com
uwatlisfagrery more troquent inspections ave made 16.1 tue
ennditions improve The court wf Bhi: wistr:et magistrasc

alga lnapected by tie sessione jadge. whe in aie

sd vet the court of any jud'cial 1081-1४ tn
the district if se thinka 11.

493. A common ecunplain, by members wf the oublic is, wim
tint cwitnesces cre askect to atiend south an a rinnber of Snore cE
sxnzimigns and a-c then sent away without being exatoined. nerasment.
Consideradle 1:80255011. ix this caused to the witeses .
end unnecessary work thrown upon the police who have te
warwn ihe summonses To prevent hee happenin ing
High Court has previded by rules that no w ld



240

be detained for more tonn three diys, Onge a wiknest
hes actanded evart ip obedlenca Ww 8 summons Nik evi-
ded and be toot oe discharged within
period of three clays lecludes Sundeys
hui av be submitted eyery cusrter to the

umber of witiéses who have
han three 0५५8७, waelheo with
expianatinns Jor suck di tien. ‘The three days refereed
16 on tha 7७10 79 ant wean thino canseouhve days. If a
wiles faa been pak? cn attend Court on more than three
ooupsieas the operation of chia vale ia nktrcled. The
yetums arc suratloiged and serious antice is tawen of any
avoideble hardship wiflicted on vdtuesses.

Nene arear- 4%, Thy long pendenuy of crbwina cess -५ forge mente
ae ८: ee dive to the rina-upyt eg nt wigeeses, The 9०४५७ blame
pee wr vor the magixtrucy a fad the must cy blame the polist for
ana 4he failure oF thr witnesses uppewr. “To ensure: thet
surnmonse: are sent to police suficiently Le advante to
cneble (# 13 36९६७ “be witness ard algo to oytesy Upon
the police th seczaslty of sctving ail senses prom hy,
% regixles :3 mutntaineéd in every magisbale’s oot #10ए-
“ag arong othte things the dale on which prwerey are
ibe 10 8 particular golice lation und thy date on which

re received hag.  Thé cirele inspector 0
er perlodl 7
police. 1९ (2:

thorised te oly thie
riba by
plucess cn the part af Chi: छाकेएए-
thst. the i peter ge wits it out to the aa ing
allicer. the yroffee i fe at fault ashe :|
taues Suemaaty acon
Delays sane! eteur in the १२४३८ vb peocezecs एफ
Tegsim of the time laken in the twansmisdea 3 नि

and worreents 1: 080 7० cow't to the police station, Th 7३%:
i instructions heve beer use that wheoever

Bible is present 10 & 20017, hi
2d of thr gay when all pryenssss ate 139
m hi setion should be bunded
छू पी! geadt: in lhe saving sf ‘to
<क Vatee days which are waually taker 8 cTanamiorg
pryeewe Uy post ty the pnbige. statin. :

Aderuual +” 45. Decently ७ numaual of inatracti Tur the <a re
Inemucrlecs. of Lhe ieapletrates has bee: prepared by & senior &| a
by the Highs Court, tt hax been

judge: urut afver
ieved कि ail (००६ aac, “s snagcual 12 extrem
elpfil and the :aslructions cobtaiwed ib it, if dellow, ipa.
should go far to avoid vkeaye dnd make for thr १४४०९
Gispesal of cticninal cases

Genum! In- 4it. The पाए Covet has prescribed, that every apa -
ecrtuya, cution for udyourument of a ९४५७ in ६ sys Fat, should
Donde ४७ scom ::उ lhe 0०1. aite am chat day te abl: ther
Adcom. tmagietrate to settle is शत work, . Care tha work is ०८९५०,
wars, the magistrate tolls the है ओह apd counze! पे, each cist pt



24

what point of (ane on thut day cach case will be taken up.
de has cleo Seer. provided shat adjournment shonhl as a
Talc by aveided and that zemeracly a turty showd be given
ouly one adjournment for the: purpose cf engagiuy 20078.
Preece inacruclhns bave also been issued 12९ ७ case
snoulé on Te ueomunl Le adjormned on tbe ground Ebct alt
the wilueszea who have been suminoned are 107 present:
On the other hand the presiding officers #ave been directo
10 exemine al’ wilnestes Whe wre vresent on a pirlicular
day. Hx:eptious may sometioce have ln ur made, but it
has bocn vided, thasos for 38. possizly, all aituesscs
presens should be exating dcyen such an txatiiuation
hreaxa tae continwiy af the case pul. Sorwaré by either
pathy:

a

47. The Hieh Court has algo provided im Une sastructions Abeeccs af
igued that requests for sHjournmmnts sy ४ departmental es
¢Ficcs in charge cf prostuiticas should be cixcauraged.

0 bas alas puinled cw. thet in simp) I: ८७:६४ Whare the sto

secnt'nn witresses arc peesent, it je swt neceassty to

adjoum the cass to enable 1 reprekentacive of the एए 90५४0

Lllch to atund, The magistrates ६०५१७ exam-ne such wil

newex Chemgelves, wilh te sid of the mernorandum

Attazhec to the charge stwet, which atates 1

cach wilness ix expetted to prove ia a perti
haz algo poor, erovhsci jog cheat adjaur
purpose of hearing inyus
maiy nat be granted
heir in:tnediately et the cle cf a cage cr in any crest
ab tae close of the succeeding day. : .

aC. Instructions have alds been kecued to the mayistratog Paming of
thas all this cases promeguled by particular depar-inents बंध
11$&॥ thar the pol.ce dke the ee 43०, Forest. oc Prohioit
Sion Departmenss should ag far es possibic be sosled on che
aame day aflee asce ing tae convenicace of the di-piett
meutsl officer in oherge af chose cases. An arrangement
of this Kind tenda to che ¢onvenianze of KU! ranzemed.

49. A number of case piten tem itin peadung for a tire -Abeence of
owing to the neo-up 10417 ef the accused. The (+ sued.
cnagisirales Reve beon (aptricted) to issn in euch caze
warrants fur the arrest aE | ubcueed, in the event
theit ron-vppsuance to issue proolerpations uncer sections
SB and 88 of the Crimina! greg? te Code. In seuond the
evidence under econ S12 Crtroima! Procedure Code alist
nblaia:ag che conmanence oC the district magistrate and to
transter lbem vo the 1० oe of lokd pending yours. Pelty
ces are, however, withdrawn By the admiatstrative
departmea’s when the mympist-2te draw: their attsntiog
lo che long poncieru:y and #0 the (86 that there i no chance
of augrebending the accesad withth 9 rresonab‘e period of



- 24

Ermita 50. Belaye im the delivery of a judgment in erim'nal

- *  pasry have Leen prevented oy 8 strict insisleate upon the
yule, thist ७४००६ 3 tria) nas teu evucladed the cases saou.d
be posted 4: ७ npecide date for juymens snd the accused
ef un bail ehowd be bourd over For sppeayance yn bhut
*qatn. Thie avoids 60४५५ weg nut of tbe necessity of
ensuring (१६६ prescnec “f thu: xecuged to hear the jucemert
pronounced, High: Court bse sleo orev'dact by its
cules chal grlnlosl essex, judgments must be
dehyered withia thrive deyy uf the cancludion of argumer.ts
and tact ar sapluation Must se subm'tted along wth the
valecuiaz etagetTrent mn every 5 where mere: taad three
days have Secor, taken foe the delivery uf the [४ प्रेद्धाभ!ए।.

we ray roi renarast insider Bozo: orher Slates tice
Utcar Pradezh ard Kajestbar. where a petind of 10९९७
d is permisted for this purpose, No-:oally three days
shovld br sufiesent for the delivery vf jucgsacmt eve
sissians tac. Ln any , ander no cirtumstanors 10९:
the Lie penmillrd exceed a week We thiswelure recom-

mend 1:७- auscdiate emendment v7 the rules in this zegard
and its strie; enfictecmest.
Suyerviti-o 54, For ensuring adequate: supervision over the

ts Wpreliane aupriiate work cf magis! tutes ard sessiuns judges a forsee

hag been prescribed kauwn as Ferm No. 40-- Ad.
Pours. Th: Jerm shows the pumber of
i Teena to sunurdinaa: courts, th
पथ ane the mauer of their cisateal ‘Thr
uratien of these cases 1s also enlemed in it. These
return: e 70 ke submitind auarter:y to the High Court.
he rylus provide -hal erdinarily judenencs in ९311-03]
appeals shnuldd be delivered cn the working diay loJowing
the day on which Acaring ix soucluded,

Arule pawiéing that copics of ull appellece judgnzenta
Gclivered by gesshous judges and magiswates should be
forwarded to the Hizh Cours sittin 5 dayx uF the data: of
such celivery vasures aD appraisal of Lhe quality of these
judgmsnis, Thit proviso hes also the addil'nqul
advange of preventmg the lower appellave courts dis
porn of sppea’s without deltvering writlen jucgraente

Wr have cxaruned the measures udopted in the Sate
ol Madras tor the quick disposal of criminal appeals ix.
{ke Caapter on Crim:nah Appciabs.

We have ezaminrd the measures adopted in the Suite
et Madras for Ihe quick disposal of cetminal eppeals in the
enepler wn Criminal Appee'e

4D The work dime by the sextions judges is mrutiniied
hy the Tigh Court, in the same way # that of magumrsica.
namely, by त icrutiny of calender slulements ang a perusa:
of judgments very pessions judgc fags 20 send to the:
High Court & printél per ot his judgrumt iu“ every
criminal care: within eight daya of the delivery of judgment,



1४०७ jut, ait 6 ७७ tte Judge in adestaieinct:
charge of the inl concerned, who 18 thereby etablea to
ausexs the quality of the work ct the seaslona Judge and ke
issue instructions to bim if thought mecesw:ry. ln eukkable
0९8७४ the Ceut cxercises its powers of revieion suo mote
The mayimuy wried erdivarily permissible for lune dis-
7०5६1 of s gesaiiins vast is | :ए-€ months from the dade of the
aparelenion of the accused,

83. We rovormmend Lact sizda: roles be framed in ull
wlner States But we muy eéoyphaskee that upicss the
preper obgervance of these rules is sdsiszed opon—and that
can be sisured only by contingows supervisiua—ihe merc

४ 70165 will serve no usetil purpiiie Chu the
8 thr higtiesl जज! ७) tive. State, Lies 50:01 she
49 fox efficient judicial adminizeration ia the
4.1. machinery needa  constans au isicim हद
geticdeal inspéclion Lo ensure its emocth oy licn. The
vuulnery for the edrricistratios of ermingl Ja is eom-
reouines very close ¢o-nperation betwee.
the prosecining agenmy and tare public. Even
3 amell écmil which prevencs such co-operatina, my weil
invow Lhe Inachinery oul of gear.

Whal uw neecssary therefore, २५ not the: men: Evang of
toe rules but thair ohservance. This can ke ewicrved 7४५
by che weihod ef a clese and conttnuous ecrutiay by the
Misteicl एलजी: as well as che High Court Jidges, Thi
Whee e¥stern cuslined #buve kee bbe meric of for हु
In€ ऑप्ट्गरनण) on all sspecte which mainly ९७०2७ delay. 1
nay «it frst sight appear unressomable bo sugyesl ttul the
valuable time of a Sigh Court fudge diouléd be ६ए:एरपए -०
work of this euiracler. Bat, in our view, the end ९.९. the
spurdy dheposal of caves in ail the ertminnt cturrlx nit ener
tie State, is worth achieving mer al that «ost.

HA. Our concusiens regardmg the aupecislendence and

of

coneret uf subardiuate comms anay be summarteed ss concloions.

fallows:—

11) Many of the delays oow prevalent im wur
system of junicial adminixtradioa are capublc of being
remedied by udequave and mifeciive eapervision.

{2} The laying down of quantitative tests ap to the
amount of work 10 te dane by a judicial officcr tends
19 result 1० eléer and diffigult case being neglecled and
lighler suits heing dispoatd oF.

@ Al cia) suits over w yeur eld should be
regarded as old swics and subordinate courts should
be ackrd periedically to explain the delay in Herir
die peal है

44) All subordinate courts should be geked to sub
5 «1 returns showkig the pemlency of cases according
im the year of inslidulion sogether with Ukeir explanas
fn: fae delay. है Oe


to the judicial

at

45) For the dispzeal pf other civil procecdings in
subordinate civil gourta. the standards set onde in pera
graph मं anée sling be ineicted 91207 and ex,
furnizhed im cases of delay.

(8) A nimestehit diratd be exec Sor le cumplotion
af arguments and the delivery of judgment in a case
after the clese cf the bearing. Failure to cemiorm to
[कर imediuts ehould be adequavely explained

47) The retuzps rom subordicale cours should ‘be
xvatematically scrutinised a dudze or Jadyes in (06
High ०८: and oot be left to the Itegistran if
meccesary, the wotk nf supervision zerutl ty ‘af ratorns
and inapection aould bo divider! amen Lhe judges vo
ease that it le effaccive,

(8) ‘The H.gl Courta should make it cloar tp the
district judges thet the primary yesponsibil:ty for the
judicial “adnisiztpation of the ६0-९8. rests au thera
aind hil La Lusk olf aupetvision chould an ne 3९०७०५:०।,
be uzglected by them,

@) Inspection of subordinate courls ig csaential
ané shad net be given up. :

(10) UL suhyrinate courts should be invatiably
iespe;led ky the discrict judge once a yeur. °

1115 All district coorts and 3: leash. orm subrinfinate
cour? in cach district should be ‘napected by a High
Court Judge al least 0172 10 wwe years,

[12% The work of euseré-siiun and inspeccion may
ke divided ap.ong th> Judges of Tigh Cocks eanh Fudge
ting fwd in chee of ¢ cistucl or yronp of

stricks,

3) All jedimal afieers should be reeulréd lo
maintain a judicial diary, showing Uke wurk ४०७७ by
them i> court every day.

pection reports should contain adequate
re 4 imsQeaulicims tar the alioees of sy bor ete
ucts with togard to thet work. .

(15) The district judge sbocld maintain 2 ९७०80
perscool coutact with sebsrdineta civil jublictal
otticers in the dlatricta and cffect rearrange! meh of
never Preessery. ‘The practing al ing
judieiat 1 confevtnee in cach district the
line iniluwed in Bombay 39 3ct out in parsgragh 25
ante shoud 11: followed .

(16) Tho distewt judge aheuld cires ete [01५
oticcts in his charge u statement anqwing.
ut work, done by sach one of them.



251

C7) A districa magistryie ([४००७॥) shock ७
appointed in the sepurdticn 99628 to ensure proper
sUpervisitm of the magistracy

- QB) A long time-limit 1:86 BMeern days for tte
delivery of judgmant in a cmmimal 23३७ showd not bs
lowed. Judgments ahouki te dalivered within three
days ang at any rite nok Inter than a “tek.

_ (C4) Tae -nethex?s of supervision of eriminel cous

in 3 Atudrea ect out in paragraphs 35 $० 52 should
be adopted in sll Steven.



Doluyt in
isl 0-
एल्‍्ट- 5193.

Volume cf
lepton:
iosficution
and ८॥-
Bvtule.

di. -DE,AYS .N CIVLL PROCEEDINGS |

3. ‘This part ef our Repart is concermed with delay: in
ibe cigyexal of civil procerdiagg in India, the causes whier
oweasion such delays at dilfercal silazes of ube litigation and
remedies for teéuctg “he delays, Jaws’ delaye amv: not
percaliar vw our country, They iwi: been and conan 42
he the mubijict of comment in the Uniled Kingdoon aul [8३
United Slams. Kor are these deJays a receal. developer
in जय counicy. १६७ ave been the subject ef pre
inquarics by Neveral comboltiema to whieh we have made a
reterenec carlier Maay of the matters deelt with by छ
were Wyo cxumnse by those Committecs and we
bave occasion 7७ इृष्ट to Use results of the's examinaioar:
in upprepciate plaues

#. Before nansideriug che oatare und the cansee of the
ays during the pmgress of 4 suit, it is momsuty ४9
gpeurtain the exvent of the delays uy ६ referenor 17 some
figures mialing lo the islilution aod dispyaal of origin!
suils ia the vetious Sigs We have, for the purpose ef
this unslyss, chased the year 19055 beeeuse it is whe latest
year 102 which a@miniatculiay reports wert avuilable for
all Bye Sta’ The hgwres of Wot which we have gives in
the fellawiay Tables relate to the foncer Part A and Part ?
States. We 7४४४- oor been able tn edtain relevant Bgures
fu: Bart C States.

3. During 1954, over ene tadlion and fitty-five Uknsans
vel cml jecluding vouwll cause रस were ioxtituted
ah tie civ! url: excluduy the village und panchayat
cOWts end tri igh (१५७९: on the oripinal side, Incladiag
the avrears एशाः एवं forward feom the previous year, the
riamber of avits ardiiable (or disposal by the courts
jn that yeur was over one mien sie bandeed and filty-alie
thensuad. Dhoring thet year, the courts disposed of one
forty.ieven troveand suils deaving odes idec
Wwrrudlted thousand or lhicty-aix pet dent of
916 fer dispreal. “Foe following ‘Table
vetall pleture of these suits before the (छा
courts ६७ the Stalvs mentioned.

22 .



45

Tebly showing the csuitutton, disposal and pendency of
Original rinit fui ertluding suite before the vilinge
eng pamiheyat sveurig wet Algh 00९०४) ia 1954.

Nee oc che ४८४८. Lustig = Tatul 3४%... Nucibir oF
४.०७

of suits
vie 9७८ lot
. disprssl

Amiha . . T Ot] rahe
Asma. . meth LTACe oe
Boer. : : 1.33452 BT 504d WASTE
Boober soe Tinie 400.898 ade” ७13)
900) 1 . 2338 a4 45653 भक्त
*Keryle 11130:3
<॥:0५०८:एणो . anger Baath” aatst Boat
Madhya = Procesh #4,tor Beene उरअउ5 SASS
Madran - *« दि का] Pegs
BA ,oude - MA, Etat 978
Ores . 7. Thao 24s 28.579 2ayta?
Punjab . न स्म्णिउ कदम सडक haa?
Hair, . 47895 70,523 AEGIS 22:25
bauash ca : . Ae 25,612 TS.HO%
एप Pravich . + 1॥,फ़ 208 Sea 1#9:$15 “ss
Wear Hengal - ATER 1.4,09% Par
7435583 MDGS = 15,47:2280 6९36 15
© eer श्र परी press

4. These m3 which ales include a “azze volumes of
small litigation decided by sourts of emall causes ace unt
ef maverlal assiscance -७ underslandiry the prerixe naturs:
दा २७०६ vt Uae delays: ir of diftiguities ef the courts
or of the litigants. The position, however. becomes a lithe
clearer from the following claesification of the number of
860 cates into oonksted and uncontested und the
rumber of pending cases into these pending for nore than
3:७४ yea. The following ‘Table gives these particulars,



“Proper ti
oFaelayed
am,

254

Total Ne. Noel mia Np, of Na vi

Nome uf th: State of eal dod aed eh
“es 2 Fie
क्रभाउथध्न
Andhra - TaD idee T4Q}e 309
Aeon feng 8255 2:3:5 2073
Hib - ६3157. Tapoy6 1075 उनकी
Exmazty . : THT 44: 425 o7235 ६४ 2. |
3:02. 35५75 Na nA. Faye
Furze. *॥| “antsy ROL 3२7०० 2aaz
Matha Prods m524 S7s742 sagt sds
Modee 51172 ५ Hie abso
Riper . 20s RRS 2७337
Onna .. छ्ड्घर T2994 497 west
Funiah ma Tact. ऋष्प५ far
Roieschieys oo. 44,618 dea7B0 382 dite
125  - 1s Keo. 3०३१७ ag (a2
Cree Trade C6383 wasB by 33-908 aya
Wee bog - .* 334.896 sAatte ३4226 exe
NOB). 22 इक स्प्प्प्ड्बा विन विकास

3 The uteontested suits include these which Were
sumcuarily dismissed under Order LX of the Chil Pro.
cedure Code ov otherwise, adits decid? ex-perte or on
édaciss.ur of che claim aud fsa compromisdd afer the
defendant had entered sppearance. Ic will be sven thut
out ef che tatal cf culos decided 24°54 par cent only
were decided ate Ba trial und the rest of the dispjeals
argenting ५: over 70 cent wete without contest, |The
average decation of ds docidsd without cintosh 3&
gener: lesz than eng year. ‘Phat would show oe ‘De
L Snceery the 2uily ure @isposed of tn 1९5६ than one yer ler
thelr inal.tut.un and the ery of “laws delays la, therefare.
dirnfed sycinst the balance af cnechind uf the meca whick
rerpain pending for 8 year of ७७3५ .



255

Before considvting che एयर ef delay Wisposa's, wo
एप, attempt te woscrecand and define. what ahuuld be
regetded as wajustifickly delayed suits or arrews. Every
cast pending before 3 court caumel be ४४४ in the category
of arrears. A case monexmuily lakes 8 certain amounl of
me io pessthy thoongh its preliminary atuges uf tho cou.

pltlicn oF pondings. service of yrores, disco very and
lnspection, before it tan reach 8 ctege when it win be set
dew fer hear’ We nave in aa earlier chapter indi-

caved what eh a be reyrded af purmal tino lisnits for
ibe disposal था various tryes of civil proceedings, We have
come tp che concluman that haviug rege zd vc the Sgures a?
avuruge ducation, the a jars Lime Giapecal of 3 8:50
in 9 0:055 '& cour; should be qne year and wi a suberdinag
judge's couct, ripstecn menths. There standards are ‘a
some extent arbiirary put In thi neture of things thai
cannot be avoided ‘I'he real arrears would, there. fare, be

thoge 0४७९४ in the snunsifz' courts whieh have: heen penéimg Pucdscy of
Zor Inne thica ore year sher inetltution acd those in the Of mate.

aumidinate judges’ courts pepding for एच and a half ty
two years. Bearing this in mind, ve Ls examine the
omens ८४ the delays trom the fatowing Table shenving (10
pencency ef ariglnal in ६88 gubordincte cows
vezcluding small cure suivs fin seven Slates) xcroniing to
tie year ct institution.



Tank: caning she pandeaty ox og 31-l2Tosg of Ogina! sats ip sho snivedinare exerts scourdieg ५24९ tsar og testi.

‘ 55 = ipa 2 1945 २: ims mw
Name afthe Sig 4.4 elie of cue tnd war Wd Tak TS a
ae
he
t « 3 + : 6 Ea 9
करत
Denarce 10५५३ Ooms £ : ड़ 1 . 1
fobs tinue Jycg2s . . डे 1 a 7 7६. aE
ot Murat! Sy : * ठ. 5: ६ «४ # 55
‘ - . "2E
FE ine
Superlye Garin . soe oa, fo» at oat
Mosk? lyri. . - . . ong 6 4m 65
rdgen  Crevtts . नि T 1
Judes Cuz oe 4 4 room om ४6 oar OB
Nanslfy Coan मे 230. 063 ee Ms eT प्पशव
Smee: arte : पु noo. 7 z 4 ? 9
१0 शी मा कु | 1४3 #

ख़ुद ayya 195. :95#. 1913. Sigg Volk
बस था हक 23 २4 SS
5 Fes es eS aT
af 66. 333. अं). BGR 116 | 3038
AB ary oy ५94 355 एप्ट। 24744
धर Panes Send 0०5०
ota ts ns किए पी
4+ 4 5 © hs Ea
£ गाव hE SAS 254५. ४6651
it i 45230 $534 46२7 55737
G 3 > at ja Gi omar
Re We सकी G32 31%. 20५6... tis
fh) 2४०० 4:59 32८4. 4699/ 0.917 40831
7 gh OM ७७ कद TH LOTS
44. mys 364. उ376. २३०३ HOH



FA

2. 1ए७ाय Chats our ikan aiet ५
Fd ५ oe the Visrrle t-
8 गजल Gara el che Diswiss ५
b Wer Deyopi

1 igreuct 1५५9७ ¢

Tas

‘The obec memen: taules unt ua seven Sates necaaye perc from cater Sears 1a ro! gine viet Slr part

for ME

313
उड़

tard

hez 4190

Ry:

“4


Law arm,
venlyay एप
a) Lpt:

253

है, We acwr tot beca able (७ cp wis
fram ather & ॥ wel be covicad, however, that the
uetber cf acading cares, whien according tw ocr defintsicu
Os SIThATs, hears a Louparativeiy low pri-
n@ ‘ated muueker of wise: pendiug at the <rd
dau: percentage of the nicubor«f (६६5
ie than -]1766 yorrs iz ४६६ Inwer, In wis
if Hibor, out of a towl एएा्ं:५.७ cl ६7-30
CL एएए४आाई wer ८3७६९ pending octween vay qt
eply 4-6 per एप: were moyre thar (1:४७ rears
“cl and sckoréunete comma, 0७६ cf bf8) 2u.ts
॥ per ७६%, yeee wale than two wee
2 yer cent were thre: years olu. The farce
ngs] are stighthy bighsr, “Phe exzeptlor:
eal wld cages -0 Madrss fn that year ७ sa
1५ to ing of the Madrse Art VT i254 whith
had the effec: cf staging promedices ju all cuits fer she
recuvary of debts from agrieiltusists und १६ consequence of
whuck a large turaber ef cle ews were ataved 3] १००६) tc
numibe: vf instivutions fell. It is drue tbat in al these
‘ elder suila hare been pending for +i

srs, Buch ceays, bowevar, ७०-०६
sll parts of the nouatty are ७36, :८ part
sus Sectors kegor.d che cortrol of the: ॥फ.० ४.

sixilaz inforwmtion

pending, shirt:
old win एच

7. The result of thie statietical analysis, therefore, 55:96
whole, morn thin sixty-five to sevenay per neal
saathin ५४ el nw cf coe Ww
aWwu yrars ita 108 civ: courts of Bhat c end ol those
casmé. che averege litigent would 1: eve couch to mut
७ aleut. But the Law does net pive Gnaliry to the
[भा ॥र्त whe court: oF instance. The aggrieved paryy
॥ right ty chatlecge the 1€९:२:७:५ atainet

: more aprellat- cuyris, ihe uuaber of a2p 2:२५
perlas! Geog regulated by the natute arc? varus of the
subject m-lter 0: 173:७-७ in each case, This rignt of agpia.
“y ६०१ [५७ to ihe exsors and cmiss.ons ef she
ourts of Grst शहद whith ix righty availed of 5४ 2
gants. In inj. therefore. the ‘dea.
of cura, one (३३-1२ bear mind lhe
dred for reaching the dna] decis.on

that on the
ot the cxsez ere disposed cl

staicc, a ociginal suite trisb’s by ६ mawasif's ९७७६1.
exc2pt guits ७६ a ब्याज] cauec natarc, the law provides «1
first apetal to the dimrict aprcliste court sed a ६०२०५]
'छ. the Heth Court. Iu our sina, डा:
Roan Ube maosit's ouurt cuht 10 he dispneeg of
wishin ane veer in the trial conrt, wilbix: cix ४४०१४ ir
‘he Gztrict appellate ceurt ard within ony year in =f
agpral in the High Caurt. tn an irieyl ecnge, therethré:..
such a suit shovid reach firei decision withir. two and 4 half
ow a the mest three yeats but not 2:०8. la igo it
auics cf Aighes valuation triable m th courts of the of Lou’
judges. ous zarge’ ५ elghteen rouths to swo years In the
its wou 31.1 the suite duratign for (ae या apney! Gr



239

tae High Court. Sach a suit sheucd, 1॥:४४४४४, be finally
decidcu an cbuel. lacs: | three and ६ kat years. But cho
Livee co fact tacen wl appear पिया: the Tollswing two
Tables whi. skow the everage duration of puts enms
foedied respectively is thr mansifs’ aad s¢bordinate
/ ४7९8 st 146 sliiges of trial anc af rat ened secord
epprals ‘The Gzures 1 8 ta the y 14



Tala aboonieg tha ween dostartott of 4 tegulast sit anergy Se 1० पाएँ court from the dake of fhititution fe tind Tate of fina? dispatsl
Sy acon! 34052

Nume clue Fiat.

“The cimuet eased Fans it

athe Spinel al hy
ene "आए ot 7८१४५
gor छः! irl

ein विज tS

Sycouge d.atan Ingars af Average ८४७७० bint ied he Gsporsd Average durz:
है The Corrie! ayy

ines ७100७ acter fal: gh disput of

ae Mh,

24 Di

Bi, &
ALLS
BI

ts

em
72539

eo SubutLane |,

Dt ०४॥६०७१

O34

Rirx-4

1२०4-४०
1155 ०

augt ०

a8? ०

ATLL -Adetit’

G
idl

ne Dintter 1.41.


2

Table viensing the twercge duvctlor oe regular suit inatt-
-  t a Tate: mete g | रएतीप date 0, dnstitutiun
to che date of “ina? disposcd

Nene ot Aveny Average Average
ey union of digadina al diana

aed
Moe ttre

Jul 55५1 7₹ ia * eur
tbe clef

weer dull
douery out colring
dintzivi:

Anouk . . foo 35-0 Sal avuilosb:*
44am - पु ३695. उच्यैन्र ns2
Rite 2. दर नए trag'5 पडा 2
Bo 538९3 2503-9
: wiry aro 25-0
. tq? ह26-3 हा83'०
633-5 बट sao

Ova! started Jeartaning ju July rosa.

chuve Tables chow thal while Wie lower oats,
fH, ace in the time taken for disposal close: to
the targzts of time incicated by as, the High Courts 816
more dilatney Ln Sispacing | of fizst and cseccnd appeals i
suits waich have origina in the court of 9 sounsi! up ४
subsrdinzts judge. We: are aware thar atstledes de nol
always aflota a ius ildpuion of the psil
किए:0७ curticularly of avetagcs, my Cot accurately पथ
tke state of affgirs. Lf thd #एएणहडुए duration of a suit in +
Dn months, 1 1७६ obvicws thst imc
of sults rust bave taken ५१०7२ sue.
As ak illustration, we may
ja wherd we have autos wilh tha
of five, ten or even teempy rears. We wets ted
key thy Chief Jusziec = the Stave @hst the vractice in the

‘Trevaicore regicn wes a sui; as old, unless
Jt nad veen pending for The pets
denlupes une Ube avere, oe might, therefore,
present a somowhat than justifed Wa

हा woule be righ t in inter हर Ggures referred ta
eacliee 0 evil Higatige ia longer del
_ in the sapellate courte Houl in lard

ae the coumalfs' courts
safe xcrat delava
is Guslrict courts ७९ in th
-Uhgdisposa’ of appeala
a 17 the strict courts
abe Seas, cr & stad
# igen thar

Upfter apocals are Med en)
High Courts, These delay:

. Far grecier in thé Hy 7
Wm ६॥ States, the durat

“appeal in the High Court’ curs}



एफ:
macticery
Frog har
acvsuot-
Byle 1७६
Eclay,

Proc:dure
ne

rasponyible
tar deka.

1९ yitit, Zivagy wise: 8 aypaal in the lower शारदा
exate cf affeice is chearly anoma-ous. Normull;, the
io the orighsl court ahou'd ke resaon of the veiriqus
5 ss Ubraugh w. 1 hax to pass take longer time than
the d:spycal nf an appeal Irom the decisicn of the qias
court,

3. It bas ocen frequently iwevcled that che chief cause
७7 delay ave the 13078 of civ) and criminal procedure
i; hws seer sacd, ace cumbrnus, wasteful end Lorre 4s
ing. Et is puiaiecl out that very often the procure
becouzes at. end ia itself, Tae fate ni Lae sults i, made
to depunt spon the procedural awechi‘que 17 sa pune
through 70 arng Uiem on the files of the court for
uJjuéication. Towerec, it is nut ‘posssbls +o refcr toa
single factor s3 ether the sale or The man caus: cf delay
iu tivi, Ltigacam 9 India Tvery systrm nf 16221 inst
७७६४४७९५ to acminister ju in wecoréance with
aw musl ceoessarily be ६2३९४ on 89 adequecc pmieniagal

hi: edit pewnoting tae ust adjudicusio: cf
cavse; defore the law courts

chal nu procedural code? sre per-
to che extent te which they hiader
tae speedy di tepeniaatian pt justion, (1७९७ musk be ह:09:11ए६।
d. But Jt would, in our opinion, be a vislake
rnlite blame fer the del aya in our litigwlina gn
foros or cumbratgces of wrocederc, When
ave mids ayplist pracedural delays, it is offen
i that the machinery of justice canno, uke:
the slot pachime, produce 3 covision us sa<m ag 7
digi 5 116:३७७ ६७ ib obj का of procedural iawais
ta bring the disputints together the purpe2 af rrial,,to
ascerasin the fects ane the law in cteapuate 30७ ७४ .() +: Be it
cuurl to reach a conclupion after LL iteres tiga icon:
pucvislous ef the Civil Prucedupe Cide ४0४५ bored on
cheney thal there must full disclosure DF cach at ¥
of his case in thy obey, thet fee rival contention: खाए
be reduced as quickly ug icesible 4 he jorm ul clear
orecige points o: ‘ssues derivdon,¢nd chat वीर ean aed
sromet adjedicetion bir the cowrd those issurs. fn
ordinary civil accion bre paghit mere a court of =
therefore, ~wirtma tly time before its
acjudicadon by the cowrt. Tha. tee which rus. ९;
hefore the master is ths bro to its, cocelucica
A grinctore ibe

५ the Lime syenc, 0!
gacir g documenisty ‘ent Seat
6 apres.
matters tad. Zhore all ober



203

a3 [euly application cr oy failure to apply it, That
view of all rezpongible and experienced persons
ecsWere) 00.7 Qusslunasie ur gave 2७ bufare

17. Te was ganeralls agreed 13६ [1० Cede of Ci
erdut2 is an exbaustive and carefully devised oni
७» il propery anc ~pidly
ved Le: expec rather than delay Whe dinynewl
The delay rests wot ‘ram Le aroyodure laid
89 it bul by seiewn 41 the nnreehservatce of Mecty
poryin; provisions particulutly thoes tieaded lit
‘lite tha ciszess] of prmesedings. The view which
keuzes delays caaiudy us thy ecenbrous proveduce taiis to
Ate 30८०0. mumerous exancous ard pesmmal
lium riesgiie: delise Hke, an ioeffie.ent and

mel,

Sudge 301 the heavy
haprers are ahall

endrzaveur ta examine ५1:

of delays amd suyyex: a:susures 1८ remdye cece.


—~—JUPISDICTION OF CIVIL CO LHS

Bee ap ut 1 Thi nor

all Caer
uf

| Fictarthy of (7४६. courts io any district
court of the distrizt judge (3) the court
tive asalstant 3:3010] Judye (3॥ toe

पु बह amd 44)

+ 18 cours of tae munsif cr the junior civil judgc Besides
abese zeyular civil courca, theve ave ३130 pancazval ३७८
villuge suns cumsliluted under ube Willige Pareshoyut
Acts af the several Stars,

erercise tw distine: tymes of
ccuusry (1५1. forixtiction which ts
Coutts Sew 17 Scrce 10 che varus

courts

‘Acl, che Guardiana and
Act anc Acts relating x warriage,
others malcers

Troster of 9 ॥ appatu> to og that it will vend ६८ tae १४०७:
is partiax and less cxpenac to the Stave if
scat mxelusively exec Ly higher dourts,
vo lower courte ६०९७ (७ whler wil bi
bearer anc to the parties, We have avmady avl.od
bow the highest courts et ike district level aze overburdened
ih work and gaffer From a uoupestieu af the.c Glee which
tas “ee! Lu sizetential delays, Go the whole, the situation
in the lower courts & not so dilisult. ‘Sha. appear wo ७७
2 1७8४७: season for the -caosfer 1

coud be + पा

soo. of the

jeviedistions which are now cnjcpod by (का higher ccrurls
6 tha Lower cwurts.
The: cevoludon cf [प्रांक्रित | जा, ty udinery sad

spesial. of the

L courts tax conven.enuly be cconderet
unde: tre folle:

ieada

1) Eal. ant of the >ecuatary jurisciction of
the junior

25 Luvesting the senior fuéges २
furstions ul the

jodac under ¢enrlai
By Istters

(3) Exlenslen of summary procedure and third
varvy procedure to subordinate corre: aed

(4 Enluyemess of the jivistition nf the कराए
of smal! causes.

5७ 82 to give relief 13

We proaosé to desl with the 10७ Ubcow hesids 3:1 thos ghaptec
anc tac fcnrth in ~he succomding or



265
The accupedyiog ‘Leble shows the otdinery o-ginal Juchikten

Jeosdiction 41. veyulur sults (excluding 220) ८६082 ४५६) taubar
ezereizad by tne 2:ए1 courts of déferenl. g-ades Che Jydper
socal Civil Cuurts Acts im sll che Slaxe, =v हु
uni ion GF che subordimate judge (15 the Madras ८

i Borgal sense} 0: offloers OF correspond: dk
cae erawiwhlle Madras avea oF Arcuco Prac

.. “sare,
Rorala, Madras, 06932, Utler Pradesh and

tt:
€् in Madispa

bordinate: judges in wae West
४०: Ike district snd addisicuea aestrict Jucdges
vnlimited jur-sdiclen In Rejastis:
sum: nf the ewoerdingte judyes ure invested ७०४६ un
feeuniery jurisdiction. cn the Telinysne 3782

Feseéesh, che maxiectue  Juriydictien af usr
judge is Kea W.UM which in inc case of
ray be inersied to Ks, S090: omy the distriz:
प्ले district judwee exercise unlimiced ju:

e

ution
simflar variydons in some of tke ४००४३ of the
laled Sli:tes of liombay and Madkya Pradosh



same ct tee Sogn Manin ingle wR

Lawn iuxad.coon

Seco: Jal or diern OL

wat vortzspudday don gvatie.
- 7 ५ + - पु ee
Andyia Prudeb . .. Undead शा इक के VT st 1953 mcd sina
३051) 3s, ea ied thy he Aadhoe
SC eT
aten + . : पु . Lilia tet Hiss rgd 1७. ६8% rat Tee Bewd Agtaid Asaut Cis] Comets Act
(81 ८1 7४४३५
Mar +५ ५» +«+ - - 10 Do
है आह पु जि पड़ 8.७।ण| fuel Cygne eet XIN कं 10५1:
Nee : Valimites Ba aw Ure peu Ged Couns Ac at 537.
Madbyn L'redech - in Crk Rs sw The (९ ७ Mere (३0७71 aa dt) ct ayer t
Machu Frnlesh Geng yer (1:
“5%.
eee Yo wane Ke gaan Manet 1.3७. Curt Ach iP? ty Suite
ded by the ००६ SO of
RIG
Mae न . = « Us. nite Re pave tid det . [] ९:34... Mao. Ac Mv
meh
Oiuwe . wy + - Vallreust The. pane ter Rs.

d Atm Cand ddan

Bs Tid


The Pula Count Ae 1 क ters,

sail:
ca vay 0६४ Une
au tke pievious cet.

Rajan - . » Ky 0०,००० (Lulinited 4. sase Re. 2.3७ ty As. 5,999 “Lhe: क्या Civid २. गाए ।ब Chilinen x, ६1950 -
of same Oivere -
‘Witsr Pradss . . « Tlaliealesd Re anata Re. ean The Few al, Age ad Assom fail Come
AL 1 wl 38153; ve muveesd Ip U.P
Ast ४ ut rags.

‘West Hengal ee Uplle glbed Da. Ly.
soe. ___. न्‍ न न « न
१", Io Made Pradeth a) the offers (थक che codr> जज dt-crlet tadge: se culled cleil judges. 0०7 Ine disticl उठे ४८ ंफ/।:॥।
TOdgty emep Cle a ०:०४ pric diction

tic

49८


Taredictiv: 5, Toure iz a greater diversily in reyerd to the pecuniary
armanalts.  jurisdictivn ised uy rvenslls stu officers Bru: 3
pesstliug deiegr. 2 oak the difees. Staxe 7

‘Ardo‘a cisticte of Annhea Pradesh ud Madres,
29:04: juréwicdlua is 168 5090 In Assaco, Bik
Oss. प्रोएच art Wich a peTomary jursdic

30) ४%1- yaay gradually be raised to Ry. $.000 by
a Co In Bowbay, the civil juices, 1709-0०
Vis.on, crercieed pou fyrisdiclisn upto its 5७७५
qauce 109 ander the Bombay “Civil Courts Act Sy wn
atesdcent af thid Act in 19%, this ‘wis >ूढा: raised to
Be Wand it may even be faised to He. 15.000 in
seected guves. In Kevulu, the jecisdicliua exercised by a
mursift is Fs, 3,030, In ४४४७ Poe where there 8
on y one class of civil JucRes, tele jurisdicl'on 39 Bs 10,000.
in the Puja’, locre are 00 to-unsiis bic urily subordbyste
Judges vo dferent elaasea inyesled ४०:४० jurisdiy loc from
IKI uisvards cpt 30 anli d auopunt avenrding to
a) experience ard eanietity. In Rejasthar, |-ltur
Pradesh und ‘eet Bengal, the juris:icloa excreistc by
Ts ॥ Rs. 30%) whien may de incrowsed wo Ra. ६०00

6. There wze pood recsone fer the extension of che
nesuusaTy juzixdiction of (0७६९ courts by ennler
tae senior judgrs the power ty try suits valimited ‘a;
ané thn junior judyesx with the | कक to uy suite |
velustion of at 10:5६ Re. 3.000 wherever these posvops
belotr sue limits. The ‘itiils of che pccer.
juvisdi of chese courts weee etatulorliy Pace 4
aga, Saxce theo. lund value anc tae prime index have
risen geet]y ४४:५५ a corresponding fu. in the ४६-७९ cf 10७
ruper, [1 was for this 7९४८७ thet in Gorabay end Mis
Pradesh the furisdietion of the cheil jedi, junior dipisica.
85 11960 trom Rs. 5,000 10 Ry. 10॥/0. On the same 8| und,
142 value of she subject mutter of spprala (० the
4:७७ tas been raiséd from As. 10,000 « Ra.
er.aygeroent of the jkcisdiction af the junior judgeg wil:
give mech needed 2 lo genicr judges whni, 7: several
Szates, have co varry a heavy bundles of civil ubpeas,
ecssinos caacs itd other wacters Lestdes  yrigiaal ०७11
work

‘ac upinien which we hive elitized ४ on the whnie
i ur of such ao increase s.thocgh 00:01 an heaitetion

sro expressed is game laces, Sume witnesses io Kerala
forw:wd the vkew that st would be inndvingbl: to
ease silher thr: gtiginal or the wonellule juréadicfion of
६५ suserdinaze civil courls unless there was to “He ficst
Taw ai impreverent 10 the compecence cod एकल of
judges. Notvothstandirg chese coubt,, “he State
= ६ nn: raised ‘the pumniary jurisdicion of the
पारा hat State to Rs, 5007. On the 0107 hand, 3
ermer Chiet Tastice uf the Catcutss High Court [av:ured
ar extension nf Lhe पात्रता Jurisdiction to doubhy the
present on:ourt, That view Bas been “echoed by: many



269

thers. Wo, chereors. rzcommend "80 tae अधरांज civil
yaders stwid be iowediplely Invested with unlimited
sécun.ary jursdicticn while the jurisdictium of the jure
iUgines or Dunia shoud hot be best ६539 Re. 2,003 in
the Slates where il is kelow this amount The: yen
of the Junior judge's jarisdiction eroufd, up the rcocr-
penance: कै tre FAigh Cert, be eveptually एव आए ta
५ 17

> bave ९00

sed the ahjéectior raisaé in zecte
Quast agains a reise in the jurlatiction ci ७:
grout) that yaw and =r eueporienved Juclur Judges wilj wt
be: able to desi anvistacorly vd lh eataeg involving stakea of
higher vaine. Ta 1५८१, as alrepdy poitted mut oy us, tie
values involved wi! owt bs higner for a jurisdicts
Rs. 2,000 or 3,00९ Len years ago के covivatent 26 3 furasictuoa
of Ss. 10,0॥: indus. Warecrves jumior civ] Jrdges heer
snctatactcrlly exetcled the higker jerisdistien cuatesred
n the States of Bor. od Madhya सी" 3७७
ved methods of recriitrrent and Dany ws
> confident that “hey cin be agicly t-ikshad to band!2 ९३३७:
ef high alugied. Ye slay, ewever, as & Bracsu
freshly appointed jumior judges shoyid
posted to disttict or subdlvis.ona] head-

eh are pietided nver by setuor oSiweg and shat juyar

त॑ 10058 ney mmey be entristed
simple aatuee. Prevtice has been
it Mixleya Tradesh whore thr diztriet iudge dis
voTk taking into cemamleracion the ssasem und

The Ceust of 1:७8 district [जा
iyicial | justsdigtior, for
j am 8 nomber

8 She orincipel anu
distric. :

cppellate werk and in hi
crs jiadze has 3150 tery seselous tase:
sore Glabes, ke ig eacisted iv Lis civi)
te Aad ciminal work.by sulmrdnsie j
4 judges who ere
(9८१८5 apd also the powers
nt a ud F et
31 sing under

ree Tum er of special Acts, both Centra! and &t::les, such
as the [ndian Succession Act, A Sy ता aud Wares Act,

do Aequisltion Aektche Linacy Act and the
Adi ४ ot. oF “yacure Property Act. to inent’on only 5
few of them Further. subject te tho ihgh Court's gencra,
niandernct, te is the fidrumistretye head of th.
avs in che dl af, a3 such, exereses pieneral
suprevisien oper he work of the judicial oP iets subordi-«
nata 10 hin, inspecta their rig fy to time and
alee contrals the subordinate’ sure of thase sourts.

fuere

Objections
co ५७४.

111“
0 "3७ pio

artere where there ६08 more eutty Ehar on:, spam af nt sealer

Truries सर
visto

mcg
1172


Powers u.
diez ub:
Saceessicn

20

10. We tuve Seen iniormed “hey w. many ixstances toe
dstvet julers do nel fine safficient ! te disenarye all
laeir manifold daties, Fhey are busy deuring sesmong caves
ad ctim appeals ané ate unadle to devote scflninnt
Vines to them e:vil arigi: epelae wns. |
di-lucts wher: criminal work is nxeeztionsally ४३७९:
the detrucl ena ५ judges get ७|
inal werle lo addisionu. dislrict judpes or
14६७४ t3 unt arougb to enacle Lkem 7 devote
suficieat time ta civil werk. Tn के better (00167, we ore
7 she juriedistuen wf tac dscries appellate
enurls la Tis, 0 X00. We have alse rocanuendad

tre sl. civil 89962 9 snvule ke Reard only by tt ता छाई
acs or additivnia! istrict judges avd mol b¢ she:
५३३९७... ‘Tacss reccommend evitualy reg
8 further increase im the: civil eppellste wark of dis
judges, which is one mers Teasun way relief should be
gveL tu [14 Ey investing senior judges: with jur:
to heap 08328 under special Agh which bas
eretclsed exilusively by the distriet judges. ‘Fhe swc‘al
jurivdietiog. under the provialene incd in the 101० 19६8
ments They ce ecmsidtzed io thie connection:

) The Indian Suewessiwn Act 1975.

(2) The Gaardians and Wards Act, 1590.

(3) The Land Ai quisition Act, 1894.

; Tee Provincial Insclvency Act, 193॥

The Jodhaa Divoree Act, EAR.

+ Sporial Mattinge Act, 1954.

The finds: Marriage Act.
iets: juke Ende of

il Precedure,
13 ci the Religious Endowment: Act,

{40} The Tudsur Lunacy Ant, (912

11 Tre Indias, Succestion Art, 126; Tae masters acia-
de: tre Indian Sycceedlun Act ave proceedings relat-
wogmink whe, cf probate. letters uf vdinbiiskeation
sievessicn 5६४४ ules. Bectinn 244 of the Act concen
und the ॥1<1-101 ju ९8 urédictiny to grant ane हार
probale and lettare of adi: at.utt i all cnsce withis
his cig Uncer sesthes 265, the High Court mar
appeits suck jucicia! officers within any district us it thinke
to act for the 3316६ 1 1९0७ as delngste to grent ptobate
fF coministetion ir non-usendous cesses

uly 88 it may oreserize; this hes 10
in a number of Sistes by Selegsthin oF
the 2aid powers in dhe civil finecs, Simdlerhy, sevesud Hizh
courts (Assam, Bembey, Madhya (1०१७४, Modras, Punjab

aid West 4.60) have invested all subenlinace jrdgos

witch all the ७८:६७ of the dtrict judge to take cegnizsrce


aR

of any cantested prcsecdg under |
the Jogal 191४1 <f 18:

Ast arisiag witrn

within wacee jarigdsciion any putl 1
adrsea mee ce lueod. may erent

Under ६३८७४ 1.%- State Govern
॥ any qvurt infor in grade to #
r Dar: 1X (6 cxvrvis> the

ey elsaction

judzcs # ४५६४ been invest
>5%43७ acd Madras. We
Apes
olfzera

aes . . Tie Gone
(७ Che Guirgicns ond Wrrdz Aci, 1700: section inne id

4(5) o2 the Act, Court’ meana the discr.ct 4 he vung Weds Ace.
surtsdictice ta entert mo stppllealis .ndse the Act.
४ . Lien 4-4 tae I ge. (आशा niuty, by general
7४5४: roy officer exercising origina
diate te: a oh: + 192५५ ot mutha
acy district ecure sonfeer power warn
noose of any ॥ए-

fud<cection (2) ale scapes
cruneter
nz om hig it Zor 2:.8592:-७1 dia
ta 300 empowered ander
Awivinding 9 view ४9 tee contrary
2d by the way High Covri, we would ५1४7४ 7
tom eh tre igh © to auke 40 lire> usr of
a-A and w eny i
sex in the Shits
As. omer के er ae
the sikrarein
perived tw \
nary 20d special. it

a

" al Usiage 1111 juggs
ariuing under the spociel Ax 5 :00193
ky then

+) hz Law

The Fedian !anacy Act of 1912: Wneor scecion al

Act. iurisdictiun has beer confected upye “be

of Colcutia. Madras aed Bormnibar fir take

stings uncer this Act, er!

Under secu, 62, whens
ine, of tae Coort. ment

for the ourcas+ of asuemainree whether euch nes
unso“nd mind. The district court has hen dotired 2
merr tae एजशा लएडी court ut arikinat aecisdtetlon in nas
arer outzide the Inca] Vite. tor the “Ame being, nf ‘he



m

Tews. As procaedings uudet Tae Act invelye
Can slloged Jurasic amd runs abo ७)४८।५४६ difl-
६०.0 gues cae ७ law ond Back we ati of tic view mat
while |:६/४..::. should be .nace in tke Act था 81:02 defe~
gavin ef lhe powers of tae Giskrics judge, suc delegation
saoule he mate: no's ts a subsadinits jude or an ctaer
imisr 199: bul Dut 1:1 ॥ monsif. We alee peeorubd
thar Scate Covernmunent kaovld, a3 ter as possible, suf
use al thot power of delegetion.

ae
§ astirion
ia,

Latin Acquisition Act, LM: Th: power ts toy
sroaces under gectton 11 ni the (क्या ca wisitivn Ack
2oen the cours, Section > dulines
“Corset? a3 the priazipsl elvil court af orizirs: adictiorr
unless thu: apprepr.ave Geyernmen; as wipointed, as It 23
eaipewerad in do मे specie] judicial afleer within any
२०22] Limets 3 | mt lao 1२०८-४३ of the court
& arising in Tand iaquis..10n
sre Dot Fill as mot
toch diver of the onic
retior civil judge. Che fsthe
feted! thut glher judisial office nay
the 57 Govermmess te sttertuin ane
the Lon Acqubition Avl. In
westad with jurisdictice to try
eflan Act where lhe atcurt
laimed fslls wilain the | oz tkgir
i In Bot byy where such jurscictiph
5 been confarred uacn civil judges of the weniur di ign,
High Cocrt 208३ rot favour the extension of ४४: i
set of thr jettier divis.on or ॥:
3 [0 1308 pther States. We are of 1
‘so where such Celzgation coss rot exiz
132५४) ple o? Materas with advantaye. Tn
कोट, fallieaing Yrychay, bavest tha ८६५ fs
jutges with jurlxtictor cider the Land
संता) Ask a. tude vi alord aeeeszery ८1471 to the

Comraiizee had
ke esnaonr res?

Ls JB ९!
(४.10 the Sale
follow !

Sey
distrie! equrt.
fot Insalvercy Act, Wil: Becticn ४41)
si Insolvency dhe: confer: on the ccseriet
stm i: exereixe the pr :
2! he

8.) ju iction lu bry any
utder tre Ael. We recoramerul that af cigil
jiucicus. adicers mar be irvceted with insnlwoncy jurisdic-
thm. Such vows have bess vocferred upon these ficers
in Borohay aul Madzres,

16 The ii pee Ack, 1809, 00४ 5६ ९८७1 शक! ५ ie
Act, [381 ced te Hida Marriage Act, 1958: Purther cellet
can be given th ccstrict [10 iar hy investing the avberdinate
judges wits jur-siction in cartain mstrmaninl 2७७९६ which
[४ vesced bo the formes, Coder ché 89२2०.

“करा, Bug: 99. गज 3. 0 :


2

Marziage Act of 1954, alt matrimonial proceedings ४13७7
Chapters ¥ soi VI are to ०4 matituted ia the district cou:
velchin the 12621 8,७1४ of whose jurisdiclicn the marriage
wes solewrized or te huskand and wife reside ce last
Tezided together vy :0 the city civ) eourl Under tue Art,
shecefore. the distries court alone avs jutsdiewiu: in che
Tomei to tske cognizant of malrirnonlal [#१४१७४४ैं: ए कप,
Le gon एफ: ४१०) ef the Hindu Yiutringe Act of 1885
ecables the Gtave Gevermment Ly nodfi.atinn in tie: ullie’s
pte bn aachucise: aay civil cours to desl with procesdings
Gis Act. We cdo nut see ap reap wiry & eimilar
provistor. choukd put १४ made in respect of 20४४ eri
sauder Iae Spurial Marri.ec Ast oF 1964 by en appropriate
amoment, Similarly, under the Indie Divoree Act, ct
proceedinya sre instituted elther ise the :45४12॥ | ७0७४६ ॥# Shi:

~ Qaercsdicsiw under this Act must be exercizad

swict juége slene end net ever by am addidenal

wudge. (rh respe:l of prociwhngs eadir lls Act
recorunend that Une definiticn cf digaiet cewrt Arc.cdmeces
a 38) 4४ the 2RRA+Ied.

s orretdiad nn the atlapy OF pel

|. ze Act, 1965. We rreommend (0६6 State
Goverament 3-६8] ske .arges wae of 1921: powsre by
emipurare ririg: <a 7 jedgiz In (ty snef ॥% 595२ of aasng
ander theac Acts,

#2 cf the 0:20 Presedare Code and Seciion Piexclings
ons Madtametts Aci. “853: Trion srecion 93 in,

of the Cede of Civil Proicdurs, the principal civil comet of 4८८ potas
eriginel jurisacetion wv ary atker court empowered in thar (०४६०३.
benall by the State Government within the local 11:18 of

38 atuets ean wy a sux

ning public cl Ta

ts Efdowiventa Act enofers on the

dighioe wo ehterclain apyilicstions

it. ection 2 defines the words “Civ

Cour” end "Cour: moun ‘hr prittcipa cx:a7t of origin)

jurimict.op, that is, tae ceust of thn dist-*et -udge or any

ather court ceceaycred ‘n shat १९७५४ by tho State Covert- saprrinai
६. छह recnamend thal the Srate Goversuneut shoukd waruste ७ be

emp 7m!

or suits referred to

१ possible of | ese Sowers Dy empires
ag suderdi !8 (७ try and Spee se of cases ueder
sotunn 02 cc tre Civl Proceduce and sesticn 16 of
the Rehpiwza Endownents Act.

16. We Tiree net been able 2o exathine the various State 8006 Man
enactments under whtcn evedial furisdiction bss been zon-
ferred ian the et judges; bit we wed suggest that
tie: State Cleveruments shoukd usderiake & conercl review
of these. 0 cures) (21. ith Ube Fgh Courts wth ६ ven
la gree nm to che district judzer by tranaferring ther
wuder specia: evactmente to guborditatr: ३00 [(58 img
Juunsdts qheryet poss‘ble,  :

ais Me of Law—12.



Sumuae=y
pracchstt.

Swtoox?
PrevLicte.

Frvcethrre,

nie

19 We have next te consider other piogpusals for

ing ep the trial and avoiding de‘ar an ike subi ” Beste
wwur.s, Our Qu:stimmpaite invited opiniim on che feas:-
hil. ly uf the extension o2 the slipanusty procedure sogterr
pliled 12803) (8 sud Onder XXXVC of the (000:
af Civil] Procosure 08 wdeedivate court, Under septiqu
12812) 411, the High Ceits lave the perwe- to maeke rules
providing fos summary procediite in—

©) Sats in whieh che plmot#® socks anly be
rsvover a debt or Hquida-ed detrind um money partabie
by fetedant, with or withoat interest, ariting on
uh express or implied ९७७७: «2 OB an ensctthont
wher: dhe sur: sought to be secrvcred isu feed cum of
nioney er in the nalicrs o! a debt ather than 8 ponglty:
rad 3 guarantee yhern the ch:im gainer she pong inal
is in resport if a debt ot 3 Uquideced demon or
cn a leusl, oF . :

12) Saits for hecnvesy of immovable property, Pith
ut rent or mezne profils, fy 9 landlord a Fe
nt prhoeg “ym 033 expired or 195 been dnly
determined by note to qditl or has become 1-37 to
forfeiture Zor nuncgayrent of vert, ot aging, pe! रे
७-&-03त₹ under asth tenare 1

Order XXXVI of the Cude lays dowa the proweduse for
che csial of 9060 suits. Tha ovde= ay pics: omly te the Hgts
Courfe vE Caleulia, Sfedres and Grumbay, A at bo
1. ty uthes ०:५०18 hes, fawever, been clven ang it
hag hoen extendas; the three Pres dency soul Caues
Cuicth @urtber, in exercise of 5080 rwle-znaking ‘By
certain Sigh Caurte hase ertetded the provisions
RNAV ro "का Courte ap wet In Bombay. it 85
extended 7७ the pate - ily Sei] (1३४४ whl, im ee
Lo Lf: Menor Chy Ciel Court and iso all Courts of
subardinute judves urd mursify In Cale otis, it has nm
exvecded to all crvil couite except toe ९००२६ of small 3
in dislric) vf २६ Payaganas, in Uttar Pradesh to apy
Loar’ thr. Pruviore 3] Bors exencdaing 80:57 cause perp
and the Pumjat te per coutts ct distsiel judges #4

id

subordinake judges, Gust (३७४8, 2n, the Province cf Dethi
sirollar courte in the 0: viet oF 41%.

20. The proostucs wider Order EXEVIE is See tial We
unly 19 suits uegatiathe insleumests. A duit ler १]
Ordor is inatitnted in the ardinery form by presenting a
pleint but she eurmmom & 6 in Form No. TV ir
Appmelix Buf the Code The estore of & swmmuty : it
auger Order XXKYIT ig that ie: defendsnt fs not, as in
ap ordinary suit, ensitled as of Tight te defend the mut, Mie
myest npply foe 1९8५९ to defend withit ton says from tae
dale ct service cf sumame@t upum 1111: amd such leave
be grnbert onty if the + (१४१४ ky the defondant ४.
eluses euch facts as will ity bent apon the plaint!



275

19 prove evtsigerstion er euch cther farts ४५४ fhe ooutt may
teem auftleient for granting 24६४8 10 the defendant 10

and defend che fail. Jf oo Jeava to defend 18 granted, the
plainlifi is eptilled to ४ Gectee. Vhe principle uadelying
the sqiomare prucedurs (3 19 prevent wwessonabie nbgic ws
lian by मे cd2fcucant whe Irae 20 esol defewtre,

Al. The Bomubay High Court ५३७ extenned this एए ovedure Sombay
to ef! the suits memicned im 12802) (7) in addithom to the Seendaner
wuts an nowotigble inewrumenta. Furtber, ths: prxe:dure has
30 50mm: extant keen 70६92 1688 -iyucrss bj an aroendmert
ot Rve 3 of 603९४ XXXVQ, The Bombay enendment
Tewieres a pisilif’ tu serve’ with the writ 02 sucamoi i
cupy of the plains and tae exbibits, and Ite deiendan:
at any time, within tm 9४५४ of such service enter on!
spheari.dce in the first instance. Notice of the uppeernnoe
Paual tw given tp tye plevutifs atcomey sul tierepter tac
plaintiff shall cezve on ths defeadcung a «romans for judg-
ment relable in logs tyan Geo dave from the date of
acres, cupparted by an affidavit versiviay Ube: opure of
actlot and ६10७ +॥९:॥:11 ol
tacte is 70 defence co they: suck. Ty ia only atte- the service
af this adifitionil surat ५ for jucdement thet 106 defendant
3 peared within tea: Qyys theseaf 19 gpk for .esve bo

joter.d.

22, A general exenatun of the: :प्रपाशा वाह procedure % BOM
all cours oF subordiurve jutiges and muselfs has not been 83०5.
advorsted aor do we recckamend any such facceaching
* utnlerstard that althou ee Order SCV has.

to the coarta of al sethewvfinste jedzee ant
muss in Macias, ‘lis notin ase ahd has virtually besone.
adend ‘etter sc ter as anbohiinace 60113 10 the mofassil of
the: Stare are caucetaed. Tro 1 igh Court cf Allahabad 157
Opp:ncd tn its guneral ९272३200. Hombay [ligh Court
is 19 favour o¢ @xtes.ding it kp im: comrbs in mach corarmerrial
WOW 88 २८६ resco meoiad by the High Court. The Civil
Jiastiee Comunittes raadé & eMilar proposal Order
XEXVT was extended te bertaln pogrts in Bengal . Uttar’
Pradees and Ukr Punjab, probaly, on the bask of thet
recomamendaticn. We giggest that the Tigh Courts saould
eextend che rules cf sumnrgary proedure, 38 ocopléfind in
Banthiy, 4¢ subordinate eqturiz kn brportent industrisk and
wrmmactcial ६57७७, like १६च7००७ ५३४७; २४5४1807, Kaupytr and
Jamshedpar. '

33, Bostion 228 73) (९) af thr: Chil Procodure Code obag Td pera
¥ives cower to “le High Gowrts ७७ maxe rules preseribing
swhat 1६ sary as third party procedure. So far as we sre
cawere, except on the Original Sides of the Hiph Courts of
81०४७, Madras and Borphay. Jp, the Rorabry City Civi}
Coart and (७ che walfweit ‘of Maddas such risles are not 7


274

torce in cther courts, The tied party provecture Ip appli-
cable where. in 2 cuct, a defendant calms ceznist any person;
गए; alreade a parly to the m: ic or indgm-=
er any relief or zeme
cai suk jert-roatter
Jatisye to ur commected ‘BET
tayalucilicly dtue susie: 96 ६१:१९ QUESTION GF 15७0९

Bo bewweer Cue pian aad the: defauiunt anc should
preperly be dexurmed not onl; between th> p-rintif”
and de Fendam. gut as hele label acid 1h
deat end she thied par, tareen any
In auch 37 Ve defer ५ may, with
zauTs, Ave s third warty notice stating the

77 ahd the

geu af The crus ot Whe veliel ow line needy claimed or
ths nature of the quoestic:ca ve isétr: 10. be ts पुफर
Used ए&/79 then 200८ ९9 ९ 816

tight. .n respect ०2 Its defence egemst any claia 5
avails. bs ७५ ६- Le had b2en duly suec w. the ordinary way
ay Lar: &1५६:॥0,. The ruliss turier seovide for the vote
quences of the third party's failure to eppear At proeent,
dy of # diuEetdent whe is entitles 10 any cnntiby}
nity or rebel a3 aforessid, against a thiré party
by way cl ॥ yepazal In mur Favor
of che State in Tor heve mede a
ior 20 eporuptiate prowisivg in the Civil Procedure
skirg ६६ obligatory: “to incplesd is prety oo a suit in-
davauges aguirst ibe Ste is wade, the
iukependens yacter fot whee act
sught ln bromide livb’e. Any ¢laien bagedt en
er contribution by the State msy elso he ycttled
i Ecweslings ay ehh tu: parties wil be befure ihe *
एकता, The IEgh Courts may consider the sdvisabé.ity
oc extending the spplkcation of the third party proceture to
commezcil tuwns Uke Atuaedabad. Kanpar, Asaneel and
others. Ws woul not recommend any larger cxtctsian
of tke third party prowedure.

24%. Our recommendations regarding the jrrisdietich of
wil snur® can ke summarised 09 follews;—

01) Subotdinale Judggx ov senior ov eyes jad,

skhouia be tnvested in ail States with
peruniary jurcadiean,
2) Tae pecuniary jueisdiction of juniar शा
'४ 08 manete shuld not be loss than 89. 91090:
why, of the tecommeddation of the Figh Caurt.
tho jorisdiction of the junior ९८०1 judge or the mudomf
ड0 ७347 be risisusd lo Rs, 10,000.

(3) Oa their fest appeirtn-ent, srohetenere or-
junior ounsifs shoahl be poetit? Io centres Whore there-
ate more judges then 1176 and at the start bo entrustert
way win th> trial ef sinyple suita er 8४:४6 nf arpall.
vai

फर्क, pee 10, we OAT deck, ह .



(4) All suierd-mate ] ould
sarnipowesed Uy greol sLovessich qettificates und subsrdd.
aris judgms saogli e990 fe authorised to Gispose 0३
eumtentious plocezdings (ur che gram af लि pater बह
1 पड mc administration.

{8) he igh Courts should 19880 larger use of
section 420 of “he Guardians and Wards Ac: an
eanpower all senior civil judges av suhordinale jadgns
to dispxe of proceedings «meer that Act.

६6) The Ind‘an Lanacy fect of 1912 should be
amoended oy ze to कर आर्ट] suburibnste judges to
exercise Che powers of the district judge under the Ac

(7) ‘Vhs peeiding officers of all civil courts shmilkld

ke eupowered hear yeterencas under the Land

Aca:csltior act. An immediste bepinning should be

Investing sukoréimate judges with Lhis power.

(8) All civil juéicial cfficeza should be invested
with ibsolveney ६९४:

(A) 016 ७००9 Divan Ach and the Special
Merriaga Act should be senenced so that courts subordi-
fave Le the dlateict court might he emoowered w deal
with praceedings under shave Arta and jurisdiction
under these Awa: 11260 be afeimed upon eubsrding le
naps.

The State Goveznmenta should freely confer
ja m under tie Rotiginus Rodos ends Ait, 15868,
sad under section 92 of the Civil Proocdure Code on
the courts of subardinate judges

{1f) The Stste Covermments should in consultadon
swith the High Courts cxamine State caachrents
conferring aperial juricdietion on the distriet judge and
conskles ‘le advinakility of tramalerring Che wrk ta
subordinate courts.

(12) Orde> KXXYIf uf the Civil Procedure Code
migh; be amended 07% the lines of the Bembey amend-
raeut. Tre Higt Courte shoukt extend such summary
provedece ‘to subordinate coyrts in important cormmer-
cial towns.

(13) The High Courts 5106 consider the odvie-
ability of applying dhe thied party procedure now gaad
ae the Original Sides of the High Courcs to Courts 10
commuercal towne



prcuctuce i
thes: २००८७.

आप of Uhese क: घटां5 proseribe the upper lirnt ni the peconia-y

time cunts, value of guits cofalua¥le by them and enumerate Che osmes

of

ite
theee presi:

19. COURTS OF SMALL CATISES

1, ‘Tin: cours nw pen as the prediéuney sell cae
ere 1181 wstablished by a Cherter of George ही
Taruaty 2753 end appear (5: be che 21005: vourts
exsting in India. (00015 ef ॥08:1 ciuses we tho molds
were Hirst erentad or 80091 180 with ths object of pravi
taza spose and cheap merany.af scl -ing claims ui & Gon:
paratively simple nstore and a2 small pecunlary value.

3, ‘The 18% relating .o the courts nf ३0-७1 causee ir the

21910; towne 7८ Calgata. Madras and Bovabar is
lhe Preaidcrney ४०७1 Cause Courts Act of 1862 while: the
Provincial Sriell Cunze Courta Act of 1837 extends In the
Wwhele we Indla exept thi: “bree presidency toa. ami the
aneae thet f:rn.ed pert 'nk the etetwhile Parl 3 States which
‘asd cottrsspunding lew of their var. The follozing are the
three types of cours qreried bp che rte atetusce:

<L) Vreidenry small ceuse cms In sa

Madras and Be established undes cectiny 5 of the
Presideccy Stoel. Cause Geurts Act (XV of 1352}.

2) Grovinelal *vourts ef small ९६०४-४३ outside) ihe
lowrs cotodlidhed weder seeion ed E the
feuse Courts Act of TAT ov cogres-
the wetwhile Put B States. *

(3) Ordinery civil wurtd invested whh powers of
sours of srmull cases under the relevant pLoylaiohs of
the States Civil Cours Acts read wilh the relnvant
penyisiens of the Taw relaliag to courts of ane) causes

3. Fixcept for certedn soecial Provisions = te
tice gmil proeseuri: ॥108016 4) courts in the
tow ४, the principlos eink died in the 1७७ Acts are i
“ aTCECrIine 2 sume ry peocediiee for the:
P af dispulva wherein the Pequniary stekes ere of
value and ire cattable for <uganary disposal. The ji Bers
oxeselting srisll (७७5 powers are 21८ o9.iged to roca!
ewe i full, the exeniinatiof. or crussexamination of
[659९४ in cot elaborata, imtoed ate oat froined; 4४:
judgroent cimnply ४०४2४ the points fer decision with the
courl's 7ndlng? thereét pul tot the rrnecne therefarJ

4, Wis a0] deal if fhe firdt instance with. the q eto
of increasing he paneers af the: scuill cease cour ७४४0९
the obesidency towht

The prev stuns af the law woids defue the jurisdiction

278


शक

of suits exctuded from “heir jurisdiccion. Saction 19 ct the
Frovineial 4mall Cause Courts Act bats the court. from
teking cngnizance of sll suils specified in the seeend see
rule thereof and epovrers te court (५ Lule cognizance of
BI. other exits ot ह civil mature the waluo of watch dius tnt
exesed Ts, 500 Te sewstion further ep.powers the Slate
Coverument to invest a छ।॥ ६ nf smell causes with jurisdic-
tier. te tey suits the yalue of which dese unl execod Ka, 1,060
subject, ayain, 10 the excepcions spoofed im schedule 11.

5. We nyiced epiofen wheuser the jurisdiction of the Evdergarcn:
sraall cage wu | showd be extended both as regards the of reds
aximyn pecuniary linet ab ake bho classes of ts cognice .
ale br such courts wx we felt the nei or ouhincicug prts-
Suce ep. | ० togule: courts of Geat instinca ws also or the
As we have alresdy seen, a very
mation iu the ouwviussil eongist: of
ue af which ix below Rs, 2000

खाई i Tew stray suggestion: for smend:uent and dri
ton of ature of isn articles of the second schedule whic
Wil Se dealt with hereafter, we टिक nat received in the
replica to the Questicmuire or in the cuuree vf evisiencr
recorded ly us ir che various Statez any propnsals for a
Isrye increase in the zurisdictinw of these cours efther as
regards money vuluc or subject-matter.

mary ए:



Dace, HT PTwERS mam east ells
Naers ul he State Subkerdiane Jedger or other Muitsith 6 efron, nf succes: Lawn deficing [arlsd'c‘an
Ab Cort yrinding १: 6171 qaaiug = desizaeion
7 ae 4 —~— ‘ _
Rh mn
Andie Prdeat . न + 77 Genre Ace (11 ७3 razz il | Matron
" साल हि ie Sac 1५! 1950 2७ #'1ध७८४ 1५: dhe Andhew
मेकीएफ्रएंगा. खरे Laws हा 4963,
1 > . Tm ‘The Berge], Aga oot Asem ceri] Crore
~ het eee WE ees,
Bilar ‘ 3 Te.
Buraboy . £00 “Cae ४०४:४१ Civil (५७८०६ Ace DHIV of 269}
Feeth . 2. sna Phe Kerala Clril Camara Act of 0२५7:
Biedhyt Prades) . जन The 0 Pf Pere बजा॥-७ Act (1 oF aziz
8 Tar Medliya Fondeh Courts Ace
(11 af 20%).
2#०३5७ - 2.293 50 Mameal Act Cad aesy Madina Avt ऋचा
cf 3951.
कफ . - - egy 00 Ths Niveore Civil (leurs Act af 129:
०. न 6 = «6 oc 240 The Rong, Aga end seem Cli) Crocs
Bul दशा ne sayy)
Panjab . 8 ae cay 3०% The Prejob Ova Ace WE of फ#.
Raju नि - . - Rise’ 10 . The = Rejartas Ci) (3311 Ovdinenoty
07%
Chace Tysteas 2 9... « 500 agn Agri and @ssam Civil Comers
£ २४448 Tul ane

Wen Aengsl woe. we हि a0 De

thar part <# Andérs Pradesh Eich एत-+-00८४ we Andhra pet ts (11-1956.
६ the soqad) ६४७६७ wort 5: 7:03 an- AlgueJatad

४८५०)
fin >ककीि|न.. Predeab, ofl ths <का:७६ Lely be cates oF tscrict एड ure



$81

Tt ropy b= apticed Lact separate courte of amall cayses
auuder wettion ज of lh: Provingial Act have heen censcitumed
cooly in 3 few catge towaz kke Delbl, Arnrilswr, Sealéah,
Poona, Aluneésbad and Kanpyr; clsewhero the ordinary
€७५४1५ ary invisdled wilt | १0 power? of the gel. racse zourt.
The Taal> on page 249 3412 ७५४ Wee saul ०६:५८ jurisdistien
of suberdinate judges and saurwils or ct oomcsaponding
o@eers in the ch eben Sates,

$ The propasals for the extenaion of smi) cane jurie Primary
dictions wx 201 a new ann. As faz 78८४ as 1995, the 7131 17:०७:
Justice Committee advorsted that the mi:ximuma limit of pada.
Ra, 1,000 contemplated io section 15 ef the Prov:neial Act
-should ke reached in a3 many Stavea ay posside, It will
br sean irom Ihe Tkle ८० pyge va: that. the raaxinounm limit
of Re 1009 wich whica aubsrdinet> courte can [0 virided
withour reacrt to le: tron hgs 26 yet been reeched exenpt
jn the States 02 win Sinead Pradesh, Bombay, Madhya Pradesh
and Madras. 10 sxe ८ the abr. which, bofnre the passing
-of the States corganizmtion Acs of [986, were Part B State,
“pee mary juriedictlon ef small esus+ epyrts is bourne Rs, 500,
Ou Lhe other bend, in Bombs La and Madras. tae
liuit has bean increased to 10 aud DUD rewpec-
tyely by Local ancondmcnts to the Provine‘a! Small Cause
Courts Act. Taiz is alzo true of a part of thy pocsent State
nf Andama Pratiesh whieh Before: the formation of the
-Amdbra Stave was part of the Madras State. Wi: are ce
acieus tha. owing to the apeclt! local conditions in each
State, inclucing ib 1९ elandacds oF efieieney and experience
of its judicial personnel, Feoeress im this direction mrst
ix. diferent parts of the muy. 12 wlavatos defer
its af the powers cf smal cause courte bi
sukjest to these Ibnits, the courts arc
ieverstedt wilh eye powers h¢yving rogard to the seniority,
experience and capacity of the presidirg cific Uee Rawr
and volume of the litigation, 504 Inca) २०००४:

ions,

7. For the pesezans which we lave given in eupport of Bepuscee

Our proposal for catending the pecuniary limits of the फिर ए20७-

ordinsry civil jurisdiction of the subordinate courts, we

recommend thal the maximum pecumfary mits of small

cesc powers should als be increased to Re. 2,000 tn the

eace u2 wemor judges and Ae. 901 in the eaac nf junior

judges and wherever Jscal conditions and cirecmatances

perma‘. the High Courts should Inccepse the powers of the
ffteremt courte of 37:3:1 cal sien 1504४ Che mexico जात

swlowod by lew. The disposal of 8 larger newmber ef suite

than hitherto in excrcine cf the amall pauce juriadicthon will

give much needed relief «: the civil ७0७०७ and, at the: samc

thne, substantially redaca the number of first appeals to

the district appellate ccirts.

8. The next quezticn is whether the amall cavse courts! Irredicriee
juctslintion cin he further eaendad अप within the पक ०
-anobit of the amall cause court proc eome of the cages sa,



Reson:
mendations
of the
18७४
Committe.

Articles
79 3 cad 3.

Arricte 4-

11]
new exampb3d by the zecond schedule to the Proviscist
Sime Cuune 1 Addressirg chemzelves to this
question the Raakin 86 observed: “—t ie Giffcult
to say whey Lut suits eeferred to tu some 0० the ertlelas of
th> Scheryle shewsid adil ira be tied na 1 soo chase
aide, Wortaver may Leva heem thr racsnns which hearly
lurty years az inducad the framers of the Act to oxclude
them, 1२ 7 ** (here 13 nothing inherently complicated fa:
tae characte: of tre classcs of auity Acrewoder dealt qweih
justifying # exclugien from the raxxete ob sin ple cabses
of 50:७1 va We have carefally examined the varfous
zugcestion? wade by pritnesads in chic matter in allithe

wes ind barge sangre ic Lherentulosicia (931 the lie ker hea
arrived whe the follgwing clessoxs of su-ls may be

bry this sreotedure".t

The Cowuitlee Leap went on tu wake detatled 1
cner dations for amendzhent of the schedule so as to babe
vouch wider cass of sults within the purview of the

of small pases. “These: prapinsds will he prea ntly : Fofren
0८ whezevar nec! vot मम reroment ¢f India ac
- 9 priticipl most oF Bra) Raikin Co tee

subject to certain fications, Their tentstive «
site were ecobodiel Ina draft to amend the Prov
Small Cause courts ef मै Act oc 106? which was cireutated
provincial Governy for {heir cpinion. The

Tecrived rom the Government disclosed a wico diver
et viewa In view of the cridé¢igm: reectved, the Gov!
run. of Lwdia tr ua thee with thus draft

have exsmuped the stticles in schedule UL ia fs
Zeetions recelved by ux from sturrerous pit.
and the ponglnsite:s of the Civil Just ee Committes,
Ou conclusions and है with respect to
arlck: art given ve :

10. Articies 1. 2 ang 3: These articles relate to shite
roneecuing acts done af Purropting 1g to have been dorel by

by order ul the Goverinnentiqr: pursuaa! lo uo Ras
3 court or ky any Governmen: gffizer in his cffcial ty
ané tae like. “hese pe axe) of 3 special category pad
zotui. bee lis ade the: small equse court procedure.

1L Aritale ¢ Hew 8 4: ‘bar tn sails for = ome
of Emmevable pripe: or for Fhe recovery of en ir. i
ir euch proverty. The C: Commities obs

is a ia ae ee ॥110५क?/५४ ५० ae 70 coable a 41
usc comet Chick प्रा articie’S cam entertein a cut h)fur
Rouge Tent) to try decid’ afertnen? suits as ov
this culegory of suits tina will bo nom.

provides for jae2e of ¢om-:apix

ees meee # petsen in ocqupation:.o€ sroperty without legwe without legue
pee, nage ©

*Cield [256 Camzaloree के, ders. x, t


and cr orders Ghecttig him to give pospecsion theres: to
tbe applica) Taeee ७५, bheretens, ag teagie why से T
callie Loud cutside ike Presidency tnwos should net he
anteusted with powers to detide exits for ejectment baxed
en writes lessee where the term fas expicxd and which
en Rot fill under cay spacial or 10091 law. ७ drat; Bill
of IF che Govarnmes of India accepted thiz recommen-
detion eud seuzht to confer uptm “he qucrt of smal] cause
powers fo “oy Suits for रु७७ब0:७४ whare;—
(a) the properly hee bewn let under e 0538 made
by 4 wrutten instrument and, :
(४) the court of stil cousgs woylé 05 eompelent
zee cogbizince of 8 sit for the rent of the property

ic) the culy itsse orixing for docisien fs नह wo
wheltir the leuse is detspmoined by effiury of tinue [tmited

thereby. हे
Toe priposcd amendment evoked faveucuble seep:uuwe
toms mejor of the Judges of Lae varias Tigh Courts,
The wrendment, howeves, es dogpped with the rest of
tar Bil Subsequeally, J 33 Bonbsy, article + amond:d
on the above lines by Bombay Act शो of 198K. 9५ ६ "एं०७:-
quent anol in 1902 se emall case Covrts' Jurisdic.
fien was ectenced to Huts Cop 5 ee:menl where the property
Vang वेज: Set wucer pl orel 148७६ as well, Further, 18 recent
yer, 1 der cjcctment arising ander the Rem Corlst:]
Accs are ED certian States पु ep coucts uf small cenzes.
Foz inetaner, iu Calerida, all suits wander tha West Bengal
Promises Rent Contral 4 {19M an: caga.ruile ty tre
Presidency Bunall Cause Courts Act, Sirailar j jurisdiction
is ५७1 या 03 in “Jomabay upog che Presideru:; Provincial
Ceurta of 8:४1 Cases bythe: Bomber Rent. Hovele ard
Lodgiy; Horses Roles Contiol Act परे 3847... Ap Juriad'ctien
kind Sa? been zatisfatiorky nxemiend py zmall cause

Fa st lwo Slated, we tecframend eh atnendmetL
to al the imes of the 1 Arooutments cf

19, Arline 5: A suit for Portion’ imanovabile propor Artie
canna: obvisusly be eutectalned by-a small cause Laat 7 Resides.

22 Artiwie 6 The Bit! of 1924 6140 sough: to meorporate wrists 6.
the Chal Jusliee Commitze’s sccommmendation fur amend- Prous
ing arlicle 6 br adding the -fulowigg: mits.

“Rat net inclueme any suit by a simple mortgage .
£3 defmed in vlaise (by of section 34 of the Transfer of
Property Act, 84, ahtm— |

(७) the property mortgaged fs free of all other
chtumbrances, amd हि

(9) the only tfaue ३7०१६ for decision 18 as te:
the weruyyot, if any, due on! ‘the Tmorkgage, - -



a

With thi: Caches peevisa Ube obly ६ prctminacy
decree shai be pasaed by  sucall cause covet.”

out whather the suit ia die or what the
defers: Wilt se and this uught ९६082 confusion and ‘nerm-
yeniepce in the uelas) waking of the rule suggested.
5 # diffcuties. bowever, do exist ia i

5) .C3 ute ls in quesdon sod resort
section 22 of the Act But they da not prevent < large
2 गए जप vt sux being wisé on the 80:81 काका: side 10 which
the defendant rais: iachinn lady a question 24109 2. title
ie immovabie groperty cr an incerest therein, A ब्याग का
provise migns ke devized २0 108४५ tit ९9392 of mortgages,
No doubl ३0:6० defendsawa may pvt it frivalaus glass in
order ५0 00३31 the juziadketion of tho small eau: curt. But
the Court kis power ta reject any 9.89 which is ४७५ bong
Ade 4.७८ is prt forevard हा ७1 ont furtsdict-on eel sych
power ie cla vxerciagé In casga in which mnperessary
declarstions or te’cingg oF weesumte ere prayed for. The
vitivanlig® ef the inclugicn of simple mortgage suite of the
Jend deierbed in stall cauzee ds that a ६९8९ number of
syits now hed up for slong tita¢ ps codmary sults will be
emeedily ard Finally Casseeed of on the emall causr अंधे.

In snaking these observations she Committee does Bot
seem to have निज: itty acuoun: the difficultics that might
cpomilt Jf 3: 2 later Gate subseqesnt cmcumbrancey were
brough: lo light. Under tae proposed uimnndment, the
exialense of another cécumbsance. price or subeequent,
3 or anencwa, weuld bar tha: couct’s juriedieden,
& decree of te xrtull «ila cxucl would ke 8 nuiljty
syarnDl vbsuchrances sare th gla.

1
Further, toe incluatog af the comdizion ic clause है
wruid tegé to other cine uliies such as ctzsdiug a jvris
tien wtuch devendicd jor iis exeness upon the d2fendam's
plea in 19% veri atatep.ent and it soni fal ther
eeavertert vo the [४11९६ Lo let ०12 pours pass 4 prellimiary
creree und awalher court deat with the matter at tbe alage
of the final cles rex’.

Gne: possible solution of the difficulty which may arksc
arce cf the mpacnce of other encumbraxces is:t

Telates to the aaie.ril.
quesdons not suitahic Fre
as priprithes 50: che valid:
trere are 1615 ect

by & snall cause court. such
ty ef the mortgag¢ may arise. if

Report, page 99 rural ऊँ


385
14. Llaving zegard 76 these considetations, we agree जाप) Armin
५ Shen eEorce: ed tg the Govteunens of Tidis Bat dosice

ry
prope: ueudsucn! wag 8 dangerous Jancvetinn aud Hee
५ course would be te drop +L.

15. Articie 7: Thi & ty suits for the
kancercsl, ubdsteTacn’ eppcclusament
iruacvshle n-mecety. ‘Tne ceterais ution, cf iss

EEMMEDT, ele ATIAE 4,
n£ rent of

Aqize &
1 Suis ber
tem.

menl wth aithor 34 Juri sFr
३९६०) thal die entice 15615 crap: wers thw
I. czugea witb
I Civil Custlee Commit
Tacommeader that che Haile Governmens shuuld sore
fi uowar and mers 1]
cause site. A suis 107 cecovery
couultscl stipalatun
ma money [४७७ and send, vb
at within the jacradictior of Ine
ay be nod chr all
slides 12004 5 have 7९८० invested
Tisdislicn of
uckicla may

be: omutced.

ve. Articies 0 tp 12: Fro
& 10 these arti
-Lted

lo. Articies 13 छाज x3: 1९६८ articles relate revimclively agicles 33
¢ enforce Jey¢meoi af 31.0७:0८६: or fees called 734 56
ak&’“ox of ९०४६७ ar other dues waen she FIs a
yable toa perecn by ream al bis Sie
५. a heredinarr offi¢e ot
wer rejzious slizution and sults relating
The Gavyertimen; [9503 accapted the
zerommendation Ural apts article
as to exeude therefrom suits where
r upl ancl reduged ta writing, The
table suipraerl एज: the figh
s. The suits mvered
ing for money dnd within
slates? above. Rowe ‘eof thr sm ee COUTt
ely oxleruise in telector. Lo theze tes articles,

Jutes 70 cases where ६ Land aoqisi
umusation tu a petyon other “han ‘ths
Tz dezcriotwin would <uyotve a
i imtuuvasle sreperty and would

( the stics Articis ptm
ur ६726 they 7*

amc RL

Article 145."

“Rei r, pug: 9, :७:७ 4५


Arities 15
“an TF.

‘Suis relogny

om “ns

-Amecmle=
waggtel,

Re

naturally Ge outside the jurisdiction of she court of small
eauees, ‘Chik urticle: myst reals.

0. Articies 18 to 170: The nature of Ue sui-g mentioned
In these: 8: wh that they cunnot be cmitted
: This aclieln refers to suits relating to 8

srt ta make good out cf the gener uslate
Trustee the 1:68 acragoned Ly 4 brew
wnd ६ suit op 8 ce-tresbee to enderce apainst che estate of
decested [4 asvce thi: dlaim Ine iantribalicn. In 1923, the
meméstion ७- th
¢ ५ snugbt 10 amend this avdcle by
ating the words “to arforee an oxpress trust” mn place
0 werds “relating ta a trues. The corresponding words
ja the Preeidency Sroall (use wt [soutien 19Q¢)'
ary als: $ 70 onfored 3 tris! The Commitze svopoped
substitudion of thase wands [nr the words “relatmy to a
trust”. It said: ‘Wie words ‘relating tn a tract

literal*y nk in sere mrigcien to; Tig On OF
Soovern with; portainin g to efermag ta bul. (कद:
ownle rot heve Seen Inthnds: ta be cynstrucd in this whde

date piven ~oom for a numer of
ucts T2garding their -ulerpretulaon.
terespromding words in Lhe Presidency Smal] Cate

mts Act are ‘eu "५३ की 613" a t-ist?. Tho
ko supetinuts re acibg to 8 ३८८३ cm A:
aroiuguily do confug she article in

ul iz lexst fo:

1 mart clear that the deuce २७४७८ oply
19 expreas Wists. A umber of ८६8९४ could by canoeitud
where e2due srl 0: tioushop. ef crusts
MA ७४.४० Me time cf the
In wake thern uttend x dsp ucee arizing oul of eger
ership il suits really ef a syoall eausey ature, So t a
gereeseey tu meploe Une Ide giaige plain and certain.’

22, In other words. avon if the claim in. the suit wa}
sitapic claim (05 res
on oF Sas sonogracs w |
६०५5४४६५७, 10:[012₹6. or respiting.
Yur example, a sit by an cv-bruatce agaion, the ae
trote> for recovery of’money ‘paid by we former on
acvnur.t of che trust ws hele to ७४ a yuit relating tf
fragt amd Unrefiat: cal-cxhizable: by 4 court af stall
cmuses®. However, the Rankin Committee’s prnogea:
50:01: the yrtels to syits to ay forec ex press teste
spen to a further obj 80178 Tel Pp f
or resting ust? may be ७ eu¥icult or compl ceced| as
sults to enlotcr exareds trusts. Ht ‘3, therefore, :७७
desisutle in exclode suits to eriforce ovlled or result!
trusts as it je to exclude 700६९ 100 ७७0०० express trobta
The petiele should. therefore, be amended slinply thy

substituting “ta enforve ४ vst" for the words “relating 4a

TRepuct, Powe 109, 7४७४ 5.
LA २०७७ १7


237

4 trust" as has been done in Bombay by he Amending
Act of 1006,

2. Articie 19: The nsture of the suit mentioned in ip Aue 7२

Taakes i} unsuitubl: to be dealt wl summarily.

24. Articles “Ml aad ४1: In Tegan to the les, the a mee ”
Civil Just:ce Commither reswounesded that che scope
thereof enonld bi: confined 2 immovable erty. This
prncéeal did nat msc. wlth auch oppesiti nM ail
haa meen g™uven effect to in Burabay by Act VI of 1980:
Such on ans.daer rosy be mace in all Lu: States.

25, Arsheles 22, 28 and 24: The: suits deals with et these Arttdes 22
grtie ng ane ubvicueiy unguitable ta be disposed in a 74
sumroary manave,

24. Article 38: This article rolecs lo a suit upon a Sais एप
ipa judgtaenl. Tae Civil Justios Comiutlee recom- ipgienr
moended that such a sul sfiaujd Le mada coguizab ए by & "
scall eawses. "If che si. were breught on the

se of acon ly wend be 9 emnll « suns and

she mut yeni ose counzeen? to deede gles of res
fudicces zeléting to the claim; that is to sey. if the 3०
dan: pleads a foreign fudement ir hig fave

pi vie qadicula in a suit eo the orig! at case cf
action. in the small ६.७5 coust, chat court Aas te sind 3s
pow cempetent to consider its wilidky. It is therefore
bot cpvarent why 3 person wha has a ॥7 judgraent
in Lis fasour zhould sul inatinute a ६; posed on ct BE
plaieliff on the s:ngll «ue elde. * * * A amma.) gaiisa:

Jdpe wh has ty decice &3 muiny ijumiliens of law on the
orra.l cause side az be does en che ordinary side might
well be quste? the ans of law which
arise (or i ing ० गम sent of a foreign

courl’, '

By the proxcecd a:nendzazat of 1946, cfset wis sought
ta he given to this tommmepdatiun by amending the
article ix che falluwing nosater:

“A auiz wpnn ० forelgn judge men: (as declined in
the (४:७७ ef Civi] lrucedgre) “mess the judge of ihr
court cf sitll cavses has be: emprecely invested by
the Jece’ Gewerument with udborily to exercise
jucixdlcticn in syeh sults!"

1 :

Several of she High Coans werr agrecibic ta Us:3
proprsa: which arom: fox drum objecsion We recom:
trend the ummi:siva of this article.

95. This article exeledes mca जाएंए eerlinn पते, sub- fader 26.
section §2) of the Cle af Cleil Procedure from the pur-
view 50 courts of sori] causes These sre cunts $9 compe’
—
int |

“Final Jesticr Committee's Re De Toogoy, para 7.


Asitees 27
te ah,

er
caeane pee
tis.

Anlefes ar.
Suit fi

Arcdcles 32
wag.

Artic as
Ci ame 23-

wan
nd 57 cll ०७ any ol the asaets Ucble ta bu mtewaly
muted bu, wish are pa.d 19 a persrn not ensitied :6-
rereive th ac. Before th enacl:nent of chic
suits Urnlet ssediouw. Ti (७1 section USS) were roc.
# Court of ating mises. Such # suit cz vinualy
ueomey Tid and recriged and there 1६ 20 Toazo: why |
shuuld oe exe!

the
what

evezously 0७६०
|, Cherefcrs, 2c;

ive Civ.) Justis: Comenitzee
t velatre li mesne orvlils
ot sel
ing 70 acieg! che promesl
बा doubt that arcse wes whehe- B30
prefs ae. 1y sland excluded hy Ii, artide. TI
i ment wae latyr che amsl.
‘oy adding the werds “but
tuezoe  pritfi Teves
Earuxay cod may Ine mad: clsewhers alse

|. Arti 32. AS aml 34; The suits deult with oy these
wrtitles cao: aby nusky he disposed of io a Eun ry
marnes. Tae arcisdes mmst, therefore, caraain.

A 35 (4) and 43-57 These aricles won agae: dot
#1914 The Civil Justice i
leticn of bath these ६९७: लक,

relates Wi & suil For compernsalinn for en
. bh ig or save fo: the iprevisicae n° Chapter TV of
the Todizn Penal Code. weuld be an offence punistpale-
ander Chaplet VIL of che sid Code. Asvicte 48-4 covers.
r ry cl peperty obtained by an act «bich
30 orowisons af Caaprer IV of the [nding
me Ishekle wider (१7७ Lied
A Code. Lhe Cemmrictee pocoled rit that

y Lrempory elsas such a4 those Zor pur leaves cuz 353
vl awe oy ५ dreepsacr or.fow the conversion of a
fay ए-६३६प्र-ए५ of neddy wae tried on the ar.y.nal pide
Lesause “cchaieally U:e acl changed areaniod to an effets:
ander the au Pons—E Code They were intended to
provice Ji: Vie agains? publi: servants relating to thelr
3८७: which might techulecly ¢unstinnte crimimel cifegon
éhuule not oe heen by imiitty of simmarr jceisdietion
alFough. ir (७००, they may be wench for revavery. of
cameges. The Gavermtaant of Tadis thinght thet thr:
Cometilee's tencous Jor dekeion of tues: atticlee were
rab ceavincing aud the proposal wax act <ccemted. The
effect af tach kn gmenément would be that ६७: Which
Javclvec a crimual gttusation agiinst she det nant
weud Occarle COynizabje by 8 srogll cance court. To alfow



edu एक

i as it woud
sprive the de Upuriun. Ly char किक
character by au बज! . 1 adveric denen. Th wee
nsideraliong such a thes: thas the two articles were
let the inzancs cf same of the
meuts. Thev should, tr ote opistoo. be

Woana |] * She suils dewalt wih a
vl novioushy ispored of sure
The articlzs nvuxt therefore resin

isis 101 Tas srtice zontomp aw: 3 suit
fal (0 1७1७८ ए०ल्‍॥ of .miru.veble
॥ 4. estes peed ae bine :
acd prcoeTty, This ७३५४ ke fit ¢ssoren ter.
che voroplex defences
sant ud. कोड

Artin le abe Asiicle 4९.

whe exidency fuce:1 Cause

De puis apts Ha, 11: “hese 0०८-: प्ड

ive exclusive juied ellen fut anew Roy OI baey एजए-
j with the Hiya Ceart ia

ity ९ कं] court Ja Médras. Under

[91101 bag ant og
aThouns ७६ ४६.८ oF

Ch letus as da antur.fy for dcetx
di colege ia the opin:on af
ication haz dear made valety fue the

or. te working of thee p:ovlkions, जा
Justice Cosuniites fourd thet ix: a gseet maja Pint

wf vaevs the dsiendaut's pirpee on
"635 lus पता war lo Caune 2५४85, at hogy only a
very aril number ‘of &: WF: 7 1090 to have
born transferred cadet section. 36 00 ६ पक

Commince dd nt recomme che
AMS Monk Caw",

maki sath applica os



mm

Abelian
re:cn
mend

jew Trial

Pecces .1६.

ना in ths
M

was thave
pou the sn

u

Wace 602 che +
Wasa: -।

“sien 4
ReFore she

wur a ti che marnyr in wiairk avid 166
mmiclee trouake chet che eels ¢f thes
4 We were Inter

yy thie Shiv€ fn
Rotbsay, tet ६४५४० the ‘dew crs ax Ir tae Fro: cont
win} ives,

(42०४८ Layer,
ehee Berga: =



own ७४९.३८

1 9. 00001.)

1a] छाना। apeteon
tif

. by atavl.uucy 5:
courte ete. b:

ay ct vevision ynéor
vl Proceds Ths


232

Coens appears cantrary 20
erty bewal? Cause (४७७ are
4

Prev sicis Freud]
twee. Judges of line
how vecrmied trom the rovinzish J
they nvr 7: “te at Proylacisl Saal
acu there appedwss At tne: presen, 9:0२ te be nn a2aent:
whatzo¢e seby decrecs or odes from both «! ५1
8591 Cans, Ceurtt saould 3:0५ be sub tay sero
The forco uf vey pinvided .n
evircig) Semall Cause Court Act ts

THIET, whe Tee

jal Sarylee as

Presidency Suna.
3 Wy thay 4४ $action 25

y thal ay ef cpinics tht
dency Sriall Cause Courl Ast
:1 purpose and shuul:) 9४
of neestioring a decrrg er
aque & Fal

Fie
uder al a

Smit.
Small Ca
at tmal

पा tarely grid: un’ ain
ion nd unesawscarily pro-
Hich (०10 be wes

shot Ine
1 न, Bpeeler
vig greainr #६1६|
mingr of oeing & Hoal
६. procedan i ble ot
11.1 anc is intended) te me te
cf thy Full Bench procedier wuuld ar:
‘lament cf tai lalter object!”

completo ayreezaent wil the Wert behgal
rree's view Wat 3 ६6२! enalxesn Le 882: or} 28
cial Smal’ Cause Courts Act zhoule ६४ in-
tocawrated into the Presidency Act unc gertien 82
tepesled, allkough thia might teeun some cacresse in , ८
work ef tac High Courts. :

Exensiem 4D. As we have pained oul, the aeximam sonal e@use
SURG; Mas (0५% uf ihe precsidenpy courts uh upte Re. 2900, La
माप Bombay. hewovns. by & recent amndweest che p2curlety
३0107 ct the prrgdieney amall cawzes conrl has geen
in MiG Tn adeéicion ४: the nv Teil gals

sof amal. cduses. courl ue tee
Jency cowne have been given jatasdicdon to try gts

arising wrtiio & | Acts, such as. tm: Beasbay
Rent, [Tr anid | Houae Rates Con=ri Act cf 194.
in Bermbay, t mH “Bengal <nizes Rare Control Aci
at 195). the Thilta Tenariy Ack cf 1449 in Calentta ard
———$—<——

६ flepott. p.27-


servent caee3 in Madzas, Tr Bombsy, lav

a (Cee Court fy ign Ihe ane ellate
under the Payment of Wages Ac. Bes the
lo jude ot in municipa

yeers and tbe chie= judy,
we courts In polit Calcutta snd Tambay’
any further extention af tbe Court's juria-
sy लि८एट it ६3 che Auga Courts
hesher cay further i
3 43 decira

concerned
17% of cuuary Juise

41. We have nt received suaze
cv op . for Lhe enlarKemrui
powcrs by ameud.ug section 11
ng in Lre ६७७८३ (1075८
veagor.d ta shore
Courts Act,
ए 14 relating x ew
vi) Provpdun: +फ जड़ा:
ianorable property, tte Ci
tare say elner sugeescicn:
We would, however, rene os
art TH ॥॥६ (!७६ Disses ७४११: WE rg.
to schedite TL in the Povis-clal

af tae Prowl Sri!

Ecrilion wf clause <2) ct #1

Oréer X XI, Rule | of the
ic

Améuiment

42 Suggestions have beer mace to us by some of the

witomses ७१०७ aay 0). rephes to our Quesdonosire thet pred

instead cf having tivo ceparate enactments for the oz

rol the rhufuséd] serail cases: अज0115; Th 1
law applicab:e to octh the areas Ute
courts o2 355६1 csu-4s (+ Lo render

fisting on plains gt saul! yelic Fron
ws both the Agts am: idercicat u. priac.ple.
ifferences ४२१४६ yous 10 cetlaja pruceriral detai
There ste certain add.ticns] srer’sions ir the Adcom
Presidency Act velaling in wank is lenewo 38 ६३५७ 1909] 7-ज+०७७
Flstedare by a fall court: procedure fu: m8 ‘Tena
iomevubk: property and distress waltuats fer rpesey दी ियष्ण
revinesty id airergrs of toot af houses o: prem ses 18 alec
Gid dewa. We have already stugusted a anctial 1111 ९-
dhe [४२८४४ ५:४३ by copormmending che abolut.on of

vteng, to 8 Tee terial anc tke conferment

on eyslogous is Unt piven by the Pro-
vincial Smali Ceuzs Courts Act

sic ate
deliver,
Tson by permission and
wher such tenakcy or permission ७३७ determ'nad or has
heen willnlecwn, under section 41 oof the Act, i person
eatitled to the possesaion of !such property cum makes an



pens ims.

dsfeul pf the कर]:
uppacans is entitled
wear dirreting hir: be weve 100 ९६510% ५
eatisted Wha; the point

sonic ४१.

८ priczexts,
६ 00६ (६०७ ४०

aMt «६008: tre: ९:८८!
taken Lhevcurd:r.
+ Eueselt

cause jatet antil suck att is ८४८
+ 4&2 oqtivides अ ६७८८ 710

3 the 9९28: ६ ६:
uit ard cneciticn ६

aAlliaed
Lae wily

siems Teganog he ६४ al the
2o3 variants in ९.५८
als xaenilar.

ET cf tke Act 1
gf ermnrs cf rent of ny wwes Je
stituting u suit ir that bebalf. Seclim
४ ४७ be enutied ९० 5

gorest
apply lo a
tress Tar Jou ect

le ५

'९1528 50 for the: purpose eo: scizure
॥: esed = We se doubtful of
a the =xttepsion of such preedure
shirk that tar provisions vend be

dis



293-

ead indus

extended acvar.tage 13 13156
3710३ 42 (५४ comcuues 0८३ जाला

40. Rave

७:26 ember ८। ०
The operation

Vo aartiedlar provwiewss
z¢ br

‘s or munsits to Re wc.
५1130 0. फशालीचं ज्ष २,
Ike ane! एशा&० K 2°.
: this lis
he Provincial Srozll Caus> Courts
Ard 1.0 dines ut की? key

11१ ४७ 4 का

७. Sol’ Ceuge Courts

16 perm’t exch 2
waren che

tank डी. Saend be

"5 chould be rl
je: 28 ३० ov dt
31 absidd |

-urigdict.on af the Tigh
art in. rut ISazlz by Lire
znuld a ekollshed.

¢ trial cone
Siasl? Caan

te that cm-
fhe i, Small Cause
ld ke ०८४ लात: rains thet rer पु
dae Peosidency 8५:01. Causce Court. mma 8



2a

(14) Seetion 13 of the Frasidency Smail Cause
Courlk Act should be amended on the lines. sugensitid
by us fou she armendrocat of Sekncule 1 10 dhe Peo
vdncial Sova!l (४0६९ Courts Act

(15) The provisos releting te che recovery uz
seeggion Of -ecumivable aro petty cunliined «mn Chapter:
ai al Loe Presidency 53ओ Cause Courts Act should
be जाता: lo the Provincial 800५) (१,
and the Stau: Guvescurmels empowered ue up.
ovidlans cl the;
hate,

६:5७) Sind ar ep 3 shavid vw token with 2०९३४ ७
the proesure for disaéts ¢contuined 8 Chapter yrir
of che Presidency Act.

CF) “t would be advantegroys to cothume Jue
Provincial and che Pres demicy Steal] 050४७ Act inte
ome eRactueeul.



4. ARIAL OF SUITS
Cx<e of Civil Procedave bas enacied Mesdlngs

8 enlucced,
frown knowing when
veal ७४7! Ler be «:
le rocaning ॥ई che ayetem is co narrow che paris
éoq therrby 10 diiunish ex.
ar PopaTés lhe amount of acim
gither alde at the searing”!

2. क uke viv] guuris mn Ingial areal pleading, 32८ aa Deal pleat
known, The soviet law prowdes cur then: valy ill
ef Jabour chsputes. The Japaness Civ J .

६1०7 10, 5 1 #ऋा। 25) agcaks ct 3:

ori] debate
save. Suet
| pwocsediags aay ke ueefai La pretly cascy oug in
urde: Tine the auc thie: ciefence tn heir prover

fo one

an types

wick alt>
Relecr. ia
on a Cirelu)

te be advisable.

2 J
“HT xf che Ti
acequace
Onder ४! ros
mien: 02 fue. bul
गधा (46 sate ua]

he tacts
wt Not the
बार ze be proved and (0) tha. it
a toncise farm ese Tes hzve
axaied tinue the cwvlier Coges of che Jast century, yel
lingltry snd cminzed pleduungs setting out runmercus

mvidentiary (9८8, péraist lo this day.” in the evvrts ia dee
हर ore particularly ip the suthduy - (;00७1[5. 00
गॉएपए हा is mede lo corwly with these एप Pleadings

are génésally pralix, me age and Cc) of irvelevi.nl
‘The avermcnt: 2 i

facté are) ouitted and iccmiaterial sad
inralavant fin ls and ever the evidaper are set out ate
Tepeuled at Jeneth. In the wtltten atatemcnts all
powlble ceicncss, whetiver they crise or poz, ure taken

Tarp ७५. Hyldewor

173) > CL. 12. Srp at ६. Sy.
BST


deiter

Fleadings.

521
including obviangly
ae ith pleadings.
zuiprisupy 15६1 very

tal of cke suit. A presiging

2 820 moth even this
furs 13 pe:fitm tis duly
६२ iss atleupt he is 10 प्रुज ए। ए represeplied ae

mar even then,
idesprvad =bekit of
ue, peoenicn? by
ir our view in 4
BS pleedings
a the यो

Commiléce
train plestders ta

Eroper raining al
gad cnty

hs canta’ ning ।

be cnt atutel Ceres ate
. Founy prscdtiona &0व 6
a PR E एच be gulijsel A
awiag of pleacings ahuuld aise
lawyer's profregiona. ‘Taining
Mimy pructitionere 1५
wn y APH pu. sib) Ic
1 छा other Jay ocrsma whe are gat
he lu-owientge « Jaw but lack genetal
1 Th preteaston must mace a determized offer
श्र practitionzr ७:11 also
ig dvafls of pleadinuw



providing निया,
७७11-09 and

informncen and pele 1850६ [३ seed are
1 [० - बज

tO of (13६ V1 ad
Jo 7७ the: party

defendant २३०७३: एप
|. 1८:७ ०७७०7 w erie cage! to

5

yoogrbidiag tur

Peadinna 2 फट mare o7 onth, wr Uiiak.
tne time of the courls 10 rues rat
3 vequived Ey the rules ir force on
Ftlgh Court.

200 Special
Pingo orery toe

“i We TO Weal Sane

LR 23 Cakore,


duscherge of such turctinns for couts situated in ६०० 0०७७:
or taluke headquarccre, way prove ve, such
officers m:g: |

+ 220: have easuga week i
803 31. crerauy ec fur che performance 0७: 1७९४४ culies wil
alsn nut be acvisto 0 70एच 3४७ bis other adrn.crizs, elulicts
and judicial werk ‘nay be held ug during his abewnee trow,
besdcuarte:e, hewever, uke propoge] sects capable of
Te: FE where there is 2 concercra-

1

tie af sever:
In order we dise: ९
spould have Uae power to make crdera cienissinz che
ae dae dg 314

picadings

cejection of the

fdlinebl uz Cae

- slags Crequently aces: a1 the stage cf
peu? 10 his
or reat

5. appear cith
nt, 79 anawWer Teaterial cusstiou: Te.
12677 ९४, Rule & werceenplales wei kar

suing the summons,
की cf thet Lever Pur:
we in the partiqular sane, syijesc:
ot Lat 19 3 87081] ceux ९६.50, th
Lexa ul tae mot A summons for final dspam]
cefendas. ta oe prepaced to produce all the
wimedces Spon when ¢vldesce and al) the docuracots 1
whiea he intends 9 7019 in siipipe Jug defen.
summer: “cr vette a2 issues the detendant is direv
Lo produce ca the dite gf appearance
which tie iavends to rely in support of F ic
VII deals vit ७३11-6७ gletements. Rule 1 cf that ०
mules that the detendant may, an ,
hull, az or hofare the lat bi
ixuil cay ७7:01. presens a ten atate-uent
Thus, unless vequicad ‘oy the court to do
nt ix net bound 2 present his defence ina
written statersrnt In peurtice, however, Ue tale of
_pprarsncs vaarticned in the summons bas ulwicys bo¢n
undersood t» be the date for Hing the writven etatemens.
In sre.) cares i's ued suils of 3 very aiuple mutate, it
the cetendsn> appears but .s mot ready wilh his Writtgn
slalern court aomc.inirs records tis sialement jn
his defrne: ‘ore dizpoajng of tha case finally or sa ite
iseues, But deterilly, evgn though a date msy be fixed की
fina. d.sposal or for actsleinent of igvies, wrillan sailemont
ave aclénm ji-ed ca Wie day fixed, the defendan! ६3७» fon
ime to file il and | grsared. Thu althcugl
eonlenipletas the final dignosa’ of a suit or the



ao

vol issues, 89 “he sway ae. ६० tac 4३७१ Bxed. the ecu‘t
[9 not 261९ to do ovlber ¢f these things in a Jarge niaje rity
Feen sfter the wrlker stateneot 188 kerma vibes:
du %01 luke che further sccp on the same day. but
ratty a2jaeemed tu 7 future dale fur che

| 10 cree oxeert unavericlicbee.

[9२ day actisily
as mvetdng. T!

aprecrane
४५७ may he:

» a great dee] of
Ravely dope the tetemdeny
Tove en
vbit the
eda pox. in

» ated ue

t if whe pretuclog iy
tind ३१७६ goad द्ञा॥/0::05 for requiring tar
eoen een Sule

actor dlart ordering: hin
uefore the date “ived

r Uae first

basting

» piven, the ८५६३ circet last the prosisnns AA
> shaw

“abstantial

la ४5 lp

a

woth Order VIIT, To: I
yun ubligsnon to Gle छ written slaternen! oufy if
d by the cours. Theagh the existing race ९४५४६ |!
the ennrl be ane whether che:suznninms chal! in the
tins: inetane:: by for setilement of aausa or for fir.

o3a.. ६७ prertice she courts ax a 7912 ८३८८1 (8
tw be ssveé . 10 fitle suits or mits of a comp!
0116

ané abe Jatter andy in sults cl a ve
rag ssl. cause suis, The Nap; aie weruld pra
be reduced in practice ro thu: same formula zo shat
wes where lis summons iz for the settlement of

५ Rates ‘and Oeeecs (एस; fae che Cid Coarse तो, Chapeer VISE
wen 14.


st?

oe 9७ ६१७७५-८७॥&।॥१८६

Tully 3755८ & 86७ 10": ४
de ह:&. in stnax far इल्एशएशए



wo

laintiff ३७७७७ se cede.
आह .( .« 4

be impened wu
ment filred

न watogly bo ma
untrue Jeni Lawl, uxpuna hin

aelf ler Lae

eerie Lares

lore be the J.
ith fimnser
Ceanled 10 ६-००

“given ta
be तर1:रओ, we «७ ५1

= the High
so 63 to provicy fur rect lege
rem the date of summers to |
ent for filing its wrlllin slatemeot. ४४
3७४ XMVIT, Gale 5 be ७.
. ailinend. Suck an
ain!

id the
Saf tie Mad.

Une

ones 7180 th ity ct aing peo
fone ta the Covercuncot I nadeer,
SESFICE oF Cheers
14. The axxnce of ar
of a party frequently caascs
plocesse: of ‘hie rzours It

Tougislec 2
Dd. Tees,


Farin shoo d. ‘tag thele leaings be
by file a statesuent la <ourt giving thei:
erbPens. Sura ९३11-६७ addres seauld after .t is lileed,

हू deemed ty be tac actrees of the parly jer the purse

ol tae service ef ए-7ल्‍्श

for the purnisrs a
devuveal to be she Etzper addnees et the part
a 0.

tin, yeosmepa che u:aera-
rier) of the oy 111! «93 tite of such
a Sole be 23:

15. Altec the plaint h.
che ६» ~ ४

che cule provides that om
dowih che plam

cami 1 ८
1911 ७ ४ delay (९३ procassps ir.

Covi) Sustice

i
wa leav'ng oplt ye
iad et die date o7
She Zerma og th $0॥॥1:४:७३२$ ३:
‘ncn aemall payment qd
ले clewhers ale £055

Proves

to dil in the |

se and got the eres zig wed. This iz #& ०९
Wael saves lime une leb ue and we coher

rend its edenior in othe: States,

A judge enfeteep 1:32 degrets ana ordsis er

11 tae process denver. ‘Fhe procesa server thug fills

nM place in tne tine pd the udtoinistrat:

led ly perform. his task vith,

ity and nunesty. Exweéyer, in a very suze awnber

of Sialra, process setvers aro known tp be octtup’,

Mal tices on their qart com regarded 8३ 4 inajor gauss

of decay in the iris] @f progped.ngs (33९५ 2 proceen—



a

af se:vice ne
ial Jiv brn

Guratlunes neice sbrnughe-

ned 46 Deere’
bese

ce bas we
2 0.15 ५138: ४ cay

५ ahree typos Tene
De eeygeq जा preerssz¥

के ol

ee 1) by
Ae deierdart personal’y
mueininw cel 128. Zann.

oy to Als agent ve

who .c Ayre with (2) by affixtne a १०79५
of ris hans if the dvferdacl or
ies ur vara te inund ef

hand (की by माह ४ ७५३७ पिता

spicwews 957०७ An she ९0६६ koure and of thes
Te the delendaut last vasided ५४ in stich other
Ine एणए। “hinds 1: aller sailhy viet
just it &02एए॥ as sabelibuicg socvion

nndan: i3 keeping
ding sevice ur
sumrené canta! br served
servic: -
the Cole atuf 1! छ 0
ou sake li Fark to (७५ the
| is us + proof of
Rules 10 ta fb of Order 9, Under
med to sige an seloiaw-

ying rfEcer on tie utlginal
© thanuaer of xeryion snr

33 kids Qe: vury cloxe ard have been

Th ९. $कञ।:-4 है. vires Gumi | Reports, [ 33.

Ste 2d एव Lana



dete in se Ci
Comte .er 010 gu

1 Cincalacs oF ad lhe 13.8:
eld.nale courts.

Di Tarties bn dea. ig with tue protien of dciaye ते Mot srrvica
॥।_ ettut ng of preces? we Aare ly hegre ind eercain prucival dit
b-vxr. cullies ४७ hala aT 58575 Karts of she enuclsy The:

Bersiee vl pavce is vite delsyed en aceosril af 5.10 leu;
by ihe veuress sccver

aa?
Remymillee १॥#॥७८

Sin myer parte Uh

i water logged. In al
el SurAtuic.ciits susmetinies besuried

£ wther ite
jit the placa

36 eapenzes which: he 14' 820 ine
Mivewates mved wheoe |
४?“ छ1॥४१ cstinitio
एड ehei: des! w:

iy ov tetan.

Kegligerve शी Tloweees whe. 116. cmasea det
वतन zormapt practces of the pro-
हु alreacty enfysred Srunetiraey
process usxrved wtheut
the yillsge ul aif rilber trcenzh — inclolen: ¢
On othe covenious he
#। Una thus lie

‘Taunulerdly ४७:२९ tho
eee Or she wera werscn, 320 may sls tetarn tr pe:
un.er

0९5६
without making prover myuidee and ध्यातता॥

1 fayd fupdee Gomenister
4 Ttepart,o. ६4



7:18 11979. service, Sua wreng or 2raudulent repurts ४1
the preerss server nevita#sle Lold up Ube sregres3 of the
esse and pot pertice to ५:४७ icy ३&(९1:5६-

ok, OFF 9१ sup 07 by tar mawel
sabhzkrint aa
व

irate ile
४ #&00 ala of

ne
T tar pruces? servers werk. Ia
md Bowen server hes ‘mia.
tai, dsy hy day

ing what werk he cid acc w
rocessrs he screed or Called to serve. The is i
fa ky che neziv whe & issues rere:
na to Fesdqu
rite get the eutcies in
| ८ avher respecwable
7 cf

ve mequita? tam
eopy ०: the form in use on

acdibun Ue vilege oflmen dn Bombay Lave bena
inatyseted by 8 Gove ment Orcer to zive evory assiscance
tu baditte when serving proceased The age offivers are



‘el a Bailiz's Patrel 30k

pred. unaintain whal is
€ follow

et a ba’ Vege he Las to
sok tar « of tie Lil ff rhe
ledove 4-10 aed che date oc bis vi
of Ubeze facts on his cwa diary
3 व Une: 4 कद. fine.
scertaia | rerreccness of th
easires chat Ue pracy
लू. Kit oraress ard fos
Ag offer ‘we 111
doof ths process serye:+ i# the apncirt-
le offerr uf the court in
vialted oy them. He we’
<tr line to 8 group af
ss 1६ दिए ॥॥ «Tf

# 15% Bo to th
ut 3 Laise

ang vrunmyuzs af the

eta he eviueted sill. Lae teste of 1४0३1:
Java Prades: an oFienr -ह frequent Ly earl
ihe best

rep ci. ॥॥ ATE
suddenly anc willicus previ: Dotlee to go ny
of a grpses3 aevver Ie test the corr:
Lsgcb vires. This aeetree hes yieldad zatis

Fuclury Tees >>.
22. A baric gauss cl t:

जाए
still remutecstion paid to
ti. In Ardhza and Macrss pro
tebligaiwert is cividet inti arnirs end pro-

stwe of remuneration o2 the amins
५ 21-£:2-01-1-. anc (६४ of

aerverz is che ¥

c€  prewen
न]

Ike process खाए... के
the ecale is

Ps. ¥-1-18 wocreas bur higliesl prevacls
॥ pets Re. 40-1-50-1-90. ‘Pheugk in est of
States dearnecs allowine is also osy2ble to th

travel oy patdie treagpert will reset. in Jess corsuption and


vocally. the rates oF precers fer
vf Whe process serying ९४
st create 2

it is only
£M full volar ter maaney ७ [1

“che erbunmsemes.t should
prot’. The State
nt service for wn

ef 1A a
Sounder Order ¥. 30:
moved Leyeud the:
court Emig oh The Higa 2
‘ ९ post
Ac cases to

To Bapewsri: in
wer Order aurlressod ४७
at ly segistered oset, uckrowledawen !

'तेए2४+१४५ purpossya 10 ke signed
mermr fo be tufirent prot cf ser
» Taste Lau Mind
& new Hulo 21-3 mede in 1940 nrovides fur a
10 cw sent ४: the cotel's i

(15७८० to che deeaday, at
wind spot iy rey.slined pect pose
Pad tu ackaewlelgment fa ८ ७1८७ edgp.ent purnert-
ing ta ke | 0४ the defirnlint is to | Gy

eourl is (४७ ३,371 :॥%8 us be pores Fm
furtFer pas

ar it 3
seeved er ovder such for
tr neces:
stu ns she

प्‌ Ar ६:एथ्था:
1 Games Act ate

. ‘cwil आए २५५७७: sie Kaepat., दा. es.
है 1. [..॥६. 35 8.0४६७४ 23



310

v. appeared shat the packe> was prape ly ac
ths defendant snd had ‘ocer registe-wr, Au,
peered, Tare presumptive te, 1.0:
॥ 1 gud ligule to be reautted. 1b
eresunptieu woul ve resutted as 5 as tie d
agpears ard iesties tbat the packet had ever “xen A
" i $ postal ७४
Objex ans. 243 [4 might ke argued ays
pret ८११८९ for

vist thy preales
Ubat a [७४51 9¢

din
joval dispadyaycage {aul
Lu <f the ours. TI
i High 2०५:

isl pruclives LY
4: s@iely iteeli whetaer the stomata
tie anurt weull zee waetacr th> parker
F ad post and er acknewleds-
and elso whethar ‘f wis proprely eddress-
mule tesehore require it te be yraved by
pecwtse that the defencpnt resided at tle
kel was eddressod 70 sim al or att
would reach him i ibe uzdinary course
aekuowledgmen? purpertiag te fave
defendant. weuldl alas in mast cases poe

i fimg the siptnalure of [|
on the scknswletgmunl “Sabjec. to saferaerds oF thin
बाप | 08, we would reenmnerd a rawe exlemsive use of the
a: fur the puzpose ¢f srozess service:

Renee Order ४ : sours Ciule Las now उध्श:
amacmer® काटा by यान Ant Gu. G6 of 1956, The हज enzcted
Ru! A enebles tie sgremets & be served oy regi

pst. ia lies of or in sdditina dn che आएं ianvier

07 where fer any reugon Wharoeter the surinonts
i fal nteger, An sexnewledyment purporting to
be gigned by the defsndant or che 2एशा ar पा pailcrge
¥ cl rt or the 36७:

by the = endre
ma “dc: root = af scrvite.
Ue new Role lays emphesis on pereoyal
ciuar, Tinde of service cod perroits the ‘pe
ons i2 the personal -erviex Has Leen
८ Lhe wee that cuca a restviclinn 25

issiuz the nw:
Viirarever,

"९४9 ६०, retucn
wae SK thet co Mnglard she € me
° ol

4. we taik, result Ia

Vier.

५ Ling Repaet 2 rhs Co:yablttes oa Supree: Court Preece ad Pho
eslure [* 15, pure १९, :


भा

Pele tog Une © cil ४५
10 azder substitute ce in सा ibe
ly, where Lhe cuurt 73 satisded that there
+ that the detendunot is Kooning cas
haz prarperge: ub ४७,१31 4९106, Or 95०१
ved

om Cale Sabeclezped

were divides ard .he
SX rule tu - (08 effe:
ard likely 1a wer
है पका 9 Jini 199 be plasad or che nomber oF
sid Whe otimary menrer
raul of a amber nf faye
‘there vroulé in

awe fix Lhe
which sith s yous; he ¢Fsoted.

11५ él effec ¥
Ir, the arly svaterisl upot which the court — azts

iideering exbstivatod saa vive az the aficavil of the glaivtift
aidan 1

way Way. ( + aes,

(urs to effec! wey way in two sucomrd.

pis siiga’d be ose. eufigicnt = eanm for
3 fanpot he errverd in the ordinary
x eu i: order suk
R omy be

Eyam etion or Pateriiss, 19520 २६६४ ako "Shiite.

23. Vee ॥0% come ts ह gewup of Enporanl ce: in the
Civil Brotisd relxting ०७ mutters prelity
the बंध uf a suis Orders X te RO] coaaie prov

iaalim ef sarties, deeavery, produccion and
al f and doc

ist 9:०)3 ८0106
पका Cader KTV

Unde Order *C¥, Hulr 1, stereie 43) ta: Caurl shall Srenung at
ter reacting the elaint and issues.

any, ard aher put oxaotio:
ties 96 10065 a> niecagkary, estercain thy malerial
rallleng of fact ot law ugen whieh Lae parties arc at
and therevpoc prarcad in frame sad record tho
Uer 5७७९ Gevision cf the case appecsa to
domend. ‘Whe cuty 0९ framing cctravl [85922 13 thos cart on
the Court whiea iy ecpectéd to diacharge ६ afocr racing the



Bre

We nave fourd "था
naly Sates the (warts dk. 7 above proundure
gccnph he isewes trates hy the p. without apply.
ing Liebe nani. to te quessions in dxpale, withwul 8१८४) 5ा-

anc: ¢xacuiies tac

ings and कह cons.dering the
ic advecaies. Oo che other band,
3:21 ५६ al-

paidta he ६133.
21१ tou gsntrel. एड." wand curclessiy 47
wiesding aFiceer accepted ४०४८-८७: qrestine
The Cow i a 3.00-71<*
५2६ be stxts
yc, iat tbe थविल्लया
cf thr Cases. The
the pants cf (spile oa erbich the paysied
ve 10:०१ [0 (६ 9६60: ६8 mi Ihe matiera on
adduwe2 evidences or expound the law.

५0६४: ७४५४५ stage 07
end पाउंधडा105 will offen mult ky Use ents
3t Coa: i cel wrth and decidir: the real pois

should “rant (he Le? after a care
weg: and ascertgin 1४ cll relevane ite
thenwelves, Tac maler
७ bhe isles are set 006 in (Order

RIF, Rule 2 us 9.७४:

Allegatinia made om 081७ by parties or ly dtu
१७४३ qiesell oe tae beaslf or by tee pleader: of
3 pawiien,

Jevatona vaade in the 8 Ot Ww whswers
3

1. ‘nterropat:

daument. gedisl by ॥४

> suck ear’
ve tae plc
produred
Kio KID



223
४ Kcuntemplale ar. exiacnation oF हे कर्ता
putie: 9; ४0% ऐ८ जाए bi 1७6 139.16६ aye -॥1:0ट Ja 00 वए५ a
lo Se <319.0 tre patat: nf the dissots. Rule ॥ ena sles ths
(१८७०४! le sitesleln fru 0822 patty ता hy pleadhr ५५
he edttitg ता denies he wtiegacion: of fact. ms
Pleadings ए hot

Ye The Buiee 19 Grd

espre

vu Jey srt made.
hy Che Cuuet of a party.
नाता les o:ecise nalure <f the dis;

he 1 BR te nerty, Hin an
the plewadlings aud J
c

vise of the:
ees cud Lh

is ]
sare of tetonds teo pare ly chinir
का advize. Here. sas lee mede ky the Phen Courts

11: gartics by exeraining: thera bedcis
33Ues but u raajorizy uf ७)
As picid

2६8
ke mraper ure ul Da:
Sireols 11. #॥:।
im lined
sages ४०५2. Lee

Tw ira
peeled

tes wuitever 07
band ७८-७:६८७ ९:
Aad (0९.७ 9-5

Longe. 1१४३८८९५७-७
we O° yg, mune



Disgsrcre.

u4

the sthame of the Code documents required mu. oe ploy
Jace Sal patagor. use wheck Ja

Va. and VOI de no: provide 1८५ the greduct-on in
tee a.

Ceurt of  doc:mente Tlowsv-r,
vlescers

४1 bas ordered to be

awenl Hot produce.

7 uf '$ |. घ््याउ:छ) tes
age unless food cause for its

ron-production is shown ७ the zerizfzction of the Court.

vyp vt Rules Wvis provides for the pro-

are io th

ft the parsy i mh lve yurredurs: |
cd vw Je docuvevts in the possesaian or payer of
y ७ cirfecemt ruchine: lg orev.ddd in
ruvery aed
mat face and decumert: end inspection ef dora-
Op the apoliceion of any paryy (without an a‘ide-
uty Lo Uke sudl tia
1६ wh.ch मप्र पर bays
in
The ditonwery is generally ma oy
sVibed 29५ speclyung the documents
and she otjce tothe productnn of any oartfaolr
coviment. The atfidav:: >f dscumenis covet apenity every
* I pewrr of he party dalled

४ Ciscovery, even though 16 may state nis
Tequeslor. of any perticLer docuradat in
The aration nf desunmits Laleal da such aa
१ com. Lat Cnurt yonder
S-. A pacty tc a suit has छ ५४० a cight of

Trodare the decuments fir h’s icespine.ion (Order XT, Mule
Nen-cemliatec with aq oreer for discrvery or for
patiis cuit being
suck ८०:

nn af dere gions | [प Bacly: is Feed down in Grdar



हा9

'फएड an १८४८७ $'
3. Leing pic oy पा,
७... ए the resi). uf rar suil ७७४२95

nD Cf Lhe ६
ol the Tue would nui easily
Hyves te the new provedice

eet majorly ul cages ate १४. ‘
3 a rm valor, wid because’ हि-आ।र
"७६1 the त८0017':9.(5 velied
Wy pacticienl”.”
acd 19% ॥"५
fur ४.0:६।६४ aad “as
ag and iah-diul cance, where e.vil 1 o
nf axperiones! advocates azul auiscueys welt.
preetice aad prvedia
ard Unf: -niliari-
wry . ul chwse tn Raa
(079%20 mi.thers 2 exact.
Thetefex2 out n wai. at axpericnge cl che judyce
the | ( tseit wockiag. The preal cdeauvages whi

veault from Lael use tani Ins aupreciated we they
] vee :0 the courls. The wi, E
1903 ulsimate'y -Apénil upon 8 sJoser (७
perstion betwren Ih: Bench and tho Mav. ‘Tit spent हु
dace he Jay vere in arx,uuintlog thes «:
fis: ४00ए1830:8 and the :aaneer of their appli
soprep—ate slages ef Litizat'on wel ge of gront hela
stave cl 11.0 triad by Aevany nerrowed di
ke fold of sontreverled (acta. Tac Co
wun adm'thng docume



Justice Commil.ce rigttly
deprived (0. पंश EOL, Rule 107
! ape dubs itn equel
०3:६0 in 126८ That roe 021 wea thee
10. cl cost. doee ७७: provid? an adn uw :

sent dae ४-७8 dou ८०५ sing @ quid 101६9 ५
sub ursiosian of 91

th OV K2s 1.8:
Eroceduce
cu. The provistns of Order WT), ale V4 rmquir.tz tte
ETeduccion with he plu. of al deccmzt हु
line plasat: 5

aod wh ch are था 1
19 pretues add the i: .
“ le We ahich
ier Code cure हज on

gant te praduce in

day: a whica
off or २० tile it 8
evidence ‘Te 1188 (2७:१३ of Allahghad and te: Pusjs
Tease. cusever trade rae ७ eouson 0६ the cuss of the ches
fenrluct >६ ॥01०:)0। Rute 11! Order VEIL The ०51 ॥५1
20) STURM ४ %। dreamers anc Ikis with che vleading
Jeid vpeu belly thy parties We suxpet leat Rule
Lobe amended २४: the Linas ef -he aurndunent casde in the

[७ alselrge aul otker dreameuls the po
hogy br aterawed by tas एज, ter Court abould,
~ geclien जी cil. upon cach parly Le ४०४०२
chimemts ar thie: cpl wand adin.t

1

ether its Karty अर दा 1:
cul such ctu: . ®2nt.

‘cease aeble Jenial of 2
eosts 2 vruving thase dociaments

2:
agunat ha


carpe
0३933 «ft wrong!

pegy
we

nics

ic
dew all th: desutreni
06६5४ 096

ei 4
are ane) erly
étage wth di

roinecd
eM १७०४ tring
ne in te ७.0८७४६४] eveas. 7,
Court a large nembker cf decunsetils
velevanz or only of remote
ra nia.pheg axdeeice of आए शाह:
yegards she ordinary cormsponcnnde it "| rocking un-
sual to fad taat th: first letter 5 the ६0'फजा। 1 15 role 33

# lucked br, 2 allel
er, ५६ to che danger ot
ww wlowed ve go near

॥ (६ ५॥ Tua ist Comings Rewut, p. ३४, para 35.


318

*- पणपुत_ाआएक 17
५+)3.19९8. 07 tne ४७ ०४:८७४:३१६ ९६:
We Zound in th> ॥४:

ta ५७७ oovire ¢

per acimige nay,
11 Lie real poin
४३1 wages the rudgr: 00५५ eel पं
| ement of i at ol 1₹५॥[ ५

ge's work आजा (9४:६७)1०६0९८ ९:
jg it ९०७2९॥९१, ky ax ४. शा
A wusipetent Rar sheuld
Teds ४:७७ of port mi:

should go ए५ ropl nut
presen oy a [00५४४ 0४७: ४:
| :marnar ial'y primizzily
. The prrsid ay uficer must. acu
proper arapgezuent end pest nail 00
? ls ke entere:
sbokigical 04 0:
पक ast i wd

1
lagieg] ax

lesaRey or
documents. & १६:०७ eavina of ‘ima will

‘ate. the Higa Cearza sbovtd ३2९ that she
% els ॥]3.1%19189. wlity andr
rte 35 and when ~hey
mug the decisi. ?
sougal Lo be tendered था ew-
ave of lis judunen.. A २01९ 17 sometimes
५ 376९६ .+ udv.itted suvject to
acmisy hilily or nm yy being: deve: 5]

|॥९५॥४॥॥5
uidenic~

weice (3 -pmittse Repair; p. 49. [०६३ 20.


oly

ub wrilirg jadguient. 11 sume.ines bagpeug thar the २७३६
y cetaled without decisig upon the
fuliiy of the decurrem and २०

This praccizi
such 38 practio: suet
inspecting officers
1५ +॥४27 /॥ niet Lier
exple svegestions that we have outl
fol owed. W> ave als» ०-० the view tha: che atter
presiding .

which rizve:

proceeding

wiuy 17% 16 in 10 1 धाएद' In ain

The ¢ Procedure Joes not
1: [72९९ 7८.11 .
Frins ६०० Ne To aeyn

2 itr 8५

no lig orciury manner lo FP
go lo a Caxtornal Court preeidee over by a layman 1
i rhl an agersa setlemens Failing a s¢lement.

i: 1 the corrt. [0 Norway, such
elimingry 7८ £& Droscedir,
i Des! go Let ou
al, 02:८७ 5.1 Wiree wediators. desi saxe
sununcll ca: mane

3

the patie te
ete che p pro-
20911 fer che

31. 2५ amie advescs of Je
suZgestel to us sh
nab assy fh
roar है

omsible peeve
धर UN ayeig- tte Doda.
ore to be datiznated
erased 3

“the fist selienmen! day efor Lhe se tsleoment
३४८६८ by means of a "Werice of Commaieint ‘2m the srescriect
Form obtsinsble from a pest’ cifice, On that day the


ides 3900:.015६ im person
७70 sa8arr ang
i

४ "छाप 26. aclon him
ne vend ower ४. ced a.
amd cat

tila azievans to
7. oxforros] met

* ire + की be coger ४
x : sbie Wits :mprisoument ox fine vor
a defence eq or a party te refuge ce neglect wilhout jyat
thane ie atiend 26 ९00 i aasyver in sugh suTimans दा
४ 19४५ ik done, Uliyuds muy be
tr by lawyers of 4. lo vetuge 10 Su

i y estilerent preeecd’nga.
jvdacs cf all cateporizs or lawrer

ess thim ten
3 Iclieve she remii:e
sient prookaddavs.

‘Sucre be stpos.ul envages on 3196 3 G@D8TALe
~ “ ery fer siucilteticn incepescent ct the trisl judge.
that the sevang op ०-० auch ७
1] secre the iateuded purgres. OA le carts
Jemenut |: serecing will, we thek, he an
step iu a vd p:eeding ard haut to greater delay in the
skoolel 11% peeescitg.
“Teal We are. heweyer, oF de view (het Lhe jvdge could
je Umself ace in a svay as a cenciishir. Tre appropriate
00३ झति ane: fFaly help:uz parttes ‘«

iu 5 Sms skdiem wold @owheo lac clarilica-
Lua of the a.cad-nes and the exeuinelien pertics cinder
Order X, Exes 1 and 2 lake vlace. In shiz connection xe
wer Wile chal fudge: in tae mofussil whe iy. ७० ‘uduce
4'ब:7 एक ta come ta ko smaica’ale gettlemenl ate abl २0 be



‘wt

misandersteed, Thal should not however, in eur view,
owske the judge deny himsulf ¢f al: Initiatlye ln dhe matter
ef? eapgeeting a ccmpromise anc deter hien from belping the
purlies जा आय it a settlement in suitable cages. A
comnperant and experienced judge whe bax lernt lo meke
3 pMper ae of Me jsions of Ordac X will heve na
cilieulty ४ pec-erminentiy suitehle for o
sumpromise. A few tactfu)] words by the Judge al a
euctabe apportunity, wilhrot the appearuny: cf laking a
vizw on either side and without playing an umculy 8८९0७
rele, ray bring about ihe desired terult 12 a mere pati.
factory ind speedier way than ५ separate cancilintion pro
ceeding in the nanmor deacribed and aproad over acyeral

seeks. ut Opiainn che promotion uf a compeomize .o
saitaale ९: shold be left lurge.y to the inifative ard
che perscnaltts of the judge auc te the parties and their

the Bar can
8 comprozolse,

lawyer. We word Uke to ery
play a very useful role in delagli

“Lawyers perlo-m @ rea? cervin: to their clients and २०
society and the courts when they make: setclements that '
396 tighl neytlementy, where ticre ate twn sires wo a case,

; the issne may well be in doabt, where the facts are
honey in Cie. or where the Lew ig unge‘tled, three is
always name Figure «hich ia fair to beth sides. Ib choul
ae Uhe Jawycr's aity to make such @ settlement if he can".

34. Acutber croposcl which ws presned upon ve and frealu
which we have cnusidiered is, whither there should be a“
thermgl-guing pre-trial conPerenco on the date of the
heatiog ‘or the purpose of (a) 3 anmmery examirasion cf
parties and the hoaring of the lawyers ¢b) the deteccima-
ton cf the dssucs (९) a cunsiderilion of fi) documencs to
bo preducad, facts necessary to be proved and the
manser of proof (पे) determining whether any wit-
beers olber than thoac mentioned in the list May be calle?
ar cxamined on soun.iasion aud alrr‘iay male A
vrovision for euch 3 precrlal cordevence is to be fcund In
fhe Huls3 af Civil rsverduyve for thy TIrited Starea TMstrict
Courts, Rule 74 which provides a3 follows —

“In sny action, the court my in its dissrocien direct The pro
the sltateys for Win partlas to appear before :t for asa.
chaZetoraz to consider _

६.) The simplification af the isetes,

(2) The necessity or d-srability of amendments
lw the pleadiigs;

(3) The possiblltty of ieee g admisslons of fact
sind of dozuments which willl awed 9077: essary prea?;

(4) The ‘imitation of the umber of sxpert wit-

५

12 Bar Assocation Jat, May 1979, ५ The Trial a? Gon
bs Eeary RO 04६76

2:4 हा. af ॥.8४--31.


एफ शुक्र:

mz
(3; The कगार cf a prelinlnacy referenge of

issues to ॥ aster for fitdinge ta be uned us evidence
wien the trai is ६७ oe by fury;

(4) Ruch other maitere 23 may aid in the dis
Rositinn of che action,

The court enali make an order which recites Ins section
taken at the corterenec, the amenéttienss allowed to che
pleadings, sod the ageeemenly mace by the perties as tn
any ot the mectters eotsidered, and whoosh Lenils the iggues
for trial ie thise net picvesea cf ky admbasions or agree
srents of counsel; and such arder when entered contre
subanqeent coutaé of tbe a¢tion, unlosa med:fed ४७ the
to prevent mumfest injostive, The court io its din
econ tay esabisn by Tull Te-tried czlencdiye an szhich
utLituis may be plscedifor ८। Pration a5 axove provided
cud may cicker confuse the calerular to jury acticns @& bo
weu-urF acl.ores or extend is to aL actions

The working of this procedure az explained by the Chics
dusline of the Steve of New Jensey :७ Un Onetted Stiles is

The plaintit und then the detendan: stetes what
expects to prove at blte trigi, The 11491 Judge there
yctates fox the ve orde: the ism.es to be proved
il say amendrpente ot fo pecedin ae 479 91088; ha ot
thera wade, The Jug tn g2 21love whal Gals gay ve
admitted. The Judge eu Body out J Une marcption
admisiojlity of say document: ara wovontroverted The
pre-trial order «hich -incor| ites above myalterp is
cictetes in opan signed bry tho Jud,
vosoe], The trial 708 ६ Lheq.orders 1 ratio oft लत
ta pe delivered in advence of the (८1; fs 0०1९६
nserinucy. (कार dedgilg 10५ #0८७४४७।७ are @ be
in Naw Jarsey Mancal-of Preyisl.Practica.  - कि

The advartayes of pretrial. cquferance have: ales heen
jard by the carne author.

“Dts sunarkable thiay about is all .३ chaz ७३ tite em
of a pro-trial wuafererte very often the ४9:80 lawyer
Bret cime yndegslands the plaintiff's qase . .....:.....
Tikrwise Lhe ci waals lawyer fe the fires time gets a
true concept cf awn. aid hia-adv 8 ९4७९. Suddgnly
it dawns on each of them that knst sad of of this being a ३8३९
that the Blaint can hose var the defendant फ्राए lose, it
bowing in be one thal ६५४ a monegary value :h terme of a

témen roteth in kod month cut, in evers
counwey $७#९३ quactore of the cases wre acttled
between Lae date of the pretrial confecenzs and: the date

See Thy Chijience vf-La= Ratgen!” hy Amur के. Yaniger

F: fq:


323

thea Lhe

wee goes to trinl tw weeks Iter without Le
Judge sey

9 & vd ubout scttiemieat"?

Vem of the
fwersatd

MW. The weckurg ०: the aystem of poe-imal pramduse
29 Comniue,

wich has been h ecme Bt
Slaven was examiacd sy lhe Teershai ©
American syste made it cle that the et
pr: ire. quicersnces degeniqd fur ihe mest part im the
Peceonulity of the Judgt ang his willingness "० deel and
“Nr doubt".
in Tx, =,

ae exisine roles relating te the
sat Order 36 of ub: Rules of 100
che powers the: arc uveded The
Rewer adoption of the
prétrusl camference yromuluza él. forms of ovsescings
wenld nel le ४: "८ is Eaglacd. “The troredy-c has,
unécouotedhy ita ४४7० D ralathy do tue: who have
hcunme accestamed ta ily werking. Aftas carsfa} (४10-
uderaticr we have reached 3 eleay soachsicn shat 1 would
aol be apovopriste fur actoplign. in (his couri—y—eer.alncy
ef loug ducat.on, pssibly develogine into e ‘fsh.ne
no; far tle gutpore of caving tooth * * * More than
tbe procedure 3:19 become sorsewhat eli:borate ant
expedituea’ 77,

the  cenchusirm
sumone far

trilar provieions for 3 1५०३४००1०७
esas hefsre ws have Inde,
[. 2 tice altcacy obtpins :ह ४ miedified

fox 22 the proviskices releasing to che exsrrinstion wl

partes and discovery and inspect(on under Orders X, XF
and XT cf the Civit Beeeedure Code. Tho provisions for,

jhe ameudteen! vf plealir.g% ave found lo Order VF Ruley Prarivrns
18 and 17 cf .be Civil Prowdure Code Rule 16 gives vf Gly
comer to the Urrark a utr stage of the preomvtings ta arder 25106
bo be élrick out दंक Wed any 0372९ in any plesding .
whieh nav ०६ (1) ennenrsnaty, 12> scandalous ७० which
tend to prejudice, embarcyss or delay the fair ria’ 6८
the suti. Sigler incr dity of frarumg prcise issueg is
court under the ginvtsions of Order XTV ard
if treen fees coe (eacaed afigr toe pesliminary examtna-
tloa of the pertics and “he reading of pleactigs 2s alscudy
sugested, 7; would ar doubt lasd to 2 congiderabl> simpli
firwiium of Lie issues. ‘Thus ik tau be 8815 shat the rules
of the (ist) Pricedure Codo amply provide fur all the
matters emvmeryity? in Rule 16 cf the Bu:fes of the Civil
Froedure for the Un-led 821०5 Die*trict (0७७०७.

> अप se SewalsJemary ita Ble Pewsions

meran Bi
al he Las>ut™.
aBind Report é tot Comgttes on Sapeo Conci Pravice and Poo-
ec Jere. page 73, Feast °
Shi 0. २4, DAD. 220.



48, An rlaborate pretelal mesfsience of ibe nature
abeve would, it was esid se veedirss watte
me Purpose coule wel] be achieved op uo
he parlies ander fr: हु of the Grea cre
eedure Cede. We werr informed ty a senlor Judye of
the Madras High Cows chat the methed of a pre-lzial
colerence had oxen tied on the Uriginal Side with
as. Condition: .. oir rauntry, we think, are

for the inftacuction of such an canuvation
3 ibe upon the cours the rrsprmsibiiity nol
एफ cf examining the pitties 3:81 settling che iswes. bus
elao of considcting what Cnewenenfe ceed groduced or

'ए४< oY 0५ comedering the farts necessary to be proved
and thr: manne: if thelr proof. The एफ: ०८: ef the are-Lial
system is to define the scapr of the ciepute ard ascertain
the luc (550२8. whieh arise. Such a definition and
claMtation Joes in many case fend Io bring 20000 ७
tawsudee. Order KX ef the Cade of (प्रा, Procedure
al ¥ privlces fer the examinsticn of the parties by
the court before the framing of the iasues, The objec of
such an exeminetion iz in हुए adetiss:ou ce denisle of the
alle zations of 1६९1 made in the pland'ngs. Thr examisation
will have lhe effect of clearly defiv'ng and firilirg the
scope of the inquiry ard foraging st*ention om the real
veints Im dispute. HE thes: provisionx amc carefelly
01 >फणां, 10.05 sl jd ऋछ&प्र im bringing about the sactary
consaquenzes ५७ ace said ta flow from a pre“Tial
trnlersnce. We da net theteforn taink i7 desirable La
Mencporale bi 0.0 procedutal laws she elahvrete spect
of prewrt! coferences which obla'ns in seme other
countries.

=

ATTENDANCR Of Wirsersrs

Smmracases 49. We shall next doal with the summoning and attend.
0९ ४:॥०७७-, ene of witnesses. Under the Code. psrties are antithed at
ime efter the institution of the suit oo cbtain by unm
ior in the ७४५८८ summonses ¢> persons whow
wtlengacke ia required richer ४) gi ici Pace or in ore.
dere documents. Tadz 15 ganoreliy i ofter the fesyes
have heen framed ang matvers relating to discovery and
caspestion hat Ser cotnpleted. In sractice, -ke applica-
Hen for summoning the witnesses 20178: be made at the
ertlicss ooperlunity 49 J:a. euficier-t time may be left for
serviec before the date fixed fiw heating of the eutt,

oXinsieivies 44. Cemsideruzle délaye arise from 38 Yiilaro in serve

aC शाह... SMMCNIT-203 ०६ Witusger, eves When the parties have fled

omams their applcstions for witdosa sommcnaes i thre and peed
ihe travelling and other expenscs 23 requird by Jaw,
emuaca of these delayy we genevelly speaking the came 2७
those which (९१८ in delays in lhe service of vrocemmes cm
the dcferdarts. Measures similar to theta indirated
vetier bave irercfore to hr adopted 80 -rmoave these de
Taya.


4. ‘There ts a larg: body of हल inion that parties ape not 05151 :०
satticien-Lr diligent :n ayp! ying ur dhe: igsae of guramemses PPP
for 120 utuenddanee of witnesses, Somelimee ७ patty who seme.
for 80096 reas) it iat interceted ia the auit being heard oo
3 pardemler date deliberately app ics for 158:10 6 rumors.
eg ६७ itnesscs at 8 8०९ scage When the chiice of effeccive
service on che witness <cr hia aticndamce hes Decotr ree
malr, The samomons -३ in auch cases relumed unserved
for want af sueent iime; cr the witness lcving been
Even yor slinrt 2०३७६ is unable to attend the cuwt. The
ease nas therelure to ८९ adjeuried ए a fuiure date In
such एदअ८३, semoiorses may be issied at the risk of the
pary. I> aervice is nut effected or Live wituess m unable w
Sttemd Fecuus che sumrrenscy were not applied for stuf
शक Eres act paid with 3 coaeunable time for sesore
oc ulyndanee, the court will bs fasted in rofasing to “attire
adjourn she sesrity en -he ground af the Don-appesrance
of witnusxcs, Uniorsmately, eeaderble laxity proveils
in thda natber which rysulls in frequent adjournment. aml
Gouederurle delays in the dispose! of suite We suggest
that it ahould Ls prevaderi ay an amendment of Order XV),
Rules 1 and 2 thal the of witnesses ta be settrenoned _
Bknud be Slog, es far az poselble, within 2 lime limic not 1 नाम आक
exceeding thirty days [rom the dale of the framing of the fa”
issues, ‘The date oc hesring rany be Jixer uly after such 8
Hist iz fed ond asving regu te the time that may be
reapamab!y sqnited for summonog the witness und on
ronsutation wth the tawyee. The Reales of alrort all
the ७४७ Cuarks आज्ञा clear instructlen, in lhis matte:
fer the Janes ef the subordinate muyrss, The Presiding
sikeers shoud rigidiy follow bore instructicrs. 0118 Higa
Courte smd bbe disiriel jucgos akould from time to time
draw thar zhention ts the Rules end insist en their being
Zolnwed.

44. In regerd to witnrase, who छाए avobd service of wo.
smuaieas 27 attendee after service, the courl has ample atrendances
Pawers wines section 32 and Opiec XYT, Rules LO te 123 of owes
the Code. 0४:00 Section 8, soe attendance of a witness हैं? Pewere
% whom a sununers Las beem (hs 28 may te compelled by
(> che issue of @ ७४4८६::॥॥ for his errest, (9) tie attach-
meant and awe of kis Brop tty, (८) 3 fire sot exceedng
Re. $90 wnd (व) ordering hirn tn furnish sceurty fe his
appearance cr in definlt esmemitting him li cry! prieon.
The prevedurr to 3c Eeliowed ir the ssp nf a witness whr
fails to sonply with the epurtis states: is [sid down in
Ordex XV1, Hula 1॥ ७ 18. Trader Rule 12 the court has
power in cerlacn 4५४७७ to icpose a Ine ypts Ms, 500 up om
witress who has dailed to yppear ur failed to ey
exaet thathe hed a tawfu muse for ale absenge. These
powers are, howrerr, rarely reised, |फरा एड are for
chvlacs crassa unwilling to move the cours for exercising
[15२ pawere against their Wiknemes. Tho Civil
Justice Committee 1vcwmmi that Ba such cases the



Discout-
try

att.
८546७

parties shod! he offeged the alecasdve ef cider epalvirg
for a ecere:ve 002888 acaunst thei: difaul wi.ngs3 0:
withdraw the witness if Iney refuse ६० agply tor euch pre-
eee. iw: sugdesoeet thet in flagrsn: ingtances the
९८७८६ &॥॥1.15 on thoir own ‘nltiatlve take aclion 3033
rovalvizeot witnesses aml met aul exrmplary praninepnosl
far the coutempt af tae vourt's Eexnss.

47. Preyvenly, kiwever, wilfal orfault ow tbe pett oF
the witnesses is not the cause o¢ they Ssilue to <ftend
Very often pariss omit to make an applcation for pam.
हैं. [1147 we pesiune th: beavy एज९४४एय of Lhe
court's file ७:७४२६ -t umlikey that ७.७ ९६३९ Wil be heerd or
Use dale Deed fur heurding and the pa: ty wants to avnid che
uaregeey expodlégre of उप्या:097 5-5७ & Large umaer of
wilnesses. “Phis questicus well oe diseureed on detnil tehoen
we deal with the heating of the eu:t.

Nov intequent y a sitrcsa ia treaced with ६0300 respec:
net only by che cressexemining lawyer kus even by ihe
pres.diig vliger. “Twde js # तप terdebes an the:part

4 wtneasea to avoid qhe ordeal cf & lengthy aud some
wuphersas, aed unlignifed cress-cxamingtion which
is so fxequeut a characterieue of tee  saburdloate ७७४८७.
Uunezessery rebukus, uoiuvoyrabla coment: spon fk
demeanour aud ridicule in open ccurt if the witness igs
Bomistlnes driven w give 82 undweliglble anewer, nat
In vigw (15 ds ore ot che priocipal raacon
why witusssea 5.0: the courts of law ard avid having ©
४-५७ ४५ 6 sUgwest ६830 the High Courts should
fruw the al anvion of st: presiding officers to the necepeity

+ ul auatitemme proper (एप ie ७.७: umd essucing. pete

ger Lrealnont of purtigs usd their aitrescos whatever thew
social etstus. Trey ahovdd be trested with courtesy . and
0011५ wu not periotiled te ७८. Lriyecwialen or impultecd
in court. .

कक, We invited opmior

oO a propoeal thal Lhe ing
tacmsrlyes sheuld be Snitivlly responsisle for pracdzil
lar otuendsner of Ciel wathesses = The opinion 13 t
evenly diviced, 2 se¢tion expressed che v.ew (1५1 | the
parties should be made responatole cer bringing their wit-
teississ bre (॥॥171, अप हक 1.17) wooed be in 8 better paren
x procure their attendance and that ataucu:meus shen be
‘ssusd ex.y In very speciel cages. Olkets cook the Hew
that such a course would ead ce delays and bargahung
wenn purses cod tant ywitnosscs and that in aE SCS,
ne court must help the party in elorning lhe ate

of bis witnesses, Some Ligh Courts beve ascuemier gheic
Tuleg Bo a3 to emabce t! E partieg in ike first instance) io
bring Uheir yitinses Vaempectyves undertaking eg ren
Ponsiléhiy of servirig fhe ०० A sumijar ene



provision naa tow beer made im She Civil Pravedury Cade
{Rule 1A uf Orde XVI). Phe new rule isi—

“Where any party to tbe guid bas, at any time oo
er before the day fet + for Eke Boor of evidence,
died in the Court a Itt of pergors sitter lor pviaz
evidetm uz fox peuducing dochtnents, the perfy may.
wicbout avglying ter gozurong under cule 3. bring
ary #uch person, whod nam appxtace in the list, to
give evidence 5८ to praduce dovutnents”,

a. Alfituibsc, Kule 3 has been amended by providing
that the whhesa summons mey py tcave of uns Court Se
Seren? by the purty cr ee applying for the samme by

personal service, aad ch sevice it waali be sarved
wm the ७७६७५ manner. A sifpi'a~ amendmen: ‘ws aly Seon
toody in Bihar, Crissk aad, Madr A:ordicg to these
amendtnents 3 party way, if he ec chooses. obtaia tho brave
of the: court Le: effect serving of stmmens personally upon
ble witnecces, [9 Ca cutta nd Assgm, cn toe ther hand,
A suopeats thet 7-6 party fp in che frst mstance bourd is
फाएटप्रः 0 Pre altendurice of hfs own witnesses except where
व: ars te te court thas sunmimons shale be served by
the eyurt in che canal ruaangr. The Calcetts rule therefore
in'roduces the gotern! prichice of faving the parties to
Ptecure attendance of treir’ comes, semmonse, being
igsund Sy ue court ०81५ in speci) cases, If a pre i.
prepated ta take the respodsisility df keeping hic oan
et [0 court ef oe eeTye the surnmonaee uv:

‘ly, there will,of courte be no guestiun ef -

them, pa:
service threugh ceurt.

49, ॥ is aseecsary on chis ocnnectian to polld out ay.
diffzulyy which ecazcusts mato atte who is ptapired ५0 pring Meter 2

hts witteczes Without ai ees ऐश iceued, Generally: bivgit
woe particularly 1७ lhe rural ४7६७५, $ witnses who appears mthos.
us: support the caso of & party withavi being. xuzamanoe Sees
thruga the comrd, ja leaked upon with suspicion und hie”
datacnumen: and iraparely are net conidered above
torsti¢n:. ‘The geneva? pragice af ébe crossexeminer in

the suser:! nate ecusts ix bo ४६7९६ his Croaeternie ation with

the question whether or not he eppdured in response to 8
euramar.s. This practice ae a daterrenc to the partied

making ary attempt wo Ering their pitossses und loads to
the witnesses ‘tztsiing 1, & vammons being merved
before conzenting to give 15907 evidence. —f therefare :t एव
cosired ta qtnend the rales Re maklhg it obigetory pon
the perties in the first inafante to ong rhe own witnewre
4s, ft siwule avo be unde that the inrpartealicr af
a witirs. whu bas come ‘atthe bout a xumwone zhoule ont,
on that accoum, oc suspect. Subject ta this safeguard, we
are of the view that abe i thes shoulda ln the 0५55९ ingtance
tt THe Tesparisinia ६9 we the. pies of ther
witnesses either by bringing jthem पर aan OES ont
by tating up the tak, of @ the ४ hawt



Filla जे
witness
iar

We thertSere recommend an amendmen: of the Code on
the Hnes of the Caleutta Rule providing the saf
mentioned above. It should alzo ke provided that when
the service of ३01:०:००७ 13 uctanged by the party, the full
process (४०५ ६001८ gad De payable by the party 46 15 ingist-
ed upon in sms swtes.

Bi. Fhe Civi] Justice Commdize considered a proposal
that a vole saoule be made wheresy partion may 00 Pequired
19 file Psb wt witwesseg 00 a cercain date amd be prevented
from ceiling witnemc: over thal Low mentioned in we
lisls given ४७ प्र: gave in excephionul circumslances
Such a role ४००1३, 1: was thought, inverfera with the in-
aerynt tight 3f tw piarlies 40 cal) as saany “immerece «5 chey
feared at any cima, Tt wis also theught thal 17 such ets
were Ting, nn oppottugily would +» given ty the sake
side, who would knew the oem cl witnesses, to Dereunde
the witnesses either 110: Lo give gviderce 0: to give >प्रए।
iigainat the varly who as exited tbe, Tie Committee
tigh-ly rejecved the firat view. poining our thas chere wer
m inheteal right in the parlieg to ,all 3४ many witnesses
as it cacs7. Tha Commie however Zeit chot ic was oy
LD vasens unecunmen for the cpposite partly, a3 avon aa he
krma that carter witnesses aore biclny called against bim,
to use &11 means in his power to dissvede thom <rom asi
है. hic oppenen:. The Commitli: novetthelasa look the
View that it was belter oo the whole, that each pails showlé
kncw what the evidence of the ctner side wo be and
that she 19:88 103 97:15 of the Migarts were aot dishonest
They Usodgh; Wut here would be an aitempt to tumper
with the ९9७2६ ४७ a mimority of cases. We tee
AO 7९४६०: to take a Tike TenL view.

'
Hoaters. not ६०७०७, a witaess named in the list

toy some reason not be availecie 70 the party cailmg

In wien 289९: a 3379 may desire to mxardine another pit

‘tess whn might be svailaal> Gut whose name igh; pat

haye heen ‘ncladed in th> ik: of witnesses. A ४1810 rule,
such a3 the one suggested. would desriv @ party of the

Oppariuclty of ead ng such evidence. It wie therefpre
Urged tht the right of a'party ws call a wimess at amy tine
should net be sstricted. Ti should Se 10८ Ibe courtjte
decide whether a wilreps whose aume is no; meluded.im
the Hat should be allowed to be oxamined cr whether 3
case shoule be sijonrmed to enable 8 party to ex) tusk a
wilnces, Moreover, righfity in thle maites may result .ic
corduct-ag Uke doriis-cxeminstion of the spporedt's
in such a way as to Mecesaltate bhe cxusrinatuon
of acitional witnesses and this woud be denied to him
Under che proposed male, On a careful cons:deration of
all these aspect, therefore, we do nol recomtiend the
acceulangs of 13 proppesL Wer shovlg lear it to vie
food pense af the court’ to oe 2 it every spylleaticn
Ineding additional ov! yr on (हि owe merits. "The poe ul rt
should however in al] mpses br ijutred to aek the



Ww give an explanalim why the evidence of witnesses
ovaer (४८७ thase mentomed fe dur list 13 required.

Titsannc

31. In an earlicr chapter, we Lave notived (5७३: about Coceuces:ed
uwo-thicde of bie covil suits are Cispoeed of by the courts matiers.
wichout 8 contss, and in tae aame your in which they are
instiiuled. The average durathn of such auitx disposed of
ex pore o> Without conlesi. varies from about thros to nite

awaths, [t dees aol appear tbat the beara of uncomboss.
vd of av porte eis de unreasonably delayed. But
* pzeastomally sach cases have tcken nime of tor rwontie or
even a jar for dispoesL iy the cpidica ul (४ Civil Tuesioe
Committee san deluys dr the disposes of €r pusir cages
६0936 in pert from the ovceworked presiding officer 120५
she Gxlug of dates for bexaving to bis clerk. ‘Tfe* (he
presiding clicer> “does rot know. Lull the case 13 celled
en, whether it would be contesced ar upewilestuc, AD
soordinately long list ७. 5 in fixed for each day, it
>aguens tw ofen chet a suit whith should be decided
€x parte cn Lhe: first date on which it is called ie crowded
vur by other work ane never reacked. The bearlny da then
adjnuiuiet by the Cer and on the adjaumed cate she sure
thing haspe! » The Commitiee thought ६८-४२ the judge Funding:
should invariabiy endewen:it ta inc out at the 11 neers yng reo
whe.bel jhe auit is contested or uncontested; and, it i: ti qoute
uncontested, 19 decide + at once, “t therciGre regommend: tam
ed a ow form of sumomons for directions whereby tbe २०३४1
dleniol void ke caplet tyon to appear merely for the Cummines,
Datpose of sliting ७1010 २८ ne dous or (०८४ Mul cobtest the
Claim an¢, -m the event of contes: of receiving directions
as: Le date un whith pe nas to Sle his wer-len slatoment,
cate of toiaj and other matters. The fonm of summons in Wel a =“
ase in Madraz sevtes* to have breed ५७४1 upon his recom: pew
nectilinn, We bave nol dcem able to ascertuin to whet of moos
cxtent 3 suznmune in chi form (६518 in apacdier dar oceal 7०६५
of anconiested ६3०६... Tf the defendag) uppears in ence ™:
quence of the emmmons beng #€7ए&1 Upon ble, ite cilhes
adnuts (७:६ Cain ar dispules it aod in the Inter cage he
slithes filce his wricten ststement immediscely or qsks fox
time to put :n his defence. Ths would happer, whelhes
suxmons he be tha fun for sctiierment of iazuer or for
receiving diserlions to A.e wrltien statement. We do not
therefore think that 20 fora «2 sucamons tecommended
by the Committee will Iulp in fotsassing che ateention of
che court ly ca which are uncortzsted any mare {han a
sumnums in (76 aimple fcrm for aettlement of issues,

52. It has been puyposed that er porte maatiers should
be frlinan for hesitg 27060 time 10 ‘ime im 4 separate
et parte list and jucg:nacl should be signed forthusth on
the verified e.alemomt in the plaint and without taking

५४००, ए 1२; para. ar. . 7
“Scheidt 3, Arpamlix 10, Toon aA.

no.



$6|97३:5

eviaric list.

etic:

ta pla:ne.
Nal _sred-
bh

Cumeied
rertera.

Crowded
aye

tt.

bi

ve. Tike position under ths Cu is tha: 4. ४७४
rdarz dies not appezr when the is called ut for
tearing and :t ‘3 pzoyeg that the sumtucnsa wes थार served
upon Gir: tir ६010५ may proceed ७८ Parte wyieciat the
deiendaat. Tha ७ wurided by Onder If, Rar & The
49७1 is, however, usabh: (७ [६७% ४1 et Datte decree fipetb-
vith becaus: che law requires that che plaintiff should
maze cul a privea [००४७ cage and che Mere 8:#८:५20 of Ine
art dees mot of, ile hl jue
plainzits case ic trac’. lf th
1६ generally tube his evedence in. aupporl af che clalm
ue passing -he ew purée cece However, very aflen
the p alot. ६४ repmesentod by 8 lawyer is Det. present
vm she first datz of hearing ir the belizi thet the Tu

1. aopear and ask for t:ne to dle hia wntes stalengent
3७6१ cares, 12 the defendant has nel appesred w <1 t
suit. Lbe courts mepke ar order ygainnt hin that: the
nod ea parte. ‘he कए perce hoerizg 18४७5 pee
thereazter om ६ jucurs date. Thee :४ of course no
4a gelling ocuwn suns | ९३७७६ fer hearing in a separate
sot parle list, [lowever merely mainczainiay such s+parece

liste ul or peyte cases eID tal mewull ia hee oe Tg
dspusal. Lr parte matters may be fixed for a
th cantested mistere but Presiding officer spust

invanasly take care to see thai tho et parte matters! are
hear? aul de peed uf before tha contesied srork 58९६-७४.
93. The proposal that judguntil shuld in ee plirte
matrers ke ayned on lhe ie sta‘cw ents 10 the plhint
ing evidonoe 0४ mot receive mich sip) ec
wera] caders c2 the High Court. expressed theosefyex
sepiozt it, It wae painted cu: Ubat verilies zion of the pied
ing? cayui ed inder ४1 Rubs ३1 :3 mot an 091.3 wan
the pigint is ६७६ a gwoka chatempenl upon which judsalent
ean be given. There ie'covsidepable forte in this ae
we dezcecute the p-actite whieN we were told wae in wigee
>० seme 54.२8 ct 08531;
uf yratements made ay
1 our verormeridaticn. + 3
earleer, acesrcd, it wi? be pestible for the courta st is-
ch the formal ev.denc® of the F

34. As ७ Tule the coukte Hx éomsiderably mare work th
cts: “Ques: ly dispom cfr any one day. Canseq Ba
dicigante and ‘lusic w-tneccas are in a large moet at
ec be come ta the court and go Sack, tire
|. Paiznout 1161७ evidens: bi vided ‘Che orackier:
45 in coraiderable de‘ays nad an increase in the stete
aliot = “Th> practice prevails roc only 2 enurls vf
avy साएश्च्रा& ८७८ ala jp Courts which have only 9 acrRel
pencing file of sat thar. G2 fo ene sind Lact
inet.cut.on. “ke pra pee fizkip more work. than dette

Mail's va j:rocedure sh Rnittos, cage 039.



१७१7१ Ve have eeisen a desire Lo pire

secu cite
mm. glidag kis personal alluetlen 70 the fixing ef biz

wud 19807 it to his Iench clerk 0: other ra.

tiroc from |
Uktant dete is e: ६४:७८ ix no cevcainty thas the qae wll.
he taken tp on the date co Asad.

36. The norma. average aizpogsl of auiza th worsted 13८२७
७०८ “Lacontested in Toansif's «url rnuy be: taken to ka about gredis
thirty ln laarty Ove criginal suits, In such a court ar िक।
ovdinaty ai it of a avntested natyre vsually Lukes a

ispoal, Gn thet bagis, a mus

pending Gle shovid nuk hey mote thar 350 49 gui

. ervier, tee preskling olticer will ke wma

rope J 4 che nutoker of pending 001 suile will nave
a tencency to एव 1110 li rise (२७८४ after year.

nah we 0826 etTcse cases where i
by a single nfOcer hag to dea! ६;
di: The ingistares by ७000९ of
pum out-larn of ratirk ax
al ulcers, esulta in s seu
altewisn ta bghiar and
joutt und becvier wrk

In Vitar Pra:
court presided ov.
file a ¢ 1090
the Tigh Courts *
2 test of ectizicncy of th

In Kora told. that the muinsifs post. 2०१७ ais
many wy thir y 13 for wisk A roll call of partics
ut. डिश: at che sommyrserogtl of Jie deg's work and thi
taxes an hear or more The jad is no’ ckle te cake ५६

४ lay 10970#0 ७३७: «me or 7४४ of the mits fixed for
the day. Thus a large rumker of pastes and their aitneszes
fang whnut the ecuz mztcscarily thrinighout the ris
The practice of lixirp scecifle datec for hearing for a “azge
Tumker of Bay-loday beusing ul cases
izapoaiible and vesults in a picoemtal bearing ord in fre
qurbl adjecayaments cf even parthzard exits,

50. In some States, rolatly in Week Rengul gud Ultar 18४८८.
Pri: slurlcgu «f judicial oZfcerg wee stated bo be the gpa ce
हाजी; Teagor. for the ciswestldn of wark and the evercrewd- af cctseu,
Jag ef cause Este वेग the subérdirute curs. The priklen
uC ९ adequacy of (७३:०३ parsaurel nas heen considered
09 us cusrwhece.

a7. The meln reasnn Aer this state of nffoize ir many कर Pedicg of
uu cours. In cur views is, shat the qt-extion of Fix-ng dale: case
मु # Tun civen the attendon whicr wu
@ uTMosk importance that at the time

wits the udvauiles, alacmp.-tn ४1: pied 119४ tirog rexquirce
for the trial 30 a3 ta susure{that alll thie work fixed om a


Pol
atecdco
of badeial
oi

co praring.
Dewy.

The Madliya
Predesh

+ 1 dispose ni

wz

particular dag vill hr 85:20: of on thet dey. “A reanen-
eathmate can be framed a5 10 Yew lang ४ =
sake lo hear. The tame required for the pur:
axceed the estina’ w the astims
deeth of a ७०015 Leing beard yn the
day on with ct tomy whtadraw the
suit, the parti ufapromise. =f the ucts On for
823:358, the hearing. may tuke 9 louge: Tr period than tne
period es‘amaled ov the vresicing ollcer. But over at
Ereater pact of 19012 no acteraat is mace co make such esti-
9332२, and more wark ($ fhe a éay chan can pexs:bly
cw dene in ta day”. 16 is rs p&ent.al thet jucicial
afleers should Hevele Lei pexsonal attention tu the fixing
ef theit Late. They yhould not live 182 work cf fining these
dates to thet: bench clerks or tr imisleaial ix. The dates
shonld be: “ined Ey them atre: opkb-g 1010 taeir diaries and
after mncing a Teasonab.e estimate ef ७:९४ 1७9८ reauited
~ work fixes on a given day. Ti nas been
vecented ta us tbat lack cf proper control of thz miala-
terial stail by the presiding 2Micer causee
aajcuramerl:. The minist2rial ctelT is, it is
98932 है।। 2 कक int the: cause list many ti
being ilually Resra 1

sud disposed of. The advacutes, if
Laney are cUmunerayed by defy feos and thir ० 01९ fume
quer ४३9 ९९९४" ve pagTiea’ ior mack day the ९6533 supeaTs
on thi: list whether the case iy heacd 201. Thus, the
Incerests ni ube clerk and of the pleade= atlec ate actverse
,७०:ए dixguiia. cf casee. It ig therefore iraperctiys 018:
ant and carcful in framing Liss
sc ug te Sescritt then: as far cs poigstble ts cases whieh will
be di.pused of on a paxdosiler day.

84. We would ia (bis conhection csfer ३43 dhe method
evolyest on Madaya Prade ne the triat of civil suits, fa
that, Btace पा: the compleson cf the oreligsivuiry sty
date is acnerally Lxed egiled the “settling date" for Ene a
llet of wituzsses aod paylog 10% recessaty process feeg and
hat day the court. is glso renaired tn ob‘air
ich eill erabh: 2b to estimate the p-vkable
img. ‘Thremafcer it rlate 0: meveral conse-
' quired ९८ be fxed Sor wee4raing evidence.
Ar onbroken 7-00९ of a euficent 8109९: of worsing cays
comricnecipe frum the And working dity of ea.h migath js
wtotled for the trisl of reraar sures cach month. This

छापा. is mmerved exc uslvele fot cages in whitch eviderse
3 70 be recorded ullaough work of & ciinot character which
dines net claim mick of the ziau: wd aths:ticn of 117 Judge
६549 ५७६ fixed along with aken asec. How this msthod werks
in 1 1946६) was described be ७ former Chief 30&1.0४
ef the Naypur High Court as under:
“Toweuld sleniagly rocommend the sxyster. of tris]
of civil cases evolved by Madhya Pradesh where
adfournttnts are the Teast frequen god the witnesses

~VRepart of ibe Cri Joules Cognininiee, 9५3, pare “



are seidom turned back om the ground that she court is
bury tleing something else. In that State if has reen
Teengoized wba: w:messex should he csil!ec! aa che date
of braving, aztuully Lied by tae court 1: way be a ing
Gax of yer. six mon-hy. Bul the 1111 2341 15 sot Ae
acd every torinigh= ar ever marth lo being hi
nesxa ond thor be doled Wel. hey all have Lo gi
beceauce the courr was otbervise besy." .

Tho ४:ए०९5६ of (bis aicthod cn Madhya Pradesh seems ‘¢
be due partly to the fact tat fawrerz are 710: interested
ih fer: Lhe: i
they ४ कक | Tecel %
Tule: cf the Hich Court and net caily fees as 15 the pract.ce
in the 4: ra ले 311:5.

Furthez. in Madays Pradesh, inabllirg ४ Lo take up ४ ९६३९
on the date fixed for nearing ls regarded ax a 8-0० upori
the presiding officer. “Henge covery presiding oti of ths
rewet makes a gona हा? curt to have the ope beard on ths
dates tr with the remult thet ther: ia least havessmeat
x the witnesses or to Lhe pacties wih otter them and Least
expendiluze lwo.’ Wie: andeeswunr tbat Ihe manner in
which a judue fixes Fis diavy and the nuroder 02 adjourp-
चारप ६३ are erouing che sta applied in Machye Pradesh for
७5९99: ast his efficiency. We ave of Use wierw Use such a
vesl of EMcleacy 52000 be upplied iz al the State

59. in Madras. a somewhat diferent system was evclved = on
and trie! succesefe]. अं ifs’ efurts in sme die panes,
tists. The basic pe 6 system. which was des .
eribret as the “soccind storm” waz alse “he same,
naricly, taat wo more w petted for the day than car
reasonebly be expected 19 be tiken up. The essence of
the spesial list systern is last ny contested auit would be
taken up Aor ट्रक. unions it iz posted for the cay in [he
spevial ltss te be prepared and published dy the presiding
cwicer in the foi grams. All erintestee guia ready
fa’ aring are in che first inetence poset on Ue diary on
hearing beok by the bench clerk. about four Ie vix Suits
beinz fixed for 6 day, 30 chet all of them car. he called up
Gu 1 हारी: or len weeks, it bring clearly understond
that thie poscing ig morely formal and cnluedid omy fer
the purpess of reporting compromise, death cf part:
the like. The spse: is Fen poeparce at the beginn
Jag af every mn: he whole of the foLowlng month,
For each dwy of the following mouth uot more than 7४०
mits selected “rom out of the suits pnsicd in the hearing
boos cud fixed lor trial. One of these mrusl hr lhe oldest
of Unore: 5:05. wile the other will be choxen from the rest

In लिए nature and caomplsxis: of the ald auit.
0] of course be a beivy suit and therefore
ond sof ig a Kphtons, The special list pre-
pared in (शक manner is है ranted, 88 8 provis-onal fiat and
is published on she notice of the court and of the



334

bet association ‘yy che गयी) dsp of each month. Between
Whe 1110 au. che tenth, aby representérion which tre
lawyers might hove to ‘rrake will 9c beard av Me usees-
Sirs ctuingvs made. Th2 yel list ig 43 be oublishee uy
the tenth smi choresfter, short nf the desi]. +( parces 01
compellag meando, xo adjusnmepte are ever
Apuecemp io thin special 19६ have ५७ oo f it
with the romark. “Net in the i;
- But sats ia the evecial 3.
oe Loken up unless circwastenzes vowel ६0७. ad ours
t ciny orsusen, a gut fur the fay
taceo up. - etaads cur of th it and 18 fo-mally acj:m
to ३237९ othe: day unless 1 orerson the
७८७७ २7४ ofiner Guoks i} vec ६1-70: 01719
to a partic d. Palirg that. it |: 0 be taken up
‘anil if vsppears in dhe spsecal ligi anil is not allowed to
alreatiy nage in 3

:0 be disposed of hefore the wiid-di-v interval. se then, (<
ecu sxeclblle to aurtcigate whether ihe heavy ecis will

di Il goon bo tke cx. day. If
twill ki a substantis! aert
o¢ the 2०: cay slso, the hence suit posted for the 7 एफ day
is taken out of the special list amd the lswyer3 coucerned
smforined accordingly. The sare courze is adopted uf Ike
Atery suit. garg cn २ a chivd or fourth Jay

6. U dlalmed tat the abow:
hearirq ८४ the caress £ ay
ness unfnecscen

# mursi’s' cots,

"६ 70७5८ this impossible +
irore than one fe 7
aor

रु ‘aime, the
Presiding Maer can utilse lus Line in checking the vatigus
[# 7:65 of the ony or di¢ta.ing पी हैँ ud
she eysvco. keg er tried succes: yy ६47. i
te iy os reason why 1 saéuld act
works wilh eqci.] susekee im ६0:०४ ४३1० judges’ comnts.

61. Iz. Tnmbsy, the Rules of the H:gh Court cnaigin
mrucdens for the vresiaing nffrera tn cuke some scrt!of
ct he ad to the scried requirad fer disoceal of eich ४
cular parser of work and 19 ff thu: ates after mak!
such ar. vs\inure xo ae to ensure thas du: work fixed fer 8
day wil be fnished. A margin may be allewed but evry
endeavour should ke wade to srevent litigants appearing
wh anucl aud hei भाई mray withen: 8 heering on the
g¥esund that. the tius of the cogrs le a» oeerpicd that he
samtloe can be alc te Liem. The Roles of the Hith

im

1 perznit the 60-10 t: enter cages on & sive die it
1६, aflec Ube (४३9९5 are a
‘yo 7९ the tral dre attanled >

en weeks, thre
je die lidt unl seek time as it can


be fixed for kencieg Tre lis. ust he cacefully examined
by the Judge every 3 39 65 10 8९९ thal lac casce i2 It
we gel dun for Learing, ux daye baoote aveitubie Tals
rutlud aiso pirevems the eong:stinm of the caily disrae
ard ij utedgent]y folliwed, she pastioe iod <hele wilaceat
size mot pa! lu suc meceszity cf ecrming to the छाए trom
tame (७ vite Witham beg yen 2 Qeecbyg.

@ Ye strongly recoramend १७० adupaion of the Madhye Qe2rens-
Pradesh roethod. nf fixiag 8 cortsin nwaber 02 says in a Oe
monla exclusively far एए: रच evdence, wlirh 269 yickded
very gevet cesilta Wlerely slog gown rules in the -
eirevlers preserilié 1g the method will net be enoagh. The
Sbartypece cf 01९३९ ries wift have: to be slvic ‘ly enforced
as in Madhya Prade IF sugie 4809 y te found रत wotk=
:ng ६६, we wand cezommend che udogtion of wm ०: the
other two methods wil such moditcel pons 89 304४ ‘ac “agen
nary having १2९2छाएँ, ta वि: 41 needa 3०0 rorddilions,

€3. Tt Zes clin keen breaght 10 out notice thal in macy Daring
States the provisions of (der XVII, Rule 1 cre distegar: ‘eq Dom Jas
sud the hiring of ॥ 2१३६ onze begun 13 not comtinund fear ey
cay 19 dey. This auppens .9 aete oz the iestrictinns +: -
the coat-ir: il Gown by tl the High Courta Ser the
guidance of rybundmate couits, (130 exurainstier of Shr:
Order sheet of 3 lerge number of shits jn the courcs of
svansit: and sulordmate snags | re in Wee? Bengeil ang [tte
Pradesh abararrd iti: utter fom While prevai’a ih Lhe
matler of dung 5 of-hearing, Day atte: day the

tases, sverc/are adjourned eiber jedpuse the -अमरष8 Bre
eugaged elsewhere or 1:४७019४ the codbt 1४ otherwise basy.
[ndead, co chaotic: were the files, that taaen often adjonnicd

"८ 5 9107४ :#1९ cniy for thr plurpese of Sxing lhe next date

of heaynig, This xiffaulty, in cur opion, 15 created ty ६

jalpi digegaes of tae yravisigns sf Oper XVI: Tu‘e ) ang

3 tsilurc "७ appreciaté that if crmtenpplates the continued
neatirg of acest, 07७५१ it has §tarted, from day fo day until]

# i finished $=) variony States we fennd the aobordinate
jodiclary sting as It they unflerstocad the Code to provide

the contrary. They seemed iq think that itter-apted bear-

igs +410५-0 ke the rule and-a dsy-today heaving the
excepiizn We found in 20५७४ State tut ccore-exemination

cf o wilhete pres cyer severut Learings with breaks 100-

ding io anne esr ints moptby 1३ swmed to be tre Vidwicn
inv ह practice ५० adijcucn. the van after the elosing of ci sha
the plsinciff's cvidencr and before pe. slaetleg of the “4:
dnfondant’s esidence, 1६ wouk) 3180 appear tp be common
practice bc wijouim che ९६०९ adger the toturding of evidence

is ghrugieved to enat:le the catced to” Ke their argu-
ments, 4 further adjoararcons itvatiybly takes place alter

the erguments ar: closed for the judge tn deliver hie Judg-

ovat. Tt ~ceds Ip bo iirplagsed that every step itt thir
toothnd of «tet 1289 be deseribed aa the ‘earing of a suit
Uhrough 8& series nE =ejourtmehts, 18 sentrsty te tha Code.

Thors ix nu resaon why हा. the withesérg in the case whether



Sadiko
प्रचंड ०
हलक Os

338

these of the painlif o: af the defendant eheuld not be
examined in n serics, the evidence fillowed immedisicly
oy treumen's of sous: and, in mort cases. the judgmest
sellawing the close of the arguments. This happens every
diy in prserice on the Ceigine! S.dex of the High Courta of
Caleetts, १४21-7५ and Bombay, ard we see no reamin why
the gubordina courts skould nat ne able to follow the satae
proesure,

$4 Tin: sitcatinn is most acute in pacts of West Bengal

| where Scerings are tolatatttly iatecsusted pitticuiarly in

she ९६७०४ af the suburtinate jndge, by the sudden intrusion
tecan time (० 10106 o2 seasions ९६988... The euberdinate judges
in that 81६९ 3७ in macty ०0:७7 ars tavested with the
Bowers uf tae saetent sos judges. But what fs uzual
on West Benga] at viell suit? im the3e qourts
is very ofl: imtertiggted by Ihe slant of A sossions case
which ia fecd for that very day or the next day. Wa were
telé by che Ihesidiene of the Alipore Har Association andl
alo py the District Judge cf AGcxae and other senicr
Jurticlal officer, thal the civil werk is delayed pews
dessa cwxe have to he given priority, Frequent ys a
civil suit which bas beeu going on for 4 mwaber nf day
hse to be: adjvurned botaure a sossioms ema fixer for kear-
‘ag cn that vory day, ie swiden'y transferred iny che seasions
court to the subordinste jadge "8६ ovxdny up of civil
ir; ३९५8:03 ७७४2५ creates yreat dificltim: “Ihe jrdicial
officcrs.said that they could depose of pending heavy casea
dar? expediticusly amd might be able to ave day-to-day
॥#8६:०:६: oriwded they weré not so Frequen?ly dist arbed by
the: renafer of sarsicns cases

At tae dime of our २11 to Celeutta we fonnd that the
distria’ of thr ४९ Margahax which is the largest in Bengal
with its Keadquarzers at Algore hed, bezdea the district
aid sessinis judge, a juni steungth nf sine 55761: Et
district. judyce, 1७२७७ eiboniinate judges und teenty two
munsts. slimes: él] dt whom were balding court in सच
itknl2 We Fave tat baeh ably ta ucderstcod shy 9 simpler
and more orreticn) Tarthed of distrituclon of civil and
evvainal work by entrusting some of the juiges cxtlusively
with त॑ tor uthe-s with criminal essce cannot be
atopted. If che exbordinate judges have ta oe esaionead see-
sicre work ft ie of che utmost Importance that the sesdions
jerge sheule transfer 0४:०४ to them. sufficiently in advance
of tae cere ८. hearing to euoble Yn: tubordisate dadec
fo ix its hea having regard to the state of his own eivit
wotk. The seasizna ७8३९४ inast theveforr be हू ५०८1 oma
5s coca as Lhe commile papers have beer recefved, leaving
it te the subordizete jurive to Gx the date of beuring. . We
Kee Ne tustifleation fir the system under woirk the hearin;
व the sessions cuss is fixed by the sessicns court (6 tot:
Ctaregerd of she state of file of the court wo which it may
altumately be transferred and the case ix srut to thet court



elevench hour zo 38 to completely digergcuis: th
Pesting of chesl werk a whet 20:७०.

7. The law cn 179 subject cf adjew-mmoute kas bee
rated .o Order XV", Nulee 1 ena 3 of .be (*

Aviva
mend,

if suffcian! cars is sien, et
है gra. bme la che ps

fro:a cime ty tome adj.
Rule 11

rity to क sdit [७ wheat Lins Fags becn
nt eticr, or to cause Lie
or to werfora unty other

Thas the hearisg oF # swt once 9 ६७१४ :
til all the ४:६1:
23 he
hte ४ f i
[३ nos been 11९411८6 beso the 70१0 dues nt intend
to fetter 11.७ ai af ibe court te grenl doe. Cho the
' To adjournmenm. san ke dradvet 1 ono eifficiere
cause is ३05५८ rt the vt tie court should rot refuse
snfPeiant cruge 28 stu. What is
qweztion «f fact in euch vase.

24 44. Ot From
ir. allnnrianee 18४0 bern
r. sees suticiont ६६02३ te

the he

Pie even after the cage has
ita progress is “mpecrs by fre~
roékls Andjoucntents ere socuctimes granted
nr lac p.ere asiring especially in the beavier va Qudile
ofan & Titlgant cures le 0७७३1 ready with witreecs to go
twith +. lew) wed 15 1616. chat tb? २७७६ has been 3010 2ccwt
Thus parties are forved w iacur 0७१॥॥ ३७ expense and partics
aml witrlessns ure kecassed, The moet crequens *!
ske adjoutament ul 3 hearing are “bal ths 2017 is pre.
secupled with other rage? aud Las ne thas lo leke up the
९46९ or essed ct that tle date it neenveninnt le Pre nertics
or Cheir leader 1a fact, tho convenience of the partles
or the aleaders ९5 prohakly the neost usual 43७३६ of adjuerd:
fnents, We heve alvence deat wich the orobler of Unpestilieg
adje ents arising ont of the ccuct'a presccupat:on wih २०००८०-
other cszes, With regard ta adjeymmerts wheb sre 7=™
Rrakted ty suit the cnryenioace of the parties, the 762: 7४१
is obvious. The zaatter waa thus commented upon by
Civil Justice Commiiles; “No hard and fast rolex can oe
said dowr in sack matters, There are imiunces in which
an adjournmen: chould be vemsonably grasutd to suit cob
vencehor ६1085 For cxumple an application for an adjcurn-
metilon the हुआ. हे ikat the tether of the principa! witness
had died &। witness we actgad 1-5 oksequies
rrasonabet application which 'whowid “be allowed. ........ ar
32M of law ae.

reveled the stage sf ‘rl
Suart adje ७:५४
fr



3B

present, ewaver, nol wy &#ड sue adjrurtments granted
106 frequently, Lar inverexts of che ocher side are not
seMiriealhy congidered, When a party wants an adiourn-
mene co 8015 hig wwe ९७४ ए६७:श॥०७ Lhe cueck &)110141 10:31 as
a preliminary thal he pays the coats of che other side “cr
S thatday, 502: adjourrments snoule sot be grarted except
Need fo for ceally goed cauye. Lr ge ofGcsrs mest be sLric
ANC. the pains, and be medy re ger up a reauig.ier for easy
Roig good reture in the interests of eff: eng Lawyers
who take up ०३०८४ work chan they cat & ectugst be
+t will ७0६ delay com 1 था sit their
. The principle musi be accepted 3s
m en upon the dale Axed
es ॥081' क good rrasem for an edjeurne st.
Open-tig. 47. Th> mile 9s $9 the opening त a case in Order XYTIT,
Rul: Qooy.dsé that the party baving the right to begin
shall alae 1-5 ६४०८ aml produce Js evidence in euppart of
tne fssuze ४१ ए 30 is bound to prove. ‘he ether pucty

zball che ecste hia case and produce his ev'dence, if any,
मात on बताता Jie eburl peaweully on the whole
eas the Civil Justice Commiltes said. that

. ॥७ lbp. Courts the above cule ix seldo:a follawed
Comair, sxce ९83९5 of greet complex'ty and large valusticn.

anew af the cate ie Tas she
omssicn <f the spening sperch saves time. The Cormmnitte:
71. tat an opening speech 9५ counsel was an absolute
ture Troms which cau delay fue cue

parcy Het sperdng hie ९७2९० and “rt sating
dow ike may charge bi
sumequescly ८:५७ call le: ow. 5६ Ceerent
ais % SUP RErt a 27४७७ Cue.
16 the casc ix net opened, a party ६०:०0 be
: bls 57:ए:१५)] cage, [07 the court does #उ knot
erigina! eart ix.

(8) Puihore In

Je irpur-
tance.

a lan presiding
th the evidenra
wilnecs 36 be is called?

eye bot in aarcen-ent with tae views exeressed
By Justice Comzuliee. The fis. teagan haa sul
much forec breause Lhe pa!
909 that have altvady been framed. and tt 39
४४ hew shay cau Le allowed lu depart 'rom the
led io the pleadings and sryslalised in tne ‘ssucs
ह. omicted. The

Comraitte: tacught opened. a court
rould nol knew wnat

read the pleedinps the plead-
ings ane i: vend net be suPhcicntly incermative ps to

Civil Justice C ymomidee Report, 9. 52, 240 73.
3, Civil josie: Commirme 8९7०५ 9. 42.


= the contest wuld ‘oc cmfined. it seem
clesy la ux thet. nas 7९80 the pleadings and ne
izaues, as indeed it limg not enly of framing
the उश:९8 tat < ५८ before २७८ bearing commences, the cent
poust chow whal. the criginal jase of cae party je The 137«

whe poinks (0 «

ther grav naracly, that ihe presiding ‘Terr aay uot be
able In de: ith the evidence of each wicness if Lhere cx no
ipening wit. alae not be val except in a very few cases of
rexcopliuasl diffeul and complexity. We are of the view

chat in a Jerde majority of cages; urlung before the
है he judze ha Laken care to have the all
ge elucidated, tes f-amed coset iasues
taken the Irosble 10 tead them before remmeticing
१ (७९ opening eantescplaccd by (१४८२ XVI, Bule 2
onecessary and can be agpensee with.

b= natized thal. ioe rule merely states Unt toe
tase. This Muatenenot cf tac cast way
Ts fro engtay claborslicn of the geyorel
che plaine supprmented ky details wf the
worzl wad पे: evidence sotinged te be ied, w oa
Teer sununsry uf ॥ pleadings cr ever! «७ mrre stztemeat
of thes wd = A pleadre adght well forma: y Open
ing out che teliefii cleimed :७ che plaint sind
lai 10 depose tc his cane. ४४४ 11५12 can
In the ore campl'cated

4 cur of aad:
i apon vecbnicaL
i inly of great
छः in

ud ln
party chal
teec any f
content rns ६:

she eviedeni0e ५७.
several 6003. ६10६ t
vhed by any sifie rv Whether

ng in 3 particular vase ix Qeuessacy ve 001 must
ivi Wpor the nature 0* she case.

ut हू to rity’ 3 the Evevshed Conrmities Views af the
191 Rerort has lake a similar view. In dealing Brother
with sve suggeitaut chat some Mensur of reduction ७२ feng Comme.
cold be chtgined :0 the dengck oF the seat, without deta
mental effect x: ing of &0 least limiting ccunsel’s crea-
' 2 Inmniltes <०३६७५ ९५ that ३७०५ speeches
y easenin! ard derw.stiated thla by the
vy admiralty dcliigion sase ne opening
ransel because the judge was known
cadings mefire enleri.g Lie courts, “On
speysed to ua that the value of an 2)677
largely ua the ature ui the omdivi-
ला: 109 ३८:३1 Cir execuple, counsel's
asugliv wid litjle Ie what may be
& In 0101 canes. howrver, Mire
ery ¢xplanalicn. by coureel may be essentai to 9
coger widersanding ‘o? the’ ewithesoe and the laeuea 1q
wluch :1 39 directed We fea, thorefern, ४४1 this 15 छ unter

wan zal

-ag eperch mvs
७६७. case. In pers
apeaing woesch wil
galhezed from cle



Ord oie
ence.

“m4

whith 5 Loe governe by any rigict rule, Kut we are
of che opiniue ३08० Lae Judges themerlyrs car 92 quch ta
renéer long opening speczhzs unneresaary, for in aDpro-
prizl: cuses dhe 14९: that Judge has real the pleadings
before the I a) table १४ speech tu ke
dispensed with or We thir

there is Little ev cst

Justic: Cotomittee 12 this quea
Rule 2 cf
li ga
९5३२ even if such a sta.
suse, cons.deves

an 51 ota. evicrnrsy: wr ४
ce al undesirable pracice which seeus to prevail
iff or tae defendant spon v-hon

nu I

Kier ovitern s a5 उछल itness:
see af the ocher witnesses ig tecerfed. He

| ५.७ ७४४. hha meen फटा... "he

९६0९ appears to oe that the
ct the smd 1:

Thr peetice 1 ४ proceeding 2horld be in a Sosil.nn al
ths commencen. cOtmed ine: Ln make un thr
7४043 wbether the dive evidence. - they ds
they shal be roquimed te conver the tities box elore any
cf their witneszee ave sxancted. We rerucimend teat Rule
2 ov Rule & ef Order XVITC oF the Code of Civil Procedusy, be

9. innced 59 a fo ९-900ए9 such @ privisiya.

8; & court trial takes
ve 53 taken 11) pyr
ving i-vclevent emé unessentiak allewulinns to whieh ao
reicterce is 246४ 12. the arguments or in the judgment.
Lengthy, fig ahd irrelovant exatoinstwa-in-ehieF wd
nrese-oxaminstlion are eememorn tt subnrdinte courts, both
civ: aad eri:sina:, in avery part of the country. ‘This ix
due, at times. x che lack of @aperic: nf the presiding
officer and their inability ta exer conwol over bie
ora) évicenew. [Cl is risa due Mm pars to the anxiel st
the examining lawyera tu nuke an impression upon thei
clien3 and upsn othete present in court, The hilganis
themselves préeler “hat examitetion aad cose-exarnma-
Hon niwulé be conducted iz, this meunet, and the methods

nd ' a ct
Proreduise धक्का athe ‘Cymmnister 40 Supreme Garr Pyavticr and


3

ara the tradisional methods cf many Distt 8.1७. ! ‘he
provisiena of the Fy:dence Act in regard ta relevanl ut

re Lint always follewed.

72. We fave ocascdererk two proposals fuz 4a mere Suggecioee
cas zenctel by the preaidtug officer on oral evidence ७० 0४०७

Tae fivet cuggestien waz {hat the exathitalon of witnesars don.
42 batt Use sides इयर Se icfl ७ the jude himacll
as ir seme Buropeen ecuntriss, liberty being given tu 035
lswrrers of :

3 Sugerst questions, ti tre judge.
has the eystero of iaming in this manner w
idge voule be a better methed cf eliching Chr gucpica
Waz “Lrtber eappestet thet che previdiog nfficer witncese.
given power to regulaly avidenec ard stop it
nohe is nf tie oplnion. thet eufficiewt evidence a
poitt haz been pal befor: de cnurt On fyllee consideza- Powe to

1.७: ued corsidezing the views expreszeé to ua on pe ot

taeze yiestious. we lee] fompelled te cejer! ante these
proposes.

ince] thet tae propraal to ferve “he poe,

arciea and che witnesses ty the: | baedracnic.
yere mty to suggesl questicn wOl

है; further the ends cf

justin Tt will place upon Use judge ihe: -rordingéclp
wavy burden of elietiny ull uszemtial Zacts relevant tu
the case ७1 पापी the parties, The allegstiona uf fist and
daw made in the vlesdogs or lav dueimettg ov od
woid not dieckes In lo judge sll the necessary .
for th.s purpose, The judve wud not lke lhe aevweston
be ércred vita nstructions from the pares und he would
Urerefore be wiable (७ discharge Usis faxction in a 8४
fsctory 03241 No-cover. the prepoza. might welk
being tac jx (६ wena ni condie., Nor would tais
procedure अवकाश) 11:90 taken in_cxamination cud cross-
yocates. On the cncitrary. 2t ray
10027 by Ine lawyers sugceeti-ys rome
Teva questions to the judge li te pul to the party. 11 i.
iran that tere :¢ a gocaver probability of ths witness
Hees tae Lous in emswer. tu cucdlion: nit byte court.

Inde tk: Tadiar Evidence Av!, Lirwever, the judge js ct
1820५ ta put any question 10 ॥ withes: ef 3797 1018 and
as it 71:10, osperfenced judves do excrcine this power and
orveté al the arnper moment sith yueszins from the
cow’. with a view tu eliciting Ihe truth, On the whnie,
ws do vob think, thit tho search for ६७० would in any
खत le fisilitiled ky the ९०७७४ undartaxing che अपार
tesporsibciey of ut nxaminetion of the wiiiessee af both
the sides.

For similar reasons We arc unable to recomend the
Prepusil io ives, the judge with power ta stop ev e
oo amy Pet ur pu when he il ink sulictor.t evidenrn:
185 Reen let. to inexperléned hands this yower may

4, Chri Junke ci

Pet २4 pares,


Lange ure
ct ७४४५4
evden,

342

Ler. If way convey an impression the perles है|
the quurt nex ple-juéged che ९६३९. It
difficulsies et the yppellaw hi
judue riay have [००७९0 19 Le euficiert evidence may not
be rezatved ws / Lby ile apgellate court. The resuls
ता: well Le a retrial Scliowing a roman, Ky.deace
which muy hove been avsilable to a partly al the hraring
Thay 1.07 be weed ७>!1* |॥॥। Use partly mdy suffer ireepat-
She cospoasibility for deciding whether
3 seen led mimst, taetefn-e, mst 1 the
party ard hia glemler. nmewever 6 716 always epen to
a 10-71 Co wupzect te the pleader that w.ough ovicerun has
5 that no useful purpeee
ke cerved by arlding veloene uf svidetune.
bire. विश ny eaperisnced judzee are 00७ acezpl-
७५ 00.७ leavers, Thyt we think that
iE Gia rule empowver:ng the judges te ston
Bill tend to unetermicue pub. comidence cn
we ७३७९ and sffecs the purity of Ine
of justice. The Civil Jusdes Ceommictee
dia sitriar propesal 13 tar folowing words "Ws
‘haz we should not. hr | 11५1 it. xdgpeeting ale:

tonginl why when presiding officers would ए अगर
rien vs. tery i I

ay le 1:८5:

point. 11 x है] भव

to see Sor # last in thelr carn intrrssts Ul

Al prezert wis 2017: leave the ania.
e cf the Arn. EB

rel a sroposs. for providing
Onder XIX af wo
evurt for eufficiers

६ 5 larger एक of
4'. ००€पंपा&

ख्वषआएशा'ज
& osrtiowlar

tions for cecrp
j a end ape
ule: taken in apipli¢a ts

lezau.t or ¢

2९:

3 id tie: encouraged net eu
ellaveous metters bab 2150 2. contested matiers
cud :osontreverHble fects. In auch
Le the party to requize the praduc-
fi a! the court
ile sharsczer cf the request it
$ yroduciton belie te: eourt

5. Repel aaa bora >.


apart iar auch
metnod of taking gviceanoe
mutters will 10: be
00 ( 10७ treet, Alida vila
vers. They du at pont
as wnuld be 10-0 by
F 01 8 wildess cn
is allowed to tell Fis cur st:
wi.ness 13 af buportar.! aspoc: whie?e the 11480 has 40 205०
Bide, ling hig evidence. The judge WLI ६
((९३५.ए०३ to 4056ए७७ the demearsur of
ide: soullyerd x ६९ peuluesd
U ast he saticled th:

Ais OH wuts.
ted only when he
The demew:nur of ths

Euslic

be deponent +
17 tie power tu exe
b> sufficient suleqvard A
iCemce 11 eoMlesled macttors opn-
that the use

successfully Tagde in
mul the Supzeme 1. 13,
116 facile te be inveztii.t ४ Ihese mravters 15
raw ard 3100. use cantet ke extended to regular
i> Suits.

77. The sasthad cf 114 reeerdidg 61 evidence in the Reventies

eure by the jndgs in his ewan 1
delay. IL wi'l ke ure2u) at 11.
ns of the Cede un ri nthe recordist
; ६, 12h ता the ६2101 Lravsau:
enyer 7 diress w

wer cor ziderckle

ary epeciied
aD12 cates stall ar im cen
Wort 3 judce
3-५ siAiciort reason frum

; Madras cud West Beawil, ey
& Déersative form. The record is
la Lhe: wimeaz and signed by him
Ore Where a judge ix
५-०४: ¢ XVI apply.
: svilener of each
1ofown in writhig, -8 the laiguags of ie
comtt, be or wo 1५६ । a. tet the petewnal dircc-
vion aid svperinwen Gage cM a hasrative form
i read over (७ the eitress in 11:

fg ken signed be che fudge
Ir is nob taker. dave bor tl
1, Rult 8 prevides thet he mist. 99 the exgrmni-
of excl wi oroneds make a Meén:ori:tcham of
pacar af what each adtacee Cupe: seh 13९005-
the judge ard stu]
ia mai appesisble cases,



#६००५ फिट .

32:50,

Free yi ag
७५ ३६८००
ropes.

440: का
छा. ६०७८.

1.48८ ५८
duciae
tWilence

He

2 provides shat it shall not be necessary to take cuwn

t vidence ०८ the witnengés in writing at lengu:, bul Loe

jade, 89 the vaatnbeution of each witness prccpeds, shall
asi ९ 8 skoilar memorwndua.

6. Tur practice 82 double necorcing which prevata ite
the courts of some Shales an whier the judges ari: nok
crpowered to regerd ovidence in Poglss under section 138
sax jts origin 77 the adsresetd cae, Ihe moss comet
Pesetice ic (hat 110 heres clerk of che oust tukor dove
ius lig gover s inngaage, the dep<eitinn oF the witness in &
narradve fore vrbile al fhe same time the judge makes
hs cua meaerorindum in Englisl. The memoradym made
‘oy the judge is not cwerety a substance of the dapouitiun
डर wonternplated ny the tule Sut a fu) nasration iv English
af 190 depos‘licn of the witness. Ba fue, the judge ०४७७
te suake ३ 191:5५1]1 rendering 11 English of tre evidence
glen in the 1: eh ८९ other tang Uae. The complaint
iagutiet -his modhod of double recoding L जा it is waste-
ful and Lael the wily el the ०४ 1३००० by the judge in
tis हम lind eogses muck delay. There Le undensh:ledy
cansiderapie eubetamee jo ues cmment, If tre evidence
2s [एच ar ylue:é the wisiesses are many, the judge hae to
writ: conlingously for hours ane ctu: fatiyue उभर पाप ia
writing bacipers Tiny 1087. ancy २1 omitrniting and iftelli-
gertly 1508६ she irené of the examinatim-Inechigf and
erozz-exaimnation byt alia कर: t:xertising effective शाएश-
vision eper the vermicoler recording by 10% bench wleck.

7%. The avegecteda solution of ths dilGeulty हि. the
ecytloyrnest nf xstesographemm te taka down a ¥ tie
transetipt o th> evidence is open $3 several sbjevtions.
Cempelent stenovraphers requbked for all the courts i the
३2090 10६६६ areas all. not be east cvailag)ls, The recording
of lhe duchlines and answers iz sbortnand and then trans:
eribinzg thea in Englisl. aad correctog thes subsequently
weuld ciuge 714 16 ४०५३७ teh eould be caused by the bss
himsclé tay dewn she ence. It tae eyidutive Is board
10 अर cy uo sinvlg coverd wold need 3 Peli
of gonagrapkers, The anplerencation of the pr ont
rod. epart from other ditfualtie:, ke very sxprsix f

40. 11: pur cninica, the bea meted of trezing the 1४४७
from the mechanical seceasity-ef taxing duwt. the cvidehee
whiz own nated and al the ४६०४१ tim
seeuvacy of the rerord is to enable ths judge to Gictate
idence elite in English or in the regianal ian guage

ua the typewriter in the nearing ef the pared and
Pleaders, Coplas ०८ the evidence si dictate? shoud
ade 1: te the aarties or paymont of the ressn-
> paderstand tivat this method of artaring
weave प्र. 2pen court is being follownd be many prosging
officers in whe Bowbay State wilh sures and bas been
एड: 11155 by Che [हु Court. Tt enable the judge tn amit



७ ontire pre
8190 to ensure better aechricy in the record-
nm thal, it robles the parcies or theis
1 4 mis-scatement ur ire-s, Fuzther,
हे the pracace of double recording 18 adaerei tu, the: eral
dictatzua oy the judge in Sngtish wil] Was aelp his bench

clerk 4 make 8 mere arcurate record in Inc remonal lanyus
aye As 9. master af fsex, under anction 363 of the Code
oft Crim:nil Provedure, all gessions judges inurl magistrates

ve been authouiin: cithar 76 cake diam te eve

ing in the apuage af the ovurt in 1091 own band o:
to hawi: it Giken dewn from their dixtaltnn in Open court
or ie thei: presser and heerag aad under deer personal
direction afr super suditun:. Unéer this section,
1068७ ur the mactisrale is mot recuired :७ write dewa
évidence wit 14५5 ८७४ hamé. Under the Cude
har band, it is ol

Auweudci sce

(
Open छपरा, We tummend the enet ai: Becatent.

ir. the Procedure Code cf 8 pruvisien similar
26 sévtinn 556 of the Criminal Procedure Coda We ure
further o2 the view that if such an amendn:ent 2g mace,
the tenexily of keeping a double recurs can sefaly be dis
petted wth.

81. Ti 2७४६ hren stated chat che org urnerils of ६9९ advc- Arkemcuty.
cates tend te be prod» 310 some method chould ke devised
la contro. 11803.

-tis true taal in many ceges arguments sce aneyily .
quutix, फिटा:श] व: ४४ the arguments breome lengthy because प्पोए-
0 COull ei ‘run inerperienoe cr fur pther reassn
is unaale ७1 cantyel cuuute’. Same Lnvyers ar: lorg-
wiade): thors are heief and to thy ping. Similac}y, sare
: 7 10 coutrel the arguzsiils woe same
acinet nny to heer any arguments at all and cut them
whens. The Couct which has heard -he case from duy
with the cvidenee end exn it
the record of the rc before the
> amracniced Le refresh tus memory. The ss
presiding off.ecr who kis followed ths cvidenes will be So epectal

In a mush bewes pedilinr to conti! argnments. The cortrol / 57४
of arguments 1६ i. mactes which must pree inntiy be luft Poti
17 the capecily, cx verience and discretion of the jidue and

the siecxi sense of lhe advprate. We do not think it ix
fracticable to renter any apecial powers n+ the Judye in
this rezpeet,

82. Very often, delay is oecathu:nd by the poste onerrnent Det.
af arguiuenli lv a (kter date on the eatinlusion of tho evi-
Wence. ‘Tha Taw ou-templetee that argicueuls shall be
hssrd immediately ifter the evidence te e:ncluded. In
imuny ९9६2, heeover, arguments are nestyened ritkor
Secaua: Ibo lawyers are not realy or becausn the court



१५०५५
०९६९७ क.

Judennenic.

Provision
sl ene.
arashyrs,

has cher wor'e om: home If the court's ciscy ia tnechodi—
call; epaved in “he munner ४६४४५ indicated, there will

iosrer aecazions for ५ judge ts :werpone the argurnents
0६: the concusicu 97 li evidence The sours must malst
upon the io the ६६३९ ६७४८: ॥॥८ bane
‘ Tacnts imaverha’ ae 400 th ie cobclusion. ot tne cvidencc,
ive: prevally on the original side cf the High
n Bowossy, wheres, however 1 r
tountel a+
fase af excnpolit

tecord, it may pi
adpeuranctyit lin s liwyurs lin prepare their छाए

morte; ku; the normst mio should ke to hem the ergu--
Tocnta immetdiasly on che conelugica of the evidence.

ngler Lat the: delivery cf fudge फू
thougs mu 05301 3९८५
ssowksne sons judges
juégcucrts. ot ४5163,
“ld of mmatances whew

Ra OTL
i: as a
Srnuytht

ef delaying ch
४० hava even keen
1 2 ७४॥५+४ gucci

ris रब! are
न the case Les
pranounce judgement 6 wpe

‘, un whieh dat
Ther

* tweens XX. Rave 1
erta che court

रण 1 hse to Ox a
deinite date for che JeLvery of jucurn: 2nd nusice af
& gven Lo ie péerties. Nohyith-
he courts haweve: merely regery

ago
fox the delivery af che judgment when -t
for jurlernerit practic it ‘3 difter
ate courts 10 give judgments at moe
keuritig 3४ contempleted Ey Orde> 2X,
| judges or subpcdingie
hi valuation. 8 judg-

, SXCEBL i ex Parle ane cutse
vary simple 8 yehore judgment
ran and sust be delivered. immuediavely or cn the next day,
ordinarily nel a thax 3 week or a foitecighl sbovld be
alh.wed ce 11० fore a jolyment is delivered. Rickie
a. thi: paet of tbe presidinz ciicer in writtng out 018 judc-
mont weakeng 1.11 craep of the facts of the ७६३९, arguments
ars fu-yeten, imorcesions Zermed of de witness” desea
cour become (aded and gensrally cheer sx a waste of Cire



2aT

occasioned by the nezesaity o° refrebh.ny kis memory by
it reference 15 revords. I all jurlisicd officers ae
provided with stenograp.lers as है। tur States ef Andara
Drsaeih and Madris, the judges wi-l oe skle 4 deliver
judgments at che clove ef the 1 in a wveater tuunhey
“of muses ard will also he uble in dui expedi igualy wich
nm We recomusend that ter sedans

> made ovailyl'e to al presiding nficrs

Snow Cixed pericel. for ststi-
Wr reeainroend verlag
rulee the: jadg- semen
ef ie close

this 1117

ot
We
tha
metite stpukb ६:
of Fearing
amid whiis:

ectlorily or
"d nal wor equally well in eter 3

Aon
icdciuenle--

५ anaetier.
fo ey ६ 46.५ .10)एएश ५.
कक anany of these facts 3१७

. ix writitg 9707 7. 1184 छ-
sly 1.13 :ए४ागते bo |
Iv: vial ‘Tiny tumld be elzted ak

nee te Irs pleadings cn spxtfe writs te
8 tas been (9226... ४ 9 whelle

ipth the #परांतिहतरुए of wil-
sme. shwhl not be a
‘ i The

to end-ayeur 10 devzlop bis cepe-
F A judamoun: ss prowlis

ko aa the caprresion vl
judge liss
1६; il x
ky emde provided
- yolemesx ul the law repos mm hich
ww awhieverems of Lue past mssicrs 97 srl"

dead Maicnilan


Sais ea
हर 1,

दा milaves
Meee a

a
ad aabiviny,

vemutious
wai 9

छाए 2.

$.977ए०-
0०1८३:॥०८8

et कर ULE.

13001
ReRoma
Cann 105९.

348

The exceLence of a Judgment oll depend upon she judge's
pewer Of expressing awl hip caperity ० grasp snd to
miushal the facts ané the law in a sitnple, yet 1400 ated
4910-८1 roarner, We .cge upon the ,adici:) officers the
i:nportence ol ९०:७९ judmmen.s of emisen; Indian and

ith judges recorded the Liew Repoms. Much mus
be achiavad iv the dis: ‘Wion of this art
by suitwle iestrnction imparted to fudiciel «fliggsn at the
elége nf prehelien.

87. Thre war chac judgment siculd ke proueucieed in
evurt requir id be reed gut ia full, Opinion
nas Lenn ¥ sed ther this practice vesulty
in youd dral of waste of sedicisl tinw- and is willy yo
Decevzay Tr windld ‘x si igh in roid the tncings co
i nd the tire. orde- ir. the j cen! In open
36 yrdgurat guuld Lacan be om ae immediate
bh ४७: tre partios, Sach 8 practice is fotlowed by
residing w@iuent We recunsuen al lowisiutive
Pruvision be nade far the udepticn of 15५ practice by
sitlah.c anoendimeett.

CVrHea Cac stk Oe DKLAYR

88. Whe kw ing *० sate Dy or scuiuet minors ५०८
persons ni¢n> a disability is cumtuined ig) Orurr XXXIT
of the Code of Civil Provedurc, Sometimes delaye occur
hy ten. of [he dad prncedue: required ia be futowed
in casea in which such porsens are parties,

Where -he plaiviff is छ mor (ur a : nadey o
Ssatility) a इए 01 hig peralt must be wstituted by a

anxt Te.md, 11016 292 Grier ROCKIT provides shat if such
a sult is irstituled by ता ca hell a minor withopt 4
29231. [riard, the defendsnt may apply tc have tbs pla dazrit
teker off “te file with eusts 16 be pad the ९ oT
४ ouerzon kee whom it wits शमी ॥ जा the otiave
if ts and wnttoues to be properly ruprosenicd, re
delays oced arise,

BE The Star Predesh Cudiciei Peferms Cercmittec,
hive Acwaver, gained ota qWiwuity. Sometimes 2 sult
i wd wo kelelt of & tatvor wfler another suit for a
wivuilar relief br 3 &Eeront porsott acti
je: of the came “qinut bas been preview क hand
discamed uf The Committee poitled oul ibaa a large
= od yuck ६-15 are felvoloua and the deferdart is
alt to cecaver his zast3 from tue next 11004 evert
sf each ८०४८३ 26" awarded aysina’ bim perserelhy, We havc
rot wmure wf skuilar fives auits 01 11)॥1 Sieve. 4g a
ate, guard Buginest Ikig vraztica the Commnttise propsed
she Inzeztom of a pew ev e (2) x Order XXV of the
(५३४१ ef Civil Preesiute 2 riny the next sriend to give
semurity dor cusis of the defrudant?

2 Kesar aege 34


349

i ॥ "७ nile 3A in Onder अऊुर। erspowers 4 Mado
st avy stage of the auit etvher om Lie 3॥॥:
of the defendant ur 4७6 motu to order the next frlend tv
ity for tee peyment of the defendants costs if it
18: thy suit tizeyt ttuslifuind wm behalf of &
y his next [701९0 imprsper.y ar 1. smmbly, The
includes eourl fsx payable te Government whe

has hen inscituoed cn fare pouperé,
ararndyocnt goee nels ०1७७३ thual bie rerciney.

of the Usa: tyadish Cor mittce which would re
ci; t amd gecurlty ७०७1७ tr the:
in milar relief had alr

world be cxdered prude nti the application of the defard.
We scorned thuil a provision cimdlar to what iowod aced
in “scdraz enzcted av the
contro! yexavious litugauict by sux

Wea she defendint 3 9 1011:0:
emuyt ६3 sce thet the eu.t does nel srouned #
less tad, A vib kesinat a 0४०८० can-
प्र la guardian ad 11४९४ ie sypmuled by Lhe
ro-o veprssent him. The evidence belere us shows tat

cavtinie: कहशल in the espolutwent ot
ey जाए neither frequent nar tow borg.
न. aoli 00 एउश ६ to exarame blieily che esiztiuz
Inyal provisions.

Rates Gav Order XXXL of the Cly.t Pemedare Cade ४४८५७
ecnpow:Ts the court In cases in which a maior us 8 defen- P%slonm,
dant ta int a [1:1॥ Tuan to be his gua:
EUrposs of the eat Tae rate glynss [he बाज of
Jur the eppointmeru of & ous fon 62 lite us fullow

(i) A ४०नापे छा apocinted ur declued hy व compe
[हा authority;

(i) The fether or cther stature] guanine to te
neden:

(iii) Where -Lete is no father or clhe:
Guardian. th» person चा whose cave lve m*nar is.

Unier Role 4 / prTscn wae lt of cound mind and
has attained majetity 002५ act ar 41८51 triond or guardizh <yr
the sult provided big iuttresty are net adversc ६० those of
the minoz. The sumu: -ule proyides chat no persca can le
appointed guardian for a 8९6, whihwut his consent and that
whecs laere is na etaer persog fit end (कप te wet pg such
guardian the courl 1५७७ aopoint any of Its ers 20 be such
guardian and may make proper urders fr she coats to be
meurred Ly such offre: cp the pevfiuemance of kis dulieg ap
auch gusuvdian.

Under Rule 4, sub-ruie (2) where tho minor bas ¢

Ruardian appointed or declared by a competent auikority,
जाए PETIOD Of ther then euck Quuydian com act 3६ a next friend

न ig ths ८७1५ ran
st kim जा
inst in -ता- जवाहर

aval



350

af the minor for the suit एचो९३३ ihe court éntaldera for
veasons be recorded Lal वी 18 for the minor's weitane thal
anctiet person be permtled co ger दा ne appuiated. Whea
no gusidian bes been #जए001॥3 by ay commpeteat acthority,
the plain h. zope. the nan ul other suiluble 0४160:
SEpointmectt. ai puardian and lo support it ६५ aiicavit

ths yuusrsed puacd-an hes तक inarset ia che rowtera
lo sondraverss in che sail adverse w the uncnar, Urcer
sub-cule 43) of Rule ॥0४+ 9९४, nO TSIM le appointed
= defeodan's guscdias 10: thr sei. without his 15::७४९७:.

aan iiculty arises Ltesefore when Lhe persons pue-
= ee ed oy the [जिसपर refuse vt are reberiarl to act | aa
हु “ilians. Itig said chaz the nalural guardian: or other
“ustee wiln ite custody of the minor nflea

Delase. oy refaging cc ४९! 33 guardians ing hold up

‘Le eit tor ‘ony periods Whee (16 pro
che jluiaulf pas to tatnk of
as 208९0... Whro

छ७ repealed be
qourl Cor apocine ene ol i
ether petsen
It often sappens chat sucee:
evade gorvicr vt decline Ft

16 acl a Guardian
'४ pLIpowd
reiauee.

i ether
il Justice

tn the appciriment af wuardiane of

Buagemea, 50 The \tiur Pradesh Carmiller suggested
ble vavdians should ke normingted ow lar very
no and votices should ssue ty all of thew simwctane
i ‘ul guardians. After -he
om he gpen to the cours to appairl a
3. oper gua vut of shore ५२ whrren nelices Lave been
Tar tars cl Uke Peja Iga Court sequicr a plain-
latives cf th> minors
and sther pelseas with their add- whe privta fame 35०
eapsb'c of aching as guandicos 10 Madras. the plaintiff 28
required Lo state in h's application ln order of aiitab (15
a ist al pessuas who aze compceten! ard cpualified ॥ acl as
guardians foz che sui. ‘cr ube ६011:0: defendanz, TI is ह.
if, pE the pragosal af the Uttar Pradesh
Tis aso veered? ty ptoduce wita

¥
qwtiees to at least two ८

. Lae peoposed 203९-
tof He person screcd

Pau
87 76% hig odnsent

—4:


wi
जज 1118९-

he carl has (५ prowersd ly strve २९:
poa Twe ००३०० selected persons wut ©: 70:8५

land thr applean’ has. within lites days of inti.
of cunmalinguess by the fest ecc ol Kuare iin, २० 98?
essary prowess Ines for serouce ep Lhe Beco uel.
रन a quardian appointed Ly the ४००३०
natural guatdia’ 7007 ४ person in
i shou. hia ex-

aid penvisions, II propzecd uaz
seu: tt arn: prezan [namely a puard:an apes. .
wwchority or a 09-०४) Ru: घ 0: apesson in
cwhese save Ene 119८४ as) should be presuried and ucl.ve
preetim.tig bis zaasen’ if he docs

pot witha ४ month refuse to 86%, If he even-ually spears
se wel thee 1 dhe

tanather guardian fie

re
severting 1७ Ue

miners bom of bis det

che suit.t

the Uttar Presb Comtiillce whigh Objecdans
rartish a list cf all potable

sarvies cn ioticss ta thera

lias bevweeo lke proposed pserdians awl Cordkes,

५ yonereeary coeds Le the plaintit®. ४४४ order of

pratecenes ia Oréer SOCKIT Rule 3 .2 based on suund prin- Lanencmey

ine ly see gha; any vse“: amrpaze wil OFF

tptieg to distanl rsta-

tural है
ary relation. प्र
in diatart relatives mag nol avree to acl #:
macy The
aTdiatt  cle-
te ९०01 wthoricy or navel guerdian are-
live to ba given tu tue actzor in whuse care
av with waom ke ‘5 residing. Ja making Lhe
epnvin at The cuuirl of 27urse take int: corsidetatinn
she qnestina whether he erst $> Lhes of
the triner, But it agpears ta us that the curt
shuul’ acarl i: rung 77६४७ wh cit a हरा. partis
puna. 19 send ¢n7 pasty lo ७०:1४. persons
phe nutoker may a’. trrpe. The cules 105:
by save High Cours fur senelag wofsiees, एक ler itd persons
aamed m 47 ‘ists. but to lwo or three a1 ६ time slsa nu
awl, ae our help lu sclye the 1:11ि063
Bre supposed ६9 represerh List interests of
dan> art inclined li ६३ anvactuble, the 00
##50 ४०७७३ of uch pero:s 01 succession wil on vane oF
refuseal and on-ition wil) in no way be improved. On
the other asod, if the natural geurdian. or salher'persan “ich

Ine Minor 1s seeding aterpls ६०७७०१-1&0:-|: iz the
fics inataace, | “



chr heavy vost o° serving notices on ocher 3ercona st the

eamic 4006,

Brees 1
bert uxde: the Code of 1692 whereby
tradceiredle. guardian. cevid ke presumed dd
in he ty cf he Ce at

Fase ct appointing a guure sin spl.

५ ४० 8 9.01 ard ié his consent 4६ pte-

Tu. sapretely wiven i, he cannot tt

Tair inte 1५ 2 ee

jor defendar’ ie 9 suit to se:
ee cn ettsining majorits caanct ke cver-
animate Heese Linen )॥ ucbuclly lees
abed 10 cum vicw suck & previsien 3४ likely to
jor. and we are unaple te yecomatacnd 1.

11%. ghivilg be
su spocint, oy 4
Dr, To the 13411
wird, ६ lies
Chis ia eweady proveded
evurt finds cha: mene 02
Lowe cL 13 |: 11706. 9901 cil esse
1 officers 95 puprdiun to- the suit ins
tif to oropose the namass of other distent re
$Q:efule (2) ७- Rule + will
We da ant expect aay difficulty

peated be'ay able 10 diseoeee

Tovomme qd cha. ०

ame: oa:
the orficrr

structions ta him zad ४४० P ub bis
he defence of Ure sunt. fl should of anurse by
Te.asive nr other person tyho hat been
Aisecversd ann spprosched by the official guanlian «. caine
ne Court aud ८४०४४ acs wilkognnss to acecpt Tdian-
shee for the purpose af tbe zait. The court woud In
cade celieve dhe 41.01) guazdiae ul his dotie, ane
ilative oc the ocher perion guardian for the suit. . In
the cvuct appoints ar officer of the court 2 ue
Prontir a an ४१४ Jim, ii shea'd also be authorised to ditect
ता एप, “Hat thr erste of the guardian shall come out of the tue
“af the tnor, Prowision-7 chie effect has been made by the
Tligh Courts of Madves, Boribay, Nagpur and others,

Xorlee tn 96, Subrule ¢4 cf Bule 4 of Order XXX requires

1. ०५6४ ta be served en the musnr aiso before any wtder can

be rade cn ko application under that rule. This rule has

been amended in differen: States. Thus in Rombay and

Madras it is not necessary now to issue a notice w the

ar Prudesk following the recommendation af

jak Caedigial Reforma Committee, 0110८ bas

serie upon the moinor only if he hus attained the age

of teelve, In Kernels the age bag been fixed at fifreen 7५; ra.

We think some unilorhily m, this mavter je desire!
Again, wheo न minor isof tenditr year, and unable to



=
lis Dereon BO: "बह to hin Eppointen
“ हि be served cy suring +
|, it 18 equally
४५ achice *८ ४ mince es bee
anc Madzes, The wins: 18५ rs

ag Ube age af majo: ann co
dls be artyartageare to 'corsult By.

ary to lay down s hatd and है
3 8 mibur show be पी की,

7 aac. whether rociee should be igs
rales ‘Tbe is precleey tre vosition ir. Madiaya
hh ubder Sule 4 frarec by the Sotmet

We xeoceiemeé 57 empacneat cf dae

ver te isgue cammise:on—(a) for
(hy -cr making tors! i
‘oz or. md uetme acecuats
Delays jt Mazes occu
Sor the sXatiiratinn ef acKisiess er fer
1 dewessigstion or adjuct'og ecoin'a .

tors, qr) for
Jueking? i
sued

a pleaccr je agppints: ¢ commussioncr 2:
Hoof acwiiness Adshough the ९७७५
cf Ihe. cumumgsion, déags Erequeatly occur
loner appoes:fer an meteudlom ef che 0८8
१२६९ 0९108 «if the coznrcispivn. ‘Me del a may
on ot the sumerdesioncy qeitg 3 busy der
le ७1 devotr tine te the sack enwrueted te
pec’ely warn the Zeds payable #१ए nuaatteactive
inay also be ex aval by the partes or their pleaders
m2 10 wek adjournment: of the exarnmalion before the
smu dseicinet.

Tre ean er appasntef under the Cede is en “rer अर

of tre cos.rt and if the ५४०0८, exercises proper vigitacce, these =
chouiz aguy in the exctution of the
oF Lz estes Tasiding withia the
. Nhe qoay ty aecasierc’d hy the
the conunxaioner himsel* the court would be

i his, 15“/ 77 im oand >४७>० पक
tead <{ extendog lime. Hoe, the
hast 2nstaner the cormission 34
11४ © ; OVATE, the mart un rewolce
of cravaination by spn and Ine party tt
resi ॥ऐ४ Cre प्र grees of such revotation.
७1५ :6 th dlisemetinn of the court ‘amd
ed if the ceamgniscioner tx मिल हर re
isa Diy work within a stated period am’

and io 6
fees gre raduced :७ tase 7६ delcy bn execcvting | the

wi

39. As regards wiktesses Teaiding bepend the cwuri'a josie
. 1095 aire genersly iesced to 12७6 court
nthe lata) Hacits of whoge jurisdiction supa. witness

ae Mw law



resides 111 1५ aby pleader ar 076: persian whew. tke cons:
fission ४999 appo.tl The gourl ६७ ७४००0
83 to revcd che evden:

Thr «
ination "७ add ta
iret ia suits mul
tied 28 1 cippeaas ॥ Picweel
nlee 35. sam TuNUOEaT:.

1

ise tan. ७७

Lia ot The work a ey

ponent ra
maitl-
zalned.

inte pattiany
vovk will andoubtedly tk

fn, il we appear tbat 18 law the ¢vinmissic ane
authorily (> exclude irtelevant or ininletasible
evidware, 187 Code is not clear on lar part and ths ¢.uae
mics'oner feels iucomprlent “4 exerzise chix power end tl
sesult ir 333 of usclms. auateer placed en 2ecosd, chro
the moush ol tle wimerees and 091९2, time anc exproditus
Rewer, af aml wirsted ia th; process, The (wil Justice Comm
Cummie recommended chaz che siies enoule ke recast In ores
smcet. panvid: ment of a inn $
have the 3 the शाप 2a enclucinis dani
sable evigenes ove lus tae appeineroeat 22 8 एकता. ducart

wha would be cb iged 0 haz veck girl:
il wh ot ina 2

Higettlooa Althaug!
has the

Regen Gesited hag nit
Jatinca slivility te | ५ एड ॥॥ ५४ oom
2 ie 0 casce in avhich ६ cotam ig given ful!
दे apices. he (2८७:101:000

evienex sould ke to the
om and that such appest का:

i sul was reecd by
dit Tac place of
slecutory aapsals hich
h ९: trial. A simeler solu
४ that che commielorer recording Ih» >vidence shey'd
gaxt 4 che proviginra wf the Eviderce Ast ang? 10
vitness
bas dis-
dsc quescion ainel che acewer
thereta, hul che seme ahow'd nol >+ admitted az evidence ©

aml Of the

igh Courl:

dor favour it will ersull ६५ a molds i,



335
opt by the order ७: the Judge heforr «hom tae depres
mney . Buch rules have Seen crags Ly come
Ane it ‘5 nomrecty Wut they should 9८ Kener]
oy being enacted 55 ६ rart of Order SOX

LoD, Gelays alsa ence

in the sttura ef umrud.ge on
issued Scr local Gs

ag ar for takinz ace: We

i 0७23. whith ace
amialls ॥ the pi. Curae ७: BTepact map
॥#७ site a dispece or Cor dice ptspoees woud 36 oxpes
i trusted to come i
plesder. The ecuct
2 a more eficcent roatral and evpervisis
jen Usb over & plesder.

aine to
over its

as regards ean mis #
Judie Motumilws su

Srape lent an psi 2 हिला af
shovdd he rer deruted scequate-
pec cimed = The sppocalracol uf cam-
ners 5 ig the dscet.on <f che covrt and Pur count
car wake a cateful vod firticives caolee, snd koop 98
xicde. wutek over His work, :

ss
Jeusen of ordacs af stay of pire
lor cours, Apart from thy stap el
y onrder: atelutheg bo siaits and

ioet julerocctsry maters.
weld up by an appeal or vevi-

nals itu t2viaions lack subs-
elucutusy preceeding: ave net
tue, The appli ant or apgel!aat whe lijies 4७५४
wwletlesuloty, supecis :७ revisions knows that tacte ig 20
ehanrg af ५3: and ne Glew 2... only 3
aime wher olter albempis to oota.n jadi have
Taile ८८). (5३९६ che original proceedires lq rot
be octeyed, antoss a veTy strony tage is matic
Ju ay धर ke geanted witksu: 10008 ६:

चाँड टुरवाव।पर ame:

such provcetcnus Veal tc mere thau 94 per ceat of

euch cased whe vedi ned Ly nf ike Sf.

dancer ॥$ :: dues SPpei or isiun os aigerig
ave, The 4 3 shoul id als» pay more ettartion
do the disp of vhese tevision snd appeal: whieh delay

the ४-8. Baxcesunes and as far ue [5511५ pri
thie Ure. Th will abe be well ff
१ by che suberd:nate: suurts ।1:1 thes
tonvts comsim 3 colvrp ettting out the suits ir which
is seedings heve 19२९७ swayed by the = sugeriat exerts

= wi have Lhe advantage cf indica} ng te the superior
warts fram time ts tne the aucber Of prictedings “hat

Other

Sue
cnter

anper!
wxdet ta gait emt:

dona,

कर thee Civ] Suy:tinios
bye घब्स्थ्व्क

strict of a suis ut proceeding offer Stay of
dings yi.azed fewseil igh

by

Tre Gf Rewtedies,


Seu nets vd

Ru]

have keen gliyed ly reason oi pele orders and ९७-००९
them lo cake tooesirgs fur une esrly dispasul of the pro
mcedings ia which ४९७ been granted.

We bare av3o diseucaxt the proklem of delays arisiny,
का छण्साप्पों uf aay of preeesing? of intrrbuntory stages
vr Chapsr ऊ " rel Revision.” aint have made
gevers: revomunendations, whieh aed no> be Lepeated

26.

100, Wr mex sumpaarise our इ्ाष्ध८]19018 ance recom
suendetlene on Ve teh 02 civil ६-६६ as followe:—

(+ Instruction in “he art af dewiuing pleadings
should ‘crn. part of the lawyes s profesgicnul raining
६322९.

131 Effcrts shuutd ba male ly she Tegel ptefes-
siux. 10 ztog: lhe gructice of glendings being dravin by
curse and pectin wrlwers

(1) Grder VIL Bule 35 uf tae Civil Piexcedure
should he: amenced by peinidung thas the veri-
o2 pleadings जाते 0६ on ०७ 20 that in er
voarte: vases, tke epurt may in ch disureuon . give
judcwent on the pisint wich. reauirin additional
mice End tee defendant toay aol felacly .deny
obyluus facts.

4) Sues showld be required to 7:71 with - their
plesdirps a s2giglered agriwes, service of propeaset
and ४०1०२ al whl, will ke cocmed to be cervice an

parly for the purposes of the suil, appea., revi-
ehecudan 1:४ ings. Order
by the acdilion a 8 ॥७९ siniler ४ cule
"4-4 ch Woes; Bengal. ‘

छ) Wk

enever toere ix concemration of several
ce, 8 epeciil wflicer of the ren of

le appointed for the purpote:
receiving, lnising wid cher king eleatingr with
pret 15 wake povempl wy uxderz for dieniss] the
suit er uutect amendmrl or <ejaction ef the
pleadings.

(6) Tée forty cf summon. oO the defandast
zhould he cmendet Ly ingercing in it a direct) in te
the defendant to file 4 Written etatermesl. 0५ » date
whith exculd ‘he she date fixed for seltlement of
im 3४] 8 note added im the zummons to theieffect

ज che written statement :2 net fled of unt

Ln
date, the multer tay be deall wilh cayparte.

(7) The: oa aha ua ti striet in the ed bad C4
manting adn ments Eng writlen dlatements.


स्का

(8) Goyermmens should generaly be given three
menths potice ‘rum the dave of [be summons “cr fil-
hig wts written ecateqnert. Qrjer XVII, Rule §
sSiould be aroerded as In Micra.

} Parties stiould be drected to, fle wil their
pies filled a: ke then
da

ge printed Lorne ot
2 ouly thi celevart dates fr Be fled "० ky the

ples

laavin
court

tue tig pavpces show dar
sto.) peymct.

(140 Varies ewule be re-pousibl: “ir che usen-
Feey of the ऑए ails given -0 the farms,

६190 The ours shonlé exertisa very sarivt sty
viwoa over the process zerving — estahl.abarent
cotta delmys 03 the service of process.

(!9॥ Uf pew i rr pomsibh: uficer
wake regular 17; of Hie wor's of che
rpcke vist; to the villages,
somditians of | process [1८६३३
gzoved unt provirmet nade for the pay-
[9.0 sd ot ver Blinwaaces to “len.
mnsns ‘sy poe. ard suthmets in the ore
vary farm shld be isgued acltanenaity 5096 t
cours sould set of Whichever Feturn shows wiechive
servics.

215) Substituted cervier’ shoule be: ordered after
two uneucceéfal atemps 19 Meth acrviee in ite
azlinary munner cr fy post

(17) Althougt. susan az to te Sramitig of
fecues meg be ovilod Hom the advorales, adicial
effizers stad i ably f-a the issces then
sadves efor stintyine the ple: and dorwmen's cud
21764 Chmiring, velevand ‘dak dings jon frxa the parties.

(19%) ‘The soles fot fhe evamiriation of partles
rectained गत Ovder X, Ale 8 and 2 steuld iid fully
applied.

(2S) Tar provisic mt relating te Bacowvery 3 BHA Lie

production kek scusissiae of dawegecl: in Ordars XL,
XN) ०० XIN skould be rads yse of as Frequently as
possinle.
(20) Ordes VIE, 8३५ 71 diould be amended a3
in the Punjab sz: २७ ta require & Gefendant ६० beduce
doomed on Ib bejbeass bie detaswe or claim for
areok and जिन्दा ७ lie, uf darumoide on whirs ne relies
ae evicense in sarin! $ lds cose,

421] The provesfous of Order Rute 3a

sone Se more axtenptiety oped =



wrmare. after che sedlement 01. ४७४॥३९:४,
te ४४६ may ka feel before che date
piemeutary 1565 of document.

(22) If 1
cus ctilermedi
of nearing acr ling

(23) ‘Tor prexlucor. of fuether docninen
|| भा. Lae slage wl heeriag save in
mgtanees and for 805८. reasons 1७ be

the list of
nu. being mane
ulcer,

ats and chrir
winch. isa or sema¢ olk:er mezhe

cy ead the admis-
leridixd 3४ ave when
nied at the stage oF

wentimnusly जज
she advantages
mg Meleting lu

Jusaid be vesjuitsd ve file the'r li
a a time ce linul ग्रेण the co
Uays Stem the dite of the 2a

lwaring should be fixed sfiier
38 comzultaticn ९ Ihe 130-

integrity or imparlallyy ef witrcaxs ४:
७ without #.1009 15 en “he fread vl Ulely
:8 3५७0700:5:७८.,

४७:३१ for examiniag addtional wit-
ned ia the List shovld pe deviled on
thelr uve: sudficrent veazong being placed
nefose the coir: For suck examination

191] Prot fees sheuld ne ces ib | ceces
nthe pirty hineell serves the swaraore.

(32) A ségarate machinery far cane
ceedings 4 anor:

(33) Tar bringing ab wong
be 121६ ta hr ind wive of the trial jedi

(94) ‘Tae judge should he able st the stage of the
plarifcation of the plendings and che emuocinulion vl
the एन- ०5 ancer Order X te form a wire oo whether
the caso js suilalle for a compromise end to mako
curalle sugs; 35% नह with av ew we effecting a fettle-
ment in app> 1.9 come,

18. r=

$0510 [|



oe
(3f0 Aw alaborsue pons-trigl pragdors का. the
Arr a uaddel ws 1:01 surtakle for sdeption in our
cour ty

Ex porte sud ureetcesed cases shovld be tard
1४ soriy by puldugl lasct in a ४६२४-४० ex parte

Cur

हैं.
(37) ए4८ए५ऑ5शव्रें 255७९ fives Jer azaving up’ aay

se disgused oof belie ctmlesled

sed far che FB att
icicle wil haw 40 be हक.

Ve Judicial] offers shoal pes pecainut sthentign
# 11. 5 ; 4 he: हैं; om cf dale. Zor aial

r xes Mis
sdjourns 2४४६8 shu be lyken ate sevnurt
6 nis effec ency.

trelicds of eryunging 2
nt in Clgdhisy Pradesh may

Is ang ining

adngird iy Madras
+1 176. in pursgtscas 53 .> G1 cute

wring, of contested ea2:
Tron day te gay in
of Order RVD Hale 1

shovig fe made te: dixtribula work
oMeere 2: ७ पृण्क- १76५ frahic a

af ufficer Jz cet aérevl oo १५ cata origeral
oan casts exes be:

Ctice ०8०४०
confarmpity

: he for the jucdge ‘ryiag the case Lo
he dats af hearing husing regard lo the state: < his

Afjoutnsacats sheu.d nor b> |
The converse: et the pscci

sd merely
॥ sdve sates.

(६६३ Sr: opening wend unl be inzislnd span ia
we शव
0221

every
in connplicaced cases oshen she coucl Fe
im

447) ६: sarties be a

wieh 00 give eviderioe the
shea'd do sy befuze thn £ i" " ¥

other evidence Ia 1
140१ The ceuzts shoald er: cous ¢ the leper wisn पट
lavit 2elcener 190 pruof 0६ ४ mnle and iarontzoverti+
je 444: (६.

Judges sheuli be enable ty - 0120(310. ७
evidence of witnasses a lyplst in cour. insted of



8 11 39 their pan hand. A gryovisinn similar 70
wien 336 of the Code: al Criminu. Procedire as und.
ad cnoule he made i the Cech: of Coil Procedure.

Arzcoierets abould, as fic ag posible. o¢ heard.

rt Sudgnent te be dict verrd एचा [79 or i
two werke of the close of che nearinz cx ofl Cor geil
rekinns le be axplaitnd by the presiding ocleer,

1 Wherever 195 com yvezerees judgment in 4
Sheschd, at tire: Lets of oa

evity the dete 01 +’
red

(53) AL codicla) cifizers sould be |
stenogzaphers 3s in the Stetes cf Anchra T
Mm

४७081 and

154) It tg Dot necessamy 70 read cu: Ihe ul’ jude
ment in open enure. fl iz aufictent (7 the Ardings on
‘dhe 5806१ awd the 10, order an: 4९30.

(55) Order KOKI Rgie 2 should be amceded ac

lo empywer the Gort al ay slage of the + ७.५ to arde-

lhe cext triend ef a minor plaintit to give ecourity ce

the cfertdacl's ७655 if the suit appears te have been

nt tated by the next friend iaprnperly o> eOremsan-
ably.

(5९ Whea ay ta ix a ofinny deferdact a suanlian-
ship uctice should 86 dsaned in the first inscarda to (1)
a Cuerdian appointed ‘sy a competert awchomry oz (31
3 natural guardian oz 13) she de foci cuardiun, that
ix, आ person in whese cud@dy le mincr 5.

(itp 11 pone 4, Crem’ cm: oe atpr.aled, the tours
shold tromtediat ene ci it of inerp ax
gaardlan fur the quit, 16% ] a suitable reerive woz cc
0060९ the gusrdienthip i dixinveted,

(58) The ०४ of the effitial gnardian saeuld come
aut of the msiate कई the minor,

(89) Ondet MROCH, Rule J, sub-rule (4) shacld be
amanced so es tg 22276 ft ker tie courts nescretion ty
deere ine whethet notioc should be fasued २0 the diiaur

160 A a pert inted hy a court for any
parpoee 18 + reuytred bo ४-03 Bax

work within the fen atd is cand of deiny tus tres
shod be (५८७:

fl) ६५: Bh pocording th cy.denm of
Sertiag AT ge Ect bs ankueei pmo
lawyers nat hat much tee. A bist of 5५ [8०1> jimior



शा

willing to work gs Ceommizgieter 3990.11. be
ack ig aise एज,

82) If any questinn is objected to and the Con mis-
fie securding evidence cansiders dhe -hjectior.
मं hut the other party inmsts an the quzstion keing
permitted, lbe Ceoeizék-ner should vecord both the
questicn and th: wem Lhereto, by! the 5७:४२. डा.
or GS wuatied o3 evidence except by the erder ut tre
jx crudeezey #छ

(4) Comrissions Cor linal inyestipalion lilee prapaa-
ing a plan ormao way be entrusted te ministerial
Oiticers uf We Cored.

exior tourte showid suwn.t appeais asd
leciicngory orders he a elope seruttery
Cala say eoly ॥: Dreper Lakes,
(€5) Suvericr courts shuld 3:59 ७७2 al sec cing
in which sly urdety, have been issved expeditiously.
(०९) Svtordinets ॥#ए६1- ६ should ceedcale in their
returns the ७३९६ sad proceedings which have 00०९1 held
Up swing te the sti orters,



l6A—CIVIL APPEALS

1९, 1. ‘Whe 0:40: lagal उप knows of three procures
Sree. by whieh ७ |: ७ 7४ ६८. agumsat de
खासाएरञ्र 9० He haw u १2576०,, 2:

We ace, iv
190५.

peal iu ¢ivll praveenings क्र poiasrily
ry che value scl rpot the sebject mater in

५ the suit for 0७ purorse 9:

figs ७४) ७15

* cont!
dispale
Have suse, abenios. Ui

HE judlzial
‘ Tsiges or Seutor Civ?
er Jung Covil  Suues. 210 ( pevoriery

pik Charrtig
the cex of

507३0 yon ure defined by he

any fa

Pur,a> a
> udges

3, From che clectees passed Ly -he ९
Lae law pouvices iz Ves Use
Hugh Court on chs

wed) as 1
alto the Supreme Sout 10५: |
Ihe

ar sacvalte pre-
Wielisn if the Cours

4. Sroell and uiuypl ¢ suits fcr -
peviy and १४९ 242 within the
ul seriall 5 जड/२ Or

according ५० the
Loot appeal fron diders péesed ir such sits but
2 rigkt to imecke the Wigh Courts yev7isivwul

7 icviom: It vases of tr.a deacripti A uccaniing
te Uke regtder proweluze By (००४ 130 weit
puvers of a sonell cagses Coal: ooly is atkwwred

4 Trius defied cecusary imi, spprals'iv ic ch. Tanzi sedges
iota dschlors a7 (1६ Saboedinae Tabural

© fe. revisions. ¢ 19 che Danie Jade.
Elid


33

on
fertoer जता: dive Loe che 1:80 Court, unless che ¥
tL rialler ia ५:३४: zreceds Rs, Ty

38० Folume oC eases which 1-9 ell

. a. Pere
de ts) of a ६ z
409.1 of che Vem 11, ar dacigr Civil das

Jelivel! by she local (7 Courts Act:

ey Che Sasy for tac fire aring ए
excopled किन lhe eguizanee of Courts of exra’l ८
taass, there :3 त frst .in la tu
Tot fats utd law and a second a!
4 [भा छत padals ot Le

“ga Cou:
eo any of wlowing &/ ०01८5. osmely:
५ ocing contrary to 1.४७ er tin
law; (b} she decision. Faving
al 1516 oC lav or vagge Jere te
3 ial exper us defect in the er:
cecure जएर:व २४. by the or by any
time 36176 in 15९९, which Tay possib ¥
orre ror

vader s'ause 15 of
Madras avd Tantay T
[3 Patent o¢ the Tigh

ards jared clue: 10 # 1
arcs cf Allababad and Patra,
11 Court trem jrdgmente of a
sing Ate ‘ eee of ils orwiogl ji: isdicvion,
(४: in tae exersise of its xppeltate Jrtisilletion in a
geal, or (2) in the ewerclse of sts sirpcllate furiaciction

ic]. provides! the 30८8७ whe pussed the
ive taal the gaxr is a Gl cae fer aapiges

Llaxeons oppesl:.
o-dets of am inty sture in pendinz sits. ap;
feovu erders in exreution, and tie Tike, Section 104 and ae
Order XL 131 1 ॥ा the Civi 1": / Cade contair an
exhavesive list of aopealakle orders ef this wpe. 85७८-०७
16044 ontemplates only one appesl igaintt such
doocapprtal is busied. Bul the sevtion
1 execption : the vasc of other orders eqaiast
whi: appeals are allowed by other express provisions of
dhe Cade ne by any her lew. Fer instance. ordera passed
under sections 27, 144. ‘45 etc. ste tromted 82 decree: und
azz subject to fizet and 3ccond appeals. Thx provisions of
secticw 1f4(2), Luvever, dior unt «luke 3७६७ the eencral
eight of apseul te the Sumteme ९०८८ ven by section 108

This co:nplever the picture of the rttustuee of our
appeliiste syater,

‘Excepe tc Rete.”



Hitters of

peorouls
currail-
men af
sapped.

अंब

&. Since the cnriy seventies, the Indiar. 1९४शे ayatem |
met wills the criticise, that it perroits a mullipialy of
appeals aq enormaug delays ened costs. A case cum.
trengead in a sxchordisuite Ce enc’ ally Laken tn 35
i Jiate (०७: ४ Fence to the High the
3 1४०८० of the
ust Ler ‘tbe: Supt
There :a
uently, wre caw
suatt= ‘oe given th:rs or fone तर ete
tod the parly uldicacks lming becomes
tosls uf all ths ste | धैरे४411:
emerging us che vil victor Tay thay st: bas
eved only 8 pystbie victury, for bis yorscveyasle octets
Hd the valun af the judvumeal he bar: cbualned.
nse caste in whieh the “aw allows no sep, »
1:0 tare, of astinvilinpg Lekcrehand the
Jidwation, becw er ar au Lever khowr
whee hig case will end

ए. The cust. vf Ieigaticn could undnuihtscty be p.inimised
ard juice 19302 «peedicr. if appeals 0707. ‘ae Gieperterd
wath slooqel ner Hiviug finality in the divis.ccus ७२ the

3 Court, mui being taken 10 make lure Coury very
fi i. But tke tctak wool*tion of che righl of een fe Ud
a course which canmot be contemplated Fre, ax Ue On
rdttes cn Rupreme oe ४८६. paactis: and = preveduce 7 in
Krelund oxserved: “है! lega] aystem of every se ed
seurrtry recognizes Lheg Taduep ore faifib.r and pr
inachine:y fox apptal im come form cr anolhes. The हैं|
of appa Al *=**> 33 toy ingrained in ६.४ iegul system ta ae
caparate cf 2eirg sprected in eto, The problert Taust! ie
appreszted ४ © * * fn the basis thal it would be pslogtly
wrong to Isuve the qeteat Etigont encirely without
srmedy at all cam, even im (0032 whore te judemert
Bcawnst bum :3 reneanatiably wreng, or ७ Gehy is
aesgether Lue chance of appraling ma a decision which
lesves Fir amavting nade: # autre of ingestion!” The
questa beforn us, thalefore, ld Wheres; oud Row far, [एन
Fight of xproeal car: Be enridiled, ऐश & view 20 making,
just speedier amd waducing (॥ह litigatt's costs.

1h, The view that digakd. ordinary be एफ ene
apreet th clal esse, sblooed We 8 revision os the 2
of fain or ere टू. 06 172, hae bear prop:
in ६9119 from ४१४५ ¢arbt Memes. Ia, 2614, Ste Janeen at
surfing wp the 0169 tf fhe dedged of tin: Cateutoe [Ei
Court, virirl ra: She Whale 50 of appeals im chit
ret FeeKalky faulty oat 0 naerabrer of gppor's
be greatly redrted tae iifertor Roure sitéagtie
Chir ir! de Tudger, Stt Bornes Peacock, nunted to al
second «ppesls + 088 8८ and werk bo the extreme
of pointing oul thet i; would be cheaper to uverntiant

+ Ful Rere taf che ret em Sopeme Cour, Practles 1 and
Praceture dr. Ercan, pane Sq > Bare, <73-

Sven Lae पाए
rie



3m

lo pay Ger bull amount ख the appellun:'s denmand with (05:73
€ bach parcivre and *c give each a ॥४४:४०३ for termcinanng
the l.igeticon than 19 2uxpuzt the ectaslish i
Courl fos hearing sug sveond oppo
uf India pee, frum
व changes co the
ne 51. prominet
restricdon of the righ

Loe, KE

weal; = ig unrectaary
an of tires prapossis or
maents collect cherear by the

Principal opposition 10 these
came Aton, uhe Cabeatlu High Cagrt.
bye Lo suuking th £45¢ cf appeal
‘alice cf the audject matter ऊ the ground
stions may be fa ६

which ४::४०९)५
dependen: pn th
tort “rport,
ats!) ५2:५०
he

e ot luv and she strength of characcer uf
suxorimate Corrts neovenitatcd a = preservetion ७7 the
o¢€ the accené appeal!

in 4051 2or the revizion pf the Cc

suite radon
veo grad

etre preprrty cacseding
1 other cases no &६९०॥:७ ippe
5६ of Uke sail wug user Re. 1G

ake

7, the OL which beoceow
e Cate cf WOE Sir Evie Awhars>
king of 110 litigant’s right ta a second append, ieferced
tu the ‘srrong Seeling 3:5८अ)06 the: pu. thet it would be
Justice bn (६|:४४९ m of the rigit of wbesiwirg a
pn of tha highest irimmais"* Se बएए2ए that y Lime

wath, by fhe oipravement cf tue Jower costs,

#ए४७ १: Civil) Proomdive Code was en

jemained practically th sarne as ६ ७
Th. in gaamin "9

Flisivy appe Orsi, inscance, lake

cegzet table esglusivelty by oficer or uh y

imc in Madvas cr Bengai ot a (४६ Judge, Wzh Coes.

Bairbuy vet cams 15916 by @ Dig ric!

Judye. in which the emoant ur value o:

suhje Taatter 13 disprie exctivis Bs. 5,९00, of in

Hombay sri Madiwva Pradesh Ks, 10,000. A first oppeal'

in Fach sages. cies dircet to the Wigh Coat, h: fa.

god law, exiny 4426 where a3 appeal can be ४.

et hy tne Discriet Cour. Whe flowing Table

the volusns af this ४४९ of work yom: २६64 sad

of ne फतवा) a ive
i ९. 3-3 बधा€ 1.3 11016 owe Caspers 20 nf rhe
59:25! PORe-334 Bead the Pollwma quges,

a
Op. ce. page gar.


sarisus Males

iu th .
oh at che Tuaasss

yeur

atts,

dias
chins,
जड़ wer oo

2307

Corie . au ye oy न ap aw ae ny aie
करा ns mts

10५७1...
Tan ere

5508
hae Prada,
Wet Deng | 1

BE


Sea

i the corres
0९ Crunmethec

nf the abkave figuevz »
xamicel by the Civil Ju

Comm f.ce ८:४8 «हाई विज). . yea as 333
Maton : : : : ayes ar 135
(७७६ पु 251 ft: le;
Punjzt . . . ° oh om

haw thal he aspecis in 1854 ara dnb

The akove Tat

rey 0
thon 10 192,

at besa ap

of o'd apps
frou: Tht underinentionsd te cables. >>ज्बा७

Tale £

aly skirving the quence ney
7007 dd

tev eis, Tribet



wins

४८०८-७०:

Saconaus +

“Lavarieeeetochia

Pic tosh

‘Wea Kegel

1955555
> "$4
tus5

T9534
(N53



Set

‘vw

Name al the
Saw

‘Kke—Asy 2०

Andhra
Pradesh (4).

Away 2.

Tikar

Burtaz

MMadbva

Prodicsh

Mado (ht
Mroe (CY

10९९8 "

एड
Prades

Wee beng ke कि
जल» विन Megas the Srures ofess
ct

taaares 30% inna ho indo dy che States ॥६ ३१६ ६२७॥
८ ७६४०७, ॥| ५० ik >> ;
पेपर ५ appeids 11० te Ee Teuungune regia *

Sud chuce peading hefure rhe Nogynir ind Rajkot Hescbes, iC) as
Arrbel, i) Jadudes appeals intututed eerlleg und weer peacing.

SS SE LT So इ0०४ तगड'

a 1 २ 5 9 गा
. L "६. 4335. शा
c : é
: : 1 a
5 r
‘ 3 ५ + Fy
1 bt 3)
“ . }
‘ 1 1 1 3 F के de 4 rz 353
(8 ६४०7:

Hb वा ऋ का हद. pay

gk ARTZ आठ 33 ३55

na in Ai sachs case cf thost arched AK $ Cul,
surgcdiinn ॥ erheratae. -

1 wails Jove Ce (डांपस्परम आंध्र oe rhe 4igh Court
y Apprals ५८% ८ 1:४ (आए bon Modi, Bounkay aad 175-
cadea Originel 50% ane ८09 Ce] Goat Appeals

७६ Uo (०7 Telungune regl



at
apzcila
1९७३1:

oto
sticed that mn the cas: of » number of Flisin

It will tm:
Cours the ४६ duraticn of hese apyeuls cwoceds tao
year: an stone ese, it is as bigh as live or aix years
He TWO | Courts which ebow the longer: aiertage Bre

aud) Madhya Pradesh, wilh sm 8५४७४1:६९
[45 aad 2222 diggs renpect: . It epeers.
coverage a wad
lo 2,394 days ७ 1954
17.06: of ten-year-old
ba realized,

४ have fixed &
12. In our npinien. mazk vel.ef cea be
Ciacts by a resutt to the simple ¢x
by Use sath
42 ju

given to dke Fuga
rt metunupended

i advanisec ir all the
Cuur.s. Ag the Hig Coust Aryrers (0717: hee
poinled ०७६ in 1943, a greet deul af she time af
Cxygrl 18 taken vp in Gaspoeing af 1.6 appeals,
|, appecle aris: Gut nf
8: ny Ue: depreeiie

ने ho has taken place ra ibe valve of 1597छए aba
:४९९,८४7:: cise in the erket yeluu of property gem rally,
ce ly be amy ९0; 12809 why 339

2 wi risdicticr to
01277: peala upte Ts. 1000". 11 ॥' 89 be poidted
out thas the puwgent limit_e2 10: Ol was axed ever a
cnlacy 360, In ambay, Mudras snd Madave Pradcah
the Disleict Judges heay cll appears upto 145. 10000 1007:
the dierves of Lae Suborasnule acd Civil Judges. In (जाए
Pradesh umd Wes. Bengal ila, the: appellate i a
०९ che Dueteict Jucpes bas been 1६87४ Lo Rs. 10,000.

15, We are confident chet the sereptuure of ihe reoum--
mendation will pire considerable cclief te thr: High Courts
hy reducing the num 3090-31 instivations. It ‘5 [६४७
169३९ in am insimasr of work the districs
Coats and = resiulry tT Judges in ube
Fu, 4 is easier and Ws axcpensivi: to |
1706 3३६७४ ७७ 4७ raise the stroetg’h the
i . Tho State Govsmments will, however. kaye
to Eke promt. aeaatrts be appetins the additinnal Districs.
Jugérs asicod; otheewese, the casult wi] merzly be ther
acct -nulat om of hravy ieresrs in the Gissrict sppetlete

warts.

14. To the course, 5 oa sled above, an dk}rytien was
on the grucad tha: the judicie! oftcsr of the present
3 not competent te Landle apprsls Ia ८५३७३ of 3 higher
valuatlon. T: 9), Do 3५03

It gyerbuke L F
in (0 vatue of money po ¢qlamr ०.

today ere bul whst weu'd bayy been ९912७ of the wala



at Re. 3.500 some yrats
ancraase in the pecun
suboniinste Corrts, both in igh
che fall un the vabuc of थ २9०४, We. therfare,
fullewmc the examples o2 Somaay,
Wes, Serecl. MWindres aml IP.
Flu states where the appellate jacisdie®
है et Cours iz belay Re. 10,000) ४००५ ऐ.
i:cutdiate svevs to raise it to Rs 10,0021.

we Qiether escormenés 1161 vets o¢e Retrogne-
hould be forthis:th urderlazen For Us joe eile
transfor=i.g all peacing tirss pp: vil;
“ith. veuween Fe. 8,000 snd Re. 19002 to 1४४३-३४ of
asteicl appellate Courls and for previdiry taat appeals fa [कहर
all suits kalaw Rs. 0.71 lie to the disliat cepela te PEE
arts, Whether the suilg Were ieitiied be

f lezialaticn. Tae West Br enc the UP,
8 Uhat Mey de not spaly
|; wr 0%3२/४ paced io eit:
commerce nent al the célevanl Arts,
have Gucome ready Jar hei
book: ave resdy and she advocate:
iliomal césty end Aardsa.p Ip ibe
parties and tac wdve € Gan be inqiaed oy lem porutily
mtg a seQfcent aumber oC District Judges at the he:
ouvartters cf the High Courl ७७ dispoze of such appeats
within a ycat.

(5. Ag & merolli

fore oe alter

1F. he "४७ 718७४ of appesl ete, the right ८! 1४३६ : ६७6३1 No srs

tu bie वाह Cruct qed + furche: ryat of uppecl to the SESS
Supreme Court in cv t

Win gusrs ave, ty (४०५० the Ci
Sustiica Commitee, “hoth proper and tecmare * ‘
and chat guarded and conditioned as st prosenz, ther axe
७५60). on principle, in practice necessary ox ७ एटा
over dbe d' Beene [and Fictir Courts ead 8 ६0९7७:
od strength for our judicial system the inetrucced aud
i i public.” WAL [है

Cort in Ta ecal hardstis ct heavy ~ A
to be socurre? jv Engiand ia appeals of this “६2 hae dis-
uppea:ed. On the whole, “therfore, we ece ne furcler
soupn tor the curlalmenl of Arst appeals to ths High Court
ar of apmale ta che Sppretan (1 wieder article: 143.

17. Our alier.tlon has, he weer’, beet drown lo a pose कै 8" The ks3-
method of reccing cxete und expediling the ulti noe pre
This हर koown as che “leapfrog

decis:on 19 cases of this 21958.
pre al and was uo:
aidered 10 iss application to apse: Court nf Apyear
and dic House of Lords by the Everabed Commiltre The
'248::प छ-8 oF the “leap-frog” system which vax sparnnioved
by Lord Greene before the Evershe§ Dommittee ४1

Vurat, age 3th.



372

es which ¢ futtable for iypea. ta the २16७७ ct
rds sad which wre ol che type in which 1९४४६ ta upprel

to the 11115 sally काम ०४, the expose
aud Jelay inv: eof Appel ‘in
आर cpyesl?

Zo i; would be com
1: x -otice of appeal. kr parts <0
wa the JJovsr ef Toréa tar 11०6 to appoul Uk
by-paszioz che Cir of Ar
ac sppes} souls go

"४1033,
to th: Court sf ऐप्याफ:। whose

ug #९:घा7
1

धर ii, Ube “leat
10 India, wrule: prubabiy i
eiew of clauses (00 [b) end
cutivn st thay with den teave ०८ the

system, in ils apeli
है Tee FAR

pres Cours, |r
pals would Ee allawed 5 “levo-froy" thr Tra. appeal to
she Dizh Couzt by taking, lau case etzaight ta tan Sapreirt
Court.

yposel of Lind Greene was hess, om the
eases of the type th ulsima-rly go
leave ate sasily recovnizad.s
surgi un waa bet #२०७ए'४7-0 to The

smile Wiese view Was confirmed by the
evacence ping d lmcve 17 that euch ready .dertiticulien wiss
nv 176 Cincunrttae’s virw ४ so soxfirmea
the Low a Ordmarr
at “the House of Lords far fra
tidable at Ar-l instar, ‘cyukencls.
firalon for the 4rss tine Sa lac Couct of

५6 Apne

1113. 405९7 clauses (b) ७;
lei of Frticke 188 of the slizution. To toeet this
objection, il. in.ga. Le argued tyat in india lar “leapfrog”
rystem could at usy rate be ‘ntrexiuend in cues covered
by clacze 72) of w 4 in which the value of the
subjert cuattes cf the dispute would clearly be abave
Rugzes 2300, provided botn the apoellant and he
respoadent before the High Court declérod, in the first
instaqen, 10 in the event of the decision at the H. gh Court

siunat tanm, d:ey would take she waster wo the Sipreie

कक था .
we to this is to be lind ir (१४ se: &एएए7:ऐ
maw the Law Lords to the "[७०9०८2६" system.
ciindél oot that slihvugh the parties osighe 334८४
‘ac case would qudoubtedly have wo ४० bo the Supreme

IBA Report a che Camanici wa 3u Cast Procite and
Preecles, cane 196, pare 4. me ae supeeis 3



37S

that ufler the Jear.nz
There ray, in Fucs, be 93
1९२०, tet so cuck cr the grovnd of
Tex: ७ जाए pacty rg 7s ke wlvised tras it
would awl be worh-waile to teke the matter ix a furtne:
uppel. .

Court il might fzequentiy hag
9 Ge Coturt of the

19937 cavizaged by the Linw Lords whies ar: of 1
Yeh Sicater. aspiicktion i tse cunditions 70 Inca
Joap-fior" gyster, as ens:
: erme Catt of whe Benet ते
१७ Ligh Coure. * it is ook ta ke Surgucton,
gmemts cf ta2 Huvss cf Loris rave ४:

binding ovecedrats in all Covrts in the Un tod Kinzéo.n.
lu the absence of tue Coutt of Appeal jodnsuens it
wen * 7 * * * he more diffeut, (५८ de Toure to asin.
'े एछुए .तो&०५-६| Jeaas, utless thea delibs .
eel” dn due». P
orl cf Ir diy ia Yindizg nn sll We Cores
६७९. we thik that it is exten ial that it
sdatsnce uf 4 quasuigred jodgtacnt <7 the |
110 State

hh. Bagiche? tha lards oF Appssl ix Ordia:y
ere sexed! trom Sepllaxd 8८ Northera Ireland as well 65
ron Mnglard and it 7758 patated out chug upon 80 appeal
3, the series nl che House gitting the cs :
ee parte uf Wie Zu,
luge nm 17 १०६९४ २६

che ju

५ al Tn India also. the Judvez of 2

Court ae recvwted nicl, paras cf the sal
aingt loom che State :
L.

3 disudvenb pe
avy jolament of tlw Higa Cat

J cust: 1
auch 1-४३

ens, though the Heerched  Cucurittoe
the inwi.duction of the system in 9 modifed
५ "वे ia sry a nem dar af safeguards, ite rer cemmen-
dklicn dews ppest +० have beer impleneute

13, The prsilan swith regard ७1 eecond @pprade in the corona

High Cows i the Fears 1945 ard 1966 «1 zs
uh Comts ir ipsests 2007: nr Appeat

i aif st Commie BY Meu’ छू
rocedure, abe 159. pu. aot am Supewre 2८४० Praczice a



‘Taare हू

Comporariey tabie atoesiug she irichutioe, Sicner? and pewateac y ey assum sPpeats im aho बुक Counc: of la earions Skates moring rhe grits
TOS me 39595 -

Ted tes ise Pending ot we
peal Digpeed ol wuss vb the ४७०७
year
toad 1955 Wa 955 4454
a 9 20
कर 6
497 444 spun 27% TAU wpwale
eye aah 122 rez THR शा dispussk थे जूझ
Bihar uals 16565
. कर 3 ™ x test wore rans
337 442० य्जव 2753 7934, 2244 oe 4920 sore ६०५ bie ol
1/ रा - aras i450 1996 2490 6 wo HID capo
Praksh . ig tm Brey uti 373% 378 root का 1700
Melee. pees BBs jer 1८ 38626 ड्म्डड़ 4245४ way wi
Mencia; ५ a Tea oy nie tse Tykz = er wort T2kT FEM cee
oni aul 395६
im. 1393. 9 waa 2B mee 1622 ae acl 3339 od
Pusjoh . ane Percy 1138 nae हि? 5] yaa5 1233 913 2245 2qlz
Rojas 1658 eq” 671 33 2329 2655 46g au ries rb
‘Trane
Wachin qs 1449 qua 41465 व्ह्त्त £ प्र स्ष्ण THER Ld
Gem
Praleh grag 10067 wiab या 1145 खउप्ल+ LB ume woot 5 1454
eu
Bengt 638 yt 1430 TaD 6064 om sto aqui 4399 40३6
_ - ड१,.ध9सकोकॉइ नीता ता सओओफओ फ5:ससडफकककसकनककक क्नन- = —

ig


ot

We have, ij, a later chapter. rcvamnended ३ stricver and foun
fhestr- secuciny of eerend 4 peal under Ordap X11 Rule a
२1९) a cours: would, ye 12:00, aveid 196 neceesity of 3 gen
resort. la Jay drastic reacedy of g iutal sbouidon cf second cent
appesis, ref.

mM. The E २9:४७ Sagpoyk’d by de i gee Quesfwuynesre
‘that thers should ke only ome appeal in ofvil ९७6 fillowed
by 4 revision on the ground of taizee of justice pro-
~ynkedl congiderabls opposition.

The High (00070 5 powers in revision wader sclion 13 Adolitiva

ef the Civ Procedure Cinde are, urke thee in scolion 445 7५6 cealrae
OL lke Criminal Proredwrr Gide, strictly lirmted to casa at
erroneul: aseumadine of adn-amxciaption ए jurisdict-an al
of iicew iy of material irregularity {sche exercise of juris-
diclua by she Courts below. ‘Ih proposal for cutting out
moore appeals allogetber, deavive (1६ aan एज to
qoova ike Hish Cor i» revision, woule imararligabic
without ग्रा।41 8-05 the seope of the movisucal jurisdiction.
10 8४:३1 be moeayeleeé chat imipurtang questions of lay srneé-
tines de arise even 4. cases outxide the limit, ul ४९०४९०
116 ap which che highest Fibunsl in tke State may be
reauiped to ptomzunce judgrieat snd give gitchoritutive
guidance. To enlarge chr scop: of section 119 would be
laslirwuas to gubstilullng onc clogs gl opocpedings sor
anazhe-, 408 wl] 7.0: takes ny ay uepror the sclutlen 9° Lhe
problem ct curta:lug too many hearings of ‘he sare
amater

2.. Nevertheless, we compar wilh Lhe wew exprasied by: Lew value
the Bankin Cemmince cht 7: 26 pogsitic to gwe Bnalily Lo ooo,
casas cf amull aml “atermediate' weluation by providing |

“tiny “one Rood wppeal' gn fact and law. Tae Comunittees
Tightly painted ovt tow! lim great volume of litigation iti
India was of 1 weoracter gad value whick required “i rial
and 30% ६०03 appeil" buch on fact and jaw and that any
otner vlabopace prowess wax uncecessary. This view,
which was eaprseeed wore than whbebe years amu, 19103
(good evry today, a2 wlll be reveuled by | reverence to x few

४९५ of th uation of second epee ie fled in svse pt
the High Courts in 19%. in West . wb of 7a
-sroncid appeals instituied (0. 1956. To? were uv value beiow
Rs. 1,000, 154 were of a vile: between As, LOG and
Re 20M. and nrdy 19 Udsppea did the veliye cerend
fix 2400. In Bihar, iv che same year, 1034 acid sppeets
ont of a vote) fitag of 149) worn valted pelow He. 140,

923 Sesween Rs. TAM! and Be. 2000 and only 220 appeals
excreded Hs. 2.000 in value. In Madras, 1398 second appeals
were tilsd in tut Fear out गए whieh 108 were below
Res. (fh in votur aad -39 were of a undue between Re ५,000
and Rs. 2,0 ln Bohay, only 160 such appaals were of
a valse shov> Ks, 2.000, sore between Hs. 11M and
Ra. 2.000 in valve qwoile 1६ <छ se-naini nF MA, the value was
bob, Re 1.000. Examinatioe vf pina figures for the



Punjad, UP., Andhra Fruisd, Rajasthan ard utler States
1२803 २७ tue ance rowed nameiy ४ था. a very large
Tasjurily a2 sevuod sale, Ue vittus oF tac * anbjecz
mi.lter 75 1८६६ than Rs. Frid Most of shear 513€315 cre fled.
mrerely ax 4 pecula The apvellant’s rai uljcct ir
Debwyue such appe eerily to THRE

LL है ow than anythirg else
'८ postpone she evil day of the tion 02 the decrer.
Wiewed again: . the backarcund of the
anujecl 1198-07 ज्ञा् the aceh rate al f y

१६ 31 the Sigh Courts, ex ayymars arom tae Spies
tha later chiples, low propceal to e:ve Anality to
shige 60 Lie decisuin al the first sypetiste
hag Tach to commend ite

arguments which
Elapesai 18 raise dhe jazi
and sLkoniinale Courts ané to
gpocilvie rife dechsium: i
ley ig 4.0: ag Qwapele:

Ley Proposal
€07n setucd appeats ma be consideved. Tt wes -
a ue nf ® euit for the purpose of Court fee or
ig Do test cl it3 imiperlanre ang that geome
AL: ज़ा-चाँड wf law arise even in cages cf deg +

og larity from
sicd interesss, = The
Tt lhe distric: oTicers are eemicc#
loth with an cye to the number rather | 967 te the gualiey
of dismal as lasisted Leon by same of the Sigk Courts,
the trying conditions Under whi; ey wertk, inglud'nz the
‘tin che maatzer af houses aad L.btaries
cticiency. There his
मा 99 goubl sane delnrargtict in the cuality करें che
kergoane:, Navectloiies, by and laize tie dist eppellate
rndges whe ar Tie” expPeriewerd whenca cat, in uly
ion. pe lepended up 10 detul+ uoestiens both ef Aack
wilh yessonable sauligfustion. We have ats stace
euimvhese which ekould byIn to reise
ewig) officers. Fr
Ine cll nicnsy of & judicial
fficerc, uf the Bar
00 jadeslrp waick It bri to mar upop
thin and prmencation of Wt case,

Reen now in cases “ried oy the Cows af Small Causes,
the Jurisdiction af whirk, [0 gevevel Stuer rxre|cs Re. 1.00
trove ig ao rlehl of even a first apes! although fu-partaat

gestion: F linw do xotelin:: . The
Twre thay, 30 per cent of che decieiu of the diztrler

appellate courls ara confirmed ia secoed ppneal. 83 appeucs

froma fhe lignes it a luter chapter, ig i our opizion, =



at

Jent rebitalua of the chazze of incompeteace 2:
5 by the 01
otis 1:७९ oe

25. (ur frst reganvnemdation fs tact the “bait et 2००७७:०१-
Rez. 1,000 :

shesad +x Pein it: 2IKHS छाडणे। tet
dood by La Cows Azreare Committes in [949 and >
the Truce, . The limit

in section 192 wrier ye x 1966 wis 4 Rs. Bid ७ :

1८ te. 10 sha year by the © Procedur= Code
dAmencmetty Ant of 196, 1३ ix taleresdog ty 26116 10
chic connection that the propesisl 10 prohibit seenud apyeale
im suitz all (3६३६ nature upto che value of Rs. 1500

goers hee) “cen अना ७01 of tae prezené century.
Th 1x24, 1: 2 ite Coromittoc recoromiended ah
amending: im: i Ly imeveesing che limit tr

Fs. 1,000. Todss. the vehue af Rs, TIM ies ताक 7 lees thea
that on की or ever: -0 1925 and se, therefern, have ne
hesitation. int ren omen ny the raising cf the limit under
section 192 (७ Ps. 2,000,

24 Weare Coelho” view 318: this restriction na atccod
fic: in su tluw Ke. 3,000 should be epreasin
u evizable smoendmant ef scclina 203, to el gitar
involviag rizhts over or in rezpect. of Prostang,
kamova'sle proserty end nek he cetriadad la wtus of Sune rele -
all wre 58. sin
srl 191६७ hacce, 28 58

propery. _.
ta anamoenelmoent af ४॥४१.२४: gan
: sx i Kersla. By Travancore. ircedmeat
Wo of 1051. the scllawing clause was added & “१०
८० I. ile cppltcatton to that Stace:

Vindiay of she lower sypellate Cuurt on
at iset matorial to the Tig'a7 dosixinn of
fh the find

36. The zmeadmen: permits a secord agpesl ever on pi,gr_
enoslion: of Gigt ad "08४४७ ecerges tke oi Te [1 Gle euch stored.
appects. A vier that quescions of 1९: should be pormit-
ted tc ke in grcund appeal, where the judgment of
she 4750 apprllwe Court is one of reversal on facts. was
alse prey 3श३भा ia 09 some embers af the Bi: ‘This
view which kes keen accopted in’ Kerets tans counter to
the well accepted prme:ple broadly laid down In the Chil
Procedure Code and accepted for a Jong time “hes send



- Levers
Tetcot
‘Appash.

“The preseqs
1 ponte.

Toant
Sbolitian
Sudkee
ole Ou
appedjate
side
ad,

#78

uppeads altould ke only questions of luw, The ae
unee of this wpe mary wi ४4 028७५ dy wipes tL
appellare judges to wvaid 33 far 38 poesible recording a
finding of reversal qm facts 80 aa to avold a sezuriny by The
High Court in arcan Spel ॥ will 3.6७ vezult ॥ an
ingrevice ia Use naber of appeals brought heforc Loe High
Courts whict ure already carrying 3 heavier 1980 of arreiurs.
We ave, therefore, unable to approve ef the chance brovgh t
iret by the Kera.a smendment or the prinvizle under-
‘ing it.

27, The compladas that the prescelt vw yackes for mulsi-
piieity co appiats ckertvea great force from the pravlaiona
fnr wapecks under thy Letters Patent of the Sigh Courts
There is congiderubig varietios in the aly on nxeredsed fo
civil appeale by a 77: मा silting an: on the a ree
aide of che Sigh २:४०४९, Bo far se firs appouls from Pea
in original suits of eubordines Courts sre coneected, there
arc very jew uxt in which much appeals are heard 04
firaliy decided ty » angle judge. 12 ‘he Hich Co o
Bombay ane Patru, a, xingle judge ie eropewered Lo hear
jind appeals ante Rs. 10,001 and in Madres, upto Re. 7,000.
in Madess av रा, these praw's an Le exercised anly
wilh respec: to appeuks fed betcre che appellate jurtadk-
tion of dislri¢l. judgae pas rained to Ba. 10,000, Tn the: athe
High Ce4i78, 3 single judge cannot bear firyt appeals egcept
10०७६ egainsl ceztzin ordera under che Civd Procedure
(०45 facluding orders ia exeestion.

Turting now to second Is, int die: High ard
Madtas, Ssmbsy. % जप Pax ‘wma and Andhra Sat ७३0.
a fudge aitting singly iv empowered to beer and ply
dis) cll secord appex3. In Wert Hes.gal. Aces and
Orizes, sitgl: juége's powers ta hear second appeals are
limited 56 cases पा ty: value of 20५ rare than Rs, 3,000.
Frotn surh qecisione, ay appeal lies ynder Jae Latéers
Betert and this cunteibutes 1,४७ to delap in the dispogal
of canes cf smell vebae-

wa. Tt sei appear from the anteses Table {Table ६)
veferritg ५८ ४६०8 of fe ah thet the average duration
uf these Letlirs Pacem: Ws varies trom 30) In 1,380
cays. ४६७७ into aceaucl that sewind appeas sake BOF:
thing from a year 09 five yisrs lor disposal, as Is evident
fron ‘lable 0, & Lolera Patent spool would remult in the
fual decision ul a westy case being delayed for iat least two
10 (1175८ years after the facts heve heen finally foun found by the
lower sppeliste court In sofas States 3 ort
aopeal ould sell In about $/000 day beng tukpo th th:
Tigh Cours over a matter vhigh was .ustituted beture 5
mumsil, or & Juninr Civil Tue We, therefore, regem-
mend the total sbulifia af Letters Patent Appeals
the ॥ male: uy a angle Jmdge in sppegl on हर CEA fm
bide of High Court,


Compararive

of Letters Patent or

Figh Cours of v

amy: af ths Store

Anata

Aamo (eeslling “he “Wr.
Arm) .
Bihar -

Hydoubat

Many Atadeat ‘
Maja

RMyacre * +

Ori बन

Donia :

52111] .

caceshire .- - .
“Srey Chin

ror Pides *५ -

‘West Genre) न ‘

‘Taree F

Yeer

प्प्रड्व
tots

हे

1934
cand
“us
te

+ (353
954
TRS.
Cert

- (54a55
1955-54
ToS4

1S
49095
1954
1935
2554
1955

गण्ठनब्उव
“954-55

Tabie sbwuing the cverage duration in days
Special Appems tivpumed of by che
‘out States,

Anon:

cunmice Keni

iv kass

3 4

Net A Lee “ot cays of
सा  avtage — lucarien.
Nee due 1 Me ७६ Toy
evailuble, keg ezcagoms wh

Nerv sav फरार ३७ 3 Cowes

meadidl cn of 5 cot vf 9
20290"9.. Cats.
Nor
verileble.
Not B Les 5४ ams of
arrilaok. eegape Gureaicn aoe
OO  ७ए see
pasy vecetians obich
imcmai in 3
Cares git af 4 91
mf 4 Comes.
r3kT-0
mow
nye
err
Hut
uvwy>ke.
Net
avalible.
sito
agG-a
aoe
Wac
wad.
Nut
aroLakis.
Not
cralurie.



Tanita G

Cuceparacign 4
oF Mewedt Appeal frowns decrees 2
Courts ef varicta State.

Wa showirg the everage duratinn es dope.
‘sqyeccal af Sy the ipa

he है. Veo

Aadhra . - . . agg aazavciritke २५ Les yr costs rf

. अषएमूफ़ ira

4025 Aue एए ६८. UE Ht

ee * 208 a | pecukinis

Jett ws EES

ss ०५ TOS 70079 id nha of 2159
14 Casta

avaialie
Agnes
S00

Maas . न . -

Nigar soe

“Vratens

1:19 dele * . - 4
2055
we Be at 9 OSE
176९



aL

४४. Yeu: Civil ॥फ (४० Qoeimiilee strogly ecélicised bbe Mics at
aywlern uf Lelters Patent Appeals under which thie High है सिशान
<ourt was obligeé to entetta.n an appeal twice. Is ६31७७ (ienoitten
that .6 its apinier “she Lemeze Patent Appsal, that is the
7 t to 8 Esurth tearing, is in un Gegree snort of cksucdily,

24 is fic AAnartae whatewer that a Lo
will be half 33 Euportant, froin any point ef view.
meney decree in i: Small Ceuss suit; and mo 8४1
Unt the jude woe decided tae second ape
Teme careless, 3001:&0०५ ur en eetrie Hun ne
ing Small Cause Courl pewers” In the Cen-riilie
apiiem:, Wis sysiem ws “so indefensible whether stem
the point of view ef expedition er ct ones in the State er
af wes! ५५1 ५
410%७0702 7

thids were 52 2€2:€3 by
shes ए५:७9॥- 85 tie gelling rid 07 Lestece Patent Ap:eale
Shorr a derrae in sacend appeal. ‘he 0५.1 wea ta try down
a that no cecend appa! id ke arard cave by a
eed th da 1251 the &३०४७। appro

iy the juéee hesr:uy thy word appeal
uid ocrbfe thes the case wis ui suck ilies or impert-
aner that a further appeal sheaald be allowed

ah secur] ructbod waz adusled ty amondnig clauge Action
15 of the Latter: Sisterl of the Celeuti. Madea 3:01 Bor canes
“ony High: Courts ind the cortespoudiug slain ni the Letzers
+ Allshased and 17:11: Tigh Courts by exetucd-
(oul Leter: Paleot Appeal from & judul
ogsaeé by a sitgh: judge ia acvond appeal sacep> apcn 8
certlicale by thet Judze thay 1) a fit one for
upper,

2 jay that even ।नांड rigat Cee tor
-of eppeal should je abolished :. al there should be no ५४० ५७४५०.
Jaters Pacat Appesl~ irom coccsions of ५ single jadg>
poellilr side, Taere seeroa little ‘gstifestion Lor
divs In cages 0- 3७91] wa.in, & sctics of appauls rem
wh'eh spring all 1:५5 evi comsequeucee ol ५५३५ in the dis-
spose. cf wusen. 1 is nin हा =p ६105 to sa5r that | 10890
who has 1061 will वादा be ssthshed with the dovisicns of ४1७
tuuraber nf Courts 30 Lang at thes: mists a right te epacal
doa higher srbunal,
33. "५६ argurocnt of those wie adyzerte the zetartlen Case) fer
nf ihe presart sysem gan be summarieed uc hi: fyllowrire reitueiva,
side 47 the WP. Swilie!a? Reforms Commits:
“Sometimes iraportent yursdohe of law ave Lovnly-
ed and lew has ta hr ते dowm for the guidance hr
subardiai:te courts 889 ard il ix, Uberefore, troop y
that. tre srovision 16 Letters Pater! App
remean.”*

+ Pe 2६3: [७७३ ०, 'ओ गा
atc; pew २.
ARcpoct. 7. 6



Atowared,

Impretert
quéytinas
mb
wtfered,
ty a
Birsk

a

No sonpe
for te
dutina,

pet iu the novfon that a eingle
ju ९३७00७6 salistartot digpexe of an spposl tryolying
& yuecticn of lav, > judges ine.a-lng :: dstingutabed
Coivf Justine and sc. sagertenced lawyers fec!, fret, that
vase: i: the Hig. Court <biuld ‘or के. a far as pocelble
ov ६ 4०४७-०८ benck af ५७७ Judges nslopd af & cirge jadge,
teveuse when bas adinds arg set co work or ilu 38008
mattar, tae peesib lity of a semen! acid salancsé view being
+5. ard, sinad'y. 1 Betwh of 39>
2४ grease’ weight than a fudge sting
3 view has imcpusiedly great farce, His ax
id by the Civ'l Justice Commitee: iL bs able to shut.
the 3८९ that not only soust a large nun:ber of
cals be heard before the snemle judge. bul that
jae must continge Mile at powet dea, of work
i anex and not les dimi-
0 १4-८०५ with Lis incressod
he High Courss and nour egeeater toed ९७
coassryve judge pevrsr,

The argement he:

oder the cufes nf elt tks Hig): Courts, it
Ky tekes the view thet e case heforn
que whien should be kewl by a Divdafon Bench,
le ७३०९ 15: yensyaily dicecied by the Chef Juslice Wy be
‘oeird by 4 Beach. This may be done by she single ४४४५६
eitlwr in che exercise af his ows: discreion ७८ op :
Avie of the appellam o che respondent, if toe ity

ot Las rfifiemly ul the case ustifica auch 6 soursr, Retwith~
standing its lew valagiion. Notmal y, Ube single pidge will
not refuse zuch eu coplication, of he. ix sslisden shst the
cure “9 of sofficien! impcriaace te ke dealt with by two
judge: Thus, casee at diticaity or mopertaner 580, mot
witestamiag whe shalitivn of Leters Pacent Appeals, still
be L2ant by a Benen of २७०0 judges. 1

JA. Seetton 14 ahd, (der KIM, Kala 1 of tho

of Civ! Procedure vontaic a list af the. Gedera a
ers appeslable. We have consi ina some suggestions
tous 10 Lue comicsion of 97600 af the iteme From this
aprealable Orders. Ts Bimbay, clause ow of Ord,
Zule L lisa been delated By a rae of the High Court so

sder udder Order ee te 4{2) yrantih; i 31171:

1५2: iz ide ही) in 5
Similarly, iterns (22: 1] end (5) ih (0:७४ ४1.:1[ baver
ooultted in Allalabag bf as autybument of the Code. He.
inye canefally examined ‘the list of Memsz in section 104 and.
Carder हा 21, Rele 1, we eto whogl: to rereramena the
ovnission of any of the items in it. Sectinn 144 (2) provides
foxy cnly onc ajoeal in Thewe 282७४ 890 a aeccnd appeal is.
belie. Bt atpecrs to ug to be coneeessury to curtel the
rigd:t uf apps. ageinst auch orders ary further.

'epart. 9. 3


308

At tes stege, we miph> cnmeider ek prapoxl for Dutia
serene ing 1: ra wer appetite Cours be Ronavitutig 17107
district spacilun जअाभ7€३ ond provdding that apeels al te 4

५ lstel shesid be heard by a Hench of tac judms 1३८
with nn further sight . ॥ 1३५४९ ef ५ dea- leah
Sazeement orlw: ld be referrind
४७ she Higa ©

The sroposal “¢ २
pa. forwa

uv ilite austvict appe:lat> snavhes
end grmsici 2rorn tus to Grac.
193 proposed Beryl oat was not
. ६ ०0 फि.एडे meuclually worked 7 ५५
trun whe eightics of the lax! cent
ik was found ime
rimmaded the ९८:४६.
a the Stat>
|, red 2210
ng lu the 91]7०७थ werci—

(2) tit 5 will ke Uners:pomies

qi) that isturked the origit
ad the gapnclcneat of extra Judges

that trom che pain; of view af ६ Maw’ decisloa: 00
ce. weald

SVATNTENS ६७
Tie saain

05:०3 tavoly-

the propogel waa ast put cute
ne, 7. 1947, lbs quesilen of the coustioition af
6 WIS Fully considered. by lhe: Aen Sour. of
rhile poling out the various dittcultics Jikely
इक arise; tn ths working ८. ६७९ preposal, it ६९६३-६४ ta heve
supported '< manly on the goataid lawl, iu 15 ppinien, reo
Judges weve wore lileely ye reach a comert decision ir i;
saaé kan 3 ud) Tye idee was. however, not pus
1-0 praclier in iter Prad Rentaly, the idea was
asin put forward at the t of the eme: ents othe
(कपड़ों ang Cavll 2०10॥018 Codes in 1965 aud 14, bat
did net mest wilh acecptanpe.

Tn the opinion elicited by us, the Ides has recsived ver:
ttle expoort. The fundamental nection underlying the ‘dea.
that apseals at th: distries Tevet would be -cove eatus-
ly disoesed of by 3 begeh of tut: fucyrs that onder
scot eystnem ‘We da nel agree Rh thin yicwr तक
micr and Tepted oficers arid there
ty ४1२ net canable of

sail nut,
better results, a Woe: OF th:

eraposst wil. also involve she ¢ost sf sddizonsl Fudges.
Tt will 2lso invelve wractice] 4:fleultieg is the
of the berm: in different ¢etteos, ff such
aches ste to 09 tae dnzi Covrts of appeal on ६



uid

ww. we 1.0७ 19 Jace 190 cantingeney ul ben lists af opininn

The Judges consti.cting the Besea 1917
i ar appeal tu lie atet Court wil
ile, sod aflar paving giver car best consics

tin to it, we st> not prevarad te: 1४ ured the 0७॥७६८-
tution of apyeilate Lenchas at the

37. Ont conclusions eco ke surimeyvised as Culkawes-

Tae appellate jurisdicl.un at Discrict Judge

stowl} imupeduscel; br saised a Ba. 10,000, Sieh

*aeislation ४1८७ ; Totrospective ullect and apply’
ils “tes prise th whe ligi-laté

tof Distries Judars *
od for che perpose of de:

we be sarug-
iWirys wilh, this ine:ease of

Es. 22,30" trum she $
aateicl (aurte LOW pe
cret Courts for

om iewre vf pardss 3 + alllcign.
trie री किए शो: a

id) For
aunth és

Ther nemkes
nsforved apne

Ci Vyoceriure
ar nen-aopeslabie

Imit te Rs. 2.300.

f€p Cven in Suis gel fg emall cause nature where
tke value ॥ bent Bs. 2,0७0, sad on right ig komove
able puiperly is invelved, there should ke 36 second
appa’.

iT) Lattera Patert Appeuls from the yudimenta of
a Single Sedge cxercising sup-alliste ja-isiedon 4hould
oe crbolished.

bis not desuatle ln certsh the exisling tight
in tee Case of appea lable a:ders

(2) [tis not porsible to intruduer the eye
“leopcrez” appu:i J in India

10) Tae constitution. ef Districl Appe‘late Benches
i net dezsrabic,

OCR



1B-CNTL APFFELLATE PROCEILRE

7. We shall now address ourselver lo the question of
cliste veutedyta ard sagged refaems ir ine procedure
ae ich shewcld, ॥# our view | rei fo 8 mers expediticas dis
dysul of 3६६०४ ४८९ lesget expense.
(है Lone.
of

2. Gulez the Lintation Act, thirty days 305 allcewe
Cor | ब्ला। uppesl to the dissect Coar’ i he Gabe
the decree or ovies oF the suborciaate 1३
and nineiy cays ior an appral 19 ॥|
defi. [nm ear Report on che indiar +. मु
vercommended the 30771: milora period
Hen oF thirty dags अं all civil appenils.

Under Parly I end ff of che Limifalioa act, tha
sppvllin. .2 extiled 0: the exclusina of the me 4:56 01517
for chtaminy cvpica of Lhe decrses and judgments cf the
Jower Court fr computing lhe perisd of Jimlcetion,
पुशक्षाखवी।, as arise in She Guse of app paly under cocoa: emacs
mente to which Parts 1: and (C of the (६९195 At Ga
nat ly, he nvectholess, he

७ 2 with his wemoreadum 2f ar

६) to file en wjwsad cn evel aages without
ropies af the doe Jodgmert of Ue: iower Court. In
our Hepert on r= |itnialion Act, we have secemmencest
that 1 १३-1४ ए snd GT of the Liraitation Act he rude appli-
catce ly proverdiags umder any enactoent. if 1 fist
recumnmendatiaan os ९७५20, the Meares janendment woule
he cedundant. Jn the swowble, we woubi suggest that
the clhee Kerh Courts should make se amerdmant भरते!
co the Madras etmetuiment in Order XL] Arle L.

३. वृष Gees where a Teemmemndam of 25729) is arenm- Oe
punied by 3 pation seeking condntsion af celay unde 8०0८०)»
gection 5 of the Lirr-titim Act, the Itigh Cruel ६ 100» im 3.
Lime. wae? to १8717 the appead schject to 001६0०078 ws be Linsituws

aibty being raised sl the cme af hesring, ‘a.

no vith resetvation. is meade i
om survives utd aa debayed upon
dapvesL This orectics was disapsTorr.
2sve:} in two cages 10 the 1-(४६ case, Bir “aweenne
Tenkirs delvering the judgment ६. the Judicial Comm<Ates
wught “i impress on the Caves im 138 the urgent
expediency of adopting 7%” a prucedure whieh wit) soeice
at (18 stage of adrciss:nn, the tal detarm’cetion (after due

Kembncon aa, kemasvand. 1 qe 4c: asd Seve 0
oc. "Thr Gullectarsf Betgruns, 77.8 # उपज joke

permit 2४ itr

इक, of Law -55.


Memare-
dum of
erpab.
ot
Copy
ace
Puy
21691... कै।-

dum of
tripe.

native (५ all purlicsb of auy queslipn ef limeation affecing
the compeccnce af the appeal’! Fallowing this advice,
the S4gh Courts ef Andhre Pradesh Bombay and Madras
buve rade appvopvlale amendments w che rule. We
retommend that similar amendiaents be made In their rules
by the olner High Cowrts, 80 ae te provide thil, if the
appellate Court thinks fit to condone the 00103 wouter ५७९ २०७0
9 01 the Lascitation Act, st should, before admitting the
appcal, give notice to tbe respordent ard bear bls oblec-
ticns. 3१ any. t che comdonation of the deJay in liling the
appeal

4. Unelsr Ouder KLE Rule 1, ४५ appea? hes to be preferred
by presenting # meragrandum of appeal which is © be
accompaied oy a copy oF Uye deciee appesled fom and
the appellate Gourt dispenses wilh il also ८ copy
0817-०1 5८% which the decree ia founded; balh these
sirg¢mnnis uf very Recessary, yet, occasionally, they vut
the vartics to ser exten expedge which !2 capable of eos 40011

४1 somet:mea kappens that a partition decree
be: of allotment papers and insistenep oo
the liling «cf ies of the allugment vapers 18 likely to put
the epvellant vo heavy expense in dbtainlng copies. The
Pataa High Court has previded in its rulra that. in ppeuls
Teun fina लाए an partition auite containing ellotihent
papers, the appellate [३7 गे है eer cepiss of the di ere
eentalalag o abe & partion of seid papers. This «
हु nbs a modifieation ef the general rule worthy of
toby ether High (९४:६७.

8७ memorandum of appeal should
dity ४ ¢opy af the jodyment i the lgwer
Court atse occasions extra expanse when (४७७ or three puits
or eppeals hare heen dispsscd of by 8 single j-sdzi (te
Buch cases, afchough she cecteep are differen:, the iudgthent
एच waigh they ace foukded is the same: yet, the appeftant

i

cf ALag mere Laan one certil copy of the same ju

Taus, in a vase in Madras, when ike roa decrees were pec

09% 8. common judgment, tho appelart bad to file

sopies cf the judem EM Tunning Into 08 pages of stamp
Phe Punjaa Court bas sel this नमन | ay

og in ils roles that when more cascs than 0:

Sisprieed af by & single judemgnt, the appellate Court goss.

Gispense with the necessity of filing more than nar

of the Judgment of the Count below, We recommens.

a s.nilur provision be made by the other High Coarts. :

6& A 4९३६: which mincerns the contents of a memdran
dun: of appext may be. ce‘errey bo at this stage. Mere ugk
the mometandum is required to cel ferth the grounds of
pbjection to the decree af the Court below, notwitheLamiing
the nrovision ir Grder XLI Rute $5 that an 2pocllate decree

shail contain o eles ificalem of the relief ted, th
(| ६८७४ al nT iB TC! 3 हाट) छि

दर areforred ग़णर than के apecal is put 720 the Sethant

MLR 4 Mathie 413 मे 417.


bd

sppellsrt is nowhere required to state thy retet which he
geeks in his memorungucm of wppeal. ‘Phin le 10 contrast
Siam te provicior. in Order Vit Role, 7 welch reapins a

t te aperizi cally state 2 rel wed. it 3, eon
times, 8 matter of difficulty i 39 appeal te ४००७ procleeiy
what sellef the app utsnk see] Ps harticubacly when the
appeal in ayainst of a part of aeorme = is wise गत
tw the respondent that be should he made aware of the
omer which the sppellant geeks from ihe appellate Court.
In Exewlead, lobiiwing the vecommeniatlans of the Byer
shed Commitiec, it is now provided in Order 17117 Rule 9
of the Rules of thw Suprame Cougt that a oitice of 399९७:
shall state “the previse Form ef the ॥ए०७ए which the
oncaee to ask the Coprt of Am al to make".
1 gtdevg of the Madhya Svedeeh High Conet
2 ९३७ appetat shoufd specify de: hd mericureti-
al the echicf savpht by him, du aur view,
Unler ALI Rule 1 requirre ta be amended 22 83 ic cast a
duty Gpon every ay pel lant to state in bis memorandum of
appeal the prece form of the under the appe‘Jane proposes
१0 wale the appeilate Comer! da malty

4. E she memoocendum of appeal ia in onder al is cot Acordes
rejecled o: ed by dx: Coun under Rule 8 ८९ Order oF Appotln
XL. the m appral is 1291 nf adeniss’an, The

weer ty adit or to dismise an eppeat 6 conferred by

ule 122 Order RL). The 39975 car im the fest
be posed far prelmingry heartogof the sppedJaxt’s nou
ut ja tsar गधा The 7७७ is act: liroted in ita apalication
to Second Apyeala. First Appeals to the distelct है “शा and
0.६ High Cmwt cun alse be posbed fot admission oder

+ Gmler KES Hule: 15.

में. 108 cevtuin Slates, Rke Maras foe irstaner. Firsk Scouting o€
App perle in the clstrit aonetiath Court are ecaichtaway WE
ited end mot.ce issued ta ch respondent. In Bommbsy, say: by
Maribya Pradesh and gem: cther Stites, 60 tre other auind, Site
enpeais from decreas in simple auita 100 money or avables Geert
ate general evl dewn Eor adtniasioy wad tution '> thu: ree
pondent 15, Dot isamed uedl the appellant'a 000 रश ix heard.
Loaippéurs thet this pratticc hus led in ihe States of Bomaay
ard Madty. Pradash 20 8 cuniber of triveleus appeals being
-ryiccced summarily. It bs, therefpre, necessary that Order
हाय Role 11 ehoulé be upolied te 1:5४ appeils fled iz, the
dcslzieL Cuarts, “Ehis will neve the cfect of seeding our
trpesis which. co the face of them, are frivolous asd dave
wen brevet merely tor the purtaxe of delay. We receur
metul the j.deslian of the practiqy fo lowed in Bembkay and
Mudhya Pradesh aid 3000९ other States.

¥. That question, whesher a district appclate Conzt, Dirtte
dismissing am azpeal summacily onder Order XuI Rule 11, Gate
is bound to write & शिया under Rule ॥1 of Creer SUT ता
hae occasionsd 8 difference of cpinior botwren the High |ofiphect-


Adznis:io7
41 Secon=
Apprak,

Courts. The Patna High Caart hus ४२०: that the writing
nf such ६ ‘udpmenl 8 oot necessary, In ne opanlon of
Mullu2 iu che absence of Hivh (०६७४ Rules and rlroulars

thrt view js correct. The Banbay High
Cours at, Cikected thes when a subpriinule
appellul:: Cour dismissts an appes: under Order XLL Bure
11 nf tie Cade o2 Civil] Procodace, a briet stutement of the.
srourds chiuid he reearded and a formal deercs drawn
ap. As tow [mings of the firsl appellate Coprl ००
ql ns of fact at dtal and as it is necessary for the

६ हूंत

Andings, ir cu- view. a रा क120210४७॥ caould ke J
oy all exbordinate adpellex Courls when 4
apgeuts under Order XI-J, Rule 18.

10. A vary Wide sonpec fur be proper usc oF Cnter XL1
Ruts ib 1७ the edmissian of sscoud appeals sy lhe
Hix Court. ‘Te rule Las been ¢ "¢ ch Stable the
Const te di amiss -mtvad oops lz jn al dretsions beso
98 fndngs cf fact, whlete do mot disclew 4 paint of lw
suck ax 33 requirsd ky sevtion 10 The nile
to Lin Cour: to digrriss sn appeal ig Etatee wichouk oclice
deat eer hearing the appellaave pleader
% faz Lhe record, E mecesury. 11 sich cases,

An osaiivacion of the figures, however, shows thir. Lhe
foal purpes: of the ६५:९६ baa 007. in piuctlee, esi sacved.
A very lerege memos second appesla idrcitted by the
Souris ace dismissed afle: u ful bearing aqd the
cesistizls thal, if Use provisiucs of Order
ad been properly warked, sud lke Courts
il Laat iniial stage to aux whelnes (46

at sectinn LD) arexe  satisHed large
perceatage of fro apprvis which are finally ds-cicaed after
énnsiclerani: expense 258 deen incarred hy Lhe fitigant and

जगह: delaying Lhe 172 riisgaumal of the / moveat ngs Tor a
Jeng (076, would wc have been adritted. The Table
bel menber of jastitutins, the summary dis-
६ for default. dispose] afver a Fill mruring
22 the decreee confirma i these

SMakim Salut y. X20) Measod 389७७, 13 Fane $4).
3B.



ar diel
arse act

Coingaranin Table shaming Bs numero! Shum Appa upyous deers ncteculed tee atspured of seem
ether n@a perenne of deere confiranod and 7087-0४ २० the तक meanber of 2:4० ०२क्वनर «० आधा
Suaees कि eho yout yd

Cand after fuit dean oe
और पेद्ध सत्र tte 16% Cavers of aa wort He

Sicunarly Dimicet Vezced — Pecsamigy Pera viaye
Jnsclenmed clemenad, fer wiley ft muerte cf Reme-ta
Name of the Some ideale fei emf! reverses
Hear Inp
Amlbrt . . . डर cy Mil Bird हम ret Takis tee, Doc
aun ४ eh Mer
. . . . ccr 2 2 4०८ 3२2'७७ ww ४०४४

. सब 9 ; or arr oom
Baur : . . . 30884. ht Bld 30 10 74777. oppesls,
Prenbas soe 7:375 Rak L se &'56 ज२ 59
@edbye Prec . cre 221 Odd one 154०
diem: : हि egret 7 Ni 1.69 फा०० To

cee
[०६ soe ६88 332 cS 395 sae a4
मन] eee as8 Sz MIL cr) 38°00 299
Punpe soon «+ ale ve ‘sil fas farsa 4.5
Suqasiten : . का 93 150 ar ta Wen
TretuctseLackin : कर m0 a sey 6346 मेहता
‘Vee Prac . - [2.279 2२ . 0.95 जप धर वर्क
Wen weal - * 170 at 2 Leas 66-0५ ane



3820

(कम जतए० 11, Tae -igures हएएच in पड prwedirg Takle, shewing

1० मन che very जाल] percentuge: of eppeals :७ which the 0९-:७९४

rik, appzaled frurn aro teversed, isdoditshly establisy shat
Rule 18 ७. ५1177 KLI, as 11 1¢ being applied, tails bo serve
Ite pursces of aflurding adequate protectian to phe
tespnncent,

॥1 L0G 0८ the Coce of Civil Procedure x के out the
cuadilions under which only a Second Aporal
vm 201 apecifesliy provides that uo Second
Appral आधा! lie exeopt of the graundg mentioned in
sezticn 10.

aving vegard ‘a the ita of १९७९-०० 100, appeal

ke admitted :narely because the बा: Isnt baa
+8? arguable or a prime facie valk? puiat n= law
de appeal. The Court has, further, tn be cetlafied
io of the ‘ower appellate Court on a point af
law ix grroneous, आए that it +3 necesasry, in order to do
justte between th: eppallan: and [05 rexpondent, that a

3'& should he given 1७ hoch the parties.

In practice, however, widely divergent views prevail
in regard to the precise datctious of the Colirt in gerutinis-
ing appeuls ‘er admission. Sere >1:7र ६९५ require only “an
atguable point of lew" yhile cthers ing:st upon “a prime
facie good point of few"; but the correctness or
af the lowe: Court's ‘imding nn the sheged 12%: 4F law 19
rarely lseke:l Into, as it should be, at the: actmission akage.
Nol ly. 63 3000 a8 the appellant’s advopate Mes
tuade out weal is eller “gn arguable poin( of law”, or “a
print facie good prt of 1६७", din Juda: shows am Incl
nabnn te seenit appeal «itheu> surther setpkiny in
order, ax li is smmc.imns steted, ta give the ellant
another chincz, This 28 obsJuusly wind. Tne
tration oy she appellun:’s counsel that = point joa
beea duridsi god shat there iz an argument
that point would be uiwinusly itrclewznt. 28 the 3;
resetod 0५ १1:७५ polit ik corres. When Le Judgcs
the appellant being given another chance, they forge: the
gliyint af the respondent wha bax toon subjected to the
trouble and expense of fighling q litigation ln twe Courts
and iz being a‘iempted to be dracge:] ion lar appellemt into
a Uird Fignt.

dlomplrints 13, Notwite standing dhe small percentage 02 stenmery
ort War. somizcale in Second Arpeals which, langley, ar bana of
decizcuss bxvent nm Andings of fast and de not vee
Point of law. .¢ was gurpriziny how quite छ com bs (न रीय
sention of the Bar atemed te complrin that the Courts were
oo strles ia the adgissinn of moond appeals. ‘Thryineamed
to preared on 11 view that it was inappropriate:fer the
Court at the rk ए+फेक Cheicr XLI, Rule i, fo etter

upon tke merits # the qosestions of law, if questions of
law did arise in ic appeal.


मरा

As slated already, this view ts erroneous, Wo have slay
dealt above with ihe rua scope of sectinng 100 and 10] of
the Code. In this cuntedilon. actention muy be drawn to
the provision of Rute 18 of Order LX( wlich entitle: the
Court, even after uctec bias been eerved upor. the cespan
dent Co cisenise th sppeal without hearing the respondent

14. The extent ५० wiigh the duty of the Court 10 serwi- Cabrestion
rise appeals under Rule [1 of Order XL 03४ Leen neglected tr ७
ip shown by Hus Set teat in two High Courts, Anul:abad ४० cy
and Pama tho power (७ admit Becond Appeels hes berm Regier
doleyited to the Registrar of the Higt Court. In is open triable
to ain to decido whellur or not notice should issue to tae
respuddent. He refera the caxn to a judge only if ho ix
of the view that Ubete da qe substance iu the repeal. Cam
menting on this practice whieh Lhen oslaned in the Patna
High Court, the Civil fugtice Coramittoa observed: “This,
we cutsider, 13 5 judicial funetion wihrck should only
exerzised by u Hlgi: Court Judge or Bench. It is surpe
ing thst, in ypite of Lats criticimm witn whic we agree,
the practice should bave spread and bean adopted by the
High Courl of Allssabad 8:80, This comment alo spplies
to the practice prevailing fn the Madera High Court of
leaving the adroiasion of ¢ivil miscellaneous sppests to Lhe
Depusy Registrar.

15. Th mas, Indeed, been urged thal Use pracdce tends (15500
ta aave judicial Eme, imagauch a9 judges need not spend He ed
ay Los za Court in he apn arqursen's in gapealn ywhidk ५
om (विश face दै&#शाए७ to bs admitted But this saving of
Ume can be eoually weil effected by udupting the practice
obtaining :n some High Courta gf circulating the papers
raleting to a ssentd appeal to the [प्र adgte wtho fooks as them
auteide Court hours, Upon 8 of the mopecs the
judge wither asderz 70002 to inne to the respondent ar
seder3 the appoal lo sé posted for a preliminary hearing
ander Order XL, Rule 13,

We recoromernd the general mdoption od this practine
which has alzo been commenced by High Court Arrears
Commiltee. It results iq 4 uubstuutial saving of 1४910 47
dime end a.so res ibak the 7 aficial fumetion of aden
ting an sopeal is performed vy 3 trained judge and tit

A mioisterial efficer. It ia eeeassiry not that
scrutiny of appeals ni thie adsedealon stage ६ bo by #
judgr tral, is our view, “is this task aiould, aa far as possible.
be encrusted ६3 acnior experienced jadges. हे

24. We rasy suggest a Further course which may be 141 (एव
॥ 10७ +.1]1 cases in which an a is admitted atter ९९ sthte
+ Rule 11. "The High point of
हि ml Lig well specify i such eases the point or ae ioe at
of law wl arise fer dclermination in Re snpeal . Tt adenlesten.
ini tun even go further and order that the

JHep ote, PARE २२२, pao. 6.


Papes
aye
Fong
iemoran
dem of
ateoud
sepeel

[edowenrs
wien

appellant should he bescd only ८७ the point at points of
law stated ॥ए tae judge uulmitirg che appeal,

_ Ther: appears to be 4 ounflict of decisiuss nn the ques
Gen 88 to एज appeals, partcularly second appeal, et
be adroitted 0:11 certain grounds only, Eewever, this diffe
can be we. by an amendment of Lie Ina. Tn our
= Batkluy requirement, prevdiry ७७६ the juege
lor epneal 52015 atate the point or poime of law
Zea cucuadeciaion in the second appes!, will
ler and better serutuay st the surpe: of adroie

37. la: view of the more tigid seruliny at lhe admiszion

stage ich we ate penomme sing, it may be usefal te
brn ai been done by the H.gh Curls ¢f Calcutta,
M ४, Beto aay. Adakabad aod the: tlunjch, thal wbere a

sd copics of the judmwenta of
accompany the Memorandum
o2 Madre and Andhra Pradesh
१ dirogted Wheat if the appellant
ij rase, ir hie app any question ¢f Ju: caislege-
ton <( a dxtwnent, « (rug triaxiation of the document
S aevunpany the mermoraéum of avpeal The
i these rul2s will eng that al the hewring at
Hor stage, lke Higk Court has beferc it ab mate
cy fora proper seratiny of the app2al

ia. We have been informed that, xame‘imes, when a
High Coucl ciseuisses awa upaeal surmerily, fairky lang
juleront; velorr'ng Gs # umber of decided cases are
mietines 9:10 £3 Muby 3$ ten pees, Th
porate tudgment is altogether insppro-
ch summary dismisesla All 153६-48

second appea. 13 1.
both the Courls

1६% rdvocnsed by sa will go.
wt che saroission of appeals which, alles i: lapee

d after consigeruble expendilure to wll
lly dfumiseed. Tt may alsa happen
shat Liknti q. the arm’ssion stege of second
zppeals 1019 eet 23 9 deterrent againa the Gling of [rivelous
second aypeals.

19. It the sppeal is not demise &01॥:1107:119; lhe next
stuge is Che 15.98 ef notice to the respondent. pee
Frei vm at this atege. As hse heen stated by t

1 Conmrnitvee for the Slate nf Wrst Bengal:
onstynt gajournments have to ha given.......... for the
Alling of agdrsesea to which notices sheuld be xent and
tiaiane in gnver the gost of such nobices. Frequently
wdjourueies. after adjuurmoml is given cecely do enable
the acting afvneate te femish an sddroas or two and te
Nie a few yvupees as talaban

ter to 0700:
७. Peay

TRepor, page 12:


20. In our view, this diffcully car Ie easly met big demote
wprovicicng thal tae eguelfsmt shall in the memerandum of Pall te
appesl, stave the nedrevas Lop ०४४ wi Totes and uther ihe ed
proceedings both on himself snd the reepondent, Mnies of dew
Tizny «ef the diygh Courcs pruvice cor the parties hliag their sw
addresses in Cant for che parpyise af preeerdiows. We ace
recoramend-ng 10 another place shat both the plairtit? and
the: eetormdgeat xhcl: pe rmqutiecd te Mle thei wddreses in
eourt. Tat sppeliant ean, in memorardi uf appa,
slate Fhe addnse एव. knee nppiuen. as furtodsed या 1.8 Courk
below.

21. 18 ceae of varcick whe have not atupesce| in che Dixprnsiag
sCuurt 505७ sud whe have Dot Wed any oddyess fe serving, HCE ee

rovision mey be mide, cy hag seen e in cercan ॥ 21 दादा ip”

ourts. enypeweriag the Camarts ७ dispucse wth aerviee OC sea expat.
fuLiet of 0: peet cn the resrondens: wh2 howe: nal
in the 19छ/7* Conet by ut cendeent of Orde: LXI Th

22 As tezarcs deloys ueuiny ‘rom 10.6 pon-asymevt of Prteys ०
process fee, sre wend suceest the fraraivs of 11 # the Fe
Bigt Court requiring ‘he wemorandum. ६६ appeal to tt जाता,
acompuiced ot the recvisite process Fee; ber setvive of gum.
aoier ma the sewpordens This hss berm cune sy ther

5 to Ee
आय, he
ce. Be ofan oe
Such ecere As in the appellant being requé-cd to pay the 2
ipwieeal,

‘the seepondent, prov si20 1:0५ be nude enusllng |, '
(१७011, ir the evenl 0. Dom-payrcent by the apnelanl ed Peas
such proccss frea as requircil bo Aiseniae We appeal for want ;रए॥७ए०७२०..
at don at has beer. done oy some 76% Caurts. We
sagged, as we fave done im the cae of plaints
sat the mies shoold rzy
i wparied ov pruess 2:47: dudy filed fle by
ight be advlesble ५7 permit eeqvier of net by specie.
3 Deel 19 the Arst imstacne ps 7x 2 47: Aundhara cate Wy
Pradevy and Marat, where notices are ordinarily issued x gsceret

fro the monies 2edarn aaa

with: three days por.
19, UFrador the penerdare 1503 down in the Crde, 0७ Mepoodar

obitceen is jeid on th: rospomdyot after 4 notice ef appeal uppetrene,
in serve on tem te erter Sm appesrance or to take any .
-other atens to defend the appcel, unless he derdoee to preter

a memeracentr: af crass olijzetion: onder Rule 22 of Orrler

XLI He iz not bowhd te jntnrm, eifber wu: Court or the
appeliiat, of 1 i 10 centast the stipe) and can

om, forwcand on date af the beariag to suppor.

the judgme it 04 U Court and may do so even

ou geiunds decided ageing, him in that ९४४४.

We ere of the view that such 5 Bosilinn eatoursges
brescaumsibility of. the part of the respondent. Tf an epee)


Burcu of
uO
In be
arene)

Auahepas
tule,

Peepertiacn
of puper
Booka.

mm

i uwteilested ind is to be आए, eo parte. it may nt be
एछ८०९४$.५ किक at the appellant to che expense of prepyrimg
B popes or, in any esse, 4 large Bumbey oF copies
Uhereof, Further, the appent cah be dealt with expedi-
tiousky wilboul 15 oeing made to wait to take "(६ bur mt
the fegilar list. 7 in, therefuce. desirable whet ६ provision
should be made for enabling’ the Court to be informed at
an cally ataze whether the respondent tends ६७ रा
Lae appeal or onl. ‘This cou be avhiownd by the एधाएवा:कर्ण
of a 28 similar to thet Jousd 10 Order LXI-/A Rola 3 of
३७९ Civil Procedure Code 38 armcoded by the: 8६०४७ Sigh
(०००६ which prov.des thet = cespoaden’ intending wo uppear
and deferd the appeal bas to enter an appearance in the
appel. Coat) by 05.2 2 mensrandum Wo appearuice
withio & specitind pariod. Form ¥VI-A has seen Inserted 8
Appenily G@ of the (४४४ Prowedux: Code by the Madras
High Courl +e eilanre that p2qper lgsiee of Ute necessfy o2
enjerlup ar. appearence is given lo the respecwlent, Rule ६५
of Order XLI-A alco casts upon the respondent a duty to
Cazusb, in Lhe metmorsndum $f sppesrance, his address for
sarvicg, We would Tecotomidd the adoption of simiiat
rules by thy other High Courts.”

34 After the respxmndecte hep eoterad his फल the
nesi ६,४६६ wick arines For odtsiderstian ia ¢ cotathor
of the paper souks in tha tale The Alishabad High
Court tru: fumed a Ade orovi thar the iondents te
4 first appect vetued al leas than Re. 20 छए0 eho nave not
filed eroeshjecLons May, of eeelpte of + nobee ta enter
an appeszance. move fur the aumuiary detarroitation of the
appeal, withous eet eperation 51 a paper book ou the
ground thut the L ix 464७0 «ar vewatioys 06 that tt
ts capable of being Wisposed of or a prelirainary ae
The appiication of Wis nile wonkt reyull in Lhe oes
af certain appeals of the grouml of ‘imitation, want of
cunpelency nf Une appeal asd the [ikea without the delay
and ¢xpen‘a cesu‘tinyg from tao preparadon of paper books,
We have rot beer able to gather whether this rule hat
ween largely availed of and har served a asctul purpess.
We woudd Tw: it tu the cumiderzilen of 0४० High Courts
whesthe: such a mule eonid be wsefylly cide:

25. Az to tw propacntion pf paper backs, 0४७१ sd not
foul urdfor-uty io 81 है rules of she various Migh Gourts.
This quesdien ५४७५ lo ke: approached frora owe ts oF
vdaw: first the time taken an lorir preaaratiqnd thith,
nitecaly, euuaer de"ay in the dispasal of the sapped’, ant
second. she cost of its prepatalian. As thr: Glea of the High
Courts stend at present, the preputation 01 paper boar ae.
cut Rew the ०७030 vf delay 3. the dizpcsalof sppeals, Evan
if the printing of tha meord bas taken a year fr गए: ९, the
fest gppea? is not aot ear reacting a hearing, Ih fact,
one High Court hag di mycd printing the records of


ams

Sret appsals Jer the mitewlhst startling ceazom fab 34 fag Daley १४
nob space fer s.otiig pw pe books even in appedls which Papenaton-
are ready for bearing qubtlicn, lbevefore, of delays

which २७७४० 16 che proper itivg of these books in the course

of punting or niherwise nap socagind concern only aflor Oe

present avcnn:ulalid arrasts of (३ sppeales are well on

the way to being cleared

26. As lo the question of Lie costa ef ihe preparation of Priva
paper books, mat, High Courts have diapensed wilh Lrana- pvaabing,
latiun and prirtirg “8 cases below Rs, 20,000 az thay would
net 0 y be taken to ‘he Supreme Court. As the
printing एडं peper books in Government Presses has bea .
ucwa to csuss cansderable 0839, we think that in wt Heduction
CRaC!s ure not Itkeby lu be taken to she Supreme Court, १४ एपएफणड-
the printing ef Lae record should be rqduced to the mini-
coum, and wiavever printing 4६ wecessary, shovid be per-
mitled ta ‘se doric in private presses. In regard to. Shes
appeala, wit would cominent the practice followed in the
Bomb:xy High Court im the Dreger ration of paper books in.
appeals before tact Court. In that 88720, otly the memo-
randurm 02 appeal mand Lye i ॥ ज the dower Cont are
required (७ fe punted. ‘These are Ernerally printed छ: the
Guveepmaert printing rete: Thr evidence afd other pro-
carding? al’ typed rect ian disirict court and are sant La tha
High (0४८ in book form. After these honky are received,

3 combingd per kook कि prepared fn thi. Tigh Court which
comprises the proceedings of tire cage, the memorandum af

ea] or crass-obj ccsium, if any, the judgment of She 109७7

oer, che evidetue recerded im the ८६88 ytd the exhibits,
है any. Typing involves isa cost than privting and we Methods af
Hatt that the method followed in Bombay 13 leas expensive pale ad
and more expedilioug an aepomnt of the division of work dejays,
im the prepereticn of paper bouk between the di 13
Caurl and the High rl. Wa, therefore, atnlder ta is
methed suitable For gemeral adoption.

A Curthar 58४४:फ 20 costs and 019९ may bo hrougat about
it jude merle ate printnd locally under the supervising af
the subordinats C.urts. Hine 13 dine in Madras where
copies of gudgments aty printed locolly at 0 Boren
Ths practice may de ghnerally adopted. cis West ee,
the reapans‘bilily fur Preparing the papez back In 2ecend
appenl wml Zurnishing a cop went to the roppondent bs
2१8: on the appellact, Sack. a prective together with the
gran! ef 3 power ७१ 418 Cour to diamics the wppéal for non-
Brosecutiem in ८288 of default may ulus be adopted alse.
where.

One may gn further end recemend that judgments Credusing
aud the memorandum: जे apps) may, instead of being
printed. be cvidnetyled ar it will cost 094 thas pringmg.


mt

ne Bwersken ९०४९७ in Englutd hes recommended
at:
“Je Rules of tha Supreme Court would be
amuended x ts to render pranlaug 110 10:0७ pecmbisdee,
exvepl Ey leave in sgeciul circum ॥-४:७९४. १४
ड2८. ८: 27. A comewhal impertant questi affecting Lbe caste
mem cf oof paper buuks needs mesliok. Not inzreqaencly,  pursy
» oF porles iogist on smuecesery pars of the record Leing
included in th: uaper book sud the adsnuusrative oleer
ghia hid Supervirian ०४९९ ina 1 ralon bas ८७ ether couree
epen to him bat 2 permil Lew. to be printed, nomnticaet,
asking a resc-valu taat they were sn prenucted subject
to tl juemion of casts. At the Sumuwing, she question of
twale ducurres by the anesetsary incision 0: ९1: piarts
cf te cecond A: urarance of a party or rue partics ढक
sarcly consulscd, Tf tke appellate evucts made ila pusecdice
lo deal oil) this ques'ian Ww! sania oosls of the
Dand 100: cue 10 punta Lae party who hae iv set
inelugion cf theze yadevesary covacoent
award hius the cn to tint
ce ९८४5, ws costs unMeceszarily 1001फ-
hin by the lowdug pearly ued. perhaps,
ed <rom insisting an unaecemeuy patts
che gaper hoes.

जा ७०1९ 1३:७७ renuni
disallowed त भ
a है Toakingr hits Poy
ew. Cad wid not be
partes will be
14 the encora being included &

Appeal: 28. We miy acs! l:ra to the grepariion of paper bochs
rer Ka. warp ot th lue of liz. 2000) sod more, Which, by
८५७००. season of their mom, ६०७४ likely 4: ७० to te Supreme

Comt. Rule 2 ef Order KV
provicles thet whece the + we been p:usted for the
pac cee of thy any tw im Covet comwumed, aval a
eafficicn= nucuber nf cwpics n° 1.8 priated recond ae aval:
able ive purpose af [७६ Supeeroe Cover. nopesl, ne tresp
the ताप: shal be nermsaacy एड: for sui
srg an may br ceguiced. Under ids rule,
25 of paper bavks ia prepared
in Iw ep Ceact ard ia aysilable for We purpes ose of the
Susrerer Ccnet agpegl. such peper books oct vevil in
Lie S apres Courl. Sit when auch p-:nted caples are : |]
128५ or wLen additional prising is required. we under-
in whieh the Sup-erne Court rulep
oe ke dutte ards cengidorably ts thee
Is eppeers tha: minting of the vevord in
by the Supreme Courl costs aboyt
Bs. 12 ves pastes, Whercw according to te ‘High Ceuwt forron
Lae cesl would de nach fess.

29, We su. sect Unct the printing of paper hocks in these

Qe Suprecoe Court Hules

“PL oafi.an
point 2 nppsale shovld be 0:84१ए छ००:७ज-१०ण७ throug:out the country
im Eogloh. in Lhe: English languep:, subject te what how been mated के?

the chapter on ‘Language’ aad that the peper bapks vhuruld
ke printed ino uniform manucr so that they could he usd

Sioa! Kepogt of ene Committee on Sapeewte coum Praccke ed
pracedure, page Wa perk 76h .