LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED FORTIETH REPORT
ON

NEED TO AMEND ORDER V. RULE 19A OF THE CODE OF CIVIL
PROCEDURE, 1908, RELATING TO SERVICE OF SUMMONS BY
REGISTERED POST WITH A VIEW TO
FORECLOSE LIKELY INJUSTICE

1991


JUSTICE M. P. THAKKAR
Chairman

D.O. No, 1(7)/91-LC(LS)

Dear Minister,

Re 1 Presentation of 140th Report.

Tel. No. Off. 38 44 75

LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

SHASTRI BHAWAN

NEW DELHI-110001

April 19, 1991,

Forwarded herewith please find the 140th Report of the Law Com-

mission of India encaptioned;

“NEED TO AMEND ORDER V. RULE 19A OF THE CODE OF
CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908, RELATING TO SERVICE OF SUM-
MONS BY REGISTERED POST WITH A VIEW TO FORECLOSE

LIKELY INJUSTICE”

Dr. Subramaniam Swamy,
Minister of Law and Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhawan,

New Delhi.

Encl, 1 140th Report.

Yours sincerely,
&d/-

(M. ७, THAKKAR)


CONTENTS

Page
CHAPTER I Introductory : . . . . . . 1
CHAPTER If Pre-1976 Developments : . . . . . . 2
CHAPTER Uh The Amendment of 1976 . 4
CHAPTER 1५ Hardship Resulting from the Present Law. . . . 6
CHAPTER V Defendant Residing outside Jurisdiction + . . . 9
CHAPTER VI Recommendations : : न पु . . 10
Notes and References. . . . पु पु . . पु 12

«ili


CHAPTER J

INTRODUCTORY

1-1 Perspective-—The Law Commission of +
India has suo motu taken up the question of amend- '
ments needed in regard to the provisions concerning
service of summons by registered post on realising
that miscarriage of justice has been occasioned in

the working of concerned provision.

1-2. The Problem.—By way of a brief statement
of the problem, it may be mentioned that under
Order V. Rule 19A of the Code of Civil Procedure,
the court is required to issue a summons for service
by post, in addition to personal service. So far as
service by post is concerned, the summons is sent by
registered post acknowledgment due, and it is pro-
vided that once the acknowledgment purporting to
be signed by the defendant (or the agent) is received
by the court or the postal article containing the sum-
mons is received back by the court with endorsement
by the addressee of refusal to take delivery, the court
“shall declare” that the summons had been duly
served. Experience of the working of the law relat-
ing to service of summons by registered post em-
bodied in Order V, rule 19A of the Code of Civil
Procedure as it stands at present, has revealed a
number of instances where injustice has been
occasioned to a litigant in as much as the concerned
provision enjoins to the effect that if an article con-
taining the summons is received back with the endor-
sement “refused”, the court “shall” declare
that the summons had been duly served. No dis-
cretion is left in the Court as the provision makes it
mandatory to make such a declaration. A number
of instances discussed in Chapter IV hereafter have
come to light where an unscrupulous postman may
make such an endorsement for dishonest reasons or
a negligent postman might have tendered the article
to a wrong person ora person other than the
addressee, and he might have refused to accept the
article. In the result, an ex-parte decree would have
been passed against the addressee by reason of the
mandatory declaration that he has been duly served
and serious prejudice, at times irreparable,would
have been occasioned to him.

1-3. The Commission has, therefore, considered
it appropriate in order to promote the interest of
justice, to examine the question how the provision
should be refashioned, so as to foreclose the likely

injustice, and reduce the chances of confusion, with-
out affecting the smooth and quick disposal of court
work,

1-4 Present law as contained in Order V. Rule
19.4. Order V. Rule 19A(2) of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 reads as under; :—

“19-A, Simultaneous issue of summons for services
by post in addition to personal service—.(1)...

(2) When an acknowledgment purporting
to be signed by the defendant or his agent is re-
ceived by the Court or the postal article containing
the summons is received back by the court with an
endorsement purporting to have been made by a
postal employee to the effect that the defendant
or his agent had refused to take delivery of the
postal article containing the summons, when ten-
dered to him, the Court issuing the summons
shalt declare that the summons had been duly served
on the defendant:

Provided that where the summons was pro-
perly addressed, prepaid and duly sent by regis-
tered post, acknowledgment due, the declaration
referred to in this sub-rule shall be made not-
withstanding the fact that the acknowledgment
having been fost or mislaid, or for any other
reason, has not been received by the Court with-
in thirty days from the date of the issue of the
summons.”

(emphasis added)

1-5 Hazards involved in a mandatory  decla-
ration.—It is the mandatory declaration under Order
V. Rule 19A (2) which has created difficulties and
opened up the possibility of likely injustice by reason
of fraud practised with the help of a dishonest post-
man or on account of a lapse or mistake on the part
of an honest postman who might have tendered the
article to a wrong person as will be elaborated in
subsequent chapters.

1-6 Hence this report is targeted at — making
appropriate recommendations to overcome the prob-
lems arising in this backdrop and foreclose likely
injustice occasioned to unfortunate litigent as noticed
in the cases discussed in Chapter IV.


CHAPTER II

PRE-1976

2:1 Mode of service of summons under the
Code,—The scheme of the Code of Civil Procedure
as contained in Order V. Rule 9 (as originally
enacted), primarily contemplates personal service
of summons on the defendant. Rules 5 to 16 of that
Order mostly relate to personal service. Rule 17 pro-
vides that where the defendant refuses to receive
a summons, the serving officer shall affix a copy of
the summons on the outer door or some other cons-
picuous part of the house in which the defendant
ordinarily resides, carries on business or personally
works for gain. The serving officer shall then re-
turn the original summons to the court, with a report
of the circumstances under which service could not
be eflected in the proper way. Rule 19 provides for
acase where the summons is returned under the
provisions of Rule 17, The court, after perusing
the report of the serving officer and also. if necess-
ary, after examining the serving officer, is empowered
either to declare that the service was sufficient, or to
order fresh summons being issued out.

2:2 Service by registered post.—Service by re-
gistered post as a permissible mode of service of
summons came to be inserted initially by local amend-
ments in Order V of the Code. In 1956 (Order V
Rule 20A), such service was permitted by a Central
Act, which amended the Code. But it was not
made mandatory. Refusal to accept service by
registered post did not (even under the 1956 amend-
ment), lead to a mandatory declaration by the court,
of the service being sufficient. [t was in 1976 that
the law, while directing service of summons by re-
gistered post, along with the issue of summons for
personal service, also directed the court to declare
the service by registered post as sufficient service,
inter alia, where the “postal article” (ie. the en-
velope containing the summons), came back to the
court with an endorsement of refusal.

2-13. Madras amendment in Order V. Rule 9.—
As mentioned above 2/1, local amendments in some
States had made service by registered post a per-
missible mode of service. In Madras, for example,
in 1951, the High Court introduced rule 9(3) to pro-
vide for sending of the first summons by registered
post to the defendant. The sub-ru'e was as under;

“(3) Where the defendant resides in India,
whether within the jurisdiction of the court in

DEVELOPMENTS

which the suit is instituted or not, thé court may
direct the proper officer to caus¢ a summons
under this Order to be addréss¢d to the defendant
at the place where he ordinarily resides or carriés
on business or works for gain, and sent to him
by registered post prepaid for acknowléedgrnent,
an acknowledgment purporting to be signed by
the defendant shall be deemed to be sufficient
proof of service of such summons”.

2-4 Effect of refusal (Madras amendment).—
The eflect of a refusal to accept a summons sent by
registered post under the Madras amendment 2/2 was
considered in Madras case, Rule 9(3) of the Madras
amendment was at issue. The referring Judge, Mr.
Justice Ganapatia Pillai, was of the view that refusal
to accept service had the same effect as refusal of
such notice when tendered personally, One of thé
reasons which he put forth in support of his view was;
that if such a contention was not to be accepted,
then rule 9(3) (inserted by the Madras amendment)
would be rendered nugatory. However, the Division
Bench, to which the reference was made, did not
accept this approach.2/3 It held that refusal on thé
part of the defendant to accept postal service (under
the Madras amendment) could not be considered
as equivalent to due service, so as to enable the court
to pass an ex-parte decree on the stréngth thereof.
The Division Bench specifically referred to thé
possibility that an indifferent or dishonest postmatt
might return the registered letter as “refused”, with-
out going near the defendant and the court would
have no effective sanction or control over him.

255. Observations in a Madras case.—The matter
was considered at some lengih in the above Madras
case and the court laid down the correct position in
paragraph 7 of the judgment as undet.2/4 (Where
the court was concerned with the Madras amend-
ment).

“Service through registered post can be
taken as due service only when the party responds
to it or at least acknowledges receipt of the sum-
mons so served. There is sound reason behind
restricting the efficacy of postal service to a case
of acceptance of service alone, It cannot be
ruléd out as impossible that an indifferent or dis-
honést postman might, even without going near

¥.


the defendant return the registered letter as re-
fased. The court will then have no effective
sanction or control over him. For one thing, the
person who can complain against the failure of
the postman to deliver the letter being the de-
fendani himself and ex concessi he would not be
aware of the misconduct of the postman; there
will be no other person who will be interested
in complaining to the court, Secondiy , the Court
will have no effective supervision over the service
by the postman as it has over its own process ser-
vers. Undue dependerice on the efficacy of postal
service might even encourage fraud in the service
of process. The rule makes it obligatory that
there should be an attempt at personal service
before the procedure under R. 19 of O.V., C.P.C,
is adopted. If the defendant does not accept
service by post, the Court will have no alternative
but to send summons through its process servers.
This was the view taken by Panchapakesa Ayyar
J. in 1958-2 Mad LJ 143; (AIR 1958 Mad 522),
following the earlier decision of Rajamannar
C.J. in 1956-2 Mad LJ 86”.

2-6 Amendment in Karnataka.-in the State of
Karnataka, the amendment was in the shape of a
proviso added to Order V. Rule 10, CPC. Rule 10
provides that service of the summons shall be made
by delivering or tendering a copy thereof, with an
endorsement duly signed etc. by the Judge.

Karnataka amendmen (effected in 1967) 2/5
added the following proviso to Rule 10—

“Provided that, in any case the Court may
either on its owa motion or on the application
of the plaintiff, either in the first instance or
when summons last issued is returned unserved
direct the service of summons by registered post
pre-paid for acknowledgment, instead of the
mode of service laid down in this rule. The
postal acknowledgment purporting to contain
the signature of the defendant may be deemed to
be prima facie proof of sufficient service of the
summons on the defendant on the day on which
it purports to have been signed by him. If the

DASH Law & Justive/93

Postal cover ts returned unserved, any endorse-
ment purporting to have been made thereon by
the delivery peon or either an employee or officer
of the Postal Department shall be prima facie
evidence of the statements contained therein.”

डेप. Rajasthan amendment.—in_ Rajasthan, a
proviso was added to Order 5, Rule 10, in the follow-
ing terms, in 1954;

“Provided that in any case the Court may
in its discretion send the summons to the de-
fendant by registered post in addition to the
mode of service laid down jin this rule. An
acknowledgment purporting to be signed by the
defendant or an endorsement by postal servant
that the defendant refused to take the delivery
may be deemed by the Court issuing the summons
to be prima facie proof of service.”2/6

Of course, these amendments Jost their utility
after the insertion of Orde 5, rule 19A by the Code
of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1976 (a Cen-
tral Act).

2-8 Order V. Rule 20A.—As mentioned above
in Order V. Rule 20A was inserted in the Code in
1956 by a Central Act (amending the Code), giving
a discretion to the court to order service of summons
by post. The rule also did not make service by re-
gistered post mandatory, but left it to the discretion
of the Court. Such service was to be resorted to,
when, for any reason whatsoever, the summons was
returned un-served.

2:9 Effect of pre-1976 wmendment.—it is im-
portant to repeat that in none of the amendments
made before 1976 (locally or other wise) regarding
service by registered post of summons issued by the
court, there was any mandatory provision directing
the court to declare that the summons (issued by re-
gistered post and received back with an endorsement
of refusal) had been duly served on the defendant.
Even Rule 20A (now deleted in 1976, as a consequen-
tial amendment) did not make such a provision, It
was the 1976 amendment which created such a
position 2/8.


CHAPTER JI

HE AMENDMENT OF 1976

3-1 Law Commission recummendation.--The
provision in Order V, Rule 19A came int ode
as a result of the amendment Act of i976 with
eflect from February 1, 1977, Oa a very important
point, however, the amendment made in 1976
departs from the recommendation made by the
Law Commission of India in its Report on the
subject.

Insertion of the provision regarding service of
summons by registered post was recommended by
the Law Commission in its 54th Report on the Code
of Civil Procedure (after a consideration of the
recommendations made in the earlier reports of the
Commission, being the 14th and 27th reports).
But, what the Law Commission recommended in
its 27th report, pages 46 and 47, were draft amend-
ments on the following lines;—

“19A. (1) The Court shall in addition to and
simultaneously with the issue of summons
for service in the manner provided in rules 9
to 19, also direct the summons to be served
by registered post addressed to the defendant
or his agent empowered to accept the service
at the place where the defendant or his agent
ordinarily resides or carries on business or
personally works for gain ;

Provided that nothing in this sub-rule
shall require the Court to issue a summons
for service by registered post, where, in the
circumstances of the case, the Court regards
it as unnecessary.

(2) When an acknowledgment purporting
to be signed by the defendant or the agent or
an endorsement purporting to be made by a
postal employee that the defendant or the
agent refused to take delivery has been
received, the Court issuing the summons may
declare that there has been valid service.’”

3-2 The Bill of 1974,—The above recommenda-
tion in the 27th report of the Law Commission was
reiterated in the 54th Report3/1 page 124, para
5-7 (February 1973). The Code of Civil Proce-
dure (Amendment) Bill, 1974 was introduced in th
Parliament in April 1974. The Bill prope
insertion of rule 19A on the same [ings us chose

recommended by ihe aw Commission, The
amendment Bill of 1974 did not make presumption
of service mandatory, because it hai followed the
:ccommendation made by the Law Commission of
India, which nad propose. to give a discretion to
the court. Clause 53, sub-clause (iv) of the Bill
was thus explained ia the Notes on clauses appended
with the Statement of Odjects and Reasons ;—

“New rule 19A is being inserted to provide
for the simultaneous issue of summons for
service in the ordinary manner and by post.’””

३-3 Joint Committee Report.—When the Joint
Committee examined the Bill, its comment was as
under ;

“Clause 55(iii)-Tiae Committee are of the
view that in order to establish that the
summons has been duly served on the defen-
dant, the simultanzous issue of summons for
service by post should be done by registered
post ackuowledg.nent due. Sub-rule(1) of
proposed new rule 19A has been amended
accordingly’—S.O. R. (Gazette of India,
1-4-76, Pt. (11, S. 2, Ext., 9. 804/12) (Ref.
The AIR Manuai, 5th edition, p. 442).

“Clause 55(iv)—Tine Commitiee also feel
that in the case of issue of summons for
service by registered post, if the defend-
dant refuses to take delivery of the
summons, wien tendered to him, or the
fact that the acknowledgment has been
lost or mislaid or has bot been received
back by the court for any other reason
within thirty days from the date of issue
of summons, the Court should be autho-
rised to draw a presumption that the
summons had been duly served on the
defendant. Sub-rule (2) of the proposed
new rule 19A has been amended accord-
ingly.” J.C.R. (Gazette of India, 1-4-76,
Pt. 1, S.2., Ext., P. 8. 04/12) (Ref. The
AIR Manual, 5th edition, p. 442).

On a proper reading of the recommendation of
the Joint Commicize, it appears that the intention
was meicly ceive the court a power, rather than
inpose va ik ८ clay, to Geelare the service to be



effective, in the situations dealt within rule 19A
as proposed by the Joint Committee.

3-4 Bill as reported.—But the actual Bill, as
anneved to the Report of the Committee. made
such « declaration mandatory.

The Bill annexed to that Report further con-
tained an additional proviso, clarifying that the
above declaration shall be made, notwithstanding
the fact that the acknowledgment, having been lost
or mislaid or for any other reason has not been
received by the court within 30 days from the date
of issne of the summons. The Bill, as reported by
the Joint Committee, also made certain other minor
changes, which are not material for the present
purpose.

ow

3-5 Case Law in Order V. Rule 19A.—To revert
to the amendment 3/2 as effected in 1976 by intro-
ducing Order ५, Rule 19A. Civil Procedure Code,
it is enough to state that the court must now draw
the presumption. The High Court of Orissa 3/3
has held that once service under Order V, Rulel9A(2)
is made on the defendant, it shall be deemed to be
sufficient and it is not necessary to prove personal
service. in other words, though a summons for
personal service has to be issued (as provided by
the rule), it is not necessary that the service by the
personal mode made should have been successful.

3-6 Copy of plaint.—The Calcutta High Court is
of the view that a notice served by registered post
A.D. should be accompanied by a concise statement
of the plaint, if such notice is to be treated as
summons, 3/4,


CHAPTER IV

HARDSHIP RESULTING FROM THE PRESENT LAW

4-1. Hardship resulting from present provision.—
Frem a study of the case law on the subject, it appears
that serious hardship has teen caused, in practice, by
reason of the mandatory and categorical provision
in Order-V, Rule 19A, which requires the coust to
declare the summons as having been duly served, in
the situation mentioned in that rule. The case law
on this peint, collected as_ result of a sample survey,
will be set out presenily.4/! Broadly speaking, the
problem tas arisen in cases where the registercd cover
containing the summons has come back with the endorse-
ment of “refusal”. An ex-porte decree is pessoa
in such a case on the strength of the legal assumption.
(i) that the postman did actually tender the envelope
and (ii) that the addressee did refuse to accept it.
Later, the party (which is stated to have refused to
receive the registered letter), applies to the ccurt to
set aside the ex-parte decree, and often dees succeed
in proving, to the full satisfaction of the court, that
the cover had not actually been attempted to be
delivered. Jt is obvious, that if the court is directed
to make a declaration of proper service in every case,
irrespective of the peculiarities of the case, on the basis
of an hardship may arise and injustice may be
occasioned.

4:2 Some selected cases.—I\t will be convenient
to refer now to some of the comparatively rccent
cases, illustrative of the possibility of hardship,
referred to above. 4/2

4-3. A Gauhati case.—The first case to be noted
is from Gauhati.4/3 In this case, the summons had
been stated to have been refused by the defendant.
The postal peon deposed that he had tendered the
envelope which was refused by the defendant (add-
ressee). An ex-parte decree for ejectment
was passed. The defendant, in the application
to set aside the ex-parte decree, maintained that no
summons was received by him, either by post or
otherwise, and added that during the relevant time,
he was away from Assam and was living in
Bihar, at his permanent home, in order to
attend to his ill father. The trial court, dealing with
this application. found that the summons
was not duly served and set aside the ex-parte decree,
Revision against the trial court’s judgment was
dismissed by the High Court. Incidentally, in this

case, there was 8. comtroversy as to whether
the original plaintiff was bound to pray to the
court for the opening of the envelope received
back through post and io adduce evidence to the
effect that the summons, as sent, actually related
to the eriginal suit itself. This mt having ऐ था
done, the High Court held that Order V, Rule 17A!
(2) had not been completely compiled with. 1

474. A case from Karnataka.—A Karnatal
case,4/4 though it seems to have arisen before the
amendment cf 1976, is also worth noting. The case
related to a suit for the recovry of money. An
ex-parte decree was passed on the basis of a summons
sent by post under V, Rule 10 of the Code (as
amended in Mysore), which permitted service
by registered post in certain circumstances.4/5

4:5 A case from Punjab and  Haryana.—A
case form Punjab ahd Haryana4/6 is also relevant,
the mode of service ordered by the court having
been by post. In this case, the husband had
obtained against the wife an ex-parte decree for
jusdicial separation under section 10 of the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955 on the basis of a summons
sent by registered post and stated to have been
refused by the wife. The wife moved to set
aside the ex-parte decree. The trial court dismissed
the wife’s application to set aside the decree passed
ex-parte. The trial court held that as the wife had
refused to acczpt ths summons (which seems to have
been sent through post), she had been duly served
by substituted service, by the publication
of a notice in the newspapers. On appeal to the
High Court, a single judge took the view that at
times, a party can persuade a postman to make a
false report (about refusal etc.). As regards
substituted service, insertion of the notice of the
date of hearing in an Urdu newspaper (as was done
in this case) under Order V, Rule 20, could be of no
avail, as young Hindu ladies did not read Urdu
newspapers. On an appeal under the letters patent,
the appellate bench agreed with the single judge of
the High Court, and expressed itself as under :—

“Once for valid reason, report of the
postman is not considered reliable and ig
tuled out of consideration, then it would
tantamount that there had not been any
attempt to effect personal service on the



ea ८

respondent. In the absence of an eflort on
the part of the matrimonial court to effect
personal service of the petition upon the
respondent wife, the substituted service
would be of no avail, more so in view of the
reasons given by the learned single Judge.”

4-6 A case from Rajasthan—in a Rajasthan
case, 4/7 the q 1 arose in a pro ing under
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. The husband had
sought divorce on the ground of adultery of the wife.
The summons (notice) ७ ived unerved. The
court then passed an order for sei afresh, and
also ordered that another set of notices be sent by
registered post to the wife. The noiices sent by
registered post were returned with the report “re
fused’. The High Court then ordered that the
service was sufficient and, after recording evidence,
passed an ex parte decree for divorce. The wife
petitioned to 5०६ aside the ex-parte decree, alleging
that the summons had not been served upon her and
that the question of refusal of summons, sent at her
Rattangarh acldress, did not arise, because at that
time, she was at Delhi with ber father’s sister, After
recording evidence and th reference
to the above point, the Court held ¢

ai the summons
had not been proved to have been duly served. In
the instant case, the posial employee was not exa-
mined to find out whether either the wife or her
agent, had refused to receive the envelope containing
the notice sent by registered post. There was some
suggestion that the refusal was by the father, but
obviously, the father was not the wife’s “agent”.
Hence the court held that the ex-parte decree should
be set aside.

4:7 Acase from Madhya Pradesh.—In a Madhya
Pradesh case, 4/8 an ex-parte decree of divorce passed
against the wife was sought to be set aside, It
appears that there was some dispute as to whether
the wife, who had moved to set aside the ex-parte
decree, had refused to receive service by post at
all. The High Court found that, apart from her
allegation that she never refused to accept the
envelope, there was the additional fact that even
if she had actually refused to accept service,
it Was only after the expiry of the date of hearing.
That being so, it could not be said that there was
any service of the summons upon her, Hence the
ex parte decree was set aside,

It would b desirable to
point out that the editor of the fourteenth edition of
Mulla’s Code of Civil Procedure 4/9 has noticed
the hardship resulting from the mandatory presump-

tion in Order 5, Rule 19A, This is the commedt in
fourteenth edition: — is

“Under this sub-rule, a simple radorserieat IB

a postal employee that registered packet was tes-
dered to the defendant or his agent but was re-
fused is made sufficient evidence of servige, Fuge
ther, if the summons has been properly addressad
and sent by registered post A.D. the Court must
make the declaration that the dependant has been
served although the acknowledgment has been
lost or mislaid or has not been received within
39 days from the date of the issue of the sume
mons. This part of the sub-rule is drastic for,
if the postal employee makes a wrong endorse-
ment, the onus of proving the negative that he
was not served would be on the defendant. No
Teport of service by the postal employee is pro-
vided for as it is done in the sub-rule 17”.

(Emphasis added)

4-9 Bombay and Madras amendments.—It would
appear that presumably because of the hardship Selt
by reason of the mandatory provision in Order V, Rule
194, the Bombay and Madras High Courts have made
certain amendments as under;—4/\0

“(Bombay)—In Order V, in sub-rule(1) of Rule
19-A:—

(i) for the word “shall” the word “may” be
substituted :

(1) the proviso shall ७३ deleted (w.e.f. 1-10-1983)

(Madras)—In Rule 19A, 35 introduced by the
Amendment Act 104 of 1976, the word “shall”
in sub-rule (2) occurring between the words “the
Court issuing the summons” and “declare that
the summons had been...” be substituted by the
word “may” and the proviso to sub-rule (2) shall
stand repealed, (Vide R.O.C.N . 6454/77 (2-F)
S.R.C. (43/89) dated 5-12-1980).””

4:10 Ex parte decree in matrimonial CASES, —
Incidentally, while dealing with the question of service
by registered post. It may be Proper to mention
that there is a conflict of decisions on the quéstion
whether an ex parte decree passed in a matrimonial
case, can be set aside by applying the Provisions of
Order 9, Rule 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
Most of the High Courts have answered the question
in the affirmative,4/11

However, the ruling of a single Judge in a Gauhati
case has answered the question in the negative.4/12

It appears that in a Supreme Court case, it ‘Was |

assumed that Order 9, Rule 13, CPC will apply; But



Some diffigulty arose in that case because of an appeal
having been filed. Once an appeal has been pre-
ferred against an ex parte decree, Order 9, Rule 13
cannot apply.4/13

The. Mysore High Court has also applied the
Provisions of Order 9, Rule 13 to matrimonial pro-
cvedines.4/14

In a Karnataka case an ex parte decree
by the husband for divorce was sought to be set
aside. The court held the application tobe main-
tainable, even though the husband had died. The
High Court pointed out that if the right is denied
to the wife, then her status would be seriously affected

and her property rights would also be seriously
affected.4/!5



|
|
\

CHAPTER V

DEFENDANT RESIDING OUTSIDE JURISDICTION

उन. Question of defendant residing outside the
jurisdiction of the Court issuing summons.—One of the
matters of details which can be conveniently dealt
with, relates to the situation of the defendant resid-
ing outside the jurisdiction of the court issuing the
summons. At present, Order V. Rule 21 of the

“Code of Civil procedure makes a provision on the

subject, as under :—

“21. Service of summons where defendant — re-
resides within jurisdiction of another court—A
summons may be sent by the Court by which
it is issued, whether within or without the Sate,
tither by one of its officers or by post to any
Court (not being the High Court) having juris-
dittion in the place where the defendant resides.”

5-2 Uncertainty regarding places outside juris-
diction—~Recomendations.—{a) The first point
that arises is whether Order ५, Rule 19A inserted in
148 ; (which provides for the simultaneous issue of

s for service by post in addition to personal
servige)5/! can be invoked in a case where the

defendant is outside jurisdiction, 1.6. in the casedeal
within Order V Rule 21. Order V, Rule 21, directs
that the court to which the summons is sontumder
Rule 21 (or Rule 22) shall proceed, as if the summons
had been issued by such court, and this would seems to
attract Order ५, Rules 9 to 19. But on this parti-
cular point a controversy can arise. It is desitable
that an opportunity should be taken of making the
position clear in this regard.

(b) Besides this, it will also be convenient if
places near the border of a court’s jurisdiction | axe
brought under rule 9 itself. If Court ‘A’ wishes to
serve a summons on a person in village ‘X’ which
is in the jurisdiction of cuourt ‘B’ but is very near
the border of court ‘A,s’ jurisdiction, it is mor¢ cone
venient to allow service by the staff of Court ‘A’
than to leave the service to Court ‘B’. हे

(©) We, therefore, recommend that order V Rule
21 CPC should be suitably revised to incorporate
the points mentioned in sub-paragraphs (४) ani (0)
of this paragraph.


CHAPTER VI

RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1 Possible solution.—We are aware that it is
not easy to evolve a perfect solution to the problem
considered in this report and it is possible that any
solution which might be thought of by way of
substitution for the present law, may create its own
controversies. Nevertheless, we cannot overlook the
fairly large number of reported cases in which injustice
might have resulted by reason of a fraud practised

with the help of a dishonest postman or a lapse on the’

part of an honest postman in tendering the article to
व wrong person, but for the redress granted by the
High. Courts, and there might be many more similar
cases, Which are not reported, because they did not
reach the High Court or did not raise any question of
law. ni dur view, it is desirable that an amendment
should ‘te thought of. And it appears to us that the
best course would be to substitute in place of the man-
datory provision contained at present in Order 5 Rule
19A. @provision that leaves it to the discretion of the
Court,tq declare whether refusal should be deemed to
be an, equivalent of service.

It is true that even if the court is given a discretion
in the matter ie. a discretion to draw or not
to draw a presumption of service on the defendant,
(on the basis of refusal to accept service as recorded
by the postal employee), hardship may still arise.
But one should not overlook the fact, that if the
drawing of the presumption is mandatory (as at
present), then the chances of hardship arising are
magnified.

6.2 Recommendations.—In the light of what has
been stated above, we recommend certain amend-
ments in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as de-
tailed in the next few paragraphs.

6.3 Order 5 Rule 19.4 to be amended.—our first
recomméndation is that order 5, Rule 19A of the code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 should be amended by making
the declaration regarding service by registered post
discretionary, instead of its being mandatory as at
present in order that a litigant is insulated against
injustice on account of either a lapse or mistake or on
account of a fraud practised with the help of a dis-
honest postman motivated to make an endorsement
regarding refusal. The rule, as so revised, will read
as uader;—

10

“19A. (1) The court shall, in addition
to and simultaneously with the issue of summons
for service in the manner provided in Rules 9 to
19, also direct the summons to be served - by
registered post addressed to the defendant or his
agent empowered to accept service at the plage
where the defendant or his agent ordinarily
resides or carries on business or personally works
for gain;

Provided that nothing in this sub-rule shall
require the Court to issue a summons for service
by registered post, where, in the circumstances
of the case, the Court regards it as unnecessary.

(2) When an acknowledgement purportiag
to be signed by the defendant or the agent or an
endorsement purporting to be made by a postal
employee that the defendants or the agent \ne-
fased to take delivery has been received, the
Court issuing the summons may declare that
there has been valid service, bearing in mind the
possibility of fraud or mistake on the part of the
postman who might have tendered the article to a
wrong person whilst in the making of the endorse-
ment regarding refusal.”

6.4 Order 5 Rule 21 to be amended.—Our
second recommendation is that for Order 5, Rule ab
of the Code, a revised rule as is being indicated here-
after for the reasons specified in para 5-2, of Chapter
V, namely :—Uncertainty regarding places outside
jurisdiction—Recommendations.—

(a) The first point that arises is whether
Order 5, Rule 19A inserted in 1976 (which pro-
vides for the simultaneous issue of summons far
service by post in addition to personal servied)
can be invoked in a case where the defendant is
outside jurisdiction, i.e. in the case dealt within
Order 5 Rule 21. Order 5, Rule 21, directs that
the court to which the summons is sent under
Rule 21 (or Rule 22) shall proceed, as if the sum-
mons had been issued by such court, and this
would seem to attract Order 5, Rules 9 to 19,
But on this particular point a controversy can
arise. It is desirable that an opportunity should
be taken of making the position clear in this res
gard.



(b) Besides this, it will also be convenient
if places near the border of court’s jurisdiction
are brought under Rule 9 itself. If Court ‘A’
wishes to serve a summons on a person in village
‘X’ which is in the jurisdiction of Court ‘B’ but is
very near the borders of Court ‘A’s jurisdiction,
it is more convenient to allow service by the staff
of Court ‘A’ than to leave the service to Court
कं,

(©) We, therefore, recommend that Order
5 Rule 21 CPC should be suitably revised to in-
corporate the points mentioned in sub-paragraphs
(a) and (b) of this paragraph.

Revised Order 5, Rule 21 as is being recommended

21. Service of simmons when defendant resides
within the jurisdiction of another court. If the de-
fendant does not reside within the jurisdiction of the
court in which the suit is instituted and has no agent
residing within that jurisdiction who is empowered
to accept the service of the summons, but resides or
has such an agent within the jurisdiction of another
court, whether within or without the State, the pro-
visions of Rule 19A of this Order shall, as far as may
be, apply, subject to the modification that the sum-
mons intended to be served by an officer of court
may be sent, by the court by which it is issued, to
the idourt within whose jurisdiction the defendant
resides or has such an agent and the court to which

it is so sent shall then proceed as provided in Rule 23
of this Order.

Provided that where the defendant resides or has
such an agent within the State at a place not exceeding
twenty-five kilometres from the place where the Court
issuing the summons is situated, or at a place within
ten kilometres of the outer limits of the jurisdiction
of the Court, the sumons may, instead of following
the procedure provided in this rule, be delivered or
sent by the court issuing it to the proper offiicer, to
be served by him or one of his subordinates in the
manner laid down in Rules 9 to 19 (both inclusive)
of this Order.

We recommend accordingly.

(M. P. THAKKAR)
CHAIRMAN

(९. V. ANJANEYULU)
MEMBER

(P. M. BAKSHI
MEMBER

(MAHESH CHANDRA)
MEMBER
(G.V.G. KRISHNAMURTY)
MEMBER SECRETARY

New Delhi, Dated the April 19, 1991.



NOTE AND REFERENCES

Chapter 11

afl.
2/2.
2/3.

Paragraph 2-2, supra.
Paragraph 2-3, supra.

Pichai Ammal v. Vellayya Thevar, AIR 1963
Madras 198 (DB) (Ramachandra Iyer CJ and
Anantanarayanan J).

2/4. Pichai Ammal v. Vellayya Thevar, AIR 1963
Madras 198, 200 para 7 (Division Bench),
2/5. Cf. para 4-4, infra.
2/6. Similar amendment was made by Patna High
Court.
2/7. Paragraph 2-2, supra.
2/8. Chapter IIT, infra.
Chapter ता
3/1, Law Commission of India, 54th Report, Page
124, para 5-7, (February 1973).
3/2. For the text of Order 5 rule 19A, see para
1-4, supra.
3/3. Samir Snigdha Chandra v. Pranaya Bhushan
Chandra, AIR 1989 Orissa 185.
3/4. Dr. Madhusudan Poddar v. Arabinda Pod-
dar, AIR 1978 Cal 195.
Chapter IV
4/1. Paragraph 4-2, infra.
4/2. Paragraph 4-1, supra.
4/3. Gopal Ch. Kalita v. Chiddi Sau, AIR 1982

Gauhati 61, 62, paragraph 4 (S.M. Ali J).

MGIPY—S14 Law & Justice/93—23-3-94—300.

12

4/4.
4/5.

4/6.

B. Padmavathi Rai v. Parvathiamma, AIR
1976 Karnataka 97 (K. Jagnnatha Shetty J).

Order V, Rule 10 amended in Mysore (later
Karnataka), Cf. Paragraph 2-6, supra.

Mangat Rai v. Shanti Devi, (1983) HLR 437,
438 paragraph 4 (Punjab & Haryana)
(Sandhawalia CJ and Tewatia J).

4/7. Chandrakala v. Banshidhar, (1984) HLR 225,
233, Para 18 (Raj) (Dwarka Prasad J).

4/8. Shakuntala v. Devi Prasad Sharma, (1984)
HLR 358, 359 (MP).

4/9. Mulla, CPC (Fourteenth Edition revised by
J. M. Shelat), (1984), Vol. 2, page 954.

4/10. 5. K. Mukherjee, code of Civil Procedure,
Vol. I, (1987), page 990.

4/11. Dr. Mithilesh Kumar Srivastava v. Saroj
Kumari Srivastava, (1987) 1 HLR 378
(Allahabad) (reviews case law).

4/12. Anjan Kumar Kataki v. Meenakshi Sarma,
AIR 1985 Gauhati 44.

4/13. Rani Choudhury v. Lt. Col Surajjit Choudhury,
AIR 1982 SC 1397.

4/14, Tirukappa v. Kamlamma, AIR 1966 Mysore 1.

4/15. Iravva v. Sivappa, (1987) 2 HLR 312, 317,
318, paras 12 to 14, (Karnataka),

Chapter V

5/1. Chapter वा, supra.

|
2