14151
REPORT

ON

NEED FOR AMENDING THE LAW 0५ REGARDS POWER OF COURTS
TO RESTORE CRIMINAL REVISIONAL APPLICATIONS
AND CRIMINAL CASES BISMISSED FOR DEFAULT
IN APPEARANCE



Tel Na, ~

विधि arity
LAW COMMISSION
भारत सरकार
GOVERNMENT OF BNBIA
4 शास्त्री भवन
SHASTRI BHAWAN,
JUSTIGR M. P. THAKKAR नई दिल्‍ली

Chairman
9. ७. No. 7 (8)/91-L€(LS). July 31, 1991.

Te

Shri K. Vijay Bhaskar Reddy,
Minister of Law, Justice

and Company Affairs,
Government of India,

Shastri Bhavan,

New Delhi.

Dear Minister,

Re : Presentation of 1419 Report of the Commission.

In order to foreclose likely injustice ia the eourse of administrating
ef justice and in order to resolve conflicting views of two sets ef Higa
Courts on a vital matter a suo motw exercise was undertaken by the
Commission which has resulted in the 1418 Report being presented
herewith encaptioned :-

“NEED FOR AMENDING THE LAW AS REGARDS
POWER OF COURTS TO RESTORE CRIMINAL REVISIGNAL

APPLICATIONS AND CRIMINAL CASES DISMISSED
FOR DEFAULT IN APPEARANCE ”

By the very nature of the issue imvolved, the matter is ome of —
importance as well as of urgency. It is, therefore, hoped that it will
receive the early attention it deserves at yeur end.

Yours faithfully,

(M. P. THAKKAR)

Encl : I41st Report.

Cepy te Sh. P. R. Kumaramangalam, Minister of State for Law, Justice &
Cempany Affairs, Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi.


CONTENTS

CHAPTER I Introductory - . : . . .
CHAPTER II Statutory Provisions . . . . . . .
CHAPTER III Judicial Decisions as to dismissal for default of Criminal matters .
CHAPTER IV Position in relation to dismissal for default of maintenance cases and
the restoration thereof . . . . . : : .
CHAPTER V Position in regard to aequittal in the context of complaints
non-apperance in summons cass. . . . .  .
CHAPTER VI Inherent Powers ry
CHAPTER VII Commission’s conclusions and recommendations
NOTES AND REFERENCES. . . . . . . . : . .
APPENDIX I List of Summons cases under the Indian Penal Code

APPBNDIX IL

List of Sum nons cases under other criminal Acts soe

i

13

15

16

18

19


CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTORY

1.1.1; Perspective of the Report.—Likely injustice
in the course of administration of criminal justice
resulting from the extant position of law in two
situations is sought to be foreclosed by recommend-
ing appropriate amendments in the existing law.

1.1.2. The ‘two’ situations giving rise to injustice
are ३-०

First situation.--If the Revisional Court by a
signed order dismisses a criminal Revision for de-
fault of the applicant or his/her Advocate to remain
present when the matter is called for hearing, the
eourt dismissing the said criminal revision cannot
restore the same for hearing on merits, The con-
@erned court cannot do so even if the applicant or
his/her Advocate was prevented from remaining
present for sufficient cause or in unavoidable circums-
tances notwithstanding the fact that the court passing
the order of dismissal for default is satisfied that the
absence deserves to be excused and ends of justice
so demand. Such i. the outcome in the context
af the fact that as per the existing law a criminal
gourt has no power to review its ‘final order’ and an
arder dismissing a criminal revisional application
‘Wy 8 signed order is construed as a ‘final order’ within
the moaning of the fetters imposed by section 362
ef the Code of Criminal Procedure pertaining to
the eeurt’s power to alter or review fts judgment or
Sixal order,

Sweond situation. The criminal court trying
३ Sumimons case is powerless to remedy the resultant
injustlee in a given case arising out of the order of
‘aeqiittal required to be rendered by the said court in
the dvent of the complainant being unable to appear
on the day appointed for the hearing [ (except in
certain eases covered by the proviso to section 256
0) 1. The net result of the relevant provisions of
the Cede is, that once the accused is acquitted under
‘section 256 or a criminal case is dismissed for de-
fault by a signed order, then it cannot be restored
aad the consequential acquittal cannot be set aside,
even if the deafult in appearance was for a sufficient
use, There are two reasons, in the main, for this
position. First, the Code does not contain any
express provision for restoring the dismissed matter
entailing the acquittal of the iccused person. Second-
ly, section 362 of the Code expressly creates a bar

@

and prohibits the review of 8 judgment or final
order, once it is signed. And because the ordex
of dignissal for default and the consequential order
of acquittal under section 256 is construed asa final
order.

1.2, Need for remedial measures.—The aforesaid
statutory provisions cause and are likely to cause
serious hardship and injustice in practice in several
cases. The Law Commission of India is, therefore,
of the opinion that there is a felt need for enacting
provisions in the Code empowering the restoration of
a criminal case dismissed for deafult of appearance
and for setting aside the consequential order of aequit-
tal in a case where the order is occassioned by the
default in appearance of the complainant if sufficient
cause exists for his default. As also for the re-
storation of a criminal revision dismissed for such
a default in appearance. For, it appears that
because of the bar created by section 362 against
the review of a final order and becasuse of the
limitations of section 482 of the Code (which
deals with the inherent power of 8 High Court),
it would not be permissible under the present law
for the court to resort to the inherent power for
restoring such proceedings even in order te seeare
the ends of justice,

1,3. Au illustration of hardship. Prime facie, te
present position, which in offect totally prediedes
the restoration of a dismissed criminal revideusl
application very often results in serious

and grave injustice. For example, take thé euse
of an accused person who has been senteneed te
a short term of imprisonment against which no
appeal lies. If his application for revision in the
High Court is dismissed for default by a signed
order, he must either undergo the sentence even
though the sentence might have been unwarragted
in Jaw, or approach the Supreme Court, after ob-
taining special leave. This course would bs too
expensive, too tim? consuming, and virtually be-
yond the reach of an ordinary citizen. So also
the dismissal of a meritorious complaint in a sam-
mons case (even when tho default in appearances
deserves to b> excused on account of existence
of sufficient cause) and the consequential oe

of the accused person is fraught with similar @pa-


sequences occassioning grave injustice to the aggriev-
ed complainant, The need for addressing this
problem also cannot be over-emphasised.

1.4. Need for examination of the Matter—It would,
therefore, seem that the matter needs a close look
from the point of view of promoting justice which,
of course, is the essential objective of any law of
Procedure. In the succeeding Chapters of, this
Report it is, therefore, proposed to examine the
position in regard to this subject taking note of

the relevant statutory provisions in the light of
the judicial decisions on the subject. It is alse
proposed to examine the analogous situation of
a Magistrate dismissing a criminal case and acquit-
ting the accused in cases not covered by the proviso
to section 256(1), Cr.P.C., where the complainant
fails to appear at the hearing notwithstanding the
existance of sufficient cause for. failure to appear.
at such hearing. (Section 256 of the Code). And
to recommend the appropriate legislative remedy”
in the light of the discussion. पर है


CHAPTER It

STATUTORY PROVISIONS

2.1. Previsieas of the Code.— Three sections of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 quoted
herein below are relevant for the present purposes,
namely, Sections 256, 362 and 482.

“256. Non-appearance or death of complainant.—
(1) ए the summons _ has been issued on complaint,
and.on the day appointed for the appearance
of the accused, or any day subsequent thereto
cote hich the hearing may be adjourned, the
inant does not appear, the Masgistrate
shall, notwithstanding any thing herein—before
contained, acquit the accused, unless for some rea-
son he thinks it proper to adjourn the hearing of
the case to some other day:

Provided that where the complainant is
represented by a pleader or by the officer con-
ducting the prosecution or where the Magistrate
is of, opinionthat the personal attendance of
the.qomplainant is not necessary, the Magistrate
may dispense with his attendance and proceed
with. the case,

(2) The provisions of sub-section(1) shall, so
far as may be, apply also to cases where the
nom-gppearance of the complainant is due to
his death.”

“362, Court not to alter judgment-—Save as
otherwise provided by this Code or by any
other law for the time being in force, no Court,
when it has signed its judgement or final order
disposing of a case, shall alter or review the
same except to correct a clerical or arithmetical
error.”

482. Saving of inherent powers of High Court
—Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to
limit or affect the inherent powers of the High
Court to make such orders as may be necessary
to give eflect to any order under this Code,
or to prevent abuse of the process of any) court
or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.’’

2.2 Pesition resulting from section 362.—It may
be stated that section 362 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, corresponds ta section 369, Code
of 1898.

2-515 Law/93

2)

Section 369, as enacted in 1898, provided that
“No Court, other than a High Court, when it
has signed its judgment, shall alter or review the
same, except as provided in sections 395 and 484
or to correct a clerical error.” Despite the express
exclusion of the High Courts from the operation
of this provision, it was held that the High Courts
had no implied power to alter or review their own
judgments, whether under section 369 or under
section 439 or otherwise. It was accordingly
proposed in 1921, that the words “other than a
High Court” should be omitted, to make it clear
that section 369 conferred no such power on the
High Courts, as it was noticed that one or two
other sections of the Code (besides sections 395
and 484 and Cl. 26 of the Letters Patent of the
High Courts) empowered the High Courts to revise
their judgments. Hence the section was redrafted.

Section 369 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1898, as amended in 1923, read as follows :~

“Save as otherwise provided by this Code or
by any other law for the time being in force
or, in the case of a High Court, by the ‘Letters
Patent or other instrument constituting such
High Court, no Court when it has ‘signed its
judgment shail alter or review the same, except
to correct a clerical error.”

In the Code of Criminal Procedure (Act 2 of 1974),

section 362 provides—
“Save as otherwise provided by this Code or
by any other law for the time being in force,
no Court, when it has signed its judgment or
final order disposing of a case, shall alter or
review the same except to correct a clerical or
arithmetical error.”

The words “or in the case of a High Court,
by the Letters Patent or other instrument con-
stituting such High Court” which were found in
the corresponding section 369 of the old Code,
have been omitted in the present section. Hence
an alteration or review by a High Court would
pe permissible (as in the case of other Courts),
only where provision therefor is made in this Code
or by any other law for the time being in force,
At the same time, the section in the present Code
bars an alteration in a final order algo,


2.3 Absence of power.—We shall deal later in
detail with the case law on the relevant sections
ofthe Code. For the present purpose, it is sufficient
to say that broadiy speaking, at the present day
by virtue of a judgment pronounced in 1986 by
the Supreme Court, it would appear that a court
cannot restore a criminal case dismissed for default.
Althoggh the judgment of 1986 in Gauraya’s case
was cb Seemed with dismissal for non-appearance
by thd ‘complainant, the following dicta occurring
in thé judgment [(1986) Cr.LJ 1074, 1076 right
hand column, para 10] should be noted ;
“So. far as the accused is concerned, dismissal
+ of a:complaint for non-appearance of the com-
plajnant or his discharge or acquittal on the
sathe ground is a final order and in the
aie of any specific provision in the Co
pu

fagistrate ‘cannot exercise any inherent
liction.”

2.4. Cobflicting views and their genesis,—There are
coniftigting views among the High Courts on the
! = gin whether a court is empowered to order the
dition of a criminal revision petition dismissed
fault. To a great extent, this conflict owes
a ७ the interpretation to be placed on two
tt provisions of the Code of Criminal
dure, 1973, one positive and the other negative.
ppsitive provision is contained in section 482
Code which recognises the inherent power
thé High Court, to be exercised for securing

the ends of justice and for the purposes mentione d
in the section. The negative provision is to be
found in section 362 of the Code, which (in effect)
bars review or alteration of a judgment or fipal

”. order once it is signed in the context of the ean-

troversy as to whether an order dismissing the
Revisional application otherwise than on merits,
is a ‘judgment’ or ‘final-order’ within the meafiing
of the said section.

2.5. Urgent need to resolve the conflict.—It is néces:*

sary to resolve the controversy with urgency for
it would be incongruous to tolerate the same a
Act operating in’ an inconsistant ‘manner if
séts of High Courts. The recent decision oP!
Supreme Court in’ Gauraya’s case’, albeit in ©
context of the dismissal-of-a criminal . 06! pins eit,
holding that such a dismissal followed by the’

tal of the accused is a ‘judgment’ or “fihal ortiér’
and cannot be set aside even in exercise of inhérpnt
powers (which courts other than High *Céurts
do not possess) enhances the complexity of fhe
situation. Besides, it underscores the need to
resolve the controversy with urgency lést somé
Courts hold that the Revisional Bais s-
midsed for default ean be restored ‘for

merits and others holding that ey tone
restored.. And-to provide for a speedier ahd ‘eh
remedy in the High Court itself witHout -Wéing
obliged to approach the Supreme Court -at' 'piro-
hibitive time-cost and. money-cost,



CHAPTER पा

» JUDICIAL DECISIONS AS TO DISMISSAL FOR DEFAULT OF CRIMINAL MATTERS

3.1. Scope of the Chapter.—In this Chapter, we pro-
pose to note the important judicial pronouncements
on the kubject of dismissal of a criminal case for
adefautt.'

3.2. Decisions of High Courts holding that power
A pip कप re criminal matters dismissed for default.-
In an Wiahabad case! criminal revision ‘petition was
dismissefl for default by the High Court, under a
miseppr¢tiension that no medical certificate of the
petitiandt or illness slip of his counsel had been filed.
Both t'te documents were, in fact, on the record.
The Allahabad High Court held that ia exercise of
its inherant powers, it could restore the case dismissed

for default.

3.3, Awother Allahabad case.--Another Allahabad
« case2 may be cited. The petitioners were being pro-
Y secuted; ender section 406, Indian Penal Code, on a
Private complaint, The complaint was dismissed by
the trying Magistrate and the petitioners were dis.
charged pader section 203, Cr.P.C., 1973. The com-
Plajnant :filed before the Sessions Judge a revision
inst the order of discharge. The revision
dismissed for non-appearance of the
complainpnt’s application. Against this order of
dismissal; the petitioners filed a revision petition in
“the HighiCourt. [t was held by the Allahabad High
_ Court thet the criminal revision, dismissed for default,
could be festored and reheard by the Sessions Judge.
The dismissal was not a judgment. Further, the Code
does not;contemplate dismissal of a revision for default,

3.4: Sdmbay Case.—In a Bombay case3- the peti-
tioner’ Wak ‘being prosecuted under sections 341, 397
and 506 df the Indian Penal Code, on the basis of a
gmade by one Navabai Vasandani. The
te process to the petitioner. The order
॥ foes passed by the Magistrate was chal-
petitioner by way of a criminal writ
petition, {The petition came up for hearing on Feb-
ruary 2,,1984, on which date a prayer for adjourn-
ment was made on behalf of the petitioner. The case
ras adjoprned to February 13, 1984. However, the
Theristedy of the court inadvertently mentioned the
next f hearing in the roznama as February 8,
1984.

writ petition when called out for hearing
on February 8, 1984 was dismissed in default, since
none was present ou behalf of the petitioner. On

७

an application being made for restoration of the
case, the Bombay High Court held that in its inherent
powers, as provided in section 482 of the Code of Crimi-
nal Procedure, 1973, the High Court could review or
revise its own judgment, if such a judgment was pre-
nounced without giving an opportunity of being heard
to a party who was entitled to hearing and that party
was not at fault. That party should not suffer for
mistake of court.

3.5. A Calcutta case, Dismissal of revision petition.—
Ina Calcutta case-4, a criminal revision against a con-
viction was dismissed by the High Court for default.
On an application for restoration of the same, the
Division Bench held that while, in India, no court
could review its judgment on the merits, it could reopen
@ rule which had been discharged because no one had
appeared at the hearing. The case had not been heard
and determined on the merits. There had been no
judgment. Hence there was no question of review of
judgment.

3.6. A Gauhati case, Dismissal of revision for de-
fault—not a “final order”.—In a Gauhati case5 a
criminal revision petition was dismissed for default
of appearanice.The Gauhati High Court held that
an order of dismissal of a criminal revision petition
for default of appearance may. not be regarded as a
“final order” disposing of the case as envisaged in
section 362, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and
as-such, when one or more of the requirements of
section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
are present and where glaring injustice stares the court
in the face, sueh an order can be set aside and the peti-
tion restored and heard on merits by the High Court,
exercising its inherent powers.

3-7+ A Madras case : Dismissal of appeal by High
Court : no judgement. —In a Madras 085८०, the appe-
Ilant, who was convicted of contempt by a special
Magistrate, filed an appeal before the High Court,
against his conviction and sentence. The appeal
was dismissed as time barred by the Vacation Judge.
The appellant, presumably in ignorance of this
fact, presented another appeal on the reopening of
the court through counsel. On an objection hav-
ing been raised, the second appeal was held to be
not maintainable. During the course of discussion,
the power of the High Court to order the restora-


tion of a case dismissed in default was also exami-
ned and it was held by the High Court that when a
criminal appeal or a criminal revision petition is
dismissed without hearing, there is no ‘‘judgment”
at all and the Judge or the Bench which disposed of
the matter for default.of appearance could rehear
the matter. The case was decided under the code of
1898. In the present Code even an alteration of a
‘final order’ is barred by section 362.

3-8+ A Patna case. —In a Patna case7, the pe-
titioners had filed a revision petition against their
conviction and sentence, but had not attached a
copy of the judgment of the trial court. The court
allowed one week for filing certified copy of the
judgment of the trial court.

A. direction was further given, that if the copy
was not filed within the stipulated time, then the
revision petition was to stand dismissed, but an
application was made to the High Court to restore
it. The Patna High Court held that the bar against
review (as contained in section 369 of the code of
1898) did not prhoibit restoration of a revision dis-
missed for default, because such order of dismissal
was not a ‘judgment’. The inherent power of the
High Court was also relied on in support of such
restoration.

It should, however, be noted that in so far as this
ruling of the Patna High Court stresses the narrow.
word ‘‘udgment” used in section 369 of the Code
as in force at that time, the ruling has lost much of
its utility because the present section uses the ex-
pression “or final order?’ also.

3-9- A Rajasthan case regarding dismissal of revi-
simu—In a Rajasthan case, the criminal revision
Petition was listed for admission on January 17,
1951, on which date neither the petitioner nor his
counsel was present and consequently the petition
was dismissed in default. It was held by the Raja-
sthan High Court as under :—

“So far as the question of restoration, strictly
so called, is concerned, there is no provision in
the Code of Criminal Procedure which empowers
8 Criminal Court to restore a criminal case once
it has been finally decided. The power of res-
toration has to be specifically conferred, as in
the case in the Code of Civil Procedure before
it can be examined by a court”.

“It is, however, the duty of the Court on the
criminal side to decide a criminal matter on the
merits whether a party or his pleader is present
or not and though there can be no restoration

in a criminal case, the High Court has the power
under s. 561A to make such orders as are ह९-
cessary in the interests of justice.

“Thus, where a criminal revision is dismissed for
default without going into its merits and there is
no fault on the part of the applicant’s lawyer who
was waiting in the court in which the case was
listed, the High Court should exercise its power
under 5, 561A to secure the ends of justice so
that the revision may be disposed of after comsix
dering the grounds raised”.

It was further directed that on the failuge of the pe-
titioners to file the copy of the judgment withia the _
stipulated time, the revision petition was to sand
dismissed without any further reference.  $ince
the petitioners did not file the certified copy of tha
judgment within the time granted by the Court, their
revision petition stood dismissed for default. after
the expiry of the stipulated period. On an, eppli-
cation for restoration having been made, the Patna
High Cuort held that section 369 of the Code of Cri«
minal Procedure, 1898 corresponding to section 362
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 wés-he
bar to the restoration of the criminal revisiow dis-
missed for default because such an order of dishaisswl
on default was not a “judgment”? within the: mean
ing of section 369 of the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1898. It was further held that the court,
in exercise of its inherent powers contained ia sec-
tion 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure; : 1898
correspnonding to section 482 of the Code ७१ Cri-
minal Procedure, 1973, could order the restemtion
of the revision petition dismissed for default in aa?
appropriate case. It was also held that im w ef
minal revision, the High Court acts at its own कक —
cretion and its order dismissing the revision pe-
tition in default is within the jurisdiction siage no
Petitioner has 3 right to be heard and the High
Court is not compelled to interfere with a judgment
brought to its notice unless it so thinks fit

३-10 - Dismissal for default. No power ie
eriminal matters according to some High
We may now note High Court rulings
mo such power exists, An Andhra 08929 rele
a dispute regarding immovable property @éction
145, Code of Criminal Procedure). The party agg-
tieved by the order of the magistrate filed a revision
before the District Magistrate. On the date ad
for hearing of the revision petition, id fe thepart

were absent and the revision was dismissed Far
fault. An Application made for resto of thes
révision petition was allowed by the District Magis.
trate. Aggrieved by this order, the opposite’ party ;



preferred a revision to the High Court. The Ad-
mission judge in the High Court did not go into the
merits of the case. But he directed the District Magist-
rate to decide the question whether a criminal case
dismissed for default could be restored (as this question
had been raised before the District Magistrate, but
not decided). It so happend, that in the meantime,
there had been a change of incumbent in the
office of the District Magistrate and the District
Magistrate who heard the matter as directed by the
High Court, dismissed the restoration petition,
relying mainly on the fact that the Code contain-
ed no provision for restoration. This time, the
party aggrieved by the dismissal approached the
High Court in revision. The Andhra Pradesh High
Court held that no restoration petition could lie
against an order dismissing a criminal revision petition
for default. It followed the Madras ruling in 2.
Rangarao 23 MLJ 371 laying down that in a crimi-
nal revision, no distinction can be made between an
order passed without hearing the petitioner and one
in which he is heard.

3+11- Another Andhra case and Himachal case.—
Another case from Andhra Pradesh!0 holds that
there is no jurisdiction in the court to dismiss revi-
sion. for default, once the records are called for.
Same is the view taken by the High Court of Hima-
chal. Pradesh!!,

3:12: A Kerala case : dismissal of revision.—
The Kerala High Court!2 has held to the following
effect (with reference to the Code of 1973) :—

“Clause (2) of s. 401 which deals with the po-
wers of revision of the High Court provides that no
order under that section should be made to the
prejudice of the accused or other person unless he
had an opportunity of being heard either per-
sonally or by pleader in his own defence. The aff-
ord of an opportunity is different from the availing
of that opportunity. A party would get an oppor-
tunity for being heard if he is given notice of the
cas¢ and the posting. His being not present at the
time of hearing is his not availing of that opportu-
nity.. There is no power conferred on the court by
the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code for
restoration of revision petitions which have .been dise
posed of, also. ........ Restoration to file,
and rehearing, prayed for here, is not to give effect
to amy order under the Code. Nor is it to prevent
abuse ‘of the process of the court, because no ab-
use of the process of the court is involved here,
As the disposal here was after perusal of records

and after hearing those counsel who were. present
in court, it was in accordance with law. The words
“or otherwise to secure the ends of justice” eccu- -
rring in section 482 also cannot take in a case of
the present kind. Those words have to be read
ejusdem generis. Restoration and hearing
of a revision petition disposed of without hearing
the respondent’s counsel, is not a purpose analo-
gous to “giving effect to an order under the Code”
or preventing abuse of the process of Court. On
the other hand, to restore and rehear a criminal revi
sion petition which has been disposed of, would be
to go against the mandatory provision in section 362
of the Criminal Procedure Code, that, except to co-
rrect a@ clerical or arithmetical error, a judgment or
order should not be altered or reviewed after it is si-
gned, unless otherwise provided, and any inherent
power cannot be used to do. what is expressly pro~
hibited by the Code. Section 482 of the Code is not
meant to give second inning to a party ina case which
has already been decided against him’.

The Kerala High Court further held that the Sup-
reme Court rulings of 1962 and 1979 had clinched
the matter.

3-13: A Madras case : dismissal of revision.—
The Madras High Court!3 in 1912 held—

(a) that it had no power to review an order
passed in its criminal revisional jurisdic-
tion.

(b) that this was so even where the revision
petiton had been dismissed for default
and

(©) that no distinction could be made between
an order passed without hearing the peti-
tioner and an order passed after hearing
the petitioner.

3-14. Another Madras case : disntissal of revi-
sion.—In another Madras casel4 of 1923, a crimi-
nal revision petition was dismissed for default by
the High Court. The petitioner filed a second revi-
sion petition for the same relief. It was held as
under :—

(a) The court could not, and would not, en-
tertain a second petition on a matter al-
ready disposed of;

(b) A revision petition dismissed for default
cannot be restored.

3-15: A third Madras case : dismissal of revi.
sion.—In yet another Madras case15 of 1949, a com-
plaint filed by the petitioner was dismissed under :


section; 203, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.
The . petitioner preferred a criminal revision before
the Sessions Judge, which was dismissed for def-
ault. Application for restoration was also dismi-
ssed by the Sessions Judge, who held that no such
application lay. On further revision being filed
before the Madras High Court, the High Court
held that a revision petition before the Sessions
Judge, dismissed for default cannot be restored.

३-16. , Sapreme Court case. of 1962.— The Supreme
Court had an occasion to consider the question whether
an app@flate court has the power to review or restore
an appeal which is dismissed in 1952, in Sankatha
Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh 16. The facts of the
case were that the appellants were convicted and
sentenped under section 323, 324 and 452 read with
section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, by the Magis-
trate. Their appeal against conviction, before the
Sessioy हल पवन was dismissed in default. The appeal
was quently restored for rehearing by the
Sessions Judge, on an application having been made
by the appellants. The successor of the Sessions
Judge, Who restored the appeal, however, was of the
opinién:that the appellate court had no power to
review or restore an appeal. He accordingly dis-
mi 4880 | the appeal, by holding that the order of his
predédéibor restoring the appeal was ultra vires and
without :jurisdiction. The revision petition carried
to the High Court against this order was dismissed.
In appeal to the Supreme Court, it was held that
an appellate court has no power to review or restore
an appegl which had been disposed of. A Sessions
Judge cannot set aside his first order passed in appeal
dismissiag the appeal when neither the appellants
nor if counsel appeared and cannot order the
rehearthp of the appeal.

soo

7 ‘Insofar as the inherent power of the court to
restore # case is concerned, the Supreme Court
aS der in Sankatha Singh v. State of UP.,
हि बक 8 hereinabove:—

“.«ijAssuming that Sri Tej Pal ‘Singh, as)
Seshigns Judge, could exercise inherent powers,

wé ae of the opinion that he could not pass the-

order of the rehearing of the appeal in the exercise:
of sich powers when section 369, read with
sect 424 of the Code, specifically prohibits the
“att, or reviewing of its order by a court.
Inherdnt powers cannot be exercised to do what
the’ Qode specifically prohibits the court from
doing.”

Apa , in the above judgment, it was held
that an appellate court must decide the appeal on
७०

the: merits, whether-or not the parties appear,:the
judgment is relevant for the present . purpose,.ja
sO far as it makes a definite negative pron@uncempeapt
regarding inherent power of the appellate gourt apd
specifically holds that an appeal once decided cagno'
be reheard under the inherent power Li
ble
3-17. Supreme Court case of 1977.—1n Bindeshwayi
Prasad Singh’s casel7, (decided in 1977), -the
Supreme Court -held:— “at

“...,there is absolutely no provision in tile
Code of Criminal Procedure of 1898 (Which
applies to this case) empowering a Magistrafe
to review or recall an order passed ‘by ff i
Code of Criminal Procedure does contait®'
provision for inlicrent power, namély secttbh
561-A which, however, confers these powers ‘dn
‘the High Court and the High Court alont.
Unlike section 151 of Civil Procedure ‘Code
the subordinate Criminal Courts have no in-
herent powers. In these circumstances, thereat
the learned Magistrate had absolutely 1
jurisdiction to recall the order dismissing the
complaint. The remedy of the respondent. was
to move the Sessions Judge or the High. Const
. in revision. In fact, after having passed: -p@
order dated 23-11-1968, the Sub-divisiomal
‘Magistrate became funcho officio and had .ag
Power to review or recall that order, on any
ground whatsoever. In these circumstances,
therefore, the order, even if there be one, re-
- ¢alling the order dismissing the complaint,’ was
entirely without jurisdiction. This : being : thd
position, all subsequent proceedings follot wih
upon recalling the said order, would fall to the
ground, including order dated 3-5-1972 samnion-
ing the accused, which must also be treated to’
be-a nullity and destitute of any legal’ effect:
The High Court has not at all considered ‘thi:
important aspect of the matter, which alome'
was sufficient to put an end to these proceedigns.””

3-48; Supreme Court jadgment of 1979. Tg! ?
most important judgment of the Supreme Court‘!
of 1979. In that casel8, the High Court had (ih:
revision) enhanced the sentence passed on the!
convicted person. A petition for review of that!
judgment was entertained by the High Court: On an :
appeal by the State Government, the Supreme Court
held that— . 5
is
(@) the High Court cannot review or revise: 4 |
judgment passed in appeal-or revision exeepq;
in accordance with the provisions of the-
Code of Criminal Procedure. o



(b) The inherent power of the Court (section
561A, Code of 1898) cannot be exercised
for a purpose specifically prohibited by
the Code.

3-19. Position arising in the context of 1986 judg-
meat of Supreme Court.—/n a case decided in 1986,
the Supreme Court,)\9 answreing a broad question,
namely, “whether a subordinate criminal court has
any inherent jurisdiction outside the provisions of the
Criminal Procedure Code”, held that no such power
existell.

The facts may be stated in detail. A complaint
had been filed under sections 67 and 72C(1)(a),
Mines Act, 1952 read with the relevant Regulations
made junder the Act. On the date fixed for
apReafance of the accused, neither the complai-
nant nor the accused appeared and the trial court
dismissed the case for default. The complainant
applied for restoration of the case to the Magistrate
and restoration was ordered, The accused, however,
applied before the Magistrate and challenged the
order as being without jurisdiction. The Magistrate
rejected the application of the accused, holding that
he had inherent power to review and recall his
earlier order. The accused then applied in revision
to the Sessions Judge and the High Court, but both
of them rejected the application of the accused.
Thereafter, the accused moved another application
before the Magistrate, relying on the judgment of
the Supreme Court in Bindeshwari Prasad v. Kali
Singh®, That judgment had held that no criminal
court had an inherent jurisdiction not provided
for in the Code. Accepting the application of the
accused, the Magistrate dropped the proceedings
against the accused. This time, it was the complai-
nant who was aggrieved by the order of the
Magistrate and he filed a revision petition before
the Sessions Judge, which was accepted and the
order of the Magistrate, dropping the proceedings,
> was set aside. The complainant aggrieved by the
order of the Magistrate, filed a revised peition
before the Sessions Court. The accused approached
the Dejhi High Court by way of petition under
article 227 of the Constitution of India read with
section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973. The petition was dismissed in limine by the
High Court. The accused filed an appeal before
. the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court allowed
~ the appeal and observed :—
“Wheat the court has to see, is not whether
the Code of Criminal Procedure contains any
provision prohibiting a Magistrate from enter-
taining an application to restore a dismissed

complaint but the task should be to find cut
whether the said Code contains any. provision
enabling a Magistrate to exercise. gn inhesent
jurisdiction which he otherwise does not have.
It was relying upon this decision that the Delhi
High Court in this case directed the Magistrate
to recall the order of dismissal of the complaint.
The Delhi High Court referred to various decisions
dealing with section 367 of the Criminal Procedure
Code (of 1898) as what should be ‘the contents
of a judgment. In our view, the entire dis-
cussion is misplaced. So far as the accused is
concerned, dismissal of a complaint for non
appearance of the complainant or his charge or
acquittal on the same ground is a final order
and in the absence of any specific provision
in the Code, a Magistrate cannot exercise any
inherent jurisdiction”.
In the course of- its judgment, (in paragraphs
9 and 10) the Suprem2 Court (apparently referring
to the Code of 1973), made the following
observations : --

“9. Section 249 of the Criminal P. C. enables
a Magistrate to discharge the accused when the
complainant is absent and when the conditions
laid down in the said section are satisfied.
S. 256(1) of the Criminal P. C, enables a
Magistrate to acquit the accused if the com-
plainant dozs not appear. Thus, the order of
dismissal of a complainant by a criminal court
due to the absence of a complainant is a proper
order. But the question remains whether a
Magistrate can restore a complaint to his file by
revoking his earlier order dismissing it Jfor the
non-appearance of the complainant and proceed
with it when an application is made by the
complainant to revive it. A second complaint
is permissible in law, if it could be brought
within the limitations imposed by this Court
in Pramatha Nath Taluqdar v. Saroj Ranjan
Sarkar, 1962 Supp. (2) SCR 297 : (AIR 1962 SC
876) filing of a second complaint is not the same
thing as reviving a dismissed complaint after
recalling the earlier order of dismissal. The
Criminal P. C. does not contain any provision
enabling the criminal Court to exercise such an
inherent power”.

3:20. What flows from aforesaid judgments of
Supreme Court:—It would appear from the above
resume of Supreme Court decisions, that the
resultant position is as under:—

(1) An Appeal cannot be dismissed for default,
It must be disposed of on merits whether


or not the party or his advocate is present.
(Supreme Court judgment of 1962).

(2) An appeal once dismissed cannot be restored
for rehearing under the inherent power of
the High Court. (Supreme Court judgment
of 1962).

(3) Where a High Court has rendered a judgment
or rejected a revisional application by a
signed order, it cannot review the same.
(Supreme Court judgment of 1979).

(4) Nor can the High Court do so in exercise
of its inherent power. (Supreme Court
judgment of 1979).

(4A) Subordinate criminal courts do not possess
inherent powers. (Supreme Court judgment
of 1977).

(5) Apparently, the same is the position regarding
dismissal of a criminal case for default

10

(6)

(7)

(8)

pursuant to @ signed order in this behalf.
(Supreme Court judgment of 1979).

A signed order of a Magistrate dismissing
@ complaint or an order discharging the
accused for default of the complainant, is
a final order. (Supreme Court judgment of
1986).

An order so passed for defauit cannot be
disturbed by restoring the case under the
inherent power, in face of the express pro-
hibition against alteration of judgment or
final order embodied in section 362 of the
Code of 1973. (Supreme Court judgment
of 1986).

SUCH ORDER OF DISMISSAL FOR
DEFAULT CAN BE SET ASIDE, IF AT
ALL, ONLY BY THE HIGHER COURT
OF APPEAL, OR REVISION. (SUPREME
COURT JUDGMENT OF 1986).


CHAPTER IV

POSITION IN RELATION TO DISMISSAL FOR DEFAULT OF MAINTENANCE CASES AND
THE RESTORATION THEREOF

4:1. Section 125 Cr. P. C. 1973:—At this stage,
we would like to deal in brief with proceedings
for maintenance under section 125, Code of Criminal
» Procedure, 1973 (Code). These proceedings, though
1 they are dealt with by Magistrates under the Code
in substance partake of the character of civil
proceedings,

4-2, A Panjab case as to maintenance:—In 1989,
in a case b2fore the Punjab and Haryana High
Court! the question arose whether the Judicial
Magistrate could restore the execution application
of an order under section 125, Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, which was dismissed in default
for non-appearance of the petitioner. The Judicial
~ Magistrate, Rajpura, had granted maintenance
under section 125, Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, in favour of Kamla Devi of Banur (District
Patiala) and her two minor children, from her
husband Mahma Singh. Because of non-payment
of. the maintenance amount, the wife filed an
execution application which was dismissed in default
as she and her counsel could not appear before the
court. Onher application, the execution application
+ ६ was restored by the Judicial Magistrate. On a
revision filed by the husband before the Additional
Sessions Judge, Patiala, a legal point was raised
that the Magistrate could not restore the execution
application because of the ban of section 362. Cr.
P.C. 1973 which bars alteration in a judgment or
final order. The plea raised by the husband
was allowed by the Additional Sessions Judge.
~The wife preferred a petition in the High Court of
Punjab and Haryana, in revision against this order.
A Division Bench of the High Court held that the
referred application could be restored. The High
Court, relying upon the decision of the Supreme
Court in Savitri v. Govind Singh Rawat? and the
decisions of the Delhi High Court in Prema Jain v.
Sudhir Kumar Jain and Surhid Kamra vy. Neeta4
4 held to the following effect :—

4

(i) There is no specific provision in Chapter
IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure
dealing with application for grant of main-
tenance to wives, children and parents to
dismiss such applications for non-appearance
of the petitioner. Since such applications

3-515 Law/93

ap

are not to be equated with criminal complaint
which necessarily are to be dismissed for
non-appearance of the complainant in view
of section 256 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, it is only in the exercise of
inherent power of the court that for non-
appearance of the petitioner, application
under section 125 of the Code is dismissed.
If that is so, there is no reason why there
should not be inherent power with the court
to restore such applications dismissed in
default on showing sufficient cause by the
petitioner for his non-appearance.

“The nature of the proceedings in
Chapter 1X of the Code is inherently con-
cerning civil rights, ie. grant of maintenance
to wives, children and parents. All these
orders passed under different provisions of
Chapter 1X, as briefly noticed above, are
interim in nature and can be modified, varied
or cancelled on the grounds mentioned there-
in. Furthermore, such orders are subject
to final orders, if any, passed by the civil
courts regarding grant of maintenance. The
Code of Criminal Procedure provides a
swift and speedy remedy to the petitioners
claiming maintenance who are being neg-
lected. It is only in the matter of imple-
mentation of such orders that a stringent
provision is made for recovery of such amount
as recovery of fine or by sending the person
against whom order is made to imprisonment
for a certain period till payment is made.
This remedy cannot be throttled by proce-
dural technicalities such as non-appearance
of the petitioner on a particular day. Such
non-appearance in a given casc may be beyond
the control of the petitioner. In other words,
there may be sufficient and cogent reason for
the petitioner not to put in appearance when
the case was actually called. In such
circumstances, not to restore the application
dismissed in default would result in mis-
carriage of justice. On a sufficient cause
being shown, the court would have inherent
power in such like cases to restore such
applications dismissed in default,”



4-3, It needs to be stressed that the order passed
by the High Court sustaining the restoration may
now become vulnerable in as much as the Supreme
Court has declared in Bindeshwari’s case5 that a
magistrate’s court has no inherent powers,
Complications are, therefore, inherent in the
present situation and serious injustice is likely to
ensue unless the law is amended persuant to the
recommendations we propose to make.

12

4-4. Effect of proposed amendment:—We may
mention that the amendments® which are proposed
to be recommended presently when accepted and
acted upon will foreclose or shut the door for any
future controversy in the context of the inter-
pretation of the provisions partaining to inherent
powers of the concerned courts to restore such
matters for the sake of promoting ends of
justice.


CHAPTER V

POSITION IN REGARD TO ACQUITTAL IN THE CONTEXT OF COMPLAINANT’S NON-
APPEARANCE IN SUMMONS CASES

51, Position under section 256.—Attention must
be drawn to another analogous problem which
arises out of section 256 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, appearing in Chapter 20, dealing
with the trial of summons cases. Broadly speaking,
cases relating to offences punishable with imprison-
ment up to two years would fall in this category.
Under section 256(1), if, ina summons case not
covered by the proviso, the complainant is absent
on the date fixed for hearing, the Magistrate must
acquit the accused, unless he thinks it proper to
adjourn the hearing to another date. And the
normal consequeces of acquittal under the law
follow.

5:2. Absence of power of restoration.— One of the
consequences of the order of acquittal is that a
second trial cannot be held for the same offence
in view of the prohibition against double jeopardy.
The only remedy available would be by way of an
appeal against acquittal under section 378 of the
Code. The conditions of that provision are, how-
ever, fairly stringent. In any case, since there
would be no decision on the merits, the order of
acquittal cannot be assailed on merits in the appel-
late forum and the order can be challenged solely
“in the context of the failure of the magistrate to
adjourn the matter instead of dismissing the same
for default. As the magistrate has n0 power! to
restore a case dealt with under section 256(1), the
resultant harm cannot be erazed even if the complai-
nant is subsequently able to establish that his
absence on the date fixed for hearing was for
sufficient cause. And in view of the order of
~ acquittal. and the attendant bar against double
” jeopardy even a fresh complaint may not be compe-
tent and the wrong would become irreversible and
irreparable.
5-3. Resultant hardship and oced for amendment.—
The present position as summarized above causes
avoidable hardship and may result in the acquittal
, Of persons who are really guilty, since in cases
not covered by the proviso such acquittal follows
as a mandatory consequence (unless the case is
adjourned) on the non-appearance of the complai-
nant. Prima facie, it seems that in cases where
the complainant had a reasonable cause for not

63

attending on the date of hearing, the magistrate
should have power to set aside the acquittal and
fix the matter for fresh hearing.

5-4-1, Magnitude of  consequences.—In this
connection, it would be useful to glance at the
categorisation of cases as summons cases and
warrant cases under the Code, in order to assess
the magnitude of the consequences flowing from the
absence of the power to restore the matter. A
“Summons Case”, as defined in section 2(v) of the
Code, means a case relating to an offence and not
being a warrant case. A “Warrant Case” as per
section 2(x), means a case relating to an offence
punishable with death, imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for a term exceeding two years.
Thus, all cases relating to offences punishable with
imprisonment upto two years become summons cases
trlable under Chapter 20 of the Code which contains
section 256.

5°4:2. A perusal of Appendix-J listing summons
cases under Indian Penal Code and Appendix-If
listing summons cases under some other Central
Acts, would show that many of the offences triable
as summons cases cannot be terme s petty of
trivial, either from the point of view of the aggrieved
person or from the point of view of the community
at large.

A few illustrations may be useful.—Thus, as
regards the offences under the Indian Penal Code,
the instance of simple cheating (section 417) may
be cited. The punishment is imprisonment upto
one year. It is non-cognizable. One can also cite
the example of offence under section 427 (mischief)
(causing damage of Rs. 50/- or more). Punishment
is imprisonment upto two years, It is also non-
cognizable. Even criminal intimidation (Section
506 first part) punishable with imprisonment upto
two years is a summons case and non-cognizable.
So also in regard to an offence under section 509
(insulting the modesty of a woman), carrying simple
imprisonment upto one year. Although the offence
is cognizable, yet it may happen that in practice,
cognisance was taken on complaint of the woman.
In all such cases the cognisance would have been
taken only on a complaint and the aforementioned


consequences would follow in the event of the
absence of the complainant.

5-4-3, Even in regard to offences under special
laws, where the offence is cognizable, cognizance
may have been taken by the court on a complaint.
Thus, the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, section
8(1), makes the offences under that Act cognizable
for certain purposes, but section 7(1)(b) of the
same Act prohibits cognizance except on the
knowledge of the court, police report or complaint

14

by the person aggrieved etc., or by a recognised
welfare institution or organisation. Punishment
for demanding dowry is imprisonment upto two
years (section 4), so that the offence relating thereto
becomes a summons case. In such cases, also
non-appearance by the complainant or the welfare
organisation will lead to acquittal.

Evidently, therefore, there exists the need to

amend the law, so as to avoid injustice in all such
cases.


CHAPTER Vi

INHERENT POWERS

6:1. Observations in L4th Report.—The Law Com-
mission in its 14th Report, while dealing with the
question of inherent powers, recommended that
such inherent powers of all criminal courts should
be statutorily recognised. The question regarding
the restoration of the case dismissed for default
was, however, not considered by the Law Comunission
in the said report. The recommendations made by
the Law Commission were to the following effect! :—

“{2. The doctrine of inherent jurisdiction was
for the first time given statutory recognition in
the case of High Courts exercising criminal juris-
diction by the enactment of section 561-A in the
Criminal Procedure Code in 1923. This section
assumes the existence of such inherent power in
the High Courts and provides that nothing in the
Code is to be deemed to limit its inherent power
to make such orders as would be necessary to
give effect to any order under the Code or to
prevent abuse of the process of any court or to
otherwise secure the ends of justice. The inherent
power, thus recognised, empowers the Court,
inter alia, to prevent the abuse of the process not

(15)

only of the High Court but of any court. The
High Court thus exercises its inherent jurisdiction
not only in respect of proceedings before it but
also in respect of proceedings in the: subordinate
court. .

“13. This statutory recognition, however, extends
only ta the inherent powers of the High Court.
One may compare it with the recognition of the
inherent powers of all civil courts by section 151,
Civil Procedure Code.

We reiterate the substance of the recommendation
made in the earlier Reports, and recommend, that
section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(which deals with inherent powers) should be amend-
ed for the purpose. However, we are of the view,
that in actually formulating the amendment, the
language employed should be affirmative, rather than
negative as suggested in the earlier Reports. Because,
what was then suggested was on the premise that
even criminal courts did possess inherent powers,
which premise no longer holds good in the light of
the Supreme Court decision in Gauraya’s case,3


CHAPTER Vit

COMMISSION’S CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

FIRST RECOMMENDATION

7-1. Recommendation regarding empowering the
courts to restore applications dismissed for default in
appearance.—Having regard to the foregoing
discussion, the Commission considers it eminently
desirable that in order to promote the ends of justice,
a provision should be incorporated in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, as section 482A, enabling
the restoration of a criminal revisional application,
dismissed for default of appearance or some other
default, where such default is due to sufficient causc.
The new section may be on these !ines:—
“482A. (1) Where an application invoking the
revisional jurisdiction is dismissed for default
of appzarance of the applicant or his/her advocate
or some other default, the court may, if it is
satisfied that such person was prevented by suffi-
cient cause from appearing, make an order setting
‘aside the order of dismissal upon such terms as to
costs or otherwise, as it thinks’ fit and shall appoint
a day for proceeding with the application”.
“Provided that no such application for restoration
shall be entertained after the expiry of a period
of thirty days from the date on which the appli-
cation was dismissed for default.

(2) No order shall be made under sub-section
(1), unless notice of the application thereunder
has been served on the opposite party.

SECOND RECOMMENDATION

7-2-1, Recommendation regarding restoration of a
criminal ease for default in appearance and consequea-
tial acqaittal of the accused for non-appearance.—The
Commigsion is further of the opinion that section
256 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, should
be amended to effectuate the recommendations made
in the earlier Chapter! in the light of the need for
remedying the injustice inherent in the situation as
spelt out earlicr. For, a meritorious complaint of a
°omplainant cannot be allowed to be thwarted, only
on the ground that the complainant was unable to
remain present, even though there existed_good and
sufficient cause for such absence. Ends of justice
demand that such a person should not be made to suffer
injustice merely because he or she cannot afford to

aq

approach the Supreme Court, which court is, in its
turn, overburdened with work. The power to set aside
the dismissal and restoring it will have, therefore,
to be conferred on the criminal court for proceeding
further in accordance with law.

7-2-2. It will also be necessary to amend the pro-
vision regarding the nature of the consequential order.
If a consequential order of acquittal as presently pro-
vided is passed, the same court cannot set it aside
even whilst setting aside the order of dismissal form-
ing the basis of the orden of acquittal. Oily the higher
court can set aside the acquittal. To overconte this
problem, it will, therefore, be appropriate to provide
that the order passed is in the form of “termination
of proceedings” and to further provide that it'will
have the effect of an order of acquittal unless (1०
order of dismissal for default is set aside in uance
Of the power to restore conferred on the court. *

7-2-3. The problem can be redressed by amending
section 256 to incorporate the following points:—

(a) the order to be passed under the section
shall be an order terminating the proceeding
having the same effect as an acquittal, unless
it is set aside as provided in (b) below;

such order may (after notice to the accused)
be set aside if the complainant, by an ap-
plication made within 30 days, shows that
there was sufficient cause for the non ap-
pearance of the complainant.

(6)

7-3, We suggest, that section 256 should be revised
as under;

“256. Non-appearance or death of complainanti—

(1) If the summons has heen issued on com-
plaint and, on the day appointed for the
appearance of the accused, or on any day
subsequent thereto to which the hearing may
be adjourned, the complainant does not
appear, the Magistrate shall, notwithstanding
anything hereinbefore contained, terminate
the proceedings, unless for some reason he
thinks it proper to adjourn the hearing of the
case to some other day:


Provided that ६

(a) where the complainant is represented
by a pleader or by the officer conducting
the prosecution or

where the Magistrate is of opinion
that the personal attendance of the
complainant is not necessary, the Magi-
strate may dispense with the attendance
and proceed with the case.

The provisions of sub-section (1) shall, so
far as may be, apply also to cases where the
non-appearance of the complainant is due
to his death.

%
An order terminating the proceedings under
sub-section (1) shall, subject to the provisions
of sub-section (4), have the same effect as an
order of acquittal.

Where the proceedings are terminated under
this section, the court may, if it is satisfied
on the application of the complainant that
he was prevented by sufficient cause from
appearing, make an order setting aside the
order of termination upon such terms, as to
costs or otherwise, as it thinks fit and shall
eppoint a day for proceeding with the case,

(>)

७)

(७)

(७)

Provided that no such application shall be enter-
tained after the expiry of a period of thirty days from
the date on which the proceedings were terminated,

Sd/-
(¥.V. ANJANEYULU)
MEMBER

Sd/-
(MAHESH CHANDRA)
MEMBER

17

(5) No order shall be made under sub-section (4)
unless notice of the application thereunder
has been served on the accused”,

THIRD RECOMMENDATION

7-4, Amendment pertaining to conferment of inherent
powers on the trial court as well.—Finally, having
considered the earlier recommendation made in the
14th Report and reiterated in the 41st Report of the
Commission, it is recommended that the: provision
relating to inherent powers of the Court to do justice
etc. be expanded, so as to confer power on criminal
courts other than the High Court. Otherwise, even
a maintenance application under section 125 Cr. P.C,
dismissed for default in appearance may not be re-
stored on the reasoning that courts exercising juris-
diction under Cr. P.C. (except High Court) do not
possess inherent powers. Our recommendation
accordingly is that present section 482 of the Code
may be renumbered as section 482(1) and a new
sub-section should be added in that ‘section, as
under;—

“() Criminal courts other than the High Court
shall also have inherent powers to make such
orders as may be necessary to prevent abuse
of the process of the court or otherwise to
secure the ends of justice.”

7-5. We recommend accordingly.

80/-
(Mp. THAKKAR)

CHAIRMAN

Sd/-
(P.M. BAKSHI
MEMBER

80/- 7,
(G.V.G. KRISHNAMURTY)
MEMBER SECRETARY.

NEW DELHI, DATED THE 30TH JULY, 1991.


NOTES AND REFERENCES

CHAPTER वा

1,

AS. Gauraya v. S.N. Thakur, (1986) Cri. L.
J. 1074 (SC) : 1986 (2) SCC 709.

CHAPTER वा

1,

10.

वा,
12.

13.

14,

Ram Das v. State of U.P., AIR 1952 All. 926,
927, para 5 (Bind Basni Prasad J).

Bishambar Dayal v. State of U.P., (1958) All.
L.J. 489, 490 (R. K. Chowdhary J).

Deepak v. State of Maharashtra, (1985) Cri.
L. J. 23, para 6 (Bom) (Kantharia, J).

Bibhuti Mohan Roy v. Sadimoni Dassi, (1909)
Cri. L. J. 287, 288, 289 (Cal.) (Harington and
Brett JJ).

Haji Sahajuddin Ahmad v. Banamali Das,
(1983), Cri. L.J. (NOC) 173 (Gau.) (K. N.
Suikia, J).

K. Kunhammad Haji v. Emperor, AIR 1923
Mad. 426, 432, 433 (Oldfield and Devadoss
JD).

Ram Autar Thakur v.
1987 Pat. 33.

Keshav Lal v. Gaveria, AIR 1952 Raj. 50,
51, 52, para 4 and 7 (Wanchoo CJ and Bapna

State of Bihar, AIR

Raj Mallaiah vy. Neeradi Naradayya, (1959)
Andh. Law Times 227, 228 (Srinivasachari,
१)

$. N, Sharma v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1971)
Cri. L. J. 1056, para 3 (AP) (Venkateshwara
Rao, J).

Mina Ram v. Jiviu Budhu, (1974) Cri. L. J.
718, 719 (H.P.) (0. 8. Lal J).

Bhanu v. Vilasini, (1980) Ker. Law Times,
13, 15, para 3-4- (Narayana Pillai J).

Ranga Rao v. Emperor, (1912) 13 Cri. LJ.

710, 23. MLJ 574, cited in Narra Appayya,
AIR 1923 Mad. 276 (1).

Narra Appayya v. Darai Venkatappaya, AIR
1923 Mad. 276 (1) (Wallace J),

Subrahmaniam v. Ramaswami, AIR 1949 Mad.
154 (Govind Menon J),

(18)

16, Sankata Singh vy. State of U.P., AIR 1962 SC

1208 : (1962) Supp. S.C.R. 817.

Bindeshwari Prasad v. Kali Singh, AIR 1977
SC 2432.

State of Orrisa v. Ram Chander Agarwala, AIR
1979 SC 87, 91, paragraph 17.

A, S. Gauraya v. S. N. Thakur, (1986) Cri.
L.J. 1074 (SC) : 1986 (2) SCC 709. —
Bindeshwari Prasad v. Kali Singh, AIR 1977,
SC 2432.

17,
18,
19.

20,

CHAPTER IV

1, Kamla Devi v. Mahma Singh, (1989) Cri. L.
J. 1866, 1871, (P & H) (D B) paragraph 7 and
8.

2. 98, Savitri v. Govind Singh Rawat, (1985)
Marriage Law Journal 561 (S C).

3. Prema Jain v. Sudhir Kumar Jain, (1980) 3
Marriage Law Journal 17 (Delhi): (1980) Cri.
L. J. 80 (Del).

4, Surhid Kamra v, Neeta,
Law Journal 193 (Delhi).

5, Bindeshwari Prasad v. Kali Singh, AIR 1977
SC 2432.

6. Paragraph 7-1-

(1988) 3 Marriage

infra,

CHAPTER

1, A. S. Gauraya v. S. N. Thakur (1986) Cri. L.
J. 1074 (SC) : 1986 (2) SCC 709.

Vv

CHAPTER VI

1, Law Commission of India, 14th Report (Re-
form of Judicial Administration), pages 820-
821, paras 1 to 3.

2. Law Commission of India, 45 Report (The

+ Code of Criminal Procedure, 1988), page 359,
para 46-23.

3. A. S. Gauraya v. S. N. Thakur, (1986) Cri.L.
J. 1074 (SC) : 1986 (2) SCC 709,

CHAPTER VII

1, Chapter V, supra.


APPENDIX 1

SECTIONS OF THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, OFFENCES
WHEREUNDER ARE SUMMONS CASES

Criminal Conspiracy
120 B (2) “

Armed Forces

135 to 140

Public Tranquillity
153. to 458, 160 -

Public Servants
163, 166, 168 to 171

Elections
171 Fto 171 T

Lawfal authority of public. servants
172—180,  182—190

False‘ ‘evidence and public justice

202 to 204, 206 to 210, 211 (para 1),

212 (छ॥ para) 213 (last para), 214 (last para),
215; 216: (ast para), 217, 221 (last para), 223,
224, 225 (first para), 225A(b), 225-B, 227, 228,
228A, 229. ह

Coins and Gevernmest Stamps
254, 262

Weights and Measures
264 to 267

4-515 Law/93

Public Health, Safety convenience, Decency and
Morals

269 to 280, 282 to 291, 292, 294, 294A
Religion

295 to 298

Human Body

304A, 309, 318, 323, 334, 336 to 338, 341 to 343,
345, 346, 352 to 358, 374, 376 (one part), 376A

Property
385—403, 417, 421, 422, 423, 424, 426, 427, 428,
434, 447, 448, 451, 453, 461

Documents and Property Marks
465, 471, 482, 483, 489, 4898

Criminal Breach of Contract of Service’

491

Marriage

498.

Defamation

500-501, 502

Criminal ‘Intimidation; insult and annoyance
$04, 506 (first para), 508, 509-510


APPENDIX-IX.

LIST OF SUMMONS CASES UNDER OTHER ACTS

Acts

— “Section(s) . 7

~~ Offence(s)

2 3

2.

. Ancient Monuments

. Architect Act, 1972.

‘Advocates Act, 1961 45

Agricultural Produce
(Grading and Marking)
Act, 1937.

Afgticultural Produce
Corporation Act, 1956.

48

Air Corporation Act, 43

1959.

Air Craft Act, 1934 10

114

1B

के कक, oe

Atcient Monuments
and Archacological Sites
and Remains Act, 1958.

Preservation Act, 1904.

36

37

38

Penalty —

5

Penalties for ‘persons illegally ~
practising in Courts and before
other authorities.

Penalty for unauthorised marking
with grade designation mark.

Penalty for counterfeiting grade
designation mark,

Using the name of the Warehousing
Corporation in any prospectus or
advertisement with written consent
of the Corporation.

Penalty for wrongful withholding
of property of the Corporation.

Penalty for acts in contravention
of rules made under the Act.
Penalty for flying so as to

cause danger.

Penalty for failure to comply

with directions issued u/s SA

of the Act.

Penalty or failure to comply with
directions issued u/s 9A of the Act.
Penalty for abetment of offences.

Penalty for destruction, removal,
injuring a monument, etc.

Penalty for destruction, removal,
injuring, etc. the ancient
monuments.

Penalty for falsely claiming to
be registered.

Penalty for using title of
Architect by unregistered
persons/firms.

Penalty for failure to surrender
Certificate of registration.

_ ‘Tmprisonment ‘upto 6 6 months

Fine upto Rs. 500/-

Imprisonment upto two years
or fine or both,

Imprisonment upto six months

or fine upto Rs. 1000/- or

both, yore
1

Imprisonment upto! one year
or fine upto Rs. 1000/-.
Imprisonment upte 2 yeep
and fine, हे
Imprisonment upto @ period
of six months or fine upte
Rs, 1000/- or with both.
Do.

Do.

Same as for the offeaces, a पर

Imprisonment upto three
months or fine upto Rs. 500/-
or both.

Imprisonment upto three

months or fine upto Rs. 5000/-
or both.

Fine upto Rs. 1000/-.

Ist Offence

Fine upto Rs. 500/-.

2nd and subsequent offence
Imprisonment which may
extend to six months or fime
upto Rs. 1000/- or both.
Fine upto Rs. 100/-.

(20)


3 4 5
9 Arms Act, 1959. 25(2) Penalty for acquiring, possessing Imprisonment upto ore yedr
or carrying any fire arm in or fine or both.
contravention of Section 9(a)i)

25(3) Failure to intimate the sale or Imprisonment upto 6 montis
transfer of fire arm, or fine upto Rs, 500/- or both.

25(4) Failure to deliver licence Do.
when required.

25(5) Failure to disclose name or Imprisonment upto 6 months
address or giving a false or fine upto Rs. 200/- or both,
name and address,

29 Purchase of arm from unauthorised Imprisonment upto 6 months
person or delivering of any arm and fine upto Rs. 500/- or
to an unauthorised person. both.

30 Contravention of licence or Imprisonment upto three
provision of the Act or rule months or fine upto Rs. 500/-
for which no punishment is or both,
provided in the Act.

31 Penalty for subsequent offences. Double the penalty provided

for the offence,
10, Bombay Companies 46(2) Failure to produce any book, Fine upto Rs. 2000/-
Act, 1949 account or other document
by a person having the duty
to produce. ely

46(3) Deposit in contravention of Fine to the extent of twice
an order. the amount of deposit,

46(4) Contravention of any provision Fine upto Rs, 2000/-.

; of the Act, rule or direction. oo
11. Indian Boilers Act, 1923 22 Failure or refusal of an owner of Fine upto Rs. 100/+
Boiler to :
(i) surrender a provisional
order:
(ii) produce the certificate
or provisional order when
called upon to do so;
(iii) to make over to the new
owher of a boiler a certificate
or provisional order.

23 Illegal use of boiler Fine upto Rs, 500/-

24 Other penalties Fine upto Rs, 500/-

25 Tampering with register mark Do.

i तु हि
12, Cantonments Act, 1924 118 Causing nuisance Fine upto Rs, Stj-

119(5) Allowing the dog to be at Fine upto 100/-.
large in street a ’

119(6) Keeping Ferocious dogs Fine upto 200/.....

124(2) Use of cinematograph instrument Do.
in unlicensed premises. boo

125 Letting of fire works causing Fine upto 50/-.

danger.



22

1948.

to produce record,or obstruction
to any officer of the Board.

1 2 3 4 5

184 Illegal ¢réction and re-erection Fine upto 500/-.’-

193 Destroying or tampering with Fine upto Rs. 25/-.
number or names.

bol. 213 Carrying on trade without licence Fine upto Rs. 200/-.

३. Cardamom Act, 1965 21 Contravention of order controlling Imprisonment upto one year
the import or export of or fine or both.
cardamom,

23 Making of false returns Fine upto Rs. 500/-

24 Penalties for obstruction to Imprisonment upto six months
officer or member of board in or fine upto Rs. 1000/- or both.
the discharge of duty.

25 Contravention of price control Do.

हि 26 Other penalties for contravention Do.
of the provision of the Act
not specifically provided
14, Cattle Trespass Act, 24 Forcibly opposing the seizure Imprisonment upto six months
> (871. of or rescuing the cattle. or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both

26 Damage caused to land, crops, Fine Rs, 10/-
or public roads by Pigs. हे

27 Failure of keeper to perform duties Fine upto Rs. 50/-.

15. Census Act, 1948 11(1) Failure to perform duties under Imprisonment upto six months
. the act or obstruction, etc. and fine upto Rs. 1000/-.

11(2) Abetment Fine upto Rs. 1000/-.

16. Central Excise and 17 Connivance at offences Imprisonment upto six months
Salt Act, 1944. or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both.

22 Vexations search, seizure etc. Fine upto-Rs.:2000/-
by Central Excise Officer
Giving of false information Imprisonment upto 2 years
leading to arrest or search or fine upto Rs. 2000/- or both.

23 Failure of officer to perform Imprisonment for 3 months or
duty. fine upto three months’ pay

है or both.

24 Carrying of excisable goods in Imprisonment upto six months
a vessel other than prescribed. or fine upto Rs. 1000/- or

both.

27 Obstruction to officers. Imprisonment upto 6 months

or fine upto Rs. 1000/- or both.
17. Central Industria! 18 Neglect of duty. हु Imprisonment upto 6 months
Security Force Act, 1968. se | : Lot
18. Central Reserve Police 10 Offences by member of. the force. Imprisonment upto one year
Act, 1949, 1 or fine upto three months’
pay or both.
19. Central Silk Board Act, 14 Filing of false return, failure Imprisonment upto one year

or fine upto Rs. 1000/- or both.



1

20. Child Marriage 3

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

27.

28,

2 3

Restraint Act, 1929.

4
6
Children Act, 1960. 4)
a2
43
44
Cinematograph Act, 14
1950
Citizenship Act, 17
1955
Civil Defence Act, 11
1968
Commission of Enquiry 10-A
Act, 1952
. Copyright Act, 1957 65
i
67
68
The Dramatic Per- 6
.formance Act, 1876
Drugs and Cosmetics 274
- ‘Act, 1940.
ners
28
29
Drugs and;Magic 7

29.

Remedies (Objectionable

. Advertisement). ,

Act, 1954,

Adult male (above 18 years of
age but below 21 years) marrying
a child.

Male adult above 21 years of
age marrying a child.

Soleminising a child marriage
Penalty for parent/guardian
concerned in child marriage.

Cruelty to child

Employment of children for
begging.

Giving intoxicating liquor or
dangerous drug to.a child.
Exploitation of child employees
Using or permitting the use of

Cinematograph or premises in
contravention of Act or rules.

Making of false representation

Neglect/refusal to discharge
functions.
Acts calculated to bring the

Commission or any number
thereof into disrepute.

Possession of plates for purpose
of making infringing copies.
Making of false entries

Making of false statements.

Disobeying prohibition

Manufacture, salé, etc. of
cosmetics in contravention of
Chap IV and rules.
Non-disclosure of the names of
manufacturer.

Using Report of Analyst for
advertising.

Contravention of the provisions
of the Act.

5 H

है “Imprisonment. upto £5 days

or fine upto Rs. 1600/- or
both.

Imprisonment upto _ three

months and fine.
Do.
Do.

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine or both.

Imprisonment upto 1
or fine or both.

Fine upto Rs. 200'-

year

Fine upto Rs. 1000/-.
Fine upto Rs. 1000/-,

Imprisonment upto six months
or fine or both.

Fine upto Rs. 500/-

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine or both.

Imprisonment upto two years
and fine.

Imprisonment upto one year
or fine or both.

Do.

Imprisonment upto _ three

months or fine or béth.

Imprisonment upto one year
or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both.

Do.

Fine upto Rs. 500/-.

Imprisonment upto six months
or fine or both.



a4

i 2 3
३0. ‘Indian Electricity 40
Act, 1910.
4l
42
43
44
45
46
47
31. Electricity (Supply) 7
Act, 1948.
32. Emblems and Names 5

(Prevention of Improper
Use) Act, 1950.

33. Enemy Property Act,
1968

20(1)
20(2)
20(3)

20(4)

34, Indian Explosives Act, 9B(1)(b)
1884,

9(8)(1)
(०
“35, Factories Act, 1948. 92

95
96
97

98

4

5

है Maliciously wasting energy or

injuring work.

Unauthorised supply of energy
by non-licenses,

Illegal or defective supply or
for non-compliance with order,
Illegal transmission or use of
energy.

Interference with meters, etc.
Extinguishing public lamps.
Negligently wasting energy.

Penalty for offences not otherwise

provided for.

Failure to comply with or give effect

ve
Imprisonment upto 2. yeirs
or fine upto Rs, 1000/- er both.
Fine upto Rs, 3000/-

Fine upto Rs. 1000/-
Fine upto Rs, 500/-

Do.
Fine upto Rs. 300/-
Fine upto Rs. 200/-
Fine upto Rs. 100/-

Fine upto Rs, 500/-

to any direction, order or requirement.

Improper use of prohibited names and Fine upto Rs. 500/-
emblems for any trade, business, etc.

Payment made to enemy, enemy sub-

ject or firm.

Non-registration of securities in
terms of orders of the Custodian.
Non appearance before custodian

when called upon to give information

or produce record.
Non submission of returns of
enemy properties.

Possession, use, sale or transport
of explosive in contravention

of the rules made under the Act
or condition of licence.

Any other contravention

Contraventioa of any provision
of the Act or the rules.

Second or subsequent offence
ufs 92

Causing obstruction of Factory
Inspector.

Wrongful disclosure of result of
analysis,

Contravention of any provision by
worker.

Using false certificate of fitness,

Tmprisonment upto 6 months
or fine or both. .
Do.

Fine upto Rs. 500/-

Do.

Imprisonment upto 2 years
or fine upto Rs. 3000/- or
both.

Fine upto Rs. 1000/-

Imprisonment upto 3 months
or fine upto Rs. 2000/- or
both. a y
Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 5000/- or
both.

Imprisonment upto 3 moaths
or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both.

Do.

Fine upto Rs. 20/-

Imprisonment upto one month
or fine upto Rs. 50/- or both.



5

1 2 3

है 99

36, Indian Fisheries Act, 4
1897

5

37. Foreign Exchange Rgula- 57
tion Act, 1973.

58(1)

58(2)
38. Indian Forest Act, 62
1927.
41
63
33
39. Foreign Contribution 25
(Regulation) Act, 1976.
40. Forward Contracts 20
(Regulation) Act, 1952.
20
41. Gold Control Act, 86
1968. 87
90
91
94
95(1)
96
42; Import and Export SA

(Control) Act, 1947.

Permitting double employment of
child.

Destruction of fish by explosives
in inland waters and on coasts.
Destruction of fish by poisoning
of waters.

Contravention of the order made by
adjudicating officer, Appellate
Board or High Court.

Vexations search by officers of
Enforcement.

Giving of false information
thereby causing arrest or search.

Wrongful seizure of property.

Breach of rules regarding
transportation of timbers.
Counterfeiting or defacing

marks on trees and timbers,

Illicit felling of trees,

illegal breaking up of forest land, etc.

Offences of failure to comply

with the provisions of the Act,

for which no separate punishment
has been provided.
Contravention of provisions of
Chapter IV of the Act.

Owning or keeping place used
for entering into forward
control in goods.

Failure to make declaration,
Failure to submit returns,
Allowing premises to be used

as refinery.

Contravention of the provisions of
the Act for which no separate
punishment is provided for.
Wrongful seizure of property
Failure of Gold Contrdl Office

to perform duties. |

Giving of false information leading
10 arrest, search or seizure.

Contravention or order made by
adjudicating authority and Appellate
Authority.

a

Fine upto Rs, 50/-

Imprisonment upto 2 months
or fine upto Rs. 200/-
Do.

Imprisonment upto 2 years
or fine or both.

Fine upto Rs. 2000/-

Imprisonment upto 2 years
or fine upto Rs. 2000/- or
both.

Imprisonment upto six months
or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both.
Do.

Imprisonment upto .2 years
or fine or both.
Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both.

Imprisonment upto 1} , year
or fine upto Rs. 1000/- or
both. petit

i

Imprisonment upto one year
or fine or both.

Imprisonment upto. 2 years

or fine or both. ‘

Do, ;

Do.
Imprisonment upto one year
or fine or both.

Imprisonment upto 3 months.
or fine or both,

Fine upto’ Rs. 2000/2.

Imprisonment upto’ oad year
or fine or both.

Imprisonment upto two years
or fine or both,

Do.



1 “2 हु
43. Industrial Disputes Act,
1947,

44." Insecticides Act, 1968.

es

45> Lepers Act, 1898

46, Levy Sugar Price
Equalisation Fund Act,
1976.

4% Indian Lunacy Act,
1912.

48, Marking of Heavy
Packings Act, 1951.

a. ह Maternity Benefit Act,
1961.

50. Indian Medical Degree
va, Act, 1916.

earl -

51. Medical and Toilet
Preparations (Excise
Duty) Act, 1955.

29

30

30A

31

29

92

21

22

5

26

Illegal strikes and lockouts.

Penalty for mobilisation to take
part in strike, etc.

Financial aid to illegal strikes
and lockouts.

Breach of settlement or Award.

Disclosing of confidential
information.

Closing down of undertaking with
complying with provision of the Act.

Other offences under the Act.

Import, manufacture, sale distribu-
tion, use of insecticides in con-
travention of the provision
of the Act.

Employing lepers in prohibited trade

Default in crediting the fund, any
excess realisation or failure to
maintain or produce accounts,
record and to furnish information,

Improper receptiori or detention
of lunatics.

Failure to mark weight on
the heavy packings for transport
by sea or inland water.

Contravention of the provision of
the Act by employer.

Obstructing the Inspector.

Conferment of degree, etc. ina
wrongful manner.

Falsely assuming or usitig
- medical titles.

Production or manufacture of
dutiable goods with licence,

of evading excise duty or failure
to supply information. ”

upto one

Imprisonment
month or fine upto Rs. 1000/-
or both.

Imprisonment upto one month
or fine upto Rs. 1000/- or
both.

Do.

Imprisonment upto “6 months
or fine or both.

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 1000/- or
both,

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 5000/- or
both. : :

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 1000/- or
both,

Imprisonment upto 2 years
or fine upto Rs. 2000/- or
both,

Fine upto Rs. 50/-:"

Imprisonment upto 2 years
or fine upto Rs. 5000/- or
both,

Imprisonment upto 2. years
or fine or both.

Fine upto Rs. 500/-. ,
हे ५४

Imprisonment upto 3 months

or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both.
Do.

Fine upto Rs. 500/-.

Fine upto Rs. 250/-.

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 2000/-.or both.



5

52. Metal Token Act,
1889

53. Motor Transport
Work.rs Act, 1961

54, Dangerous Machines
(Regulation) Act, 1983

55. Emigration Act, 1983

56. latelligence Organi-
sations (Restrictions of
Rights) Act, 1985

57. National Services Act,
1972

58. Northern India Canal
and Drainage Act, 1873

“5515 Law/93

170)

17(2)

29(1)
29(2)
30
31

32.
31

24(1)

24(2)
24(4)
240)

26

10

under the Act

Wrong seizure by Excise
Officer.

Wrong information leading to
arrest, etc.

Failure of Excise Officer in
performing duty.

Use or possession of metal
token as coins.

Receipt of any metal as coin
by local authorities or railway.

Obstructing the Inspector in
performance of duty.
Failure to produce record,

Using false certificate of fitness.

Contravention of provision
regarding employment of
motor Transport workers.

Other offences.

Contravention of any provision
of the Act or rule or'order
under the Act.

Illegal emigration, furnishing
of false information, disobeying
the orders, charge of excess
amount from emigrants, or
cheating an emigrant.

Attempt to commit above offence.

Abetment. ,
Contravention of any term or
condition of emigration
clearance.

Contravention of restrictions
to form association, freedom
of speech, etc.

Contravention of the provision
for which no penalty prescribed
separately under the Act.

Causing damage, alteration or
obstruction or interference
etc, with canal or drainage work.

Imprisonment upto 6 mopths
and fine upto Rs. 500/s of
both.

Fine upto Rs. 2000/-.

Linprisonment upto 2 years
or fine upto Rs. 2000/- or both.
Imprisonment upto 3 months
or fine upto 3 months’ pay or
both.

Imprisonment upto one year
of fine or both.
Fine upto Rs. 10/-

Imprisonment upto 3 monthis
or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both.
Do. .

Imprisonment upto one motith’
or fine upto Rs. 50/- or boti.

Imprisonment upto 3 months
or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both.

Do.

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 1000/- or both.

Imprisonment upto 2 years,”
and fine upto Rs. 2000/-.

Do.
Do.

imprisonment upto oneyear or’
fine upto Rs. 2000/- or bot’

Imprisonment upto 2 years”
or fine upto Rs. 2000/- or both.

Fine upto Rs. 500/-.

Imprisonment upto one month
or fine upto Rs. 50/- or both.


38

Fine upto Rs, 50. -

Imprisonment upto 3 months
or fine upto Rs. 500/-or both.

Imprisonment upto 3 months
imprisonment upto six months
or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both.

Imprisonment upto 3 months
or fine upto Rs. 250/- or both.

Impriscument upto 6 month’s
or fine upto Rs. 2000/- or both.

Imprisonment upto 3 months
or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both.

Imprisonment upto 2 years or
Imprisonment upto one month

or fine upto Rs, 1000/ or both.

Imprisonment upto 6 months

Imprisonment upto 6 month
or fine upto Rs. 1000 or both.

t 2 3 4 रे
59. Northern Indian Ferries 21 Breach of provision as to table
“Act, 1879 | and list of tolls.
wo 22 Taking unauthorised toll. Fine upto Rs. 100/-.
23 Breach of rules. Do.
25 * Offence by passengers, i.c. Fine upto Rs. 50/-.
avoiding payment of toll, “
obstruction, etc.
26 Maintaining private ferry within Fine upto Rs. 500/-.
prohibited area.
28 Rash navigation and staking
of timber.
60. Notaries Act, 1952 12. Falsely representing to be Notary.
of fine or both.
61. Obstruction in Fairways 9 Breach of rules.
Act, 1881
63. Orplianges and other 24 Contravention of the provisions
Charitable Homes of the Act, rules, regulation
(Supervision and direction or order.
control) Act, 1960
43. Passport Act, 1967 12(4)  Burnishing false information,
Loa failure to produce passport,
using passport of another
Person, etc. .
12(2)  Abetment. Do.
123) Contravention of a condition
of passport of travel document.
64, Indian Patent and 18 Wrongful use of words ‘Patent Office’. Fine upto Rs. 200/-.
Designs Act, 1911 78E = Contravention of directions.
है fine or both.
65. Petroleum Act, 1934 33 Contravention of the provision
of the Act or the rules.
66, Petroleum Pipelines 15 Causing obstruction to any
(Acquisition of right person doing an act under the Act. or fine or both.
of user of land) Act,
1962...
47, Pharmacy Act, 1948 41 Falsely claiming to be registered.
422) Dispensing by unregistered persons Do.
43 Failure to surrender certificate of Fine upto Rs. 50/-.
Tegistration.
68. Poisons Act, 1919 6 Unlawful importation, etc.

Fine upto Rs. 500/- (convic-
tion) Imprisonment upto 6
months or fine upto Rs. 1000/-
or both (second or subsequent
conviction).


29

1 2

* 69. Police Act, 1861

79. Police Forces (Res-
triction of Right)
Act, 1966

7\. The Police (incitement
to Dissatisfaction)
“Act, 1922

12: dadian Ports Act, 1908

3

19

28

29

32

34

ran

Refusal’ to serve as special
Police Officer.

Refusal to deliver up certificates,
etc. on ceasing to be a police
officer.

Neglect of duty.

Disobeying the orders or
violation of conditions of a licence.

Offences on roads; i.e. causing
obstruction, inconvenience, etc.

Convention of restriction to form.
association, freedom of speech, etc.

Causing dissatisfaction amongst
the members of police force.

Obstruction within limits.
Fooling of Govt. moorings.
Obstruction to conservator or his
assistants, to board vessels or enter
building.
Refusal to place member of the crew
at the disposal of the conservator.
Injuring buoys, beacon and moorings

Wilfully loosening vessel from
moorings.
Improperly descharing ballast.

Drawing vessel within prohibited
limits.
Boilor Ditch on board vessel within
prohibited limits,
Drawing spirit by unprotected
artificial light.
Contravening of direction as to
warping.
Leaving out warp or hanger
after sunset.
Discharge of Fire-arms in port.
Master omitting to take order to
extinguish fire.
Search by unautherised person.
Removing stores or injuring
shores.

Fine upto Rs. 50/-.

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 200/- or both.

Imprisonment upto 3 months
or fine upto 3 months pay or
both.

Fine upto Rs.

Imprisonment upto 8 days or
fine upto Rs. 50/-.

Imprisonment upto 2 years
or fine upto Rs. 2000/- or both

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 200/- or both.
Fine upto Rs, 100/-.

Do.
Fine upto-Rs. 200/-.

Fine upto Rs. 25/-.

Imprisonment upto 2 years
ot fine upto Rs. 2000/- or both.
Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 200/- or both.
Imprisonment upto 2 months
and fine upto Rs. 500/-.

Fine upto me
Fine upto Rs. 200/-.
Fine upto Rs. 200/-,
Do.
Do.
Fine upto Rs. 50/-,

Imprisonment upto 6 months
orfineupto Rs. 1000/-or both.

Fine upto: Rss. 100/-.
Do.



73. Post Office Act, 189%

74. Indian Power Alcohol
Act, 1948.

75, Press and Registration
of Books Act, 1867

tr

he ०० 5४
. Press (Objectionable.
Matters) Act, 1951

51
53
54

49

61
68
69

70

16
16A
16B
19K

191,

Moving vessel without Pilot or
permission of harbour master.
Absence of fire extinguishing,
apparatus.

Failure to hoist number of vessel
Disobedience by Pilot.
Disobedience, rule or order
under the Act.

Misconduct of persons employed
to carry on deliver mail.
Withdrawal from duty without
permission or notice, of person
employed to carry or deliver. mail.
Detaining or opening of mail bag
in the course of transmission.
Retaining or wrongly delivering
mail bags.

Unlawful diverting letters.

Abettment of offenges under
the Act.

Contravention of the provisions
of the Act or any order issued
thereunder.

Printing of book without giving
the name of the printer,
publisher and the place of
printing/publication.
Keeping a press without making
a declaration. हि हु
Making false statement.
Printing or publishing newspaper
without conforming to rules,
Non-delivery of books or non- |
supply of maps to the printer.
Failure to supply newspaper gratis.

Failure to supply copies of
newspaper to Press Registrar.
Failure to furnish annual
reports and returns.

improper disclosure of information.

Keeping 'press or publishiig
newspapers and without making
a depot. -

Fine upto Rs. 200/-.
Fine upto Rs. 500/-.

Fine upto Rs. 1000/-.
Fine upto Rs. 500/-.
Fine upto Rs. 100/-.

Fine upto Rs. 50/-.

Imprisonment upto onemonth
or fine upto Rs. 50/- or both.

Fine upto Rs. 200/-.

Imprisonment upto 2 years
and fine. हे
Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both.
Same’ sentence as. provided
under the Act for the offences.

Imprisonment upto 6 months
oF fine upto Rs. 1000/- or both.

Imprisonment upto 6 months
orfineupto Rs. 2000/- or both.

Do.

Do.
Do.

Fine upto Rs. 50/-.

Fine upto Rs. 50/- for each
default.

Fine upto Rs. 50/- for each
default,

Fine upto Rs. 500/-.

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 1000/- or
both.

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 2000/- or
both.


31

4

5

77. Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals Act,'1960

78, Prevention of Seditious
Meetings Act, 1911

79. Prisoners Act, 1894

80. Prize Chits and Money
_ Circulation Schemes
. (Banning) Act, 1978

81. Prize Competitions Act,
1955

82. Protection of Civil.
Rights Act, 1955

12

20

26

41

54

40

TA i

Disseminating unauthorised
newspapers and unauthorised
news sheet.

Treating animals with cruelty.

Protecting Phooka or doom-dev
on cow or other milch animal.
Contravention of the order or
condition imposed by the
Committee constituted under the
Act.

Exhibition or training of animals
etc, by a person not registered
under the Act.

Holding of public meetings in .
contravention of the Act.
Delivery bf speeches in public
places without permission.

Introduction or removal of
prohibited articles into

or from person and communication
with prisoners.

Offences by prison subordinates.

Taking of steps to promote or
conduct of any prize chits or
money circulation scheme in
contravention of the Act.

Promoting any prize competition
in contravention of the Act.

Failure to keep and submit the:
amount,

Taking of steps to promote.or
conduct prize competition. in,

~ Sontravention of the Act,

Enforcing religious ‘disabilities.

Enforcing social disabilities,
Refusal te, admit. persons to.
hospitals, etc, ie
Refusal to sell goods‘or reader
services. Sout
Other offence arising out of
untouchability. 7
Unlawful compulsory labour.

Imprisonment for six months
or fine or both. ~

Fine upto Rs. 50/-.
Imprisonment upto 2 years

or fine upto Rs. 1000 or both.
Fine upto Rs. 200/-.

Fine upto Rs. 500/-.

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine or both.
Do.

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 200/- or both.

Imprisonment upto three
months or fine upto Rs. 200/-
or both.

Imprisonment upto two years
of fine upto Rs. 3000/- or both.

Imprisonment upto three
months or fine upto Rs. 1000/-
or both.

Imprisonment upto one month

or fine upto Rs. 500/-or both.
Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both.

Imprisonment upto six months
and fine upto Rs. 500/-.
Do.
Do.
Do.
Do.

Do.



32

1 2 3 4 5

83. Public Gambling Act, 3 Owning or keeping of having Imprisonment upto 3 months
1867 charge of gaming houses. or fine upto Rs. 2000/.

4 Presence in gaming bhouse.for Imprisonment upto one month
the purpose of gaming. or fine upto Rs. 100/-.

7 Giving false names and addresses. Imprisonment upto ore month
or fine upto Rs, 500/-.

13 Gaming and setting birds and Imprisonment upto one month
animals to figert in public street. or fine upto Rs. 50/-.

84, Public Premises il Unauthorised seoccupation of Imprisonment upto one year
(Eviction of Unauthorised the premises by the evivted person. or fine upto Rs. 1000/ or
Occupants) Act, 1971 both.

85. Indian Railways Act, 99 Breach of duty by a railway Fine upto Rs, 20/-.

1890 servant.
100 Railway servant found in state Imprisonment uptoj 2 years
of intoxication. or fine upto Rs. 560/- or boll.
1004... Abondoniing trains without Imprisonment upto 2 years
authority. or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both.
100B Obstructing running of trains. Imprisonment upto 2 years
or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both.
101 Railway servant while on duty Do.
- endangering the safety of persons
102 Compelling passengers to enter Fine upto Rs. 20/-.
cartiages already full.
103 Omission to give notice Fine upto Rs. 50/-.
of accident.
104 Railway servants obstructing Fine upto Rs. 20/-.
level crossings.
105 Submission of false returns Imprisonment upto 1 year
orfine upto Rs. 500/-or ‘both.
106 Giving false account of goods Fine upto Rs. 150/- for every
quintal or part thescef. :
107 Unlawfulty bringing dangerous Fine upto Rs. 500/-. '
or offensive goods upon a railway.
108 Interfering with means of Imprisonment upto 3 months
communication in a train. or fine upto Rs. 250/-or both. ©
109 Entering compartment reserved Fine upto Rs. 20/-.
or already fult or resisting
entry into a compartment not full.
110 Smoking withomt consent of the Fine upto Rs. 20/-. t
fellow passenger.
ul Defacing public notices. Fine upto Rs, 50/-.
112 Travelling or attempting to Imprisonment upto 3 months
travel without a proper or fine upto Rs. 100/-.
pass or ticket.
114 Unauthorised sale of tickets Imprisonment upto 3 months
or fine upto Rs. 250/-.
116 Altering or defacing 9886 or Do.

ticket.



33

86, Railway Protection

87,

Borce Act, 1957

Reformatory Schools
‘Act, 3897

88, Registration of Births

an@ Deaths Act, 1969

3
1176)

172)

118

119
120

120A
121

122

123

124

125

129

236)

2302)
23(3)

23(4)

4

Travel by a person from infectious
of contagious disorder.

Railway servant permitting such
person to travel.

Entering carriage in motion or
otherwise improperly travelling
ona railway.

Entering carriage or other place
reserved for females.
Drunkenness or nuisance on a
railway.

Convassing or hawking on railway
Obstructing a railway servant

on the duty.

Trespass and refusal to desist
from Trespass.

Disobedience of omnibus,
tramear carriage or other
catriage’s driver or conduct

to obey directions of railway
servant or police.

Opening or not properly shutting
gates or level crossing.

Cattle trespass on railway area.

Endangering safety of persons
travelling by railway, by roads
or negligent out or omission.

Neglect of duty by members of
the force,

Introduction or removal or
supply of prohibited articles

and communication with youthful .
offenders.

Abetting escape of youthful
offender.

Failure to give information
regarding births/deaths or arty other
information required under the Act.
Failure/refusal of Registrar

to register births/deaths,

Failure of the doctor to issue

a certificate of illness.

Any other contravention of the
provision of the Act.

5

Fine upto Rs. 20/-.
Fine upto Rs. 100/-.

Imprisonment upto one month
or with fine upto Rs. 50/-
or both.

Fine upto Rs. 100/-.
Fine upto Rs. 50/-.

Fine upto Rs. 250/-.
Imprisonment upto sismonths:
or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both,
imprisonment upto 3 months
or fine upto Rs. 150/- or both.
Fine upto Rs. 20/-.

Fine upto Rs. 50/-

Fine upto Rs. 10/- per cattle
in addition to the amount
recoverable under Catéle
Tresspass Act.
Imprisonment upto 1
or fine or both.

year

Imprisonment upto 6 months

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 200/- or both.

Do.

Fine upto Rs. 50/-

Do.
Do.

Fine upto Rs. 10/-



34

1 2

rs

89. Registration of
Foreigners Act, 1939

. Rice Milling Industry
(Regulations) Act, 1958

91.-Indian Sarais Act, 1867

92. Spirituous Preparations
(inter-state Trade and
commerce) Control Act,

1955

93. Indian Standards
Institution (Certification

Marks) Act, 1952.

Standards of Weights
and Measures Act, 1976

5

13(1)

13(2)

96)
92)

14

50

51

53

54.

55

57

Contravention of any provision
of the rules made under the Act;
(a) if a foreigner

(b) if not a foreigner

Contravention or abetment or
attempt to contravene provisions
of the Act.

Failure to make statement or
furnish information, record
etc.

Infringement of provisions of the
Act or regulations.

Contravention of any provision
of the Act,

Vexatious search, seizure, etc,
Giving of false information
causing arrest, search or seizure.

Improper use of standard marks.

Contravention of any other provision
of the Act.

Use of non-standard weight
or measures.

Tampering with or altering
standard.

Non-contorming to standards
or weight by manufacturers.-

Inscription of weight or measure

not conforming to weight or measure.

Obstruction to Director or any
person authorised in this behalf in
performance of duties.

Trading. with or -wsing non-
specified weights, measures or
numbers,

Selling or delivering goods
or rendering service less than the
quantity or number contracted.

Imprisonment upto one year
or fine upto Rs. 1000/- or both.

Fine upto Rs. 500/-
Imprisonment upto one year

or fine upto Rs. 10,000/- or
both.

Tmprisonment upto 3 months
or fine upto Rs. 2000/- or both.

Fine upto Rs. 20/- and
further penalty upto rupee
one per day for every day
during which the offence
continues.

Imprisonment upto one year
or fine upto Rs. 1000/- or both.

Fine upto Rs. 2000/-
Imprisonment upto one year
or fine.

Fine upto Rs. 10,000/-

Fine upto Rs. 1000/-

Tmprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs. 1000/- of both.
Imprisonment upto .2.. years
or fine upto upto Rs. . §000/-
or both.

Imprisonment upto one year
or fine upto Rs. 2000/- or both.

Do.

Imprisonment. upto’ 3 - years.

Imprisonment upto one year
or fine or both.

Fine upto Rs. 5000/-



aia

35

95. Indian Telegraph Act,
1885

96. Telegraph Wires
(Unlawful Possession)
Act, 1950

97. Trade and Merchandise
Marks Act, 1958

’

65

66

67

70

a

20A
21
22
23
24
250

28

294

30

32

6

5 79

Failure to maintain requisite
records,

Fxport or import of weight or
measure without having been
registered under the Act.
Export of commodity in packaged
form not conforming to the
standard weight or measure.
Importing non-metric weight or
measure.

Contravention of any provision
of the Act for which no penalty
otherwise provided.

Giving false information or
false returns.

Vexatious action by officers.

Breach of condition of licence.
Using unauthorised telegraph.
Opposing establishment of
telegraph on railway land.
Intrusion into signal room,
trespass on Telegraph Office.
Unlawfully attempting to learn
contents of messages.

Injury to or interference with
telegraphs lines or post.
Misconduct of telegraph officer.

Making or issuing of a document

of a nature reasonable calculated

to consent to be believed that

the same has been issued by or

under the authority of D.G. Posts
and Telegraphs.

Fraudulently retaining a message
delivered by mistake.

Attempt to commit offence.

Failure to make a declaration,

Applying false trade marks,
trade discriptions, etc.

Selling goods to. which a false
trade mark or false trade.
description is applied.

5

Imprisonment upto 6 months

and fine.
Imprisonment upto six months
and fine,

Fine upto Rs, 5000/-

Fine upto Rs, 5000/-,

Fine Rs. 2000/-

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine upto Rs, 1000/- or both.
Imprisonment’ upto 1 ~ year
or fine upto Rs, 2000/- or both.
Fine upto Rs. 1000/- है

Fine upto Rs. 50/-

Fine upto Rs, 1000/ on day
during which refund continues.

Fine upto Rs. 500/-
Imprisonment for one year.
Fine upto Rs. 1000/-.

Imprisonment upto 3. months
or fine upto Rs. 100/-

Fine upto Rs, 50/-

Imprisonment upto 2 years
or fine or both.

Same penalty as
for the oflence.

Prescribed

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine or both.

Imprisonment upto 2 years
or fine or both.

Do.



36

3 4 5
80 Removal, sale, possession for Fine upto Rs. 1000/-
sale goods, cotton yarn or
thread which is not marked.
81 False representation of a trade Imprisonment upto 6 months
mark or registered. or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both.
82 Improperly describing a place Imprisonment upto six months
of business as connected with or fine or both,
trade mark office.
83 Falsification of entries था 116 Imprisonment upto 2 years

98, Indian Treasure Trove 20

Act, 1878
21
99, Unlawful Activities 10
-(Prevention) Act, 1967
12

100, Vaccination Act, 1880 22

101, Weekly Holidays Act, 9
1942

102. White Phosporus Matches
Prohibition Act, 1913

103, Wild Birds’ and Animals
"protection Act, 1912

wa

+

104. Wild Life (Protection) 51

Act, 1972
52
53
105, indian Wireless Tele- 6(1)

vgmaphy Act, 1933

106, Young Persons (Harmful 3
publication) Act, 1956

register,

Failure of the finder to
give notice.
Abetment of above offence.

Penalty for being member of
unlawful association.

Use of an article in contravention
of a prohibitary order.

Contravention of the provisions
of the Act, rules or ordezs,

Contravention of the provision
of the Act, rules or order.

Obstructing the Inspector to
take sample.

Capturing, selling, buying or
killing any wild bird or
animal during close time.

Contravention of any. provision
of the Act or rele or

order made the rounder.
Attempts or abetments.
Wrongful seizure.

Possession of any wireless
telegraphy. apparatus in.
contravention of the provisions
of the Act.

Sale, hire, distribution of harmful
publication.

or fine or both.

Imprisonment upto one year
or fine or both.

Imprisonment upto 6 months
or fine or both.
Imprisonment upto 2. years
and fine, .
Imprisonment upto one year
and fine.

Imprisonment upto 6 morths
or fine upto Rs. 1000/- or
both,

Fine upto Rs. 250/-
Fine upto Rs. 200/-

Imprisonment upto 1 month
or fine upto Rs. 100/- or both,

Imprisonment upto 2. years
or fine upto Rs. 2000/- or both.

Do.

imprisonment upto six moaths
or fine upto Rs. 500/- or both.

Fine upto Rs. 250/-

Imprisonment upeo: sit months
or fine or both.

NOTE 1. The above list is not

\ 2.

exhaustive but only. illustrative:

The above list covers only the Central Acts. There are such or similar State Acts.

3, Besides the above, Acts, offences under the Motor Vehicle Act, Shop and Establishment Act,
Municipal Acts are also triable as summons cases.

MGIPF—-515 Law/93—17-6-94—400.