LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

One Hundred Forty Second Report
ON
Concessional Treatment for Offenders
who on their own initiative choose
to plead guilty without
any Bargaining

1991


TEL, No. 384475

4 LAW COMMISSION

’ GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

JUSTICE M. P, THAKKAR SHASTRI BHAVAN
Chairman

NEW DELHI

D. 0. No. 6 (3)/90-LC (LS). August 23, 4904
To

Shri K. Vijay Bhaskar Reddy,

Minister of Law, Justice and

Company Affairs,

Government of India,

Shastri Bhavan,

NEW DELHI.

Dear Minister,
Ref. : Presentation of 142nd Report.

A problem exercising the minds of all concerned with the administration of Justice, Pooh
the mounting arrears of criminal cases ‘and unconscienable delays in disposal theredf, has >
the attention of the Law Commission of India. The suo motu exercise undertaken by ‘the Commis-

sion in respect of one facet of the problem has culminated in the 142nd Report of the Commission
being presented hereby bearing the caption:—

CONCESSIONAL TREATMENT FOR OFFENDERS
WHO ON THEIR OWN INITIATIVE CHOOSE TO
PLEAD GUILTY WITHOUT ANY BARGAINING

It is hoped that the recommendations made therein will prove of great value in tackling the
problem.

With warm Regards

Yours faithfully,
Sd.

(MP. THAKKAR)
Enel. : 142nd Report.


CONTENTS

Carrer 1 Introduction © + © + 5s ‘
10:2३ » ५: II Magnitude of the Problem of delays in Criminal cases +
CHAPTER III Concept of Plea-bargaining a practice being Successfully Pra-
ctised in USA. . . soe : : पु
Carrer IV Commission Makes A Survey .
CHAPTER V Canadian Law Commission Examines the Concept in a work-
ing Paper of 1989 and Recommends Introduction thereof in
Criminal Jurisprudence. . . . . पु : पु
Carrer VI Observations of Supreme Court of India Concerning “Plea-
bargaining” in the Context of the Present Legal Frame. ..#
CHAPTER VII Objections to the Introduction of the Concept in Indian Legal
System Answered. . . पु पु . . पु .
Cuaprer VIII Objections to the Application of the Concept to all Offences -
CHAPTER IX Guidelines and Procedure to be Incorporated in the Statute -
CHAPTER X How the Proposed Scheme Overcomes the obicctions and appre-
hensions Entertained by those who doubt the Feasibility of
the Concept. . . . . . पु पु . .

CuaPTer XI Conclusions and Recommendations -
NOTES AND REFERENCES

Appacunss (8, कफ 8070)...

i)

PAGE NO.

10
13
20
23
24

35
37


CHAPTER I
INTROUDCTION

1.1. The Objective.—The Commission has been exercised by the problems
acising on account of abnormal! delays in the disposal of criminal trials and appeals.
And by the explosion of the number of under-trial prisoners languishing in jails
for very many years. The Commission, accordingly felt that some remedial
legislative measures to reduce delays in the disposal of criminal trials and appeals
and also to alleviate the suffering of under-trial prisoners in jails awaiting the com-
mencement of the trials were called for. The Commission, therefore, suo moto
took up this matter and invested considerable time and deliberations in order to
formulate propo.als on this subject. The present report recommending the intro-
duction of the concept of concessional treatment Jor those who choose to plead guilty
without any bargaining under the authority of Jaw informed with adequate safe-
guards, is the culmination of this exercise on the part of the Commission.

1.2. Experieace of American Courts.—In this context the practice of plea-bar-
gaining which h2s found acceptance in many states forming a part of the United
States of America and has proved to be successful attracts attention to itself. In
Canada a serious move is already afoot to introduce this Practice by way of a special
legislation. The Law Commission of Canada which was earlier disposed against
it appears to be veering round to the view that it deserves to be introduced, albeit,

with adequate safeguards.

1.3.1. Evolviag a new model-—On the part of the Commission an endeavour
has been made to evolve a system on an entirely new model which allays the fears
and appichensions cntertained by those who are averse to the aforesaid concent and
steers clear of the pitfalls to a great extent in this back drop.

1.3.2. What is more, the model being evolved is required to take care of the
Provisions relating to (1) release of offenders on Probation and (2) to compounding
of offences, which aspects do not figure in' the plea-bargaining practice obtaining
elsewhere. In shaping the model scheme these aspects have been taken care of.

.
1.4, It is hoped that the scheme being proposed by this Report will, by and large,
meet all objections and achieve the purpose of the exercise.


CHAPTER II

MAGNITUDE OF THE PROBLEM OF DELAYS IN
CRIMINAL CASES

2.1, Delay in the disposal of criminal trials and appeals.—Grievances have been
vented in public that the disposal of criminal trials in the courts of the Magistrates
and District and Session Judges takes considerable time. It is said that the criminal
trials do not commence for as long a period as three to four years after the accused
was remitted to judicial custody. In the meantime the accused languish in jails. It
was further represented that the conditions prevailing in the jails are appealing and
the accused are obliged to live in sub-human conditions mixed up with hard-core
criminals. It is said that in several cases the time spent by the accused in jails before
the commencement of trials exceeds the maximum punishment which can be awarded
to them even if they are found guilty of offences charged against them.

2.2. An appeal is generally carried against the Order of the trial court, especially
in Sessions cases. Experience has shown that in the High Courts, (barring excep-
tions), it would take at least five to eight years for a criminal appeal to be decided.
In High Courts like Allahabad and Bombay, the Commission gai red the period of
waiting for the disposal of the Appeals is as long as ten years. If the matter should
be carried on further appeal to the Supreme Court, it would be another 10 yeors
by the time the Supreme Court decides the matter. As on date, the Commission
found, the Supreme Court is dealing with criminal Appeals relating to the year 1979.
This enormous delay in the disposal of criminal matters in courts which should
normally receive speedy attention is the result of docket explosion.

2.3. Supreme Court takes cognizance of the matter.—The facts stated in the
immediately preceding paragraph came to the notice of the Supreme Court in a
number of cases, most important among which is that of Hussainara Khatoon V.
State of Bihar', dealing with the above case originating from the State of Bihar.
The Sup reme Court passed a number of Orders in this connection commencing from

2.4. It was brought to the notice of the Supreme Court that an alarmingly
large number of men and women—children including—are behind prison bars फू
years awaiting trails in courts of law. It was observed by the Supreme Court that,?

“the offences with which some of them are charged are trivial, which, even if
proved, would not warrant punishment for more than a few months, perhaps for
a year or two, and yet these unfortunate forgotten specimen of humanity are in
jail, deprived of their freedom for periods ranging from three to ten years without
‘even as much as their trial having commenced”.

[Emphasis added].

2.5. The Supreme Court noticed that several under-trial prisoners have been
in jails for as many as five, seven or nine years and a few of them even more than ten
years Without their trial having begun. The Supreme Court lamented:*

“what faith can these lost souls have in the judicial system which denies them
a bare trial for so many years and keeps them behind bars, not because they
are guilty, but because they are too poor to afford bail and the courts have no
time to try them. It is a travesty of justice that many poor accused, “little
Indians, are forced into long cellular servitude for little offences because the
bail procedure is beyond their meagre means and trials don’t commence and,
even if they do, they never conclude’’.

The Supreme Court had further found :*

“There is also one other infrinity of the legal and judicial system which is res-
ponsible for this gross denial of justice to the under-trial prisoners and that is
the notorious delay in disposal of cases. It is a sad reflection on the legal and

2


Law COMMISSION oF INDIA—142 REPORT

judicial system that the trial of an accused should not even commence for a
long number of years. Even a delay of one year in the commencement of
the trial is bad enough ; how much worse could it be when the delay is as long
as 3 or 5 or 7 or even 10 years. Speedy trial is of the essence of criminal justice
and there can be no doubt that delay in trial by itself constitutes denial of
justice.”

{Emphasis added]

2.6. The Commission noticed that over the years the situation has not impro-
ved. Long delays continue to occur in the disposal of trials and appeals.
In the state of affairs as now existing it is extremcly difficult to expedite the process
of criminal trials in the subordinate courts and the disposal of appeals in the appellate
courts. Extent and duration of cross examination cannot be curtailed without
creating other problems. Nor can arguments be curtailed for the same reason.
There is, there! ore, little scope for streamlining the system to achieve more expe-
ditious disposal. Besides, the Commission has reason to believe that the increase
in the number of courts and the Judges would not necessarily result in eliminating
the delays in the disposal of trials and appeals mitigating the hardships suffered
Dy the under-trial prisoners. In spite of the stern warning administered by the
Supreme Court bail procedures continue to be as unsatisfactory as they were. It
is not reported that there is any improvement in the duration of the time spent by
the under-trial prisoners in jails awaiting their trials to commence. The Commis-
sion feels that perhaps the conditions have further deteriorated calling for imme-
diate reform in the matter.

2.7. Unavailability of relevant statistical data regarding under trial prisoners.—
Unfortunately, the relevant statistics are not available. The State Governments
have to be approached for furnishing the number-of under-trial prisoners languishing
in jails awaiting trials to commence and the period of which they have been in
jails. The State Governments are generally rel Juctant to collect the information and

# the same. The State of Bihar, which was a party before the Supreme Court
in Hussainara Case. failed to furnish the information even though specifically directed
by the Supreme Court. Eventually, the Supreme Court had to proceed on the basis
that the information contained in the affidavits filed by the petitioners and the news-

reports was correct as the State of Bihar did not refute the same. The absence
of vital statistics has, to some extent, hampered the Commission in processing the
matter. Realising that fruitful results are not likely to follow, no «ttempt has
been made to write to the State Governments for information in this regard. The
Commission drew upon its own experience and the innumerable representations
being made by sociologists and others to pursue consideration of the matter. In
one sense, the statistics are not indispensable because the practices and the principles
are not, and cannot be, in dispute.

2.8, The High Courts in the country were addressed to furnish relevant statictical
data. Information was called for concerning the period for which criminal trials
are pending in Sessions Courts and Magistrates Courts and also the number of cases
disposed of classified into cases resulting in conviction and cases resulting in acquittal.
This information was called for with a view to examine two aspects First ly, the
length of time for which trials are pending in subordinate courts and secondly. the
percentage of acquittals eventually after the conclusion of the trials. The High
Courts were also requested to state the number of criminal appeals pending, classified
yearwise, and also the number of appeals disposed of with res cults Some High
Courts had complied with the request of the Commission. Andhra Pradesh,
Karnataka and Maharashtra forwarded statements from the District Judges, Metro-
politan Magistrates and Chief Judicial Magistrates. Unfortunately, however, the
statements forwarded do not cover all the courts in the jurisdiction of the concenred
High Courts with the result that consolidation of the particulars was not possible.
It was obviously for these reasons that even the High Courts did not endeavour
to consolidate the particulars furnished by the District Courts. The statements
as such were forwarded to the Commission. There is very meagre response from
the remaining High Courts in the sense that only a handful of statements were for-
warded from the Sessions Judges, etc. without the slightest possibility to consolidate
the information for the entire State. The Commission noticed some kind of reluc-
tance on the part of the High Courts to engage actively in this matter obviously in
view of the workload involved. For obvious reasons, the Commission could not
also persuade the High Courts to strictly comply with the requests.


Law COMMISSION OF INDIA—142 REPORT

2.9. The information available to the Commission was examined. The State
of Andhra Pradesh perhaps was the only exception in regard to criminal a ypeal
pending in the High Court. The Commission noticed that appeals upto and 1०0०
ding the year 1988 had been disposed of and High Court is now engaged in the
process of disposal of criminal appeals for the year 1989—a vey satisfactory state
of affairs indeed. The position is not happy in regard to the other High Courts.
Pendency of trials in the Sessions Courts as well as the Courts of the Metropolitan
Magistrates and Chicf Judicial Magistrates is quite alarming. A close study of the
statistical data furnished by the Judges would indicate that criminal trials are pending
from the year 1982 onwards. The statistical information furnished regarding the
result of trials indicates extraordinary results. The acquittals constitute over 90
Ber cent and convictions are a paltry 10 per cent and less. The information furnished
by Judges in some courts revealed that “all the cases resulted in acquittals. The
Judges who personally appeared before the Commission were asked to state excep-
tional reasons for a high percentage of acquittals. There was a uniform reply from
all the Judges. It is pointed out that during the period the trials remain pending,
situations completely change; some witnesses vanish and some witnesses on whose
testimony the prosecution sought to rely make total somersaults. The reasons
may be two-fold. Firstly, due to passage of time memories fail and the happening
of events passes outside the comprehension of the witnesses resulting in setious
discrepancies when they go to the witness box during the course of the trial years
after the event. Secondly, the ingenuity of the accused and the lawyers influences
the course of trial. The result is the Judges are very often faced with exceedingly
unsatisfactory prosecution cases. They are helpless and the cases result in acquit-
tal for want of satisfactory evidence. “The Judges stated that if the period of waiting
could be reduced, there may be a greater possibility of the evidence forthcoming more
effectively. That confronts us again with the same problem of reducing the delays
in the courts.

2.10. Some press reports cause distress and dismay. A recent press report®
relates to the story of a criminal case which occupied 33 years. It cost the public
exchequer about one crore of rupees though it pertained to defalcation of a sum
of Rs. 19000 (Rs. 12000+Rs. 4000 + Rs. 3000). Another’ pertains to the state
of docket in City Civil & Sessions Court, Bombay. In 1988, 124 (One hundred
and twenty-four) rape cases were recorded but only 1 (one) was disposed of. In
first half of 1989, 67 cases were recorded but none was disposed of. This information
makes one wonder whether culprits would be brought to book for decades, what
with appeals and further appeals. And if 90 per cent of cases terminate in acquittals
even after decades, is any social purpose served by the present system?

2.11. It cannot, therefore, be again said that the’problem is a grave one and

clamours for urgent attention. The concept of plea-bargaining as obtaining in the
USA needs to be examined in the light of this ungainly situation.

1-194 Min. of LI & CA (ND)/93

Ni

aT ee te et ae

करत,


जज ee अीण--ज-ा

CHAPTER III

CONCEPT OF PLEA-BARGAINING—A PRACTICE BEING
SUCCESSFULLY PRACTISED IN U.S. A.

3.1. The Concept.—What is “plea-bargaining”? In its most traditional and
general sense, “plea-bargaining” refers to pre-trial negotiations between the defen-
dant, usually conducted by the counsel and the prosecution, during which the
defendant agrees to plead guilty in exchange for certain concessions by the prose-
cutor. “Plea-bargaining” falls into two distinct categories depending upon the
type of prosecutorial concession that is granted. The first category is “charge
bargaining” which refers to a promise by the prosecutor to reduce or dismiss some
of the charges brought against the defendant in exchange for a guilty plea. The
second category, ‘“‘sentence bargaining” refers to a promise by the prosecutor to
recommend a specific sentence or to refrain from making any sentence recommen-
dation in exchange for a guilty plea. Both methods affect the dispositional phase
of the criminal proceedings by reducing defendant’s ultimate sentence.

3.2. Not practised in India.—Criminal jurisprudence of India does not recog-
nise the concen t of “‘plea-bargaining’’ as such. Reference may, however, be made
to section 206(1) and section 206(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure and section
208(1) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. These provisions enable the accused to
plead guilty for petty offences and to pay small fines whereupon the case is closed.
But there is no bargaining between the prosecution on the one hand and the accused
on the other. For examining the pros and cons of the practise it is, therefore,
necessary to make an intensive study of this concept as practised in America and other
countries and the results thereof. The views in favour of the concept as well as
against it deserve to be carefully assessed. It would be desirable to deal with this
concept in some detail so that there is proper appreciation of the matter.

3.3.1. Origim—The practise of “Plea-bargaining” in America goes back a cen-
tury or more. One study found it, for example, in Alameda County, California, in
about the 1880s. Judges in the County even talked about the way they gave
credit for guilty pleas. ‘“Plea-bargaining” was not as pervasive as it is now....
not even close to it....but it was by no means rare.

3.3.2. Extent of prevalance.—Entering a guilty plea is greatly prevalent in
many American States. In 1839, in New York State, one out of every four criminal
cases ended with a guilty plea. By the middle of the century there were guilty pleas
in half the cases. In Alameda County, one out of three felony defendants pleaded
guilty. In 1920s guilty pleas accounted for 88 out of 100 convictions in New York
City, 85 out of 100 in Chicago, 70 out of 100 in Dallas and 79 out of 100 in Des
Moines, Iowa. It has kept its dominance ever since.’ In short, one can trace a
steady and marked decline in number of trials by jury in America from the early
19th century on.

3.4. Reasoning of proponents.—A sizeable section of public opinion favours
the practise. Five reasons are advanced by its support :—
(6) Most people arrested, they say, are guilty any way ; why bother with a
tri
(2) Why waste public money ?
(3) ‘Plea-bargaining” is a compromise ; both sides give a little and gain a
le.

(4) Trials consume time and costs.

(5) It is best (for both sides) to avail it since on the one hand there is always a
chance that even if the defendant is guilty and the evidence is adequate
there isa chance of aslipup. On the other the defendant saves time and
money and earns a concession in the form of a less serious offence or
sentence.

3

2—104 Min. of LJ & CA (ND)/93.


Law CoMMIssioN oF INpIA—142 REPORT

3.5. Opponents view points.—On the other hand a growing number of people
in America feel that “Plea-bargaining”’ is a disgrace and offer three criticisms viz:—

(1) “Law and order people” think, it shows too much softness towards defen-
dants. Dangerous criminals cop a plea and slip through the nets.

(2) Others claim that the process is unfair to the innocent.

(3) One study claimed that up to one-third of the people who plead guilty
would be acquitted if they went to trial.

3.6. Some people, however, think that whilc it does not mean that those who
secured acquittal were innocent of the crimc, “‘plea-bargaining” provides only a
legal excuse where the evidence is weak. In any event, “plea-bargaining’’ (so the
argument goes) makes a mockery of criminal proses. It does not fit into the image
of due process.

3.7. Several prosecutors have tried to end “‘plea-bargaining”. In Wyne County,
Michigan, the prosecutor ordered his staff not to bargain in any case when defen-
dant used a gun. The Attorney General of Alaska in 1975 banned the practice of
“plea-bargaining’”.

3.8. Need to assess the system as it is.—With the public opinion being sharply
divided in U.S.A., demands for reform have been surfacing from many quarters.
Nevertheless, the system is in vogue in a number of States even today and the
number of trials settled by guilty pleas constitute a very large proportion of the total
cases disposed of. The system as it is functioning as at present, may, under the
circumstances, be subjected to scrutiny with advantage in the light of the positive
features of the practise without disregarding the negative features thereof.

3.9. Assumption that ordinarily the innocent would not plead guilty.—The Superme
Court of the United States has explicitly approved the practise mainly on the assump-
tion that defendants who are convicted on the basis of negotiated pleas of guilt would
ordinarily have been convicted had they elected to stand trial. The principle

consists of the promise of reduction of charge from the one levelled against a defen- .

dant to a less serious charge or of sympathetic treatment in sentencing. For the
accused what is important is saving of expenses (legal and otherwise) and the desire
to start a new life after suffering the agreed sentence as early as possible and also to
avoid detention pending the trial. In most cases some or all the considerations
indicated hereinbefore that induced pleas of guilty.

3.10. Do the really guilty escape lightly.—Public attention in America has also
focussed on one important aspect of this problem : The extent to which “plea-
bargaining” has permitted the defendants to escape the just consequences of their
crimes by pleading guilty to reduced charges. The variance between the offence
charged and the offence accepted on plea provides highly visible and J-:amatic
evidence of the extent to which the State’s interest has been compromised. The
fairness of bargaining practices, however, also depends on how likely it is that the
aceuscd would have been convicted if no bargain had been offered. If the case
against the accused is weak his plea of guilt can be attributed to inducements that
may taint the trustworthiness of his admission. More fundamentally it necds to be
examined whether strong pressure has been exercised to compel a confession in weak
case and when the prosccutor’s zeal to obtain a confession by “consent” begins
to collide with the defendant’s privilege against self-incrimination.

3.11. U.S. Supreme Court upholds coastitutionality and recognises the value of
plea-bargaining.—It would, perhaps, be appropriate to refer to two leading cases
of the American Supreme Court sustaining the constitutional validity and also the
important role the concept of ‘‘plea-bargaining’”’ plays in the disposition of criminal
cases.

The costitutional validity of “plea-bargaining”’ has been upheld by the United
States Supreme Court in Brady v United States® Justice White, who delivered the
opinion of the Court, observed : हु

“The issue we deal with is inherent in the criminal law and its administration
because guilty pleas are not constitutionally forbidden, because the criminal law
characteristically extends to judge or jury a range of choice in setting the sentence


Law CoMMISSION OF INDIA++142 REPORT

in individual cases, and because both the State and the defendant often find it
advantageous to preclude the possibility of the maximum penalty authorisea by
law. For a defendant who sees slight possibility of acquittal, the advantages of
pleading guilty and limiting the probable p-nalcy are obvious—his exposure is re-
duced, the correctional process can begin immediately, and the practical burdens
of a trial are eliminated. For the State \h-re are also advantages—the more
promptly imposed punishment after an admission of guilt may more effectively
‘attain the objectives of punishment; and with the avoidance of trial, scarce
resources are conserved for those cases in which there is a substantial issue of
the defendant's guilt or in which there is substantial doubt that the Scate can
sustain its burden of proof. It is this mutuality of avdantage that perhaps ex-
plains the fact that at present well over three-fourths of the criminal convictions
in this country rest on the pleas of guilty, a gtvat many of them no doub: mozi-
vated at 1085 in part by the hope or assurance of a lesser penaliy then might be
imposed if there were a guilty verdict after a trial to judge or jury.” (25 L. Ed.
20. P. 758).
[Emphasis added]

3.12. The Supreme Court held that guilty pleas are valid if they are voluntary
and intelligent.—There must be matesial to show that the 8910 pleais volunary,
deliberate and informed; the record must affirmatively disclose that a deiendant
who pleads guilty enters his plea understandingly and voluntarily. It was observed.
by the Superme Court that a guilty plea is more than an. admission of past conduct;
it is the defendant’s consent that judgment of conviction may be entered without
a trial...... ‘a waiver of this right to trial before a judge.

The Supreme Court further observed :

“Pleas of guilty—made by some people because their reach of a Statutee law
is alone sufficient reason for surredering themselves and accepting punish-
ment, by others because apprenhesion and charge, both threatening acts by
the Government, far them into admitting their guilt, and by still others because
the post indictment accumulations of evidence may convince the defendant and
his counsel that a trial is not worth the agony and expense to the defendant
and his family—are all valid, and are not impzopesly compelled, in spite of the
State’s “responsibility for some of the factors motivating the pleas.” (p. 751
- Para 10).
[Emphasis added]

3.13. The Supreme Court also found that the award of lesser punishment pursuant
to please bargain is not invalid. It observed :—

“Although the fact that the prevalence of guilty pleas as the basis of convictions
is explainable because of the mutuality of advantage to the defendant and the
State does not necessarily validate such pleas nor the system which produc:s
them, nevertheless it is not unconstitutional for the State to extend the benefit
of a lesser penalty than after trial to a defendant who in turn extends a substantial
Benefit to the State and who demonstrates by his crime and to enter the correc-
tional system in a frame of mind that affords hope for success in rehabilitation
over a shorter period of time than might otherwise be necessary.” (p. 751,
Para 14.)
{Emphasis added]

_ The Supreme Couct further observed

“This is not to say that guilty plea convictions hold no hazards for the innocent
or that the methods of taking guilty pleas_presently employed in this country
‘faze necessarily valid in ali aspects, his mode of conviction is no fool proof than
full trials to the court or to the jury. Accordingly, we take great precautions
against unsound results, and we should continue to do so, whether convic-
tion is by plea or by trial.” (p. 761, Para 24).

{Emphasis added]

3.14. Validity of plea bargaining was also upheld by the United States Supreme
Court in: Sanobello vs New York® Chief Jastice Burger, who delivered the opinion

of the Court, observed at p. 261-262,


Law CoMMISSION oF INDIA—142 REPORT

“Disposition of charges after plea discussions is not only an essential part of
the process but a highly desirable part for many reasons. It leads to prompt and
largely final disposition of most criminal cases; it avoids much of the corrosive
impact of enforced idleness during pre-trial confinement for those who are denied
release pending trial; it protects the Public from those accused persons who
are prone to continue criminal conduct even while on pre-trial release; and
by shortening the time between charge and disposition, it enhances whatever may
be the rehabilitative prospects of the guilty when they are ultimately impri-
50766.

Of course the court highlighted the need for precautions by pointing out that:—

However, all of these considerations presuppose fairness in securing agree-
ment between an accused and a prosecutor. It is now clear, for cxampl le, that
the accused pleading guilty must be counselled, absent a waiver. Moore vs.
Michigan 335 US 155 (1957). Fed. Rule Crime Proc. ll, Boverning pleas in
federal courts, now makes clear that the sentencing Judge must develop, on
the record, the factual basis for the plea, as, for example, by having the accused
describe the conduct that gave rise to the charge. The plea must, of course.
be voluntary and knowing and if it was induced by promises, the essence of
those promises must in some way be made known. There is, of course, no
absolute right to have a guilty plea accepted. Lynch vs. Over holser, 369 US.
705, 719 (1962) Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 11. 4 court may reject a plea in
exercise of sound judicial discretion.

“This phase of the process of criminal justice, and the adjudicative element
inherent in accepting a plea of guilt, must be attended by safeguards to insure
the defendant what is Teasonably due in the circumstances. Those circums-
tances will vary, but a constant factor is that when a plea rests in any signi-
ficant degree on a promise or agreement of the Prosecutor, so that it can be
said to be part of the inducement or consideration, such promise must be

fulfilled.”
In concurrent judgment Mr. Justice Douglas observed : (9. 257)

“these plea-bargains are important in the administration of justice both at
the State and at the Federal levels and, as the Chief Justice says, they served
an important role in the disposition of today’s heavy calendars.”

3.15. The United States Supreme Court has reiterated the view, in the Sollowing
cases that, when properly administrered, “plea-bargaining” is a proper method Sor
administering justice :

() In Hatto v Ross ‘the Supreme Court observed, inter-alia,

“If every criminal charge were subjected to a full scale trial, the States and
the Federal Government would need to multiply by many times the number
of judges and court facilitised. Disposition of criminal charges after plea
discussions or plea-bargaining is not only an essential part of the criminal
process but a highly desirable part.”

ii) In Chaffin v Stynchcombe “the Supreme Court reiterated its earlier view
@ in Santobello case that the legitimacy of the practice of “plea-bargaining”

cannot be doubted and where properly administered, it is to be enourag-
ed as an essential and desirable component of the administration of justice.

(iii) Blackledge v Allison,’ the Supreme Court noted that it was onl egently

a that “plea-bargaining” had become sible Practioe accepted as a legitii
comp: onent of the administration of criminal jus and that it was not
until the decision in Santobello that lingering doubts about the legitimacy
of the practice were dispelled.

(iv) Weatherford v Bursey’ The same views were reiterated by the Supreme
Court in this case.

3.16. In Newton v Rumery‘, Justice Stevens of the U.S. Supreme Court observed
(at page 426).


Law CoMMISSION oF INDIA—142 REPORT

“The net result of every plea bargain is an admission of wrongdoing by the
defendant and the imposition of the criminal sanction with its attendant stigma.
Although there may be some cases in which an innocent person pleads guilty
to a minor offence to avoid risk of conviction of a more serious charge, it is
reasonable to presume that such cases are rare and represent the exception rather
than the rule...... the plea bargain represents a practical compromise between
the prosecutor and the defendant that takes into account the burdens of litigation
and its probable outcome as well as society’s interest in imposing appropriate
punishment upon an admitted wrongdoer. The dependent admits wrongdoing
for conduct upon which the guilty plea is based and avoids further prosecution;
the prosecutor need not go to trial; and an admitted wrongdoer is punished all
under close judicial supervision. By simultaneously establishing and limiting
defendant’s criminal liability, plea bargains delicately balance individual and
social advantage.”

[Emphasis added]

3.17. An Analysis of U.S. Supreme Court Judgments.—It would be seen from
the cases discussed referred hereinabove that the reasoning which appealed to the
American Supreme Court was to an extent built on the assumption that those who
are induced to plead guilty would, in any cvent ordinarily be convicted. The U.S.
Supreme Court has expressed the view that ‘‘plea-bargaining’’ provides advantages for
both the defendant and the State. The Court has observed to the effect that for a
defendant who sees a slight opportunity of securing an acquittal the advantages
of pleading guilty and limiting the penalty are obvious. On the other hand from
the stand point of the State the plea which results in avoiding a fullfiedged trial serves
to conserve the judicial and prosecutorial resources for being utilized only for those
cases in which there is substantial doubt that the State can sustain its burden of proof.
The Supreme Court further held ‘‘among the virtures, a guilty plea enhances what-
ever may be the rehabilitative process of the guilty when they are ultimately impri-
soned.

3.18. Conclusion.—The moral of the discussion is that the practise does not
collide either with the constitution or the fairness principle and is on the whole
worthy of emulation with the awareness as regards providing appropriate safeguards,
What the Commission has in mind is a scheme, specially evolved or designed in the
context of the existing legislation and the National ethos by getting rid of all objec-
tionable features and introducing some basic improvements in several areas. But
before addressing this question, it is appropriate to assess the import of certain
observations made by the Supreme Court of India, albeit in the existing legal fram-
work of law which does not recognise such a practise.


CHAPTER IV
COMMISSION MAKES A SURVEY

4.1. Taking a note of all the above aspects of the matter, the Commission

felt that a sample survey should be made and well-informed opinion gathered within
the country before finally taking a decision in the matter. The Commission thought
that opinion may be gathered by contacting members of the Bar : nd Bench in four
States and one Union Territory. Accordingly, Andhra Pradesh, Kainataka, Maha-
tashtra and Uttar Pradesh and the Union Territory of Delhi were selected by way
of a sample survey for the purpose of eliciting opinion not only on the basic question
whether the concept of “plea-barga: ing’ should be introduced in our criminal
jurisprudence, but also on the various allied matters that arise for consideration.
‘A brief note, along with a questionnaire (ANNEXURE ‘A’) was sent to all the
High Courts with a request that it may be circulated among all the Hon "ble Judges
of the High Court and the Sessions Judges and Magistrates. The said note and
questionnaire were also circulated among persons whom the Commission proposed
to contact personally.
2. uate programmes were drawn up in each of the four States and the
Union Territory of Delhi to contact High Court Judges, Sessions Judges, Metro-
politan and Chief Judicial Magistrates, Law Officers like Advocate General,
Public Pro ccutor, Government Pleader ९५०. President of the Bar Association,
Chairman of the Bar Council, Senior Counsels on the trial as well as the appellate
side of the criminal courts and finaily Academicians and sociologi The High
Courts of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Uttar Ps lesh helped
the Commission in drawing up suitable programmes to contact the above category
of persons. The High Court of Delhi has also issued directions to some Sessions
Judges to appear before the Commission aud state the necessary views in the matter.
The Commission deputed one of its Members to visit the above Siaivs personally
and hold sittings in the respective High Courts and record the views of the Hon’ble
Judges of the High Court, judicial officers, law officers and the counsel specially
invited to meet the Members of the Commission for the purpose. The Learned
Member accordingly visited the States and recorded the views of the experts appearing
before him in response to the request made by the Commission. The High Courts
have also circulated the questionnaire and forwarded the same to the Law Com-
mission. The views personally expressed by the persons who appeared before tne
Member of the Commission and also the views expressed in the answer to the question-
naire issued were duly tabulated in the Comniission’s office.

4.3. The following Table shows particulars of the various persons whose views
were recorded in the State: of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra and
Uttar Pradesh and the Union ‘erritory of Delhi. The Table also contains particulars
regarding the number of per. ons who sent replies to the questionnaire issued. It
may be pointed out that apa-t from Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Uttar Pradesh and Delhi, Punjab and Haryana, Kerala, Himachal Pradesh and
West Bengal have also forwarded responses to the questionnaire issued.

Number of Number of
Persons whose _persons res- Total

State r

views were ponded to the

recorded questionnaire
Andhra Pradesh 17 4 58
Karnataka Fe 12 42 54
Maharashtra | et 35 34 0
‘Uttar Pradesh : + . 30 26 56
Dihi et 3 17 20
Punjab and Haryani . . . a 84 84
Kerala. et कि 18 18
Himachal Pradesh. |} st हु 22 22
‘West Bengal toe . 41 41
ToraL . o7 325 422

a
10


Law. COMMISSION OF InDiw~+142 REPORT

: 4.4. A classification of the persons whose views were personally recorded may
be seen from the following Table : :

‘ict aad Law Lawyers
Sessions Officers, including
Judges, Chief Advocate trial Lawyers
Metropolitan General, and appellate

State Public Tawyers on Total
MS, Prosecutors, the criminal
Registrars Govt. side
of High Advocates

Courts etc. etc.
Ardhra Pradesh. 5 3 4 3 17
Karnataka. 1.1 4 3 12
Maharashtra. : 3 4 5 35
Uttar Pradesh . 4 1 5 30
Delhi 3 3
Tore. 18 Py 7 4a 7

The responses to the questionnaire received from the High Couris were from the
Sessions Judges, Metropolitan Magistrates, Chief Judicial Magistrates, whose
views were not personally recorded. .

4.5. An analysis was made of the views recorded from persons from various
States and also of the views expressed by the judicial officers in the response sent
from various States.

4.6. Basically two questions arise for consideration. The first question is whether
the scheme of “plea-bargaining” deserves to be introduced in the Indian Criminal
Jurisprudence ? If the answer to this question is ‘No’, further questions do not
arise. The second basic question, if the answer to the first question is in the affir-
mative, is whether the scheme should be applied to all categories of offences without
any discrimination or only to specified offences ?

4.7. Out of the persons whose views wore recorded personally. 65 PERSONS
EXPRESSED THE VIEW THAT IT WOULD BE APPROPRIATE AND
BENEFICIAL TO INTRODUCE THE CONCEPT of “plea-bargaining” whereas
32 PERSONS INDICATED THEIR MIND “AGAINST” THE INTRODUC-
TION OF THE CONCEPT. OUT OF THE 65 PERSONS WHO REACTED
“FAVOURABLY” to the introduction of the concept, 27 PERSONS WERE
OF THE VIEW THAT THE SCHEME COULD BE APPLIED TO ‘ALL’ offences
without discrimination. THE REMAINING 38 PERSONS QUALIFIED THEIR
VIEW BY ADDING A RIDER. According to them the scheme could be anvlied
to ONLY SPECIFIED OFFENCES. Pa‘ticalarly spsaking. THESE PERSONS
HOLD THE VIEW THAT THE SCHEME SHOULD NOT BE EXTENDED
TO MAJOR OFFENCES AND ECONOMIC OFFENCES. There is again a wide
divergence in the concept of “major offences”. SOME ARE OF THE VIEW THAT
THE EXCLUSION SHOULD BE ONLY OF OFFENCES WHICH ARE LIABLE
TO BE PUNISHED BY DEATH SENTENCE OF LIFE IMPRISONMENT;
SOME PUT IT AS OFFENCES FOR WHICH IMPRISONMENT IS MORE
THAN 10 YEARS; YET OTHERS PUT IT AS_ OFFENCES PUNISHABLE
WITH IMPRESONMENT FOR 7 YEARS AND MORE. Such are the views
of those persons favourably disposed towards the concept being introduced in our
criminal jurisprudence.

4.8. It may be ponited out that there isan almost near unanimity in the view
that the scheme should not be extended to socio-economic offences and offences
involving moral turpitude.

4.9. It was already mentioned that responses were received from 325 judicial
officers by way of replies to the questionnaire. Out of these, 242 judicial officers
expressed their views in favour’ of introduction of the concept while the remaining
"83 officers are against the introduction. Out of the 242 officers, 41 officers are in
‘favour’ of the introduction of the scheme 10 ‘all offences’ whereas 201 officers expressed
themselves against extention of the principle to all offences. The 201 officers who
expressed thamselves against the application of this scheme to major offences hold
the view that it can be applied to less serious offences. They are willing to classify



12

Law CoMMISSION oF INDIA—142 REPORT

less serious offences as offences for which imprisonment is seven years and more :
offences for which imprisonment as 10 years and-more ; and offences which are liable

for punishment with death or life imprisonment.

4.10. The statistical data may be summed up as under :

No. of persons who appeared‘ before the Commission 97

in persons and expressed their views.

No. of persons who answered the questionnaire . 325 422

No, persons in favour of introduction of the concept 307

No. of persons opposed to the introduction. . 5 422
.x ‘No. of personsfin favour of introduction of the concept 68

to all offences.

No. of persons in favour of introducing the concept 239
only to specified offences _

— 307

The survey reinforces the view that an improved version of the practise suitable
to law and legal ethos of India needs to be considered with seriousness and with
a sense of urgency. But before proceeding 10 do so it might be useful to take into
account the thinking taking place on this very subject in Canada where the Law
Commission has issued a working Paper recommending the practise of plea-
bargaining in Canada where just like India it does exist at present. That will be the
endeavour in the next Chapter.


CHAPTER V

CANADIAN LAW COMMISSION EXAMINES THE
CONCEPT IN A WORKING PAPER OF 1989 AND
RECOMMENDS INTRODUCTION THERE OF IN

CRIMINAL JURISPRUDENCE

5.1. During the course of investigation, the Commission realised that the con-
cept of plea-bargain_was examined in detail by the Law Reforms Commission of
Canada. Working Paper No. 15 was issued by the Canadian Law Commission
in the year 1975 entitled “Criminal Procedure : Control of the Process’.
Canadian Commission did not view favourably the introduction of the concept of
“plea agreement” and expressed serious reservations both as to its utility and as
to its desirability as a vehicle for furthering the ends of justice. The matter was
re-examincd in the year 1985 and eventually a working paper No. 60 was issued
in the year 1989 recommending the consideration of the concept in criminal juris-
prudence, The following observations of the Canadian Law Commission in its
Working Paper in the year 1989 explain why the Canadian Law Commission recon-

sidered the matter and recommended the introduction of the concept in the Canadian

Criminal Jurisprudence:
“We believe now, as we did in 1975, that justice should not be and should be seen
to be, something that can be purchased at the bargaining table. At the same
time, however, we are obliged to recognize that our legal system has undergone
significant. change in the intervening years, and that it is in the process of un-
dergoing further change. Although we remain attuned to the practical and theo-
retical difficulties inherent in the practice of plea negotiation, we believe a
cautious re-examination of the subject to be only prudeat and appropriate
in the light of a number of recent and ongoing developments having potentially
far-reaching effect on the workings and character of our justice system.
[Page 4]

“In short, the nature of our criminal justice system has evolved, and is
constantly in the process of evolving. Our recognition of this fact, in turn,
has caused us to explore in some detail the problems associated with plea
negotiation, as it is currently practised, and to consider what measures (short of

total abolition) might be employed to deal with these problems in an effective
and principled way.
[Page 5]

“We believe it is safe to say, therefore that the plea negotiation process has
not generally enjoyed a very flattering public image. Being a largely unregulated
practice, moreover, plea negotiation has been susceptible to abuse. Having
considered the question at length, however, and having taken into account
recent studies dealing with possible effects that attempts to abolish plea nego-
tiation might have, we are not convinced that abolition as opposed to regulation),
is the soundest remedial alternative. We note that in its recent rep ort on
Sentencing Reform, the Canadian Sentencing Commission has alluded to
studies indicating that efforts to abolish plea negotiation may in fact present

their own difficulties.......
[Page 7]

“In its policy document on The Criminal Law in Canadian Society, the Govern-
ment of Canada quite clearly did not view the process of plea negotiation as
being incompatible per se with the basic precepts it espoused. Rather than
condemn the process outright, it expressed the hope that suitable prosecutorial
guidelines would be developed in the area, as part of an effort to control discre-
tion and thereby enhance accountability and equality in the criminal process.
[Page 8]
“In our estimation, it would be a mistake to dismiss plea negotiation as a distasteful
practice made necessary only by the unhappy reality of an overburdened criminal
justice system. Plea negotiation is not an inherently shameful practice; it
13
3—104 Min. of LI & CA (ND)/93.


14

Law COMMISSION OF INDIA—-142 REPORT

ought not, on a theoretical level, be characterised as a failure of principle, If
practised properly it should, to the contrary, be recognised as the expression
and merging of two gomplementary principles : those of efficiency and
restraint... :

[Page 98]

ser should prosecytorial Gampremise necessarily be regarded as a means of
shortchanging justige. Jf the Presecytion of a particular accused person without
plea negotiation results in conviction for more offences, or conviction for a
more serious offence, than that to which the accused was prepared to plead
guilty (and results in the imposition of a more severe sentence, or more severe
sentences, than might otherwise have been imposed), does this mean inevitably
that justice has been properly served? Often, we believe, the ordeal of a full
scale trial may create its own injustice. [Page 9]

[Emphasis added]

5.2, Weighing the pros and cons the Commission finally expressed the view in
favoyr of statytorily recognising the schame of pleaebargaining which the Commis-
fon chose to designate as “plea discussions and agreements.” The Commission

served +

“.... people are more likely to expect that a sentence imposed following a
negotiated guilty plea and joint submission will be appropriate.Jf they are assur-
ed that the presiding judge has been apprised, in open court, of the process by
which the agreement was reached. They also appear more likely, in such cir-
cumstances, to express gonfidence in the fairness and Propriety of the judges
handling of the case.” [Page 13]

Emphasis added]

§.3. in Chapter II of its Working Paper, the Candian Law Commission has
twenty-three recomniendations made by the Commission which are appended to
this Report ( ANNEXURE‘B’). ~

5.4. A close study of the views expressed by the Law Commission of Canada
and the recommendations made there ,uPPorts the conclusion articulated in the
earjler Chapters as regards the desirability and need for s2rious and urgent consi-
deration of this subject. The Commission will Proceed to do so after dealing with
some observations made by the Supreme Court of India in the context of the exist-
ing legal frame work which docs net recognise the practice of plea-bargaining.



CHAPTER Vi

OBSERVATIONS OF SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CONCERNING “PLEA-BARGAINING” IN THE
CONTEXT OF THE PRESENT LEGAL FRAME

6.1. Courts in India had not had occasion to consider directly the impact of
the practice of plea-bargaining on the administration of crimnal justice. It
cannot be doubted that in quite a few trials and in the appeals against trial convic-
tions, sentences are awarded taking into account suggestions imadt By the counsel for
the defendant and agreed to by the prosecutors. These inforinal eotipromises
do not have the sanction of law. Nevertheless, they are ofteit acted upon without
making specific reference to the compromise in the judgements of the eourts con-
cerned.

6.2. The Commission noticed that the Supreme Court has had occasion to make
some observations in regard to the efficacy of “plea-bargaining’” in two cases to
which we shall presently refer. Since these observations emanate from the Supreme
Court the Commission feels that it wilt be expedient to carefully assess the weight
and importance thereof. The two cases are :

(i) Mutlidhar Megkiraj Loya etc. Vs State of Maharashtra, etc. AIR 1976 SC
1929 (Krishna lyet, Goswami, JJ).

(ii) Kasambhai Abdulrehmanbhai Sheik etc. Vs State of Gujarat and another
AIR 1980 SC 854 (Bhagwati, Sen, JJ)

6.3. In Murlidhar Meg raj Loya’s 685० pid Supreme Court gained an impression
that the defendants ple: guilty. The fi reme Court felt, that the plea must
have been entered pursuant to an informal inducement on holding out the prospect
of alight sentence. When the matter was carried on eppeal against the light sentence,
the appellate court reversed the trial cougt conviction. and enltavced the sentence.
Thereupon the accused approached the Supreme Court by way of an appeal.

6.4. In para 13 at page 1933, the Supreme Court observed :
“Many economic offenders resort to prantives the Ameri¢ais ‘call’ ptsé bargain-

vy
ing’ ‘plea negotiation’, ‘trading out’ and ‘compromise in criminal cases’ and the
trial magistrate drawned by 8 dotket Uitden ods fséént to the sub rosa
ante-room séttlement. This’ businéssian éulprit, bonfrehted by a 548 prospect
of the agony and ignominy of tenanéy of a prison éell; ‘trades out’ of the situation,
the bargain being a plea of guilt, coupled with @ promise of ‘hd jail’........ It
is idle to speculate on the ¥I eae Of négotiatel settlements df criminal cases, as
obtains in the Unitea States but in our furiddiction; esplcially in thé 488 of dan-
gerous economic crimes dnd food affehe3s, this practice infeudes 6% society's
interests by opposing society’s decision expressed, through pre-determined legislative
(fixation of minimum senten:és an& by sobtly subverting the itidndate of the law.
The jurists across the Atl antic path) Condé the bad odour of purchased
pleas of guilt and parily justify it pI hulpsophically as a_ sentence concession
to a defendant who has by his plea In énsurihg the prompt and certain
application of cotfectional meesttés to lim”.

{Bmphasis added]
6.5. The Suprerhe Court did rot iterfere fere witli the enhanced sentence as the
minimum sentence was presctited by the . The Supreme Court, however,

observed that :

“the State must do its duty by justice to the citizens and relieve over-worked
courts by more judicial agencies and stredmline procedure imstead of leaving
the uninformed public blindly to ceasure delaycth dispdsals.”

[Banphasis applied)

6.6. Three factors deserve to be highlighted :

(1) The offttice in Giiestion Was ai ecBHBIIe Offedee pertainiiig to food adul-
teration which a..octs the health and well beidg of ey citizens.

15


16

Law Commission or INDIA—142 REPORT

(2) The Legislature had prescribed a minimum jail sentence and the trial court
brazenly flouted the legislative will and mandate by not sending the
convict to jail for 3 months.

(3) There was no legal authority for invoking the plea. bargaining procedure
not recognized by the Criminal Jurisprudence of India.

6.7. It may be pointed out, with respect, that plea-bargaining as invoked in
American Courts does not necessarily invol Be “no jail” as was obscrved by the Sup-
reme Court in Murlidhar’s case. Observa tions to this effect are obviously based
on a misapprehension that in every case where an accused enters a plea of guilty
and negotiates for a compromise, he is let off without any sentence of imprisonment.
On the contrary, in most cases the pre-trial negotiations can only result in a reduced
sentence and defendant is not given a holiday from undergoing imprisonment in
jail. We may, perhaps, refer to a latest instance of plea-bargaining in the United
States Federal Court involving a New Delhi businessman who had been sentenced,
pursuant to a Pleacbargain, to 33 months of imprisonment instead of the maximum of
42 months. economic offence was involved in this case in that the businessman
attempted illegal export of hi-tech equipment from the United States. The business-
man pleaded guilty. Asa resolt of the plea-bargain, the sentence of imprison-
ment was reduced from 42 months R.I. to 3 months R.I. A report regarding the
above matter appeared in the New Delhi edition of Indian Express dated 11-11-90.
It will therefore, be correct to observe that the bargain consists of a promise of “no
Jail” on the part of the prosecution or the outcome of the plea-bargaining in every
case is that the offender gets off lightly with sentence of fine without undergoing a
sentence of jail.

6.8. The Commission does not consider, in the circumstances aforementioned,
that the evidence the understanding, but the Supreme Court felt, considering the
circumstances of the case, that the sentence must be due to an understanding.
The Supreme Court observed (para 2 page 854) :

“It is highly regrettable that the prosecution as well as the learned Magistrate
should have been a party to any such “plea-bargaining’” in a Prosecution for adul-
teration involving the health and well-being of the community”.

Disapproval of the concept of ple lea-bargaining implicit in the observations of tho
Supreme Court has to be 1000 ia the context highlighted hereinbefore.

6.11. The Statute provided a minimum sentence of three months imprisonment
and a fine of Rs. 500/-. The High Gourt enhanced the sentence suo moto to
conform to the minimum provided by ithe, Statute. Surely there was no legal sanc-
tion for the learned Magistrate to disregand the minimum sentence. provided by the
Statute and to award a lesser sentence, , It was in these circumstances that the
Supreme Court upheld the High Court’s,action in disregarding the understanding
‘etween the parties at the trial stage and enhancing the conviction.

6.12. In para 4 at page 855 the Supreme. Court made some observations of a general
Character. These may be referred (0. :—

“.... The conviction of the appellagt was based solely on the plea of guilty
entered by him and his cop fession of guilt was the result of p a-bargaining
between the prosecution, the defenceand the Icarned Magistrate. It is obvious
that such conviction based on the plea of guilty entered by the appellant as

“a result of plea-bar gaining cannot be sustained. It is to our mind contrary to
public poliey to allow a conviction to bc recorded against an accused by inducing
him to confess to a plea of guilty on an allurement being held out to hin that if
he enters a plea of guilty he will be let off very light! i

“Such a procedure would be clearly unreasonable, unfair and unjust and would
be violative of the new activist dimension of Atricle 21 of the Constitution,
unfolded in Maneka Gandhi’s case. Next, it would have the effect of of polluting
the pure fount of justice, because it might induce an innocent acc to plead
guilty to suffer a light and inconsequential pimishment rather than go through
@ long.and arduous criminal trial which, having regard to out coumbrous and
unsatisfactory system of administration of justice, is not only long drawn
out and ruinous in terms of time and money, but also uncertain and unpre-
dictable in its result and the Judge also might be likely to be deflected from the

‘4


Law COMMISSION oF INDIA—142 REPORT

path of duty to do justice and he might either convict an innocent accused by
accepting the plea of guilty or let off a guilty accused with a light Sentence, thus,
subverting the process of law and frustrating the social objective and purpose
of the anti-adulteration statute.

“This practice would also tend to encourage corruption and collusion and as a
direct consequence, contribute to the lowering of the standard of justice. There
is no doubt in our mind that the conviction of an accused based on a plea of
guilty entered by him as a result of. plea-bargaining with the Prosecution and the
Magistrate must be held to be unconstitutional and illegal”.

[Emphasis added]

6.13, Although the observations are made in the context of a serious economic
offence for which a minimum sentence of jail is prescribed, they reflect the Supreme
Court’s views, generally speaking in the context of the American practice being
adopted in the Indian Court without any authority of law. Itis, therefore, necessary
to carefully deal with the said objections.

6.14. Iegality.—The observations of the Supreme Court that a conviction
based on the plea of guilty entered by the appellant as a result of plea-bargaining
cannot be sustained should be understood in the context Of the plea-bargaining entered

plea of guilty and a concessional treatment being accorded in the light of the statutory
authority of law in accordance with the prescribed guidelines by a judicial authority,
it would not be possible to say that the conviction based on the plea of guilty is
efroneous.

6.15. Public Policy.—Inducing an accused to make a voluntary confession of
guilt is undoubtedly against public policy as observed by the Si reme Court. In
the fact of the case before the Supreme Court there was material to indicate that
the accused entered plea of guilty because of an “inducement” the the prosecution
and the Magistrate. In Suggesting the enactment of a law Providing for a scheme
of concessional treatment, the Commission has ensured that, no inducement is offered.
On the contrary, the provisions of the prop १052व law. would make it abundantly clear
that it is entirely up to the accused to consider whether a plea of guilt should be entered
or not and there would be no negotiations with the Prosecution. The law as suggested
does not suffer from any infirmity on this count, ‘

6.16, Constitutionality.—The next objection of the Supreme Court is that the
procedure by which a person is convicted on a plea-bargaining made as a result of
Inducement, would be violative of article 21 of the Constitution.

6.17. Article 21 of the Constitution provides that :

“No person shall be deprived of his life or p2rsonal libzrty except according
to procedure established by law”.

The observation oa this score has been made in the context of the fact that as at
present neither the Code of Criminal Procedure nor any other law authorises plea-
ining of the American model. It was without any authority of law that the
practice was adopted in the case in question. It was in this backdrop that reference
to violation of article 21 as regards “procedure established by law” has been made.
If there was a legal provision authorising the procedure, . the objection would dis-
. That was the reason why in Meghraj’s case the Supreme Court observed
thera a “streamlined procedure” should be devised if the State should administer Justice
by recourse to plea-bargaining, The observations made ‘by the Supreme Court in
sambhais case regarding the possible violation of article 21 should be, therefore,
confined to the situation where without legal sanction and ay priate procedure
a court takes note of a voluntary plea of guilty and conviats the socused ignoring
the mandate of law. These observations will be inapplicable in a situation where
a law governing concessionil treatment without higgle-haggling or bargaining
(not plea-bargaining of the American model) is enacted as is being proposed.

6.18. Reference may usefully and with advantage be made to the two leading
cases of the United States Supreme Court, namely, BRADY v UNITED STATES

1. Ed. 2d 747] and SANTOBELLO ५ NEW YORK [404 United States 257
Hay ) (upholding the constitutional validity of plea-bargaining) which were not
brought to the notice of out Supreme Court in the aforesaid two decisions.

17


“18

Law ComMrssiiN oF INDIA~142 Report

6.19. For the sake of convenience, the propositions which emerge from the
aforesait two decisions of the U.S. Sepreme Court may be broadly stated whilst
annexing for the sake of preciseness, the verbatim extracts of the rel fevant passages
at ANNEXURE ‘C’. Broadly stated, the U.S. Supreme Court has taken the view

that—
6)
(2

3)
(के

(5)
(0

0)
@

(2)

the Constitution does not forbid the plea of guilty;

the constitutional right to triaf can be waived provided the waiver is made
voluntarily and with sufficiciit awareness of the relevant circumstafices
and the likely coasequerides of stich waiver;

well over 75% of the criminal convictions in the U.S.A. rest on the pleas
of guilty;

convictions based on guilty plea are not free from hazards for the innocent
but experiettce shows that there is not much likelihood of defendants
advised by competent counsel condemning themselves falsely. This
view is based on the expectation that courts will satisfy themselves that
pleas of guilty are voluntarily and intelligently made by competent de-
Yendants with adequate advice of counsel and there is no reason to question
the accuracy and reliability of the admission made by the defendants
that they committed the crimies with which they are charged. AH tajal

००615 are now requited to interrogate the defendants who entered. guilty ,

plea so that the waiver of these fundamental rights will affirmatively appear
in the 10००१;

plea-bargaining is an essential component of the administration of justite

and, if properly administered, it deserves to be encouraged;

tte practice is considered desirable because—

(a) othetWise if evety criminal charge were subjected to full-scale trial,
it would Ue tiecessary to multiply by many times the number of judges
and court — facilities;

(0) it leads to prompt dnd targely final disposition of most ctiniinal
cases;

(०) it avoids mucti of the corrosive impact of enforced idleness during
pro‘trial confinement for those who are denied release pending
trial;

(d) the publieis ptotected froin those who are prone to continue criminal
conduct ever’ whilé on pte-ttiat reledse;

(०) by shortening the time between the charge and the dispositibi, it
enhances the rehabilitative prospects of the guilty when they are
ultimately iniprisoned;

(f) judicial and prosecutorial resources are conserved for those cases
in which there is a substantiat isste of the defendant’s guilt or in which
there, is substantial doubt whethér the State can sustain its burden of
ptoof; .

(8) 3 peompily i maposed punishement after an admission of guilt mi
mane effectively attsin the objectives of punishment lst aonaihe,

th the Stato and the defendant often find it advan tageous to preclud.
the possibility of the एक penalty authorised by law; Preomee
fot a defetiddrit who sees’ sight possibility of acquittal, the atvdfitages

of pleading guilty ard linliting the probably penalty are Sonate 8,

wanigly :--

(७) his exposure is reduced;

(b) the correctional process can, begin immediately;

(O the practiont butdews of & trial are eliminated;

thé defendant may chedse t6 plead guilty as he may consider ४ Breach

of the law as sufficient reason for surrendering himself 386 asvepting' thé

punishment;


i
\

Law COMMISSION OF INDIA—142 REPORT

(10) the defendant may choose to plead guilty on realising that it is not worth
the agony and expense of a trial to himself and his family in view of the
evidence gathered by the prosecution.

6.20. Whereas even the ‘*plea-bargeining”’ gs it obtajns in the Ameriqan system
has been held constitutional by the United States Supreme Const, what is being
proposed is a system where—-

(1) there will be no bargaining at all between Prosecution and defence;

(2) the accused alone can take the initiative to move the machiner, for
concessional treatment or benefit of probation leaving no scope for in-
ducement from the prosecution; ;

(3) while the plea judges will hear the plea for concessional treatment, there
will be no prior assurance to the accused and the Judicial mind wil] deter-
mine the sentence;

(4) for serious offences punishable with punishment exceeding 7 years, a high-
powered two member Bench of retired High Court Judges will exercise
the jurisdiction;

(5) the application will be entertained only if the plea court is fully satisfied
that it is voluntarily made without inducement or coercion and anly if
there is some prima facie material; and

(6) all possible safeguards are provided.

There is no scope for successfully assailing the Constizutionality of the concerned
provisions of law. ~

6.21. In view of the foregoing, the Commission is confident that the constj-
tutional validity of a law setting out such a scheme for concessional treatment is
not open to question and there is no violation of the provisions contained in article
21 of the Constitution.

_ 6.22, Conclusion.—In the view of the Commission, the observations contained
in the aforesaid two Supreme Cour: judgements do not militate against the engct-
ment of a law carefully setting out the scheme broadly on the aforesaid pattern
laying down appropriate guidelines and Procedure governing the matter ag is bei

proposed. It is, therefore, proposed to proceed to evolve a scheme Specially desi; |
r the logal environment in India after dealing with the objections brought into
focus during the survey undertaken by the Commission as reflegted in Chapter

19


CHAPTER VII

OBJECTIONS TO THE INTRODUCTION OF THE
CONCEPT IN INDIAN LEGAL SYSTEM ANSWERED

4.1. The Commission has carefully considered the various objections to the
introduction of the concept in Indian criminal jurisprudence. The objections raised
and the Commission’s views in relation to the same are dealt below.

7.2. Country’s social conditions do not justify the introduction of the concept.—
Several respondents point out that the scheme of “‘pleasbargainin3” might have
succeeded in America and a few other European countries because of the social
conditions existing in those countries. Literacy, it is pointed out, is of a high order
and people in those countries, by and large, realise the consequences of invoking
the scheme involving a confession to the commission of crime. It is said that the
position is not the same in out country where literacy is very low.

7.3. It has to be realised that even illiterate persons with their robust common
sense are capable of realising the consequences of making recourse to the scheme.
The legal aid apparatus is also available for consultation if they cannot afford legal
counsel.

7.4, It may be pointed out that defendants are generally advised by their trusted
lawyers and there are no grounds to think that a defendant, except in very rare cases
and circumstances, would make confession of guilt entailing personal and social
consequences to him not with standing his innocence. Besides, the scheme which
is being proposed takes care of this objection in as much as a judicial officer acting
as a plea judge or a committee of two retired High Court judges would be explaining
tothe accused persons the consequences of pleading guilty under the scheme.

7.5. Pressures from prosecuting agencies may result in convictions of the inno-
cents.—One of the fears expressed is as regards the likelihood of pressure being
exercised by the prosecuting ager nncies and even innocent persons yielding to such
pressures. This fear can be allayed if a judicial officer explains the implications,
and satisfies himself in the absence of any police officer that no coercion is exercised

by the police and if the application is made at the initiative of the accused himself *

as is being provided in the’ scheme being evolved by us.

7.6. The poor will be the ultimate victims of the concept.—It is forcefully contend-
ed by some that ittals in criminal trials are as high as 90 to 95 percent and con-
sequently an accused and his counsel generally hope to secure acquittal in the course
of a regular trial. It is claimed that a wrongdoer will not come forward to make
a confession if there is the slightest possibility of acquittal. It is further claimed
that a person will be willing to spend any length of time in jails as an under-trial
prisoner in the hope that he will secure an acquittal when regular trial is taken up.

any event, it is pointed out that the rich, influential and well-informed accused
would seldom undertake the risk of social and personal consequences of a confession
as they look forward to a clean acquittal in course of time. It is eventually the poor
who may come forward to making confessions and suffer the consequential con-

viction.

7.1. It does appear that the rate of acquittals in our criminal trials is very high.
The principal reason for the acquittals, which was rightly advanced by several,
Session Judges, is the long delay involved in taking up the trials. It was brought
to the notice of the Commission that during the interregnum when accused are
awaiting trials, many manipulations take place. Witnesses who were initially willing
to speak truth back out because of the temptations offered on behalf of the accused
to retract from the original testimony. Passage of time also affects the veracity
of the evidence tendered by the witnesses who are subjected to critical cross-exa-
mination. Memories fade during the long time taken for conducting the trial and
the witnesses confuse themselves of the actual course of events when they are
put to severe cross-examination. It would be wrong to say that most of the trial
result in acquittals because the defendants did not actually commit the crimes. The

20


Law CoMMISsION OF INDIA—142 REPORT

defendants escape convictions because of the aforesaid factors. Be that as it may.
the rgumgt that the scheme may not succeed is merely a conjecture and a matter
of opinion to which we do not subscribe. It is not a good reason to oppose the
scheme.

7.8. It is also not possible to proceed on the assumption that persons would
be willing to spend three to eight years in jails as under-trial prisoners if there is a
possibility of their release from the jail much earlier. Most 03096 know that long
periods of stay in jail bring about economic and social ruin. It is reasonable to think
that such defendants will look forward to rehabilitate themselves as quickly as pos-
sible if there is a p> lity of thzir boing convicted for similar periods and releas-
ed from jail.

7.9 Comsel representing the accused would be anw (008 to adwise canfession
invoking scheme.—This is a point forcefully put forward by the counsel in Allakabad
High Court. It is claimed by them that the counsel representing the defendant are
not likely to advise the clients to make recourse to the scheme. Firstly, it is said
that the moment any such advice is given the defendant loses faith in the counsel
representing him and will engage another counsel. Segondly, it is pointed out that
after release a person who suffered conviction may be told that he would not have
undergone the sentence had it not been for the advice given by his counsel, He
would be told that as in several cases his case would also have resulted in acquittal.
This objection also do:s not appear to be sound. Nor docs it provide a good ground
far abandoning the idea. Counscl will doubtless give such advice as is considered
to be in the interest of their clients. And the likelihood of failure of the scheme,
as expressed by some, cannot justify insction on the part of the law makers.

7.10. Plea-bargaining may increase the incidence of crime.—lIt is suggested
by some that adoption of the scheme may increase the incidence of crime in the
country. It is claimed that because of the expectation that a person may be let off
lightly’ by reason of pleading guilty, offences may be committed by persons so
minded. There may also be temptations to repeat the commission of offences;
it is argued.

7.11. In the first place, the scheme does not envisage that an application, if
gaade, shall be necessarily ०, The authority considering the acceptance
भा otherwise of the request for concessional treatmoas would weigh all pros and cons
apd, more particularly, look into the nature of offences broadly and exercise discoe-
tion to accept or reject the request. Secondly, the scheme may be restricted to a
first offendcr. Even in the present state of law, a first offender is entitled to be en-
larged on probation in respect of many offences. The fear is thus ill-founded,

7.12. Criminals may slip through the net with impunity.—Equally untenable
is the apprehension tht by resorting to the scheme criminals may slip through the
net with impunity and escape due punishment. The scheme being evolved ensures
that in regard to serious offencs a minimum substantive sentence of imprisonment
is imposed. The scheme is for ‘concessional treatment” not for ‘no punishment’.
The deterrent effect of a jail term operites with e qual force whether the stigma
is associ ‘ted with a term of 6 months or 18 months. ides, in the present scenario
even after a protracted trial more than 75 per cent of the cases result in acquittals
83 discussed elsewhere. This point of criticism is, therefore, devoid of merit.

7.13. No social benefits accrae.—This criticism is unwarranted. There are
nunizrous advantages ९.8. :--

(1) Saving of time cost and resources cost to courts which are already over
loaded.

(2) Saving of money cost to the community as also to the accused.
(3) The faith in honesty is reinforced.

(4) Rehabilitation and reformation of the offender commences early and he
can start a fresh life without loss of time.

(5) When the offender pleads guilty he feels cleansed of the feeling of guilt.
Commentary.—When an offender is punished after a trial consequent to his

“plea of not guilty” he is lowered in his own cyes. The society by implication
4-104 Min. of LJ & CA (ND)/93.

a


22

Law CoMMIssION oF INDIA—t42 REPORT

conveys to him thet
Tn the eyes of the «
feels contrite and
becomes lighter.

jon of innocence is found to be untrue.
lowered. If on the other hand hehimself
his guilt the burden of guilt carried by him

Attonemeni by the offender satisfies his conscience sets him free of the
feeling of guilt in the inner-most recesses of his heart. It thus becomes the most
important pathway on the ascent to moral heights and strengthens his resolve to
1080 a blemish free and pro-social life. If the stonenemt is deep and sincere, the
offender is likely to have an abiding awareness thxt he has been morally rein-
stated. It also results in the object of protecting society being achieved along
with attainment of the object of moral and social re-generation of the criminal.

7.14, Pablic debate.—Before closing this Chapter, we may point out that the
National Law School of Bangalore conducted a Seminar and the Director of the
institute reported that the learned members participating in the seminar expressed
their unqualified view thet the concept of “‘plea-bargaining” should be introduced.

7.15. A seminar was also conducted by a public institution known as Jagrut
Bharat, Dherwad, Karnataka. The Editor of the organisation is an advocate.
The seminar was held on 8-9-1990 which was largely «ttended by the citizens, advo-
cates, judges etc. The institution communicated to the Commission the views
expressed in the seminar. It would appear that the learned members participating
in the seminar expressed the view that'the concept of “plea-bargaining” should be
troduced in the criminal jurisprudence.

7.16. Conclusion.—Or weighing the pros and cons of the matter it is felt that
scheme for concessional treatment in respect of those offenders who on their
own volition invoke the scheme which takes care of appropriate safeguards may
prove beneficial.

7.17. It will also make the provisions relating to release on probation whith
are already on the st-tute book really effective. For, it is of little use to invoke these
provisions, at the conclusion of a full-fledged and full-dressed trial “after? investing
time, effort and money in recording evidence and recording a finding of guilt. If
the scheme is invoked an offender can seek the benevolent provisions relating to
probation without having to undergo the rigours of a trial. The idea, ti fore,
need not be abandoned. In fact the crying need to evolve a suitable scheme canriot
be disregarded.


CHAPTER जाता

WHETHER TO MAKE THE CONCEPT APPLICABLE
TO ALL OFFENCES

8.1. Reference has already been made to quite a substantial number of persons
agreeing to the introduction of such a scheme in our criminal jurisprudence with
the rider (1) that socio economic offences are excluded, (2) that its application
should be limited only to “less serious offences.” .

8.2. Non-application of the Scheme to certain offences.—The Commission has
carefully considered the aforesaid suggestions. In regard to the suggestion that
the scheme should not made applicable to offences involving moral. turpitude
and socio-economic offenc the scheme envisages exclusion of such offences from
the purview of the sche! the first phase. The scheme also envisages extension
thereof with the rider that in any event a substantive sentence of imprisonment
of a minimum specified term, say, one year is imposed. It is also envisaged that
it may be so extended after assessing the results of the working of the. pilot scheme,
and cfter a public debate.

8.3. It may be pointed out that in the present statutes relating to economic
offences there are several technical offences which are liable for punishment. Failure
to file certain statutory returns within time, failure to furnish required information
to the designated authorities within time, etc. are some of the technical offences
which are liable for punishment with imprisonment as well as fine. Whether or
or not to extend the scheme with a similar rider in the light of the experience gathered
during the first phase will have to be considered in the light of a public debate at
an appropriate time. .

8.4. As regards the suggestion from several quarters that the scheme should
be made applicable only to “less serious offences”, the Commission is of the opinion
that the scheme as framed may encompass all offences subject to the rider that in
the first instance, the scheme may be made applicable only to offences under all
Central Acts, which are liable to imprisonment for 165 than seven years. The
extension of the scheme to offences liable for imprisonment under the respective
statutes to more than seven years may be considered after careful assessment of the
results of the scheme as applied to offences liable for imprisonment for 1६5 than
seven years. If after such assessment of the results, it is felt that the scheme deserves
to be extended to other offences, it may be so extended in the light of the experience
gathered and in the light of the public opinion generated in the context of the ex-
perience so gathered. .

8.5. As regards the application of the concept to offences under various laws
enacted by the States, the Commission feels that it should be left to the respective
state Governments to take a decision in ‘this behalf having regard to the fact that
the State Governments of each State may have its own perception in regard
to this matter.

8.6. As regards the category of serious offences it can be further sub-divided
for the purpose of phased application. The sub-category comprising of offences
punishable with death or imprisonment for life may be excluded in the first phase
initially and the application of the scheme may be extended to this sub-category
only later on, in the light of the experience gathered ‘in the working of the
other sub-category and the public debate generated in its wake.

8.7. It is proposed to now proceed to evolve the scheme in the aforesaid pers-
pective.

23


CHAPTER IX

GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURE TO BE
INCORPORATED IN THE STATUTE

9.1, For the sake of implementing the scheme and the smooth functioning
thereof, it would be necessary to incorporate in the statute by amending Code ot
Criminal Procedure and by incorporating a separate Chapter in this behalf the pro-
cedure to be followed and the broad guidelines to be applied on the lines indicated

9.2. In order to unfold the broad reasoning underlying the proposed procedure
ane: plamator commentary has been added which is calculated to buttress the basis
for the recommendation.

9.3. Competent Authority.—The jurisdiction for the exercise of the powers
under the scheme shall be exercised by the Competent Authority as defined under
the scheme i

(a) In respect of criminal cases where the relevant statute provides for
imprisonment of less than 7 years for the offences alleged to have been committed,
3 metropolitan magistrate or a magistrate of the first class, especially desig-
nated as a “Plea-Judge” by the High Court, will be empowered to act as the
Competent Authority;

(b) In respect of criminal cases where the relevant statute provides for
imprisonment for 7 years or more for the offences alleged to have been committed
a Committee consisting of two retired High Court Judges, duly appointed
by the concerned Government in consultation with the Chief Justice and his
two seniormost colleagues, for the purpose of receiving and considering appli-
cations under the scheme will act as the Corhpetent Authority under the

9.4, Commentary.—The machinery for the implementation of the Act has been
bifurcated, into two categories for the reasons being articulated presently. In respect
of offences, alleged to have been committed by an accused punishable with imprison-
ment of 7 years or,more, it is considered appropriate to constitute a high powered
authority comprising of two retired High Court Judges constituting a Bench for the
purpose of exercising the powers. It has been considered so necessary having regard
to f Bravity 0 of the offences in respect of which fhe provisions of the scheme may be
invoked by the concerned accused. Offences which are punishable with imprisonment
of 7 years or more under the relevant statute, by the very nature of things. are seri-
ous offences which call for close consideration at the hands of an authority of high
stature, in whose ability, capacity, wisdom and integrity, trust can be reposed with
a degree of safety. That is why the composition of the authority needs to be of
appropriately high level. At the same time, in respect of minor offences and offences
of relatively lesser gravity, it would be counter-productive to invest the powers
in such a ghpowered authority. It would result in the time of the high authority
being taken by relatively less important matters and may result in over-crowding
of metters and making the Committee of High Court Judges do work of lesser
impo jortance. It would also become unworkable, for if such a high-powered Coi-

¢ were to be bothered by relatively minor offences like theft or assault or
ttéspass, etc., the Committee would not be able to discharge its functions with
efficiency and with due degree of serious applicatio of mind. That is why in respect
of offences punishable with imprisonment of less than 7 years, a practical formula
has been devised, namely, that of invésting a metropolitan magistrate or a magistrate
of the first class to be designated as a “Plea-Judge”. To ensure that a competent
official enjoying a good reputation whose confidential records are satisfactory
is selected , it has been suggested that the selection of the magistrate or metropolitan
magistrate as Plea-Judge should be made by the High Court which would be ex-

pected to know about the antecedents and suitaiblity of the Judge concerned. The -

Plea-Judge will not try any case as a regular Judge to ensure that matters are disposed
of expeditiously and to ensure that the accused invoking the machinery will not
have any apprehension that in case of his application being rejected, the case may

4


Law CoMMIssION or INDIA—142 REPORT

BS triéd by thé Plea-Judge who might entertain bias by reason of the fate tia¥ the
aocused had invoked the machinery to plead guilty in order to claith the bent or
the scheme.

9.5. So far as the mechinery in respect of offences alleged to have been conm
mitted by an accused which are punishable with imprisonment of 7 years or more is
hat the appointment should be made in consul-
vo seniormost colle: so that the retired
hh reputation ar ied for the purpose.
the conii sof the public and the administrati
36 Competent Authority shall comprise of two
Judges constituting a Di Bencx. Thu inode of selection suggested hereinabove.
and the qualifications p: ed fo. the Competent Authority should be sufficient
to allay apprehension, if any, on the pait of the administration and the public as
also the accuscd and to inspire the confidence of all concerned.

Judges of the appre
For the purpo:e of
it has been suggested that

9.6. How to set in motion the machinery.—It is appropriate to provide that
the machinery shall be sct in motion by a written app! fication to be made by. aif
decused desirous of seeking the benefit of the scheme.

9.7. In the scheme prevailing in U.S.A. and which has been proposed it the
Working Paper by the Law Reforms Cominission of Canada, the framework
6f the scheme provides for making an application by the public prosecutor and the
aeBVSed after a process of negotiations between them. The scheme evolved by the
present Commission makes a departure and contemplates niachinery being moved
sélely at the instance of the accused. There are four good reasons for making this
departure. In the first place, the Commission considers it inappropriate that any
Hegotiations or bargaining between the accused and the public prosecutor
sMould take place. Such bargaining or higgling haggling results in the confiderice
of the people being shaken. When a ciime has been committed, the last word must
be with a judicial officer acting as Competent Auchority and the public prosecutor
should not have any role to play as a negotiator for the purpose of bargaining.
In fact, bargaining itself may be considered somewhat odious. This can be avoided
only provided the bargaining and higgling haggling part is done away With and: the
accused alone is authorised to move the Competent Authority to invoke the scheénte.
im the second place, in the present times, even the probity of a public prosecutor
may be considered suspect by a section of the public or by the administration.
An apprehension may perhaps be cntertained that some underhand understanding
might have been arrived at between the public prosecutor and the accused on 3०608 nt
of oblique considerations. All this can be avdided if the public prosecutor has
no role to play in moving the machinery under the scheme and the initiative in this
behalf is to be taken solely by the accused person. Thirdly, the apprehension that
the public prosecutor might have cxercised some pressure on the accused to make
him plead guilty would also be removed if there is no contact between the public
prosecutor and the accused and the public prosecutor has no authority to initiate
the proceedings under the scheme whercas the accused alone can do so.
the making of the desicion whether or not to move the application rests sore अक in
tHe hands of the accused, there is practically no risk of any pressure having been
eXercised on him by the public prosecutor. Fourthly, it will also ensure that the
application has been moved voiuniarily and after due deliberations, havihg consi-
dered the pros and cons of the step taken by the accused.

9.8. When can the application be made ?—An application 118) be made at any
time, giier the filing of the charge sheet in a case instituted by the police by lodging
an FIR.

9.9. Commentary.— Till th. charge sheet is filed, the investigating agency would
be engaged in collecting the material supporting: the prosecution case: It-is, there=
fore, considered appropriate that the app! fication: may be madé only after the charge
sheet 15 . :

9.10. in respect of complaints initiated by private persons, that is to say oy
respect of complaints lodged otherwise than by lodging an FIR: by the police, the
application may be moved at any time after the court issues a process.

9.11. At summons cases an accused may make an application before his plea
js recorded under séction 251 of Code of Criminal Procedure.


Law CoMMission oF INDIA—142 REPORT

. 9.12. In warant cases an application may be made when the matter is ripe for
charge but before charge is framed.

9.13, Commentary.—It is not necessary to provide for any time lag because
in a private complaint the material would have been already gathered by the com-
plainant before the complaint is lodged and he or she can make it available to the
Competent Authority for the purposes of taking an appropriate decision.

The application has to be made by the accused before making his plea because
by the very nature of things plea of guilty can be made only before the Competent
Authority if the scheme for concessional treatment is to be resorted to and plea
of not guilty can be followed only by a trial.

9.14. Procedure to be followed on institution of an application.—The competent
Authority shall fix a date for preliminary hearing of the application and apprise the
applicant thereof in writing or an officer of the court may apprise him personally
about the date of hearing and obtain his signature in token of the accused having
been so apprised after rec-iving the relevant record pertaining thereof from the
trial court which should be transmitted by the trial court within 10 days of the
receipt of the requisition in this behalf.

9.15. On the date fixed for hearing or any other date to which the hearing may
be adjourned, the Competent Authority shall ascertain from the accused in the open
court whether the application under the scheme was made by him voluntarily and wil-
lingly without any inducement or pressure from any quarters. At the time of rating
this preliminary examination of the accused, the Competent Authority shall satisfy
himself that neither the public prosecutor nor any police officer other than the Security
officer, if any, posted in the court is present in the court room so that the Ppossi-
bility of any direct or indirect pressure is excluded and the voluntary character of
the application is assured.

9.16. Apprising the accysed of the implications of the Proceedings.—The next
step, after the applicant has been apprised of the aforesaid facts and the Competent
Authority is satisfied about the voluntary nature of the application, is that the
Competent Authority may fix a date for hearing the public prosecutor and the ag-
grieved party and/or the other side and for final disposal and passing a final order.
If the Competent Authority is not satisfied that the application is voluntarily made
or that the applicant, after realising the consequences, is not prepared to proceed
with the application, he may reject the application.

9.17. If the application is not rejected.—The Competent Authority shall explain
to the accused that on his pleading guilty, the Competent Authority may, after
hearing the public prosecutor or the aggrieved person, record a conviction for such
offence as appears to have been committed and, after hearing the public prosecutor
and the aggrieved party, may, afier hearing the accused or his advocate, if any,

(i) recommend imposing of a suspended senicnce and release him or on
probation or impose an appropriate sentence and release him or probation,
or

(ii) direct him to pay such compensation to the aggrieved party as may be
considered ‘appropriate after hearing both the sides, or

(iii) impose sentence considered appropriate by the Competent Authority.

9.18, Rejection of application—An application may be rejected either at the
initial stage of after heating the public prosecutor or the aggrieved party. If the
Competent Authority is of the opinion that, having regard to the gravity of the
offence or any of the circumstances which may be brought to his notice by the public
prosecutor or the aggrieved party, the case is not a fit one for exercise of his
as it would amount to miscarriage of justice or that it is a matter which ought to
go to trial or that there is no material which prima facie spells out the offence charged
or any other offence, he may reject the application brie! fy indicating his reasons.

9.19. Summoning of record if application is not rejected.—The Competent
Authority shall have the power to send for and obtain the record relating to the
case from such court or office as may: be having custody thereof.


Law COMMISSION OF INDIA—142 REPORT

Authority

afideatial and a copy thereof shall
not be given to any:

© a4 to who:n it may b2 supplied if he
so desires. Th: making of tion on the part of [| ed o: the rejection
by the Competent Authority shall not create any prejudice against the accused at
a regular trial which may follow in due course.

9.21. Commentary.—If by the making of an application which is rejected
the accused is to suffer any prejudice he would be deterred from invoking ths bene
ficial provisions of the scheme. It would, therefore, be necessary to provide to the
effect that neither a copy of the application that has been rejected or the brief reasons
therefor, if any, shall be mad: available to anyone other than the accused and that
it should be statutorily provided that if this fact comes to the notice of the
court trying the case in the event of the going for a regular trial, it shall not
result in any prejudice to the accus: » It shall alco be provided by statute
that the public prosc-uio- of th: ag, shall not be entitled to mention the
making of such an application or tl it was rejected in the trial court or
the appellate court in case of an appeal arising from the order of the trial court
and that if any mention is mad2, it shall constitute contempt of court punishable
with a minimum senteace of imprizonment for 7 days.

9.22. The hearing of the applicatioz.—At the hearing of the application, the
accused or his cou if any, tae public prosecutor and the agerieved party,
if any, shall be heard as regards the prayer of the accused for release on probation
or the quantum of the sentence and/of the amount of compensation to be paid
to the aggrieved party. The Competent Authority shall pass an order considered
appropriate by him having regard to all the circumstances of the case. He shall
not be bound to set out the argument~ advanced by each of the parties but shall
pass a order mentioning in brief such reasons as he migrt consider appropriate
and shall pass an appropriate order having regard to the cirscumtances.

9.23. Commentary.—The Competent . Authority has to exercise his discretion
having regard to all the circumstances and it would be countet-productive to require
him to reproduce al! th: submissions urged by the concerned parties and to deal
with the same as if he was writing a judgment. It would be sufficient to mention the
brief reason which operates on his mind in appropriate cases for the sake of the
appropriate functioning of the scheme. The submissions also should, be only on
the aspect indicated hereinabove and the submissions should be cricumscribed to
the aforesaid extent lest the very pucpose of the scheme is defeated. The public
prosecutor has to be heard so that th2 relevant aspects which require consideration
from the point of view of the prosecution are at the disposal of theCompetent Authori-
ty for the sake of fair disp :al, So also the agerieved party should have.an opp-
ortuni'y to place his point of view for the sake of fairness so that he feels that he
has brought tc the notice of the Competent Authority th: relevant aspects +

924. Procedure to be followed in cases to which the probation of Offenders Act
(P.O. Act. for short) and/or the provision of section 360 Cr. P.C. is ‘applicable.—
In cases where the b:n:ficial provision of the P.O. Act and/or section 360, Cr.
P.C., are attracted to an applicant, he would be eatitiled to make an application
mentioning that he is dzsirous of pleading guilty coupled with a prayer for granting
him the benefit under the P.O. Act and section 360, Cr. P.C. In such cases, after
hearing the public prosecutor and th: aggrieved party, the Competent Authority shall
pass appropriate orders having ragard to the circumstances of the case in the light
of the concerned provisions in conformity with the conditions embodied in the same.
The Competent Authority may be staturorily authorised to dispense with the réqire-
ment to call for the report of the probation officer if considered appropriate in the
circumstances of the case in order to save time and to dispense with an exercise
considered unnecessary. In where it appears to the Competent Authority
that, having regard to the P.O. Act and section 360, Cr. P.C., and having regard to
the circumstances of the care, the case is not a fit one for granting the benefit of the
said provisions or that it is not lawful to do so, the application as a whole may
be reieted without ‘recording any order of conviction. The provision Tegarding
confidentiality of the making of the application and the consequences of rejection,
as outlined in paragraphs 9.22 and 9.23 will be applicable in such cases of rejection
as Well. ‘ हु mo

4


Law Commission OF INDIA—142 REPORT

9.25, Commentary.—Th2 P.O. Act and the provision embodied in section
360, Cr. P.C., constitute 82120: isions calculated to benefit the community
as a whole as also to extend humnane treatment with an cye on the reformatioa of
the offender in resp2ct of mutters whore the imposition of a substantive term of
jail would be counter-productive both to th: commuaity as well as to the offender.
‘As indicated in the Statsment of Objects and Reasons of the P.O. Act and in a
catena of court cases;

(1) There has been an increasing emphasis on the reformation and rehabilita-
tion of the offender as a useful and selfrzliant mzmber of society without
subjecting him to deleterious effects of jail life;

(2) A conviction coupled with supervision through the Probationary Officers
may result in reformation and make the offenders useful members of
the community and prevent them from indulging in anti-social behaviour
in future:

(3) Mony of th ofzaders are not hibitus! or dangerous criminals but are
weak characters who have surrendered to temptation or through mis-
fortune have bzen brought into the operations of the police and the courts:
They, therfore, deserve to be given an opportunity to behave as respen-
sible citizens in future;

(4) The offender is not thrown in the company of hardened criminals and
exposed to being led to deeper waters or more serious crimes and adopting
a criminal way of life in future, having carned a stigma of undergoing
a jail sentence and having lost respectability in the society;

(5) Recourse to probation in preference to sentencing to a term in jail results
in reducing the burden on jails which are already over-crowded and saves
the community from sp2nding on the upkeep of those who have harmed
the community in the past and those who are exposed to be initiated on
a path harmful to the community;

(© A person who has once gone to jail may not mind going to jail once again
for another offence, for the harm to his character and standing in the com-
munity has already be fallen him and having once becn painted black,
his social visage would remain tarnished.

The Court would, therefore, make an enlightened approach and extend the
enefit of these provisions to such offenders who seek to avail of the benevoleat
- provisions. But as at present, it is both common knowledge and it is gathered in
the course of the interviews with the persons concerned with the administration
of these provisions as well as the members of the Judiciary and the members of the
Bar, these provisions are availed of but infrequently. It is common knowledge
that only very few persons avail of the beneafit of these provisions. The factor which
is responsible for the apathy in invoking and applying these provisions is net
difficult to identify. Recourse to these provisions can be made by an offender who
pleads guilty in a summons case as soon as he appears. There is no attraction to
do So te his prayer for release on probation is likely to succeed. If he pleads
not ‘he can make recoruse only after a protracted trial which results in convie-
tion. An offender who has already undergone the heart-breaking travails of a ctiminal
trial involving tremendous time-cost, money-cost and effort-cost till the conclusion
of the trial has little incentive to avail of these provisions if and when the trial yltj-
mately results in conviction. He would have already spent considerable amoyat
in kegal cost in securing the services of a professional lawyer and would have
iderable time in making innumerable visits to instruct his lawyer at his ae
numerable visits to the court where, after having to wait for hours, his matter
would have been ad, d from time to time. He would have lost many working
and mapy work: days in the cource of this exercise. At the conclusion of
howe trjal, because of tne inavailability of some witness or on acc unt ofthe लिए,
‘af the witness to give a 3४ ansistent coherent account after a lapse ofa
long time. between thedete of the occurrence and the date of his giving
ewidence on account of sqme technical lacuna on the part of the prosecution,
he would have secured an unmerited acquittal eve. if he was really ay
of an off2ice with which he wis charged. [14 cise he was convict
fhe would still have hope of securing an acquittla in the appela or revisional 6०77,
Having suffered for a long time, he would not mind suffzring for somemere
time in pursuing an appeal ora revision. If ultimately the conviction is confiymad,



ce

Law COMMISSION of INDIA—142 REPORT

[[the st:

how thetthe ratio of conviction is perhaps less than 20%], Jhe may
at least 57 hy

“seatence. Under the circumstances, there is» little enthusiasm
‘dv-ovisions of the Act. If, however, he has the option to
nt Authority under the scheme to avail of the benefit of these
stage when he has not expended his money, time and
would be in a better position to realise the advantages of
therefore, desirable to enable an offender to make
0 8 2 seayer for allowing him to plead guilty and telea-
a, cic., in accordance with the letter and the spirit of the afore-
The Competent Authority must, however, be authorised by the statute
with the requirement as regards calling for the report of the probation

tent Authority considers it fit case for dispensing with the same
in fit cases. The purpose of the community would have been
“ion recorded in the case which would uphold the banner
of rule of law. So also the purpose of giving an opportunity to the offender to cleanse
himself would hav: served. It would, therefore, be advantageous to all con-
corned to mak ion in this behalf on the lines indicated hereinabove. If
the Compete: y is of the view that having regard to the gravity of the
offence of hi: gard to the limitations engrafted in the provisions or having
lar ci nstances of the case, it is not a fit case for exercise
> Competent Authority would reject the application for pleading
[8 convic and release on probation and direct that the matter
tt 1 court in the regular court in the regular manner and the
tial. Tt would not result in prejudice cither to the prosecu-
tion or davence in that event, for the making of the application itself would remain
a confidential mattcr and there would be a statutory prohibition against this fact
being mentioned 0 court holding the trial or this factor being taken into con-
sideration for reaching the conclusion in the trial which would have to be disposed
of in nccordance with law on merits on the basis of the evidence on record.

9.26. The plea iudge shall follow the same procedure as prescribed by section
360 Cr. P.C. and so far as practicable, shall be informed by the same spirit and
record reasons for d:clining the prayer for release on probation as envisaged by
section 361 of Code of Cr. Procedure.

9.27. Procedure to be followed in cases arising out of offences alleged to have
been committed which are compoundable under section 320 of Cr. P.C.—As per the
law declared by the Supreme Court in Biswabahan Das v. Gopen Chandra Hazarika
and others [ATR 1967 SC 895], the policy of the Legislature adopted in section 320
relating to compoundable offences is that in the case of certain category of offences
[which have been identi in the Table incorporated under sub-section (1)
‘of section 320] whore the interests of the public are not vitally affected, the com-
plainant should be permi' ‘ed to come to terms with the party against whom he
complains. It would appear that the Table under sub-section (2) of section 320
relates to offences which are considered to be compoundable without detriment to
the community in case the court before which the prosecution is pending accords
permission to compound. But even compoundable offences may not be compoun-
ded by the complainant for a number of reasons, such as, by reason of either being
vindictive, or being desirous of obtaining either an apology or a monetary com-
pensation or advantage by using the pending prosecution as a lever, etc. Having
regard to the fact that the Legislature itself in a way considered these offences as
wrongs curable without sentencing an offender to a term in jail albeit with the consent
of the complainant and has considered that the interest of the community may
not suffer if the offences listed in the Table under sub-section (1) are compounded
whereas the interest of the community would not be affected if the offences listed in
the Table under sub-section (2) are considered by the court itself to be such that
permission can be granted having regard to the circumstances of the case to com-
pound the offence, there is no reason why an offender should be obliged to undergo
the misery of a trial at the money-cost, time-cost and energy-cost to the community,
the complainant, as also to the offender if the court itself can remedy the wrong
substantially by directing the offender to pay monetary compensation of a reason-
able order to the complainant who may have refused to compound the offence on
account of his intransigence or feeling of hurt which he may not have been able to
overcome. Of course, in such cases, the offender would be able to invoke the
powers of the court only provided he is prepared to plead guilty and accept an order

5104 Min. of LJ & CA (ND)/93.



Law COMMISSION OF “INDIA—-142 REPORT

of conviction. The Competent Authority shall take into account the gravity of
the offence, the gravity of the injury where injury has been occasioned to the person
or property and take into account the paying capacity of the accused as also the
submissions of the public prosecutor, the offender and the complainant or the aggrie-
ved party. The Competent Authority may thereafter direct imposition of a sen-
tence of fine a term in jail coupled with a direction suspending the sentence of jail
in the event of the offender depositing in the court the amount of compensation
determined by the Competent Authority within the time prescribed by such autho-
rity not exceeding six months commencing from the date of the order. The offender
shall undergo the jail sentence imposed on him if he fails to deposit the compensa-
tion but the suspended sentence shall not be executed if the compensation is depo-
sited for being paid to the victim of the offence or the aggrieved party as directed
by the Competent Authority. Such a provision would protect the complainant or
the victim or the aggrieved party from being deprived of the compensation ordered
to be paid to him notwithstanding the order of the Competent Authority and the
compe nsation awarded by the Competent Authority would bz realised by the person
entitled thereto without having to make recourse to any other proceeding in, gn)

court of law. It may also be provided that in case the complainant (aggrieved party)

and the offender are agreeabl i to compound the offence the proceedings may ‘be
terminated by recording the compromise (where leave of court is not necessary)
and the offender may be acquitted. If leave is needed and the Competent Authority
is of the opinion that Icave deserves to be granted an appropriate order may be
passed in that behalf,

9.28. Procedure to be followed in cases where minimum sentence is provided
for the offence alleged to have been committed by an offender.—If an application is

made for availing of the benefit of the scheme by a person who is charged of an .

offence in respect of which the Legislature has provided a minimum sentence and the
competent authority is satisfied that it is not a case where public interest demands
the rejection of the application in limine, the competent authority may, after
following the procedure for fixing the date of hearing and apprising the public pro-
secutor and the aggrieved party as outlined earlie-, accept the plea of guilty and
record an order of conviction and impose a sentence to the tune of one-half of the
minimum term of jail provided by the statue for th: concerned offence.

9.29. Commentary.—It is no doubt true that Legislature would provide
a minimum sentence having regard to the fact the: the Legislature considers the
offence to be a very serious one and is desirous to cir ure that no sentence less than
the minimum is imposed by.a court in order that the minimum sentence may have
the desired deterrent and punitive effect. But then even in cases where minimum
sentence is provided, the ratio of convictions is very low by reason of the fact thet
sometimes there is tampering with the evidence, sometimes some technical lacunae
are found and sometimes there is laxity on the pa-t of the prosecution in several
respects. If, however, by making recourse to the scheme, an offznder pleads guilty
by reason of feeling contrite and wanting to make amends or an offender is honest
and candid enougk to plead guilty in the hope that the community will treat Him
with a degree oF compassion and consideration due to a person who honestly
admits his guilt and feels contrite unlike a person who by virtue of his money-power
or the power to withstand the hardship of litigation reposes faith in contesting
notwithstanding his awareness of the factum of guilt, treating an honest person who
wants to make amends alike a person who wants to contest knowing his guilt and
the injury caused to the community is treating unequals as equals. It is also unjust
and unfair. In such an event, even an honest person would be discouraged from
availing of the benevolent scheme for concessional treatment. Under the circum-
stances, it may be in the overall interest of the community to enable a person who
honestly wants to own up his guilt and make amends by undergoing a term in jail
to show some consideration to the person who wants to make amends. If, there-
fore, the Competent Autharity is authorised to impose a substantive jail sentence
to the tune of one-half of the minimum prescribed by the relevant statute, the
scheme may become workable and may yield a just and fair result which would
uphold the sanctity of law as also accord a compassionate treatment to an honest
person. A statutory provision empowering the Competent Authority to do 80
notwithstanding anything contained in apy other law would, of course, have to be
made in order that the provision prescribing the minimum senéence in the relevant
law is not violated. It may be mentioned that so long as a person guilty of an
offence which the community considers to be grave meriting a minimum jail term

re


Law Commission oF INDIA—142 REPORT

undergoes actual imprisonment with the resultant loss of reputation, status and
with the attendant stigina and dishonour, whether he undergoes for the prescribed
period of, say, one year or the concessional period of six months, it would hardly
make any difference. For, the dvierrent effect and the punitive purpose of the
law would have been served without compromising the interest of the community
and the will of the legislature. Ii is in this background that recommendation in
this behalf is being made which, it is hoped, will be appreciated in the aforesaid
perspective and spirit underlying the recommendation.

9.30. Power to convert the section uader which charge is levelled to a section con-

_ stituting a lesser offence.—The Competent Authority shall have the power to record
a conviction for an offence of lesser gravity than that for which the offender has
been charged in the charge sheet ox, the relevant documents or case papers if on the
perusal of the same, the Competent Authority is satisfied that the facts constituting
the alleged act and the maivrial in support thereof, even if taken at their face value

would constitute an offence of a lesser gravity.

vy io make such a provision because very
a more rigorous provision which constitutes
than tiie one which is spelt out by the facts and
id cven if the acts attributed to the offender

covpid at its face valuc. This is the desire
a provision attracting a more severe
punishment which of. mind of the prosecuting agency and is in
& way understandabl: [219 onc may not approve of it. The prosecuting
agency might well say it is the function of the court to decide whether the acts attri-
buted to the offender constitute an offence of lesser gravity than the one with which
he may be charged in the .ecord. For the sake of fairness and with a view that the
scheme may opeiate in a just mannez, the judicial officer constituting the Competent
Authority is, therefore, :quired to be empowered to act in a fair manner in exercise
of this power. Of course, he would be expected to closely and carefully examine
the material on record in order to satisfy himself that the offender does not gct away
lightly and sccure an undue advantage by invoking this power. Since the final
opinion would be formed by the Competent Authority armed with his wide know-
ledge, experience and expertise with the assistance of the commetts of the e prose:
cuting agency as well as the offender as also the aggteived party, there is sufficient
assurance that this power will not be liable to be misused in an improper manner
but will be exercised in a just and proper manhet with the end in view to promote
the ends of real justice as demanded by the facts and circumstances of each indi-

vidual 6: se.

9.32. Guidelines for determining the quantum. of substantive punishment of int
prisonment in jail in cases [excluding cases relating to offences punishable with death
or imprisonment for life] other than the cases where the P.O. Act or section 320, Cr.
P.C., or the provision pertaining to compoundable offences is not made applicable.—
the appropriate stage deal with the question as

0 power to release on probation under the relevant provisions
or the power to record a finding of guilt and direct payment of compensation to the
aggrieved party instcad of imposing a substantive sentence of imprisonment in
Pe are required to be exercised by the Competent Authority. However, in cases
cluding those relating to offences punishable witH:death or imprisonment for
i where the Competent Authority forms the opinion that, having regard to the
gravity of the offence and the circumstances of the case viewed in totality, the ends
of justice demand that substantive sentence of imprisonment in jail deserves to
be imposed on an offender who pleads guilty whilst invoking the scheme for con+
cessional treatment, appropriate guidelines will have:to be fornmulated.

or
circumstances: dic!
and the material in «1
of the prosecutor to

9.33. In considering this aspect, it is necessary to examine the background in
which the scheme is being framed.

Since it is considered inadvisable to adopt the scheme for plea-bargaining which
obtains in U.S.A. for weighty reasons in the context of the prevailing conditions
im India, a practical difficulty requires to be overcome. In the American system,
an offender would approach the court in a situation ‘where the prosecution is agree
able to a concessional treatment as well as the ‘extent’ of the concessionel treatment.
In other words, when he invoke: the plea-bargaining procedute before the court,


Law CoMMISSION OF INDIA—142 REPORT

he is assured of the extent of concession he is likely to secure in the event of the appli”
cation being granted by the court. In case the application is rejected, he is not
worse off. But in case the application is granted, he is sure of extent of conces-
sion that he is likely to obtain by pleading guilty. Unless there is a reasonable
chance of his securing some advantage, no offender would be able to persuade him-
self to avail of the scheme. He would feel persuaded only if he cen foresee cither
an advantage or a situation where he is not worse off. In other words, if the only
option open to him is to give up his right to claim a trial at the risk of gaining no
advantage or even possibly facing the maximum senterce, no offender is likely
to avail of the scheme which may remain a dead letter on the statute book.

It is true that if he is given an option to withdraw the application in case the
proposed punishment is considered to be inacceptable to him, every offender might
like to take a chance in the hope of gaining an advantage and the co:apetent authority
would be flooded with work which may ultimately come to nought. But then if
there is no attraction for him and, on the other hand, he is facing an unknown
hazard, no offender would avail of the scheme. Since bargaining with the prose-
cutor which provides the offender with an attraction io avail of the scheme is con-
sidered hazardous in the Indian context, some other formula requires to be evolved
in order to make the scheme reasonably attractive or workable.

The formula which is considered just, fair, proper aid acceptable would appear
to be to make a provision in the scheme that in the event of the application for con-
cessional treatment being entertained by the competent authority, he may impose
such punishment as may be considered appropriate in the facts and circumstances
of the case subject to the rider that the jail term that can be imposed shall not exceed
one half of the maximum term provided by the statute for the concerned offence.
If this formula is adopted in a case where the maximum nce is 10 years, the
competent authority would have an option to impose a scatcnce not exceeding 5
years. In that event, the scheme can be made applicable to all offences excluding
the offences punishable with death or imprisonment for life. If the serious offences,
such as murder, for which penalty of death or imprisonment for life is provided,
are excluded, the scheme might be considered to be acceptable without any reser-
vation.

9,34. Guidelines as regards punishment to be imposed : cases relating to offenceS
in which the offender is charged with an offence punishable with death or imprisonment
for life but the competent authority on an application being made in this behalf by the
offender or offenders is satisfied from the perusal of the records that accepting the acts
attributed to the offender and the material supporting the prosecution case at its fate
value, the offence deserves to be reduced to one under sectiou 304(1) or 304(2) or 326.—
In cases of this category, the task of the Competent Authority would be extremely
difficult and delicate. It is in such cases that the apprehension with regard to the
shaking of the confidence of the public in the adminisiration would understandably
come into play in a significant manner. Experience shows that in several cases, the
statements recorded and the material gathered by the police taken at its face value
would go to show that it is a case of—

(1) exercise of right of private defence, or
(2) the offender having acted under grave aad sudden provocation, or

(3) the death being caused by some rash or negligent act or mischance or mishap
rather than a case falling under the category of culpable homicide amounting
to murder.

For instance, an incident might have occurred at the house of the offender which
was surrounded by a hostile aggressive crowd which had gathered in front of his
house or surrounded his house with the members of the crowd crmed with deadly
weapons and administering threats, In such an eveni, if the offender uses reasonable
force inexercise of his right of private defence, though technically cacceding what
the law Permits, the act may fall under a provision constituting a less serious or
lesser offence. Or there may be a case where in the heat of moment, the offender
gives a kick or & fist blow on the body of the victim who has a diseased vital organ.
Tn such cascs, it would be futile to make the offender undergo rigours of an arduous
trial which may visit the offender with considerable avoidable misery even though
he may be prepared to plead guilty of a lesser offence. An offender may, therefore,
be permitted to invoke the machinery under the scheme exercising his prepared-
ness to accept and to plead guilty to any lesser offence as the court might consider to


Law ComMMission oF InDIA—142 REPORT

govern the facts and circumstances of the catse. In that event, the Competent
Authority may after hearing the public prosecutor, the aggrieved party, or the next
of kin of the victim and the offender accept the plea of guilty upon being wholly
satisfied that the act attributed to the offender and the material in support thereof
taken as accepted at its face value would constitute a lesser offence. But even in
that event, the court may award a minimum jail term of 4 years R.I. in offences
falling under section 304(1), 3 years RL in offences falling under section 304(2)
and minimum 1-1/2 years R.L where the offence would fall under section 326 under
the Indian Penal Code so that the rule of law is we held, the public confidence is not
shaken, and the offender does not escape lightly.

It is just and fair with regard to matters falling in this category to evolve a
formula similar to the one which has been recommended in respect of the offences
to which P.O. Act and section 360 of the Cr. P.C. are applicable, namely,
that the accused may make an application for pleading guilty to a lesser offence
and the Competent Authority may have the power either to accept it and impose
appropriate sentence or to reject it subject to the applicability of the provision that
the making of the application will not result in any prejudice to the offender invoking
the scheme and that even the factum of the making of the 14 lication would be
treated as confidential and may not be adhered to at the trial. It may also be
provided that the prosecutor who appears before the Competent Authority shall
be disqualified from appearing at the regular trial or in the appeal arising from an
order passed by the trial court.

The Commission is of the opinion that a provision in the aforesaid regard may be
made after public debate and full consideration of pros and cons if considered acceptable
on due deliberation. If it is considered to be inappropriate at the present juncture,
the offences punishable with death or imprisonment for life may altogether be excluded
from the purview of the scheme. In the absence of a public debate, the Commission
is not in a position to make any firm recommendation in this regard though the Com-
mission is prima facie in favour of it.

9.35. Certain categories to be excluded from the scheme totally or in the first
phase.—The categories of offences specified hereunder may be excluded from the
purview of the scheme either altogether or at least in the first phase—

(a) Second timers 1.०. persons who have been convicted for an offence under the
same provision at any time in the past.

(9) Persons who have invoked the scheme once at any time in the past.
(c) Persons who are charged with a non-technical socio-economic offence.
(d) Persons who are charged with offences against women and children.

9.36. Commentary. —(a) For reasons of safety and in order to foreclose misuse,
it would be proper to restrict the applicability of the scheme to first offenders only
so that there is no room for apprehension that those who secure a concessional
treatment may indulge in the same activity under the beilef that concessional treat-
ment may be extended to them.

(b) For the same reason it would be appropriate to exclude those who have
secured the concessional treatment once, from again seeking a similar treatment
in future.

(c) Public opinion is against the extension of the scheme to socio-economic
es of a non-technical nature altogether. It being a sensitive issue, prudence
denzands that these offences are excluded from the purview of the scheme. However,
the scheme may be extended to such offences in future in the light of the experience
gathered in the working of the scheme in other areas and in the light of a public
debate in the context thereof. The option to extend the scheme to this area may
be kept open, for, the scheme may perhaps be applied with the rider that a minimum
substantive sentence of say six months or an year or of a specified term shall be
imposed on the offenders. Once an offender is made to undergo the rigours of a
jail sentence it would serve the objective of deterrance to the offender himself as
‘also to those who are like minded. It is not as if an offender will commit a crime
if he has to undergo a substantive jail for say ¢ 6 months but will not do so if he is
liable to be punished to a longer term. In fact with an acquittal ratio of 75% to
90%, the temptation to commit crime is already there as it is. On the other hand,
a plea of guilty will result in early conviction and swift sentence with the purpose of

offe:



Law COMMISSION OF INDIA—142 REPoRY

punishment being served better. It is, therefore, desirable to keep the option open.
and extend the scheme to such offences also in future taking into a accownt the resealt.
of the working of the scheme in relation to other offences and the publit: debate:
in the light thereof.

(d) The same reasoning will apply with equal force as re pards offences against.
women and children which may be excluded from the purview. of the scheme presently,
The guidelines in the aforesaid terms may serve the purpose.

9.37. The scheme may be made applicable in a phased matmer:
it may be made applicable to offences punishable with a jail term of less than seven
years. It may be extended to the’ offences punishable with a jail term exceeding.
7 years (but excluding those punishable with death or imprisonment for life) in-the
second phase. And to the excluded category only in the third phase provitied’the
working of the scheme in the first phase is found satisfactory in the wake-of a yublic
debate in the light of the experience gathered in the course of the first phase. .

ae oa & amendment of section 357 of cr. B.C Moreover, under seetion
357(1) of ~.C. it is onl m out of the fine imp y the court compen
sation can be awarded. And under section 357(3) compensation can be awarded
only whilst imposing a sentence other than that of fine. As at present, comes
sation cannot be awarded in matters in which partics compound an offéttee
section 320 of Code of Cr. Procedure because the compounding usually takes pikee-
by agreement between the parties in compoundable matters even before the comm-
encement of trial. Stipulation for payment of compensation cannot under the
circumstances, be made a part of an order of the Court or the Competent Austtionity
without recording a conviction. So also larger amount of compensation

ordéted. where there is a ceiling on the imposition of fine. In ordér to give effect
to the scheme, it is therefore, necessary to amend this section to enable the competent
authority to direct payment of compensation to the aggrieved patty even im the
absence of a plea of guilty and regardless of whether fine is imposed ‘or not: ‘Thwtt'
is why it is recommended that section 357 of Cr. P.C. be amended so as ta empower
the Competent Court to ordér payment of compensation even in cases ‘where no
conviction has been recorded and tegardless of whether fine is imposed or not i ifan-
offence is compounded before the Court or the Competent Authority under the
scheme.

9.39. Definition of ‘aggrieved’—The expression ‘aggrieved’ shall mean, the
victim of the crime if alive or his/her next of kin if the victim is dead, wherever
it occurs in this Chapter or elsewhere in this Report.

9.40. It is now Proposed to highlight the. positive features of the scheme: and,
thereafter proceed to formulate appropriate conclusions and recommendations.

oer


>

CHAPTER X

HOW THE PROPOSED SCHEME OVERCOMES THE
OBJECTIONS AND APPREHENSIONS ENTERTAINED BY
THOSE WHO DOUBT THE FEASIBILITY OF THE CONCEPT

10.1. The scheme being propounded by this Report is basically different from
the plea-bargaining schemes prevailing elsewhere in five important areas, namely :—

(1) There will be no contact between the public prosecutor and the accused for
the purpose of invoking the scheme. The initiative will be solely with the
accused who alone can make the application. The public prosecutor will
have no role to play.

(2) The decision to accord concessional treatment will rest solely with a judicial
officer functioning as a Plea-Judge in respect of offences punishable with
imprisonment for less than 7 years or Tribunal comprised of two retired
High Court Judges in respect of offences punishable with imprisonment
for 7 years or more and will rot be the result of an auteome of higgling
haggling between public prosecutor on one hand and accused on the other.

(3) There will be no bargaining with the judicial officers and an application
once made will not be adowed to be withdrawn and the accused will not
know what the judicial officers will do. He will only make a representation
and plead for such concessional treatment as, according to him, would be
appropriate.

(4) The sole arbiter will be the judicial officer and, therefore, there will be no
risk of underhand dealings or for coercion or improper inducement by the
prosecution.

(5) The a; grieved party and the public prosecutor will have a right to be heard
and pl their points of view.

10.2. In view of these distinctive features, the apprehensions in regard to the
feasibility of the scheme will stand allayed, as discussed hereafter:—

(1) In the plea-bargaining scheme prevailing elsewhere, an agreement is an out-
come of negotiations and higgling haggling between the prosecution on one
hand and the accused on the other. In the proposed scheme, this feature
which is considered less than desirable has been eliminated. The higgling
haggling process is viewed with scepticism by the public at large and under-
mines the faith of the public in the outcome of the process. It also gives
scope for doubting the bona_fides and the integrity of the prosecutor in-
volved in the negotiations. The criticism on this score is overcome in the
proposed scheme which does not envisage any role to be played by the
public prosecutor. It also does not visualise any higgling haggling process.
The Proposed scheme contemplates that the initiative for invoking the
powers for concessional treatment under the scheme must originate from
the accused and the application must be addressed directly to the Plea-
Judge or the Tribunal constituted in this behalf who will decide whether
or not to entertain the application and if it is decided to entertain the
same, the Plea-Judge or the concerned Tribunal will decide what concessional
treatment would be afforded having regard to all the relevant circumstances
in the light of the guidelines and the statutory provisions.

(2) In the scheme obtaining elsewhere, there is a risk of improper inducement
being offered inasmuch as there is a contact between the prosecutor and the
accused in negotiations for entering a plea of guilty. In the proposed
scheme, as the initiative comes from the accused, this risk is substantially
eliminated. The possibility of threats or improper inducement having been
offered in a clandestine manner also is eliminated since the proj
scheme visualises ascertainment by the competent authority as to wi pone
the application has been made voluntarily without any inducement or threat
by making an enquiry in the open court whereat no police officer or person
objected to by the accused would be allowed to remain present. Thus,
there is an inbuilt safety mechanism to guard against inducement or threat.

35


Law CoMMIssION OF INDIA—142 REPORT

(3) The risk of an innocent person pleading guilty is also taken care of in the
proposed system since a judicial officer would apply his mind to the material
on record and would be required to reject the application if there is prima
facie no material spelling out the offence with which the applicant has
been charged.

(4) The less than desirable feature of higgling haggling which may be. consi-
dered 1055 than becoming also docs not exist in the proposed schethe, for
the accused can only plead and place his point of view before the competent
authority but cannot higgle haggle for he will have no power to withdraw
the application if the court is not inclined to take as lenient a view as may
be considered appropriate in the circumstances of the case.

(5) The risk of a guilty person escaping with unduly lenient punishment will
also not exist inasmuch as the competent authority [composed of two retired
High Court Judges in relation to offences punishable with imprisonment
of 7 years or more] alone would decide what would be the appropriate punish-
ment in the circumstances of the case and also because the aggrieved party
will be heard before the competent authority passes an order under the
scheme. Besides, the guidelines envisage imposing of a minimum jail term
in regard to specified offences as elaborated in Chapter IX.

10.3. It can, therefore, be said with a degree of assurance that the proposed scheme
does away with all objectionable features of the American practise and can be safely
implemented and there is no cause for entertaining any apprehensions regarding the
feasibility or desirability of this course being adopted.


CHAPTER XI

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
CONCLUSIONS
I

The Commission is of the considered opinion that a scheme, to be known as
“scheme for granting prayer for concessional treatment made by accused pleading
guilty voluntarily” requires to be introduced in the criminal justice system in India
by way of enacting a legislation according statutory recognition and authority to
the scheme.

YW

The need for introducing the scheme has become compulsive in a situation
where the trial of a criminal case culminating in an acquittal can take as many as
33 years in a rclatively petty case (involving alleged misappropriation of Rs. 12,000,
Rs. 4,000 and Rs. 2,000) and result in an expenditure of as much as a crore of Tupees
to the State cxchequer!, with no corresponding benefit to the community. And
in a situation. as reported on 16-8-1989 in Indian Express, where the courts in a
city like Bombay in 1988 recorded 124 rape cases but could dispose of only one and
in first six months in 1989 recorded 67 cases but could dispose of not a single case

Il

There is more than ample justification for introducing the scheme in as much as:-—

(1) It is not just and fair that an accused who feels contrite and wants to make
amends or an accused who is honest and candid enough to plead guilty
in the hope that the community will-enable him to pay the penalty for the
crime with a degtce of compassion and consideration should be treated
on par with an accused who claims to be tried at considerable time-cost

and money-cost to the community.

(2) It is desirable to infuse life in the reformative provisions embodied in
section 360 of the Criminal Procedure Code and in the Probation of Offen-
ders Act which remain practically unutilized as of now.

(3) It will help the accused who have to remain as undertrial prisoners awaiting
the trial as also other accused on whom the sword of damocles of an im-
pending trial remains hanging for years to obtain speedy trial with atten-
dant benefits such as—

(a) end of uncertainty,

(0) saving in litigation-cost,

(©) saving in anxiety-cost,

(d) being able to know his or her fate and to start a fresh life without

fear of having to undergo a possible prison sentence at a future
date disrupting his life or career,

(©) saving avoidable visits to lawyer’s office and to court on every date
of adjournment.

(4) It will, without detriment ही public interest, reduce the back-breaking
burden of the court cases which have already assumed menacing propor-
tions.

(5) It will reduce congestion in jails.

(6) In the USA nearly 75% of the total convictions are secured as a result of
plea-bargaining.
(7) Under the present system 75% to 90% of the criminal cases if not mote,
result in acquittals.
37
6—104 Min. of LJ & CA (ND)/93.


38

Law ComMISsION OF INDIA—142 REPORT
RECOMMENDATIONS
I

The Commission, therefore, recommends that a scheme for concessional treat-
ment to offenders willing to plead guilty on their own volition without any plea-
bargaining or higgle haggling as outlined in Chapter IX (highlights whereof are set
out hereunder) be statutorily introduced by adding a Chapter in the Code of Criminal
Procedure of 1973.

Highlights of the Scheme
(1) The scheme may be invoked only by the oilender bimself. (See para 9.6).

(2) There will be no negotiations for plea-bargaining with the Prosecuting agency
or its advocate none of whom will have any role to play in the matter of
moving the Competent Authority for invocation of the: scheme. (86९
para 9.7).

(3) The Competent Authority will be a ‘plea-judge’ designated by the Chief
Justice of the concerned High Court from amongst the sitting judges
competent to try cases punishable with imprisonment of upto 7 years.
And a Bench of two retired High Court Judges nominated in this behalt
by the Chief Justice of the State concerned in respect of offences punishable
with imprisonment for 7 years or more. (See paras 9.3 and 9.5),

(4) The application will be entertained only after the Competent Authority is,
upon ascertaining in the manner specified in the scheme, is satisfied that it
is made voluntarily and knowingly. (Sce paras 9.15 and 9.16).

(5) The Competznt Authority will hear the application in the presence of the
aggrieved party and the public Prosecutor or an assistant public prosecutor
and after affording a short heating to them. (See paras 9.17 & 9.18).

(6) The Competent Authority shall have the Power to impose a jail term, and/
or fine and/or direct the accused applicant to pay compensation to the
aggrieved party for compounding the offence in regard to the offences
which are compoundable with or without the leave of the Court. (See
paras 9.17 (ili) and 9.27).

(7) The Competent Authority shall award a minimum jail term of say six months
or one year in respect of specified offences if the scheme is extended in
this cpa in the ght of the provisions in the scheme. [Sec paras 8.2,
9.36 (०).

(8) The Competent Authority may award a jail term not exceeding one half
of the maximum provided by the relevant provision where the Competent

(10) The scheme may be made applicable to offences liable to be punished with
imprisonment for 7 years and more after properly evaluating and assessing
the results of the application of the scheme to offences liable to be punished
with imprisonment for less than 7 years. (See paras 8.4, 8.6 and 9.37),

[The scheme has been outlined elaborately in Chapter IX.)

U

The scheme may be made inapplicable to Socio-economic offences of a non-
technical navure in the first phase provided, however, that it may, later on, be made
applicable with a rider that an offender will have to undergo a minimum jail term
of not less than six months or I year or such other period as may be Specified, if
considered appropriate in the light of the public debate.

wee

har)


Law CoMMissION OF INDIA—142 Report

Note : In making this recommendation the factors that weigh are :—

(1) a punishment meted out quickly serves a better public purpose than a
punishment meted out after a decade of litigation tiring to both the sides
and shaking the faith of the public at large.

(2) once an offender is made to suffer a substantive jail term from the point
‘of view of deterrence, it may not matter much whether it is for 1 year or
whether it be for a longer term. (Sec para 9.35).

वा

The scheme may be made inapplicable to offences against women and children
including offences of rape, bride burning, dowry deaths, demand and acceptance of
dowry etc. which are viewed by the community with social worth in the context of
the age-long history of injustice and suffering on the part of these sections of the
society. {See para 9.35 (0).

IV

Moreover. under section 357(i) of Cr. P.C. it is only from out of the fine imposed
by the court that compensation can be awarded. And under section 357(3) com-
pensation can be aw: d only whilst imposing a sentence other than that of fine.
As at present, compen:ation cannot be awarded in matters in which parties ‘com-
pound’ an offence under section 320 of Code of Cr. Procedure because the com-
pounding usually takes place by agreement betwecn the parties in compoundable
matters even before thc commencement of trial. Stipulation for payment of com-
pensation cannot undcr the circumstances, be made a 0211 of an order of the Court
or the Competent Authority without recording a conviction. So also larger amount
of compensation cannot be ordered where there is a ceiling on the imposition of
fine. In order to give effect to the scheme, it is therefore, necessary to amend this
section to enable the competent authority to direct payment of compensation to the
aggrieved party even in the absence of a plea of guilty and regardless of whether
fine is imposed or not. That is why it is recommended that section 357 of Cr. P.C.
be amended so as to empower the Competent Court to order payment of compen-
sation even in cases where no conviction has been recorded and regardless of whether
fine is imposed or not if an offence is compounded before the Court or the Com-
petent Authority under the scheme. (See para 9.38).

Vv

The scheme may be restricted to first offenders only. [See paras 9.35(a) and (b)].

It is hoped that if appropriate legal measures are taken as soon as practicable
in the light of this report it will goa long way in resolving the alarming problem of
the mountain of arrears of criminal matters which problem brooks no delay.

We recommend accordingly.

Sd.f-
(M.P. THAKKAR)
CHAIRMAN
$d.f- Sd.f-
(Y.V. ANJANEYULU) (P.M. BAKSHI
MEMBER MEMBER
Sd./- Sd.f-
(MAHESH CHANDRA) (G.V.G. KRISHNAMURTY)
MEMBER MEMBER SECRETARY

NEW DELHI, Dated the August 22, 1991,

39


Law CoMMISSION OF INDIA—142 Report
NOTES AND REFERENCES
CHAPTER II
1. AIR 1979 SC 1360.
AIR 1979 SC 1360, page 1361, para 1.
AIR 1979 SC 1360, page 1361, para 2.
AIR 1979 SC 1360, page 1364, para 5,
AIR 1979 SC 1377, page 1382, para 8.
See “The Hindu’, dated 20-12-1990, New Delhi Ediion.
See “The Hindu’, dated 20-12-1990, New Delhi Edition
CHAPTER HL
1. Source : American Law—Crimes & Punishments,
2. 297 US 742-25 L. Ed. 2d 747,
3. 404 US 257 (1971).
4. 50 L. Ed. 2d 876, 878.
5. (1973) 412 US 17.
6. 52 L. Ed. 2d 136.
7. (1977) 429 US 545,
8. 94 L. Ed. 2d 405,

CHAPTER V

1. See Annexure ‘B’,

कर छा छा ली 2

CHAPTER XI

1. See “The Hindu”, ‘dated 20-12-1990, New Delhi Edition.
2. See “The Hindu”, dated 20-12-1990, New Delhi Edition.

P. 168-169,

4


ANNEXURE ‘A’

- FEASIBILITY OF INTRODUCING
THE CONCEPT OF PLEA-BARGAINING

The Law Commission of India has undcrtaken a study of the aforementioned subject in the
context of the situation obtaining in the sphere of administration of criminal law throughout the
country, namely :—

(1) The dockets of the courts are over-crowded. The arrears of criminal cases awaiting trial

have assumed menacing proportions.

ersons accused of criminal offences who have not been able to secure

) (2) Large number of pi r ’
furnish bail have to languish in jails as under-trial prisoners for years.

H bai! or are unable to

(3) A majority of the cascs ultimately end in acquittal and even so the time of the court is
pro-cmpted by the protracted trial stretching over a number of years in respect of

a such cases.

oo (4 The accused have to undergo mental torture of an impending trial and potential con-
viction for a number of years.

? (5) The accused have also to spend considerable sums of money by way of legal ex-
penses.

५ (© The accused have to remain in a state of uncertain ty and are unable to settle down in
% life for a number of years awaiting the completion of the trial.

(7) The jails are over-crowded and the public exchequer has to bear the resultant economic

(8) During the course of the detention as under-trial prisoners, the accused persons are exposed
to the influence of hardened criminals.

2. The aforesaid background makes it expedient to examine the feasibility of introducing the
eoncept of plea-bargaining in the administration of criminal justice. It requires to be examined
पु whether it should be restricted to the area of the nature of the offence or should be extended to
i the area of the extent of the sentence, including releasing the convict on probation in exercise of

powers under sections 360 and 361 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

3. For this purpose, it has become necessary to gathzr the relevant information and to obtain
the views of judicial officers and members of the Bat coacerned in the trial of criminal cases.
You are, therefore, requested to extend your cooperation by providing the necessary information
and by offering your views by way of answering the following queries :—

1) Do you think that a statutory scheme bargaiaing, hédged in by appropriate safe-
00 Do 28३ and guidelines, can’ be 6 गटर ण्

2) What, in your opinion, are the ital be Pee to be guarded against and what safeguards can 0:
® devised in order to avoid the ay pital canbe

ry
~ 3) Please draw upon your wide experience'to make an approximation as to the percentage
; © ‘of cases tried/handled by you which have resulted in acquittals over a period of, say, last
‘one year.
(8) In the context of your experience of the working of the trial court, do you think that
00 0) In she contort of your experience of Te ert Rive legitimacy abcepied the ples of
guilty for an offence lesser than the offence with which the accused was charged with upon
perusal of the F.LLR., the complaint, the relevant record and papers or the record of the

committal court, as the case may be?

(b) Can you give a rough estimation of the percentage of such cases over a period of,

say, last one year
(5) (a), Having regard to your wide experience, do you think that in quite a number of cases
9 triedhandled by you, on a bare perusal of the complaint or the F.I.R. or the relevant
1 papers and records, you felt that the allegations taken at their face value disclosed extenua-
हे ting circumstances justifying the taking of a lenient view in the matter of sentence?

Do you think that if in such cases the accused had the option of ca bargaining
(®) Do, you think that if in such cas the oe ear scntcoee wes prooat i he a

6) Where the Legislature has prescribed the minimum sentence subject to the power to it

हि Moen ei ae eaters To be Tosorded, do you think that an accused would have
entered a plea of guilty and confined himself to the extenuating circumstances in a sizeable
number of cases if the plea was available?

(0) Do you think that in a sizeable number of cases where section 360 of the Code of Criminal
‘Procedure is attracted, the accused would have pleaded guilty at the very inception in
case the option of plea-barg plea-bargaining was available to him and it was realised that, having
regard to the circumstances of the caso, the court would be inclined to release him on

probation even on recording a conviction on the basis of plea of guilty

a खाए

41


Law CoMMISSION OF INDIA—142 REPORT

(8) Lo you consider it experdient to extent the concert of plea-tarraining also to cases involv-
ing major offences tried by Session Judges including offences liable for sentence of death
or life imprisonment ?

(9) Do,you ० you consider it desirable to exclude some category of serious anti-social or aconomic
sees for the purpose of applying the concept of plea-Largaining? If so, please state the

(10) A plea of “guilty” has 10 be entered volurtarily ty the accused. What precautions do
you suggest to ensure that no coercion, pressure, o influence is trought on the accused
to enter a plea of guilty?

(11) Do you consider that pre-trial negotiations towards plea-targaining should te conducted
before a plea judge feet than the Trial Judge)? Or, do you think the matter could be
dealt with by the Trial Judge himself ?

(12) Do you consider that the negotiations for .plea-bargaining should _be conducted in open
court or should be conducted in camera in the chambers of the Judge?

13) Do you consider it necessary that a complete record of all the discussions and Tepresenta-
¢ tions-should. be made and preserved in pre-trial negotiations where the plea is accepted?

14) What safeguards would you suggest that collusion does not take place between the
oo Prosecution and the accused’ 88 & consequence of which the accused 1s let off lightly?

(15) (a) Do you.think that there is a possibility of the judge before whom plea-bargaining
(५ 9 00 ete ‘are conducted being rut.to cmtarrassment by keing invol\cd in ‘unnecessary
controversy?
(by If yes, what safeguards do you suggest to overcome this problem?

Be consider that ples bargain ing should. be available only for the first offence
७७ should t be available e fon the subsequent offences? ¥

17) Bo youthiak that the incidence of crime will incrcsuse ty reaton ofa feeling that a
ce Can ae ae ene aL incre गे feelin

(18) Do you consider the system: of ples-burgsining would help the rehabilitative Frocess of
the criminal 7
1% Do think that provision should be made for minimum substantive. punishment to

09 2 posed is the cheger) of लए हद ,

(20) Do you think that a provision should be made that the victim of the offence or his or her
near relatives should be given an opporttmtty to oppose the plea-targairing? If the accuse
enters a plea of guilly potsuant 16 plea bargaining nfegotiations, «toutd the victim of th
offence or his or her near relatives be given a right ० requesting that a reference be mad®
to a’ higher forum for approving the proposal’for entering plea-bargaining?

(2a) Do you consider that in socio-economic offtaccs a minimum substantive sentence should
be prescribed?

(22) Have you any. other suggestions to make in the matter?

ty


Law CoMMISsION OF INDIA—142 REPORT 43

Proforma of Statistical Information to be Furnished by the Metropolitan Session Judge
and District and Sessions Judges

1, No of criminal trials pending as on 31-12-89 :

2. Classification of the above trial cases with
reference to the year of filing :

3. Classification of the above trial cases under
convenient heads, namely :—

(a) offences liable for-sentence of death or
life imprisonment

(0) offzaces liable for sentence of imprison-
ment of seven years or more :

(©) offences liable for sentence of imprison-
ment of less than seven years :

4. No.of criminal appeals pending as on 31-12-89
(yearwise) :

5. No, of cases disposed of in the calendar year

(a) resulting in conviction :
(b) resulting in acquittal :

6. No. of cases-in which benefit of seetion 360,
Code of Criminal Procedure, was given to
the accused persons of 21 years of age and
above during the calendar year 1989

Statement of Criminal Cases (Trials) Dippsed of ducing the Csleniler
1992

Sl. No. of the Cases Offence No. of No of of The. . Sentence Pees,
No. charged accused, ane
Se 2a See ee

1 2 3 4 5 ४ ४): ॥

Note i

1. f
Cs SAE MRSS Sea tet To At nt cn, at ae

2. If in any case benefit under Section 360 Cr. P.C. or _Probat of offenders
been given to the accused, the sam> may be indicated in Col No. 7 of the starenent


ANNEXURE ‘B”

RECOMMENDATION MADE BY THE LAW REFORM COMMISSION OF
CANADA IN WORKING PAPER 60
1. The term “plea agreement’? should be defined as meaning any agreement by the accused
to Plead guilty in return for the prosecutor’s agreeing to take or refrain from taking a particular
course of action,

2. The term “plea discussion’ should be defined as meaning a discussion directed towards the
conclusion of a plea agreement.

3. (1) There term “improper inducement” should be defined as meaning any inducement
that necessarily renders suspect the genuineness or factual accuracy of the accused's plea, and as
including the following conduct when it is engaged in for the purpose of encouraging the accused
to plead guilty :

(@) the laying of any charge not believed to be supported by provable facts :

(b) the laying of any charge that is not usually laid with respect to an act or omission of the

type attributed to the accused ;

(©) a threat to lay charge of the ‘ype described in paragraphs (a) or (b) above ;

@ a threat that any not guilty plea entered by the accused will result, upon the accused’s
coaviction, in the prosecutor’s asking for a seatence more severe than the sentence tha
is usually imposed upon a similar accused person who has been convicted, following a not
guilty plea, of the offence with which the accused is charged ;

(© any offer, threat or promise the fulfilment of which is not a function of the maker’s Office ;

(0 any material misrepresentation; and

(8) any attempt to persuade the accused to plead guilty notwithstanding his or her continued
denial of guilt.

(2) The term “improper inducement” should be defined so as to make it clear that encouragis
the accused to enter into a plea agreement, as defined in Recommendation 1, is not in Ttsolf ao
improper inducement.

4. (1) The prosecutor and the accused, or counsel for the accused on his or her behalf, should
be permitted to have plea discussions.

(9 No judicial officer before whom Proceedings in respect of the accused are or will be held
should take part in plea discussions,

@ Notwithstanding part (2), it should be permissible for the Chief Justice, or a judge whom
he or she has designated, to initiate and preside over plea discussions between the Prosecutor and
the defence, provided it is emphasized that the accused will not be appearing before that judge and
is not obliged to conclude any plea agreement.

Of ines, Satin oer aes 15 55 4 ion and defence as to the tial

benefit of ples thscdsstons, and may, ide कप शीत an opp an opportunity to have such digs,

5. A prosecutor, police officer or defence counsel should not offer any improper inducement
accused.

to an .

6. No judicial officer before whom Proceedings in respon ४ of the accused are or will be held
Should offer any inducement for the purpose of encoura; Ing an accused to plead guilty to any
offence.

7. (1) A prosecutor should not, when the accussed has retained counsel, have pl is ic
dicectiy लक Whe acts na hen the, ace abeysed’s counsel, Ne Plea discussions

2) A prosecutor with whom an unrepresented accused wishes to have plea discussions shoutd
into the accused that. Pl

(@) representation by counsel may be advantageous to the accused 3 and

(®) if the accused cannot afford to retain counsel, he or she should ascertain from th in-
cial legal aid plan whether he or she is eligible for assistance’ ? Provia:

and should not thereafter have plea discussions directly with the accused unless the accused has
informed the prosecutor unequivocally that he or she will not be retaining counsel.

8. (1) Prosecutor should afford accused persons in similar circumstances the same opportu-
nities for engaging in plea discussions.

(2) A prosecutor should endeavour to ensure, in the course of plea discussior भर accused
persons in similar circumstances receive equal ‘treatitient. ns, that

44


Law COMMISSION OF INDIA—142 REPORT

9. Counsel for an accused perso: should not conclude on the accused’s behalf any plea agroc-
ment that requires the accused io plead guilty to an offence of which the accused maintains he or
she is innocent.

10. A prosecutor should not sugges. corclude or participate in any plea agreement that:

the accused to plead guilty to an offence that is not disclosed by the evidence;

the accused to plead guiliy to charges that inadequately reflect the gravity of the
" ual fiable in

provable corduzi, excepiional circumstances, they are ju
mS oF ihe beasi.s chai will a, the administration of justice, the proie
1५9, or the protection of the accused ;

(©) requires the prosecutor to withhold o7 distort evidence; or

@ contemplates a disposition thai depa:ts significantly from that which, in the absence of a
pica agreement, would have resulied upoa 013 accused’s pleading guilty 19 the same offence,
ualess, in ०४०३ circums.a.1c33, it is justifiable in terms of the benefits that will accrue
to the adminisiratioa of j 0 protection of society, or the protection of the accused.

3६10०, 1

(0) A prosecutor

‘d, ualess the circumstaaces make it impracticable to do 50, Solicite
and weigh carefully the vic’

of any victims before concluding a plea agreement.

(2) A prose judes a piea agreement should endzavour io erasure that victims
are told the subs:aace of, and reasoa: 3 tad agreement, unless compelling reasons, such as a
likelihood of serious harm 10 the accused or to another person, require o:herwise.

12. (1) A prosecutor and an accused who have concluded a plea agreement should, before the
accused’s plea is entered, disclose to the court

@) the substance of, and reasons for, that agreement; and

() whether any previous plea agreemznt has bzea disclosed to another judge in connection
with the same matter and, if so, the substance of that agreement.

(2) The disclosure and jus:ificatioa coaternplated by part (1) of this recommendation should
be made in open court ualess compelling reasons, such an a likelihood of serious harm to the accused
or to another person, require otherwise.

13. Upon being informed that the prosecutor and the accused have concluded a plea ६६ cement,
the judge should be able, where he or she considers it necessary to do. 80, to ascertain by question.
ing whether the accused understands the substance and consequences of that plea agreement.

14, No plea agreement or submission should be binding on judge.

15. In any case in which the judze, having informed of the existence and substance of a plea
agreement and of the reasoas for that agreement, determines that an accused should not be
judicially disposed of in the manaer coatomplated ‘by the plea agreement, the judge should infos
the accused of this fact.

16. Before any guilty plea is accepted trom an accused, the judge should be able, where he or
she considers it nze2ssary to do so, to ascertain by questioning whether any inducement to plead
guilty, other than an inducement disclosed as part of a plea agreement, has been offered th the
accused.

17. In any ०३५३ in which the prosecutor and the accused have concluded a plea
judge should bz able, before any guilty plea is accepted from the accused, to make such incur
* he or she considers n2cessary in ord>r to be satisfied that a factual basis for the accused's guilt
plea exists.

18. Ip determining whether to 8००३ pt an accused’s plea of guilty to any nce
offence charged, the judge should consider the substance of, and reasoned 00 any pier gens
conclided between the accuscd and the prosecutor

19. The judge should reject an accused's guilty plea’ if inter alia he reason:
grounds to believe. Plea " or she has able
(a) that the plea was entered as a result of an improper inducement;

(0) that the plea was entered as a result of a judicial officer's havini induce
for the accused to plead guilty; offered an inducement

(०) where the accused, pursuant to what is currently section (4) of the Crimi:
pleading “not guilty of the offence charged but guilty Of fant hen llfence at

the same transav.ioa ....” that the offeace to which the accused is pleadi
quately reflecis the gravity of the accused’s provable conduct; or pleading 2

(4) that no factual basis for the accuse4's guilty plea exists.
20. An accused who has entered a guilty plea should be entitled ithdra\

sentence, or to appeal against a conviction ‘based thereon + (© Withdraw that plea before
(a) if it was entered as a result of an improper inducement;

45


Law COMMISSION OF INDIA=-142 RgrorT

(b) if it was entered as a result of the judge’s having offered an inducement for the agzused
to plead guilty;

(©) if it was entered as a result of a significant misapprehension as to the substance or conse-
quences of a plea agreement concluded between the accused and the Prosecutor ; or

(@) if the prosecutor has breached a plea agreement concluded with the accused,

21. Where an accused has pleaded guilty to an offence and, upon his or her conviction, has
received a sen‘ej.ce that is permitted under the Criminal Code in the circumstances and’ that
accords with, or is within the range anticipated by, a plea agreement, the prosecutor should not be
permitted to appeal against the sentence received by the accused unless it is shown.

(a) that tiie prosecutor, in the course of plea discussions, was willfully misled by the accused
in some material respect ; or

(0) that the court, in passing sentence, was willfully misled in some material respect.

22. In any case in which the accused has pleaded guilty to an offence in accordance with a plea

+ agreement concluded between the accused and the prosecutor, any Proceedings taken subsequently
against the accused in contravention of that agreement should be prohibited unless the prosecutor.

(3) was, in the course of plea discussion, willfully misled by the accused in some matorial.res”
pect, or

(b) was induced to conclude the plea agreement by conduct amounting to an obstruction of
justice,

23. Evidence of a guilty plea, later withdrawa, or of an offer to plead guilty to an offence, or
of starements made in connection with any such plea or offer, should be inadmissible on the
issue of guilt or credibility in any proceeding.


ANNEXURE ‘C’

VERBATIM EXTRACTS OF THE RELEVANT
PASSAGES FROM THE TWO LEADIND CASES
OF U. S. SUBREME COURT

{See Chapter VI, Paras 6.19 and 6.21]

The United States Supreme Court in BRADYV UNITED STATES examined the position
thoroughly and came to the conclusion that if a constitutional right to trial by a court or by jury
is waived by a subject by entering a voluntary plea of guilty, it is not invalid if the waiver is voluntary
and is made with sufficient awareness of the relevant circumstances anid likely consequences. Justice
White, who delivered the opinion of the Court, observed:

“Tt is the defendant’s consent that judgment on conviction may be entered without a trial
.... waiver of his right to trial before a jury or a judge: Waivers of constitutional rights not
only must be voluntary, but must be knowing, intelligent acts done with sufficient awareness
of the relevant circumstances and likely cofisequentés. On neither score could the plea of
guilty be held to be invalid”.

Justice White further observed: (Page 757)

“The State to some degree encourages pleas of guilty on every important step in the criminal
process. For some people their breach of a State’s law is alone sufficient reason for surrender-
ing themselves and accepting punishment. For others, apprehension and charge, both threate-
ning acts by the Government, jar them into admitting their guilt. In still other cases, the post-
indictment accumulation of evidence may convince the defendant and his counsel that a trial
is not worth the agony and expense to the defendant and his family. All these pleas of guilty
are valid in spite of the State’s responsibility for some of the factors motivating the pleas; the
pleas are no more improperly compelled than is the decision by a defendant at the close of the
State’s evidence at trial that he must take the stand or face certain conviction”.

2. The following observations of Justice White at pages 758 and 759 are illuminating :

“The issue we deal with is inherent in the criminal law and its administration because guilty
pleas are not constitutionally forbidden, because the criminal law characteristically extends
to judge or jury a range of choice in setting the sentence in individual cases, and because both
the State and the de*-ndant often find it advantageous to preclude the possibility of the maxi-
mum penalty authorised by law. For a defendant who sees slight possibility of acquittal, the
advatages of pleading guilty and limiting the probable penalty are obvious—his exposure
is reduced, the corrections! processes can begin immediately, and the practical burdens of a
trial are climinated. For the State there are also advantages—the more promptly imposed
punishment after an admission of guilt may more effectively attain the objectives of punish-
ment ; and with the avoid f trial, scarc2 judicial and prosecutorial resources are cot

for those cases in which there is a substantial issue of the defendant’s guilt or in which there
is substantial doubt that the State can sustain its burden of proof. It is this mutuality of advan-
tage that perhaps explains the fact that at present well over three-fourths of the criminal con-
victions in this country test on pleas of guilty, a great many of them no doubt motivated at
least in part by the hope or assurance of a lesser penalty than might be imposed if there were
a guilty verdict after a trial to judge or jury”.

3. The following observations occuring at pages 761-762 are also pertinent:

“This is not to say that guilty plea convictions hold no hazards for the innocent or that the
methods of taking guilty pleas presently employed in this country are necessarily valid in all
respects. This mod: of conviction is no more foolproof than full trials to the court or to the
jury. Accordingly, we take great precautions against unsound results, and we should continue
to do so, whether conviction is by plea or by trial. We would have scrious doubts about
this case if the encouragement of guilty pleas by offers of leniency substantially increased the
likelihood that defendants, advi by competent counsel, would falsely condemn themselves,
But our view is to the contrary and is based on our expectations that courts will satisfy them-
selves that pleas of guilty are voluntarily and intelligently made by competent defendants
with adequate advice of counsel and that there is nothing to question the accuracy and reli
bility of the defendants admissions that they committed the crimes with which they are charged”.

6.21, In the second leading case, namely, SANTOBELLO, the United States Supreme Court
once again reiterated the constitutional validity of the plea-bargaining. Chief Justice Burger, who
delivered the opinion of the court, observed (pages 260, 261) :

“.... The disposition of criminal charges by agresment between the prosecutor and the
accused, sometimes loosely called “‘plea-bargaining,”’ is an essential component of the admi-
nistration of justice. Properly administered, it is to be encouraged, If every criminal

were subjected to a full-scale trial, the States aad the Federal Goverament would need to multi.
ply by many times the number of judzes and court favilities.

“Disposition of charges after plea-discussions is not only an essential part of the pi buta
highly desirable part for many reasons. It leads to prompt and largely final disposition of

ay


48 Law ComMIssiOoN oF INDIA—142 REPORT

most criminal cases; it avoids much of the corrosive impact of enforced idleness during pre-
trial confinement for those who are denied release pending trial ; it protects the public from
those accused persons who are prone to continu? criminal conduct even while on pre-trial ree
lease; and by shortening the time between charge and disposition, it enhances whatever may
be the rehabilitative prospects of the guilty when they are ultimately imprisoned. ay

“However, all of thes? considerations pre-suppose fairness in agreement between an 1
accused and a prosecutor. It is now clear, for example, tho: tho ed pleading guilty must
be counselled, absent a waiver. Moore v. Michigan, 355 US 155 (1957). Fed. Rule Crim.
Proc. 11, governing picas in federal courts, now makes 7 that ta senteacing judge must
develop, on the record, the factual basis for the plea, as, for example, by having the accused
describe the conduct that gave rise to the charge ....”.

{Emphasis added]

5. Douglas, J, in his concurring opinioa observed that, whils plea-bargaining is not per se
unconstitutional, a_ guilty plea is rendered voidable by any threats that may be hel Id out as a con-
sequence of which the accuscd eaters any plea of guilty. The learned Judge further observed that :

“In order to assist appellate review in weighing promises ia light of all the circumstances, al/ ‘
trial courts are now required to re rate the defendants who enter guilty pleas so that the waiver
of these fundamental rights will affirmatively appear in the record”. >

1
[Emphasis added} 4
|
4

ws

GMGIPN—86—104 M. of LJ & CA/ND/93—28-2-95—500.