oy हू
arta जपते

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED FORTY-FIFTH

REPORT
ON

ARTICLE !2 OF THE CONSTITUTION
AND
PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS

1992


K.N. SINGH Chairman
(Former Chief Justice of India) Law Commission
Government of India
Shashtri Bhawan.
समन कक ‘New Dethi-110001
Tel. Off. : 384475,
Res. : 3019465
D.O. No. 6(a)(1)/87-LC(L$) November 25, 1992
Dear Prime Minister,
I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the 145th Report of the Law Commission of India on
the subject “ARTICLE 12 OF THE CONSTITUTION AND PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS”.

2. This is the second Report after the constitution of XIIIth Law Commission. This Report is being
submitted in pursuance to the formal reference made by the Minister for Law & Justice vide his D.O.
No. F. 12(1)/87-IC, dated 30th March, 1987 to the XIth Law Commission headed by Justice D.A+
Desai. A photo copy of the letter is enclosed. By that letter the Law Commission was requested to
examine the question|whether Public Sector Undertakings should be excluded from the operation of
Article 12 of the Constitution.

3. The Commission has examined the question in its various aspects in the light of the law declared
by the Supreme Court and also in the background of 126th Report of the Commission which dealt
with litigation policy of Government and Public Sector Undertakings. The Report further deals with
the questions raised by the Bureau of Public Zaterprises at whose instance the reference bad been
made to the Commission.

With kind regards, .

‘Yaurs sincerely,
(KN. Singh)
Hon'ble Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao,
Minister for Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
New Delhi.

tii


Minister of State
Law and Justice
Government of India
New Dethi-110001
10.0. No. F.12(1)/87-I.C. 30 March, 1987

Dear Shri Desai,

As you are aware, the Supreme Court has of late interpreted Article 12 of the Constitution
holding that any agency or instrumentality of the Government will be covered by the expression
“other authorities” occurring in that Article. The latest judgement of the Supreme Court is that of
Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited Ys. Brojo Nath, reported in AIR 1986 SC 1571.

2. The matter was considered in a meeting of Committee of Secretaries on 19-1-1987, wizn it was
decided that a formal reference to the Law Commission should now be immediately mad: for which
purpose the Department of Public Enterprises would draw the necessary referencz stating all the issues
involved and send it to the law Ministry for making a reference to the Law Commission. Th: Law
Commission would be requested to treat this on an urgent basis and give their recommendations as
early as possible.

3. Accordingly, the Bureau of Public Enterprises have sent to us the material for reference to the
Law Commission and the same is enclosed.

4. I shall be grateful if the Law Commission could examine the issues raised by the Bureau of Public
Enterprises and favour us with their recommzndations on the subject as early as possible.

With kind regards,

Yours sineerely,
(H.R. Bhardwaj)
Shri Justice 0.4, Desai,

Chairman, Law Commission,
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.

Encl. : As above :

(करने


CHAPTER |
CHapirr 2

CHAPTER 3

CHAPTER 4

Cuapter 5

CONTENTS

Page
INTRODUCTION a oe न न न 1-2
PRESENT POSITION... - ~ an न 3-6
OBJECTIVES OF PUBLIC SECTOR AND THE STATISTICAL
PICTURE on oo - 1-9
SOME MINOR CLARIFICATIONS न { न 1 10-13

ARGUMENTS FOR AND AGAINST AMENDMENT, AND = 14-22
CONCLUSION

(vei)


CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

1.1 Genesis of the Report

This report deals with the question whether public sector undertakings should be exlcuded from
the operation of Article 12 of the Constitution. Article 12 defines the expression “State” as including,
for the purposes of Part III of the Constitution (fundamental rights), all local_ or other authorities
within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India. The Law Commission
of India has been requested to examine the question, in a formal reference made to the Commission
by the Government of India at the instance of the Bureau of Public Enterprises.*

1.2 Decisions of the Supreme Court

The Supreme Court of India has held in a number of decisions that Public Corporations and
Undertakings fall within the inclusive definition of ‘State’. Therefore these Corporations and Under-
takings are subject to Part-II of the Constitution. Consequently, the Supreme Court and the High
Courts have power of judicial review under Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution. The Supreme
Court and High Courts have interfered with the orders of Public Corporations and Undertakings in
relation to service matters and also with regard to commercial transactions. The interference by the
courts caused anxiety to the Bureau of Public enterprises, as, in its opinion, this has created serious
difficulties in the functioning of Public Sector Undertakings on commercial and industrial principles.
The Bureau has proposed amendment of Article 1211 a manner designed to exclude Public Corporations
and Undertakings from the expression “other authorities”, to ensure the avoidance of judicial review
and interference by courts in the functioning of these Undertakings.

1.3 Points raised by Bureau of Public Enterprises

The Bureau of Public Enterprises has projected the following few difficulties and problems, con-
fronted by the publicenterprises which have led them to this reference :—

First, as regards service matters, it is experienced that by reason of application of the provision
of Article 14 of the Constitution, to Public Sector Corporations, employees of these Corporations have
practically come to acquire a permanent employment status and their services cannot be terminated
even if the rules allow such termination on three months’ notice.

Secondly, in the sphere of award of contracts, it has been noticed thateven where the management
of a Public Sector Corporation knows of the bad credentials of a firm, itcannot stop dealing with that
firm or refuse to deal with that firm, without following the formalities insisted upon in the judicial
decisions on the subject. Further, ifa person having dealings with a Public Sector Corporation does not
get the required material from the corporation, he files a writ petition and often brings an application
to seek an ex-parte injunction against the Public Sector Corporation to deliver the material,

Thirdly, instances have come to the notice that the courts have granted interim orders, even for.
not calling the ordinary meetings of the general body of the corporate bodies.

Finally, a point that has been raised regarding a matter of procedure in the context of documents
is, that if a document issued by another agency in the public sector is produced in evidence in court,
it is not possible to dispute the same, even if it be incomplete or defective, as the other party takes the
plea that the same was issued by another agency of the Government, and as per the doctrine of “ins-
trumentality”, the document is supposed to be accepted by all agencies.

1.4. Earlier Report

It may be mentioned that in 1988, the Law Commission of India forwarded to the Government
a Report concerned with litigation policies and strategies pertaining to (i) the Government, and (ii) pul-:
lic sector undertakings.? In that Report, the commission examined the reasons for the spurt in litiga-
tion in which Public Sector Undertakings are involved and it also stressed the need for evolution of
a sound litigation policy. The Report recommended, inter alia, the establishment of an effective Grie-
vance Cell for the settlement of disputes between the employer and the employees in the Public Sector.
It further recommended that disputes relating to commercial and business transactions should also be

a हो No. 0.0. F, 12(1)/87-IC dated 30-3-1987 of Shri H.R. Bhardwaj, Minister of State, Law and Justice, Govt. of
india.

+, Law Commission of India, Govt. and Public Sector Undertakings Litigation Policy and Strategies (126th Report).
fh


2

settled through the medium of arbitration. The present Report deals with a different matter, namely,
thesubstantive question relating to the constitutional status of Public Sector Undertakings. The present
Report is not confined io procedural aspects, but deals with the basic question whether the
rights and remedies available to ६ person against the Government by virtue of Part-II of the Consti-
tution should continue to be available against Public Sector Undertakings also, and further, whether
it is desirable and constitutionally permissible to amend Article 12, so as to exclude the Public Sector
Undertakings from the judicial review of the Supreme Court and the High Courts under Article 32
and 226 of the Constitution. Thus, the scope of the present Report is different from that of the earlier
126th Report. However, some data examined in that Reportare relevant and valid for dealing with the
question under consideration in the present Report also; and reference thereto would be made at the

appropriate stage.

1.5 Steps preparatory to the Report

On receipt of the reference from the Governmant, th> Law Com-nission took steps to obtain
statistical date through the Bureau of Public Enterprises regarding the nature and quantum of litigation
fnvolving the Public Sector Undertakings, in so far as such litigatioa avises our of ths preseat position
under which, by reason of judicial pronouncements, such unde 5 fall withia the defiaition of
“State”. A study of the revelant judicial pronouncements was also undertaken in the Commission.
The subsequent Chapters of this Report will cover interalia, the important points arising out of the sta-
tistical data that the Commission has been able to obtain? and also tae avove-mzationed judicial pro-

nouncements,*

* Paragraph 3.4, infra.
© Chapter 2, infra.


CHAPTER 2
PRESENT POSITION

2.1 The constitutional provision

The problem that is going to be dealt with in this Report arises from Article 12 of the Consti-
tution, (occurring in Part Hl of the Constitution) which reads as under : .

“12. In this Part unless the context otherwise requires, ‘the State’ includes the Government and
Parliament of India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the States and all local
or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India.
It will be noticed that Article 12 does not, in so many words, provide that undertakings in the
public sector fa'l within the definition of “State”; but that is virtually the position resulting from judicial
pronouncements on the subject. To state the position in brief terms at this stage, such undertakings
fall within the words “other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Govern-

ment of India.”

2.2 The beginning

Generally, this expansive interpretion of Article 12 is taken to have begun with a judgement
holding that the Rajasthan State Electricity Board falls within “State”.1_ In coming to this conclu-
sion, the Supreme Court emphasised the fact that such authorities are constitutional or statutory autho-
rities and that they exercise powers conferred by law. It may be mentioned that State Electricity
Boards are constituted under the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948. The ingredient of “authority” (apart
from other additional factors) seemed to have weighed with the court in coming to this conclusion.
This reasoning was reiterated in one of the judgements of the Supreme Court pronounced in 1975.2

2.3 Agency or instrumentality of the State

In order to analyse the link between the State and the undertaking in question, it was necessary
to evolve some formula; and that is the principal approach adopted by the Supreme Court in its well
known judgment relating to the International Airports Authority.? The International Airports Autho-
rity is a body corporate constituted under the International Airports Authority Act, 1971. The Direc-
tor of the Authority had issued a notice, inviting tenders for putting up and running a second class
restaurant and two snack bars at the International Airport at Bombay. Tenders were received in res-
ponse to thenotice. Shri R.D. Shetty, the appellant, who was not a tenderer, filed a writ petition which
was rejected by the Bombay High Court. He applied for and obtained special leave to Appeal to the
Supreme Court. He urged that the notice inviting tenders by the Airports Authority had stipulated a
condition of eligibility, but subsequently the same was changed without any rational justification, as a
result of which he could not submit his tender. It was further urged before the Supreme court that the
International Airport Authority, being a “State” within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution,
was bound to give effect to the condition of eligibility set up by it was and not entitled to depart from
itat its own sweet will without rational justification.

The Airports Authority contended that since the appellant had not submitted any tender, he had no
locus standi to maintain the petition and he had suffeted no injury by the grant of licence to one of the
responsdents. It further raised the contention that the condition of eligibility had no statutory force.
Therefore, even if there was any departure from the standard or norm of eligibility, it was not justi-
ciable. The Supreme Court dismissed the appeal on the ground that the appel lant had not submitted
any tenderand he had suffered noinjury. Nevertheless, the Supreme court held that “where the Govern-
ment is dealing with the public, whether by way of giving jobs or entering into contracts or issuing |
quotas or licences or granting other forms of largesse, the Government cannot act, arbitrarily at its
sweet will, and, like a private individual deal with any person it pleases, but its action must be incon-

‘formity with a standard or norm which is not arbitrary, irrational or irrelevant. The power or discre-
tion of the Government in the matter of grant of largesse including award of jobs, contracts, quotas,
licences, etc. must be confined and structured by rational, relevant and non-discriminatory standard or
norm and if the Government departs from such standard or norm in any particular case or cases, the
action of the Government would be liable to be struck down, unless it can be shown by the Government

Rajasthan State Electricity Board, Jaipur y. Mohan Lal, A.1.R. 1967 S.C. 1857.
* Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagat Ram, A.LR 1975 5.0, 1331.
© RD. Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India, AI.R. 1979 5.0. 1626.


4

that the departure was not arbitrary, but was based on some valid principle which in itself was not irra-
tional, unreasonable or discriminatory.” After making the aforesaid observation, the Supreme Court
further held that Corporations established by statute or incorporated under law are an instrumentality
or agency of the Government, if they satisfied certain tests which may be summed up as under :

(i) The source of the share capital;
(ii) The extent of State control over the Corporation, and whether it is “deep and pervasive”;

(ii?) Whether the Corporation has a monopoly status;

(iv) Whether the functions of the Corporation are of public importance and closely related to.
governmental functions; and

(१) Whether, what belonged to a Government Dzpartm2at formerly was transferred to the
Corporation.

After laying down the aforesaid tests, the Supreme Court observed that the list is not exhaustive
and by its very nature, it cannot be, because, with increasing assumption of new tasks, growing com-
plexities of management and administration and the necessity of continuing adjustment in relations
between the Corporation and Government, callingfor flexibility, adaptability and innovative skills,
itis not possible to make an exhaustive enumeration of the tests which would invariably and in all cases
provide an unfailing answer to the question whether a Corpora is a governmental instrumentality
or agency. The court observed that no one single factor will yield a satisfactory answer to the question
jand the court will have to consider the cumulative effect of these factors, in arriving at its decision on_ the
\ basis of facts and circumstances of each case. The court emphasised that since the Corporation is an
instrumentality or agency of Government, it would be subject to the same constitutional or public
law limitation as the Government. Referring to the principle of equality before law under Article 14
of the Constitution, the court declared that the rule inhibiting arbitrary action by Government must
‘apply equally where such Corporation is dealing with the public, whether by way of giving jobs or
entering into contracts or otherwise, and it cannot act arbitrarily and enter into a relationship with any
person it likes at its sweet will. Its action must be in conformity with some principle which meets the
.test of reason and relevance.

24 Public Character

t For our purpose, it is relevant to point out that the public character of the urdertakingis one of the
ingredients emphasised by the court in coming to a positive conclusion. Ti test of “agency or ins-
trumentality” had, in fact, been suggested by Mr. Justice Mathew in 1975.4 Incidentally, Mr. Justice
{Mathew had also stressed the element of public character of the functions of the corporation, apart
from other factors. .

i 2.5 Government companies

: One consequence of the broader test of “agency or instrumentality” that came to be laid down (as
stated above) was that Government companies, as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act-1956
came to be included within the concept of “State”, for the purposes of Article 12 of the Constitution.
Thus, the Bharat Petroleum Corporation was held to fall within its ambit.6 Comparatively recently, |

ithe Indian Oil Corporation has also been held to fall within the ambit of Article 12.° Accordingly, the

yudden stoppage of supply of lubricants to the petitioner firm by the Indian Oil Corporation, without

snotice, was held to be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution as arbitrary, against natural justice

and fair play and unreasonable and practically amounting to blacklisting of the petitioner firm. It may
( be mentioned that Government companies are not created directly by statute, but (like other comanies)

areincorporated under statute. Nevertheless, the test of “agency or instrumentality” became rele-
_ ant for coming to this positive conclusion.

)
:2.6 Statutory and non-statutory status

‘ After the above decision, to state the position broadly, it became possible for the courts to hold
an entity to be “State”, even if it did not have a diréct statutory origin. No doubt, if it isa statutory
dertaking vested with functions analogous to those of ths Government, it would be falling within the
Bmbit of State, But the absence of direct statutory origin may not bz material, if the entity in question is
an agency or instrumentality of the State. This is iftustrated by the well knowa judgment of 1984.”

«Sukhdev Singh vy. Bhagat Ram, A.I.R. 1975 S.C, 1331.
% Som Prakash Rekhi v. Union of India, A.I.R. 1981 S.C, 212 : (1981) 1 S.C.C. 499,
® — Mahabir Auto Stores y. Indian Oil Corporation, (1990) 3 S.C.C. 752.

Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib, A.L.R. 1981 S.C, 487.


5

That case involved a society registred under the Jammu and Kashmir Registration of Societies Act,
running the Regional Engineering College at Srinagar, sponsored by the Government of India. The

ingredients which weighed with the Supreme Court in holding the society to be a “State”—to mention
the principal characteristics—were the following -—

{i) The composition of the society is dominated by the representatives of the Government.

(ii) The expenses of the society are entirely provided by the Central Government.

(iif) The rules made by the society require prior approval of the Government.

(iv) The society is required to comply with alt directions of the Government.

(से Government can appoint aad remove members from the society.

(vi) Thus, an overall control is exercised by the Government.

2.7 Registered Societies
it may be of interest to mention that in several other judicial decisions, registered societies which are

practically under the control of the Government have been held to fall within “State”. Some examples
are given below :--

(i) Indien. Statistical Institute:®

(00) Indian Council of Agricultural Research;®

(iii) Buddhist School;?¢

(iv) Children’s Aid Society"
2.8 Deep and pervasive control and societies

Jn contrast, where the court found, on the facts, that the society was not related to governmental
business and was not subject to deep and pervasive control of Government, it would not fail within ,
“State”. This is illustrated by the judgement relating to the institute of Constitutional and Parliamen-
tary studies.*?

2.9 Banking institations and co-oprative societies : Test of Control

It is on an application of the test.of “control”, that nationalised banks have been held to fall .
within “State” by the Supreme Court. In contrast, co-operative banks and other co-operative societies
have been held by most High Courts not to fail within “State”, सा 70 पक पर

2.10 Tests not exhaustive

It could be pointed out at this stage, that none of the tests which have come up for considera-
tion in the decisions of the Supreme Court mentioned abveis conclusive in itself, nor is the enumeration
exhaustive.® The financial contribution of the Government, its deep and pervasive control, the nature
of the functions performed by the corporation,|the monopolistic status of the corporation and other;
relevant factors, may make a difference. Sometimes, one or other factor may come to be em hasised
but essentially, it is the totality of the circumstances which would be taken into account. The fact that
the share contribution of the Government is not very dominant may, alongwith other factors, become
material, as happened in the case of —

{i) The Cochin Refineries Limited;
(ii) Nellore Co-operative Spinning Mills Limited;
(iii) The joint venture of Maruti Udyog Limited.*t

* B.S. Minhas v. Indian Statistical Institute, (1983) 4 S.C.C. 582.

* PAK. Ramachandra Iyer v. Union of India, (i984) 2 S.C.C, 141.

10 Chairman, School of Buddhist Philosophy v. Makhanlal Mattoo, (1990) 4 8.C.C. 6.

मर... Sheels Barse v. Secretary, Children’s Aid Society, (1987) 3 $.C.C. 50,

38: Tek Raj Vasandiv. Union of Inaia, (1988) 1 SCC. 236,

3» Hyderabad Commercials y. Indian Bank, (1991) 2 SCALE 825.

4% Chakradhar v. Sama Singha Service Co-operative Society, A.I.R. 1982 Orissa 38.

1 Pritam Singh v. State of Punjab, A.LR. 1982 P&H 228.

18: Satish Kumar v. Punjab State Co-operative Bank, A.L.R. 1981 P&H 382.

1 Sri Konaseema Co-operative Central Bank Lid. |. Seetharama Raju, A.LR. 1990 A.P. 171.

38 Chander Mohan v. N.C.E.R.T., (1991) 3 S.C.J, 613,

18 KM. Thomas v. Cochin Refineries Lid., A.1.R. 1982 Ker. 248.

2° Baroda Cotton Co. v. Andhra Pradesh State Federation of Co-operative Spinning Mills Lid., ALR. 1991 AP. 320,
अत. PB, Ghayalod v. Maruti Udyog Lid., C.W. No. 3182/90 Delhi High Court, decided on 11-9-1991.



6

At times, courts have tried to explain that the mere provision for guidance, advice and coun”
sel by the Government does not necessarily amount to deep and pervasive State control. This
is Mustrated by decisions relating to—

(iv) Rashtriya Lalit Kala Kendra (National Academy of Arts);#*
(v) Indian Institute of Bankers.

2.11 Nopn-Statutory functions

Ifa non-statutory body doesnot perform any statutory or public duty, it may not fall within
“State”.24 Similarly, the mere {act that the name of particular society appears in the Allocation
of Business Rules would not be conclusive, as has been held ina case relatingto the Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research, which is 2 registered society and non-statutory body.®>

2.12 Legal Position

Now the legal position is clearly established by the decision of the Supreme Court that a Corpora-
tion, a Government Company or any other instrumentality of the State or agency consitituted under
the statutory provision or under the Companies Act or under the Societies Registration Act would
fall within the definition of ‘State’ under Article 12 of the Constitution for the purposes of Part INI of
the Constitution, provided such undertakings fulfil the tests as discussed earlier, Sometimes, difficulties
do arise in determining the character of an instrumentality of the State—even on the application of the
tests laid down by the Supereme Court. Some of the High Courts have taken divergent views in this

rd. But if one bears in mind the fact that no particular factor is conclusive, one can understand the
decisions which are sometimes cited as deviating from the principles laid down by the Supreme Court
Jt has to be remembered th:.t if a company, besides being a non-statutory body, does not perform any
statutory or public duty, it may not fall within “State”. Similarly , the mere fact that the name of a
particular society appears in the Allocation of Business Rules would not be conclusive, as held in the
case of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, a registered society and non-statutory body.
[The view taken by the Supreme Court in. that case has been watered down by subsequent decisions ;
and, at present, the view taken in the case of International Airport Authority holds the field.] In Ajay
Hasia’s case, the Supreme Court held that society registered under the Jammu and Kashmir Regis-
tration of Societies Act, 1898 was an instrumentality or agency of the State and the Centra] Govern-
ment; consequently, it was an authority within the meaning of Article 12.** The declaration of law laid
down in the International Airport Authority decision is the law of the Jend. Any different view taken
by High Courts contrary to the Supreme Court’s decision is incorrect.

‘Swapan K. Das v. Secretary, Lalit Kala Academy, ALR. 1990 Notes of Cases 129 (Cal.).
Ram Prasad v. Indian Institute of Bankers, A.LR, 1992 P&H 1 (FB).
Praga Tools Corporation v. C.A. manual, (1969) 1$.C.C. 585.
Sabhajit Tewary v. Union of India, AUR 1975 S.C. 1329.
Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, (1981) 1 S.C.C, 722 : AIR 1987 SC 487.

‘SPEER


CHAPTER 3
OBJECTIVES OF PUBLIC SECTOR AND THE STATISTICAL PICTURE

3.1 Difficulties experienced

It has been stated to us, that the wide scope for judicial review of acts and omissions of public
sector undertakings, resulting from the interpretation placed on Article 12 of the Constitution, clogs _
the functioning of public sector undertakings, in matters of contract, service conditions and other
matters.

3.2 Major objections

We will deal with the problems seriatim, as stated in the reference material, to consider whether
the judicial decisions holding the public sector undertakings to be “Authority within the meaning of
Article 12 have affected the efficiency of these undertakings or created serious hurdles in carrying on
the activities of these undertakings in a business-like manner. Before doing so, we consider it necessary
to examine the major objectives of public undertakings. In order to ascertain the main objectives of
public undertakings, it is necessary to bear in mind the Directive Principles of State Policy enunciated
in Part IV of the Constitution. Article 38 enjoins the State to promote the welfare of the people by
securing and protecting eftiectively a social order in which justice, social, economic and political, shall
inform all the institutions of the national life. The State is further directed to strive to minimise
inequalities in income, and endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities,
not only among individuals, but also amongst groups of people residing in_ different areas or engaged
in different vocations. This Article, and other Articles e.g. 39, 39A, 41, 42 and 46, lay down funda-
mental policies, which the State is required to follow in making laws with a view to securinga welfare
State. Though Directive Principles are not justiciable and the Courts cannot enforce them, still those
are binding on the various organs of the State. The Union government, with a view to securing a
welfare State, prepared Five Year Plans for the transformation of society. It took steps for growth
and increase in the sphere of industrial development, as stated in the Industrial Policy Resolutions of
1948 and 1956. The Industrial Policy Resolution of 1956 clearly stated that for the adoption of the
socialistic pattern of society as a national objective, and also for planned and rapid development,
it was required that all sectors which are of basic and strategic importance, or which are in the na-'
ture of public utility services, should be in the public sector. In furtherance of this Industrial Policy,
a number of public sector undertakings were constituted. The legislative history leading to the es-
tablishment of the public sector undertakings is discussed in detail in Chapter 1 of the 126th Report
of the Law Commission. The public sector undertakings function under the control and direction
of the Government; and, as such, they have to function in a manner expected from “State”, even in
its commercial sphere. No doubt, the primary purpose of public sector undertaking is to promote
economic growth by increased production and to secure adequate return which would help the State
in providing social, economic, educational and medical facilities to the people. Nonetheless, unlike
private undertakings, the public sector undertakings are not required to be profit-oriented only.
Since some of the undertakings deal with public utility services, they have to frame and mould their
policies to serve the people even though there is no profit. The Supreme Court in the case of Oil
and Natural Gas Commission’ held that “the notion that the cost plus basis can be the only criterion
for fixation of prices in the case of public enterprises stems basically from a concept that such enter-
prises should function either on a no profit—no loss basis or on a minimum profit basis. This is nota
correct approach. In the case of vital commodities or services, while private concerns must be allowed
a minimal return on capital invested, public undertakings or utilities may even have to run at losses,
if need be and even a minimal return may not be assured. In the case of less vital, but still basic,
commodities, they may be required to cater toneeds with a minimal profit margin for themselves.
But, given a favourable area of operation, “commerical profits need not be either anathema or for-
bidden fruit, even to public sector enterprises.”

३.३ The aspect of efficiency

Efficiency in running a public sector undertaking is not related to the High Courts and Supreme
Courts interference under Articles 226 and 32 of the Constitution. On the other hand, the effi-
ciency depends upon the efficiency of the officers and workers connected with the undertaking.
The efficiency is related to planning, hard work, devotion to duty, honesty and integrity of all
those who are working with the undertaking. Court’s interference is called for, when there is
infraction of law or of constitutional provisions. High Courts and Supreme Court would inter-
fere with the orders or functions of public sector undertakings, only when there is violation of

1 O.N.GL. v. The Association of Natural Gas Consuming Industries of Gujarat, 1993 (1) SCALE 900, para 31.
7


8

fundamental rights under Part III of the Constitution. Such limited interference cannot, and should
not, affect the efficiency of the undertakings. The fundamental rights as contained in Part III
of the Constitution are sacrosanct and every authority in the country is bound to act in accordance
with the constitutional provisions and to mould its policies and orders consistently with the fundamen-
tal rights. It is no valid argument to say, that judicial interference in a case of complaint of violation
of fandamental rights leads to inefficiency or clogs progress and development of public sector under-
taking. A public sector undertaking, like any other State organ or authority, has to respect the law
of the land and the Constitution.

3.4 Thestatistical picture : Commercial matters

We have stated above, in an abstract form, the difficulties stated to be felt by the public sector
undertakings in the context of Article 12. We should now say a few words about the statistics that
we have been able to get from the Bureau of Public Enterprises. We should mention here,
wks these statistics relate to 21 public sector undertakings. The total number of public sector under-
takings as on 3150 March, 1991 was 244, Against these 21 public sector undertakings, 268 writ

[005 were filed during the period in question (9 years) (broadly 1981 to 1989). Out of the total 268
writ petitions, 183 related to commercial transactions.

About one third of the public sector undertakings covered in the sample data had no cases at
all, Three public sector undertakings had | case each. 7 public sector undertakings had less than 10
cases, 2 public sector undertakings, namely, the Mines and Minerals Trading Corporation and the
Food Corporation of India, had 8{ and 45 cases respectively, relating to commercial transactions

3.3 Statistics as to service matters

Coming to the writ peititions relating to service matters (85 as per sample data) the figures supplied
bythe Bureau of Public Enterprises relate to recruitment, promotion, dismissal, seniority etc. The break
up of the service matters is : (i) recruitment 11 cases, (ii) dismissals 22 cases, and (iii) seniority/ pro-
mgtion etc. 52 cases.* However, 16 public sector undertakings had no pending case pertaining to

itment, 13 public sector undertakings had no case relating to dismissal and 12 public sector under-
wre ‘ings had no cases in the category of seniority/promotion etc. Thus, on an average, 14 public sector

kings out of 21 had no case in the field of service matters. Only 7 public sector undertakings
‘ounted for 85 writ petitions, which comes to about 30 per cent of the total litigation.

3.6 Overall picture

Taking the overrall picture, on the whole, 3 Public Sector Undertakings, namely, Neyveli Lignit
Corporation, Mines and Minerals Trading Corporation and Food Corporation of India, account
far-nearly two-third of the total litigation against the public sector undertakings. In terms of per-
egntage, about 7 per cent of the public sector undertakiggs are responsible for morethan 65 per
edt of litigation against the public sector undertakings im the sample survey.

3.7 Figures given in 126th Report

by At this stage, reference may also be made to the Report af the Law Commission already mentioned-.'
us‘ (126th Report), where a tabular statement of the quantum of cases filed in courts by or
against public sector undertakings is given, alongwith the expenditure incurred during five years:
ig. 1981, 1982, 1983-85/1986/1987, The Commission pointed out® that from amongst public
sector undertakings, nationalised banks and financial institutions had been responsible for a large
amont of litigation. The Commission stressed the factor of lack of responsibility on the part of the
mpanagerial executives in resolving disputes. Elsewhere in its Report,’ the Commission highlighted
major causes for mounting litigation in the public sector as under :—

(0) lack of accountability;
(i) corruption ;
(iii) eccentric approach of officers in service matters,

® Director, Bureau of Public Enterprises, letter dated Sth February, 1991,

Law Commission of India, 126th Report (Government and Public Sector Undertaki itigati ic
27 Como oF ia, ४ ing Litigation Policy and Strate

Director, Bureau of Public Enterprises, letter dated Sth Feburary, 1991.
126th Report, pages 38--39, para 7.3.

126th Report, page 17, para 2.261.

126th Report, page 38, para 7.1.


9

In the same Report,® several specific instances of litigation have been narrated, with detailed
comments as to how the suits or proceedings could have been avoided by the public sector under-
takings concerned.

3.8 Committee of Public Undertakings : 9th Report (10th Lok Sabha)

It is also necessary to refer to the recent report® of the Committee on Public Undertakings, re-
lating to litigations pending for settlement in public sector undertakings.

The report (para 1.9) gives the relevant figures and further (para 1.10 or 1.32) examines in de-
tail some 11 glaring cases of litigation. While Committee (Report 2.2) mad it clear that
detailed examination was in progress, yet the drift of the Report, on the sample egal

and selective examination by the Committes, is clearlyin the direction of the need to reduce

ture on litigation that is unproductive. We cannot avoid quoting paragraph 2.3 of the

which reads as under :—

“2,3. On a random study of information received from public undertakings the Committee
are perturbed to find a large number of litigations pend ng for settlement involving expenditure on
fees etc. and wastage of public time notwithstanding repeated Government instructions to: the
contrary from time to time. What further agitates the Committee is the number of peading
litigations releating to trivial matters or petty claims, some of which have been hanging fire
for more than fifteen years. Ithardly needs mention that in many such cases 11046) spent on
litigation is far in excess of the stakes’ involved, besides wasting valuable time and energy of
the concerned parties as wellas the court.”

हि हो कि reports clearly indicate that Public Sector Undertakings have not acted reasonably te settle
trivial disputes. Instead, they have indulged in litigation over trivial matters. How, then, can Courts
be blamed for inefficiency in running the public sector undertakings? The plea raised on behalf of
public sector undertakings is without force. :

*. 126th Report, Chapter 4.

Committee on Public Under:akings, (Tenth Lok , 9th Re Litigations
Commit ce on Ful ager ‘ent Sabha, eport) 20 August, 1992, Peding for Settle-

93-M/S351MofLJ&CA—2


CHAPTER 4
cos SOME MINOR CLARIFICATIONS
4. 1 Scope: of the Chapter.
: : Before we deal with the major issue whether an amendment of Article 12 of the Constitution, as
Suggested, is desirable, it would be convenient if certain matters are clarified, because, in our view,

the problems said to have been created by the interpretation of Article 12 do not have a material
“bearing on those points. We proceed to deal with them, one by one.

4.2. Article 311 of the Constitution.

+’ " At the outset, we must mention that employees of public sector undertakings do not mney the
“benefits of Article 311 of the Constitution. Broadly speaking, that Article provides certain safeguards
“to civil servants against dismissal, removal or reduction in rank without complying with the provisions
of that Article, Two major safeguards are, (i) that a person holding a civil post under the Union ora
#$tate shall not be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed;
1 and, (ii) that he shail not be dismissed, removed or reduced in rank without an inquiry in which he has
‘been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in’ respect
of those charges. This Article does not apply 10 4 person who does not hold a “civii post under
_the Union or a State”. Since public sector undertakings are, in juristic theory, separate from the
¢ Government as such, and since their employees are not paid out of the Consol'dited Fund of the
#.Government, they do not hold a civil post. Consequentially, Article 311 does not apply to them.?
! The point hardly needs further elaboration: But it may be useful to quote the following passage
from a decision of the Supreme Court?

“While we were referring to the cases in an earlier part of our judgm2nt, we have noticed the cau-

tion indicated by this court that evan if some institution becomes ‘State’ within the meaning

of Article 12, its employees do not become holders of civil posts so as to become entitled to

the cover of Article 311. They would, however, be entitled to the benefits of Part III of the
stitution.”

It has been pointed out that employees of the public sector undertakings do not enjoy the pro-
tection of Article 311, for the simple reason that undertakings are legal entities, separate from the
Government Even a statutory undertaking is not regarded as “State” for the purposes* of Article

4,3 Problems of documents

A point has been made that if there is li tigati ion. between a private person and agency A, and,
in that Frigation, the private party tenders in evidence 4 document issued by agency B, difficulties arise
because (it is stated) the document issued by one instrumentality is supposed to be accepted by ail
agencies in the public sector. We are afraid that such a plea cannot, as per the provisions of the Evi-

+ dence Act, be taken successfully in a court. Probably, such a stand is taken, or sought to bz ,taken,
by litigantsin the light of the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 relating to “Public documents”
But we should point out that as per the concept of public documents envisaged by that Act,a document
issued by a public sector undertaking does not necessarily become a public document. In the scheme
of that Act, a document must satisfy the statutory requirement, before it could fall in the category of
public document. In this connection, we would like to refer to the provisions of sections 74 and 75
of that Act, which read as under :-—~

“74. Public docunznts.—The following documents are public docunzats:—

(1) Documents forming the acts, or records of the acts—
जा... @) of the sovereign authority,

+ (a) Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagat Ram, AIR 1975 SC 1331;
9) Somprakash Rekhiv. Union of India, (1981) 1 SCC 449, 463 para 29;
8 Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib, (1981) 1 SCC 722, para 12;
(d) A.R. Kalra v. P & E Corporation of India, AIR 1984 SC 1361, para 20.
३. Tekhraj v. Union of India, AUR 1988 SC 469, para 21.
Guru Gobinda ९. Shankari* Prasad, AIR 1964 SC 254, 258; Mafatlal v. Divisional Controller, AIR 1966 SC 1364.
State of Bihar v. Union of India, (1970) 1 SCC 67, 75. oe
“See para 1.3., last sub-paragraph supra. ‘ हे

10



18 1

(ii) of official bodies and tribunals, and
(iii) of public officers, legislative, judicial and executive of any part of Iadia or of the
Commonwealth or of a foreign country.

(2) Public records kept in any State of private docu nents.”

“75, Private documents—All other documents are private.”

It will be seen that the definition of “public documents” in section 74 would not cover public
sector undertakings and their officers. They cannot be regarded as “official bodiss and tribunals.”
As regards the expression “public officers” which occurs in section 74 (and is not defined in th? Evi-
dence Act) one can at best, consult section 2(17) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. Th> enumsra-
tion of various persons to be rgarded as “public offizers” in that claus2 dozs not cover employees of
public sector undertakings.

Further, it has been held that an officer of a body corporate c1inot 03 a public officers. Officers
of the Food Corporation of India, a public sector undertaking, are not “Public Officers” withia the
meaning of section 2(17;(h) and section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure.7 This view has bzen approv-
ed by the Supreme Court also. In spite of the control and sup2 ision exercised by the State Govern-
ment on the funds and activities of the State Electricity Board, it cannot be held to constitute
“Government” and its officers cannot be regarded as “Public Officers” for the purpose of section 80
the Civil Procedure Code.? Probably, some misconczption szems to have arisen bzcause, for the
purposes of the Indian Penal Code, the expression “public servant” has been defined as denoting a

person falling under the specified descriptions, and Clause “twelfth” of section 21, which covers the
following :— .

Every person—

(a) In the service or pay of the Govornmzat or reaunzrated by fe2s or commission for the
performance of any public duty by the Government;

(b) In the service or pay of a local authority, acorporatioa establish2d by or undera
Central, Provincial or State Act or a Government company as defined in section
617 of the Companies Act, 1956(1 of 1956).

It should be pointed out that even the definition in the Penal Code defines the expression “‘public
servant” and not the expression “public officer”. Its main object is to (1) deal effectively with the
‘offence of bribery which (under the Code as enacted) is defined in terms of public servants; (ii) make
effective provisions for certain offences against public servants, including contempts of the lawful
authority of the public servants; (iii) deal with conduct which becomes aggraveted when committed
by or against a public servant; and (iv) make provisions for the connected sections of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, particularly section 197, under which, certain public servants cannot be
prosecuted for any offence alleged to have been committed by them while acting or purporting to act
in the discharge of their official duties, except with the previous sanction of the appropriate Govern-
ment. The definition of Public servant in the Penal Code has no relevance for construing the expression
“public officer” as occurring in the Evidence Act.

4.4 Injunctions

Since a point is often made! regarding temporary injunctions issued by courts against public
authorities, it becomes necessary to offer a brief analysis of the relevant provisions of the law. We leave
aside permanent injunctions, which are governed by section 38 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963
and concentrate on the issue of temporary injunctions under the Civil Procedure Code. Injunctions _
concerning property are provided for by Order 39, rule 1 of the Code. The more frequently invoked
provision in the context of public sector undertakings would appear to be Order 39, rule 201),
which we quote below :—

“2(1) In any suit for restraining the defendant from committing a breach of contract or other
injury of any kind, whether compensation is claimed in the suit or not, the plaintiff may, at ‘any
time after the commencement of the suit, and either before or after judgement, apply to the Court
for a temporary injunction to restrain the defendant from committing the breach of contract or
injury complained of, or any breach of contract or injury of like kind arising out of the same
contract or relating to the same property or right.”

Renuka Thue. तरीका Bank Lid, Anviser, ARIGOP RHE v. Grntdlays Bank Ltd., Anvritsar, ATR १980 P & H 146.
Kanta Prasad Singh v. Food Corporation of India, A.1.R. 1974 Patna 376.

Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner v. Ramesh Chander Sha, A.1.R. 1990 SC 648.
V. Padinanabhan Nair v. Kerala State Electricity Board, A:1.R. 1989 Kerala 86.

2-. Paragraph 1.3, second and third sub-paragraphs, supra.

93-M/S351MofLI&CA—3

eee


12

4.5. Considerations for the grant of Injunctions.

It will be noticed"! that a temporary injunction can be granted, only if it is required for restraining
the defendant from committing a breach of contract or other injury of any kind under Order 39,
tule 2(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. By and large, “injury” denotes violation of a legal
obligation. But the mere fact that one party alleges the possibility of an injury, does not necessarily
entitle him to a temporary injunction. Wellestablished propositions exist on the subject 1. Speak-
ing very briefly, the court will take into reckoning the following guidelines* :—

(1) Whether the person seeking temporary injunction has made out a peina facie case, This is

asine qua non.

(2) Whether the balance of convenience is in his favour. i.e. whether it could cause greater
inconvenience to him if the injunction is not granted, than the inconvenience which the
other side would be put to, if the injunction is granted. As to that, the governing princi-
ple is, whether the party seeking injunction could be adequately compensated by award-
ing damages and the defendant would be in a financial position to pay them.

(3) Whether the person seeking temporary injunction would suffer irreparable injury, if the
injunction is not granted: With the first condition as sine qua non, at least two conditions
should be satisfied by the petitionerand a mere proof of one of the three conditions
does not entitle a person to obtain temporary injunction.

4.6. Injunctions against public sector undertakings.

It is needless to add that the benefit of these restrictions on the discretion to issue temporary
injunctions are available as much to public sector undertakings, as to undertakings in the private
sector. For example, it has been held that in a matter touching the discipline or the administration
of the internal affairs of a university, the court would not interfere by injunction, unless a strong
prima faciecaseis made out. Conversely, where the plaintiff, a handling contractor engaged
in handling iron and steel materials the Durgapur Stockyard of the defendant company sued for
permaneht injunction and also prayed for temporary injunction to restrain the defendant company

m making deductions from its running bills, the plaintiff’s prayer was allowed and temporary in-

ction granted because (i) he had made out a prima facie case; (ii) deductions would cause him consi-

functor inconvenience in the performance of the job; and (iii) not granting an injunction would mean
irreperzble injury to the plaintiff.16

In an interesting case which also involved a public authority, the Allahabad High Court has dis-
gussed the ingredients required for the grant of interlocutory injunction; and it seems to be useful to
devote 2 few lines to its judgment.!7 Relying, inter alia, on the House of Lords decision in American
Cyanamide Col,!8 the High Court emphasised that the three requirements for obtaining an injunction
are—Prima facie case, balance of convenience and irreparable injury. It also pointed out that the
Flouse of Lords had placed great emphasis on the balance of convenience. As to interference by the

igh Court in appeal, the Allahabad High Court expressed itself as under :—

“A court of appeal against the judgment of granting of refusing to grant injunction can interfere
when the order passed is arbitrary or is passed by not taking into account th- relevant considera-
tions. The court below gave 2 go-iyy to all the principles of law and, most a:vitrarily and without
applying its mind to the requirements, granted the injunction restraining the defendants from rea-
lising the unpaid instalments. The judgment shows that the learned Judge thought that the inter-
locutory injuction could be given as a matter of course. Its granting rests in the sound dis-
cretion of the court, to be exercised in accordance with well settled equitable principles and in the
light of all the facts and circumstances of the case. The discretion of the court does not include
& mise pplication of the law or an obvious error in the application of the principles of equity. The
character of injunction being extraordinary, it should be exercised sparingly and cautiously.
After thoughtful deliberation injunction should bé-given or awarded only in clear cases.”

™ Paragraph 4.4, supra,

&  Dorab Cawasji Warden v. Comi Sorab Warden, A.LR. 1990 SC 867 Pr. 14-15. +
1% Mulla, Code of Civil Procedure (abridged edition, 1990), page 1006. at
“Paragraph 4.5 supra.

V.S. Vishwaridyalaya v. Raj Kishore Tripathi, AUR 1977 SC 615.

™ s. Krishnaswamy v. South India Film Chamber of Commerce, ATR 1969 Mad. 42.

U.P. Awas Evam Vikas Parishad v. N.V. Rajagopalan Acharya, AIR 1989 All. 125, 127, 128, 129, paragraphs 11 to-
15 (K.C. Agarwal & B.L. Yadav, JJ). ‘ope 2' paragae

as

American Cyanamid Co. v. Ethicon Ltd., (1975) 1 All E.R. 504 (HLL).


13

On the facts, the order of the trial court, restraining the defendant Vikas Parishad from realising from.
the plaintiff unpaid instalments claimed towards the hire purchase agreement of flats, was set aside.

In 2 recent case! the Supreme Court has considered in detail the question of grant of interlocu-
tory mandatory injunctions. The Court observed that interlocutory mandatory injunctions are granted

generally.

(a) to preserve or restore the status quo of the last non-contested status which preceded the
pending controversy until the final hearing (when full relief may be granted), of

(b) to compel the undoing of those acts that have bzen illegally. done, or the restoration of
those which were wrongfully taken from the party complaining. :

But, since (i) the granting of such an injunction to a party who fails or would fail to establish his right,
at the trial may cause great injustice or irreparable harm to the party against whom it.was granted.or,
(ii) alternatively, not granting it to a party who succeeds or would succeed, may equally cause great
injustice or irreparable harm; Courts have evolved certain guidelines. The Court stated the guide-
lines as under :—

(1) The plaintiff has a strong case for trial. That is, it shall b> of a highse standard than a
prima facie case that is normally required for a prohibitory injunction.

(2) It is necessary to prevent irreparable or serious injury which normally cannot 02 compen-
sated in terms of money. ‘

(3) The balance of conveniencz is in favour of the one seeking such relief.

4.7. Bank guarantees

A few words also appear to be necessary on the subject of bank guarantees. Notwithsanding the
belief in certain quarters to the contrary, the correct law is, that where there is a bank guarantee
and no prima facie case of fraud, courts should not restrain the enforcement of the bank guarantec*0.
If there is any irrevocable commitment or obligation of the bank, either in the form of a confirmed
bank guarantee or letters of credit, the guarantee must oridinarily be honoured free from interference
by the courts, unless there is a prima facie case of fraud or a special equity.24 Courts should seldom
restrict the holder of the guarantee from enforcing it.

4.8. Article 12 and injunctions.

Finally, we would like to point out that the applicability or non-applicability of Article 12 to pyblic
sector undertakings is not relevant on the subject of injunctions. Everything depends on the groynds
on which the temporary injunction is prayed for, If it is a ground which owes its justiciability only
to fundamental rights, then the exclusion of public sector undertakings from article 12 may make a
difference. But if it is a ground available to every person and against every person under the ordinary
law, say, wrongful interference with property or possession or commission of a breach of contract or
other injury, then it matters little whether Article 12 is attracted or not. For the violation of a right, even
if it is not a fundamental right, relief by way of injunction in an otherwise appropriate case is available
under Order 39, rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil procedure, 1908,23 whether the opposite party
is a public sector undertaking or a private party.

%  Dorub Cawasji Warden v. Coomi Sorab Warden, AIR 1990 SC 867, at page 873 pr. 14.
2 United Commercial Bank v. Bank of India, AIR 1981 SC 1426.

a. Ashi Ganguly v. Indian Oxygen Ltd., AIR 1989 Cal. 150, 153, 154.

U.P. Co-operative Federation Ltd., v. Singh Consultants, (1988) 1 SCC 174.

* Paragraph 4.5, supra.


CHAPTER 5
ARGUMENTS FOR AND AGAINST AMENDMENT AND CONCLUSION

5.1 Introduction

In this Chapter, we propose to examine the agruments that might support the need for amend-
ment of Article 12 of the Constitution, as also the argruments that might be advanced against such
an amendment. In doing so, it will be necessary for us to examine the constitutional validity also,
of such an amendment, if at all an amendment is to be proposed. However, we intend to ‘reserve our
examination of that aspect to a somewhat later stage and proszed first to examine the 1534 for amend-
ment on the merits,

5.2 Arguments favouring the amendment : business principle

Broadly speaking, the major geouad ०1 waich the case for am2adiazai of Aciicic 12, so as to~
exclude public sector undertakings from the scope of the Article, is the argument that if public sector
egterprises are to function on business lines and to be allowed the largest mzasure of freedom, then
ag interpretation of Article 12 of the Constitution that brings such undertakings within the concept
of “State” for the purposes of fundamental rights creates serious difficulties in regard to the func-
tioning of those enterprises on commercial and industrial lines. In this connection, attention has
béen drawn to Rule 312A of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Lok Sabha which
(so far as is material) reads as under :—

312A. There shall be a Committee on Public Undertakings for the exanination of the working
of the public undertakings specified in the Fourth Schzdule. Th furctioas of the Committee
3 _

(०) to examine, in the context of the autonomy and efficiency of th> public undertakings,
whether the affairs of the public undertakings are bzing managed in accordance with sound
- business principles and prudent commercial practices; and

513 The agrument of autonomy

Connected with the above argument is what may be called th2 argu n>it of auto1omy. [0 this
काका, attention has been drawn to the Industrial Policy Resolution, 1955 which, fier alia, states
ag under :—

“With the growing participation of the State in industry and trade, ths manaer in which these

' activities should be conducted and managed assumes considerable importance. Speedy decisions
‘and a willingness to assume responsibility are essential if these enterprises are to succeed. For
! this, wherever possible, there should be decentralisation of authority and their management

should be along business 1658. , . . . ७. ०-०० ०००० ०- 0०००००००००००० Public enterprises have to be
judged by their total results and in their working they should have the largest possible measure
of freedom.”

4.4 Impact on management.

Another contention that has been advanced with some empaasis, is the impact on management

of the present wide interpretation of Article 12 of the Constitution. We would like to quote in this

text from an article published some time ago.1 After pointing out that the present position has

mainly invoked by employees of the undertakings or persons having commorcial dealings with
on as contractors or in some other capacity, the article makes the following point :—

“As mentioned earlier, the characterisation of public enterprises as “State” is essentially
in relation of fundamental rights and the provisions for writs. Who invokes these vis-a-vis
public enterprises ? Not tie general public, but mainly the employees of public enterprises and
others who are in a contractual or potentially contractual relationship with public enterprises.
An aggrieved employee of a private sector company can go to court on the basis of his cont-
tact of appointment; similarly, an aggrieved contractor of a private sector firm can go to court
on the basis of the terms of his contract, and a bidder for pre-qualification for tendering for a

* Ramswany R. lyr, “dacecgcises as State and Ardcie 12” (25ch August, 1990), Econo nic and Political Weekly,
(pages M129 to M134) (at page M132).

14


15

major contract can go to court if the conditions laid down in the notice inviting bids for pre-quali-
fication have not been adhered to. None of them can invoke fundameatal rights or the pro-
visions for writs; but an aggrieved employee or tenderer or supplier in the case of public enter-
prise can file a writ petition. This is the precise implication regarding public enterprises as
‘State’ and leads to a crucial differentiation between public enterprises and private sector,

In the practice of management the selection of good personnel and their advancement or
non-advancement on the basis of merit are among the most crucial elements. Similarly, the
selection of good agents or suppliers or consultants or contractors is crucial to the success of
a business. In Government, all these become acts of State patronage, and consequently, issues
of fairness, non-discrimination, natural justice, and so on, become far more important than
suitability and efficiency. Strangely enough, an essentially managerial act such as _the framiny
of job specifications becomes in Government virutally a legislative act; all ‘recruitment rules
are considered to be acts of subordinate legislation. Government employees can go to court
on matters such as being called for interviews for appointments, the actual selection for appoint-
ment or promotion, seniority, the determination of pay, disciplinary matters, and so on.
The excessive protection given to Government servants and the extensive legal recourse
to them are among the major factors affecting the efficiency of Governmental functioning. What-
ever the merits of such protection in the case of Government employees, the consequences of
the ruling that public enterprises are ‘State’ is that this entire approach and attitude gets extended
to them. In their case, as in Government, the framing of job specifications and ‘recruitment
tules’ become virtually acts of subordinate legislation; and questions of fairness and discrimi-
nation tend to over-shadow considerations of merit and efficiency. Questions of uniformity
and non-discrimination also loom large in the context of contracts and purchases. The ern i
ments of public enterprises are thus obliged to worry more about procedural correctness 0848.
fensibility in a court of law than about making the most expeditious, efficient and economic
choice. This weakens the managements of public enterprises and renders commzrcial_and enter-
prises like behaviour extraordinarily difficult. In effect, this alters their nature as business ventures
and handicaps them in the practice of management.”

5.5 The beneficiaries

A point of detail which can be subsumed under the above poiat, but which may still require speci-

‘fic mention, is the criticism that no great public purpose is served by the present position, as those who

: derive advantage from it (by ready access to writ petitions) are not the general public, but certain

groups, such as employees, tenderers and contractors. It has been added that even in the case ‘of

Protection of employees, it is largely white-collar workers and middle level management who widely
it from this. This argument has been thus elaborated : पु

“Industrial workers are covered by elaborate legislation relating to industrial disputes,
payment of wages, workmen’s compensation, etc. which applies to public and private दशा rises
alike; they also have the power of industrial action. Workers therefore do not necessarily dorive
any specific-advantage from the treatment of pubilic enterprises as ‘State’. The white-collar
workers and managers do; but is this a desirable protection ? We had noted earlier that ‘one
of the judges in a dissenting judgment had expressed doubts about the creation of a vast class
of neo-Government servants. Is it necessary to extend to the employees of public enterprises
the kind of protection which is available to civil servants (the desirability of which in itself is
open to question) ? Should the top-level management of a public enterprise which is a re =
mercial organisation set up for business purposes be prevented from exercising the kind of inde
ment and selectivity, whether in regard to persannel matters or in regard to contractual mattefs,
that private sector chief executives exercise as a matter of course ?”

5.6 Inter-connection between the arguments

3 For the sake of convenience, in the above paragraphs, the various points of importance have
;been mentioned under different heads. But this need not make us oblivious to the fact, that they are
all inter-connected with each other; and the whole case for the introduction of an amendment ta
- Article 12 (as put by those who argue for it) can be sumnbed up in the broad proposition that —

(@) proper functioning of the public sector undertakings pre-supposes that such functionieg
should not be hedged in by constraints of the nature that flow from the applicapability ०]
Article 12 of the Constitution to public sector undertakings ;

(0) the principal beneficiaries of the present position are employees of the higher level or mid-
die level, prospective contractors and actual contractors with these undertakings, on whom.
a special benefit is conferred which is nat enjoyed by those who are employed under, or
have commercial dealings with, undertakings in the private sector or private individuals.

* Ramaswamy R. Iyer, “Enterprises as State ani Articles 12” (25th August, 1990), Economic and Political Weekly.
pages M129 to M134 (at page 133). .


16

5.7 Arguments against amendment : business principles

The argument that the management of undertakings in the public sector should be conducted
on sound business principles may appear very attractive at the first sight, and no one can deny that
this ideal should be kept by cach undertzking before itself and implemented as far as possible. ; But,
in stressing this argument, one need not overlook the fact that in some form or other, these under-
takings possess a public clement, as their very name indicates. From the fact that they possess such
3 public element, certain consequences conceivably follow, one of which is that their actions sought
to be open to judicial review on certain weil defined grounds. This is not the placz for catering into
a detailed exposition of the grounds for judicial review of State action. But it is well underst that
violation of the law, non-compliance with the procedure laid down in law, want of sufficient factual
material, perversity in coming to a conclusion, acting malafide or on collateral considerations and
(according to recent developments), unreasonableness, are some of the important grounds for such
judicial review. These grounds become applicable in theory, where the action is that of the State. No
doubt, one can legitimately ask the question why. the court should insist on the observance of the re-
levant norms embraced by the grounds mentioned: above, in the case of public sector undertakings.
The answer must be found, and can be found without much difficulty, in the very fact that these are
“public”. Constitutional scholars have written at length on the various indicia which are considered

- relevant in order to constitute an undertaking into a “State”. But, for the present purpose, it is suf-
ficient to mention that in some form or other, these undertakings have a connection with the State
aad the public.

“By extending the executive power of the Union and each of the States to the carrying on
of any trade or business, Article 298 does not, however, convert either the Union of India.or any
of the States which collectively form the Union into a merchant buying and selling goods or
carrying on cither trading or business activity, for.the executive power of the Union and of the
States, whether in the field of trade or business or in any other field, is always subject to-Consti-
tional limitations and particularly the provisions jrelating to Fundamental Rights, in'Past ता
of the Constitution and is exercisable in accordance with and for the furtherance-of the ‘Witec-
tive Principles of State Policy prescribed by Part IV of the Constitution. ”3 .

As regards the public character of the public sector undertakings, the Supreme ‘Courth:.as obs
served that it must be kept in mind that the empl loyment under the public undertakings is a gublic
employment and a public property. it is not only the undertakings, but also the society, same has
a,stake in them for their proper and efficient working. ®4 This connection has many facets, a eral
ef which have been stressed or highlighted in the judi ial decisions on the subject dealing with rhs
concept of “State” as embracing public sector un in, BS But the golden thread that binds
all together, is the broad proposition that there is a public element. This public element is occas!
traced to the fact that the undertaking in question: owed its existence to a statute. At times, it is’
nature of the functions which they perform that feceiyes emphasis from the courts. The financial
support given by the State may also be regarded as ree vant, along with other factors. The caggept
of “instrumentality or agency of State”, oft hen relied ont in this contexts, is another way of saving Gat
Yhese undertakings are projections of the State or emanations of the personality of the State. -
degree of control or the intensity of the inter-link “oat ¢n the State and the undertaking will naturally
differ from undertaking to undertaking; but the essestial idea is the connection between the State
(in the conventional sense) 2nd the particular undertaking. No particular test is sufficient <orjcon-
Clusive in itself; so many criteria may be kept in mind.. The result reached, is not.on the enc five
app lication of one or two criteria, but on an oan oat ५ in toto, of the nature and charactes..of the:

dertaking. One particular undertaking may be nothing but the “alter ego” of the anne :
the bond between that undertaking and the Govarnment is very strong and fully visi i
why the expression “deep and pervasive control” is oftea. employed in judicial pronouacements.:
undertakings will be easily regarded as falling within thé ambit of the “State”. At the other
may be a undertaking whose link with the State is thin and:fragile; in sucha case, it may
tocall it “State”. Take, again, the financial aspect, Ag undertaking may be substantially
on the resources of the Government and the court may ind it easy to hol ia it as “State”. =
posite extreme, there might stand an undertaking id which the financial stakes of the Gov
tinor or negligible; the court may be justified in ra 08 a cautious approach before.‘ :
an undertaking to be a “State”. But all these apparetitly heterogenous criteria essentially pay fo- |
mage to the central criterion, which assesses the 101 bdtwoen‘the State.and the undertskingn
to find out the existence, nature and extent of the “public” charactor of the uadsrtaking;

5.8 Relevance of “public” character

a At the risk of some repetition, let us emphasise the proposition that it is the public. charadter
t of the undertaking that supplies the rationale for equating it with “State”, for the Purposes of ‘er
+8" Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Lid. and Anr_.¥. Broja Nath, ALR. 1986 SC. 1571, 1588-89, ~———
५ 7A. 9.8. Sawant, J. D.T.C. v. workers, 1990 (Suppl) (2) Scale 1). : °



{pou

17

tain provisions of the Constitution. If the dealings of the undertaking are of a public character, cer-
tain norms can be justifiably applied and made binding on the undertaking, while conducting those
dealings. The community has a legitimate interest in ensuring fairaess in such dealings. Again, leave
ing aside the aspect of dealings, if the funds of the undertaking come substantially from the Govern-
ment, the community can be regarded as having an intersest in the manner in which the business is
conducted with the aid of those funds. Similarly, if the broad sange of functions performed by the
undertaking (even where it is not entering into contract, as such, on frequent occasions) partakes
Of the character of public welfare, no one can deny that certain principles must be observed. .

-5.9 Dichotomy of business principles and availability of writ jurisdiction

It would appear that those who argue for amending Article 12, assume that there is a conflict
‘between good business principles or sound management and the applicability of constitutional pre:
visions regarding fundamental rights and the like, in regard to such undertakings. But we believe
that the conflict is more apparent than real. The fallacy lies in assuming that every action of the under+
.taking can be set aside by the court. The truth is, that only illegal, arbitrary or unreasonable action.
is open to judicial review. No doubt, an application (by writ or otherwise) for judicial review-can
be initiated by a citizen against any order or action, because one cannot prevent the citizen from
approaching the court. But this does not mean that the citizen will necessarily succeed in eyery cage,,
,A Citizen so minded can initiate proceedings even against a private sector undertaking; but he wilk
mat necessarily succeed, if there is no cause of action. The courts are open; but success after entering
ite portals of the court does not necessarily go with the right to enter the court. .

5.10 The aspect of autonomy

Much of what we have said above should suffice to constitute a satisfactory answer, in so कि:
:as the aspect of autonomy is sought to be emphasised, Undoubtedly, there must be spzedy disposal
j of business and willingness to accept responsibility;on the part of the public sector. But it must be-
| pointed out that this applies as much to organs of the Government in the narrow sense, as it applies,
ito undertakings in the public sector. Governmental authorities also have to function with a-sense
‘of responsibility and with reasonable speed; and yet, they are subject to fundamental rights. .-*

15.11 The aspect of management

+2 One of the aspect on which emphasis has been plaged while arguing for amendment of Artié¢le
119, is that of-maintaining a quality of Engen de sblic sector undertakings. It has been parti-

’ | qilarly emphasiscd that these undertakings, when 8 with contracts or the relationship of em-

ployment, should be allowed to be conducted with ‘iency and speed. and these objectives often
: ¢gme to be thwarted by reason of the present interpretation of Article 12, which makes them subject

_ | td judicial scrutiny and throws open the possibility of litigation and subject to judicial scrutiny which

| @lemrient of reasonableness is concerned, it is 400 : the courts may spell out such a_reqi

Sbstructs the smooth conduct of their business. On a careful consideration of the matter, it appears
ta us that there are several answers to this objection. hee first place, we are not certain if the fact
jat writ jurisdiction can. be invoked necessarily - ob; s smooth functioning in every case. It

ig undisputed that such jurisdiction has been, exereigabldever since the commencement of the Constix

i tation against acts of the Central Government andthe {tate Government and its officers and autlto-
| fities. There has not been any serious grievance made jthat the jurisdiction has come in the.way.of
| expeditious disposal of governmental business in deal fre with commercial transactions,

. Railways and Posts and Telegraphs are noteworthy: examples of commercial or semi-commerdial
| getivities directly carried on by the Government, and we are not aware of any serious are दि

1 made by the concerned Departments in this regard. ndly, if the grant of stay orders in ‘wri i.
against public sector undertakings (on the basis df the alleged violation of a fundamental

- | dees occasionally suspend completion of the partic transaction, one has to balance ee it

‘ the-higher values sought to be protected by insistence 00 gompliance with certain constitutional nokrps.
i We shall revert to this aspect later. at ‘dly, pe bliq. sector undertakings may themselves. hgv
to invoke writ jurisdiction, say, against another public, sector undertaking and then some of the bete=

{of the right to equality and other furdemea its would be realised. Finally, so far aq:

| met merely on the basis of constitutional rights (as have done so far, because the smu

' were there), but also in the light of the implications of'statutory interpretation. In this connectién,

| attention may be drawn to the fact that even in countrids like England where, as yet, no ‘funda

rights ts have been written in the Constitution, courts are, as a matter of administrative law, slowly”

1 ig the view that statutory action, particularly ‘actibn which affects the rights of citizens, - प्रात
be marked by a reasonable approach. Even if Article 12 is amended so as to-confine it. ta Govern:

+ ment authority, courts can still take the same view in regatd to public undertakings as a- matter of
statutory interpretation. Mog


18

5.12 Beneficiaries of the present position.

In support of the proposed amendment, it has been argued that the main beneficiaries of the
present position are contractors or prospective contractors with the public sector and higher level
employees. The assumption is that they need not be given such benefits. It seems to us that in making
this point, the basic reasoning on which the relevant Articles of the Constitution have come to be
regarded as applicable to public sector undertakings have been overlooked. The constitutional rights
are meant for every citizen, under Article 19, but the right to equality is available to every person, under
Article 14. It may be that occasionally, frivolous cases are filed by contractors or employees. But the
courts are not totally helpless in the matter. They can award compensatory as well as exemplary costs.
We would also like to emphasise that the beneficiaries of the availablity of writ against public sector
undertakings are not merely employees or contractors. They could be honest, public-spirited institutions
or individuals. This is illustrated vividly by a recent judgment*in which the court upheld a
Gujarat judgment applying the provisions of Article 19(i)(a) of the Constitution, so as to
require the house magazine of the Life Insurance Corporation to publish the petitroner’s rejoinder
on a matter of public interest concerning the Corporation. In fact, many of the cases referred
to in the earlier Report of the Law Commission, or included in the statistial material mentioned in that

rt related to litigation filed against the Life Insurance Corporation (or other public sector under-
takings) by persons other than employees and contractors.5

5.13 The fundamental issue : Equality पु
What has been stated in the preceding few paragraphs is by way of dealing with the main grievances

made against the present position by those concerned. Much more important is the basic question of
constitutional objections. Leaving aside specific provisions in Part III of the Constitution, one has still
110 take note of the philosophy of equality, enunciated in the Preamble to the Constitution. Consistent
* with this philosophy, it will be difficult to take the stand that public authorities and public undertakings
should be allowed to operate in. manner which will not take notice of equality. It would be found that

much of the case law that has emanated in this sphere, where it insists on the absencs of arbitrariness in
‘State action, expressly or impliedly derives its lineage from the piramount coasidzration of equality,

which demands that arbitrariness, or a reasonable suspicion of arbitrariness, should be avoided “in

State action. To givea go-by to the doctrine of equality isto wipe off from th? print of tae Constitution
the ideals which are the inspiring forces underlying the 11016 to the Constitution.

:5.14 The statistical picture
The Law Commission has been able te obtain certain statistical informatioa (tarouga thy Bureau
of Public Enterprises), as to cases filed. against certain public sector undertakings oa the basis of Article
12, The first observation that the Commission would like to make is that the statistical picture is not
१80 forbidding as to cause alarm or justify a major consitituional amzadment. The second observation
‘which needs to be made is that at least in the case of certain undertakings,® no occasion has arisen say
;the lowest tenderer has challenged action of the unertaking by way of wiit petition. Thirdly, ona study
‘of some of the sample cases, it appears that at times, there are plausible grounds of objection on the
{part of the contractor to the action taken or proposed 10 be taken by the public sector undertahing. -
twill not be convenient in this Report to go into details. But, by way of example, we may mention that
jqccasionally (in the case of contractors) there is a bonafide dispute about the acceleration of price by
‘the undertaking. There are also cases where the award of acontract has been refused on the ground that
‘the contractor had not paid dues to the labour and the dispute in this regard was made the subject’
matter of a writ petition by the contractor. Such disputes cannot be said to bz totally groandiess,

5.15 Situation regarding lowest tender .

Tt will appear from some of the letters on the Law Com nis;io. file (a3 723373 from the public
jseetor undertakings through the Bureau of Pablic Enterprises) that an 19:33 94 so>m3_ to preyail
;that the person who has given the lowest tender must be awarded the contract, whatever bz the credentials
background of the tenderer. Itis because of this i pression that the suzz2stion has b222 made’,

if the public sector undertakings are excluded from applicability of Acticle 12, it would ite

functioning of the undertakings. “This would ptovide flexibility to the undertakings to reject ¢
Towese tender in case the performance of the tenderer is regarded as unsatisfactory or his credentiags
fare considered to be questionable.” It is further stated that similacly, the requirem2nt of a show नह .
notice before stopping dealings with a contractor pein barring him from pretercing tead2rs “is ah है
‘onerous बात open to challenge in courts of law andin case this requiremeatis removed, it would strengt-
nen the hands of the undertakings because their action will not be subjected to judicial scrutiny.”

® LLC. ९. Manubhai D. Shah, ST 1992 (4) SC 181.

+ Law Commission of India 126th Report, paragraphs 4.7 to 4.11. See also 112th Report on section 45 of the Ins
Tance Act, 1938.

Letter dated 6th February, 1989.
Letter dated 13th February, 1989.

rn ae


19 -

While we appreciate the desire for quick and efficient functioning of undertakings in the matter
of award of contracts, we would like to point out that it is not the law that the lowest tender cau never
be rejected. What the law insists upon, is that the action of this nature, iftaken in regard toa tenderer
should be based on some reasons and should be taken after giving the tenderer an opportunity of hear-
ing. The law does not even require that the reason given by a department or undertaking for not accept-
ing the lowest tender should be one which is necessarily acceptable to the court. All that the courts
demand is that there should exist on the file some plausible justification for the State action and that the
opportunity to be given should be reasonable. No . elaborate or lengthy inquiry is contemplated and it is
believed that the court will pay attention to the substance of the matter rather than to the form. At the
‘same time we would like to point out that the law regarding the duty of public authorities to avoid
arbitrariness in the matter of acceptance or rejection of fenders isa part ofthe much wider concept of
the rule of law. In a fairly recent case8, the Supreme Court, while dealing with the question of acceptance
of tenders by.a Government company, held that it was too late in the day to contend that an institution
like a Government company should be exempt from judicial review where it was carrying on a commer-
cial activity. “An instrumentalityof the State has to act within the ambit of Rule of Law and would
not be allowed to conduct it self arbitrarily and, in its dealings with the public, would be liable to judicial
review.” It was on this reasoning that the court expressed itself to be in agreement with the submission
of the counsel for the petitioner (namely) ‘that when highest offers of the type in question are rejected,

_ feasons sufficient to indicate the stand of the appropriate authority should be made available and
ordinarily, the same should be communicated to the concerned parties unless there be any specific
justification not to doso.”

5.16. Right to information

Indeed, in the context of the duty to communicate reasons,9 for rejection of highest tender, and in
the context of the duty to afford the public an opportunity to express its views on affairs of public sector
undertakings,!° we would like to refer to the exposition of the law in a judgement whichis often quo-
ted? : :

“Ina Government of responsibility like ours, where all the agents of the public must be responsible
for their conduct, there can be but few secrets. The people of this country havearightto know
every public act, everything that is done in 2 public way, by their public functionaries. They are
entitled to know the particulars of every public transaction in all its bearing. The right to know,
which is derived from the concept of freedom of speech, though not absolute, is a factor which
should make one wary, when secrecy is claimed for transactions which can, at any rate, have no
repercussion on public security. To cover with veil of secrecy, the common routine business, is
in the interest of public.” .

These observations were, no doubt, made in the context of Governmental activity. But, the reason.
ingis substantially applicable to the public sector also.

5.17. Inadvisability of amendment

There are, in fact, certain issues going beyond the narrow topic of tenders and contracts. State
action is subjected to judicial review, because it is action in which the public have an interest. The ground
of judicial review known as arbitrariness has come on the scene because it is the public whichis affected
asa whole. The individual whose interests are prejudiced by arbitrary action may appear to be pursping
his own interest, and may look like a very sinall character in the drama. But, in reality, , he is odly &
vehicle through which a much bigger message is sought to be conveyed. Philosophi cae (thougly not,
legally) he is a minuscule reflection of the great and majestic concept of the Rule of Law. i
individual that invokes the law for his own cause, what speaks is the voice of the public. From
angle one looks at public sector undertakings it is, ultimately their public character that brings
the same category as the Government proper.

5.18. Function of judicial review

The function of. judicial review was put by the House of Lords in words which are felicitous बाकी
to deserve quotation”, .

“|... itis nota sufficient answer to say that judicial review of the action of officer of”
departments of Central Government is unnecessary betause they are accountable to Parliames for

® Star Enterprises v City and Industrial Development Corporation of Maharashtra Ltd , 1990 (3) SCC 280,

© Paragraph 5.15 supra.

® Cf LLC. ५. Manubhai D. Shah, ST 1992 (4) SC 181. . a,

+ State of U.P. v. Raj Narain, (1975) 4 SCC 428. हि

2. Inland Revenue Commissioners v. National Federation of Self -Employed and Small Businesses Ltd, (1981) 2 ७.६8.
122. (HL) (Lord Diplock). 22 Wie


20

* the way in which they carry out their functions. They are accountable to Parliament for wha.
they: do so far as regards efficiency and policy, and, of that, Parliament is the oaly judze; they ares
*““ accountable to a court of justice for the lawfulness of what they do, and, of that, th court is. the only;
+ judge.” 7

4

5.19 The aspect of human rights

We believe that it would also be appropriate and important aspect which has been dealt with, in’,
Ajay Hasia’s (४५९३५, The relevant observations areas under :—

“The mantle of 8 corporation may be adopted in order to free the Government from the in-
evitable constraints of red tapism and slow motion but by doing so, the government cannot be
allowed to play truant with the basic human rights. Otherwise it would bo the easiest thing for the
government to assign to a plurality of corporations almost every State business such as_ Post &
Telegraph, TV and Radio, Rail Road and Telephone—in short every economic activity—and
thereby cheat the people of India out of the Fundamental Rights guaranteed to them. That would
bea mockery of the Constitution and nothing short of treachery and breach of faith withthe people
of India, because though apparently the corporation will be carrying out these
functions. It will in truth and reality be the Government which will be controlling the corpora-

-; tion and carrying out these functions through the instrumentality or agency of the corporation.

~ We cannot by a process of judicial construction allow the fundamental Rights to be rendered
futile and meaningless and thereby wipe out Chapter III from the Constititon. That would be
contrary to the constitutional faith of the post-Maneka Gandhi era. (Maneka Gandhi v. UOI
(1978) 1 SCC 248; (1978) 2 SCR 621).”

Somewhat the same aspect was expressed in different words in another case! :
“It_is a limb of Government, agency of the State, a vicarious creature of statute working on the
wheels of the Acquisition Act. We do not mean to say that for purposes of Art. 309 or otherwise,
this Government Company is State but limit our holding to Art. 12and Part IIT.”
We may mention that the public element has been relied upon in a few other reactions!3,
An equally convincing reason was given by Mathew, J. in his concurring judgmentin the oft-cited
> case of Sukhdev Singh!6, His observations areas under :
7 “A State is an abstract entity. It can only act through the instrumentality or ageacy of natural or
juridical persons. Therefore, there is nothing strange in the notion of the State acting through a
corporation and making it an agency or instrumentality of the State.”

5.20 Validity of the proposed amendment

_. We must now turn to the question whether, even if the proposed amendmentis sound on the merits,
it can be regarded as passing the test of constitutionality. For this purpose, it becom2s necessary to
quote the tentative proposal in this regard. The proposal is to insert a> Explanation below Acticle i2 as
under :

“A. statutory corporation, a company formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1936 ora
society registered under the Societies Registration Act shall not be considered as ‘State’ for the
purpose of this Part.”

We are not dealing with the question of drafting. But we have to point out that the exclusion of
statutory undertakings, Government companies and Government aided registered societies from the
benefit of Part III of the Constitution is bound to raise the important constitutional issue whether such
an amendment does not impair a basic feature of the Constitution. There are at least two decisions of the
Supreme Court which are relovant for answering this question. Applyin; 8 the test of basic features laid
down in Kesavanand Bharati. State of Kerala, ALR. 1973 SC 1461, the Supreme Court, in Minerva
Mills Ltd., A.1.R. 1980 SC 1789, observed (in paragraph 31 of the judgment) that Article 14 of the
Constitution (right to equality)) is the very foundation of a republican form of Government and is by
itself a basic feature of the Constitution.” The second judgment is Vamanarao’s case, A.1.R. 1980 SC
271, which reiterates the theory of basic structure. It must also be pointed out that the proposed amend-
ment will afiect not merely Article 14, but possibly all fundamental rights in their application to public
sector undertakings. Obviously, such an amendment would be regarded as of very far-reaching character
and it may be very difficult to defend a challenge to such an amendment, which would take away a
large slice of activities, conducted practically under the control of the State, from the ambit of funda-
mental rights.

1 Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib, (1981) 1 SCC 722, 733 para 7.
24: Somprakash Rekhi v. Union of India, (1981) 1 SCC 449, 463 para 29.

ia 8 6.8. Mahajan ए. Jalgaon #००१४ al Council, (1991) 3 SCC 91 : 1991 SC 1153,
२९0) श्र. Parthasarathy v. Controller of Capital Issues, (1991) 3 SCJ 325.

30. Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagat Ram, AIR 1975 SC 1331,


21

5.21 Role of civil court a

- It must also be pointed out that even if writ-jurisdiction is readered inappliaSte~ agzinst public
sector undertakings as contemplated by the proposéd amendment, there can still remiin som? scop2for
judicial interference, if the issue raised by the contractor or employee is such that the samz can b3
litigated in an ordinary court. No doubt, the grounds of judicial rem2dy ina writcase aad ia an
ordinary civil suit may not necessarily be identical: But we are mentioning this aspect in order to em-
phasise that the possibility of stay orders or injunctions issued by ordinary civil courts would still
be there. A temporary injunction can be grantéd under Order 39, rule | of the Cod? of Civil Proc2dure,
1908 if an inujry is apprehended by the applicant. In this context, “injury” is generally und:rstood
as meaning the violation of a legal right. If it is the plea of the contractor that the action taken or pro=

sed to be taken by the undertaking is in breach of contract, obviously there is a possibility of an
injunction being issued, provided the case is otherwise fit for injunction. We are referring to this aspect,
because we find from the material on the file, that there are several instances of writ petitions wh:reth>
dispute is about alleged breach of contractual stipulations by a public sector undertaking. Som>tim2s,
the dispute is about increasing the price!7. Occasionally, the contractor petitions for delivery of spzcified
commodities as per contract, where the commodity is under the control of a public sector uadertaking!8.
At times, the dispute is about the interpretation of a rate running contract!9. In a few other cases, tha
encashment of bank guarantee was at issue*0. We need not multiply examples; but we must point oat
that such matters will continue to be the subject matter of litigation, even after public 5३००० undsrtakin; a
are removed from the ambit of Artilce. 12. Their prima facie justiciability dep2nds on a variety:
of arguments, whose source lies in legal principles detived from the ordinary law. Th2 relevant principles.
are not derived only from the Constitution.

It is also worth mentioning that in several judicial decisions, it has been poiated out that the word
“authority” in Article 226 of the Constitution may have a wider ambit than theagencies mentioned in
Article 12. Removal of public sector undertakings from the scope of Article 12 may not, therefore,
totally removethem from writ jurisdiction. put

Before we conclude, we consider it relevant to refer to the Law Commission’s 126 Repart.
emphasised that the Government and public sector undertakings must have their own litigation be
and strategy and they must be devised with a view to encouraging avoidance of litigation and settlement:
of disputes by alternative methods. Litigation is an unproductive investment both in time. and money.
Public sector undertaking and the Government have to conserve their resources and determine priorl-
ties of expenditure by a judicious approach 50 that, unproductive litigation dozs not eat ro i
chunk of the scarce resources, smoothering, socially beneficial schemes for want of financial an | .

These observations were made as the law Commission observed that there was a_movem:

public sector undertakings to be freed from the'yok¢ of the Constitiution. The Law Com nisson furthé

observed :— y
t

“Tr fact, there isa recent movement by public sector undertakings to be freed from the yoke of the;
Consttution. At any rate, the objest purposegnd underlying Prompts towards setting up of;
public sector undertakings must mould its a h towards its employees, the consumers of its

products and even other public sector st ings. At any rate, it cannot afford to develop a;
litigious culture exhibited by private sector . And yet, numerous cases can be: quoted:
where the public sector undertakings not only brought entirely frivolous disputes right up to the,
Supreme Court, but delayed the résolution of disputes by raising absolutely unsustainable, frt:
volous, preliminary objections. (1983) 4 SCC 214; S.K. Vermavs. Mahesh, Chandra. 21८ Dthers |
Goa Sampling Employees Association vs. Gener@l Superintendence Co. of India (1985) 2 ‘ined

D.P. Maheshwari vs. Delhi Administration; 4 983) 4 SCC 293; Workmen Employed by, |
stan Lever Ltd., vs. Hindustan Lever Ltd., (1984) 4 SCC 392..” :

5.22 Conclusion

It may now be convenient to state very briefly ogr corclusions r2garding th> proposed ansadment |
of Article 12 ofthe Constitution :— 7

(i) Such an amendment would not be a proper or necessary measure to be adopted for Beating |
with the difficulties that may be ex, te Public Sector Undertakings in the matter:

ice matters and thelike, arising out of the presen
ings. i

award of contracts, rejection of tent
applicability of Article 12to such ser

Letter dated 13th February, 1989 and letter dated 7th February, 1989.
2 Letter dated 6th February, 1989, |
4 Letter dated 9th March, 1989 and enclosures thereto.
2 Letter dated 13th February, 1989.

"Shri Anandi Mukta Sudguru S.M.V.S.J.M.S. Trust v. V.R. Ructani, AIR 1989 SC 1697 followed 10 96 CN :
and (1992) 2 MLJ 55, east


22

(ii) Having regard to the Preamable and sora ॥ philosophy of the Constitution, even if such an
amendment is made, some of the pro! s experienced by the public sector undertakings
would still survive under the ordinary law. -

(ii) In particular, judicial intervention in the form of injunctions issued under the ordinary law
cannot be ruled out, even after the suggested amendment.

(iv) It is highly doubtful whether, in the light of the theory of non-amondability of the basic
features of the Constitution as at present recognised, such an amendment will pass muster
on the Constitutional level.

We recommend accordingly.

Sd/-
(K.N. SINGH)
Chairman

Sd/- Sd/-
QMOHD. SARDAR ALI KHAN) (D.N. SANDANSHIV)

; Membmer Member
1 .

7 sd:
@@.M. BAKSHI)
हु Member (Part-Time)

Sd/-
(M. MARCUS)
Member (Part-Time)

Sd/- a
(G.V.G. KRISHNAMURTY) -
Member Secretary

Dated, New Dethi, the 13th November, 1992

‘98-M/S8351MofLI&CA —300—9-9-94-GIPS