LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY - SIXTH
REPORT
ON
SALE OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

PROPOSED SECTION 373 — A
INDIAN PENAL CODE
1993


— age

=

K.N. SINGH

(Ex-Chief Justice of India) CHAIRMAN

LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI-110001
Tele. Off. 3844 75
Res. 3019465

aahs aos

9.0. No. 6(3) (19)/93-L.C. (LS) February 26, 1993
Dear Prime Minister,

The social evil of sale of women and children has been growing in India during recent years. This
evil is substantially confined to the poor sections of our society. All human baings especially women and
children need special protection of law as they are particularly vulnerable to exploitation. The Law
Commission has considered this subject suo moto having regard to the importance of the subject in the
light of social justice to the poor. Though the Indian Penal Code contains certain provisions designed to
deal with the disposal of persons belowa certain. age by way of sale or other mode of transfer, but those
provisions are confined to cases where the transcction is entered into, for one of the purposes specified
in those sections. But where such a purpose does not exist or is not proved at th: trial, those provisions
are not adequate to safeguard the interest of women and children,

The Law Commission has considered the matter in detail and I have great pleasure in forwarding
herewith the 146th Report of the Law Commission of India on the subject of “Sale of Women and
Children” with a proposal to add Section 373A to the Indian Penal Code to the meet the social
evil.

This is the third;Report of 13th Law Commission.
With regards,
Yours sincerely
Sdj-
(K. N. Singh)

Hon’ble Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao,
Prime Minister and Minister for
Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
New Delhi.

Copy to :
Hon’ble Shri H. R. Bhardwaj,
Minister of State for Law, Justice and
Company Affairs,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi.

(KN. Singh)
®


Carter |
CHapTER 2
CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4

CONTENTS

Introduction :
The Present Legal Position

Need for amendment of the Law

Recommendation
Footnotes

(i)

Pace


a

CHAPTER 1
Intreduction

1.1 Genesis cf the Repert

The subject deait with in this Report has been taken up by the Law Commission of India for
consideration suo mcto, having regard to the importance of the subject in the light of social justice.

1.2 The Sccial evil
The social evil of saie of women and children has been growing in India during recent years’.
While the li.cian Penal Code contains a few provisions designed to dea! with the disposal of persons
below a certain age by way of sale cr other mode of transfer, those provisions re confined to cases
where the transaction is extercd into, for one of the purposes specified in those sections. Where such 4
purpose does not exist or cannot be proved at the trial, these sections cannot be pressed into service.
e Law Commission felt that the matter needed an examination, with a view to remedying any
deficiency in the existing law that migat be discovered cs& result of such examination.

Truly speaking, no human beir.g can be allowed to b2 treated as a chatt-i, in this twentieth century.
Women and childre, however, particuiariy need the protection of the law, because they are peculiarly }
vulnerable to exploitation

‘The Corstitution of India specificaily declares “rights egainst cxploitation” as a part of the
fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution, sce in particular Article 23. The right against |
exploitation has figured before the Supreme Court in several cases?

The right has been recognised and its provision for punishing its contravertion laid dowa in
several statutory previsior.s. Of course the fact thet such pronibitions egaiast specific practices were
considered necessary does not mean that in legal theory those practices are regarded as valid. At the
same time if the penal law is found to be defective in any respect it is obviously desirable that the
position be looked into and such reforms xs may" be found necessary be concidered.

Accorditigiy, the present Report devotes itself to an examination of the lw relating to saie of women
and children and tresactions analogous thereto with 2 view to suggesting reforms, if needed.

1.3 Scheme of discussion

With the above object in view we proceed to examine i this Report the present legal positioa and
the deficiency therein. Our concrete recommendation for amending the law will be made at the end of
Report.


CHAPTER 2

The Present Legal Position

2.1 Provisicnsin the Indian Penal Code : sections 372 and 373, ,

The provisions of the Indian Penal Code that come n: Ae subject under consideration
in this Report are sections 372 and 373 of the Codel. Th ections prohibit the sale, letting out on
hire or otherwise disposing of a child for the purpose specified in the sections, as also the converse
conduct of purchasing, hiring or otherwise obtaining possession of a child for the specified purpose.
The sections are concerned with the sale etc. 0 ६ person below the age of 18 years.

2.2 Limited scopr

As these sections are confined to a transaction entered into for (ae specified purpose, their ambit
is limited. Broadly speaking, the scope of the two sections is confined to s:le or purchase, etc. for
Prostitution or illicit intercour-¢ with any person or for eny unlawful and immoral purpose. Explanation
॥ to section 372 (which appiies to section 373 also) defines “il! rcourse”’ as meaning “sexual
intercourse betweer ors net united by marriage or by any union or tie which, though not amounting
toa marriage, is recognised by the personal law or custom of the community to which they belong or,
where they belong to different communities, of both such communities, as constituting between them a
quasi-marital relation.”

2.3 Adoption Act

A provision occuring in the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 also may be referred to,
at this stage, as a matter of interest. Section 17 of that Act prohibits the charging of consideration for
giving.a child in adoption under the Act?, It is obvious that the section is confined to cases where the
sale of the child takes place in connection with, or coupled with, adoption. It will have no utility and
eannot be pressed into service. where the malpractice in question has no connection with adoption.
A transaction having no connection with adoption sale for Rs. 12,000 reportedly went unpunished.

2.4 Legal position in regard io Contract

It is perhaps necdlees to point out that the “sale” of a woman or child would not be regarded as a
valid contractual transaction fer the purposes of civil liabilty. In a Madhya Pradesh Case‘, a woman was
“sold” (though not in open market). The purchasers sued for refund of the consideration because’the
sale failed in its purpose. The plaintiff (a woman) had made an arrangement with the defendant to

provide व dcngi girl as a mistress for the plaintiff’s son. The defendant sent a girl to the plaintiff’s

९, making the representation that the girl was a dangi. But the girl went back to her village
staying for only twenty days with the plaintifi’s son. The plaintiff later discovered that the girl was
a dancing girl. The plaintiff sued for refund of the money. The defendant raised the plea of un-
enforceability of the agreement. The trial court as well es the first appellate court decreed the suit. On
second appeal the High Court set aside the decree, as the agreement violated Article 23 of the Constitu-
tion and the suit could not be countenanced. हि

It may also be mentioned that in another case decided by the same High Court§ the proposition
that individuals cannot te treated as chattels, has been recognised.

2.5 The case for Amendment

We shall examine in detail in the next Chapter the question whether the provisions of the Penal
Code are adequate to deal with the social evil with which this Report is concerned.

न्द्धा 5“


,
'

CHAPTER 3
Necd for Amendment of the Law

3.1 Deficiency in the present section.

It appears to us that the present 1०85 position, which has been summarised above, is seriously
deficient in one important respect. It docs not take care of cases where a sale simpliciter of a persons
takes place, where there is no object of using the person. sold fora purpose not specified in sections
372-373 of the Indian Penal Code. In particular, these sections fail to attend to the situation of sale of a
minor for marriage.

It is also worth mentioning that the section do not cover the case of sale or purchase of adult
women. We are of the view tat on both these points. the law should have a specific penal provision.
Detailed reasons are set out in the next few paragraphs.

3.2 The Constitutional aspect.

The Constitution of Indi
vis that such conduct s
60 0050५ it is the inten
book. Of course. th
the purpose.

iu Ariicle 23, iater alia, prohibits the traffic in human beings and en-
offence punishable by law. This is a fundamental right and
nstituton that the neces: isiation be found on the statute
at a new (post-Constitution) legislation should be enacted for

Besides this, the br ive of social justice underlying the Constitution and the specific pro-
visions in the Part containing Directive Principles of State Policy, which direct that the State must
prevent exploitation of women and children, envisage that conduct in the nature of exploitation be
discouraged.

It is an imperative of the Constitution that—

(0) the content of the existing statutes be studied, in order to consider how far they carry out the
constitutional mandate, and

(ii) in so fur as the existing statute may be found to be inadequate, necessary amendment be
made in the law.

tthe sale of women and children, whatever be the object of such sale,
sot partakes of the character of such traffic. Evenif it be argued
tic course of conduct (i.e. a series of acts) and may not embrace
2d that an isolated sale offends the spirit of Article 23, if

that “traffic” contempl:
ah isolated act of sale, it
not its letter.

3.3 Legislative competence.

In this context, it is pertinent to point out that where a particular social malpractice is found to
coatravene the provisions of Article 23 of the Constitution}, then, by virtne of Article 35006) of the
Constitution, Parliament is competent to cnact a law on the subject. Further, under the Concurrent
List, Entry 2, inter दी, legislation. on Criminal Law (including matters dealt with in the Indian Penal
Code at the commencement of the Constitution) is within the competence of Parliament,

3.4 The gravity of the offence.

Not much argument is needed to support the proposition that the sale of a human being (of any
age-or sex) is an anti-social act of the most heinous character whatever be the purpose. It tends to
destroy all that mankind in its journeys through centuries of progress towards a civilized society, has
somght to achieve. It inevitably creates a species of such human beings, thus violating all norms of civilized
sowiety. .

The greatest harm is caused by such conduct to the individual so treated. He or she loses the most
precious possession of a human being, namely respect for oneself, and a sense of identity andan aware-
ness of one’s diginity. No greater harm can be caused to an individual than the inflicting of a wound
on his or her dignity, the mairning of his or her respect for oneself, the degradation of the soul. A
sogiety which tolerates such conduct not ouly harms itself by degrading its moral level, but is also
guilty of injustice to the individual , and ultimately damages thesocial fabric.

3


3.5 Relevance of above arguments.

These arguments are not new. They have been present in the minds of imost social reformers who
have tried to initiate, intensify or consolidate improvements in social structure and practices. In some
form or other, these propositions have beer. addressed in the course of history to so many generations
ofmenand women inthe past, and—though this may be regarded as unfortunate—it may be necessary
also to address such arguments to generations to come in future. But these aspects have assumed a
renewed significance ia the present context. Siace the existing lew dealing with the sale of women and,
childsen is not all-embracing oz comprehen rough, it becomes necessary to amend it. And it isa
truism that an amendment of the law—particularly, 2. mendment of the criminal (law in the shape
of addition of a new offence—can be eifective, only if the need for it is demonstrated by reasoning,
that carries its own convincing icrce on the morai level.

3.6 Magnitude and frequency cf the Evil.

Of course, the mere fect thet a certain social malpractice is found to prevail ina particular society
does not necessarily mean that it's an appropriate case for the intervention of thelaw. There are limitat-
ions to the use of jegal sanctions, particularly criminal sznctions. Not every departure from high moral
norms can be dealt with by leg:.] measures. The coercive nery of the Jaw may rot be appropriate
in many cases. Sometimes inter ‘cntios of the law ever. where it is appropriate ir. nrincipl, may not be
effective in practice. Even apart from these ius, there is the question of economy in the use of
criminal sanctions. But in the present ca raiiuas can be said to be coun ter-balanced by
the basic values constituting the underpu ropositions which we have set outin the
earlier paragraphs of this Chaptur. Moree ith which we are conczrned causes
rerious harm to the individuai: von! { 3, the.seadment of tae Penal Code
which we use contemplating in ६ swe Cun See, impos
burden on the law enforcesn iad ६0 ८ modest eatent
existing penal provisions and al anomalies.

3.7 Some recent instances

At this stage, it appers to be proper to mention that the pratice of sale of women and children,
the evil effects of such a practice and the abhorzence that it deserves, areallamply demonstrated by
several actual instance of such sales, reported recently®, Itis against this bacxground that we proceed to
examine the law.

3,8 Sections 372 and 373 of the Indian Penal Code.

‘The social evil of selling women and children is dealt wit in the Penal Code, directly or indirectly,
by several provisions. As stated above’, the provisions that co:ae nearest to the point uader consideration
aresections 372 and 373, Indien Penal Code, which read as under :--

“372, Selling minor for purposes of prostitution, etc.

whoever sells, lets to hire, or otherw:
intent that such person shill, at ६५५
illicit intercourse with any persor: 07 fo
likely that such person will, atany age, b>
with imprisonment of cithe: description fora t
liable to fine.

disposes of any porson under the age of eighteen years with
be employed or used for the purposes of prostitution or
clewful aid immoral purpose, or knowing it to be
yed or used for any such purpose, shall be punished
a which may extend to ten yearsand shallalso be

Explanaticn 1.—When 2. female under the age of eighteen years is sold, let for hire, or otherwise
disposed of to a prostitute or to any person who keeps or manages a brothel, the perso. so dis-
posing of such female shall, until the contrary is proved, be presumed to have disposed of her with
the intent thet she shall be used for the purpose of prostitution.

Explanation I.—For the purposes of this section, “illicit intercourse” means sexual intercourse
between persons not united by marriage or by any union or tie which, though not amountingto @
marriage, is recognised by the persons! lew of custom of the community to which they belong or,
where they belong to differetit com: ies, of both such communities, as constituting between
them 8 quasi-raarital relation.

“373, Buying minor for purposes of prostitution, etc——Whoever buys, aires or otherwise obtains
possession of any person under the age of eightcen years with intent that such person shall at any
age be employed or used for tlie purposs of prostitution or illicit intercourse with any person or
for any unlawful and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be likely that such perscn will, at any age
be employed or used for any such purpose, shall be punished with imprisoamznt of either descript-
jon fora term which may extead ten years, and shall also beliable to fine.

ge


5

Explanation Any prostitute or any person keeping or managing a brothel, who buys. hires or
otherwise obtains possession of a female under the age of eighteen years shall, until the contrary is
proved, be presumed to have obtained possession of such female with the intent that he shall be

used for the purpose of prostitution.

Explanation 1f-—Mlicit intercourse” has the same meaningas in Section 37.

3.9 Limitations of sections 372-373, Indian Penal Code

Having quoted sections 372 and 373, Indian Penal Code, we would like to point out that (50 faras
itis relevant for the present purpose) the operation ‘of these sections is subject to two important iimitat-

ions.
(a) Inthe first place. they are confined to sale (or purchase), letting on hire (or taking on hire) or
other disposal (or acquisition on disposal) of a person under the age of 18 years. They do
not cover the sale, etc. of adults,
(b) Secondly. the sections are confined to transactions entered into for any of the purposes
specified in the sections. Broadly speaking, these are—
(i) prostitution,
-  ¢if) illicitintercourse withany person, or a
(iii) any unlawful and immoral purpose.

Thus, sale of a person above the age of 18 years is, not punished nor is any sale fora purpose not

specified in the sections.

3.10 Need for-Amendment

It is this limited scope of the two sections that gives rise to the need for amendment. There is, we
believe, justification for extending the scope of the legal provisions so as to cover cases where 4 woman
ora child is sold, whatever be the immediate or ultimate objective of the transaction and whether such
objective be apparent or not, We have, in the Opening paragraphs of this Chapter, set out soe of the
important consideraticns that should be borne in mind in approaching the subject. It is not e2cessary
to repeat everything that has been said in those paragraphs. It is sufficient to state that the sule of a
human bei particularly where the question is of an individual who needs special protect!
law—should be irded, not only asa practice deserving condemnation by the law, but as corcuct that
should be visited with criminal penalties. The presence ofan unlawful or immoral purpose aggra-
vate the criminality: but its absence does not take away the heinousness of the conduct. 50९ :-
ion destroys the very humanness of the individual so sold. let on hire otherwise disposed of. Even irom
the point of view of the doer of the act, itis demorallising act, because, if the law does not pusish that
doer. it may tend to generate and perpetuate in him an insidious abhorrence of human valuss and a
disregard of the dignity of human beings. He tends to treat human beings as chattels to be used for
accomplishing mercenary motives. The lacuna existing in the present law, therefore, needs to be

removed.

3.11 Section 17, Hindv Adoptions Act.

We shall make our recommendation on the existing law in due course‘. At this stage, we would like
to make a reference to a provision of some interest contained in the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance
Act, 1956. Section 17ofthis Act reads as under :—

“17, Prohibition of certain payments.—

(1) No person shall receive or agree to receive any payment or other reward in consideration
of the adoption of any person and no person shall make or give or agreeto make or giveto any
other person any pay ment or reward, the receipt of whichis prohibited by this section.

(2) If any person contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1), he shall be punishable with
imprisonment, which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.

(3) No prosecution under this section shall be instituted without the previous sanctioa of the
State Government or an officer authorised by the State Governmentin his behalf.


CHAPTER 4

Recommendation

4.1 Recommendation to insert section 373-A in the Indian Penal Code.

In the light of the discussion in the preceding Cha ters, we recommend the insertion, after section
373 of the Indian Penal Code, ofa new section on thé following lines :—

ca

(7373-4. Selling woman or minor, ete. 9/
(1) Whoever, ina case not falling undersection 37 or section 377५.

(a) sells, lets to hire or otherwise disposes of, for consideration, any person under the age of
eighteen years. or any woman of any age, or

(6) buys, hires or otherwise obtains for consideration the possession of any such person or
any woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either diescription for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. -

(2) The provisions of this séction apply in rélation to a person of unsound mind, as they apply in.
relation toa person under the age of eighteen years.”

Explanation + Nothing in this section shall apply in relation to the hiring of the services of any
person.

—~4-2-Consequential change. :)

On the insertion of the above section in the Indian Penal Code, a consequential amendment of the
First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 will be needed. That Schedule deals with the
categorisation of offences as bailable etc. It is suggested that the newly created offence should be —

| (a) cognizable,
(0) non-bailable, and
(९) triable exclusively by the Court of Session. )

4.3 Persons of unsound mind

One minor point may be mentioned. A person of unsound mind may, at least theoretically, be
subjected to the type of misconduct under consideration. Such cases may not be frequent in practice,
but they should also be covered in the new section. Incidentally, the existing sections 372 and 373 of the
Indian Penal Code! do not cover persons of unsound mind sold for the purpose of prostitution or illicit
intercourse or unlawful or immoral purpose. The Comiunission is of the view that the aforesaid
sections should be suitably amended to cover such persons aiso.

4.4 Proposed offence distinct from kidnapping

It should be pointed out that it may not be appropriate to link up the sale, ete. of the minor child
(for & purpose not falling within sections 372 and 373 of the Indian Penal Code) with abduction. The
offence of kidnapping or abduction is primarily one concerning violation of guardianship rights (in
the case of kidnapping from unlawful guardianship under section 361) or infringement of the right
to personal liberty by the use of force of fraud where the offence is that of kidnapping from India
(section 360) or of abduction (section 362). The misconduct on the part of the parent or other guardian
which is now under consideration, is more in the nature of abuse of guardianship and violation of the
dignity of the child placed in guardianship. Of course, the offence may be committed even by a person
who is not the guardian of the child. but even in that case, the offence is in the nature of violation of
human dignity, leading to exploitation of the child in many cases.

4.5 Removal from custody

It may also not be quite appropriate to go to the extent of punishing any mode or device by whicha
child is removed from the lawful custody of the parent. Such a provision is bound to raise questions of
some difficulty—for example, the question as to in what circumstances one parent may remove a child
from the custody of the co-parent (when there is a discord between the two parents) and similar other
issues. Courts have already been confronted with such controversies while dealing with' cases under
section 361 of the Indian Penal Code. Under that section, taking or enticing a minor (under 16 years

6

a


|
!

7

ifa male, or under [8 year female) or any person of unsound mind, out of the keeping of the lawful
guardian without the guardian's consent, commits the offence of kidnapping from lawful guardianship.
There is an exception in regard to the act of any person who, inter alia, in good faith believes himself
to be entitled to the lawful custody of such child, unless such act is committed for an immoral or unlaw-
ful purpose. These complications will be avoided under the section as formulated above. On principles
also, we ave concerned here, not so much with the rights of the guardian or with personal liberty, as
with the broader principle that a child ought not to be treated as a chattel.

We recommend accordingly.

Sd/-
(K.N. SINGH)

Chairman
Sd/- Sd/-
(S. RANGANATHAN) (D.N. SANDANSHI¥)
Member Member
Sd/- Sd/- Sd/-
(SARDAR ALI KHAN) (P.M. BAKSHD (M. MARCUS)
Member (Part-Time) Member (Part-Time) Member (Part-Time)

(CH. PRABHAKARA RAO)
(Member-Secretary)

New Dexut The 23rd February, 1993.


FOOTNOTES

CHAPTER 1 a

1. See Nihal Singh v. Ram Bai, ALR 1987 M.P. 126. :
2. People's Union of Democratic Rights v. Union of Indian, AVR 1982 SC 1473: Sanjit Roy v. State of Rajasthan, ALR
4983 Se 325; Sulal Hydroelectric Project v. Stare of J&K, ALR 1984 SC 177; Bandiua Mukti Morcha y. Union of

India, ATR 1984 802; and Neeraja Chowdhury v. State of M.P., AIR 1984 SC 1099.

CHAPTER 2

1. See paragraph 3.8 infra for the text. न

See paragraph 3.1 infra. H

3. ‘THE TRIBUNE,’ 23 December 1992, page 3. al

4, Nihal Singh v. Ram Bai, AIR 1987 M.P. 126, 127.
5. Manohar Dalal y, State of M.P., AIR 1987 M.P. 132, 134.

CHAPTER 3
1... Cf. paragraph 2.4 supra. ;
2. See paragraph 2.2 and 2.4 supra. A two year old: baby was repor radly sold dy her uncle for Rs. 80,000. ‘INDIAN

EXPRESS, 3 December 1992, Page 1. se . .
3 December, 1992, page 1. हि है *
3. Paragraph 2.1, supra.
4. Chapter 4, infra.

>

CHAPTER 4

1. Paragraph 3.2, supra

-
\

i

|

»

.
we
\

IRL ICN)349MOFLI&CA 40) ~ 9-2-1995 —GIPS