LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY SEVENTH
REPORT

ON
THE SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT, 1963

1993


CHAIRMAN
LAW COMMISSION

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

K. N. SINGH
(Former Chief Justice
of Indic}

Shastri Bhawan
NEW DELHE-110 001

Tel: Off. : 384475
Res. + 3019465

D. 0. No, 6(3) (23)'93+LC(LS) 617 October, 1993.

Dear Prime Minister,

1 have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the {47th Report of the
Law Commission of India on the subject ‘The Specific Relief ict, 1963. This
is the fourth Report after the constitution of the {3th Law Commission.

2. The problems and difficulties posed in the course of jaterpretation of
various provisions of the Specific Relief Act. 1963 have prompted the Law
Commission to consider various issues suo motu, with a view to make the law
simpler and to avoid litigation on technicalities.

3, The Commission trusts that the recommendations, when accepted and
acted upon, will minimise the problems and difficulties arising under the
Specific Relief Act, 1963.

With warm regards.

Yours sincerely,

(Sd)
(8, N. SINGH)

Hon’ble Shri P. V. Narasimha Rao
Prime Minister
&
Minister for Law. Justice & Company Affairs
New Delhi

(i)



Pact

CuapieR | : INTRODUCTION . . . . . . 1
CHapter 2 TERRITORIAL COVERAGE - पु पु : : 3
CuapieR 3. : SUIT FOR RECOVERY OF PO3SI 4
CuapreR 4. : PERSONS BY WHOM CONTRACTS C\N BE SPECIFI-

CALLY ENFORCED पु . . न + + व 5
Carter 5 READINESS AND WILLINGNESS - : . : . 7
Cuapier 6 : DOCTRINE OF MUTUALITY - . . . . . 9
(आशा 7: POSSESSION AND PARTITION . . : . न 10
CuapteR 8 : RESCISSION OF CONTRACT . : मु पि . . 131
Cwaprer 9 : CANCELLATION OF DECRELS . : : . . 12
Carrer 10: RECOMMENDATIONS : . . . : पु . B

NOTES AND REI ENC

ii)



CHAPTER |

INFRODUCTION

1.1... Genesis of the Report

The subject dealt with in this Report has been taken up by the Law
Commission of India for consideration sve mot.

1.2. History of the Legislation

The Law of Specific Relief in India was originally codified by the Spe-
जाए Relief Act. 1887. The provisions of this enactment were considered by
the Law Commission in its Ninth Report which led to the enactment of — the
pecific Relief Act, (Act 47 of 1963) in place of the earlier enactment. ‘The
Ninth Report of the Commission pointed out valid reasons for the then state
of affai’s and the new legislation proposed by it was confined to seven forms
of specific reliel viz.--

(1) Recovery of possession of property:
(2) Spccifie performance of contracts;
(3) Rectification of instruments:

(4) Rescission of contracts:

(5) Cancellation of instruments,

(6) Declaratory decrees: and

(7) Injunetion.

Compensatory relief of various kinds and ceitain forms of specific relief
specifically mentioned in certain enactments were kept out of the purview of
1963 Act.

1.3. Need for re-consideration

‘The Specific Reliel Act, 1963 has posed several problems and. difficul-
ties. Indeed it has given rise to divergence of judicial opinion on some of the
provisions. (i) There is a conflict of judicial opinion on the question whether
an owner can bring a suit for possession under section 6 when uot he but a
person deriving title from him is in possession of the property; (ii) Section 15
of the Act is not free trom difliculty. Courts in lndia have often been con-
fronted with a situation where a contract is clearly intended for the benefit
of third party but still have been reluctant to enforce the contract at tie ins-
tance of such third pariies. This is despite consideration for the contract may
move n from such third party: (iii) The expression “failed to aver and
prove’ in Section 16 has given rise to lot of litigation: (iv) The decision of पीर
Supreme Court in Babulul v. Hazari Lal Kishori Lul', while analysing the
provisions of Section 22(2), emphasised the need for adding after the word
“proceeding” in the proviso to section 22(2), the words “including a proceeding
in execution”: (iv There is a divergence of judicial opinion on the question

1



whether courts can extend the time originally iixed for payment, notwithstanding
the terms of the deerce under Section 28: एज) Doubts have also been expressed
as to whether decree other than compromise decree will fall within the meaning
of the expression “writin instruments” under Section 31 and (vii) Section 1
requires reconsideration in order to bring uniformity at national level. These
difiiculties have prompted the Law Commission to consider these questions suo
moti, with a view to make the law simpler and to avoid litigation on techni
Hities.

With the above object in view. we proceed t~ examine Sections 1, 6,
15, 16, 20, 22, 28 & 33 of the Specific Relief Act and to analyse the case law
giving rise to judicial controversies and detiviencies therein. At the end we
have made recommendations in this regard. Since 1963, various other areas
calling for speciiic relicf have also opened up.’ But, having considered this
question afresh, we think thai there may be need for different types of solu-
tions to meet those difficulties’ but at present there is no justification to change
wie arrangement oi the 1963 Act in this respect or to make the Act more com-
prehensive to cover other types of specific reliefs as well.



CHAPTER 2
TERRITORIAL COVERAGE

2.41. Before 1963, the Specitic Relief Act us amended from time to time, was
not applicable to the State of Jammu & Kashmir as well as to the territories
known as ‘Scheduled districts’. The removal of the latter of these restrictions
was suggested in the Ninth Report. This was accepted and the 1963 Act was
made applicable to the whole of India except the State of Jammu & Kashmir.
Jn the opinion of the Commission. there is no reason why this exclusion should
now continue. Several Central enactments including the Income Tax Act and
Wealth Tax Act (which fall under List 1 in the Seventh Schedule of the Cons-
titution) have been extended to the State. It is time that enactments such as
the Contract Act, the Specific Relief Act and the Partnership Act are also ex-
tended to the State of Jammu & Kashmir to take the place of local laws. if
any, even though they deal with topics covered by List वी] of the Seventh Sche-
dule. In our view, All India uniformity is necessary. proper and desirable
in respect of statutes like the above which are based on general principles uni-
versally recognised the world over. We wouid, therefore, recommend that the
words “except the State of Jammu & Kashmir” in S. 1(2) of the Act be omitied.
It is, however. necessary that before this is done, an appropriate Presidential
Order is issued under Article 370 of the Constitution to enable such laws,
falling under List III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, being ex-
tended to the State.



CHAPTER 3

SUIP FOR RECOVERY OF POSSESSION

3.1. 5.9 of the 1877 Act provided a summary relief to a person dispossessed.
without his consent, of immovable property. otherwise than in due course of
law and enabled him to recover possession immediately. without the need to
20 INtO questions of title and other controversies provided he files a suit within
six months of his dispossession. Though the Ninth Report’ had recommended
the omission of this provision, the provision has been retained in the 1963 Act
as S.6.

3.2. On the interpretition of Section 6, there has been a judicial diver
of opinion on the question whether an owser can goa suit for possession
under the section when not he but a person deriving litle from him is in possession

of the property. One view is that when the owner confers an interest on a deck

ened

vative holder which entitles the latter to actual use and possession of the pro-
perty. it is only the latter and not the former that can maintain an action wader
section 6° The other view is that disposses:ion of the derivative hol by a
trespasser is. in reality, the dispossession of the owner शरण! and लाती even
the former to mai
that the latter v
distinguishable. It is unnecessary to go into the merits of the controv:
it seems desirable to clarify the position legistitively. We are of the opir

tain an action under ths section’ ॥ pas been sv

gested!

wis the only possible view and that the other line of cases is

sy bul
fon that,
if Section 6 is to stand. 1 should be available even to a person in the position
of an owner who may be in possession three

a derivative holder, OV cop.
trary view would make it possible fer a person in derivative possession to
collude with a third party and deprive the real owner of the possession of the
property, We would. therefore. suggest that 5,611] he amended to read as
follows:

601) ॥ any person is dispossessed without his conscit of immovable
property otherwise than in duc course of law. he or aay person thrcigh
whom le

as been in possession or any person claiming through him
may. by suit. recover possession thereof, notwithstandins title

that may be set op ir such suit



CHAPTER 4

PERSONS BY WHOM CONTRACTS CAN BE SPECIFICALLY ENFORCED

4A. Section 15 of the 1963 Act reproduces the provisions of Section 23 of
1877 Act. It enumerates persons for or against whom contracts may be speci-
fically enforced. The general rule is that a suit on a contract can be main-
tained by one of the parties to the coniract. is enumerated in clause (a). The
right of a successor-in-interest of any of the parties to the contract is enunciated
in clause (b) Clause (d) to (g) provide for special cases where the cause
of action (being assignable) is assigned by, or survives by operation of law on
the death or extinction of, one of the parties to the contract. They all indirectly
emphasise the rule that a third party to a contract cannot sue which stands
established by a long catena of judicial decisions.’

4.2. Jn England, the rule is that a third party to a contract cannot suc was
inextricably intertwined with the principle that the consideration for a contract
can move only from a party to it and not a third person. The courts there
have, therefore, consistently insisted on strict adherence to the rule in common
law though equity often sought to intervene, on one consideration or another,
to give relief in appropriate cases.

4.3. The summary of the position in England on this aspect can be seen
in Cheshire & Fifoot (11th Edition), pp. 430-455 and Anson (23rd Edition),
Chapter X. Cheshire observes (p. 441):

“Thus the doctrine of privity, while not an irrational inference from the
nature of contract in genera] and of English contract in particular, has
in its incidence worked injustice and proved inadequate to modern
needs. Parliament. when it has intervened. has offered गाए
spasmodic and occasional relief. In these circumstances, it is not sur-
prising that many and various attempts have been made to induce the
courts to sanction evasions of the doctrine. These have, indeed, met with
a considerable measure of success.”

Arson has this to say (9. 398):

“The doctrine of privity of contract has been the subject of considerable
criticism both in the courts and among the writers of text books on the
law of contract. It is said that it seems only to defeat the legitimate
expectations of the third party, that it undermines the social interest
of the community in the security of bargains, and that it is absent from
the law of Scotland, and generally from the legal systems of the United
States. In their Sixth Interim Report? the Law Revision Committee re-
commended the abolition of the doctrine. The actual terms of their
recommendations read:

where a contract by its express terms purports to confer a benefit directly
on a third party, the third party shall be entitled to enforce the provi-
sion in his own name, provided that the promisor shall be entitled 10
raise as against the third party any defence that would have been valid
against the promisee. The rights of the third party shall be subject to

5
2--1 MofL&J/ND/94



6

cancellation of the contract by the mutual consent of the contracting
parties at any time before the third party had adopted it either expressly
or by conduct’?

It is seen that Lord Denning was a persistent critic of the rule but his attempt
to treat it as a nineteenth century innovation irrelevant to present modern times
were unsuccessful.‘ But though the House of Lords has reiterated the rule
as one firmly entrenched in the law of England, there is no doubt that it does
call for revision and relaxation.’

4.4. There is no reason why such an inequitable rule should prevail in India
particularly when, under the Indian Contract Act, the consideration for the
promise need not move from the promisee but can move from any other person
as well."

4.5. Indian courts have been frequently faced with situations where a con-
tract is clearly intended for the benefit of a third party but still have been reluctant
to enforce the contract at the instance of such third parties,’ although in India,
unlike under the English Law, consideration for a contract may move even from
a third party". Some relief has been granted in a very few cases by straining
the law and importing some doctrine. of equity or some special consideration
of agency, trust, assignment or statute.”

4.6. It is clear that there is no justification to continue this type of limitation
on action in India. In the U.S.A., after much debate and controversy, it is
now settled that third persons can sue on contracts made by others for their
benefit." In Australia also the position is that while a person who is not a
party to a contract may not sue on it so as to directly enforce its obligations,
it is possible for that person to obtain the benefit “by steps other than enforce-
ment by himself in his own right.”" As already pointed out, the Law Revision
Committee in England recommended a revision of the law to provide “that
when a contract by its express terms purports to confer a benefit directly on a
third party, it shall be enforceable by a third party in his own name.””

4.7. On the same lines, it is recommended that $.15 of the 1963 Act be
amended by inserting a clause (i) to the following effect:—

“@ any person, where the contract by its express terms purports to
confer a benefit directly on such person.”



CHAPTER 5

READINESS AND WILLINGNESS

5.1. §.16(c) of the Act, which was inserted primarily to give effect to the
principle that he who seeks the aid of equity must himself do equity has created
certain difficulties and given rise to certain problems of interpretation. The
clause runs thus:—

“Specific performance of a contract cannot be enforced in favour of a

person—
(a) * * * *
(b) * * * *

(0) who fails to aver and prove that he has performed or has always
been ready and willing to perform the essential terms of the contract
which are to be performed by him, other than terms, the performance
of which has been prevented or waived by the defendant.”

5.2. Two difficulties caused by the words “fails to aver and prove”, have
come to the fore. The first is that they obviously refer to an averment in
the-plaint and, where the averment is traversed, proof in the course of the trial
by the plaintiff that he is so ready and willing.'’ By some mistake, in the
headnote to the Privy Council ruling in Ardeshir Mama's Case.’ an impression
has been created to the effect that there should be readiness and willingness
on the part of the plaintiff to perform the contract right up to the date of the
decree? The second is the nature and form of the averment that has to be
made by the plaintiff.

5.3. So far as the first of these difficulties is concerned, no remedial measures
are necessary. The court can adjudicate the readiness and willingness of the
plaintiff only on the basis of the averment in the plaint and the evidence at
the trial. There is no way by which his readiness and willingness beyond these
dates and up to the date of the decree can be ascertained or adjudged nor is
it called fort Moreover, it will be appreciated that, if the plaintiff after the
trial develops an unwillingness or lack of readiness to perform his obligations
under the contract, he will either not press for a decree for specific performance,
or if he has obtained one, will refrain from putting it into execution.

5.4. In regard to the second question, the difficulty is caused by the pro
formas prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 for plaints in respect
of suits for specific performance (Sch. I, forms 47 & 48). Questions have been
raised (1) as to whether the averment in the plaint should be in exactly the
same terms as prescribed in the pro forma or whether a substantial compliance
therewith will suffice, and (2) whether an initial omission to make such an
averment in the plaint is fatal or can be permitted to be amended subsequently.

5.5. The first question is well settled by the decision of the Supreme Court
in Premrai v. D.L.F. Housing & Construction (P) Ltd.’ Ouseph Verghese v-
Joseph Aley’ and Abdul Khader Rowther v. Sarabai’ laying down the proposi-
tion that in absence of averment in the prescribed form, the suit should stand

7



8

dismissed.‘ This would be so even though there is a close nexus between the
provisions of the Specific Relief Act and the formats of the suit prescribed
under C.P.C.. as pointed out in the Ninth Report of the Law Commission.
Once an averment is made in the plaint on the lines of the section, courts have
invariably applied the rule of substantial compliance and declined to dismiss
the suit on a mere technicality as to its form. But Indian courts seem to have
almost unanimously’ taken a view, following the dicta of the Supreme Court
in the Gomathinayagam case (supra), that the complete absence of an aver-
ment in the plaint will be fatal to the suit." If this is so, the question would
arise whether it would be open to the court to permit the plaintiff in such
a suit, cither at his request or even suo motu by the court, to amend the plaint,
either at the trial or at the appellate stage, so as to include an averment originally
omitted to be included.

5.6. In the above state of the authorities, one view may be that the above
difficulties may be left to be sorted out by judicial determination in each
case and that the rule in the statute, properly interpreted, does, not involve
any irremediable hardships. It may be said that it is always open to a plaintiff
to withdraw such a defective plaint in terms of Order 23, Rule 1(2) of
the Code of Civil Procedure with liberty to file a fresh suit, if possible, within
the period of limitation," or alternatively, that it is open to him to seek an
amendment of the plaint."*

5.7. We do not think that this course is advisable. Real difficulties will
continue to arise and suits may continue to run the danger of dismissal on
a technical plea if the section is left as it is. As pointed out above, courts
will insist that the pleadings must contain a formal plea of readiness and
willingness and Supreme Court decisions't have sometimes been understood as
insisting also on a rigid conformity with the requirements of Forms Nos 47
and 48 in the First Schedule. Although, the state of pleadings being what
it is in India, a liberal judicial attitude towards amendment of pleadings is
desirable and is also in general, adopted by Courts, it does not appear to
be a satisfactory solution to leave issues for the Court’s determination in indi-
vidual cases. Defective pleadings sometimes give rise to frivolous issues. The
filing of defective pleadings, the subsequent submission cf an application, often
belatedly, for amendment and the hearing thereon are all steps which clog the
speedy disposal of the case. Also occasionally courts do not grant an amend-
ment” and, sometimes feel constrained to do so in view of certain Supreme
Court decisions.” It is, therefore, better that the reference to a specific aver-
ment in the plaint regarding readiness and willingness is omitted from the
statute, though such readiness and willingness will have to be established on
the evidence before a favourable decree can be obtained. We. therefore,
recommend, in order to avoid unnecessary litigation, that the words “aver and”
in Section 16(c) be deleted.



CHAPTER 6
DOCTRINE OF MUTUALITY
6.1. Section 20 (4) of the Act provides:
“The court shall not refuse to any party specific performance of a con-

tract merely on the ground that the coatract is not enforceable at the
option of the other party.”

118 sub-seciion was inserted on the recommendations of the Ninth Report which,
after a detailed discussion of the principles involved, felt that. in the absence of
a specific provision to this effect, “there would still be scope 10 the application
of the rule in Mir Sarwar case* in the case of contracts for the purchase of
property on behalf of a minor which cannot be said to be for the benefit of the
minor.” Mulla observes that it is difficult to appreciate the necessity for this
sub-section’ for two reasons: one is that s. 12 has clearly discarded the doctrine
of mutuality and secondly. tiat the language of sub-section (4) will not be of
any relevance in cases of the type envisaged by the Commission as it applies
only to the enforcement of contracts and, in cases like Mir Scrwarjan there was
no valid contract at all of which specific performance could be sought. The only
situation in which do:rine of mutuality caa be sought 10 be availed of is where
one of the parties to a contract cannot seek specific performance thereof while
the other will be able to do so and that situation has been amply provided for
in S. 12 of the Act. There seems to be some force in this criticism of the pro-
vision as an unnecessary superfluity. However, we do not think it necessary to
suggest the omission of $. 29(4) from the Act. It has remained in the statute
for thirty years and given rise to no difficulties. It only reiterates a principle,
well settled in several jurisdictions, as pointed out in the Ninth Report, that
want of mutuality should be no ground for denial of a decree for specific per-
formance.

9
3-1 MofL&J)ND/94



CHAPTER 7
POSSESSION AND PARTITION

7.1. The object of Section 22, newly introduced in 1963, was to enable parties
to sue in one suit for specific performance as well as possession, etc. This pro-
vision was considered necessary because, under the 1877 Act, some High Courts
had taken the view that since title would pass only after specific performance
is decreed, possession could be claimed only thereafter in a separate suit. Other
High Courts, however, favoured the view that possession could be asked for in
the ssme suit. Some courts! went to the extent of saying that even if there was
no prayer for possession in the suit, it could be claimed in execution proceedings
in tre suit after the deed is got executed in pursuance of the decree. In Baby
Lai v. Hazarilal KishorilaE the Supreme Court, analysing the provisions of Sec-
tion 22(2), observed:—

“The word ‘proceeding’ is not defined in the Act. Shorter Oxford Dic-
tionary defines it as carrying on of an action at law, a legal action or
process; any act done by authority of a court of law: any step taken in
a cause by either party”. The term ‘proceeding’ is a very comprehensive
term and generally speaking means a prescribed course of action for
enforcing a legal right. It is not a technical expression with a definite
meaning attached to it, but one the ambit of whose meaning will be
governed by the statute. It indicates a prescribed mode in which judicial
business is conducted. The word “proceeding’ in Sec. 22 includes execu-
tion proceedings also. In Remeshwar Nath v. Uttar Pradesh Union Bank
Ltd, such a view was taken. It is a term giving the widest freedom to
a court of law so that it may do justice to the parties in the case.  Exe-
cution is a stage in the legal proceedings. It is a step in the judicial pro-
cess, It marks a stage in litigation. It is a step in the ladder. In the
journey of Jitigation there are various stages. One of them is execution,

Section 22, read with the above decision. es legislative recognition to the
latter of the two views set out carlicr. It, however, appears desirable to clarify
the position and incorporate the effect of the decision of the Supreme Court
by adding, after the word ‘proceeding’ in the proviso to Section 22(2). the words
‘including a proceeding in execution’. We recommend accordingly.

10



CHAPTER 8

RESCISSION OF CONTRACT

8.1. Section 28(1) of the Act provides for rescission of certain contracts of
sale or lease of immovable property where the purchase or lease money is not
paid within a specified period. Sometimes. the Court may pass a “sclf-opera-
tive” final decree: that is to say, one that provides that, if the payment is not
made within the time fixed by the decree, the suit shall stand dismissed. On the
question whether, in such cases also, the Court can extend the time originally
fixed for payment notwithstanding the terms of the decree, there is a cifference
of judicial opinion.’ Strictly speaking, it appears. such a “self-operative” decree
would be against the law and in any event, would clearly rus contrary to the
express provisions of Section 28. Whatever that might be, we think that it
should be clarified that Section 28 would be applicable even in such cases. We.
therefore, recommend that a new sub-section (1A) be inserted. after sub-section
(1), in Section 28 as follows:

“(LA) An application under sub-section (1) for the extension of the
period within which the purchase money cr other sum was payable under
the decree or for the rescission of the contract may be made by vendor
or lessor at any time and may be made notwithstanding that the decree
may have provided that certain consequences should follow automatically
on the default of the purchaser or lessee to pay the said sums within the
period specified in the decree or otherwise allowed by the Court.”



CHAPTER 9

CANCELLATION OF DECRE

9.1. Section 31 provides for the capcellation of “writen instruments”. — This
expression is not confined to contracis and is wide enc eh 10 cover unilateral
documents such as receipts. acknowledgements. gifts and wills. It has also been
held to cover awards and compromise decrees. Th however. a doubt as
to whether decrees other than compromise decrees will fall within the meaning
of the expression.'

We are mentioning this in passing We de not recommey
amendment for the present and we would
fication, if and when an occasion should arise.

any statutory
7 matter open for judicial clari-

12



CHAPTER 10
RECOMMENDATIONS

101, To sum up, we recommend the following amendments to the Act:—

1. Sec, 1(2)--The words “except the State of Jammu & Kashmir” ia
3. 12) may be omitted. A Presidential Order under Art. 370 of the Constitution
10 make this amendment effective may also be issued.

2, See. 6--S. 6(1) of the Act may be amended to read as follows:

761) Hf any person is dispossessed without his consent of immovable
property otherwise than in due course of law. he or any person through
whom he has been in possession ox any person claiming through him
may. by suit. recover possession thervaf. nutwithstanding any other title
that may be set up in such suii.

3. See. 15.---In Sec. 15, the following may be inserted as clause (i):
“() by any person, where the contract by its express terms purports
to confer some benefit directly on such person.”

4. See. 16(c)—The words

ver and” may be deleted.

5. See, 22.--In the proviso to sub-section (2) of See. 22 the words “in-
cluding a proceeding in execution” may be inserted after the word “proceeding”.

6. See. 28.-In Sec. 28, after sub-section (1) a sub-section (LA) may be
inserted in the following terms:

“(LA) An application under sub-section (1) for the extension of the period
within which the purchase money or oiher sum was payable under the
decree cr for the rescission of the contract may be made by the vendor
or lessor at any time and may be made notwithstanding that the Gecrce
may have provided that certain consequences should follow automatically
on the default of the purchaser or lessee to pay the said sums within the
period specified in the decree or otherwise allowed by the Court.”

No vthei changes in the Act are considered necessary.

150.)
(K. N. SINGH)
Chairman

(Sd.) (Sd.)
(S. RANGANATHAN) iD. N. SANDANSHIV)
Member Member
(Sd.) (Sd.)
(P. M. BAKSHI) (M. MARCUS)
Member (Part-Time) Member (Part-Time)
(Sd.)

(CH. PRABHAKARA RAO)
Member-Secretary

New Delhi; The 06th October, 1993.

13



NOTES AND REFERENCES

Chapter 1
1. ALLR. 1982 S.C. 818.

2. For example compensatory relief in respect of death or personal injury in
various kinds of situations including those while in police custody.

ने The Commission is proposing to consider the wider issues and to cover them
in a later report.

Chapter 2
Nil.

Chapter 3
1. Para 16 of the Ninth Report.

2. Feeraswami vy. Venkatackala, AIR 1926 Madras 18:
Ramchandra v. Sambashiy, AIR 1928 Nagpur 313:

3. Raghuvar Dayal vy. Har Govind, AIR 1953 Raj. 287:
Gobind Ram ४. Mewa AIR 1953 Pepsu 188:
Sailesh Kumar vy. Rama Devi, AYR 1952 A.P. 339:
Jadhunath vy, Bishunath, LR 1951-2 All, 16:
Ratanlal vy. Amar Singh, AIR 1929 Bom. 467:
Bindubasini ४. Jahnvi, (1901) ILR 24 Cal. 260:
Virjivanns v. Mohamed Ali (1881) ILR 5 Bom. 208.

Chapter 4
1. Dunlop Penumatic Tyre Co. v. Selfridge & Co. 1915 AC 847;
Serutions Ltd. v. Midland Silicons Ltd. 1962 AC 446;
Be. kv. Beswick 1967-2 AER 1197 (H.L..)-
Clause (c) is perhaps the only real exception to this rule, very limited in
its scope.

2. 1937 (Cmnd. 5449), para 48.
3. The recommendation of the Committee has not been implemented in England.

4. Beswick v. Beswick (1968 AC 58) disapproving of Lord Denning’s observations
in Same vy. Same (1966) Ch. 538. (See also Jackson v. Horizon Holidays
Ltd, 1975-3 All ER 92 which represented another attempt by Lord Den-
ning to water down the strictness of the rule).

5. tn Wodar Investment Development Lid. v. Wimpey Construction (UK) Ltd.
1980-1 All, E.R. 571 at 591 also Lord Denning’s view in Jackson was
criticised but Lord Scarman has forcefully urged the desirability of the
House of Lords reconsidering the rule.

6. S. 2(d) of the Indian Contract Act.

7. See, tor example, Shiv Dayal v. Union AIR 1963 Pun. 538. But there are
also some dissenting voices as in Kshirode Bihari v. Man Govinda, AIR
1934 Cal. 682, Debnarayan Dutt v. Chunilal Ghose, ATR 1941 Cal. 129
and Dwarika Nath v. Priya Nath, (1917) 22 C.W.No. 279. See in this
context Pollack & Mulla, Indian Contract Act (10th Edition) pp. 28-37.

14



15
8. $. 2d) of the Indian Contract Act. See also Subbu Cheni vy. Arunachalam
Chetty, AIR 1930 Mad. 382: Krishna Lal Sundhu y. Pramila Bala, AiR
1928 Cal. 518 and Kepeng Prospecting Co. Ltd. v. Schmidt (1968) 2 WLR
55. a Privy Council decision on a Malayan Ordinance which contains a
provision identical with S. 2(d).

9. Khwaja Muhammad Khan v. Hussaini Begum, (1910) 37 LA. 152 (P.Co:
Shuppu Ammal vy. Subramania, 1.L.R. (1910) 33 Mad. 238: Sundararaja v.
Lakshmi, 1.L.R. (1915) 38 Mad. 788.

10. See Pollock & Mulla, Indian Contract Act. Tenth Edn. p. 35.

11, Coulis ९. Bagot’s Executcr & Trustee Co. Ltd. (1967) 40 A.L.J.R. 47.

12. Cmd. 5449 (p. 31) referred to in Beswick v. Beswick (1967) 2 AER 1197.

Chapter 5

1. Gomathinayagam Pillai vy. Pal.niswamy Nadar, AIR 1967 SC 868. In
Pakhar Singh v. Krishan Singh, AYR 1947 Raj. 112. it has been mentioned
that the readiness and willingness should cover the period from the date
of the contract to the date of filing the suit.

2, Ardeshir Mama v. Flora Sasson. ATR 1928 P.C. 208 which was applied in
Gomathinayagam (supra).

3. See Mulla, Specific Relief Act, 10th Edition p. 997.

4. Gomathinayagam Pillai v. Palaniswami Nadar, AIR 1967 SC 228.
5. AIR 1968 SC 1355.

6. 1969 (2) SCC 539.

7. AIR 1990 SC 682.

8. See Dhinn Singh v. Tara Chand (AIR 1984 All. 5) and Kamdev Nath Chou-
dhary v. Devendar Kumar Nath (AIR 1979 Gau. 65).

9. Idris Ali v. Abdul Samad, AIR 1973 Gau. 132 and Kamdevnuth v. Devendra
Kumar Nath, ATR 1979 Gau. 65, however, voiced exceptions to be rule.

10. AIR 1967 SC 228: See also Prem Raj v. DLF Lid.. AIR 1968 SC 1355.

11. See Madan v. Kamaluddin (AIR 1930 Pat. 121), referred to in the Ninth
Report and the later cases cited in f.n. (77) to (84) of Mulla Specific Relicf
Act (10th Ed.) on p. 998. The Supreme Court of Pakistan, however.
seems to have taken a different view: Mulla, Specific Relief Act 10th Edn..
p. 998 f.n. (89).

12. Thankamma Mathew v. Azamatulla Khan J.T. 1991-1 SC 35.

13. Code of Civil Procedure, Or. 6. R. 17. If he fails to do so, he cannot blame
the law or the court and will have to thank himself and face the conse-
quence of the suit’s dismissal.

14, Ouseph Verghese v. Joseph Aley 19692) SCC 439, A.K. Rowther ४
P.K. Sarabhai, AYR 1990 SC 680.



16

15 See Sumbaviva Rao y. अक्राइव॥ Raju, ATR 1985 XP 190... 1 कवीी:बक ४
Thavelaparabil Appu, AYR 1००1 Ket ।

16, 56९ Mahmocd Khan v. Ayub Khen, AUR 1978 All, 463, Ram Sighasan \
Sudema Prased, AUR 1982 Pat. 200.

17. Ganesh Trading Co, ए. Moji Rem, AUR 1978 SC 484
Chapter 6

1. See para 51 of the Report.

>

2. Mir Sarwarjan vy. Fatiwuddin Metimmed (1०12) 39 1.0. 1

3. Mulla. Specific Relief Act. 10th Le. p. 1025.

Chapter 7

1. ctyjun ४. Sahu, AUR 1950 AIL 45: Kariih ९. Dibaker, AIR 1982 Cal. 302:
Shyama v. Dili Chand (1987: All Ld. 148.

2. AIR 1982 SC 818.

3. AIR 1956 All. 586

Chapter 8

1. Bhujangrio Ganpay 5. Seshrac Rajeram, AUR 1974 Bom. 101 and Surve-
narayana Vv. Sydich 19721. An. W. R. 367: contra: Saraswethy v.
Somasundaran 1977 2 MLA 68 and Chalapathi v. Subba Reddy (4989)
3 Current Civil Cases 431 (A.P.) at pp. 433, 435.

Chapter 9

1. Shanti Prasad 5. Kunj Lol, AUR 1953 Pepsu 151... conva: Dunia Lal v.
Nagendra Nath, AIR 1953 Cal. 163.

31031 छा --S8- ) ME of 1. & 1 ND. 94—-23-2-95—209,