LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED FORTY - EIGHTH
REPORT
ON

REPEAL OF CERTAIN
PRE - 1947 CENTRAL ACTS

1993


CONTENTS

PAGE
Carter | INTRODUCTORY . . . पु पु . . पु पु 1
CHAPTER 2 PRINCIPLES TO BE FOLLOWED IN RECOMMENDING RE- 3
PEAL :
CHAPTER 3 PRE-1947 CENTRAL ACTS RECOMMENDED FOR REPEAL . 4
Cuapter 4 SOME PRE-1947 ACTS CONSIDERED BUT NOT RECO- 7
MMENDED FOR REPEAL. + : . .
CHapTer 5 CONCLUSION . . पु : . . पु . . 10

94-M/S73MofLJ&CA—1


CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY

1.1 Scope

The Law Commission of India has suo motu taken up for consideration the question of repeal
of the Central Acts passed before 15th August 1947 and still formally in force. The subject appeared
to be suitable for study, as 8 part of the function of the Law Commission of making recommenda-
tion for keeping the law up-to-date.

1.2 Need for study

The process of periodical spring-cleaning of the statute book has been familiar to Indian drafts-
men since 1866 and to English diaftsmen since 1856, thesé being the years in which the first repealing
Act was passed in the respective countries. The need for such periodical review of the statute book is
obvious. Citizens of a country are expeced to be familiar at least with the statutes relevant to the
lives and affairs. Such familiarity cannot be satisfactorily acquired and properly maintained if the
statute book contains statutes which are really “dead” though formally alive. Citizengare concerned
with the living law. They should aot be mzde to wade thougha forest where obsolete or anachronistic
statutes corrupt the scenario. Such a situation is bound to cloud the vision, besides leading to a waste
of energy, time and tesources, The co-existence of dead law with living law creates confusion even in
understanding.

1.3 Repealing Acts and the modern era.

The consideration mentioned above which is valid at al] times, assumes still greater validity in
modern oor: when statutes are being enacted in large numbers ‘almost every year. Citizens find it
difficult-tocop: with the statute book. So 69 many lawyers. If the dead wood can be cleared, the labour
devoted to its identification would be worthwhile.

1.4 Identifying the dead wood.

The object of this Report is to identify the-dead ४००४-०४ the Indian_statute Book in regard to
pre-1947 Central Acts. The date 15th August, 1947 has been chosen as the Sividing | line, mainly
forthe teason that enactments passed befote the attainment of independence standin a special
class.In the case of such enactments the chances of their becoming wholly or partly obsolete are greater
thanin the case of otherenactments. The attainment of independence may conceivably (though not
necessarilyhave some impact on the need for their retention. The new pclitical status so acquited by
a countrly) may render irrelevant an Act enacted pricr to idndependence, or at least reduce its
importance.

There is another aspect of the matter, though it is incidental. The older an enactment, the more
scope there may be for an examination of that Act from the point of view of the possibility of its obsol-
escence. Just asa child starts agein gas soonas itis born, so does an enactment.

1.5 Earlier Reports.

Of course, the present Report is not the first one of the Law Commission of India in the nature of «
such examination. The Law Commission has, in the past, had more than one ocscasion for such
examination. In 1958, the Commission examined all the British statutes then in force as applicable to
India, the Commission forwarded a Report recommending the repeal of the Converts Marriage Dissolu-
tion Act (18th Report) Thereafter, the Commission forwarded another Report recommending
repeal of the Hindu Widows Remarriage Act (81st Report). Besides this, the law Commission forawrded
a comprehensive Report in 1984 on the repeal of certain obsolete Central Acts, 1That Report, inter
alia, incorporates certain important materials relating to the function and significance of repealing
acts and we have, in this Rey port, made use of some of those materials, as these are not easily available
and may, in course of time, become even more scarce than at present.

1.6 Need for formal repeal

Statutes, unlike human beings, do not die a natural death, with the possible exception of statute
whose life is pre-determined by the legislature at the time of their enactment. A statute, unless it is
expressly. enacted fora temporary period, survives until it is killed by repeal. To this extent.

1. Law Commission of India, 96th Report (Repeal of Certain Obsolete Central Acts) (1984)
1


2

_. Statues enjoy immoratality. This consequence flows from the well-established proposition that long
desuetude of a statute does not amount to its repeal.1 Even where an earlier enactment relating to a
particular subject matter is followed by a latier enactment on the subject matter covering almost every
inch of the area covered by the earlier enactment, the earlier enactment may still be held to retain its
vitality because courts lean against implied repeal. Thus. neither the cbsolescence of an old enact-
ment for the fact that its content is substantially covered by a latter enactment, has the effect of robbing
the old enactment of its vitality in law. That effect can be achieved only by 9 formal repealing Act.

1.7 Repeal and law reform.

The formal repeal of an a obsolete Act achieved through a repealing Act is not to be viewed as a
mere technical exercise. It has a wider role to perform and has a place of its own in the working of the
legal system. Such a repealing Act is essentially a part of statute law tevision, which, in its turn, is
comprised within the concept of law reform in its totality. A repealing Act may appear to be a drop in
the river of statute law revision and the vast expanse that law reform is, would need so many rivers to
feed it. Nevertheless. each such river hasa role to play andeach such drop has a function to perform.

1.8 Statute law revision and its function

The function of statute law revision and the principles on which its exercise should proceed have
been lucidly put by Lord Westbury, Lord Chancellor, while speaking in 1863 on the Statute Law
Revision Bill. This is what he said? :

| “The Statute Book should be revised and expurgated-weeding away all those enactments that

; ne longer in force and arranging and classifying what is left under proper heads, bringing

4 the dispersed statutes together, eliminating jarring and discordant provisions, and thus
getting 8 harmonious whole instead of a chaos of inconsistent and contradictory enact-
ments.”

We have quoted this passage from the 96th Report of the Law Commisson of India? and would
like to add our own analysis of the pithy but pregnant statement of Lord Westin Lord Westbury. Jt appears to us
thatas 589०6 by Lord Westbury. statute law revision is intendea to achieve four main
objectiv:

(0) renovation—which is achieved by “weeding away” obsolete enactments;

(i) order and symmetry—which can be introduced by arrangirlg and classifying the enactments
really in force:

(ii) easy access to legislation—promoted through consolidation by “bringing the dispersed
statues together” and

(iv) harmony—perfected by “eliminating discordant and jarring provisions.”

These goals, pursued systematically, can obliterate so much of the past as is useless, organise the
present and equip us for meeting the chanilenges of the future.

1.9 Scheme of discussion

With these introductory observations, we proceed to deal in the next Chapter with the Principle
to be followed in recommending the repeal of Central Acts. Thereafter we shall summarise the
results of our examinaton of pre-1947 Central Acts and conclude our remarks.

1, Perrin v. U. S.(1914) 58 L. Ea. 69

2. Lord Westbury, «Pxrliamentary Debates” (1863) 3rd Seri Vol. 171, col. 775, it
Glaisdale and Webb, “Consolidation and Statute Law Revision” (1975), Pablic Lew tug coe? Lord Simon of

3, See Law Commission of India, 96th Repor , Para 1.4 Page 11


CHAPTER 2
PRINCIPLES TO BE FOLLOWED IN RECOMMENDING REPEAL

2.1. Broad approach
In our examination of the pre—1947 Central Acts with a view to considering the question of their

retention or repeal, we have borne in mind the main objectives of statute law revision? namely,

(/) keeping the s atute book in repair;

(ii) introduction of order and symmetry in the statute book:

(iii) providing easy access to legislation; and

(iv) maintaining and restoring harmony in the statute book.
2.2. Detailed examination

In our detailed examination of the various Acts, we have focussed our attention on enactments
that are useless at the present day, superseded by subsequent legislation, overtaken by developments
that have taken place since their passing or in obvious conflict with the Constitution.

2.3. Scope of the enquiry

(a) We should make it clear that our examination is confined to pre-1947 Central Acts relating
to matters in the Union Listor the Concurrent List. We have not touched enactments relating to
matters in the State List. ForExample, the Dramatic Performances Act, 1876, which seems to far
within the State list, would be outside the scope of our inquiry.

(b) We should also mention that in the 96th Report, the Law Commission of India made do-
tailed recommendations in regard to the repeal of twelve Central Acts.? Out of these, only three
Acts have either fully or partially been repealed but the rest have yet not been r
We reiterate the recommendation as contained in the earlier 1eport and recommend the repeal of
the remaming Acts also. We have not considered it necessary in this Report to examine those Acts.
afresh, but would like to express our agreement with the recommendations made in the earlier Report

1. cf. para 1.8 supra.
2, Law Commission of 10013, 96th Report (1984), pages 19-20.

3


CHAPTER 3

PRE-1947: CENTRAL ACT RECOMMENDED FOR REPEAL
3.1 Scope of the Chapter

‘We deal in this Chapter with some pre-1947 Central Acts that appear to be suitable for repeal.

3.2 The Forfeiture Act. 1859 (9 of 1859)

The Forfeiture Act, 1859 was enacted to provide for the adjudication of claims to property
seized as forfeited. The Act was enacted to give validity to certain forfeitures or seizures of property
which head been or were liable to be called in question on the ground of some irregulzrity of pro-
cedure ot defect or infirmity in recording the convicticns of the parties whoce property had been for-
feited or seized or of the absence of any adjudicaton of forfeiture as required by the Forfeiture Act,
1857 (Act 25 of 1857).

Sections 1—15, which dealt with constitutiou, proceduré etc. of Special Commission Courts
were repealed by the Repealing Act, 1868 (Act No. 8 of 1868).

Section 16 of the Act debars the questioning by any court in «ny suit or proceedings relating
to forfeiture cf property on convictions. Section 17 debars the questioning of zny conviction on
the ground that the capacity of the convicting officer is not shown in the record. Similarly, section
18 lays down that the-dttachment of property without zdjudicetion of forfeiture by any officer of the
Govetiment cannot be questioned unless the offender be acquitted within one year etc. Section
18 mdde an exception in respect of persons entitled to pardon upon Her Mejesty’s proclamation to
be published in Extraordinary Gazette of Calcutta.

Phe tifle of the Act is misleading as it gives the impression that the general criminal law of the
country-authorises forfeiture. The Act was meant only to validate certain foreitures. Tt should ‘be

repeated.
3.3 Gabiges. Tolls Act, 1867 (1 of 1867)

The Ganges Tolls Act, 1867 was enacted to authorise the levy of tolls on certain steamers and
boats plying on the river Ganges, to be applied for the improvement of the navigation of the said
tiver between Allahabad and Dinapore. Section 2 of the Act provides that toll not exceeding 12 2nnas
per hundred maunds shall be payable, at such place or at one of such places as the” Goveritinent
shall from time to time direct in respect of every steamer, flat and boat of the burden of 200 maunds
and upwards, which shall pass up or down the Ganges by such place or any one of such places. Sec-
tion 4 provides that the funds raised by the tolls payable under this Act shall be applicable towards
defraying the expenses of improving and facilitating the navigation of the Ganges between Allahabad
and Dinapore.

The Indian Parliament passed National Waterway (Allahabad-Haldia stretch of Ganga Bhagirathi-
Hooghly River) Act, 1982 (49 of 1982) which declares the Allahabad Haldia stretch of the Ganga-
Bagirathi-Hooghly River to be a National Waterway. The Act empowers the Government to provide
for the regulation and development of that river for the purposes of shipping znd development
of that river forthe purposes of shipping and navigation on the said waterway and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Section 9 of the said Act empowers the Central
Government to levy fees at such rates as may be laid down by rules made in this behalf for services
or benefits rendered in relation to the use of the National Waterway for the purposes of navigation
and infrastructural facilities, etc. Thus, the Allahabad-Dinapore sector which was covered under
the Ganges Tolls Act, 1867 is also covered under the National Waterway (Allahabad-Haldia stretch
of the Ganga-Bbagirathi-Hooghly River) Act, 1982. Similarly, the object of the passage of Ganges {
Tolls Act was to levy tolls whereas the object of the 1982 Act is to levy fees for the services or bene- ‘
fits tendered in relation to use of the National Waterway.‘

There may act be direct contradictions or inconsistencies between the two Acts, but apparently
there is 2 possibility of some double taxation. This may be not unconstitutional, but is likely to cause
\inconvenience. The subject matter of fhe Ganges Tolls Act seems to fall within Union List entry,89.
‘We recommend repeal of the Act for there reasons stated abpve. है

4


us

3.4 The Acting Judges Act, 1867 (46: of 1867)

We now come to the Acting Judges Act, 1867. The Governor-General of India in Council and the
Local Governments were empowered by diverse enactments to appoint the judges of ‘certain. courts
during the British rule in India. Doubts arose as to whether the power to appoint judges of the said
courts also included the power to appoint persons to act temporarily as such judges. The Actin aA judges
Act, 1867 98५ passed with» view to removing such doubts. The Act was initially in force in the Districts
of Hazaribagh, Lohardaga (now in Ranchi disrict) and Manbbum and Paragnas Dhalbhum and the
KoJhan in the district of Singbhum. By a notification under section 3(a) of the Scheduled Districts
Act, 1874, the Act was subsequently extended to certain other provinces and territories of India.

Section | of the Act provides as follows : . —

“In every case in which the Central Govrn ment or the State Governmnt, as the case may be, has
power under any Act or Regulation ६० appoint a judge of any court, such power shall be
taken to include the power to appoint any persons capable of being appointed a permanent
judge of such coutt, to act as a judge of the same court for such time as the Cehtral Govern-
ment or the State Government, as the case may be, shall direct. Every person so appointed
to act temporarily as a judge of any such court shall have the powers, and perform the
duties which he would have had and be liable to perform in case he has been duly appointed
a permanent judge of the same court.” :

Acting Judges in High Courts are governed by articles 224 and 224A of the Constitution of India
in the post-independence cra. Appointment of Judges to Subordinate Courts is governed by articles
233 te 237 of the Constitution.

It would appear that the Acting Judges Act, 1867 was primarily meant for subordinate civil courts.
Whatever may have been the need for the Act in 1867, the present position in this regard is that the Civil
Courts Acts of most States have already made appropriate provision (wherever considered necessary)
on the subject of filling up temporary vacancies in the judicial cadre. We give below an illustrative list of
provisions of this nature, in Civil Courts Acts :

(1) Sections 13 & 28 Andhra Pradesh Civil Courts Act. 1972.
(2) Sections 3 & 16 Assam Frontier (Administration of Justice) Regulation
(3) Sections 8, 10 & 36 Bengal Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act, 1867.
(4) Sections 35 to 37 Bombay Civil Courts Act, 1869.
(5) Sections 9, 19 & 28 Goa, Daman & Diu Courts Act, 1965.
(6) Sections 6 & 16 Kerala Civil Courts Act, 1957
(7) Sections 18 & 19 Madhya Pradesh Civil Courts Act, 1958.
(8) Sections 3 & 7 Orissa Civil Coutts Act, 1986,
(9) Sectins 7, 21 & 28 Punjab Courts Act 1918.
(10) Sections 3A, 4, 4A & 25 Tamil Nadu Civil Courts Act, 1973,
(11) Paragraph 27 to 39 Tripura (Courts) Order 1950

Jn the circumstances, it seems proper to. Fepeal the Acting Judges Act, 1867 and we recom-
mend accordingly. ~

3.5 The Companies (Foreign Interests) Act, 1918 (20 of 1918)

The Companies (Foreign Interest) Act, 1918 was enacted to give Power to the Government of India
to prohibit the alteration, except with the sanction of Government of India, of Articlesof Association
which restrict foreign interest in certain companies and to provide for other purposes connected
therewith. During the first World War, certain companies had been reconstituted in India on the lines.
approved by the Government of India. It was felt that new companies whose business was of
importance to the security of India and of the British Empire as a whole should be restrained from
altering their Articles of Association in sucha way as to bring them under the control of foreign
interest. The Act, therefore, restricts the shares or interests held or the powers exercised by the persons
other than British subjects from being altered without the consent of Govemor General-in-Council,

As far as can be ascertained, the subject matter of such regulation can (wherever necessary) be
taken care of by appropriate measure taken under the Foreign xchange Regulation Act, 1973,
Subject to departmental checkingin this regard, the Act may berepealed, ee


6

3.6 The Promissory Notes (Stamp) Act, 1926 (11 of 1926)

This Act was enacted with a view to providing for the validation of certain Promissory Notes
executed after 30-9-1923 and before 5-1-1925, and stamped with adhesive stamp or adhesive stamps
inscribed for postage and of the value required by the law enforced at the time the promissory note for
38 amount exceeding Rs. 250 was executed. The Act provides that a promissory note shall not by
reason only of the fact that the stamp or the stamps or any of them is of a description otherwise than
that required by law, be deemed, forany of the purposes of th: Indian Stamp Act, 1899 orof the rules
madethereunder, notto have been duly stamped.

Thus, the object of the Act is to validate certain promisscry notes which would not have been
otherwise lawful. After expiry of nearly 65 years, it may be safely presumed that the parties to the
Tomissory notes must have acquied their respective rights. The Act, therefore, seems to have become
and we recommend its repzal. We are aware that the ordinary practice has been to repeal
‘validating Acts. However, the Act under consideration addresses itself to a very short period anda
departure can be made from the usual practice. Incidentally, the short title of this Act is misleading.
At the rst sight, it gives the impression thatthe Act contains 2 permanent law.


CAHPTER 40h
SOME PRE-1947 ACTS CONSIDERED BUT NOT RECOMENDED FOR REPEAL

4.1 Scope of Chapter

In this chapter, we propose to examine certain Central Acts of the pre-1947 period in order to
consider whether they need to be repealed. .

4.2 The Berar Laws Act, 1941 (4 of 1941)

We begin with the Berar Laws Act, 1941. The provisions of many Central Acts were applicable
to the erstwhile area then known as Berar, But such applicability did not flow from the Centsal Act
itself as being proprio vigore operative in Berar. It was achieved by the.application of such Acts by .
order made under the Indian (Foreign Jurisdiction) Order in Council, 1903 (often with certain modiB-. -
cations). Certain administrative inconvenience resultéd from this. The Act as in force ip Britigh
India was distinct from the Act as in force in Berar. Notifications and statutory rules issued under
identical provisions operative, both in British India and ih Berar, had to be issued separately for
British India and for Berar. i eg

Since the commencement of Part व of the Government of India Act, 1935 on the 158 April, 1937,
Berar and Central Provinces were deemed tp be one Gpvernor’s Province and.an Act: passed after. /
that dite and expressed to extend to the whole of Britisk India extended proprio vigore to Berar. "

+ i

The primary object of the Berar Laws Act, 1941 is to assimilate the provisions of the Contzal .
Acts passed before the first day of April, 1937 to those which were, passed after that date and) were .
automstically in force in Berar, as stated above. Wee

- Thus, by one comprehensive enactment, the proprio vigore operation in Berar of Central Acts.
passed before the commencement of Part II} of the Government of India Act, 1935 was achgjwed,:
while simultaneously a brogating the orders under the Foreign Jurisdiction Order in Council by vietse
of which those Acts are operative in Berar, The Berar Laws Act, 1941is a small Act ‘consistii Gof
four sections and four schedules, The first schedule lists the Acts which are extended to कु.
second schedule contains lists of Acts which are partially extended to Berar. The third sc pee Babe
vides for amendments of the Code of Civil Pracedurb,1908and the Indian Limtitation Act, 1908:
(then in force). The fourth schedule sets out the list of enactments which have ctased to ‘have’ effect
and repealed in Berar. nee

With the re-organisation of States, Berar now forms part of the State of Maharashtra. How We.
ever, this does not render the Act obsolete. The States Reorganisation Act, 1956 and the Bomba: ele
Reorganisation Act, 1960 (to mention two enactinents of immediate relevance), the Adaptatian of /
Laws and Orders issued thereunder have not repealed the Berar Laws Act for obvious reasons. "Nol 2
gan we recommend its repeal. -

4.3 Dehradun Act, 1871 (22 of 1871)

The tract of the-country known as Dehradun had, on severajoccasions, been removed. by. Isgis- .
lative enactment from one jurisdiction to another. The final effect of these transfers was, s ssaged, |
to be that the Dehradun traci was subject to the ‘operation of Central Regulations and
for many years past, the administration of justice had been conducted on that assu{taption.
case of Dick ५. Heseltine, the High Court ruled that the General Regulations and Acts were i,
legally in force in Dehradun.1_ Hence legislation for the purpose of giving validity ‘to the past ROb
ceedings of the local courts which by the decision in Dick v. Heseltine were in effect declared to Be हु
been illegal, became necessary. Accordingly, the Dehradun Act, 1871 was passed. . Fhe: Act was
intended to be only a temporary measure and was to be eventually absorbed in a more comprehensive
legislation. १

By the United Provinces High Courts (Amalganjation) Order, 1948, High Court of Judi
Allahabad was invested with all original, appellate and other jurisdictions fn peer gate at
United Provinces under the law in force immediately before 19th July, 1948, The aforesaid Order of
1948 amended the Letters Patent establishing the High Court of Judicature for the North Wester:
Provinces ai Allahabad. हु a

oni k

ASSURED,
Act , end,
jut inthe. |

1 526 Guzette of India, 1871, Part V, page 221 and Supplement pages 907-908, 1050,
7


8

As fray we cau see, the need for maintaining the Dehradun Act on the statute book has not dis-
appeared. Territorial changes in one particular year-do 10 necessarily render redundant all enact-
ments passed earlier in order to deal with the legal consequences of anyearlier territorial changes
that may have raised legal issues. We are not, thetefore; ina position to recommend repeal of the

radun Act.

4.4 The Dekkhan Agriculturists’ Relief Act, 1879 (17 of 1879)

The. Dekkhan Agriculturists’ Relief Act, 1879 wasenacted to relieve the agricult es i
certain parts of the Dekkhan from indebtedness. In regard to erstwhile Bose Sista ihe Ant wa
repealed by the Bombay Agricultura! Debtors Relief Act, 1939 (Bombay Act 28 of 1939). The Bombay

t No. 28 ९ repealed the Bombay Act No. 28 of 1939and re-cnacted thi: 5
The Act as re-enacted expired on 26-5-1950, c-enacted this Act for three years.

It has been held! that.the Dekkhan Agriculturists’ Relief Act, as re-enacted by ६
section 56(1) of the Bombay Agricultural Debtors Relief Act 1947 28 of 1947) for-a “अम्ल or nee

years, expiced on the midnight of 26-5-1950 and was not in force in the State of Bombay after that:
daté for any purpose whatsoever. However, the position as regards areas not comprised within-the -

erstwhile Bombay State is not very certaid. Besides this, the subject matter does not seem to fall
within the Union List. Accordingly, we cannot recommend its repeal. im

4.5 Fort William Act, 1881 (13 of 1881)

The Fort William Act, 1881 was enacted to give power to the Chief of Arm: hii ७:
for the better Government of Fort William in Bengal and to provide for the eee eerste ie ला
within Fort William for the trial.of persons charged with breaches of such rules. According to sec.
tion 3 of the Act, the Chief of the Army Staff was empowered 10 make rules from time to time with
the sanction of the Central Government, to be in forcé within the Fort William in respect
of matters specified in the schedule annexed thereto and other matters of a like nature an to
prescribe, by such rules, penalties for the infringement thereof. Secticn’4 of the Act empowered
the Central Government 0 invest a Commissioned Officer in the Indjan “Army with power to try
sans char with infringement of the rules made under section 3 of si
लि शक] ‘yas catled the Fort Magistrate. ae the Act. The officer so

“The delegation to a Commissioned Officer: in the Indian Army of the power to try a is

petsons charged , with the violation of the. rules framed urkder the Act is conttaty to the yonerah eat
me_of our Constitution and is opposed to the directive prinsiple of separation of the judiciary ftom
thei 0 कहकर Under Section 6 of the: Act) fa poliog officer can detain any arrested person for an un:
immjte etiod until the detenue signs ह band ef specific'amount. This provision 1: ८
spirit of the Constitution. 5 Provision is contrary to the

In our opinion, these parts of the Fort William Act, 1881 (including the Sched 2;
should be examined by the competent aythority and may have to be repliced by neovisions onan
fect nature that harmonise with the Constitution..-However, a total (or even partial) repeal of the

ct without substituting the needed provisions would create a hiatus. We fi i
position to recommend its repeal. € are not therefore, in a

4.6 The Government Seal Act, 1862 (8 of 1862)

The Government Seal Act, 1862 was enacted in order to remove the doubts about
for the certification of certain documents. Before the passage of the Act, certain हलक गत की neds
provisions prescribing the affixation of seals to certain instruments and for connected matters. For
instance, certificates of Registry unde section 8 of the Coasting Vessels Act, 1838 were to be ‘sealed
wath the seal of Fast india Company. it was also aid down that no other seal could properly be
ig r such certificates until the passage of some Act prescribing the seal to in lit
seal of thé East India Company. ९ ड़ be used in lieu of the

The Government Seal Act provides as under :

“Whenever it is required by any Regulation of a local Government or by an Ce
tral Legislature that the seal of the East India Company shall be affixed atten ate
the authority of the Government to any instrument or document, it shall be lawful, ye
the seal is to be affixed on behalf or by the authority of a State Government to affix in
lieu of the seal of the East India Compa ny, a seal bearing the designaticn of such State
Government or, if the seal is to be affixed on behalf ण by the authority of the Central
Government a seal bearing the inscription “Government of India” and such instrument
or document so sealed shall to all intents and purposes be as valid and effectual as if th
seal so used had been that of the East India Company.” ©

3 AIR 1983 Bom. 198. 200


9

The documents and instruments so sealed under the Act of 1862 might have given rise to certain
rights and liabilities. Such liabilities, obligations, rights, succession to property etc. have been ac-
cepted and undertaken by the Government of India/State Governments under articles 294-295 of
the Constitution of India. Inthe circumstances, repeal of the Act cannot be recommended.

4.7 The Maintenance Orders Enforcement Act, 1921 (18 of 1921)

The Maintenance Orders Enforcement Act, 1921 was enacted in ofder to do justice to, and pro-
vide protection for the wives deserted by their husbands (and children who had been, neglected by
their legal guardians) either in the United Kingdom or in any part of the British Dominions and to
make reciprocal legal provisions in the constituent parts of the British Empire in the interests of 'such
destitute and deserted persons. The Act enables the court in British India to make an order to be
transmitted to the courts in every reciprocating part of the British Empiie to be registered and en-
forced there (and vice versa). According to Section 3, ifthe Central Government is satisfied that legal
provisions exist in any country or territory outside India for the enforcement within that country or
territory of maintenance orders passed by the courts in India, the Central Government may, by hoti-
fication in the Official Gazette, declare that this Act applies in respect of that country or territory aod,
thereupon the Act shall apply accordingly. The Act lays down the detailed procedure for achiev-
ing this object.

Maintenance of wife, children and parents is governed by Section 125 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 and by enactments or rules of personal law. But situations of a transnational nature,
such as those dealt with by the Act under consideration, would need special legislation. Section 13
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 would not meet the kind of situation for which the Act under
consideration is intended. Section 13 is concerned with a suit on a foreign judgement and not with
its immediate enforcement. Sections 44 and 44A of the Code, also would not be adequate to provide
for the enforcement of orders. Hence the Act cannot be repealed.


CHAPTER 5
CONCLUSION

On the basis of the discussions contained in the preceding chapters, we have identified the fol-
lowing Central Acts suitable for repeal’, and accordingly recommend their repeal.

(1) The Forfeiture Act, 1859 (9 of 1859).
(2) The Ganges Tolls Act, 1867 (1 of 1867).

(3) The Acting Judges Act, 1867 (16 of 1867).

(4) The Companies (Foreign Interests) Act, 1918 (20 of 1918).
(5) The Promissory Notes (Stamp) Act, 1926 (11 of 1926).

As regards other Central Acts examined in this Report?, suitable action (as indicated in the rele-
vant Chapters) may be taken.

(JUSTICE K.N. SINGH)

Chairman
(JUSTICE S. RANGANATHAN) (D.N. SANDANSHIV)
Member Member
(P.M. BAKSHI) (M. MARCUS)
Part-time Member Part-time Member

(CH. PRABHAKARA RAO)
Member-Secretary

Dated, the 26th November, 1993

1. Chapter 3, supra,
2. Chapter 4, supra. 10
94-M/ST3MofLJ&CA —200—24.2.95—GIPS,