LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-NINTH REPORT

ON

REMOVING CERTAIN DEFICIENCIES IN THE
MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988 (No. 59 OF 1988)

1994


CHAIRMAN
LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

K. 1४. SINGH SHASTRI BHAWAN
(FORMER CHIEF JUSTICE OF INDIA) , NEW DELHI - 110 001
Tel. Off. 38 44 75
Res. 3019465
D.O.No.6(3)(25)/94-LC(LS) Dated : February 11, 1994

Dear Prime Minister,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the
149th Report of the Law Commission of India on the subject
"Removal of certain deficiencies in the Motor Vehicles Act,
1988 (No.59 of 1988)'. This is the sixth Report after the
constitution of the 13th Law Commission.

2. The subject was taken up by the Law Commission
suo motu with a view to make the law simpler, remove
deficiencies in the existing law, to prevent litigation on

technicalities and also to remove the anomalies in the 1988
Act. This report is, however, confined to provisions relating
to ‘no fault liability' and the liabilities incurred by

insurers, owners and users of motor vehicles where any
Person or property suffers damage in an accident involving the
vehicle. The Commission has made appropriate
recommendations giving solutions to the problems and also
suggested amendments in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.

3. The Commission trusts that the recommendations, when
accepted and acted upon, will go in a long way to give
adequate relief to the victims of road accidents or their legal
representatives.

With warm regards,

Yours sincerely,

ky HL

( ६.३. SINGH —
J
Hon'ble Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao,
Prime Minister and
Minister for Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
NEW DELHI

Encl: As above


LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-NINTH REPORT
on
REMOVAL OF CERTAIN DEFICIENCIES IN THE
MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988 (0.15 OF 1988)


CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
CHAPTER

10
W

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

NO FAULT LIABILITY
COMPULSORY INSURANCE COVER
DEFENCES OPEN TO THE INSURER
HIT AND RUN CASES

LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
JURISDICTION OF TRIBUNAL
LIMITATION PERIOD FOR CLAIMS
IMPACT OF OTHER STATUTES
DISTRIBUTION OF COMPENSATION
PAYMENT OF INTEREST
RECOMMENDATIONS

ANNEXURE 1

>13003-«

PAGE

38-41
82-95
45-53
54-55
56-60
61-68
65-69
70-75

76-83

84-85


CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

1.1 The Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (Act & of 1939),
based on the English Road Traffic Act, 1930, remained on
the statute book for about five decades. Recently, the law
relating to motor vehicles has been re-framed by enacting
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Act 59 of 1988), but certain
hardships and practical difficulties have been experienced
in the working of the new Act even though it is only five
years old. This Report discusses the amendments needed
to the Act in the light of this experience.

1.2 The frequency of accidents caused by motor
vehicles and the pitiable plight of the victims of such
accidents and their dependants have been the subject
matter of comment by the Supreme Court in a number of
cases!. During recent years, the number of road accidents
in the country have increased more alarmingly. Almost
every day one finds in the newspapers sad tales of road
accidents. The number of road accidents in the country
during 1989-91 was 8,37,601. The number of persons killed
during the aforesaid period was 1,65,22?. The State-wise
break up of the road accidents and the number of persons
killed in such accidents in India during 1989-91 is
contained in Annexure-1. There is, therefore, an urgent
need for streamlining the mechanism through which the
victims or their legal representatives are compensated for

their loss in such accidents so that they may be able to


receive expeditiously an appropriate amount as compensation
for the damages sustained by them. It is felt all-round
that victims of motor accidents and their legal
representatives, where the accident is fatal, besides
having grievously suffered as a result of the unfortunate
event, are subjected to the agonies and uncertainties of a
legal battle for a number of years for receiving the
damages due to them through the process of Court. Of
jate, Lok Adalats have been settling the cases of such
nature but it has been found that the victims or their
legal represen-tatives are compelled to be satisfied with a
paltry sum out of the damages claimed by them. Such
persons have no other option but to settle the dispute
because they do not know for how many more number of
years they will have to litigate for receiving the damages.
In the backdrop of these and other related matters, the
Law Commission has suo motu taken up the exercise of
finding a solution to some of the problems relating to the
Motor Vehicles Act and giving their appropriate
recommendations thereon. These are discussed below.

1.3 In India, there are a number of legislations dealing
with the topic of wrongful deaths’. Of these, the Fatal
Accidents Act, 1855 deals generally with the liability for
compensation for wrongful deaths (including deaths resulting
from motor accidents). The Law Commission in its 1110
Report? considered the provisions of the Fatal Accidents
Act, which deal with some aspects of the same species of

liability as the one with which we are here concerned and


-3-

it made certain recommendations but those recommendations
have not so far been implemented. It would, therefore, be
proper that the Government considers both reports together
to avoid anomalies and inconsistencies between the two
enactments. Some of the areas where the other enactments
impinge upon the present topic of discussion are also
referred to at the appropriate places of this Report.
There are also- several shortcomings in the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1988 which need to be set right. The more important
of these inadequacies may be briefly touched upon at this
stage.

1.4 Section 140 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
provides for payment of compensation on “no fault" basis
but the scope of the section is limited as it applies only
where the victim dies or is permanently disabled. It does
not provide for any relief in respect of injuries other than
permanent disablement. The Commission has felt it
necessary to widen its scope and coverage. The amount of
compensation, both in case of death and permanent
disablement, seems to be inadequate and requires
reconsideration.

1.5 There appears to be infelicitous drafting, want of

clarity and overlapping in Section 147 of the Motor

Vehicles Act, 1988. These drafting defects and obscurities

have caused difficulty in interpretation of Section 147 and


-4-

therefore it requires amendment.

1.6 Under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, on the death
of a person in a motor accident, the 'relatives' and
‘dependants' of the deceased are entitled to claim
compensation. Similar provisions exist in the Fatal
Accidents Act, 1855 and the Railways Act, 1989 but there
is no uniformity in the definitions of 'relative' and
‘dependant’ under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. There is,
therefore, need to bring uniformity in the aforementioned
expressions.

1.7 The choice of remedies provided under Section 167
is unhelpful, particularly, when vastly different remedies
are provided under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923,
Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 and other laws. This
requires redrafting of Section 167.

1.8 The aforesaid difficulties have prompted the Law
Commission to reconsider these questions suo motu with a
view to make the law simpler, remove deficiencies in the
existing law, to prevent litigation on technicalities and
also to remove the anomalies in the 1988 Act.

1.9 With the above object in view, we proceed to
examine and analyse the deficiencies in the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1988. The present Report is confined to the
provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Act 59 of 1988)
relating to the liability incurred by insurers, owners and
users of motor vehicles where any person or property

suffers damage in an accident involving the vehicle.


-5-

1.10 It may be recalled that the Commission has also
made various recommendations relating to the amendments in
the Motor Vehicles Act and its ancillary provisions in its

51st, 85th, 106th and 119th Reports.


~6-

Footnotes (Chapter 1)

1. See, for example, State v. Darshna Devi AIR 1979 SC
855 and Concord Insurance Co. v. Nirmala Devi AIR 1979 SC
1666.

2. These are the Legal Representatives' Suits Act (XII
of 1855), the Fatal Accidents Act (XIII of 1855), the
Workmen's Compensation Act (VIII of 1923), the Employers!
Liability Act (XXIV of 1938), the Employees’ State Insurance
Act (XXXIV of 1948), the Merchant Shipping Act (44 of 1958),
the Carriage by Air Act (69 of 1972), the Motor Vehicles Act
(59 of 1988), the Indian Railways Act (24 of 1789) and the
Public Liability Insurance Act (6 of 1991).

3. 11101 Report dated 16.5.1985 which has recommended

a_ legislation proposed to be named "Wrongful Deaths Act,
1985" to replace the Fatal Accidents Act, 1885.


-7-

CHAPTER 2
NO FAULT LIABILITY

2.1 Chapter X of the 1988 Act deals with liability
without fault in certain cases and Chapter XI of the Act is
titled as "Insurance of Motor Vehicles against third party
risks". Section 140 in Chapter X, reads as follows:
"(1) Where death or permanent disablement of any
person has resulted from an accident arising out of
the use of a motor vehicle or motor vehicles, the
owners of the vehicles shall, jointly and severally,
be liable to pay compensation in respect of such
death or disablement in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(2) The amount of compensation which shall be
payable under sub-section (1) in respect of death of
any person shall be a fixed sum of twenty-five
thousand rupees and the amount of compensation
payable under that sub-section in respect of the
permanent disablement of any person shall be a fixed
sum of twelve thousand rupees.
(3) In any claim for compensation under sub-section
(1), the claimant shall not be required to plead and
establish that the death or permanent disablement in
respect of which the claim has been made was due to
any wrongful act, neglect or default of the owner or

owners of the vehicle or vehicles concerned or of any


- 8 -

other person.
(4)" A claim for compensation under sub-section (1)
shall not be: defeated by reason of any wrongful act,
neglect or default of the person in respect of whose
death or permanent disablement the claim has been
made nor shall the quantum of compensation
recoverable in respect of such death or permanent
disablement be reduced on the basis of the share of
such person in the responsibility fcr such death or
permanent disablement."
2.2 A perusal of the aforesaid provisions reveals that
the liability to pay compensation of ad-hoc amount is based
on the principle of no fault liability. Thus, in a claim
under this section in respect of death or permanent
disablement of a person resulting from an accident, the
claimant is not required to establish that such event occured
due to any wrongful act, neglect or default of the owner or
owners of the vehicle or of any other person! or that there
was no contributory fault, neglect or default on his part.
The amount of compensation fixed in respect of death of any
person is Rs.25,000/-and in case of permanent disablement
Rs.12,000/. The object of the aforesaid provision is to
obviate a protracted trial into nuances as to the extent of
negligence of either of the parties or as to the amount of
compensation to which the injured/deceased should be

entitled. Further, the financial solvency or otherwise of the


~9-

owner of the motor vehicle is also not taken into
consideration. The victim of the accident or his legal
representatives are entitled to receive from the insurance
company, irrespective of the fault on the part of the vehicle
owner or contributory negligence on his part, the amounts
specified in section 140(2)?. This provision does not
preclude the victim from claiming a higher compensation
against the owner of the vehicle, in case he can prove the
same. There are, however, two limitations in section 140:
(i) it is applicable only where the victim dies or is
permanently disabled on account of an accident arising out of
the use of a motor vehicle, (ii) the compensation provided
for is the fixed amount mentioned in the section.

2.3 Experience shows that motor vehicle accidents, of
manifold nature, occur wherein the injuries sustained by the
victims are severe but not resulting in permanent disablement
or death of the victim. A question arises whether such
cases should be compelled to be contested in ordinary civil
court or should those victims also be entitled to claim ad
hoc amounts. It is a matter of common knowledge that
pedestrians, cycle and three wheeler users on road mostly
belong to poor class of our society who are victims of road
accidents. Such victims, as in cases of permanent
disablement, ‘are also required to meet medical expenses etc.,
and the injuries may even result in considerable absence from

their work-place resulting in loss of earnings. If those who


- tue

depend for their daily bread cn the day's wages are made to
suffer such loss, their families suffer, but Section 140 does
not provide any ad_ hoc relief to this category. This results
in great hardship and suffering to the poorer section of the
people. We ere therefere of the view that some amount of
statutory compensation even for injuries less severe than
those set out in section 140 should be prescribed.

2.4 The amounts fixed viz., Rs.25,000/- in case of death
and Rs.12,000/- in case of permanent disablement are woefully
inadequate’. When a person dies in a railway accident, he
gets compensation on the scale mentioned in the schedule to
the Railway Accidents/Compensation Rules, 1989 which goes up
to Rs.2 lakhs in cases of death or permanent disablement®.
If a person below 12 years of age dies in plane accident, his
legal representatives are entitled to a sum of Rs.2.5 lacs and
if the victim is more than 12 years of age the compensation
would be to the extent cf Rs. 5 lacs.” But if a person
dies in a motor vehicle accident, the amount of compensation
payable to him is so paltry that it does not come to even a
fraction of the amount payable in the case of a plane
accident. There appears to be no valid justification for such
a disparity. In either case, it is the insurance cover from
which compensation is available for payment. The need for
removing such disparity and anamolous situation has been
emphasised by the Supreme Court in Manjushri's case® as

under:-


“Our country can ill-afford the loss of a precious
life when we are building a progressive society and
if any person engaged in industry, office, business or
any other occupation dies, a void is created which
is bound to result in a serious set back to the
industry or occupation concerned. Apart from that
the death of a worker creates a serious economic
problem for the family which he leaves behind. In
these circumstances, it is only just and fair that the
Legislature should make a suitable provision so as to
pay adequate compensation by preperly evaluating the
precious life of a citizen in its true perspective
rather than devaluing human life on the basis of an
artificial mathematical formula. It is common
knowledge that where a passenger travelling by a
plane dies in an accident, he gets a compensation of
Rs. 1,00,000/- or larger sums and yet when death
comes to him not through a plane but through a motor
vehicle, he is entitled only to Rs. 2,000/-. Does it
indicate that the life of a passenger travelling by
plane becomes more precious merely because he has
chosen a particular conveyance and the value of his
life is considerably reduced if he happens to choose
a conveyance of a lesser value like a motor vehicle?
Such an invidious distinction is absolutely shocking

on any judicial or social conscience and yet section


-12-

95(2)(d) of the Motor Vehicles Act seems to suggest a
such distinction.... We would also like to suggest
that instead of limiting the liability of the insurance
companies to a _ specified sum of money as
representing the value of human life, the amount
should be left to be determined by a Court in the
special circumstances of each case".?
The above observations were reiterated in a subsequent
decision!® also. Besides, as aiready stated it appears
inequitable that persons who suffer injuries not resulting in
death or permanent disablement should be left without any
redress. Such persons also need immediate ad hoc relief in
the form of compensation.
2.5 While there is, therefore, a case for the enhancement
of the amounts of compensation fixed under S.140, we do not
think that the scales of compensation in respect of air or
railway accidents can be usefully adopted here. So far as
air accidents are concerned, (a) the provisions are governed
by international conventions, (b) the Passengers carried
generally belong to an affluent class, the loss resulting from
the death or injury to whom is likely to be evaluated at the
notified figures, and (c) it is open to the carrier to
exonerate itself from his liability wholly or partly by
proving that the damage was caused by, or contributed to by
the negligence of the injured person. |! So far as railway

accidents are concerned, they commonly involve a large


number of persons and a fixed ad hoc scale of compensation
on "no fault" basis has been evolved to avoid protracted
proceedings in such cases. On the other hand, the
assessment of individual compensation is less cumbersome in
the case of motor vehicle accidents and an_ elaborate
adjudicatory machinery has also been constituted under the
Act. Even under the Railways Act, such individual
assessment is envisaged in cases of injuries other than those
specified in the Rules, !2 In principle too, the specification
of a rigid formula of fixed compensation as final without any
regard to the circumstances of the deceesed/injured would
appear to be incorrect and unjust.

2.6 Taking note cf the above considerations and even
keeping in view that what section 14C provides for is a "no
fault. liability" without prejudice to claims for higher
compensation after enquiry and adjudication, it is clear that
the amount of compensation payable under the section is
inadequate and, therefore, it needs to be raised. We are of
the view that Section 140 should be modified to provide for
compensation even in respect of injuries less severe than the
ones set out presently in the aforesaid section. It is,
therefore, recommended that the amounts of compensation

payable under Section 140(2) be fixed as follows:


(i)
(ii)

(iti)

- 14 -

In the case of death - Rs.1,00,000
In the case of permanent disablement- Rs.60,000
In the case of serious injury not

resulting in death or permanent

disablement - Rs. 5,000


- 15 -

Footnotes

{Chapter 2)

1 Sub-Section 3 of section 140.
2. Sub-section 4 of section 140.
3. Section 140 does not make mention of the insurance

company, but this follows from the languages of S.1&7 in
Chapter XI.

4, Section 141.

5. It is interesting to see that Schedule I to the recent
Public Liability Insurance Act (6 of 1991) incorporates these
limits. It, however, provides relief for temporarily partial
disability and also for damage to private property.

6. Section 127 of the Railway Accidents Act, 1989 read
with the rules made thereunder.

7. See notification ($.0. 1018) issued by tne Ministry of
Civil Aviation and Tourism published in the Gazette of India,
Part II - Section 3 - Sub-section (ii) dated 11.4.1992 p.1943.

8. AIR 197 S.C. 1158, decided in the context, not of
Section 140 of 1988-Act, but of a complicated scale regarding
the limits of statutury insurance cover spelt out in $.95(2) of

the 1939 Act, in respect of goods and public passenger
vehicles. In respect of other vehicles, the insurance cover
had to be co-extensive with the liability of the insured.

9. In this context, the recommendations of the 85th
Report of the Law Commission (Chapter 5) may also be seen.
The legislature has preferred to prescribe fixed sums as ad-
hoc compensation leaving parties to litigate for higher
compensation at their choice.

10. Kunhimohammed v Ahmedkutty, AIR 1987 SC 2158.

11. Rule 22 of the First Schedule to the Carriage by Air
Act, 1972.

12. Rule 3(3) of the Railway Accidents (Compensation)

Rules, 1990 and the Schedule thereunder.


- 16 -

CHAPTER 3

COMPULSORY INSURANCE COVER

3.1 Chapter X of the 1988 Act deals with liability
without fault in certain cases, while Chapter XI, deals with
the insurance of Motor Vehicles against third party risks.
Chapter XII pertains to the constitution of Claims Tribunals,
the procedures to be adopted by them and other provisions
incidental thereto. Although Chapters X and XI are titled
differently, there is a common feature that they relate to
meeting the claim of the victims of a motor vehicle accident
from and out of the insurance cover. Section 95 of the 1939
Act and Section 147 of the 1988 Act set out the requirements
of a policy of insurance and the limits of liability
thereunder. The present study deals with the language of
Section 147(1) of the 1988 Act which is almost identical with
that of Section 95(1) of the 1939 Act. The only material
difference between the two is the omission, from Section
147(1), of clause (ii) of the proviso to Section 95(1) of the
1939 Act. Sub-section (1) of Section 147 of the 1988 Act is
quoted below for ready reference:

"(1) In order to comply with the requirements of

this Chapter, a policy of insurance must be a policy

which -

(a) is issued by a person who is an authorised

insurer; and

(b) insures the person or classes of persons


-17-

specified in policy to the extent specifed in sub-
section (2) -
(i) against any liability which may be incurred by
him in respect of the death of or bodily injury to
any ‘person or damage to any property of a third
party caused “by or arising out of the use of the
vehicle in a public place;
(ii) against the death of or bodily injury to any
Passenger of a public vehicle caused by or arising
out of the use of the vehicle in a public place;
Provided that a policy shall not be required -
(i) to cover liability in respect of the death,
arising out of and in the course of his employment,
of the employee of a person insured by the policy or
in respect of bodily injury sustained by such an
employee arising out of and in the course of his
employment other than a liability arising under the
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, in respect of the
death of, or bodily injury to, any such employee -
(a) engaged in driving the vehicle, or
(b) if it is a public service vehicle engaged as a
conductor of the vehicle or in examining tickets on
the vehicle, or
(c) if it is a goods carriage, being carried in the
vehicle, or

(ii) to cover any contractual liability.


- 18 -

Explanation - For the removal of doubts, it is
hereby declared that the death of or bodily injury to any
person or damage to any property of a third party shall be
deemed to have been caused by or to have arisen out of the
use of a vehicle in a public place notwithstanding that the
person who is dead or injured or the property which is
damaged was not in a public place at the time of the
accident, if the act or omission which led to the accident
occured in a public place."

3.2 An examination of Section 147 of the 1988 Act reveals
that sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) suffers
from infelicitous drafting, want of clarity and avoidable
overlapping. ! The language of the sub-clause which seems to
require the taking out of an insurance policy which insures
the specified persons "against the death of or bodily injury
to any passenger ......+.." is clearly infelicitous as,
obviously, no insurance policy can insure any one against
death or bodily injury. One would, therefore, think that
what the sub-clause intends to say is that the specified
persons should be insured "against any liability which may
be incurred by them in respect of the death of, or bodily
injury to, any passenger........." and that the sub-clause
should be recast accordingly .7

3.3 Quite apart from the infelicitous wording of the sub-
clause, there is apparently an overlapping between sub-

clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (9) in their scope. Sub-clause


- 19 -

(i), read by itself, is very wide. It requires the owner or
user of a vehicle to take out an insurance policy to cover
any liability which he may incur "in respect of the death of,
or bodily injury to any person or damage to any property of
a third party caused by or arising out of the use of his
vehicle in a public place." This clause, prima facie, is
applicable to all motor vehicles including public service
vehicles. Likewise, the use of the expression "any person"
and the reference to any "third party" (which obviously
takes in any person other than the insurer and the insured)
makes the requirement all embracing. Sub-clause (i) is,
therefore, comprehensive enough to require the owner or user
of any motor vehicle including a "public service vehicle" to
take out an insurance policy that would cover the risk of
death or injury to the person or damage to the property of
any person including any passenger in such a vehicle. In
this view, since the language of sub-clause (i) is wide
enough to include cases covered by sub-clause (ii) as well
sub-clause (ii) seems redundant.

3.4 However, before recommending the omission of sub-
clause (ii), we may examine the question whether the
legislature has inadvertently framed the aforesaid clauses or
whether there is some other way to reconcile the two
clauses, making them meaningful. An answer to this question
requires a study of the legislative history of Section 95 of

the 1939 Act, which corresponds to the present Section 147.


- 20 -

Section 95(1)(b), as originally inserted in the 1939 Act, read
as under:-
"(1) In order to comply with the requirements of
this chapter, a policy of insurance must be a policy
which -
(a) xxx = Xxx XXX
(b) insures the person or ciasses of persons
specified in the policy to the extent specified in
sub-section (2)-.
(i) against any liability which may be incurred
by him in respect of the death of or bodily injury
to any person or damage to any property of a third
party caused by or arising out of the use of the
vehicle in a public place....
Provided that_a_ policy shall not be required - (emphasis
supplied)
(६) to cover liability in respect of the death,
arising out of and in the course of his employment,
of the employee of a person insured by the policy or
in respect of bodily injury sustained by such an
employee arising out of and in the course of his
employment that then a liability arising under the
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, in respect of the
death of, or bodily injury to, any such employee -
(a) engaged in driving the vehicle, or

(b) if it is a public service vehicle, engaged as a


~ 21 -

conductor of the vehicle or in examining tickets on
the vehicle, or
(c), if it is a goods vehicle, being carried in the
vehicle, or
(ii) except where the vehicle is a vehicle in which
passengers ,are carried for hire or reward or by
reason of or in pursuance of a contract of
employment, to cover liability in respect of the
death of or bodily injury to persons being carried in
or upon or entering or mounting or alighting from the
vehicle at the time of the occurence of the event out
of which a claim arises, or
(iii) to cover any contractual liability."
An examination of the proviso shows that it contained three
exceptions. One of these exceptions excluded a public
service vehicle from the need to carry insurance “against
death or injury to passengers" unless it was one on which
passengers were carried for hire or reward.? Thus, save in
cases covered by the proviso to sub-section (1) of Section
95, the section applied to all vehicles including public
service vehicles and the requirement to carry a policy of
insurance against liability for causing injuries to all persons,
including passengers was mandatory even in the case of public
service vehicles. This interpretation was plain on the terms
of clause (b) of Section 95(1) of the 1939 Act and as earlier

pointed out, on the terms of sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of


- 22 -

Section 147(1) of the 1988 Act as well.
3.5 Section 95(1) of the 1939 Act was amended by Act
No. 56 of 1969. Clause (b) was substituted by a new clause
consisting of sub-clauses (i) and (ii) in the same terms as
sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (b) of Section 147 (1) of
the 1988 Act, earlier extracted. There was 3 minor
amendment in the opening words of the proviso (which is
irrelevant for our present purposes), clause (ii) of the
proviso was omitted and clause (iii) redesignated as clause
(ii). The Statement of objects and reasons for this
amendment * reads as under:

"This amendment requires that a policy of insurance

of a motor vehicle under Chapter VIII covers the

following additional matters, namely:-

(1) damage to any property of a third party;

(2) death or bodily injury to any passenger of a

public service vehicle even though the owner or the

driver of the vehicle may not be responsible for the

accident, provided there is no contributory negligence
on the part of the passenger.”

While the amendment made it clear that the insurance policy
had -
(a) to cover the liability of the insured in respect
of death of, or injury to, or damage to the property
of, third parties by vehicles; and

(b) to compensate passengers to whom death or


- 23 -

injury was caused where the vehicle was a public
service vehicle and the passengers were carried on
it for hire or reward,
the substitution of two sub-clauses in the place of the earlier
single one created some ambiguity.
3.6 The Supreme Court had occasion to interpret the
amended provisions of Section 95 of the Motor Vehicles Act,
1939 and to examine the difference between the scope of sub-
clauses (i) and (ii) of $.95(1)(b) in the case of Minu_B.
Mehta_v_ Bal Krishna.” It overruled the general principle
enunciated by the High Court® that the insurance company
would be liable to compensate a person who died or was
injured in any motor vehicle accident irrespective of any
fault or negligence on the part of the driver of the vehicle.
The Supreme Court observed -
"Under Section 95(1)(b)(i) of the Act, it is required
that policy of insurance must be a policy which
insures the person against any liability which may be
incurred by him in respect of death or bodily injury
to any person or damage to any person or damage to
any property of a third party caused by or arising
out of the use of the vehicle in a public place. It
may be noted that what is intended by the policy of
insurance is insuring a person against any liability
which may be incurred by him. The insurance policy

is only to cover the liability of a person which he


- 24 -

might have incurred in respect of death or bodily
injury. The accident to which the owner or the
person insuring is liable to the extent of his
liability in respect of death or bodily injury and
that liability is covered by the insurance. It is
therefore obvious that, if the owner has not incurred
any liability in respect of death or bodily injury to
any person, there is no liability and it is not
intended to be covered by the insurance. The
liability contemplated arises under the law of
negligence and under the principle of vicarious
liability. The provisions as they stand do not make
the owner or insurance company liable for any bodily
injury caused to a third party arising out of the use
of the vehicle unless the liablity can be fastened on
him. It is significant to note that under sub-clause
fii) of Section 95(1)(b) of the Act_the policy ०
insurance must insure 3 person against the death or
bodily injury to any passenger of a public service
vehicle caused by or arising out of the use of the
vehicle in a public place. Under Section 95(1)(b)
Clause (ii) of the Act, the liability of the person
arises when bodily injury to any passenger is caused when bodily injury to an assenger_is caused
by ० ७७९ ०६ the vehicle in a public place. So far
as_the bodily injury caused to a__passenger__is.
Goncerned it need not be due to any act or liability


=~ 25 -

incurred by the person. It may be noted that the

provisions of Section 95 are similar to Section 36(1)
of the English Road Traffic Act, 1930, the relevant
portion of which is to the effect that a policy of
insurance must be a policy which insures a person in
respect of any liability which may be incurred by
him in respect of death or bodily injury to any
person caused by or arising out of the use of the
vehicle on road. The expression "liability" which
may be incurred by him is meant as covering any
liability arising out of the use of the vehicle. It
will thus be seen that the person must be under a
liability and that liability alone is covered by the
insurance policy." (underlining added).
It is evident from the aforesaid decision that the purpose of
the insurance policy visualised under the Act is only to
indemnify the insured against a liability which he has
incurred in law towards third parties, and that where there
is no such liability incurred by the insured the insurer
cannot also be fixed with any liability. However, it would
appear that the Supreme Court attached importance to the
difference in language between sub-clauses (i) and (ii) and,
by the words underlined in the above extract, interpreted
sub-clause (ii) of Section 95(1)(b) of the 1939 Act (as
amended by Act No.56 of 1969) to mean that the policy of

insurance taken by the owner of a public service vehicle


- 26 -

should provide compensation to any passenger of the vehicle
for death or bodily injury caused by or arising out of the
use of the vehicle in a public place irrespective of whether
there was any fault on the part of its owner, agent or
driver, or not. हि
3.7 As earlier pointed out,” one view could have been
that the opening words of sub-clause (ii) reflect ambiguous
and inept drafting, as there can be no insurance against death
or injury® and that there is nothing in the difference in
language between the two sub-clauses which requires sub-
clause (ii) to be interpreted as making the owner or user of
the vehicle liable to pay compensation even without any fault
on his part. This would tantamount to something more than
what a policy of indemnity to the insured, insuring him only
against a liability incurred by him, can achieve. However,
since the sub-clause has now been interpreted by the Supreme
Court in Minu_B. Mehta's case (supra), the question does not
remain res integra. Sub-clauses (i) and (ii) have, therefore,
now to be understood as explained by the Supreme Court and
the apparent overlapping in the two sub-clauses, referred to
earlier ,® disappears.

3.8 Although it is possible to reconcile sub-clauses (i)
and (ii) of clause (9) of S.147(1) 2, their continuance in
their present form seems inadvisable for the following
reasons. In the first place, it can give room for an

argument that sub-clause (ii), which deals with public


- 27 -

service vehicles, is exhaustive of the insurance cover needed
to be taken by owners of such vehicles. In other words it
can be contended, that such vehicles are liable to take out
insurance cover only against death or injury to passengers
carried by them for hire and not against the wider liability
envisaged in sub-clause (i) to third persons and goods of
third parties. The argument may seem far-fetched but it is
advisable to clarify that this is not so. Secondly, the
purpose of inserting sub-clause (ii), as mentioned earlier,
was to impose a no+fault liability as, but for a specific
provision, the insurance can be effective only in cases where
there is fault attributable to the owner of the vehicle, as
explained by the Supreme Court. It is patent that there
should be insurance cover against death or permanent
disablement of any person, even where there is no proof of
any fault on the part of the owner of the vehicle causing the
accident or his agent or servant, as experience has shown
that benami ownership of vehicles and the involved language
of insurance policies can easily be exploited to render a
victim's remedies nugatory unless he can have direct recourse
against an insurance company, irrespective of issues of fault,
contributory negligence and the like. To meet this difficulty
the 1939 Act was amended and S$.92-A was inserted to impose
a no-fault liability on the owners of all vehicles in cases of
death or permanent disablement caused to third parties by

motor vehicle accidents. Since S$.92-A creates a liability on


- 2 -

the owners even in no-fault cases to compensate persons so
affected, the language of the earlier sub-clause (i) itself
becomes adequate to achieve the desired purpose and the
continued retention of sub-clause (ii) has been rendered an
unnecessary surplusage.Thirdly, there is a certain extent of
redundancy between the provisions of S$.92-A गाव
S.95(1)(b) (ii). Whereas the former creates a no fault
liability only in respect of death or permanent disablement
and also imposes a limitation on the amount of compensation
that would be payable in such cases, the insurance under the
latter would cover any kind of injury to passengers and the
extent of compensation that would be payable also remains
unspecified and hence limitless. Also, with the omission of
clause (ii) of the proviso to $.95(1) of the 1939 Act, the no-
fault liability on the part of public service vehicles would
get extended even to gratuitous passengers who have not
paid, or evaded payment of, hire for their carriage in the
vehicle. It was perhaps not the intention of the legislature
to create a no-fault liability towards passengers of public
service vehicles different from that of other vehicles.
Indeed, such differentiation may even amount to discrimination

10 For these

violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
reasons, and particularly in view of $.92-A of the 1939 Act
(and its corresponding provision in $.140 of the 1988 Act), it
is clear that sub-clause (ii) of S.147(1)(b), corresponding to

the earlier S.95(1)(b), is unnecessary, redundant and otiose.


- 29.

It can be deleted without detracting, to the slightest extent,
from the efficacy of the remedies open to victims of road
accidents. We recommend accordingly.

3.9 We think that sub-clause (i) should also be amended
to make it clear that the insurance policy also covers the
no-fault liability of the owner or user of the vehicle under
S.140 of the Act. We, accordingly, recommend the
substitution of the following clause (b) in place of the
existing clause (9) of S.197(1):

"(b) insures the person or classes of persons specified in
the policy to the extent specified in sub-section (2) against
any liability which may be incurred by him (including the
one under section 140) in respect of the death of or bodily
injury to any perscn or damage to any property of a third
party caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a
public place."

3.10 Clause (i) of the proviso to 5.147 is also very

ambiguous in its wording. The purport, apparently, is that

insurance cover is not necessary in respect of liability on

account of death or personal injury of the employees of the

insured. This is apparently because such liability would

be normally covered by the Workmen's Compensation Act,

1923 and it need not be covered by insurance. But the

Proviso reads as if it requires a policy to be taken

specifically covering the liability under the said Act in

respect of injury to the employee. Even assuming this, the

Janguage of the proviso can be improved upon. Secondly,


~30-

it is not clear why the need for a policy is restricted only
to the cases of employees who fall within one of the three
descriptions.

(a) conductor or ticket examiner of a public

service vehicle;
(b) the driver of the vehicle in all cases; and
(c) an employee who is a4 Passenger on a@ goods
vehicle.

There could be employees other than the driver, conductor
or ticket examiner travelling in a private or public service
vehicle in the course of their duties, the liability fer
injury to whom due to an accident to the vehicle may be
covered by the 1923 Act. Thirdly, the language of the
proviso is also very clumsy and repetitive, the words
“arising out of and in the course of his employment" and
"in respect of the death of or bodily injury to" being
repeated over twice. If the only idea is that a policy of
insurance need not extend, in the case of employees, beyond
the cover provided by the 1923 Act, it could perhaps be
expressed in much simpler words. The proviso needs to be
recast in this regard.
3.11 The above drafting inadequacies apart, we are of
the opinion that the first exception carved out by the
section is totally uncailed for and gives rise to certain
unintended anomalies. The extent of liability of a person
injured or killed in a motor vehicles accident is determined

by the Tribunals constituted under the Act on general


- 31 -

principles for determination of damages for tortious
liability. These principles envisage the assessment of
damages with reference to the facts and circumstances of
each individual case by taking into account several factors,
such as the age of the victim, his earnings, his expectation
of life at the time of the accident, the extent to which he
was providing financial support to his kinsmen and so on.
Of late, the amount of compensation awarded by these
Tribunals are generous, substantial and in tune with the
economic conditions of the present day. On the other hand,
the Workmen's Compensation Act (Act 8 of 1923) is an
enactment framed at the beginning of the century and the
scales of compensation provided by it in S.4 are inadequate
and divorced from present day realities and values!9, If
we examine the proviso keeping this essential difference in
mind, it would be apparent that while the owner of a motor
vehicle and his insurer will be liable to third parties who
may be injured in an accident involving the vehicle to the
fullest extent of the loss or injury caused to the victim,
the liability, where the victim happens to be an employee
of the owner, will be restricted to the limited extent
specified in the Workmen's Compansation Act, 1923!!, It
could not have been the intention of the legislature to
create such a wide disparity. This may perhaps even
amount to discrimination violative of the Constitution. It
is, however, sufficient to say that this limitation on the

extent of compulsory insurance qua workmen to the extent of


- 32 -

the liability under the 1923 Act and its restricted
application only to the categories of employees specified in
the proviso, cannot be justified.

3.12 Secondly, the proviso also leads to another,
perhaps unintended, consequence. It implies that an
employee injured in a motor accident may, in certain cases,
be entitled to make a claim for relief under the 1923 Act.
If he does so, the employer, to meet the liability, should
protect himself by taking out a policy of insurance which
is compulsory under this section to cover such liability.
But such an employee has also the alternative remedy of
claiming compensation under this Act and, if he exercises
the option!, the liability of the employer would arise
under this Act and not under the 1923 Act. Presumably,
therefore, the compulsory insurance cover under the proviso
will not cover the case. The employee has, therefore, to
decide not only as to which of the two remedies will fetch
him higher compensation, but also to take a decision as to
whether it will be worthwhile to opt for the, perhaps
higher, relief he may get under this Act at the risk of
josing the insurance protection otherwise available to him.
This is by no means an easy choice for an illiterate or
semi-literate workman and the enforcement of such a
difficult option will not advance the cause of justice.

3.13 Thirdly, the proviso ignores the impact of the
provisions of the Employees’ State Insurance Act (Act 34)

1948, which may be attracted in some of these cases. The


- 33 -

proviso does not define the extent of the insurance cover
necessary in those cases. Logically, the proviso should
have been amended to make it clear that no insurance cover
would be necessary in cases which get insurance protection
under the 1948 Act.

3.14 In this situation, there are two possible courses
that can be adopted. One would be to exclude compulsory
insurance cover against any liability towards employees,
leaving the employees to agitate their claims against the
employer in other fora available to them - under other
enactments or by way of suit - and leaving the employer-
owner an option to take out such insurance cover in respect
of death or injury to an employee as he may consider
advisable. The other alternative would be to do away the
exclusion, provided in the statute, of the need to provide
compulsory insurance against liability to employees (save in
respect of certain categories) and put all employees in the
same position as other persons who might be killed or
injured in a motor vehicles accident. In our opinion, the
second course is preferable as there is no justification to
distinguish between employees and other persons in the
matter of compensation for death or injury caused due to
motor accident.

3.15 For these reasons, we are of the opinion that the
aforesaid part of the proviso has outlived its usefulness
and lost its rationale and should be omitted. It is,

therefore, recommended that the proviso should be amended


- 34 -

to read thus:

“Provided that a policy referred to in this sub-

section shall not be required to cover any

contractual liability”.
3.16 As already: discussed, the statute had originally
provided several limitations on the scope of the compulsory
insurance cover. Fortunately, all those limitations have
since been removed and it is now provided that, in the
case of death or injury to any person, the insurance should
cover the entire extent of actual liability (S. 147(2)(a)).
However, in respect of damage to, or loss of, property,
the compulsory insurance cover is limited to Rs.6,000/-
under S. 147(2)(b).
3.17 We are of the opinion that the restriction of amount
under clause (b) requires to be amended altogether. Apart
from the fact that the amount specified in the clause is
insignificant in the context of the steep rise in the value
of goods carried by motor vehicles or likely to be damaged
in a motor accident, we think that the insured should be
required to be covered for his full liability even in
respect of damage to the property of a third party; there
is no logic or principle on the basis of which a partial
cover can be stipulated. This is particularly so in view
of the revolutionary changes that have taken place in the
realm of transport in recent years. The size of the
vehicles that ply on public roads, the speed with which

these are driven, the weight of the cargo that is carried


- 35 -

on lorries and other vehicles and the nature of the goods
transported by motor vehicles have undergone such
transformation that the impact of any accident caused by
the vehicle is far-reaching and can affect property of high
value. In the distant past, an accident arising out of the
use of the vehicle in a public place caused damage to third
persons and to some property carried on the vehicle which
was usually not of considerable value. But accounts of
recent accidents show that motor vehicles accidents can
inflict heavy losses to properties of third persons. In the
first place, the value of the goods or property of third
persons carried on the vehicle has gone up considerably and
not always covered by insurance. That apart, it is easy to
conceive of incalculable damage caused to property of third
parties as a result of an accident. A car, bus or truck
may sometimes go out of control and plow down property
belonging to third persons. An accident to a truck carrying
inflammable substances can very well result in an explosion
with far-reaching impact on, and extensive damage to, the
property of third parties. A huge lorry carrying a
gigantic tonnage of goods, while overturning as a result of
an accident, may crush beneath its weight not only human

beings but even valuable property of others. Having regard
to all these considerations, we think that the amount of
insurance in such cases, as in clause (a), should cover the
entire liability of the insured towards third parties in
respect of any damage caused to their preperty by the use
of the vehicle in a public place. We, therefore, suggest

that the existing $.147(2) may be substituted by the


- 36 -

following provision:
"S.147(2) Subject to the proviso to sub-section
(1), a policy of insurance referred to in sub-
section (1) shall cover any liability incurred in
respect of any accident upte the full amount of the
liability incurred by the insured in respect of the
death of or bodily injury to any person or damage
to any property of a third party caused by or
arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public
place". The proviso to $.147(2) will, however,

continue in its present form.


(1)

(2)

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

- 37 -

FOOTNOTES

CHAPTER 3
See M.N. Srinivasan, "Beneficiaries under the New
Motor Insurance Law", 1992 II MLJ (Journal), 203.
This perhaps is not so, as will be seen later.
Moreover, recasting the language as suggested would
make the two clauses repetitive.
This exception has been omitted in the 1988 Act.
By clause 54(a)(i) of the Amending Act.
AIR 1977 SC 1248.

Haji Zakaria ४. Noshir Cama, AIR 1976 AP 171.

Para 3.2 ante.
Para 3.3 above.

This provisicn re-enacted in its present form in
1984, takes into account a percentage of the wages
of the workman and provides a fixed multiple
thereof as compensation depending on the age of
the workman. The wage of the workman for this
purpose is ‘pegged at a maximum of Rs.1,000/-
p.m.

Indeed, even without this provision, it could well
be contended that the owner, as employer, cannot
be called upon to pay higher compensation than the
amounts specified in the 1923 Act and that the
insurer's liability, being one of an indemnifier,
cannot be higher.

He cannot obviously claim both reliefs. This is
made clear by S.167 of the Motor Vehicles Act,
1988 .

In such cases, the 1923 Act will not apply. See
S.53 of the 1948 Act.


CHAPTER 4
DEFENCES OPEN 10 THE INSURER

4.1 S.94 of the 1939 Act made it mandatory that no
motor vehicle could be used in a public place unless the
user or owner thereof had taken out a policy of insurance
covering risks to the insured as well as to third parties.
The underlying object was that, if any third party is
injured as a result of such user, he should not be left
without an effective remedy. However, this protection could
have been frustrated by the insurer introducing terms,
conditions, exceptions, or limitations in the policy,
restricting his liability or releasing him from liability
altogether in certain situations. To overcome this
difficulty, the Act provided that the policy taken should
fulfil the requirements of Chapter VIII of the Act. These
requirements were set out in 5S.95.
4.2 S.96(2) further provided that an insurer could
defend an action for compensation on the grounds set out
therein, viz.,

(a) that the policy had been cancelled, even
before the accident took place giving ruse to the liability;

(b) that there had been a breach of one of the
three conditions of the policy enumerated in $.96(2)(b): and

(c) that the policy itself was void as it was
obtained by non-disclosure, or mis-representation, of

material facts. In these three situations, the insurer was


- 39 -

not liable either to indemnify the insured or to satisfy any
judgment obtained by a third party against the insurer.
But, where there was a violation of conditions contained in
the policy other than the three mentioned in $.96(2)(b), the
insurer was bound to satisfy a judgement obtained by a
third party but could recover the amount paid from the
insured. In other words, such restrictive conditions were
binding as against the insured but was not as against third
persons. This was the effect of $.96(3) which read thus :
Where a certificate of insurance has been issued
under sub-section (4) of Section 95 to the person
by whem a policy has been effected, so much of
the policy as purports to restrict the insurance of
the person insured thereby by reference to any
conditions other than those in clause (b) of sub-
section (2) shall, as respects such liabilities as
are required to be covered by a policy under
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of S.95, be of no
effect:

Provided that any sum paid by the insurer
in or towards the discharge of any liability of any
person which is covered by the policy by virtue
only of this sub-section shall be recoverable by
the insurer from that person."

4.3 In the 1988-Act, S.149 replaces the S.96 of the
1939-Act, S.149(1), (3), (4), (5), (6) & (7) of the 1988-Act
re-enacts S.96(1), (2A), (4), (5) and (6) of the 1939-Act
respectively with minor changes not material for our present

purposes. $.149(2), however, re-enacts $.96(2) of the 1939


- 40 -

Act with one major difference, viz., the cmission of clause
(a) thereof. Thus, $.149(2) has cnly two clauses (a) and
(b) which correspond to clause (b) and (c) of $.96(2) of
the 1939 Act. In other words, the new Act, in enacting
5०149, intended no material deviation from the provisions of
S.96, save only the omission of S.96(7)(a). S.169(4),
however, repeats the language cf S.96(3) of the 1939 Act
verbatim, except that "sub-secticn (4) of Secticn 95" and
“clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 95" have been
replaced by “sub-section (3) of secticn 147" and "clause (b)
of sub-section (1) of S.147" censeauent on the re-enactment
of S.95 of the old Act as S.147 with some changes. But it
retained the reference tc "conditions other than these in
clause (b) cf sub-section (2)" overlooking that the said
“clause (b)" had become "clause (a)" in the new S.199(7).
This is clearly a mistake. We, therefcre recommend that,
in $.149(4) of the Act, the words “clause (a) of sub-section
(2)" should be substituted for the werds “Clause (b) of

+ syal
sub-section (2)"


- 45 -

FOOTNOTE

CHAPTER 4
Reference may be made, in this context, to the
article by Shri M.N. Srinivasan (AIR 1992 SC -

Journal - 18) pointing out this patent error which
calls for rectification.


- 42 -

CHAPTER 2
HIT AND RUN CASES

5.1 There arise, not infrequently, cases in which the
vehicle causing an accident speeds away after hitting a
human target. For such hit-and-run cases the remedy
provided under Ss.140 and 147 is of no avail. To meet
this difficulty, S.109A was inserted in the 1939 Act under
which a 'solatium fund' was set up from which compensation
could be paid to victims of such accidents. ! S.161 of the
1988 Act, which corresponds to S.109A of 1939 Act, has
fixed the amount of compensation payable in such cases as
follows:
In case of death :  Rs.8,500
In cases of grievous hurt : Rs.2,000

slightly increasing the corresponding figures under S.109A
which were Rs.5,000 and Rs.1,000 respectively. The
intention apparently, is to provide for ad hoc relief
irrespective of fault for such cases also as under S.140.
There is, however, a small difference in that the "grievous
hurt" referred to in S.161 is somewhat wider expression
which would cover cases which may not amcunt to permanent
disablement within the meaning of 5,142. 2
5.2 It seems to us that there is hardly any differene
in principle between the two situations covered by Ss.140
and 161 in regard to the compensation payable to victims of
accidents on an ad_ hoc basis? withcut prejudice to the
right of the victim to pursue his remedies against the

offender or his insurer. Nor is there any need to draw up


- 43 -

a different classification for the purposes of this section
from that in S.140. We, therefore, suggest that the
language of S.161 should be the same as contained in S.140
and recommend that clause (a) of sub-section (1) and sub-

section (3) of S.161 be amended appropriately’.


3.

4,

- 4b -
FOOTNOTES
CHAPTER 5

This was in partial acceptance of the Law
Commission's recommendation in its 5151 Report that
in such cases compensation should be paid by the
State.

Cf. the definition in S.142 of the 1988 Act and
S.326 of the Indian Penal Code.

It is liable to adjustment in case the victim
secures an award directly.

See Chapter 12, part, for the proposed amendment.


- 45 -

CHAPTER 6
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES

6.1 S.166 of the 1988 Act, corresponding to S.110A of the
1939 Act, provides that where death has resulted from an
accident, the application for compensation may be made by all
or any of the legal representatives of the deceased victim.
The expression 'legal representatives’ has not been defined in
the Act. An earlier report of this Commission had suggested
that, for the purposes of this Act also, the definition of the
expression in the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 could be adopted.!
The Supreme Court in Kunhimohammed's case” has not agreed
with this view and has suggested that the definition drafted
by the Pearson Committee in England? and incorporated in the
new English enactment on the subject would be more
appropriate.” Though the Bill was under consideration of
Parliament when the Supreme Court made its observations,
Parliament did not incorporate a definition of "legal
representative' in the 1988 Act. This omission should be
remedied. We think, in the circumstances, that it is
necessary to insert a definition of the expression "legal
representatives" for the purposes of this Act. We suggest
that it may be inserted as an Explanation to Sub-section (1)
of S.166 of the Act. What should be the wording of the
definition of ‘legal representatives'?

6.2 The definition, inserted in England, on the

+ toe 5
recommendations of the Pearson Commission,? and the Law


- 46 -

Commission's Report of 19737 is to the following effect:”

"(3) In the Act, ‘dependant! means -

(a) the wife or husband or former wife or husband
of the deceased;

(b) any person who -

(i) was living with the deceased in the same
household immediately before the date of the death;
(ii) had been living with the deccased in the same
household at least for two years before that date; and
(iii) was living during the whole cf that period as
the husband or wife of the deceased;

(c) any parent or other ascendant of the deceased;
(d) गाए person who was treated by the deceased as
his parent;

(e) any child or other descendant of the deceased;
(f)~ any person (not being a child of the deceased)
who, in the case of any marriage to which the
deceased was at any time a party, was treated by the
deceased as a child of the family in relation to that
marriage;

(g) any person who is, or is the issue of, a
brother, sister, uncle or aunt of the deceased.

(4) The reference te the former wife or husband of
the deceased in sub-section (3)(a) above includes a
reference to a person whose marriage to the deceased

has been annulled or declared void as well as a


- 47 -

person whose marriage to the deceased has been

dissolved.

(5) In deducing any relationship for the purposes of

sub-section (3) above -

(a) any relationship by affinity shall be treated as

a relationship by consanguinity, and relation of the

half blood as a relationship of the whole blood, and

the step child of any person as his child; and

(b) any illegitimate person shall be treated as the

legitimate child of his mother and reputed father;

(6) Any reference in this Act to injury includes any

disease and any impairment of a person's physical or

mental condition".
This is a very comprehensive and all embracing definition
enabling almost any person related to the deceased to claim
compensation.
6.3 The question is whether this definition should be
imported verbatim in the 1988 Act as well. Tt is hardly
disputable that the ‘ist of persons entitled to compensation
under the 1988 Act should, in principle, be evolved, more or
tess on the same lines as the cne drawn up under the Fatal
Accidents Act. Unfortunately, the Fatal Accidents Act in India
was enacted in 1855, when fatal accidents were not so common
as they have become now after the proliferation of fast moving
vehicles, but the Act has not undergone any revision

thereafter. It was cn account of this circumstance that the


- 48 -

Supreme Court of India read into Ss.110A and 1108 of the 1939
Act an intention to bring in a much wider category of
dependants and was unwilling to accept the importation of the
narrow definition as contained under the Fatal Accidents Act of
1855 for this purpose.® The Law Commission has had occasion
to consider the provisions of the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 and
forwarded its detailed recommendations.” That report has
discussed at great length the whole question of defining the
relatives who should be entitled to receive compensation on
the occurrence of the wrongful death of a person. In that
report the Commission referred to the definitions in the Fatal
Accidents Act of England, the Indian Workmen's Compensation

10 and the Indian Railways Act, 18901. and finally

Act, 1923
recommended the following list of relatives: !2
(a) Wife or husband; (b) child; (८) daughter-in-law,
if a widow; (d) parent; (e) brother or sister's issue;
(f) brother's widow; (g) sister and sister's issue;
(h) uncle and uncle's issue; and (i) aunt and aunt's
issue.
In this list, the expression "child" is to be understood in a
very wide sense so as to include "son, daughter, grandson,
grand-daughter, adopted child and a person to whom the
deceased stood in 4Joco_parentis' arentis" and the expression "parent"
to include "father, mother, Srandfather, grand-mother, step

father, step-mother, a person who had adopted a child, 2 and

a person who stood in doco _parentis to the deceased."


- 49.

Provisions on the lines of sub-sections (5) and (6) of S.1 of
the English Act, as substituted in 1982!4 and 8. further
provision to the effect that "all words in this Act expressive
of relationship apply to a child in the womb who is
afterwards born aliven!5 were also recommended. This
definition has virtually incorporated the provisions of the
English definition.
6.4 Recently, while re-codifying the Railways Act, 1989,
the Parliament has introduced the definition of ‘dependant’ for
the purpose of enumerating the relatives who can claim
compensation on the death of a person in a Railway accident.
The definition reads thus: !€
"dependant" means any of the following relatives,
oeeeeee namely :-
(i) the wife, husband, son and daughter, and in
case the deceased passenger is unmarried or a minor,
his parent;
(ii) the parent, !” minor brother, or unmarried
sister, widowed sister, widowed daughter-in-law and a
minor child of a predeceased son, if dependant,
wholly or partly on the deceased;
(iii) the minor child of a pre-deceased daughter, if
wholly dependant 5 on the deceased passenger;
(iv) the paternal grand-parent wholly dependant on
the deceased passenger."

6.5 We have thus two definitions to choose from.!? Both


- 50 -

the definitions are much wider than the earlier definition
given under the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 and = are
comprehensive enough to meet the situations envisaged by the
Supreme Court.2? Actually, it would be appropriate and
proper if the definition of "relative" or "dependant" are
identical under all the three enactments i.e. Fatal Accidents
Act, 1855, Railways Act, 1989 and Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
It would be, therefore, simple to suggest the adoption of the
definition already enacted in the Railways Act, 1989 for the
Motor Vehicles Act as well, leaving the same to be also
incorporated as and when a new version of the Fatal Accidents
Act is enacted. But one finds certain defects in this
definition. Firstly, it emphasises more the point of
dependance of the relative on the deceased than his degree of
relationship with the deceased. This emphasis is not really
needed in the definition, for the compensation receivable by a
relative has to be proportionate to the injury caused to him
as a result of the death and, if the relative was not at all
dependant on the deceased, the relief due to him will be
ni.2! Secondly, the definition in the Railways Act contains
certain discriminatory clauses which may perhaps be challenged
in a court, e.g., a minor child of a predeceased son can claim
compensation even where he/she is partly dependant on the
deceased whereas a minor child of a predeceased daughter
cannot claim unless he/she is wholly so dependant. A

paternal grandparent is included in the definition whereas a


- 351 -

maternal grand-parent is excluded. Thirdly, the definition
does not clarify that the expressions 'child' and ‘parent!
have to be understood in a wide and comprehensive manner.
For these reasons, we are of opinion that it will be more
appropriate to adopt the definition proposed in the draft Bill
forwarded with the 11 Report with some changes, as

22

indicated later. We recommend accordingly .7?


2.
3.

4,

5.
6.

7.

8.

10.

- 22 -

Footnotes

(Chapter 6)

85th Report (30.5.1980), para 9.15.
AIR 1987 SC 2158.
Set out at pages 1695 & 1696 of AIR 1987 SC.

See also observations on this issue in Gujarat State

Road Transport Corporation v Ramanbhai Prabhatbhai
AIR 1987 SC 1690.

1978 Cmnd. 7054.
Report No. 56(H.C.) 373.

Sec.! of the Fatal Accidents Act, 1976, as substituted
by S.3 of the Administration of Justice Act, 1982.

It included only the wife, husband, parent or child of
the deceased: second paragraph of S.1A.

With Report (16th May, 1985) which, apparently was
net available to the Supreme Court when it decided
Kunhi-Mohammed's case, supra.

S.2(d). 11 contains a list of relatives, based mainly
on their dependance on the deceased workman. The
scheme of this Act is somewhat different and atleast
for the present need not be brought into the
legislation under consideration. The Law Commission
in its 134th Report (1989) has suggested that the
definition be amended to include the wife, husband,
children, dependant parents and deceased son's widow
and children.

Now replaced by the Indian Railways Act, 1989,
considered below.

Chapter V of the Report.

Such a person can be compendiously described as an
"adoptive parent".

Extracted earlier.

These definitions are set out as S.2 and 4(3) of a
draft bili titled "The Wrongful Death Bill, 1985".
Perhaps the split up of the definition into two
provisions was unnecessary.


16.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.
23.

$.123(b).

This is not quite clear, as a parent, under cl.(i)
qualifies as a dependant only where the child is
unmarried or a minor. The distinction appears to be
that in the latter case, the parent will automatically
come in whereas, if the deceased is married or a
major only a dependant parent will be within the
definition.

In contrast to clause (ii), this requires a complete
dependance on the deceased passenger.

There are also the definitions contained in the
Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, as amended by
Act 44 of 1966 and Act 29 of 1989 (S.2(6A)) and in
the Carriage by Air Act, 1972 (Explanation to $.5(2)).
It is, however, sufficient to consider the two
definitions referred to as they cover all categories of
persons who may be affected by the death in question.
It is, however, necessary, as pointed out earlier,
that all these definitions should be so amended at
some point of time as to bring in uniformity in an
area where so much anomaly prevails.

In Kunhimohammed v. Ahmedkutty AIR 1987 SC 2158 and

Gujarat State Road Transport Cc Road_ Transport Corperation v Ramanbhai,
AIR 1987 SC 1690.

Sec. 1A (third para) of the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855.
Also S.€(1) of the draft Bill appended to the 1101
Report of the Law Commission. Though not
specifically stated so, the principle under the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 and the Railways Act, 1989, should
be the same.

Chapter 12, post.

Indeed, we would recommend that the definition in the
Railways Act, 1989, and other enactments such as the
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, the Employees!
State Insurance Act, 1948, the Carriage by Air Act,
1972 and the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991
shourd also be brought in line with this definition.


- 54 -

CHAPTER 7
JURISDICTION Or TRIBUNAL

7.1 $.110-8 oof the 1929 Act! provided that an
application for cempensation in respect cf a moter accident
should be preferred before the Claims Tribunal having
jurisdiction over the area in which the accident occurred.
This provision was approved by the Law Commission in an
earlier Report? but in a_ tater Report? the Commission
examined the problem in depth and suggested that it should
be made wider to permit the applicaticn also being filed
before a Bench of the Tribunal having jurisdiction over the
area in which the claimant or the defendant resides,
carries on business or personally works for gain, at the
option of the claimart. The suggestion does not appear to
have been considered at the time of the enactment cf the
1988 Act®. For the reasons set cut inthat Report, we
reiterate the recemmendation to amend S.166 of the new Act
suitably’. In case this is not considered acceptable, there
sheuld be a provision enabling transfer of cases from one
Tribunal to another in appropriate cases, as recommended

by the Law Commission in its 85th Report’.


2.
3.

a.

- 55 -

FOOT NOTES

CHAPTER 7

Inserted by Act 47 of 1978.
85th Report (30th May, 1980).
119th Report (19th February, 1987).

The Act was enacted on the terms of Bill No.56 of
1987, which was perhaps prepared before the
Report of the Commission could have been examined.

See Chapter 12, post, for the proposed amendment.
lhere may be some cases of hardship if the
suggestion is implemented but in difficult cases the
aggrieved party may move to the Supreme Court for
transfer.

See para 7.12 of the 85th Report.


- 56 -

CHAPTER 8

LIMITATION PERIOD FOR CLAIMS

8.1 S.110-A(3) of the 1939 Act originally provided that an
application for compensation in respect of the injury caused by
a motor vehicle accident should be made within a period of
sixty days of the occurrence of the accident. The proviso to
the sub-section, however, enabled the Claims Tribunal to
entertain an application made after the expiry of the said
period if it was satisfied that the applicant was prevented by
sufficient cause from making the application in time. Act 56 of
1969 amended the sub-section raising the time-limit of 60 days
to six months, apparently because the period of sixty days
originally prescribed was found to be too short and it caused
great hardship.
8.2 The 1988 Act, while re-enacting the terms of S.110-
A(3) of the 1939 Act, effected a substantial change. $.166(3)
of the 1988 Act, corresponding to S.110-A(3) of the 1939 Act,
reads :

"No application for such compensation shall be

entertained unless it is made within six months of the

occurrence of the accident:

Provided that the Claims Tribunal may entertain
the application after the expiry of the said period of
six months but not later than twelve months, if it is

satisfied that the applicant was prevented by


~- 57 +

sufficient cause from making the application in time."
By the insertion of the underlined words, the 1988-Act has
restricted the power of the Tribunal to condone the delay in
filing of the application to a period of six months. In other
words, if the application is filed beyond the period of twelve
months specified in the proviso, the Tribunal would have no
Power to entertain the application and be compelled to reject it
as time-barred.
8.3 The notes on clauses appended to the Motor Vehicles
Bill, 1988 does not give any reason for this change while re-
enacting S.110-A of the 1939 Act. Presumably, the Legislature
had in mind the handicaps and difficulties in procuring
necessary evidence that could arise if an application for
compensation is made long after the accident and it therefore
considered the outer limit of twelve months adequate to cover
all cases and eventualities.
8.4 The Commission has received represenations from
various quarters that the new provision, imposing a rigid time
limit for making of claims under the Act, is causing serious
hardship and that it should be removed. !
8.5 The Commission has considered the issue and is of the
opinion that the balance of interest lies in favour of
prescribing a time-limit which can be relaxed by the Tribunal
in appropriate cases. The victims of motor vehicles accidents
are, in most cases, poor and illiterate persons whose ignorance
of the legal provisions and difficulties in securing legal and

financial assistance are formidable. Their interests will suffer


- 58 -

if a rigid time-limit is imposed even though it may be as long
as 12 months. Even in other cases, considerable time often is
required for ascertaining the necessary details, going through
the procedures of obtaining necessary certificates and in travel
where the accident occurs at a distant place. Cases are also
Not uncommon where the injury caused to the victim is of a very
serious nature; the victim may be under coma or need
hospitalisation or treatment for a long period of time and hence
unable to present the application within the prescribed period
of twelve months.

8.6 It has been represented to the Commission that in
Practice too, a large number of applications are being dismissed
all over the country on the ground of delay and that the rigid
time-limit is also being applied in respect of accidents which
occurred before the coming into force of the 1988 amendment”
resulting even in the dismissal of applications that had been
earlier entertained.

5.7 Having considered all aspects of the issue, the
Commission is of the opinion that the language of the proviso to
$.110(3) is preferable to that of the present provision in
5.166(3). The provision, as embodied in the 1939 Act, we
think, safeguarded the interests of all concerned persons. It
required the filing of application normally within a period of
six months and gave power to the Tribunal to relax the
requirement only in deserving cases. It is difficult to conceive
the various types of situations that could lead to delay -in the

filing of the’ application and the imposition of a rigid outer


- 59 -

limit, however liberal, would not always be conducive in the
interests of justice. In our view, the better course would be to
prescribe a short period of limitation and leave a discretion to
the Tribunal to entertain applications after the prescribed period
provided sufficient cause is shown rather than to enlarge the
period of limitation and make it rigid.

8.8 For the above reasons, we recommend that the words

"but not later than twelve months" in S.166(3) be omitted.


- 60 -

FOOTNOTES

CHAPTER 8

Letter received from Mr. Mathews J. Nedumpara,
Advocate dated 17.12.93 states that some Members of
Parliament have brought this to the notice of the
Government and that a Private Members’ Bill has
already been sought to be moved on this subject.

Relying on the decision in Vinod Gurudas Raikar_v.
National Insurance Company Ltd. AIR 1991 SC 2156 that

National Insurance Compan

the amendment is retrospective.


- 61 -

CHAPTER 9
IMPACT OF OTHER STATUTES

9.1 S.167 of the Act lays dewn that when a claim
arising under this Act is by a person who is also entitled
to lodge a claim under the Workmen's Compensation Act, the
Person entitled to claim compensation can do so only under
Bither of the Acts but_not_under both. It has been pointed
out earlier! that this provision for a choice of remedies in
such cases is unhelpful and that a workman or employee
injured in a motor vehicles accident (or his dependants,
where death results) should have the same remedies, under
this Act, as any other person Injured or killed in such an
accident. S$.167, therefore, needs amendment.

9.2 It is also necessary to make a reference to cases
where an employee who is injured (or his dependants where
he dies) in a motor accident become entitled to payment of
benefits under the tmployees' State Insurance Act, 1948. It
will be salutary to provide that any such claimant also
should seek his remedies only under this Act and not the
1948 Act.

9.3 It is also advisable to make it clear that where
death results from a motor vehicles accident, the provisions
of this Act will over-ride those of the Fatal Accidents Act,
1855. Such a provision is necessary as there are some
limitations imposed under the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855

which it is not advisable to import into the present


statute.”
9.4 The Motor Vehicles Act is a special enactment
codifying all liability arising in respect of motor vehicles
accidents, and this Act should be the only code within the
four corners of which relief should be sought by persons
injured or dependants of persons killed in such accidents,
even though there may be some other enactments protecting
some special interests (as for e.g. workmen or employees)
generally against injuries suffered by them in certain
situations (for e.g. in the course of their employment) .>
The Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 and the employees!
Insurance Act, 1948 are general in nature providing relief to
all class of employees engaged in workshops, factories or
business premises. These statutes also provide for
compensation in the event of death or injury caused during
the course of employment but since the Motor Vehicles Act,
1988 is later in time and further as it specially provides
fcr compensation for death and injury arising cut of motor
accident, this Act alone should apply even to employees
who may suffer injury or death on account of motor
accident, and the application of other acts should be
excluded.
9.5 We, therefore, recommend that the following section
should be substituted in place of the present S.167 of the
Act:

“Notwithstanding anything contained in the Fatal

Accidents Act, 1855, or the Workmen's Compensation

Act, 1923 or the gemployees' State Insurance Act,


- 63 -

1943 or any other Jaw tor the time being in force,
the provisions of this Act alone and no other shall
apply where the claim made fer compensation Is in
respect of the death of, or bodily injury to, any
person caused by or arising out of the use of a

motor vehicle in a public place."


- 64 -

FOOTNOTES

CHAPTER 9

See paras 3.10 to 3.19 above.

See, for example, the discussion in Chapter 6 above
in respect of the persons who are entitled to claim
compensation in such cases.

Particularly as the benefits provided under this Act
are. in no way less beneficial than the benefits
provided to those employees under those enactments.


- 65 -
CHAPTER 10
DISTRIBUTION OF COMPENSATION

10.1 The only provision of the Act which deals with this
topic is Ss. 168(3). It provides that "the person who is
required to pay any amount in terms of (an) award" should
deposit the entire amount awarded in such manner as the Claims
Tribunal may direct within 30 days of the announcement of the
award. If the amount is so deposited, it will, presumably, ! be
paid to the respective parties in favour of whom the award has
been made, on their making an application to the Tribunal for
payment. If the amount is not so deposited, the same will be
recovered from the party liable as if it were an arrear of land
revenue on an application made by the beneficiary concerned”.
10.2 We are of opinion that the rigidity of this provision
should be somewhat relaxed by conferring a discretion on the
Tribunal, in cases of hardship, to extend the period above-
mentioned. Such relaxation is necessary, as the amount of
compensation may be quite large and may have to be paid
sometimes, not by an insurance company, but by some other
person whose financial position may not be very strong. We,
therefore, suggest the addition of a proviso in S. 168(3) to the
following effect:

"Provided that the Tribunal may, in appropriate cases

and for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the

period above mentioned for making the deposit.”

10.3 We may also refer to another aspect on which it would


- 66 -

be better to have statutory clarification. In the initial years,
the Tribunals used to direct the payment out of the full
compensation money straightaway to the applicants entitled
thereto or their agents or representatives. But, this gave rise
to several difficulties and malpractices with the result that
certain precautionary steps became inevitable.? Some of the
difficulties, malpractices and situations which need to be
provided for are these:
(a) Very often the claimants are poor and illiterate and
the compensation amounts are withdrawn and
misappropriated by middlemen.
(b) In cases where the claimant is a minor or a person
of unsound mind, the payment of compensation amount may
have to be deferred and arrangements made for the
utilisation of only the income accruing therefrom for the
benefit of the applicant. This course may sometimes be
advisable also in the case of other claimants who are
badly in need of some regular recurring income and the
immediate payment to whom of the entire compensation
amount may only result in its being frittered away;
(c) Sometimes, even in the case of a person of the
above categories whose compensation has to be kept in
deposit, situations may arise requiring the immediate
Payment out of the whole or part of the amount (e.g.,

where funds are needed for the medical treatment or


- 67 -

higher education of the minor or for the marriage of
daughter). There may be many such imponderable
situations warranting immediate payment.
10.4 Considering the various circumstances discussed earlier,
it appears to us advisable that a reference to these situations
should be specifically set out in the statute itself for guidance
of the Tribunal. We would like to make it clear that the
situations as contemplated by us are not exhaustive; they are
merely illustrative and the Tribunal may issue orders for the
payment of the compensation at one time or in phases according
to the facts and circumstances of a particular case. However,
we are of the opinion that the Tribunal should have express
power in this respect and for that reason we recommend the
insertion of sub-section (4) in section 168 in the following terms:
"(4)(a) The Tribunal may, in an appropriate case,
having regard to the disability of the applicant on
account of being an iUliterate widow, a minor or of
unsound mind, or otherwise, direct that the whole or any
part of the amount of compensation shall, instead of
being paid to the applicant, be kept in deposit or
invested in a bank or in other trustee securities for
such period and on such terms and conditions as it may
consider necessary to safeguard the interest of the
beneficiary.
(b) Where any amounts are directed by the Tribunal to

be deposited or invested under clause (a) and until they


- 68 -

are disbursed to the applicant concerned, the interest or
income accuring thereon from time to time or part
thereof may be directed to be paid to the applicant or
utilised for his benefit in such manner as may be
directed by the Tribunal from time to time;

(c) Where the Tribunal directs the payment out of any
amount of compensation under this Act, it may issue such
directions or impose such conditions or restrictions as
may be necessary to ensure that the compensation
reaches, or enures to the benefit of, the intended

beneficiary."


- 69 -

Footnotes

{Chapter 10)

There is no specific statutory provision in this behalf.
S. 174 of the Act.

Such precautions have generally been observed in recent
years. See, in this context, the guidelines laid down
by the Supreme Court in Union Carbide Corpn. & Ors. Carbide Corpn. & Ors. v
Union of India & Ors. (1991 - $ SCC 584) approving the
decision of the Gi Gujarat High Court in Mulibhai
हि एक जा Harijan & Ane. Harijan & Anr. v. i

Utd. & Ors. (I 1

982-1 Guj. LR” 756). See also
K.S.R.T.C. ४ Sussamma Thomas (1933 - 4 Scale 643 at
p-650).


-70 -

CHAPTER 11

PAYMENT OF INTEREST

11.1 Where compensation becomes payable to any person for
the injury caused to his person or Property or to the legal
representatives of a person who has been killed in a motor
vehicles accident, it is of utmost importance that the amount of
compensation should be paid to the affected persons with the
greatest expedition. Indeed, the amount of compensation payable
under S. 140 on a no-fault basis or the one Payable in the case
of a hit and run accident under S. 161 should be paid or
deposited in the Tribunal at once by the insurer or the authority
administering the solatium fund under S. 163. However, with all
the best will in the world and all possible attemps to expedite
the relevant procedures, it is inevitable that there would be
some delay in the payment of the compensation amounts in such
cases. In cases where the aggrieved Party has to approach the
Tribunal constituted under the Act for the determination of the
compensation due to him, more delay is inevitable. There can
be no doubt that the aggrieved party should be compensated for
the loss and injury resulting to him by these administrative or
judicial delays for which he is not responsible. The only
manner in which he can be so compensated is by the payment of
interest on the amount of compensation determined eventually as
Payable to him in respect of the period for which payment has
been delayed.

11.2 Section 171 of the Act does indeed provide for this


relief. It reads:

"Where any Claims Tribunal allows 8 claim for
compensation made under this Act, such Tribunal may
direct that in addition to the amount of compensation
simple interest shall also be paid at such rate and from
such date not earlier than the date of making the claim
as it may specify in his behalt."!

Provision for payment of interest was made in the 1939 Act by

the Amendment Act 56 cf 1969 with effect from 2.9.1970 by

inserting Sec. 110CC which provided for the grant of interest by
any Court or the Claims Tribunal at the time of allowing a claim

for compensation and the same provision continues in the 1988

Act as well.?

11.3 The following are the salient features of the provision:
(a) The grant of interest is in the discretion of the
court. The court may award or refuse to award,
interest, at its discretion;>
(b) The rate of interest is left to the discretion of
the court. In practice it has been seen to fluctuate
widely over the years between 4 to 18% per annum;*

(c) The section contemplates that interest should start
to run only from the date of the application at the
earliest but the court has the discretion to award
interest commencing from a later date;

(d) The provision seems to envisage a uniform rate? of

interest on the entire amount of compensation®; and


-72-

(e) Interest will run, apparently, till the date of

actual payment.
11.4 The Law Commission, in its 85th Report, had suggested a
revision of 5.1100९ requiring the Court to award interest at a
rate not less than {2% per annum in the absence of special
circumstances. The recommendation of the Commission has not
been implemented. We also think that 5,110 needs to be
amended. In our opinion, it will be better to incorporate the
principles of interest payment in the statute more specifically.
It may be made clear that the award of interest is mandatory
unless cogent reasons exist to justify refusal to grant interest.
While generally, in principle, the rate of interest is left to the
discretion of the court, subject to its not exceeding the current
market rates, to be awarded in each case in the light of its
individual facts and circumstances,” suggestions have also been
made from time to time for specifying the rate cf interest® or
the minimum? or maximum '° rate of interest that should be
awarded. In the absence of statutory provision, the award of
rate of interest has not been uniform and it has varied from
Tribunal to Tribunal. It would therefore be advisable to
incorporate statutory provision in this respect. We think, that,
as an encouragement to prompt payment, the Tribunal may be
given the discretion to specify a particular rate of interest for a
stipulated time with a condition that interest at higher rate will
become payable in case the amount of compensation is not

deposited within the stipulated time.


- 73 -

11.5 Keeping in mind the various aspects discussed above,

we recommend the substitution of the following provision in

place of the existing S.17I:
"S. 171 Award of interest where any claim is allowed:
(1) Where any Tribunal allows a claim for compensation
made under this Act, it may direct that in addition to
the amount of compensation, simple interest shall also
be paid at a rate of not less than fifteen per cent per
annum from the date of the application under S. 166
tlil the date of payment:

Provided that if the Tribunal is satisfied for

reasons to be recorded in writing, that interest at a
rate less than fifteen per cent per annum or interest
for a shorter period may be awarded in any particular
case, it may direct accordingly.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section
(1), the Tribunal may in an appropriate case, direct
that interest shall be paid at a specified rate if the
amount of compensation is paid or deposited within a
stipulated period, and that, in default of such deposit,
interest beyond the said period shal! be paid at a
higher rate.

In making this suggestion we are virtually reiterating the

recommendations contained in the 85th Report of the Law

Commission substituting 15% in place of 12% consequent on the

increase in commercial rates of interest in recent years.!!


2.

3.

5.

~ 74 -

Footnotes

(Chapter 11)

This corresponds to S. 3(1) and (2) of the Interest Act,
1978 and S. 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

S. 171 of the 1988 Act refers only to 'Claims Tribunal’.
This, however, makes no real difference as a court
hearing appeals from the order of the Claims Tribunal is
also competent to grant like relief.

It has, however, been held that this is a judicial
discretion to be exercised reasonably in the light of the
facts and circumstances of each case and that, if
interest is not awarded, reasons for not awarding
interest should be recorded. in one case, this was done
because the amount of compensation was settled without
delay and prompt payment thereof assured: Elizabeth
Mathew v. Vasudev, 1990 ACJ 461 (Del.).

The annexure to Chapter VI of S.S. Minhas on "Law of
Compensation for Wrongful Death" (1993) sets out an
interesting analysis of the decided cases on this aspect.

It has, however, been held that it is open to the Court
to provide that the amount should bear interest at a
particular rate for a stipulated time and at a higher
rate if the amount is not deposited by that time: See
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Shanabhai_Anjanbhai,
1987 ACJ 688 (Guj.); Somme, NC Group v. Nirmala
Moherana, 1984 ACJ 459° (Ori.); Narmada Choudhary v.
MACT, 1984 ACJ 283 (Gau.).

In English Law, differential rates of interest on ‘pre-
trial' and ‘'post-trial' | damages are contemplated; See
Cookson v. Knowles (1975) ACJ 216 (HL) and Jefford v.
Gee (1970) 2-Q.B. 130 (CA).

See para 6.2 of the 63rd Report of the Law Commission
on the Interest Act.

The Workman's Compensation Act, 1923 specifies a rate
of six per cent. The 62nd Report (1974) of the Law
Commission suggested that this be enhanced to 9% (para
3.54) while 134th Report (1989) suggested its being
stepped upto 15%.

The &5th Report on the Motor Vehicles Act has suggested
that the interest shall net be less than 12% unless the
court specifically directs otherwise for reasons to be
recorded.


Under S. 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 the
court may award interest at any rate not exceeding the
contractual rate of interest or the rate of interest fixed
by a commercial bank in relation to a commercial
transaction.

See Chapter 14 of the 85th Report of the Law Commission
(May, 1980) under the Chairmanship of Justic ९.५.
Dikshit.


- 76 -

CHAPTER 1?

RECCMMENDATIONS

ler the reasons discussed above, we recommend the

following amendments to the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988:

140 ४

Section

Fer sub-section (7) of  Secticn 140, substitute the
following:

"(2) The amount of compensation under sub-section (1)
shall be a fixed sum of rupees one lakh in respect of the
death of any person, rurees sixty theusand in respect of
the permanent disablement of any persen and rupees five
thousand in respect of sericus injury te any person not

resulting in death cr permanent disablement." (Para 2.6)

187 $

Sectien

2.

(i) Fer clause (b) of sub-sectien (1) of S.147, substitute

the following:

“(b) insures the person cr class of persons specified in
the policy to the extent specified in sub-section (2)
against any liability which may be incurred by him
(including the cne under Section 140) in respect of the
death ef or bodily injury to any perscn cr damage te any
property cf a third party caused by cr arising out of the

use of the vehicle in a public place." (Para 3.9)

(ii) The following previso be substituted in place of the


-77-
existing proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 147:
“Provided that a policy referred to in this sub-section
shall not be required to cover any contractual Mability."
(Para 3.15)
(ili) For the main Part of sub-section (2) of Section 147
as at present existing, substitute the following:
"S.197(2) Subject to the Proviso to sub-section (1), a
Policy of Insurance referred to in sub-section (1) shall
cover any liability incurred in respect of any accident
upto the full amcunt of the liability incurred by the
insured In respect of the death of, or bodily injury to,
any person or the damage to any property of a third
Party caused by or arising cut of the use of the vehicle
in a public place."
The existing proviso to S.187(2) will however continue to read as
before. (Para 3.17)
Section 189: |
3. In section 189(8), for the werds “clause (0) of sub-
section (2), read "clause (a) of sub-section (2)", (Para 4,3)
Section 161:
a, In Section 161:
(i) In sub-section (1), for the existing clause (a)
substitute the following:
"(a) ‘permanent disablement! shall have the same meaning
as in section 142."
(ii) For sub-section (3), substitute the following:

"(३) Subject to the Provisions of this Act and the


5.

>> 73 -

scheme, there shall be paid as compensation, in respect
of a hit and run motor accident, a fixed sum, which
shall be -

(a) in respect of the death of any person resulting from
such accident, rupees one lakh;

(b) in respect of the premanent disablement of any person
resulting from such accident, rupees sixty thousand; and
(c) in respect of serious injury other than permanent
disablement resulting from such accident, rupees five

thousand. (Para 5.2)

Section 166:

In Section 166:

(i) the following Explanation may be inserted at the end

of sub-section (1):

“Explanation: (1) For the purposes of this section, the

expression ‘legal representative’, in relation to a person

dying in an accident, means -

(a) the wife or husband or former wife or former
husband of the deceased;

(b) any parent or other ascendant of the deceased;

(c) any child (including a step child or illegitimate
child) or other descendant of the deceased;

(d) 8 widowed daughter-in-law, or the widow of a
deceased brother, of the deceased:

(e) any person who is, or is the issue of, a brother,
sister, uncle or aunt of the deceased.

(2) For the purposes of clause (1), “child” includes a


-79 -

child in the womb afterwards born alive, a step child,

an adopted child as well as a person to whom the

deceased stood in loco parentis; and "parent" includes a

step parent, either adoptive parent and either of the

persons who stood in loco parentis to the deceased!,

(3) की deducing any relaticnship for the purpose of this

explanation -

(a) any relationship by affinity shall be treated as a
relationship by consangunuity, any relation of half
blood as a relationship of whole blocd and the step
child of any person as his child: and

(b) any illegitimate person shall be treated as the
legitimate child of his mother and reputed father”.

(Para 6.5)

(ii) For the main clause of sub-section (2), substitute

the following:

"(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be

made to the Claims Tribunal having jurisdiction over the

area in which the accident occurred or the area in which
the applicant or any of the respondents resides, carries
on business cr works for gain, at the cption of the
applicant and shall be in such form and shall contain such
particulars as may be prescribed." (Para 7.1)
(iii) In the proviso to sub-section (3), the words and
punctuation "but not later than twelve months", shall be omitted.
(Para 8.8)
Section 167:

6. For Section 167, as existing at present, substitute the


- 80 -

following:

"167. Application of other Acts excluded of other Acts excluded -

Notwithstanding anything contained in the Fatal Accidents
Act, 1855 or the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 or the
Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 or any other law for
the time being in forceythe provisions of this Act alone
and no other shall apply where the claim made for
compensation is in respect of the death of, or bodily
injury to, any person caused by or arising out of the use
of a motor vehicle in a public place.” (Para 9.5)
Section 168:
(i) 71 sub-section (3) of S.168, insert the following
proviso:
“Provided that the Tribunal may, in appropriate cases and
for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the period
above mentioned for making the deposit". (Para 10.2)
(iii) After sub-section (3) of S.168, insert the following
new sub-section (4):
(4)(a) The Tribunal may, in an appropriate case, having
regard to the disability of the applicant on account of
being an jlliterate widow, minor or of unsound mind, or
otherwise direct that the whole or any part of the amount
of compensation shall instead of being paid to the
applicant, be kept in deposit or invested in a bank or in
other trustee securities for such period and on such terms
and conditions as it may consider necessary to safeguard

the interest of the beneficiary.


- 81 -

(b) Where any amounts are directed by the Tribunal to
be deposited or invested under clause (a) and until they
are disbursed to the applicant concerned, the interest or
income accruing thereon or part thereof may be directed
to be paid to the applicant or utilised for his benefit in
such manner as may be directed by the Tribunal from
time to time.

(c) Where the Tribunal directs the payment of any
amount of compensation under this Act, it may issue such
directions or impose such conditions or restrictions as
may be necessary to ensure that the compensation reaches,
or enures to the benefit of, the intended beneficiary."

(Para 10.4)

Section 171:

8.

For Section 171, substitute the following:

"171. Award of interest where claim is allowed - (1)

Where any Tribunal allows a claim for compensation made
under this Act, it may direct that, in addition to the
amount of compensation, simple interest shall also be paid
at a rate of not less than fifteen per cent per annum from
the date of the application under S$.166 till the date of
payment:

Provided that if the Tribunal is satisfied, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, that interest at a rate
less than fifteen per cent per annum, or interest for a
shorter period may be awarded in any particular case, it

may direct accordingly.


- 82 -
(2) Without prejuocice to the provisions of sub-section

(1), the Tribunal may in an appropriate case direct that interest
shall be paid at a specified rate if the amount of compensation is
paid or deposited within a stipulated period and, in default of
such deposit, interest beyond the said period shall be paid at a

higher rate." (Para 11.5)

‘

hep J

(K.N. “SINGH

CHAIRMA!

हे fy 4 ’ 7 Le
SU {Ars Me “ fa dime _

(S. RANGANATHAN) (D.N. SANDANSHIV)

McMBeR . McMBrR
bee

ae . <

Ay : eo. we
पे पु "
(P.M, BAKSHI) ~(M. MARCUS)
MeMBeR (PART TIM) McMBeR (PART TIMr)

“ (CH. PRABHAKARA RAO) ~~ -
MEMBER-SECRETARY


2.

3.

- 83 -

FOOTNOTES

CHAPTER 12
A provision corresponding to S.1(4) of the English Act is
not included here for the reasons explained in Para 5.7
of the Itlth Report.
This definition departs in some respects from, but
consolidates, the definitions spread over the Sections 2
and 4(3) of the draft Bill appended to the 11111 Report.

See the discussion in this regard in Chapter 10.


- 8५ -
Annexure-I

NUMBER OF ROAD ACCIDENTS AND PERSONS KILLED JIN INDIA DURING 1989-91

S.No. States/UTs 1989 1990 1991
Accidents Persons Accidents Persons Accidents Persons
Killed Killed Killed
953 so > 6 7 3
1. Andhra Pradesh 13423 4458 16042 5211 17371 5753
2. Arunachal Pradesh 239 59 233 97 204 36
3. Assam 1956 895 1762 904 1899 867
4. Bihar 9552 2183 9522 2751 9776 2304
5. Goa 1813 169 2205 174 2168 180
6. Gujarat 23823 3509 23823 4077 24908 4308
7. Haryana 5358 1819 5056 1969 4867 1916
8. Himachal Pradesh 1060 469 1123 465 1269 414
9. Jammu & Kashmir 3615 491 2326 371 3927 672
10. Karnataka 20902 3655 21992 3901 22438 3979
11... Kerala 16762 1737 20247 1793 21556 1709
12. Madhya Pradesh 20265 2709 23492 2793 25096 3089
13. Maharashtra 59045 5785 56982 5427 59418 9884
14... Manipur 430 129 472 106 369 87
15. Meghalaya 646 98 540 133 450 104
16. Mizoram 98 38 80 38 74 28
17... Nagaland 263 42 237 64 57 40
18. Orissa 5737 VWi7t 6069 1193 6171 1300
19, Punjab 1622 819 1621 1133 1483 1019
20. Rajasthan 9593 3023 10456 3465 11046 3736
21... Sikkim 105 26 115 26 137 34
22. Tamil Nadu 32962 6299 34634 6663 32522 6406

23. Tripura 449 136 408 113 371 102


- 85 -

24, Uttar Pradesh 13696 6130 16318 7639 15960 7936
25. West Bengal 15946 2094 16375 2600 16041 2559
UNION TERRITORIES

26. A & N Islands 124 15 144 17 86 5
27. Chandigarh 277 76 250 80 258 60
28. Dadra & Nagar 61 10 79 18 50 9
Haveli
29. Delhi 7192 1583 7687 1679 8065 1829
30. Daman & Diu 66 2 9 16 67 7
31. Lakshadweep 5 Nil 2 Ni! Nil Nil
32. = Pondicherry 663 82 662 106 724 107

INDIA 267648 49730 281125 55013 288828 60879