LD.92 XV
3000

LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

FIFTEENTH REPORT

(LAW RELATING TO MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE AMONGST
CHRISTIANS IN INDIA)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA : MINISTRY OF LAW

PRINTED IN INDIA BY TIE GENFRAL MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS,
NEW DELHI AND PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI 1960


CHAIRMAN
LAW COMMISSION.
New Delhi—3.
August 10, 1060.
Shri Asoke Kumar Sen,
Minister of Law,
New Dethi.

My DEAR MrnistTER,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Fifteenth
Report of the Law Commission on the law relating to Marriage
and Divorce among Christians in India.

2. This subject was referred by the Law Ministry to the
previous Law Commission, and was taken up by the present
Law Commission on a top priority basis. A draft of the
proposed legislation was prepared by me, and was revised by
the Commission in its meetings held on the 23rd and the 24th
April, and the qth May, 1959. The revised draft was circulated
for opinion, and as a number of persons and associations
desired to make oral representations on the proposed Bill, we
took their oral evidence at Bombay on the ith, rzth, 14th
and 15th September, 1959, at Madras on the 13th, rgth and
rsth October, 1959, and at New Delhi on the and, 3rd and ath
November, 1959. The draft was again revised in the light of
the evidence given before us and was finalised hy the
Commission at its meetings held on the 22nd and 23rd April,
1960. The Report has been drawn up in accordance with the
decisions taken at that meeting.

3. Shri P. Satyanarayana Rao has signed the Report
subject to two separate notes which are appended to the
Report. Shri Sachin Chaudhuri has also signed the Report

subject to a note appended to the Report.
281 L—1


(ii)

4. The Commission desires to express its appreciation of
the services rendered by Shri D. Basu, Joint Secretary, in the
Preparation of the Report and by Shri P. M. Bakshi, Deputy
Draftsman, in the Preparation of the Bill and the Notes.

Yours sincerely,
T. L. VENKATARAMA ATYAR.


REPORT ON THE LAW RELATING TO MARRIAGE
AND DIVORCE AMONGST CHRISTIANS IN INDIA

CONTENTS
Inrropucrion
PARAGRAPHS
i The need for revision . . . . . .
2. (@) Consolidation, . . . . .
@) Tithe . . - . . . . .
3 Local extent, . . . . पु . .
4 Application . . न . . . .
5. Question of domicile . . . . .
6 Modes of sclemnisation of marriages .
7 Procedure for Indian Christians . . . -

&. Civil marriages - . . . . . .

$—14. Sacramental marriages . . . .

15—19. Recognised Churches . . . . . :

20. Licences to Ministers . . . .

शा Registration of marriages. . . . =

22. Conditions of a valid merriage . . . पु .

23~2§. Prohibited degreey  . . . . न .

26. Age . . - पु . + . . .
Consent of guardian. . . - oe
Guardianship. पु . . : . .

27. Withholding of guardian’s consent नि + . .

28. Bride’s own consent . . . . पु .

29 Prohibitions under Canon Law . . - oe .

30. Danger of death . . . . . . .

31. Nullity of marriage. . . . . . .

32—-3q. Existing faw under the Divorce Act, 1869

35. Marriages solemnised under existing law

36, Status of children born of voidable marriages

37 Status of children born of void marriages—three views

35. First view—Children jegitimate . .  .  ,

39

Second view—Children of bonafide marriages 10. वाला
legitimate . . . . - .

( ii)

4-10
10
10-31
1
113
13७4
14०२5
15
15
Is—16

16
16-17
17

17
7
17-18
18
Be)
18-19
19—20
20
20

20—~21

खान


Civ )

PARAGRAPHS
40. Third view—Children to inherit a8 legitimate . :
ai. First view not accepted =, . . - . +
42. Argument in favour of second view. , an
43. Third view accepted . : पु . . .
44-45. Judicial separation
46. Capacity of wife to acquire property or to enter into contracts
after'a decree for judicial separation ==
बा. Succession to the properties of a wife dying intestate after a
decree for judiciat separation . + न . .
48. Divorce. . . . .
49. Grounds of divorce :
5०. Provisions in other enactments + .
51. Ad leery . 2 .
52. Leprosy © ee, :
53. Refusal to consummate marriage पु
$4. Desertion . .
55-86... Cruelty . .
Sh. Imprisonment .
58. Venereal disease .
59. Judicial separation and non-resumption of co-habitation .
60. Renunciation . 5 .
61. Consent. + . .
62. Actificial insemination . . . .
63. Conversion . . . . . . . .
64. Joinder of aduiterer or adulteress in actions founded on
: adultery . : - . . . . . .
65-66. Damages for adultery न पु . .
67-68. Settlement of property . . .
69-70. Jurisdiction . . . न . . .
7 Forum. Se
72-73. Course adopted as to jurisdiction . . . .
74. Course adopted as to forum. . . .
7. Matrimonial tribunal . . . . . : . .
76, Decisions of ecclesiastical guthorities . . . .
77-78. Decree isi and decree absoute .

Pacer

2223
23
3३-०4

28—29
29
29
30

30
37-३1
3r

3I-~3a
32-3
34735
35-96
36

36—37
37

38
38—40



(५)

PARAGRAPHS:
79. Confirmation by High Court. . . पु
King’s Proctor « . . . पु न .
80. Minor changes . पु . . . . .
Bie Appendices . . . . . .

APPENDICES

ApPenpix [,--Showing the recommendations of the Commission in the

form of a draft
(There is an index at the beginning)

AppeNpix TI,—Notes on clauses. . . - .
AppENDIX HI,~—Comparative Table - . . :

APVENDIE IV.—List of witnesses examined by the Commission

-Apeenvix V.—-Recommendations in respect of other Acts.

Paogs
4
40
4a
ar
48--83
84—130
131—137
138—~139

140-161


REPORT ON THE LAW OF CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE AND
DIVORCE

1. The law relating to divorce amongst Christians is The need for
contained in the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, and that relating ©”
to marriage in the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872.
Both these enactments are based on the law as it then
stood in England. Since then considerable changes have
taken place in the social conditions both in England and
in India. With a view to adjusting the law to those changes,
the British Parliament has enacted a number of statutes
on the above topies. culminating in the Marriage Acts,
1949, and 1954, and the Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950, In
India, however, the law as originally enacted in the
statutes of 1869 and 1872 has remained practically un-
changed, and the criticism that it has become antiquated
and to some extent obsolete is well-founded. The need!
has thus arisen for enacting a law on the topic of marriage
and divorce such as will be suitable to the present condi-
tions. Indeed private Bills on the subject were introduced
in Parliament, and the question of revision of the law on

the subject has since been referred by the Government to
the Commission.

We invited suggestions from all persons interested in
the matter. The response was large, and written repre--
sentations were received from dignitaries of the Christian
Church, reoresentatives of Christian associations members
of the Christian community, Bar Associations and Judicial
Officers. Special mention’ must be made of two draft
Bills which were prepared and sent to us, one by the
National Christian Council, Nagpur, and the other by the
Catholic Bishons’ Conference, India. Tt may be mentioned
that in England, a Royal Commission was anpointed in 1951
to “inquire into the law of England, and the Law of Scot-
land concerning divorce and other matrimonial causes and
to consider whether any changes shall be made in the law
or its administration”. The report! of the Commission
contains valuable discussion on several problems, which
arise for our decision. In the light of the above materials,
we prepared a draft of the Law on marriage and maitri-
monial causes and had it circulated for opinion, and in
answer thereto, we received quite a large number of sug-
gestions and comments. Some of the correspondents.
desired to make oral representations. and in view of the
importance of the subject, we acceded to this suggestion
and took their evidence at Bombay, Madras and Delhi.
The names of witnesses who were so examined are set out
in an Appendix’. The draft was then finalised by us after
. cRepert of the Royal Commission on Marriage and Divorce, 1955,
(Cmd. 9678),

“See Appendix IV.



(9) Conso-
lidation.

@) Title.

Local extent,

2

taking their evidence into consideration and the same is
annexed to ‘his report.

2. Under the present law, there are two statutes, one
dealing with divorce and another with marriage. It would
obviously be advantageous to have one comprehensive code
dealing with both the branches of the law; and that is the
view which has generally found favour with the com-
munity. The Parsi Marriage Act, 1936, the Special
Marriage Act, 1954, and the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955,
deal, all of them, both with marriage and with matrimonial
causes in one enactment, and that is the pattern which we
have adopted.

The proposed Act accordingly covers the ground
traversed by the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, and the Indian
Christian Marriage Act, 1872, and it has been termed the
Christian Marriage and Matrimonial Causes Act. We have
omitted the word “divorce” in the title, because the Act
deals not only with divorce, but also with other kinds of
actions such as nullity of marriage, restitution cf conjugal
rights and judicial separation. It will also he more satis-
fying to sentiment to avoid the word “divorce” in the title
to a law on marriage.

3. We shall now discuss in detail the main points on
which the law requires revision, The first question that
has te be considered is as to the territories to which the
proposed law should apply. We have provided that it
should extend to the whole of India except Jammu and
Kashmir, At present the Indian Christian Marriage Act,
1872, has no application to the areas of the State of Travan-
core-Cochin, and Kashmir, though. it should be noted, the
Indian Divorce Act. 1869, was made applicable to the whole
of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. A
suggestion has been made to us that the proposed legisla-
tion should not extend to the erstwhile Travancore-
Cochin State, which has now become merged in the State
of Kerala. and the main ground that has been urged in
support of it is that the Syrian Christians whe form a
considerable proportion of the population in that State are
governed by a customary law of marriage, which is ancient,
and differs from that in force among other Christian com-
munities, and that that should not be disturbed. But an
examination of that customary Jaw does not reveal any
such radical difference as would justify a separate treat-
ment. Under that law. parties who intend to marry give
notice thereof to the clergyman, who publishes it in two
successive meetings of congregations, and if there is no
obiection, the marriage is solemnised. If there is any
abjection, then the matter is enquired into by a Bishop,
and his decision is final. No marriage is solemnised if the
parties are within prohibited degrees of consanguinity or
affinity. That, in brief, is the customary law, and that
does not differ in substance from the mode of sclemnisation.

पड


ee me “८

3

in Roman Catholic Churches, and there is therefore no
sufficient justificution to exclude the territories of the
erstwhile Travancore-Cochin State from the proposed Act.
We should add that though the suggestion for exclusion of
Travancore-Cochin from the Act was made in the written
Tepresentations, no witnesses appeared before us to sup-
port the suggestion. The position regarding the State of
Manipur is similar. The Indian Christian “Marriage Act,
1872, does not apply to it, but the Indian Diverce Act, 1669,
doves. It is desirable that as far as possible there should
be one uniform law for al! Christians in India. We have
accordingly recommended that the proposed legislation
should apply to the erstwhile Travancore-Cochin State as
well as Manipur.

4. One of the cucstions agitated before us is, whether Application.

the provisions of the proposed Act should govern marriages
even when only one of the parties belongs to the Christian
faith at the time of the marriage. Under section 4 of the
Indian Christian Marria 7 age has to be
solemnised in accordance with the provisions ef the Act
even when only cone of rhe nersons is a Christian, [1 has
been suggested before us that the law in this respect
requires modificalien. Section 5 of the Hinda Marriage
Act, 1955, expressly provides that the Act applies to
marriages between Hindus. Section 2(6) of the Parsi
Marriage Act, 1936, defines a marriage as one hetween
Parsis. Conformably to this, “husband” and “wife” are
defined in section 2(5) and section 2(9) respectively as
meaning a Parsi husband and a Parsi wife. Thus, the
scheme of legislation has, latterly, been that laws govern-
ing marriages in a particular religious denomination should
have application onty when both the parties to the marri-
age belong to that religious denomination. The wit-
nesses, who pressed for applying the Act to marriages even
if one of the parties thereto was a Christian while the
other was not, maintained that if the non-Christian party
was willing to have the marriage solemnised in a Church
in accordance with the rites and ceremonies of that Church,
there was no reason why the law should refuse to recog-
nise it. But clearly such a marriage cannot. in any sense,
be regarded as sacramental, In this connection, reference
should be made to the Special Marriage Act, 1954, which
is applicable to marriages between persons belonging to
different faiths, and it would be quite logical if marriages
between persons both of whom are Christians are alone
brought within the purview of the Act, while marriages
in which only one of the parties is a Christian are lefi to
be solemnised under the provisions of the Special

~ Marriage Act, 1954. Further, if a marriage between

persons belonging to different faiths is allowed to be
solemnised under the provisions of the proposed Act, that
would lead to various complications. Tf, for example, a
Christian male marries a Hindu female, the succession to
their properties would be governed as regards the husband

281L—2


4

by the Succession Act, and as regards the wife by the
Hindu Law. The result would be anomalous and inecuit-
able. Difficulties might arise as regards the rights of the
parents to the custedy of children in case of dispute. The
normal law awarding to the father the right of guardian-
ship over children after a particular age might work
hardship on the mother. We consider that the proposed
legislation should apply only when both the parties thereto
are Christians. This view has also the support of a consi-
derable body of Christians.

Question of 5. The next question which falls to be considered is a!
to the application of the proposed legislation to marriages
‘solemnised in India, when one or both the parties thereto
are of foreign domicile, and on that there has been differ-
ence of opinion amongst us. It has been strongly urged
that the legislation should be limited to marriage between
persons of Indian domicile, because, according ta rules of
private international law, when there is a confiet of lev:s—
and that is bound to be when the parties 10 the merricge
have one or both of them a foreign domic‘le—, the validi
of the marriage will have to be judged so far #5 the ¢
city of the parties is concerned by the law of their domi~i
or lex domicilii and that to the extent that the rronosed
legislation prescribes conditions for the val al such a
marriage it will he onnesed to rules of te interna~
tionnl Jaw. Therefore. is said, the pre’ sa'stat on
should be limited to merriages between per: Indian
domicile.

@) Pattern Tt may be stated, at the very outset, thet in prov’
followed by that it is to anply to all marriages solemaiced
oxher coun the pr: ed leg a

other countries. ge Act, 1949,
iages solemnised in E: nd, even thot
06 ave not British by domicile, and
prescribe not merely the form to he observ
conditions of a valid marrizge. That is also the scone of
the marriage laws in the American states, and in all
English speaking countries. Indeed no instance has been
brought to our notice where a sovereign state has enscted
a marriage law limited to persons domiciled in the state.
Conformably to this pattern, the Special Msrriage Act,
1954, and the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, apply to all
marriages solemnised in India. And what is the ground
on which our Parliament should now retreat from the
position taken by it in these enactments and hy all
sovereign states in the marriage laws and decline to
legislate for marriages solemnised within ils territories,
when one or both the parties thereto. have a foreign
domicile? That ground is stated to be the rule of private
international law, that the validity of a marriage should,
in case of conflict, be decided according to the Jaw of

‘Vide sections 1, 2 and 3.

व

ene


5

domicile, and not the law of the country where the
marriage was celebrated. The answer to this is first that
as a statement of the rule of private international Jaw, the
above proposition is too broad, and second that whatever
that rule, it operates not to encroach on grounds occupied
by municipal law, but to supplement the grounds which
should be complied with before the marriage can be held
to be valid. Both these statements will now be explained.

The rule of private international law generally accept- (वी Rule of

ed, no doubt, is that where there is conflict of personal
laws the validity of a marriage should be determined as
‘regards forms and ceremonies according to lex loci cele-
brationis and as regards capacity of the parties according
to lex domicilii. But this rule, it must be mentioned, has
come to be recognised only in quite recent times, and
cannot, even now, be said to command unqualified accep.
tance. The view which originally held the field was, that
the validity of a marriage both in respect of capacity of
the parties and of the forms to be observed was governed
by the law of the country where the marriage was cele-
brated. That is on.the principle that the validity of a
contract must be judged by the ler loci contractus and that
marriage is a contract which is concluded where it is
solemnised. On this ground, it was held in Dalrymple v.
Dairymple' that the validity of a marriaye solemnised in
Scotland between an English domiciled husband, and a
Scottish domiciled wife was to be determined in accord-
ance with Scottish law. In 1861, came the decision in
Brook v. Brook”. There the question was as to the validity
of a marriage solemnised in Denmark, between persons
having English domicile. The marriage would be void
under English law on account of prohibited relationship,
but valid according to Danish law. It was held that the
prohibitions imposed by English law rested on nationality,
and that English subjects were subject to these prohibi-
tions wherever the marriage might be celebrated. Thus
the rule in Dalrymple v. Dalrymple was departed from.
Then came the decision in Sottomayor ५, De Barros
(No. 1)*. There the question was as to the validity of a
marriage solemnised in England between persons, both of
whom were assumed to be of Portuguese domicile; and it
was held that the marriage was void, as it was prohibited
by the law of their domicile, though it would be valid
according to the law of England. It is this decision which
forms the foundation for the rule that as regards the
capacity of the parties to enter into a marriage contract it
is lex domicilii that is determinative and not the lex loci
<elebrationis. This statement of the law has generally

41811) 2 Hagg. Cons. 54. ~~
+1861), 9 HL. Cas. 193.
(1877), 3 P.D. 5.

private
ternationa]
daw.


(मर) Doctrine
of Matri-
monial

(०) Position
where one
party domi-
ciled in the
country.

i

been accepted as corrcet', though its correctness has been
assailed in subsequent decisions*.

It should however be mentioned that there is also
another view, which has the support of a large body of
opinion in England. It is that the validity of a marriage,
as regards the capacity of the parties, should be judged
not by reference to the domicile of the parties prior to
their marriage but by reference to whai is called the
matrimonial domicile, that is to say, the law of the place
where they intend to set up their marriage home. That is
the view taken by Cheshire in his ‘Private International
Law" and that is also ihe recommendation made by the
Royal Commission on Marriage and Divoree’. The trend
of the recent authorities in England has been in favour of
this view’. The result of the authorities is thus summed
up in Graveson on ‘Conflict of Laws"*:

“The essentials of a marriage are governed by the law
of the damicile of eack party at the time of marriage (or
just possibly by that of the intended matrimunial residence
of the parties}, while the formalities are governed exclu
sively by the law of the place of celebration applicablo ta
the particular type of marriage celebrated.”

It will be thus seen fhat even the rule that the validity:
of a marriage should be judged as regards capacity of the
parties by the law of their domicile is still far from being
settled.

But it is sufficient for our purpose that even accepting
the law as laid down in Sottomayor v. De Barros (No. 1)7,
an exception to it has been recognised when one of the
parties to the marriage is domiciled in the country, where
the marriage is solemnised. In Sottomayor v. De Barros
(No. 20", which represents a later stage of the litigation in
3 P.D.1, the question arose as to the validity of a marriage
solemnised in England between two persons, one of whora
had the English domicile and the othcr the Portuguese
domicile. The marriage would be bad according to the
Portuguese law but valid according to English law. It was
held that as one of the partics had the English domicile,
it was the law of England where the marriage was
solemnised that applied and that, according to that law,

Vide Dicey’s * Conflict of Laws’, 7th odn., Rules 31 and 32, _ pages
249 and 257 ; Halsbuzy’s Laws of England. Lord Simonds edition. Vol. 7,
Po.

Wide Soromayor v. De Barras (1879). LAR. 5 B.D. 94 and Ogden wv.
Ogden (1908), ७, 46.

356९ the discussion at pages ३०5 to 312, of the sth edn.
"Vide Cmd. 96783 p. 395.

‘Vide the observations of Lord “Greene M. R. in De Reneville v. De
Reneville (1948), 1 A.F.R. 56 at p. 61 5 Casey ५, Casey (1949), 2 ALE.

“3rd edition, p. 131,
1877). 3 P.Dat,
(1879) LR. 5. P.D. 94.



+ 7

it was valid. It is said that this decision is opposed to
principle, but it has stood and hus been accepted as good
Jaw, and as laying down an exception 10 the rule in Sotto-
mayor v. De Barras (No. 1)". On the rule enunciated there-
in, the proposed legislation can properly lay down the
conditions of a valid marriage, even as regards capacity,
if any of the parties thereto had the Indian domicile. And
even when both the parties theretc have foreign domicile,
there is, as already stated, a 14082 body of opinion in fayour
of the view that if they intend ty set up their matrimonial
home in the country where the marriage is celebrated it is
the law of that country that will govern even in respect
of capacity to enter into marriages. Thus according to
tules of private international law, the validity of a mar-
riage sclemnised in India, will be governed by our law,
not merely when both the varties thereto are of Indian
domicile, but also when even one of them is of Indian
domicile, and, it may be, even when both are of foreign
domicile, if they intend to adopt India 35 their matrimonial
home. No question of conflict of laws could arise in the
above cases.

Even as regards the area wherein there might be a(v) Compe-

conflict of laws, the question is whether the State legisla- tence of a
ture should withdraw when it comes into conflict with jovgiatere
Tules of private international law. Now the law is settled .
beyond doubt that it is competent to the legislature of a
sovereign sfate to enact laws so as to bind all jersons
within its territories, irrespective of their domicile, and
that such a legislation is not lisble ta he questioned on the
ground that it is not in accordance with rules of private
international Jaw. In enacting the law, the sovereign legis-
Jature may and generally does tale into consideration the
rules observed by other nations but it is ultimately for
the legislature of that State to decide what the law should
be, and when it comes to a decision and enacts a law, that
is supreme. Dealing with the very question of conflict of
laws arising by difference in daomiciles, the court observed
in Sottomayor vy. De Barros’:

“This statute and all the marriage Acts which have since
been enacted are general in their terms, and therefore
applicable to, and bind, all persons within the kingdom. In
the weighty language of Lord Mansfield, ‘the Jaw and
legislative government of cvery cuminion equally alfects
all persons and all property within the limits thereof, and
is the rule of decision for all questions which arise there?
Campbell v. Hall.”

‘Vide exception व al’p. 264 of Dicey’s ‘Conflict of Laws” 10 03), ;
Halsbury’s Laws of England, Vol. 5, p. 91, para, 16n ;

1879) LR. के P.D. 94, at 5, 106; See also Schmitthoff, ‘The English
Conflict ‘of Laws’, 1954 edn., pages 6-7.

*Cowp. 208.


(ai) Diccy’s
view.

Qo

8

‘What, then, is the effect, it may be asked, of the rule
that in case of conflict, the validity of a marriage, as regards.
capacity, should be determined ‘according to the law of
domicile? Its effect is, not to give validity to marriages
which are void according to lex loci celebrationis; for that
would be to encroach on the domain of a sovereign legis-
lature, but to render void marriages prohibited by lex
domictlii, notwithstanding that they may be valid accord-
ing to lex loci celebrationts. In others words, lex domicilit
operates not in supersession of lex celebrationis, but in
conjunction with it, with the result that such marriages, in
order to be valid, must comply with both the ler celebra-
tionis, and lex domicilit.

That is the view expressed in the latest edition of
Dicey’s ‘Conflict of Laws. After setting out in Rule 31
the general principle that the validity of a marriage as
regards capacity of parties should be determined in accord-
ance with their respective domicile, the learned Editors
state an exception to it in the following terms": —

“A marriage is, possibly, not valid if either of the
parties is, according to the law of the country where
the marriage is celebrated, under an incapacity to
marry the other.”

Tt is then observed that this is the view taken by
Westlake, Dicey and Chesire. Then we have the following
observations: —

“Accordingly, it is conceived that no marriage cele-
brated in England would be held valid by an English
court if the parties were within the prohibited degrees
of English law or if either of them was under the age
of sixteen, even if the marriage was valid by the law
of their domicile.”

Then follows a reference to the decisions which support
the above view.

Discussing the inter-relation in case of conflict between
lex loci celebrationis and lex domicilii, with reference to 8
marriage solemnised in England, Graveson states the
position thus*:

“The overriding effect of English law in _ this
respect is to maintain minimum, not maximum, Eng-
lish standards of essentials of marriage, so that provided
the English standard is satisfied, reference will still
he made to the lex domicilii 10 ascertain the existence
of capacity, for example, to perform an act in England.”

In the same manner, a marriage solemnised in India
may be required to satisfy certain conditions which we

"Dicey’s ‘ Conflict of Laws’, Seventh Edition, p. 256.
“The Conflict of Laws’ ty R, 17. Graveson, 3rd edn. 9. 731.

8... - .


9

. consider essential, and then lex domicilii may be left to

operate on it.

It will be material for the Purpose of the present dis-
cussion to note that according to rules of private interna-
tional law, the question whether 4 marriage is void or void-
able is to be determined in accordance with ler loci cele
brationis;' and that as under the proposed legislation the
only two grounds on which a marriage will be void are
the existence of a spouse by a previous marriage and the
Parties being within certain ‘prohibited relationship, and as
the list of prohibited relations has been framed with due
regard to other systems of law and is not strin: ent, a con-
flict based on those grounds, though theoretica ly possible,
ig practically speaking unlikely.

It remains to consider whether there is anything in sec- (viii) Section.
tion 88 of the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872, which 88 of the

militates against this view. That section provides that Ch
nothing in the Act renders valid a marriage which is for

bidden by the personal law of the parties thereto. It is said
that this is a recognition of the principle that the validity of
a marriage is to be judged not by lex loci celebrationis, but
by lex domicilti. But this is to ignore slike the object
and the true seope of section 48. While the course of
legislation on marriage in England was to prescribe both
the conditions of a valid marriage and the forms to be
observed in its sclemnisation, he Christian Marriage Act,
1872, deliberately departed from this scheme and restricted
itself to the latter, leaving the former to be determined
by the personal law of the parties. ‘The reason for this
was, as stated by the Select Committee* on the Native Con-
verts' Dissolution of Marriage Bill, 1865, that in India a
considerable proportion of the Christian population was
Roman Catholic by persuasion, and it was not considered
desirable to impose on them conditions which had been
evolyed in the ecclesiastical courts forming a part of the
Established Church of England. It is to give effect to this
that section 88 was enacted. Now that the proposed legis-
lation is to be comprehensive and to deal both with con-
ditions of a valid marriage and modes of solemnisation
thereof, we must abandon section 84 and fall back on the
pattern of the English statutes, and on the latest of them,
the Marriage Act, 1949.

Nor does section 88 on its true construction lend any
support to the view that the marriage law of a State should
be limited to persons domiciled therein. It has not in
mind any question of conflict between lex loci celebra-
tionis and lex domicilii. It merely leaves the question of
validity of marriage to be determined by the personal law
of the parties, and that, of course, is something different
from the law of domicile. The contrast in section 88 ig

Wide De Reneville v. De Reneville (1048) 1 AER. 56.
*Gazette’ of India, Jan. 20, 1866, p. 763, para. 7.



10

not between the lex loci celebration‘s and the ler domicilié,
but between one system of personal law and another, appli-
cable to persons having the same domicile.

Moreover, the section only says that nothing in the Ac
shall render valid a marriage (orbidden by the personal
law of the parties, which is merely one other application
of the doctrine that the conditions as to the validity of a
marriage prescribed by lea loct celebrationis aud by ler
domicilii, operate both cumulatively and that a marriage
which is invalid under the personal law of the parties does
not become valid because it complies with the requirements
of the Act.

(ix) Conclu- We, therefore, recommend that the proposed legislation

sion. should apply to all marriages soleninised within the terri-
tory of India whatever the ‘domicile of the parties thereto,
and that it should leave no vacuum therein. And in this
we follow not merely the scheme adopted in the Special
Marriage Act, 1954, and the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955,
but also the pattern of similar legislation in England,
which, being general, binds, as observed in Sottomayor v.
De Barros (No. 2)', all persons within the kingdom. And
in this we are no more disregarding rules of private inter-
national law than the very countrizs where they have been
developed.

Modes of 6. Coming next to the topic of solemnisation of mar-

solemnisetion riages, section 5 of the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872,

af marriages. enumerates five different modes in which marriages could
be solemnised. It has been pressed before us that the law
as laid down in the section is complicated and cumbersome
and that it should be simplified by prescribing one mode
of solemnisation for all marriages between Christians in
India. We agree that the ultimate goal should be to enact
one law applicable to all Christians; but, as will presently
appear, it is not feasible, in the conditions as they exist, to
enact such a law, and it is now possible only to make a
near approach to it.

@ Procedure 7. Dealing with the five modes of solemnisation men-
tor Indien tioned in section 5, sub-sections (1) to (3) thereof contain
Chritions. provisions applicable, in general, to marriages between
Christians, while sub-section (5) 13 limited to marriages be-
tween Indian Christians for which a special procedure is
laid down. The reason for making this distinction is stated
to be that the more formal and elaborate procedure for
solemnisation of marriages obtaining in the Established
Churches was unsuitable to Indian Christians, many of
whom were considered not sufficiently literate. But this
reason, even if it was correct in 1372, when the Indian
Christian Marriage Act was passed, has long ceased to he
so, and we think that there is no need at the present day
to retain the special procedure for solemnisation of

ALR. 5 PD. 94-


EEE ee

11

marriages between Indian Christians. We have, therefore,
omitted the special procedure prescribed in section 5(5}.

8. As regards the other four modes of solemnization of Gf) Civil
marriages mentioned in section 5, they ean be divided into Marmiages.

two categories—civ'] and sacram>ntsl. Section 5(4) pro-
vides for marriages being solemnized by or before the Re-
gistrar appointed under the Act. That is. of course, a civil
“marriage, and that has been retained, There was a sugges-
tion that since all civil marriages could now be performed
under the Special Marriage Act, 1954, there was no need
to recognise such a category in tae proposed enactment,
which might be limited io sacramental marriages. But the
representatives of the Christian community are strongly
opposed to this, as marriages solemnized under the Special
Marriage Act could be dissolved by the consent of parties,
and that is against their notions and sentiments.

9. Coming next to sacramental marriages, the scheme (i) Sacra-
of the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872, is this. Section mental mar
5(1) provides for marriages being sulemnised by any per- 58%:

son who has received episcopal ordination, and this head
will comprehend all marriages verformed according to the
Tites of the Church of Rome and the Church of England.
Section 5(2) provides for marriages being solemnised by
clergymen of the Church of England Under Section 5(3)
marriages can be solemnized by any minister of religion
who is licensed under the Act. Now the question is, whe-
ther it is possible to have one category of what may be
said to be sacramental marriages as distinguished “from
civil marriages.

10. The strength of the Christian Pepulation in India
.is stated to be about ten million, and the evidence is that
they belong to different Church organisations. Nearly half
the number is of the Roman Catholic persuasion, and that
forms a distinct uit. Then there are those who were
members of the Indian section of the Anglican Church prior
to 1927, and, on the constitution of that section as a distinct
Church under the Indian Church Act, 1927, under the
name of the Church of India, Burma and Ceylon, became
members of that Church. Then there is the Church of
Scotland which seceded from the Roman Catholic Church
in 1560, and after throwing off episcopalism became in
1688 a Presbyterian Church. Then there are the Presby-
terian Churches of America and cf England, the Lutheran
Church, and several congregational Churehes. The evidence
discloses that the Protestant Churches functioning ir. India
number several hundreds, each of them having its own
followers, There are substantial differences in the rites
and ceremonies relating to solemnisation of marriage in
those Churches. The question is, whether it is possible to
bring all these Churches under one category. It was sug-
gested that it would be possible to introduce uniformity,

417 and 18 Geo. 5, ९. 40.



13

if the law provided that no minister of religion, whatever
the Chureh to which he might belong, could solemnize a
marriage unless he was licensed by the State, and also
prescribe the rules for solemnisation to be observed by
them.

11, Simple and attractive as this suggestion might seem,
there is considerable difficulty, legal and practical, in giving
effect to it. Two of these Churches, the Church of Rome,
and the Anglican Church and its successor, the Church of
India, Burma and Ceylon, have rules for solemnization of
marriages which are ancient, definite and well-designed to
prevent clandestine or prohibited marriages. These
Churches are religious denominations, and have a constitu-
tional right to manage their own affairs in matters of reli-
gion. It has been held by the Supreme Court! that religion:
includes not merely matters of doctrine and belief but
also practices which are regarded by the community as
part of its religion. These Churches cannot, therefore, be
compelled to adopt rules for solemnization of a marriage
different from those sanctioned by their usage. It follows,
that we have to recognise two different modes for solemni-
zation of marriages, one for ministers of established
Churches and another for other ministers of religion. The
former must he left to be governed by the rules and usages
of the Church wherein the marriage is solemnized, and
the latter will have to be regulated by statute.

12, Then, as regards the persons who are enlitled to
solemnize the marriages in the Church of Rome and in the
Church of India, Burma and Ceylon, the ministers derive
their authority from episcopal ordination. And a provi-
sion that they should obtain license from the State might
be challenged as constituting the super-imposition of an
outside authority on the Church in what is a matter of
religion, and therefore repugnant to the Constitution.
Moreover, the power to grant a license carries with it the
power to revoke it, and it is a question whether such a
power can be reconciled with the episcopal character of
the Church. And, legal difficulties apart, there is the prac-
tical inconvenience in having to license thousands of priests
all over the country. And what purpose does licensing
serve, if the solemnization is to be in accordance with the
practice of the Church? The rules of these Churches ere
sufficiently stringent to maintain discipline among its
clergymen, We therefore recommend tha: such Churches
should be brought under a distinct category, and that the
ministers of those Churches should, as heretobefere, ‘have
the authority to solemnize marriages in accordance with
the rules and usage observed therein.

13. Then there are other Churches, such as the Church
of Scotland, the American Presbyterian Church and the

\The Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras v. Sri
Lakshmindra Thirtha Stcamiar, (954) S.GR. 1005, and Sti Venkataramana
Devarn ए. Stare of Mysore (1958), S.CR. 895.

a

a,


13

like which, though not episcopal in their constitution, have
well-settled rules 857६0 the appointment of ministers and
solemnization of marriages. These Churches also stand,
so far as the legal position is concerned, very much on the
same footing as the Church of Rame or the Church of
India, Burma and Ceylon, and any provision requiring
their ministers to follow the rules of solemnisation pres-
cribed in this Act for licensed ministers, or even for obtain-
ing licenses from the State, may be open to attack. In
our opinion, these Churches also should be placed in the
same category as the Roman Catholic Church or: the
Church of India, Burma and Ceylon.

14. Besides these Churches, if new Churches are form-
ed, and they frame their own rules for appointment of
ministers and for solemnization of marriages, those
Churches also will have to be accorded the same status as
is enjoyed by the Roman Catholic Church or cther existing
Churches. The result is, that all these Churches which can
be said to form religious denominations will form a cate-
gory of their own, with the right to follow their own rules.
as to solemnization of marriages. These Churches have
been termed by us as “recognised Churches”. Where, how-
ever, parties to a marriage do not belong to any recognised
Church, we have to provide for solemnisation of their
marriages by ministers licensed by the State and to pres-
cribe the procedure to be followed by them in sclemnizing
marriages. Thus sacramental marriages must necessarily
fall under two categories, (i) these solemnized by minis-
ters of recognised Churches, and (ii) those solemnized by
ministers licensed by the State.

15. That leads us on to the question as to which of the Recognised:
Churches ate to be recognised. There is no difficulty 80 Churches.

far as the established Churches, such as the Roman Catho-
lic Church, the Church of India, Burma and Ceylon and
similar Churches are concerned. The difficulty aiises with
reference to other Churches, whose number is said to be
legion. It appears from the evidence that there is a move-
ment among several Protestant Churches to merge them-
selves into a single Church. In 1947, the four southern
dioceses of the Church of India, Burma and Ceylon united
with the Wesleyan Methodist Church and the Scottish
Church of South India to form a new Church called the
Church of South India. It is said that there is a similar
movement for union among the Protestant Churches of
North India. If that fructifies, the task of recognition
would, to that extent, be rendered easy. But it is admitted
that there are several Churches which are functioning as
independent units, and, on the materials before us, it is not
possible for us to say which of them deserve recognition.

16, The evidence also disclosés that new Churches are
in the course of formation and expansion, such as, for
example, the Indian National Church. This is said to have
been started in 1947 with the object of establishing a


Licenses to
ers.

14

national Church, which wiil be wholly free from the in-
fluence of foreign Churches and missions, which will pro-
pagate the Christian faith on lines suited to Indian notions
and traditions, and in which the ministers of religion would
be Indians. This Associalion has been registered under
the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950, and is stated to have
a following of about 60,000 persons.

17. Now, what are the criteria which should be taken
into consideration before a Church is recognised for the
purpose of the proposed Act? They are that the Church
must have a sufficient following and strength to justify
recognition, that it should have a place of worship, that
there should be, in the Church organisation, a proper autho-
tity to appoint and control ministers, that the Church must
have clear and definite rules as to solemnization of mar-
Tiages such as will prevent hasty: and clandestine mar-
Tiages, and that it should be registered in accordance with
the law relating to registration of societies. These are,
in general, the factors that would be relevant in deciding
whether a Church should be recognised under the proposed
legislation.

18. Then there is the question as to the authority which
is to decide whether a Church should be recognised. We
have provided that the power of recognition should be
vested in the State Governments, and that they should be
guided by a committee consisting of Christians not ex-
ceeding five in number. It will be the duty of the com-
mittee to examine applications for recognition in the light
of the considerations set out above, and recommend to the
State Government whether the Church should be recognis-
ed. and it will be for the State Government to come to a
decision on the recommendation of the committee.

19. To summarise the result, marriages can, according
to our recommendations. be solemnised in three modes;
(0) by or before the Marriage Registrar—and that ‘s a
civil marriage; (ii) by ministers of recognised Churches;
and (iii) by ministers licensed by the State-.the two latter
being sacramental marriages; religious denominations hav-
ing clear and definite rules for solemnisation of marriages
by ministers constituted under the rules of the Church
should be classed as recognised Churches: a committee of
Christians should be constituted to recommend to the Gov-
ernment which Churches should he recognised; and the
State Governments should have the power to grant or
withhold recognition on such recommendation.

20. As regards licenses to ministers of religion, some of
the witnesses insisted that the Government should issue
licenses only to Indians, gs they are likely to understand
Indian customs and manners better. But if the parties do
not belong to a recognised Church. it is only Indian minis-
ters who would ordinarily solemnise such marriages, and
there seems to be no necessity to make it a rigid rule. The



me

15

opinion was also expressed that the system of licensing
ministers should be totally apolisned and that marriages
should be allowed to be solemnized, as among the Hindus
and Muslims. by ptiesis selected by the parties. This _ is
wholly unworkable. The system ot marriage among Hin-
dus and Muslims has evolved on different Jines, and can-
not be fitted in with the scheme of splemnization among

Christians.

31. Though it has nol been possible. as alrcady stated, Registration

mtal m

to bring all sac:
have p nisters of religion shou
solemnizing a marriage, enter jt in a book kept
yarpose and send a एज १३ “nercal to the Registrar-G
That would introduce an clemaat of uniforrmit:
sacraments: 1

. after
or the
eral.
in ail

22. We shel now
a valid marrivve. The Indian
1872, deals exclusive i
marriege, and Jos
be determined in ac " ९ of the
parties. That ans tatrodua ar ertainty in
the law. which. it is desir. As the
object of the proposed le
lating to Christian marriages, we cons
also prescribe the conditions on which a valid marriage
could be contracted. हि

(ian Wlarris
topic of solemni-a
of a valid

vriages under ene caterory, we of marriages.

up the question sf conditons of Conditions
Act of a valid
cf mattiage.

23. One of the conditions of a valid marriage under the Prohibited

proposed law is that the parties should rot be
hibited relationship unless the custom governing, each of
them permits of a marriage between the tw 1 We have
set out! (i) the relations who cannot be martied by a man

and (ii) the relations who cannot be married by a woman.
In framing this list, we have examined the lists appended
to the (English) Marriage Act. 1849, and the Special Mar-

riage Act, 1954, and the provisions of the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955, and we_ have further iaken into account the
sentiments of the Christian commynity of this country in
the matter. There ‘s one aspect of this question which
may be elucidated. In the lst. as originally framed by
us and included in the draft which was e'reulated for cpi-
nion, we had included in: Part 1, “sister's daughter, brother's
daughter, mother’s sister and father’s sister”, and in Part
TI “brother's son, sister's son, mother’s brother and father’s
prother”. Objection is taken by the Roman Catholic
Church witnesses to the inclusion of the above relations
in the prohibited lists, because, it is said, though marriages
with those relations are not Viewed with favour, and are
prohibited, the prohibition is not absolute and is capable
of being removed by a Papal dispensation. Tr was there-
fore urged that these relations should be taken out of the
lists, or, in the alternative, provision should be made for

TSee Appendix I, Schedule 1.

thin pro- degrees.


Age,

16

the grant of dispensation by the appropriate authorities of
the Catholic Church. We consider that it would be inappro-
priate in a piece of legislation ‘ike this to enact any provi-
sion for dispensation by any authority, and much less by
an outside authority. But the question still remains, whe-
ther these relations should be Placed in the list of prohi-
bited relations. Can it be-said that marriage with these
relations is so repugnant to the prevailing notions as to call
for prohibition? In some communities in India, marriages
with some of these relations, as for example, sister's
daughter, and mother’s brother are not unusual, and they
are valid. The fact that the Pope can issue dispensation
with respect to these marriages shows that they cannot
‘be very obnoxious to Christian sentiment, though they may
not be favoured. We have, therefore, omitted these rela-
tions altogether from the lists,

24. Another point which was raised with reference to
Prohibited degrees, may be mentioned. In requiring as a
condition of marriage that the parties should not be within
prohibited relationship, we have made an exception where
the custom governing each of the parties permits of such
a marriage. Two points have been raised in connection
with this provision. One is that the excep: in favour
of custom should be omitted if the interests of harmony
and purity of the home. But in this country customs as
to marriage have varied from region to region, and they
have recognised as valid marriages which are not in accord-
ance with strict rules of law. Now to enact a law which
will render them void would be to throw the society into
great confusion. We are therefore unable to accept this
suggestion, though we appreciate the sense behind it

25. A suggestion different in its tenor is that when the
custcra of one of the parties permitted the marriage, it
shouid be declared to be valid, even if the custom of the
other party did not sanction it. We are unable to accept
this suggestion, as marriage is a bilateral affair, and it is
onty a custorn which binds beth the parties that could be
recognised. हे

26. Another condition for a valid marriage under the
Proposed legislation is, that “the bridegroom has completed.
the age of eighteen years and the bride the age of fifteen
years at the time of the marriage”. Under section 60 of the
Christian Marriage Act, 1872 as amended in 1952, it is a
condition of marriage between Indian Christians that the
age of the bridegroom shall not be under eighteen years
and the age of the bride shall not be under fifteen years.
We have adopted this as a condition of all Marriages solem-
nised under the proposed legislation.

We have also provided that where the bride is a minor,
the consent of her guardian must have been obtained. That
is because marriage, like other contracts, pre-supposes con-
tractual capacity in the parties; and as a minor cannot,


eo

. 17

cunder the law, consent to a contract, her guardian has to
act for her. On this, two questions arise for consideration:
{i) who are the persons who can act as guardian for this
purpose, and (ii) what is to happen if the guardian refuses

to consent, without just cause. On the first question, the
witnesses are for liberalising the list of guardians, and for

including de facto guardians also therein. We have, con- Guardian-

formably to their evidence, provided for a long category of tip.
guardians. As for including de facto guardians in the list,
we have, on full consideration, come to the conclusion that
they can obtain leave of the district court, and need not be
specially mentioned.

27. Then the question is, what is to happen if the con- qj thong

sent of the guardian is withheld without just cause. We of

have provided that in such cases, the permission of the dis- conseat.

trict court will have to be cbtained before the marriage is
solemnized. At one stage, We were inclined to the view
that this provision might be limited to marriages solem-
nized by Marriage Registrars (as at present)! or by licensed
Ministers. But the question has been raised whether such a
provision should not apply even to marriages solemnized
by Ministers of recognised Churches. It appears that in
these cases, when consent is refused, the higher ecclesiasti-
cal authorities usually intervene and bring about a settle-
meni. We are of opinion that this is a function which per-
tains to the domain of civil rights, and more properly con-
fined to the district court. The result is, that the procedure
cf resort to district court in case of refusal of consent will
nuw be available for all marriages performed under the
Act.

| 28. Another point raised in connection with the marriage pride’ own
oi a minor bride is that under the Canon Law, if she is consent
.over f urteen years of age, her own consent must also be

‘obtained before a marriage could be solemnized and such
व provision should be enacted in the present law. Speaking
practically, the parents or guardians would be acting wisely
in obtaining the consent of the bride or else she might re-
fuse to go through it. But as, in law, she is incapable of
giving consent, that cannot be prescribed as a condition of
a valid marriage.

29, We may now refer to certain prohibitions to pronipitions
marriage contained in the Canon law, which the Romar under Canon

Catholics proposed for inclusion in the proposed law: Law,

(1) Persons who have joined the sacred order
cannot marry, But it appears that this is an impedi-
ment which is capable of being removed by a dispen-
_Sation being granted, and our policy is not to recognise
such prohibitions as conditions of a valid marriage.

(2) Under the Canon law, abduction, commission
of certain crimes, conduct violating public propriety

'See section 45, Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872.


Danger of
Death.

Nullity of
marriage.

Existing law
under the
Divorce Act,
1869,

and certain spiritual relationships are also regarded as
impediments to a lawful marriage, and it is said that
the proposed law should not recognise, as valid,
marriages performed in disregard of that law. But
these impediments pertain to the domain of moral and
not positive law, and they cannot, therefore, be pres-
eribed as conditions the breach of which will render
the marriage void. This dues not preclude the Church
from refusing to sclemnize such marriages as are re-
pugnant to Canon law, and that is what has heen pro-
vided!,

(3) In general, it is said that incapacity which is
a bar to the solemnization of a marriage according to
the lows and customs of the Roman Catholic Church

should also be recognised as conditions of a valid’

marriage. For the reasons given above, we are unable
to 726०७ this.

80, Fina. * was sugsested that under the Canon law,
® person is in danger of death, he cen lidly enter
& contract of marriage in the presence of two witnesses
‘cing through the formalities of svlemnisation by
the priest, 2nd that a similar provision might be made in
the proposed statute. But, in our opinion, to provide that
a declaration before two witnesses should suffice to consti
tute a valid marriage will open a wide door to false claims
and perjured evidence. On the other hand, it should not be
difficult for a dying man to send for the Registrar and have
the marriage solemnized before him under the provisions of
this Act. We have, therefore, not accepted this suggestion.

31. Having dealt with the conditions of a valid matriage,
we now proceed to consider the effect of a breach of those
conditions on the validity of a marriage, In England, this
question is considered on principles applicable to contracts.
Under the general law, ‘some contracts are void, as for
example when they are illegal or immoral, and some are
voidable, as for example when they are brought about by
fraud, in which case it is open to the party defrauded to
avoid them. This distinction has been maintained in the
law of marriages, certain grounds being recognised as
grounds for declaring a marriage void, and certain others
as grounds for annulling it. A void marriage is, under the
law. no marriage at all, whereas a voidable marriage is
good and valid until it is annulled by an order of court. In
English law, the differences in the legal consequences
between the two classes of marriages are well-scttled? and
section 8 of the Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950, proceeds on
2 recognition of them.

82, This subiect is dealt with in section 19 of the Divorce
Act, 1869. Under that section, a marriage would be void if
(i) the respondent was impotent at the time of the martiage

1868 Appendix 1, clause 70,

pilaisbury’s Laws of England, Vol. 12, Paragraphs (420-425 ); Tolstoy.
on Divorce, 4th dition, pp. 98-99. eraphs (420-425 aad

|

4


19

and at the time of the institution of the suit; {ii) the parties
are within the prohibited degrees of consanguinity or affi-
nity; (iii) either party was a lunatic or idiot at the time of
the marriage; or (iv) the former husband or wife of either
Farty was living at the time of the marriage, and the marri-
age with such former husband or wife was then in force.
The section saves the jurisdiction of the court to annul
marriages on the ground that the consent thereto was
obtained by fraud or force. On general principles, those
marriages would be voidable. The distinction between void
and voidable marriages has been adopted in the Special
Marriage Act’ and in the Hindu Marriage Act’,

33. Now the question is as to how marriages should be

dealt with under the proposed Act, when they are invalid
either on account of breach of a condition prescribed or
otherwise, The opinion is overwhelmingly in favour of
limiting the category of void marriages within the
narrowest limits, the reason being that the children of such
marriages would be illegitimate. Agreeing with this view,
we have provided that marriages shall be void only in two
cases: (i) when either party has a spouse living at the time
of the marriage. or (ii) when the parties are within prohi-
bited relationship. Reasons of public policy require that
these marriages should be prohibited, and that is also in
consonance with the sentiment of the members of the
community. In all other cases, we have provided that the
marriages would be voidable,

34. Conformably to the rules relating to avoidance af
contracts, the right to obtain annulment of avoidable
marriage will be available only to the party aggrieved, and
thai is to be exercised subject to the conditions prescribed,

35. It will be sean that the scheme of the proposed Act
marks a substantial departure from that adopted in section
19 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, and as that Act is 10
sland repesled by this Act, the question arises as to the
legal incidents of marriages solemnized before the eom-
meneement of this Act, when they suffer from infirmities
wh: will render them void or voidable under the propcsed
Act. In dealing with this matter, we have followed two
principles; first, that a marriage which was valid, according
to the law as it stood at the time of the marriage, should re-
main unoffected by the provisions of the proposed Act, and
second, that even if it was void under the existing law, it
aight be treated as voidable under the proposed legisla-
tion, and a right has been given to avoid it in those cases,
‘Thus a marriage, when the spJuse by a previous marriage
is living, or between persons within prohibited relationship,
will be void both under section 19 of the Indian Divorce Act

\Sections 24, 25 and 26,
"Sections, 17, 12 and 16,

281 L—-3

Marriages
solemnised
under the i
existing law.


20

and under the proposed Act. As, however, the Indian Chris-
tian Marriage Act, 1872 did not enumerate who the prohi-
bited relations are, whereas the proposed Act enumerates
them, it is conceivable, though highly improbable, that a
marriage between two persons, which might be bad on the
ground of prohibited relationship under the proposed Act,
might be valid if solemnised before its commencement,
having regard to the then Jaw of prohibited relationship.
But such a marriage-will not be open to attack under the
provisions of the proposed Act, because we have provided
{hat a marriage solemnised before the commencement of
Act, shall not be deemed to be invalid by reason of any
provisions of the Act. Under the Indian Divorce Act, 1869,

_a marriage is null and void if (a) the respondent was

Status of
children born
of void 25
marriages—
three views.

illegitimate.

impotent at the time of marriage and the date of suit, or
(0) either party was an jdiot or lunatic at the time of
marriage. Under the proposed Act, the marriage would be
voidable in either of these cases, and we have provided that
the party aggrieved can move for annulment thereof. Thus
the retrospective operation of the Act will not prejudicially
affect rights previously acquired.

36. So far, we have considered the rights of the parties
to a marriage, when the marriage is void or voidable. We
have now to consider the rights of the children, if any, born
cf such marriages. Where the marriage is voidable, no
difficulty arises. It is valid in law until a court passes a
decree annulling it, and the children born of that marriage
pefore a decree of annulment is passed are rightly regarded
as legitimate.

37. The problem arises only when the marriage is void.
Three views are possible as to the status of children born
uf such a marriage: (i) they must be regarded as illegiti-
rate, because a void marriage has, in law, no existence, and
the children of such a marriage can only be regarded as
filius nullius; (ii) they should be entitled to succeed to
their parents, as if they were legitimate, provided the
parents had contracted the marriage bona fide and without
knowledge of any impediment; (iii) they should, in all
cases, be entitled to succeed to their parents as if they were
legitimate.

38. The first view is the one generally accepted in all
English-speaking countries, and that was also the law of
England before the enactment quite recently of the Legiti-
macy Act}. In support of this view, it is said that as prohi-
bition of certain marriages rests on grounds of public
policy, it would defeat that policy if children of these
marriages are regarded as legitimate, because what largely
deters persons from contracting prohibited marriages is
the fear that the children would be illegitimate. In other
words, in a conflict between the inferesis oor in a conflict between the interests of the general

tLegitimacy Act, 1959 (7&8 Eliz 2, Ch. 73), section 2 (1).


21

‘public and those of the innocent offspring of prohibited
marriages, it is the latter that must give way to the former.

39, The second view recognises the force of the reason Second view:
in support of the first view, but seeks to limit it to eases eal
where the parties to a marriage deliberately break the law marriages to
-and contract prohibited marriages. Where however they inherit as
are not aware of the true facts constituting the impediment, legitimate.
and there is no intention on their part to set the prohibitions
at naught, then, the demands of publie policy are, it is said,
‘sufficiently satisfied by declaring the marriage void, and
there is no need to go further and visit the consequences of
the mistake of the parents on the children. To illustrate, .
the wife marries a second time in the honest belief that
her husband had been drowned when the ship in which he
travelled cank in the high seas. Likewise, two persons who
are within prohibited degrees, contract a marriage in igno-
rance of their relationship. Public policy does not, it is
said, require that in addition to declaring the marriage
void, the children of the marriage should also be bastar- २
dised. This principle has, it should be noticed, been accept-
ed to a limited extent in section 21 of the Divoree Act, which
provides that when a person contracts a second marriage in
the bona fide belicf that te sp by tho previous marri-
age was dead, then the children uch marriage would be
entitled to succeed to the esizig heir parents as if they
were legitimate.

It may be mentioned here that it is this view that com-
mended itself tc the Royal Commission on Marriage
Divorce in England. Its report on this point run:
follows’:

“In England, if a marriage is void ab initio, the children
of the marriage are deemed to be iegitimate. It may be
noted, hawever, that before the Reformation, the Canon
Jaw held that the child of a void marriage was legitimate
where the defect rendering the marriage void was un-
Known to one of the parties.

“Under the cammon law of Scotland, where at the
dime of the marriage one or both of the parties ts a putative
inarriage was or were ignorant of the impediment to the
marriage, the children arc held to be legitimate, and are
entitled to the ordinary rights of succession. The ignorance

must be of the existence of the impediment and nat merely
ignorance of the law.

“One wilness sugdested that the Scots rule be adopted
in England. Others advocated that to avoid hardship to
children born of a void marriage they should always be
deemed to be legitimate. In our view no distinction can
be drawn between children who were illegitimate from

’Report of the Royal Commission on Martiage and Divorce, 1955, Cred.
+9678, 70. 305 and 306, paragraphs 1184 to 1186,



‘Third view 4
children to
inherit as

legitimate.

First view
not_accepted,

Argument in
favour of
second view.

22

birth and children born of parents who had gone through:
@ ceremony of marriage, both knowing at the time of an
impediment which rendered the marriage void. The Scots

rule, on the other hand, seems to us to be sound end we:

suggest that in England, as in Scotland, children born of a
void marriage should be held to be legitimate where it is.
shown that one or both of the parents was or were ignorant.
of the impediment to the marriage.”

It was to implement the above reccmmendation that the
British Parliament enacted, as already stated!, the Legiti-
macy Act, 1959, providing therein that the child of a void
marriage shall be treated as the legitimate child of _ his:
parents if at the time of the act of intercourse resulting in
the birth (or at the time of the celebration of the marriage
if the marriage took place later) both or either of the
parents reasonably believed that the marriage was valid.

40. The third view also agrees that a marriage entered
into in disregard of prohibitions enacted on grounds of

+ public policy should be declared to be void, but seeks to

relieve the children of the marriage from the consequences:
of such a declaration on the ground that the children, being
innocent, should not suffer for the sins of their parents. It
is sufficient, it is said, that the parents are punished for
contracting a marriage prohibited by law.

41, The first view is, strictly speaking, logical. But the
Indian legislature has to some extent, made a departure
from it when it enacted section 21 of the Indian Divorce
Act, 1869, conferring certain rights of succession on children
of void marriages contracted bona fide; and that having
stood as law for now ninety years, we do not consider it
expedient now to go back upon it on grounds of pure logic.
As already stated*, the British Parliament has also relaxed
somewhat the strictness of the law on this subject and has
recognised by the Legitimacy Act, 1959, certain rights in
children of void marriages contracted bona fide. We have,
therefore, not adopted the first view.

42, It is a more difficult question whether we should
adopt the second or the third of the views set out above.
In support of the second view, apart from the fact that it
was adopted as law in section 21 of the Divorce Act, 1869,
it may be urged that if the third view is to prevail it would
mean that persons can with impunity defy a law based on
grounds of public policy, and frustrate the purpose with
which the legislature has enacted the’ prohibition.
Sympathy is undoubtedly due to innocent children of pro-
hibited marriages, but they are not without rights under
the law. They have a right to be maintained, and that is all
that legitimate children are entitled to, during the lifetime
of their parents. But to enlarge these rights, and_ place
them on the same footing as legitimate children with right

4See para. 38, supra.
*Paras, 38 and 39, supra.



23

to inherit, would be to abrogate the distinction between
marriage and concubinage. So long as society believes in
marriage as an institution and prescribes conditions there-
for, there must be a point at which breach of the regula-
‘ions must render the marriage void and the children illegi-
timate. That is the argument in support of the second view.

43, There is undoubtedly great force in this reasoning. Third view
But, then, our Parliament had quite recently occasion to go accepted.
into the question of the status and rights of children born
-of void marriages, in connection with two pieces of legisla-
tion, the Special Marriage Act, 1954, and the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1956, and on both these occasions, it has adopted the
‘third view and recognised the rights of children of void
marriages to succeed to the properties of their parents as
if they were legitimate. Section 26 of the Special Marriage
Act provides that where a decree of nullity is granted in
xespect of a marriage which is either void or voidable, any
child begotten before the decree is made who would have
been the legitimate child of the parties to the marriage if it
had been dissolved instead of being declared null ana void
shall be deemed to be their legitimate child. Then follows
4 proviso which limits the rights of succession to the pro-
perties af the parents. Section 16 of the Hindu Marriage
Act is on the same lines as section 26 of the Special Marn-
age Act and confers similar rights on the children of void
marriages. Now the question is, whether there are sufficient
grounds for our departing from a decision taken by the
legislature quite recently on a matter which is as much
“social as it is juristic, We are unable to find any justifica-
tion for treating children born of marriages prohibited by
the proposed legislation differently from those born of
marriages prohibited by the Special Marriage Act, i954,
and the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. We have accordingly
provided that they should also be entitled to succeed to the
Properties cf their parents as if they were legitimate.

44. Under section [4 of the Matrimonial Causes Act, Judiciat
1950, a petition for judicial separation can be presented on Separation,
the same grounds on which a petition for divorce ean he
presented, and on certain other grounds specified therein,

That, in general, is the scheme of the Special Marriage Act,
1954, and jt is also provided in section 27(i) of the said Act,
that when a decree for judicial separation is made, but the
parties do not, within two years thereafter, come together,
that itself would be a ground for a petition for divorce. Naw
it is said that to provide far two remedies on the same facts,
one for judicial separation and another for divorce, serves
20 purpose, and that, further, when a decree for judicial
separation is passed, and, two years elapse thereafter w
out the parties coming together, a provision that a fresh
action for divoree could again be filed on the same gr Is
can only result in needless delay and expense, [Ft has there-
fore been suggested that an action for judicial separation
‘might be altogether omitted. There is considerable force



Cop acity of
wife to
acquire pro~
pertv or to
enter into
contracts
after a
decree for
judicial
separation.

24

in this. But the Roman Catholies do not recognise divorce,
and ihe legal systems based on the Canonical law, generally,
provide only for judicial separation. There are consider-
able sections .f the Protestants also who are averse to
divorce, and they would prefer a decrce for judicial separa-
tion to a decree of dissolution of marriage. ‘This is one of
the modes of relief recognised in the Indian Divaree Act,
1869, and we do nut see sufficient grounds for changing the
law. We have, therefore, provided for relief by way of judi-
cial separation being granted on the same grounds as
divorce. But we are impressed by the suggestion that, to
permit a second action for divorce after a decree for judi-
celal separation has remained in ६72९ for two years, on the
identical grounds on which that decree is founded, must
result in delay and expense. We have accordingly provided
that it is open to either party, to apply, in that very suit,
after two years, for a decree of dissolution, if the parties do
not come t.gether.

45. It was also suggested by a few witnesses that the
grounds for judicial separation might be less stringent than
those for divorce. Apart from the vagueness of this sug-
gestion, having regard to the fact that a decree for judicial
separation would, in the proposed Act, result, without
more, in a decree for dissolution’, the nature and standard
of the grounds should be the same for both forms of action.
And that in general, is the scheme of the Matrimonial
Causes Act, the Special Marriage Act, and the Hindu
Marriage Act.

46. We should now refer to sections 24 and 25 of the
Indian Divorce Act, 1869, which enact, inter alia, that after
a decree for judicial separation is made a married woman
shall have the right to hold and acquire property, dispose
of it inter vives or by testamentary disposition, and to
enter into contracts. This provision is based upon the
common law of England under which the personality of
the wife became, on marriage, merged in that of her
husband, and they constituted one person in the eye of
the law. The result was that marriage operated as an
assignment to the husband of the property which the wife
owned at the time of the marriage. Properties acquired
by her later also vested in him. On her death, they passed
to him absolutely. Likewise, any contract entered into by
her only operated as one entered into on behalf of her
husband. The Court of Chancery made some inroads into
this law, and in 1882, the British Parliament enacted the
Married Women's Property Act, providing that the pro-
perties of a woman would continue to be her own, even
after marriage; that she could acquire properties in her
own right after marriage; and, that she had absolute domi-
nion over them. When the Divorce Act was enacted in
1869, it was the common law doctrine that held the field,
and it is that doctrine that is reflected in sections 24 and.

*See para, 44, supra,


25

25 of the Divorce Act. The common law of this country,
however, was different, and, conformably to it, the statute
law of this country allowed married women equal righis
with men in respeci of property and contracts. Section 4
of he Married Women's Right to Property Act, 1874, which
applic. to Christians, provides that the earnings of a
married woman shall be her separate property, gnd under
section 7 of that Act, she is entitled to maintain legal pro-
ceedings with reference thereto. Section 20 of the Indian
Succession Act, 1925, makes it clear that a person does not
become, by marriage, subject to any disability in respect
of his or her property, or acquire any interests in the
property of his or her spouse. Under the Contract Act,
1872. there is no bar to married woman entering into a con-
tract in her own name and in her own right. The pro-
visions of sections 24 and 25 of the Indian Divorce Act,
1869, based upon the then current English Law that marri-
age effaces the separate personality of the wife, and that
the effect of judicial separation is to bring about its re-
emergence, must, therefore, be regarded as out of tune
with the common law of India and with the statutes afore-
said, and as obsolete. There being no need for those pro-
visions, they have been omitted in the proposed enactment.

47. Section 24 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, further succession
Provides that when there has been a decree for judicial to the pro-
separation, the properties acquired by or devolving on the Laird of a
wife shall, if she dies intestate, devolve as if her husband Droste
had then been dead. This was the law in England when after a
the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, was enacted, and that con- decree to
tinues to be the law even now under section 21(1) (a) of imdicial
the Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950. The question is, whether “P#“°™
the law should now be laid down in those terms. On
principle, the distinction between judicial separation and
divorce is that, while in the latter the marriage tie is dis-
solved, in the former it still subsists. If persons continue
to be related, in the eye of law, as husband and wife, and
if one of them dies intestate, the persons who are entitled
to succeed to che properties must be his or her heirs on
the footing that he or she is a married person. In that
view, if a married woman dies after the passing of a decree
of judicial separation, her husband will be one of the heirs.
Likewise, if the husband dies after a decree for judicial
separation is passed, the wife will be one of his heirs. To
provide, therefore, that on the death of a married woman,
in respect of whom a decree for judicial separation has been
passed, her property will devolve as if her husband were
dead even though he is in fact alive, is to ignore the very
basis of the jural relationship between the parties when
the decree passed is one of judicial separation and not of
divorce. Such a provision is, therefore, clearly illogical.

It is to be further noted that under the law of England,
if a husband dies after a decree for judicial separation is
passed, the wife is entitled to succeed as one of his heirs.
That is on the footing that the marriage still subsists; and



Divorce,

Grounds of
divorce,

26

equally the husband must be entitled to succeed to tne
properties of his wife when she dies intestate after a decree
for judicial separation is made, but for the special rule
enacted in section 25. We see no reason to adopt different
rules as regards the two spouses, and it may be mentioned
that in neither the Special Marriage Act, 1954, nor the
Hindu Marriage Act 1955, has the law as laid down in
section 25 been adopted. We have therefore omitted the
special provisions in sections 24 and 25 of the Indian Divorce
ct.

48. Coming next to divorce, the Roman Catholics have
strongly pressed on us that divorce should not be recog-
nised, as it is opposed to their faith, or, in the alternative,
that they should be exempted from the provisions of this
Act in so far as they relate to divorce. They say, basing
themselves on the passage in the Bible, “what therefore
God has joined together, let not man put asunder”, that,
it is a fundamental article of the Christian faith that
ynarriage is indissoluble; that the Canonical law therefore
does not recognise divorce; that the grant of divorce would
be repugnant to it; and that therefore the provisions re-
lating to divorce should not apply to them. But it should
be noted that the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, applies to all
Christians including Roman Catholics, and has been in
operation for now ninety years without any protest. It
will be too late now to reverse the current and exempt
Roman Catholics from the provision for divorce. It should,
moreover, be remembered that the provisions of the pro-
posed Act are merely enabling in character. They do not
compel any Roman Catholic to go against the Canonical
law. He or she can, consistently with it, apply for judicial
separation and nat divorce. If notwithstanding that the
Divorce Act, 1869, has provided for divorce, the Roman
Catholic Christians have been in a position, during all
these years, to conform to Canonical principles, in not
resorting to court for divorce, they are free to do so under
the proposed Act as well. The proposed Act introduces
no change in the existing law. For these reasons, we have
provided that the Act should apply to all Christians,
Roman Catholics as well as Protestants.

49, We may now refer to the grounds on which divorce
eould be granted. The law on the subject is now con-
tained in section 10 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, and
that has come in for the following criticisms:

(i) It makes a distinction between the husband
and the wife in the matter of grounds on which they
could obtain divorce. While adultery, without more,
is a ground for divorce in a petition by the husband,
in the case of a petition by the wife, there should, in
addition, be some other element, such as that it should
be incestuous adultery, or bigamy with adultery, or
adultery coupled with cruelty or desertion for two
years. The criticism is, that there is no justification



27

for maintaining this distinction between the husband
and the wife. We agree with it.

(2) Under section 10 of the Divorce Act, adultery
is the only ground on which divorce could be granted,
apart from some grounds special to the wife. It is said
that this law has now become very much out of date,
and that it is necessary to allow divorce on several
other grounds, as has been done in all modern legis-
lation. This criticism is also well-founded. Section 10
is thus of little assistance to us in formulating the
grounds for divorce.

50. We have, however, two enactments of Parliament, Provisions in
the Special Marriage Act, 1954, and the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955, which deal exhaustively with this topic, and, S#tmen™
in laying down the grounds for divorce, we have, in
genera], followed the provisions in those enactments viz.,
section 27 of the Special Marriage Act, and section 13 of
the Hindu Marriage Act. But there are certain matters
on which those two enactments differ, and certain matters
‘on which the proposed Act differs from both of them. We
shall now refer to them,

51. Under section 10 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, Adulte-y,
it is a ground for divorce that the wife “has been guilty
of adultery”, and this follows the English law on the
subject. That is also the provision under section 27a)
of the Special Marriage Act: but the corresponding pro-
vision of the Hindu Marriage Act, section 13(1) (i), requires
that the respondent must be “living in adultery”. That
imports a course of conduct, whereas on the language of
section 2714), even a single act af adultery will be sufficient
ground for divorce. But the law that has at all times
been in operation among the Christians is that even a
single act of adultery is a ground for divorce, and as there
is no serious opposition to it, we do not propose to depart
from it. We have accordingly provided, following the
language of section 27(a), that adultery is, in itself, a
ground for divorce,

52, Under section 13(1) 6०) of the Hindu Marriage Act, Leprosy.
it is a good ground for divorce that the respondent hes been
‘suffering for a period of not less than three years imme-
diately preceding the presentation of the petition from a
virulent and incurable form of leprosy. There is a similar
provision in section 27(g) of the Special Marriage Act,
but it differs from section 13(1) (iv) of the Hindu Marriage
Act in two respects. It does not contain the limitation
that it should be virulent and incurable. But obviously
that must have been the intention. It is further provided
in section 27(g) that it is not a Sround for divorce if the
leprosy has been contracted from the petitioner. We do
not think that any such limitation need be imposed, and
we have adopted the provisions of the Hindu Marriage
Act as more just.


Refusal to

marr

28

53. Under .ection 25(i) of the Special Marriage Act,

matigge wilful refusal by the respondent to consummate the mar-

riage is a ground for annulling it. This is in accordance
with the law as embodied in section 8 of the Matrimonial
Causes Ac’, 1950, but its correctness is open to question.
A decree for annulment could, properly, be made only
on grouuds which exi.l at the time of the marriage, whe:e-
as when the petition is founded on a ground which arises
subsequent thereto, the appropriate relief to be granted
is dissolution. On principle, herefore, a refusal fo con-
summate a marriage, as distinguished from impotence at
the time of marriage, would be a ground for dis. solving the
marriage, and not for annulling it. That is also the view
taken in the Renart of the Royal Commission on Marriage
and Divorce, 19551. We have, accordingly, included wilful
refusal to consummate a marriage as one of the grounds
for divorce.

54 Under section 27(b) of the Special Marriage Act,
1954, it is a ground for divorce that the petitioner had been
deserted without cause for a period of at least three years
immediately preceding -he presentation of the petition.
Unde~ the Hindu Marriage Act thi, is a ground for judi-
cial separation, but not for divorce. In England desertion
was made a ground for judicial separation by the Matri-
monial Causes Act, 1857, and it was only in the Matri-
monial Causes Act, 1987, that ‘t became for the first time
a ground for divorce, and that is the law as enacted in
section 141)(b) of the Matrimonial Cauzer Act, 1950. In
our opinion this should be available as a ground for
divorce among Christians.

55. Under section 27(d) of the Special Marriage Act,
cruelty is a ground for divorce. That is also the law in
England as embodied in section 1(1)fe) of the Matrimo-
nial Cau-es Act, 1950. Under the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955, cruclly is a ground for judicial separation under
section 10(1)(9), but it is not a ground for divorce under
section 13(1). We are of opinion that we should adopt
the law as embodied in section 27(d) of the Special
Marriage Act.

53. The suggestion has been made that we should define
+ What is cruelty for the purpose of divorce has
been considered in numerou decisions in England. In
Russell v. Russeil’ it was defined as “conduct of such a
character as to have caused danger to life, limb, or health,
bodily or mental, or as to give rise to a reasonable appre-
hension of <uch danger’. Tt has been observed in Latey
on D ce’ that “there has been so marked a develop-
ment in the mutual relations of husband and wife end in
the right of a wife since the Ecclesiastical Courts admi-
nistered the matrimonial law. and Judges are so bound
to exercise their judicial discretion with due regard to
the customs and manners of their own time, that a blind

md. 9678, page 37, paragraphs 88 and Ri ९ 83, .

(089°) PL 195, afficmied on Beals 897) मै, Ce Sage PAP 83

गन edition, page 82, para, 158,



29

adherence to the decisions of over a century, cr even a
generation ago, is impossible.” Tt would therefore be
obviously inexpedient to lay down hard and fast rules as
to what would amount to cruelty. That appears to be the
Teason why the Hindu Marriage Act, 1935, also does not
define cruelty, but provides in section 10(1)(b) that cruelty
which can be a ground for judicial separation must be
such as to cause a reasonable apprehens.on in the mind
of the petitioner that it will be harmful or injurious for
the petitioner to live with the ether party. Considering
this question, the Royal Commission on Marriage and
Divorce, observed? that it was preferable not to have a
detailed definition of that word but to allow the concept
of cruelty to remain open to such adjustment as it was
desirable to make through the medium of judicial decisions.
We also propose to leave it at that.

57. Under section 27(c) of the Special Marriage Act, 'mprison—
it is a ground for divorce that the respondent is uhder- ment.
going a sentence of imprisonment for seven years or more
for an offence as defined in the Indian Penal Code, and
there is a proviso that no divorce shall be granted on this
ground unleis the respondent has undergone at least three
years’ imprisonment at the time of the petition. But there
is nothing corresponding to this in the Hindu Marriage
Act; and following that “Act, we have excluded this from
the grounds for divorce.

58. Under section 276) of the Special Marriage Act Venereat
and section 13(1)(v) of the Hindu Marriage Act, the disease.
petitioner can ask for divorce on the ground that the res-
Pondent had been suffering from venereal disease for three
Years prior to the petition. It has been urged before us,
that as a result of the advance of medical science venereal
disease could not now he regarded as incurable, and that
it should therefore be no Jonger a ground for divorce.

We, however, think that there are not sufficient grounds
for laying down the law in terms different from those of
the Special Marriage Act and the Hindu Marriage Act.
Nor is this view likely to create any great hardship, as
no action for divorce could be maintained unless the res-

in the Hindu Marriage Act. We have preferred to follow
the language of the Hindu Marriage Act.

‘Royal Commission's Report, 1955, Cmd. 9678, pace 42, para. 133.


30
Judicial 59. Under section 270) of the Special Marriage Act,
हि कमान it would be a ground for divorce if the respondent has

sumption of Not resumed cohabitation for a period of two years or up-

cohabitation. wards after the passing of a decree for judicial separa-
tion. We have, as already explained', provided that, on
these facts it would be open to the petitioner to apply
for divorce in the very proceeding in which a decree for
judicial separation had been passed. There is therefore
no need to make this a distinct ground for a petition for
divorce.

‘Renunciation 60, Section 13(1){vi) of the Hindu Marriage Act pro-
vides that if either party renounces the world by entering
a religious order, that would be a ground for dissolution
of the marriage. We do not think that there is need for
such a ground in the Christian community, and it should
be observed that there is nothing corresponding to it in
the Special Marriage Act. We have, accordingly, not in-
cluded it among the grounds for divorce in the proposed
Act,

“Consent, 61. Section 28 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, enacts
that the marriage might be dissolved if a petition for
divorce is presented by both the parties stating that they
had been living separately tor a period of one year or more,
that they are not able ta live together, and that their marri-
age should, by consent, be dissolved. The question is
whether such a ground should be incorporated in the pro-
posed Act. The opinion of all sections of the Christian com-
munity is strongly against it. The question whether divorcee
could be graiited on the consent of the parties is discussed
in the Report of the Royal Commission on Marriage and
Divorce, 19887 It states that with ene exception, “all
agreed that the present law based on the doctrine of the
matrimonial offence should be retained.” That is to say,
before a marriage which is intended to be a lifelong union
is dissolved it must be made out that either party is guilty
of what has been termed the matrimonial cftence. The
Hindu Marriage Act, 1953, also does not provide for a
marriage being dissolved merely by the consent cf the
parties. There is no reason for treating sacramental marri-
ages between Christians differently from these between
Hindus. We have not, accordingly, provided for divorce
being granted on the mere consent of parties.

Artificial | 62. It is necessary to refer to one other ground for
inseminations Givorce about which there has been considerable discussion
in England. The Report of the Royal Commission on
Marriage and Divorce} suggests that artificial insemina-
tion by a donor without the husband's consent should bea
ground far divorce. This practice does not appear to have

Wee para. 44, supra.
*Cmd. 9678, p. 13, para. 65.
*Cmd. 9678, p. 28, para. 73, and 9, 31, para. 90.


31

come into vogue in India to such a degree as to call for
legislation. We have accordingly ignored it.

63. One of the grounds on which divorce could be had Conversion.

under the proposed legislation is that the respondent has
ceased to be a Christian by conversion. This corresponds
to section 13(1) (ii) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, under
which it is a ground for divorce that the other party has
ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion, and
to section 32(j) of the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act,
1936, which provides for divorce on the ground that the de-
fendant has ceased to be a Parsi.

A connected question which Joomed large in _ the
evidence before us is as to the rights of a convert to Chris-
tianity to obtain dissolution of a marriage contracted before
his or her conversion. (That is the converse of the case for
which provision has been made by us). The Converts’
Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866, provides that ‘when a
husband or wife changes his or her ‘religion to Christianity
he or she can move the court for a decree dissolving the
marriage, and the court may pass such a decree after com-
plying with the procedure prescribed therein and that
thereafter the parties thereto shall have the right to re-
marry. But this Act applies only if the parties to the
marriage are not Muslims, Parsis, or Jews; and the criticism
levelled against it, that it js discriminative in character in
that (1) it applies only to cases of conversion from Hindu-
ism, and (2) it gives telief only in cases of conversion to
Christianity, is well-founded. In view of this, we are con-
sidering whether we should not recommend the enactment
of a law, which will be generally applicable to all cases of
conversion from one religion to another religion. The ques-
tion of the repeal of the Converts’ Marriage Dissolution
Act, 1866, can appropriately be taken up then for consider-
ation.

64, We should now refer to the changes proposed in the Joinder of
law relating to the joinder of adulterer as a co-respondent. adulterer OF
Section 11 of the Divorce Act, 1869, enjoins that in a peti- adulteress in
tion for divorce presented by the husband, the alleged founded on
adulterer shall be made a co-respondent, and to this there adultery.
are three exceptions provided. The following questions
arise for our decision on this subject: —

(1) The first question is whether the rules relating
to the joinder of an adulterer should be enacted in the
section itself, as under section 11, or, whether they
should be left to be framed by the High Court in the
exercise of its rule-making authority. Under section
41 (2) (a) of the Special Marriage Act this is one of the
matters on which the High Court is authorised to make
rules. That, however, is not the practice in England,
and, further, to delegate the power to the High Courts
would lead to diversity and differences in provisions,
on a subject in which uniformity is both possible and


Damages for
adultery,

32

desirable, We hava, therefore, enunciated the rules as
to joinder of an adulterer in the section itself.

(2) Another question which arises under this sec-
tion, is, whether the grounds set out in section 11 of the
Indian Divorce Act, 1869, for dispensing with the join-
der of an adulterer, require to be enlarged. While we
think that those grounds must prima facie, be taken as
exhaustive, the courts should, nevertheless, have a
discretion in. particular eases to excuse the non-plead-
ing of the adulterer as a party to the proceedings.
Such a provision is to be found in section 3 of the
Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950, and we have inserted a
similar provision in the proposed Act.

(3) A third question which calls for decision is
whether the adulteress should be made a party when a
petition for divorce is presented by the wife on the
ground of adultery. The principle on which this legis-
Jation proceeds is that the husband and the wife
should. in all matters, be placed cn the same footing,
and it therefore follows that the adulteress also should
be impleaded as a co-respondent, and that is what we
have provided.

(4) And, lastly, it has been suggested that when a
petition for judicial separation is made on the ground
of adultery, the adulterer or the adulteress should also
be made a co-respondent as in an action for divorce.
We havo agreed with this suggestion, and given effect
to it,

65, Then there is the question of damages for adultery.
Section 34 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, provides that
the resp-ndent may claim damages from any person who
raitted adultery with his wife, and that he can do
ina netition far divorce or judicial separation, or
1 damages without any such relief. There is

min the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. Under
the Special Marriage Act, 1954, section 41 (2) (b), this matter
is left to he regniated by the rules to be framed by the
High Courts. The question is whether the law should coun-
tenance such a claim. It is undoubtedly strange to Indian
sentiment that adultery should be a matter for compensa-
tion. In England, the rule in question has its origin in the
commen law, and has been consistently followed by_ the
statute law on the subject. In the Report of the "Royal
Commission on Marriage and Divorce, 19557, it is observed
that this law has been criticised as out of tune with the
accepted law on the question. But the Report considers
that there might be circumstances in which it is reasonable
that the adulterer should be compelled to make redress to
the petitioner, and that therefore the provision should be
retained. While the law as enacted in the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955, is more in accord with Indian sentiment, we have

no such pr

*Cmd. 9678, p. 129, para, 432,



33

retained the provision for damages as that has been the
law well-settled in the Christian community for centuries,
and no exception has been taken to it by the witnesses who
appeared before us. And, on the principle of equality
already stated, this provision will be applicable not merely
to a husband as against an adulterer, but also to a wife as
against an adulteress. This is also the recommendation!
of the Royal Commission on Marriage and Divorce.

66. While we have thus retained the claim for damages
for adultery, we have, departing from the law as laid down
in sectivn 34 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, provided that
such a claim could be made only in a petition for divorce
or judicial separation, and not independently of such relief.
According to the law of England as it stood prior to the
Matrimonial Causes Act, 1857, it was competent to the
husband to claim damages against any person who com-
mitted adultery in an action for criminal conversation,
without asking for divorce or judicial separation. That
statute abolished this action and substituted in its place a
suit in the divorce court, and that right has been preserved
by the statute law right through, the latest provision being
section 30(1) of the Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950, It is this
right that is embodied in section 34 of the Divorce Act,
1869, which provides that a husband can present a petition
limited to a claim for damages only. We are not in favour
of recognising such a claim. While it may be legitimate to
permit a claim for damages when it is ancillary to a prayer
for divorce or judicial separation, to permit such a claim to
be made as the only substantive relief must lead ta black-
mail actions. We consider that a self-respecting husband
who is aggrieved by a person committing adultery with his
wife will seek to get the marriage dissolved and not to
make a profit aut of the wrong. It is true that seducing a
mun’s wife will, under the English law, furnish a cause of
action in tort, and damages can be recovered on the groan
of 1558 of consortium or service. But this coctrine kh
come in for considerable criticism, and it was observed by
Talbot J., in Detlwin v. Cooper’, “it seems quite possible for
a husband and wife in financial difficulties to sow the
seeds of an action for enticement, and when the result has
proved a financial success, to share the proceeds by staging
a tauching reconciliati In this report, we are not co
cerned with the question whether the English law on 1
subject should be adopted in this country, and if so, wi
what limits, because it is well-settled) that the remedics
of an action in tort for enticement and pet'tion for diverce
on the ground of adultery are based on different causes
of action. It is sufficient for the present purpose that no
right should be recognised in the husband to move the
divorce court for damages simpliciter. We have accard-
ingly limited the claim for damages on the ground of

1Cmd, 9678, p. 121, pata. 434.
2183 L.T, our) 222.
°Vite Etiott v. Alberts (1934) 1 K.B. 650.


‘Settlement of
Property.

34

adultery, under the Act, to petitions for divorce or judicial
separation.

| 67. The Indian Divorce Act, 1869, enacts certain provi-
sions with reference to settlement of property. Section 40
provides that when a decree for dissolution or nullity of
marriage is made, the court may inquire into the existence
of any settlement, ante-nuptial or post-nuptial, and direct
that the properties so settled be applied for the benefit of
the husband. or wife or children or both children and
parents as it might deem fit. This is a salutary provision,
and has been retained, Section 27 of the Hindu Marriage
Act enacts that the court might make such provisions in
the decree as it deems just and proper with respect to any
property presented at or about the time of marriage which
might belong jointly to both the husband and the wife.
This will comprehend properties other than those which
section 39 of the Indian Divorce Act might cover, and we
have accordingly inserted a similar provision in the
Proposed Act. .

68. Then there is section 39 of the Divorce Act, which
provides that when a court passes a decree for dissolution
of marriage or judicial separation on the ground of adultery
of the wife, and the wife has properties cf her own, the
court may order such settlement of those properties to
be made as it thinks reasonable, for the benefit of the
husband or children of the marriage or of both. Having
regard to the other provisions recommended by us, this
section should be omitted. The husband has a right to
claim compensation for the wife's adultery. He has also
been given a right to claim alimony, interim or permanent,
in appropriate cases. In view of this, there seems to be
no reason why he should claim the properties of the
wife should also be settled on him. As for the children,
the court has the power to make suitable orders for their
maintenance and education. It should be remembered that
under the law the children have no right actually to the
properties of parents, but only a right to be maintained.
That being so, there seems to be no ground for a special
provision that the properties of the mother should be
settled on them by reason of the adultery of the mother.
On principle, therefore, it would seem that all that the law
need provide is adequate and reasonable alimony for the
parents and- adequate maintenance and expenses for the
education of the children. To go further and to enact that
the wife should be deprived of a portion of her properties
and the same settled on the husband and children would
appear to be unduly severe and unjust, bordering on vindic-
tiveness. It is true that the Royal Commission has, in its
Report', considered this question and recommended that
there should be a provision for settlement of properties

1Report of the Royal Commission on Marriage and Divorce, 1955, Cmd.
9678, Pp. 141, path. 516 3 p. 142, para. 520 ; and 9. 154, para. 570.


ai

35

whenever there is a decree for divorce or nullity of mar-
riage. For the reasons already given, we are unable to
agree with this view. It may be mentioned here that no
such provision has been enacted either in the Special Mar-
riage Act, 1954, or in the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. Our
proposal to omit section 39 will bring the law in line with
those two statutes.

69. We shall now deal with questions relating 2 Jurisdiction.
ie

jurisdiction and procedure under the proposed Act.
provisions of the Indian Divorce Act,. 1869, relating to
jurisdiction fall under two categories: (1) Section 2 pres-
cribes the conditions on which the court could pass decrees
under the Act, such as for dissolution of marriage, for
nullity and so forth. (2) The Act further specifies in the
several sections relating to the different kinds of action,
the courts in which they could be instituted. These two
categories have reference to two distinct aspects of juris-
diction. The former views the question from the stand-
point of private international law, the latter from that of
municipal law. Dealing first with the former, a Sovereign
State can enact laws providing for the conditions on which
its courts could grant relief by way of decree for divorce
or nullity of marriage, and the decrees passed by the
courts acting within the authority conferred by these
provisions will be valid and enforceable within its terri-
tories. But when the status of the parties to such a decree
becomes the subject-matter of a dispute in a proceeding
between them in another State, the question arises whether
courts of that State are bound to recognise that decree.
That is a matter regulated by rules of private international
law, and recognition of decrees passed by one State has
not seldom been refused on the ground that it is not in
accordance with the accepted rules of private mternationa!
law, with the result that “a man and woman are held to
be man and wife in one country, and strangers in
another”!

70. Section 2 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, as it
stood prior to its amendment in 1926, provided that the
court could pass a decree of divorce if the parties to the
action resided within the jurisdiction of the court at the
time of the presentation of the petition. But it is a rule
of private international law, well-recognised, that a decree
of dissolution of marriage could be passed by the courts of
a country only if the parties thereto had the domicile of
that country at the time of the application®. In enacting
that divorce could be granted if the petitioners were
residing within jurisdiction at the time of the petition,
irrespective of domicile, section 2 went beyond the bounds
recognised by private international law, and in Keyes v.

"Vide Le Mesurier v. Le Mewrier, (1895) A.C. $17 3 Vide also Mountbatten
Ye Mountbatten Chas) 1 MER by) NO 547 § Vide also Mountbatten

*Vide Rule No. 31 in Dicey's Conflict of Laws, 6th edition, 6 and
Rule No. 7r at page 368. mone page guean
281 L—4


to jurisdic.
tion,

36

Keyes and Gray! it was held that a decree of an Indien
court dissolving a marriage of persons of British domicile
could not be recognised in England. As a result of this
decision, the British Parliament had to enact a law validat-
ing the decrees of Indian courts, and the Indian legislature
passed an amendment Act? so as to bring section 2 in
accordance with the rules of private international law.
Under section 2, as amended, decrees for dissolution of
marriages could be made only if the parties are domiciled
in India at the time of the petition; decrees for nullity—
if the marriage was solemnised in India and the petitioner
was residing in India at the time of the petition; and
other decrees—if the petitioner was residing in India at
the tme of the petition.

‘il. When once the conditions provided in section 2 are
satisfied and action could be taken in the Indian courts,
the question arises as to which of the Indian courts is
competent to entertain the action. It is this aspect which
is dealt with in the second category of provision. Under
the provisions of the Indian Divorce Act, the court where
the proceedings could be taken is the High Court or the
District Court, and according to the definition of these
terms in section 3, that meant the High Court or the
District Court within the ierritory of India within whose
jurisdiction the husband and wife reside or last resided
together. This is analogous to the provisions of the Civil
Procedure Code laying down in which court a suit could
be in-tituted. Thus the Indian Divorce Act deals with
jurisdiction of matrimonial courts in both aspects.

72. Section 31{1) of the Special Marriage Act and
section 19 of the Hindu Marriage Act, deal with the second
of the two aspects mentioned above. ‘As for the first, there
is nothing about it in section 19 of the Hindu Marriage
Act, possibly because questions of marriage under that Act
with persons of foreign domicile are likely to be of merely
academic interest. Section 31(2) of the Special Marriage
Act does deal with the first aspect to a limited extent,
but it is not exhaustive of the law on the subject. Having
regard to the scope of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, as
already stated’, and to the fact that Christians form an
international community, we consider it desirable to lay
down the law on the subject from the points of view of
both private international law and municipal law. On
the former aspect, while generally adopting section 2 of
the Indian Divoree Act, we have introduced a new provi-
sion under which a decree for dissolution could also be
passed in favour of a petitioner, who, being the wife. was
domiciled in India before marriage, and has been residing
in India for a period of not less than three years preceding
the presentation of the petition. The purpose of this

1(1927) 9.
har 2: 08 6,
जएब्ाब, 69, supra.

3

ated


37

enactment is to empower Indian courts to grant relief to
Indian women who may marry persons having foreign
domicile. As, in law, the wife will acquire on marriage
the domicile of the husband, such a provision is necessary
to clothe the Indian court with jurisdiction to dissolve
such a marriage. There is, it may be mentioned, a similar
provision in section 18 of the Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950.

73, Then as regards decrees for nullity of marriage,
they can be made under section 2, paragraph 4, of the
Indian Divorce Act, 1869, only if the marriage was solem-
nised in India, and the petitioner is residing in India at
the time of the petition. But it is mow recognised that
the courts of a country have jurisdiction to grant such
decrees, even though either of those conditions is absent,
if at the time of the petition, both the parties!, or even the
petitioner alone’, is domiciled in that country. We have
accordingly enlarged the scope of section 2 of the Indian
Divorce Act, by providing that decrees of nullity could be
made if the parties are, or, in certain events, even the
petitioner is, domiciled in India.

74. On the second aspect, that is municipal jurisdiction, Cours
we have provided that a petition in a rnatrimonial cause adopted as
may be presented to the district court within whose local 7
limits the respondent is residing at the time of the petition,
or the marriage was solemnised, or the husband and wife
last resided together; and with a view to minimising delay
and expense, we have enlarged the definition of ‘district
court’ in section 3 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, so as to
include any other court which may be notified by the
State Government. We have further provided that the
petition might be presented in the District Court within
whose jurisdiction the petitioner resides at the time of the
presentation of the petition, provided the respondent is,
at that time, residing outside India’,

75. Coming next to matters of procedure, the National Matrimonial
Christian Council, Nagpur, has strongly pressed for the tribunal.
constitution of a matrimonial tribunal, consisting of a
clergyman and some respectable members of the com-
munity to bring about recoriciliation between the parties
to a matrimonial cause. They suggest that as soon as a
‘dispute under the Act comes before the court, it should
be transferred to the tribunal, that the latter should try
informally to effect a settlement, and if that fails, then
and only then should the matter be taken up by the court
for trial under its ordinary procedure. The object behind
this suggestion is, without doubt, commendable, but there
are considerable difficulties in the way of accepting it in
the form suggested. If the tribunal] is constituted under

\Dicey’s Conflict of Laws, 6th edition, page 244, Rule 35 ; Tolstoy on
Divorce, 4th edition, page 18,

"De Reneville v. De Renevilie (1948), 9. 700.
See also Appendix 11, Notes on clauses, under clause 36.


Decisions of
ecclesiastical
courts,

Decree nisi
and decree
absolute,

38

the provisions of the Act, it becomes a statutory body and
cannot function informally, as desired. It is true that in
holding an enquiry, it is not bound by strict rules of
evidence, but it has to observe rules of natural justice,
and its findings will be open to attack in the normal way
on appropriate grounds, and it is agreed that it is not
such a body that is in their contemplation. The lawyer
witness, who elaborated this point in his evidence, stated,
aiter some discussion, that the object would be achieved
if a duty is cast on the court to bring about, whenever
possible, reconciliation, and a power is given to it to refer
the matter to a person agreed to by the parties or sug-
gested by the court, for the purpose of effecting settle-
ment. We consider that that could be done, and have
accordingly inserted a clause authorising such a reference.
The referee under this provision is not a tribunal, not
even an arbitrator, as under the Arbitration Act, but a
conciliator, and a reference to him will be optional with
the court,

76. We may now refer to the suggestion made by the
Roman Catholic witnesses, that decisions of the ecelesiasti-
cal authorities functioning under the Church of Rome on
matrimonial causes heard by them should he accepted by
the courts hearing petitions under the Act as final and
conclusive, the function of the latter being limited to
merely carrying out these decisions. We are unable to
accede to it. It is the courts constituted under the law
of this country that can have the exclusive authority to
determine disputes relating to civil rights, and there can
be no surrender or abdication of that authority. That, of
course, does not bar the reception in evidence of those
proceedings to the extent they may be admissible under
the law,

77. & question on which there is divergence of opinion
is as to the procedure te be followed before a decree for
divorce is finally made. Under section 16 of the Indian
Divorce Act, a decree nisi has first to be passed, and a
decree absolute could thereafter be made only after the
expiration of such time as the High Court might direct, but
not less than six months from the pronouncement of the
decree nisi. The point for consideration now is, whether
the proposed legislation should retain that procedure, or
whether, dispensing with the decree nist, it should provide
for a decree for divorce being straightway passed. In
support of the latter view, it is said that that would
simplify the procedure in an action for divorce, save time
and reduce expense. It is also pointed out that both the
Special Marriage Act, 1954, and the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955, provide for the passing of only a single decree, and
it is said that it is desirable that the law relating to
divorce among Christians must also fall in line with them,
and that therefore the provision for the passing of a
decree nisi should be abolished. As against this, it is


39

claimed that the procedure of passing a decree nisi, before
a decree absolute dissolving the marriage is made, has
certain advantages justifying its retention. First, it is said
that the provision that there should first be a decree nisi
and that a specified period should elapse before it could be
made absolute, would give the parties a further opportu-
nity of becoming reconciled. Secondly, it is said that the
present procedure is better suited to prevent collusive
decrees of divorce being obtained. Mere service of sum-
mons in a divorce action on the respondent goes generally
unnoticed; but the proceedings in court resulting in a
decree are bound to attract attention and afford reasonable
opportunity to any person to establish that the proceedings
are really collusive. It is said that the need for such a
provision is all the greater, as it is now proposed to omit!
section 17A of the Indian Divorce Act, and there would
thus be no officer who could intervene in the proceedings
and object to a decree being passed on the ground of
collusion. In this connection, reference may be made to
the sections of the Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950, bearing
on this point. Section 12(1) prevides for a decree nisi
being passed, and that can be made absolute only after
the expiry of six months from the pronouncement thereof,
unless the court fixes a shorter time. Then section 12(2)
provides that any person might intervene and show cause
why it should not be made absolute, on the grund of
collusion or other relevant circumstances. It is said that
the proposed legislation should be on the same lines for
this reason as well. Thirdly, it is said that the procedure
of first passing a deeree nisi and then absolute obtains in
all the English-speaking countries and has practically
come to be regarded as part of the law of the Christians,
The question whether this procedure should be continued,
or whether one decree should be passed dissolving the
marriage was considered by the Royal Commission’, and
it expressed the opinion that it was desirable to retain the
existing procedure of passing a decree nisi which cculd
be made absolute after a specified period, and it has fur-
ther suggested that that period should be three months.
The evidence of the witnesses before us is also in support
of this view. There was only one witness who stated that
the procedure of passing two decrees might be abolished,
but in the course of discussion, it appeared that his
objection to its retention was based mainly on the ground
of additional expense. The Roman Catholic witnesses, on
the other hand, desired that after the passing of a decree
nisi nine months should elapse before a decree absolute is
passed.

78. It wiil be relevant, for the purpose of deciding which
of the two views should be accepied, to refer to section 57
of the Indian Divorce Act, which enacts that when a decree

7868 para. 79, infra.
*Report of the Royal Commission on Marriage and Divorce, 1955, Cmd.
678, pages 250 to 252, paragraphs 952 to 958.


Confirmation
High

ourt.

King’s Proc-
tor,

changes.

40

for divorce has been passed, it shal! be lawful for the res-
pective parties to marry again after the expiration of six
months from the date of the decree and not earlier. The
combined effect of sections 16 and 57 of the Divorce Act is
that after a decree nist has been passed for dissolution, six
months must elapse before a decree absolute can be passed,
and another six months must elapse before the parties can
re-marry. Section 30 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954,
provides that when the marriage has been dissolved by a
decree, and that decree has become final, the parties there-
to may remarry after the lapse of one year, but not earlier.
A similar provision has been enacfed in section 15 of the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. Now it is for consideration whe-
ther it would be expedient to eaact a prohibition against
re-marriage after a decree for dissolution is finally made.
If there is a marriage during the prohibited period, it is in
law null and void and the children of that marriage would
be illegitimate. Questions have 815० arisen as to the pater-
nity of children born after the decree for dissolution of
the marriage and within the prohibited period. We are
disposed to think that the purpose of prohibiting a mar-
riage after a decree for dissolution, namely, to prevent
resort to divorce proceedings for getting rid of the wife,
so as to be able to marry another woman-—is better served
by prescribing an interval betweea the decree nisi and the
decree absolute. So far as the parties to the action are
concerMed, it will make no difference in the result whether
there is a single decree dissolving the marriage, followed
by a period during which they cannot te-marry, or whether
there is a decree nisi, followed by a decree for divorce to
be after a specified period, with no further prohibition
against re-marriage. After careful consideration, we have
come to the conclusion that the ecdure of decree nisi
and decree absolute should b ned, and that after the
final decree, the parties shouid be free to re-marry (ufter
the period of appeal has expired).

79. Section 17 of the Indian Divoree Act provides for a
decree for dissolution passed by a District Judge being
confirmed by a special Bench of the High Court. We see
no need for such a provision. The decree of divorce passed
by the district court would be open to appeal like cther
decrees of that court, and that, in our opinion, is sufficient.
We have also come to the conclusion that section 17A of
the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, may be omitted, because that
provision docs not appear to have Leen availed of in prac-
tice to any appreciable extent. The purpose of that section
will be sufficiently served by retaining the procedure for
the passing of a decree misi'.

80. We have explained the imporiant propcesals above.
Our recommendations on minor matters relating to the
subject are explained in the notes on clauses.

3862८ para. 77, supra.


41

81. In order to give a concrete shape to our proposals,

we have, in Appendix I, put them in the form of a draft
Bill.

Appendix II contains the notes on clauses, explaining,
with reference to each clause in Appendix I, any points
that may need elucidation.

Appendix III contains a comparative table showing the
provision in the existing Acts and the corresponding provi-
sion, if any, in Appendix I.

Appendix IV contains a list of the witnesses examined
by us on the subject.

Appendix V shows our recommendations in respect of
other Acts. गे

1. T. L. VENKATARAMA AIYAR (Chairman).
*2. 7. SATYANARAYANA RAO
3. L. 5. MISRA,

4. 05. हे. RAJAGOPAUL,
6. N. A. PALKEHIVALA,

|
4 (Members),
|

**5. S. CHAUDHURI J

D. BASU,
Joint Secretary,
New Dew;
The 19th August 1960,

gned the report, subject to the two notes

#3 Shri Chaudhuri has si

igned the report, subject to the note
appended,


INDEX TO APPENDIX I

Subject matter

10.

ton

az,

13.

24.

15.

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
Short title, extent and commencement * . . . .
Definitions - . . + पु . . .
CHAPTER II

CONDITIONS FOR CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE

A
Marriage between Christians to be solemnized according to Act

Conditions of marriage Soe ee
Consent of guardion in martiage . 0. ee we
CHAPTER HII

SOLEMNIZATION OF CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE
A.—Persons authorised 20 solemnize marriages
Who may solemnizc marriages. + see

Recognised Churches ©. ss

Grant of licences to Ministers of Church to solemnize mar
rlages « न पु +

Marriage Registrars in India. |) ees

Marriage Registrars outside India. . ee ee
By—-Marriages before Ministers of recognised Churches

Solemnization of marrisges by Ministers of recognised Churches

C.—Marriages before licensed Ministers and Marriage
Registrars

Notice of intended marriage to licensed Ministers, etc., and
‘marriage notice bool Lo yO.

Procedure to be follawed by licensed Minister on receipt of
notice . soos se

Procedure to be followed by Marriage Registrars on [receipt of
notice. :

Issue of cettificate of notice « . . . . .

42

Page
Nos.

49

49-82

sis

52-753

Es3
33-54

s4
54
55

Si

55556
56-57

57
57


43

ne

Clause Subject matter Page
16. Objection to certificate . . . . . . . . 58
17. Application to district Court against decision on objection « 58
18. Procedure on receipt of objection by Marriage Registrar abroad . 58
19. Certificate not to be issued and marriage not to be solemnized

in certain cases . . . पु . 58
20, Solemnization of marriage by licensed Minister . . . 59
a3. Solemnization of marriage by Marriage Registrar ~ 59
22. Certificate void if marriage not solemnized within three months « 9
D.—Registration of marriaget
23. Certificate of marriage and registration > . . . s§—60
CHAPTER I¥
RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS
24. Restitution. पु : . पु . . . . 60
CHAPTER V
JUDICIAL SEPARATION
as. Indicwt separation see et 6
26, Effect of judicial separation on dury to cohabit . . + 67-56
CHAPTER VI}
NULLITY OF MARRIAGE
2% Void marriages « . . . . . पु पु . 6
28. Voidable marriages पु . . * . . . + 61~62
29, Legitimacy of children of certain void marriages and voidable
marriages . हू हू . 62-63
CHAPTER VII
DIvoRcE
A.—Grounds of divorce
30. Grounds of divorce. . . . . . 1 © 63-64
3h. Divorce after decree for judicial separation . . . . 64
32. No petition for divorce to be presented within three Jyears of

marriage . . Pes toe .

64—65


”

Clause Subject matter Page
Nos.
B,--Remarriara
33. Remarriage of divorced persons 5 ww 65
CHAPTER VIIT
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE

34 Relief to be given to Christians only =.) » «+ «65-66
35- Jurisdiction of Indian Courts . . . + . . 66
36. Court to which petition should be made} : . . «O67
37. Contents and verification of petitions. पु &
38. Application of Code of Civil Procedure . . . . o
39. Decree in proceedings . . . . . . . 68
49. Adulterer or adulteress to be a co-respondent . . 68-69

4i. Relief ta zespondent in case of apposition to petition for divorce
on certain grounds. + toe का
42. Decree nist for divorce . . पु . - . न . &
43. Damages from adulterer or adulteress ५ . . o
44... Maintenance pendense tite and expenses of proceedings . . 70
45. Permanent alimony and maintenance. wee 70
4s. Disposal of property. . . . . - . © गण
47 Custody of children. . . . . . . . ?
48. Proceedings may be ia camera and may not be published =. 1
4. Appeais from decrees and orders. . . . . + qt
50. Enforcement of decrees and orders . . . . . 7

CHAPTER IX
PENALTIES

si. Punishment of bigamy . . . . . न . uF
$2, Penalty for breach of certain other conditions of marriage 72

§3. Penalty for false oath, declaration. notice or certificate for pro-
vuring marriage 1 51 9३ rs कस
जब False personation by person objecting to marriage . . 12
55. Solemnizing marriage withour due authority . 0. 72


45

Clause Subiect matter Page

56, Penalty for not deciding objections within prescribed period, or

refusing to solemnize marriage . . 7०775
57% Penalty for wrongful action of Marriage Registrar or Minister, n
sh Destroying or falsifying Marriage Certificate Books. . : 73
5% Penalty for publishing proceedings held iu camera. | 3
6a, Limitation for prosecutions. . . . 73
CHAPTER X
MISCELLANEOUS:
3. Liability for frivolous objections. न न पु . . 73-74
62, Savings regarding irregularities 9... . ”
63. Correction of erors 5. न 14
4. Solemmization of marriages by Ministers of Church in places
vanctioned by custom or usage . . . 74775
5... Martiage Registrars to be deemed to be public servants . 1s
@6, Inspection of Marriage Notice Book 5 st . 7s
67. Inspection of Marciage Certificas Book. 9. wl, 15
8. Certified copy 19 be evidence. . . पु पु . 15
a9. Language of notices and declarations =~ पु न पु . 75-76
78. Ministers uf Recognised Churches not compelled to solemnize
marriages contrary to the rules of the Church ws; 76
7%. Powers of Marrisge Resistrars in respect of inguiries 2. 76
qe Power to make rules. . . . . . . 16—77
73. Rules by the High Cont. , kek, cd
74. ‘Savings regarding marciages solemmized before the Act. , 7
75. Savings for other martiages 1... ५... 9. . . 7
76. Repeal of the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872, and the Indien
iverce Act, 1869 a oT

‘THE SCHEDULES . . + . . . “ . . . 28--83

Hvplanation ef abbrevivsions used
Christian Mersiage Act. |The Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872.

Divyerce Act. - . . » ‘The Indian Divorce Act, 1869.


-P.M.D.A,
जज, .

46

‘The Hindu Martisge Act, 195%.

The (English) Matrimonial Causes Act,
1950,
The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936.

The Special Marriage Act, 1994.


APPENDIX I

Proposal as shown in the form of a draft Bill.
{This is a tentative draft only.]

[Corresponding sections of the existing Act are roted
im the margin.]

al


i, 4

\!
pe

ar


‘THE CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE AND MATRIMONIAL
CAUSES BILL, 1960

A
BILL

to amend and codify the lew relating to marriage and
matrimonial causes among Christians.

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of
the Republic of India as follows: - --

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Christian Marriage Short tite,
and Matrimonial Causes Act, 1960. extent and
commence-
ment,
1S. 1, 1st

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State[s. 1, 2nd
of Jammu and Kashmir, and applies also to Christians para, Chris-
domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends who St} Marriage
are outside the said territories. Ist para , Di-

vorce Act.}

(3) Section 7 shall come into force at once, and the re- [New]
maining provisions of this Act shall come into force on Gf, 81 धो
such date as the Central Government may, by notification 6» EMA
in the Official Gazette, appoint. _

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions,

(a) “Christian” means a person oprofessing ४1९ [8, 3, past,
Christian religion: Christian
‘Marriage
Act]

(8) “church building * includes any chapel or other & 3, part
building generally used for public Christian worship; Christian
sal
(c) “desertion” means ithe withdrawal by one [S. 3 (9),
spouse, without reasonable cause and without the con- Divorce Act]
sent or against the wish of the other spouse, from 81० (0
cohabitation with the other spouse with the intention एक,
of bringing cohabitation permanently to an end; and H.M.A.
its Arpmmatical variations and cognate expressions
shall be construed accordingly;

49


New}
Of, 4. 2 (५);
S.MAA.

New]
Cf. 8, 2 (A,
S.MLA.

[5. 3 (3४७
part, Divorce
Act]

Cf. 8. 3 (8)
HLM.A.

Cont rast

3. 2 (०),

5,040,8.

(9. 3. part,
hristian

Marriage

Act]

[New]

[New]

[New]

IS. 3, part,
Christian
Marriaces
Act and s. 3
(5). Divarce
Act:

(New!

[New]
Cf. 5. 2 (७),
SMA.

50

(d) “diplomatic officer” means an ambassador,
envoy, minister, charge d' affaires, High Commissioner,
Commissioner or other diplomatic representative, or a
counsellor or secretary of an embassy, legation or High
Commission;

(९) “district”, in relation to a Marriage Registrar,
means the area for which he is appointed as such under
this Act;

(f) “district court” means, in any area for which
there is a city civil court, that court, and, in any other
area, the principal civil cuurt of ginal jurisdiction,
and includes any other अंश court which may be speci-
fied by the State Government, by notification in the
Official Gazette, as having jurisdiction in respect of
the matters dealt with in this Act;

(91 “India” means the territories to which this Act
extends;

(h) “licensed Minister” means a Minister of Church
licensed under section § to solemnize marriages under
this Act;

(i) “Marriage Registrar” means the Marriage Regis-
trar appointed under section 9 or section 10;

(j) “Minister of a recognised Church’ means a
Minister of any Church which is a recognized Church
within the meaning of this Act;

(k) “minor” means a persen who has not complet-
ed the age of eighteen years.

(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made
under this Act;

(m) “prohibited relationship’--a man end any of
the persons mentioned in Part I of the First Schedule,
and a woman and any cf the persons mentioned in
Part IL of the said Schedule, are within prohibited
relationship;

Explanation 1—‘Relationship’ inctudes,-—-

{@) relationship by half or terine blood as
well as by full blood;

(b) illegitimate biocd relationship as well as
legitimate; amd ६: terms of relationship in this

Act shall be construed accordingly;

Expiunation 2—‘Fuil blood” and “half blood"—
Two persons are said to be related 10 each other by
full blood when they are descended from a common
ancestor by the same wife and by half blood when
they are descended from a common ancestor but by
different wives;


51

Explanation 3-— Uterine Lieod’—twe persons are

said to be related to each other by uterine blood when

they are deseended from + common anvestress but by
different husbands;

(0) “recognised Church” means a Church declared iNew}
to be @ recognised Charen under geetion v3

(a) “Reg'strar-General? rheans— [S. 3, part,

i R Fol . ; Christian
(1) 8 Regist: ~General of Births, Deaths and Matriage
Marriages appointed under the Births, Deaths and Act.)

Marriages Registration Act, 1886, and 6 of 1886

(#) in relation -o any territuries to which that
Act does not extend, an afficer Pelforming the
functions of a Regislar-General of 15195, Deaths
and Marriages unde: any correspernding law in
force in those territo

(p) “rule”, in any oxprassion denoting rules of 5119 iNew]
Church, includes a rite, ceremony er custom of thar
Church

CHAPTER IL
Convitions ror CHRISTIAN Marriaces

3. Every marriage between persons both of whom are Marriag:,
Christians shall be solemnized in accordance with the pro- between
visions of this Act, unless the ariiaga is so. ed under Christiane
the provisions of the Special Marriage Act, 195: Bicone
according to
Act.

1S. 4: Chris
tan Marriage
Act]

; p 43 of 1974.
4. A marriage trey be  sclemnised between any two (71, litions

Chr tians if the following conditions sre fuiied, व inarriace,
namely:—

tt} nu er part
of the marriage:

3 a spouse Hving ai the time [New]

(४8) the parues arc not within probibited relation- 8
ship, unless the custom governing each of them Christian

ite attiage het WO: Marriage
permils of a marriage between the two; Act}

8. 5 (9),
Had कफ

281 1....5


Bea 5 0),
HMA,
5.09
iNew]
Ske, 0»
he

& 4 (
San

ae tw,

Or) te
of 4 (४
SMA.
Consent of
wardian in
mariage,
(8. 19 and
44, Ist

(New)

{New]

52

(tit) neither party ia an idiot or a Junatic at the
time of the marriage;

(iv) the bridegroom has completed the age of
eighteen years and the bride the age of fifteen yeara
al the time of the marriage;

(०) where the bride has not completed the age of
eighteen years, the consent in writing of her guardian
in marriage or the permission of the district court
under sub-section (4) of section 5, has been obtained
for the marriage; and

(vi) where the marriage is solemnized outside
India, both parties are domiciled in India.

5, (1) Whenever the consent of a guardian in marriage
is necessary for a bride under this Act. the persons entitled
to give such consent shall be the following in the order
specified hereunder, namely:—

(०) the father;

(b) the mother;

(c} the paternal grandfather:

(2) the paternal grandmother;

(४) the brother by full blood;
as between brothers, the elder being preferred;

(f) the brother by half blood;
as between brothers by half blood, the elder being
preferred:

Provided that the bride is living with him and is
being brought up by him;

19) the paternal uncle by full blood; as between
paternal uncles, the elder being preferred;

(Rh) the maternal grandfather;

fi) the maternal grandmother:

() the maternal uncle by full blood; as between
maternal uncles, the elder being preferred:

Provided that the bride is living with him and is
being brought up by him,

(2) No person shall be entitled to act as a guardian in
Marriage under sub-section (7) unless such person has
himself completed the age of twenty-one years.

(3) Where any person entitled to be the guardian in
marTiage under sub-section (1) refuses, or is for any cause


53

unable or unfit, to act as such, the person next in order
shall be entitled to be the guardian,

(4) Where no such person as is referred to in sub- (S. 45, part,
section (1) is living and willing and able and fit to act Cheivtien
as guardian in marriage, or where any guardian in Act, ex
marriage, without just cause, withholds his consent to the tended.)
marriage, the permission of the district court shall be neces-
sary for the marriage of the bride.

(5) The permission of the district court for the {S. 4s, part,
marriage of the bride under sub-section (4) may be Sprisilan
applied for by a petition made by the parties to the aa
intended marriage,

(6) Where such a petition is made, the district court is $5; Parte
shall examine the allegations of the petition in a summary Marriage
manner and shall decide the matter after giving a reason- Act]
able opportunity to the parties 10 be heard.

(7) The decision of the (str: जता: granting or refus- [New]
ing permission under sub-section (4) shall be final.

(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section [New]
41), where any person has been appointed or declared by & diane”
a court to be the guardian cf the person of the bride, he गाय Wards

alone shall be entitled to act as guardian in marriage. Acs, 1890.

{9) Nothing in this section shall affect the jurisdiction (New)
of a court to prohibit by injunction an intended marriage,
if in the interests of the bride for whose marriage consent
is required the court thinks it necessary to do so.

CHAPTER III
SOLEMNIZATION OF CHRISTIAN MARRIAGES

A—Persons authorised to solemnize marriages

fi. Marriages may be solemnized under this Act— Who may
(a) by any Minister of a recognised Church; sclemnize
(b) by any Minister of Church licensed under [S. 5, part

section 8 to solemnize marriages: Nowa

(c) by, or in the presence of, a Marriage Registrar Act.J
appointed under section 9 or section 10.

7. (1) For the purpose of advising the State Government Recognised
as respects Churches ta be declared as recognised Churches, Churches,
the State Government shall, by notification in the Official [New]
Gazette, establish a Committee consisting of such number
of Christians, not exceeding five, as the State Government
‘may think fit to appoint, and it shall be the duty of the
Committee to examine applications by Churches for being
declared to be recognised Churches and to make recom-
‘Mendations to the State Government thereon.


54

(2) In making any recommendaiion to the State Gov-
ernment under sub-section (1), the Committee shall have
regard to the following, among other matters, namely:—

(i) whether the Church is properly organised;

(i) whether the Church is registered under any
law for the time being in force relating to the regis-
tration of societies in general or religious societies in
particular;

(ii) whether the Church has well-established
rules ior the solemnization of marriages;

(iz) whether the Church has proper places of
worship;

(0) whether, according to the rules of the Church,
clergymen are ordinarily ordained to solemnize
marriages;

(vi) whether the strength or standing of the
Church is such as to justify recognition being accord-
ed thereto.

(3) The State Government, after taking into considera-
tion the recommerdations made by the Committee under
this section, may by notifieation “in the Qilicial Gazette
declare any Church to be a recognised Church for the
purposes of this Act, and any such notification may also
deciare a group of Churches belonging to anv organisation
or denomination to be recognised Cnurches.

Grant ot 8 The State Government may, otification in the

Heences to Official Gazette, grant licences to Ministers of Church ta
inisters 9} ize jases withi a whole or any a.

Church to solemnizs merriages within the whole or sny part of the

solemnize tate

marriages,

15. 6, Chris-

tian Marriage

Act]

Marriage % (1) The State Government may, by notifi
Registrars the Official Gazette, appoint any person to be a M
(5. 3% Chris- Registrar for any district.

tian Marriage

fon in
arriage

Act]
Ch. 3.31) (2) Where there are more Marriags Registrars than
SMA. one in any district, the State Government shall appoint

one cf thom to be the Senior Marrisge Registrar,

(2) Where there is only one Marriage Registrar in a
district, end such Registrar is absent from the district or
is ill or his ofiice is temporarily vacant, any person autho-
tised in this behalf by the State Government, by general
or special order, shall act as, and be, the Marriage Regis-
trar of the district during such absence, iliness or tempo-
rary varancy.



55

10, For the purposes of this Act in its application to Marriage
Christians domiciled in India who are outside India. the Registrar
Ceniral Government may, by notification in the Gfticial 4

Gazctte,— [New]

(a) in the case of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, Gf s. 3 (से
apsoint such officers of the Central Government as it S-M.A.
may think fit to be the Marriage Registrars for the
State or any part thereof; and

(b) in the case of eny other country, place or ares,
appoint such diplomatic or consular officers as it may
think fit to be the Marriage Registrars for the country,
place or area.

B.—Marrioges before Ministers of recognised Churches

वा, (1) Marriages may be colemnized under this Act Solera
by any Minister of a recognized Chureh according to the too &
rules of the Church of which he is a Minister end in the by Ministers
presence of at least two witnesses, of recognised
Churckes.
is part,
Christian
Marriage
(2) Ne such marriage shall be solemnized-— Ast}

(a) if the inister has reason (0 believe that the [New]

solemnization of ihe intended marriage would be
contrary 10 the provisions of section 45 or

(b) if any other lawful impediment he shown to
the satisfaction of the Minister why such marriage
should not be solemnized:; ur

(९) unless a solemn declaration has been made
before the Minister in the form specified in the Fourth
Schedule—

(i) by the bridegroom, and

Gi) by the bride, or, if she is a minor for
whose murriage the consent of the i

required under this Act, by the guardian on behalf
of the bride.

C.—Marriages before Ucensed Ministers and Marriage
Registrars

12, (1) When a martiege is intended to be salemn’zed Notice of
by a licensed Minister or by or in the Fresence of at
Marriage Registrar, the parties to the Marriage shall give ji
notice thereof in writing in the form specified in the Mi
Second Schedule,— st

marriage
: Mink . notice took.
(6) to the licensed Minister whom they desire to(s. 17 and
solemnize the martiago, or $. २७, Chris
dan Mar

(b) to the Marriage Registrar of the #istriet

in
which at least one of the prrties to the mz

tigge Acr,]
वि Cf. 5. 5.
ब1486 has $.M.a.


[New]

§5, 40, pany
Sbristian

riage
Act]

CH. ४. 6.
Sita

Procedure to
be followed
by licensed
eC On

receipt of
Dotice,

कई 13, Chris-
tian Marriage
Act.]

५ 8. 6 (2),
Rae (3:

56

resided for a period of thirty days immediately preced-
ing the date on which such notice is given.

(2) Where the bride is a minor for whose marriage the
consent of the guardian is required under this Act, the
notice to be given under sub-section (1) shall be signed on
behalf of the bride by the guardian.

(3) The licensed Minister or the Marriage Registrar, ag
the case may be, shall keep all notices given under sub-
section (1) with the records of his office and shall also
forthwith enter a true copy of every such notice in a book
prescribed for that purpose, to be called the Marriage
Notice Book.

13, Where a notice under section 12 is given to a licensed
Minister, he shall proceed as follows:—

{a) if the parties intending marriage desire it to
be sclemnized in a particular church building, and if
the licensed Minister be entitled to officiate therein,
he shall cause the natice to be published by affixing a
copy thereof to some conspicuous part of such church
building;

(b) if he is not entitled to officiate as a Minister
in such church building, he sha!l. notwithstanding
anything contained in sub-section (3) of section 12, at
his option, either return the notice to the person who
delivered it to him, or deliver it to some other licensed
Minister entitled to officiate therein, who shall there-
upon act as if the notice were given by the Parties to
him under section 12;

(८) if it is intended that the marriage shall be
solemnized in a private building, the licensed Minister,
on receiving the notice under section 12. shall forward
a copy thereof to the Marriage Registrar of the district,
who shall cause it to be published by affixing it to
some conspicuous place in his own office;

{d) if the bride intending marriage is a minor,
the licensed Minister, on receiving the notice under
section 12 shall, unless within twenty-four hours after
its receipt he returns the same under clause (b), send
by post or otherwise a copy of such notice to the
Marriage Registrar of the district, or, if there be more
than one Marriage Registrar of the district, to the
Senior Marriage Registrar, and the Marriage Registrar
or Senior Marriage Registrar, as the case may be, on
Teceiving any such copy, shall affix it to some conspi-
euous p. face in his own office, and the latter shall fur-
ther cause a copy of the said’ notice to be sent to each


57

of the other Marriage Registrars in the same district,
who shall likewise publish the same in the manner
above directed.

14, Where the notice under section 12 is given to a Procedure
Marriage Registrar, he shall proceed as follows:— lowed by
Marriage

Registrars

on receipt
of notice.

(a) the Marriage Registrar shall cause the notice (8. 39, गन
to be published by affixing a copy thereof 10 some Para, Chri
conspicuous place in his own office; ee Az)

Cf. 3. 6 Gh
S.MLA.

(0) if the bride is a minor, the Marriage Registrar (5. 39, _ 20d
shall, within twenty-four hours after receiving the pare.,
notice under section 12, send, by post or otherwise, a rage ‘Acty
copy of the notice to each of the other Marriage Regis- ofa ASO B, 15,
trars, if any, in the same district, who shall affix the intian
copy to some conspicuous place in his own office; Marriage

(८) if either of the parties intending marriage is [New]
not permanently residing within the local limits of the ०.
district of the Marriage Registrar, the Marriage Regis- ९2007 (he
trar shall also cause a copy of such notice to be
transmitted to the Marriage Registrar of the district
within whose limits such party is permanently resid-
ing, and that Marriage Registrar shall thereupon
cause a copy thereof to be affixed to some conspicuous
place in his own office.

15. (7) Any licensed Minister or Marriage Registrar Isue of ot
consenting or intending to solemnize any marriage under certificate
this Act shall, on being required so to do by or on behalf [S. 17, pars
of either of the persons by whom the notice was given, 24, 41, part,
issue under his hand a certificate of notice in the form and. 50
‘specified in the Third Schedule. Marriage

Act]
(2) No such certificate shall be issued— & a a
(०) until the expiration of seven days from the ee
date of publication of the notice or, where the bride Act]
is a minor, until the expiration of twenty-one days
from the said date; and

(b) unless a solemn declaration has been made
before the licensed Minister or the Marriage Registrar,
as the case may be, in the form specified in the Fourth
Schedule—

(i) by the bridegroom, and

(४) by the bride, or, if she is a minor for
whose marriage the consent of the guardian is
required under this Act, by the guardian on behalf
of the bride.


Objeciion to
certificate,

Cf. 8. 7 (3)
and s. 7 (3),
S.MLA.

cof. $ 8 (1),
cartier part,
SMA.

Cf. 5. 8 (2),
latter part,
SM.

Application
to district
court against
decision on
objection,
[S. 46,
Christian
Marriage
Act, extend-
ed,

Ch 8, 8 (2),
SMA.

Procedure on
receipt of
ob'ection by
Marriage
Registrar
abroad,

[New]

Cf. 8. to,
S.M.A.

Certificate
not to be
issued and
marriage not
to be solem-
nized in
certain cases,
{S. 17, part,
8. 41, part
nds. 42,
part, Chris-
tian Marriage
Act.)

58

16. (1) Any serson may, before the expiration of seven
days from the date on which 2ny notice has been rublished
under section 13 or section 14 make an objection in writ
ing to the marriage nd that it would contravene
one oz mare of the conditions specified in section 4

(2) If an cbjection is made under sub-geetion (1), the
licensed Minister or the Mar: ige Registrar shall not issue
the certificate under section 15 unless he has inquired into
the matter of the objection and is satisfied that it ought
not to prevent the issue of the certificate or the objection is
withdrawn by the person making it,

(3) The Licensed Minister or the Marriage Registrar shall
not take more than thirty Jays from the date of the objec-
tion for the purpese of Ing: ६ into the matter of ‘the
objecion and arriving at a decisien.

17. (1) 16 the licensed M ster or the Marriage Regis-
trar upholds an objection te intended mazriate and re-
fuses to issue the certiticate of notice of marri either
party ta the intended marrie: may, within a pericd of
twenty-one days from the date of such refusal, apply by
Petition to the district court.

(2) The district court may examine the allegations of
the petition in a Summary manner, and shall decide the
matter after ¢ 8 a Teasonabis oppartunity to the parties
to be heard.

(8) The devision of the district court on such petition
shall be final, and the licensed Minister or the Marriage
Registrar i act in conformity with the decision,

2

18. Where an objection is made under section 16 to a
Marriage Registrar outside India in respect of an intended
marriage outside India, and tne Marriage Registrar, after
making such inquiry into the nizlter as he thinks fit, enter-
tains a doubt in respect thereof, he shall not solemnize the
mattiage but shall transmit the recard to the Central Gove
emment with such statement respecting the matter as he
thinks fit to make, and the Central Government, after mak-
ing such inquiry into the matter and afler obisining such
advice as it thinks fit, shall give its decision thereon in
writing to the Marriage Registrar, who shall act in ecn-
formity with the decision uf the Central Government.

19. No licensed Minister or Marriage Registrar shall
issue a certificate of notice in respect af any marriage or
solemnize any marriage under this Act—

(a) if he has reason te believe that the solemniza-
tion of the intended marriage would be contrary to
the pro ins of section ३; er

(४) if any other lawful impediment be shown to kis
satisfaction why such ceitificate should not be issued
or such marriage should not be solemnized,


20. After the issue of the certificate of notice by the Solemniza-
licensed Minister, the marriage may b2 solemnized between ton of mar-
the persons therein described by the licensed Minister 14058
according to such form or ceremony as obtains in the Minister.
Church to which the licensed Minister belongs and in the [S. 25,
presence of at least two witnesses, Christian

Mecruge

21, (1) After the issue of the certificate of notice by the Solemniza-
Marriage Registrar, the martiape may be sclemnized be- tion of mare
tween the persons therein doseribed by or in the presence Marriage
of the Marriage Registrar according to such form or vere Registrar.
mony as the parties think fit to adopt and in the presence [S. st
of at least two witnesses: Chistian

arial
Act] a

Provided that the marriage shall not be complete and Cf. s. 12 (०)
binding on the parties unless each party says to the other Proviso,
in the presence of the Marriage Registrar and the wit- 5A.
nesses and in any language understeod by the parties—

“I, (A.B) take thee (C.D.) to be my lawful wife
(or husband)".

(2) The marriage may be sclemnized--

(a) at the ofice of the Marriage Registrar; or [New]

(b) at such other piace in his district and within 1 8. 12 (72%
a reasonable distance trem his office, as the parties S.M.A.

may desire, and upon such conditions and the payment
ef such additional fees as may be prescribed.

22. If a marriage is not solemnized within three manths Certificate
after the date of the certificate issued by the licensed Min- oid if mar.
ister or the Marriage Registrar under section 15, such Tage ned
certificate and all proceedings, if any. thereon shal! be void, कक
and no person shall proceed to solemnize the said marri 2 months.
until new notice has been siven and the certificate thereof {Ss. 26 and
issued in the manner provided in this Chapter. % Christian

Marriage
Act] ४

Cf. 8. 14
SMA.

D.—Registration of marriages

23. (1) When the marriage has been sclemnized, the Certificate
Minister of recognized Church or the licensed Minister or of Tracriage,
the Marriage Registrar, as the case may he, shall enter a तप
certificate thereof in the form specified in the Filth Scho-
dule in a book to be kept ty for that purpose and to [Ss. 27 10 36,
be called the Marriage Certificate Book, and such certificate Soh S35
shall be signed by the parties to the miarriage and the ही कक 5%
witnesses. Marriage

At]

Ch $. 13 (1),
SMA,


60

Cf 8.13 (2 (2) On a certificate being entered in the Marriage Cer-

s tificate Book by the Minister of a recognized Church or
the licensed Minister or the Marriage Registrar, the certi-
ficate shall be deemed to be conclusive evidence ‘of the fact
that a marriage under this Act has been solemnized.

Gf. s. 48, (3) Every Minister of a recognized Church, licensed

SMA, Minister or Marriage Registiay in a State shall send to the
Registrar-General of that State, at such intervals end in
such form as may be prescribed, a true copy of all entries
made by him in the Marriage Certificate Book since the
last of such intervals.

CHAPTER IV
RestiruTion or Consucau Ricuts

Restitution, 4. (7) When either the husband or the wife has, with-
is. 32, part, Out Teasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the
ivorce other, the aggrieved party may apply by petition to the
Cae 9 district court, for restitution of conjugal rig! is
Any

% 23,

S.M.A.

(5. 33, Di- (2) Nothing shall be pleaded in answer to such peti-

yore Act] tion which would not be a ground for judicial separation
or for nullity of marriage or for divorce.

2% 32, pat, (3) The court, on being satisfied of the truth of the

i Act.J Statements made in such petition, and that there is no
Jegal ground why a decree of restitution of conjugal rights
should not be granted, may decree restitution of conjugal
rights accordingly.

CHAPTER V

JupiciaL SEPARATION

Judicial 25. Either party to a marriage, whether solemnized
separation. before or after the commencement of this Act, may pre-
IS. 22, earlier sent a petition praying for a decree for judicial separa-
Litas a tion on any of the grounds specified in section 30

Ht
p23 0७

Effect of 26. (1) Where a decree for judicial separation has been
judicial passed, it shall no longer be obligatory for the petitioner

separation on rt i
duty to to echabit with the respondent.
cohabit.

(S. 33; latter
part, and s

An}

come,


हा

(2) The court may, on the application by petition of C/ s 79 (2)
either party and on being satisfied of the truth of the state. ५ Mu
ments made in such petition, rescind the decree where the cr, 3 (ay
parties have expressed a desire to come together and to SMA.
resume cohabitation or where for any other reason the G

court considers it just and reasonable to rescind the decree. [1% 14 (४; »

CHAPTER VI
Nuuirry of MARRIAGE

27. Any marriage solemnized, whether before or after Void mar-
the commencement of this Act, shall be null and void and tages.
may, on 2 petition presented for the purpose, be so declar-[S. 18, Di-
ed by a decree of nullity, if it contravenes the condition vore Act
specified in clause (3) or (#) of section 4. and 5. 1900),

Divorce Act}

Cf. 3. I,

opening lines.
M.A.

Cf. ४. 24 (7)

@, 5.26.#.

28. (1) Any marriage solemnized, whether before of voidabte.
after the commencement of this Act, shall be voidable and marriages
may be annulled by a decree of nullity on any of the fol-
lowing grounds, namely:—

[(a) that the marriage is in contravention of the [8, 179. (Gy

condition specified in clause (iii) of section 4; or Divorce! Act

Of. +. 12 (0

(9), HMA
Contrast

8. 24 (1),
S.M.A.

[(b) that the respondent was impotent at the हद, De

time of the marriage and continued to be so till the Of 3.13 al
institution of the proceeding; or ( 9), EM. है पा
Contrast
8. 24 (1) (H),
S.M.A.
[(०) that the consent of the petitioner, or where [s. 39 lass
the consent of the guardian in marriage of the peti- Divorce
tioner is required under clause (v) of section 4, the Act}
consent of such guardian, was obtained by force or of 3. 19 (3)
fraud; or (०, HMA.
Gf. 8. 25 (8)
S.M.A.
[New]
[(d) that the respondent was at the time of the
marriage pregnant by some person other than the &. BBE

petitioner. Of. 3. 25 Gs
s.-M.A.


{New}

Contrast,
4

@,

[New]
Cf. $. 12 (2),
HMA,

Cf. 8. 25,
2nd proviso,
S.M.A.

gf; F.9.12 (2),
(M.A. and

Ss 25, Ist

शुभ
MA.

{New]

Legitimacy
of children
of certain

void mar-
rlages and
voidable

amartiages.

62

(2) Any marriage solemnized after the commencement
yf this Act shall be voidable and may be annulled by a
decree of nullity on any of the following grounds, name-
ly

[ (७) that the marriage is in contravention of the
condition specified in clause (iv) of section 4; or

[ (>) that the marriage of the petitioner, being the
wife, is in contravention of the condition specified in
clause (v) of section 4.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(2), no petition for annulling a marriage—-

[(a) on the ground specified in cluse (c) of sub-
section (1) shall be entertained, if—

[7 the petition is presented more than cne
year after the fores had ceased to operate or, as
the case may be, the fraud had been discovered;
or

{Gi} the petitioner has, with his or her full
consent, lived with the other party to the marriage
as husband or wife after the force had ceased to
operate or, as the case may be, the fraud had been
discovered;

[(b) on the ground specified in clause (व) of sub-
section (1) shall be entertained, unless the court is
satisfied—

{(t) that the petitioner was at the time of the
marriage ignorant of the facts alleged;

[@i) that the proceedings have been institut-
ed, in the case of a marriage solemnized before the
commencement of this Act. within one year of such
commencement and, in the case of a marriage
solemnized after such commencement, within one
year from the date of the marriage; and

[ (i) that marital intercourse with the con-
sent of the petitioner has not taken place since
the discovery by the petitioner of the existence of
the grounds for a decree,

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(2), no petition for annulling a marriage urder that sub-
section shall be entertained if the petition is presented
more than one year after the petitioner has completed the
age of eighteen years.

29. (i) Where a marriage is null and void under section
27 by reason of contravention of the condition svecified in
clause (१) or clause (ii) of section 4, any child begotten or
conceived before the marriage is declared to be null and
void, who would have been the iegitimate child of the par-
ties to the marriage if the marriage had been valid, shall


63

be deemed to be their legitimate child notwithstanding that [S. 21, Di-

the marriage is null and void. vorce Act.]
Cf. 8. 16,
HMA.
Gf. s. 26
SMA.

(2) Where a marriage is annulled by a decree of nullity
under section 28, any child begotten or conceived before
the decree is made, who would have been the legitimate
child of the parties to the marrtiage if the marriage had
been dissolved instead of having 2623 annulled by a decree
of nullity, shall be deemed to be their legitimate child
notwithstanding the decree of nullity,

(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be constru- Ch 8 16.
ed as conferring upon any child of a marriage which is void praviso,
or which is annulled by a decree of nullity any rights in HMAs
or to the property of any person ether than the parents in Ch s. 26,
any case where, but for the passing of this Act, such child proviso,
would have been incapable of possessing or acquiring any 5.M.A.
such rights by reason of his not being the legitimate child
of his parents,

CHAPTER VII
Drvorce
A.—Grounds of divorce

30. (7) Any marriage, solemnized whether before or Grounds of
after the commencement of this Act, may, on a petition divorce.
presented either by the husband or the wife. be dissolved [S. 10, 1st

yy a decree of divorce on the ground that the respondent— ead apd

para, part,
Divarce
Act J

(i) has, since the solemnization of the marriage, Cf. $. 27 (a),
committed adultery; or SIMA.

CF. ५. 13 (1)

(9, TLMLAL

(i) has ceased to be a Chyistian by conversion Cf. $. 13 @)

to another religion; cr GD, HMA.

(i) has be:
continuaus p
diately precedir

curably of unsound mind for a Cf. s. 13 (1)
not less than three years imme- 4 है HLM.A.
¢ presentation of the petition; or छल ©

gs

(iv) has, for a
immediately pre
tion, been sufferi
of leprosy; or

(०) has, for a period of not less than three years Cf. s. 13 q@)
immediately preceding the presentation of the peti- का] HLM.A,
tion, been suffering from venereal disease in a com- Cf. $. 27 (/),
municable form; or SMA.

period of not 1९55 than three years Of. 8. 13 (1)
ag the presentation of the peti- (ic), H.M.A‘
 izom a virulent and incurable form RA 427 (e)>



mo

a. a7 Gs {vi} has not been heard of as being alive for a

Cf.s. 73 (1), period of seven years or more by those persons who
ee > would naturally have heard of the respondent if the
MA. respondent had been alive; or

‘Contrast (vit) has wilfully “refused to consummate the

54. O marriage, and the marriage has not, therefore, been

Of. 8. 32 (०), consummated; or
PMDa.”

९३. ५. 27 A, (viii) has failed to comply with a decree for resti-
SMA, tution of conjugal rights for a fered of two years or
of. $. 73 (1) upwards after the passing of the decree against the
(७), HMA, respondent; or

Of. $. 27 (&, (iz) has deserted the petitioner for a period of at
S-M-A-and Jeast three years immediately preceding the presen-
inition of tation of the petition; or
“desertion”
G27 @, (x) has, since the solemnization of the marriage,
DAA. amc iti i
5 treated the petitioner with cruelty,
% 10 (Xb)
Judicial
ration,
BMA.

& 8. 13 (2) (2) A wife may also present a petition for the disso-
(8, व पी lution of her marriage by a decree of divorce on the
sentence, “ground that the husband has, since the solemnization of

SMA. the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality.

Divorce after 31. Where in respect of any marriage, solemnized whe-
sears for ther before or after the commencement of this Act, a
separation, eeree for judicial separation has been passed, and there
has been no resumption of cohabitation as between the
{New} parties to the marriage for a period of two years or up-
wards after the passing of the decree, e‘ther party may, by
an application in the proceeding ‘in which the decree
was passed, pray for a dissolution of the marriage by a
deeree of divorce; and the court may, on being satisfied
of the truth of the statements made in such application,
pass a decree accordingly.
Ro petition 32. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
to be presen- Act, it shall not be competent for any court to entertain
ted within any petition for dissolution of a marriage by a decree of
shree years of divorce under section 30, unless at the date of the presen-
merge. tation of the petition three years have elapsed since the

(New date of the marriage:

of. 3.

M.A. + Provided that the court may grant leave to present 2
$ 295 petition before the said three years have elapsed, if the
MLA.

11f it is considered that a fresh Proceeding for divorce should be filed,
the clause can run as follows :—

“Either the husband or the wife may also Present a petition for
the dissolution of the marriage by a decree of divorce on the ground. thet
there hes been no resumption of cohabitation as between the parties to the
moarriag [८ for a period of 1 फिण years or upwards after the passing of a decree
for judicial separation in a proceeding to which they were parties",


65

court thinks fit to do so on the ground that the case is
one of exceptional hardship to the petitioner or of excep-
tional depravity on the part of the respondent; but any
such leave may, in the interests of justice, be revoked by
the court at any time before a decree nisi of divorce is
passed; and where the leave is so revoked, the court may
dismiss the petition without prejudice to any petition
which may be brought after the expiration of the said
three years upon the same or substantially the same facts
as those alleged in support of the petition so dismissed.

(2) In disposing of any application under this section Cf. s. 14 (०
for leave to present a petition for divorce before the H-M.A.
expiration of three years from the date of the marriage, 3. 29 (2),
the court shall have regard to the interests of any child-Saa. ””
ren of the marriage and to the questicn whether there is

न a reasonable probability of a reconciliation between the

parties before the expiration of the said three years.

B—Re-marriage after divorce

33. Where a decree of divorce has been made absolute Re-marriage
under section 42 or a decree of divorce has been passed of divorced
under section 31, and the time for appealing has expired Persons.
without an appeal having been presented or an appeal ह- 57 Di-
has been presented but has been dismissed and the decree "7५० Act.
of dismissal has become final, but not sooner, either party Fee @,
to the marriage may marry again. Contrast

30s

8. 15.
HLMLA. and
®
SMA

CHAPTER VIII
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE

34. Nothing contained in this Act shall authorise any Relief to be
court to grant any relief under Chapters IV to VII, | ice
except where— only. tang

(व) both the parties to the marriage are Chris-[S. 2. and

tians at the time of the presentation of the petition; rere res)
or "

(8) both the parties to the marriage were Chris-
tians at the time of the marriage, and at least one of
the parties is a Christian at the time of the presenta-
tion of the petition; or

(c) the marriage was solemnized under any
- enactment repealed hereby, and at least one of the


Jurisdiction
of Indian
Courts.

[S. 2, ard
para,, Di-
vorce Act,}

{S. 2, 4th
para.,
Divorce
Act]

(S. 2, sth
para.,
Divorce Act,}
Court to
which
petition to
‘be made.
[New]

[New]

66

parties is a Christian at the time m the presentation
of the petition’.

35. Nothing contained in this Act shall authorise any
court—

(०) to rake any deeree of dissolution of marri-
age, except where--

(i) the parties to the marriage are domiciled
in India at the time of the presentation of the
petition; or

(ii) the petitioner, being the wife, was domi-
ciled in India immediately before the marriage
und has been residing in India for a period of not
less than three years immediately preceding the
presentation of the petition;

{b) to make any decree of nullity of marriage,
except where—

(i) the parties to the marriage are domiciled
in India at the time of the presentation of the
petition; or

(ii) the marriage was sclemnized under this
Act or under any enactment repealed hereby,
and the petitioner is either domiciled or residing
in India at the time of the presentation of the
petition;

{c) ta grant any other relief under Chapters IV
to VII, except where the petitioner is residing in
India at the time of the presentation of the petition.

36. (1) Every petition under sub-section (5) of sec-
tion 5 shall be presented to the district court within the
local limits af whose ordinary original civil jurisdiction
the bride resides.

(2) Every petition under section 7 shall be presented
to the district court within the local limits of whose erdinary
original civil jurisdiction the licensed Minister discharges

The following alternative draft can also te considered :—~

“Na court shall grant ang relief under Chapters IV to VII except
where at least one of the parties was a Christian at the time of
ihe marriage end continued to be so till the institution of the
praceeding”.

‘This is wider in sonie respect than the main draft, because it will cover
cases where @ Christian end a non-Christian marry outside India
(or thouch this car, happen very rarely even within India. where
the personal law of the non-Christian allows such marriage} and
one of the parties petitions for matrimonial relief. [६ is, how-
ever, narrower in one respect than the main draft. because, it will
rut apply to cases where for example, two non-Christians marry
and then be ome converts to Christianity.

It is narrower than the existing section, by requiring that one party
should have been a Christian atthe time of the marriage also



87

‘this functions or the office of the Marriage Registrar is
situate, as the case may be.

(3) Every petition under Chapters IV to VII shall be !S. 3 (1), part
Presented to the district court within the local limits of a 3 (3)
whose ordinary original civil jursidiction— Divorce Act,

$., 10 first
para, part,
and second
para. part,
Divorce
Act, and
section 23,
earlier part,
Divorce
Acr,}

“(a) the respondent is residing at the time of the Cf s. 29 (3), ww
presentation of the petition, or P.M.D.A,

- ized, Ch s 19,
(0) the marriage was solemnized, or Bea. 19,
(c) the husband and wife last resided together, ६ (27 (0:

or

(व) the petitioner is residing at the time of the Ch. $. 29 (3),
presentation of the petition, provided the respondent P.M.D.A.
is, at that time, residing outside India.

37. (1) Every petition presented under Chapters IV Contents
‘to VII shall state as distinctly as the nature of the case gare
permits the facts on which the claim to relief is founded petitions.
and shall also state that there is no collusion between Is 47, ast
the petitioner and the other party to the marriage. para, and

8. 30, thin
., Di-

wore’ Act]

Cf. s. 20,

HLM.A.

5. 32,

SMA.

(2) The statements contained in every petition under {s. 47, and
Chapters IV to VII shall be verified by the petitioner or P&., Di-
some other competent person in the manner required by Vr® Act.]

Jaw for the verification of plaints and may, at the hear-
ing, be referred to as evidence.

38. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Application
Act and to such rules as the High Court may make in of Code of
this behalf, all proceedings under this Act shall be regu- cul Pro:
lated, as far as may be, by the Code of Civil Procedure, re
ioe. bash

धर $. 21,
fn
Gf. 8. 40,
S.M.A. 5 of
1908,

5 of 1908,
281 L~7


68

Decree in 39. (1) In any proceeding under Chapters IV to VII,
Proceedings. whether defended or not, if the court is satisfied that—
[8. 12, part, (a) any of the grounds for granting relief exists
saz pat and the petitioner is not in any way taking advant-
and 3. 23, age of his or her own wrong or disability for the pur-
latter part, pose of such relief, and

Divorce

Bagg 2 (b) where the ground of the petition 15 adultery,
8.33, the petitioner has not in any manner been accessory
S.MLA. to or connived at or condoned the adultery, or where

the ground of the petition is cruelty, the petitioner
has not in any manner condoned the cruelty, and
(९) the petition is not presented or prosecuted in
collusion with the respondent, and
(d) there has not been amy unnecessary or im-
proper delay in instituting the proceeding, and
(e} there is no other legal ground why relief
should not be granted,
then, and in such a case, but not otherwise, the court shall
decree such relief accordingly.

[New] (2) Before proceeding to grant any relief under
Chapters IV to VII, it shall be the duty of the court in
the first instance, in every case where it is possible so to
do consistently with the nature and circumstances of the
case, to make every endeavour to bring about a reconci-
liation between the parties.

[New] (3) For the purpose of aiding the court in bringing
about such reconciliation, the court may, if the parties so
desire or if it thinks it just and proper so to do, a djourn the
proceeding and refer the matter to any person named by
the parties in this bahalf or to any person nominated by
the court if the parties fail to name any person, with
directions to report to the court as to whether a recon-
ciliation can be, and has been, effected, and shall, in
disposing of the proceeding, have due regard to the
report.

Adulterer or iti ‘ iudici

40. (1) On a petition for divorce or judicial separa-

Adulteress to tion presented on the ground of adultery the petitioner

pondent. shall make the alleged adulterer or adulteress a co-

हि. 11, Di respondent, unless the petitioner is excused by the court

oF from so doing on any of the following grounds, namely: —

OF es (a) that the respondent is leading the life of a
(a), S.M.A. prostitute, and that the petitioner knows of no per-

son with whom the adultery has been committed;
(0) that the name of the alleged adulterer or

adulteress is unknown to the petitioner although the

petitioner has made due efforts to discover it;

a (०) that the alleged adulterer or adulteress is

lead;


69

(d) any other ground which the court may regard Cf. s. 3,
as sufficient in the circumstances of the case. M.C.A.

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall, so far as [New.]
may be, apply in relation to the answer of a respondent
praying for divorce or judicial separation on the ground ८/. $. 3
of adultery, as they apply in relation to a petition 10 MCA.
divorce or judicial separation presented on that ground.

41. If, in any proceeding for divorce or judicial separa- Relief to
tion, the respon: dent opposes the relief sought on the respondent
ground of the petitioner’s adultery, cruelty or desertion, opposition to
the court may give the respondent the same relief 10 petition for
which he or she would have been entitled if he or she had divorce on

presented a petition seeking such relief, prounds,

ae व
फिर Act

42, (1) Every decree for divorce under section 30 Decree mist
shall, in the first instance, be a decree nisi, not to be made for divorce.
absolute until after the expiration of ‘six months from दिन 1
the pronouncing thereof, unless the court fixes a shorter “
time.

(2) After the pronouncing of the decree nisi and Cf.ss. 12 (7)
before the decree is made absolute, any person may, by !2 2,
an application made in accordance with such rules as MCA.
may be made by the High Court in that behalf, show
cause why the decree should not be made absolute by
reason of the decree having been obtained by collusion
or by reason of material facts not having been brought
before the court, and in any such case the court may make
the decree absolute, reverse the decree nisi, require further
inquiry or otherwise deal with the case as the court thinks

it.

(3) Where a decree nisi has been obtained and no appli- Gee (3)
cation for the decree to be made absolute has been made 7 “बी
within six months from the pronouncement of the decree
nisi by the party who obtained the decree, then, at any
time within three months from the expiration of the said
six months, the party against whom the decree nisi has been
granted shall be at liberty to apply to the court and the
court, on such application, may make the decree absolute,
reverse the decree nisi, require further inquiry or other-
wise deal with the case as the court thinks fit.

43. (1) A husband or wife may, on a petition for divorce Damages
or for judicial separation, claim damages from any person from adul-
on the ground of adultery with the wife or husband of agutteress.
the petitioner. [s. 34,

Divorce Act.]

(2) The court may direct in what manner the damages $. 39, 3rd
recovered on any such petition are to be paid or applied, Bit. Act]
and may direct the whole or any Part of the damages to ¢y 5, 30,”
be: settled for the benefit of the children, if any, of the M.C.A.
marriage, or as a provision for the maintenance cf the wife, at (2)@),

Ss.
or husband. SM.


70

per ena 44. Where in any proceeding under Chapters IV to VII

7 ex- it appears to the court that either the wife or the husband,
penses of as the case may be, has no independent income sufficient
proceedings. for her or his support and the necessary expenses of the
(8. 36, Di- proceeding, it may, on the application of the wife or the
voree Act.} husband, order the respondent to pay to the petitioner the
Cf.s.24, expenses of the proceeding, and monthly during the pro-
HLMLA. ceeding such sum as, having regard to the petitioner's
Cf. 3. 36, own income and the income of the respondent, may seem ,
SMA. to the court to be reasonable.
een ond 45. (1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under Chap-
maintenance. ters IV to VII may, at the time of passing any decree or
[s. 3०, Die at any time subsequent there‘o, on application made to it
is 2 ‘Act. for the purpose by either the wife or the husband, as the
case may be, order that the respondent shall, while the ap-
Cf. s. 25, plicant remains unmarried, pay to the applicant for her
HLM.A. or his maintenance and support such gross sum or such
Cf. 37 monthly or periodical sum for a term not exceeding the 1:18
S.M.A. of the applicant as, having regard to the respondent's own
income and other property, if any, the income and other
property of the applicant and the conduct of the parties,
may seem to the court to be just, and any such payment
may be secured, if necessary, by a charge on the immovable
property of the respondent.

(2) If the court is satisfied that there is a change in the
circumstances of either party at any time after it has made
an order under sub-section (1), it may, at the instance of
either party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in such
manner as the court may deem just.

(3) If the court is satisfied that the party in whose
favour an order has been made under this section has re-
married, or, if such party is the wife, that she has not re-
mained chaste, or, if such party is the husband, that he has
had sexual intercourse with any woman outside wedlock,
it shall rescind the order.

Disposal of 46. (1) In any proceeding under Chapters IV to VII, the

Property. court may make such provisions in the decree as it deems

[New] just and proper with respect to any property presented, at
or about the time of the marriage, which raay belong joint-
ly to both the husband and the wife.

S. 40, main (2) In any case in which the court pionounces a decree
para, Divorce for divorce or nullity of marriage, the court may inquire
et] into the existence of ante-nuptial or post-nuptial  settle-
Cf..s. 25, ments made on the parties whose raarriage is the subject
MCA. of the decree, and may make such orders, -vith reference to
the application of the whole or any part of the property s0
settled (whether the settlement is for the benefit of the
children of the marriage or of the parties to the marriage

or both), as the court thinks fit.


a

(3) The court shall not make any order under sub- (5, 42 Prom
section (2) for the benefit of the parents or either of them सजा ‘Act]
at the expense of the children. हे

47. In any proceeding under Chapters IV to VII, the Custody of
court may, from time to time, pass such mterim orders and Children.
make such provisions in the decree as it may deem just and [Ss. 4, 42
Proper with respect to the custody, maintenance and edu- 43 and 44,
cation of minor children. consistently with their wishes, Divorce
wherever possible, and may, after the decree, upon applica- Act]
tion by petition for the purpose, make, from time to time, MA
all such orders and provisions with respect to the custody, 5." 58,
maintenance and education of such children as might have S.M.A.
been made by such decree or interim orders in case the
proceeding for obtaining such decree were still pending,
and the court may also हे मय time to time revoke, suspend
or vary any such orders and provisions Previously made.

48, A proceeding under this Act shall be conducted in Proceedings
camera if either party so desires or if the court so thinks ™¥ bee
fit to do, and it shall not be lawful for any person to print jnay not be
or publish any matter in relation to such Froceeding except published
with the previous permission of the court. 18, 53,

Divorce
Act}
Cf.
HMA.
sai,

49. Except as otherwise provided in this Act, all decrees Appeals
and orders made by the court in any proceeding under this from decree
Act shall be appealable as decrees of the court made in ig? वा
the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, and such Divaree Act)
appeal shall lie to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie Contrast
from the decisions of the court given in the exercise of its s. 23,
original civil jurisdiction. pM.

26,

22),
A.

Provided that there shall be no appeal on the subject SMe
of costs only. Chae ot Ci
Procedure.

50. All decrees and orders made ty the court in any Enforcement
proceeding under this Act shall be ent! forced in the like of flecrees
manner as the decrees and orders of the court made in the is. S ‘part,
exercise of its original civil jurisdiction for the time being Divorce *”

are enforced. Act.)
टू, 5... 28,
HLM.A.
CHAPTER IX 8-39,S.M.A,
PENALTIES

51. Every person whose marriage is solemnized under Punishment
this Act and who, during the lifetime of his or her wife of bigamy,
or husband, contracts any other marriage shall be subject (ew)
to the penalties provided in section 494 and section 495 Sua, +
of the Indian Penal Code for the offence of marrying 45 of 1860
again during the lifetime of the husband or wife, and the
marriage so contracted shall be void.


82
3.1 am not related to C. 9. (the bride} within the
prohibited relationship.
4. I am a Christian,

5. I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration
is false, I am liable to imprisonment and also to fine.

(Sd.) A.B. (the Bridegroom).

DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDE

1, ९. D., hereby declare as follows:—

1, Lam at the present time unmarried (or a widow or
a divorcee, as the case may be),

2. I have completed ..., years of age.

3. [ am not related to A. B. (the bridegroom) within
the prohibited relationship.

4. 1 am a Christian.

3. Consent of my guardian in marriage, Shri बन
ve has been obtained to my proposed marriage
AB.

6. 1 am aware that, if any statement in this declaration
is false, I am liable to imprisonment and also to fine,

wil

(Sd.) C. 0. (the Bride).

Nore :—In the case of a minor bride fur whose marriage the consent ofan
is required, che guardian should sign on her behalf.

Signed in our presence by the above named A.B. and
C.D. 80 far as we are aware there is no lawful impediment
to the marriage.

(Sd.) G. HL है।
} Two witnesses.
(Sd) LJ. J

(Countersigned) E. F,

Minister of a recognised Church?
Licensed Minister*

Marriage Registrar’

Dated the ........................ day of ......... जज 5

3311६ 6 off if nat applicable. If in tieu of guardian’s Consent, permission of the
district court has been obtained state so.

*Strik: off what is taapplicable.



3

(2) Whoever, being a licensed Minister or a Marriage
Registrar, refuses, without just cause, to solemnize a
marriage under this Act, shall be punishable with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months, or with fine which may extend to one hundred
rupees, or with both.

57. Whoever, being authorised under this Act to Penalty for

-solemnize a marriage, knowingly and wilfully— wrongful
(a) solemnizes such marriage— Marriage
arn ishi नि rding Registrar or
(4) without publishing a notice regarding Minister, ete.
such marriage as required by any provision of [Ss. 69, 70,
this Act, or जा 7a and
(ii) in contravention of any other provision BR Marriage
contained in this Act, or Act]

(8) issues any certificate in contravention of any Sak. 46
provision contained in this Act, “vs
‘shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.

58. Whoever, by himself or another, wilfully destroys Destroying
or injures any Marriage Certificate Book, or any part or falsifying
thereof or any authenticated extract therefrom, or falsely Menriege
makes or counterfeits any part of such book, or wilfully Books.
inserts any false entry in any such book or authenticated
extract, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a [S. 75, Chris-
term which may extend to seven years and shall also be far easier
liable to fine which may extend to two thousand rupees. *

59. Any person who prints or publishes any matter in Penalty for
contravention of the provisions contained in section 4g publishing
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one proceedings
thousand rupees. camera,

[New
Cf. 22 (2),
HMA.

60, No prosecution for any offence punishable under Limitation
section 2, section 53, section 54, section 55, section 56, for prosecu-
section 57, section 58 or section 59 shall be instituted Hons
after the expiry of two years from the date on which the तीर
offence is committed Marriage

Act.

CHAPTER X
MISCELLANEOUS

61, (7) Where any person makes an objection against Liability for
the issue of any certificate of notice of marriage and the frivolous
Marriage Registrar under section 16, or the district court °biections.
under sub-section (4) of section 5 or under section 17, [S. 49 Chris-
declares that the objection is not reasonable and has not tian Marriage
been made in good faith, the Marriage Registrar or the Act]
district court, as the case may be, may, after giving such

‘persen a reasonable opportunity of being heard, award, Shan? छा


Savings re-
garding irre-
arities.

Correction
of errors.

(8: 78
Christian
Marriage
Act]

Cf. 8. 49
S.M.A.

Solemniza-
tion of mar-
riage by
Ministers of
Church in
places sanc-
tioned by
Custom or
usage.
[New]

4

by way of compensation, costs, not exceeding one thousand.
rupees, to the parties to the intended marriage.

(2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Marriage
Registrar or the district court under sub-section (1) may,
within a period of thirty days from the date of the order,
appeal to the district court or the High Court, as the case:
may be.

(3) Subject 10 any order passed on appeal under sub-
section (2), the order of the Marriage Registrar or the
district court under sub-section (2) shall be final.

(4) Any order of costs made under sub-section (I}
may be executed in the same manner as a decree passed
by the district court within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction the office of the Marriage Registrar is situate.

62, Whenever any marriage has been solemnized bet-
ween two Christians under this Act in accordance with
the provisions of section 6, it shall not be void merely on
account of any irregularity in respect of any of the
following matters, namely: —

() any statement made in regard 10 the dwell-
ing place of the persons married;

{#) the notice of the marriage;

(iii) the certificate of the notice of the marriage
or translation thereof;

(iv) the registration of the marriage.

63. (1) Any person authorised to solemnize a marriage
under this Act, who discovers any error in the form or
substance of any entry in the Marriage Certificate Book
may, witnin one month next after the discovery of such
error, in the presence of the persons married, or, in case
of their death or absence, in the presence of two other
witnesses, correct the error by entry in the margin,
without any alteration of the original entry and shall
sign the marginal entry and add thereto the date of such
correction.

(2) Every correction made under this section shall be
attested by the witnesses in whose presence it was made.

(3) Where a copy of any entry has already been sent
under sub-section (3) of section 23 to the Registrar-
General, such person shall make and send in like manner
a separate certificate of the original erroneous entry and
of the marginal corrections therein made.

64. Subject to the other provisions contained in this
Act, a marriage under this Act may be solemnized by a
Minister of 8 recognised Church or a licensed Minister—

(a) in a church building, or


75.

(9) in any other place agreed upon between the
parties to the marriage, if solemnization at such place
is in accordance with.the custom or usage applicable
to the community to which the parties to the marriage
belong.

65. Every Marriage Registrar shall be deemed to be a Marriage
public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Registrars
Indian Penal Code, to be deemed

to be
public ser-
vants,
[New]
45 of 1860,

66. The Marriage Notice Book shall be open for inspec- Inspection of.
tion at all reasonable times, without fee, by any person Marriage
desirous of inspecting the same. Bok

S. 40, part,
Christian
Maxriage
Act]

61. (1) The Marriage Certificate Book kept under this Faspection of
Act shall at all reasonable times be open for inspection and M@ttiase

Sed नि ५ Certific
shall be admissible as evidence of the statements therein Rooke
contained. [$. 79 and
80, part,

s
(2) Certified extracts from the Marriage Certificate Chr
Book shall, on application, be given by the person who Ma
solemnized the marriage or other person having the custody asd 4

’ for the time being of the Marriage Certificate Book, to any Sua. ?”
person who applies for the same. gn 58 (3)

(3) Inspection of the Marriage Ccttificate Book under
sub-section (1) and the grant of certified extracts therefrom
under sub-section (2) shall be—

(a) without fee, if applied for by the parties to
the marriage at or about the time of the murriage;

(09) subject to the payment of the prescribed fee,
in other cases.

68. Every certified copy, purporting to be signed by the Certifiea
person entrusted under this Act with the custody of any copy to be
Marriage Certificate Book, of an entry of a marriage in such ¢¥*lence.

Book, shall be received in evidence without production or {s. So. art
proof of the original, Marriage
Ct.)

69. (1) Any notice to be given or declaration to be made Language of
by any person in respect of an intended marriage under this notices and
Act may be given or made in g language commonly in use 4*!#rstions.
in the State or the part of State in which the notice is [New
given or declaration made, or in English. ew]

(2) Every person solemnizing a marriage under this Act [Ss. 23,
shall satisfy himself that the parties to the marriage have 37,204 58
understood the contents of the notice given and the declara- Marriage
tion made by each of them, and (where a certificate of Act.]


76

notice of marriage is required to be issued under this Act)
of the certificate of notice of marriage issued for the
Ministers of Marriage.

i 70. No Minister of a recognised Church shall be com-
recognised en izati
Churches not pelled ta solemnize any marriage, the solemnization of
compelled to which would be contrary to the rules of the Church of
solemmize which he is a Minister.
marriages
contrary to
the rules of
the Church.
fs 58, Die
vorce Act,
extended]

Powers of 71. For the purpose of any inquiry under this Act, the
Marriage Marriage Registrar shall have all the powers vested in a
By eeapect civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when
of inquiries. trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely: —
f 1908
हि. 53 Ghris-
tian Mar-
riage Act.}
Cf. 5. 9 (1), (७) summoning and enforcing the attendance of
S.M.A. witnesses and examining them on oath;
(0) discovery and inspection;
(c) compelling the production of documents:
(०) reception of evidence on affidavits; and
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of
witnesses;
and any proceeding before the Marriage Registrar shall be
deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of
45 of 1860, Section 193 of the Indian Penal Code.

Explanation.—For the purpose of enforcing the attend-
ance of any person to give evidence, the local limits of the
jurisdiction of the Marriage Registrar shall be the local
limits of his district.

Power to 72. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in
हि rales. the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the pur-
{Ss Christian Poses of this Act.
87०
riage Act.)
Of. 3. 50, (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generali-
S.M.A. ty of the foregoing power, such rul es may provide for all or
any of the following matters, namely: —
(a) the duties and powers of Marriage Registrars
and the areas in which they may exercise jurisdiction;
(b) the manner in which a Marriage Registrar
may hold inquiries under this Act, and the procedure
therefor;
(c) the form and manner in which any books
required by or under this Act shall be maintained;
(व) the fees that may be levied for the perfor-
mance of any duty imposed upon any person under this
Act;


7

(९) the conditions under which licenses to solem-
nize marriages may be issued by the State Government,
and the circumstances under which they may be
Tevoked;

(f) the surrender of such licences on the expiry
thereof by revocation or otherwise;

(9) the procedure to be followed by Committees
constituted under section 7;

(h) the form in which, and the intervals within
which, copies of entries in the Marriage Certificate
Book shall be sent to the Registrar-General;

(#) any other matter which may be or requires to
be prescribed,

(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days, which may be comprised in one session er in two
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
in which it is so laid or the session immediately following,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the
rule shall thereafter have‘effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be without preju-
dice to the validity of anything Previously done under that
Tule.

73. The High Court may, by notification in the Official Rules by the
Gazette, make such rules consistent with the provisions High Court.
contained in this Act as it may consider expedient for the 62, Di-
purpose of regulating the procedure to be followed in peti- {s. 62 “Act]
tions under sub-section (5) of section 5 or under section 17,
and for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions Cf. s. 41 (1),
of Chapters IV to VII. SMA.

74. A marriage solemnized before the commencement Savings re-
of this Act, which is otherwise valid, shall not be deemed garding mar-
to be invalid merely by reason of any provision contained एकड़ 5°

हि . mh ized
in this Act? before the

Act.
[New

Cf. the
wording of
829 (Ds
HM.A.

75. Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of Savings for
the Special Marriage Act, 1954, or apply to any marriage other mar-
solemnized under that Act. [Newi

*An alternative draft, based on section 79 (7) of the (English) Marriage 43 Of 1954
Aes 2a atte rma पी 0)
“ ing in this ct al t the dit 54 ‘any marriag ¢ solemnized ML

before the commencement of this Act, aes HLMLA.
But the words “affect the validity ” would extend the protection, it can
be argued, to voidable marriages also (which is not the ‘inteutions. tte
Phraseology used in the English Act has not, therefore, been adoped,



78

Repeal. 76. (7) The Indian Divorce Act, 1869, the Indian

1:07 Christian Marriage Act, 1872, the Indian and Colonial
Divorce Jurisdiction Act, 1926, the Indian and Colonial
Divorce Jurisdiction Act, 1940, the Indian Divorce Act,
1945, and any enactment corresponding to the Indian

15 of 1872 Christian Marriage Act, 1872, in force in the territories
which, immediately before the first day of November,
1956, were comprised in the States of Travancore-Cochin
and Manipur are hereby repealed.

Cf. yeu @) (2) Notwithstanding such repeal,—-

(@), SMA. (a) all marriages duly solemnized under the

1s of 1872 Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872, or any such
corresponding enactment, shall be deemed to have
been solemnized under this Act;

Contrast (b) all suits and proceedings in causes and
$32 G» matters matrimonial which, when this Act comes
ands. 51 into force, are pending in any court under the Indian
(20), Divoree Act, 1869, or under ‘the Indian and Colonial
SMA. Divorce Jurisdiction Act, 1926, or urder the Indian

and Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction Act, 1940, or under

4 of 1869 the Indian Christian Marriage [९ Act, 1872, or any such

SS of 1872 corresponding enactment, shall be dealt with and
decided by such court as if this Act had not been
passed,

Of. 8. 51 (39) (3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall be without

S.-M. Prejudice to the provisions contained in section 6 of the

io of 1897 General Clauses Act, 1897, which shall also १४ ply to the
repeal of the Indian and Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction
Act, 1926, the Indian and Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction
Act, 1940, the Indian Divorce Act, 1945, the Indian Divorce
Act, 1945, and such corresponding enactment.

THE FIRST SCHEDULE

[New] PROHIGITED RELATIONSHIP
[See section 2(m)]
Part I

Cf. First 1. Mother
Schedule, 2. Father’s widow (step-mother)
3. Mother’s mother.
4. Mother’s father’s widow (step-grand-mother}
5. Father’s mother
6. Father's father’s widow (step-grand-mother)
7, Daughter
8. Son’s widow
9. Daughter's daughter



7g

10. Daughter's son's widow

11. Son’s daughter

12. Son’s son's widow

13. Sister

14, Wife’s daughter (step-daughter)

15. Wife’s mother

16. Wife’s son’s daughter (step-son’s daughter)

17. Wife's daughter's daughter (step-daughter’s daugh-
ter)

18. Wife’s father’s mother

19. Wife's mother’s mother.

Explenation.—For the purposes of this Part, the expres-
sion “widow” includes a divorced wife, न

Paar IT
20. Father
21. Mother’s husband (step-father)
22. Father’s father
23. Father's mother’s husband (step-grand-father)
24, Mother’s father
25. Mother’s mother’s husband (step-grand-father)
26. Son
27. Daughter's husband
28. Son's son
29. Son’s daughter’s husband
30. Daughter's son
31. Daughter’s daughter's husband
32. Brother
33. Husband’s father
34. Husband's son (step-son)

35, Husband's son's son {step-son’s son)
36. Huband’s daughter's son (step-daughter’s son)
37. Husband's father’s father

- 38, Husband’s mother’s father,

Explanation—For the purposes of this Part, the res-
sion “husband” includes a divorced husband. oP


86

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 12(i}]
[Sch. 1,

‘Christian Form or Notice or INTENDED MARRIAGE
Marriage
Act To

Ube, cee eer et eget ett 1 न १5
SMA. We hereby give you notice that a marriage under the
Christian Marriage and Matrimonial Causes Act,

ot Second The [licensed Mlinister]' [Marriage Registrar]! for

eee is intended to be solemnized between us withi

in
three calendar months from the date hereof.

Name Condition 7 Occupa- Date of Pwelling Permanent Length Church,
tion birth place dwelling of — chapelor
place, if resi- place of
present dence worship:
dwelling in which
place not! martiage
permanent] is ta be
solemnized
Gf the
marriage
is to be
so solem-
nized)

Strike off what is inapplicable,

Witness our hands, this........

day of... eee
Sd. A.B.
89. C.D.

Nora,—In the case of 8 minor bride for whose marriage the consent of her guardian
is required, the guardian should sign on her behalf,

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
{See section 15(1)]

[Sch. [sch IE Form or CeatiricaTe op Noricz
4 do hereby certify that, on the
Act)

; Rotice was duly entered in


a1

my Marriage Notice Book of the marriage intended
between the parties therein named and described, delivered

under the hand of both the parties, that is to say,

Name Condition Occu- Date Dwell- Perma- Length Church,
pation of ing nent of resi- chapel or
birch place dweil- dence place of
ing worship in
place, which
if pre- marriage
sent is to be
dwelling solemniz-
place ed (if the
not marriage
perma- is to
nent be 830
solemniz-
ed)

A. B. Unmarried
Widower
Divorcee

C.D. Unmarried
Widow
Divorcee

and that the declaration

required by section*
of the Christian Marriage and Matrimonial Causes Act

has been duly made by the sai

Date of notice entered................. :
Date of certificate given... eee
‘Witness my hand chis...............

day of...
Licensed Minister’
Marriage Registrav!

THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
[See sections 11 (2) (c) and 15(2) (b)]

DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDEGROOM
1, A. B, hereby declare as follows:—

.-day of... Soe S Pees

[New]

Cf. Third
Schedule,

1. I am at the present time unmarried (or a widower §.

or a divorcee, as the case may be).
2. I have completed .... years of age,

*To be filled up.
‘Strike off what 18 inapplicable,


82
3.1 am not related to C. 9. (the bride} within the
prohibited relationship.
4. I am a Christian,

5. I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration
is false, I am liable to imprisonment and also to fine.

(Sd.) A.B. (the Bridegroom).

DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDE

1, ९. D., hereby declare as follows:—

1, Lam at the present time unmarried (or a widow or
a divorcee, as the case may be),

2. I have completed ..., years of age.

3. [ am not related to A. B. (the bridegroom) within
the prohibited relationship.

4. 1 am a Christian.

3. Consent of my guardian in marriage, Shri बन
ve has been obtained to my proposed marriage
AB.

6. 1 am aware that, if any statement in this declaration
is false, I am liable to imprisonment and also to fine,

wil

(Sd.) C. 0. (the Bride).

Nore :—In the case of a minor bride fur whose marriage the consent ofan
is required, che guardian should sign on her behalf.

Signed in our presence by the above named A.B. and
C.D. 80 far as we are aware there is no lawful impediment
to the marriage.

(Sd.) G. HL है।
} Two witnesses.
(Sd) LJ. J

(Countersigned) E. F,

Minister of a recognised Church?
Licensed Minister*

Marriage Registrar’

Dated the ........................ day of ......... जज 5

3311६ 6 off if nat applicable. If in tieu of guardian’s Consent, permission of the
district court has been obtained state so.

*Strik: off what is taapplicable.



83

THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
[See section 23(1)]

Form or CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE

I, E. F., hereby certify that on the ............ day of [Schs, IIT
sess . A.B. and C.D.' appeared before me and and TY,
that the de m required by section के eee Marriage
of the Christian Marriage and Matrimonial Causes Act, Act.]
19............... was duly made, and that a marriage under that Cf, Fourth
Act was solemnized between them in my presence and in Schedule

the presence of two witnesses who have signed hereunder. S.
(Sd) E. F.
Minister of a recognised Church*
Licensed Minists

Marriage Registrar?
(Sd.) A. 8. (Bridegroom).
(Sd.} C, D. (Bride).

(Sd) G. H.

(89.) I. J.

Two witnesses.

*To be entered.
tHerein give particulars of the parties.
‘Strike off what is inapplicable.

281 L—8


APPENDIX वा
Nores oN CLAUSES

Clause 1

Title—The word “Indian” has been omitted in con-
sonance with recent legislative practice. The words “and
Matrimonial Causes” have been used, instead of the word
“divorcee”, since “divorce” ig a natrower expression than
“matrimonial causes”.

Extent—The reasons for extending the new Act to
Manipur and Travancore-Cochin have already been stat-
1

(1) Marriage

Application—The Act will apply to all marriages
solemnized within India, This result has been achieved by
the extent clause, which applies the Act to the whole of
India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. As regards
the extra-territorial operation of the Act, Indians domiciled
in the territories to which the Act extends will, if
Christians, be governed by the Act, wherever they are.
{it is considered unnecessary to add the requirement that
they must be citizens of India).

Gi) Matrimonial causes

As regards matrimonial causes, the separate clause
dealing with the jurisdiction of Indian courts may be
seen.’

The application of the Act to any person is, of course,
subject to the provisions laying down certain restrictions*
on the powers of court—a proposition which, it is felt,
need not be expressly enacted in this clause.

Commencement.--The provisions relating i, recognition
of churches should come into force at once, so that the
necessary machinery may be set up and recognition grant-
ed before the substantive provision comes into force,
Though the General Clauscs Act may also ensure this,
still, to avoid ali doubts, a specific provision has been
made.

1586 the body of the Report, para. 3.
35०६ draft clause 35.
*Dratt clauses 34 End 35.

84

* ag

ii


85

Clause 2 :
“Christian” —the singular “a person” has been preferred
to the plural.

The following alternative definitions were considered,
but have not been accepted:——

“(i) ‘Christian’ means a person who has become 8
member of some Christian Church by an act custo-
mary in that Church for the admission of members,
and continues to be such unless and until the laws of
his Church determine otherwise”.

“(ii) ‘Christian’ means a person who has become
a member of some Christian Church by an act recog-
nized in that Church”,

“(ii) ‘Christian’ means a person who has been
baptised”,

The emphasis in all these definitions is on certain
ceremonies; but, since religion is a matter of persuasion,
it is considered unnecessary to insist on overt ceremonies.

The word “profess” is not likely to create any difficulty.
Even the dictionary meaning of “Christian” is in harmony
with the definition adopted in the draft.

“Church building”

The expression “Church” is used in two senses—
(i) “Church” with the capital C—denoting the
organisation;
(ii) “church” with the small c---denoting the place
of worship,
To avoid confusion, the expression “chureh”, in the
second sense, has been replaced by “church building".

[“Custom” and “usage’—have been defined in the
Hindu Marriage Act. But it is considered that it is
unnecessary to define either of these expressions].

Clause 2—‘desertion”—

(a) The existing definition of “desertion” in the Divorce
Act says that desertion implies abandonment of one party
by the other. This does not appear to indicate, in detail
and specifically, the essential ingredients of desertion.

The definition in the Hindu Marriage Act does not
purport to analyse the concept of desertion; it merely
stresses certain ingredients—i.e,—“without reasonable
cause” ete.

The meaning of desertion as established by judicial
decisions is this—that there must be a failure of the dis-
charge of matrimonial obligations—what is called the total



86

forsaking of “consortium”, The sub-clause under discus-
sion, therefore, attempts a fresh definition of desertion,
bringing out the aspect of withdrawal from cohabitation
while also mentioning the other ingredients.

(b) The definition in the Hindu Marriage Act has been
discussed in a recent decision cf the Bombay High Court.
An analysis of that decision would show ‘that desertion
requires—

(i) seperation in fact between the two spouses;

(ii) an intention, on the part of the deserting
spouse, to forsake or abondon the other spouse;

(iii) absence of consent on the part of the deserted
spouse; and

(iv) absence of conduct on the part of the deserted
spouse giving reasonable cause to the spouse leaving
the matrimonial home to form the necessary inten-
tion.

Intention to forsake or abandon is thus an essential
ingredient, and this has been Sought to be brought out in
the draft clause by the words “with the intention of
bringing co-habitation permanently to an end”. Factual
separation has been brought out by the words “with-
drawal” etc,

As regards ingredients No. (iti) and (iv) above, the
language of the Hindu Marriage Act has been followed.

(९0) The inclusive part of the definition in the Hindu
Marriage Act, which says that desertion includes “the
wilful neglect” of one party by the other, has been omitted
in the sub-clause under ‘discussion, because it will be
covered by the words “withdrawal from co-habitation”.
Tt may also be pointed out that it has been‘held' that the
conduct of the spouse, in order that it may amount to
wilful neglect, must be “deliberate and intentional failure”
io perform the obligations of married life, indicative of a
total repudiation of the obligations of marriage.” “The
intention to desert is implicit in the concept of desertion
and is implict in wilful neglect”

(d) The draft definition will aisc bring out one essen-
tial ingredient of the concept of desertion—intention to
desert permanently. “In its essence, desertion means the

‘Meena vs, Lachman, (1959) 61 Bombay Law Reporter 1549
(Division Bench),

jSee the judgment of Shah, J., in Meena vs. Lachman, (1989) 61
Bombay Law Reporter, 1549, 1552.

‘Desai, J., in Meena vs. Lachman, (1959) 67 Bombay Law Reporter,
1549 1557.


87

intentional permanent forsaking and abandonment of one
spouse by the other without the other's consent, and with-
out reasonable cause.”!

(e) For an elaborate definition, see the Royal Commis-
sion’s Report.?

Clause 2—‘diplomatic officer” —

Follows the language of the corresponding provision
in the Special Marriage Act.

Clause 2—“distriet”—

Follows the Janguage of the corresponding provision
in the Special Marriage Act.

~~ Clause 2—“High Court” (omitted) —

The definition ef the expression “High Court”, occur-
ting in existing section 3(1) of the Indian Divorce Act, has
been omitted, for the following reasons:—

(i) So far as “States” Proper are concerned, the
respeclive High Courts for the States will exercise
jurisdiction as at present, So far as “Union Territo-
ties” are concerned, the High Court exercising juris-
diction or the Judicial Commissioner concerned, can
be regarded as the High Court by virtue of the defini-
tion in the General Clauses Act, which applies to all
civil cases,

(ii) The Judicial Commissioners now exercise
jurisdiction to issue writs etc. and there is no harm
if they are regarded as High Courts for this Act also.

(iii) There is no express definition of the expres-
sion in the Hindu Marriage Act or in the Special
Marriage Act.

*(iv) The expression occurs at very few places in
the Bill as drafted.

Clause 2—‘India” —Needs no comments,
Clause 2—“Licensed Minister”

This is new, and is intended to avoid the use of the
lengthy expression “Minister of Church licensed by the
State Government” in the substantive Provisions,

Clause 2—“Marriage Registrar’
This is new. There is no corresponding provision in

the Special Marriage Act, but it has been inserted here for
the sake of precision.

838, 300 Bibi Chander Faisinghbhai Shah vs. Prabhawati, (1956), $.C.R
138, 850.

iReport of the Royal Commission on Marria d Dit
Cmd, 9678, para, 155 (iii), Be and Divorce, (1954),

“I occurs, for example, in the rule-making clause—Clause 73.


Clause 2—“Minister of recognised Church”—
This is new, and is intended to distinguish between—-
(i) Ministers of recognised Churches;
(7) Ministers licensed by the State Govern-
ments."

The use of the expression under discussion, and the
expression “licensed Ministers” etc. will make it clear
whether a particular substantive provision applies to all
Ministers or only to Ministers of certain classes.

Clause 2—“minor”—

The existing provision in the Christian Marriage Act
defines a minor as a person who has not completed the age
of 21 years and who is not a widewer or widow. Two
changes have been made in this definition, -

(a) instead of the age of 21 years, the age of 18
years has been substituted, in conformity with the
general law as contained in the Indian Majority Act;

(9) the exception for widoweis and widows has
been omitted, since it is felt that even widowers and
widows (if miner), should be subject to the special
provisions of the Act applicable to minors,

The existing definition in the Divorce Act makes
special provisions for “native” boys and girls. This
restriction has been removed. For non-natives, the provi-
sion in the Divorce Act treats as “minors” all “un-married
children who have not completed the age of 18 years”,
This has been adopted in substance in the draft in so far
as the age is concerned. But the change made is, that all
children below 18, whether married or unmarried, will be
“minor” for the purposes of the new Act.

The expression “completed” the age has been adopted
here as well as elsewhere in the draft clauses.

(Section 78(1) of the (English) Matrimonial Causes
Act, 1950, defines a minor as a “person under the age of
dwenty-one years”,

Section 3 of the Indian Majority Act, 1875, uses the
word “attained”.

Section 4(a) of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship
Act uses the word “completed”.

Section 4(1) of the Guardians and Wards Act seys
“attained majority":

Section 4(c), Special Marriage Act and section 5(iii),
Hindu Marriage Act say, “completed the age”].

4Vsde the body of the Repert, para. 19.



जन

89

Clause 2—“prescribed”—
Needs no comments.

Clause 2—“prohibited relationship”—

The definition is new and follows the language of the
Special Marriage Act. But one departure has been made.
That Act defines “degrees” of prohibited relationshi
but since some of the prohibited relationships do not repre-
sent any “degrees”, the word “degrees”, has been omitted.

Clause 2—“recognised Church?—

This is new, and is consequential on the changes made
in the provisions regarding Churches having the system
of episcopal ordination.*

Clause 2—~“Registrar-General”—

A provision has been added to enver the vases where
the Centrai Aci (the Births, Deaths and Marriages Regis-
tration Act, 1886) is not itself in force in the place con-
cerned.

Clause 2—‘ryle”—

This is new. The lengthy formula “rule, custom, rite
or ceremoney” occurs in existing sectiog, 5 of the Christian
Marriage Act. The definition under discussion wil!
shorten the formula. The definition will be useful for
other draft clauses also, where a reference has been made
to rules of Church.

Clause 3

The following changes have been made in the existing
provision: — .
(1) The provision is sought to be changed by

limiting its scope to cases where both the parties are
Christians.”

(ii) The existing provision to the effect that a
marriage solemnised otherwise than in accordance
with the provisions under this Act shall be void, has
been omitted as unnecessary.

(iii) Marriages solemnised under the Special Mar-
riage Act have been expressly excluded from the scope
of the section. Though thera is also a general savings
for such marriages,’ it has been ronsidered necessary,
in the interests of clarity, to insert that saving provi-
sion here also,

WSeeciause 7 7एणएए clause 7.
For a detailed discussion, please see the body of the Report, para. 4.
*Soe clause 75.



90

(iv) The expression “persons both of whom are
Christians” has been. adopted, as more accurate. (The
form “persons......... Christians” has been adopted.
in other clauses also, except in lengthy sentences where
it was found to be adding to the length.)

Clause 4

The conditions for marriage have been put here on the
lines of the corresponding provision in the Hindu Marriage
Act and the Special Marriage Act."

Sub-ciause {i) has been taken from the corres-
ponding provision in the two Acts referred to above.

Sub-clause (ii) has been taken from the corres-
ponding provision in the two Acts referred to above.
The exception for custom has been taken from the
Hindu Marriage Act. It is considered unnecessary to
refer to “usage” here.

Sub-clause (ii) has been taken from the corres-
ponding provision in the two Acts referred to above.

Sub-cleuse (iv) has been taken from the corres-
ponding provision in the two Acts referred to above.

Sub-clause (») has been taken from the corres-
ponding provision in the Hindu Marriage Act. As to
the powers of the district court, the relevant clause”
may be seen,

Sub-clause (vi)—Since the new Act will apply
ta persons outside India," this has been inserted on the
lines of the corresponding provision in the Special
Marriage Act.

Clause 5

General.—it is considered that a comprehensive provi-
sion relating to guardian in marriage would be desirable.
The clause has been drafted generally on the basis of the
corresponding provision in the Hindu Marriage Act. Im-
portant departures from that Act are explained below.

Sub-clause (1).—The list of guardians given in the sub-
clause is much longer than that in the existing Act. A
full list _has been given, in order to make the _ position
clear. [The list given in the Hindu Marriage Act has been
foliowed, with the omission of the paternal uncle by half
blood. He has been omitted in view of the social conditions
of Christians.]

‘Fora detailed discussion, please see the body of the Report,
Para. 22 et seg.

Clause 5 (4).

3866 clause 1,



91

Sub-clause (2)—A slight verbal departure from the
Hindu Marriage Act is the use of the formula “has......-.
completed” in relation to the guardian. This is in confor-
mity with the word “completed” used in other clauses.t

Sub-clause (3).—Needs no comments.

Sub-clause (4) —This differs from ‘he Hindu Marriage
Act, whereunder in such circumstances the guardian’s
consent is not necessary. In view of the social conditions

of Christians, it is considered that such a provision would
be useful.

The words “where no such person is living and willing
ete. will make it clear that the sub-clause will apply not
only where the persons entitled to act as natural guardians
are dead, but also where, though living, they are not willing
te act or able to act etc. Contrast the Hindu Marriage
Act, where the words used are “In the absence of”. It is
considered that the wording adopted in the sub-clause will
be more clear,

Existing section 45 of the Christian Marriage Act deals
elaborately with the procedure to be followed in cases
where a guardian refuses consent. This has been ccvered,
in substance, in this sub-clause, but briefly. Apart from
this change in form, the following changes of substance
have been made in the provision regarding the court’s per-
miussion:—~

(a) The case where the guardian is insane has
been omitted, since an insane guardian will be treated
as incompetent to act, and the guardian next in order
of preference will automatically take his place.

(9) The provision will apply to all marriages
whether solemnized by ordained Ministers, licensed
Ministers or Marriage Registrars.

(c) The provision has been made applicable to
the father (as well as to any other guardian), since
there is no reason why the case of the father’s consent
should be left uncovered.

(d) The petition will lie in all cases to the “district
court” as defined in the definition clause.

(९) Unnecessary matter has been omitted.

Sub-clauses (6) and (6) need no further comments.

Sub-clause (7)—It is considered that the decision of
the district court granting or refusing permission should
be final and not subject to any appeal etc. Hence this sub-

clause. (There is no such provision in the Hindu Marriage
Act).

1868 notes to clause 2—" Minor’’,



92
Sub-clauses (8) and (9) need no further comments,

Clause 6

_. General—The various classes of marriages mentioned
in section 5 of the existing Act have been dealt with here.

The category of marriage by certificate, applicable to
Indian Christians under section 60 of the Indian Christian
Marriage Act, has been omitted.

Sub-clause (a).—The existing Act specifies certain
particular Churches whose Ministers are episcopally
ordained. While preserving the separate category of per-
sons so authorised to solemnize marriages, the sub-clause
under discussion requires that they should be Ministers of
“recognized Churches”. The manner in which the recog-
nition will be accorded is dealt with separately?

The manner of solemnization of marriages by such
Ministers has been dealt with separately?

Sub-clause (b).—Instead of the formula “Minister of
Religion” the formula “Minister of Church” has been adopt-
ed as more appropriate, everywhere in the draft clauses.

Though the expression “licensed Minister" has been
defined. it is felt that in the sub-clause under discussion,
the full expression “Minister... . licensed” ete. would
be better, in view of the importance of the sub-clause.

Sub-clause (९) need no comments
Clause 7
This deals with recognition of Churches.t

The criteria laid down in sub-clause (2) will ensure
that recognition is granted to Chugches having an organisa-
tion and standing.

Clause 8

Only verbal changes have been made in the existing
section, as follows:—

(1) Tt has been made clear that the licence may
be granted cither for the whole State or for any part
thereof.

(ii) The mention of the power to revoke the
licence has been omitted, since it is felt that this will
be covered by the provisions of section 2: of the General
Clauses Act, under which a power to issue an order
includes a power to rescind it.

+For a detailed discussion, see the body of the Report, para. 7.
3 See clause 7.
*See clause 11.
“Bor a detailed discussion, see the body of the Report, para. 18.


(iii) The words “so far as regards the territories
under its administration etc.” have been omitted, a
unnecessary.

Clause 9

Sub-clauses (1) and (2)—Slight verbal changes have
been made. They need no comments.

The requirement that the Marriage Registrars should
be Christians has been omitted, since their functions are
not sacramental.

Sub-clause (3).—Under the existing section, when there
is a temporary vacancy in the office of the Marriage Regis-
trar, the District Magistrate is directed to act as Marriage
Registrar during the vacancy. The structure of the admi-
nistrative and judicial machinery in the various States,
however, (and particularly the nomenclature of the officer
at the head of the District), may vary from State to State,
and hence the sub-clause under discussion leaves the matter
elastic, by providing that such person as the State Govern-
ment may authorise will act as the Marriage Registrar
‘during the vacancy.

Clause 10

Since the new Act will be applicable (to persons domi-
eiled in India) outside the territories to which the Act
extends!, it becomes necessary to provide for the appoint-
ment of Marriage Registrars for those territories. Hence
this clause, which is modelled on the corresponding section
in the Special Marriage Act.

Clause 11

Sub-clause (¥).—Existing section 5, of the Christian
‘Marriage Act provides (in substance) that an episcopally
ordained Minister may solemnize Maarriages according to
the rules, rites, ceremonies and customs of that Church.
‘This has been adopted here, using the short expression
“rules” which has been defined separately?

An additional requirement of the presence of at least
two witnesses, has been inserted since it is felt that this
should apply to all marriages under the Act.

Sub-clause (2).—The existing Act does not lay down
any such obligation; but since the proposed conditions of
marriage will now apply to marriages solemnized by any
person under the Act* it is felt that there should be a
specific obligation on all persons solemnizing marriages
under the Act to see that the conditions for marriage are

See olause 1 (2).
"See clause 2—" rule”,
*See clause 4.


94

fulfilled, that there is no lawful impediment to the marriage
and that the parties make a declaration to that effect.
Compare sections 17, 18, 41 and 42 of the Christian Mar-
riage Act, which are confined at present to licensed Minis-
ters and Marriage Registrars.

As an example of other “lawful impediments”, see sec-
tion 57 Divorce Act.

Clause 12

Provisions which are common to marriages solemnized
Ministers licensed by the State Government and mar-
Tiages solemnized by or in the presence of Marriage Regis-
trars have been put in this group, in order to avoid repeti-

Sub-clause (1), opening paragraph.—The provision has
been simplified on the lines of the corresponding provision
in the Special Marriage Act. Following that, it has been
Provided that the notice must be given by both the Parties.

Sub-clause (1); paragraph (a).—Slight verbal changes
have been made, which do not need any comments.

Sub-clause (1), Paragraph (8) —The existing provision
is to the effect that ihe notice may be given to the Marriage
Registrar of —

(४) the district within which the parties have
dwelt; or

(ii) the districts within which each of the parties
has dwelt, the notice in the latter case being given to
the Marriage Regisirar for each district concerned,
This is likely to create confusion, and hence the para-
graph under discussion, Provides that it will suffice if
at least one party has resided in the district of the
Marriage Registrar to whom the notice is given.

The words “as the case may be” have not been inserted
(at the end) as unnecessary.

Sub-clause (2) —This is intended to make it clear that
in the case of a minor bride, the notice must be signed by
the guardian whose consent is required

Sub-clause (3).—Follows the language of the corres-
ponding provision in the Special Marriage Act.

Clause 13

General—Since there is some difference between the
‘tion to be taken by a licensed Minister and that to be

‘Compare clauses 17 (2) and ts (aX).


95

taken by a Marriage Registrar on the receipt of a notice,
the subject has been dealt with in separate clauses.

Paragraph (a).—Small verbal changes have been made,
which do not need any comments. The expression “church
building”, used here, has been defined separately.

Paragraph (6) needs no comments. The verbal changes
are very minor.

Paragraph (c) needs no comments.

Paragraph (9) -ना is sufficient to say that the notice
must be sent “Oy post’4, This paragraph will apply to
every minor bride—that is, whether she is marrying with
the guardian's consent or otherwise.

Other changes are verbal and minor, and hardly need
any comments.

Clause 14

Paragraph (6) needs no comments. Small verbal
changes, have been made which are self-explanatory.

Paragraph (b).—The verbal changes made are very
minor and need no comments.

Paragraph (c).—This is new. The object is to give
publicity to the notice of marriage in the district where the
parties are permanently residing.

The corresponding provision in the Special Marriage
Act may be compared.

Clause 15

This follows, in substance, the existing provisions on
the subject in the two Chapters relating to Ministers of
Church licensed by the State and Marriage Registrars.
The expression “certificate of notice’ has been preferred
to the lengthy expression “certificate of receipt” ete.

The minimum time limit of 4 days for the issue of the
certificate, preseribed at present, is felt to be inadequate
and has been increased to 7 days. For the same reason,
the time-limit of 14 days (where a party is a minor) has
been inereased to 21 days,

The time-limit has been expressed in a condensed form
in paragraph (a), of sub-clause (2), while paragraph (b)
of that sub-clause is intended to focus attention on the
necessity of a declaration by the parties.

Section 17, proviso, clause (3), of the existing Christian
Marriage Act has becn omitted. That relates, in substance,
to objection by a guardian. The reason for the omission

18९९ clause 2— “church building”,
356६ section 27, General Clauses Act, 1897, as to service by post.


96

is, that under the draft clauses, the position of a guardian
who wants to “forbid” a marriage will not differ from the
position of any other person making an objection to the
marriage,

Tt has been made clear that in a case of a minor bride
the declaration is to be signed by her guardian whose con-
sent is required under the Act.

Clause 16

Sub-clause (1) —This is modelled on the lines of section
7 of the Special Marriage Act. Differing from section 7(3)
of the Special Marriage Act, however, this sub-clause pro-
vides that the objection must itself be in writing when
submitted to the licensed Minister or the Marriage Regis-
trar.

There is no corresponding provision in the existing
Christian Marriage Act, authorising any person to file an
objection; there are, of course, provisions relating to ob-
jections by guardians, vide sections 20 and 44 of the exist-
ing Act. .

The period of seven days mentioned here harmonises
with that given in the earlier clause.4

While in the case of minor brides the period mentioned
in the preceding clause is 21 days, it is nat considered
necessary to extend the maximum period for objections
in the case of minor brides to 21 days. Whether the bride
is a minor or 4 major, the period which will be allowed to
the objector, will be 7 days in all cases. This course has
been adopted in view of the over all time-limit of 30 days
laid down by sub-clause (3).

Sub-clauses (2) and (3) follow the language of section
8(1), Special Marriage Act,

Clause 17

General.—_Unnecessary matter has been omitted, The
application will lie to the “district court”, as defined in
the definition clause, in all cases. The provision will apply
to marriages solemnised by licensed Ministers also, since
it seems desirable to extend its scope to such marriages.

Sub-clause (1) —A time-limit of twenty-one days has
been imposed for making the petition. (The Special Mar-
riage Act allows thirty days).

Sub-clause (2)—The language of this sub-clause has
been taken, in part, from existing section 48, third para-
graph, of the Christian Marriage Act. To make matters
clear, provision fer opportunity being given to the parties
has been inserted,

1866 clause 15 (2) (a).


ant

97

Sub-clause (3).—Slight changes have been made on
the lines of the corresponding provision in the Special
Marriage Act.

Clause 18

This is intended to deal with a case where objection is
made to a marriage outside India. The corresponding pro-
vision in the Special Marriage Act has been followed; but,
after the word “such statement as he thinks fit”, the words
“to make” have been added, as a drafting improvement.

Clause 19

This dees noi differ, in substance, from the existing
provision. Slight verbal changes have however heen made
which are consequential on the scheme of other clauses.

Clause 20

The following changes have been made in the existing
provision:—

(@) The existing section provides that the form or
ceremony will be such as the Minister thinks fit to
adopt. It is considered, however, that instead of leav-
ing the choice to the Minister, he should he required
to follow the rules of his Church. The provision has
been altered accordingly.

(ii) It is not necessary to say expressly that there
must be two witnesses ‘besides the Minister’. These
words have, therefore, been omitted.

(tii) Other changes are verbal and consequential.

Clause 21

Sub-clause (1)—The following changes have been
made:—

(१) Instead of the words “form and ceremony”,
the words “form or ceremony” have been used. Com-
pare existing section 25, Christian Marriage Act.

(ii) Unnecessary matter has been omitted.

(iii) The existing section requires that the wit-
nesses should be “credible”. This has been omitted,
as unnecessary. It is not contained in the section relat-
ing to licensed Ministers (section 25, Christian Marriage
Act),

(iv) The words “besides the Marriage Registrar”
have been omitted as unnecessary.?

(०) A proviso has been added to the effect that
the marriage will not be complete and binding unless
each party says to the other the prescribed formula.
This follows the corresponding provision in the Special
Marriage Act.

‘Compare clause 20 and the notes on that Avase.


98

Sub-clause (2).—This is new and follows the corres-
Ponding provision in the Special Marriage Act.

It has been made clear that the place where the Mar-
viage Registrar can be called should be situated in his
district (that is, within his jurisdiction).

Clause 22

The existing provision allows a period of two months,
after which a fresh notice ete. is necessary. This period
is regarded ag slightly inadequate, and has, therefore, been
increased to three months.

Other changes made are very minor and verbal and do
not need any comments,

Clause 23

General_—The provisions regarding registration of mar-
riages which occupy thirteen sections in the existing Act,
have been put here in a simplified and brief form. 5 uni-
form procedure has been applied to all Marriages under the

ct.

Sub-clause (1) is mainly modelled on the correspond-
ing provision in the Special Marriage Act.

Sub-clause (2).—This follows the earlier part of section
13(2) of the Special Marriage Act. The latter part of that
sub-section raising a conclusive Presumption regarding
signatures of witnesses—is considered unnecessary and has
not therefore, been adopted.

Sub-clause (3) —Follows the language of the corres-
ponding provision in the Special Marriage Act.

Clause 24

General—Where either the husband or the wife with-
draws from the society of the other, the other party can
sue for restitution. This substantive Proposition has been
placed in sub-clause (1). The defences that are open
have been put in sub-clause (2). The action to be taken
by the court has been dealt with in sub-clause (3).

Sub-clause (1).—The wording used in the existing pro-
vision is that “either the wife or the husband” may sue for
restitution. The wording used in the Hindu Marriage Act
and the Special Marriage Act is, that the “aggrieved party”
can sue. In the draft, the words “aggrieved party” have
been used as more elegant

Sub-clause 7?) —The existing section provides that
nothing shall be pleaded in answer to 8 petition for resti-
tution, which wouid not be a ground for judicial separa-
tion or nullity. To this, the draft makes an addition by
providing that a ground for divorce can also be pleaded.
On this point, the draft follows the provision in the Hindu
Marriage Act,

ge:


1

owe

99

The negative language used here has been used in the
other Acts also, and has therefore been retained!

Sub-clause (3)——The existing section (as well as the
corresponding provision in the other Acts) says, that if
there is “no legal ground” why restitution should not be
decreed, the court may decree it. This has been retained,
after some consideration. (It was, at first, considered that
the words “no valid defence” would be better. But, later,
it was felt thet the exivting words ure more precise’, 5),

Clause 25

The language of the corresponding provision in the
Special Marriage Act has been followed, with necessary
modifications,

The reference to divorce a mensa et toro has been
omitted as not needed now.

Under the Hindu Marriage Act, failure to comply with
a decree for restitution entitles the other party to divorce
only and not to judicial separation. The Special Marriage
Act entitles him to either of the two reliefs, and this has
been followed, as more comprehensive, in the draft.

Clause 26

Sub-clause (1)—The provision that it shall not be
obligatory for ihe petitioner 10 co-habit with the respon-
dent, has been framed on the lines of the Hindu Marriage
Act, and the Special Marriage Act. Though a subsequent
clause' allows either party (after a decree for judicial
separation) to apply for divorce, it is considered that the
release from the obligation to co-habit should not extend
to the respondent in the decree for Separation.

Existing section 26, proviso, Indian Divorce Act refers
to capacity to contract debts. This has been omitted as
unnecessary.

Sub-clause (2).—Under the existing Act, the court can
rescind the decree on the ground that it was obtained in
the absence of the party applying for rescission and that
there was reasonable cause for 106 alleged desertion
(where desertion was a ground for decree). There is, how-
ever, some amount of confusion in the existing provision,
because it mixes up the question of merits {reasonable
cause) with the question of procedure (previous decree
obtained in absence). Morever, so far as absence is con-
cerned, the normal proceedings for setting aside an

‘Bora discussion of thoeffectof this provision, see J. DM. Derrett,
“Recent Decisions and some Questions ia Hindu Law”, (1960) 62
Bom. LR. ( Journal} 18, 20.

“As to the meaning of “' legal ground “, see L.R. (1913), 9. 803 (1948)
व ,8.8.,8. 188 ; (1950), A.E.R. 832. 5

3८7. Clause 39 (7),
‘Clause 31.
281 L—9


100

exparte decree should suffice; and so far as reasonable
cause for desertion is concerned, that could have been in-
vestigated in the earlier proceedings. The only justifica-
tion, it is felt, for setting aside a decree of judicial separa-
tion, would be a change in the circumstances. Hence the-
power has been limited to cases where—

(०) the parties desire to come together, or

(8) for any other reason the court considers it just.
and reasonable to rescind the decree.

Category (b) above will preserve the wide discretion of
18 court, found in the corresponding provision in the
Hindu Marriage and the Special Marriage Act.

Compare and contrast sections 14(2) and 14(3) of the
(English) Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950.

Clause 27
This deals with the subject of void marriages.

The form of the clause follows that of the corresponding.
provision in the Hindu Marriage Act, with this difference
that while the Hindu Marriage Act confines the right to-
apply to the parties to the marriage (vide the words “on =
petition presented by either party thereto”), the draft
clause eliminates that requirement.

The reason for the omission is, that there may be occa-
sions when a person who is not a party to the marriage
has to sue for a deeree of nullity of that marriage—for
example, when, after a marriage between A and B, A
again enters into marriage with C and it therefore becomes
necessary for B to sue for nullity of the second marriage.
It may be noted that the provision in the Special Marriage
Act does not require that the petition should be filed by
either party.

. (Under section 11 of the Hindu Marriage Act, it has
been held*,? that the previously married wife cannot
apply under that section to have the later marriage dec-
Jared null and void).

4As to the substance of the clause, please see the discussion in the Ice ६
ofthe Report, para, 31 ef 224.

*Amarlal v. Vijayabat (1959), AI-R. 1959 Medhys Predesk aco.

tLakshmi Ammal y. Ramswami (1960), ALR. 19€0 Madras 6... हू:


101

The following chart will show

the points of difference

between void and voidable marriages: —

Void marriages

Voidable marriages

1. Avoid marriage does aot require a judicia
declaration before it can be treated as
void.

2. A void marriage can be repudiated by
either pasty.

3. Avoid marriage can be impugned by
third parties also.

4. A void marriage can be annulled after
the death of the parties.

5. A vold marriage does not change the
domicile of the wife.

6, A decree of nullity is always retrospective

1. A voidable marriage ts valid unless set
aside by a court.

2. Avoidable marriage can be repudiated
only by the party aggrieved, by the
flaw in the marriage. .

3. Avoidable marriage cannot be impugned

by third parties.

4, Certain yoidable marriages, for cxample
those voidable for impotence, cang be
invalidated only during life time,

~ A voidable marriage confersfa unity of
domicile on the husband and the wifes

ar
A decree of nullity in a voideble mar-
riage, is properly’ speaking, prospec-
tive.

al

Clause 28

General.—This deals with vaidable marriage’.

Sub-clause (1).— In treating the marriage as voidable

in the circumstances dealt with

here, the corresponding

provision in the Hindu Marriage Act has been followed.
(It should be noted here that the Special Marriage Act

treats a marriage as void in cases

of idiocy or impotence).

The language of the various paragraphs is also modelled

on the Hindu Marriage Act, exce
impotence) the positive “till? ha

pt that (with respect to
s heen preferred to the

negative “until” used in the Hindu Marriage Act.
Sub-clause (2).—This is new. It is considered that where

parties below age marry or wher

'€ the guardian’s consent

im not obtained, the marriage should be voidable, though
not void. The Special Marriage Act makes the marriage of

a person below the requisite age
therefore differs from that. The
silent on the subject, and the sub.

void, and the sub-clause
Hindu Marriage Act is
clause differs from that

also by making an express provision. The sub-clause will,
however, be limited to marriages solemnized after the new
Act, since there was no such provision in the old Act, It is,
further considered desirable to specify the period within
which the parties may set aside the marriage®.

‘As to the substance of the pravision,
the body of the Report, para. 31 ef reg.

*See clouse 28 (4),

Please see also the discussion in


102

is considered that in the case of the want of the
guardian's consent, only the minor, that is the wife should
have the right to avoid.

Sub-cluuse (3}.—This follows the language of the cor-
responding provision in the Hindu Marriage Act and the
Special Marri Act.

As regards para. (a) (ii) relating to the petitioner
living with the other party to the marriage after the foree
has ceased ete. the dr ses the words “full consent” as
in the Hindu Marriage Act, while the Special Marriage
Act uses the words “free consent’. In the gontext in
which the words are used, it is presumed that both would
carry the saine meaning.

Sub-clause (4). —Not

under sub-clause (2) above
may be see The fe: Ja “unless the petition is pre-
sented within one 5 been avoided, since it would
create a slight unc: nty to whether the petition can
be presented before attaining majority.

Clause 29

General egitimacy of children of
void and 3 has been dealt with here.
The ton narrow, because it

is ९०:

3 rand: of nullity

(i} where the former spouse was living, and
(9) in

The clause under discussion seeks to extend it to certain
other cases also, as will appear from a discussion helow.

५ Name

As to the substance of the provision, see the discussion
in the Report

Sub-clause (1) —The exisiing section deals only with
the case where a spouse by a previous marriage was living.
The draft makes the following changes: —

(i) The provision has been widened so as to
extend to all cases irrespective of good faith and
belief of the parties ete. Further, it has been extended
to cases of marriages void by reason of prohibited
degrees also.

(ii) The provision will apply to any child begotten
“or conceived”. The corresponding provision in the
Hindu Marriage Act may be compared.

It may be noticed that the protection given by this
clause will apply irrespective of whether a decree is pass-
ed or not. The other two Acts do not expressly deal with
the case where a decree is not passed.

1 See the bady of the Report, para. 36 er sag.


103

Sub-clause (2).—This deals with voidable marriages
annulled by the court and follows, in substance, the langu-
age of the main paragraph vf section 16 of the Hindu
Marriage Act, with necessary modifieations.

Section 21 of the Divorce Act requires the court
to specify the names of the children in the decree. This
has been ornitted, as unnecessary.

Sub-clause (3).—The existing section confines the
right cf succession of the children “to the estate of the
parent who at the time of the marriage was competent to
contract”. The sub-clause under discussion gives him the
right to inherit to both the parents, The corresponding
provision in the Hindu Marriage Act ete., has been followed

As in the other two Acts, this will apply to voidable
marriages also.

Clause 30

The reasons for including the various grounds for
divorce embodied in this clause, have already been given#

The actual wording of the various paragraphs of sub-
clause (1) follows the wording of the corresponding pro-
vision either in the Special Marriage Act or in the Hindu
Marriage Act.

Wilful refusal to consummate the marriage has been
treated as a ground for dissolving the marriage here, since
it is a case of fault after the marriage and not of a flaw
existing at the time of the marriage like impotence etc, ¢,

Artificial insemination has not been included, as the
Practice is not in vogue in India®, 5.

Clause 31

This is new. A proceeding for Judicial separation, it
has been suggested in some quarters, is a waste of time,
because a decree of separation neither ends the marriage
nor encourages the parties to come together, On the other
hand there are certain persons and bodies, who hold the
opinion that the sanctity of marriage should be preserved
at all costs, and that where the parties cannot stay toge-
ther, they may be allowed to remain separate by a decree
¢ judicial separation without breaking the marriage by

ivorce,

‘See the body of the Report, Para. 48 et seg,
*Cf. 8. 32 (a)Parsi Marriage and Divorce ‘Act, 1936.
*See also the discussion in the body of the Report, para. 53.

SOF. the Report of the Royal Commission on Marriage snd Divorce,
(7955). Cmd. 9678, page 31, paragraphs 88-89.

Contrast the recommendation in the Report of the Royal Commission
on Marriage and Divorce (1955), Cmd. 9678, page 31, para. 90.

‘See also the body of the Report, para. 62.


104

As a compromise between the two shades of opinion,
the clause under discussion attempts to provide a proce-
dure which, while mitigating the objection based on waste
of time, will ensure that the marriage is not broken up
in haste’. The difference between the clause under dis-
cussion and the provisions in section 13(1) (viii) of the
Hindu Marriage Aci and section 27(i) of the Special
Marriage Act is two-fold:—

(i) Under the clause under discussion, it will not
be necessary for the parties to file a fresh petition for
divorce. Under the other two Acts, a fresh petition
is necessary.

(ii) Under the clause under discussion, either
party (that is, whether he is the petitioner or the
respondent in the decree for judicial separation} can
apply for divorce, while under the other two acts only
the petitioner who obtained the decree can so apply.
It is felt that where A obtains a decree for judicial
separation against B, the initiation of further pro-
ceeding for divorce should be open to B also. The
reason is, that in the absence of such a provision, B is
always kept at the mercy of A and A can, after hav-
ing obtained the decree for judicial separation, sit
quiet and neither end nor mend the marriage’.

fit may ए of interest here to note that in South Aus-
tralia, a decree of juidicial separation passed by any court
in the British Commonwealth, is a ground for divorce*.]

It has been considered unnecessary to have an express
provision as to whether divorce can be obtained on the
very ground that led to the earlier decree for separation‘.

It is also considered unnecessary to lay down any ela-
borate procedure as to the passing of the first decree
(separation) and the second decree (divorce), and the
inter-relation between the two.

Clause 32

General.—This is new and is based generally on the
corresponding provision in the Hindu Marriage Act and
the Special Marriage Act.

Sub-clause (1)—While the main paragraph of this
sub-clause follows the Hindu Marriage Act and the Spe-
cial Marriage Act, the proviso has been worded in a
slightly different manner. Under the other two Acts,

48ce also the body of the Report, para. 44.

1CFf. the Hindu Marriage (Amendment) Bill 1958, Bill No. V of 1958,
as introduced by Dt. W. S. Barlingay in the Rajya Sabha.

See the U. N. Survey of Legislation on marriage, divorce etc., 1001
cation No. ST/SOA/29. dated gth March, 1956, U. N. Bureau of Social
‘Affairs, Population Branch.

‘Contrast Section 7 (English) Matrimonial Causes Act, To<n,


105

Jeave can be granted upon application made “in accordance
with the rules” etc, This mention of rules ete., has been
‘omitted, as it is considered unnecessary to make such an
elaborate provision expressly. Secondly, while under the
other two Acts, leave can be revoked only in case of mis-
apprehension or concealment as to the nature of the case,
under the clause under discussion, it can be revoked “in
the interest of justice”, Thirdly, instead of the compli-
cated procedure provided in the other two Acts as to the
order to be passed when leave is revoked, a simple provi-
sion has been made that the court will dismiss the peti-
tion without prejudice to any subsequent petition which
may be brought after the expiry of three years,

The clause will not apply to a decree of divorce after
judicial separation!.

Sub-clause (2) follows the corresponding provision in
the other two Acts,

Clause 33

The provisions relating to remarriage of divorced Pper-
‘Sons, as contained in the various Acts, vary in form and
substance. For example—

@ As regards the period—mn section 57 of the Perlod for
Divorce Act, the provision is that when six months after re-marriage.
the dissolution of the marriage have expired, or (when an
appeal has been presented to the High Court in its appel-
late jurisdiction)” the appeal has been dismissed or the
marriage is dissolved on appeal, the parties may re-marry,
provided no further apeal has been presented. If there
is any further appeal, the parties can re-marry after the
further appeal is disposed of.

Section 15 of the Hindu Marriage Act allows re.
marriage where the matriage has been dissolved and
either there is no right of appeal, or if there is a right of
appeal, no appeal has been filed within the time or the
appeal has been dismissed. The Proviso, however, pres-
-eribes a minimum period of one year from the decree “in
the court of the first instance”,

Section 30 of the Special Marriage Act is to the same
effect, but the period of one year has to be calculated, it

would appear, from the date of the appellate decree

{where there has been an appeal),

(i) As regards the right—The right of the parties to Right to
remarry has been expressed in different terms in the re-marry.
various statutes. Section 57 of the Divorce Act says, “it
shall be lawful..... to marry again as if the prior marriage
had been dissolved by death”.

Section 15 of the Hindu Marriage Act simpiy proviaes
that “it shall be lawful to marry again”,

1 Under clause 31



‘Course
adopted,

106

Sertion 30 of the Special Marriage Act provides that
“either party to the marriage may marry again”,

As to the consequences of the violation of the
prohibition._Section 57 of the Divoree Act emphasises the
mandatory character of the prohibition by adding the
words “but net sooner”.

Section 15 of the Hindu Marriage Act does not contain
these words, but the words in the proviso—“it shall not be
lawful” appear to have the same force.

Section 30 of the Special Marriage Act contains the
words “but not sooner.”

The clause under discussion takes away any minimum
period for re-marriage after the final decree. In case of
appeal, of course, the party has to wait until the appeal
is dismissed. And in any case, the party has to wait until
the time for appeal has expired. But once the proceed-
ings finally end, there is no further waiting period.

The words “but nat sooner” have been retained, to
emphasise the mandatory character of the provision. The
phraseology “either party may marry” etc., used in the
Special Marriage Act, has been adopted ‘as brief and
simple.

Compare also section 13(i) of the (English) Matri-
monial Causes Act, 1950.

Clause 34

General—The existing provision in the Divorce Act
authorises the court to grant relief under the Act where
either the petitioner or the respondent professes the
Christian religion (at the time of the petition). It seems,
however, more logical to provide that (as a rule) both the
parties must be Christians at the time of marriage (or
petition).

The result of this change is, that where a non-Christian
is married to a Christian outside India (or—though this
can happen very rarely,—even within India, where the
personal law of the non-Christian allows that), the parties
will not be able to get relief under the new Act. Similarly,
where two non-Christians marry and one of them is
subsequently converted to Christianity, the parties cannot
claim relief under the new Act. In both these respects,
the clause is narrower than the existing section.

Sub-clause (a).—This will include cases of two non-
Christians marrying as non-Christians and subsequently
getting themselves converted to Christianity.

Sub-clause (b}.—See discussion under “General” above.
The words “at least one of the parties is a Christian” ete,
are intended to exclude cases where both the spouses have,
after re-marriage, renounced Christianity,


7

Sub-clause (c).--To protect the rights of persons
married under the existing Act, it has been made clear
that such a marriage can be made the subject-matter of
proceedings under the new Act, if at least one of the
parties is a Christian at the time of the petition. This part
of the clause follows the existing provision in the Divorce
Act.

Placing —It is considered that the clause under diseus~-
sion should be placed along with the clause dealing with
the local jurisdiction of district courts, Hence it has been
placed here.

Clause 35

This clause deals with the jurisdiction of Indian
courts."

If, on applying this clause, an Indian court is found
to have jurisdiction, then the question—“which Indian
court has jurisdiction” will have to be decided under a
separate clause.” ,

Placing—It is considered that the clause under discus-
sion should he placed in the same Chapter as deals with
the internal jurisdiction of district courts. Hence it has
been placed here.

Clause 36 ,

Sub-clauses (1) and (2) are new and are intended tc
define which district court will have jurisdiction in certain
petitions relating to marriage. ‘ .

Sub-clause (3)—General—Assuming that Indian courts
have jurisdiction to try a particular petition in the nature
of matrimonial cause, this sub-clause seeks to lay down
which district court shall exercise such jurisdiction.

The provisions of the sub-clause are thus subject tu
those of the clause relating to jurisdiction of Indian Courts®
—a proposition which need not be expressly enacted.

(a) This head of jurisdiction is new, and is not found
either in the existing provision or in the Hindu Marriage
Act or the Special Marriage Act. It follows the principle
behind section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, under
which the defendant’s residence confers jurisdiction on the
court. Section 29(1) of the Parsi Marriage and Divorce
Act, 1936, may also be compared.

See also Supplementary note (i) below.

Para (b).—This is not found in the existing Act, but
has been adopted from section 19 of the Hindu Marviage
Act and section 31(1) of the Special Marriage Act.

‘For a detailed discussion, please sec the body of the Report, paras"
69 to 73.

38८८ clause 36.

'Clause 35. See also clause 34.


Para. (c)—This is found in section 3(1) and section
3(3) of the existing Divorce Act, and also in section 19 of
the Hindu Marriage Act and section 31(1) of the Special
Marriage Act.

Where the husband and wife are residing together, sub-
clause (a) will suffice.

Para. (d).—Whenever Indian courts have jurisdiction by
virtue of the provisions inserted in the clause’ relating to
jurisdiction of Indian courts, it is necessary to provide
which district court will exercise jurisdiction. While para-
graphs (3) to (c) above will meet normal situations, there
tmay be situations which are not covered by them, though
covered by the clause! relating to jurisdiction of Indian
courts. Hence the paragraph under discussion.

In most of the provisions incorporate] in the clause
relating to jurisdiction of Indian courts, jurisdiction is
related to—

(i) domicile of the parties;
(ii) domicile of the petitioner;
{iii} residence of the petitioner.

In such cases, the question “which district court will
exercise the jugisdiction” will be decided (in view of the
paragraph under discussion) on the basis of the residence
of the petitioner.

[It is considered that the petitioner should have some
kind of residence and that more physical presence should
not suffice. Cases where a petitioner is domiciled in India
but us no residence here are, it is considered, not likely to
arise].

[It may, of course, be noted that the paragraph under
discussion is intended to deal with cases only where the
respondent is residing outside India. If he is residing with-
in India, the matter will be decided by draft paragraph (a),
and the petitioner’s residence or presence within a parti-
cular jurisdiction will be irrelevant.]

The paragraph under discussion will, in short, ensure
that whenever an Indian court has jurisdiction, the ques-
tion—“which district court will exercise the jurisdiction”
is answered for all situations.

[The sub-clause under discussion is, it need not be men-
tioned, not intended to have the effect of expanding the
jurisdiction of Indian Courts. As already pointed out, it is
subject to the provisions of the restrictions on jurisdietion
of Indian courts.]

Supplementary Note—

(0) It may be noted that where the marriage was
solemnised within the jurisdiction of court ‘A’ and the

*Clause 35.


109

parties last resided together in the jurisdiction of court ‘B’,
while the husband now resides in the jurisdiction of a
court ‘C’ and the wife now resides in the jurisdiction of
court ‘D', the case would not be covered by the existing
Provision in the Indian Divorce Act or by the fprrespo nd-
ing provision in the Special Marriage Act‘ or the Hindu
Marriage Act. Such a case will be covered by draft para.
(a) which authorises the filing of a petition in the court
within whose jurisdiction the respondent is residing. In
the absence of such a Provision, the parties have to zo

either: to court A or to court B—even though neither of
them is staying there now,

_ (i) No special provision has been considered necessary
in respect of a petition at the instance of a person who is
not a party to the marriage.’

Clause 37

This follows the language of the Hindu Marriage Act
and the Special Marriage Act. An express statement that
there is no connivance, though insisted upon by section 47,
ist paragraph of the Indian Divorce Act, is not found in
the other two Acts and has been omitted?

Clause 38

The lang
Hindu Mari
followed.

uage of the corresponding provisions in the
Tiage Act and the Special Marriage Act has been

Clause 39
General.—This is a new provision.

Sub-clauses (1) and (2}—These follow the correspond-
ing provision in the Hindu Marriage Act and the Special
Marriage Act, which seeks to lay down the principles that
should guide the courts in matrimonial causes.

Sub-clause (3).—Fears have been expressed in certain
quarters that if the task of reconciliation 18 done by the
court, the parties may not co-operate with the court, and
that it would be desirable if private Persons are associated
with the court for this purpose. A provision to that effect

has accordingly been inserted in ‘the sub-clause under
discussion.‘

[There is no such provision in the other two Acts
referred to above.

*Section 31 (2) of the Special Marriage Act need not be considered here.
383 to such petitions, see the notes on clause 27,

4Clause 39 (1)(b); of course, bars relief onthe ground of atulte THI
there has been connivance,

4 Sec also body of the Report, para. 75,


110

Clause 40

Sub-clause (1)—This follows the existing provision in
Indian Divo: Act. with the addition of the words “or
adulteress"; the added words will cover cases where the
wife sues the husband icr divorce on the ground of
adultery. Gn th’s point, the clause fullows section 3 of
the (English) Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950. The cvurt
has also been given discretion to 2xcuse non-compliance
xin the section on any other ground, as in the English

ct.

The scape of the provision has been extended to petitions
for judicial separation, where the ground is adultery.

Sub-elause (2)—is entirely new, and has been modelled
on the lines of section 3 of the (English) Matrimonial
Causes Act, 1950.

Clause 41

The existing provision has been reproduced in substance,
but in a simplified form. The corresponding provision in
the Special Marriage Act has been followed, as far as
possible,

It appears desirable to extend this clause to petitions for
judicial separation’ That change has been made
accordingly.

Clause 42

As to the substance of this clause the reasons have
been already stated.?

The language of section 12(1) and section 12(2) of the
(English) Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950 has been followed
in place of existing section 16 of the Indian Divorce Act,
since the former is more precise and simple.

Sub-clause (3) is intended to deal with a case where a
party. after having obtained decree nisi, does not take steps
to get it made absolute. The respondent should not in
such cases be allowed to remain at the mercy of the peti-
tioner (decree-holder), and hence the sub-clause confers
upon the respondent the right to apply to the court, which
can deal with the case in such manner as it thinks jit.

Section 12(3) of the (English) Matrimonial Causes Act,
1950, may be compared.
Clause 43

The provisions regarding damages from adulterer or
adulteress, at present contained in sections 34 and 39, 3rd
para., of the Indian Divorce Act, have been placed here in

'Camvare clause 40.
"See the body of the Report, paras, 77-78.


111

a simplified form. The language of section 30 of the
(English) Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950, has been fallow-
ed. as more precise and brief.

The changes of substance are: —

(a) The right has been given to the wife also.

(9) The provision for a mere claim for damages
has been omitted as repugnant to modern ideas and
likely to lead to black-mail.’

Clause 44

The existing complicated provisions regarding interim
alimony have heen replaced by a simple one, which fol-
lows the corresponding provisions in the Hindu Marriage

Act and the Special Marriage Act.

The elaborate provisions in section 36, second and third
paragraphs, of the Indian Divorce Act appear to be
unnecessary and have been omitted.

Clause 45

The corresponding provisions in the Hindu Marriage Act
and the Special Marriage Act have been follawed.

Clause 46

General—The pri ons of section 39, first para.
Divoree Act, authorising the court to order settlement of
the wifes property for the benefit of the husband and the
children, have been omitted. Tt is felt that as the power
to award maintenance is proposed to be widened, the

7 power of the court to order settlement cf the spouse's pro-
perty or to vary settlements, is not needed?

Sub-clause (1)—This is new and has been inserted an
the lines of the corresponding provision in the Hindu
Marriage Act.

Sub-clause (2}—Where there is already in existence a
settlement, there is no harm if the power of the court to
direct the application of the property, contained in section
40 of the Indian Divorce Act, is retained. It has been
embodied here, with slight verbal changes made for
clarity.

Sub-clause (3) does not need any comments.

Clause 47

_ This follows the language of the vorresponding provi-
sions in the Hindu Marriage Act and the Special Marriage

1¥For a detailed discussion, see the body of the Report, para. 66.
4For a detailed discussion, see the body of the Report, paras, 67-68,

‘Contrast 8. 24, M.C.A. and the Royal Commission’s Report on Marriage
and Divorce, (1955), pacagrapha 512 ¢t-seg.



112

Act, which are simpler, briefer ang yet more comprehen-
sive than the language in the existing section.

__ As to the question whether an order under such a provi-
sion can be made after the parties have remarried each
other, see the discussion in a recent English case.‘

Clause 48

The following changes have been made on the lines of
corresponding provision in the Hindu Marriage Act snd
Special Marriage Act:—
(i) It has been provided that if either party desires,
then the proceedings must be held in camera,

Gi) An express provision, that it will not be law-
ful to publish or print such Toceedings without the
court’s permission, has been added.

As regards the penalty for non-publication, a separate
clause* has been inserted in another Chapter.

Clause 49

1, This deals with that part of section 54 of the Indian
Divorce Act which deals with appeal. The following ver-
bal defects in the existing Act may be noted: --

(4) The words “may be appealed from” oceur in
jarring repetition,

(b) The expression “laws and orders” is lengthy
and not precise also,

(९) The reference to “orders’, occurring for the
second time in the existing section of the Divorce Act
is not accurate. Orders of a court are not appealable
in all cases (that is, unless mentioned in Order XLII,
tule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure). Hence it would
Not be accurate to say that the decrees and orders will
be appealable as decrees and orders in original civil
jurisdiction. The difficulty has been felt under section
28 of the Hindu Matriage Act in a recent case where it
was held? that an order refusing interim maintenance is
not appealable, because it is not listed as an appeal-
able order in the Code of Civil Procedure.

(d) It is not clear whether the right of appeal
should be sought in any other statute. See the discus-
sion on the subject in a case which arose under the
Hindu Marriage Act

'Grainger vs. Grainger and Clark, (4959) 3 WLR. 642, 649, 650
Court of Appeal),

‘See clause 59.
*Saraswati v. Krishnamurthy, A.LR. 1960 Andhra Pradesh 30,
‘Shobhana Sen's case, ALR. 1959 Cal. 455.


an

113

2. To make the matter clear, a short and straight pro-
vision giving a right of appeal against all decrees and
orders has been made.

3. A provision that the decrees ete. may be eppealed
from “under the law for the time being in force”-—which
would cover such points as limitation, form of appeal etc.
has been regarded as unnecessary.

Clause 50

Existing section 54 of the Indian Divorce Act deals with
two topics—(#) appeal; (ii) enforcement. For the sake of
convenience, it has been broken up inte two clauses. The
clause under discussion deals with enforcement.

Clause 51

A person married under the Christian Marriage Act
may marry again—

Gi) under the Christian Marriage Act; or
(४) under any other system of law.

So far as the situation at No. (i) above is concerned,
the second marriage will be void by reason of breach of
the condition providing that there should be no “spouse
living at the time of the marriage”, and will be punishable
as bigamy under the Penal Code,

So far, however, as the situation at (ti) above is con-
cerned, it is not clear if the Christian Marriage Act will
apply, and it is better to make a specifie provision for such
a situation.

Hence the necessity of the clause wider discussion, which
follows section 44 of the Special Marriage Act.

[So far as the situation at No. (i) above is concerned,
the clause under discussion will be a repetition of the
elause which provides that such marriages shall be void.
Compare section 44 of the Special } rriage Act, which
similarly repeats the pravision in sectian £4(1)() read with
section 4(a) of that Act.]

__ It is not considered necessary to incorpcrate any provi-
sion similar to section 43 of the Special Marriage Act.

Clause 52

This imposes punishment for contravention of certain
conditions of marriage, and follows section 18 of the Hindu
Marriage Act,

As to breach of the condition regarding “spouse living”,
586 a separate clause.!

Clause $1.



114

Tt is considered unnecessary to punish breach ct the
condition regarding idiccy or lunacy or regarding domicile
of parties wt go is solemnised outside India.

Clause 53

The following comments may be made:--

{i) The reference to various classes of Churches
have been omitted.

(ii) The formula “shall be deemed to have cam-
mitted the cffence punishable” has been replaced by
the words “punishable with’. Existing section 67 of
the Christian Marriage Act links up the cffence with
section 193 17.0. (false evidence ete), while section
45, Special Marriage Act, links it up with section 199
LP.C. To make the clause self contained, the punish-
ment hag becn reproduced in the clause.

(iii) Section 45 of the Special Marriage Act runs
on different es, in ather respects. It has nat heen
considered necessary to follow the language of that
section, which punishes every oerson making, 1
or attesting any notice, declaration or certificate
pective of the motive of the offender.
mn of “rule” in relation ta rules
inserted', consequential changes
have been made in the clause under discussion.

Clause 54

The clause has been made wider by including felse
personation before a licensed Minister also. Instead of
reference to “forbidding issue” of certificate, the mention
of “making an objection’ has been made. This is conse-
quential.

It appears that there is no corresponding provision in
the Hindu Marriage Act or the Special Marriage Act.

Clause 95

The following changes have been made in the existing
provision:

(i) The condition that the unauthorised solemniza-
tion should be “in the absence of a Marriage Registrar
of the district in which the ceremony takes place” has
been omitted, as unnecessary.

(ii) Transportation has been omitted, and the fine
has been limited to two thousand rupees.

(iit) The words “under this Act” have been added
for the sake of clarity.

(iv) Other changes are consequential.

‘See clause 2—“ rule”.

ce wee 4

—


pence

15

Clause 56

Sub-clause (1).—This is new and is intended to expedite
the disposal of objections to a Proposed marriage,

Sub-clause (2)—This is also new, Complaints received
show that very often the Ministers licensed by the State
Government refuse to solemnize a particular marriage
without reasonable cause. It seems desirable to make a
Provision that such refusal shall be punishable. Hence the
sub-clause.

The sub-clause has been made applicable to Marriage
Registrars also, for the sake of comprehensiveness,

Clause 57

the Christian Marriage Act. These have all been
consolidated in this one clause, which is framed on the iines
of the Special Marriage Act,

On a study of sections 69 to 73 of the existing Act, it
has been found that all the offences concerned would’ be
covered by the residuary words “in contravention of any
other provision contained in this Act’ in paragraph (a) (it)
and the similar words used in Paragraph (b) in the clause
under discussion.

Most of the existing sections provide for imprisonment
of three years to five years and unlimited fine. This has
been replaced by imprisonment up to one year and fine
up to five hundred Tupees, as in the Special Marriage Act.

Clause 68

The following changes have been mad? (in the existing
section) :—

(i) Instead of reference to “register, book or coun-
ter-foil certificate” reference to “the marriage certi-
ficate book” has been made. This is consequential.

(ii) The fine has been limited to two thousand
rupees.

Clause 59

This is new and imposes a penalty for Publication of
proceedings without permission of the court, where pro-
ceedings are held in camera. The corresponding provision
in the Hindu Marriage Act may be compared.

The existing section—section 53 of the Indian Divorce
Act—does not impose any penalty in such cases,

281 L—10


. 116

Clause 60,

The substance of the existing provision has been retain-
ed; but the positive form has been changed into a negative
one, in order to emphasise the mandatory character of the
provision.

The offence of bigamy’ has been excluded from this
clause, as it is a serious one.

Clause 61

Sub-clause (1).—It has been made clear that the order
awarding cost should be passed after giving the parties an
opportunity of hearing.

Following the language of the corresponding provision
in the Special Marriage Act, a maximum compensation of
one thousand rupees has been imposed.

The Special Marriage Act requires that the cbjection
must not be reasonable and must not have been made in
good faith. This wording has been preferred to the exist-
ing wording “frivolous and such as not to obstruct” etc.,
as the former brings out the real ingredients.

Sub-clause (2) —It is felt that the order should be appeal-
able, and hence this sub-clause. [The corresponding provi-
sion in the Special Marriage Act does aot provide for appeal
from the decision of the Marriage Officer.]

Sub-clause (3)—This will bar any second appeal.

Sub-clause (4)—Departing from the ex'sting provision,
it has been provided that a separate suit will not be reces-
sary, and the order will be executable as a decree of the
district court. Compare the corresponding prevision in the
Special Marriage Act.

Clause 62

The following changes have been made: --

(४) Existing section 77(1) of the Christian Marriage
Act saves any irregularity regarding ‘any statement in
regard ta the consent of any person” whose consent is
required by law. This has becn omitted, because the
substantive provision regarding effect of want of guar-
dian’s consent makes the marriage vcidable, ond not
void, Therefore, no saving for false statement regard-
ing consent is necessary.

(i) Existing section 77(4) saves irregularity 2s to
time and place of marriage. This.has been omitted,
because the substantive provisions regarding time and
place (sections 10 and 11 of the Christian Marriage Act}
have been omitted

1Clause दा.
*Clause 28(2)(5).
"Clauses 21 (2) and 64 are merely enabling provisions.


117

(४४) The words “sclemnized in accordance with the
provisions of sections 4 and 5” have been replaced by
“solemnized between two Christians under this Act in
accordance with the provisions of section 6”. The re-
ference to existing section 4 is thus replaced by the
gist thereof, namely—“between two Christians”. It
is also made clear that the marriage must be under the
Act.

Clause 63

The words “and such person shall make the like margi-
nal entry in the certificate thereof” have been omitted.
Under existing section 54 of the Christian Marriage Act,
when a marriage is registered, an entry has to be made at
two places—

(1) in the marriage register book, and

(ii) also in the counterfoil,
But in the scheme proposed, there is no separate certificate.
The only entry is in the marriage register book.’ Hence
this omission in the draft.

Section 49 of the Special Marriage Act does contain the
omitted words. But even in that Act the words appear to
be out of place, in view of the provisions of section 13 of
the Special Marriage Act.

Clause 64

This is new. Since it appears that in practice marriages
are solemnised at places 00067 than churches, it scems
desirable that such practice should be given statutory re-
cognition, provided, of course, it is sanctioned by custom
or usage. The clause under discussion is intended to make
this clear,

Such customs or usages should be prevalent in the
community to which the parties belong. That has bcen
made clear.

Clause 65

This is new. Though there is no such provision in the
Hindu Marriage Act or the Special Marriage Act or in the
English Act, still it will prove a useful one for the present

t.

Clause 66

Only a slight verbal change has been made. The plural
“all persons” has been replaced by the singular “any
person”.

3866 clause 23(1).


118

Clause 67

It is considered that inspection of the Marriage Certi-
ficate Book and the supply of certified extracts therefrom
should be free if the inspection or extracts are required by
the parties to the marriage (at or about the time of mar-
riage). In other cases, fees should be charged. This prin-
ciple has been incorporated in the clause under discussion.

Tm other respects, the corresponding provision in the
Special Marriage Act has been followed.

By allowing inspection free in the cases mentioned above,
the clause departs from existing section 79 of the Christian
Marriage Act. Further, unlike the existing Act, the clause
will apply to Ministers of Churches (or other persons hav-
ing the custody of the Marriage Certificate Book) also,

Clause 68

The changes made are consequential and intended to
improve the language.

Clause 69

The existing provisions regarding making the parties
understand the substance of notices and declarations have
been embodied here, with certain additions and alterations.
It has been provided in sub-clause (1) that the notice ete.
may be given in the language commonly used in the State
07 m English.

Clause 70

The clause under discussion is merely intended to protect
Ministers of Church in cases where, by the rules of their
Church, they are prohibited from solemnizing a particular
Marriage.

It will take the place of section 58 of the Indian Divorce

Act, and widen the scope of that section, by~—
(i) applying it to Ministers of all recognised

Churches, and
(#i) allowing the protection not only vhere the
Minister's objection to solemnizing the marriage is
based on the parties being divorced (as at present),
but also in any case where the rules of his Church do
not allow it.
It is considered unnecessary to embody the protection
Against suits etc. contained in existing section 58, latter part,
Divorce Act.

Section 59 of the Divorce Act, which requires that in
such cases uny other Minister should be allowed to
solemnise the marriage in that church building, has been
omitted as unnecessary. Parties can, in such cases, go to
any other church building.


ng

Clause 71

The Janguage of the corresponding provision in the
Special Marriage Act has been followed.

Clause 72

The language of the corresponding provision in the
Spec ‘ial Marriage Act has been followed with the addition
of certain matters relating to licensing of Ministers and
the Advisory Committees for recognition of Churches,

The provision regarding the procedure for laying the
tules before the Parliament and modifications ete. by
Parliament is in conformity with the latest legislative
Practice?

Clause 73

1. The language of the corresponding Provision in the
Special Marriage Act has been Mowed; but sub-section
® of section 41 of that Act, which enumerates the matters
in respect of which rules may be made, has been omitted
as unnecessary.

2. Section 41(1) of the Special Marriage Act contains
the restriction that the rules should be consistent with the
Civil Procedure Code. But the clause applying the Act?,
is itself subject to rules made by the High Court. Hence
this restriction is unnecessary.

3. Petitions under the clauses? relating to marriage,
have also been covered for comprehensiveness.

Clause 74

This is new. Since the grounds which render a marriage
void under the new Act are not co-extensive with those
given in section 19 of the Indian Divorce Act, it is consi-
dered prop’ er to ensure that a marriage performed before
the new Act will not be rendered void by the new provi-
sion. (For example, the existing Indian Divorce Act does
not contain a list of prohibited degrees, though s. 19 men-
tions it as a ground of nullity.)

[So far as voidable marriages are concerned, the matter
has been dealt with in the very clause! dealing with void-
able marriages]. :

| The language of the sub-clause will dew such doubu @ aie Gan clear such doubts as arise from
the observations of the Supreme Court in re. Kerala Education Bill, ALR.
1959, S.C. 956, 957— (1959}—450, 459.2 S.C.A. © Afier the rules are laid
before the Legislative Assembly they may be eltsred or amended and it iz
then that the rules, as amended, become effective. If 20 amendments are
made, the rules come into operation after the period of 14 days expires”,
See also Express Newspapers (Private) Led. vs. Union of Indias ALR 1958,
S.C. 578.

*Clause 38.

"Clauses 5(5) and 17.

"Clause 28.


120

It may be noted, that the clause under discussion will
apply also to marriages solemnized outside India, ie,
marriages solemnized not under the existing Christian
Marriage Act but under the law of the foreign country
where they are solemnized.

Placing.—It is considered that this savings should ap-
pear at the end, and not in the main clause’ dealing with
void marriages. Hence it has been placed here.

Clause 75

This is new. The correspynding provision in Hindu
Marriage Act may be compared.

Clause 76

General—This is a repeal clause.

Sub-clause (1).—Repeal of the Indian and Colonial
Divorce Jurisdiction Acts, 1926 and 1940, and the Indian
Divorce Act, 1945 (all U.K. Acts have also been provided
for, For reasons, see the note below, entitled “Colonial
jurisdiction”.

Sub-clause (2), paragraph ‘(a)—This follows the
language of section 51(2) of the Special Marriage Act.

So far as matrimonial relief under the Act is concerned,
the substantive provisions relating to decree of nullity,
restitution, judicial separation, divorce etc., themselves
make it clear how far the new Act is to apply to marriages
solemnized before its commencement. Therefore, the
saving provision under discu.sion may not be of much
use in respect of matrimonial relief.

But it may be desirable t> make it clear that the pre-
Act marriages will be deemed to have been solemnized
‘under the new Act, for other purposes. Apart from the
general utility of such a provision, ‘here may be specific
cases where it will come handy—for example, in relation
to punishment of bigamy?

The paragraph under discussion will not, have the effect
of attracting the nullity provisions of the new Act so as to
affect the validity 0०: any pre-Act mafrriages*.

Sub-ciause (2), paragraph (b).—It is felt that pending
suits and proceedings under the existing Acts regarding
marriage and divorce should continue to be dealt with by
the respective courts, notwithstanding the repeal of those
Acts. A provision has been made accordingly. This is a
departure from the course adopted in 5. 51(2) (9) 8. M. A.

This provision will be “without prejudice to the general
provisions of s. 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897.”—See

1Clause 27.
"See clause 31.
3966 clause 74.


121

sub-clause (3). The provisions of section 6 of the eneral
Clauses Act save previously acquired rights, liabilities ete,
and it is considered that there would be no conflict between
the specific provisions embodied in the sub-paragraph
under discussion and those of the General Clauses Act.

Proceedings other than judicial proceedings e.g. notices
of marriage etc. already given, do not, it is considered,
need any savings provision. Parties can give fresh notices
in such cases, This course had to be a opted in view of
the fact that the continuance of such proceedings would
create complications, particularly because the scheme in
the proposed Act is, in some respects, different from that
in the existing Act—e.g. (i) both parties must be Chris-
tians, (ii) both parties must sign the notice, and so on.

Sub-Clause (3).—This follows the language of section
51(3), Special Marriage Act. Though & specific saving
provision has been inserted in sub-clause (2), paragraph
(६०), regarding pre-Act marriages (following the Spec al
Marriage Act), the words “without prejudice” in the sub-
clause under discussion have been used, again following the
Special Marriage Act.

The words “without prejudice” etc. are not likely to
create any complications when contrasted with sub-clause
(2), paragraphs (2) and (b). The position relating to sub-
clause (2), paragraph (a) has been discussed above in the
Notes thereto, The position relating to sub-clause (2),
paragraph (0) has also been discussed above in the Notes
thereto, which may be seen.

{As to the Converts’ Marriage Dissolution Act, the sab-
ject has already been dealt with]

Colonial jurisdiction

(1) The Indian and Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction Act,
1926? (as amended by the Indian and Colonial Divorce
Jurisdiction Act, 1940)5 confers jurisdiction on Indian
Courts to make decrees for dissolution of marriages where
the parties to. the marriage are British subjects domicifed
in England or Scotland, in any case where a court in India
would have such jurisdiction if the parties to the Marriage
were domiciled in India,

(2) The 1926 Act was passed in consequence of the deci-
sion in Keyes v. Keyes, holding that Indian courts could
not grant a divorce where the parties were not domiciled
in India (even though the marriage was celebrated in
India, the parties were resident in India and the acts of
adultery were committed within the jurisdiction of Indian

7866 the body of the Report, para. 63.
416 and 17 Geo. 5. ०. 40.

#3 and 4 Geo. 6 ८, 35.

‘Keyes y. Keyes, (1921) -p. 204,


oo

122

courts). The 1926 Act achieved, through an act of British
Parliament, a result which, in view of the political subordi-
nation of India, could not be achieved then by Indian
legislation.

(3) There are, of course, certain conditions which are
applicable to a decree under the 1936 Act. The important
conditions, stated briefly are!,

{a) The grounds on which the decree may be
granted should be such as those on which a decree may

be granted by the High Court in England, according’

to the law for the time being in force in England.

(b) Relief will be given on principles and rules as
nearly as may be conformable to those on which the
High Court in England acts.

(९) The court cannot grant relief under the Act
except in cases where the petitioner resided in India
at the time of presenting ih @ petition and the place
where the parties last resided together was in faa,
Nor can the court dissolve a Marriage on a ground of
adultery, cruelty or any crime except where the mar-
riage was solemnised in India or the adultery, cruelty
or crime Was committed in India.

(d) The court may refuse to entertain the fetition
unless it is desirable in the interests of justice it the
suit should be determined in India,

(4) There are certain other minor provisions which are
not material for the present purpose.

(5) The 1926 Act was amended by the 1940 Act, which
was enacted to remove certain doubts, and make certain
modifications, Section 1 of the 1940 Act made it clear that
the substantive amendments made in the English Law
on divorce by the Matrimonial Causes Act, 1937 were to
be taken into account by the Indian courts also while
acting under the 1926 Act. Section 3 of the 1940 Act made
it clear that where the wife is deserted by a husband and
the pre-desertion domicile of the husband was in England
or Scotland, then any change in the domicile of the husband
after desertion could be disregarded for the purposes of
jurisdiction under the Act. Other amendments are not
material.

(6) The 1926 and 1940 Acts have not, in forms been
repealed so far. But it would seem from section 17(1) of
the Indian Independence Act, 1947? that the jurisdiction
under the 1926 Act can now be exercised only in Tespect
of proceedings instituted before the “appointed day” (ie,

*Section 1 (4), Provio, of the 1926 Act.
"ro and 11060. 6, ०, 30.


128

before the !5th August, 1947). Sections 17(1) and 17(2)
ef the Indian Independence Act are as follows: —

“17(1). No court in either of the new Dominions
shall, by virtue of the Indian and Colonial Divorce
Jurisdiction Acts, 1926 and 1940, have jurisdiction in
or in relation to any proceedings for a decree for the
dissolution of a marriage, unless those proceedings were
instituted before the appointed day, but, save as afore~
said and subject to any provision to the contrary which
may hereafter be made by any Act of the Parliament
of the United Kingdom or by any law of the Legisla-
ture of the new Dominion concerned, all courts in the
new Dominions shall have the same jurisdiction under
the said Acts as they would have had if this Act had
not been passed.

(2) Any rules made on or after the appointed day
under sub-section (4) of section one of the Indian and
Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction Act, 1926, fer a court in
either of the new Dominions shall, instead of being
made by the Secretary of State with the concurrence
of the Lord Chancellor, be made by such authority as
may be determined by the law of the Dominion con-
cerned, and so much of the said sub-section and of any
rules in force thereunder immediately before the
appointed day as require the approval of the Lord
Chancellor to the nomination for any purpose of any
judges of any such court shall cease to have effect.”

(s. 17(3) (4) are not material]

(7) It may be of interest to note here that the 1926 ~
and 1940 Acts were considered by the Law Commission in
its Report relating to British Statutes applicable to India.
The observations made are as follows:—

“(301) 1926 Indian & Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction
Act (16 & 17 Geo. 5, ९. 40),

1940 Indian & Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction Act
(3 and 4 Geo, 6. ०, 35).”

This statute (as amended in 1940) gives jurisdiction to
the High Courts in India to try matrimonial causes where
parties thereto are British subjects domiciled in England
or Scotland.

Apparently, this jurisdiction is still beneficial to those
British subjects who are coming to India for business and
the like, But it is striking that this jurisdiction of our
High Courts is to be governed by rules made by the
Secretary of State, with the concurrence of the Lord
Chancellor [s. 1(4)].

If this jurisdiction is to be maintained, it should be
settled with the Government of the U.K. that the jurisdic-
tion should be governed solely ty our laws, and then we


124

may adopt the provisions of this statute with necessary
modifications”!

(8) As these two Acts are now applicable only to pro-

. ceedings pending in August 1947, they can be taken as

repealed, for ali practical purposes. However, a formal
repeal is necessary, and the clause therefore seeks—

(व) to incorporate a saving provision in the new
Act to the effect that the two Acts mentioned. above
shall continue to apply to pending proceedings, and

(b) to provide for a formal repeal of the two Acts.

For future, the cases of British subjects domiciled
in England or Scotland and coming to India will be
governed by the provisions of the new Act relevant
to any other non-Indians, No special provisions will
be necessary.

(9) With the proposed repeal of these two Acts, the
repeal of a later Act—the Indian Divorce Act, 1945—a
British Act, also becomes necessary. The Act was passed
to validate certain proceedings for dissolution entertained
by the High Court of Bombay (in relation to P arties from
the State of Hyderabad). It is essentially linked up with
the Indian and Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction Act, 1940,
and has no independent object of its own3

First Schedule

The list of prohibited relationships has been framed
muiniy on the basis of (English) Marriage Act, 1949 and
the Special Marriage Act. Only items which are common
to both the Acts have been retained‘. And even from the
items so common, the following have been omitted: —

Sister's son; sister’s daughter; brother’s son;
brother’s daughter; mother’s brother; mother's sister;
father’s brother; father’s sister.

These have been omitted in view of the fact that in
some communities, it is usual to arrange such marriages.5

The items in the list could be reduced in number by
adopting some drafting devices. For example, the expres-
sions “any lineal ascendant or descendant”, “widow of any
lineal ascendant or dezeendant of the wife” and so on could
be used. But that would make the list less concrete and
has been avoided.

4Fifth Report of the Law Commission, page 74, itenr (301).

®9 Geo. 6 Ch. 5.

4Cf. Fifth Report of the Law Commission (British Statutes Applicable to
India), page 83, item (393).

4See also the discussion in the body of the Report, paras, 23--25%

*See also the discussion in the body of the Report, para. 23.


125

The items have been treated both from the bride’s
angle and from the bridegroom’s angle. Each item in
Part I of the Schedule (that is, the item as seen from the
angle of the bridegroom), has its converse (that is, the
item as seen from the angle of the bride), in Part II, as
shown below:—

Ttem in Part I Corresponding item in
Part [1

0००३ AUR 0२ ++
1॥ ॥ ॥ ॥ ॥ 1 ॥ 8
ny
&

3
॥ ॥ ॥ | ॥
m

Second Schedule

The form of notice contained in the First Schedule to
the Christian Marriage Act mentions the period of “three”
calendar months. Under the form, parties give notice that
the marriage is intended to be solemnised “between us
within three calendar months from the date hereof”. It
must be noted, however, that under the provision in the
body of the Act!, as it exists at present, if a marriage is
not solemnised within two months of the date of the certi-
ficate, a fresh notice is required. The existing Act seems
to have given an extra one month on supposition that
about a month might be taken up between the notice and
the actual issue of the certificate, and the parties would
get two months more after the date of the certificate, thus
making a total period of three months. It is, however,
better to mention in the Schedule the same Period as is
mentioned in the body of the Act. For this reason, while
the period in the body of the draft? is increased to three
months, the period in the Schedule has been retained with-
out any increase.

For verbal changes, see the corresponding provision in
the Special Marriage Act.

*See sections 26 and 52 of the Christian Marriage Act.
‘Clause 22.


126

As to the note regarding minor bride, the substantive
provisions may be seen}

The column regarding “age” has been replaced by ‘date
of birth” which is more convenient,

Third Schedule

The verbal changes made are consequential.

Fourth Schedule

This is new and, follaws the corresponding Schedule in
the Special Marriage Act,

As to the note regarding minor bride, the substantive —
Provision? may be seen,

Fifth Schedule

The form of “certificate of marriage” contained in the
existing Act, has been replaced by a simplified form which
follows the corresponding provision in the Special Marri-
age Act.

The declaration to be filed regarding absence of impe-
diment ete’ would be much earlier than the actual
solemnisation—at leas: in the case of licensed Ministers
and Marriage Registrars‘—, and hence the witnesses who
signed the declaration may not necessarily be the same ag
those who attend the marriage. In view of this, the refer-
ence to those witnesses, though found in the Special
Marriage Act, has not been adopted.

Omitted Sections

The reasons for omitting the following sections of the
existing Acts have been given below:—

Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872

Section
Section 3—Definitions of varions Churches, Omitted, a8 unnecessary.
and of “Indian Christian” end
“Roman Catholic”.

Sections 9, 10 and 11. पु - Omitted, as unnecessary.

3866 Clause 12(2).

Clause 15(2)(060).

"See the Fourth Schedule, as proposed. _
See clause 15 (20९४), etc,


127

‘Sections 20, a1 and a2. . पु . Ontitted, ag unnecessary.

Section 37. पु + . . Omitted, as unnecessary in the presat day
conditions

Section 43. =. 0... Omitted, as unnecessary.

Section 44, 2nd and 3rd paragraphs . Omitted, as unnecessary,

Section 43. . . . . - Omitted, a3 unnecessary,

Sections 60 10 65 . पु + पु Omitted, consequent on ihe proposed abo
lition ‘of marriage by certificate.

Section?4 5 =. s,s Omitted, a8 unnecessary.

Section 81. . पु . . Omitted, ax unnecessary.

Section 85. . . . . . Omitted, as unnecessary.

Section 87. . न . - - Omitted, as unnecessary.

Indian Divorce Act, 1860

Section 3 (1) part, “High Court” . Omitted for reasons given already
Saction 3 (2) ५ + - - Omitted, as unnecessary.
Szetion 3 (4) पु पु . . . Omitted, es unnecessary.
Sectton 3 (6) and 3 (7) . पु +. एपरंपल्प, av unnecessary.
Section 3 (8) ५... + ५ ... Omitted, a3 unnecessary.
Section 3 (10) . . . . - Onnitted, as unnecessary.
Sections 42060. पु पु - Omitted, as unnecessary.

Section 7—Section 7 provides that in all suits and
proceedings under the Act, relief should be granted as
nearly as may be on principles and rules followed by the
Court for Divorce and Matrimonial Causes in England.
The opinion is generally against the retention of such a
provision, and hence it has been omitted. It is true that
decisions of English courts might afford valuable assis.
tance, as the branch of law is one with which English
courts had to deal with for a considerable length of time.
But that is not a ground for laying down that the Indian
courts should act in conformity with the rules laid down
in the English Divorce Courts. Courts in India might
refer to them for guidance as indeed they do in respect
of other subjects as well.

Sections 8 and 9—Under the proposed scheme, there
will be a regular appeal to the High Court against deci-
‘sions given by the district court in proceedings under the

38०८ notes to clause 2.


128

Act, and that will assimilate these proceedings to other
civil proceedings. There is no need, therefore, to confer
an extraordinary jurisdiction on the High Courts to trans~
fer proceedings duly taken in the mufassil courts,

As regards section 9, it should be noted that under
existing section 45, Indian Divorce Act, the provisions of
the Civil Procedure Code are generally to apply to the
trial of proceedings under the Act. There is, therefore,
no need for a special provision such as is contained in.
section 9,

Section 12, part (re-countercharge). —Omitted, as un-
necessary.

Section 13, part—Section 13 in part states certain
grounds on which relief could be refused. All such
grounds have already been provided in a single compre-
hensive clause. There is, however, a further provision in
section 13 that when a petition is dismissed by a district
court, the petitioner may nevertheless present a similar
petition to the High Court. This is not necessary, Once a
petitioner has moved the district court and a decision has.
been pronounced, the only remedy which should be open
to the petitioner is to take the matter in appeal. This part
of the section has, therefore, been omitted.

Section 14, part (condonation).—Omitted as unneces-
sary.

Section 17.There is. considerable opposition to the
retention of section 17. There are no special reasons why
decrees for dissolution should be put on a different footing
from decrees passed by civil courts in other civil proceed-
ings. Hence there is no need for a Provision requiring
that decrees for dissolution of marriage passed by a dis-
trict court should be confirmed by the High Court. "Section
17 has therefore been omitted.

Section 17A—Section 174A was introduced in the
Indian Divorce Act, 1869, by an amendment of 1927 and
is based upon a similar provision in England. The section
has not in practice been availed of to any extent. No
useful purpose will be served by providing for the appoint-
ment of a (State) Proctor, It has, therefore, been omitted.

Section 20.—Omitted, as unnecessary,
Sections 24 and 25.—Omitted, as unnecessary',

Sections 27 to 31.—These sections confer certain rights
on a wife to whom the Indian Succession Act, 1865, does
not apply. The relevant provision is section 4 of the
Indian Succession Act, 1865 and that has been repealed by
the Indian Suceession Act, 1925 and re-enacted as section
20. Under this section, two classes of persons are exempt-

*For a detailed discussion, see the body of the Report, para, 46.


129

ed from its operation: (a) persons married before the
Ist January, 1866, This sub-clause would have worked
itself out and need not now be repeated. (b) The wife
of a marriage where either bride or bridegroom was at
the time of the marriage a Hindu, a Mohammadan, a Sikh
or a Jain by religion. This might have been necessary in
view of the fact that the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 and the
Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872, apply to marriages
where one of the parties thereto is not a Christian. But
under the scheme as proposed, the Act will apply only
when both the parties thereto are Christians. In view of
this, sections 27 to 31 are unnecessary and have been
omitted.

Section 35.—This deals with costs. It is not necessary
to enact any special provision in that behalf. The provi-
sions of the Code of Civil Procedure are ample and confer
on the court a diseretion in the matter of awarding costs,
and that must be sufficient to cover cases arising under
this Act also. The section has therefore been omitted.

Section 38—This provides that payments of alimony
{granted to the wife) might be made either to her or to
the trustees. There is no need for such a provision.

Section 39, first paragraph.—Omitted, for reasons already
given!

Section 39, second paragraph.—Omitted, as unneces-
sary.

Section 46.—Section 46 provides for the forms men-
tioned in the Appendix being used. There is no such
provision in the Special Marriage Act or the Hindu
Marriage Act. This can be left to be dealt with by the
rule-making authority of the High Courts. The section
has, therefore, been omitted.

Sections 48, 49 and 50.—Provisions of the Code of Civil
Procedure relating to the matters mentioned in these
sections will be attracted by the force of existing section
45, Indian Divorce Act. Hence the sections are unneces-
sary.

Sections 51-52.-—-These sections lay down certain speciti
rules in the matter of taking evidence in proceedings under
the Act. Subsequent to this cnactment, the Indian Evidence
Act was passed in 1872 and it contains general provisions
applicable to all proceedings. In view of those provisions,
these sections have become unnecessary. They have been
omitted and the matter left to be determined in accord-
ance with the provisions of the Evidence Act. [As to
competence, see sections 118, 137 and 138 of that Act. As.
to compellability, see section 118 of that Act and section
179, LP.C.].

3866 notes to clause 46. 7



130

Section 54—There is no need for this section as the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure will be ample
for that purpose.

Section 56—Omitted, as unnecessary.
Section 59.—Omitted for reasons already given.
Sections 60 and 61—Omitted, as unnecessary,

Schedule of forms.—Omitted, as unnecessary (see
under section 46, above)

‘See pores on clause Jo,


APPENDIX पा
. MARRIAGE
b- Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872
Table showing the provision in the existing Acts and the

corresponding provision, if any, in Appendix I

Existing provision Corresponding clause,
if any, in. App. I

i tI 2
[Clause}
Section z, 1st para, . . पु t (1), part.
ता and para, |, 1 (2), part.
Section 2 (Repealed)
‘ Section 3 a
f “Church of England and “Anglican” Omitted.
“Church of Seodand” 2 ॥#"ु Omitted.
पु “Church of Rome” and “Roman Omitted,
Catholic”,
f “ Church” Soe ee 2, part,
i “ India” oo . fo 2, part.
: “Mine” 2 5... 25 part.
“Christian” 9. 9. 9. - a, part.
5 “Indian Christian” =. 0. Omitted.
॥ हु “Registrar-Generl” 5s 2, part.
. Setting . 9. .,. 3
न 6.
Section 5, part . . . . 11 (1).
Setin6 . . . . - 8,
Setiny 2 2 - - - 9.

Section 8 (Onnitted by the Adaptation
of Laws Order, 1980),

Section 9 2. ५. - - Omitted.

Section to. 7 ww, Omitted,

Section tts. wk, Omitted,
133

7 281 L—it


132

ee

Section 12. .
Section 130. .
Section 4. .
Section 15.
Section 16. .
Section 17, part
Section 17, part.
Section 18 .

Section 19.
Section 20. .
Section डा." +

Section 22. .

Section 23. पु

Section 24,
Section 25 :
Section 26. .

Sections 27 to 36 -
Section 37. .
Section 38.
Section 39, 1st para,
2nd para,
Section qo, part.
Section qo, part,
Section 41, part.
Section 41, part
Section 42, part .
Section 42, part.
Section 43 . .
Section 44, 1st para,
Section 44, 2nd para,
Section 44, 3rd para.

12 ६7), part.
13 (०) and (6), part
13 (० part
13 (व), earlier part
13 (d), latter part
19, part

15 (7) part
15 (2), part
5 (2), part
Omitted,
Omitted.
Omitted.

69 (2). part
Ts (1), part
20

22, part

23, part
Omitted.

¥2 (1), part,
14 (के

14 (8).

12 (3).

66

19; part

35 (7), part
75 (2), part
19, part
Omitted.

5 Gy part
Omitted.
‘Omitted.



133

r 2

Section 4s, part, extended 5. 5 4)
Section 45, pat 2. ७ 5 (5).
Section 45, part. + . 5 (6)
Section 46, extended .  .. x
Section 47 (Omitted by the Adapta-

tion of Laws Order, 1940).
Section 48. . . . . Omitted,
Section 49... 61
Section 50... ., 15 (3), part.
Section डा... 9. . at (1)
Section 52. * . + 22, part
Section 53 . . . . qt
Section 64. . . . 23, part
Section 55 . + . . 23, part
Section 56 (Omitted by the Adapta-

tion of Order, 1950).
Section 57. . . . 69, part.
Section 58... ., 69, part
Section $9. . पु . . 23; part
Section 60 ta 6g, . Omitted.
Section 66. . . . . 53
Section 67. . . . 54
Section 68. . . . . 55
Section 69. + . 57% part
Section fo. . . . . 57> part
Section 71. . . * . 57; part
Section 720, . . 57 part
Section 73. पु . 37s part
Section 74 . . Omitted.
Section 75 . . . : . 58
Section 76. . . . . 60
Section 77.0. . . . पु 62 °



134

1 2

Section 78. . पु पु : 63

Section 796 we 67, part

Section 80, pat 6 6 ee 67, pert

Section 80, part. ee 68

Section 81+ . . . . Omitted.

Section 82+ . . . . 72, part”

Section 83+ . . . . 92, part

Section 84 (Omitted by the Adapta- .
tion of Laws Order, 1950).

Section B5 . . 1 . Omitted.

Section 86 (Omitted by the Adaptation a
of Laws Order, 1950).

Section 87... - . + . . Omitted.

Section 8 . . + . - हर]

इलब्वशब व... ee Second} Schedule,
Schedule IT. पु . - पु Third Schedule.
Schedule IT]. + . . न Pifth Schedule, part
Schedule IV. पु पु . . Fifth Schedule,” pert

Schedule V (Repealed)

DIVORCE
Indian Divorce Act, 1869

Bxisting provision Corresponding provision, if any,
. in App.
1 ~ 2
[Clause]

Section 1 न पु . पु . ३ (7), part
Section 2, 1st para, . . . 1 (2), part
Section 2, 2nd para. . . 34
Section 2, 3rd para. न पु 35 (a).

Section 2, 4th para . . + 35 (०)



135

Section 2, 5th para, .

Section 3 (1), part

Section 3 (1), part «

Section 3 (2) . 4 .

Section 3 (३); part .

Section 3 (3), part .

इव्दांग्म 3 (4) . *.

Section 35)...

Section. 3 (6),

Section 3 (7) - .

Section

5
6
Section 7
Section 8
Section 9
Section 10,
Section 10,
Section 10,

Section 10,

Section 3 (8). *«
Section 3 (9) «
Section 3 (70) . .
Setiong . + -
Section :

Ist para, part.
Ist para, part.
and para, part

2nd para, part

Section 10, ard para,

Section 11

Section 12,

pat.

Section 12, part (relating to counter-

charge),

Section 13, part 1.

Section 13, part. .

35 (2)
Omitted

36 (3), part
Omitted.
2, part

36 (3). part
Omitted.

2, part
Omitted.
Omitted.
Omitted,

2, part
Omitted,
Omitted.
Omitted,
Omitted.
‘Omitted.
Omitted.
Omitted.
30, part

36 (3}, part
30, part

36 (3), part
37 (1), part
4o (7)

39 (1), part
Omitted,

39 (7), part
Omitted.



136

I
Section ig. wee 39 (x), part
seen 14> part (relating to condona- Omitted.
Section 15 5. ee gt
Section 16. . . . पु 42
Section 17 - *- पु noe Omitted.
Section 178 - . . पु . Omitted.
Section 18 - पु . + + 27, part
Section 19 (1) . . + . 28, part
Section 19 (2) पु + . . 27, part
Section 19 (3) . + . . 28, part
Section 19 (4) . . . . 27, part
Section 19, last para. . . . 28, part.
Section 200. . . . पु Omitted.
Section 21 . . . . . 29
Section 22, earlier part... 25
Section 22, latter part. . . 26, part
Section 23, earlier part. . . 36 (3), part
Section 23, latter part - . . 39 (1), part
Section 240 - . . . . Omitted.
Section 25+ . . . . Omitted,
Section 26. पु . . . 26, part
Sections 27 to 31 - . . . Omitted.
Section 32, "part - . . . 24 (1)
Section 32, part = - . . . 24 (3)
Section 33 . . . . . 24 (2)
Section 340 ee 43
Section 35 . . . . . Omitted.
Section 36. . . . . 44
Section 37——- . ‘ पु न 45

Section 38. . . . . Omitted,
Section 39, rst para. . . . Omitted.



137

Section 39, 2nd para,

Section 39, 3rd para,

Scetion 40, main para

Section 40, Proviso .

Section 41
‘Section 42
Section 43
Section 44
‘Section 45

‘Section 46

Section 47, Ist para .

Section 47, 2nd para

Section 48
Section 49
Section 50
Section sr
Section 52
Section 53
Section 54

Section 55, part
Section 55, part

Section 56
Section 57

Section 58, extended

‘Section 59
‘Section 60
‘Section 61
‘Section 62

Schedule of form

Omitted.
43 (2)
46(2)
46(3)
47 part
47, part
47, part
47; part
38
Omitted.
37(1), part
3702)
Omitted.
Omitted,
Omitred,
Omitted,
Omitted.
48
Omitted,
49
50
Omitted.
33
70
Omitted.
Omitted.
Omitted.

3
Omitted,



APPENDIX IV¥
LIST OF WITNESSES EXAMINED

‘Witness Name of witness Page No. in the
No. record of evidence
i 2 3
BOMBAY (11th, r2th, rqth and 15th September,
1959)
t Dr. J. S. Williams (Indian National Church, Bombay) .
a Sh D. Suryawanshi, President, Indian Christian
Association पु न पु . पु . .
3. Shri James J. John, General Secretary of the All India
Federation of National Churches, Bombay .
4 Shri David F. Shaw, M.L.A., Bombay . ‘ .
s The Catholic Union of India, Bombay (A. Soares—
President and Alfred T. 0, Pinto, Secretary) . .
6 Shroff & Co., Bombay Solicitors (Shri 5, K, J. Modi} .
7 The Methodist Church, Bombay (Rev. J. 8, Satyarvata
* and Shri ¥. Uzagare) . . . . .
8 अप GS. Kirby |) Representing the | Ceatenary
Shri C. S, Deodhar ‘hristian Association, Hubli,
Shri G. 5. Deodhar J Dharwar District, Mysore
State. ५०» -«
9

10
ar
bey
13
Los

16
7

Shri D. N. Tilak, Representative of the National Chris-
an Council पु . . . . .

MADRAS (x3th to 15th October, 1959)
Shri R. Sadasivan, Chief Preside: Magistrat
Madraa ee eagistrates

Shri Balasingham Satya Nadar, Advocate, re resenting
the National Christian Coundl Pe

Shri ८. K. Nair. . + . . . .
Shri A. Dorairaj . soos पु hoe .
Shri P. T, Mathew . . . . . .

Shri L. V. Mathews, representing the National
~tian Council . + . . .

Shri C. ५. Naida . . . . . + .
Shri B. 8. Devadason . . + . . .

138


1

2a

22
23

24

25
26

NEW DELHI (2nd to qth November, 1959)

Rey. John Justin Levi, Chief Priest, Indian National
Church, Delhi.

Shri Gyan Chand, Editor, “ Masihe Duniya"
Cardinal Gracias, | (Representing the Catholic
Bishop Raymond, Bishops’ Conference of India)
Father Sanders &
Father Nazareth, J

Shri E, A. N. Mukerji, representing the National Chris-
tian Council : . पु पु

Prof. Eric H. Banerji, Jullundar
Shri B. S. Darbari, Advocate, Agra

Shri A. B. Shinde, Jubbulpur, representing the National
Christian Councit + .

Rev. W. 0. Maddan. पु . पु .

Rev. William Glad, representing the Northern Evangeli-
cal Lutheran Church of India. .



APPENDIX प्र
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF OTHER AcTS

1. Converts’ Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866—As_ the
existing Act is limited ta cases of conversion from Hindu-
ism to Christianity, the question whether a law generally
applicable to all cases of conversion from one religion to
another is needed, is under consideration, When such
legislation is undertaken, the repeal of the Converts’ Mar-
riage Dissolution Act can be taken up.t

“छल the body of the Repo, pam Gl para. 63,
140


NOTE OF SHRI P. SATYANARAYANA RAO

I am unable to subscribe to the view implicit in the
provisions of the proposed Bill that no distinction ought
to be made in the matter of capacity and essential validity
between persons domiciled in India and persons not so
domiciled, in the case of marriages solemnised under the
proposed Bill in India. The proposed Bill proceeds on the
assumption that the provisions as to capacity and essential
validity embodied in clause 4 should apply inexorably even
‘where one or both the parties to the marriage is or are of
foreign domicile in all cases in which the marriage is
solemnised in India under the Act. Be it noted in this
connection that apart from the Special Marriage Act which
suffers from a similar defect and which even otherwise is
bound to be objectionable to the vast majority of Chris-
tians who would prefer a religious form of marriage, this
is he only Act under which Christians may marry in
ndia.!

The relevant provisions of the Bill are clauses 1(2), 3,
4, 11, and 19.

Clause 1(2) provides that the Act extends to the whole
of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir and also
to persons domiciled in India who are outside the said
territories. This means that the Act will apply, irrespective
of the domicile of the parties, 40 all marriages solemnised
under it in India. This clause purports to follow section
1, first para. of the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872,
and section 2, first para. of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869.
It is so as regards the wording but not as regards the sub-
stance. The former, as will be pointed out later, purported
to deal only with forms of marriage. The latter dealt with
matrimonial causés and in the very section relied on
embodied significant qualifications. These are really no
precedents. The draft clause proceeds on exaggerated
notions of sovereignty and the earlier part of the ९. Prise is
not in harmony with the latter part of the clause import-
ing the domicile qualifications as to marriages solemnized
under the Act outside India.

tt Clause 3 which provides that marriages between Chris-

ans in India shall be solemnised under the proposed Act
unless the same is solemnised under the P rovisions of the
Special Marriage Act, has been adverted to earlier.

*See clause 3.

141


142

Clause 4 deals with capacity and essential validity and
it provides that a marriage may be solemnised in India
between any two Christians if the conditions laid down by
it are fulfilled. Clauses 11 and 19 deal with the duty of
different persons entitled to solemnise a marriage under the
Act to ensure that the requirements of clause 4 are com-
plied with, Clause 11 applies 10 marriages before a minister
-of recognised church and it imposes a duty on the minister
to refuse to solemnise a marriage if the minister has reason
to believe that the solemnisation of the marriage will,
inter alia, be contrary to the provisions of clause 4. Clause
19 deals with marriages before a licensed Minister or a
Marriage Registrar and imposes on them a duty similar
to that imposed on Ministers of recognised. church by sec-
tion 11, with this difference that clause 19 provides expres-
sly for an enquiry into the matter and for an appeal from
the decision.

It would be seen from the foregoing survey that the
Bill makes lex loci celebrationis govern not only the formal
validity of the marriage but also its essential validity. Fur-
ther it excludes altogether the personal laws of the foreign
party or parties to the marriage, at any rate, so far as the
validity of the marriage in India is concerned. There is
no provision in the Bill corresponding to section 88 of the
‘Christian Marriage Act, 1872, saving the application of the
personal laws to the parties. The elaborate provisions in
the Bill giving effect to rules of private international law
as to jurisdiction in matrimonial causes would naturaliy
lend support to the view that the Bill should be construed
to be exhaustive on the subject of the applicability of its
provisions. The very fact that a qualification is introduced
on the basis of domicile in the case of marriages solem-
nised under the Act outside India may be construed as
leading to the inference that no such qualification be intro-
duced in the case of marriages solemnised in India. It has
been asserted that the effect of the provisions of the Bill
would be to make the lez domicilii operate cumulatively
with the lex loci. Whatever may be the merits of the
solution it is obvious that the provisions of the Bill do
not give effect even to this solution.

Tam of the opinion that this extreme lack of solicitude
for foreign laws displayed by the Bill is (i) inswlar and (ii)
not in keeping with the liberal approach in the matter of
jurisdiction in matrimonial causes adopted in the Bill (iii)
inconsistent with the policy adopted in the case of Christian
marriages for nearly a century (iv) inconsistent with the
practice followed in England from whose legal system we
have drawn considerably, and an injudicious break with
which is bound to be out of harmony with settled legis-
lative and judicial approach, though it may satisfy pseudo-
notions of sovereignty (v) contrary to the consensus of


143

juristic opinion as to the proper principles of Private Inter-
national Law applicable to the subject.

I will consider these objections seriatim.

(i) Insular approach—The recognition of the foreign
laws by all civilised countries for the purpose of doing
justice between the parties has been well-established and
all the writers on Private International Law have emphasis-
ed the necessity of such recognition. To quote only one
authority—Cheshire on Private International Law’ sums

“up the position in the following words:—

“Private International Law owes its existence to
the fact that there are in the world a number of sepa-
rate territorial systems of law that differ greatly from
each other in the rules by which they regulate the
various legal relations arising in daily life. The occa-
sions are frequent when the courts in one jurisdiction
must take account of some rule of law that obtains in
another territorial system. A sovereign is supreme with-
in his own territory, and, according to the universal
maxim of jurisprudence, he has exclusive jurisdiction
over every transaction that is there effected. He can,
if he chooses, refuse to consider any law but his own.
The adoption, however, of this policy of indifference,
though common enough in other ages, is impracticable
in the modern civilised world, and nations have long
found that they cannot, by sheltering behind the prin-
eiple of territorial sovereignty, afford to disregard
foreign rules of law merely because they happen to
be at variance with their own territorial or internal
system of law. Moreover, as will be shown later, it
is no derogation of sovereignty to take account of
foreign law.”

In this connection it may be noted that Indian courts?
and legislation’ have, by following English precedents,
impliedly given preference to the theory so ably expound-
ed by Savigny* that the general principle in cases involv-
ing a foreign element should be that full effect should be

tgth edy 9. 1,

*See in the sphere of marriage, sq Bom, 288 and sg Bom. 278. In other
spheres see the collection of ९७४९४ in the atticle by T. 8. Rama Rao on “ Pri-
vate International Law in India” in the Indian Year Book of International
Affairs, 1955.

ड़, 3. 11 C.P. (..; S. 41 Evidence Act; 5. 2 Indian Divorce Act ; S. 5
Indian Succession Act ; 9, 88 Indian Christian Marriage Act ; 5, 134 to 137
Negotiable Instruments Act, etc.

‘For an exposition a Savigny’s theory and its merits, sce Wolff: Private
International Law, and ed, pp. 34—38 and p. 39.


144

given to foreign laws unless there are overriding principles
of public policy to the contrary. It is thus clear that in
disregarding altogether the personal laws of the foreign
parties the Bill is unduly insular in character,

It must also be remembered that the followers of
Christian religion in our country are a comparatively
small minority; but there is an overwhelming adherence
to this religion in the countries abroad. When considering
a legislation for such a community it may not be justified
to do so merely from the domestic angle. We should also
take note of the principles of Private International Law.
Domestic consideration in the legislative policy of a country
which has one religious concept may be justified but it
would be inadequate legislation if such principle is rigor-
ously applied in a country like India.

It is not suggested that our legislature is not competent
to legislate for marriages when one or both parties thereto
have a foreign domicile. No one can dispute the com-
petency of our le; gislature to legislate on the subject, nor
is it maintained that we should not legislate on the sub-
ject. All that is said is that when we legislate we should
take into account the peculiar feature of such marriages,
namely, a party or parties being of foreign domicile and
formu. fate Tules suited to the situation. Private Interna-
tional Law is not super-State Law. It is only part of the
law of a State. If foreign laws are allowed to be taken
note of in cases involving a foreign element it is because
the sovereign permits it. So there is no point in entertain-
ing the fear of ‘encroachments’ of Private International
Law into Municipal Law.

Gi) Not in keeping with the liberal approach adopted
in the matter of jurisdiction:

In this connection reference may be made to clause 35
of the draft Bill. If in the matier of jurisdiction we are
Prepared to set a limit to the jurisdiction of our courts it
is difficult to understand why we should not be actuated by
the same spirit in the matter of capacity and essential vali-
dity of marriage. We must be logical.

(iii) Inconsistent with the policy adopted in the case of
Christian Marriages for nearly a century:

The law relating to solemnisation of Christian marriages
was consolidated and amended by the Indian Christian
Marriage Act, 1872. An examination of the provisions of
the Act of 1872 reveals that the main object of the Act was
to provide the machinery for the solemnisation in India of
marriages among Christians while leaving the question of
essential validity to the personal Jaws of the parties. Part
I of the Act deals with persons by whom marriages may
be solemnised; Part II deals with the time and place at
which marriages may be solemnised; Part III relates to


"कक जल,

145

marriages solemnised by Ministers of Religion licensed
under the Act; Part IV relates to registration of marriages
solemnised by Ministry of Religion; Part V relates to mar-
riages solemnised by or in the presence of marriage regis-
trar; Part VI relates to marriages of Native Christians;
Part VII deals with penalties and Part VIII deals with mis-
cellaneous matters. This Act chan ged the law as it stood
then under which the Registrar or Minister had to satisfy
himself that there was no lawful impediment according to
the law of England and by section 88 left the question of
capacity and essential validity to the personal laws of the
parties.! Section 88 of the Indian Christian Marriage Act,.
1872, expressly provides “nothing in this Act shall be
deemed to validate any marriage which the personal law
applicable to either of the parties forbids him or her to
enter inte.”

Thus the determination of the capacity of the parties:
and the essential validity of the marriage was exp ressly
left to the personal law or laws of the parties. Under this.
scheme, foreigners could take advantage of the provisions
of the Act and have their marriages solemnised in one or
other of the forms provided by it while being governed by
the personal law in the matter of capacity and essential
validity. This system ensured the international validity of
their marriages without at the same time imposing restric-
tions alien to their personal laws and minimised in no small
measure limping marriages or marriages valid in one
country and invalid in another country. This state of law
has obtained since 1872 at least. No hardship has been
experienced; no objection has been expressed; no qualms:
of sovereignty were felt. Eminent judges of an age when:
judicial side-comments on the propriety of the principles
underlying a legislative provision were considered both.
proper and necessary, have had occasion to apply section:
88 but none felt the need for criticising the principle. What
then is the justification for the radical de, parture from the
liberal principle in the proposed Bil)? y should we
now revert to a system similar to that abandoned in 1872.
It is hard to understand.

(iv) Inconsistent with the practice in England:

Firstly, the statutory provisions may be considered’
The domestic law of marriage in England was finally con-
solidated with some amendments by the Marriage Act, 1949.
This Act provides for two categories of absolute prohibitions
or prohibitions which may be classified as pertaining to
capacity and essential validity. These are (i) as to age and
(ii) as to Prohibited degrees. Section 2 of the Act taker
from the Age of Marriage Act, 1929, provides that a ma-
riage between persons either of whom is under the age of
16 shall be void. Section 1 deals with prohibited degrees

*For a stacement of the lav prior to 1872, see Lopez ७. ez,
906 मे oe: 9: pez. Lopez, 12 Cal,


146

and provides that marriages within prohibited degrees of
consanguinity or affinity as stated in Parts 1 and If of the
First Schedule to the Act shall be void. It may be noted
that the Schedule reproduces with some modifications the
rohibitions of the Prayer Book as confirmed and modified
by statues commencing from Lord Lyndhurst’s Act of
1835 (526 Will. 4. ९. 54).

It is significant that the Act is silent on the question.
whether its provisions on the subject under consideration
are confined only to persons domiciled in England or
whether they apply to all persons marrying in England.
It is this legislative silence that enables Courts to import
principles of private international law. It cannot be claim-
ed that our Bill follows the pattern of the English Mar-
tiage Act. There is nothing in the Act corresponding to
clause 1(2) of our proposed Bill, Nor can an inference
be drawn from the provisions of the Act that compliance
with sections 1 and 2 is condition precedent to the solem-
nisation of marriage under it. In contrast to the provi-
sions of our Bill the Act does not empower any of the
authorities authorised to solemnise marriages to suo motu
refuse to register marriages on the ground of any prohi-
bitions falling under section 1 or 2. Thus in the case of
marriage by banns, no doubt, publicity is given and it is
open to raise objections. In the case of marriage by com-
mon license provision is made in section 16 whereby one
of the persons 10 be married should swear before a person
granting such licence that he or she believes that there
is no impediment of kindred or alliance of any other law-
ful cause nor any suit commenced in any court, to bar or
hinder the sclemnisation of marriage in accordance with
the licence. That sworn statement is accepted and, if it is
false penal consequences will follow. Section 29 provides
for the entering of a caveat and that caveat is to be enquir-
ed into by the Superintendent and an appeal is provided
for to the Registrar-General from the decision of the Supe-
Tintendent, Thus it is clear that the Act does not insist as
does the present Bill, that whatever may be the law of the
domicile of the parties they are bound to satisfy the solem-
nising authority that there are no impediments under sec-
tions 1 and 2 of the Act.

Considerable light is thrown on the question as to what
is the meaning of the expression “impediments” in rela-
tion to the declaration that there are no impediments, by
other statutory provisions and judicial decisions and the
views of writers of authority. We may consider first Mar-
riage with Foreigners Act, 1906 (6 Edw. 7, ०. 40) which is
still on the statute book. ‘Section 2 of the Act deals with
marriages of foreigners with British subjects in the United
Kingdom and deals with issue of certificates that there are
no impediments according to the foreign law. Though
the Act applies only in the case of subjects of reciprocating
territories, it is clear that it proceeds on the assumption
that impediments in the case of a foreigner would mean


147

impediments under the foreign law’. Secondly, reference
may be made to section 19 of the Foreign Marriages Act,
1892, which provides that the Marriage Officer under the
Act should refuse to solemnise a marriage which would be
inconsistent with the principles of international law or
comity of nations. As will be pointed out later, the prin-
ciple referred to is the principle that capacity and essential
validity are governed by lex domicilii of the parties.

It may also be noted that leading authorities like Hals-
bury and Dicey support the view that the law relating to
prohibited degrees of consanguinity and affinity laid down
Be the English Act affects only persons domiciled in

gland. See 19 Halsbury's Laws of England (3rd edn.),

ge 785 and Dicey's Conflict of Laws (7th edn.), page 258.
The decisions relied on by these writers in support of the
proposition—Re De Wilton, Re Bozzelli’s ttlement—
Sottomayor v. De Barros (No. 1}—bear it cut?.

In the sphere of English conflict of laws, since the deci-
sion of House of Lords in 1861 in Brook v. Brook? it is well
established that a distinction has to be made between for-
malities and essentials of marriage and that the latter
which includes capacity is governed by the law of domi-
cile of the parties. In Brook v. Brook, the marriage was
solemnised in Denmark between a man and his deceased
wife’s sister, both of English domicile. According to the
law of Denmark, the marriage was valid. According to
the law of England, as it stood then, the parties were with-
in prohibited degrees of relationship and hence the mar-
lage was void. The question in issue was whether the

1566 Halsbury Lews of England (ard edn.}, Vol. 19, pp. 778, 779 where
this Act is referred to.

"In Re De Wilton [(1900) 2 Ch. 481] the question arose with reference
to the persons professing the Jewish religion who were domiciled British
subjects, ‘The marriage was sclemnised outside Englend according to Jewish
rites between a niece and a maternal uncle, The marriage was valid according,
to Jewish Law but was void according to English law, It was held, notwith:
standing the fa:t that the marriage was valid eccording to Jewish law, as the
persons were domiciled in England they were governed’ by the impediments
laid down by the English Law (Lord Lyndhurst’s Act) and so the marriage
was void.

In Re Bozzelli’s Settlement [(1902) 1 Ch. 781] the question arose about the
validity of the marriage between a naturalised Htalian domiciled in Italy who
married her deceased hushand’s brother, sn Italian domiciled in Italy.” The
marriage was solemnised in Italy after the necessary dispensation has been.
obtained. It was valid according to the Italian law and the question arose
whether it is a marriage which should he tecngnised as valid in the United
Kingdom. It was held that notwibstanding Lord Lyndburst’s Act, the
marriage was valid in Engiand. Swinfein Eady J., applied the principle of
Brook ७. Brook [(1861) 9 H.L. Cas. 193] which established the principle that
the law of domicile of the parties will govern the essential validity of mar-
Tiage. A passage from the judgement of the Court of Appeal in Sottomayor
v. De Barros कफ 3 7, 12, 1] was also quoted with approval, It repeats
the well-recognised principle of private international law that a question of
Personal capacity to enter into a contract is to be decided by the law of do-
micile of the parties,

(1861), 9 HLL. Ces. 193.
281 L183



148

tex loci celebrationis would prevail over the doomiciliary
prohibition as to capacity. The point was debated before
very eminent Law Lords and in an exhaustive judgement
it was held that the marriage was void, as under_the law
of England such a marriage was void. Lord Campbell,
LC. at p. 207 in that case stated: “There can be no loubt
of the general rule that a foreign marriage, valid accord-
ing to the law of a country where it is celebrated, is good
everywhere, But, while the forms of entering into the
contract of marriage are to be regulated by the lex loct
contractus, the law of the country in which it is celebrated,
the essentials of the contract depend upon the lex domicilit,
the law of the country in which the parties are domiciled
at the time of marriage, and in which the matrimonial
residence is contemplated. Although the forms of celebr-
ating the forei marriage may be different from those
required by the law of the country of domicile, the marriage
may be good everywhere. But if the contract of marriage
ia such, in essentials, as to be contrary to the law of the
country of domicile, ‘and it is declared void by that law, it
is to be regarded as void in the country of domicile, though
mot contrary to the law of the country in which it was
celebrated”, and at p. 212 the Lord Chancellor further
observed: “It is quite ‘obvious that no civilised State can
allow its domiciled subjects or citizens, by making a tem-
porary visit to a foreign country to enter into a contract,
fo be performed in the place of domicile, if the contract
4s forbidden by the law ‘of the place of domicile as con-
trary to religion, or morality or to any of its fundamental
jnstitutions.” The other Lords, Lord Cranworth and Lord
St. Leonards also enunciated the same principles. Ever
since that decision the principle has been applied in
England to varying situations.

The application of the principle laid down by the House
of Lords in Brook v. Brook may be considered with refe-
rence to the following situations*.

(1) Both parties domiciled in England and the
marriage celebrated abroad,

(2) Both parties domiciled abroad and the mar-
riage celebrated in England.

(3) One party domiciled in England and other
party abroad am the marriage celebrated abroad.

कक One ery domiciled in England and the other
abroad and the marriage celebrated in England.

‘The first of the aforementioned situations was the one
directly in tssue in Brook v. Brook and does not require
further consideration. It is clear that lex domicilit of
the parties is decisive in such & बे प्र parties is decisive in such a situation?. The second

जगह situation where both parties are domiciled in England and the
marriage is celebrated in land is clearly a problem governed exclusively
bby municipal law.

19७९ also Re De Wilton (1900) 2 Ch. 481. Facts given earlier, sce p. 146,
footnote 2.



149

situation arose in Sottomayor v. De Barros (No. 1). In
“this case the marriage was between two first cousins, both
assumed to be of Portuguese domicile. By the law of
Portugal the marriage was void as being within prohibited
degrees, but by the Law of England the marriage was valid.
The court held that the domiciliary prohibition tie bind-
ing and accordingly declared the marriage void. e third
situation—one party domiciled in England, the other
abroad and the marriage celebrated abroad—arose in
Mette v. Mettet, Re Paine’ and more recently in Pugh
v. Pugh*. In all these cases the rinciple of domicile gov-
verning capacity was applied and Y virtue of the prohibi-
‘tion under one or other of the laws of domicile applicable,
the marriages were held void althou; ah the marriages in
-each case was valid by the lex loci celebrationis and the lex
-domicilii of one of the parties. It is significant that both
‘in Re Paine and Pugh v. Pugh, the - decision in Brook v.
Brook was followed and applied. In Re Paine, Bennet
J., expressly endorsed the views of Dicey, Westlake and
alsbury viz., that capacity is governed by the law of domi-
-cile of each of the parties.

It is only with regard to the fourth situation—that is,
where the marriage is celebrated in England and one party
is domiciled in England and the other domiciled abroad—
that there is confusion and difficulty. The only authorities
are Sottomayor v. De Barros (N. 2}5, and dicta in Ogden v,
Ogden* and Chetti vy. Chetti’. The dicta in Ogden’s
Case are of not much weight as the decision proceeded,
rightly or wrongly, on the assumption that matters of con-
‘sent pertain to form. The decision in Chetti’s case can be
explained with reference to the ultimate reservation in
favour of public policy of lex fort. It is enough, therefore,
to consider Sottomayor’s (No, 2) case in detail. Strong
reliance has been placed on this case in support of the pro-
visions of the proposed bill and it is therefore necessary to
consider it in detail and show what criticism it has evoked.

The case originally started before Phillimore 1.१ and
the question raised was about the validity of a marriage
‘an England between first cousins one of whom was admit-
tedly of Portuguese domicile. Such a marriage was valid
according to the law of England, The marriage itself was
telebrated in England. Phi limore J., directed the Queen’s
Proctor to intervene as the respondent, the husband Merely
-entered ap pearance and did not file an answer. He dis-
“posed of the case without trial holding that as the marriage

1(7877)073 P.D. 1.

(1859) 1 Sw. & Tr. 416.
4(1940) Ch. 46.

(7957) P. 482,

(1879) 5 P.D. 94.
*{1908) P. 46.



150

Was contracted in England and being valid under En, lish.
law, the fact that the partie were incapacitated om
entering into a marriage by the law of Portugal did not
affect the validity.

The matter was taken in appeal’. In the Court of Ap-
peal, the facts not having been tried by the first court,
the matter was argued on the assum tion that both the
parties, the husband and the wife, had Portuguese domicile.
On this footing, as the marriage was invalid according to
the law of Portugal, the Court of Appeal reversed the deci-
sion of Phillimore J., and remanded the case for further
disposal on the other questions, particularly questions of
fact. Cotton LJ., delivered the judgement of the court
consisting of James, Baggalay and Cotton L.JJ. He applied
the principle laid down by the House of Lords in Brook
y. Brook viz., that the capacity to enter into marriage must
be determined according to the domicile of both the parties.

After it was sent back, the case was disposed of by Sir
James Hannen P.*. He found as a fact that the husband’s
domicile was English while that of the wife was Portu-
guese. The President held the marriage valid, Though the
judgement is not a well-reasoned one, it is clear that the
Jearned Judge relied upon the English domicile of one of
the parties and the place of celebration of marriage for
testing the validity of marriage with reference to English
Law and for disregarding the Prohibition of the law of
foreign domicile.

This decision has created a stir in England and
was severely criticised. It is, however, treated by
Dicey and others as an exemption to the general rule
Telating to dual domicile as they could not get over the
decision until it was reversed by high authority. The
decision, however, is opposed to principle and authority
and is not in keeping with ail other decisions ecommenc~
ing from Brook v. Brook. It has been criticised by a num-
ber of writers of authority.

Westlake*, in effect, refused to recognise the decision;
for, notwithstanding it, he laid down in section 21 the rule
as follows: —

“It is indispensable to the validity of a marriage
that the personal law of each party be satisfied so far
as regards his capacity to contract it, whether abso-
lute, in respect of age, or relative, in respect of the
prohibited degrees of consanguinity or affinity.”

Referring to the case, the learned author observed thus:

“....but this authority is weakened, (1) by the
learned Judge’s pronouncement in favour of the lex
loci contractus as governing competency, (2) by his

33 7.1), 1.
*879) 5 P.D. 94.
*Private International Law, 4th ed. p. 59.


151

taking Creswell’s opinion in favour of the lex loci
contractus from Simonin v. Maliac', without refer-
ence to that learned Judge's saying in Mette v. Mette?
“there could be no valid contract unless each was
competent to contract with other”, (3) by his refer-
ence to the statutes on the marriage of first cousins,
which seems to imply that the rules of private inter-
national law are less applicable where the English
law is contained _in statutes than where it is the
common law. In Re De Wilton*..... the dependence of
capacity for marriage on domicile was held not to be
Subject to an exception for the marriages of Jews.

And conversely, a marriage in which the personal
law of each party as regards his capacity is satisfied is
valid in England so far as regards such capacity,
notwithstanding that by English law it would be
incestuous: Re Bozzelli’s Settlement*,.......and the
judgements of Lord Campbell and anworth in
Brook v. Brook there quoted.”

The eminent Canadian authority, Faleonbridge dis-
eussed six different methods of reconciling Mette v. Mette®
and Re Paine® with Sottomeyor No. 2 all of which he
rejects as untenable’. Referring to this Morris® observes:

“The decision in the latter is based upon the
grounds (1) that capacity to marry is governed by the
Jaw of the place of celebration, and (2) that an ineapa-
city imposed by foreign law is less important than a
capacity imposed by English law and can therefore be
disregarded. The former ground is clearly untenable
since Brook v. Brook. The latter ground is unworthy
of a place in a respectable system of conflict of laws’ ”

Rabel’, a leading authority of international reputaticn,
examines the decision very critically and states his conclu-
sion as follows:

“On the basis of this latter case, many writers
have believed that English courts would always apply
domestic law, if the marriage is celebrated in England
and one party, or at least the bridegroom, is domiciled
there, irrespective of any incapacity by which the
other party may have been affected under his own
domiciliary law. Thus, whereas a domiciled English-
man marrying abroad would remain subject to the
English rules on capacity, the foreign grounds of
incapacity, of a person domiciled abroad would be

1860) 2 Sw. & Tr. 67,

21S & T 423,

*1g00) 2 Ch. 481.

4(1902) 1 Ch. 751.

*(1859) 1 Sw & Tr. 416.

*(1940) Ch. 46.

‘Falconbridge : Essays on Conflict of Laws (1st ed), pp. 640643,
®Morris : Cases on Private International Law (Third edn.), p. 79.
*The Conflict of Laws, A Comparacive Study, एवी, 1, 1945, 9. 260.



152

disregarded. This alleged rule has acquired world-
wide notoriety; it has been labelled a badge of
“insular pride and complacency”. In fact, apart from
the unclear grounds of the court in the second Sotto-
mayor decision and the entirely discredited case of
Ogden ए. Ogden* there is no reasonable support for
such unilateral English doctrine.”

Referring to the decision, Dicey? remarks as follows:

४.१ an anomalous exception to the negative
application of the doctrine under consideration was,
as we shall see, established by the decision of Sir James.
Hannel P., on the second hearing of the case of Sotto-
mayor v. De Barrost. Although it may have been
justified by some remarks of the Court of Appeal on
the previous hearing of the case‘, the decision was
largely based on the Judgment in earlier cases which
stressed the predominance of the lex loci celebrationis
iin all matters affecting the validity of marriage. The
learned judge appears to have failed to appreciate the
significance of the first decision which differentiated
questions of capacity from those of formal validity,
and his judgment in favour of the validity of the
marriage celebrated in England between parties one
of whom was domiciled there, and the other of whom
was incapable of intermarrying with him by the law
of her domicile, gives a national bias to English Pri-
vate International Law which is logically indefensible.

Subject to the above anomalies, the rule that
capacity to marry depends upon the law of the ante-
nuptial domicile of each of the parties is borne out to-
the full by the authorities; and it is submitted that it

consistent with sound principle, because a person’s
tus is, as a general rule, determined by the law of
his domicile, questions of status cannot be affected by
fe e intention of the parties, and a person’s capacity
Oo marry is a matter of public concern to the country
f his domicile.”

Schmitthoff thinks that the decision, however, could
be sustained on other grounds than those on which it was
decided and he also points out that the decision of Willmer
J. in Chapelle v. Chapelle® indicates clearly that the alleged
exception does not exist. In that case, it may be stated,
the marriage was celebrated in England while the husband
was domiciled in Malta where the wife went after the-
marriage and where she lived with him for about ten

(1879) 5 P.D. 94.

२19०8) P. 46.

*Dicey on Private Inteznational Law, 7th ed, pp. 25०51.

41877) PLD. 2, 67.

*Clive M, Schmitéhoff, The English Conflict of Laws, 3rd ed., p. 352..
1950) P. 134.

“«



153

ears; the marriage was valid by English law but void by
the Jaw of Malta. Willmer J. disregarded the domicile

Even Graveson!, who has been relied on in support
of the approach ‘of the Bill concedes that the doctrine
laid down by the case is ‘inelegant’ though he has some.
thing to say in favour of it" by way of apology. He

2 «-.. it exists to protect domiciled English-
women on entering into marriages with

different types of generally recognised marriage cere-
monies. In short, if there is any force in Prof, Graveson’s
justification that does not hold “good in the context of our
Bill.

Tt is needless to multiply other authorities in support
of the criticisms levelled against the decision in Sotte-
mayor v. De Barros. Though text-book writers who

followed in the Proposed Bill. To follow it would be guly

to swing back the Pendulum to the situation wi

existed prior to the decision of the House of Lords in
kv. Brook?,

The foregoing survey of English Law represents the
Position as can be deduced from statutory provisions and
Judicial decisions, Jt does not take note of theories of
what individual writers Tegard as ought to be the law.
Private International Law is indeed a fertile field for the
free play of imagination and a fine arena for the display

~*Gravesoa 1 Goalie of Law GH EX) Ie पप--+ Conflict of Laws (Third Edn.) p, 136,
1861) 9 HLL, Can, 193.



154

of fanciful theories. Views of writers are not Jacking
which are far away from what can legitimately be deduc
on the basis of doctrine of precedent and the established
canons of interpretation. Judicial dicta swung out of
their context can conveniently be made to buttress these
theories. In the present context it is enough to consider
two theories. Firstly, the so called matrimonial domicile
governing capacity and essential validity—a theory pro-
pounded by Prof. Cheshire. Prof. Cheshire has found
respectable ancestry for this ‘pet child’ of his in Savigny
and has managed to get it ‘adopted’ in the Royal Commis-
sion Report, by virtue of his position as the expert mem-
ber. It is true, in recent years, a few judges have flirted
with the theory though no one has wedded it much less
wedded it to English Law! How truly it represents
English law may be judged by the learned professor's own
confession in the third edition of his book after a heroic
struggle with a crusader’s zeal to support it. After exa-
mining all the English cases excepting the second Sotto-
mayor case he observed:

“It may be objected with force that one of these
decisions is conclusive in favour of the law of matri-
monial home....Nevertheless there remains one deci-
sion which, on the facts though not on the reasoning
is a more convincing authority for the view now
being advocated. This is Sottomayor V. De Barros
(No. 2)? . ma

This is what the learned Doctor had to confess as late
as 1947.

While the importance of the theory consists in focuss-
ing aitention on the seat of the status in issue, it suffers
frona a serious drawback in that it makes everything hinge
on intention and thus introduces confounding uncertain-
ty asto the validity of the marriage. And if this defect
is sought to be remedied by presumption such as that the
matrimonial domicile will be the husband’s domicile, its
chief merit is pro tanto sacrificed.

In De Reneville v. De Reneville’ while dealing with
the question of jurisdiction in nullity suits, Lord Greene
MR., observed at p. 61 as follows:

“Tn my opinion the question whether the
matriage is void or merely voidable is for French law
to answer. My reasons are as follows: The validity
of @ marriage so far as regards the observance of
formatities is 6 matter for the lex loci celebrationis.
But this is not_a case of forms. It is a case of essen-

. tial validity. But what law is that to be decided?

1899) 5 PD. 04 हु

2Cheshire Private International Law, Third edn., 1947 (949 reprint),
P. 284,

+ (1948) + AIL ER. 56.



sd, 155

In my opinion, by the law of France either because
that is the law of the husband’s domicile on the date
of the marriage or (preferably in my view) because
at that date it was the law of the matrimonial: domi-
cile in reference to which the parties may Have been
supposed to enter into the bonds of Marriage. In
Brook v. Brook the marriage in Denmark (by the law
of which country, assuming it applied, it was valid)
of two persons domiciled in En; gland was held to be
void on the ground that, although the lex loci govern-
ed the form of marriage, its essential validity depend-
ed on the lex domicilii of the parties”.

Then the learned Lord quoted the passage from Lord
Campbell's judgment in Brook v. Brook which has already
been referred to. Let it be noted, and the relevant Pas-
sage is italicised, that this case does not support the
application of lex loci to determine essential validity: It
lends countenance to the matrimonial domicile theory.
But as Morris! has pertinently pointed out something
more tangible is necessary to hold that a case dealing
with jurisdiction has given the go by to the law obtain-
ing for nearly a century, a law stated in crystal clear
terms only seven years earlier in Re Paine’, In fact,
Re Paine was not considered in De Reneville’s case.

Assuming that the matrimonial domicile theory repre-
sents the true position in English law how does it support
the stand taken in the Bill of governing essential validity
exclusively by ier loci? How can i be assumed that
those who marry in India necessarily make India their
matrimonial home?

I now pass on to consider the second theory, the theory
of what may be termed public policy, Passages from
Dicey and Graveson have been quoted that some or all
the English requirements apply to marriages solemnised
in England. In Dicey® there is a frank confession that
there is no reported decision in support of the proposition

did not invalidate the marriage, Besides a suggestion is
made that the lex loci cetebrationis prohibitions may be
overcome and the marriage saved by applying the Renvoi
doctrine. It is clear from this that the statement is made
ina half-hearted manner. Graveson observes that the
municipal rule as to age would apply in all cases though
he cites no authority but he cautions strongly against the

‘Morris: Cases on Private International Law, Note G, 9. 774 at 9. 177.
3(7940) Ch. 46,
“Conflict of Laws (7th ed.) pp. 256-257.



156

full application of municipal law requirements. He
observes:

“The overriding effect of English law in this
respect is to maintain minimum not maximum stand-
ards of essentials of marriage, so that provided the
English standard is satisfied, reference ‘will still be
made to lex domicilii to ascertain the existence of
capacity.”

A passage from Sottomayor v. De Barros (No. 2) has
been relied on in support of the application of the lex loci,
It will indeed be edifying for the editors of Dicey and

Enough has been said to show that English law howso~
ever construed would not support the extreme approach
adopted in the Bill.

(v) Contrary to the consensus of authority as to the pro-
per principles of Private International Law applicable
to the subject:

That personal law plays a decisive part in determining
the capacity of parties to a marriage is well establishe:
in practically all the systems of Private International Law
of the world’, though there is divergence of opinion as to
the criterion of personal law. Even in the United States
of America with its emphasis on lex loci, statutory provi-
sions have been made to ensure compliance with lex
domicilii®,

In conclusion, we would like to emphasise that deviations
from generally accepted Principles of Private Interna-
tional Law in the sphere of capacity and essential validity
of marriage will only lead to the increase of the number
of limping marriages, The real solution for avoiding this
is to follow principles &enerally accepted so that the
requirements would be the same whether the marriage ig
celebrated in one country or the other and secondly to
restrict so far as may be the 4pplication of, on grounds of
public policy, local’ requirements. In a composite legal
system such as ours under which widely divergent
institutions ranging from polyandry to Polygamy coexist,
itis not justifiable to insist'on special requirements on
grounds of public policy. If for hundred years no consi-

‘ation of public policy were felt and capacity and essen-
tial validity could be exclusively left to personal laws of

‘For a survey of the various systems, see Rabel: Conflict of Laws, A
eomparative study, Vol. I, See also Wot : Private Tnternational Law
Gand ०१.), 326 au to the position jn continental Laws.

33८8 for ९६.३ Uniform Marzioge Hvasion Act of 1912, See also Restater
ments on Conflict of Lewa, 6. 140,


187

parties! what justification is there now for deviating
from that course?

The ideal solution would be to maintain the status quo
by restricting the provisions of the Bill to persons domi-
ciled in India and little consolation can be derived by
claiming that we are creating a sort of “jus gentium”
paying due regard to the requirements under different
municipal laws. If it is intended to engraft an exception
recognised in England in Sottomayor (No. 2) case, that
may also be embodied. If, on the other hand, it is intended
to adopt Cheshire’s matrimonial domicile theory, that
may be stated clearly. As pointed out there are other
types of cases, which are not covered by the principle in
Sottemayor (No. 2) case, and provision has to be made
for such cases. If on the other hand it is intended to
tighten the provisions still further and to adopt the prin-
ciple of cumulative impediments, that is, to insist that
the conditions laid down in section 4 should be satisfied in
addition to the conditions laid down by the law of domi-
cile it may be sc stated in the Bill instead of leaving it
uncertain. It is, of course, for the sovereign legislature
of India which has undoubtedly the power to enact any
law as it pleases to decide whether it should or should not
take cognizance of the well-accepted principles of private
international Jaw which in some respects have been
adopted in Indian legislation. The precedents of the Special
Marriage Act and the Hindu Marriage Act need not be
taken seriously. In the case of the former, the question
was not debated fully, possibly because of Law Minister’s
assurance on an allied subject that the question of conftict
of laws would be examined and that a suitable bill would
be introduced later. In the case of the Hindu Marriage Act
different considerations apply, In any case, two wrongs
cannot make a right!

P. SATYANARAYANA RAO,
30-5-60.

(See above discussion a¢ to ® 88 of the Indian Christian Marriage Act;
PP. 143, 144.


SUPPLEMENT TO THE MINUTE OF DISSENT

In view of the revision of the original paragraph 5 of
the report subsequent to my sending the minute of dissent
I feel it necessary ta clarify certain points,

Firstly, it is assumed that what was urged was that the
proposed legislation should be limited to marriages between
persons of Indian domicile and that a ‘vacuwm’ should be
jeft in the law as to marriages of persons not domiciled
in India. I would only emphasise that there is nothing
in my minute to justify such an assumption. The follow-
ing passage in my minute sets in clear terms the stand I
have taken:

“No one can dispute the competency of our legigla-
ture to legislate on the subject, nor is it maintained
that we should not legislate on the subject. All that
is said is that when we legislate we should take into
account the peculiar feature of such marriages, namely,
a party or parties being of foreign domicile and for-
mulate rules suited to the situation”.

It is enough to point out that this liberal plea for giving
persons domiciled abroad the elementary facility of hav-
ing the essential validity of their marriages regulated by
their personal laws cannot by any means be construed as
a plea for not legislating on the subject of marriages of
persons domiciled abroad.

Secondly it has been added that the decision in Sotto-
mayor v. De Barros (No. 2)5 “has stood’. To one fami-
lier with the methods of legislative reform in England it
will be no revelation to be told that other anomalies
“stood” or have been “standing” for long periods without
being slashed by the legislative axe. An instance in
point is the law as to the deserted wife’s right to petition
for dissolution of her marriage. This was reformed par-
tially in 1937 and almost completely in 1949. In short,
“standing” of a rule in English Iaw is not necessarily a
safe test.

In this connection reference may be made to the passage
in the Royal Commission Report on Marriage and Divorce
which has been relied upon in support of the ‘matrimonial
home’ or the 839 called ‘matrimonial domicile theory’. The
Passage reads thus:

“If the marriage is alleged to be void on a ground
other than that of lack of formalities, that issue shall

7568 opening para, entitled ‘question on domicile’ in paragraph 5 as
revised.
See concluding para. entitled ‘(f) Conclusion" in paragraph 5 as

revised.
11879 L.R. 5 9.0. 94.

158


159

be determined in accordance with the personal law
or laws of the parties at the time of the marriage (so
that the marriage shall be declared null and void if it
is invalid by the personal law of one or other mor both
of the parties); provided that a marriage which was
celebrated elsewhere than in England or Scotland
shall not be declared void if it is valid according to the
law of the country in which the parties intended at the
time of the marriage to make their matrimonial home
and such intention has in fact been carried out'.”

It is clear from the first part of this passage that the
principle of determining the validity of the marriage
aecording to the dual domicile of the parties applies to
the marriages celebrated in England. It would seem that
the rule in Settemayer (No. 2) has not found favour.

Thirdly, I shall consider the interp’ retation placed on
section 88 of the Indian Christian Marriage Act. It will
perhaps be conceded that statement of objects and rea-
sons, proceedings in the legislature in respect of even the
very Act under consideration do not constitute an aid to
construction of that Act in courts, It is no doubt true that
one_of the objects accomplished by section 88 is to save
to Roman Catholics their personal law as to capacity, If
that had been its only object it is strange that it has not
been so stated. It cannot be denied that the section would
apply to all persons marrying under the Act.

The next question is as to what is the meaning of the
expression ‘personal law’, The expression has to be cons-
trued in the light of the context in which it is used. In
the context in which it cecurs it is used to denote the law
poverning the person marrying under the Act, particu-
larly the status of the person for purpose of marriage. This
Jeads us on to the question as to what is the criterion by
which tc determine the law governing ‘personal status.
The criterion may be with reference to the concept of a
territorial system of law or to use the language of Dicey
a “Law District" or it may be with reference to member-
ship of a religious or tribal group. Where the criterion
is with reference to a territorial system of law it is either
Domicile or Nationality. Where on the other hand, it is
with reference to membership of a group it may be reli-
gion or tribe membership. In India we have side by side
the terviiorial criterion of domicile and also the criterion
of religion. The latter concept is used as regards persons
domiciled in India. The former criterion is employed as
Tegards cases involving a foreign element. Either would
Jead to the s: result in the case of persons domiciled in
India. sr example, if a Hindu and a Christian, both
domiciled in India, marry under the Christian Marriage
Act and the criterion of personal law is said to be the law
of domicile, then it will be Indian law. Now Indian law

*Report of the Royal Commission on Marriage and Divorc’, Cmd. 96 78
29 395 cited in Cheshire, Private International Law (sth edn.), p. 312.


160

will say that if the party is a Hindu, Hindu law would
apply, etc. In other words, it is an instance of the criterion
religion coming into opration through the criterion of
domicile’. It is for this reason that the expression ‘domi-
cile’ is used as synonymous with ‘personal’ law.

It has been observed that the contrast in section 88 is
between one system of personal law and another applica-
ple to Pessons having the same domicile. It is difficult
to justify this view. Firstly section 88 does not occur in
Part VI but in Part VIII of the Act. Secondly the langu-
age of the section is very wide and it clearly has in view
‘any marriage’ solemnised under the Act. It cannot be
denied that persons domiciled abroad, in the same country
or in different countries, can marry under the Act. In
such cases section 88 of the Act would come into opera-
tion to confirm the effect of the prohibitions under the
lex domicilii of the parties. An authority on the point is
the decision of Gentle J, in William Hudson v. Mr. Web-
ster*, At p. 568 the learned judge observed:

“A bigamous marriage in England is a marriage
which is not a valid marriage and section 88 of the
Christian Marriage Act clearly to my mind contem-
plates and prevents a marriage which would be invalid
in places elsewhere, including England, not becoming
a valid marriage because it is celebrated in this coun-
try”.

It has been claimed that section 88 is merely “one other
application of the doctrine that the conditions as to the
validity of a marriage prescribed lex loci celebrationis and
lex domicilit to operate both cumulatively”. This cumu-
lative operation is not in the sense that the requirements
@s to capacity and essential validity under two systems
tre to be complied with for, as conceded in the Report
the Act deals with forms only.

9. SATYANARAYANA RAO,
5-8-1960.

३ Fora proper appreciation of this paint, see the judgment of Beaumont
©. J., in Khambhatia v. Khambhatia, $9 Bom. 273 wherein he pointed out
that the lex domicilit of a Muslim domiciled in India would be Indian law
applicable to Muslims (at pp. 284-285). Delivering his judgment in the
appeal from the decision of Beaumont C. J., Broomfield J. dbverved at p. 308
thus ste. It is recognised that the law of the religion is 3 part of the law of

[A.LR. 1937 Mad. 565.


NOTE BY MEMBER SHRI SACHIN CHAUDHURI

While I generally subscribe to the views on Private
International Law as expressed by Shri Satyanara
Rao in his note, my agreement is not such as to imp el me
to dissent from the majority view.

8. CHAUDHURI,
19-8-60.

16r

GMGIPND—TSS—28r M of Law—1g-11-60—3000