LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTIETH REPORT

ON
SUGGESTING SOME AMENDMENTS TO THE

CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE
(ACT V OF 1908)

1994


K.N. SINGH CHAIRMAN
(EX-CHIEF JUSTICE OF INDIS LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI-110001
Tel. Off. 38 44 75
Res. 3019465

D.O. No. 6(3)/(27)/94-LC(LS) May, 9, 1994

Dear Prime Minister,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the 150th Report of the Law Commission of India
on the subject “Suggesting some Amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure (Act No.V of 1908)”.
This is the 7th Report after the constitution of the 13th Law Commission.

2. The subject was taken up by the Law Commission sua motu with a view to remove ano nalies
in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 1115 pertiaent to state that the provision in Order I Rule 10(5)
C.P.C. are inequitable and liable to be misused to delay the proceedings because it enables recalcitrant
third parties to resort to all kinds of devices to avoid service of summons on them till the period of
limitation expires. The Commission is of the opinion that the anomalies observed in this report
should not be allowed to continue.

3. The Commission trusts that the recommendations will go a long way to subserve the
interests of speedy and effective administration of justice.

With warm regards,

Yours Sincerely,

(6, N. SINGH)

Hon’ble Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao,
Prime Minister and Minister for
Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
New Delhi.

Encl : As above.

(i)
957 LI&CA/9S—1


CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 2
CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4
CHAPTER 5

CONTENTS

GENERAL INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND OF THIS REPORT
ORDER I, RULE 10(5)

ORDER XXH, RULE (3)
RECOMMENDATIONS

FOOT NOTES

Gi)

PAGg

1-2

4-6
1-8

10


CHAPTER |
GENERAL INTRODUCTION

1.1 The 1908 Code--The law relating to the procedure to be followed in suits and other
Procecdings in civil courts was codified in the early years of this century by the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure(Act Vof 1908). Theadequacy ofthese rules of procedure, their compatibility with the new
oréer of thirgs ushercdin asaresult of theindependence of thecountry and the promulgation of the
Constitution of India in 1950, and the important question as to how far the Code had been able to
stand the test of time and the strain of li-igation explosion consequent on the changes in the social,
political and Iegal atmosphere in the country have been considered in detail by the Law Commission
r several reports.

1.2 The 14th Report—The First Law Commission (1955—1958) appointed after the coming
into force of the Constitution devoted its attention to certain major enactments and important
legal top h cricd fer reform. In its [4th Report, presented on 16-9-58, the Commission
addressed itself to the major problems facing judicial administration in India and made important
recommendations for its reforms. Various aspects and intricacies of reform in the procedure in
ccurts, including civil courts, were discussed in this report.

1.3 The 27th Report—The 27th Report of the Commission made in December,. 1964
examired at length the historical background as well as the scheme of the 1908 Code. While
broadly of the view that the code -had been well-thought out and formulated, it -found,
after reviewing the mass of case law that had accumulated during the half cents ‘y of its
life as weil as the reforms made-in dther counties (particularly in England in 1962), that
certain changes were required in some of theprovisions of the Code and recommendations for
amendment were accordingly made. A Bill to implement the reports of the Law Commission
was duly introduced-in Parliament but the. Bill lapsed.

1.4 The 54th-Report--When the question of reintroduction of the Bill arose, the Government
of-India considered it proper to request the Law Commission to examine the Code afresh. This
was in 1972, it was thus the 54th Report of the Commission made in February, 1973 that exa-
mined the issues in all their perspectives and ramifications and suggested a comprehensive
re-codification of the procedural law to better subserve the interests of speedy and effective
administration of justice. It examined the Code from the angle of —

(a) minimising costs;
(b) avoiding delays in litigation; and

(c) the revised terms of reference of the Commission, the most important of such terms being
the implementation of the directive principles in the Constitution.

The Commission, however, did not consider it necessary to deal again with the matters dealt with
inthe earlier report except where they disagreed with its recommendations or considered it necessary
to reiterate and emphasise particular recommendations therein. Each and every provision of the
Code and each and every general aspect that needed consideration was meticulously considered
and a substantial report running to 347 printed pages was presented to Government in February,
1973,


4

oris—The 541 Report was supplemented shortly thereafter by the next
two reports of the Commission on certain isolated issues. The 54th Report (4-5-73) dealt with the
question of the 152 cf interest on decrees and on costs under Ss. 34 and 35 of the 1908 Code.
The 55th Reprot (also prescited on 4-5-73) deal: with the issue of notice of suit mandatorily required
under certain statutory provisions.

1.5 The 55th & 560 Re;

1.6 The C.P.C. Amendment Act, 1976—It is a matter of great satisfaction that the recommen-
dations made bythe Law Commission on the Code of Civil Procedure were substantially
accepted and implemented by the 1976 Amendment of the Code.

1.7. Subsequent Developments—Aboute twenty years have passed by since the large scale amend-
ment ofthe Codein 1976. The quantum of the litigation in the Civil Courts, the incidence of
delay and costs and cther diffictlties incidental to litigation have Increased enormously during
this period. An extreme viewhas been sometimes ventilated ‘hat the currently existing Anglo
Saxon paticrn of the Code embodying the adversary system of procedure cannot survive these on-
slaughts, and is soon bound to colianse. It is, however, generally felt that even if the present system °
is to continue, some radical reforms are needed in the procedural Code if it is to satisfactorily meet
the requirements of litizants and provide an efficient and speedy system of justice. The task of
suggesting the necessary reforms for this purpose, however, is an enormous one. It will need, as
the recommendations in the 54th Report-did, to be preceded by the elicitation of public and expert
opinion on the various steps needed to_ usher in substaatial changesinthis sphere. That, no doubt
is a task to which the Law Commission will have to address its2If soon, That exercise may be
taken up.by the Commission at some later stage, but meanwhile tais. short report is submitted to
meet an Urgent need for amendment of Order.1 Rule 10 and Order XXII Rule (3) of the CPC.

1.8 Need for interim amendments—The possibility of an elabotate examination - for the over-
hading of the Code altogether shoul not, be feel halt the process of effzcting therein glaring changes
foiind (0 be necessary in the existing framework. A consolidated codification cannot in the nature
of things, be the only cure to all defects found in enactmen‘. It is inevitable that, side by side with
the process of considering periodical wholesale changes in any existing statu’e, one has also to
consider setting right anomalies and drafting defects that come to light from time to time. Thus,
soon after presenting its 54th Report of the Code asa whole, the Commission found it necessary to
submit short reports (55th & 56th ) on two minor but allied topics to suggest certain changes. Again
quite recently, in 1991, the Commission found it necessary to recommend amendments in Order Vv
Rule 19A and Order XXI, Rule 970) of the CPC, «ide its (139th and 140th Report) suggesting
such amendments. Again, in 1992, the 144th Repoct of the Commission has suggested amendments
to a number of provisions in the Code with a view to settling conflicts of judicial opinion that had
arisen in regard to these provisions. Reports of the Law Commission have also been presented
outlining the need to carry out certain amendments to isolated provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure®. This process of suggesting necessary amendments to a Statute is a continuous and
inevitable one. It has recently come to the notice of the Commission that there are certain other
provisions of the Code of the Civil Procedure which also require amendments in the light of the sub-
sequent amendments ia connected statutes. There is no point in deferring consideraiion of such
amendments untill there are a good number of them or until a comprehensive amendment of
the stature in question is taken up. It is for this reason that the Commission has considered it
necessary to present this report suo motu though it is confined only to two provisions in the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908.


CHAPTER 2
BACKGROUND OF THIS REPORT

2.1 The Code of Civil Procedure (Act V of 1908) (hereinafter referred to as “the Code”) was en
acted in 1908. Consequently, where its provisions dealt with certain points of limitation, they refer
red to the relevant provisions of the Indian Limitation Act, XV of 1877 (hereinfter referred to as
‘the 1877 Act’). However, though the 1877 Act was replaced by the Indian Limitation Act, Act IX
of 1908 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the 1908 Act’) and then by the Limitation Act, 36 of 1963 (here-
inafter referred to as ‘the 1963 Act’) and the Code was also extensively amended by Act 104 of
1976, references to the Indian Limitation Act, 1877 in the Code have been left untouched. This
per se is not of much consequence-except that the references to a statute long since repealed should
have been rectified at least at the time when a spate of amendments to the Code were carried out
in 1976—as S.8 of the General Clauses Act provides for suh a situation. However, the references to
the Indian Limitation Act, 1877 appear only at two places in the Code. It now transpires that these
provisions require amendment in the light of later legislation as explained below.

2.2 In another provision in the Code (Order XXI, rule 92(2)] a time limit was prescribed on the
basis of a period of limitation prescribed in the1877 Act. The Limitation Act, 1963 had amended the
latter, but this was not taken note of to make a consequential amendment in the period prescribed
in the Code, This created an anomaly and gave a rise to a need for an amendment to rule 92(2) of
Order XXI of the Code in the light of a later amendment to the 1963 Act. This was the subject
matter of the 140th Report of the Commission.

2.3 The other two anomalies mentioned in para 2.1 earlier, however, survive. The Commission is ~
of opinion that these anomalies should not be allowed to continue and that simultancoulsy with any.
action that may be taken with reference to the 139th, 140th and 141 5६ Reports of the Commission,
action should be taken to amend these provisions as well. Hence this report.


CHAPTER 3 है
ORDER I, RULE 10(5)

4.1 The first reference to the 1877 Act occurs in Order I, Rule 10 ofthe Code. Order! of the
Code deals with “Parties to Suits” and rule 10 thereof deals with certain situations in which
necessity to add or substitute fresh parties in a suit already filed arises. The rule reads thus:

“10(1) Where a suit has been instituted in the name of the wrong person as plaintiff or where it
is doubtful whether it has been instituted inthe nameof the right plaintiff, the Court may.
at any stage of the suit, if satisfied that the suit has been instituted through a boa fide mistake,
and that it is necessary for the determination of the real matter in dispute so to do, order any
other person to be substituted or added as plaintiff upon such terms as the Court thinks fit.

(2) The Court may, at any stage of the proceedings, either upon or without the application
of either party, and on such terms as may appear to the court to be just, order thatthe name of
any party improperly joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, be struck out, and that the name
of any person who ought to have been joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, or whose
presence before the Court may be necessary in order to enable the Court effectively and
completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved in the suit, bz added.

(3) No person shail be added as a plaintiff suing without a next friend or as the next friend
ofa plaintiff under any disability without his consent.

(4) Where a defendant is added, the plaint shall, unless the Court otherwise directs, be amend-
ed in such manner as may be necessary and amended copies of the summons, and of the
plaint shall be served on the new defendant and if the court thinks fit, on the original defendant.

(5) Subject to the provisilons of the Indian Limitation Act, 1877 Section 22, the proceedings as
against any person added as defendant shall be deemed to have begun only on the service of
the summons.”

(emphasis supplied)

3.2 The intention of sub-rule (5) above apparently is that where a fresh party is ordered to be
added as defendant in a suit, such party should be treated as having become a party only on the
date he is served with summons in the suit, This deeming fiction is created primarily, if not solely,
to preserve the plea of limitation that could be raised by such party and to enable the third party to
raise the plea on the footing that the suit, so far ashe is concerned, should be deemed to have
been instituted only on the date on which he has been served with summons in the suit,

3.3 The language used in the sub-rule, however, suffers from two infirmities. In the first place, it
says that “the proceedings” as against such party “shall be deemed to have begun only on the service
of summons” instead of using words “the suit shall be deemed to have been instituted” only on such
service. These words do not offer adequate protection to the third party in regard to its plea of
limitation which has to be based on the “‘date of institution” of the plaint and not on when “the pro-
ceedings are deemed to have begun’? against a defendant. They are not effective enough to change
the date of institution of the suit so far as the freshly added defendant is concerned,

3.4 Secondly, the language appears to be some what repugnant to the relevent provisions of the
Limitation Act, Viz., Section 22 of the 1877 Act, which was in operation when the code was enacted
and of the 1908 Act which replaced it. The provisions were materially the same and read thus :

4

wo


5

“g, 22(1) Where, after the institution of a suit, a new plaintiff or defendant is substituted
or added, the suit shall, as regards him be deemed to have been instittuted when he,was

go made a party”.

The effect of this provision was to postPone the date of institution of a suit, qua a newly added
defendant, to the date on which he is made party, thus protecting his right to raise appropriate
pleas of limitaticn. Sub-rule (5) of rule10 clearyl, intended to postpone this date still fwither
andthus alter the impact of §.22 in such cases and to provide in effect, that the suit
as against such party, be deemed to have been instituted cn the date of service of the
summons cn him and that the provisions of Limitation Act weteto apply asso mcdified

3.5 On the language of sub-rule (2) of rule 10. the person added as a defendant under that sub-
tule is cither one who ought to have been added as a defendant even initislly cr cne wkcse presence
before the Court is found necessary for a complete and effective adjudication cf all the ques icns
involved in the suit, Whether the emission to jcin him as defendant in the suit originally was due
to a fault on the part of the plaintiff which is souhgt to be cured on his application or bythe Court
suo motu cr whether the necessity 10 add him is felt by the plaintiff or the Ccwt which picceeds
to do so, the newly added defendant may not have been responsible for the delay in the initiation
of the suit (or prcccedings) against him and should not therefore, be deprived of any plea of limita
tion that may be available to him consequent on the delay between the original date of institu-
tion of the suit and the date on which he is added asa patty. This was the object cf S, 22 (1) of
the 1877 and 1908 Acts and rule 10 (5) of Order I of the Code Intended that this tenefit should
be further liberalised and made available till the date on which the newly added defendant receives
the summons in the suiit, after he is added as a party defendant. Butthen the sub-rule should
have read:

Notwithstanding any provision contained in the Indian Limitation Act, 1877, the suit sbell,

as regards any person added as defendant under sub-rule (2).shall be deemed to have been

Instituted only cn the date on which he is served with summons in the suit”.

The words “subject to the provisicns cf the Indian Limitation Act, 1877” are totally inapposite
tothe context, Those words only bring in the 1877 Act and since that Act had already provided
for deeming the suit to have been initiated onthe date when the new defendant is added, the words
of rule 10(5) added nothing to the contents thereof by making the rule subject to Section 22.

3.6 The purpose of rule 10(5) has, further, become more pointless after the enactment cf the
Limitation Act, 1963. S, 21 of the 1963 Act corresponds to S, 22 of the 1877 and 1908 Act but
its whole effect is Changed by the insertion of a proviso. S, 21 reads:

21. Effect of substituting or adding new plaintiff or defendant: (1) Where after the ins-
titution of a suit, a new plaintiff or defendant is substituted cr added the cuit shall, as
regards him, he deemed to have been instituted when he was १0 made a faity

Provided that where the Ccurt is satisfied thatthe omissicn to include a new plaintiff ot
defendant was due to a mistake made in good faith,. it may direct: that the suit Shall te
deemed to have been instituted on any earlier date”.

3.7 The effect of S.8 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 isto compel one to read the reference to
$.22 ofthe 1877 Act inrule 10(5) 88 reference tc its successor provisicn viz. $.21 ofthe 1963 Act.
Reading S. 21 of the 1963 Act and rule 10 (5) of Order 1 01६16 Ccdetogether it willbe seen that
they are pulling in opposite directions althought rule 10(5)is expressed to be subjectto S21, The
object of S. 21 isto treat the suilts against a new defendant as having been filed onthe dateon which
he is made a party (with a disetion tothe Court totreat it as having been filed even earlier) On
the other hand, the purpose cf rule 10(5) is to treat the auit as having been filed cnly on the date
957 LI&CAI9S—2 a


6

on which the newdefendant is served with summons. In this context there is no sense in making
rule 10 (5) subject to $ 21; its previsicn should, if at all, be operative not withstanding cf any-
hing contained in the Limitation Act, as already pointed out.

& The real question that arises, therefore, is whether the refinement attempted in rule 10 (5)
of treating the date of service cf summons as the date when “the picceedings are deemed to, have
begun” against the new defendant is at all woithwhile and whether it wil] not te much simpler and
more equitable to omit rule 10(5) alicgether and allcwtle picvisicrs cf S, 21 of the 1963 Act, which
are intended to cover precisely the vety situaticn prcvided fcr in crder 1106 10 to cperate directly
without any change. The answer tc this question, we think has to be in the affiimative. Interests
of justice and equity nc deult require tbat 8 third peity stculd net be prejudiced in putting tor ward
the pleas of limitation available 10 it as a consequence cf the failure. omission or neglect te implead
it earlier in the suit, It is quitejust to provide, ag S.21 of the 1963 Act dees, that. in such cases
asregards the newly added defendant, the date or instituion cf the suit shell be the date on which it
1s added asa party. The proviso empowering the Court to relax this rule is also necessary safe-
guard to protect a bona fide plaintifi. On the other hand, the ptovisicn in rule 10 (5)
postpones the date of institution to the date of service summons on the newly added
party. There is thus anomaly in the two provisions as, while under Sec. 21 of 1963 Act suit
shall be deemed to be instituted against the newly added defendant on the date he is ad ed asa
party, under Rule 10 (5), the suit shall be deemed to be instituted against such party not on the date
he is added as party but ona later date, viz.the date on summons are served on him. This is illogical
because in principle limitation should be computed with reference to the point of time when the
plantiff has taken steps for initiating legal proceeding against the defendant in question and should
not be made dependant ona later event. There is no need to postpone the institution of the suit beyond
the date provided in S. 21 of the 1963 Act. The provision in rule 10 (5) is also inequitable, and
liable to be misused to delay the proceedings because it will enable recalcitrant third parties to
resort to all kinds of devices to avoid service of summons on them till the period of limitation ex-

pires.

3.9 For the above reasons, it is clear that the necessity for rule 10 (5) does not survive. It is
therefore, recommended that sub-rule (5) °frule 10 of Order I of the Code of Civil Procedure, 198


CHAPTER 4
ORDER XXII. RULE 9 (5)

4.1 Order XXII deals with the steps to be taken in a suit when death, marriage and ‘insolvency
of parites supervere after « suit is instituted. We are concerned here only with a case of death
of the plaintiff in ati action. Rules | to 6 provide that the death of a party shall not cause a suit to
abate if the right to sue survives and that the suit may be allowed to be continued by the legal re-
presentatives of the deceased party on an application being made by them for being substituted in
the suit in the place of the deceased party. Rule 3 (2) prov'des. however, that the suit shall abzte
if legal representatives of a deceasco plaintiff fail to make such an application to be brought on
record within the period specified therefor—which is 90 days from the date of death*.

4.2 Rule 9 provides an escape hatch from this situation. It reads (in so far as is relevent for
our present purpose):
“9 (1), Where 4 suit abates or is dismissed under tnis Order. no fresh suit shall be bicught
on the same cause of actiois.
(2) The plaintiff or the person claiming to be the legal representative ofa ceceased plant fi
or the assignee or the receiver in the case of an insolvent plaintiff! may apply for an order
to set aside the abatement or dismissal; and if it is proved that he was prevented by any
sufficient cause from continuing the suit, the Court shall set as‘de the abatement or ai: n :
sal upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit.

(3) The provisions of S. 5 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1877, shall apply to appl'caticns
under sub-rule (2).”

4.3. The rule is clear and unambiguous. An application to set aside the abatement had to be

filed within a period of 60 days from the date of the abatement (Art. 171 of the Schedule to the
1877 and 1908 Acts; Art. 121 of the Schedale to the 1963 .Act). A relaxation of this rigid rule
was, however, necessary since there could be circumstances wh'ch prevented such an appl'caticn
being filed in time. §. 5 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1877 empowered the Court, on sufficient

cause being shown, to condone the delay in filing of “any appeal or application for review of
judgment or any application to which this section is made applicable for the time being in force”
‘and admit the same alter the prescribed period. In view of the underlined words, it ‘became ne-
cessary to add sub-rule (3) specifically making the provisions of S. 5 of the 1877 Act epplice ble to
applications made under Order XXII Rule 93(2) of the Code.

4.4 As mentioned carlier, the 1877 Act was replaced by the 1908 Act which in turn was replaced
by the 1963 Act. While S, 5 of the 1908 Act substantially ,repected the language of S. Sof the 1877
Act, the corresponding section 5 of the 1963 Act which has to be read in to Order XXII rule 9 (3) of
the Code by virtue of S. 8 of the General Clauses Act has been worded differently. It reads (in so
far as it is relevant here):

“5, Extension of prescribed period in certain cases: Any appeal or any application other

than an application under any provisions of Order XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 may be admitted after the presctibed period. if the appellant or the applicant satisfie
the Court that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal or making the
application within such period.”

957 LI&CA/9S -3


3

The change in language iy significant. The power of condonaticn of delay available under S. 5 of
the 1963 Act has become available automatically in respect of all applications made to a Court
under the Code (with the cne exception mentioned therein) and it is no longer necessary, for such
power to be exercised, that the provis ons of S. 5 should find an ex; licit reference in the relevant

statute.

4.5. The need for subrule (3) of Order XXII, rule 9 therefore, no longer survives. It is true that
its presence is only superfluous. However, in order that such a specific provision in respect of only
one of the innumerable categories of applications that can be made under the Code and its obsolete
reference to the 1877 Act may not create anomalies or apprehensions, and in view of its patent
superfluity, it is advisable that sub-rule (3) of rule 9 of Order XXII of the Code be omitted. We,

therefore, recommend accordingly.


CHAPTER 5
RECOMMENDATIONS

5.1 For the reasons discussed above, we recommend the following amendments in the Code of
Givil Procedure (Act V of 1908) :--

(a) Sub-rule (5) of rule 10 of Order Tof the Code be omitted ;

(b) Sub-rule (3) of rule 9 of Order XXII of the Code be omitted.

5.2 We also reiterate the recommendations contained in our 139th and 140th Reports suggesting
amendments to Order V, Rule 19A and Order XXI Rule 92 (2) of the Code.

(K. N. SINGH)

CHAIRMAN
(S. RANGANATHAN) (D. N. SANDANSHIV)
MEMBER MEMBER
(P. M. BAKSHI) (M. MARCUS)
MEMBER (PART TIME) MEMBER (PART TIME)

(CH, PRABHAKARA RAO)
MEMBER SECRETARY



FOOT NOTES
1, And also on the Code of Criminal Procedure.

2. The 48th, 102nd, 113th, 132nd, 135th, 1415 and 142nd reports of the Commission, likewise,
Saggested isolated amendments to supplement the recommendations for a major overhauling
of the Code of Criminal Procedure on the basis of which the law of Criminal Procedure

had been recodified in 1973.

3. Vide: Article 175A of the Schedule to the 1877 Act, Art. 176 of the Schedule to the 1908
Act and Art. 120 of the Schedule to the 1963 Act.

10

MGIPRRND -957 LI&CA /95 —Sec.-Ist-D—5-9-97—300 copies

[ee