LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED AND
FIFTY FIRST REPORT

ON

ADMIRALTY JURISDICTION

1994


K. N, SINGH CHAIRMAN
(EX-CHIEF JUSTICE OF INDIA) LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

Shastri Bhawan

NEW DELHI-110001

Te. Of. . 384475

Res. : 3019465

August 17, 1994

D.O. No. 6(3)(16)/92-LC(LS)

Dear Prime Minister,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the 151st Re-
port of the Law Commission of India on the subject of “Admiralty
Jurisdiction”. This is the 8th Report after the constitution of the
13th Law Commission.

2. The subject of “Admiralty Jurisdiction” was taken up
for an indepth study by the Law Commission suo motu in view
of the observations of the Supreme Court in M.V. Elizabeth and
Others ९. Harwan Investment and Trading Private Limited (JT
1992 (2) SC 165) relating to the jurisdiction of the Andhra Pradesh
High Court in Admiralty matters. India does not have “Admiralty
Law” of its own, instead our courts continue to administer the
admiralty jurisdiction in accordance with the statutes enacted by
the British Parliament and extended to the then colonial India. The
British Admiralty Law has undergone, several radical changes but
in India there has been no legislative exercise to enact or amend
the law of admiralty. The Commission has in this report consi-
dered the matter in detail and it has recommended enactment of
law. For purpose of convenience. a draft of the proposed legisla-
tion is annexed to this Report.

3. The Commission trusts that its recommendations con-
tained in this report will be accepted and acted upon which will
meet a long standing need of Shipping and Maritime trade and
business and it will further remove the uncertainty of law relating
to courts’ jurisdiction in Admiralty matters.

With warm regards.

Yours sincerely,

(Sd.)
(K. N. SINGH)
HON’BLE SHRI P. V. NARASIMHA RAO,
Prime Minister &

Minister for Law. Justice and Company Affairs
New DELHI.

Encl: As above.

1-4 M of L&J/ND/95 (0)


CHaerer 1

CHAPTER 2

Cuaprer 3

CuapTer +

CwapTER 5

CHAPTER 6

ANNEXURES

CONTENTS

SECTION I

Introduction =. - . पु soe . .
General Background

SECTION If
Historical Development of Admiralty Jurisdiction in England

Development of the Admiralty Jurisdiction in India .

SECTION Il
International Conventions. पु : so foe

International Conventions and India’s Status . . पु पु

SECTION IV
‘Steps for Updating the Law . . पु . .
Nature and Scope of Admiralty Jurisdiction .
Admiralty Courts
Conclusions and Recommendations = - . . . .

I to VIII

ii)

PAGE

35

43
St

55


SECTION I
INTRODUCTORY



CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

_ 1.1. Even after forty four years of the promulgation of the Constitution of
India, there are areas of jurisprudence in which issues regarding the jurisdiction
of courts as well as issues regarding the law applicable thereto remain unclear,
incomplete and unsatisfactory. One such area is the law pertaining to admiralty,
shipping, carriage by sea and maritime matters. While there are statutes relating
to some aspects of this field of jurisprudence, there is a vast grey area which calls
for legislative action. However, the prevalence of absolute chaos has been avert-
ed and a modicum of order has been preserved as a result of the transitional
provisions of the Constitution enabling the continuance of the status quo ante
in all matters until specific legislation is introduced.

1.2. Article 372 of the Constitution has enacted a general saving provision
that, subject to the provisions of the Constitution, “‘all laws in force in the terri-
tory of India immediately before the commencement of the Constitution shall
continue in force therein until altered or repealed or amended by a competent
legislation or competent authority.” Explanation I to the Article defines a “Law
in force” as including “a law passed or made by a Legislature or other competent
authority in the territory of India before the commencement of this Constitution
and not previously repealed. notwithstanding that it or parts of it may not be then in
operation either, at all or in particular areas”; and Explanation II clarifies that “any
law passed or made by a Legislature or other competent authority in the territory of
India which, immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, shall sub-
ject to any such adaptations and modifications as aforesaid. continue to have such
extra-territorial effect.” These provisions preserved the continuance in force of
the English Common Law as well as the substantive laws earlier applicable to
India in pre-independence period even after India became a Republic.

1.3, In regard to the jurisdiction of courts, Article 225 of the Constitution
provides specifically that all jurisdiction of existing High Courts as on the date
of commencement of the Constitution would continue subject to the provisions
of any Jaw of the appropriate Legislature made by virtue of the powers conferred
thereon by the Constitution. In other words, the jurisdiction of, and the law
administered by, any existing High Court and the respective powers of the judges
thereof in relation to the administration of justice in the Court, including any
power to make rules of the Court and the members thereof sitting alone or in
Division Courts, continue to be the same as immediately before the commencement
of the Constitution. The proviso to Article 225, and Articles 226 and 227 en-
large the powers of the High Courts in certain respects which they did not have
prior to the Constitution have direct impact in the areas of jurisprudence with
which we are concerned here. Likewise, Articles 32 and 136 also vest powers
in the Supreme Court which would enable the Supreme Court to examine and
pronounce opinions as effective and conclusive on matters which pertain to these
branches of jurisprudence as on matters pertaining to any other branch of the law.

1.4. Under the Indian Independence Act, 1947, India became a dominion
with sovereign legislative power to amend or repeal the existing laws including the
Government of India Act, 1935 and the British statutes which were thought to
have been extended to India. Section 6 of the Independence Act conferred
this power on the legislature of the newly created Dominion of India. Under
this Act, no British statute passed on or after 15th August, 1947 was to extend
to India of its own force and the legislature of India was empowered to repeal or
amend the Acts of the British Parliament in their applications to India. Since a
number of statutes made by the British Parliament were applicable to India.
Article 372 of the Constitution took care to provide for the continuance of the
existing law until they were altered. repealed or amended by a competent legis-
fature. After the promulgation of the Constitution, the Parliament had power
to replace the British statutes by enacting laws of its own, although the Parlia-
ment did not do so till 1957. Asa result, the British statutes which were expressly

1


2

applicable to India on account of India being a ‘British Possession’ con-
tinued to apply in India without any change in the text. Since India had acquir-
ed the status of sovereign Republic, the continuation of British statutes were
bound to give rise to anomalies as was noticed by the Supreme Court in the case
of State of Madras V. C.G, Menon.’ The Supreme Court, while considering the
provisions of the Fugitive Offenders Act. 1881, an Act of the British Parliament,
observed that it was not possible to work out the Act and apply the same to the
changed situation that had arisen after the coming into force of the Constitution
of ‘India. The Supreme Court emphasised the urgent need for examination of the
British statutes in force in India with a view to their repeal or amendment.

1.5. Thereafter, the First Law Commission of India examined the British
statutes applicable or of possible application to India and forwarded a detailed
report (Sth Report) to the Government in May, 1957. The Law Commission,
while dealing with the British Statutes relating to subjects like Merchant Shipping,
Extradition and Admiralty Jurisdiction with respect to which Indian enactments
did not cover the whole field, observed that it was necessary for the Parliament
to replace the British statutes by enacting laws of its own. Appendix III to the
Law Commission’s Report recommended that ‘the British statutes, ic. Admiralty
Jurisdiction (India) Act. 1860 and the Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890
should be repealed by Indian law. The Commission further recommended that
the necessary substantive provisions of the Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act,
1890 may be incorporated into the Colonial Courts of Admiralty (India) Act,
enacted by the Indian legislature so as to make the Indian law comprehensive.
Pursuant to the recommendations of the Law Commission, the British Statutes
(Applicable to India) Repeal Act, 1960 was enacted by the Parliament repeal-
ing 259 statutes but the admiralty jurisdiction remained untouched, as a result
of which various provisions as contained in the British Statutes have continued
to apply to India.

1.6. The unsatisfactory state of law in admiralty jurisdiction came to the
notice of the Supreme Court in M.V. Elizabeth & Others. V. Harwan Investment
and Trading Pvt. Lid’ The Supreme Court was surprised and shocked at
the absence of legislative exercise in the sphere of admiralty jurisdiction. Sahai
J. felt strongly and expressed his shock and surprise in the following words:

“But what was surprising to hear, even in 1991, was that the admiralty
jurisdiction exercised by the High Courts in Indian Republic is still govern-
ed by the obsolete English Admiralty Courts Act, 1861 (referred hereinafter
as ‘the Act’) applied by (English) Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890
Gn brief ‘the 1890 Act’) and adopted by Colonial Courts of Admiralty
(India) Act, 1891 (Act XVI of 1891). Yet there appeared no escaj pe from
it notwithstanding its unpleasant echo in ears. The shock was still greater
when it transpired that this state of affairs is due to lack of Jegislative
exercise, even when in wake of decision of this Court in State of Madras V.
€. 6. Menon & Others that Article 372 of the Constitution cannot save
this law because the grouping is repugnant to the concept of a ‘sovereign
democratic Republic.’ The Law Commission in its Fifth Report on British
Statutes applicable to India went into detail on scope of Article 372 of
the Constitution and observed that the British Statutes which were expressly
applicable to India because India was a ‘British possession’ are still sup-
posed to be applicable to India without any change in the context, there-
fore, it impressed upon thé urgency as far as back as 1957 to enactment,
own laws on the subject matter of those statutes where it is necessary to do
so and take legislative action making it clear that these statutes are no
longer applicable to India.”

Thommen J. also emphasised‘ the need for the codification of the law relating
to admiralty jurisdiction, keeping in mind the International Conventions and
Declarations. The learned Judge observed that the Law Commission of India
should take up this matter.

1.7. The broad effect of these developments is that in spite of India being a
Republic under its own Constitution, the Indian courts continue to administer
admiralty, shipping and maritime law in accordance with the English Common
Law and the statute law enacted by the British Parliament and extended to the


3

colonial India. Even though British Admiralty Law has undergone several radi-
cal changes, in India thcre has been no legislation to cover the entire field of admi-
ralty, shipping and maritime law and the courts in India having admi-
ralty jurisdiction axe still following the English judicial precedents. During the
British Raj in India, three High Courts, Bombay, Caicutta and Madras exercised
admiralty jurisdiction but after the promulgation of the Constitution, more High

have been established by the Constitution, the law with regard to their
jurisdiction in admiralty matters is not clear. There is chaos and confusion
regarding courts’ jurisdiction. India has a sea coast of the length of approxi-
mately 5700 Kms. and the sub-continent is abutted in three directions by the sea.
It has 11 major ports and 163 minor ports and the shipping industry is carrying
on maritime trade ard business. to the extent of more than 40 million tonnes.
India has liberalised its economy and it is entering the global economy, as a
result, there would be spurt in international shipping and maritime business. The
absence of maritime admiralty laws dealing with Courts jurisdiction is bound to
hamper the shipping and maritime trade. Thore is, therefore, a pressing need
to codify law with respect to maritime shipping and navigation, in accordance
with the domestic need having regard to the relevant international conventions
and treaties pertaining to laws of sea.

1.8. In view of the aforesaid developments, the Commission was of the
opinion that even though the relevant administrative department has not consi-
dered it necessary to make any reference to it, there was an urgent need to consi-
der the various aspects of Admiralty Jurisdiction. The Commission has. there-
fore, taken up, the subject suo motu to submit its report and recommendation to
the Government for initiating legislative exercise to have Indian law relating to
Admiralty Jurisdiction codified to cater to the expanding need of the maritime
trade and shipping.

1.9. The Report is divided in four sections. Section I is introductory in
nature which considers the historical devclopment of admiralty iurisdiction in
England and. fndia. In Section 1. the Commission has considered the substantive
aspects of admiralty jurisdiction with reference to international covenants. Section
वा discusses the issves with regard to the nature and scope of admiralty jurisdic-
tion and establishment of admiralty courts; it also considers the steps which are
to be taken for updating the law. Section IV contains the Law Commission's
conclusions and recommendations. Annexure VIIT to the Report contains a
draft of the proposed Admiralty Act.

FOOT NOTES- CHAPTER 1
1. AIR 1954 SC 517.
2. JT 1992 (2) SC 65.
3. AIR 1954 SC 517.
4. YT 1992 (2) SC 65.

2—4 M of L&JIND/95


CHAPTER 2
GENERAL BACKGROUND

2.1, The term ‘admiralty and ‘maiitimce’ law have been regarded as
almost synonymous in the English speaking world of merchant shipping, parti-
cularly, in the context of what prevails in the United Kingdom and the United
States. However, maritime 8७ siands for wider and mere descriptive reference
whereas “admiralty” refers to the law adminisiered” in Courts. In its origin,
maritime law developed out of ihe conduct of sea Wansport which is as old
as human civilization itself. ihe ship has been. described as the last relic of
barbarism and the first relic of civilization. Long distazce transport and com-
merce in general have come a long way from the earliest times till today, and
admiralty jurisdiction depends for its existence ether or not the cause
involved is an admiralty or maritime maticr. Ba: | special jurisdiction
has a maritime purpose and is different from the common it has a strong
internal aspect, but it may undergo independent changes in several countries.
Certain features exist in all countries that have admiralty law, and such inter-
national features are given sericus consideration by ordinary courts.

2.2. Throughout the world, the ‘admiralty jurisprudence’ system was
brought by British settlers along with common law and squity, and courts for the
administration of the maritime law were commissioned in almost all the colo-
nies. These admiralty courts continued io exercise the power conferred on
them until replaced by the suitable legislation of the country concerned, There
is, however, no statutory definition of admiralty jurisdiction, and difficulties arise,
if any attempt is made to define its exact limits. The scope of admiralty
jurisdiction is limited under ciassical English Law.

2.3. In India, Admiralty Jurisdiction is an uniamiliar branch of juris-
prudence. Even lawyers aud judges aze not familiar with the technicalities of
this branch of law. Though India has been carrying on maritime trade since
long, but unfortunately law relating to admiralty jurisdiction has not developed.
As already stated, India has been tollowing the British Admiralty Laws and the
Indian Courts’ jurisdiction was also regulated by the laws made by the British
Parliament, Since the Admiraly Jurisdiction is founded on the — British
Admiralty laws, it would be necessary and proper to have a resume of the origin
and history of Admiraliy Jurisdiction in England.

2.4. The origin of the Admiralty Jurisdiction is traced succinctly in Hals-
bury’s Law of English’, According to which, Admiralty jurisprudence, even in
England, is as unfamiliar branch of jurisprudence alihough jurisdiction of the
Admiralty there is of ancient origin. As 8 resuit of possessing criminal jurisdic-
tion, the Court of the Lord High Admiral began to hear all disputes in civil
as well as criminal matters connected with the sea aad giadually began to en-
croach upon the jurisdiction of the common law courts in matters arising in
inland tidal waters, in consequence of which two statutes were passed in the
reign of Richard II confining the jurisdiction of the admirals and their deputies
to things done upon the sea and in the mainstream of great rivers. The Criminal
jurisdiction of the Admiralty, as adjusted by these statutes continued until 1537,
when it was, to a great extent, transferred to the Commissioners of oyer and
terminer under the t Seal. of whom one was the judge of the Admiralty
Court. The Civil jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court continued within the
limits Jaid down by the statutes of Richard H but its e

o

rcise involved — the
Admiralty Court in a jong struggle with the superior couris of common law.
The Admiralty Court asserted the highest and fullest jurisdiction over every
thing which might happen upon the high seas, but it was obliged to give way
to the common law courts and slowly ceased to exercise jurisdiction to the full
extent which it had formerly claimed, Nevertheless, in the reign of William
TV, it still retained a curtailed jurisdiction which included 4 number of important
subjects like collisions and tortious acts committed on the high seas, bottomry,
wages, etc. This position continued till the Admiralty Court Act, 1840 which

was passed “to extend the jurisdiction and improve the practice of the High
5


6

Court of Admiralty” in England. This was the first of a seri
enlarged or defined the jurisdiction, the latest of which Supreme Court
Act, 1981...... In the last hundred years, the English 2 Law, though
developed In separate courts and has continued to iy influenced by
changes in concepts of the common law, and in regard to today as constituting
a system of law entirely separate from the genera! law may
modern international law, it has been recognised that the jurisdiction of the
Admiralty Court extends both to foreign ships on high scas as well as over
injurious acts done on the high seas. In other words, the admiralty juris-
diction of the High Court now extends to all ships or aircrafts whether registered
or not and wherever the residence or domicile of 1 5 may be. and
in relation to all claims, wheresoever arising. How ~ the of jurisdic.
tion is subject to rules governing the mode Of exercise of jurisdiction.  Gene-
tally, the jurisdiction of the court is a'so restricted in collision and other similar
cases where the action is in personam The international nature of maritime
affairs and the right to proceed in rem readily produced ca; 5 Of jurisdiction
and disputes as to the forum in which claims should be he:

of Acts which

2.5. Position in India——So far as India is concerned, Admiralty jurisdiction
is being exercised only by some of the Indian High Cour's as the matter is still
governed by the obsoiete English Admiralty Court Act of 1861. initially applied
tu India by the (English) Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890, and then
adopted by India by Colonia! Courts of Admiralty (India) Act (Act No. 16 of
1891). So far as criminal offences in Admiralty jurisdiction were concerned,
the provision of the Admiralty Offences (Colonial) Act. {849 were extended to
India but with power only to the Supreme Court to try them. This was done
by the Admiralty Jurisdiction (India) Act, 1860".

2.6. After the Supreme Court Judicature Act,
England, a number of Acts relating to Admiralty Jurisdi were passed by
the Indian Legislature from time to time with th> result, the law became increas-
ingly difficult to be referred to and the need for consolidation become very
pressing. Though several attempts were made, all attemp:s failed, owing to
Tegal and constitutional difficulties. Two of the principal contributory factors
were: the limited powers of the Indian Legislature to le: ardivg shipping,
and the fact that part of the British Statute Law on the subject applied to
India and any Indian enacimen. had to be in harmony with that law. An attempt
was made in 1921-22 to codify the Indian Law on merchant shipping by the Statute
Law Revision Committee, which decided that only consolidation and not revision
should be attempted immediately. The result was the Indian Merchant Shipning
Act, 1923, which repealed as many as 30 Acts (mentioned in tho Schedule to
the Act). The said Act has also been amended from time ६० time and replaced
by the Merchant Shipping Act (44 of 1958) spocially to i ment the provi-
sions of international conventions which have been ratified by India. The object
of the 1958 Act is mainly to foster the development in a manner best suited
to serve the national interest and for that purpose io establish a National Shipp-
ing Board and a Shipping Development Fund, to provide for the registration
of Indian ships and generally to amend and consolidate the !aw relating to
merchant shipping. Though Parts X, X-A, and X-B of the Act refer to colfi-
sions, accidents at sea and liability for cil pollution, the problem of “Admiralty
Turisdiction’ is left unresolved and is still governed by various erstwhile British
Acts which, by reason of Article 372 of the Constitution. still continue to be
in force in India, despite the fact that some of them (like the Act of 1861), have
already been repealed in England. Thus, on ‘Admiralty Jurisdiction’ it is the
British Admiralty Courts Act of 1840 and 1861 which provide the statutory
base though since then a number of International Conventions have also come
‘up on the subject.

was passed in

2.7. Unsatisfactory State of the law.—The above brief historical back-
ground makes it abundantly clear that the state of the Indian law in this branch
of jurisprudence is unsatisfactory. The jurisdiction of courts to deal with
admiralty matters need to be more precisely defined. The various statutes in
existence on different aspects of maritime law need to be reviewed and appro-

party amended. The common law, as well as the judge made law. as projected
t precedents, need to be analysed and, where necessary, codified. | The various
daternational agreements, protocols and conventions to which India is a party


7

or signatory or assenting State have to be compiled and consolidated. There is
much ground work to be done for making this branch of the law uptodate
and bringing it in line with the international rules and conventions and develop-
ments in other countries. No doubt, in India, the statutory law regulating the
shipping is contained in the Shipping Act, 1958. but it does not deal with the
iralty jurisdiction.

2.8. Present scope limited.—Admiralty law, in its wide meaning, com-
prehends the entire law of the sea. It covers areas included in special statutes
such as the Indian Bills of Lading Act, 1856, the Indian Carriage of Goods by
Sea Act, 1925, the Merchant shipping Act, 1958, the Multimodal Transport Act,
1993 and also by general statutes, such as the Marine Insurance Act, 1963, the
Indian Contract Act, 1872, the Evidence Act, 1872, the Indian Penal Code, 1860,
the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 and the Companies Act, 1956; it also covers
areas dominated by common law and general principles of law such as the
Jaw of torts, public and private international law, it further covers matters con-
nected with ports such as the Indian Ports Act, 1908 and the Major Ports Act,
1963; it also encompasses matters dealt with by the Customs Act, 1962 con-
taining various regulatory measures affecting ships. goods and persons in con-
nection with importation or exportation of goods; it also includes the statutory
provisions touching upon maritime boundaries" and those governing employ-
ment and labour and the like. The task of consolidating the law applicable
to all the areas is a monumental one and cannot be tackled effectively, in all
its comprehensiveness, within a short span of time. The Commission is of the
view that the more practical and reasonable approach will be to codify the
law in stages. The Commission first proposes to address itself only to the codi-
fication of the law pertaining to the jurisdiction in Admiralty matters. This
report is, therefore, confined to issues pertaining to “Admiraly Jurisdiction”.

FOOTNOTES--CHAPTER 2

1. Halsbury’s Laws of England, Vol. 1 (4th Ed.) (Re-Issue), paras 301-304.
. Offence at Sea Act, 1536 (repealed).
Admiralty Jurisdiction Act, 1391 (Since repealed).

Exception is the ships of foreign soverigns: Halsbury’s Law of England (IV Edition), (Re-
issue), Para 304.

5. This may be by statute such as the Supreme Court Act, 1981 (U.K.) or by International
Conventions such as those relating to the “‘Arrest of sevgceing Ships” or “Rules concerning
Civil Jurisdiction in Matters of Collision”.

6. Sea Civil Court Manual, Sixth Ed., Page 874-881.

7. Sea Civil Court Manual, 4th Edition, p. 882-3. _ This Act declared the High Courts at
Bombay, Calcutta and Madras to be Colonial Courts of Admiralty.

8. These were the Supreme Courts at Bombay, Calcutta and Madras.

pes

9. Extracts from these two enactments are set out in the Appendix.
10, JT 1992-2 SC 65.


SECTION Hi

9--10


CHAPTER 3

HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ADMIRALTY
JURISDICTION IN ENGLAND

3.1. Admiralty Law is a branch of jurisprudence regulating maritime
matters of civil and criminal nature and it contemplates a court or tribunal
administering maritime law by a procedure peculiar to it. This jurisdiction
finds an ultimate source in the initial law of sea which was the law of commer-
cial nations gencrally. England, being an island, has all along been engaged
in commercial business through the sea and in that process the admiralty law
developed. Since Indian admiralty jurisdiction is founded on the English
law, it would be proper to briefly refer to the development of admiralty jurisdic-
tion in that country.

rat 3.2, During Medieval period in England, Lord High Admiral and other
Admirals appointed for different portions of the sea around the British Isles
Possessed disciplinary powers to cover vessels under their command; in addition,
they, were in a sense functioning as Sea Magistrates. They were only maritime
offic: having both authority and power. They determined disputes according
to the custom, usage and equity. Generally, they determined disputes in regard
to capture of enemy property on sea regarded as “Prize”. Finally, there emerg-
ed from among these disputes a personage who. from being deputy: of the
Lord High Admiral, became the appointed judge of the English Court
of Admiralty, exercising criminal jurisdiction, who in times of war fulfilled
duties as a judge of the Prize Court and exercised jurisdiction in certain Mari-
time causes. These two jurisdictions eventually became quite separate of the
Lord High Admiral and his fellows. This, in brief", is an epitome of the genesis
of the High Court of Admiralty Jurisdiction which struggled on for centuries
side by side with the Common Law and Chancery Courts of England, the one
seeking to enlarge and the other to limit its jurisdiction.

3.3. This rivalry between the jurisdiction of the High Court of Admi-
ralty and the Common Law Courts of England was eventually taken note of
by the British Parliament. In 1389, it passed an Act (13 Ric, 2 (1389) pertain-
ing to the jurisdiction of the Admiral and the Deputy and also prescribing the
limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court of Admiralty. The Act laid down
that the Admirals and their deputies shall not meddle of anything done within
the realm, but only of a thing done upon the sea. In spite of legislation forbidding
the High Court of Admiralty from meddling in things not wholly and exclusively
done upon the sea, the Admiralty Court continued to encroach upon the forbid-
den area of jurisdiction. The British Parliament rassed another Statute (Juris-
diction of the Admiral Act, 1391), which’ clarified that of all manner of con-
tracts, pleas, and quarrels and all other things arising within the bodies of
the counties as well by water, and also wreck of the sea, the Admiral’s Court
shall. have no manner of cognizance, power, nor jurisdiction, instead all such
manner of contracts, pleas and quarrels and all other things arising within
the bodies of Counties. as well by land as by water, as afore, and also wreck
of the sea, shall be tried, determined, discussed and remedied by the laws of
the land, and not before nor by the Admiral nor his lieutenant. This Act made
it clear that the jurisdiction of the Hieh Court of Admiralty was confined to
things done upon the high seas and it had absolutely no jurisdiction to deal
with thines arising within the body of a county. However, this enactment fail-
ed to bring avoidance of the conflict of jurisdiction.

3.4. In 1648 an Ordinance was issued prescribing the jurisdiction of the
Court of Admiralty, but it was set aside and thereafter the High Court of
Admiralty lost is importance for nearly two centuries until. in the eighteenth
century, the learning and ability of Lord Stowell raised the Court to a position
of the highest importance’. In 1840.the British Parliament passed the Admiralty
Court Act, 1840 (3 & 4 Vict. C. 65 hereafter referred to as the 1840 Act) to
improve the practice and extend the jurisdiction of the High Court of Admiralty.
A significant feature of this Act was that the High Court of Admiralty. could

3--4 M of L&JINDI9S 11


12

also take cognizance of the things ‘arising within the body of the county in
the same manner as the Common Law Courts. The 1840 Act inter alia provi-
ded for claims in respect of damage received by a ship.

3.5. In 1861, the British Parliament enacted the Indian Admiralty Court
Act of 1861. This Act made an effort to remove the conflict of jurisdiction
and to enlarge the jurisdiction of the High Court of Admiralty. One of the
significant changes introduced by the 1861 Act was that the High Court of
Admiralty, instead of confining its jurisdiction only to cases of ‘damage received
by a ship’, could now entertain claims in regard to “damages done by a ship”.
It is important to note that the jurisdiction of the High Court of Admiralty and
the Common Law and Chancery Courts in respect of “damage received by a
ship” were concurrent under the 1840 Act, but the jurisdiction of the High
Court of Admiralty in regard to “damage done by a ship” under the 1861 Act
was exclusive. The 1861 Act further provided that in cases of damage done
by a ship on the high seas, the aggrieved party had the choice to move the High
Court of Admiralty either for an action in rem or for an action in personam.
Another feature of this Act was that. by S. 6. it empowered the Admiralty Court
to assume jurisdiction over forcign ships in respect of claims to cargo carried into
any part in England or Wales but it did not apply to outward cargo.

3.6. The Judicature Act of 1873, which came into force in 1875, merged
the High Court of Admiralty with the High Court of Justice, causing a fusion
of Admiralty Law, Common law and Equity. The provisions of the 1861 Act
Hmiting jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court to the claims respect of inward
cargo was discarded by the Administration of justice Act This Act ex-
tended the jurisdiction of the High Court to:

(a) any claim arising out of an agreement relating to the use or hire of a
ship;

(b) any claim relating to the carriage of goods in any ship; and

(©) any claim in tort in respect of goods carried in any ship.

3.7. The 1861 Act and the subs equent enactments were consolidated by
the Supreme Court of judicature (Consolidation) Act, 1925. This Act vested the
Admiralty jurisdiction in all divisions of the High Court empowering the Court
to entertain, apart from actions in rem, any claim in personam which could be
brought in any other divisions of the High Court. By che Administration of
justice Act, 1956, the Admiralty Jurisdiction was further widened and redefined.

3.7. (a) The 1925 Act was superseded by the Supreme Court Act of 1981.
The Parliament enacted the 1981 Act to consolidat: with amendments the
Supreme Court Act of Judicature and other enactments and to repeal certain
obsolete and unnecessary enactments. Section 20 of the Act defines admiralty juris-
diction of the High Court and Sections 21 and 22 deai with the procedure and
mode and side of admicalty jurisdiction. Section 24 defines various expressions
and commonly used in maritime and admiralty jurisdiction. The provisions
contained in that Act have made significant changes enlarging the High Court's
jurisdiction in admiralty matters. It is not necessary to discuss in detail the

Provisions in Sections 20, 21 and 22 but it is important to note that the position
that has now finally emerged in England is that the jurisdiction of the High
Court is vested in al! Divisions, although in practice, admiralty actions are
assigned to the Queen's Bench Division and taken up by the Admiralty Court.
It also ensures that the usual requirements of an action in personam, viz. the
habitual residence or a place of business of the defendant or the cause of action
having a nexus with England and Walcs or a connected matter in the English
High Court or the submission of the defendant to the jucisdiction of that Court
are not applicable to a proceeding commenced as admiralty action in rem. The
law as it stands at present extends the right to proceed कह rem in many claims
which do not give rise to a maritime lien. Similarly, the admiralty jurisdiction
of the High Court will now in all causes be invoked by an action in p
although the exercise of jurisdiction is inhibited by the opsration of rules of court
relating to service of proceedings within jurisdiction.


13

3.8. EEC. Convention.—To bring the position up-to-date, it may फैट
mentioned that the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgements Act, 1982, has enacted into
English and Scottish Law, the European Economic Commissio; Conveation on
Jurisdiction and Enforcement of Judgements in Civil and Commercial Matters.

3.9. The aforesaid references to a series of staluics should net mislead one
into believing that the law adminisiered in admiraicy couris are derived from and
confined to Statutes only. “The wide jurisdiction vested in the English Courts
is derived from ancient principles of maritime law developed by custom and prac-
tice as weil as from subsequent statutes many of which have isicozporaied the
Provisions of International Conventions unifying ihe Jaws practised in several
maritime countries”. In the words of Holdsworth “Modern Legislation has restor-
ed to the Court of Admiralty many of the powers and much of the Jurisdiction
of which it had been deprived in the Sevenieenth Ceniury . But Admiraity
Jaw has lost the internaticnal character which it once possessed. 1६ is essentially
English Law, The Law which is admigistrated in the Admicaity court of Ergiand
is the English maritime law. It is not the ordinary municipal jaw of the country,
but it is the law which the English Court of Admiralty, either by Act of Parlia-
ment or by reiterated decisions and traditions and principles, has adopted as the
English maritime law. Neither the laws of the Rhedians, nor of Cleron, nor of
Visby, nor of the Hanse towns, are oi i] ८1०७ any paiit of Admiraliy law
of England...... But they contain many principles aid staiesaents of marine prac-
tice, which together with principles found in the Digest, and in the French, and
other Ordinances, were used by the Judges of the English Court of Admiralty,
when they were moulding and reducing to form the principles and practice of
their court’.

FOOTNOTES.-CHAPTER 3

1. This has been traced by Kochu-Thommen J, in his scholarly judgement in M.V. Elizabeth
& Others. For further treatment, reference can be mate to Holdsworth: A History of
English Law, Volumes 1, 5 and 8: Admiralty Practice, 5th Edn. Marsden; Sclect Pleas
of the Court of Admiralty, Vols. 1 & II, and Law and Custom of the Sea, Vol. 1 & 1;
Benedict on Admiralty, 6th Edition, Vol. I; acd Gilmore & Black; Law of Admiralty,
1957.

2. Roscoe: Admiralty Practice, 5th Edition, p. 14. quoted under JT 1992 (2) SC 65 Para-
graph 34.

3. Elizabeth & others V. Harwan Investment etc, JT 1992 —2 SC 65 at 82.
4. A History of English Law, Vol. 1, pp. 558-59.



CHAPTER 4

DEVELOPMENT OF THE ADMIRALTY JURISDICTION
IN INDIA

4.1. The first Charter was granted in 1726 to the United East India
Company (after the union of the old and new Companies), establishing Mayor’s
Courts at the settlements of Madras, Bombay and Culcutta, Mayor's Courts, each
comprising of a Mayor and nine Aldermen. The Mayor's Court was a Court
of Record and it had jurisdiction to try, hear and determine ull civil suits, actions
and pleas within the respective towns. Ihe Governor and the five Seniors of
the Council were appointed Justices of the Peace with power to hold Quarter
Sessions of the peace and they were constituted into a Court of Record for the
trial of all offences (except high treason) committed within the said towns or
within ten miles of the same. By a Charter of 1753 the Mayor’s Courts, the
Courts of Quarter Sessions, etc. were re-established with re-distribution of juris-
diction amongst them. In 1773, the Committee of Secrszy appointed to enquire
into the state of the East India Company submitted its report. This report led
to the passing of “the Regulation Act” 13 Geo. HI, C-63. This Act authorised
His Majesty to establish a Supreme Court of Judicature at Fort William in Bengal,
consisting of a Chief Justice and three other Judges to exercise all Civil, Criminal,
Admiralty and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. The Supreme Court of Judicature
at Fort William was to be a Court of Record. Accordingly, the Charter dated
26th March, 1774, established a Court of Record to be called “the Supreme Court
of Judicature at Fort William in Bengal” consisting of a Chicf Justice and threc
other judges. Thus since 1774 the Supreme Court of Judicature at Fort William
began to exercise Admiralty jurisdiction, Clause 26 of the Charter dated (26th
March, 1774) declared the Supreme Court of Judicature at Fort William in

to be a “Court of Admiralty” in and for the provinces, counties, or
districts, of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa and all other dependent territories and
islands adjacent thereunto. The Supreme Court was given full power and autho-
rity to take cognizance of, hear, examine, try and determine all causes, civil
and maritime, and all pleas of contracts, debts, exchanges. policies of assurance,
accounts, charter-parties, agreements, loading of ships and ali matters and con-
tacts, which in any manner whatsoever relating to freight, or money due for ships
hired and let out, transport-money, maritime usury or bottomry, and matters civil
and maritime, whatsoever, between merchants, owners, and proprietors of ships
and vessels, employed or used within the jurisdiction aforesaid or between others
contracted, done, had, or commenced, in, upon of by the sea, or public rivers,
or port, creaks, harbours, and places overflown, within the ebbing and flowing of
the sea and high-water mark, throughout Bengal, Bihar and Crissa and the depen-
dent territories adjacent thereunto, the cognizance whereof belonged to the juris-
diction of the Admiralty, as the same was used and exercised in England. Clause
27 of the Charter conferred full power and authority on the Supreme Court to
exercise jurisdiction according to the law and customs of the Admiralty in Englis!
in regard to maritime crimes committed upon the high seas within the aforesaid
limits of jurisdiction, to punish offenders according to the civil and maritime iaws
and to deliver and discharge them, and to take cognizaiice ard to arrest ships,
persons, goods, etc. Clause 27 further laid down that the proceedings in_ such
cause or causes were to be according to the course and order of the said Charter
dated 26th March, 1774 which infer alia provided that jurisdiction in maritime
causes extended only to the subjects of the King residing in the Kingdom or
‘provinces of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa and to persons in the service of the
Company or of any of the subjects. Similar was the position at Bombay and

ras.

4.2, The 1861 Act: (Stat, 24 and 25 Vict. Chap. 104) was enacted by
the British Parliament for establishing High Courts of Judicature in India which
inter alia authorised Her Majesty to establish High Courts of Judicature at
Calcutta, Bombay and Madras by Letters Patent under the Great Seal of the
United Kingdom. Section 9 of the Act authorised the High Courts. established
under the Act, to exercise all such civil, criminal, admiralty and vice admiralty,

15


16

testamentary, intestate, and matrimonial Jurisdiction, original and appellate, and
all such Powers and authority for and in relation to the aiminkiratee of justice
in their respective presidencies as Her Majesty might by Letters Patent grant and
direct. Clause 31 of the Letters Patent of 1802, inter aiia, provided that the
High Courts were to bave such civil and maritime jurisdiction as was then
exercised by the Supreme Court of Admiralty. Clause 32 conferred on the High
Conrts such criminal jurisdiction as was then exercised by die Supreme Court
as a Court of Admiraliy. The jurisdiction vested in the High Courts by the
Clauses 31 and 32 of the Letters Patent, 1862 was continued by Clauses 32 and
33 of the Letters Patent dated 28th December, 1865.

43. The British Parliameat enacted the Colonial Courts of Admiralty
Act of 1890 (53 and 54 Vict. c. 27) (hereinafter referred to as the 1890 Act).
This Act was enforced in the ‘British Possessions’ on July 1, 1891. Section 2
Of the Act provided that every court of law in a British Possession which is
for the time being declared in pursuance oi the Act to be the Court of Admiralty
and if such declaration is in force and if there be a court having unlimited civil
jurisdiction, it shall be Court of Admiralty. it further proviled that such court
will exercise all the powers which it possessed for the Purpose of other civil
jurisdiction. Clause 2 of Section 2 declared ihat the jurisdiction of Court of
Admiralty shail be over the like place, matters and hi as the admiralty
jurisdiction of the High Court and the Colonial Court of dmiralty may exer-
cise such jurisdiction in like manner to full extent as the High Court in England.
Section 3 conferred power on the Cojonial Legislature to enact law to lare
any court of unlimited civil jurisdiction, whether original or appellate, to be a
Colonial court of Admiralty. Such a law may further provide for exercise
of jurisdiction under the Act and limit territorially or otherwise the extent
of such jurisdiction. It further conferred power on the colonial legislature to
enact law to confer upon any subordinate or inferior court such partial or
limited jurisdiction as it may deem fit.

4.4. Pursuant to the aforesaid provision contained in Section 2 of 1890
Act, the Indian Legislature enacted the Colonial Courts of Admiralty (India)
Act (XVI) of 1891 (hereinafter referred to as the 1891 Act) wherein the High
Courts of Judicature being courts of ‘unlimited civil jurisdiction’ were declared
to be Colonial Courts of Admiralty established under the 1890 Act, at Calcutta,
Madras and Bombay. S. 2(2) of 1890 Act limited the jurisdiction of Colonial
Courts of Admiralty established under the 1890 Act—jurisdiction of the High
Court of England as it existed on the date of the enforcement of the Act. As
indicated, the jurisdiction of the High ef Admizalty in England had
been considerably expanded by the Acts of 1840 and 1861 passed by the British
Parliament. This expanded jurisdiction of the High Court of Admiralty in
England was conferred on the Colonial Courts of Admiralty by the 1890 Act.

4.5. Thereafter the Chartered High Courts of Calcutta, Bombay and
Madras established under the Letters Patent continued to exercise wd
jurisdiction in view of the declaration made by virtuc of the 1891 Act. Their
powers and jurisdiction were further continued successively by the Government
of India Act, 1915 and Government of India Act, 1935, On the promul-
gation of the Constitution. the aforesaid Chartered High Courts continued to
exercise admiralty jurisdiction in view of the saving provisions contained in
Article 372 of the Constitution as no law or statute was enacted by the Parlia-
ment limiting or expanding the admiralty jurisdiction. The High Courts in
India after the promulgation of the Constitution enjoyed unlimited ( futisdietion
in civil matters, being the superior constitutional courts under the Constitution.
In regard to the extent of admiralty jurisdiction. the High Couris had framed
tules for regulating the procedure and practice in cases arising out of admiralty
jurisdiction.

6. observed earlier. the question relating to the extent of admiralty
jurisdiction a up for consideration after the promulgation of the Constitution
‘before the Calcutta and the Bombay High Courts. Though the admiralty juris-
diction has been extended to a considerable extent in England by the laws made
by the British Parliament but since these laws could not be made applicable
to India the admiralty jurisdiction of the Courts continued to remain the
same as conferred on them by 1891 Act. The Calcutta High Court dismissed
a suit tur a claim for necessarics supplied in the port at Calcutta to a ship


17

registered in Madras and the owner of which was domiciled in India on the
ground that since the owner of the ship had domiciled in the country, the sup-
plier could seek his remedy by the ordinary process of law in the ordinary civil
courts. While considering the extent of the admiralty jurisdiction of the
Calcutta High Court, Justice Mukherjee held that in view of the Admiralty
Court Act 1861, the jurisdiction of the Calevtta High Court was limited? The
Calcutta Hish Court in an earlier case of Madras Sicam Navigation Company
Utd. Vv. Shalimar Works Ltd? had interpreted the extent 0 admiralty jurisdiction,
in a restrictive manner by referring to clause 23a) of the Colonial Courts of
Admiralty Act, 1890.

4.7, The Bombay High Court! discussed the scope, nature and extent
of admiralty jurisdiction of that court with particuler reference to the torts
committed on the hich seas. The Court after a detailed consideration of the
admiralty law in England and Yndia held that the High Court of Bombay
enjoyed the same admiralty jurisdiction after the promulgation of the Consti-
tution, as enjoyed by it earlier as the High Courts of Admiralty Jurisdiction
in England had exclusive jurisdiction in regard to certain matters, Again in
Kashi Bai v. S. S. Navigation’. Justice Shah considered the origin and continuity
of the admiralty jurisdiction of the Bombay High Court. The learned Judge
held that_a suit for damages in rem in respect of loss of life as a result of
collision on the high seas fel! within the exclusive jurisdiction of admiralty
side of the Hieh Court.

4.8. The views of the Calcutta. Bombay and Madras High Courts were
followed later by the same High Courts? as well as by other High Courts’. No
doubt, in these decisions tite existence and continuance of admiralty jurisdiction
of the chartered High Courts was not disputed in respect of ceftain dispute,
but with regard to extent of jurisdiction of the High Courts in India there
was considerable doubt. The view taken in the Calcutta and Bomba decisions
indicated that the admiralty jurisdiction of the High Courts in India did not
exist beyond the ambit of the English Act of 1861 and that the expansion of
the jurisdiction of admiralty courts in England by later British statutes did
not have a similar eTect of expanding the jurisdiction of the Indian High Courts.
Consequently. no High Court in India acting in admiralty jurisdiction could
order arrest or detention of a foreign ship in an action im rem in respect of
a cause of action relating to outward catgo, as distinguished from inward
cargo,

4.9. The restrictive interpretation made by the High Courts limited the
admiralty jurisdiction in India. Fortunately, this question was considered in
detail by the Supreme Court in the case of M. V. Elicabeth y. Herwan Invest-
ment & Trading Co... The Apex Coun examined the various Acts in detail
and thereupon it upheld the admiralty jurisdiction of the Indien High Courts.
In the case before the Supreme Court, the plaintiff with its registered office at
Goa, had filed a suit for action in rem invoking the admiralty jurisdiction of
the Andhra Pradesh High Court against the defendants’ ship and its owner
on the ground that the defendant had acted in “breach of duty” by leaving
the port without issuing bills of lading or other documents for the goods shipped
as required by the plaintiff shipper and further in discharging the goods. and
delivering them to the consignee inspite of the directions of the plaintiff not
te do so as the price had not been paid. The defendant raised preliminary
objection on the grommd that the plaintiff's suit against foreign ship owned by
a foreign company not having a place of residence or business in_ India was
not liable ta be proceeded against in the admiralty ju sdiction of the High
Court by an action in rem in respect of a cause of action having arisen in
tart or for a breach of obligation arising from the carriage of goods from a
port in India to a foreien port. Tse High Court reiecied the objection and
the Supreme Court in appeal upheld the High Court’s decision. Thommen J.
dealing with the extent of admiralty jurisdiction spoke thus:

“Tt is likewise within the competence of the appropriate Indian Courts
to deal, in accordance with the general principles of maritime law and


18

the applicable provisions of statutory Jaw. with all persons and things
found within their jurisdiction. The power of the court is plenary and
unlimited unless it is expressly or by necessary implication curtailed.
Absent such curtailment of jurisdiction, all remedies which are available
to the courts to administer justice are available to a claimant against a
foreign ship and its owner found within the jurisdiction of the concerned
High Court. This power of the court to render justice must necessarily
include the power to make inter-locutory orders for arrest and attach-
ment before judgement.”

Referring to Admiralty Act of 1890. the learned Sudge observed:

“In equating the admiralty jurisdiction of the Indian High Court to that
of the English High Court, the Colonial Court of Admiralty Act, 1890
significantly refers to the admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court in
England whether existing by virtue of any statute or otherwise. This is
an enapling statute and not a statute of limitation of power. It aids, and
does not fetter, the growth of jurisdiction. There is no reason why the
words “Statute or otherwise” should be so construed as to exclude the
various sources from which the admiralty jurisdiction in England deve-
loped. Apart from statutes the powers of that Court. as seen above,
were derived from custom and practice and the principles developed by
common law and equity as well as by the generally recognized principles
of civil law developed and practised in Europe. There is no reason,
as rightly stated by Westropp. 0. J. of the Bombay High Court in Bardot,
(supra), why the expression statute or otherwise should be so construed
as to exclude all these vast areas of legal principles which enriched and
strengthened the maritime Jaws of England. Likewise, there is no reason
why those principles should not be drawn upon to enrich and strengthen
the jurisprudence of this country, even if the jurisdiction of our courts
were to be. by compulsions of history, considered to be curtailed and
dovetailed to the colonial past a proposition which is neither correct nor
consistent with our status as a sovereign republic."

In upholding the admiralty jurisdiction of the High Courts in India on the
ground of their being superior courts and enjoying unlimited jurisdiction under
the Constitution, Thommen J. placed strong reliance on a decision of the US.
Supreme Court in The Schooner Exchange v. M*¥addon & Ors. U.S. Supreme
Court Reports, Cranch 5-9, p. 114, 133 (3 L. ed. 287) and observed: “Admiralty
Jurisdiction is an essential aspect of judicial sovereignty which under the Cons-
titution and the laws is exercised by the High Court as a superior court rot
record administered justice in relation to persons and things within its juri
tion. Power to enforce claims against foreign ships is an essential attribute of
admiralty jurisdiction and it is assumed over such ships while they are within
the jurisdiction of the High Court by arresting and detaining them”.

4.10. Before the Supreme Court an important question was raised as to
whether the Andhra Pradesh High Court, not being a chartered High Court
had jurisdiction in admiralty matters. The Supreme Court held 4 that since
the Andhra Pradesh High Court was successor to the Madras High Court, it
had the admiralty jurisdiction. But the question whether other High Courts of
India which are non-chartered High Courts have also the admiralty jurisdiction
was not decided expressly although the observations made by the Supreme
Court make it amply clear that the High Court being superior Court of record
constituted by the Constitution has unlimited civil and appellate jurisdiction
subject to statutory restrictions if any. The Court further ruled that the Hi: a
Courts in India after the promulgation of the Constitution have Admira
Jurisdiction uninhibited by the limitation of High Courts power in England
under the 1861 Act. In this view there is need to codify the law conferring
power on all High Courts to exercise admiralty jurisdiction. The mede, manner
and procedure for exercise of power under their jurisdiction has to be laid down
by law bearing in mind the international practice and conventions. The details
of the proposed legislation will be considered in the subsequent Chapters.


19

FOOTNOTES—CHAPTER 4

Sections 220 and 223.

Jayaswal Shipping Co. V. S.S. Leelawati, AIR 1954 Cal 415.

. AIR 1915 Cal 681.

पु Ramalakar Mahader Bhagat ¥. Scindia Steam Navigation Co. Ltd., AIR 1961 Bom

2 एफ (जे हे

फ्

. AIR 1961 Bom 200.

6. Sahida Ismail V, Pekto R. Salve} Kov & Others, AIR 1973 Bom. 16 and Rungia Sons
'P. Lid. & Anr. V. S.S. “Edison Mariner” & Another (1961-62) 66 CWN 1083.

1, Reena Padhi V. Jagdhir, ATR 1982 Orissa 57.
8. JT 1992 (2) SC 65.

9. 1d, at page 94.

10. 1d, at poge 95.

4—4 M of L@JIND/95


SECTION पा



CHAPTER 5 है
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS

5.1, In the case of international law, it is claimed that there must be
a transformation of the international convention into state law before it ‘can
be enforced. This is not merely a formal but a substantive requirement which
alone validates the extension to individuals of the rules laid down in international
treaties and conventions.

Such theory rests on the supposed consensual character of international
law as contrasted with non-consensual nature of State law. In particular, the
transformation theory is based on an alleged difference between treaties which
are of the nature of promises, and municipal statutes which are of the nature
of commands. It follows from this basic difference that a transformation from
one type to the other is formally substantially indispensabie.

5.2. The Law of Admiralty is governed by both municipal laws as well
as international law. Some aspects like registration of ships are governed by
Municipal Laws of the maritime country concerned. while other aspects, specially
commercial aspects, are governed by maritime international law. Maritime
international law has its source either in customary law based on general prac-
tice followed by maritime States or treaty based mainly on internal conventions.
Customary maritime law has developed over centuries and in different civiliza-
tions but during recent years, a substantial part of it has been codified into
international conventions. Different international conventions cover different

aspects of maritime law. A brief study of the development of this law. will be
of use. है

5.3. In the pre-Second World War period a!l problems relating to shipping
which required international agreements were dealt with by ad 1०९ conferences.
The latter framed conventions to regulate various aspects of shipping —- an in-
dustry primarily international in its operation.

The establishment of a permanent international maritime commission
was contemplated as early as 1889 at the International Marine Conference
held in Washington, which dealt exclusively with questions of “safety for life
and property at sea”. The conference came to the conclusion. however, that
“for the present the establishment of a permanent international maritime com-
mission is not considered expedient.”

5.4. The first inter-governmental organisation to deal with shipping matters
was, however, set up in 1944. This organisation. was called the United Maritime
Authority and its main task was to atrange for necessary shipping for the require-
ments of demobilisation, civil need, relief and rehabilitation programmes, etc.
In 1946, the United Maritime Authority was replaced by another organisation,
the United Maritime Consultative Council. This Council had two sessions,
one at Amsterdam in June, 1946 and the other in Washington in October.
1946. In pursuance of a Resolution of the Economic and* Social: Council of
the United Nations, these Sessions of the United Maritime Consultative Council
prepared a draft Convention for the setting up of a permanent inter-governmental
maritime organisation. Finally, at the instance of ihe Economic and Social
Council of the United Nations, a conference of representatives of Governments
on a world-wide basis was called at Geneva in February-March, 1948, to con-
sider the desirability of a permanent Governmental Shipping Organisation and
to lay down its scope and functions. The basis of discussion was the draft
Convention already prepared by the United Maritime Consultative Council.
The Geneva Conference successfully prepared and opened for signature a Con-
vention on the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation (IMCO),
which, could come into force only after twenty-two States (including seven
having at least one million gross tons of shipping) became parties to it. On
Marcly 17, 1958, Japan became the twenty-first State to accept the Convention.
The organisation which thus came into being is the twelfth specialised agency

23


24

of the United Nations. Its members include not only the traditional maritime
coumtries but all those who rely largely on the shipping services of other coun-
tries. It was the first inter-governmental organisation concerned with maritime
affairs, since its raison detre is shipping engaged in international commerce—a
most important field since more passengers and greater tonnage of goods are
still carried in ships than by other means of transport.

5.5. The first objective of IMCO is to facilitate cooperation among
Governments in technical matters of all kinds affecting shippi Its vim is to
achieve the highest practicable standards of maritime safe! efficient navi-
gation. It has a special responsibility for the safety of {if at sea. It also
provides for the wide exchange of information between nations on all technical
Maritime subjects.

5.6. Another purpose of the IMCO_ is to discourage discriminatory.
unfair and restrictive practices affecting ships in international trade, so as to
promote the maximum possible availability of shipping services to meet the
needs of the world for overseas transport. Yaz IMCO is also required to give
advice to other international bodies on shipping matters, including agencies of
the United Nations, and to coordinate its activities with those of the United
Nations Agencies dealing with labour questions. telecommunications, meteoro-
logy, aviation, automatic energy and health. Other responsibilities of the organis-
ation include such matters as the prevention of pollution of the sea by oil, and
the unification of regulations for the tonnage measurements of ships

5.7. In the present report it is not possible to do anything more than
to refer merely to the numerous International Conventions.

5.8. Major International Conventiens—The major International Conven-
tions governing merchant shipping during peace have been admirably treated
under the following five principal sections in Volume VIII of “BRITISH SHIP-
PING LAWS":

(a) Technical and Operational Conventions.

(७) Employment, Welfare and Status of Seamen.

(०) Unification of Private Maritime Law.

(0) Law of the Sea; Land-locked States. Ports, Canals and Straits.

(०) International Organisations concerning Merchant Shipping
“Needless to say that the treaty Jaw today ia the context of merchant shi pping
fas become ail inaportant in the regulation of inter-state relations. Merchant
shipping today is largely regulated by bipartite agreements. multilateral treaties
and international conventions which could not be found in the national Code

of any flag State which concerns itself with municipal fegistations, including
those international instruments whose rattfication made municipal enactment.

5.9. Technical and Operational Conveations—Technical and Operational
Conventions relate to:

(a) Navigation:

(b) Safety Conventions;

(०) Submarine Cables and Telecommunications:
(व) Tonnage Measurement of Ships: and

{e) Sanitary Conventions.

Intemational Conventioa relating to navigation include agreements con-
cerning maritime signals and martned lightships not on their and diverse
other matters; but imtemationa? safety conventions deserve fuller notice,


25

5.10. Telecommunication Conveatio&s.—The International Telecommuni-
saticn which was adepted at the Pleniperentiary Conference of Buenos Aires
in 1952, came into fcrce on January 1, 1954. It made no Major structural
changes. Nor did the Geneva Convention of 1959, which came into force on
January 1, 1961, make any major changes in the structure of the Union or in
the workings of its headquarters.

___ However, a3 the Geneva Conventioa of 1959 represents the latest legis-
lation on the subject and the Radio Regulations, Geneva, 1959, supersede ali
previews tegwacions, the texis of the following Conventions cover the entire
field:

- International Telecommunication Convention, Geneva, 1959 along
with the Final Protocol of the Convention;

2. Radio Regulation, Geneva, 1959;
3. Additional Radio Regulations, 1959;
4. Internationa] Telegraph and Telephone Regulations, Geneva, 1958.

The previous International Telecommunication Conventions such as those
of Buenos Aires (1952) or Atlantic City (1947), as well as the Radio Regulations,
Atlantic City (1947), are not in force now, having been superseded by the Geneva
Convention and regulations of 1959.

5.11. Sanitary Conventions.—In order to ensure maximum security against
the international spread of disease with the minimum interference with world
traffic, the Intervational Sanitary Regulations, Geneva, 1951, were adopted by
the World Health Assembly in that year, and these Regulations as regards yellow
flag provisions. sanitary control of pil; igri traffic, etc.. were amended by subse-
quent World Health Assemblies. As far as shipping is concerned, the Sanitary
Regulations of 1951 represent, as it were, the codified law on tae subject, being
the culmination of a process which started in 1892.

5.12. Employment, Welfare and Status of Seamen.—The _ {nternational
Labour Organisation established by the Peace Treaty of 1919 with the sole object
of serving International peace through the establishment of social justice, is one
of the very few international organisations which have survived the Second World
War. An agreement bringing the Organisation into relationship with the United
Nations and defining its status as a specialised agency of the U.N. came into
force upon its approval by the U.N. General Assembly on December 14, 1946,
The Maritime Conventiors and Recommendations of the International Labour
Organisations are included within the following broad categories:

1. Employment of Seamen:

(a) Entry of employment;
(b) Conditions of employment;

. Certificates of qualification;

. Wages, hours of work and manning:

2.
3.
4. Social security;
5. Welfare of Seafarers on board ships and ports;
6.

. Miscellaneous.

5.13. Unification of private Maritime Law.—The Government of Belgium
convened as a host country a number of sessions of the Diplomatic Conference
on Maritime Law and these Conferences produced diverse International Conven-
tions including those with respect to collisions, salvage at sea. limitation of
liability of owners of sea-going vessels. stowaways. catriage of goods and passen-
gers by <ea. liability of operators of nuclear ships and maritime liens and
morteages,


26

whi A passing reference may be. made to the Oxford Conference of 1932

ich adopted the Rules known ‘Warsaw-Oxford Rules”, these being intended

to offer te those interested in the sale and purchase of goods on specific terms

but have no standard form of contract ar general conditions available or means

oi voluntarily and readily adopting in their specific contracts a set of uniform
les.

. 5.14. Law of the Sea—tUntil 1958 when the Geneva Conventions on the
Law of. the Sea were signed it was left to the customary principles of  inter-
national law to regulate this important sphere of inter-state relationship. In
fact, the influence of customary law of the sea in furnishing the basis of the
Geneva Conventions has been acknowledged in the preamble of the Conven-
tion of the High Seas, which States that the provisions incorporated in the con-
vention are “generally declaratory of established principles of international
law.” However, it could still be said that in certain respects the task of codifi-
cation of the law of the territorial: sea has still not been accomplished’. To
prevent the pollution of the sea by oil discharge from ships an International
Convention was drafted in London in 1954 and it has since been revised to
make it more acceptable to maritime states. Certain states have implemented
the Convention by municipal legislation.

5.15, The U.N. Convention of the Law of the Sea, 1982.—On 10th Decem-
ber, 1982, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea was signed
by 117 countries and two other entities (the Cook Islands and the U.N. Council
for Nambia) on the very first day of its opening for signature. This marked
the culmination of over fourteen years of work involving participation by more
than 150 countries representing all regions of the globe, all legal and political
systems, all degrees of socio-economic development, countries with various dis-
positions regarding the kinds of minerals that can be found in the sea-bed,
coastal states, states described as geographically disadvantaged with regard to
ocean, space. archipelagic states, island and landlocked states.

The Convention, along with four related Resolutions, was adopted on
30th Apri!, 1982. Only four States, namely. Israel, Turkey. U.S.A. and Venezula
voted against the Convention. On December 10, 1982, the Convention was
signed in a formal ceremony at Montego Bay, Jamaica. It came into force on
the 10th December. 1983. The Convention was signed by 117 States and two
other entities on the very first day. Lastly. Japan also signed the Convention.
Apart from the developing and socialist countries, Australia, Canada. Denmark,
France, Finland. Ireland, the Netherlands. Norway and New Zealand who have
signed the Convention so far. are the Federal Republic of Getmany. Ttaly.
Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the U.S.A. The elaboration of
the convention represents an attempt to establish the universality in the effort
to achieve a “just and equitable international economic order” governing ocean
space. The Convention is multi-faceted and represents a monument to inter-
national cooperation in the treaty-making process. The new law of the sea
comprises वी] aspects of ncean snace from delimitations to environmental control,
technology and the settlement of disputes relating to ocean matters. The con-
vention aims rot only at the eodification of customary norms. but also the
progressive development of international law.

5.16, The Convention itself established a comprehensive framework for
regulation of all ocean matters. The Convention contains 320 Articles and 9
Annexures, It is divided into seventeen parts and the first part deals with the
question of areas of national jurisdiction. Rest of the Convention contains
provisions governing various aspects of ocean matters including access to the
seas. navigation, protection and preservation of the marine environment. exoloi-
tation of livine resonrces ard conservation. scientific research. sea-bed mining
and other exnloitation of non-livine resources. and the settlement of disputes.
“In addition. the Convention establishes new international norms which may be
“summed up as under:”

1, Coastal States would exercise sovereignty over their territorial sea
of up to 12 miles in breadth. but foreign vessels would be allowed
innocent passace throuch those waters for purposes of peacefu! navi-
gation. .


27

2. Ships and a
through sirai
proceedad w’
States acong
other aspects of passage.

rafts of all countries would be allowed ‘transit passage’
ts used for international navigation, as long as they
out threatening the bordering states.
iis would be able to regulate navigation and

y

Coastal States would have sovereign rights in a 200 mile exclusive
economic zone wit respect ta natural resources and certain economic
activities, and would also have certain type of jurisdiction over marine
science researc’ and environmental protection. all other states would
have freedom of navigation and overficht in the zone, as well as
freedom to lay submarine cables and pipelines Jand-locked and geo-
graphically disadvantaged States would have the opportunity to parti-
cipate in ey ine part of the zone’s fisheries when coastal State
could not harvest them all itself: the highly migratory species of fish
and ma-ine mammals woud be accorded special protection.

4. Archipelagic States. made up of a group or groups of closely related
islands and interconnecting waters would have sovereignty over a sea
area enclose! hy straight lines drawn between the outermost points
of the islants: all other States would enjoy the right of passage
through sea lanes designated by the archipelazic States.

5. All States would eniay the traditional free navigation, overflicht,
scientific rese an? Sshing on the high seas: they would be obliged
to adopt or co-onerate with other States in adopting measures to
manage end censerve living resources.

6. The territo:'2' sea. exclusive economic zone and continental shelf of
islands would be determined in accordance with rvles applicable to
Jand territory but rocks which could not sustain human habitation
or economic life would have no economic zone or continental shelf.

7. Coastal States would have sovereign rights over the continental shelf
(the national area cf the sea-bed) for the purpose of exploring it up
to 350 miles from the shore cr even more under snecified circums-
tances: coastal States would share with the international community
part of the revenue they would derive from exploiting oi] and other
Tesources from any rart of their shelf beyond 200 miles. and Com-
mission on the Limits of the Continenta! Shelf would make recom-
mendaticn to State: on the Shelf’s other boundaries.

8. A paralle’ em would be established for exploring and exploiting
the international sea-bed area: all activities in the area would be
under the control of the International Sea-Bed Authority to be esta-
blished under the Convention.

9. Land-locked St:tes wou'd have the right of access to and from the
sea and would enioy freedom of transit through the territory of transit
States.

10. States borderine enclored or semi enclosed seas wou'd be expected
to coonerate जा manacoment of living resources and on environmental
and research and policies and activities.

11. All marine scientific research in the exclusive economic 7one and on
the continental shelf would be subject 10 the consent of the coastal
States, but coastal states would in most cases be cbliced to grant
consent tc foreign states for conducting research for peaceful pur-
poses.

12. States would he bound to prevent and controt marine pollution from
any sou’ vd woul? be liable for domese caused by violation of
their international oblications to combat marine pol ution,

13. States would be obliged to settle by peaceful means their disputes
through reference to an International Tribunal for the Law of the
Sea, to be established under the Convention, to the International Court

5--4 M of L&JIND9S


28

of Justice, or to Arbitration, Conciliation is also available and in
certain circumstances submissions to it is compulsory.

14. States would be bound to promote the development and transfer of
marine technology “on fair and reasonable terms and conditions”
with proper regard for all legitimate interests, including the rights
and duties of holders, suppliers and recipients of technology.

15. The paramount duty of all State parties is to respect the rights of
others; however, some duties may entail more executory acts. The
duty to give notice of hazards would be an example of the latter kind
of duty. The omnipresent concept of the balance of rights and duties
is emphasised by Article 300 of the Convention.

16. The Convention also sets out the principles and regulations governin;
the “Sea-Bed Authority”. ®

5.17. With the signing of the Convention on the Law of the Sea, a pre-
paratory commission was established to pave the way for the two major institu-
tions to be set-up under the Convention, namely, the Sea-Bed Authority with
headquartes in Jamaica and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
to be located in Hamburg, Federal Republic of Germany. These matters are
still under study.

5.18. It is well known that in spite of the Convention, the ill effects of
pollution of sea water is increasing. There is no doubt that the Convention
opens a new era in history of international law. It is a successful attempt of
objectivity in the search for solution to the problems. But technically the Con-
vention does not reflect the new law of the sea which is binding on all States.
Farther, it is doubtful how far the international Sea-Bed Authority would be
able to function effectively without the cooperation of technically advanced States.
Various arguments and interpretations have been advanced by the law governing
treaties in support of the Convention*. But without the super powers, the Con-
vention is bound to be weakened. In addition, the Convention fails to answer
why the laws of the coastal states cannot be directly enforced within its contiguous
zone, although the coastal states are in a better position to regulate the rational
exploitation of the resources adjacent to their coasts. In fact, a major part of
exclusive economic zone and of the continental shelf would fall within the
national jurisdiction of the coastal states which will affect the traditional concept
of “admiralty jurisdiction” too.

FOOTNOTES—CHAPTER 5
1. Satish Chandra, the U.N. Chronology of the “Law of the Sea”, Civil and Military Jour-
nal, Vol. 20 (3-4) 1984 p. 159.

. Satish Chandra: ‘Some aspects of the New Constitution for the Ocean”, Academy Law
Review, Vol. 7 (1983), p. 194.

3. Satish Chandra: ‘‘Law of the Sea”, 1985.

v


CHAPTER 6
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS AND INDIA’S STATUS'

6.1. India has been signatory to several maritime conventions and pro-
tocols. It is interesting to note that 22 maritime conventions and 15 protocols
have been formulated so far. Out of these 37 International Maritime Organi-
sation Instruments, 19 Conventions and 7 Protocols are presently in force. India
has ratified 12 Conventicns and 5 Protocols, Proposals for ratification of 6
Conventions and 1 protocol are under consideration of ‘he Government of India.
India has not ratified 13 Conventions/Protocols on the ground that they are
either not in force internationally or for other substantive reasons. A list of
the Conventions and Protocols and their status in India is as follows.

6.2. Conventions already ratified by India.—Tiie followiig IMO Conven-
tions have a'ready been ratified by India:

(i) International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974 (SOLAS

(2) Protocol of 1978 relating to SOLAS, 1974;

(3) Convention of the International Regulations for Preventing Colli-
sions at Sea, 1972 as amended (COLREG 1972);

(4) Convention of Facilitation of International Tratfic, 1965 (FAL-1965);
(5) International Convention on Loadlines, 1966;

66) International Convention on Tonnage Measurement of Ships, 1969;
(7) Special Trade Passenger Ships Agreement, 1971;

(8) हा on Space Requirements for Special Trade Passenger Ships,

(9) International Convention on Safe Containers, 1972;
(10) Convention on International Maritime Satellite Organisation (IN-
MARSAT);

(11) Operating Agreement on the INMARSAT:

(12) International Convention of Standards of Training, Certification and
Watchkeeping, 1978 (STCW);

(13) MARPOL 1973/1978 Protocol;

(14) International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage
1969 (CLC 1969);

(15) 1976 Protocol to CLC 1969;

(16) Convention on Establishment of an International Fund for Compen-
sation for Oil Pollution Damage, 1971; and

(17) The 1976 Protoco’ to the Fund Convention.

6.3. Conventions under consideration.—At present India is considering
roposa Is for ratification of six IMO Instruments. The present status of consi-
deration of the Convention is given below:—

Convention Present Status of Consideration
International Convention on Search and A draft Note secking concurrence of vari
Rescue, 1970 and adoption of Global Martine concerned departments was circulated “on
Distress & Safety Systems. 8-8-91, While the comments of most of
have already been obtained, those
of the Departments of Legal Affairs are
still awaited. The matter is bemg pur-


> & Convention for Suppression of Unlaw
3 Navi

30

fal Acts
988 and
whul 205

avy

ation,
ssiva of Uni

against Safety Mati
Protocol for Supp:

‘ews cf the Ministry of Law,
cto! sfuirs and) Ministry
० been

Minisiry ¢

of Home obtained.

agasint the Safety of Fixed Platforms located Director 1 of Shipping is examining
on Continentai Shelf, i383. the sugge. recevicd ‘rom the above
Ministries.

4. International Convention on Salvage, 1989. While the concurrence of most of the con-
corned departments the proposed ratifi-
cation of the Convention has been obtained,
concurrence of the Deptt. of Legal Affairs
is awaited.

5. Convention on the Prevention of Marine Puilue Director Ge ipping has been re-
tion by Dumping ef Wastes and other Matters, quested to Present stage of
1972. studies rade (0 to consider the

desirability in view of the Provisions of the
Brusseis Cox 30081,

6. International Convention on Intervention in While concurronce cf most of the Depart-
High Seas in cases of Oil Pollution Casualties, ed satificetion has been
1969. ‘rence of Deptt. of Legal

Affairs and the t. of Ocean Develop-
ment is stil . The matter is
being purst

7... International Convention on Oil Pollution Director General, Shipping is in the process

Preparedness, Response and Cooperation. 1990.

of cxamining ch tinanciat and legal/legis-
lative impuications of the Convention.

6.4. Other Intezzztional/U.N. Conventions.—Ministry oi Surface Transport
is also concerned with the following U.N./Internuiional Conventions relating to
Law of Seas:

(@ International Convention for Unification of Certain Rules of the
Law relating to Bill of Lading, 1924 (Hague Ru'es):

Gi) Hague Visby Rules, 1968 and 1979.

(iii) U.N. Convention on Carriage of Goods
R

by Sea, 1978 (Hamburg
ules);

(9) U.N. Convention on Code of Conduct for Liner Conference, 1974.

6.5. We would briefly discuss the aforesaid Conventions:

(1) International Convention for Unification of Certain Rules of the Law
relating to Bill uf Lading, 1924, popularly known as Hague Rules were adopted
in 1924. This Convention lists out the carrier’s responsibiities and liabilities
together with the rights and immunities. The Hague Rules came into force
with effect from June 1931, India did not ratify this Convention mainly because
the Convention requires that Bill of Lading should be issued even in respect of
carriage of goods in the coastal trade by the sailing vessels, which was not
acceptable to India, However, the rest of the provisions ci the Convention were
incorporated in the Indian Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 1925.

(ii) Hague/Visby Rules, 1968 and 1979 (Protocois).—In 1968, a Protocol
was adopted to increase the limits of liability provided in the Hague Rules per
package or units of goods lost or damaged. This protocoi came into force from
23-6-77. The Hague Rules were further amended in 1979 by adoption of
another protoco] which changes the Unit on account to SDR. These two Pro-
tocols could not be ratified by India since India did not ratity the main Con-
vention.

(9) U.N. Convention on Carriage of Goods by Sea 1978.—In 1978, the
United Nations adopted the Convention on Carriage of Goods by Sea, 1978
known as Hamburg Rules, 1978. This Convention seeks to replace the Hague
Rules and their two Proiocols. This Convention has come into force inter-
nationally from November, 1992. The question of ratification or otherwise of
this Convention is still under consideration by India.

(iv) U.N. Convention on Code of Conduct for Liner Conference, 1974—
Up to the first half of the 20th Century, sea borne trade was generally catered



31

to by the merchant fleets of developed countries. When developing countries
started building up their merchant fleets, there was stiong demand from the
shipping lines of developing countries for increasing the share of their national
Reets in their countries’ overseas trade. As a result, mainly for the purpose of
equitable cargo sharing and for other matters relating to sea borne trade, United
Nations Convention on Code of Conduct for Liner Conference was adopted
in 1974.

The fundamental objectives of this Convention are to facilitate orderly
world sea borne trade, to stimulate development of regular and efficient liner
services and to ensure the balance of interest Between suppliers and users ot
Liner Shipping Services. Cargo provisions of this Convention provide that
trade between two countries shall be carried by the National Lines of each of
the oe countries to the extent of 40% and third country lines can carry
up to 20%,

India ratified this Convention in 1978. However, the Code has come
into force internationally with effect from 6-10-83. In 1986, proposal to intro-
duce legislation for giving effect to the provision of the Code was approved
by the Central Government in principte. However, in view of some apprehen-
sions expressed by the Ministry of Commerce about the adverse impact on India’s
foreign trade, no {cgislation could be introduced in Parliament. On the basis
of Inter-Ministerial ussions, a modified non-legislative cargo support scheme
was formulated and the Government has since approved implementation of
this scheme. This modified scheme does not make any reference to the U.N,
Convention Liner Code.

FOOTNOTES—CHAPTER 6

1. Position set out in, the light of the letter No. D.O. No, SR 13011/10/86-M.A. dated
19-4-1994 from the Ministry of Surface Transport.


SECTION IV



CHAPTER 7

STEPS FOR UPDATING THE LAW

7.1. The discussion in the previous Chapters brings out the unsatisfactory
State of the maritime law in this country. It has not only failed to keep pace
with the political and constitutional changes in the country but also lagged far
behind other maritime countries. Disputes in maritime matters being, more
often than not, international in character, the state of the law at present is
deplorable and even derogatory 10 the sovereign status of the country. These
shortcomings and deficiencies were noticed by the Supreme Court’. The Supreme
Court has, in the course of its judgment, exhaustively discussed several issues;
we do not consider it necessary to deal with those issues again.

7.2. Parveen Singh Committee.—But even before the Supreme Court had
occasion to deal with the matter, the shipping industry had been highlighting
from time to time the need to make India’s admiralty law uptodate, respon-
sive to the requirements of the shipping industry and conducive to the efficient
and speedy disposal of maritime disputes. Recognising the urgency of an
enquiry into the state of this branch of law, the Ministry of Surface Transport
of the Government of India set up, in December, 1986, a Committee under
the Chairmanship of Shri Parveen Singh. the then Director-General of Shipping?
for going into the matter thoroughly. The terms of reference of the Committee
were as follows:

“(a) To study the various aspects concerning Admiralty Jurisdiction | in-
cluding advances made in other countries and international conventions
adopted on this jurisdiction:

(0) To recommend what uptodate consolidated maritime legislation could
be introduced supported by a report explaining the statements, objects
and reasons: and

(c) To make specific suggestions to establish separate Admiralty Jurisdic-
tion/ Admiralty Courts/Tribunals for the purpose of more effectively deal-
ing with Admiralty and Maritime disputes.”

The Committee submitted its report in 1987. The report comprised of two
sections. The Committee surveyed the international scene, discussed the pro-
visions of the existing law applicable in India and the changes needed in the
present law to make it more responsive to the present day needs. It recommend-
ed the enactment of a legislation defining the scope of admiralty jurisdiction and
submitted the draft of an Admiralty Act of India for consideration. The Com-
mittee discussed the role of the High Courts in exercising admiralty jurisdiction
and suggested a re-orientation of the nature of the courts administering admiralty
law. The letter containing the terms of reference and the drafts of the Admiralty
Act of India and the Admiralty Courts Act formed the three Annexures to the
‘eport?.

7.3. Committee on Admiralty Jurisdiction—The Committee noted that.
under the English Admiralty Act of 1861 which formed the foundation for the
jurisdiction of Indian Courts, the Courts had jurisdiction in Admiralty only
in respect of—

(a) claims for building. equipping or repairing of ships;
{b) claims for necessaries supplied to a ship;

35
6—4 M of L&J/NDI95


36
(c} claims for damage to cargo imported into a Port;
(9) claims for damage done by a ship;
(e) claims as to ownership. employment and earnings;
(f) salvage;
(g) claims for wages and disbursements by the Master of a ship; and

(h) matters arising out of mortgages.

It noted that, in maritime matters, aclaimantis often tempted to seek relief not
merely against the owner ofa ship but alsoto seek, very often, relief by way of
arrest of a ship as that is the most effective means by which claims as well as mari-
time liens and mortgages, could be enforced. Attempts were made in the past to en-
ter into intenrnational conventions on maritime liens and mortgages and on the
arrest of sea going ships’. But they were unsuccessful. A fresh attempt was being
made by the IMO* and the UNCTAD*® in consultation with the CMI’ but consi-
derable time was bound to elapse before a new convention js adopted and ratified
by the required number of countries to bring it into force. In the meantime,
many countries had adopted their own laws to govern maritime liens and claims.
Even in England, fresh Jegislation had been enacted, but India was following
the archaic British Law as adumbrated in the Admiralty Act of 1861, This
had to be changed. Tt was essential to enlarg> the scope of legislation to cover
claims pertaining to oil pollution. damages, 1055 of life, personal injury, towage
of ship, pilotage of ship, port dues, disbursements made by shipowners and
agents of ships, general average, bottomry bonds, forfeiture or condemnation of
ships or cargo and other matters. It was also necessary to provide for exercise
of jurisdiction in rem and in personam and also provisions enabling the arrest
not only of the ship that causes damage but also of a “sister-ship”, ie. a ship
under the beneficial ownership of the same owner. There was also necessity
to lay down legal provisions regarding priorities of the claims that would arise
for settlement out of the sale proceeds of a ship, in particular a provision for
priority (to some extent) of crew’s wages over all other claims against the
ship except those of salvage. It was also necessary to cover the claims of owners,
whether resident in India or abroad, and also mortgages and charges, whether
registered or not and whether created in India or abroad. Some other important
provisions proposed were:

(1) As Indian ships are under the full contro! of the Government of India
under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, no arrest of an Indian ship
should be effected unless at least six days’ notice was given to the
owner and he failed to provide security to the court to cover the
claim.

(2) Interests of third parties who may have claims should be protected

by giving 90 days’ notice in newspapers.

(3) Once the ship is sold by orders of court, the purchaser will get a title
to it free from all encumbrances with no liability in respect of the
claims.

(4) The courts should be empowered to lay down the inter-se priority as
between mortgages and maritime liens.

(5) The provisions of a notice, where a suit is filed against a foreign ship,
for notice to the counsel/mission of the foreign country in India.


37

Taking into consideration these aspects and deriving the benefit of legislation
that had been enacted in this regard in U.K., Singapore and other common law
countries, the Committee drafted its Admiralty Act of India.

7.4, Committee’s views on courts exercising Admiralty Jurisdiction.—
The Committee took note of the fact that at present admiralty jurisdiction was
being exercised only by the High Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras and
that the High Courts of Gujarat. Andhra Pradesh and Orissa claimed to have derived
such jurisdiction under the enactments pertaining to reorganisation of states’. The
Committee, however, was of the view that there was a need for the Central Govern-
ment to constitute independent courts of admiralty called “admiralty courts’
and delink admiralty jurisdiction from existing High Courts so as to ensure that
maritime claims received undivided and quick attention at the hands of experts.
It was suggested that, to avoid divergent decisions in tie admiralty courts, a
Single Admiralty Appeal Court to entertain a first appeal should be constituted.
Suggestions were made for the constitution of these courts in the light of the
Provisions contained in the Central Administrative Tribunals Act™.  Sugges-
tions were also made for the adoption of the rules framed by the High Court
of Bombay and for the framing of rules prescribing courts fees and costs". The
draft of an Admiralty Court Act was also submitted which took into account
these considerations.

7.5. Law Ministry’s Comments.—The report of the Committee was con-
sidered in the Law Ministry which appears to have raised certain queries:

(1) Whether certain other causes could not be included within the juris-
diction of the Admiralty Courts;

(2) Whether the Admiralty Courts would have jurisdiction over hover-
craft as well;

(3) Whether any limitation would be prescribed for filing maritime
claims;

(4) Whether the Acts of 1861, 1890 and 1891 did not have to be repeal-
ed, and if so, whether a single enactment clabbing the provisions
of the two proposed legislations after the details are worked out
would not be adequate;

(5) Whether the provisions of the proposed legislation will need amend-
ment to the existing statutes, viz., the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act,
1925, the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 and the Major Port Trusts
Act, 1963;

(6) Whether the proposed legislation would necessitate the repeal of the
Admiralty Jurisdiction (India) Act, 1860 and the Admiralty Offences
(Colonial) Act. 1849 dealing with the admiralty offences; and

(7) Whether the proposed legislations need any review in the light of
the decision of the Supreme Court in Elizabeth's case".

It appears that some correspondence has ensued between the two concerned
Ministries and that the matter is under consideration still with no final decision
taken yet.

7.8. The Law Commission's task—In the meantime, the Law Commis-
sion, in deference to the observations and directions of the Supreme Court in
the Elizabeth case” has taken up the matter suo motu and is presenting this
report, after taking into account the views of the Parveen Singh Committee and
the comments thereon referred to above. As Stated earlier, this report does
not deal with al) aspects of maritime law or the provisions of the existing statutes


38

applicable to this field of Jaw"; instead it is confined only to the two broad aspects
discussed in the Parveen Singh Committee report, viz.

(1) Nature und scope of Admiralty Jurisdiction, and
(2) Admiralty Courts for India.

The views of the Commission on these two topics are set out in the two succeed-
ing Chapters.

FOOTNOTES—CHAPTER 7

1, See M. V. Elisabeth V. Harwan Investment & Trading Agency Ltd., JT (1992) 2 SC 65.

2. The other members of the Commitice were: Sri K.C. Sidhwa, Senior Central Government
Advocate; Dr. $.N. Sanklacha (representative of the Tndian National Shipowners
Association), Shri H.N. Fotedar (Managing Director, Indian Ports Association), Shri
S. Venkateswaran (Advocate), Dr. Leo Barnes (General Secretary, National Union of
Seafarers of India) and Shri B.S, Bhesanial of M/s Mulla, Craigie, Blunt & Cares, Soli-
citors, Shri C.M. Shetye, Deputy Director General of Shipping was the Member- Secre-
tary.

3. The Annexure to the Report of the Commitice are mode Annexures to this Report for
the purposes of convenient reference.

These Conveniions were adopted in 1926 aad 1952 respectively, but were not ratified.
International Maritime Organisation.
United Nations.

Committee Maritime Internationale,

Pm Awe

A claim which has been approved in Elizabeth’s ०5०, JT 1992 (2) SC 65 by the Supreme
urt.

9... To start with, it was considered sufficient to have four such courts at Calcutta, Madras,
Bombay and Cochin.

10. As interpreted in Sampat Kumar's case : AIR 1987 SC 386.
”

11, A relaxation of these rules was suggested for
12. JT 1992 (2) SC 65.
13. See para 2.8, ante.


CHAPTER 8
NATURE AND SCOPE OF ADMIRALTY JURISDICTION

8.1. It is not necessary to emphasise, over again, the archaic state of
the Indian Law on the subject and its inadequacies. Luckily, as pointed out
at the very outset, complete chaos in the matter was averted by the laws of transi-
tion passed in India when there was a change in the political set-up in the country.
Even this is almost on the point of breakdown by the denial of admiralty juris-
diction to many of the High Courts on the one hand and the attempt to limit
Indian jurisprudence to the pre-1891 Statute and case Jaw in England. But for
the far-sighted and liberal view taken by the Supreme Court in Elizabeth's case’,
the Indian law on the subject might have almost lapscd into regions of ludicrous-
ness and absurdity.

8.2. Though the general position has got crystallised and become some-
what definite after the pronouncement of the Supreme Court, it is necessary to
enact independent legislation to replace the century old statutes on the scope and
extent of Admiralty jurisdiction.

8.3. Turning to the contents of such legislation, our task has been made
comparatively easy by the legislations recently introduced in U.K”. The Par-
veen Singh Committee which felt the need for such legislation all the more in the
absence of the guidance of the Supreme Court had taken pains to consider the
UX. Legislation as well as those introduced in Singapore and other countries
and drafted the Admiralty Act, annexed to its report. The Commission have
referred, in the previous Chapter, to the various improvements and additions
which the above Committee considered necessary to meet our country’s needs.
Its draft is based primarily on the Supreme Court Act, 1981 of U.K. and. it has
taken into account the aspects and features which the Committee felt needed
special reference or provision.

8.4. In regard to the various questions raised by the Ministry of Law at
an earlier stage in its correspondence with the Ministry of Surface Transport and
referred to earlier’, we would like to make the following observations:

(1) The causes in respect of which admiralty jurisdiction can be extended
have been most comprehensively set out in the proposed statute, in
the light of the 1981 Act of U.K. and other recent legislations. It
does not seem necessary to add any other causes in the proposed
Section 2.

(2) In regard to the query as to whether there should be separate enact-
ments on the scope of Admiralty jurisdiction and on the courts em-
powered to administer it, we are of the view that no such separate
enactments are necessary, for the reasons contained in the next
Chapter. . Briefly, we are of opinion that for the present Admiralty
Jurisdiction should be vested in High Courts and that all High Courts
in India should be vested with such jurisdiction, But, if at some
subsequent stage, it is found that Admiralty Jurisdiction should be
conferred on other Courts, steps may be taken for conferring this
jurisdiction on the Principal Civil Court of the District. This can
be given effect to by an amendment of Sections 1 and 2(a) of the
draft Admiralty Act of India proposed by the Committee and dis-
pensing with the Admiralty Courts Act proposed by the Committee
altogether.

(3) On the question as to whether ‘hovercraft’ should be covered ‘by the
proposed enactment, we think that the answer should be in the
negative for the time being. The U.K. Supreme Courts Act, 1981,
no doubt defines a “Ship” as including a “hovercraft’’ as well. But

39


40

this is subject to the provisions of the Hovercraft Act, 1968 which
render the application of the legislation liable to the excluded or
modified by an Order in Council. Moreover, ihe regulation of
hovercraft will have impact} not-~only’ on the legislation pertaining to
carriage of goods by sea but also on legislations pertaining to carriage
by air and even on road traffic legislation, India has no legislation cor-
responding to the Hovercraft Act, 1968 ‘of-England:: These aspects
need further cxamination and we, therefore, do not think it appro-
priate to include “Hovercraft” part of Admiralty Law for the present.
This can be easily done at a later stage :if found necessary.

(4) It is true that the continued application of U.K. Admiralty Act, 1861
should be scrapped and the Colonial Courts of Admiralty (Indian)
Act, 1890 the Coloniat Admiralty Jurisdiction Act. 1891 will have
to be repealed. This can be done by the addition of a provision in
the draft legislation prepared by the Committee on the lines indicated
later. The Admiralty Offences (Colonial) Act, 1849 and the Ad-
miralty Jurisdiction (India) Act, 1890 have to be repealed also but
it is necessary to add a provision in the proposed legislation confer-
ting jurisdiction in respect of admiralty offences.

(5) The decision of the Supreme Court in Elizabeth's case’ does not: call
for any changes in the proposed legislation. The Merchant Ship-
ping Act, 1958 and the Carriage by Air Act, 1925 may require
amendments in the light of the observations made in paras 81 and 82
of the judgment. This can be considered separately later when these
enactments are takén up for ‘consideration. s

8.5. From the above discussions, st will be clear that the enactment of
legislation by Parliament in the field of admiralty law is‘imperative both ag a
matter of prestige and as a matter of necessity. India’ is now ‘an indépendérit
nation and it does not behove its sovereignty that a British Statute enacted ‘a
century and more ago should govern its maritime Jaw. Also, with vast ex-
‘pansion in India’s maritime trade and commerce in recent years, with. clear
wprospects of their further expansion in the coming years consequent 6n liberali-
sation of its economic policies and the emergence of :trad@ as a global
phenomenon, this branch of the law will assume greater importance in coming
qyears and it is necessary and desirable that it should be covered by specific
dndian legislation. We. therefore. agree with the Parveen Singh: Committee
that an attempt should be made to draft such legislation. we

8.6. As pointed out earlier, this task is to a latge extent, rendered easy
iby the existence of recent U.K. legislation’ on the topic. The maritime law
administered in this country has been based on the English law al! along and it
is also that law which has to a considerable extent influenced the law adminis-
‘tered all over the world. It will, therefore, be not only expedient but also
matural that our proposed legislation should be substantially based on the legis-
lation in U.K., but with improvements and additions necessary to meet our needs.
After considering the provisions of the U.K. .Act and the legislation suggested
Iby the Parveen Singh Committee, we have prepared a draft Admiralty Act
which is appended to this report as Annexure VIIT.

8.7. Though the proposed draft Bill is explanatory in itself. we how-
ever, think it necessary to briefly outline the main features of the proposed legis-
jation. This may be considered in two parts: (i) the court which should
exercise admiralty jurisdiction: and (ii) the scope and extent of their jurisdic-
tion. The first of these topics is dealt with in greater detail in the succeeding
‘Chapter 9. We shall here deal with some principal aspects of the second topic.

8.8. A wide range of subjects now fall within the ambit of admiralty
gurisdiction, particularly those relating to maritime claims, contracts, torts, etc.
There are various aspects touching admiralty jurisdiction in regard to location, per-
sons, aliens, property, vessels, hydroplanes. etc. and certain principles governing
tortious liability in admiralty matters which are governed by judicial precedents


41

and which it is unnecessary to spell out in this legislation. The principal feature
of admiralty actions, however, has been a distinction between proceedings
in rem and proceedings ii personam. Admiralty law confers on a claimant
a right in rem to proceed against a ship or cargo as distinguished from a right
in personam against the owner. The principal characteristics of these types
of action have been elucidated in Eligabeth’s case’ and it is unnecessary to
elaborate on the same here. As the Court has pointed out:

“The admiralty action in rem, as practised in England or in the United
States, is not followed by many States. In the countries following the
civil law, all proceedings are initiated by an action in personam.

Court having competence in the matter has the power to order an attach-
ment of the ship if it is convinced that the plaintiff is likely to lose his
security unless the ship is detained within jurisdiction. The hands of
the court are not fettered by the technicalities of an action in personam
ane the scope of the proceedings are not limited to maritime liens or
claims ...

The real purpose of arrest in both the English and civil law systems
is to obtain security as a guarantee for satisfaction of the decree, although
arrest in England is the basis of assumption of jurisdiction, unless the
owner has submitted to jurisdiction. In any event, once the arrest is
made, and the owner has entered appearance, the proceedings continue
in presonam. All actions in the civil law whether maritime or not—are
in personam and arrest of a vessel is permitted even in respect of non-
maritime claims. Admiralty actions in England, on the other hand,
whether in rem or in personam are confined to well defined maritime
liens or claims and directed against the res (ship, cargo and freight)
which is the subject matter of the dispute or any other ship in the same
beneficial ownership as the res in question.”

In the light of these observations and having regard to the importance, in
maritime matters. of an effective remedy against the ship, we have proposed
to retain the distinction between an action in rem and an action in personam.
But at the same time, the proposed enactment confers discretion to the Court
to decide the more appropriate form of action in any particular case at any stage,
make appropriate directions and orders and grant necessary relief so.as to ensure
that technicalities as to the form of action do not defeat the valid claims and
rights of parties’. Supplementary provisions have been included to ensure,
imer alia, that the admiralty jurisdiction includes the jurisdiction to entertain a
claim for wages in relation to an Indian ship". Provisions have been included
in respect of the effect of a sale as well as the manner of distribution of the
proceeds of the sale of any ship or property and the order of priority of claims
in regard thereto". Priority has been accorded to the wages and other sums
due to the crew on a ship, “the wages for a period of six months receiving a
higher priority than the balance of the wages so due”. The topic of attach-
ment of maritime liens and their extinguishment has been dealt with®. Also
included is a power conferred on the Central Government to make rules govern-
ing procedure and practice in the Courts in admiralty matters, including court
fees and costs.

8.9. The procedure in admiralty matters will be the same as that in
suits and interlocutory applications in civil courts. ‘The Code of Civil Proce-
dure (V of 1908) will. therefore, be applicable, as far as may be to these
proceedings. However. having regard to the position that sometimes difficult
issues involving technical appraisal may arise, a provision has been made
enabling the court to avail the assistance of assessors whenever necessary. A
provision for a first appeal and a provision enabling reference to arbitration have
also been included in the proposed legislation".

8.10. It is necessary to refer to one more aspect at this juncture. The
existing statutes contain certain provisions which need to be noted. The
Merchant Shippine Act, 1958 contains a definition of ‘High Court’ in relation
to jurisdiction and also enacts provisions authorising the detention of a foreign


42

ship’. The Indian Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 1925 contains provisions
imposing certain liabilities and responsibilities and conferring certain rij ights
immunities on the carrier. We have left these provisions untouched as they
do not directly impinge on the subject matter of the draft legislation proposed
by this report, and they can be considered when these Acts are taken up for
revision. The proposed legislation, however, calls for the repeal of certain
cxisting statutes and a recommendation and provision to this effect have been
made".

8.11. The above broad outline of the draft legislation proposed will, we
hope, facilitate a proper appreciation of the provisions of the tt (Annexure
II).

FOOTNOTES—CHAPTER 8

1. JT 1992 (2) SC 65.

2. There appears to have been similar legislation in Singapore and other countries but it
is perhaps unnecessary to consider them in view of the fullness of the UK Legislation.

3. And this report as well, as Annexure I to गा.

4. See Chapter 7. ante.

5. “Hovercraft” means a vehicle which is designed to be supported when in motion wholly
or partly by air expelled from the vehicle to form a cushion of which the boundaries
include the ground, water or other surface beneath the vehicle: S. 4(1) of U.K. Hover-
craft Act, 1968.

6, JT 1992—2 SC 63.

7. U. K. Supreme Court Act, 1981.

8. JT 1992 (2) SC 65.

9. Proposed Admiralty Act at Annexure VIII, Section 8.

10. Id, Section 9.

11. Id, sections 10, 11, 12.

12. Id, Section 12(2) (b).

13, Id, Section 13.

14, Id, Section 19,

15. Id, Sections 15 to 18.

16. Sections 3 (15); 342 of the Merchant Slipping Act, 1958,
17. Id at Footnote 9, Section 20.


CHAPTER 9
ADMIRALTY COURTS

9.1, The question as to the designation of the courts that should be vested
with admiralty jurisdiction is one of great importance. India is a large country
with sea coast of the length of approximately 5700 kms. abutting it in the three
directions except the north. It has always been having a vast extent of maritime
traffic and trade and its history shows that many early empires and rulers en-
couraged international trade of various kinds of goods. In recent years, goods
‘traffic into and out of India has increased so tremendously that there are at
present 11 major ports and 163 minor ports in the country. The number of
foreign fiag vessels that visited major Indian ports for loading or unloading of
goods in the past three years are as follows:

Year No, of Vessels
1990-91 , 2 we ke 5528
1991-92, : पु पु पु पु ». 5462
1992-93 पु . पु पु . ~ 6129

Full information regarding the extent of loading and unloading of goods
at minor ports is not readily available. The total tonnage of overseas trade
carried by vessels carrying Indian flags during the 185६ three years is as under:—

Year Total Trade
(In million metric tonnes)
1990-91. . . . . . + 38.86
1991-92 पु . . . . » 39,53
1992-93. . पु . पु » 42.66

The above statistics furnish a rough idea of the extent of India’s shipping
trade. With the recent liberalisation of Indian Laws regarding export and import,
there is no doubt that these activities will receive greater spurt in the coming
years. With the increase in the number of vessels plying, passenger travelling
and goods carried between India and other countries, the magnitude of maritime
claims, disputes and litigation is also bound to increase. It is, therefore, necessary
to clearly define the Indian courts which will exercise jurisdiction in admiralty
Maritime matters.

9.2. The discusions contained in Chapters 2 and 3, aute. clearly shows
that, by accident of history, maritime or admiralty jurisdiction was exercised,
till India became independent, and even after it became a Sovereign republic, only
by the High Courts of Madras, Bombay and Calcutta. With the reconstitution
of the territories of the various States, this jurisdiction has also vested in the
High Courts on which the jurisdiction of the above three High Courts developed
as a result of territorial readjustments', To a large extent this position has got
stabilized with the decision of the Supreme Court in the recent Elizabeth's case
but there may be some points of ambiguity as to which of these High Courts
should exercise jurisdiction in such matters. Before, however, adverting to this
aspect of the issue which needs clarification, it is necessary to deal with the totally
different recommendation that has been made by the Praveen Singh Committe
report. As indicated earlier, that Committee has suggested that the admiralty
jurisdiction should be taken away from the High Courts and should be vested
in specially constituted Admiralty Courts with one Appellate Court empowered
to hear appeals from their decision. This is a somewhat revolutionary suggestion,
inspired by the recent trend of constitution of administrative tribunals’ which
needs careful consideration and examination.

9.3. It is first necessary to analyse and examine the reasons given by the
Committee in support of its recommendation for the constitution of Admiralty

43
7-4 M of L&JIND/95


44 यु

Courts‘, The Scheme envisaged by the Committee proceeds on the following

lines:

@

The present law vests admiralty jurisdiction only in the three High
Courts of Madras, Bombay and Calcutta and there is divided of inion
on the question whether these Courts can exercise effective jurisdiction
in the absence of clear cut and precise provisions of the Admiralty
Act itself.

(2) The admiralty jurisdiction of a Court cannot be restricted only to the

(3)

4)

6)

territory where a court is located and should extend to the entire
coast of India and inland waters as parties to maritime disputes are
dispersed all over India.

The exercise of admiralty jurisdiction and the application of the law
relating to it is an exclusive speciality and it is necessary to develop
adequate expertise in the specialised field. The present system under
which the judge in whom admiralty jurisdiction is vested has also
to deal with other litigation before the High Court, does not allow
him sufficient time to concentrate on and acquire specialised know-
ledge in this field.

Admiralty jurisdiction has international ramifications as the court has
powers to arrest and even sel) off the vessel involved whether it be an
Indian or a foreign one. This not only makes expertise in the field
of law a necessary desideratum; it also renders it necessary for the
Central Government to constitute independent courts of admiralty
and to ensure that maritime claims receive undivided attention of ex-
perts in their settlement. A maritime country like occurs an ill afford
to live with an outdated law admittedly coming in the way of growth
of our shipping industry on the desired lines.

According to the Committee’s assessment based on the experience of
its members the High Courts ordinarily take not less than six years
to dispose of an admiralty suit. The delay in civi! courts are under-
stood to be much greater. With the jurisdiction of the Admiralty
Courts being made extensive as in U.K. and Singapore, India can
become a centre of admiralty litigation which an also be the earner of
valuable foreign exchange, only if the delays in courts are minimised.

(6) The Admiralty Courts to be constituted should in no way be inferior

0)

(8)

(9)

9.4.

to the High Courts. The qualifications, experience and mode of

appointment of the judges of these courts should be strictly in accor-

dance with the provisions of the Constitution. For the appointment

of judges of the High Courts, the format of the Central Administra-

five feibunal Act, 1985 as interpreted by the Supreme Court’ can
utilised.

To avoid conflicting decisions the rules governing procedural matters
in these courts should be made by the Central Government. Also
the safeguards provided by the existing rules of the Bombay High
Court can be incorporated in framing the rules.

To avoid divergent decisions, in different Admiralty Courts, it is
necessary to provide for an appeal to one Single Appeal Court of
Admiralty from the decision of the Admiralty Courts at the first
instance. No further appeals or revisions should be provided except
that an appeal to the Supreme Court may be provided on questions
of law, jurisdiction or issues of national or international importance,
subject to a grant of Special Leave by the Supreme Court.

The Central Government should prescribe different court fees and

expenses but no such fees/expenses wou'd be payable by crew of ves- |
sels.

The Commission has considered the recommendation of the abov

Committee carefully in all its aspects and is unable to accept the suggestions «


45

the Committee to delink admiralty jurisdiction from High Courts and vest it in
Admiralty Courts. The Commission would like to enunciate first its broad views
on the general issues involved in the recommendations and, then, take up for con-
sideration the specific points made by the Committee.

9.5, It is ue that, as an aftermath of the Constitution of India and the
growing awareness of the common man regarding the rights and the legal | Teme:
dies available to him, there has been an unprecedented explosion of litigation in
the courts of the country and in particular in the High Courts. This coop inion
the consequential problems of delay accentuated by frequent differences of -opinic
among the High Courts has Prompted the Government to consider the possibility
of an alternative forum for the citizen to air his grievances, particularly in areas
of speciality. The 42nd amendinent to the Constitution gave legislative recogni-
tion to this line of thought by enacting Part XIV-A in the Constitution compris-
ing of Articles 323-4 and 323-B and authorising the setting up of National or
State Level Tribunals in place of Courts in regard to certain areas of adminis-
tration. It is unnecessary to set out fully the provisions.

Suflice it 10 say that the most important features of the legislation consti-
tuting a tribunal under either of these provisions are—

(a) that it may provide for the exclusion of the jurisdiction of all courts
except that of the Supreme Court under Article 136 with respect to
all or any of the matters falling within the jurisdiction of the said
Tribunal; and

(9) that it may provide for the transfer to such tribunal of all cases
which, at the time of its establishment, are pending before the courts
or any other authorities in regard to the matters entrusted to the
tribunal by the law in question.

The Parveen Siitgh Commitee has, apparently, drawn inspiration from the afore
said provisions as interpreted in Sampat Kumar's case’ in making its recommen-
dations. The Committee has, however, suggested the constitution of Admiralty
Courts and not Admiralty Tribunals as envisaged in the above provisions’, per-
haps because ‘admiralty’ is not one of the subjects with reference to which a
tribunal can be constituted under either of the above provisions.

9.6. (a) With regard to the proposal to constitute Admiralty Tribunals to
the exclusion of High Courts’ jurisdiction under Article 226 and 227, an impor-
tant question arises whether this is permissible under the existing provisions of
the Constitution. We have referred to Article 323(A) & (8) which confers powers
on the appropriate legislatures to enact laws excluding the jurisdiction of the
High Courts. A close scrutiny of Articles 323(A} & (8) would make it clear
that the former provides for setting up of administrative tribunals for adjudica-
tion of disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of
service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the
affairs of the Union or a State or any local or any other authority. Article 323(B)
also confers power on the appropriate legislature to enact law for the adjudication
or trial by tribunals of disputes, complaints or offences with respect to all or any
of the matters specified in Clause (2) which refers to levy. collection and enforce-
ment of tax, foreign exchange, import and export across customs frontiers, indus-
trial and labour disputes, land reforms, ceiling on urban property, election to
either Houses of Parliament or the House or either House of Legislature of
States, production, procurement and supply and distribution of food stuff and
other goods. By no stretch of imagination any law relating to admiralty juris-
diction would fall within the matters specified in Clause (2) of Article 323(B).

9.6. (0) Law with respect to admiralty jurisdiction falls within Entry Nos.
24, 25 and 95 of List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Corstitution. Parliament
has exclusive jurisdiction to enact law with respect to matters svecified in these
three Entries which would cover the entire admiralty jurisdiction. The matters spe-
cified in Entry Nos. 24, 25 and 95 of List I do not find place under Article 323A)
or 323(B). There ४8, therefore, no escape from the conclusion that no tribunal for
(A) or 323(B). There is, therefore, no escape from the conclusion that no tribunal


46

tor adjudicating the admiralty matters can be constituted to the exclusion of the
High Courts’ jurisdiction. Moreover, there is a widespread feeiing that Tribunais
can be no good substitute for the High Courts. Some of ine observations of the
Supreme Court in R.K. Jain’s case’ and the observations made by Ahmadi, J
in a recent address to the Ahmedabad Income-tax Bar Association’ gave exptes-
sion to this feeling. It has also recently been pointed out by tue Andhra Pra-
desh High Court’s that the power of judicial review vesied in the High Coust
under Articles 226 and 227 is a basic feature of the Constituiion which
cannot be taken away even by a costitutional amendment. The High Court in
that case entertained a writ petition and interfered with the orders of the Admi-
nistrative Tribunal. A Special Leave Petition has been filed in the Supereme
Court and the matter has been referred to a large Bench for considering the whole
issue. These developments do indicate that it would not be proper Or desirable
to deny the power of judicial review to the High Court against the orders of the
Admiralty Court or Tribunal as suggested by the Parveen Singh Committee.

{b) The suggestion for the constitution of admiralty courts instead of
tribunals does not improve the situation either. Under Articles 226 and 227 of
the Constitution all courts and tribunals are under the supervisory jurisdiction of
the High Courts and their orders are subject to judicial review by the High
Courts. Thus, even if admiralty courts are constituted their orders would be
subject to judicial review by the High Courts.

(c) In the absence of any constitutional provision, neither Parliament nor
State Legisiaturee have legislative compelence to enact a law excluding the juris-
diction of the High Courts. The Supreme Court has emphasised that admivalty
jurisdiction, despite peculiarities of its origin and growth is, nevertheless, a part
of the totality of jurisdiction vested in the High Court as a superior court of re-
cord. High Courts being Courts of unlimited jurisdiction and repository of all
judical power under the Constitution, except what is excluded, are competent to
deal with admiralty matters. The Consititution does not confer any power on
legislature to curtail the High Courts’ admiralty jurisdiction. Therefore, the re-
commedations of the Parveen Singh Committee for excluding the High Courts’
jurisdiction cannot be accepted.

9.7. But, whether we call it a court or tribunal, such a body can be aliow-
ed to replace the existing jurisdiction of a High Court only for compelling rea-
sons. The principal reason why tibunals have been thought of to replace ihe exist-
ing courts is that they provide a specialised body which can offer the atiractions
of special expertise ensuring speedy disposa.. lf a Tribunal is considered better in
an area of taxation, it is because it is possible to constitute such a tribunal with a
judicial member and an Acountant or Technical member. The former of these is
drawn from the higher subordinate judiciary, profession of lawyers and the legal
service of the centre or State while the latter is drawn from the profession of ac-
countants or high officers of the relevant Government depatiment, This combina-
tion makes it possible to have a body which has special familiarity with and know
ledge and expertise of tax laws. Likewise, in an administrative tribunal, the
judicial members are judges, lawyers and legai men while the administrative
members are drawn from higher ranks of the service who are expected to have
gained first hand knowledge and experience in the administration of service rules
and service jurisprudence, Even these experiments have not been universally
acclaimed and there is a strong opinion that the jurisdiction of Courts should not
be taken away even in such matters”. In the area of admiralty law, unfortunately,
there is no such specilised body that can be thought of. One would think that
the lawyers specialising in this area are very few and they are unlikely to accept
service of this kind. Indeed, even in the case of the other tribunals, it is found
that the response from practising lawyers is very discouraging. There is no other
service which can contribute persons with special knowledge or experience in
this field to man these courts. Indeed, even the Parveen Singh Committee has
only suggested that the Admiralty Courts should be constituted in the same way
as the ‘ich Courts. The requirements of the situation can be met by recruit-
ing lawyers practising in this branch of the law, to the extent possible, to High
Court benches rather than go in search of such personnel to constitute a number
of admiralty courts. Except for the nomenclature, these would be no real im-
provement in the situation.


47

9.8. Apart from a need to ensure a specialised body, a requirement which,
as we have indicated, is not likely to be tultilled here—the justification postu-
lated for delinking any special branch of litigation from the courts (High Courts)
is the huge pendency and delay on the part of the ° High. Courts in disposing of
the regular and normal litigation before it. The Commission is of the opinion
that no data have been made availble for considering such ground to exist. The
statistics referred to by the Conumittee” are incomplete and refer only to the posi-
tion in one of the Hogh Courts, viz., the Bombay High Court”. These figures
are® so insigniticant compared to the total pendency in the various courts that they
do not warrant any such serious apprehension as to justify taking away the juris-
diction from the High Courts. On the question of delay, one has to take note
of the fact that, in maritime matters, a certain amount of delay is inevitable in
view of the fact that the parties interested in any one litigation may be many
and that very often service is required to be effected on foreign nationals and
companies, a process which takes time. That apart, even the Committee has sug-
gested one tier of appeal as of right under its scheme and it is not conducive to
quick disposal. The truth appears to be that, up to now, no special attention has
so far been paid to devise way and means of expeditious disposal of admiralty
matters. A special effort and concentration on disposal of this type of litigation
is bound to hasten matters and there is no reason to believe that the existing
difficulties are insurmountable. Indeed the suggestion of the Committee that it
will be sufficient to have four admiralty courts in India” is a clear giveaway
which indicates that the problem of magnitude and delay is not a very serious
one in this branch of the law.

9.9. It is true that, in certain branches of law, diffetence of judicial opinion
between several High Courts stands in the way of an early settlement of the Jaw
and the creation of a single body might be helpful in obviating difference of
opinion and sorting them out itself by creation of large benches. But this is a
criticism based on a fundamental misapprehension. The system of administering
justice we have under our Constitution, contemplates a hierarchy of courts. There
is, therefore, bound to be some conflict of opinion between courts and this can.
not be helped. India being a vast country, having several States and eighteen
High Courts administering same laws and also different laws, are bound to have
different views on different matters. This is inherent in a fedaral structure and
there is no way to eliminate conflict of decisions altogether. Rather, we are of
the view that conflict of decisions is desirable at certain times as thougs that
process the law has developed and progressed to meet the needs of the society
and that would be so particularly in he branch of admiralty jurisdiction which
is yet to develop in our country. That apart, the Commission does not think
that this problem has assumed any such dimensions at all in admiralty matters.
The fact that in the 57 years that have lapsed since the Government of India
Act, 1935, no such difference of opinion seems to have occurred which was
considered worthwhile to be brought up to the Federal or Supreme Court shows
that this apprehension is more theoretical than practical, It may be that, with
the passage of time, the problems of pendency and conflict of opinion may assume
Jarger proportions and may have to be tackled by appropriate measures. The con-
mission is of the view that, for the present at least, these are not of such mag-
nitude as to take away the jurisdiction of the High Courts in these matters.

9.10. On the contrary, there are compelling reasons why the High Court's
jurisdiction should be retained. In the first Place, this is a field in which it was
considered necessary, even in the last century, to vest jurisdiction only in the
High Courts". Secondly, the jurisprudence in’ this area is yet to develop. and
tecedents of other countries, customary practices of the sea and international con-
ventions which have the force of law in practice need to be interpreted authorita-
tively and the High Courts’ primacy in achieving this object cannot be denied.
Thirdly, the arm of the courts’ jurisdiction in these areas is long and powerful.
It can arrest. detain, impound and sell vessels and property belonging to nationals
of various parts of the world. As the Committee has pointed out, it is in the
nature of an international jurisdiction and it should be dealt with by a well esta-
blished judicial body which has a status in the country’s Constitution and in
the eyes of foreign nationals as well. This indeed should be a paramount consi-
deration for a decision in favour of retaining the jurisdicton of the Hgh Courts
in admiralty matters. :


48

9.11. There is also another aspect of the present pendency in admiralty
matters that calls for consideration. It lias been pointed out earlier that the figures
of pendency in the Bombay High Court give no cause for alarm. ‘That apart,
there is simple way of reducing the impact of these factors. At present only
some of the High Courts exercise jurisdiction in admiralty matteis. As pointed
out by the Committee itself the admiralty jurisdiction of the court cannot be
restricted only to the territory where it is located but should extend to i
coast of India and its iniand, waters. On the basis that admiralty juri
vested in all the Higi Courts of India having original |: mand that the
jurisdiction is not restricted only to the territory of the siate where tlie High Court
is locaed, a provision may be engrafted enabling the Supreme Court, suo motu or
on application, to transfer any admiralty suit from one High Court to any other in
the country for such reasons at it may consider appropriate alter hearing the par-
ties. Even the existing litigation in three High Courts can be distributed over
all the Indian High Courts and can be disposed of much more expeditiously than

at present.

9.12. In the above discussion the points adveried to in the Parveen Singh
Committee Report have aiready been dealt with and we do not ccasider it neces-
sary to discuss it further by referring to each point again separately. The Com-
mission is, therefore, of the opinion that existing admiralty jurisdiction should
continue with all the High Courts.

9.13. The High Couris will be dealing with the admiralty jurisdiction as
in the case of company and testamentary and other matters, on iis original side.
Generally the original jurisdiction in company and testamentary matters is exer-
cised by a single judge of the High Court and appeals against his orders and
judgments lie to a Division Bench of the Court. This should also be the position
in admiralty matters. This will meet the need of having an appeliate forum,
adverted to by the Parveen Singh Committee.

9.14, The Parveen Singh Committee expressed an apprehension that due
to congestion of cases in the High Court, perhaps, it may not be able to deal
with the admiralty matters expeditiously. As already discussed, there is no doubt
some explosion of litigation in the High Courts and there is delay in disposal of
cases but that by itself does not justify an attempt to divest the High Courts of
the admiralty jurisdiction at least for the present, especially in the absence of
full statistics regarding the pendency of arrears in this jurisdiction. The Com-
mission is, therefore, of the opinion that for the present the High Courts should
continue to exercise admiralty jurisdiction exclusively. If it is found later on,
that the volume of work is so large that the High Courts are not abe to cope up
with the work, the Central Government may, in consultation with the Chief
Justice of India and the concerned Higi Court take steps to empower the Prin-
cipal Civil Court of the relevant District to exercise such powers in exercise of
admiralty jurisdiction as may be considered necessary having regard to the cir-
cumstances then prevailing. In such an event, an appeal against the order
of the admiralty court would lie to High Court both on_ facts and on
law. But, for the present, we are firmly of the opinion that the High Court should
exclusively exercise admiralty jurisdiction, In the proposed draft legislation,
necessary provisions on the above lines have been made.

9.15. So far we have been discussing the admiralty jurisdiction in civil
matters. Criminal jurisdiction in admiralty offences is governed by different
considerations. Section 4 of the Indian Penal Code”, makes it possible for an
ordinary Court in India to try, in the normal exercise of iis jurisdiction any
offence committed by an Indian citizen in any place within or outside India. It
also authorises the prosecution and trial in India of any person for an offence
committed on any ship or aircraft registered in India irrespective of ihe location
of the aircraft at the time of the crime. This jurisdiction is based on the principle
that a ship registered in India is, in law, a floating island representing Indian
territory. This general jurisdiction apart, certain statutes also confer jurisdiction
on Indian court regarding “Admiralty Offences”. The Admiralty Offences (Colo-
nial) Act, 1849", which enabled the authorities and courts in a British colony

to try offences committed on seas or water-ways where the Admiral has jurisdic-
tion where made applicable to India as it then was, by the Admiralty Jurisdiction
(India) Act, 1860" with the proviso that any person in India or brought to India
accused of these offences could claim that he should be tried only by the Supreme


49

Court of the Presidency in question”. These provisions continue to be operative
in India.

9.16. It appears that the Merchant Shipping Act, 1894 of the United King-
dom also made such offences triable in England as well as in India by ordinary
criminal court. Sectioa 684 to 687 of the said Act are relevant in this context.
But they need not be elaborately set out here since the British Merchant Shipp-
ing Act has been repealed in its application to India by our Merchant Shipp-
ing Act, 1958". This Act contains a number of provisions regarding the offences
under the Act” but there is none corresponding to sections 684 and 687 of the
British Act set out earlier.

9.17. It is clear that the applicability of the Admiralty Offences (Colonial)
Act of 1849 and The Admiralty Jurisdiction (India) Act, 1860 to India should
be repealed. Those legislations were enacted at a time when India was a British
possession. Their continued application to India even after its independence
and its constitution as a Republic is derogatory to the sovereignty of India.
These two Acts have, therefore, to be repealed with immediate effect.

9.18. The question. however, reminds whether we should enact some pro-
visions corresponding to those contained in the above enactments to facilitate the
apprehension, prosecution, trial and punishment of persons who are guilty of
offences in India or in places beyond the territorial jurisdiction of India. We
have considered this question and we are of opinion that it is unnecessary to
re-enact the above provisions as the situations envisaged by them are fully
covered by the provisions of Sections 3 and 4 of the Indian Penal Code read
with Section 188 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The position thus will be
that, while civil admiralty matters can be dealt with by the High Court exclu-
sively, unless and until provision is made enabling other courts to deal with such
matters, but criminal offences committed on the high seas and navigable waters
will be subject to the ordinary law of the land.

FPOOTNOTES—CHAPTER 9

1. This would clearly include the High Courts of Andhra, Orissa,Gujarat and Kerala and
perhaps some others also.

2. Elizabeth's Case, IT 1992 (2) SC p. 65.

3. See Articles 323-A and B of the Constitution. The Central Administrative Tribunal and

the National Tax Tribunal, a proposal for the Constitutional of which is under consie-
deration, are examples of this trend. .

4. A draft I ion for the constitution of such courts has also been prepared by the
Committee which is also annexed to this report.

5... Sampat Kumar's case 7 ATR 1987 SC 386.

6. ATR 1987 SC 386.

7. Tt would seen that the Committee had not kept the distinction in mind.
&

9.

(1993) 4 SCC 119,
. IT 1994 (2) Journal Section 1.
9A. 5. Hari Nath V. State of Andhra Pradesh, 19933) Andh LT 471,
10, JT 1994(2) Journal Section 1.
11, Tn para 13 of its report.

12, The Commitree says that “the number of suits filed under the maritime law with the va
rious civil courts are far greater” but, with Admiralty jurisdiction presently vested
only in three High Coutts it is not clear what the Committee here refers to.

13, Both the numbers and amounts referred to. More recent figures are unfortunately not
readily available.

14, Para 16 of the Report.

15. Initially,it may have been because the ships and ship owners belonged to the U.K. and
they desired to safeguard their interests. But, on second thoughts, it will be realised
that it is also prudent.

16. Sce, for example, the observations of Kochu Thomman, J. in para 91 JT 1992 (2) SC
65 at p. 105, extracted earlier,

17, The Indian Pancl Code (Act No. XLV—OF 1860), Section 4.

18. The Adm Offences (Colonial) Act, 1849 (12 & 13 Vict., 2. 96).

19, The Admiralty Juvisdiction (India) Act, 1860 (23 & 24 Vict., C. 88), Section 1.

20, 1d, Section 2.

21, The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, Section 465(2) and Part JI of the Schedule thereto.
22. 11, Section 436.



CHAPTER 10
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

हि 10.1. The jurisdiction of courts in a State is the manifestation of the State’s
independent sovereign Power as a nation. The jurisdiction of the nation within
its own territory is necessarily exclusive and absolute. It is susceptible of no
limitation unless imposed by the State itself. Therefore. admiralty jurisdiction is
an essential aspect of judicial sovereignty which under the Constitution and the
laws is exercised by the High Court as 2 superior court of record administering
justice in relation to persons and things within its jurisdiction. The power to
enforce claims against foreign ships is an essential attribute of admiralty jurisdic-
tion and it is assumed over such ships while they are within the jurisdiction of
the High Court by arresting and detaining them.

10.2. The Supreme Court has Pointed out recently': “All persons and
things within the waters of a State fall within its jurisdiction unless specifically
curtailed or regulated by rules of international law’. The power of arrest a
foreign vessel, while in the waters of a coastal State, in respect of a maritime
claim, whenever arising, is a demonstrable manifestation and an essential attri-
bute of territorial sovereignty. This power is recognised by several interna-
tional conventions. These conventions contain the unified rules of law drawn
from different legal systems. Although many of these conventions are yet to
be ratified by India, they embody principles of law recognised by the generality
of maritime States and can, therefore, be regarded as part of our common law.
Absence of ratification of these conventions is apparently not because of any
policy disagreement, as is clear from active and fruitful Indian participation in
the formulation of rules adopted by the conventions, but perhaps of other circum-
stances, such as lack of adequate and specialised machinery for implementation
of the various international conventions by co-ordinating the concerned Depart-
ments of the Government. Such a specialised body of legal and technical experts
can facilitate adoption of internationally unified rules by national legislation.
It is appropriate that sufficiet attention is paid to this aspect of the matter by the
concerned authorities. Perhaps the law Commission of India, endowed as it
ought to be with sufficient authority, status and independence, can render valu-
able help in this regard. Delay in the adoption of international conventions
which are intended to facilitate trade hinders the economic growth of the nation.”

10.3. The Commission has discussed in detail, earlier in this report, the
various international conventions/protocols and agreements to which the Indian
Government has been a party and also indicated the extent to which our country
has implemented these conventions, protocols and agreements. It has also i
cated the stages at which the issues of implementation of each of the various
protocols and conventions stand. All that is now necessary to be done in this
regard, in the Jight of the observations of the Supreme Court quoted earlier, is
speedy action to review the position and expedite implementation of the conven-
tions. agreements and protocols wihout further delay. The Supreme Court has
commented on the lack of adequate specialised machinery for implementation
of the various international conventions. A persual of the dates of these conven-
tions and the stage of implementation referred to earlier will show that the
Government has not given enough priority to follow-up action in these matters.
We view with great concern the apathy and indifference which have characterised
the actions of the Government in this regard and regret that the process of deci-
sion-making has been caught up in bureaucratic delays and tangles. We have
considered the possibilities of our direct contribution in this regard. We have,
however, come to the conclusion that as ratification (or otherwise) of international
conventions will primarily be a matter of State poticv and as decisions on the
issue will denend unon up-to-date information reeardine the attitudes of other
countries, procedural and other difficulties that the country and the
trade may face and appreciation of technical data: it will not be

51
8-4 M of L&JIND'9S


52

feasible or practical for the Commission itself to take on this exercise. We
would, therefore, Tecommend that the Government should immediately constitute
a Review Committee to undertake this task, the Committee may comprise of
Officers of the status of Additional Secretaries in the Home Ministry. the Legal
and treaties Division of the External Affairs Ministry, the Ministry of Surface
Transport and the Department of Legal Affairs in the Ministry of Law. The
Committee may examine in detail, in respect of each of the several conyentions/
Protocols and agreements which have been ratified by India but still remain
to be implemented, the cause for delay and ensure that speedy action is taken
to implement these international conventions without further celay. The Com-
mittee may also review the latest position in respect of other pretocols and con-
ventions which have been adopted by other countries and are internationally
in force but which are yet to be ratified by the Indian Government and make
recommendations as to their ratification or otherwise in the immediate future.

10.4. Jt has been pointed out earlier that the Admiratty Jurisdiction, despite
the peculiarities of its origin and growth is a part of the totality of jurisdiction
vested in the High Court as a superior court of record, and it is not a distinct
and separate jurisdiction as was once the Position in England before the unifica-
tion of courts. The 1890 and 1891 Acts specifically conferred admiralty iurisdic-
tion on. the Indian High Courts by reason of their being courts of unlimited
jurisdiction. These Acts did not create any separate or distinct. and separate
jurisdiction, but merely equated the Indian High Courts to the position of the
English High Court (united and consolidated as that Court has been since 1875)
for the exercise of admiralty powers within the jurisdiction of the former. The
contrary view expressed in some of the decisions of the High Courts referred to
earlier was clearly wrong. We have also pointed out that it is not permissible
or desirable to take away the jurisdiction of the High Courts in admiralty matters
and vest the same in sepatate courts constituted for the Purpose as recommend-
ed by the Parveen Singh Committee. As it is proposed that admiralty jurisdiction
should extend over all navigable waters in the country, it is not necessary to
mit the jurisdiction only to High Courts whose territories have a coastal belt.
Hence, it is recommended that the Admiralty Jurisdiction mist continue with
all Indian High Courts as part of their original jurisdiction, with a provision
empowering the extension of this jurisdiction to other principal civil courts in
case a necessity therefor should arise in future. Details of this recommendation
have been dealt with in Chapter 9.

10.5. The Cortimission har earlier pointed out that once a foreien ship is
arrested in Indian waters by an order, the High Court, in exercise of the admiralty
jurisdiction vested in it by statue, or inherent in it as a court of record, in Tespect
of any maritime claim against its owner. wherever the cause of action may have
arisen, and whether or not the ship is subsequently released by the owner on fur-
nishing security, proceedings must continue against the owners as in any other
suit. The arrest of the vessel while in Indian waters by an order of the concerned
High Court attracts the jurisdiction of the competent court to proceed with the
पांच, as in the case of any other suit, as an action against the owner, and any
decree obtained by the plaintiff should be executable against any property of the
owner available within its jurisdiction, including the security furnished by him
for release of the vessel. However, as discussed earlier. it is recommended that
the question whether any action should be instituted or permitted to continue
in. rem or in. personam should be left to the concemed High Court which will
examine each case on its merits and take appropriate action in the interests of
justice. This aspect and other recommendations as to the nature. and extent of
court's jurisdiction.in admiralty matters have been discussed in detail in Chapter 8.

10.6. Reference has been made earlier in the report to a question of delay
in courts focussed by the Parveen Singh Committee. This has been dealt with
in detail earlier in Chapter 9. As a further step to counter the problems of delay,
we recommend the incorporation of a provision for arbitration in proceedings in
admiralty matters which, we expect, will prove effective in the atmosphere cur-
rently prevalent everywhere reflecting a tendency to settle disputes by arbitration
in preference to litigation. Another special feature of the proposed legislation
is a provision on the line of Section 140 of the Code of Civil Procedure enabling
the Court to avail of the assistance of assessors in technical matters.


53

10.7. In the light of the discussions contained in earlier Chapters of this
report, it is also recommended—

@ that the wide range of subjects now definitcly within Indian Admi-
talty Jurisdiction, particularly those relating to maritime crimes, con-
tracts, torts, etc. should continue with the admiralty courts:

(७) that the Indian Admiralty Courts extend the jurisdiction to all waters
that are infact navigable regardless: of whether they are influenced
by the tide or landlocked or open, or salt or fresh:

Gii) that the Indian Admiralty Jurisdiction extend to all ships on the
High Seas (except sovereign ships) and over injurious acts done on
the High Seas if any Indian element is involved.

10.8. A draft legislation, incorporating ‘the above recommendations and
suggestions, is annexed to the Report. In Preparing this draft, due regard has
been taken of the various provisions contained in the draft Admiralty Act of
India Proposed by the Parveen Singh Conymittee as well as the relevant provi-
sions of the British Statute on the subject viz., Supreme Court Act, 1981. No
elaborate discussion of the various provisions of the draft legislation is, however,

entered upon here as the draft enactment only embodics the conclusions earlier
diseussed in detail in this report.

10.9. It is necessary to point out that in case the draft legislation proposed
is accepted and enacted, certain existing legislations on the subject would become
redundant. It is, therefore, recommended that the following Acts should be
repealed:

1. Admiralty Offences (Colonial) Act, 1849;

2. Admiralty Jurisdiction (India) Act, 1860:

3. Admiralty Court Act, 1861:

4. Colonial Courts of Admiralty (India) Act, 1891;

5. Clauses pertaining to admiralty jurisdiction in the Letters Patent
relating to the High Courts of Bombay. Calcutta & Madras.

A provision to this effect has been included in the draft legislation.

10.10. Substantially speaking. our major recommendations are two in
number: :

(i) a legislation dealing with the courts to exercise jurisdiction on admi-
ralty powers and the nature and extent of their jurisdiction on the
lines embodied in Annexure VIII to this Report be enacted; and

Gi) a Committee of high departmtental officials be set up toZreview the
process of implementation of -international conventions, protocols and
agreements and expedite the same. हे


ba

Both these reforms are long overdue, and their urgency has also been
emphasised by the Supreme Court in Elizabeth's case’. We hope the Govern-
ment shall give top priority to this Report and take expeditious action in pursuance

(Sd.)
GUSTICE K. N. SINGH)
CHAIRMAN

(Sd.)
(JUSTICE S. RANGANATHAN)

MEMBER (Sd.)
(Prof D. N. SANDANSHIV)
MEMBER

(Sd.) (Sd.)
. M. BAKSHI) (M. MARCUS)
MEMBER (PART-TIME) MEMBER (PART-TIMB)

(Sd.)

(CH. PRABHAKARA RAO)
MEMBER-SECRETARY

FOOTNOTES—CHAPTER 10

1, Blisabeth's Case (1992) 2 JT (SC) 45.
2. Like Sovereign and Diplomatic Immunities. etc.
3. 16., & 1.


ANNEXURE I

(The) Admiralty Offences (Colonial) Act. 1849
(12 & 13 Vict. ०. 96) :

An Act to provide for the Prosecution and Trial in Her Majest "s Colonies
of Offences committed within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty.

(Ist August, 1849)

(Repealed)
(Preambie—Repealed by 54 and 55 Vict. c. 67)

1. Trial of Admiralty offences in colonies.—{i any person within any
colony shall be charged with the commission of any treason, piracy, felony,
robbery, murder, conspiracy or other offence of what nature or kind soever,
committed upon the sea, or in any haven, river, creek or place where the admiral
or admirals have however, authority, or jurisdiction or if any person charged with
the commission of any such offence upon the sea or in aay such haven, river,
creek or place shall be brought for trial to any colony.

Then and in every such case all magistrates, justices of the peace, Public
prosecutors, juries, judges. courts, public officers and other persons in such
colony shall have and exercise, the same jurisdiction and authorities for inquiring
of, trying, hearing, determining and adjudging such offences, and they are hereby
respectively authorised, empowered, and required to institute and carry on all
such proceedings for the bringing of such person so charged as aforesaid to
trial, and for and auxiliary to and consequent, upon ihe trial of any such person
for any such offence; wherewith he may be charged as aforesaid as by the law of
such colony would and ought to have been had and exercised or instituted and
cartied on by them respectively if such offence had been committed, and such
person had been charged with haviny committed the same. upon any, waters
situate within the limits of any such colony, and within the limits of the local-
jurisdiction of the Courts of Criminal justice of such colony.

(a) Introductory words were repealed by 54 and 55 Vict. c. 67.
2. (Repealed by 54 and 55 Vict. ०. 67).

3. Provision, etc., where death in the colony or at sea, etc. follows from
injuries inflicted on the sea, etc., where any person shall die in any colony of
any stroke, poisoning, or hurt, such person having been feloniously stricken,
poisoned, or hurt upon the sea or in any haven, creek, or place where the
admiral or admirals have power, authority, or jurisdiction, or at any place out
of such colony, every offence committed in respect of any such case, whether the
same shall amount to the offence of murder or of manslaughter. or of being
accessary before the fact to murder, or after the fact to murder or manslaughter,
may be dealt with, inquired of, tried, determined, and punished in such colony.
in the same manner and in all respects as if such offence had seen wholly com-
mitted in that colony:

if am rson_ in any colony shall be charged with any such offence
as अत अत in spect of the death of any Person, who. having been feloniously
stricken, poisoned or otherwise hurt, shall have died of such stroke, poisoning,
or hurt, upon the sea, or in any haven, river, creek or place where the admiral
or admirals have power, authority, or jurisdiction, such offence shall be held for
the purpose of this Act to have been wholly committed upon the sea.

{a) Introductory words were repealed by 54 and 55 Vict. c. 67.

4, (Omitted as being inapplicable to India).
55


36

प्र ition of “colony”.—For the purposes of this Act the word
“colony” shall mean any island, plantation, colony, dominion, fort or factory of
Her Majesty, except any island within the United Kingdom and the Islands of
Man, Guernsey, Jersey, Alderney, and Sark, and the lands adjacent thereto
respectively.

(a) Introductory words were repealed by 54 and 55 Vict. c. 67.

(b) And includes British India, see 23 and 24 Vict. c. 88 S. 1 page 22a.
supra.

(c) Words repealed by 44 and 45 Vict. ०. 59.

6. Repealed by 41 and 42 Vict. ०. 79.


ANNEXURE वा

(The) Admiralty Jurisdiction (India) Act, 1860
(23 & 24 Vict. c. 88)

An Act to extend certain provisions for Admiralty Jurisdiction in the
Colonies in Her Majesty’s Territories in India.

(13th August, 1860)

(Preamble reciting 12 and 13 Vict. ०. 96 S. 5; and enacting words were
repealed by 55 and 56 Vict. ०. 19)

1. Applicabifity of principal Act to British India and Britich Berma—
The Admiralty Offences (Colonial) Act, 1849 shall apply to British India and
British Burma as it applies to colonies.

(a) Substituted by A.A.P.O. 1937

2. Proceedings in case of persons entitled to be tried by the Supreme
Court of a Presktemcy.—Provided always that where any person within any place
in India is charged with the commission of any offence in respect of which juris-
diction is given by the said Act, or where any person charged with the commis-
sion of any such offence is brought for trial under the said Act to any place
in India, if at any time before his trial he makes it appear to the Court exercisii
criminal jurisdiction in the place where he is so ed or brought for triak
that in case the offence charged had been committed in such place he could
have been tried only in the Supreme Court of one of the three Presidencies in
India, and claim to be tried by such a Supreme Court accordingly, the said
Court exercising criminal jurisdiction as aforesaid shall certify the fact and claim
to the Governor of such place or chief local authority thereof; and such Governor
or Chief local authority thereupon shall order and cause the person charged to
be sent in custody to such one of the Presidencies sas such Governor shall think
fit for trial before the Supreme Court of such Presidency: and the said Supreme
Court and all public officers and other persons in the Presidency shall have the
same jurisdiction and authorities and proceed in the same manner in relation to
the person charged with such offence as if the same had been committed or

iginally charged to have been committed within the limits of the ordinary
jurisdiction of such Supreme Court.

57


ANNEXURE IH
Admiralty Courf Act, 1861
(24 and 25 Viet. ७ 10)

AD. 1861.

An Act to extend the fvrisdiction and improve the ptactice of the High
Court of Admiraity. p p ° 8

(17th May, 1861)
(Preamble)

1. Short title—This Act may be cited for all poses as “the Admiral
Court Act, 1861”. Y Pumposis 9 © Admiralty

2. Interpretation of terms.—In the interpretation and for the purposes of
this: Act (if not inconsistent with the context or subject) the following terms
shall have the respective meanings hereinafter assigned to them: that is to say,

“ship” shall include any description of yessel used in navigation not pro-
pelled by oars;

“Cause” shall include any cause, suit, action or other Proceeding in the
Court of Admiralty. 7

* * * * * *

16. Proceedings where a claim is made to goods takes in execution.—If
any claim’ shall be made to any goods of chattels taken in execution under
any process of the High Court of Admiralty, or in respect of the seizure thereof,
Or any act or matter connected therewith or in respect of the proceeds or value
of any such goods or chattels. by any landlord for rent, or by any person
not being the party against whom the process has issued, the registrar of the
said Court may, upon application of the officer charged with the execution of
फिट process, whether before or after any action brought against such officer.
issue 8 summons calling before the said Court both the party issuing such Process
and the party making the claim: and thereupon any action which shall have been
brought in any of Her Majesty’s Sunerior Courts of Record, or in any local or
inferior court, in respect of such claim. seizure, act or matter as aforesaid. shall
be stayed: and the Court in which such action shall have been brought or any
judge thereof, on nroof of the issue of such summons. and that the goods and
chattels were so taken in execution may order the party bringing the action
to pay the costs of all proceedings had upon the action after issue of the summons
out of the said Admiralty Court: and the Judge of the said Admiralty Court.
shall adjudicate upon the claim, and make such order between the parties in
respect thereof and of the costs of the proceedings, as to him shall seem fit
and such order shall be enforced in like manner as any order made in any suit
brought in the said Court. Where any such claim shall be made as aforesaid,
the claimant may deposit with the officer charged with the execution of the
process either the amount or value of the goods claimed. the value to be fixed
by appraisement in case of dispute, to be by the officer paid into Court to abide
the decision of the Judge upon the claim, or the sum which the officer shall be
allowed to charge as costs for keening possession of the goods until such decision
can be obtained: and in default of the claimant so doing, the officer may sell the
goods as if no such claim had been made, and shall pay into Court the proceeds
of the sale, to abide the decision of the judge.

18. Party in Court of Admiralty may apply for an erder for inspection by
Trinity Masters, and e.—Any party in a cause in the High Court of Admiralty
shall be at liberty to apply to the said Court for an order for the inspection
by the Trinity Masters or others appointed for the trial of the said cause. or

58


59

by the party himself or his witnesses, of any ship or other personal or real pro-
perty, the inspection of which may be material to the issue of the cause; and

the Court may take such order in respect of the costs arising thereout as to it
shall seem fit,

25. Powers of Registrar and of Deputy or Assistant Registrar.—The registrar
of the Sigh Court of Admiralty may exercise, with reference to causes and matters
in the said Court, the same powers as any surrogate of the judge of the said Court
sitting in chambers might or could have heretofore lawfully exercised; and all:
powers and authorities by this or any other Act conferred upon or vested in
the registrar of the said High Court of Admiralty may be exercised by any
deputy: or assistant registrar of the said Court.

_ 26. Registrar may administer oaths.—The registrar of the said Court of
Admiralty shall have power to administer oaths in relation to any cause or
matter depending in the said Court;

28. Qualification of Examiners.—Any advocate, barrister-at-law, Proctor,
attorney, or solicitor may be appointed an examiner of the High Court. of
Ad: ty.

33. Bail.may be taken in the Court of Adandmalty for the Court of

and, c—In any cause in the High Court of Admiralty bail may be taken to anawer
the judgment as well of the said court as. of the Court of Appeal, and the: said:
High Court of Admiralty may withhold the release of any property under its.
arrest until such bail has been given: and in any appeal from any: decree or
order of the High Court of Admiralty the Court of Appeal may’ make and.
enforce its order against the surety or sureties who may have signed any such
bail bond in the same manner as if the bail had’ been given in the Court of
Appeal.

34. Hearing of Cross Cases——The High Court of Admiralty may, on the
application of the defendant in any cause of damage, and on his instituting a.
cross cause for the damage sustained by him in respect of the same collision,
direct that the principal cause and the cross cause be heard at the same time
and upon the same evidence; and if in the principal cause the ship of the defendant

been arrested or security given by him to answer judgment, and in the cross
cause the ship of the plaintiff cannot be arrested, and security has not been given.
to answer judgment therein, the Court may, if it thinks fit, suspend the proceed-
ings in the principal cause, until security has. been given to answer judgment
in the cross cause.

9--4 M of L&J/ND/9S


ANNEXURE IV

Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890
(53 and 54 Vict. c. 27)

AD. 1890

An Act to amend the Law respecting the exercise of Admiralty jurisdic-
tion in Her Majesty’s Dominions and else where out of the United Kingdom
(250 July, 1890).

1, This Act may be cited as the Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890.

2. (i) Every Court of Law in a British possession, which is for the time
being declared in pursuance of this Act to be a court of Admiralty, or which, if
no such declaration is in force in the possession, has therein original unlimited
civil jurisdiction, shall be a court of Admiralty, with the jurisdiction in this Act
mentioned and may for the purpose of that jurisdiction exercise all the powers
which it possesses for the purpose of its other civil jurisdiction and such court
in reference to the jurisdiction conferred by this Act is in this Act referred to as
a Colonial Court of Admiralty. Where in a Biitish possession the Governor is
the sole judicial authority, the expression “court of law” for the purpose of this
action includes such Governor.

(ii) The jurisdiction of a Colonial Court of Admiralty shall, subject to the
Provisions of this Act. be over the like places, persons, matters and things, as
the Admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court in England, whether existing by
virtue of any statute or otherwise, and the Colonial Court of Admiralty may
exercise such jurisdiction in like manner and to as full an extent as the High
Court in England, and shall have the same regard as that Court to international
law and the comity of nations.

(iii) Subject to the provisions of this Act, any enactment referring to a
Vice-Admiralty Court, which is contained in an Act of the Imperial Parliament
or in a Colonial Jaw, shall apply to a Colonial Court of Admiralty, and be read
as if the expression “Colonial Court of Admiralty” were therein substituted for
“Vice-Admiralty Court” or for other expressions respectively referring to such
Vice-Admiralty Courts or the judge thereof, and the Colonial Court of Admi-
ralty shall have jurisdiction accordingly:

Provided as follows:

(a) Any enactment in an Act of the Imperial Parliament referring to the
Admiralty Jurisdiction of the High Court in England, when applied
to a Colonial Court of Admiralty in a British possession, shall be
read as if the name of that possession were therein substituted for
England and Wales; and

(0) A Colonial Court of Admiralty shall have under the Naval Prize
Act, 1864, and under the Slave Trade Act, 1873. and any trade, the
jurisdiction thereby conferred on a Vice-Admiralty Court and not
the jurisdiction thereby conferred exclusively on the High Court of
Admiralty or the High Court of Justice; but, unless for the time
being duly authorised, shall not by virtue of this Act exercise any
jurisdiction under the Naval Prize Act, 1864, or otherwise in relation
to the prize; and

(c) A Colonial Court of Admiralty shall not have jurisdiction under this
Act to try or punish a person for an offence which according to the
Jaw of England is punishable on indictment: and

60


61

(को A Colonial of Admiralty shall not have any greater jurisdiction in
relation to the Jaws and regulations relating to Her Majesty’s Navy
at Sea or consider any Act providing for the discipline of Her
Majesty’s Navy than may be from time to time conferred on such
court by Order in Council.

(iv) Where a Court in a British possession exercises in respect of matters
arising outside the body of a country or other like part of a British possession
any jurisdiction exercisable under this Act, that jurisdiction shall be deemed to
be exercised under this Act and not otherwise.

3, Power of Colonial Legislature as to Admiralty Jurisdiction.—The
legislature of a British possession may be any Colonial Jaw—

(8) declare any court of unlimited civil jurisdiction, whether original or
appellate, in that possession to be a Colonial Court of Admiralty, and provide
for the exercise by such court of its jurisdiction under this Act, and limit terri-
torially, or otherwise, the extent of such jurisdiction: and

(b) confer upon any inferior or subordinate court in that possession such
partial or limited Admiralty jurisdiction under such regulations and with sucl.
appeal (if any) as may seem fit:

Provided that any such Colonial Jaw shall not confer any jurisdiction
which is not by this Act conferred upon a Colonial Court of Admiralty.

4, Reservation of Colonial Law for Her Majesty’s assent-—Every Colonial
law which is made in pursuance of this Act, or affects the jurisdiction of or
practice or procedure in any court of such possession in respect of the jurisdic-
tion conferred by this Act, or alters any such Colonial Law as above in this
section mentioned, which has been previously passed, shall, unless previously
approved by Her Majesty through a Secretary of State, either be reserved for
the signification of Her Majesty’s pleasure thereon, or contain a suspending clause
providing that such Jaw shall not come into operation until Her Majesty’s plea-
sure thereon has been publicly signified in the British possession in which it has
been passed.

(This section shall not apply to Indian laws............... ).

5. Local Admiralty Appeal.—Subject to the rules of court under this Act,
judgment of a court in a British possession given or made in the exercise of
the jurisdiction conferred on it by this Act, shall be subject to the like local
appeal, if any, as judgments of the court in the exercise of its ordinary civil
jurisdiction, and the court having cognisance of such appeal shall for the Purpose
thereof possess all the jurisdiction, by this Act conferred upon a Colonial Court of
Admiralty,

6. Admiralty Appeal to the Queen-in-Council.—(1) The appeal from the
judgment of any court in a British possession in the exercise of the jurisdiction
conferred by this Act, either where there is as of right no local appeal or after a
decision on local appeal, lies to Her Majesty the Queen in Council.

(2) Save as may be otherwise specially allowed in a particular case by
Her Majesty the Queen in Council, an appeal under section shall not be allow-
ed—

(a) from any judgment not having the effect of a definite judgment un-
less the court appealed from has given leave for such appeal, nor

(b) from any judgment unless the petition of appeal has been lodged
within the time prescribed by rules, or if no time is prescribed with-
in six months from the date of the judgment appealed against, or if
leave to appeal has been given then from the date of such leave.

(3) For this purpose of appeals under this Act, Her Majesty the Queen
in Council and the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council shall, subject to


62

ales under this section, have all such pewers for making and enforcing judg-
ments, whether interlocutory or final, for punishing contempts, for requiring the
Payment of money into court, or for any other purpose, as may be necessary, or
@s were possessed by the High Court of Delegates ‘before the passing of the Act
transferring the powers of such court to Her iMajesty in Council, or as are for
the time being possessed by the High Court in England or by the Court appealed

from in relation to the like matters as those forming the subject of appeals under
Ct,

(4) All orders of the Queen in Council or the Judicial Committee of the
Privy Council for the purposes aforesaid or otherwise in relation to appeals
under this Act shall have full effect throughout Her Majesty’s dominions, and
‘im all places where Her Majesty’s has jurisdiction.

(5) This section shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
authority of Her Majesty in Council or the Judicial Committee of the Privy
‘Council arising otherwise than under this Act, and all enactments relating to
appeals to Her Majesty in Council or to ‘the powers of Her Majesty in Council
or the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in relation to those appeals,
whether for making rules and orders or otherwise, shall extend, save as other-
wise directed by Her Majesty in Counil to appeals to Her Majesty in Council
under this Act.

7. Rukes of Court—(1) Rules of court for regulating the procedure and
practice {mcluting fees and costs) in a court in a British possession in the exer-
cise of the jurisdiction conferred by this Act, whether original or appellate, may
कक maiic ‘by the same authority and in the same manner as rules touching the
‘practice, procedure, fees and costs in the said court in the exercise of its ordirary
आधा] yuriadiction respectively are made:

‘Provided ‘that the rules under this section shall -not, save as provided by

‘this Act extend to matters ‘relating to the slave trade, and shall not (save us

ided by this section) come into operation until they have been approved ‘by

Majesty in Council, but on-coming into operation shall have full effect as

‘enacted in this Act, and any enactment inconsistent there with shall so far as
it is so inconsistent, be repealed.

(2) It shall be lawful for Her Majesty in Council. in approving rules
made under this section to declare that the rules so made with respect to any
matters af detail or of local concern may be revoked, varied, or added to with-
‘out the upproval required by this section.

(3) Such rules may provide for the exercise of any jurisdiction conferred
‘by this Act by the full court, or by any judge .ए judges thereof, and subject 10
any wiles, where ithe ordinary civil jurisdiction of the court.can in any case be
exercised by a single judge and jurisdiction conferred by this act may in the
like case be exercised by a single judge.

8. Droits of Admiralty and of the Crown.—{1) Subject to the provisions of
‘this yection ‘nothing in this Act shall alter the application of any droits of Ad-
miralty or droits of or forfeitures to ‘the Crown in ‘a British possession: and such
droits and forfeitures, when condemned by a court of a British possession in
‘the Act, shall, save as is otherwise provided by any other Act, be notified,
accounted for, and dealt with in such manner as the Treasury from time to time
direct, and the Offers of every Colonial Court of Admiralty and of every other
Court in a British possession exercising Admiralty jurisdiction shall obey such
‘directions im respect of the said droits and forfeitures as may be from time to
time given ‘by the Treasury.

(2) It.shall be lawful for Her Majesty the Queen in Council by Order to
direct that, subject to any conditions, exceptions, reservations, and regulations
contained:in the Order, the said droits and forfeitures condemned by a court in
a British possession shall form part of the revenues of that possession either for
ever or for uch ‘limited term or subject to such revocation as may be specified
iin the Qader.


53

(3) वा and so long as any of such -droits छा forfeitures by virtue ‘of this
-Act or any ather Act from part of the revenues of the said possession the same
‘shall. ‘subject to the provisions of any law for the time being applicable thereto
‘be directed :by the Government -of the possession, and the Treasury shall करण
chave any power in relation thereto.

9. Power to establish ‘View Rémy Oowt.—(1) 11 shall be tewhil fer
Her Majesty, by commission under the Great Seal, to empower the Admiralty
to establish in a British possession any Vice-Admiralty Court or Courts.

(2) Upon the establishment of a Vice-Admiralty Court in a British
_pessession, the Admiralty, by writing under their hands and ‘the seal of the office
sof Admizalty a in such form as the Admiralty direct, may appoint a judge, re-
gistrar marshal, and other officers of the court and may cancel any such .appoint-
ment; and in addition to any other jurisdiction of such court, may (subject to
the limits imposed by this Act or the said commission from Her Majesty) vest
‘in such court the whole or any part of the jurisdiction by or -by virtue of this
-Aat ‘conferred upon any courts of that British ‘possession, and may vary or revoke
‘such vesting, and while such vesting is in fosee the power of such last-mentioned
courts to exercise the jurisdiction so vested shall be suspended :

Provided that—

(०) mothing im this section shall authorise a Vice-Admiralty Caurt 20
established in India (......or in any other ‘British possession) having 2
representative legislature 10 exercise any jurisdiction, except for some
purpose relating to prize, to Her Majesty’s Navy, to the slave trade,
to the matters dealt with by the Foreign Enlistment Act, 1870, or
the Pacific Islanders Protection Acts 1872 and 1875, or to matters in
‘which questions erise reheting to treaties or conventions ‘with forcign
countries, ‘or ‘to interndtiomal lew; and

(0) In the event of a vacancy im the dffice ef judge, registrar, smmambml,
or other officer of any Vice-Admiralty Courts in a British possession,
the Governor of that possession may .appoint a fit person to fill the
vacancy until an appointment to the dffice is made ‘by the Admiralty.

(3) The provisions of this Act with r t to appeals to Her Majesty in
from courts .in British possessions in exercise of ‘the jurisdiction con-
erred “by this Act shall apply to appeals fram Vice-Admiralty ‘Courts, but the
tules and orders made in relation to appeals from Vice-Admiralty Courts
differ from the rule made in relation to appeals from the said courts in British
(passessions.

(4) If Her Majesty at any time by commission under the Great Seal so
directs, the Admiralty shall by writing under their hands and the seal of the
office of Admiralty abolish a Vice-A ‘niralty Court established in any British
geyamion ander this section, and upon abolition the jurisdiction of any

01 Court of Admiralty in that jpessession which was previously suspended
shall be revised.

‘10. Power to appoint 2 Viee-Admind.—Nothing :in this -Act shall affect
‘any power of appointmg a ‘Vice-Admiral in 810 for any British :possession ‘or
‘any ‘place ‘therem; and whenever ‘there is not a formally appointed Vice-Admiral
in a British possession or any place ‘therein the Governor of ‘the :possession shall
be ex-officio Vice-Admiral thereof.

11, ‘Exeeption «f Channel Idantl an@ oteer possession —(1) The :provi-
sions of this Act with respect to Colonial Courts of Admiralty ‘shall not .apply
to the Channel Island.

{2) It shall be lawful for the Queen in Council by order to declare, with
pet to any British legislature, that the jurisdiction conferred this Act on
idl Courts of Admirdlty shall not be -vestad in any court of such
we. ‘or thal be vested orily to the partial ‘or ‘imited extent specified in the
ier.


64

12. Application of Act to Courts under Foreign Jurisdiction Acts.—It
shali be lawful for Her Majesty the Queen in Council by Order to direct that
this Act shall, subject 10 the conditions, exceptions, and qualifications (if any)
contained in the Order, apply to any Court established by Her Majesty for the
exercise of jurisdiction in any place out of Her Majesty's dominions which’ is
named in the Order, as if that Court were a Colonial Court of Admiralty, and to
provide for carrying into effect such application.

13. Rules for Procedure in Stave Trade matters—(1) It shall be lawful
for Her Majesty the Queen in Council by Order to make rules as to the practice
and procedure (including fees and costs) to be observed in and the returns to be
made from Colonial Courts of Admiralty and Vice-Admiralty Courts in the
exercise of their jurisdiction in matters relating to the slave trade, and in and
from East African Courts as defined by the Slave Trade (East African Courts)
Acts, 1873 and 1879.

(2) Except when inconsistent with such Order in Council, the rules of
court for the time being in force in a Colonial Court of Admiralty or Vice-
Admiralty Court shall. so far as applicable extend to proceedings in such court
in matters relating to the slave trade.

(3) The provisions of this Act with respect to appeals to Her Majesty in
Council, from courts in British possessions in the exercise of the jurisdiction con-
ferred by this Act, shall apply, with the necessary niodifications, to appeals from
judgments of any East African court made or purporting to be made in exercise
of the jurisdiction under the Slave Trade (East African Courts) Acts, 1873 and
1879.

14. Orders-in-Council.—It shal} be lawful for Her Majesty in Council
from time to time to make Orders for the purposes authorised by this Act, and
to revoke and vary such Orders. and every such Order while in operation shall
have effect as if it were part of this Act.

15. Interpretation.--In the construction of this Act, unless the context
otherwise requites—

The expression “representative legislature” means, in relation to a British
possession, a legislature comprising a legislative body of which at least one-half
are elected by inhabitants of the British possession.

The expression “unlimited civil jurisdiction” means civil jurisdiction un-
limited as to the value of the subject matter at issue, or as to the amount that
may be claimed or recovered.

The expression “judgment” includes a decree, order, and sentence.

The expression “appeal” means any appeal, rehearing, or review; and the
expression “local appeal” means an appeal to any court inferior to Her Majesty
in Council.

The expzession “Colonial Law” means any Act, ordinance or other law
having the force of legislative enactment in a British possession and made by
any authority, other than the Imperial Parliament or Her Majesty in Council
competent to make laws for such possession.

16. Commencement of Act.—{1) This Act, shall save as otherwise in
this Act provided, come into force in every British possession on the first day of
July one thousand eight hundred and ninety-one:

Provided that—

(a) This Act shall not come into force in any of the British possessions
named in the First Schedule to this Act until Her Majesty so directs
by (Order in Council) and until the day named in that behalf in such
order; and


65

(b) If before any day above mentioned rules of court for the Colonial
Court of Admiralty in any British possession have been approved by
Her Majesty in Council, this Act may be proclaimed in that posses-
sion by the Governor thereof, and on such proclamation shall come
into force on the day named in the proclamation.

(2) The day upon which this Act comes into force in any British posses-
sion shall, as regards that British possession, be deemed to be the commence-
ment of this Act.

(3) If, on the commencement of this Act in any British possession, rules
of court have not been approved by Her Majesty in pursuance of this Act,
the rules in force at such commencement under the Vice-Admiralty Courts Act,
1863 and in India the rules in force at such commencement regulating the res-
pective Vice-Admiralty Courts or Courts of Admiralty in India, including any
tules made with reference to proceedings instituted on behalf of Her Majesty’s
ships, shall, so far as applicable, have effect in the Colonial Court or Courts of
Admiralty of such possession, and in any Vice-Admiralty Court established
under this Act, in that possession as rules of Court under this Act may be revok-
ed and varied accordingly: and all fees payable under such rules may be taken
in such manner as the Colonial Court may direct, so however that the amount
of each such fee shall so nearly as practicable be paid to the same officer or
person who but for the passing of this Act would have been entitled to receive
the same in respect of like business. So far as any such rules are inapplicable
or do not extend, the rules of court for the exercise by a court of its ordinary
civil jurisdiction shall have effect as rules for the exercise by the same court of
the jurisdiction conferred by this Act.

-(4) At any time after the passing of this Act any Colonial law may be
passed, and any Vice-Admiralty Court may be established and jurisdiction
vested in such Court, but any such law, established or vesting shall not come
into effect until the commencement of this Act.

17. Abolition of Vice-Admiralty Courts—On the commencement of the
Act in any British possession. but subject ta the provisions of this Act, every
Vice-Admiralty Court in that possession shall be abolished: subject to as follows:

(1) All judgments of such Vice-Admiralty Court shall be executed and
may be appealed from in like manner as if this Act had not passed,
and all appeals from any Vice-Admiralty Court pending at the
commencement of this Act shall be heard and determined, and the
judgment thereon executed as nearly as may be in the like manner
as if this Act had not passed:

(2) All proceedings pending in the Vice-Admiralty Court in any British
possession at the commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding
the repeal of any enactment by this Act, be continued in a Colonial
Court of Admiralty of the possession in manner directed by rules of
Court, and, so far as no such rule extends. in like manner. as nearly
as may be, as if they had been originally begun in such court;

(3) Where any person holding an office, whether that of judge, registrar,
or marshal. or any other office in any such Vice-Admiralty Court in
a British possession. suffers any pecuniary loss in consequence of the
abolition of such court, the Government of the British possession on
complain of such person, shall provide that such person shall receive
reasonable compensation (by way of an increase of salary or a capital
sum, or otherwise) in respect of his loss, subject nevertheless to the
performance, if required by the said Government. of the like duties
as before such abolition:

(4) All books, papers. documents, office furniture. and other things at
the commencement of this Act belonging or appertaining to any
Vice-Admiralty Court. shall be delivered over to the proper office of
the Colonial Court of Admiralty or be otherwise dealt with in such
manner as subject to any directions from Her Majesty, the Governor
may direct;


66

(5) Where. at the commencement of this Act in a British pessession, any
person holds a: commission: to act as advocate in any Vice-Admiralty
Court abolished by this Act. either fer Her Majesty or for the
Admiralty, such: commission: shail’ Be of the same avail im every court
of the same British possession. exercising jurisdiction: under this Act
as if, such court were the court mentioned or referred to in such
commission.


ANNEXURE V

DRAFT
Admiralty Act of India, 1987
(Act oF 1987)
An Act to amend the Law relating to Admiralty Jurisdiction, legal pro-

ceedings in connection with the ships and the arrest of ships and other property
and for purposes connected therewith.

BE Ir Enactep By PartiAMENT in the Thirty Eighth Year of the Re-
public of India as follows :

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

1. Short title, commencement and application.—{1) This Act may be
called “The Admiralty Act of India, 1987”.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification, in the Official Gazette, appoint.

(3) It applies to the Courts of Admiralty constituted by the Central
Government from time to time under (the Admiralty Courts Act) this Act.

2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:

(a) “Admiralty Court” means a Court constituted as an Admiralty
Court, or any other High Court in India which has been vested with
Admiralty Jurisdiction;

(9) “Ship” includes any vessel made for the conveyance (mainly by
Water) of human being or of property but excludes sailing vessels
and any class of vessels as may be notified by the Central Govern-
ment by notification in the Official Gazette.

CHAPTER व
ADMIRALTY JURISDICTION AND OTHER PROVISIONS AS TO SHIPS

3. Admiralty Jurisdiction of the Court—(1) The Admiralty Jurisdic-
tion of the Court shall be as follows, that is to say. Jurisdiction to hear and
determine any of the following questions or claims:

{a) Any claim to the possession or ownership of a ship or to the owner-
ship of any share therein:

{b) Any question arising between the co-owners of a ship as to posses-
sion, employment or earnings of that ship:

(c) Any claim in respezt of a mortgage of or charge on a ship or any
share therein:

(d) Any claim for damage done by a ship; including civil liability for
oi! pollution damage under Part XB of the Merchant Shipping Act;

{e} Any claim for damage received by a ship;

: 67
10—4 M of L&J'ND/95


68

(f) Any claim for loss of life or personal injury sustained in consequence
of any defect in a ship or in her apparel or equipment, or in con-
sequence of the wrongful act, neglect or default of the owners,
charterers or persons in possession or control of a ship or of the
Master or crew thereof or of any other person for whose wrongful
acts, neglects or defaults the owners, charterers or persons in
Possession or control of a ship are responsible, being an act, neg-
lect or default in the navigation or management of the ship, in the
loading, carriage or discharge of goods on, in or from the ship or
in the embarkation, carriage or disembarkation of persons on, in or
from the ship;

(g) Any claim for loss of or damage to goods carried in a ship;

(0) Any claim arising out of any Agreement relating to the carriage of
goods in a ship or to the use or hire of a ship:

@ Any claim in the nature of salvage of life, vessel. cargo property,
equipment or wreck, or preservation thereof;

(0) Any claim in the nature of towage in respect of a ship or any aircraft;
(k) Any claim in the nature of pilotage in respect of a ship or an aircraft;

(@) Any claim in respect of goods, materials, bunker or other necessaries
supplied to a ship for her operation of maintenance;

(0) Any claim in respect of the construction, repairs or equipment of
a ship or any charges or dues of the Port Authorities under the
Indian Ports Act, 1908 or the Major Port Trusts Act. 1963;

(0) Any claim by a Master or member of the crew of a ship for wages
and any claim by or in respect of a Master or member of the crew
of a ship for any money or property which, under the provisions
of any Law is recoverable as wages and in the manner in which
wages may be recovered;

(०) Any claim by a Master, Shipper, Charterer or Agent in respect of
disbursement made on account of a ship;

{p) Any claim arising out of an act which is or is claimed to be a gene-
ral average act,

(q) Any claim arising out of bottomry;

(t) Any claim for services rendered to a ship for her operation or main-
tenance,

(s) Any claim for the forfeiture or condemnation of a Ship or of goods
which are being or have been carried, or have been attempted to
be carried, in a ship, or for the restoration of a ship or any such
goods after seizure; and,

(® Any action by shipowners or other persons under Part XA or Part
XB of the Merchant Shipping Act (Act 44) of 1958 as amended
from time to time for the limitation of the amount of their Lability
in connection with the ship or other property together wil
any other jurisdiction which either was vested in High Court of
Admiralty at Bombay, Calcutta and Madras under the Admiralty
Act, 1841 and 1861 and the Colonial Courts of (India) Act, 1891
as being Courts with Admiralty Jurisdiction and any other Admi-
talty Jurisdiction vested in the High Courts at Bombay, Calcutta
and Madras.


69

(2) The jurisdiction of the Admiralty Courts under clause (b) of Sub-
section (1) of this Section includes power to seitle any account outstanding and
unsettled between the pariies in relation to the ship, and to direct that the
ship, or any share thereof, shali be sold, and to make such other order as
the Court thinks fit.

(3) The preceding provisions of this section apply—

(a) in relation to all ships whether Indian or not and whether _regis-
tered or not and whenever the residence or domicile of their Owners
may be;

(0) in relation to all claims, wheresoever arising (including, in the case
of cargo or wreck of salvage, claims in respect of cargo or wreck
found on land); and

(०) so far as they rejate to mortgages or charges, to all mortgages or
charges whether registered or not and whether 1688: or equitable, in-
cluding mortgages and charges created under Foreign Law.

4. Mode of exercise of Admiralty Jurisdiction.—(1) Subject to the pro-
visions of Section 5 of this Act, the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court may
in all cases be invoked by an action in personam.

(2) The Jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court may. in the cases mentioned
in paragraphs (a) to (०) and (s) Sub-section (1) of Section 3 of this Act be in-
voked by an action in rem against the ship or property in question by its arrest.

(3) In any case in wiich there is a maritime lien or other charge on any
ship, or other pro perty including bunker for the amount claimed, the Admi-
ralty Jurisdiction of the Court, may be invoked an action in rem against that
ship or property in question by its arrest.

(4) In the case of any such claim as is mentioned in paragraphs (d) and
(f) to (0 of Sub-section (1) of Section 3 of this Act, being a claim arising in
connection with a ship, where the person who would be liable on the claim
in an action in personam was, when the cause of action arose, the Owner or
Charterer of, or in possession or in control of, the ship (whether the claim
gives rise to a maritime lien on the ship or not) may be invoked by an action
in rem by an arrest as aforesaid against—

(a) that ship. if at the time when the action is brought she is bene-
ficially owned in respect of all the shares therein by that person;
or the charterer if it is under a party by demise

OR

(b) any other ship which, at the time when the action is brought, she is
beneficially owned in respect of all her shares thereon.

(5) Notwithstanding anything in the preceding provisions of this section,
the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court shalt not be invoked by an action in
rem in the case of any such claim as it mentioned in clause (n) of Sub-section
wo of Section 3 of this Act unless the claim relates wholly or partly to wages

ly.

(6) Where, in the exercise of its Jurisdiction, the Admira'ty Court
orders any ship or other property to be sold. the Admiralty Court shall have
jurisdiction to hear and determine any question arising as to the title to the
proceeds of sale.

(7) कर determining for the purposes of Sub-section (4) of this Section
whether a person would be liable on a claim in an action in personam it shalt
bo assumed that he has his habitual residence or a place of business within

पं


70

(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Jurisdiction of
the Admiralty Court shail not be invoked by an action in rem by arrest of a
ship, in the case of a ship registered in India as an Indian ship, unless six
clear days notice in writing is served upon the registered owners or the Master
of the ship intended to be proceeded against, stating the cause of action and
the quantum of claim and the date and the time of application to the court for
arrest and calling wy pon the owners or Master to provide security for the claim
to the satisfaction of the Admiralty Court in lieu of the arrest, and where such
a security is provided the court shail entertain the action without arresting the
ship and shall order arrest of the ship only in the event of failure to provide
such security.

5. Jurisdiction in personam.—(1) The Admiralty Court shall not enter-
tain an action in personam to enforce a claim to which this section applies
UNLESS.

(७) the defendant at the commencement of the action, actually and
voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for
gain in India;

(b) the cause of action wholly or in part arose in India including in-
land waters of India or within the limits of a Port of India:

OR

(९०) an action arising out of the same incident or series of incidents is
proceeding in the Admiralty Court or has been heard and determined
in the Admiralty Court.

(2) The Admiralty Court shail not entertain an action in personam to
enforce a claim to which this Section applies until any proceedings previously
drought by the plaintiff in any Court outside India against the same defendant
in respect of the same incident or series of incidents. have been discontinued
or otherwise come to an end.

(3) ‘Fhe preceding provisions of this Section shall apply to counter claims

being counterclaims in proceedings arising out of the same incident or
series of incidents) as they apply to actions in personam but as if the reference
to this plaintiff and the defendant were respectively references to the plaintiff
on the counterclaim and the defendant to the counterclaim.

(4) The preceding provisions of this Section shall not apply to any ac-
tion or counterclaim if the defendant thereto submits or has agresd to submit
to the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court.

(5) Subject to the provisions of: Sub-section (2) of this Section, the Ad-
miralty Court shall have jurisdiction 10 entertain an action in Personam to
enforce a claim to which this Section applies whenever any of the conditions
specified in paragraphs (a) to (c) Sub-section (1} of this sections are satisfied,
and the Rules of the Court relating to the service of process outside the Juris-
diction shall make such provisions as may appear to the rule-making authority
to be appropriate having regard to the provisions of this sub-section.

(6) The claim to which the Section applies are claims for damage, loss
of life or personal injury arising out of a collision between ships or out of the
carrying out of or omission to carry out a manoeuvre in the case of one or more
of two or more ships or out of non-compliance on the part of one or more
of two or more of two or more ships, within the Collision Regulations,

(7) In this Section—

“Inland Waters” includes any part of the sea adjacent to the Coast of
India within the territorial “sovereignty of the Republic of India: “Port”
-Means any port, harbour, river, estuary, haven, dock, canal or other
Place so long as a person of body of pensons is empowered by or under
an Act to make charges in respect of ships entering it or using the faci-
lities therein and “limits of a port” means the limits thereof as fixed


71

by or under the Indian Ports Act or the Major Port Trusis Act; “Col-
ision Regulation” means regulations and rules made under the Mer-
chant Sipping Act and any Rules, Byelaws and/or Regulations made
under the Indian Ports Act, 1908 or the Major Port Trusis Act, 1963.

6. Jurisdiction for Wages—(1) Notwithstanding the provisions con-
tained in Section 146 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1953 the Admiralty Court
shall have jurisdiction to entertain an aotion for wages.

(2) Nothing in this part of the Act shall be construed as iimiting the
Jurisdiction of the Court to entertain an action for wages by the Master or a
member of the crew of a ship, not being an Indian ship.

7, (1) WHEREIN a suit in rem the Admiralty Court has. ordered the
property proceeded against to be sold, aay party who has obtained or obtains
a decree or order againsi the said property or the proceeds of sale thereof may
after obtaining judgment apply to the Admira.iy Court by a sotice of motion for
an order determining the ode, of puwiay OF Lic aims against the proceeds
of sale of the said property.

(2) WHEREIN a suit in rem the Admiraliy ६; orders the छा0-
Perty proceeded against to be sold, IT SHALL FURTHER ORDER that a
notice be given in one international and one national newspaper as the Admi-
ralty Court may specify that the property has been sold by the Order of the
Admiralty court in a suit in rem giving the number of suit and the names of
the parties to the suits, and tnat the gross sale proceeds, ifying the amount
thereof, have been paid into the Admiralty Court and that the order of priority
of the claims the said proceeds will be determined only after the expiration of
a period of ninety days from the date of the publication of the said notice and
that any party having a claim against the property or the proceeds of sale
thereof, should apply to the’ Court for leave: to intervene and. prove iis caim
before the Admiralty Court by filing a suit and obiaining a decree-hefore the
expiration of that period.

(3) The Admiralty Court may extend the period of ninety days on the
application of any party who has instituted proceedings before the Court as
provided in sub-section (2} or before any other Admiraity Court of competent
Jurisdiction in India for obtaining a deciee against the property or proceeds of
sale and the court shall not disburse the sale proceeds and/or determine prio-
tity until thirty days after the disposal of the said suit or any appeal filed
therefrom.

(4) Notwithstanding what is stated in Sub-section 3 above, the Adméiralty
Court may determine priority and direct payment out of the sale proceeds
on an application by any party who has obtained a decree or crder against
the property or the sale proceeds if the Admiralty Court is of the opinion
that the c'aim of the applicant is in any event on priority to the claim for which
a suit has been instituted PROVIDED THAT the Admiralty Court shall hear all
Parties who have made claims and filed suits against the prop: or sale pro-
ceeds within the prescribed period of 90 days before determining priority and
directing disbursement out of sale proceeds.

8. Vesting of right on sa’e of ship.—On a sale of 5 ship by an Admi-
ralty Court, the ship shall vest in the purchaser free from all encumbrances
including mortgages. charges, Hypothecation and maritime liens,

9. Power to make rufes—The Central Government may make Rules for
regulating the procedure and practice in cases brought~hefore the Courts. of
Admiralty under this Act.

10. Maritime liens.—(1) Maritime lien shall atfach to a‘ship or a property
in the following instances of claim and the date of suc tual of maritime
lien shall be date of which the operations giving rise to the said claims were

« performed:

(a) Claim for salvage of life. ship or property.


72

(b) Wages and other sums due to the Master or the members of the
crew of the ship in respect of their employment on the ship.

(©) Port and canal and other waterway dues and pilotage dues.

(9) Loss of life or personal injury in direct connection with the opera-
tion of the ship.

(०) Claim for contribution of general average, and

(0 Claim based on tort arising out of physical loss or damage caused
‘by the operation of the ship other than the loss or damage to cargo,
containers and passengers’ effects carried on the ship.

(2) A maritime lien shall be extinguished on the expiry of one year from
the date on which the lien has been attached to the property, provided that
the claim, if any, not barred by the law of limitation, may be enforced by
an action in personam. This period of one year shall be extended further if
the claimant of lien is unable to commence an action to enforce the lien against
the vessel for reasons beyond his control.

11. Order of Priority of Claims—(1) The order of claim for determin-
ing inter se priority in an admiralty action shall be as follows:
(a) A claim where there is a maritime lien on any ship or other pro-
perty including bunker, against which action is proceeded with.
(0) Mortgages and charges of the ship or other property against which
the action is proceeded with.
{c) All other claims,

(2) The priority among the claims inter se in clause 1(a) above shall

be as follows:

(a) Claim for salvage of life, ship or property provided that salvage
of life shall take priority over other salvages.

(b) Wages and other sums due to the Master or the members of the
crew of the ship in respect of their employment in the ship not ex-
ceeding four month’s wages.

(c) Port, canal and other waterway dues and pilotage dues.

(d) Balance of wages and other sums due to the Master or the mem-
bers of the crew of the ship in respect of their employment on the
ship after deducting the amount paid under ciause (b) above.

(०) (i) Loss of life or personal injury in direct connection with the ope-
tation of the ship;

Gi) Claim for contribution for general average:

‘ Gii) Claim based on tort arising out of physical damage or damages
caused by the operation of the ship other than loss or damage to
cargo, containers, and passengers’ effects carried on the ship.

(iv) Bottomry.

(3) (i) Claims prior in order of priority shall exclude subsequent;

Gi) If there are more claims than one in each of the category of priority,
they shall rank pari passu.

(ii) Claim for various salvages shall rank jin inverse order of time
when the claim secured thereto accrue.

(iv) Claims for salvage, port, dues, wages, and the nature of general
average shall take priority over all other claims mentioned in Clause D{e) above
which are attached to ship prior to the time when the operations giving rise
to the said elaims were performed.


73

12, In all suits under this Act, the nationality of the ship proceeded
against shall be stated in the plaint, and if the ship is a foreign ship, notice
or institution of the suit shall be given to the Consul of the State to which the
ship belongs if there be one resident in the City where the Admiralty Court
is situated. A statement of service of such notice or a statement that there is
no such Consul present in the City, shall be made in the affidavit, in support
of any application for arrest of the ship. If a notice is served on the Consul, a
copy of the said notice shall be annexed to the affidavit.


ANNEXURE VI

DRAFT
Admiralty Courts Act, 1987

Preamble

This is an Act to constitute Admiralty Courts relating to ships and the
arrest of a ship and other property and for purposes connected therewith and to
establish a Special Court for the same.

BE IT ENACTED BY PARLIAMENT in the Thirtyeighth year of the Republic of
India as follows:

1. This Act may be called, “The Admiralty Courts Act of India. 1987".

2. It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government by a
Notification in their Gazette appoint.

3. The Central Government shall constitute and establish Admiralty
Courts in the Cities of Bombay. Calcutta, Madras and Cochin and all the Ad-
miralty Courts shall have Jurisdiction throughout the Territory of India and
throughout the Coast of India and including inland and territorial waters,

4, The Jurisdiction of the Admiralty Courts shall be to exercise exclusive
jurisdiction in regard to all matters atising under the Admiralty Act of India,
1987 and/or any other Law for the time being in force.

5, An Admiralty Court shall be presided over by one Judge/and the
Central Government shall stand empowered to constitute such rumber of Benches
as it deems fit in each of th> Cities roferred to in Section 3 to hear such suits
as may fall within_the definition of “Admiralty Jurisdiction”, as it may appear
necessary for the Central Goverrment to do so.

6. An Admiralty Judge shail be appointed from among persons who have
necessary qualifications as required for the appointment of a Judge of a High
Court of any State and shal appoinied by the President of India in the same
manner as a Judge of the High Court of any State PROVIDED THAT the con-
sultation for such appointment shall be with the Chicf Justice of India.

7. The salary, perquisites and protocols applicable to an Admiralty Judge
shall be the same as that of a Judge of the High Court.

shall constitute an Appeal Court of Admiralty
t shall be presided over by two Judges which
ist the decision of the Admiralty Courts.

8. The Central Governme
at Bombay and the Ap Cc
shall hear all Appeals ag

9. Admiralty Courts shall be subject to the general superintendence of
the Supreme Court of India.

10, The provisions in this Act shall have effect in respect of any cause
of action arising before coming into operation hereof and all the proceedings
pending in any High Court exe’ ing Admiralty Juris n shall forthwith
stand transferred to the est Courts constituted under this Act, and this Court
shall dispose of ali such cases in accordance with the provisions of Law in force
when the cause of action arose.

11. A suit before the Admiralty Court shall be commenced by a plaint
signed and verified according to the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1973,

4


75

12. The Central Government shall frame Rules and Regulations for regu-
lating the procedure and practice in the Admiralty Courts or for any other matter
including the payment of court fees. poundage and other changes for the enforce-
ment of the provisions of this Act.

13. Any person aggrieved by any order or judgment of the Court of
Admiralty may prefer an appeal to the Appeal Court of Admiralty.

14. Notwithstanding what is stated in any other Law for the time being
in force,.no appeals or revision shall lie against an order of the Appeal Court
of Admiralty to any court PROVIDED THAT subject to the grant of special
leave by the Supreme Court of India under Article 132 of the Constitution of
India, an appeal may be preferred to the Supreme Court of india on a question
of Jaw, jurisdiction or any other question of national or international importance.

15. The provisions of the Civil Procedure Code shall apply to all the pro-
ceedings before the Admiralty Court in so far as it is not inconsistent with or
contrary to the provisions made hereunder or the Admiralty Act 1987, or rules
made under any of these Acts.

16. The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette alist
of assessors containing the names of 10 persons who have specialised qualifica-
tions or experience in Admiralty and Maritime matters for cach of the Admiral-
ty Courts in the cities of Bombay. Madras. Calcutta and Cochin, to assist the
Court of Admiralty or the Appeal Court of Admiralty Assessors.

17. In any proceeding before the Admiralty Court cither in its criginal
or Appellate or Jurisdiction. the Court shall on request of either party to such
cause a summons to its assistance, in such manner as it may direct or it may
or Appellate or Jurisdiction. the Court shall on request of either party to s
such Assessors shall attend and assist the Court accordingly. Every such assessor
shall receive fees for his attendance as presctibed by the rules to be paid by
such of the parties as the court may direct.

18. Appointment of Assessors shall not be a bar to any of the parties
examining an expert witness.

19. The provisions of clause 32 of the Letters Patent dated 28th December
1865 for the Courts of Bombay, Madras and Calcutta are hereby repealed.

11--4 M of L&JTNDI96


ANNEXURE VII

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

Ministry of Sarface Transport
(Shipping Wing)

Ne. SR-10011/10/86-MA New Dethi, the 3rd December, 1986

To

‘The Director General of Shipping.
‘Jahaz Bhavan’,

Walchand Hirachand Marg.
BOMBAY-400 001.

Supect: Review of the Maritime Law and Admirally Jurisdiction— Setting up
of a Committee—Reg.

Sir,

In the light of the need expressed by the shipping industry in general,
including shipping agents, seafarer’s community, shippers etc., to make India’s
Maritime Law and Admiralty Jurisdiction up-to-date and more responsive to
the needs of the industry and to make it more conducive to the efficient and
speedy disposal of disputes, the undersigned is directed to say that Government
have decided to set up a Committee for this purpose with the following composi-
tion:

1. Shri Parveen Singh, Chairman
Director-Gencral of Shipping.

2. Shri K.C. Sidhwa, Member
Sr. Central Government Advocate.
Ministry of Law,
Justice & Company Affairs,

Bombay.
3. Dr. SN. Sanklacha, Member
INSA, Bombay.
4. Shri H.N. Fotedar, Member

Managing Director,
Indian Ports Association, New Delhi.

5. Shri S. Venkateswaran, Member
Advocate,
High Court, Bombay.

6, Dr. Leo Barnes, Member
General Secretary,
NUSI, Bombay.

7. Shri B.S. Bhesania, Member
Mulla & Mulla & Craigie,
Blunt & Caroe, Bembay.

है. Shri C.M. Shetye Member-Secretary
Dy. Director Generat ot Shipping,
Bombay.


17

2. The terms of reference of the above Committee may be as follows:

(a) To study the various aspects concerning Admiralty Jurisdiction includ-
ing the advances made in other countries and international conventions
adopted on this Jurisdiction;

(b) To recommend what up-to-date consolidated Maritime Legislation
could be introduced supported by a report explaining the statements,
objects and reasons; and

(c) To make specific suggestions to establish separate Admiralty Jurisdic-
tion/Admiralty Courts/Tribunals for the purpose of more effectively
dealing with Admiralty and Maritime Disputes.

3. The Committee may co-opt any persons or interests as necessary and

meet or consult various interest /organisations for the purpose of finalising its work.

4, The above Committee will function in Bombay with immediate effect

and shall submit its report to the Government within six months.

5. The expenses of non-official Members on travel and stay in connec-

tion with the meetings of the Committee will be met by their respective organi-
sations. Similar expenses of official) Members sha!] be met by their respective
Departments.

6. Office of the Director General of Shipping shall provide the Secretarial

assistance to the Committee.

Yours faithfully.

Sd/-
(0.0. soon)
Under Secretary to the Govt. of India.


ANNEXURE शा

Admiralty Act, 199
(Act No. of 199 )
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the admiralty

jurisdiction of courts in India. of legal proceedings in connection with ships
their arrest. detention and sale and matters connected therewith.

BE IT ENACTED BY PARLIAMENT IN THE FORTY -
YEAR OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA AS FOLLOWS:

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

1. Short title and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called ‘The
Admiralty Act, 199°.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may by notification in the Official Gazette appoint.

2. Definition—In this Act. unless the context ctherwise requires:

(a) “Charge” means any charge with the exception of light cucs, local
light dues and any other charges in respect of lighthouses, buoys or
beacons and of charges in respect of pilotage:

(0) “collision regulations” means rules and regulations made under the
Merchant Shipping Act {Act 44 of 1958) or any rules. byc-laws and
regulations made under the Indian Ports Act (Act 15 of 1998) or
the Maior Port Trusts Act (Act 38 of 1963):

“Court™ means the High Court or other court in scisin of admiralty
proceedings under Section 3 or Section 4:

(d) “goods” include baggage.

(c

(e) “inland waters” includes (i) all waters that are in fact navigable,
irrespective of whether they are affected by tides or are land-locked
or open or contain salt or fresh waters and (ii) also any part of the
sea adjacent to the coast of India certified by a Secretary to the
Government of India to be designated in this behalf to be waters
falling by international law to be treated as within the territorial
sovereignty of India apart from the operation of that law in relation
to “territorial waters”:

(f) “maritime lien” means the maritime lien specified in Section 13:

(g) “master” has the same meaning as in the Merchant Shipping Act
(Act 44 of 1958) and includes every person (except a Sailor) having
command or charge of a ship:

ch) “port™ means any port. harbour, river, estuary. haven. dock, canal,
or other place so long as a person or body of persons is empowered
by or under an Act to make charges in respect of ships entering it or
using the facilities therein: and
“limits of a port” means the limits thereof as fixed by or under
the Indian Ports Act (Act 15 of 1908) or the Major Port Trusts
Act (Act 38 of 1963):

78


Te

() “ship?. incladgs. any:.veage, 2228 yeas ay 4. 07% मो pte ter) of
human beings or propery; 0 reece raf nay class
of vessels as may be tral Government in this behalf

in the official gazette;

0) “towage” and “pilotage” in relation to an aircraft mean towage and
D pilotage while the aircraft is. water-borne.

CHAPTER II
JURISDICTION OF GOURTS

3. Courts to erercise of cixil jurisdiction—(i) Subject to the provisions of
sub-section (2), the civil jurisdiction in respect of all Claims under this Act shall
vest exclusively in the High Court and be exercisable in’ accordance with the
provisions hereinafter contained in this Chapter.

(2) If, at any time, the Central Government is of opinion that the volume
of sipims in any High Court is unduly large, it may, in cousulation with the
Chief Fustice of India and the Chief ‘Justice of the concerned High Court, by
notification in the Official Gazette, also confer jurisdiction in such matters, wholly
or to the extent considered nece: scary, , on suth of the principal civil courts of the
State as may be specified in the n¢tification."

(3) Any notification issued under sub-section (2) may make provisions
ancillary or incidental to the above including those governing the
institution of such cases in, or transfer of of pending cases to, such courts.

4. Transfer of actions from one High Court to another.—{1) The Supreme
Court may, suo motu or on the application of any party, transfer any proceedings
in admiralty jurisdiction from one High Court to any other High Court competent
to exercise such jurisdiction under Sectian 3 at any stage of the proceedings if,
for any reason, it considers it necessary to do so.

2) Order of transfer under sub-section (1) shall be passed after giving
all the :parties to the action opportunity a being heard and the transferred pro-
‘ceedings may be continued in the High Court to which they may be transferred
from the stage at which they stood at the time of transfer.

5, Admiralty Jurisdiction—(i) The Admiralty Jurisdiction of the Court
shall be as follows, that is to say—

(a} jurisdiction to hear and determine any of the questions and claims
mentioned in sub-section (2);

(b) jurisdiction in relation to any ef the proceedings mentioned in sub-
section (3);

(०) any other admiralty jurisdiction which it had immediately before the
commencement of the Act by virtue of the Adfniralty Act, 1861
or the Colonial Court of Admiralty Act, 1890 or the Colonial Courts
of Admiralty (India) Act (Act XVI of 1891) or otherwise howsoever,

(9) any jurisdiction connected with ships or aircraft which is vested in
the High Court apart from this section and is for the time being,
by rules of court made or coming into force after the commencement
of this Act, assigned and directed to be exercised by the Admiralty
Court.

(2) The questions and claims referred to in sub-section (1)(a) inchude-—
(a}.any claim to ees ign or, ownership of a ship or to the owner-
ship of any, share: Capen: -_

12—4 M of L & JINDI9S


80

: uestion arising between:the co-ownets of possession,
७) गए लए or eeinnge ot ‘daat, ably ३ ship ७ to

(०) any claim in respect of a mortgage of of charge on a ship or any
share therein;

(9) any claim for damage received by a ship during her stay, business
‘or voyage;

(©) any claim for damage done by a ship including civil liabi for oil
pollution damage under Part X-B the Merchant Rela Act
(Act 44 of 1958);

(0 any claim for loss of life or personal injury sustained in consequence
of any defect in a ship or in her apparel or equipment, or in conse-
quence of the wrongful act, neglect of

@ the owners, charterers or persons in Postession or contro! of 8

ip; or

(ii) the master of crew of a ship, any other person for whose
wrongful acts, neglects or defaults the owners, charterers or persons
in possession or controt of a ship are responsible,

being an act, neglect or default, in the navigation or management of
the ship, in the loading, carriage OF or discharge of is On, in or
from. ship, or in the embar! carriage or चिप ot
persons on, in or from the ship; हा

(g) any claim for loss of or damage to goods carried on in a ship;

(0) any claim arising out of any agreement relating to the carriage of
goods in a ship or to the use or hire of a ship;

0) any claim in the nature of salvage of life, vessel, cargo, property,
equipment or wreck or preservation thereof:

() any claim in the nature of towage in respect of a ship or an aircraft;
«&) any claim in the nature of pilotage in respect of a ship or an aircraft;

() any claim in respect of goods, materials, bunker or other necessaries
supplied to a ship or any services rendered to a ship for her operation
or maintenance;

(m) any claim in respect of a construction, repair or equipment of a ship
or in respect of any charges or dues to the Port Authorities under the
Indian Ports Act (Act 15 of 1908) or the Major Port Trusts Act
(Act 38 of 1963):

(0) any claim by a master or member of the crew of a ship for wages
luding any sum allotted out of wages or adjudged to be due by
way of wages and any claim by or in respect of a master or member
of the crew of a ship for any money or property which, under the
provisions of any law, is recoverable as wages in the manner

in which wages may be recovered:

(0) any claim by a master, shipper, charterer or agent in respect of
disbursements made on account of a ship;

(p) any claim arising out of an act which is or is claimed to be a general
average act;

(वो any claim arising out of bottomry:

(r) any claim for the forfeiture or condemnation of a ship or of goods
hich are being or have been carried, or have been attempted to

be carried, in a ship, or for लगन Oto ship oF any such
goods after seizure, or for ae


81

(3) The proceedings referred to in sub-section (1) (b) include:

(a) any application to the High Court under the Merchant Shipping Act
(Act 44 of 1958) for the appointment of a person to act as a substi-
tute for a person incapable of acting:

(b) any action to enforce a claim for damage, loss of life or personal
injury arising out of—

(i) a collision between ships; or

(ii) the carrying out of or omission to carry out a manoeuvre in
the case of one or more of two or more ships: or

(iii) non-compliance, on the part of one or more of two or more
ships, with the collision regulations;

(०) any action by shipowners or other persons under the Merchant Ship-
ping Act (Act 44 of 1958) for the limitation of the amount of their
liability in connection with a ship or other property.

(4) The jurisdiction of the Court under sub-section (2) (b) includes power
to settle any account outstanding and unsettled between thz parties in relation
to the ship, and to direct that the ship, or any share thereof, shall be sold, and
to make such other order as the court things fit.

5) The seference in sub-section (2) (i) to claim in the nature of salvage
includes a reference to such claims for services rendered in saving life from
3 ship or in preserving cargo, apparel or wreck as under section 390-404 of the
Merchant Shipping Act (Act 44 of 1958), are authorised to be made in con-
nection with a ship.

(6) The preceding provisions of this section shall apply—

{a) in relation to a!l ships or aircraft, whether Indian or not and wherever
the residence or domicile of their owners may be:

() in relation to al! claims, wherever arising (inchiding, in the case of
cargo or wreck salvage. claims in respect of cargo or wreck found
on land); and

(c) so far as they relate to mortgages and charges. to all mortgages or
charges, whether registered or not and whether legal or equitable,
including mortgages and charges created under foreign law:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as extending
to cases in which money or property is recoverable under any of the provisions
of the Merchant Shipping Act (Act 44 of 1958).

6. Mode of exercise of admiralty jorisdiction—(1)} Subject to the pro-
visions of section 7 of this Act, the jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court may in
all cases be invoked bv an action in personam.

(2) The jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court may, in the cases entioned
in clauses (a) to (c) and (r) of sub-section (1) of Section 5 of this Act, be invoked.
by an action in rem egainst the ship or property in question by its arrest.

(3) In any case in which there is a maritime lien or cther charge on any
ship, or other property including bunker for the amount claimed, the Admiralty
Jurisdiction of the Court may be. invoked by an action im rem against that ship
or property in question.

(4) In the case of any such claim as is mentioned in section 5 (2)(e) to
(0, where—
(a) the claim arises in connection with a ship; and

(b) the rerson who would be liable in the claim in an action in personam
(hereinafter referred to as ‘the relevant person’) was, when the cause

13-4 M of L & JIND/9S


82

of action arose, the owner, or charterer of, or in possession, or in
control of a ship, admiralty jurisdiction may be invoked (whether
or not the claim gives rise to a maritime lien on that ship) by an
action in rem against—

@ that ship, if at the time when the action is brought the relevant
Person is either the beneficial owner of that ship as respects
all the shares in it or the charterer of it under a charter by demise;
or

ii) any other ship of which, at the time when the action is brought,
the zelevant person is the beneficial owner as respects all the
si in it.

(5) Notwithstanding anything in the preceding provisions of this section,
the jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court shall not be invoked by an action
in rem in the case of any such claim as is mentioned in paragraph (n) of sub-
section (2) of Section 5 of this Act unless the claim relates wholly or partly to
wages.

(6) Where, in the exercise of its Admiralty jurisdiction, the Court orders
‘any ship or other property to be sold, the court shall have jurisdiction to hear
and determine any question arising as to the title to the proceeds of sale.

{7) In determining for the purposes of sub-section (4) of this section whe-
ther a person would be liable on a claim in an action in personam, the Court may
Presume that such person, at the commencement of the action, actually and
voluntarily resides or carzies on business or personally works for gain in India.

(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the jurisdiction of the
Admiralty Court shall not be invoked by an action in rem by atrest of a ship,
in the case of a ship registered in India as an Indian ship, unless six clear days’
notice in writing is served upon the registered owners or the master of the ship
intended to be proceeded against, stating the cause of action and the quantum
of claim and the date and time of application to the court for arrest and calling
upon the owners or master to provide security for the claim to the satisfaction
‘of the Admiralty Court in lieu of the arrest, and where such a security is provi-
ded the court shall entertain the action without arresting the ship and shall order
arrest of the ship only in the event of failure to provide such security.

पर 7. Jarisdiction in personam.—(1) This section applies to any claim for
damage, loss of life or personal injury arising out of—

- (a) a collision between ships; or

(b) the carrying out of, or omission to carry out, a manoeuvre in the case
of one or more of two or more ships; or

(0 non-compliance, on the part of one or more of two or more ships, with
the collision regulations.

(2) Subject to the provisions of any law a Court in India having Admi-
taity jurisdiction shall not entertain any action in personam as against any
defendant, unless

(a) the defendant or all the defendants (where thete are more than one),

at the time of the commencement of the action, actually and volun-
tarily reside or carry on business or personally work for gain in

Provided that an action can be entertained where there are more

- defendants that one who, at the time of the action, do not actually and

voluntarily reside or carry on business or personally work for gain in

India either if the leave of the court is given for, or each of such defen-
dants acquiesces in, such institution; or

(७) ‘the catise of action wholly or in part arose in India including inland
waters of India or within the limits of a port of India; or


83

(छ an action arising out of the same incident or series of incidents is
proceeding in the court or has been heard and determined by the
court; or

(d) a ship is beneficially owned or “chartered by demise by the defendant
has been arrested and those proceedings are pending.

(3) The Court shall not entertain any action im personam to enforce a
claim to which this section applies until any proceedings previously brought by
the plaintiff in any court outside India against the same defendant in respect of
the same incident or series of incidents have been discontinued or have otherwise
come to an end.

(4) Sub-sections (2) and (3) shall apply to counterclaims (except counter-
claims in proceedings arising out of the same incident or series of incidents) as
they apply to actions, the reference to the plaintiff and the defendant being for
this purpose read as reference to the plaintiff on the counterclaim and the defen-
dant to the counterclaim respectively.

(5) Sub-sections (2) and (3) shall not apply to any action or counterclaim
if the defendant thereto submits or has agreed to submit to the jurisdiction of
the Court.

(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-section 3), the Court shall have
jurisdiction to entertain an action in personam to enforce a claim to which this
section applies whenever any of the conditions specified in sub-section (2) (a) to
(d) is satisfied and the rules of court relating to the service of process outside
the jurisdiction shall make such provision as may appear to the rule-making
authority to be appropriate having regard to the provisions of this subsection.

(7) Nothing in this section shall prevent an action which is brought in
accordance with the provisions of this section in the High Court from being
transferred, in accordance with the enactments in that behalf, to some other
court.

8. Discretion of Court.—_Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 6
and 7 of this Act, it will be open to the Court, at any stage of the proceedings
and wholly in its discretion, to treat the proceedings as in rem or in personam,
in whole or in part, and to grant such reliefs and make such directions and orders
(including amendments to pleadings) as it may consider appropriate and just
notwithstanding that the action may have been described by the parties as
belonging to one or the other category.

9, Supplementary proyisions.-(1) The Admiralty Court shall have
jurisdiction to entertain an action for wages notwithstanding anything contained
in the Merchant Shipping Act. (Act 44 of 1958).

(2) Nothing in this Act shall—

(a) be construed as limiting the jurisdiction of the Court to refuse to
entertain an action for wages by the master or a member of the crew
of a ship, not being an Indian Ship;

(b) affect the provisions of Part XIII of the Merchant Shipping 4९5५
1958 (Act 44 of 1958) (power of a receiver to wreck to detain a ship
in respect of a salvage claim); or

{c) authorise proceedings in rem in respect of any claim against the State
or the arrest, detention or sale of any ship belonging to avy State.

10. Vesting of rights on sale of ship.—On the sale of a ship by Court, the
ship shall vest in the purchaser free from all encumbrances including mortgages,
charges, hypothecations and maritime liens.

11. Distribution of sale proceeds—({1) | Wherein an action in rem the
Court has ordered the property proceeded against to be sold, any party who


34

has obtgined or obtains a decree or order against the said property or the pro-
ceeds-of sale thereof may after obtaining judgement apply to the Court by a
notice of motion for an order determining the order of ‘priority of the claims
against the proceeds of sale of the said property.

(2) Wherein an action in rem: the Court orders the property proceeded -
against to be sold and the property has been sald, the Court shall order that a
notice be given in one international and one national newspaper as the Court
may specify that the property has been sold by the order of the Court in an
action in rem giving the number of the action and the names of the parties thereto
and that the gross sale proceeds, specifying the amount thereof, have been paid
into the Court and that the order of priority of the claims of the said proceeds
will be determined only after the expiration of a period of ninety days from the
date of the publication of the said notice and that any party having a claim
against the property or the proceeds of sale thereof. snould apply to the Court
for Ieave to intervene and prove its claim before the Court by filing an action
before it or filing a suit before any other appropriate court before the expiration
of that period.

(3) The Court may extend the period of ninety days on the application
of any party who has jastitued proceedings before the ‘Court as provided 18
subsection (2) or before any other Court of competent jurisdiction in India for
obtaining a decree against the property or proceeds of sale and the court shall
not disburse the sale proceeds and/or determin priority until thirty days after
the disposal of the said suit or action or any appeal filed therefrom.

(4) Notwithstanding the provisions contained in subsection (3) above, ihe
Court may determine priority and direct payment out of the sale proceeds on
an application by any party who has obtained a decree or order against the
Property or the sale proceeds if the Court is of the opinion that the claim of the
applicant is in any event entitled to priority over the claim for which a suit or
action has been instituted:

Provided that the Court shall hear aj] parties who may have made claims
and filed suit or action against the property or sale proceeds within the prescrib-
od ‘period of 90 days before determining priority and directing disbursement out
ef the sale. proceeds.

12. Order of Priority of Claims.—({i) The order of claim determining
infer se priority in an admiralty action shall be as follows:

(a) A claim where there is a maritime lien on any ship or other property
including bunker, against which action is proceeded with.

(b) Mortgages and charges on the ship or other property against which
the action is proceeded with.

(c) All other claims.

(2) The priority among the claims inter se in clause 1{a) above shall be
ae follows:

(a) Claims for salvage of life, ship or property provided that salvage of
life shall take priority over other salvages.

(0) Wages and other sums due to the master or the members of the
crew of the ship in respect of their employment in the ship not
exceeding six months’ wages.

(c) Port, canal and other waterway dues and Pilotage <tues.

(9) Balance of wages and other sums due to the master or the members
of the crew of the ship in respect of their employment on the ship
after deducting the amount paid under clause (b) above.

(०) 0). Claims in respect of the loss of life or personal injury in direct
connection with the operation of the ship; हे

(ii) Claims for contribution for genera! average;


85

iii) Claims based on tort arising out of physical damage or damage
caused by the operation of the ship ciher than loss or damage
to cargo containers and passengers’ effects carried on the ship;

(iv) Bottomry.

(3) The following rules shall apply in determining the priority of claims
inter se—

(6) Claims prior in order of priority shall exclude subsequent ones.

(ii) If there are more claims than one in any category of priority, they
shall rank pari passu.

(iii) Claims for various salvages shall rank in inverse order of time when
the claim secured thereto accrue.

(iv) Claims for salvage, port dues, wages and claims in the nature of
general average shall take priority aver all other claims mentioned
in clause 2(e) above which are attached to ship prior to the time
when the operations giving rise to the said claims were performed.

13. Maritime Lien —(1) Maritime lien shall attach to a ship or a property
in the following instances of claim and the date of accrual of such maritime
lien shall be the date on which the operations giving rise to the said claim were
performed: पर

(a) Claims for salvage of life, ship or property.

(b) Wages and other sums due to the master or the members of the crew
of the ship in respect of their employment on the ship.

(c) Port and canal and other waterway dues and pilotage dues.

(d) Claims for loss of life or personal injury having a direct connection

with the operation of the ship.

(९) Claims for contribution to general average.

(09 Claims based on tort arising out of physical loss or damage cawsed
by the operation of the ship other than the loss or damage to carge,
containers and passengers’ effects carried on the ship.

(2) A maritime lien shall stand extinguished on the expiry of one year
from the date on which the lien has attached to the ship or property:

Provided that the claim, if any, not barred by, limitation, may be enforced
by an action én personam:

Provided further that the period of one year shall be extended further if
the claimant of lien is unable to commence an action to enforce the Tien against
the ship or property for reasons beyond his control

14. Procedure in respect of foreign ships.—(1) In all actions under this
Act, the nationality of the ship proceeded against shall be stated in. the plaint,
and if the ship is a foreign ship. notice or institution of the suit shall be given
to the Consul of the State to which the ship belongs if there be one resident in
a city where the Court is situated.

(2) A statement of service of such notice or a statement that there is no
such Consul present in the City, shall be made in the affidavit in support of any
application for arrest of the ship.

(3) If a notice is served on the Consul, a copy of the said notice shall be
annexed to the affidavit.


86
CHAPTER III
PROCEDURE AND APPEALS

15. Code of Civil Procedure to apply—(1) The provisions of the Code of
Civil Procedure (Act V of 1908) shall govern all the proceedings before the
Court in so far as they are not inconsistent with or contrary to the provisions of
this Act or the rules made thereunder.

(2) The Admiralty Court shall have all the powers of a Civil Court in
dealing with interlocutory applications and of passing such interim and other
orders, as it may consider necessary and appropriate, to protect the interests of
the parties before it.

6. Assistance of Assessors.—(1) The provisions of S. 140 of the Code of
Civil | Procedure {Act V of 1908) shall be applicable to all proceedings under
this

(2) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette a list of
assessors containing the names of persons who have specialised qualifications or
experience in admiralty and maritime matters who may be called upon to assist
the court as Assessors.

(3) The appointment of assessors under this section shall not be construed
as a bar to the examination of expert witnesses by any of the parties.

(4) The Central Government may make rules prescribing the qualifica-
tions for assessors, the nature of duties to be performed by, and the fees to be
paid to them and other ancillary and incidental matters.

17. Reference to Arbitration.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the
rovisions of any other law, it shali be open to the Court in admiralty proceed-
to refer, with the written consent of all concerned parties, the entire dispute
it or such questions of law or fact raised thereby as the court may con-
necessary, to arbitration and dispose of the dispute or the questions,
the case may be, in conformity with the award as upheld or modified by the
court.

adn appeal shall lie from any judgment, decree or final
order of a Judge of the High Court or any other court exercising admi-
ralty jurisdiction under this Chapter to a Division Bench of the High Court.

CHAPTER IV
MISCELLANEOUS

19. Power to make reles.—(1) The Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Gazette of India, make rules for the whole or any part of India for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for regulating Practice and procedure in the
Admiralty Courts under this Act as well as 16: regulating fees, costs and expenses

in such proceedings.

(3) Until the rules are made under subsection (1) by the Central Govern-
ment, the rules at present governing the exercise of admiralty jurisdiction in the
High Courts’ shall continue to be applicable.

(4) The Central Government shall cause every rule made, or notification
issued, under this Act to be laid as soon as may be after the rule is made or
notification issued before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a


87

total period of thirty days (comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions) and, if before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid. both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or
notification should not be made or issued, that rule or notification shall there-
after have effect, only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without pre-
judice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or notification.

CHAPTER V
REPEALS & SAVINGS

20. Repeals and Savings—(1) The following enactments are hereby
repealed:

(a) (The) Admiralty Offences (Colonial) Act, 1849 (12 & 13 Vict. ०. 96);
{b) (The) Admiralty Jurisdiction (India) Act, 1860 (23 & 24 Vict. ०. 96):
(c) (The) Admiralty Court Act, 1861 (24 & 25 Vict. c. 10);

(d) (The) Colonial Courts of Admiralty (India) Act, 1891 (Act XVI of

(९) Letters Patent, 1865 (in so far as it applies to the Admiralty Jurisdic-
tion of the Bombay, Calcutta and Madras High Courts).

(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of any of the enactments mentioned in
subsection (1) any rule. notification, regulation. bye-law or order issued or made
under any such enactment shall. until revoked, continue in force as if it had
been issued or made under the corresponding provisions of this Act.

(3) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not prejudice

or affect the application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, (Act X of 1897)
with regard to the effect of repeals.

MGIPCBE—S4—4 M of L&J/ND/95—19-7-97—A10 Bhs.