LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY SECOND

REPORT

ON

CUSTODIAL CRIMES

1994


CHAIRMAN
LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI-110 001
Tel. Off. 384475
Res, 3019465

K. N. SINGH
(FORMER CHIEF JUSTICE OF INDIA)

D.O.No.6(3) (16)/92-LC(LS) August 26, 1994
Dear Prime Minister,

I am glad to forward herewith Law Commission’s 152nd Report on “Cust
odial Crimes” (9th Report of the 13th Law Commission).

Complaints of abuse of power and torture of suspects in custody by the police
and other law enforcing agencies have been the concern of the society. Custodial
crimes and torture of persons in police custody are heinous and revolting as they
reflect betrayal of custodial trust by a public authority against the defenceless
citizen, such practices violate fundamental rights and human rights. There is a
pressing need to control this malady. The victims of custodial crimes, torture,
injury or death, mostly belong to the weaker section of our society, the Law Co-
mission considered it necessary to take up this matter sou motu for an in-depth,
study.

The commission circulated a working paper on the subject to elicit public
opinion. It also organised a Seminar wherein the problem of custodial crimes was
discussed at length. The Commission has, after an indepth analysis of the Con-
stitutional and legal provisions, prepared this report which contains recommend-
ations for amendment of substantive and procedural laws, including amendment
of some of the provisions of Indian Penal Code, 1860, Criminal Procedure Code,
1973 and Indian Evidence Act, 1872. The recommendations have been made with
a view to contain the possibility of abuse of power and to provide for payment
of compensation to the victims.

We hope the recommendations made by the Commission in this Report will
be implemented as that will greatly benefit the poor and ignorant victims of cust-
odial crimes and it will further be a progressive step towards the protection of
human rights of our citizens.

With regards,
Yours sincerely,
(K. N. SINGH)
Hon’ble Shri P. V. Narsimha Rao,
Prime Minister &
Minister for Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
New Delhi.

Gi)


CHAPTER |
CHAPTER 2

CHAPTER 3

CHAPTER 4
CHAPTER 5
CHAPTER 6
CHAPTER 7
CHAPTER 8
CHAPTER 9
CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER 11
CHAPTER 12
CHAPTER 13

CHapter 14

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION .

CIRCUMSTANCES LEADING TO CRIME IN CUS-
TODY . . : पु पु पु पु पु पु
SONSTTUTIONAL AN D STATUTORY PROVI-
INTERNATIONAL COVENANTS

ARREST

CALLING TO THE POLICE STATION .
MEDICAL EXAMINATION

FIRST INFORMATION REPORT AND INQUIRY
INQUIRIES AND INQUESTS INTO DEATH .
SANCTION FOR PROSECUTION .

LAW OF EVIDENCE. : पु . : .
COMPENSATION .

ORGANISATION OF THE POLICE
RECOMMENDATIONS : . . : .

APPENDICES:

APPENDIX 1

WORKING PAPER ON CUSTODIAL CRIMES

APPENDIX I COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING
PAPER . : : . पु पु पं : .

Pacs No

16

30
32
35
38
39
41

48
41

57


CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

1.1 There is a deep concera at the growing incideave of custodial crimes occurr-
ing in different parts of our country. Complaints of abase of power, and torture
of suspects in custody by the police and other law enforcing agencies having power
to detain a person for interrogation in connection with investigation of an offence
are, on rise. Of late, such compiaints have assumed a larming dimensions project-
ing the incidence of torture, assault, injury, extortion, sexual exploitation and
death in custody. Compared with other crimes, custodial crimes are particularly
heinous and revolting as they reflect betrayal of custodial trust by a public servant
against the defenceless citizen. Custodial crimes violate law; human dignity and
human rights.

1.2 Despite constitutional and statutory provisions safeguarding the liberty and
the life of an individual, the growing incidence of custodial torture and death
have become a disturbing factor in the society. It is disiressing to find the gory tales
of dehumanising torture, assault and death in the custody of police almost in every
morning newspaper. The alarming rise in custodial crimes has picked the con-
science of every section of society and it mas evoked public outcry against the law
enforcing agencies, especially the police and the Directorate of Revenue Intelli-
gence and Enforcement Directorate. The Supreme Court hus expressed its deep
concern on the recurrence of custodial crimes on more than one occasion. While
dismissing the appeal of an Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police, who was senten-
cedtolife imprisonment by the coutrs below, fortorturinga person to death,
in the police custody in connection with the interrogation of an offence of theft
committed in a police officer’s house, the Court expressed its distress and angu-
ish in these words : “We are deeply disturbed by the diabolical recurrence of police
torture resulting in a terrible scare in the minds of common citizens that their lives
and liberty are under a new peril when the guardians of Jaw gore human rights to
death. ...Police lock-ups, if reports in newspapers have a streak of credence, are
becoming awsome cells. This developmentis disastorous to our human right awar-
eness and humanist constitutional order.”

1.3 No reliable or authentic statistics are available regarding the custodial cri-
mes as most of the incidents of torture are not recorded. Incidents of torure and
injury in urban areas is brought io public notice by the media, while large number
of such incidents occurring in rural areas of our vast country, remain unnoticed.
In this state of affaits, it ts difficult to pinpoint the exact number of incidents of
torture and death in custody. According to the Amnesty International's Report
for the year 1993, 415 persons died in custody throughout India during
the period 1985 to 1993. According to the National Crime Records Bureau, 289
rapes and 274 deaths in police custody were reported from all over the country
during 1990 to 19932. A report published in a leading newspaper indicates that
265 incidents of custodial deaths occured during 1990—1993%, There is no guar-
antee as to the correctness of these figures, but this is quite evident that the inci-
dents of torture and death in custody have assumed alarming proportions which
is affecting the credibility of our system of criminal justice and bringing the State
to disrepute.

1.4 The problem of custodial crimes has been the subject matter of debate in the
Media and various fora in our country and even in international fora. National
as well as international agencies have indicated our system for the violation of hum-
anrights in the wake of reports of custodial torture and deaths. In September,
1992 the Central Governemnt convened a Chief Ministers’ Conference to discuss
the violations of human rights, and it is reported that the question of custodial
crimes was discussed therein. The decisions taken at the Conference are not avail-
able although after the Conference, the Central Government constituted the Nat-
ional Human Rights Commission to deal with the violations of human rights.

3, Raghubir Singh v. State of Haryans (1980) 3 SCC 17 : AIR 1980 SC 1087.

4, Letter No. 205/1/94-STAT/NCRB dated 15-6-1994 of National Crime Records Bureau, Ministry.
of Home Affairs. Government of India.

+, BP. Saha “Towards Batter Police—Public Repport’, The Hindu May 17, 1994 at 9. 17.



2

1.5 Generally, the victums of custodial crimes, torture, injury or death belong
to weaker sections of society. The poor, the dewntrodden and the ignorant with
little, or no political or financial power, are unable to protect their interests. The
affluent members of the society are generally not subjected to torture as the Pol-
ice is afraid of their resources as such resourceful persons immediately approach
higher authorities and courts to regain their freedom. Members of the weaker or
poorer sections of society, are arrested informally and kept in police custody for

together without any entry of such arrests in the police records. During the
ae formal detention they are subjected to torture, which at times results in death.
Tn the event of death in custody, the body of the deceased is disposed of stealthily-
or thrown to a public place making out a case of suicide or accident. Records are
manipulated to shield the police personnel. The relatives or friends of the victim
are unable to seek protection of law on account of their poverty, ignorance and
illiteracy. But even if some voluntary organisations take up thier case or public
interest litigation is intiated against the erring public officers, no effective or spesdy:
Temiedy is available to them, as a result of which erring public officers go scot-free, This,
situation gives rise to a belief that the laws’ protection is meant for the rich etd
not for the poor. If the incidents of custodial crimes are not controlled or elimin-
ated, the Constitution, the law, and the State would have no meaning to the people
which may ultimately lead to anarchy de-stabilising the society. Justice Brande
is of U.S. Supreme Court looked upon Government ‘“‘as the potent_and omni-
present teacher (that) teaches the whole people by its example”. If the Government
becomes a law breaker, it breeds contempt for law; it invites every man to be
come a law unto himself’’. Such a situation cannot be permitted to exist in a civil-
sed society.

1.6 Maintenance of law and order is of prime importance to any Government:
Investigation of crime and apprehension of an offender is extremely necessary;
to ensure peace and order. For the implementation of laws and maintenanee of
law and order, police and other law enforcing agencies are necessary, but no civili-
sed country can permit the use of torture and third degree methods during interro-
gation and investigation of an offence. The police and other Governmental agen-
cies, while enforcing the law, are required to respect the constitutional commmit-
ment to the indiviaual’s fundamental rights, The statutory laws including the Criminal
Procedure Code and the Indian Evidence Act provide procedure to safeguard the
interest’ of a suspect or an accused, but, in actual practice, those provisions are
violated. The existing law is inadequate and ineffective in dealing with the cust-
odial crimes and in many cases the erring officers go scot-free on account of the
complainants inability to prove the case against them. The Supreme Court has
adversely commented upon the inadequate statutory provisions dealing with the
Custodial crimes in India and it has made several suggestions for reforms in the
existing laws.

1.7 As observed earlier generally the victims of custodial crimes belong to the
‘weaker sections of society. In the event of death of the earning member of a poot
family in custody, the family members of the deceased are left to lead a pathetic
life-in. penury. Various enquiry commissions appointed by the Government to 66-
quire into costodial deaths have recommended the amendment of the law, pto-
yiding for relief and rehabilitation to the family members of the deceased!. The
Supreme Court and other courts have also directed the State to pay damages to
the affected family members. The State functionaries including the Chief Mink
sters and Home Ministers have been granting: ex-gratia payment to the affected
family members of the victims of custodial crimes, but the existing law- does -not
adequately provide for the grant of compensation or damages to the affected family
members, nor there is provision for granting interim relief. No doubt relief for
damages may be claimed in tort through a Civil suit but the legal position in this
tespect is unclear and the process of civil suit is too cumbersome, making it illusory.

- = pe -- कि ate

3, Report of the Commission of Inquiry into the death of Sri U. Narasimha in the Police Custody
at Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar Police Station, Hyderabad on 10-7-1986, 28 Government

Andhra Pradesh (1986).

Report of the Commission of inquiry on the death of Sri T. Murlidharan at V Town Police

Station, Vijayawada, on 17-9-1986 (Government of Andhra Pradesh, 1987),

Report of the Inquiry Commission on the death of Dadugula Sankuriah in the Outposrof

Yelleswaram on 26-8-1985, (Government of Andhra Padesh, 1986).

Report of the Commission of Inquiry inte the death of.Sri Machela Anjiah while in the

police custody at Thungathurthi on 6-9-1986 (Government. of Andhra Pradesh).


1.8 The Law Commission is entrusted with the task of examining the laws which
affect the poor and suggesting such measures as may be necessary to harness law
and the legal process in the service of the poor, keeping under review, the system
of judicial administration to ensure that the system of judicial administration
is responsive to the demands of the society in the light of Directive Principles of
State Policy. Though the Government has made 19 reference to the Law Comm-
ission on the subject under study, the Commission has taken up the matter sou
motu for an in-depth study, with a view to providing relief to the victims of Cust-
odiai Crimes, which mostly belong to weaker sections of our society. There have
been demands in public to amend laws, both sybstantive and procedural to mini-
mige the-ocgurrence of the custodial crimes and to provide for the relief to the vict-
ingg and-their-dependents, hence this study. The Commission is consciaus that abuse
of: pawer by the law enforcing agencies cannot successfully be prevented altoget-
her. aa. the obedience to the Jaws depends upon the social consciousness of the law
enfarcing agencies, consiousness of their commitment to the human rights and
tq.the indiyidyal’s freedom and liberty. The law should be made stringent to elimi-
nate-chapces of tarture in custody and even if it is-not possible to eliminate it alto-

sais, शक should be made at least to minimise it to maximum possible extent.

‘Coramissian has undertaken this task with the.afpresaid object in view.

1.9.19 order to eficit public opinion on the subject, the Commission circulated a
Waren Peper on Custodial Crimes, setting out various aspects of the subject
study. In the Working Paper! the Law Commission formulated ten issues

On Various, aspects of the problem of custodial crimes and invited opinion on
proyisional proposals for the amendment of substantive and procedural laws.
working Paper was sent to all State Governments, Director Generals of all
State Police and para-military forces and also to the Home Ministry and Central
Bureau of Investigation, and to Supreme Court, and High Court Judges, Bar Ass-
ociations, academicians Law Professors, Human Rights agencies, Advocates and
other persons. Commzats reczived on the Working Paper are summarised
in Appeadix-Il. The Commission has alsa organised an all India Seminar
01 “Admipistration of Criminal Justice, its problems and perspectives” at New
Delhi, In. the seminar Judges, Jurists, Advocates, Law Professors, Magistrates,
and Police Officers expressed their views on various aspects of the administration
of stiminal justice. “Custodial crimes’ was one of the topics for discussion, which
nerated a lively debate. The Commission has, while formulating this report, taken
into consideration the views expressed at the seminar.

1, See Appondix—t.

DS-M/J128Me@fkJ&CA—2


CHAPTER 2

CIRCUMSTANCES LEADING TO CRIME IN CUSTODY
2.1 Arrest and its significance.

Arrest of a person leads to custody, which provides possible opportunity for
commission of crime against the person in custody. Commission of a crime by
a public servant against the arrested cr detained person while in custody amounts
to custodial crime. The custodial! crime is preceded by arrest or detention. In generals
“custody” commences on a person being arrested, the arrest may be legal or illegal:
it may be formal or informal; it may be by word or action.!-° Whatever be the origin
or category of the act of arrest, it has one very important consequence; it deprives
the person arrested of his personal liberty. From that moment onwards, he is totally
under the control of the person arresting him. His movements, his freedom, his actions,
even his thinking, come under the exclusive control and mastery of another person.
His personality becomes subordinate to that of the person in whose custody he is
placed. Every arrest amounts to custody. Arrest and custody are not synonymous
terms. Custody may amount to arrest in certain circumstances but not in all circum,
stances.? Arrest is a formal mode of taking a person in custody, but a person may be
in the custody in other ways also. Ordinarily, the term “‘custody” in relation to
detention of a person implies restraint upon the movement of the person concerned
denying him freedom to move about according to his volition. Thus a person after
arrest, formally or informally is in custody of the authority concerned.

2.2 Situation of mastery and abuse of authorty.

It is this situation of mastery, domination and total control that is generative of
a possibility of abuse. If “power tends to corrupt” in the political area, it is equally
true to say that a situation of authority tends to abuse of authority. Such abuse may
take a variety of forms. It may lead to physical torture, mental cruelty, silent psychic
domination or any other form of abuse. The varieties of custodial torture and crime,
an be as infinite as are the varieties of human perversity.

The situation is indeed peculiar. Ore person comes under the total domination
of another person. And that other person (so placed in domination) is not (in general)
subject to the concrete and immediate supervison or overview of a third person.

2.1 Role of the Law.

Of course, such supervision and overview can be supplied by the law. And,
indeed, it is one of the essential functions of the law to create and maitain an apparatus
that will function as the retraining a element against oppression, malpractice, abuse and
corruption, particularly in situations of sensitivity, Where the situation is one of
temptation, the law will act as a brake on the vice of greed. Where the situationis one
of passion, the law, by its sanctions, trics to control the surge of passion. Where the
situation is one of exploitation or oppression, the law must try to construct a barrier
to stop the on slaught of the evil mind. It is in this respect that the invisible, but
omnipresent influence of the law has a role to play. And it is for this reason that the
law should try to supply the deficiency that the peculiarity of the situation may give
Tise to.

This is not to say that passing a good law is, in itself, enough to cure all evils.
Good legislation is only the beginning, but is a good beginning. In the context of
arrest (with which this paragraph is concerned), the legal framework should be such

4, 113th Report of Law Commission of India on Injuries ia Police Custody :

3, Uttam Chand ». Mahmud Jewa, AiR 1936 Nagpur 200.

», Chottey Lal v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1954 Allahabad, 687.

4, Muthiah Chettiar v. Ganesan, AYR 1960 Madras 91.

%, Paramhamsa Jadab v. State of Orissa, AUR 1964 Orissa 144.

*, Jodha Khoda Rabari v. State of Gujarat 1992 Cri. LR 3298.

1, Directorate of Enforcement v. Deepak Mah«ujan & Ant JT 1994 (1) SC 299, 306,
4



asto supply the restraining influsnc2 which is need2d because of the weakness of
human nature. This mzaas (apart from other ६ rings) that the law of arrest should itself
be kept under constant review. Ia the “law of arrest”, ons has, of course, to include
@ the statutory provisions that give power to arrest, (ii) the kind of persons
empowerd to arrest, (iii) the safzguards provided ia law in relation to arrest and
detention, and (iv) connected matters, including, in particular, the subjective and
objective factors that must exist before the po-ver of arrest can 03 exercised. All these
need consideration and we would discuss them at the appropriats place.

2.4 Officers other than the police.

At this stage, we may like to make it clear that the power of arrest is not given only
to police officers. In our statutory framework, this power is conferred on many
other officers as well. Whatever be the technical view, y are also, in subastance,
Persons in authority, like police officers. It is possible that in the ensuing paragraphs
of this eport, for brevity and convenience, the expression used is “police officer”
or “the polce.” But (unless the context otherwise demands) the discussion would
apply mutatis mutandis to officers other than the police officers, who are entrusted
with the duty of law enforcement and who have poer of arrest and of keeping persons
in custody,

2.5 Initiating the criminal process

If unfortunately, an incident of tortur> or other crim2 in custody 0:
obviously becomes necessary to invoke the criminal process. Ordinarily, the initiation
of the criminal process in India takes the shap2 of lodging information with the police
or of making a complaint to the competent Magistrate. Lodging information with the
police is the more frequently adopted course. However, where the personal leged to
have committed an offence is himself an officer concerned with the enforcement of the
law, this may not always prove to be very effective. It is this element of the situation
which, in a negative way, counts as a factor that facilitates malpractices,

2.6 Medical Examination.

Allegations about the perpztration of violence by an officer having custody have
to be proved by concrete evidence. Eve witness testinoay in such cases would very
rarely be available. But, in general, medical evidence would furnish a very satisfactory
material in this regard, provided it is available. To ensure that such evidence is
available, medical examination of the alleged victim of custodial violence could be
the best device. This postulates, infer alia, that such examination is adequately
provided for in the law, which is not the case at present. This aspect will therefore
feceive atteation at the appropriate place.

2.7 Inquest, investigation and inquiry.

Where custodial violence results in death of the victim, obviously the substantive
law has failed. But procedural law must ‘take over’ in order that the factum of death,
the cause of death, the mode of death and other relevant facts are ascertained. As far
as possible, the ascertainment of such facts must be—

(a) quick in its timing,

(b) adequate in its coverage,

(c) thorough in its methodology, and
(9) impartial in its approach.

The desideratum that we have mentioned last in the above enumeration is, of
course, of the highest importance. It is in regrd to this very desideratum that the
present situation is not satisfactory. No doubt, the statutory law, particularly, the
Code of Criminal Procedure, does contain a few provisions on the subject, but ex-
erience seems to indicate that there are three major defects in this regard. In the

t place, though inquest by the Executive Magistrate is, at resent, mandatory,
cases are not known'where police officers are associated with the inquiry, thus defeating
the very object of the provision for Magisterial inquiry. Secondly, without casting
any reflections of the police or Executive Magistrates, one must take note of the fact
that these inquests have not always inspired sublic confidence. This is evident from
the persistent demands for the appointment of Commissions of Inquiry that are made


é

whenever there is custodial torture, rape or death. Finally, assuming that inquest by
an Executive Magistrate is, from the practical point of view, the best that can be
thought of, the dificulty is that such inquests do not always result in the initiation of
appropriate criminal proceedings against those who may be guilty.

2.8 Deficiencies in regard to evidence : difficulty of proof.

We may now turn to certain practical problems arising in the sphere of evidence.
By its very nature, a crime that tekes place while the victim is in custody is extremely
difficult to prove. In the first place (as laborated above), the situation is such that
the victim is totally subservient tc the alleged perpetrator of the crime. Hence the
victim would be afraid to speak out. Secondly, the situation is such that no third person
may ordinarily be present who can give oral testimony. Even where there is a
probability that custo: violence had been committed, it is difficult to link up the
episode with the custodian and to establish to the satisfaction of the court that (i)
the offence in question had been committed, and (ii) the offence was committed by the
the custodian.

2.9 Using force to compel statements leading to discovery.

Apart from the question posed in the preceding paragraph, there is another
point pertaining to the law of evidence, which, we believe. is of still greater practical
importance. The root of this problem lies in a highly anomalous provision contained
in the Evidence Act, namely, section 27. In the scheme cf the Act, a confession made
by a person in police custody is not admissible. By way of 2 proviso, section 27 lays
down that if a person in the custody of a police officer makes a statement leading to
the discovery of a fact, the same is admissible. whether or not it amounts to a con-
fession. Different grammatical problems and linguistic vagueness have been generated
by the placing and inept language of the section. Our present concern is with more
substantial matters. The fact that a statement can be rendered admissible, if it is
represented to the trial court as a “discovery statement” and presented at the trial in the
form of a confession marked as a discovery statement, a fact will known to every
police officer, acts as a lever to the police officer to use unfair means to procure such a
statement. The police knows that thi is an easy method of circumventing the pro-
hibitions based on practical wisdom, experience, of generations, and deep thinking.
It isan unpleasant thing to say, but it must be said, that secton 27 of the
Evidence Act has been productive of great mischief, in the sense that it generates an
itch for extorting a confession which, in its turn, leads to resort to subtle, disguised
action in regard to the section. For the present, let us say that the section does need
drastic surgery. ifthe cause of honest law enforcement is to be promoted.

2.10 Organisation of the police.

While on the theme of honest and efficient law enforcement, we must also make a
mention of an important aspect relating to the organisation of the police. By and
large, the police in India is so organised that no strict dividing line is drawn between
the function of investigation and the function of maintenance of law and order.
The former requires patience, skill, long range efforts and expertise of a high order.
The latter envisages very quick action on the spot, facutiy of immediate response,
firmness of the mind and a decisive approach. The officer engaged in investigation has
to collect facts, explore the reality, reconstruct the past and analyse the entire
gamut of materials. The officer charged with duties connected with law and order,
security and the like must, on the other hand, capture reality in a fleeting moment and
exhibit an immediate and effective response. If a police officer is shunted off from
time to time to emergency duties, he cannot be expected to adopt ‘the text book line
of invesigation and may be teoted to switch over to less desirable methods. This is
very likely to result in an urge to resort to coercion. There are many other factors
arising out of the Police Organisation which cotribute to adoption of coercive
methods. We will discuss those in a little detail in a later chapter of this report.


CHAPTER 5
CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY PROVISIONS
3.1 Introduction

The legal framework in India, both constitutional and statutory contain provi-
sions relating to custodial torture and other crimes in custody. The substantive law
Indian Penal Code) provides for punishment of a person causing injury, torture or
death on the body of a pers>n in custody. The procedural law (Criminal Procedure
Code and Evidence Act) contains several provisions safecuarding the fundamental
rights and interest of a person in custody. The constitutional and thc relevant statutory
provisions on the subject have been supplemented by th ificant judicial pro-
Bouncements

3.2 Constitutional provisions : Article. 20

The prohibitions impcsed by Article 20 of the Constitution axe directly relevant
to the criminal process. Article 20(1) prohi’sits retrospetive operetion of penal legis-
lation. Article 20(2) guards against double ieopardy for the same offence. Article
20(3) provides that no persons accused of any effence shall be compelled to be a
witness against himself. These three clans may appear to be dealing with three
different topics or facets. But there is a co~ mon thread running through all of them
namely, the anxiety to ensure that the various facets of the criminal justice system—
substative, procedural and evidentiary shall not be used to onpress._ the accused person.
To put the matter in different words, the common theme is that the administration
of the criminal justice system should not be so designed or implemented as to destroy
the deeper and moral values of justice itself.

Of course, article 20(3) is most directly relevant. The Constitution and the law
protect against testimonial compulsion on the premise that such compulsion may
act as a subtle form of coercion on the accused.1 This is a value which has been given
the status of a fundamental right but is also the underiying theme cf several statutory
provisions—particularly sections 24 to 26, Evidence Act (as aspect which is often
overlooked). Article 20(3) comes into operation as soon 85 a formal accusation is
made, whether before the commencement of a prosecution ot during its currency.?

3.3. Article. 21

Article 21 of the Constituton provides that no persion shal] be deprived of life or
personal liberty except according to procedure established by law. Because of the
expansive interpretation placed on the words “procedure established by law”, this
article has been held to cover a variety of Governmental acts which have an impact
on personal liberty. The case law on the article is so vast that none can grasp the total
coverage of this article without very deep study and no one ran do full justice to it
without a lengthy discussion. But our task at present is confined to drawing attention
to the relevance of Article 21 (as judicially interpreted) to ci:stodial crime Though
Article 21 does not contain any express provision against torture cr custodial crimes,
the expression “Life or personal liberty” occurring in the Artivle has been interpreted
to include Constitutional guarantee against torture, assav!t or injury against a
person under arrest or under custody. Following are some illustrative deci-
sions :-—

(i) Punishment which has an element of torture is unconstitutional.?

(ii) Prison restrictions amounting to torture, press
beyond what the court order authorises, are unco:

- or infliction and going
stitutional.4

1 Lord Mustills Judgement in Smith v. Director, Serious Fraud Office, (1992) 3 AN E.R.

3, Dastagir v. State of Madras, AIR 1960 SC 759. 1978 SC 1025. para 30: Balkishan v .

State, AIR 1981 SC 279.
4. Inderjeet v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1975 SC 1867.

3, Sheela Barse ५, State of Maharashtra. AIR 1983 SC 378; Javed ५. State of Maharasht
AIR 1985 SC 231. EEN,

7


8

(ii) An under-trial or convicted prisoner cannot be subjected to physical or
mental restraint :

(a) which is not warranted by the punishment awarded by the court, or

(b) which is in excess of the requirement of prisoner’s discipline, or
(० which amounts to human degradation.>

3.4. Article 22

Article 22(1) and 22(2) of the Constitution are also relevant for the present pur-
pose, because one of their objects is to ensure that certain checks exist in the law to
prevent abuse of the power of arrest and detention. Article 22(1)provides that no
Person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed as soon as
may be, of the ground for such arrest, nor shall he be, of the grounds for such
arrest, nor shall he be denied the right to consult and to be defended by a legal
practitioner of his choice.

Article 22(2) provides that every person who is arrested and detained in custody
shall ७३ produced before the nearest Magistrate within a period of 24 hours of such
arrest, excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to
court of the Magistrate and no such person shall be detained in custody beyond the
said period without the authority of a Magistrate.

Both the provisions referred to above, have a vital importance to the theme of
the present Report. The right to consult a lawyer is intended to enable the detained
Person, inter-alia.

{a) to secure release, if the arrest is totally illegal.

(b) to apply for bail, if the circumstances $0 warrant,

(c) to prepare for his defence, and

(d) to ensure that while he is in custody, no illegality is perpetrated upon him

The right to be produced before a Magistrate under article 22(2) is intended,
inter-alia, to ensure that :

() there will be an independent scrutiny of the legality of the detention,

(ii) there will be an adequate and deffective opportunity for seeking release
on bail, and

(iii) there will be available an avenue where the person detained can ventilate
his grievance that he might have against the treatment meted out to him in
custody.

Realising the essential connection between the provisions of article 22(1) and
article 22(2), the courts have held that the provisions of clause (1) and (2) of article
22 are mandatory.® पु

3.5 The Indian Penal Code : General Scheme

As an enactment containing the general criminal law of the country, the Indian
Penal Code does not omit to take notice of the need to create criminal sanctions
against conduct that harms another persons through an act which ought to be
punishable. It needs to be emphasised that the Code takes as much notice of in-
tangible harm as of tangible harm. The definition in section 44 of the Code which
defines the expression “injury” as covering harm to body, mind, reputation or
property.

*. Sunil Batra v. Dethi Adiministration, AIR 1968 SC 1675; Sita Ram v. State of Uttar
Pradesh AIR 1979 SC 745 ; Sunil Batra vy. Delhi Administration, AIR 1988 SC 1579, para
31, 42; Javed v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1985 SC 231, para 4; Sher Singh v. State of
Punjab, ATR 1983 SC 465, para 11,

5. Gopalan v. State of Madras, 1950 SCR 88; Hansmukh ४. State of Gujarat, ATR 1981 SC 28;
Statement of Madhya Pradesh ९, Shobhram, AIR 1968 SC 1910, 1917.


y

The provisions of the Code that are relevant for the present purpose fall into
two categories—

() provisions applicable as protecting all categories of persons against speci-
fied types of harms, such provisions being expressed in language wide
enough to cover persons in custody (though not confined to them, and

(ii) provisions specifically focused upon the protection of persons in custody.

Thus, most of the provisions contained in Chapter 16 of the Penal Code (offence:
against the human body) cover persons in custody as well as others. In contrast,
section 330 of the Penal Code is specifically addressed to the causing of hurt to extort
48 confession (though it covers certain other acts also).

3.6 Sections 166 and 167
Section 166 of the Penal Code reads as under :—

“166. Whoever, being a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of
the law as to the way in which he is to conduct himself as such public servant
intending to or knowing it to be liekly that he will by such disobedience, cause
injury to any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year or with fine or with both.”

It may be reiterated that the expression “injury” (see section 44) covers harm
illegally caused to body, mind, reputation or property.

Section 167 provides for punishment of a public servant framing an incorrect
document with intent to cause injury etc.

3.7 Section 220

Section 220 of the Code provides punishment to a person (with legal authority
to confine persons etc.) who corruptly or maliciously confines any person, knowing
that in doing so he is acting coatrary to law.

3.8 Sections 330, 331

Chapter 16 of the Indian Penal Code (offences affecting the human body) is
the second longest Chapter of the Code. It provides punishment for almost every
kind of restraint, interference with or harm to body, ranging from the lowest degree
of physical attack (assault) to the highest category of physical harm, namely, the
extinction of human life. However, for the present purpose, it is sufficient to confine
the discussion to certain specific sections which are of direct relevance to custodial
crimes. Under section 330, a person who voluntarily causes hurt to extort “any
confession or any information which may lead to the detection of an offence or mis-
conduct” or for compelling restoration of any property etc. becomes punishable with
imprisonment upto 7 years and with fine. Illustrations (a) and (b) are of particular
relevance and read as under :—

“(@) A, a police officer tortures Z in order to induce Z to confess that he com-
mitted acrime. Ais guilty of an offence under this section”.

“(b) A, a police officer tortures B to induce him to point out where certain
stolen property is deposited. A is guilty of an offence under this section.”

Section 331 punishes a person who causes grievous hurt to extort confession or
to compel restoration of property. The offence is punishable with imprisonment
upto 10 years and with fine.

3.9 Sections 340 to 348

Sections 340 to 348 of the Indian Penal Code constitute a group of sections deal-
ing with wrongful restraint, and wrongful confinement and their aggravations. Of
course, they envisage that the confinement itself is illegal—an ingredient prominent
brought out by the adjective “wrongful”. But we must refer to section 348 whi
provides for punishment to a person who wrongfully confines any person for extort-
ing any confession etc. The section also punishes extortion committed to extract
information leading to the detection of offence or misconduct.


3.10 Section 376(2)

The next provision in the Indian Penal Code which deserves to be noted is
section 376(2) ,which deals with an aggravated form of rape committed by police
officers and other public servants—persons in charge of hospitals and women’s
institutions etc.

3.11 Sections 3769 to 376D

Custodial sexual offences are specially taken care of. by sections 376B to 3760
of the Indian Penal Code, dealing with—

(व) intercourse by a public servant with woman in custody.
(0) intercourse by Superintendent of Jail, remand home etc.,

(2) intercourse by member of the management or staff of hospital with an
inmate of the aospital.

3.12 Sections 503 and 506

Criminal intimidation is punished by section 503 read with section 506 of the
Indian Penal Code.

3.13 Code of Criminat Procedure, 1973 : General observations

The relevance of tic ‘ode of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to the theme of the pre-
sent Report is two-fold. In the first place, the Code itself contains provisions in-
tended to operate as a safeguard against custodial torture. These represent, what
may be called, the positive side. Secondly, those provisions of the Code which con-
fer various powers on law enforcement agencies need to be kept in mind, in so far
as they create possibilities of abuse of authority. This may be regarded as the nega-
tive side. Besides these two categories of provisions, we are concerned with the
question how far the provisions of the Code need to be supplemented, with reference
to custodial crimes, so that the investigation, trial, punishment and remedial mea-
sures in respect of such crimes arc taken care of in an adequate manner in the scheme
of the Code.

As a matter of convenience, we shall deal with the provisions of the Code
sectionwise, at the same time keeping the above considerations in view.

3.14 Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 : Section 41 : Arrest

The power of arrest is conferred on any police officer by section 41 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure 1973. For the present purpose, Section 41(a) is the most
important provision, as uader this provision a police officer may, without an order
from the Magistrate and without a warrant arrest any person—

“(@) who has been concerned in any cognizable offence, or against whom a
reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has been received,
or a reasonable suspicion exists, of his having been so concernce.”

3.15 Section 49 : Restraints

Section 49 of the Code provides that the person arrested shall not be subjected
to more restraint than is necessary to prevent his escape. The emphasis is on the
prevention of his escape which may supply the need for restraint. However, at the
same time, the quantum of restraint is very carefully defined by the word “necessary”.
It is noteworthy that the entire provision begins with a categorical prohibition,
because the command of the law is that the arrested person shall not be subjected to
unnecessary restraint. Any excessive restraint would definitely give rise to a cause
of action o for damages, because, in such a case the immunity from civil action con-
ferred by the doctrine of lawful authority would not be applicable. Presumably,
appropriate criminal sections wculd also be available, with reference to sections 340 _
to 348 of the Indian Penal Code. as also sections 349 to 358 of the same Code which
are concerned with assault and the use of criminal force. If lawful authority is
exceeded, the pretection otherwise available under sections 76 to 79 of the Penal
Code cannot be claimed with the result that penal action will be maintainable against
the erring public servant.



11

3.16 Section 50 : Groands of arrest

The section reads as under :—
“50, Person arrested to be informed of reaundy of arrest and of right to bail

any person without warrant

(1) Every police officer or other per:
: lars of the offence for which

shall forthwith communicate to hi
he is arrested or other grounds for suc!

(2) Where a police officer arrests w
person accused of a non-bailable oT:
that he is entitled to be relersed oa ba!
on his behalf.”

Section 50 has been regarded as mandatory, particularly in the light of article
22(1) of the Constitution, so that non-compiiance with the section renders the arrest
and detention illegal?

“yout warrant any person other than a
2, he shall inform the person arrested
land that he may arrange for sureties

3.17 Section 53 : Medical Examination of the accused

In certain circumstances, medical exavtination of the accused may become
necessary and this is taken care of by section 53 of the Code. As the law stands at
present., it is lawful for a registered medics! practitioner at the request of a police
officer not below the rank of sub-inspecter, to mabe a medical examination of the
accused, if there are reasonable grounds f:> believing thatthe examination of the
person will afford evidence as to the com~vissicn of an offence. Such force as is
reasonably necessary for this purpose can ४ used. In the case of women, section
53(2) provides that the examination ‘‘shall t= made only by, or under the supervision
of, a female registered medical practitioner”, rovision obviously intended to
guard against sexual malpractices at the time of such examination.

the Code, Bill No. 35 of 1994 of the
fied that “examination” shall
al assault, sputum and sweat,

It appears that in the recent Bili to am
Rajya Sabha (9th May, 1994), it is sought to
include the examination of blood, swabs in
hair sample and finger nail clippings and s ther tests which the registered medical
practitioner thinks necessary in a petticule= case. This Explanation seems to have
been considered desirable in view of the fact thet the subject of pathological tests

_ has been the point at issue before certain High Courts (although the Notes on Clauses
to the Bill do not mention this aspect).

3.18 Section 54 : Medical examination at the request of the arrested person

Section 54 of the Code gives to an arrested person the right to get his body
examined if the allegation is that such exesination will afford evidence which will
disprove the commission by him of any of against anybody. In this context,
it has been held that it is the duty of the Magistrate to inform the arrested person
that he has such a right of medical examination if he has a complaint of torture,

- maltreatment etc?

Jt may be mentioned that in the recent Biil to amend the Code (Rajya Sabha
Bill No. 35, 9th May, 1994), the following subsection is proposed to be added to
section 54 :—

“(2) Where an examination is made ur “er sub-section (1), a copy of the report
of such examination shall, on a reques* being made by the arrested person or
by any person nominated by him in th's behalf, be furnished by the registered
medical practitioner to the arrested person or the person so nominated.”

by the fact that in Uttar Pradesh by
८ 2en amended by inserting the following

The proposal seems to have been $प९९६
the U.P. Act No. 1 of 1984, section 54 ha:
sentence at the end :—

“The registered medical practitioner stall forthwith furnish to the arrested
person a copy of the report of such examination free of cost”.

1, Ashok v. The State, 1987 Cri. LY 1750.
4, Sheela Barse v. State of Maharashtra, AUR 1983 SC 378 : 1983 Cri. LJ 642.
S-M/3128MofLI&CA —3


12

3.19 Sections 56, 57 and 58 ; Action after arrest

Section 56 of the Code provices that a police officer making an arrest without
warrant shall, without unnecessary delay aid subject to provisions as to bail, send
the person arrested before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case or before the
officer in charge of a police station. By section 57, no police officer shall detain in
custody a person arrested without warrant for a longer period than under all the
circumstances of the case is reasonabie and such period shall not, in the absence of
a special order cf a Magistrate under section 167, exceed 24 hours exclusive of the
time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the court of the Magistrate.
Provisions of section 57 are mandatory.1

Section 58 provides that officers in charge of police stations shall report to the
District Magistrate (or, if he so directs, to the Sub-Divisional Magistrate) the cases
of all persons arrested without warrant, within the limits of their respective stations,
whether such persons have been admitted to bail or otherwise.

The object of these sections, is to ensure that prolonged detention is not resorted
to by the Police and that the person detained has an opportunity of making known
to the Magistrate any problems that he might have faced after arrest.

3.20 Sections 75 and 76 : Arrest onder warrant

Where the arrest of a person under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is
under ६ warrant, sections 70 to 81 of the Code become anplicable, of which sections
75 and 76 are relevant for the present purpose. They read as under :—

“1S. Notification of substance of warrant.—The police officer or other person
executing a warrant of arrest shall notify the substance thereof to the person to
be arrested, and, if so required, shall show him the warrant.

76. Person arrested to be brought before Court without delay.—The police
officer or other person executing a warrant of arrest shall (subject to the provi-
sions of section 71 as to surety) without unnecessary delay, bring the person
arrested before the Court before which he is required by law to Produce such
person :

Provided that such delay shall not, in any case, exceed 24 hours exclusive of

the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate's,
Court.”

3.21 Section 154 : Information in cognizable cases

In order that the criminal process may be invoked in respect of any offence,
two principal modes of approach are available under the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973. A person may report the matter to police if the offence is a cognizable one.
In the alternative, he may make a complaint before the Magistrate, whether or not
the offence is a cognizable one. Section 154 of the Code deals with information
given to the police in a cognizable case. The relevance of this section to the pre-
sent Report is a general one, the section being applicable to all cognizable offences
would include offences concerned with wrongful arrest or torture etc, by the police.
The scheme of section 154 may be analysed, for convenience, as under :—

(a) The information given to an officer in charge of a police station shall be
reduced in writing;

(0) It shall be signed by the person giving it and its substance shall be entered
in the prescribed book;

(०) A copy of the recorded information shall be given forthwith, free of cost,
to the informant;

(d) If there is a refusal by the police to record the information, the person
aggrieved may send the substance of the information by post to the
Superintendent of Police concerned. If the latter is satisfied that the
information discloses the commission of a cognizable offence, he must

either investigate the offence himself or direct a subordinate officer to
do so.

1, Khatri». State of Bihar, AIR 1981 SC 928: 1981 Cri LJ 470,


13

It has been held that before the pclice starts investigation, there must be a rea-
sonable suspicion of the commission of cognizable offence.

3.22 Section 160 ; Attendance of witnesses

An important provision in the area of police powers is contained in section 160(1)
of the Code, reading as under :—

“160. Police officer's power to require attendance of witnesses{1) Any police
officer making an investigation under this Chapter may, by order in writing,
require the attendance before himself of any person being within the limits of
his own or any adjoining station who, from the information given or otherwise,
appears to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case; and such
person shall attend as required ;

Provided that no male person under the age of fifteen years or woman shall be
required to attend at any place other than the place in which such male person
or woman resides.”

This section is of particular importance, in view of the express prohibition,
contained in the proviso, against summoning of women of any age and males under
fifteen years at a place other than their place of residence. The legislative seems
to have taken note of the possibility of abuse of authority if the section is not com-
plied with.

3.23 Section 163 : Prohibition of Inducements

Taking note of the fact that a person in custody may be subjected to subtle
influences to make a confession, section 163(1) of the Code expressly provides that
no police officer or other person in authority shall offer or make, or cause to be offe-
red or made, any such inducement, threat or promise, as is mentioned in section 24
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. For convenience, we quote section 24 of the
Evidence Act below :—

“24. Confession caused by inducement, threat or promise, when irrelevant in
criminal proceeding—A confession made by an accused person is irrelevant in
a criminal procecding, if the making of the confession appears to the Court to
have been caused by any inducement, threat or promise, having reference to
the charge against the accused person, proceeding from a person in authority
and sufficient, in the opinion of the Court, to give the accused person grounds,
which would appear to him reasonable, for supposing thar by making it he
would gain any advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal nature in reference
to the proceedings against him.”

3.24 Section 164 : Confession before Magistrate

The Code, in section 164, contains provisions of great importance to the criminal
process and vital for the preservation of integrity in the process. The full signifi-
cance of this section cannot be appreciated unless, one keeps in mind certain impor-
tant provisions of the Indian Evidence Act and of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
In the Indian Evidence Act, by section 25, a confession made to a police officer
cannot be proved as against the person who has made the confession. Under sec-
tion 26, a confession made by a person while he is in the custody of a police officer
cannot be proved as against such person, unless it is made in the immediate presence
of a Magistrate. By section 26, of the Evidence Act a confession made to a Police
Officer becomes irrelevent besides this the legislature has enacted in section 164 of
the code, a procedure whereunder the competent Magistrate may record a confes-
sion made to him in the course of an investigation or at any stage afterwards before
the commencement of the inquiry or trial. In practice, when it is the case of the
police that an accused person in custody wishes to confess, the accused person is
taken before the competent Magistrate who, after complying with the elaborate
formalities prescirbed in section 164, records the confession. Those formalities are
intended primarily to ensure (i) satisfaction of the Magistrate that the confession is
voluntary, and (ii) proper record of the statutory warnings which are intended to
achieve the above object.

1, Rita Wilson v. State of Himachal Pradesh, 1992 Cri. LI 2400 (HP). Nina Nargis Devaud
¥. Farida 6. Devecha, 1991 Cri, L3 2694 (Karn.).


14

There is another aspect relevant fi 2 prosent purpose. While under sectio®
161 of the code, the investigating p. n examine orally any person sup
posed to be acquainted with the facts of ug case nnd reduce into writing the statement
made by such person, section 162 of the Code provides that the statement shall not
be signed by the wil and furd st the statement shall not be used for any
purpose (save as provided in law) at any 1 .quiry or trial in respect of an offence under
investigation at the time when such ment was made. It is at this stage that
section 164 of the Code becomes useful. Under that section, the comp ctent Magis-
trate may record, on cath, any 5 yi aad tc him in the course of an investiga-
tion or at any time afterwards before पाए commeacement of the tiral.

3.25 Section 313 : Examination of the cccused in Court

Under section 313 of the Cade, the criminal court is required to examine the
accused after the prosecution case is ७५ the purpose of enabling the accused
personally to explain any circu curing in the evidence against him. But
section 313{2) prohibits the administratisa of oath to the accused.

3.26 Section 315 : Accused as witacss

Section 315 of the Code makes

. ४ C s the accused a competent witness for the defence
in which case he may give evi i

sproof of the charges, but this can
be only on his own written request. the constitutional privilege against
testimonial compulsion. Szction 31511), provis: further provides that the failure
by the accused to give any evid not bs made the subject of any comment
by the parties or by the court, nor shali it give rise to any presumption against him
or against the co-accused.

3.27 Section 357 : Compensation

Section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 empowers the criminal
court to award compensation to victims of an offence when the court passes a judg-
ment.

The order may be passed not only when the court imposes a sentence of fine,—
but also when it does not impose fine. The compensation can be ordered in favour
of the person who has suffered lass or isiury caused dy the offence. In that part of
the section which applies where fine is iposed, it is specifically stated that the loss
or injury must be such that in a civil suit compensation would be recoverable. Where
fine is not imposed, this requirement is nut expressty stated. But the word “injury”
itself suggests that it must be actionable harm. (See section 2(h) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1972 read on 43, Indian Penal Code). In short,
section 357 of the Code empowers the c*iminal court to function also as a civil court,
within the limits laid down in the section.

3.28 Indian Evidence Act : General obse-yations
The Evidence Act deals with the following principal topics :—
(a) the facts about which evidence can be given;
(6) the kind of evidence that can be given about such facts;
(०) the buden of proof and the presumptions that can be drawn;

(8) the mode of examination of witnesses and the permissible limits about the
substance and forni of questions to put to them; and

(९) the role of the judge in regard to all these matters.

In the present report, we are conce-ned in the main, with certain matters falling
under category (a) and category (0) ab: Under category (a), it will be necessary
to deal with confessions, while under category (d), it will be necessary to deal with
the privilege against seif-incrimination.

3.29 Section 24 to 27 Evidence Act
The subject of confessions is of एक. relevance to the theme of custodial crimes,

because it is often found that the urge to procure a confession tempts the law enforce-
ment officers to resort to unfair means. The provisions of the Evidence Act relating



15

to confessions cannot be fully appreciated unless one keeps before the mental eye
the setting in which they appear in the Aci. The scheme of the Act in this regard
can be analysed as under :--

(a) A statement made by a party to a proceeding is un ‘admission’ (section 17)
and is admissible in evidence.

(6) An admission is the genus; confession is a species thereof, and is therefore
admissible.

(०) However, since a confession (as distinct from an ordinary admission)
may resuit in the imposition of punishment, the law has enacted certain
special provisions restricting their admissibility. One such iestriction
relates to voluntariness. A confession is not admissible if it is not
voluntary (section 24).

(d) In certain special situations, the law even goes to the length of assuming
that the confession may not be voluntary, ha ‘d to the pressures
of the situation; and it therefore enacts special “exclusionary” provisions,
totally shutting them cut from evidence. One such provision is contained
in section 25, which provides that no confession meade to a police officer
shali be proved as against a person accu: y offence. Such a
confession can never be used as substantive evidence to convict the
accused.*

Another exclusionary provision is contaned in section 26, Evidence
Act, under which no confession made by any person while he is in the
custody of a police officer shali be proved against such person unless it
be made in the immediate presence of a Magistrate. Reference has
already been made tc section 164 of the Ccde of Criminal Procedure,
1973 under which a Magistrate can record a confession.

(e) Finally, section 27 of tie Evidence Act (which curiously begins with the
words *‘Provided that’) lays down that when any fact is deposed to as
discovered in consequence of “information” received from an accused
person in the custody of a police officer, then so much of such information
as distinctly relates to the fact so discovered, is relevant whether or not
it amounts to a confession, wiether this section overrides section 26 only,
of any other section or sections preceding it is a question. We need not
go into that question. What matters for practical purposes is that if

information” is givei and it ieads to the “discovery” of any fact, (it
should be a relevant fact, though the section does jot expressly say so)
then the information can be admitted in evideace—-

(7) even though the person is in police custody, and
(ii) notwithstanding the fact that it amounts to a confession.

Tn so far as section 27 overrides the exclusionary rules relating to confessions
made by a person in custody, it puts a powerful weapon in the hands of the police.
The vast mass of case law on the section is sufficient to show that the weapon has
been extensively used by the police to extract confessions by use of force and coer-
cion. And if one can read between the lines, the case law also projects an apprehen-
sion that there is a tendency on the part of the police to use means not totally legiti-
mate, to procure “information” that satisfies the formal requirements of section 27,
even though the giving off such information may not be an exercise of the voliation
of the accused. It is for this reason that we shall have to revert to this section when
we make our recommendations.?

3, Paulose v. State of Kerala, 1990 Cri. LJ 100 (Ker.).
3, See Para 11.6 of Chapter 11 of the Report,



CHAPTER 4

INTERNATIONAL COVENANTS
4.1 Right to life

The right to life is safeguarded by most of the international instruments relating
to human rights. The general clause for the protection of the right to life in these
instruments declares every human being’s inherent entitlement to life, which right
Governments undertake to protect by law. 174

4.2 Positive and negative aspects

So far as the international covenants are concerned, they seem to impose both
a positive and a negative responsibility on the State. In their positive aspect, those
covenants require the State and its agencies not to violate the right to life. This is
implicit in the obligation to respect such right. In their negative aspect, the State
must take at least such reasonable steps as are necessary to ensure protection of the
right conferred by the Covenant. In regard to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, the Human Rights Committee established under the Covenant
seems to have taken the view that the obiigations of the particular States under the
Covenant encompass both positive and negative dimensions.>

4.3 U.N. Declaration

The General Assembly of the United Nations adopted the Declaration for pro-
tection of persons from being subjected to torture and other crime of inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment on December 9, 1975. Article 5 of the Declara-
tion requires compiehensive training of law enforcement officers against torture.
Article 7 contemplates a system of review of the interrogation, methods and practices
as well as custodial arrangements. Article 9 obligates the States to ensure that the
acts of torture are made offences under national criminal law. The Declaration also
provides that victims shall be afforded redress and compensation.

4.4 Code of Conduct

In December i979, a Code of Conduct for Law Enforceinent Officials was adopted
by the United Nations General Assembly. Article 5 of the Code prohibits law
enforcement officials froin inflicting, instigating or tolerating aay act of torture. The
United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, 1981 was set up pursuant
to General Assembly Resolution 36/15] of 16 December, 1981 to receive voluntary
contributions for distribution, through established channels of assistance, as humani-
tarian, legal and financial aid to persons who may have been tortured and to member
of thei: families.

1, Article 6 ; of International Convenant oa Civil and Political Rights (United Nations,
1389). Text in Ian Brownlie (ed.), Basic Documents on Human Rights (OUP, 1985), page

3, Article 2(1) of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedom
(Council of Europe, 1950). Text in lan Brownlie (ed.), Basic Documents on Human Rights
(OUP, 1985). page 242.

3, Article 4 (1) of the American Convention on Human Rights (Organisation of American States
1969). Text in Ian Browalie (ed.), Basic Documents on Human Rights (OUP, 1985), page

3, Article 4 of the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights (Organisation of African
Unity, 1981). Text in K. Ginther and W. Benedek (eds.), New Perspectives and Conceptions
of International Law : An Afro-Europeao Dialogue (Springer-Ver-lag, Vienna), page 247.

4, See Dadiel Monguya Mbengo Vv. Zaire, Communication No. 16/1977, in Reportsof the Human
Rights Committee to the General Assembly, U. N. Doc. A/38/40 (1983), p. 134. Pedro
Pablo Connargogy. Colombia, communication No. R. 11/45, in Reports of the Human Rights
Committee to the General Assembly, U. N. Doc. A/37/40 (1982), p. 137. Also see Olive
Farrell v. United Kingdom, Application No. 9013/80, in Vol. 25 Yr. Bk. of the European
Convention on Human Rights. p. 124.

16


17

4.5 U.N. Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treat-
ment or Punishment, 1984

The U.N. Convention against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment of 1984, came into force on 26th June, 1987. The Con-
vention comprises 33 articles divided into three parts. Part | of the Convention
defines torture, prohibits acts of torture and allied concepts and obliges State parties
to the Convention to ensure that all acts of torture are punished. Part II provides
for the machinery for the e:.forcement of the above prohibition. Part III relates to
formal matters.

4.6 Torture defined

The Convention against torture (1984) defines the term ‘torture’ as any act by
which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted
on a person for such purposes as obtaining from his or a third person information
or a confession punishing him for an act (which) he or a third person has committed
or is suspected of having committed or intimidating or coercing him or a third person,
or for any act based on discrimination of any kind, wher such pain or suffering is
inflicted by, or at the instigation or with consent or acquiescence of, a public official
or other person acting in an official capacity but does not include pain or suffering
arising only from action inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctionsn (Article 1),

4.7 Measures

Article 2 of the U.N. Convention against Torture (1984) obligates the State
parties to the Convention to take effective legislative, administrative, judicial or
other measures to prevent acts of torture in any territory under its jurisdiction. No
exceptional circumstances whatsoever, whether a state of war or a threat of war,
international political instability or any other public emergency, may be invoked
as a justification of torture. An order fron a superior officer त a public authority
may not be invoked as a justification for torture. Article 4 reads as under :-—

“Article 4.1—Each State party shall ensure that all acts of torture are offence
under its criminal law. The same shall apply to an attempt to commit torture
and to an act by any person which constitutes complicity or participation in
torture. Each State party make these offences punishable by appropriate penal-
ties which take into account their grave nature.”

4.8 Education etc.

The Convention, in article 10, also requires each State party to ensure that educa-
tion and information regarding the prohibition against toxture are fully included in
the training of law enforcement personnel, civil or military, medical personnel,
public officials and other persons who may ne involved in the custody, interrogation
or treatment of any individual subjected to any form of arrest, detention or imprison-
tment.

4.9 Review of rules

Article 11 of the U.N. Convention (1984) provides that each State Party shall
keep, under systematic review of rules, instructions methods and practices as well as
arrangements for the custody and treatment of persons subjected to any form of
arrest, detention or imprisonment in any territory under its jurisdiction. with a view
to preventing any case of torture.

4.10 Other acts of cruelty

Article 16 of the UN Convention (1984) provides that each State Party shall
undertake to prevent, in any territory under its jurisdiction, other acts of cruel,
inbuman or degrading treatment or punishment which do not amount to torture,
as defined in Article 1, when such acts are the result of acquiescence of a pufilic official
or other person acting in an official capacity. In particular, the obligations con-
tained in articles 10, 11, 12 and 13 shall anply, with the substitution (for reference
to torture); of references to other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment.


18

4.11 Victims

On 29th Noveinher, 1985, the United Nations adopted a Resolution to ensure
justice for the victims of crime and abuse ef power. The General Assembly of the
United Nations adopted the Caracas Resolution ‘Declaration on Basic Principles
of Justice for Victims of Crime and abuse of Power’. This Declaration defines
‘victims of crime’ and requires the mem ber States to establish judicial and_adminis-
trative mechanisms to encible the victims to obtain redress, formal or informal, in
procedures that are exnedient. fair, inexpensive and accessible. The Declaration
further obligates the member States to make laws providing for restitution and pay~
ment of compensation te the victims of crime and abuse of power. Article 12 of the
Doclaration of 1985 obligates the member States to provide financial compensation
to victims of crime. Article 19 requires the States to incorporate, into the national
laws, norms prescrit’ ¢ abuse of power and providing remedies to victims of
such abuse. Such remedies should include restitution and compensation and neces-
sary material, medical. psychological and social assistance in support.

4.12 India’s obligation

India is a party to the aforesaid Declarations. Hence, it is under an obligation
to take effective steps to implement them. In the delibecations before the United
Nations, the representative of Indian made “ta committment by the Government on
behalf of its citizens and a guarantee for these citizens which they could claim when-
ever their rights were threatened.”

4.13 In India, the pcople’s resolve to foster respect for international law and
treaties and obligations is reflected in Article 51 of the Constitution. In fact, Parlia-
ment has enacted laws to give effect to the international obligation as contained in
various Declarations ard Conventions. In addition, the courts have also, by their
judicial innovation, ensured the effective implementation of thosea norms. Where the
State or its agencies failed to implement the international norms, aad the State has
ratified or adopted those norms, the Supreme Court of India has intervened to issue
directions for the effective enforcement of those norms through laws. Further, the
Court has interpreted domestic law in a manner so as to give effect to the implementa-
tion of the internaticn! norms. We do not consider it necessary to refer to all the
decisions on the subject, but it would be worthwhile to refer to only some of the land-
mark decisions.

4.14 Case law

In Francis Corelle Mullin y. Administrator, U.T. of Delhi,2 the Supreme Court
gave due recognition to the international norms while interpreting Article 21 of the
Constitution, when it observed :

any form of torture or Cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
would be offensive to human dignity and constitute an inroad into this right to
live and it would, on this view. be prohibite by Article 21 unless it is in accorda-
nce with the procedure prescribed bylaw, but no law which authorises and no
procedure presecibed by law. which leads to such torture or cruel, inhuman or de-
grading treatment can ever stand the test of reasonableness and non-arbitrariness
it would plainly be unconstitutional and void as being violative of Articles 14
and 21. It would thus be seen that there is implicit in Article 21 the right to
protection against torture or cruel, inhman or degrading treatment which is
enunciated in Article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
guaranteed by Article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights.”

The Supreme Court, while interpreting Articles, 21, 48-A and 51(8) of the
Constitution in Charan Lal Sahu v. Union of India. observed as under :—

“In the context of our national dimensions of human rights, right to life, liberty,
pollution-free air and water is guaranteed by the Constitution under Articles
21, 48-A and 51(g). It is the duty of the State to take effective steps to protect

3, Nigel Rodley, Treatment of Prisoners under International Law (UNESCO Paris Clarerdon
Press Oxford, 1987). nage 59.

2, Francis Coralle Muli Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi, (1981) 1 SCC 608, 619.
3, Charan Lal Sahu v. Union of Inda, (1990) 1 SCC 613, 713.



19

the guaranteed constitutional rights. These rights must be integrated and illumined
by the evolving international dimensions and standards, having regard to our
sovereignty, as highlighted by clauses 7 and 13 of the Code of Conduct os
Transnational Corporations. The evolving standards of international obligations
need to be respected. Maintaining diguity and sovereignty of our people, the
State must take effective steps to saf guard the constitutional rights of citizens
byenacting laws.”

In Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab, the Supreme Court, while dealing with
Article 21 on human rights observed as under :

“We are undoubtedly committed to uphold human rights even as 8 part of
long standing heritage and as enshrned in our constitutional law. We feel that
this perspective needs to be kept in view by every law enforcing authority because
the recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of
the citizens is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world. If the
human rights are outraged, then the Court should set its face against such
violation of human rights by exercising its majestic judicial authority.”

These illustrative cases are cited here simply to show the importance of keepingin
mind International Conventions while desing with questions of national law.

95-MjJI2BMofLJ&CA—~4


CHAPTER 5
ARREST

5.1 Totroduction

The law of arrest which, at ७-४8 tive, was regarded as.a véry simple subject,
has proved to be a diffictult and thornv one for a variety of reasons. Political events of
the las} spat a century throughcut th» world have lent ‘an added emphasis to the need
to obééive certain principles in mulating the law of arrést ahd in administerin;
thé Jay i. International covenants on the subject, and developments in the sphere of
humah tights no longer permit one to sit quict'and’take the view the everything is
well with the law of arrest. Added to this, is the apprehension, ‘often expressed froms
various quarters, that, 00. some occasions artests are made without reasonable cause,
or are being made in a‘thannez contrary to'tl'sintendment of the flaw. Tn India, (as
in other countries), the constitutional mandate against the deprivation of a person’s
persotiedl liberty except according to procsdure estab ished by law, naturally increases
the theoretical drtd pradtiéal imnottiiice’ of a dis

sion of the subjett:’ Moreo wer |,
the vital and essential connection of the concent and procedure of arrest with the
cherished personal liberty of the citizen must obviously make it a matter of perennial
anxiety and concern for the wise law-giver as well as for the judge.

5.2 Concept of arrest

In common paralance, one understands, by the word “arrest,” the deprivation
of personal liberty and we take it that a person is arrested when his freedom of move-
ment is circumscribed at the will of the person arresting him. Origin of the word
“arrest” is interesting. The Latia verb restare meant “stand back, remain behind”
or “stop” (it is the source of English “est in the sense “remainder”). The compound
verb arrestare, formed in post-classifical times from the prefix ad and restare,
had a causative function : ‘“canse to remain behind or stop,” hence “capture, seize”.
These meanings were carried over, via Old French arester into English. (Bloomsbury,
Didctionary of Word origins 1992, page 38.)

5.3 Legal provisions as to arrest

The power to arrest a person is conferred by statute in a variety of situations.
For the present purpose, the most relevant provision is contained in section 41(1)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, which provides that a police officer may
arrest a person “who has been concerned in any cognizable offence, or against whom
areasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has been received,
or a reasonable suspicion exists of having been so concerned.” The first part of the
section is totally objective, hecavse. if a person has been concerned in any
cognizable offence, then the police officer may arrest him. What matters in the first
part is the fact of having been concerned in a cognizable offence. The police officer’s
view of the matter is of no consequenc2, But, in regard to the remaining portions of
section 41(1), one finds a combination of objective facts coupled with a certain
amount of subjective evaluation. The objective element in this part of section 41(1)
is highlighted by its repeated use of adjectives, such as “reasonable” or “credible.”
But it is not necessary to establish objectively that the person proposed to be arrested

has been c ned in a cognizable offence. Reasonableness of the complaint, or
credibly oli ¢ information or reasonableness of the suspicion, would suffice,
although these elements themselves could be the subject matter of debate in concrete
cases.

5.4 Formal and informal arrest

There has been considerable amount of discussion as to when an arrest takes
place, a discussion which seems to have become necessary because of the practice
adopted by police officers of “detaining, लि inauiries” or “stopping and frisking”
and the like. In an appeal from malaysia,! Lord Devlin stated the position thus :

3, Shabban Bin Hussain vy. Chorg Fook Kani,,(1969)3 ANE. R.1626(P.C.)
20



vat

“An: arrest occurs when a police officer states in terms that he is arresting or
when he uses force to restrain the individual concerned. It occurs also when by
words or conduct, he makes it clear that be will, ifn ary oz to prevent
the individual from going where he may want to go. [i does not occur when he
stops an individual to make inquiries.”

In another case (in the House of Lords,’ Lord Diplock expressed himself as
under :—

“Arrest is.a continuing act; it starts with the arrest or taking a personsinto
eustody (by, action or words restraining him from moving anywaere beyond: the

-@rtestor’s control), and it continues until: the person 30 restriined 15 ek
“teleased‘frony custody, or having been brought before a Magisirate, is remanded
-into custody by the Magistrate’s judicial ac

5 Requirements of ‘section 41Cr. P.C.

महा: be noticed that section 41(1)(a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
Operates: iti-three alternative situations (apart from the totally objective situation of
the person to be arrested having been concerned in any cognizable offence :-—

(i) reasonable complaint has been made, of having been so concerned;

(ii) credible information having been received, of having been so concerned
+, (iii) reasonable suspicicn existing, of having been so concerned.

जब. practice, most arrests by police officers fall under the third category. In this
connection, it may be pertinent to point out that reasonable suspicion has been
described as the minimum requirement. According to a Full Bench decision of the
Madhya Pradesh Hight Court,? reasonable suspicion is the minimum, requirement
We shall refer later to a recent Supreme Court Judgmea.3 where several aspects, of
the power of arrest have been elucidated and certaia guidelines laid down. It is
obvious that the objective “reasonable” introduces an objective element and that
reasonable suspicion must exist before a person is arresied. Since arrest is a serious
imread on the liberty of a person, the law has enjoined a police officer to exercise the
power of ‘of arrest only after the objective element of reasonable suspicion is made“ out.
-in- actual practice this salutory mandate of the law has not been followed.

as indiscriminate arrests are teing made dy polic2 on mere susvicio

5.6 Discretion regarding arrest

In - England, by section 2(4) of the Criminal Law Act, 1957, the constable’s
power of arrest has been laid down in these wo-ds :—

where'a constable with reasonable cause suspects thai an arréstable offence has
committed; he may arrest without warrant anyore whom le, with
teasonable cause, suspects to be guilty of the offence.

que tion arose in England some time ago, as to whether, on such reasonable.
suspicion being entertained by he constable, arrest is mandatory. Dealing with-this
question, the House of Lords held? that even when the police has a reasonable sus-
i¢jon 01808 person has committed an arrestable offence, it does not follow that he
must be arrested. The discretion has to be reasonably exercised and its exercise can
juéstioned in a court of law on the principles which have come to be.known as
Li6 principles® According to these principles, a person on whom discretion
col by statute

(a) ‘must exercise it in geod faith, for furtherance of the object of the statute;

(0) must not proceed upona misconstruction of the statute;

‘Holgate Mohd. v. Duke, (1984) 1 511 8.६. 1054, 1056 (प, 1...
3. Gulabchaitd Kannoolal v. State of M. P., (1982; M. P. L. J. 7, 17 (F. BD.
2, Joginder Sihigh, para 3.7, infra
+, Holgate Mohd. v. Duke, (1984) 1 All E.R, 1054, 1059, ” 1060 (H. La.

हार Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation, (1947) 2 Ail ER.



22

© must take into account matters relevant for exercise of the discretion;
an

(d) must not be influenced by irrelevant matter.

5.7 Judgment of the Supreme Court :
Joginder Singh’s case

The subject of discretion to arrest came up before the Supreme Court of India, in
Joginder Singh’s cas2 waici is of great practical importance for the present purpose.?
In that case, the Supreme Court first noted that the law of arrest is one of balancing
individual rights, liberties and privileges on the one hand and individual duties etc.
on the other hand. One has to balance protection for the individual, against the social
need that crime shall be suppressed. After elaborating on this point, and after noticing
the views expressed by tue National Police Commission in its Third Report (pages
31 and 32) and by the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure, the Supreme
Court of India took care to suggest certain guidelines regarding arrest by the police.
The court also referred to the following suggestion of the Royal Commission on
Criminal Procedure :

“To help to reduce the use of arrest we would also propose the introduction
here of a scheme that is used in Ontario enabling a police officer to issue what is
called an appearance notice. That procedure can be used to obtain attendance
at the police station without resorting to arrest provided a power to arrest exists,
for example to be fingerprinted or to participate in an identification parade. It
could also be extended to attendance for interview at a time convenient to both
to the suspect and to the police officer investigating the case......... ”

The Supreme court also referred to section 56(1) of the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act, 1984 (U.K.) which reads as under :—

“where a person has been arrested and is being held in custody in a police station

or other premises, he shall be entitled, if he so requests, to have one friend or

relative or other person who is known to him or who is likely to take an interest

in his welfare told, as soon as is practicable except to the extent that delay is

permitted by this section, that he has been arrested and is being detained
re,

$.8 Guidelines suggested by the Supreme Court

In the case of Joginder Kunar v, State of U.P. (1994) 3 J.T. (S.C.) 423, 430,
which we have referred to in the preceding paragraph, the court (paragraph 24 of
the judgment) took pains to point out that an arrest cannot be made, merely because
it is lawful for the police oilicer to do so. The existence of the power is one thing,
while the exercise of the power quite another. The police officer must be able to
justify the arrest apart from his power to do so. Arrest and detention may cause
incalculable harm to the reputation and self esteem of a person. The court made the
following observations in this behalf :

“No arrest can be made in a routine manner on a mere allegation of commission
of an offence made against a person. It would be prudent for a Police Officer
in the interest of protccuva of the constitutional rights of a citizen and perhaps
in his own interest at no arrest saould be made without a reasonable satis-
faction reached after some investigation as to the genuineness and bona fides of a
complaint and a reasonable belict both as to the person’s complicity and even so
as to the need to eilect arrest. Denying a person of his liberty is a serious matter.
The recommendations of tae Police Commission merely reflect the constitutional
concomitants of the rundainentai rigat 10 personal liberty and freedom. A person
is not liable to arrest iaerciy om tne suspicion of complicity in an offence. There
must be some reasoadic jusiiticatioa in the opinion of the officer effecting the
arrest that such arrest is necessary and justined. Except in heinous offences,
an arrest must be avoided is a police officer issues notice to person to attend the
Station House and not to icave Station without permission would do.”

3, Joginder Kumar v, Stateof Uttar Prasesh, (1994)3J.T.(9C) 423.


23

In paragraph 26 of its judgment, the Supreme Court set out the requirements as
under :—

“These rights are inherent in articles 2] and 22(1) of the Constitution and require
to be recognised and scrupulously protected, For effective enforcement of these
fundamental rights, we issue the following requirements :

1. Ax arrested person being held in custody is entitled, if he so requests, to have
one friend, relative or other person whois known to him or likely to take an
interest in his welfare told, as far as is practicable that he has been arrested and
where he is being detained.

2. The police officer shall inform the arrested person when he is brought to the
police station of this right.

3. An entry shall be required to be made in the Diary as to who was informed of
the arrest. These protections from power must be held to flow from articles 21
and 22(1) andenforced strictly.”

5.9 Doty of Magistrate

In the same Judgment (Joginder Kwnar), in paragraph 27, the Supreme Court
directed that it shall be the duty of the Magistrate before whom the arrested person is
produced, to satisfy himself that the requirements.set out in the preceding paragraph
have been complied with. As per paragraph 28 of the judgment, the above require-
ments must be followed till legal provision’s are made in this behalf and it was further
clarified that these requirements are in addition to the rights of arrested persons found
in, various police manuals.

5.10 Reasons for arrest

In Joginder Singh's case, paragraph 29, the Supreme Court, while clarifying

these requirements are not exhaustive, directed the Directors Generals of Police
of all the States in India to issue necessary instructions requiring due observance of
requirements. “In addition, departmental instructions have also to be issued that a
Police officer making an arrest must also record in the case diary the reasons for
making the arrest.”

5.11 Judgment in Sheela Barses case

At this stage, we may also make a reference to an earlier Supreme Court judg-
ment in Sheela Barse’s case wherein certain guidelines were laid down, both regarding
arrest generally and regarding the arrest of women. The relevant guidelines are as
under :

“(1) Four or five police lock ups should be selected in the reasonably good locali-
ties where only female suspects should be kept and they should be guarded by
female constables,

(2) Female suspects should not be kept in a police lock up in which male suspects
are detained.

(3) Integrrogation of female suspects should be carried out only in the presence
of female police officers/constables.

(4) Whenever a suspect is arrested by the police and taken to the police lock up,
the police will immediately give intimation of the fact to the nearest legal aid
committee.

(5) Surprise visits to the police lockups in the city should periodically be made
with a view to providing arrested person an opportunity to hear their grievances
and ascertain the conditions of police lock up.

(6) As soon as a person is arrested, the police must immediately obtain from
him/her the name of any relative or friend who he/she would like to be informed
about his/her arrest and the police should get in touch with such relative or friend
and inform him about the arrest.

(7) The Magistrate before whom an arrested person is produced shall enquire
from the arrested person whether he has any complaint of torture or maltreat-
ment in police custody.”

8. Sheela Barse y. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1983 SC 378.
9. Nandini Satpathy v. State of Bihar, 1978 Cri, LJ 968,


24

5.12 Presence of counsel

The topic of presence of counsel at the time of interrogation of an accused by
the police has received attention to many countries, particularly from the constitu-
tional angle. The point was touched in the well known case of Nandini pat
where an emphasis was laid on the présence of counsel in the light of article )
of the Constitution (testimonial compulsion) and article 22(1) of the Constitution
(right to consult and to be defended by a lawyer of one’s choice). The relevant
observations areas under :—

“‘Lawyet’s presence is a constitutional claim in some circumstances in our
country also, and, in the context of article 20(3), is an assurance of awareness
and observance of the tight to silence ..we'think that articlé 20(3) and
article 22(1) may, in a way, be telescoped by making it prudent for the ‘police
to permit the advocate of the accused, if there. be one, to be present at
the time he is examined...... We do not lay-down that the police must-secure
the services of a lawyer’s system, an abuse which breeds other vices. But all that
we mean is that if an accused person expresses the wish to have his lawyer by
his side when his examination goes on, this facility shall not be denied, without
being exposed to the serious reproof that involuntary self-crimination-s¢cured in
secrecy and by coercing the will was theproject........

It would appear that at least three articles of the Constituiion articles 20, 21 and
22 have relevance if one were to examine the constitutional aspect in great detail.
Even if the non-constitutonal aspect is taken into accqunt, it would seem.that if
serious effort is made to check the malpractices of torture and allied practices during
interrogation, there should be a provision, at least entitling the arrested, person to
demand that the interrogation should be carried out in the presence of his counsel
or a family friend of his choice. Requirement of State appointed counsel being present
at that stage need not be inserted, but what we have stated in the preceding sentence,
needs to be incorporated 176 the Jaw. We should mention that in response to our
questionnaire (Issue No. 2) some replies "have favoured the presence of counsel
though a fairly large number have opposed it: (Este No. 2).

5.13 Law Commisson Report No. 115

We would like to specifically mention at this. place that the Law Commission
of India, in its 135th Report on Women in Custody (1989) recommended detailed
provisions to avoid harassment to women in custody and to protect them to the extent
possible. The Commission,-for this purpose, recommended the insertion of a specific
and -separate-Chapter in the Code of Criminal Procedure, so that the concerned
officers, as well as women’s organisations and women in custody and their relatives,

, without much effort, discover and inform. themselves of the rights of such women
and the obligations of various officers. A draft of the proposed separte Chapter
relating to arrest, interrogaion and custody of women etc. was attached to the Report.
‘At the present stage, it may be sufficient to mention only those recommendations
which are related to arrest and interrogation. These areas under :—

. 5 . y
(1) In the event of a woman being required to be arrested, the police-officer
concerned shall not actually touch the person of the woman aad may
presume her submission to custody. This recommendation is being
made in ofder that the dignity of the concerned woman is: maintained.

(2) Ordinarily, no woman shall be arrested after sunset and before sunrise.
In exceptional cases calling for arrest-during these hours,—

(i) prior permission of the immediate-superior officer shall be obtained,
Or (ii) if the case is of extreme urgency} then, dfter arrest, a report
with reasons shall be made to the initedmte superior officer and to the
Magistrate.

(3) Wherever a, woman is medically examined, the examination ‘shall be
conducted only. ander thé ‘supervision. of-a female medjgal practitoner,
with sfrict regard to. decency.


25

(4) The concerned woman shall be informed about her right to be medically
examined, “‘in order to bring on record any fagts which may show that an

offence against her has-been-committed after herarrest.” .
6) A copy of the report of the medical examination shall be furnished to the
“woman. '

(6) A woman shall not, under section 160 of the Criminal Procedure Code,
be required to attend for interrogation at any place other than her,dwelling
house, ard section:160 of the Code should be amended for the purpose..

(7) When the statement of a woman is recorded during investigation, a

ry felative or friend of the woman or an authorised representative of an
organisation interested in the welfare of women shall be allowed to remain
present.

5:14 Judicial officers

It would be proper to mention at this stage the Supreme Courts another judg-
ment in which certain guidelines have been suggested to be followed by police officers
or judicial officers The guidelines areas under :—

(a) If a judicial officer is to be arrested for some offence, it should be done
under intimation to the District Judge or the High Court, as the case may
be.

(b) If facts and circumstances necessitate the immediate arrest of a judicial
officer of the subordinate judiciary, a tecnical or formal arrest may be
effected.

(० The fact of such arrest should be immediately communicated to the District
and Sessions Judge of the concerned District and the Chief Justice of
the High Court.

(9) The judicial officer so arrested shall not be taken to a police station, without
the prior order or directions of the District and Sessions Judge of the
concerned district, if available.

(g) There should be no handcuffing of a judicial officer. If, however, violent
resistance to arrest is offered or there is imminent need to effect physical
arrest in order to avert danger to life and limb, the person resisting arrest
may be overpowered and handcuffed. In such case, immediate Teport
shall be made to the District and Sessions Judge concerned and also to
the Chief Justice of the High Court. But the burden would be on the
Police to establish the necessity for effecting physical arrest and handcuffi-
ng the judicial officer, and if it be established that the physical arrest and
handcuffing of the judicial officer was unjustified, the police officers
causing or responsible for such arrest and handcuffing would be guilt
of misconduct and would also be personally liable for compensation an ay
or damages as may be summarily determined by the High Court.

3715 ‘Member of Parliament

We may also like to take note of the fact that the question of arrest of Members
of Parliament (and of Members of Legislatures of States) is of some importance.
The current convention is that the police officer arresting such member on a criminal
charge shail forthwith inform the presiding officer of the legislature through telegram
and also by post. This practice should continue. In Joginder Singh’s case,? the
Supreme Court emphasized the need to observe strictly the following norm :—

“Under Rule 229 of the Rules for Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok
Sabha, when a Member is arrested on a criminal charge or is detained under an
executive authority or order of the Magistrate, the executive authority must inform
without delay such fact to the Speaker. As soon as any arrest, detention, con-
viction or release is effected, intimation should invariably be sent to the Govern-
ment.concerned concurrently with the intimation sent to the Speaker/Lok

, Sabha/Rajya Sabha. This should be sent through telegrams and also by post and
the intimation should not be delayed on the ground of holiday.”

1, Dethi Judicial Service Association v. State of Gujarat, (1991) 4 SCC 406.
3, Joginder Singh v. State of Punjab, (1994) 3JT (SC) 423, 430, 431,


26

5.16 Course to be adopted—Amending the Law

We have tried to collect together in this Chapter the important materials relating
to arrest, with a view to focussing attention upon the various mesures that should be
adopted, particularly in order to check malpractices. We are conscious that it may
not be feasible to put everything in legislation. A possible device of dealing with the
various propositions mentioned in this Chapter would be to insert a numer of
sections—like, 508, 508 50C and so on—in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to
incorporate all those propositions that can be overwhelmingly codified. Itis necessary
that the important propositions, having direct relevance to the prevention of torture
in custody should be given legislative form. With this end in view, we would
recommend that a new section or sections (as may be convenient) should be inserted
after section 50 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to incorporate the following
propositions in substance :—

(1) Whenever a person is arrested by a police officer, intimation of the arrest
shall be immediately sent by the police officer (along with intimation about
the place of detention) to the following persons :—

(9) a relative or friend or other person known to the arrested person, as
may be nominated by the arrested person;

(b) failing (a) above, the local legal aid committee.

(2) Such intimation shall be sent by telegram or telephone,! as may be con-
venient, and the fact that such intimation has been sent shall be recorded
by the police officer under the signature of the arrested person.

(3) The police officer shall prepare a custody memo and body receipt of the
person arrested, duly signed by him and by two witnesses of the locality
where the arrest has been made, and deliver the same to a relative of the
person arrested, if he is present at the time of arrest or, in his absence,
send the same along with the intimation of arrest to the person mentioned
in(1)(a) above.

(4) The custody memo referred to in(3) above shall contain the following
particulars :—

(i) name ofthe person arrested and father’s or husband’s name,
(ii) address of the person arrested;

ii) date, time and place of arrest;

(iv) offence for which, the arrest has been made;

(v) property, if any, recovered from the person arrested and taken
into charge at the time of the arrest; and

(vi) any bodily injury which may be apparent at the time of arrest.

(5) During the interrogation of an arrested person, his legal practitioner
shall be allowed to remain present.

(6) The police officer shall inform the person arrested, as soon as he is
brought to the police station, of the contents of this section and shall
make an entry in the police diary about the following facts :

(a) the person who was informed of the arrest;
(b) the fact that the person arrested has been informed of the con-
tents of this section; and

(c) the fact that a custody memo has been prepared, as required by
this section.

5.17 Arrest of women : Recommendations

Of the various recommendations made in the 135th Report of the Law Co-
mmission of India (Women in Custody) referred to above,? recommendations
No. 1 and 2 are of direct relevance to arrest and we recommend that the same

3, At present there is some obscurity in this regard. See report about beliefs of Delhi Police
‘The Statesman, 13th April, 1994, page9.

*, Para5.13, supra.



27

should be incorporated into the Codes of Criminal Procedure, 1973 at an appro-
priate place.

5.18 Power of arrest : Recommendations

We now come to the major question as to the direction in which the power
of arrest conferred on the police, in regard to cognizable offences needs to be amended
in order to reduce the possibility of misucs of the power. Section 41(1) (a)
of the Code of Criminal Proceduze 1973 which contains the material reads
as under :—

“41(1) Any police officer may, without an order from the Magistrate and
from the Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person—
(a) who has been concerned in any cognizable offence, or against
whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible infor-
mation has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists, of
his having been so concerned.

A misconception seems to prevail that if there is a power to arrest, then that
power must be exercised. The judicial decisions to which we have referred in the
relevant paragraphs of this Chapter! take pains to point out that this is not the
legal position. The power is subject to the ordinary principles of administrative
law. Justification for its exercise must be shown to exist in each case. What the
law requires, is not merely the requisite quality of complaint, information or sus-
picion about the commission of a cognizable offence, but also the satisfaction
of a further condition, that shows the coraplicity of the person to be arrested, in
the suspected offence. All these propositions are implicit in the scheme of section
41, particularly when the section is viewed against the background of the general
law, including administrative law and rules of statutory interpretation. Thus, the
fact that there is a discretion and not a duty, is sufficiently indicated by the word
“may”. The fact that complicity of the particular person is to be established, is
also sufficiently indicated by the words “apainst whom” and by the words “of
his having been so concerned” which occur in section 41(1)(a).

5.19 Need for Amendment

Notwithstanding clear words, and amexdment is needed, because the essen-
tial requirements are many times overlookes either deliberately or through over-
sight. The rush of work may also prevent full and proper attention from being
given to the need to satisfy all these requirements, though that cannot be an ex-
cuse for non-compliance. In this situation, we are faced with a dilemma when
considering the question whether an amencment to h’ghlight these essential feat-
ures is needed. On the one hand, a provisicn which is vitally concerned with lib-
erty should be as precise as possible and it can be argued that even)at he cost of
making the provision appear cumbersome, one can with some justification, take
the liberty of putting more emphatically into the section all those requirements
which are unfortunately overlooked sometirces. As against this, there is the con-
sideration that a matter which is already explicit (if the section is read carefully)
cannot be added and that such addition goes against the normal practice of leg-
islative drafting. We have ultimately come to the conclusion that on balance it
will be preferable to recommended ‘an amendment’. The situation prevailing is
one where brevity must yield to clarity; privciple and detail must be made to re-
side together; elegance of form cf will have to yield to structural complexity; and
profusion of language will have to be regarded as excusable, in order to achieve
objectives whose importance transcends the ordinary canons of drafting.

5.20 Amendments of Sec 41 Recommended

. _ Accordingly, we recommend that in section 41 of the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure Code, 1973 after sub-section (1), the following new sub-section (1A) should
be inserted :—

“41 (1A) A police officer arresting a person under clause (a) of sub-sect-
ion must be reasonably satisfied and must record such satisfaction,
telating to the following matters :—

(a) the complaint information or suspicion referred to in that clause,
is not only in respect of a cognizable offence having been comm-
ited, but also in respect of the complicity of the person to be arr-
ested, in that offence;

1, Para 5.7, 5.8., supra.
95-M/J128MofLJ&CA—S



28

(0) arrest is necessary in order to bring the movements of the person
to be arrested under restraint, so as to inspire a sense of" securit®
in the public or to prevent the person to be arrested from sade rad
ing the process of the Jaw or to prevent him from committing
similar offences of from indulging in violent behaviour in’ gen-

We should mention at this stage that about unrestricted power. of arrest, some
of the replies to our Questionnaire favour some restriction (Issue No.’ 8) In
fact a senior police officer expressed this view at the Seminar.

In Joginder Singh’s case,1 avery helpful suggestion has been made about
the possibility of substituting a notice of appearance in place of arrest by the pol-
ice. This is really in the nature of a summons, but it is new idea inasmuch as, und-
er the present law in India, while a summons to an accused person may be issued
by the court, the police does not issué a summons to an accused person. There
are several factors justifying the insertion of such a provision. The great factor
is, of course, the protection of personal liberty which, in certain cases, cant be ach-
ieved without sacrificing considerations of public welfare. Substitutio: gt t!
device will automatically eliminate, or at least reduce, thie possibility of: cys oa
crimes. We should, therefore, recommend that’ in the Code of Criminal’ Pro
use, 1973, a new Section should be inserted gn the following lines :—

“AlA. Notice of appearance—Where the case falls under clause (a) of sub-segt+
ion ‘(1) of section 41, the police’ officer may, instead’ of arresting the: person
concerned, issued to him a notice of appearance requiring hom to appear
befdre the police officer issuing the notice or at such other place as may be
specified ‘in the notice and to co-operate with the police officer in the investi:
gation of the offence referred to, in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section-44.

(2). Where such a notice is issued to any. person, it shall be the duty of that
person to comply with the terms of that notice.

(3) Where such person complies and continues to comply. with. the. naticg,
he shall not be arrested in respect of the offence referred to in if ie notice un-
less, for reasons to be recorded, the police officer is of the opinion: that the
ought to be arrested. oe

(4) Where such person, at any time, fails to comply with the terms of the npr
icg, it shall be lawful for the police officer to arrest him for the. offence. meat:
ioned in the notice, subject to such orders as may have been passed. in. thig
behalf by a competent court.”

5.21 Duty of Magistrate : Recommendation

In order that the various safeguards set out in this Chapter are complied with
itisdesirable that there oughtto be a kind of supervision of overseeing of the
polite by ait independent agency. In the present set up, it may not be possible ty
Provide for aseparate agency in this regard, but it shouldbe possible to utilise
the’ existing machinery for the purpose. Botl under constituional’ tequireme ty
as laid’ down in Article 22 of the Constitution and under section 56 of the Cidé
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the person tq 6e arrested has to 06 prodt ct
fore a Migistrate, By virture ‘of the combined operation of section 56:
ofthe Code, production of the accused’ beforea Magistrate must take plac wilt this
24 hours ‘of the arrest But in cases where informal arrests are msde en

is not produ fore the Magistrate within. ours, instead 1. he, ig. in
police custody for interrogation and his arrest is shown only ai he is 11६8७
tq- Confession or to state facts leading to distovery of weapon or gpods. To pre-

vent this nialpractice, the Magistrate before whom. the accused is presented. shoul
enquire from the accused the time and date of his arrest and record the same. Gur
recommendation is that a new section. 574 may, be inserted in the Code of Crimi-
nal Procedure on the following lines :—

70574, Duty of Magistrate to verify certain facts—When a person arrested
without warrent is produced before the Magistrate, the Magistrate shall, by
inquiries to be made from ‘the arrested person ‘satisfy himself that the pro-
visions of sections, 57 and 57, have been: complied with (sections relating to

3, Joginder Singh v. State of UP., JT (1994)3 SC of UP., JT (1994)3 SC 423, 430, 431.
2, Khatri v. State of Bihar, AIR 1981 SC 928: 1981 Cri, 17 470 (SQ),


29

safeguards in connection with arrest, rights on “arrest, intimation etc. to
be entered) and shall also enquire and record the time and dare of arrest.’

3.22 Other matters

The recommendations that we have made in some of the paragraphs immedi-
ately preceding this paragraph seek to take care of important matters on which
a legislative prosition is urgenlty desired. For the present, we are not making re-
scommmen लक regarding some matters touched upon in this Chapter,
‘pecan. y.may not lend themselves easily to législative formulation. However
-the. tocodify themin the Police Manualisvery urgent. We arer eferring ‘here
‘4p-such spetialised topics as relate to the arrest of judicial officers and the arrest
-of:Members of Parliament. The fact that in this report, we are not suggesting leg-
islative amendment on these points, does not méan that they are not of vitat fm-
portance. If such problems recur, it may been be névessary to attend to them»by
recommending statutory provisions.

ae ards matters dealt with in the Law Commission of India’s 135th Re-
“perts' in inf Custody), we have already made a recommendation in this Chapt-
“er! गा pothts’ diréctly relevant to the theme of arrest in the context of the present
‘Report. But the remaining recommendations made in that Report also need to
be implemeiitéd. We note that in the Bill recently introduced to amend the Code
‘(tk May, 1994), one or two of the points dealt with in the 135th Report have
been implenténted. But maay other recommendations of that Report have been
téft-out even’ though they relate to provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973. We have not been able to locate in the Notes on Clauses to the Bill any
जा ‘for this non-implementation. We are of the view that the remaining re-
“Geatailations should also be implemented as that would safeguard the interest

worren:

3, Para 5,17., supra.


CHAPTER 6
CALLING TO THE POLICE STATION

6.1 Introduction

We propose to deal in this Chapter with one situation forming part of the
investigation by the police into cognizable offences, namely, calling a person (wit-
mess) to the police station. This particular act by the police may appear to be just
a preliminary step and insignificant from the overall point of view of the mach-
inery of criminal procedure, but, for the purpose of the subject matter of this re-

port, it is of cruical importance.

6.2 The present law

To begin with, we may refer in brief to the present law on the subject. Chapt-
er 12 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 which is titled “Information to
the police and their power to investigate’, confers by section 156, power on an
officer in charge of the police station, without the order of the Magistrate, to in-
vestigate any cognizable case. The procedure for investigation begins with section
157, under which, inter alia, the investigating officer is expected ito proceed to
the spot to investigate the facts and circumstances of the case and, if necessary,
to take measures for the discovery erd arrest of the offender. Under section 158,
the Magistrate himself may direct an investigation or hold a preliminary inquiry.
In the majority of cases, the police cflicer calls the witnesses to the police station
under section 160 (to be examined in detail presently) and it may be noted that
under section 161, the investigating chicer may examine orally any person supp-
osed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case.

Section 160 of the Code, reads as under —

“160. Police officer's power to require attendance of witnesses —(1) Any pol-
ice officer making an investigation under this Chapter may, be order in writ-
ing, require the attendance before himself of any person being within the
limits of his own or any adjoining station who, from the information given
or otherwise, appears to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of
the case; and such person shall attend as so required ;

Provided that no maie person under the age of fifteen years or woman shall
be required to attend at any place other than the place in which such male person

or woman resides.

(2) The State Government may, by rules in this behalf, provide for the
payment by the police officer of the reasonable expenses of every person,
attending under sud-s2ctioa (1) at aay place other than his residzace,

6.3 Section 160 Cr. P.C. Recommendation

Section 160 of the Code of Cirminal Procedure, 1973 which we have quot-
ed in the preceding paragraph is not a minor provision of routine character; in-
stead it confers very wide power on a police officer investigating a case to summon
any person to the pvlice station for interrogation. The enacting section grants leg-
islative sanction to the age-cld convention of the police officers to bring persons
to police station for purposes of interrogation. By and large, this power is mis-
used by the police. Though the law requires the investigating officer to summon
any person for interrogation 89 an order in writing. Yet, in actual practice, this
is rarely followed. Generally, the investigating officer or a constable of the police
station calls the witnessto the police station, where heis interrogated. Manya
time, he is made to wait for hours and sometimes even for days together and if
during interrogation, the witness pleads ignorance of the incident which may be
the subject matter of investigationg he is threatened, coerced, assaulted and even
tortured at the police station. Some persons have raised the question whether it
is necessary to call a witness to the police station for interrogation. A witness

30


31

is not an accused, he need not visit the police station to give evidence though as
a responsible citizen, it is the duty of every citizen to furnish to the police
information regarding the facts and events which may be in his knowledge. That
information from him may be obtained by the police officer at the place of the
witness. However, there may be special circumstances in some cases where the
presence of the witness at the police station may be necessary, but, by and large,
the provision requiring the witness to appear at the police station for interrogat-
ion by the investigating officer doesnot appear to be necessary or desirable. This
section provides an easy handle and occasion to the police to coerce and torture
the withess at the police station. We are, there fore, of the opinion that section 160
needs midification to the effect that ordinar ily attendance of the witness at the
police station shall not be neceassary; instead, he should be interrogated or exami-
ned at his place of residence but, if in any particular case it is necessary to do so,
reasons must be recorded and the witness must be summoned by a written order.
Section 160(1) needs amendment to avoid the prevailing malpractice.

6.4 Need for Penal Sanction

The principal objective of the proviso to Sec. 160(1) is to ensure that the ex-
amination of young persons and of women is undertaken in an environment fami-
liar to them, so that the possibility of physical abuse is eliminated, as also the poss-
ibility of creation of psychological tension in their minds. In the modern era when
the protection of privacy is given great importance, this provision obviously ass-
umes considerable significance. In any case, the under lying assumption that call-
ing the woman etc. to the police station is an extremely undesirable eact impliet
that the provision must be complied with scrupulously. Unfortunately, ar pres-
ent, the law while enacting this restriction, has failed to enact a direct and spec-
Sic provision to enforce this salutary prohibition. It is to remedy this situation that
a penal provision in the nature of criminal sanction is needed.

6.5 Section 164A IP.C. Recommended

As discussed earlier, section 160 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 is
observed more in its breach, than in its compliance. As a result, the object of pro-
tection by lawto safeguard the interest of witness is defeated. The Law Commi-
ssion in its 84th Report on “Rape and Allired Offences : Some Question of Subsantive
Law, Procedure and Evidence” considered this question and recommended to
enact’a specific provision as Section 166A in the Indian Penal Code to cover vio-
lation of Section 160 of the Criminal Procedure Code. Agairi in tits 135th Report
on“Women in Custody”, the Law Commission recommended the insertion of
Section 166A in the Indian Penal Code providing for punishment to a public ser-
vant who knowingly disobeys any direction of the law prohibiting him from re-
quiring the attendance of a person for the purposes of investigation into an
offence. Unfortunately earlier recommendations have not been implemented. Con-
sequently the safeguard provided to a witness continues to be defeated.

6.6 In the light of what we have stated in this Chapter, we reiterate the recomm-
endation made in the aforesaid earlier Reports! of the Law Commission of India
to the effect that after section 166 of the Indian Penal Code, there should be in-
serted a new section 166A punishing the violation of section 160 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, Even if the view is taken that the situation is governed
by section 166 of the Penal Code or by some other section of the code, we are
very strongly of the view that there is need for a specific provision as recommend-
yy us.

ene
3, Law ccmmissicn of India, 84th Report on Rape and allied offiences—some questions of
‘substantive law, procedure and evidence’ and 135th Report on’ Women in Custody’


CHAPTER 7
MEDICAL EXAMENATION
7.1 Beneficial and adverse aspect

The subject of medical examination has relévitice to the malpracticeés cotimn-
itted during investigation, in the following two aspects :

(a) Medical examination of an arrestéd<petson may be useful as estab-
lishing the fact that certain injuries were inflicted on his body during
custody. If undertaken immediately’ after-arrest, it may be useful. for
establshiing that atstho time of arrest, thtve were no injuries on: his-bedy.
This is the “beneficial aspect” Medical examination of a public ser-
vant accused of custodial rape is also impdstant from ‘the évicefitiary
angle and can equally be described as falling under the beneficial as-
pect.

(0) In contrast with the above, théfe is van ‘adverse aspect of medical ex-
amination. At the time of, or @uring nasdical examination, mralpract-
ices may occur, particularly in the 6886 of victims of sexual offeness
who offer themselves for medical examination. The law has to guard
against this possiblility also. Of course, the malpractice perpetrated
on an alleged victim of sexual crime 006 not téchnically fall ‘within
“custodial” crime. but there have béén 045०5 of sexual crime on Wo-
men in custody. We think: it wées3@#ty-to discuss various aspects of
this topic.

7.2 Various situations categorised

Sections. 53 and 54 of the Code of Criminal-Procedure provide for the medi-
gal examination of an arrested person. Under section 53, a police officer has -pow-
er to get an-atrested person medically examinad-by-a registered medical paractit-
ioner if there are reasonable grounds for believing. that medical examination ef
his person will afford evidence to the commission-of offence. Once the police olfi-
cer entertains reasonable grounds for believing:.that the examination of the arte-
sted person will afford evidence to the commission of the crime, it wouki be
compulsory for the accused to undergo medical examination. Section 54, on the
other hand, confers a right on the arrested. person to.get himself medically exami-
ned, if, at the time of his production before the magistrate he makes an allegat-
ion that the examination of his body will afford. evide ence which will disprove tHe
commission by him of an offence or which: widl’establish the commission by. any
other person of an offence against his body. On such a request being miad od
tiagistrate: is 88006 to issue‘a‘direction 6 the H¥edical: examination: of the ‘bg
“Sf such a pétson by a registered medical ptictitioner 01055 the ihapistrate: obi.
sidets thit the réquest is made 107 the’ purpdse'ot! dubiy or for défdating the:Wnds
of justice. These two general ‘provisions regulatelttHe question of medical éxamtis
‘nation, in-all‘Kind of cases including rape at हक भी ताक atid custodial ofiiies.

1.3 Meiiteal exaritination of the decaséi’genetally :
Sections 53-54, Cr. P.C.
quneoretically, medical. exdminbtion: can’-Be-catdgorived unter the following
heads :
(a) Medical examination of the accused generally.

(b) Medical examination of the accused in cases of rape and cognate off-
ences.

(©) Medical examination of the victim generally.

(9) Medical examination of the victim in cases of rape and cognate off-
ences.

32


33

Se far as medical examination under category’ (c) is concerned, it does not gen-
erally present any problem cf malpractice. As regards the medical examination
of category (9) and (d), both relate to the offences of rape and cognate offences.
In such cases medical examination of the acensed as weil as the victim is necess-
ary, as it provides valueable evidence regarding proof of the allegations. Medi-
cal examination of accused and the victim in cases of rape and cognate offences
has been exhaustively considered by the Law Commission in its 84th Report.
Affer a detailed discussicn, the Commission was of the opinion that the existing
provisions in Sections 53 end 54 of the Criminal Procedure Code were not ade-
quate 10 afford evidence of commission of offénce. The Commission recommend-
ed amendent of Section 53 as well as insertion of‘seetion 164A of the Code of Cri-
minal Procedure. We agree with those recommendations and reiterate that the
same should be carried out.

Incidentally, we find that the bill to amend the Criminal Procedure Code
introduced recently (9th May, 1994)? seeks amendment of Section 53 and 54 of
the principal Act on the subject on the basis of the recommendations of the Report
of the Law Commission. However, we find that in the Notes on Clauses no ref-
erence has been made to the Law Commission’s Report. It would have been help-
ful if this had been done.

7.4 Medical examination of the accused

Section 53 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 relates to compulsory
medical examination of the accused at the request of the police, while Section
54 is concerned with the right of the accused to get himself medically examined.
Section 54 is a beneficiary provision which provides an opportunity to an arrested
person to get himself medically examined to disprove the commission of any off-
ence by him or to establish the commission of any offence against his body. This
provision is directly connected with the custodial crimes. Under the existing pro-
visions of Section 54, if a person under arrest is tortured or assaulted he may,
when produced before the magistrate, make a request to the magistrate for the
medical examination of his body to establish that he had been subjected to tort-
ure and physical assault during the period of detention. Though this right exists.
Yet, as pointed out earlier, most of the arrested persons, especially those against
whom custodial crimes are committed, are ignorant of their right. Even if the arr-
ested person who is produced before the magistrate is aware of this right, he does
not dare to make a complaint to the magistrate or makea request for medical
examination in the presence of the police. In order to minimise the chances of
custodial torture or sexual exploitation, it is necessary and desirable that Sec-
tion 54 should be strengthened in the interest of preventing malpractices. When
the accused is produced before a magistrate, it should be mandatory for the mag-
istrate to enquire from the arrested person whether he has any complaint of tort-
ure and maltreatment or sexual exploitation in custody and the Magistrate should
further intimate to the arrested person that he has a right under the law to get
himself medically examined. As observed by Supreme Court in Sheela Barse V.
State of Maharashtra’ it is also desirable that giving of such intimation and
making enquiries should bein the absence of the police officer. The magistrate,
before making an enquiry from the arrested person, should ensure that no police
officer is present along with the accused. We are of the opinion that Section 54
needs amendment to make it more effective and meaningful. We are further of
opinion that the amended section should set out in detail the matters to be record-
ed in the medical report. We may incidentally note that in Uttar Pradesh by U.P.
Act 1 of 1984 amendments have been made in Section 54.

7.5 Comments on the Working Paper

We may mention at this stage that along with our Working Paper wehad
invited views on the question as to whether there should be a provision for co-
mpulosry medical examination of accused in every case of arrest or during interr-

ition. There has been a mixed response to the question. Majority of the police
off icers and some of the lawyers do not consider it necessary. However, a seni-
or police officer and some other persons are of the opinion that there is necessity

7, Law Commission of India, 84th Report on “Rape and Allied Offiences--Some Questions of
Substantive Law, Procedureand Evidence”.

3, Code of Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill, 1994 (9th May, 1994),
*, AIR 1983 SC 378,


34

to provide for compulsory medical examination especially in cases of custodial
crimes. Some of the responses suggest compulsory medical examination of a per-
son immediately on his arrest and before interrogation. We are unable to accept

this suggestion, as it will delay investigation.
7,6 Recommendation

In view of the above discussion, we reommend that section 54 of the code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 should be amended to incorporate the points made
in paragraph 7.4 of this Chapter. While drafting the ainendment for incorport-
ing the details of medical report, assistance may be taken from the Law Comm-
ission’s 84th Report, Chapter 4.


CHAPTER 8
FIRST INFORMATION REPORT AND INQUIRY
8.1 Introduction

Chapters 12 and 13 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 lay down the
proced ire for investigation of the offence and trial of the accused. The police mach-
inery is. ignited on receiving information relating to the commission of an offence.
Such iaformation, if relating to a cognizable offence, is recorded under section
154 and if the information is non-cognizable, it is recorded under section 155.
Both tiese sections are important, as, if the scheme of the section is carried out
in its cullness, the machinery of criminal process at the pre-trial stage (arrest,
interrogation, investigation, forwarding of the report to the court) is set in mot-
ion.

On receiving information of a cognizable offence under section 154, the police
has pcwer to investigate without order of any court, whereas under section 155
the police officer has no power to investigate non-cognizable offence without the
order of a magistrate. Any information relating to the commission of a cogniz-
able ov non-cognizable offence if given to the police must be recorded in accord-
ance with Sections 154 and 155. Generally, this is not done and it is, more so,
in the case of custodial crimes. We propose in the secceeding paragraphs of this
chapte: to examine some of the factors contributing to the above situation and
to suggest such measures by way of law reform as appear to be necessary,

8.2 Non-Registration of Information

Section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 makes it obiligatory
for the police to register information relating to a cognizable offence. Section 157
further makes it obligatory for the police to investigate the facts and circumstan-
ces of the case and to take measures for the discovery and arrest of the offender.
Unfortunately, compliance with these provisions is very often wanting even in
non-custodial offences. Non-registration of complaints is a common malpract-
ice in police station. There are several reasons for this malady. The National
Police Commission took note of the act that in a study conducted by the Indian
Institue of Public Administration, New Delhi, on the “Image of the Police in India”,
it was found that over 50 percent of the respondents had mentioned non-regist-
ration of complaints as a common malpriactice in police station. The National
Police Commission? further set out several factors accounting for such non-re-
gistration which included extraneous influence and corruption, besides the dis-
inclina‘ion of the staff to take on additional load of investigational work in the
midst wf heavy pressure of several other duties, It was also stated that somtimes
there was a desire to keep the figure of reported crime on the records low, in order
to show “efficient police administration under their charge”. This is due to the
statisti:al approach applied by the higher echelons of police administration, for
assessing the crime situation and evaluating police performance, with the result
that this attitude permeates the entire heirarchy down the line and is reflected
among the officers at the police station in their reluctance and refusal to register
cases ar: and when crimes are brought to their notice. Experience has shown that
whenever a serious attempt was made by the police administration to remove
this milpractice, there was a marked increase in the number of registered cogniz-
able ciimes. Refusal by the police to record information relating to commission
of an offence is a serious matter, which puts the complainant ‘to harassment and
also af‘ects the credibility of the police. We are strongly of the view that there
should be effective sanctions for the non-registration of the first information giv-
en to the police, of a cognizable offence.

8.3 Section 167A I.P.C. Recommended

Under fhe existing law, there is no provision for taking penal action against
the police for their refusal to record information as contemplated by Section 151
(1) of the Code. Sub-section (3) of section 154 provides that on the refusal by the

4, National Police Commission, 4th Report (1980), Page 2.
35

95-M i J12MofLIRCA—6


30

police to register a case, the aggrieved person may send the substance of the
complaint in writing to the Superintendent of Police who may investigate the case
himself or direct any officer in-charge of police station to investigate the same.
This procedure is, no doubt, useful as is illustrated by a reported case but itis
not, in itself adequate, for meeting the problem of non-registration. The Law
Commission of India in its 84th Report on “Rape and Allied Offences” took nd
of this position. The Commission found that administrative action or provi
alternative method of lodging the information do not prove more effective and
there was a need for suitable penal provision providing for the punishment of
erring police officers for their failure to record information relating to ike
commission of a cognizable offence. The Commission recommended the enactment
of Section 167A in the Indian Penal Code. The draft of the recommended section
was as under :—

“167—whoever, being an officer in-charge of a police station and requiréd
by law to record any information relating to the commission of cognizable
offence reported to him refuses or without reasonable cause fails to record
such information, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descript-
ion for a term which may extend to one year or with fine or with both.

The above penal provision, ifimplemented will certainly have a deterrent effect
on the police and it may discourage or prevent the malpractice of refusing to re-
gister information relating to commission of cognizable offences. We are in futl
agreement with the recommendation made by the Commisssion in its 84th Rée-
port and we reiterate the same.

8.4 Investigation by the police and other agencies

Generally, complaints relating to an a offénce against the body of 4 persoi
in the custody of police is not recorded by the police officers on account of bro-
therhood and fellow feeling. Information or complaint by the wife or children
of the deceased person or by the victim, generally ignored and since such a class
of persons generally have no resources, they are not in a position to approach
the Superintendent of Police or the courts for redressal of their grievances.
the police which protects the citizens itself violates the law in committing torture
and assault on a person in custody and if complaint against their action is not
recorded by the police, the question arises how the allegation of a civtim or his
relation is to be investigated. In such a situation courts have been compelled to
direct the Central Bureau of Investigation to investigate the cases. The Supreme
Court? in,a case of alleged death in the custody of Directorate of Enforcement
and the Delhi High Court? in the case of alleged death in police custody directed
the Central Bureau of Investigation to investigate. There are many reported decisions
where the allegations of custodial crimes have been directed to be investigated. In some
cases the courts have appointed judicial officers like the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sess-
ions Judge or a District Judge to hold inquiry into the police excesses relating to
custodial crimes. These episodes show the desirability of having an independent
investigating agency to inquire and investigate into allegations relating to
custodial crimes.

_ In some of the responses to our questionnaire, a suggestion has been made
to have an independent agency other than the police to investigate the complaints
relating to custodial crimes. A suggestion has also been made to entrust investi-
gation in such matters to the Central Bureau of Investigation. There is ah her
suggestion to provide for inquiry by judicial offi cers through the agency of Mag-
istrates arid the Sessions Judges as has been done by courts in several cases. Hav-
ing given our anxious consideration to this vexed problem, we think that it ma
not ,be possible or feasible owing to financial considerations to set up another int,
ependént agency exclusively for the purpose of investigating complaints félating
to the commission of custodial offiences. We are of the opinion that thete isa
need for the higher officers of the police administration to impress upon the pol-
ice officers in-charge of the police stations the need to record information relating
to the commission of custodial crimes and every administrative effort should be
tiade to implement this policy and to take disciplinary action against the erritig
officials. But this administrative exercise would not in itself meet the present nédd.
We think that it would be desirable and proper to provide by law for the fiting

3, Bhagwan Singh v. State of Punjab, (1992) 2 All India Crim. Rep. page 546.



37

of petition on the refusal of the police to register a case of custodial violence be-
fore a judicial officer for inquiry and prosecution of the erring police officers. The
inquiry by the judicial officer would keep the police under supervision and cont-
rol and it will also inspire people’s confidence.

8.5 Recommendation to insert section 154A, Cr. P.C.

At appears to us that having regard to the paramount need for prompt, eff-
ective an independent investigation of allegations of offences in the natyre of
custodial crime, the Code of Criminal Procedure should be amended fo insert
a specific provision which will ensure such investigation. At the same time, wé do
(Rot.consider it necessary, at least for the present, to go so far as to recot nd
the Creation of a new agency for the purpose. A new agency may not be feasible
owing to financial considerations, as stated above, even assuming that admini-
aa itive problems will not arise. What we envisage is proposal whereunder, on
‘efusal by the police to register a case of custodial (conizable) offence, it’ should
be p ossible to approach an appropriate judicial authority who should be empow-
cred to conduct a preliminary inquiry and then (if satisfied that such action is call-
ed for) to direct the filling of a complaint before the competent Magistrate. The
appropriate judicial authority would be the Court of Session in a case of (alleged)
custodial death and the Chief Judicial Magistrate in a case of (allieged) custodial
.offence nat resulting in death. We recommend that a new section 154A be insert-
edin the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 on the above lines. It may also be
Provided that the Court of Sessions or the Chief Judicial Magistrate (as the case
umay 72 ay, if satisfied that such action is called for, direct the Ministerial ofti-
ger.to 6 a complaint as set out above.

4. In re: death Sarvinder Singh Grover 1993 (1) Cr, LR 163 (SC’.
+, Baarat Bhushaa vy. The State, (1986) Ceri. LJ 1624 (Delhi).



CHAPTER 9
INQUIRIES AND INQUESTS INTO DEATH
9.1 Introduction

We propose, in this chapter, to deal very briefly with the present legal frame-
work as to inquiries and inquests into cases of suspicious deaths.

9.2 Role of the police

By section 174 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in case the of sui-
cide, death by accident or death under circumstances raising a reasonable sus-
Picion of an offence, the police officer in charge of a police station or some other
powered officer must intimate the fact to the nearest executive magistrate em-
powered to hold inquests and to proceed to the place and investigate. In certain
cases involving death of a woman and also where there is a doubt regarding the
cause of death, section 174(3) of the Code makes a special provision. Section
175 confers on the police officer power to summon persons as witnesess.

9.3 Inquiry by Magistrate

Section 176(1) of the Code, as amended in 1983, inter alia, makes an inquiry by
the Magisrate into the cause of death mandatory, where any person dies while
in the custody of the police. We need not discuss the procedure in detail as cont-
emplated by this section. However, this kind of enquiry has generally been a for-
mality and it does not inspire confidence, as the Inquiry is made by an Executive
Magistrate,

9.4 Coroners

In the towns of Calcutta and Bombay, the Corners Act, 1871 is applicable
and inquests into suspicious deaths are conducted by the Coroner or his deputies,
appointed under the act,

9.5 Commission of Inquiry
Where the death of a person in Police custody or otherwise under suspici-
Ous circumstances is regarded by the State Government as a fit subject

for the appointment of a Commission of Inquiry, an order for the constitution
of such a Commissionis made under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952.1

9.6 Special Acts

__. Special Acts applicable to particular subjects may provide for an inquiry
into deaths, caused in transport such as railways, aircraft, merchant shipping etc.

9.7 Writ jurisdiction

,_,. Where a matter is raised before the Supréme Court or a High court having
jurisdiction, an order for inquiry into the cause and circumstances of death may
passed by those courts under their constitutional jurisdiction.

9.8 Custodial deaths

The provisions briefly outlined by us in this Chapter may not be adequate
to specifically deal with the problem of custodial deaths. It is for this reason that
we have mace a specific and separate recommendation on the subject, which envisages
an inquiry by the Sessions Judge in case of custodial deaths or by the Chief Jud-
icial ay आर in cases of bodily injuries not resulting in death, occuring during
custody. '

1. See Report of the Commission of Inquiry into the death of Sri U. Narashima in the Police,
Custody at Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar Police Station, Hyderabad on 10-7-1986, 28 Govt. of
Andhra Pradesh (1986): Report of the Commission of Inguiry on the death of 7. Murlidharan
at. Town Police Station, Vijayawada, on 17-9-1986 (Govt. of Andhra Pradesh, 1987):
Report of the Inquiry Commission on the death of Dadagiila’ Sankuriah in the ouipcst Of
Yelleswaram on 26-8-1985 (Govt. of Andhra Pradesh, 1986); Report of the Commission
of Inquiry into the death of Sri Macherla Anjiah while in the police custody at Thungathurtht
$n 6-9-1986 (Govt. of Andhra Pradesh); A.G. Noorani, “Death in Police Custody",
20 Economic and Political Weekly 1161 (1985); Special Report “Andhra Sadist Cops aad
Lockup Deaths”, The Blitz, 5 Nov. 1986, 9. 10: Sri Sankar Sen’s articles in the Statesman
150 & 16% April, 1994,

2. Paragraph 8.5, supra.

38


CHAPTER 10
SANCTION FOR PROSECUTION
10.1 Present Position

We are concerned, in this Chapter, with an important provision of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973—section 197—under which certain categories of
public servants cannot be prosecuted without the sanction of the appropriate Go-
ernment, the condition being that the offence must have been committed by the
public servant “while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official
duties”. It is common knowledge that public servants prosecuted for misconduct
often resort to this section as a bar to prosecution, because the section deprives
the court of its jurisdiction to try the offence in question. The words “while act-
ing or purporting to act’ etc. have not been found to be very precise. Much case
law has gathered around them and, notwithstanding this vast mass of case law,
an attempt is made, every time a public servant is prosecuted, to take shelter
under this section. We are not concerned, for the moment, with the various rami-
fications of the section. What is relevant for our purpose is the question, how an
abuse of the protection given by this section to public servants may be avoided
in respect of custodial crimes. Of course, a clarification of the provisions of the
section may not necessarily be confined to such crimes.

10.2 History

It is interesting to note that in the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1898 (prede-
cessor of the present Code), the corresponding words in section 197, (before that
section was amended in 1923), were “is accused as such judge or public servant of any
offence.” This gave tise to a conflict of decisions, as to the precise scope of those
words. While one view was that these words covered only cases where the offence
was such that the fact of the offender being a public servant was an essential ingre-
dient of the offence as defined in law, a contrary view also came to be taken. Thus,
according to the first view, if a judge used defamatory language while trying a case,
section 197 of the 1898 Code did not apply}. On the other hand, according to the
wider view, the section would cover all cases where the offence had some connection
with the official duty. The amending Act of 1923 substituted the words “while
acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties”, for the words “as
such judge or public servant”. Courts have usually regarded this amendment as
widening the scope of the section?

10.3 Amendment

‘After the 1923 amendment, as stated above, the court has to decide in each case
whether the offence was committed while purporting to act in the discharge of offical
duties. Our concern at the present stage is with the question whether the section
needs to be clarified to ensure that the obstacle of requirement of sanction under the
section shall not be pleaded as a bar to the prosecution of an officer for custody rela-
ted offences. Having regard to the fact that in almost every case, the sanction is
sought to be resorted to, we consider it necessary to make a Clarification in this re-

| Of course, even without such amendment it can be argued that the language
of the section will not cover torture or death caused in custody. Ina case which
arose under section 270(1), Government of India Act, 1935 (worded in similar lan-
guage), the Federal Court, speaking through Justice Varadachariar, observed as
undert:—

“Jn one group of cases it is insisted that there must be something in the nature
of the act complained of that attaches it to the official character of the person
doing it: In another group, more stress has been laid on the circumstances that
the official character or status of the accused gave him the opportunity to com-
mit” the offence. It seems to me that the first 15 the correct view. In the third

1. Nandu Lal Barak ५. N. N. Mitter, (1899) ILR 26 Cal. 853, 861, 862.
2. R. P. Kapur v. Ch.. Daryao Singh, (1965) 1 Cri, LI 593.

3. Hemendra Nath Gupta v. Emperor, AIR 1937 Pat 160, 162.

4. Hori Ram Singh v. Emperor, AIR 1939 FC 43, 56: 40 Cri. LJ 468.

39



av

group of cases, stress is laid almost exclusively on fact that it was at a time when
the accused was engaged in his official duty that the alleged offence was said to
have been committed. The use of the expression ‘while acting’ etc, in section 197
Criminal Procedure Code (particularly its introduction by way of amendment
in 1923), has been held to lend some support to this view. While I do not wish
to ignore the significance of the time factor, it does not seem to me right to make
it the test. To take an illustration suggested in the course of the argument, if a
medical officer, while on duty in the hospital, is alleged to have committed rape
on one of the patients or to have stoien a jewel from the patient’s person, it is
difficult to believe that it was the intention of the legislature that he could not
be prosecuted for such offence except with the previous sanction of the Local
Government.”

Section 190 of the Code empowers a magistrate to take cognisance of any offence.
Section 197 embodies one of the exceptions to the general rule laid down in Section
190, as it regulates the competence of the court and bars its jurisdiction in certain
cases. The object and purposes of the section is to ensure that public servants and
officials while acting in their official discharge of duties are not subjected to needless
or vexatious prosecutions. Prosecution is permissible only after sanction is granted
on the well-considered opinion of the superior authority. The Supreme Court? held
that the offence alleged to have been committed must have something to do or must
be related in some manner with the discharge of official duty. No question of sanc-
tion can arise under section 197 ualess the act complained of is an offence; the only
point to deterinine is whether it was committed in the discharge of official duty.
There must be a reasonable conzection between the act and the official duty. There
is a plethora of decided cases on the section. We do not cosider it necessary to
make any reference to them for the present purpose. However, no court has taken
the view that sanction is necessary for the prosecution of a public servant for custo-
dial offences.

10.4 Cases of torture

Coming more specifically to the question of torture, reference may be made to a
Madras case where the charge was under section 330 of the Indian Penal Code.® In
that case, a Magistrate who had power to arrest and keep under custody persons-sus-
pected of certain offences, held in confinement a person whom he had arrested and
tortured that person to force him to confess his guilt. It was held that in committing
such torture, he was not purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties and
no sanction under section 197, Cr. P.C. was needed.

We may note here that in the replies received on our questionnaires most of the
Advocates and Judges and majority of even police officers have expressed the- view
that sanction in such cases is either not needed or should not be required. (Issue
No. 8).

10.5 Need for claritication/Recommendation

Theoretically, it can be argued with great force that custodial offences, in the
nature of causing death or bodily injury or commission of sexual offences haye no
connection with the official duties of a public servant and section 197 cannot apply
tothem, But (as stated above) the very fact that in the past such attempts have been
made to seek shelter under section 197, and the,serious possibility that such attempts
will continue to be made in the future, would seem, to justify a clarificatory amend-
ment, There are enough difficulties in the way of the successful prosecution of
offences committed by public servants and one need not add to them by. nora
a provision operating as a bar to prosecution to, nublify attempts to bring such -
ders to trial, Our recommendation, therefore, is that below section 197(1) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 the following Explanation should be added :—

“Explanation—F or the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provi-
sions of this section do not apply to any offence committed by a judge or public
servant, being an offence against the human body committed in respect of a
person in his custody, nor to any other offence constituting an abuse of autho-
rity.”

1. Prabhakar 5. Sinuri, AYR 1969 SC 686.
2. Ganapathy Gounder v. Emperor, AIR 1932 Mad. 214, 215 : 33 Cri, 1.1 557,


CHAPTER 1!
LAW OF EVIDENCE
11.1 Introduction

It is often said that facis constitute nine points of the law. This is all the moré
true of criminal prosecutions. where a pretty large bulk of the evidence comes to the
court through the medium cf witaesses giving oral testimony in court, unlike a civil
trial, where some reliable n -terial would be available in the shape of documentary
evidence, evidence of possession, entries in the books of «ccounts, certificates issued
by public officers, commercial usage, knowledge and ation available to mem-
bets of the family, Goverament records and the like. ides Chis. in a criminal
trial, certain special rules become applicable. In particular , as per judicial practice,
the quantum of evidence, or rather, the standard of proof in a criminal trial is higher
than that required in a civil suit. Moreover, long history of ebuse of the power of.
criminal prosecution has persuaded so mary countries of the werld, including India
to incorporate in their constitution elaborate protections which operate more fre-
quently in a criminal prosecution, than in a civil suit,

11.2 Prosecutions for torture etc.

The special features of a criminal charse, with reference to the law of evidence
mentioned in the preceding paragraph, become all the more prominent where a police
officer is to be prosecuted for custodial crimes. To state the position in broad terms
(sections 101 to 104, Evidence Act), the prosecution must prove the guilt of the
accused. This problem is highlighted in the context of custodial crimes by reason
of the peculiar situation in which such crimes are usually committed. The matter
received serious attention at the hands of the Supreme Court ina judgement of 1985,
in the wake of which the Law Commission prepared and forwarded a separate Re-
port dealing with prosecutions of police officers in certvin situations? The case
telated to a highly shocking incident of torture of a suspect in police custody who
died within almost six hours of his arrest. When two hours after his arrest, the
person was produced before the Magistrate, he was found to be badly injured and
in a serious condition. In fact, he could not even walk up to the room of the Magis-
trate, who had to come out and examine him in the verandah of the court room.
Both the Magistrate and the prison doctor were told by the accuse 4 about the beating
by the police constable. The constable was convicted by the Court of Session of the
offence of culpable homicide not amounting to murder (section 304 of the Indian
Penal Code). The case went through the usual hierarchy of appeals with which we
are not concerned. It was the Supreme Court which emphasised the extremely
peculiar character of the situation where none else than the police officer having
custody can give evidence regarding the circumstances in which the person in custody
came to receive injuries. Persons on whom atrocities are perpetrated by the police
in the police station, are, thus, left without any evidence (excent their own statement)
to prove who the offenders are. For this reason, the court called for re-examination
of the law of burden of proof in such cases. As mentioned above, after this judge-
ment, the Law Commission of India made a specific recommendation dealing with
the injuries in custody, to which we refer in the next paragrenh.

11.3 Law Commission’s recommendation (113th Report)

After the judgement in State of U.P. ५, Ram Sagar Yadav, referred to in the
preceding paragraph, the Law Commission of India, after a survey of the law, re-
commended the insertion of a new section in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, as
ander :-—

“114B. (1) In a prosecution of a Police Officer for an offence constituted by
an act alleged to have caused bodily iniury to a person, if there is evidence that
the injury was caused during a period when that person wa; in the custody of
the police, the court may presume that the injury was caused by the Police
Officer having custody of that person during that period.

1. State of UP v. Ram Sagar Yadav, AYR 1985 SC 416.
2, Law Commission of India, 113th Report on “Injuries in Police Custody”.
41


42

(2) The Court in deciding whether or not it should draw a presumption under
sub-section (1) shall have recourse to all the relevant circumstances, including, in
particular, (a) the period of custody, (b) any statement made by the victim as
to how the injuries were received, being a statement admissible in evidence,
(©) the evidence of any medical practitioner who might have examined the victim,

and (d) evidence of any magistrate who might have recorded the victim’s state-
ment or attempted to record it.”

11.4 Later Decisions

It may be mentioned that after the above judgment of the Supreme Court, fol-
lowed by the above Report of the Law Commission, the question of burden of proof
in such cases has come before the courts more than once. In one of the cases,} the
following observations occur :—

“If a person is in police custody, then what has happened to nim is peculiarly
within the knowledge of the police officials who have taken him into custody.
When the other evidence is convincing enough to establish that the deceased
died because of the injuries inflicted by the accused, the circumstances would
only lead to an irresistible inference that the police personnel who caused his
death must also have caused the disappearance of body.”

In another case,? where the victim taken into police custody was on the next day
found dead at a place near the police post, the court held that the burden was on the
State how the victim came to sustain the injuries resulting in his death. The need
for a change in the rule regarding burden of proof was adverted to in this case also.

11.5 Recommendation for Amendment of Section 114

In the light of the material contained in the preceding paragraphs of this Report,
we are very strongly of the opinion that the recommendation made by the Law
Commission in its 113th Report should be carried out by inserting Section 114B of
the Indian Evidence Act and we would add two points by way of amplification. The
provision in the first place may specifically include death even though that is implicit
in the draft that was recommended in the eralier Report. Secondly, the provisions
of the new section should be made applicable to every public servant who has power
under the law to arrest and detain a person in custody. The actual placing of the
section, we leave to the draftman. We may mention that a response to our Ques-
tionnaire the majority have favoured such a rebuttable presumption (Issue No. 4).

11.6 Section 27, Evidence Act

The provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 relating to confessions particu-
larly those relevant for the present purpose are contained in sections 25, 26 and 27
of that Act. While sections 25 and 26 exclude confessions made by a person to a
police officer or confessions made by a person (to a police officer or to a third person)
while in custody, section 27 carves out an exception in respect of cases where
the confession is made in the form of information leading to the discovery of a fact,
being information given by a person in custody. This section has created several
problems of interpretation with which we are not, for the moment, concerned. Our
concern for the present is mainly with the possibility that section 27 creates of misuse
by resort to malpractice. Let us quote the section :—

“27. How much of information received from accused may be proved—Provided
that, when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of information
received from a person “accused of any offence, in the custody of a police officer,
so much of such information, whether it amounts to a confession or not, as
relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved.”

This section, because it constitutes an escape valve against the prohibition other-
wise imposed by preceding section or sections in relation to confessions made during
the custody of a police officer, tends to create a desire to resort to its provision even
where the person in custody is not really volunteering the information. To put it
voluntly, what cannot come in because of an exclusionary rule contained in the earlier
provisions, would be sought to be brought in by recourse to the permissive rule or
enabling provision in section 27. If information spoken of in section 27 is not forth-
coming voluntarily, the police may have recourse to procuring the same by other

1, Bhagwan Singh v. State of Punjab, (1992) 3 SCC 249
2. Niilabati Behera v. State of Orissa (1993) 2 SBC 746


43

means. This is not to say that in every case the information is compelled to be
given. But it cannot be gainsaid that the very existence of the section (in the form
in which it appears at present in the Act) creates an impression or an urge to resort
to means not desirable or legitimate so that the section is pressed into service in
situations never intended by the legislature. We are convinced that the section needs
amendment, if not repeal, in order to completely ward off the tendency mentioned
above.

In order to meet the malady two courses are open. Section 27 may be repealed
jn toto and that is our first preference. But if that course is not acceptable, the mini-
mum that can be done is to revise the section so as to confine it to make admissible
‘the fact discovered but not the information. This alternative, though it is the milder
one will be more intelligible by presenting a brief analysis. The analysis is as
under :—

0) A criminal trial is concerned with proof of facts which are at issue.

(ii) If the facts in issue cannot be directly proved, the law allows them to be
proved by facts declared to be relevant by the law.

(iii) If a certain fact relating to discovery, such as discovery of a weapon,
discovery of clothes etc. of the victim or any other relevant fact, is the
result of the so-called information given by a person, the requirements of
the trial would be satisfied by taking the fact of discovery on the record
(assuming that it is a relevant fact).

(iv) The law need not go further and admit the confession part of the infor-
mation. For the reasons stated above, the confession part is mostly
tainted with coercion and torture even though this may not be on the
surface.

(0 The information part. if it does not amount to a confession may not be
objectionable in theory but in practice, it is not easy to keep the infor-
mation element and the confession element separate from each other.

Therefore, if the milder alternative of merely amending section 27 (and not its
total repeal) is to be adopted, we would recommend that section 27 may be replaced
by the following section :—

“27, Discovery of facts at the instance of the accused.—When any relevant fact
is deposed to as discovered in consequence of information received from a person
accused of any offence, whether or not such person is in the custody of a police
officer, the fact discovered may be proved, but not the information, whether it
amounts to a confession or not”.

11-7 Recommendation to extend Sections 25 and 26 to other officers

We are further of the view that the exclusionary provisions contained in sections
25 and 26 of the Evidence Act which are, at present, confined to police officers, should
be extended to all public servants having power to arrest and detain persons in cus-
tody. If this recommendation is accepted, it follows that section 27 of the Act (unless
it is repealed as per our first alternative) should also be extended to such public ser-
vants (after it is amended on other points according to our second alternative re-
‘commendation in the preceding paragraph).

95-M/J128MofLI&CA—7


COMPENSATION

12.1 Introduction

<r Chapters. legal action in regard to
gatory, punitive or remedial. In the
17209 in the shape of compensation
¢ or (in the case of his death) to his

cf the ea

As has been indicated in <
custodial crimes could te prev
present Chapter, we propose io ¢
to be awarced to the victim cf a cusiedial crim
dependants.

12.2 General Law

Under the general 185, piirarity the law of torts, compensation is available
and can be claimed at the instance of the victim against the person causing death or

bodily injury, pr d the sents cf civil liability in that regard are satisfied.
Leaving aside ents, such as the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, the Work-
men’s Compensaticn Act, 1923 4d the Public Ciability Insurance Act, 1991, the mat-

les of the law of torts as modified or supple-
case of wrongful death, it is the fatal Acci-
S ‘able in general. The Act essentially deals with,
what may be called, “wrong‘ul death’, an aspect amply indicated by the convenient
and concise phrase “wrongful act, neglect or default”. We need not enter into de-
tails of the content of the Act for the present purpose but it will suffice to note that
the Act is referred to specifically in section 357(1}(c) of the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, पु

12.3 State’s liability for compensaéion in Tort

the English Common Law as imported into India on
nd sood conscience, with statutory modifications of
Article 300 of the Constitution provides for the filing of
a suit against the Unicn as well 85 State Government. The second part of the
Article provides, inter alia, that the State may sue or be sued in relation to its affairs
if a corresponding Province might have been sued or be sued if the Constitution had
not been enacted, subject to any lew made by legislature. Thus if a suit is to be filed
against the Government in tort, the suit can be filed if such a suit could have been
filed against the corresponding provisions of the Constitution had not been enacted.
The Article contemplates that the appropriate Legislature would enact law in this
respect. The Legislature has. however, made no law as contemplated under Article
300, The question whether the Goy:rament is liable to be sued for damages in tort
at the instance of an aggrieved citizen remains in a state of quandry and confusion on
account of non-exercise of legislative function. Ordinarily, in a welfare state, a suit
in tort for damages should be main<ainable against the State and its servants causing
injury to an individual. But in the absence of appropriate legislation, as contem-
plated by Article 300, the liability of the State for the tortious acts of its servants
remains the same as it existed prior to the enactment of the Constitution.

Prior to the Constitution the doctrine of the common law of England that King
commits no wrong and he cannot be liable for negligence or misconduct, consequently
he could not be responsible for the negligence or misconduct of his servants, was in
force. This doctrine was based on the premise that the State was not liable for
damages caused to any individual in the exercise of sovereign functions. However
in England this legal position has been substantially altered by the Crown Proceed-
ings Act, 1947. There the law has been liberalised and the distinction between the
sovereign and non-sovereign functions and governmental or non-governmental
functions are no Jonger in vogue to determine the liability of the State. In India no
similar steps were taken. The Law Commission of India considered the question
of the liability of the State in tort and it recommended that under Article 300 it was
necessary to enact law affording pretection to the citizens as even in England the
immunity of the Crown was substantially reduced.1_ The Law Commission recom-
mended that legislation be enacted making the State liable for the torts committed by

sion of Dadia on ‘Liability of State in Tort’.

44

ter is basicaliy governed
mented by relevant
dents Act, 1855 which Secomes 5१

The general law of torts
the principle of justice.
that law is in force in I

1, First Report of the Law Com



45

its employees while acting within the scope of their employment. In respect of duties
of care imposed by the statute, the Comrission recommeaded that if a statute autho-
rised the doing of an act, which was in itself injurious, the State should not be liable,
but the State should be fiable without proof of negligence for breach of statutory duty
imposed on it or its employees which may cause damage. it further recommended
that the State should be liable if in the discaarge of statutory duties imposed upon
it or its employees, the empioyces negiigenuy or maiiciously and whether or not
discretion is involved in the exe: of such duty. The reco:aniendations made by
the Commission, have, however, not been impicmented so far and no law as recom-
mended has been enacted, with the resuit 113८ there is considerable amount of un
certainty on the question of liability oi tae State for the tortious acts of its servants.
We reiterate the Commission’s recotinmendaiions in this regard and recommend that
the relevant law as suggested should ve enacted.

12.4 State’s Judicial decisions on the question of tortious liability

In the absence of legislative exercise, the Supreme Court and High Courts by
their judicial innovations have beea awarding damages agaiust tne State for the tor-
tious acts of the public servants of the Stat2. [ne Supre.az Court in State of Rajas-
than v. Smt. Vidyawati* awarded damages fo: injury cau vy a Government car
which was rashly and negligibly driven oy the empioyee of Siate of Rajasthan. The
Supreme Court, upheld the liability of the State for damages in respect of tortious
acts committed by its servants within its scape of empioyment. he view taken in
Vidyawati’s case was, however, subsequently uot approved by a Constitution Bench
of the Supreme Court in Kasturi Lal's vase. ‘Tne facts of that case were that Kasturi
Lal the plaintiff was arrested by the paiice ou the suspicion of stolea property and
on a search of the body of the plainiff, a large quantity of gold was seized and kept
in Malkhana. On his release the piaintiff claimed reiura of tae gold seized from him
but that was not returned on the ground tnat the Head Consiable in-charge including
the gold seized from the plaintiff. On a suit by the plair gainst the State for the
return of the gold or in the alternative for damages 107 the loss caused to him, the
trial court decreed the same. On appoal, tae ifigh Court see aside the decree. "The
plaintift approached the Supreme Court in appeal. A Coustitution Bench of the

upreme Court relying on the docirine of sovereign immunity held that since no
law had been enacted, as contemplaied by Article 300, the suit was not maintainable
on the ground of the immunity of the State for the tortious acis of its servants, The
Court observed that the docirine of sovereign immunity followed in India on the
basis of common law principle which prevailed in Englaud in regard to claims made
against the State for the tortious acts committed by its servauis. The Court further
held that this immunity was with regard to tie damages resulting from injury caused
by negligent or malicious acis of tiie servants if the employment was referable to
sovereign power. The Court referred to the non-exercise of legislative power and
expressed its concern in the following words :—

“In dealing with the present appeal, we have ourselves been disturbed by the
thought that a citizen whose property was seized by process of law, has been
told when he seeks a remedy in court of law on the ground that his property
has not been returned 10 him, that 18 can make no claim of the State, that we
think, is not very satisfactory position in jaw. The remedy to cure this position,
however, lies in the hands of the legislature.”

Unfortunately, the anxiety expressed by the Supreme Court, and the recom-
mendations made by the Law Commission both have gone unheeded, as no law has
been enacted, as yet, with the result, the law laid down by the Constitution Bench of
the Supreme Court in Kasturi Lal’s case hoids the field.

12.4(a)

The Supreme Court, however, exercising its power under Article 32 has awarded
dama apes to the petitioners for the injuries suffered both on account of the tortious
act of its servants and also on ground of the State being liavie to pay compensation
for the violation of their Fundamental Rights. A survey of the decided cases would
reveal that the Supreme Court in its judicial activist role adopted two ways to redress
the victims of abuse of power by the public servants a iati icti
way of right of compensation and to penalise the State
vants. We do not consider it necessary to discuss all

1, AIR 1962 SC 993,
के Kasturi Lal v. State of U. P., AIR 1965 SC 1039,


46

a brief reference may be made to some of them.!-8 The High Courts have also
awarded compensation under Article 226 of the Constitution..°-!7 Apart from grant-
ing relief under Article 32 of the Constitution, the Supreme Court has in a number of
cases upheld the award of damayes to the aggrieved person against the 51808. 18-1१

In Nilabati Behra v. State of Orissa, (1993, 2 SCC 476), the Supreme Court
referred to its decision in Kasturi Lal’s case and observed that the principle of sove-
reign immunity does not apply to a claim made under a public law, it accordingly
directed the State of Orissa to pay damages to the petitioner in the case of custodial
death as it violated Article 21 of the Constitution. The Court observed that the
State had a right to be indemnitied and to take such action as may be available
against the wrong doers ia accordance with law. The brief survey of the judicial
decisions would show that taouga techaically Kasturi Lal’s case still holds the field,
nonetheless courts have been granting relief to the aggrieved persons. But the legal
position is not clear, it is, therelore, necessary that statutory enactment is made with
regard to the State’s liability for tae toriious acts of its servaats.

12.5 Machinery for claiming co-npeasation

Assuming that conduct resuiting in custodial death or constituting any other
custodial crime is a tort, the person entitled to damages uader the law of torts can,
under the general procedure, tile a civil suit in the competent civil court against the
persons liable. The question “who are the persons liable’’ will have to be determi-
ned in conformity with the principles of ihe law of torts, waich inter alia, are relevant
for matters such as conditions of liad; (including the requirement of fault), im-
munity from liability and vicarious liability of governmental and non-governmental
agencies. As stated above, special enactments applicable to particular types of
situations may fortify or suppiement the general rule prevailing relating to the law
of torts,

12.6 Section 357 of the Code

Apart from the machinery of the civil court, the provisions of section 357 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 can be utilised, whereunder a criminal court can,
in certain circumstances, make an order the payment of compensation by a convicted
person.” Such order can be passed not only where fine is imposed Section 357(1),
but also where any other sentence is imposed section 357(3).

12.7 Recommendation to insert section 357A

In our opinion, in order to have a specific provision regarding compensation in
custodial offences, it would be proper to insert in the Code of Criminal Procedure
section 357A, a draft whereof is given below. Our intention is to provide specifically
for the joint and several liability of the guilty odicers and the Government and to set
out the important factors to be taken into account in assessing the compensation, we
recommend the following section.

1. State of Rajasthan y. Vidvawati, AIT 1862 SC 993,

2. Sir Basava Patil vy. State of Mysore, AIR 1977 SC 1749,

3. Nilabati Behra v. State of Orissa, (1993) 2 SCC 746.

4. State of Gujarat vy. Memom Mohummed Hazi Hussain, AIR 1967 SC 1885.
5. Rudal Shah v. State of Bihar, AIR 1983 SC 1086.

6. Sebastian M. Monghray v. Union of India (1984) 1 SCC 339,

7. Bhim Singh v. State of J & K, 1983 Supp. SCC 564.

8. Bhim Singh v. State of J & V (1983) 4 SCC 677.

9, Saheli v. Commissioner of Police (1990) 1 SCC 422.

10. In Re : death of Survinder Singh Grover, (1993) 1 Cr. L. R. 163 (SC).

11. V. Varmlamma vy. State of Andhra Pradesh, 1993 (1) SCALE 19.

12, Rethinam ५. State of Gujarat, 1993 (2) SCALE 631.

13, Ravi Kanth v. Director Geueral of Police, State of Maharashtra, 1990 ACJ 1060.
14, के, Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1980 Mad 20.

15. Nalini Bhanot v. Commissioner of Police, 1990 ACJ 345.
16. Sir Basava Patil v. State of Mysore, AIR 1977 SC 1749.

17. See para 3 29 Supra.
418, AIR 1962 SC 1:


47

Section 357A, Cr. P.C.
Compensation in custodial offences

(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 357, where the court convicts a
public servant of an offence resulting in death or bodily injury being an offence
constituted by an act of such public servant against a person in his custody, the pro-
visions of this section shall apply.

(2) The court, when passing judgment in any case to which this section applies,
shall order that the Government in connection with the affairs of which such public
servant was employed at the time when such act was committed, shall be liable jointly
and severally with such public servant to pay, by way of compensation such amount
as may be specified in the order,

(3) An order for payment of compensation under this section may also be made
by an appellate court or by the High Court or Court of Session when exercising its
powers 0: F revision,

(4) While rewarding compensation in any subsequent suit relating to the same
matter, the civil court shall take into account any sum paid or recovered as compensat-
ion under this section.

(5) The amount awarded under this section shall not be less than :

(a) Rupers twenty five thousand in case of bodily injury, not resulting in
leath;

(b) Rupees one lakh, in case of death;

- (© In fixing the amount of compensation under this section, the court shall,
subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), take into account all relevant circum-
stances, including (but not necessarily limited to) the following :

(a) the type and severity of the injury suffered by the victim;
(b). the mental anguish suffered by the victim;

(CA) the expenditure incurred or likely to be incurred on the treatment and
rehabilitation of the victim;

(d) the actual and projected earning capacity of the victim and the impact of
its loss on the persons entitled to compensation and other members of the
mily ;

(०) the extent, if any, to which the victim himself contributed to the injury.
(f) the expenses incurred in the prosecution of the case.
(7) In case of death or permanent disablement of the victim, the court may

take into account the estimated annual income of the victim as multiplied by the.
number of years of his estimated span of life.

(8). Pending final determination of the proceeding, the court may award, by way.
of interim relief, such compensation as it may think proper in the circumsances of the.
case at any stage of the case, even before judgment of conviction is passed.

. (9) The Government may recover any amount paid by it as compensation under
this section wholly or partly as it may think proper, from the delinquent pyblic
servant.”


CHAPTER 13
ORGANIZATION OF THE POLICE
13.1 Introduction

In the earlier chapters, we have referred to the various aspects of the custodial
crimes arising out of abuse of power by the police and other public officers. The
police is in the dock, day in and day out, it has to face mounting severe public criticism.
The allegations of incompetence, corruption, ruthlessness, violation of human rights,
communalization, unlawful and partisan behaviour are often made against the police.
But one should not have the feeling that all policemen are ‘blood-thirsty hounds.’
The police is in an essential organisation being part of the Executive to maintain law
and order and to prevent crimes. The police is a necessity for a civilized society. The
citizens look to the police for security and protection and it has served the society well.
Unfortunately, due to various factors, the police in India has not bzen able to play its
effective role in people’s service. It is proposed to deal in this chapter certain matters
concerning police organization. Of course, this report is not on the organisation of
police force, but we consider it necessary to refer to some of the factors which are
responsible for the malpractices connected with investigation of crimes, as in our
opinion, unless those factors are removed the police as a whole will continue
to suffer with the maladies and it would be difficult for it to transform itself into an
instrument of service to the people.

13.2 Role of Police under British Rule

The present police system in India is a British legacy. It is the creation of British
Government and it rests on the basic ideals of efficiency and subordination to the law
of the land. During British Rule the rule of police was limited to the role invested
by the Police Act, 1861—whose main objective was to make the police an efficient
instrument for the prevention and detection of crime and to use it as an effective
weapon at the disposal of the foreign government to put down firmly any challenge
to its authority. Their approach was not public service oriented, instead their objective
was to maintain status quo. During the British Rule in India, the police had to take
effective repressive meaures, at the bidding of the then rulers, against our own people
engaged in freedom struggle, as a result of which, the image of the police was greatly
tranished and it came to be identified with tyranny and oppression.

13.3 Role of Police after Independence

After India became independent, it declared itself to be a Republic. It ceased to
be a Police State, instead it was transformed into a Welfare State. The Constitution
guranteed Fundamental Rights to the citizens and it also enacted new legislations,
special laws, regulatory measures and progressive law reforms. The implementation
and enforcement of many of these laws was entrusted to the police. Various laws
including measures like Maintenance of Internal Security Act, Defence of India Act,
Terrorist and Disrupitve Activities Act conferred wide discretionary power on the
police. Such powers are to be exercised in conformity with the Fundamental Rights
and in accordance with the statutory provisions. Unfortunately, the police was not
reorganized to meet the new challenge. Recruitment policies, training and hierarchical
controls introduced during British days have basically continued to be in force even
today with the result that the police have not been able to meet the need of the
society.

In recent years, police have to perform difficult and delicate task particularly in
view of the deterioriating law and order situation, communical priots, political tur-
moil, students unrest, terriorist activities, radical politicism lihe extremists and among
others, the increasing number of white collar crimes like bribery and corruption,
evasion of taxes, violation of fiscal laws and smuggling, etc. Organized criminal gangs
have taken strong roots in the society. Such criminal gangs use ultra modern wea-
ponry, explosives and many other devices to completely smash the objectives without
leaving a little, or no evidence at the place of offence. Similarly, dealing with insurgent
and terrorist groups is also vastly different from dealing with the traditional criminals.
This category of criminals is also well trained, hardened and equipped with ultra

48


49

modern weaponry. An ordinary policeman carrying a small ruler or even a gun does
not match to the excrutiating speed of terrorists. The widening of the sphere of
activities and responsibility has confronted the police with challenges and crisis

ushering in a series of new and significant problems, for which they have not been
trained or equipped so they fail to serve the people in accordinace with the Constitu-
tional and human rights norms.

In addition to aforementioned factors, prolonged stress and strain and a long
hours of duty in connection with law and order and VIP duty, very little time is left
for police to investigate cases for detection of crimes. The police, under pressure
of quota of work assigned 10 them, driven by a desire to achieve quick results, leave
the path of patience, reticence and scientific interrogation, instead they resort to the
use of physical force in different forms to pressurise the suspect or accused to disclose
all the facts known to him. While law recognizes the need for use of force by the police
in the discharge of their duties on some specified occasions like the dispersal of violent
mob or the arrest of a violent bad character who may resist the arrest, they use force
against the individual in their custody.

13.4 Reports of Police Commission

The Indian police today finds itself handicapped not only in its numerical
strength but also in its adquate infrastructural facilities like modern weaponry,
equipment, communication network and more importantly need based training
which is of paramount importance to make it efficient and effective instru-
ment of law enforcement. The National Police Commission has gone into
the whole range of problems of police administration and it has made several

rts for reform in the police organization. In one of its reports, the
Police Commission (January 1980) emphasized the need to modernize the method
of investigation by harnessing science and technology to aid efficient police perfor-
mance. It also made recommendation for improved facilities for communication,
transport, computerized study and assistance from forensic science. The recommenda-
tions highlighted the establishment of more Central Forensic Science Laboratories
and Medical Examination Laboratories, State Handwrting Bureaus and Regional
Laboratories to handle certain types of cases which frequently arise in the normal
crime work of the state. It also recommended for the constitution of Central investi-
gation effective, the Police Commission recommended that training should be made
more scientific. By another report the Commission made a series of recommendations
to improve effectiveness and efficiency of the police by making administrative changes.
The recommendations made by the Police Commission have not been fully implement-
ed. In our opinion, the Police Commission’s Reports, if implemented,will goa long
way to remove the causes of aberration in police and minimise the chances of abuse
of power and custodial crimes.

13.5 Need for separation of Investigation Wing from Law & Order Wing

The enactments relating to the police force as operative in various parts of India
—whether it be the Police Act, 186lor the Provincial Act or State Act governing the
lice, primarily contemplate at least two major functions for the police force.
The first is the maintenance of law and order, while the second is the investigation of
offences, particularly cognizable offences. Prior to independence when the population
was low, the crime rate was not high and the area to be governed by the then rulers
was not very large, there was no need to keep these functious separate. Now the
situation has changed, and it seems to us that efficiency and integrity in the perfor-
mance of the functions of the police cannot be maintained at a reasonable level with-
out embarking upon a scheme of separation of the two functions. Of course, this
pre-supposes that the structure and organization of the police force in each State will
have to be re-modelled a matter which we do not propose to deal with in detail.
But there is no doubt that such a change is needed from a variety of angles.

13.6 Recommendations relating to Police Organisations

We are of the opinion that, to a large extent, the problem of torture and other
malpractices in the course of investigation of offences owes itself to the fact that
police officers who are kept busy in other work do not find time and cannot have an
inclination to devote their best intellectual and physical resources to the investigation
of crimes. The faculties of the mind which must be brought into play at the time of
investigation are different from those which are to be exercised when dealing with
an urgent situation of breach of public order. It is desirable that there should be a
separate wing for the investigation of offences, manned by officers of the necessary


50

expertise and approach who can devote their full time energy to the detection and
investigation of cognizable offences. We are aware that this is not a new approach.
We cannot also say that it can be put into practice very easily. Beside this (except
for Union Territories), it can only be put into concrete shape by the State Govern-
‘ments. Nevertheless, we must reiterate our view in this regard, so that the cause of
personal liberty and other fundamental rights may not suffer, merely be reason of
official lethargy or inaction. The scheme may involve a little bit of additional expendi-
ture in the beginning. However, in the long run, it may save not only time and duplicat-
ion of Work, but also money. If any work studies are to be made in this reagrd, the
same can be undertaken. The exeperience of those States in which such a scheme
might have been tried in the past can also be taken into account. But, at the same time,
the idea should not be thrown out at the outset, because its adoption could go a long
-way in contributing to a solution of a problem which has baffled well-meaning
persons for quite some time and which is not goiag to disappear in a reasonable time
auniess it is dealt with on a variety of fronts,

The Commission feel’s that immediate measures should be taken to improve the
functioning of the police. We accordingly recommend that the following measures be
taken :—

@ Investigating agency should be separated from the law enforcement wing;

(ii) Investigating agency should be trained especially to have an intimate
knowledge of the procedural and penal provisions of various criminal and
economic laws and they should also ‘be trained in modern sophisticated
gadgets and equipments;

(iii) Special stress must be laid in the training programme requiring the

‘policemen to respect the Constititutional and human rights and laws of
‘the land in the discharge of their duties; and

(iv) Orientation and refresher courses should be organized to apprise the
police of the new developments and techniques in investigation.


CHAPTER 14
RECOMM ENDATIONS

14.1 In the light of the discussions made in the earlier Chapters of this Report,
the Commission is of the opinion that it is essential to make appropriate provisions
in the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Code or Criminal Procedure, 1973, and the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 to foreclose torture in custody by public servants and to protect
the inteest of the victims of custodial crimes. The proposed amendment in the relevant
enactments have already been discussed in the preceding Chapters of the Report
but for convenience a draft of the proposed amendments is being set out hereinafter.

14.2 Indian Penal Code

The Law Commission reiterates its earlier recomn2ndation made in the
135th Report on ‘Women in Custody’. We recommend that a new section 166A be
inserted in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 for punishing the violation of section 160 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 :

“166A. Whoever, being a public servant—

(a) knowingly disobeys any direction of the law prohibiting him from requiring
the attendance at any place of any person for the purpose of investigation into an
offence or other matter, or

(b) knowingly disobeys any other direction of the law regulating the manner in
which he shali conduct such investigation, to the prejudice of any person shall
be punished with imprisonment fora term which may extend to one year or
with fine or with both.”

The proposed offence should be cognizable bailable and triable by any magis-
trate,”

(Para 6.5)

14.3 The Commission reiterates need fer insertion of section 167A in the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 as recommended in its 84th Report of ‘Rape and Allied
Offences, and some question of substantive law, procedure and evidence.’ (para 3.3),
on the following lines :—

“167A.—Whoever, being an officer in crarge of a police station and required by
law to record any information relating t> the commission of a cognizable offence
reported to him, refuses or without 78850 nable cause fails to record such informat-
tion, shall be punished with the imprisonment of cither descri ption of ora term
which may extend to one year or with fire or with both.”

(Para 8.3)
14.4 Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973

The Commission recommends that section 41(1) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 be amended and a new section 41(1A) be inserted in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 on the following lines :

“41(1A) A police officer arresting a person under cluase (a) of sub-section (1) of
this section must be reasonably satisfied, and must record such satisfaction,
relating to the following matters :—
(a) the complaint, information or suspicion referred to in that clause, is not only
in respect of a congnizable offence having been committed, but also in respect
of the complicity of the person to be arrested, in that offence;
(b) arrest is necessary in order to bring the movements of the person to be
arrested under restraint, so as to inspire a sense of security in the public or to
prevent the person to be arrested from evading the process of the law or to prevent

. him from committing similar offences or from indulging in violent behaviour
in general.”

(Para 5.20)
51
95-M/J128MofLI&CA—8


52

14.5 It is further recommended that recommendations No. | and 2 made in the
Law Commission of India’s 135th Report (Women in Custody) wich relate to the
arrest of women, should be implemented.

(para 5.17)

14.6 The Commission recommends that a new section 41—A should be inserted
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 on the following lines :—

“41A. Notice of appearance—Where the case falls under clause (a) of sub-
section (1) of Section 41, the police officer may, instead of arresting the person
concerned, issue to him a notice of appearance requiring him to appear before
the police officer issuing the notice or at such other place as may be specified in
the notice and to cooperate with the police officer in the investigation of the
offence referred to, in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 41. (2) Where
such a notice is issued to any person, it shall be the duty of that person to comply
with the terms of that notice.

(3) Where such person complies and continues to comply with the notice, he
shall not be arrested in respect of the offence feferred to in the notice unless, for
reasons to be recorded, the police officer is of the opinion that he ought to be
arrested

(4) Where such person, at any time, fails to comply with the terms of the notice,
it shall be lawful for the police officer to arrest him for the offence mentioned in
the notice, subject to such orders as ray have been passed in this behalf by a
competent court.”

(Para 5.21)

14.7 The Commission is of the view that there is a need to insert a new section
50-A after secton 50 in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 on the following
lines :—

50A (1) Whenever a person is arrested by a police officer, intimation of the
arrest shall be immediately sent by the police officer (along with intimation
about the place of detention) to the following person :—

(a) a relative or friend of other person known to the arrested person, as
may be nominated by the arrested person;

(0) failing (a) above, the local legal aid committee.

(2) Such intimation shall be sent by telegram or telephone, as may be con-
venient, and the fact that such intimation has been sent shall be recorded
by the police officer under the signature of the arrested person.

(3) The police officer shall prepare a custody memo and body receipt of the
person arrested, duly, signed by tim and by two witnesses of the locality
where the arrest has been made, and deliver the same to a relative of the
person arrested, if he is present at the time of arrest, or, in his absence,
send the same along with the intimation of arrest to the person mentioned
in (1) above.

(4) The custody memo referred to in (3) above shall contain the following
particulars :—

(i) name of the person arrested and father’s name or husband’s name;

(ii) address of the person arrested ;

(iii) date, time and place of arrest;

(iv) offence for which the arrest has been made:

(रो property, if any, recovered from the peson arrested and tken in to
charge at the time of the arrest; and

(vi) any bodily injury which may be apparent at the time of arrest.

(5) During the interrogation of an arrested person, his legal pratitioner shall be
allowed to remain present.

(6) The police officer shall inform the person arrested, as soon as he is brought
to the police station, of the contents of this section and shall made an
entry in the police diary about the followingfacts :—


33

(a) the person who was informed of the arrest;

(b) the fact that the peson arrested has been informed of the contents of
this section; and

(© the fact that a custody memo has been prepared, as required by this
section.

(Para 5.16)

14.8 The Commission is of the opinion that in addition to the recommendations
contained in Chapter 4 of the 84th Report of the Law Commission, section 54 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure be amended on the following lines :

“54. Examination of arrested person by medical practitioner. When a perso~
who is arrested, whether on a charge or otherwise, alleges at any time during th
the period of his detention in custody that the examination of his body may
afford evidence which will disprove the commission by him of any offence; or
is produced before a Magistrate, the Magistrate shall inform the accused so
arrested, about his right of medical examination which will establish the commiss-
ion by any other person including the public servant of any offence against his
body committed during the custody and record in writing about the fact of
communication of such right to the accused who exercised this right without any
coercion or fear of any public servant having effected his arrest or without the
presence of such public servant, the Magistrate shall if so alleged by the arrested
person, unless the Magistrate considers that the allegation is made for the pur-
pose of vexation or delay or for defeating the ends of justice get the examination
‘of the body of such person by a registered medical practitioner in the manner
prescribed hereunder and mention the following particulars :—

(a) The examination of the accused victim shall be conducted by a Registered
Medical Practitioner or through a Government Hospital available, as the
Magistrate may direct.

(0) The Registered Medical Practitoner to whom such person is forwarded
shall without delay examine him/her and prepare a report and specifically
record the following details :

(i) the name and address of the victim and of person by whom he was
brought;

(ii) the age of the victim;

ii) injuries external/internal if any, on the person;

(iv) general mental condition of the victim;

(v) other material particulars and any other relevant details.

(० The report of the said examination shall precisely state the reasons for
such conclusion arrived at.

(d) The exact time of commencement and completion of examination shall

also be noted in the report and the registered medical practitoner shall with-

out delay forward the report to the Magistrate who shall thereafter act in

accordance with the provisons contained in the Code of Criminal Pro-
ture.”

(Para 7.6)

14.9 With a view to having a greater and effective compliance of the various
safeguards, the Commission recommends that section 57-A be inserted in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 on the following lines

“S7A. Duty of Magistrate to verify certain facts—When a person arrested without
warrant is produced before the Magisrtrate, the Magistrate shall, by in-
quiries to be made from the arrested person, satisfy himself that the provisions
of sections...... have been complied with (section relating to safeguards in
connection with arrest, rights on arrest, etc. to be entered) and also inquire about,
and record, the date and time of arrest.”

(Para 5.22)
14.10 If the police officer refuses to reord the FIR, the aggrieved person should

have a right to file a petition (i) before the Chief Judicial Magistrate in the case of
custodial injury or torture and all custodial crimes other than killing and (ii) before


34

the Sessions Judge in the case of death in custody. Accordingly, the Commission
recommends that a new Section 154A be inserted in the Coce of Criminal Procedure,
1973, on the following lines :—

“154A. Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 154.

(1) Any person (in¢luding Legal Aid, Centre or NGO, or any friend or
relative) aggrieved by a refusal on the part of an officer in charge of a police
station to record the information referred to in sub-section (1) of that section,
in cases relating to custodial offences, may file a petition giving the substance
of such information—

(a) before the Chief Judicial Magistrate , in case of custodial offences
other than those involving death of the victim; or

(b) before the Sessions Judge, in cases of custodial offences involving
death of the victim.

(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Session Judge, if satisfied, on a
preliminary enquiry that there is a prima facie case, may himself hold
enquiry into the complaint or direct some other Judicial Magistrate or
Additional Sessions Judge, as the case may be, to hold enquiry and thereupon
direct the ministerial officer of the Court to make a coplaint to the competent
court in respect of offence that may appear to have been committed. (3)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 190 of the Code of Cri-
minal Procedure on a complaint made under Sub-section (2) the competent
court shall take cognizance of the offence and try the same.

(4) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Sessions Judge may obtain the
assistance of any public servant or authority as they made may deem fit
in holding the enquiry under sub-section (2).

(Para 8.5)

14.11 The Commission recommends that after the existing Proviso contained
in Section 160(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, a second proviso be
added, on the following lines :—

“Provided that no person shall be required to attend at any place other than
his or her dwelling place unless, for the reasons to be recorded in writing by the
investigating officer it is necessary to do so; and every such person shall be so
summoned by an order in writing.”

(Para 6.3)

14,12 The Commission recommends that below section 197(1)of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 an Explanation should be added on the following
lines:—

“Explanation.—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the
provisions of this section do not apply to any offence committed by a judge or
public servant, being an offence against the human body, committed in respect
of a person in his custody, nor to any other offence constituting an abuse of

authority.”
(Para 10.5)

14.13 In order to provide separately for compensation for custodial offences,
the Commission recommends insertion of a new section 357A in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, on the following lines :—

“Section 357A : Compensation in custodial offences

(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 357, where the court convicts a
public servant of an offence resulting in death or bodily injury, being an offence
constituted by an act of such public servant against a person in his custody, the
provisions of this section आगे apply.

(2) The Court, when passing judgment in any case to which this secton applies,
shall order that the Government in connection with the affairs of which such
public servant was employed at the time when such act was committed, shall
be liable jointly and severally with such public servant to pay, by way of com-
pensation such amount as may be specified in the order. 7


55

(3) An order for payment of compensation under this section may also be made
by an appellate court or by the High Court or Court of Session when exercising
its powers of revision.

(4) While rewarding compensation in any subsequent suit relating to the same
matter, the civil court shall take into accownt any sum paid or recovered as
compensation under this section :

(5) The amount awarded under this section shall not belessthan :

@ Rupees twenty five thousand in case of bodily injury, not resulting in
ath;

(b) Rupees one lakh, in case of death;

(6) In fixing the amount of compensation under this section, the court shall,
subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), take into account all relevant
circumstances, including (but not necessarily limited to) the following :

(a) the type and severity of the injury suffered by the victim;

(b) the mental anguish suffered by the victim;

(c) the expenditure incurred or likely to be incurred on the treatment and
rehabilitation of the victim;

(d) the actual and projected earning capacity of the victim and the impact
of its loss on the persons entitled to compensation and other members of
of the family;

(©) the extent, if any, to which the victim himself contributed to the injury

(f) the expenses incurred in the prosecution of the case.

(7) In case of death or permanent disablement of the victim, the court may take
into account the estimated annual income of the victim as multiplied by the
number of years of his estimated span of life.

(8) Pending final determination of the proceeding, the court may award, by way
of interim relief, such compensation as it may think proper in the circumstances
of the case at any stage of the case, even before judgment of conviction is pass-

(9) The Government may recover any amount paid by it as compensation under
this section wholly or partly as it may think proper, form the delinquent public
servant.”

(Para 12.7)

14.14 Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

The Commission recommends that the exclusionary provisions contained in
Sections 25 and 26 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, at present confined to police
officers should be extended to all public servants the sections by amended as under :

“25, Confession to public servant not to be proved.—No confession made to a
lic servant shall be proved as against a person accused of any offence.”

Tn this section, “public servant” means

(a) a public servant not being a police officer, who has the power of arresting

the person making the confession; and

(0) every police officer, whether he has or has not the power of arresting such

person.

26. Confession by accused while in custody of public servant not to be proved

against him. No confession made by any person while he is in custody of a

a public servant, unless it be made in the immediate presence of a Magistrate,

shall be proved as against such peson.

Explanation.—In_ this Section “Magistrate” does not include the head of a

village discharging magisterial functions in the Presidency of Fort St. George or

elsewhere, unless such headman is a magistrate exercising the powers of a magis-

trate under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1882 (10 of 1882).”

(Para 11.7)


- 56

14.15 The Commission recommends that for section 27 of the Indian Evidence

Act, 1872 the following section be suostituted :—

“27. Discovery of facts at the instance of the accused. When any relevant fact is
deposed to as discovered in consequence of information received from a person
accused of any offence, whether or not such person is in the custody of a police
officer, the fact so discovered may be proved, but not the information whether
it amounts to a confession or not.”

(Para 11.6)

14.16 The Commission recommends the insertion of a new section in the Indian

Evidence Act, 1872 as under :—

“114B. (1) Ina presecution of a Police Ovficer for an offence constituted by an
act alleged to have caused death or bodily injury to a person, if there is evi-
dence that the death or injury was caused during a preiod when that person
was in the custody of the police, the court may presume that the death or in-
jury was caused by the Police Officer having custody of that person during
that period.

(2) The Court in deciding whether or not it should draw a presumption under
sub-section (1) shall have regard to all the relevant circumstances, including,
in particular, (a) taz period of custody, (b) aay statement made by the victim
as to how the injuries were received, being a statemzat admissible in evidence,

(c) the evidence of any medical practitioner who might have examined the
victim, and (d) evidence of any magistrate who might have recorded the victims
statement or attempted to record it.”

(para 11.3)

14.17 We recommend that organisation of the police should be restructured so as
to keep separate the wings dealing with investigation from the wing dealing with

law and order. Further tne police should be imparted suitable training in modern
techniques of investigation.

(para 13.6)
Sd/-
(JUSTICE K.N. SINGH)
Chairman
Sd/- Sd/-
(PROF: D.N. SANDANSHIV) (CH. PRABHAKARA RAO)
Member MEMBER-SECRETARY
Sdy- Sdy-
(P.M. BAKSHI) (M. MARCUS)

MEMBER (PART-TIME) MEMBER (PART-TIME)


APPENDIX-I
CUSTODIAL CRIMES
(A Working Paper)

Complaints of police excesses and torture of suspects in police custody and other
governmental agencies having power to detain a person for interrogation in con-
nection with the investigation of an offence have been made in the past. Of late, such
complaints have assumed wide dimensions as the incidents of torture, assault, in-
jury and deaths in police custody have increased to alarming proportions. Article
21 of the Constitution guarantees right to life and personal liberty, although it does
not, contain any express provision against torture in custody, but it is wide enough
to protect the personal liberty of a person as no law or procedure established by
law permits torture or assault on a person in custody. Statutory laws, including
the Indian Penal Code and Criminal Procedure Code also ensure the personal li-
berty of a person against assault and injury. However, in spite of the constitutional
and statutory provisions safeguarding the personal liberty and life of a person,
growing incidence of torture and death in police custody has been disturbing fac-
tor. Almost every day one finds newspapers full of gory tales of dehumanising tor-
ture, assault and death in custody of police and other governmental agencies. Even
though no reliable official statistics on custodial crimes is available in the country,
Amnesty Internaltional, in its 1993 report indicates that in India 415 people were
reported to have died in custody during 1985—1992. A recent press report also
reveals that 46 persons died in custody during January—March 1993, Without
entering intofthe correctness of these figures, it is evident that the incidence of tor-
ture and death in custody have assumed alarming proportions which are adverse
affecting the credibility of the rule of law and the administration of criminal jus-
tice. It has priched the conscience of all freedom loving people and ignited criti-
cism from law courts, human right activists and the media. The community feels
that death in police custody must be viewed seriously for otherwise there will be
big strides in the promotion of police raj. It should be curbed with heavy hand and
fhe ‘punishment should be such which would deter others indulging in such be-

jour.

Custodial violence and abuse of the police power has been the concern of
international community. The General Assembly of the United Nations adopted
the Declaration for protection of pesrons from being subjected to torture and other
crime of inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment on December 9, 1975.
The Declaration prohibited the member States to permit or tolerate even in excep-
tional circumstances such as state of war or threat of war, or internal political sta-
bility. Article 5 required comprehensive training of law enforcement officers against
torture. Article 7 required system of review of the interrogation, methods and prac-
tices as well as custodial arrangements. Article 7 obligates the States to ensure that
the acts of torture are made offences under National Criminal Law. The Decla-
ration also provides that victim shall be afforded redress and compensation. The
Declaration which is part of the binding international law has not yet been im-
plemented so far in our country. There also exists a code of conduct for law enforce-
ment officials adopted by the General Assembly on December 17, 1979, under which
substantive norms are prescribed for “‘effective maintenance of ethical standards”
by the officials. Article 5 prohibits law enforcement officials from inflicting, insti-
gating or tolerating any act of torture. This was followed by another Declaration
on December 10, 1984, by a Convention which provides for more elaborate regime
of 33 articles. The General Assembly adopted another Declaration known as “Carcus
Declaration on Basic Principles of Justice for the Victims of Crime and Abuse of
Power” on November 29, 1985. This Declaration also obligates the State to define
laws “prohibiting the criminal abuse of power” and also for prohibition of re-
course to third degree methods. India being a party to these Declarations and Con-
ventions, is under an obligation to take effective steps, to prohibit abuse of power,
including torture and custodial violence and providing for restitution and com-
pensation to the victims and their kith and kin in accordance with the constitutional
mandate under Article 51.

37


58

Invariably, the victims of torture and death in custody are poor persons who
do not have adequate resources or finances to protect their life and liberty. In many
cases the sole bread earner of a poor family is the victim of custodial death leaving
the entire family in a State of penury and starvation. The Law Commission has,
therefore, considered it necessary to take up this matter for consideration suo moto
so that adequate steps are taken by amending laws to prevent recurrence of such in-
cidents and also to provide for pinishment of the guilty persons and also for grant
of pecuniary relief to the victims and their dependents.

Before we discuss the various issues arising in connection with the problem of
custodial torture and death, it is necessary to briefly have a look at the constitutional
provision safeguarding the right to life and guarantee against torture and assault
in custody. Article 21 of the Constitution provides that no person shall be deprived
of life end personal liberty except according to procedure established by law. The
expression “life or personal liberty” includes the right to live with human dignity
which would include guarantee against torture and assault by the State. Article
22 guarantees protection against arrest and detention in certain cases. It declares
that no person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed
of the grounds of such arrest and he shall not be denied the right to consult and
defined himself by a legal practitioner of his choice. Clause (2) of the Article
directs that the person arrested and detained in custody shall be produced before the
nearest Magistrate within a period of 24 hours of such arrest, excluding the time
necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the court of the Magistrate
A person accused of an offence shall not be compelled to be witness against himself
under Article 20(3) of the Constitution. The object of these constitutional pro-
visions is to safeguard the life and liberty of an individual even after his arrest in
comnection with commission of an offence. Even though Articles 21 and 22 do not
contain any express provision against torture, assault or injury inflicted on an are
rested person while in custody, the Supreme Court held that Article 21 guarantee-
protection against torture and assault by the State while a person is in custody.!

Consistent with the constitutional guarantee, the statutory provisions are con-
tained in the Criminal Procedure Code and the Indian Penal Code for the protece
tion of a person arrested in connection with the commission of an offence. Chapter
V of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 provides for arrest of a person and the
safeguards which are required to be taken by the police to protect the interest of the
arrested person. Section 41 confers powers on any police officer to arrest a person
under the circumstances specified therein without any order or a warrant of arrest
from a Magistrate. This provision confers a very wide power on the police officer
to interfere with the freedom and liberty of a person. Section 46 provides the method
and manner of arrest. Under this Section, no formality is necessary as it may be
made by action or word of mouth. While arresting a person the police is not permit-
ted to use more restraint than is necessary to prevent the escape of a person?
Section 50 enjoins every police officer arresting any person without warrant, to
communicate to him the full particulars of the offence for which he is arrested and
grounds for such arrest. The police officer is further required to inform the person
arrested that he is entitled to be released on bail and that he may arrange for sure-
ties on his behalf in the event of his arrest for a non-bailable offence. It is persmiss-
ible to the police officer to get the arrested person emdialally examined; similarly
arrested person has also a right to insist for his medical examination (Section 53
and 54), Section 56 contains a mandatory provision requiring the police officer
making arrest without warrant to produce the arrested person before a Magistrate
without unnecessary delay. Section 57 provides that no person shall be detained in
custody by a plilce officer without warrant for a longer period than under all the cir-
cumstances of the case, is reasonable exceeding 24 hours, excluding the time neces-
sary for travel from the place of arrest to the Magistrate’s court. Tf, however, the
police want to detain a person for a longer period for the purpose of interrogation
and investigation, they have to obtain the orders of the Magistrate and follow the
procedure as prescribed under Section 167. The arrest of a person without a war-
Tat is to be reported to the District Magistrate or the Sub-Divisinoal Magistrate by
the officer incharge of the police station making the arrest. These provisions afford
procedural safeguard to a person arrested by the police. Whenever a person dies
in custody of the police, Section 176 requireds the Magistrate to hold enquiry into

T See Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration, A. I. R. 1978 S. C. 1673, Bachan Singh v.
‘State of Punjab.
‘A. 1. R. 1980 Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration, A. 1. R. 1980 S.C. 1579.

4, Section 49.



the causes of death. The Magistrate 5 emporvered to record evidence and to get the
dead body examined to discover the cause cf death. The obicct of this Section is
to hold enquiry into a suspicious death. Sve'1 an enquiry and inquest report does
not constitute substantive evidence as held ty the courts?

Punitive provisions are also contained i> thy Indian Penal Code which seek to
prevent violation of right to life. Secticn 229 provides for punishment to an officer
or authority who detains or keeps a nersen in confirnement with the corrupt or a
malilcious motive, Section 330 and 231 provide for punishment of those who in-
flict injury or grievious hurt on a person te “tort confession or information in re-
gard to commission of an offence. Mlustrations (a) and (h) to Section 330 make
a police officer guilty of torturing ¢ rerscn ir order to induce him to confess the
commission of a crime or to induce tim to raint out places where stclen property.
is deposited. Section 330 therefore directly makes the torture punisheble under
the Indian Penal Code. These stetutcry provisions seek to safcquard the interest of
an arrested person, but these are inedeauate. Mcreover. the police do not follow
these provisions instead they evade the rigours of precedural law by manipulating
records. As noted earlier, a person arrested withovt warrant must be presented
before the Magistrate without unnecessary deloy and he should also be informed
of the offence for which he may have heen arrrehended cr the round for his arrest:
and he should be enlarged on bail if < ed for non-cogrizable offence. The police
is further required to make entry of his arrest vere] documents under the
Police Act and Police Manual. information fo the District Magistrate and the Sub-
Divisional Magistrate about the date and t'me of arrest. In order to avoid these
rigours of law, the police makes informal ervest without making any entry into the
records. Instances are not Jacking where the pelice has arrested a person without
warrant in connection with the investigation of an offence and the arrested person
is subjected to torture to extract informatica from him for the purpose of further
investigations or for recovery of weaners or goods and also fer extracting confes-
sion in violation of the statutory law. The torture and the injury caused on the
body of the prisoner sometiemes resu'ts into his ceath. The desth in custody is not
generally shown in records and every effort is made by the police to dispose of the
body or to make out a case that the arrested person died after he was released
from custody. Any complaint against such torture or death is gencrally not given
any attention by the police officer on accout of brotherhood. No first information
report at the instance of the victim or his k'th and kin is generally entertained and
even the higher police officers prefer to tu blind eye to such complaints. But
even if a formal prosecution is launched victi his kith and kin, no direct evidence
is available to substantiate the charge of to: hurt resulting into
death as the police lock up where generally ¢orture or injury is caused on the arres-
ted person is away from the public gaze, where the sole witnesses are either police-
men or co-prisoners who are highly reluctant to appear as prosecution witnesses
firstly because of police brotherhood and secondly due to fear of retaliation by
the superior officers of the police.

As the law stands today, if a complaint is made against torture death or in-
jury, in police custody, no evidence is availa‘le to substantiate the charge in a court
‘of law and the complainant or the prosecution is unable to produce evidence to
prove the charge beyond ‘all reasonable dow>t’. In such cases it is difficult rather
impossible to secure the evidence against the nolicemen responsible for resorting to
third degree methods since they are incharze of police station record which they
do not nd difficult to manipulate. Consequently, prosecution against the delin-
quent officers generally results in acquittal. This difficulty was considered by the
Supreme Court also in a series of cases and it observed that the situation required
amendment of law relating to burden of proof in the law of evidence.

The law relating to burden of proof is contained in Sections 101—114 of the
Indian Evidence Act. The general princio's as deductible from these Sections is
that the prosecution is under a mandatory ‘Itty to prove the essential elements of
the offence charged against an accus4 nerson beyond all reasonable doubt. On
the suggestions of the Supreme Court in agar Yadav case, the Law Com-
mission in its 113th Report reconmn21d2d 10३ insertion of a new Section as Sec-
tion 114B in‘the Indian Evidence Act. The Commission recommended that in a
prosecution of a police officer for an alleged offences of having caused bodily in-
jury to a person, if there was evidence that the injury was caused during the period

955) ISCR 1090.
4, # . 1. ए. 1985 SC 446.
95-M/J128MofLI&CA—9


60

when the person was in‘the custody of the polics, the Court may presume that the
injury was caused by the police oTicer having the custody of that person during
that period.

The Commission further recommended that the court, while considering the
question of presumption, should have regard to all relevant circumstances including
the period of custody, statement made by the victim, medical evidence and the
evidence which the Magistrate may fave recorded. The Supreme Court again
considered this question in a recent case? and observed that where the admitted
facts of the case indicate that victim was taken in custody and later, on the next day
if he was found dead near the police post, the burden was clearly on the State to
explain how the victim sustained those injuries which caused his death. The Court
again amphasised the need for change of the rule of burden of proof in such cases.
It is a matter of regret that inspite of the Law Commission's recommendations ans.
the Supreme Court’s observations in several cases the requisite amendment in the
law of Evidence has not been made. In view of the sharp rise in police atrocities and
custodial violence, tortures and death, it is of utmost imrortance to amend Section
114 of the Indian Evidence Act as suggested earlier. In this connection it is worth
mentioning that the Parliament amended the Evidence Act for raising presumption
in the case of rape in custody and dowry death with a view to meet the growing
incidence of sexual exploitation during custody. The Parliament by amending the
Act inserted Sections 1144 and 1148 of the Indian Evidence Act 1873 empowering
the Court to draw presumption against the accused in prosecution for rape and
dowry deaths. This legislative steo was taken to meet ih? technical plea of lack of
evidence in rape and dowry cases. There appears to be 29 7३3507 as to why the same
principle should not be extended in the case of custodial crimes.

There is need for making further provisions in the laws to eliminate the pos-
siblility of torture and beating in custody during interrogation. Police is, no doubt,
under a legal duty to arrest a criminal and to interrogate him during the investigation
of the offence, the law does not permit use of third degree methods or torture of
accused in custody but the police generally resorts to these methods with a view to
solve the crime. It is a legitimate right of the police to arrest a suspect on receiving
some credible information, or material, but the arrest must be in accordance with
the law and the interrogation should not be accompanied with torture and use of
third degree methods, The interrogation and investigation should be in true sense
and purposeful to make the investigation effective. By torturing a person and using
third degree methods, the police would be accomplishing behind the closed doors
what the demands of our legal order forbid. If the custodians of law themselves
indulge in committing crime, then no member of the society would be safe and secure.
In this situation, it would be worthwhile to amend the law to eliminate or at any
rate minimise, the chances of torture or injury or death in custody.

When a person is arrested without warrant for 4 cognizable offence it should
be imperative for the police officer to obtain fron the accused the name of any
relative or friend whom he would like to be informed about the arrest and the po-
lice should get in touch with such relative or friend and inform him about the ar-
rest®. When the accused is produced before the magistrate it should be mandatory
for the Magistrate to enquire from the arrested person whether he has any complaint
of torture or mal-treatment in custody and he should further be informed that he
has a right under Section 54 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to be medically
examined.’ Very often the arrested person is not aware of this right and on aecount
of his ignorance he is unable to exercise his right before the Magistrate even though
he may have been tortured or mal-treated by the police in the lock-up. It is, there-
fore, necessary that the law should be amended and a mandatory duty should be
amended and a mandatory duty should be cast on the Magistrate to enquire from
the arrested person about the torture and remind him of his tight of medical exami-
nation under Section 54 of the Code.

Torture or beating of an arrested person in the lock-up is generally carried
on behind the closed doors and no member of the public is permitted to be there and
instances are not wanting where even the family members of the arrested persons
are not allowed to meet them. In developed countries it is well recognised right of

5, 1993 (2) SCC 346.
*, Sheila Barse ५. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1983 SC 378 para 4.
१. Shiela Barse Ibid.



01

an arrested person to inisist for the presence of his counsel during the course of in-
terrogation while in custody. The presence of counsel would deter the police from
using third degree methods during interrogation. The Cr. P. C. does not confer ex-
pressly any such right on tne accused but the Apex Court while interpreting the
scope of Article 21 and 22 has held घाव tne accused is entitled to have his counsel
during interrogation. The law deciared by the Supreme Court is the law of the land
under Article 141 of the Constitution. Since the decisions of the Supreme Court
are not brought to the notice of each and every police oilicer, it would be proper
and appropriate to amend the law in this respect. Amendment of Sections 41, 50
and 56 of the Criminal Procedure Code may be necessary to secure the aforesaid
objectives.

Non-Recording of FIR

A first information report against a police officer is generally not recorded.
Ordinarily, the police officer responsible fer recording of FIR relating to commis-
sion of a crime would turn away the complainant if the complaint is against the
police.

Therefore, in cases of custodial torture, violence and injury, even if the victim
or the kith and kin of the victim take steps to lodge FIR, they are generally un-
successful in their attempt. Gu refusal on the part of the officer incharge of police
station to record the information, tie complainant is entitled to approach the higher
police officers namely the Superiniendeat of Police, Deputy Inspector General of
Police and even the Inspector General of Police. But generaily the higher authorities
of the police department do not take these complaints seriously on account
of their soft corner for their subordinate officers. It is true that in some cases the
Superintendent of Police or higher officers have taken steps to record the FIR and
investigate the case but, by and large, FIR is not recorded against the police at the
instance of the victim or his kith and kin. In a number of cases the aggrieved party
has approached the court and on its direction FIR has been recorded and case has
been investigated and the prosecution has been launched. But, it is not possible for
every aggrieved person to obtain the circuitous relief. In the circumstances, it is
necessary to meet the situation by amending the law. If the police refuses to record
the FIR, the aggrieved person should have the right to file a petition before the
Chief Judicial Magistrate in the case of injury or torture and the District Sessions
Judge in the case of death in custody and tite petition so made should be treated as
the FIR for the purpose of investigation and enquiry under the Cr. P.C.

Investigation of Complaint in Custodial Offences

As the law stands today, a complaint against the police in respect of torture, ia-
jury or death in custody is also required to be investigated by the police but such
enquiry cannot be effective and free from bias.® In order to meet the situation,
in some cases, investigation agaiast the poiice torture have been entrusted to the
Central Bureau of Investigation but, under the existing law, CBI cannot take up the
investigation of all cases of custodial crimes since the State Governments consent to
such investigation may not be available in many cases. The ideal course would be
to have an independent agency for holding investigation and enquiry into such
complaints, and this may be entrusted to the proposed Human Rights Commis-
sion. But, in the absence of such commission, it would be necessray to have an
independent agency to deal with such matters in an objective and fair manner. One
method may be to authorise tiie courts to hold enquiry into such complaints. Under
Section 176 of the Code, enquiry in case of death of an arrested person while in
custody is made by a Magisirate empowered to hold such inquest. The
object of this enquiry is to verify the cause of dzath this enquiry is
judicial but the Magisirate does not function as a court the inquest report
or statement contained in the enquiry report do not constitute substantive evidence.
The Commission is, however, of the opinion that in case of complaint of torture or
injury caused in police custody, the Chief Judicial Magistrate who is head of the
Magistracy in the District should have the power to hold enquiry into the complaint
and for that purpose he may obtain the assistance of the police officers of his own
choice. In cases of custodial death, the Sessions Judge should be invested with au-
thority to enquire into the matier. If on enquiry by the Sessions Judge/Chief Judicial

*. Nanda! Saipat ४. RL, Thanai, 1968 CRLJ 968 para 38, 59 per Krishnaswamy Ayyar

3, State v. P. 5. Yadav, AIR 1985 SC 146.
18, (1955) 1 SCR 1083.


62

Magistrate/Metropolitan MM.
Judge or the Chief Judicial 1
gistration of cases against the delinque:
ness and objectivity in helding tie ev

ima facie case is made out, the Sessions
ould be competent to direct for the re-
2 officers. This method may ensure aware-
iry into the complaints against the police

Under the law no publ
for an offence without the sancii
doubt, there are a 107
death in custody is net v
Section 197 is not attrac ed
of sanction under 5:
facing the prosecution. Tac
lot of delay in the trial of
tion 197 of the Cr
Prosecution of police ०:

the Sessions Judge:
a proviso would be necessary tc be
in the following inanncr :—

vant, i:cluding police officers, can be prosecuted
of the State under Section 197 Cr. P.C. No
ms of the court that toriure, injury or causing
chetge of official duties of a police officer and
5 out invariably a technical plea of absence
ised by the members of the police force
in regard to necessity of sanction causes
therefore, be necessary to amend Sec-
2 necessity of sanction of Government for
19:1 a prime facie case is made out on enquiry
Magistrate. In order to achieve this object,
crted under Sub-section (1) of Section 197

“Nothing contained in this Section shall apply in case of custodial offence
where a court on an eng is prima facie of the opinion that the accused pub-
lic servant committed an olfence of penal nature within his custody,

Compensation

With the advance of civili
sation against the abuse of p
throughout the civilised natic
Government for the tortuo

ion, individual’s right to restitution and compen-
+ by public servants has been well recognised
rior to independence the liability of the
Servants was limited and the person
affected could enforce his 1: : vy filing a civil suit. But no restitution or
compensation was available to 8 person if the damage or injury was caused in exer-
cise of sovereign function. Even ७ ‘ter independence the distinction between sovereign
and non-sovereign functions of ii Siace was -naintained and the State’s claim for
immunity was upheld by | prem.e Court] But without abandoning the
distinction formaily, the Supic: ct has recenthy taken a more realistic and en-
larged view of the functions teri n-sovereign”. Further, the Supreme Court
of India 8 number of path b: pronouncements has extended the fundamental
right of life and personal libert ss.iioned compensatory and rehabilitative reliefs
to the victims of crines. Despite the distinction between
exercise of sovercignand ncn-suvergeia functions, the Supreme Court has awarded.
compensation to the victir cir kitvand kinfor the injury caused to the victim
by the police and other detair yrities of the State. Such damages have
been awarded even for the 2 Out of police firing killing innocent citi-
zens in crowd or riot. Th ¢ Court has awarded compensation to
the affected persons bui n piinciples have been laid down. In the ab-
sence of specific legisiati iceriainty and the courts have adopted their
own standards in aw compensation or in determining its quantum. The
question that arises for c ation is whether legislative provision should be
made for the award of conpensation aad, if so, what should be the principles for
determining the amount of compensatioa, A further question that arises for consi-
deration is whether in case of death of a person in custody of a public servant com-
pensation upto a specified limit irre: peetive of the proof cf fault skculd te provided
for. It is felt that such ovisicn would be justifiable in the interest of social jus-
tice and the rule of law. Ancti.er interesting question that arises for consideration
is whether the victim of torture and injury and his kith and kin inthe case of his
death should be awarded onc tine compensation or itshould te continuous to provide
means of sustenance cnd iivelii:ocd to the relatives of the victims. Under the gene-
tal law prevailing in our country. any award of compensation or ex-gratia pay-
ment by the criminal court o: tc Supreme Court and the High Court under the writ
jurisdiction or the ex-gratia payinent by the executive is subject to the right of the

AIR 1965 SC 1039.

i, AIR 1962 SC 933 ; Sir Basava Patil v. State of Mysore ,

ay. State up Orissa, (1993) 2 SCC 746: State of Gujarat v.

» ATE. 1967 SC 1855; Rudol Shah v. State of Bihar, AIR

vv. Union of India (1984) 1 SCC 339; Bhim
64; Bhim Sinzh v. State of J & K, (1985) 4SCC

677 Saheli v. Commissioner uf Police (1990) 1 SCC 422,

मे, Kasturi Lal v. State of U. P

ua, State of Raiasthai v. Vidv
AIR 1977 SC 1749 i



63

victim and his kith and kin to obtain decree for damages in tort before the civil
court. If the criminal court is vested with power to award compensation to the
victim of custodioal offences or his kith and kin why should they have another innings
of litigation before civil court in tort. According to one view the amount awarded
by the criminal court and the Civil Court and High Court under writ jurisdiction
is tentative and the final amount of compensation is determined on consideration
of the basis of the scrutiny of evidence and circumstances of the casein detail by
the civil court. This question requires further consideration.

The Supreme Court!® has granted compensation to provide support to the
dependants of the deceased. An analysis of the decisions of the Supreme Court
shows that the Court has awarded Rs. 75,000,4 Rs. 1,50,00035 and Rs.
2,00,000/-1° as interim measure’? to the legal heirs of the victims who died in police
custody. This indicates that the amount of compensation has not been uniform and
no principles have been laid down or followed. The award of compensation has
varied from case to case probably on the facts of each.!®

If the law is required to lay down principles, the question arises what formula
or principles should be prescribed for determining the quantum of compensation.
The Indian courts have followed two kinds of formula to determine the amount of
compensation payable to the dependants of the deceased in case of wrongful death
ie., the interest theory and multiplier theory. In the case of former the proposition
contemplates that only such amount should be payable to the claimants which
would ensure the accrual of interest equal to the annual dependancy if the same were
invested on a long term basis in the bank. Under the multiplier theory damages
are computed on the basic annual figure of dependancy, by applying a multiplier
which seeks to take care of uncertainity of vicissitudes of life. While determining
the amount the damages must represent solatium for the mental pain, distress,
indignity, loss of liberty and death.-® The principles laid down by the English
court? for determining the compensation in the case of worngful death have been
followed by the Supreme Cowt of India.®? These principles are as follows :

“The deceased man’s expectation of life has to be estimated keeping in view his
age, his bodily health and the possibility of prematuie determination of his life
by subsequent accident ;

(2) The amount required for the future provision of his wife should be estima-
ted having regard to the amount the deceased used to spend on her during his
life time ;

(3) This estimated annual sum should be multiplied by the number of years
of the man’s estimated span of life;

(4) The said amount must be discounted so as to arriveat the correct equi-
valent in the form of lumpsum payable on his death, after making deductions
for the acceleration of her interest in the estates; and

(5) Deductions should also be made for the possibility of the wife dying earlier
if the husband had full span of this life and also for the possibility that in case
the widow remarriages, that may result in improvement of her financial position”

In this connection it would be worthwhile to refer to some of the proposals
made in respect of relief to be provided to the victims of custodial crimes or their
kith and kin placed before the Chief Minister’s Conference on Human Rights held
on 14th September, 1992. One of the proposals made contemplated that incase of

38. Rudal Shah v. State of Bikar (1983) 4 SCC 141; (1983) 3 SCR 508; Sebastian M. Hongroy
v. Union of India (1984) Al SCC 339 (1) ; Bhim Singh v. State of J & K, 1984 Supp. $८6
504; Bhid Singh v. State of J & K 1985) 4 SCC 677 ; Saheli : 4 Women's Resource
Centre v. Comunissioner of Police, Delhi Police Headquarters (1990) 1 SCC 422.

24, People’s Union of Democratic Rights v. Police Commissioner (1984) 4 SCC 730.

. Nilabati Bahera v. State of Orissa, (993) 2SCC746.

|. Snwaider Singh Grover v. State of West Bengal (993) 1 Criminal Law Reporter 163.
» Rudal Shah v. State of Bihar (1983)4SCC 141.

See supra notes 13 to 16,

Saheli v. Commissioner of Police 1961 SC 442.

. (1951) AC 601.

, AIR 1962 SC 1,

es

Rees


64

death the amount of compensation should be determined by the criminal court
taking into account all relevant considerations and the court may further allow pay-
ment of interim relief. The extent of suc’ sim relief may not be iess than Rs. 10,000
and may extend upto Rs. 25,000 in case of death and in the case of other injury it may
not exceed Rs. 10,090. As regards the final relief payable in the case of death, the
proposal contemplated maximum amount of Rs. 5,00,000 and Rs. 50,000 in the
case of injury.

Section 357 of Cr. P.C. confers power on court to direct for payment of compen-
sation out of the fine awarded against ike accused at the time of passing judgment
The amount of compensation is contemplated to meet the expenses incurred in prose-
cution and compensation for loss of injury casued by the offence, .if the compensa-

_ tion is recoverable in a civil court. Under this provision, com pensation can be ordered
to be paid only if the accused is convicted and sentenced and fine is imposed, but the
payment of compensation is subject to appeal. The Supreme Court has interpreted
this Section narrowly. The court held that the court has to consider in the first instance
whether the sentence or fine is at all called for particularly when the offender is sen-
tenced to death or life imprisonment. Even if the fine is to be awarded it should
not be excessive.22 The provisions of Section 357 are not adequate to provide for
restitution or compensation to the persons entitled to compensation.

Apart from the police there are several other governmental auinorities like
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, Directorate of Enforcemzat, Coastal Guard
Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF), Border Security Forc2 (355), the Central
Industrial Security Force (CIS#), the State Armed Police, Tavelligence Agencies like
the Intelligence Bureau, R. A. W., Coniral Bureau of Investigation (CBI), cID
Traffic Police, Mounted Police and ITBP, which have power to detain a person and
to interrogate him in connection with the investigation of economic offences under
Essential Commodities Act, Excise and Customs Act, Foreign Exchange Regulations

ct etc.

There are instances of torture and death in custody of authorities other than
the police authorities.2? it would be necessary to amend the law to protect the interest
of arrested persons in such cases also. Tis may require amendment of the relevant
provisions of law.

There is yet another view point which needs consideration. The police in India
have to perform a difficult and delicate task, particularly in view of the deteriorating
law and order situation, communal riots, politcal turmoil, students unrest, terrorist
activities, radical politicism like extremists and among others the increasing number of
armed gangs and criminals. Many hard core criminals like extremists, the terrorists,
drug peddlers, smuggles who have organised gangs, have taken strong roots in the
society. One can visualise that with the more and more liberalisaion and enforcement
of fundamental rights, it may lead to more difficulties in detection of crimes by such
categories of hardened criminals. It is felt in certain quarters that if we provide them
with more measure of safety and interests pertainig to their fundamental rights and
human rights vis-a-vis torture of their person, such criminals will go scot-free without
exposing any element or iota of criminality. To deal with such a situation a balance
approach is needed to meet the ends of justice. This is all the more so, in view of the
expe tation of the society that police must deal with the criminals in an efficient and

fective manner.

Issues for Consideration

In view of the above discussion the following issues would arise for consideration:
1. Should the police continue to have unrestricted power to arrest any person at
any time and at any place without any order or permission from the Magistrate or
apy other court ?
2. Should the law be amended to confer right on the suspect who is detained for
interrogation to insist for the presence of his counsel at the time of interrogation ?
If the amendment is made, will it not delay and interfere with the investigation of
crimes ?

21, 1972 SCC 634 para 12.
2, Sapvinder Singh Grover v. State of West Bengal (993) 1 Criminal Law Reporter 163


65

3. Should the law provide that on the arrest of a person it should be mandatory
for the police officer or any public servant holding the custody of a person to get
him medically examined before commencing the interrogation ?

4. Whether Section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act should be amended to provide
for raising of a presumption against the police officer or the public servant in case of
any injury caused to a person in custody or resulting into death? Should the pre-
sumption be rebuttable?

5. — Should the law provide for an indepedent ageacy for hoding enquiry into the
complaint of torture of a person in police custody or death, if so, what should be
the agency? Will it not 5९७०१ ९ the purpose if the enquiry is he!d by the Chief Judicial
Magistrate or Metropolite> Magistrete in case of tcrture and injury and by the
Sessions Judge of the District in case of death? Should they have the liberty to obtain
the assistance of the Criminal Investigation Department or any police officer of
their choice?

6. Should 2 Criminal casc be registered against the delinquent police officer or
the public servant, if a prima facie case 0% torture, injury, or death is found without
any further investigaticn and without obtaining sanction of the Government for
the prosecution of such delinquent public servants u/s 197 Cr. P.C.?

7. Should there be provision for the award of compensation by the Government on
no fault basis in the case of death or injury caused to a person ? If so, what would be
the appropriate amount to be fixed. Should the Court trying the aforesaid delinquent
officer have the power to award final comnensation to the victim or the dependants of
the victim, notwithstanding their right to obtain damages in tort before Civil Court ?

8. Whether the law should provide for interim compensation in a case where as a
result of the enquiry, prima facie case of torture, injury or death on account of injury
caused in custody is made out ?

9. Should the law confer power on the Government to recover the amount of
compensation from the delinquent officer?

10. Will the aforesaid steps not affect the functioning and morale of the police
adversely in investigating cases and further whether it-will result into non-investiga-
tion of crimes which will affect public order? What measures shouldbe taken to
avoid these situations ?

The aforesaid issues arise out of our concern for the protection of the poor
people who are generally subjected to torture in custody. The Law Commission has
prepared this working paper indicating the various aspects of the problem which is
neigther exhaustive nor final; instead it is tentative. The Commission will be obliged
if the considered opinion of the Jurists, Judges, Lawyers, Law-teachers and non-
Governmental organisations, Human Rights Activities are available to it as the same
will be helpful in formulating the Commissions recommendations to the Government
for amending the laws. Any suggestion for amendment of law or enactment of a
new law or formulating of any scheme in this respct which would advance public
interest would be welcome.


APPENDIX-II
COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE WORKING PAPER

Introductory

As already stated, the Law Commission circulated a Working Paper on ‘Custodial
Crimes’ for eliciting opinion from various quarters. In the working paper, the Law
Commission formulated ten issues on various aspects of the problems relating to
custodial crimes.

The Commission also invited further suggestions for amendment of the law or
enactment of a new law or formulating a new scheme.

The Working Paper was sent to nine Academacians, fifty two Judges, fifty six
Advocates, seventy four Police Officers of the rank of Director General of Police/
Commissioner of Police of all States; Commandant General of Home Guards of all
States; Director General Industrial Security Force; Director, Central Bureau of
Investigation; Director, Intelligence Bureau; Director, Enforcement; Director Gen-
eral, Indo-Tibetan Border Police; and Director General, Bureau of Police Research
& Development, and 32 Home Secretaries of all States & Union Territories. Out of
these, responses were received from two academicians, five judges, seven advocates,
twelve police officers and nine State Governments (including UnionTerritories).

The working paper was also sent to the human rights activities and voluntary
agencies like People’s Union for Democratic Rights, People’s Union for Civil
Liberties; but it is regretted that the Commission received no response from these
agencies on the important subject of ‘custodial crimes’, which is vitally connected
with the protection of human rights.

1. Power of Police to Arrest.

ISSUE NO. 1

Should the police continue to have unrestricted power to arrest‘ any person at
any time and at any place without any order or permission from the Magistrate or
any other court.

Views of Academici:

Both of academicians are of the view that police should not continue to have
unrestricted power to arrest. In their view proper accountability has to be built
up against power of arrest exercised by the police.

Views of Hon’ble Judges

The Hon’ble Ex-Chief Justice of India answered Issue No. 1 in affirmative.
So do all the four of the High Courts. They regard the existing provisions to be
satisfactory. According to the Ex-Chief Justice of India, the Constitution has im-
posed an obligation to convert the detention into judicial custody within 24 hours
which is more than sufficient.

Views of Advocates

Out of seven, five have supported the power of police to arrest and one has
deviated from the question and not replied the issue directly. The Calcutta Bar
Association has responded in negative and has suggested to restrict the power of
police regarding arrest. They feel that the term ‘“‘cognizable” should be redefined so
that the police may arrest without warrant only in appropriate cases. The law should
also enjoin the police officer to record reason for arrest and as such he suggested
that Section 41 of Cr. P. C. be deleted.

66


67

Views of Police Officers

Out of twieve, eleven officers have suggested that there is no need for any amend-
ment in existing laws regarding arrest and one officer from Manipur (Imphal) has
agreed and wanted the law be amended. They feel that the powers of arrest are not un-
restricted. One officer says that the power of arrest should be restricted except in the
case of hard core extremists, ‘errorists, drug paddlers and smugglers. Others say
that any condition should not be placed in regard to their power of arrest. On the
other hand, A.I.G. of Arunachal Pradesh, Itanagar, agrees with the proposal of Law
Commission.

Views of State Governments

Six State Governmenis, namely. Government of Goa, West Bengal, Karnataka,
Rajasthan and Bihar supported the powers of police to arrest as necessary to maintain
law and order. They are of the view that if the police officer is required to take the
permission for arrest from the Court the suspect may flee away. The Government
of Goa feels that in case police have to obtain persmission from the Magistrate or any
other Court it will go against Section 41 of Cr. P.C, and even a murderer will escape
from the scene of offence. It wiit amount to permi: members of unlawful assembly to
escape after indulging into violence. If this power 15 taken away there will be serious
adverse effect on law and order position. The Government of Andhra Pradesh
is of the view that as the punitive provision contained in the Indian Penal Code under
Sections 220, 330, 331 are inadequate and almost ineffective, there is every possibility
of misusing such powers, They suggested that power of arrest under Section 41
Cr. P. C. may be curtailed and it should be limited to Terrorists, hard-core criminals
but not to others. There should be no routine arrests. The State Governments/
Union Territories of Pondicherry, Mizoram, also support this view.

2. Presence of Counsel at the time of interrogation.
ISSUE NO. 2

Whether law shouid be amended to confer right on the suspect who is detained
for interrogation to insist for the presence of his counsel at the time of interroga-
tion. If the amendment is made, will it not delay and interfere with the investiga-
tion of crime ?

Views of Academicians

Both the academicians have supported the issue raised by Law Commission
and suggested amendment in the present laws. One of them has apprehension
about its success, as he feels it is not feasible. He questions who is poor man’s cou-
nsel ? The other has suggested the presence of third party like family friends or
legal consel will contribute 10 accountability of police powers. He has further
suggested that senior police olicers should be selected to make surprise visit of
police station, to ensure that i:legal arrests are not made and third degree method
is not used. Both of them agreed that if a person is arrested in a village then ‘Gram
Pradhan’ or ‘Sarpanch* of the village should also be informed and the whereab-
outs of the arrested person should also be given to the family and friends of the
arrested person, They have also suggested that there should be prescribed a “Cust-
ody-Memo” wherein complete information regarding arrested person and prop-
erty taken by the police should be entered and details of the police officers making
arrest should also be filled. This view is now supported by the recent judgenient
of the Supreme Court in the case of Juginder Singh V. State of Uttar Pradesh,
(1994) 3 JT (SC) 423.

Views of Hon, Judges

Two of the High Courts, namely, Jammu & Kashmir and Gangtok have
responded in negative. According to them the proposed amendment will serve
no purpose and would delay investigation. They suggested that interrogation should
be made on scientific lines by using an electronics and psychologistic pattern.
According to them the presence of friend and relative will be sufficient and there
is no need of presence of counsel. The Andhra Pradesh High Court has also re-
sponded to the issue in negative. It is of the view that there is no need to change
the existing procedure. Accorcing to it, the presence of counsel will delay inves-
tigation. On the other hind, the ex-chief Justice of India has said that the p-es-
ence of an advocate would be appropriate; only in exceptional cases the perm:.ss-
ion shou'd be taken from the Court for investigation in privacy. Thus out of four
95-M/J128MofLJ&CA-—10


68

judicial opinions three are against the proposal to amend the existing law to allow
the presence of a sel during interrogation of the arrested person and Justice
R.N. Mishra is in favour of amendment to provide the assistance of advocate
during the investigation in exceptional cases.

Views of Advocates

Out of seven, four have categorically supported the proposal of Law Comm-
ission to provide the legal assistance during investigation by presence of the coun-
sel. They feel that the presence of a counsel is desirable and would not delay or
in any manner interfere with the investigation of crime. Accroding to them it is
also in the tune of Article 22(1) and 15 supported by the ruling of the apex court
in the Nandini Satpati v. P.L. Dani, (1978 Cr. 13 968). They plead that appropri-
ate amendment be made in Sections 41, 50 and 56 of Cr. P.C.

Views of Police Officers

Out of twelve, only one oilicer from Manipur. Imphal has supported the
proposal by suggesting amendment to provide a Counsel during investigation.
‘The other from Itanagar has suggested that help of a lawyer can be provided at
a later stage of investigation, The rest of the senoir police officers fromDelhi, Bombay
and U.P. do not consider it necessary to amend law for the presence of counsel
at the time of interrogation because presence of counsel at the time of interrogat-
ion would adversely affect the proceeding and will cause delay and will also be
an interference with the investigation of crime. A scnior IPS officer from Sikkim
feels that if this proposal is accepted investigation will be rendered impossible.
It would interfere in investigation of cases and put terrible financial pressure up
on the detenu. Another senior officer (former Commissioner of Delhi Police) is
of the view that counsel should not be allowed except in the cases of murder, rape,
dacoity, robbery, etc.

Views of State Governments

Out of nine responses of different State Governments, the Governments of
Goa, Andhra Pradesh, Mizoram and Pondicherry have supported the proposal
for view of amending Section 41, 50 and 56 of Cr. P.C. to entitle the accused to
have his conusel present at the time of interrogation. The Government of Goa
has also quoted the judgement of Nandini Satputhi v. P.N. Dani, 1978 Cr. L.J.
968. The Government of Andhra Pradesh states that in most of the countries, a
person arrested by the police is allowed immediate access to his attorney. Even
Article 22 of our Constitution lays down specifically that the arrested person should
not be denied the right to consult and defend himself by a legal counsel of his cho-
ice. The Government of Andhra Pradesh is of the view that law on. this point
should be elaborated by specifically providing that before interrogation starts
by the police, the arrested person should be allowed to consult his legal counsel.
1६ also advocates that where arrested person cannot afford a legal counsel, the
State should itself provide him the assistance of a legal counsel of his choice out
of a panel of advocates appointed by the Human Rights Commission or the Dist-
riet Legal Aid Committee

The remaining State Governments have disagreed with such proposal and
they have suggested not to confer any such right, as it will delay in investigation of
crime.

3. Medical Examinatian of Victims/Suspects
ISSUE NO. 3

Should the taw provide that on arrest of a person it should be mandatory for
4 police officer or a public servant holding the eustody of the person to get
im medically examined, before commencing the interrogation ?

Views of Academicians

The academicians have supported the proposal of the Law Commission and
responded in affirmative but they have raised the doubt whether such medical
officer should be available to persons arrested in remote vi lage areas or tri-
bal areas. Despite this fact they have urged to amend the provisions in Cr. P.C.
and make it mandatory on police to get the person medically examined before he
is taken iato custody.



oy

Views of the Judges

Out of the five, three have supported the proposal of the Law Commission,
‘one has disagreed and one bas not given the reply directly. Those who are in fav-
our of providing the provision for compulosry medical examination of person
being arrested have felt that the amendment will be useful and serve as a safeguard
against public atrocities.

Viwes of Advocates

Out os six advocates two have supported the proposal and recommended
for amendment to provide medical examination of arrested person; one of them
has deviated from direct reply and three have opposed the proposal as they do
not feel it necessary. One advocate has advised that in addition to medical exami-
nation which is necessary as and when the arrested person is produced before a
Magistrate, the Magistrate should satisfy himself that the arrest took place on
the date and time as recorded by the pclice and not earlier and that arrested per-
son has not been subjected to any torture before his production in the Court. A-
Senior Advocate of the Supreme Court has stated that_the person in custody has
got the right of medical examination under Section 54 Cr. P.C. but the police offi-
cer while arresting such person should also inform him that he has got the right
to be examined by a medical officer.

Views of Police Officers

Out of three, one of them feels that there is no need to make a provision, the
other says that law may not be amended but administrative instructions may be
issued, that if at the time of arrest a person is found infirm, injured, etc., he should
be mediaclly examined. The third is in favour of the proposal of the Law Comm-
ission provided that the medical officer is available near the police station.

Views of State Governments

All the responses received from nine State Governments/Union Territories
do not favour the proposal. The Government of Andhra Pradesh states that it
may not be practicable to follow this in all cases. This may be followed in cases
where the arrested person or his counsel or relatives request for a medical examina-
tion, the police should be duty bound to allow the same.

4. Presumption against Police Officer or public servant
ISSUE NO.

Whether Section 114 of Indian Evidence Act should be amened provide
for raising presumption against the police officer or publice servant in case of any
injury caused to a person in custody or resulting into death. Should the presump-
tion be rebuttable ?

Views of Academicians

Out of two academicians, one has responded in affirmation. The other has
not touched the issue.

Views of Judges

Out of five Judges, almost all of them are in favour of the presumption in case of
custodial death and have answered it in a‘firmative. One of them Mr. Justice Rizvi
from J &K High court says the presumption must be rebuttable. One of the judges
bas suggested to amend Section 114 of Evidence Act and the presumption should
be rebuttable under Section 4 of the Evidence Act. Mr. Justice Ranganath Mishra
is of the view that public sentiment seems to be in favour of raising presumption.
However, an exception may be made in the cases of grievous injury and death

and the rebuttable presumption could be proved in such cases.

‘Views of Advocates

Out of seven responses, five are in favour of rebuttable presumption. They
feel that once the presumption under section 114 of Evidence Act is introduced,
it would definitely go a long way in restricting and controlling the prosperity of
public servant or police officer in existing custodial cruelty or torture on arrest-
ed person,


70

Views of Police Officers

» the Law Commission, three senior pol-
of presumpiion and rest have opposed
1 that there is no need of amending Section
2 Police officers of higher ranks have no ob-

Out of the twelve view:
ice officers have supported
the same. Those who are agi
114 of the Indian Evidence Act. T
jection to third-degree method.

Views of States Goveraments

Out of nine State Governments/UnionTerritories, four are against the idea
of presumption and five seem to heve to chjection to amending Section 114 of the
Evidence Act to draw presuniption that injury caused during custody was caused
by the officer under whose custody the person was given at that time. The Govern-
ment of Andhra Pradesh feels that the provisicns contained in Section 114(A
and 114(B) of the Indian Evidence Act. if extended to custodial crimes the pol-
ice officer concerned will be made xccountable and the custodial crimes can_be
checked. The Governments cf Pordicherry and Mizoram follow this view. The
Governments of Goa and Meghalaya also favour the proposal. The Government
of Goa also states that it should be specified whether the benefit of presumption
applies to cases of gricvous hurt or to cases of simple injury as well.

5, Independent Agency for holding Enquiry
ISSUE NO. 5

The fifth issue raised by the Law Commission was whether the law should
provide for independent agency for holding inquiry into the complaint of tor-
ture or death of a person in police custody. What should be that agency ? The Law
Commission also raised further question whether the purpose will serve if the inquiry
is held by the Chief Judicial Magistrate or Metropolitan Magistrate in case of torture
and injury and by Sessions Judge of the District in case of death ? Should they
get the assistance of C.I.D. ०४ any polic: o fcer of their choice.

Views of academicians

The academicians favoured an independent agency for holding the enquiry
into custodial crimes. One of them adds that Women’s Commission Act provides
for an independent agency.

Views of Judges

All the five judges are in favour of a law providing for an independent agency
for investigation of cases. One Hon’ble Chief Justice of a High court has suggested
that it will be really worthwhile to empower the Chief Judicial Magistrate and
Sessions Judges to take cognizance of the reports to custodial violence and custo-
odial death respectively. By doing so police agencies will be supervised by judicial

cers. The other Judge has indicated that newly constituted Human Rights
mmission will be proper agency.

Views of Advocates

Except one advocate who has not replied to the question, rest of them are in
agreement with Law Commission’s suggestion that an independent agency is
pecessary for investigation of custodial death or torture during custody. They
feel that if the inquiry is held by Chief Judical Magistrate or Metropolitan Magi-
fstrate or Senior judge as the case may be the Code of Criminal Procedure will
have to be changed quite substantially for the purpose of holding the trial of
offence. They have said that police administration should not be allowed to par-
ticipate in such inquiry. They feel that C.B.I. being a part of police administration
does not hold better position in public trust.

Views of Police Officers

Out of twelve only three arc in favour in independent agency. One Ex-Co-
mmissioner of Police, Delhi, prefers setting up of a separate organisation under
fhe Government headed by serving or retired judge in every State to look into
the torture or custodial death. A majority of police officers are not in favour of


TL

any such agency. They said that in Maharashtra there is an order of state Govern-
ment for investigation of the cases of custodial deaths or custodial violence or
rape by the State C.I.D. and similar practice is followed in other States also. In
Tamil Nadu P.S.O. 445 Vol. I placed on the procedure in cases of police tor-
ture, death in custody, rape cic. for tier public servants investigation is carried
out by police and action taken according to law. Investigation by the Executive
Magistrate is adequate in actual eaperience. According to them, the suggestion
made by the Law Commission wiil not serve the purpose because C.J. Ms and Sessions
Judges are already over-burdened and it will take along time in enquiry and then
case will be registered. The purpose would be served by making investigation of
such cases by State C.L.D. or a central independent police agency mandatory and
providing for investigation by Human Rights Commission in any case where the
Investigation by such an agency is not found to be satisfactory.

Views of State Governments/Union Territories

Most of the State Governments/UnionTerritories are against the suggess-
tion of an independent agency. One of these has suggesied that an inquiry by a
Magistrate under Section 176 Cr. P.C. will serve the purpose. The Government
of Andbra Pradesh feels that the Human Rights Commission both at Central and
State level created by an crdinance will have an investigating machinery of its
own to investigate complaints of torture or death of a person in police custody.
Ho other agency is required. The Governments of Mizoram and Pondicherry follow

is View.

The Government of Karnataka is of the view that there are no two opinions
as regards entrusting cases of torture or death in police custody to an indepen-
dent agency for a thorough investigation. 11 adds that entrusting enquiry of all
such case to the judicial authorities would not be advisable. In Karnataka cases
of custodial death are referred to the COD. Cases of torture in custody are also
dealt with departmentally.

The Government of Meghalaya holds that such mandatory inquiry may be
conducted by an Executive magistrate. Section 176 Cr. P.C., may need amend-
ment. The Magistrate may have the assistance of the CID or any police officer
of his choice.

The Government of West Bengal is of the view that in case of torture or death
in custody, it will be suiicient if a Jadicial Magistrate having jurisdiction holds
inquiry. He should have the literty to ob the assistance of the Criminal Investi-
gation Department of any police officer witha the jurisdiction.

The Government of Bihar and Goa are against the proposal.

Sanction for prosecution

ISSUE NO. 6

Should a criminal case be registered against the delinquent police officer or
the public servant, if a prima facie case of torture, injury or death is found without
any further investigation and without obtaining sanction of the Government for
the prosecution of such delinquent public servants puunder Section 197 Cr. P.C

Views of Academicians

Both the academicans are of the view that Section 197 Cr. P.C. should be
amended.

Views of Judges

All the five Judges who have forwarded their views, answered the issue in
affirmative. According to the ex-Chief Justice of India, the judicial opinion is
clear and there is no need for sanction for prosecution.


72

Views of Advocates

Out of six Advocates, five Advocates have agreed with the proposal of Law
Commission for ameading Section 197 of Cr. P. C. one has suggested that delin-
quent officer should be kept under suszension immediately. One senior Advocate
of the Supreme Court is against regisiration of a criminal case. He feels that the
Court should take the cognizance of the case on the basis of report of the magis-
istrate.

Views of Police Officers

Out of twelve, ten senior police ofticers are of the view that a criminal cases
should be registered against the delinquent officer and no sanction of the Govern-
ment is necessary uader S2ction 197 Cr. P.C. But in circumstances like escaping
from police custody and jumping from train at the time of transfer from one place
to another, prosecution without sanction will be unfair and unjust.

Views of State Governments; Union Territories

Out of nine responses received from various State Governiments/Union Terri-
tories, three are in favour of not amending Section 197 of Cr. P.C. One State
Government is of the view that a criminal case be registered against the delinqu-
ent police officer or public servant after a thorough investigation is made and with
the sanction of the government under Section 197 of Cr. P.C. The Governments
of Rajasthan, Bihar and Meghalaya favoured the ‘proposal. The Government of
Andhra Pradesh states that the prcvisicn under sub-section (1) of Section 176
of Cr. P.C. suggested by the Law Commission will be more appropriate for deal-
ing with the delinquent public servant. The Government of Mizoram endorses
this view. The Government of Pondiciierry is of the view that for registering a
criminal case no sanction under Section 197 Cr. P.C, is necessary.

Compensation on no fault basis
ISSUE NO. 7

Should there be provision for the award of compensation by the Government
on no fault basis in the case of death or injury caused to a person ? If so, what
would be the appropriate amount to be fixed? Should the Court trying the
aforesaid delinquent officer have the power to award final compensation to the
victim or the dependents of the victim, notwithstanding their right to obtain dama-
ages in tort before Civil Court ?

Views of Academicians

Both the academicians agree with the poposal of compensation. They have
suggested payment of compensation. One of them suggested that the compensa-
tion should not be on the basis of earning and status as in matters of accident cases.
He has suggested compensation of Rs. 5,00,060 in case of death, Rs. 3,00,000 in
case of crippling and Rs. 1,00,000 for minor injury.

Views of Judges

All the Judges except a one have supported the proposal of compensation,
Two of them are of the view that compensation should be on no fault basis. One
of the Judges has suggested the amount of Rs. 50,000 in case of injury, between
Rs. 2,00,000 to Rs. 5,00,000 in case of death. One judage is against any such move
and he is of the view that State should not be made liable to pay compensation
and the other has not responded to the issue.

Views of Advocates

All the six Advocates are in favour of compensation. Two of them recomm-
ended it in addition to civil remedy under torts. They want a public compensation
system. The other two Advocates are of the view that the quantum of compen-
sation should be determined judicially, while the fifth one has mentioned that
the compensation should be fixed one. Sixth opinion is that quantum must de-
pend on the nature of injury and liability of victim. One of the senior Advocates,
Shri Anand Prakash is of the view that there should also be a scheme for rewards

and compensation for exemplary work and for injuries received to a Police officer
on duty.


73

Views of Police Officers

All the twelve police officers have supported the cause of compensation but
on no fault basis. One officer has suggested Rs. 25,000 and Rs. 1,00,000 respecti-
vely in the case of injury and death. The other has reduced this figure to Rs. 25,000
and Rs. 50,000 respectively.

Views of State Governments/Union Territories

All the nine States Governments/Union Territories are in favour of paying
compensation when a prima facie case is made out. One of these is not in Favour
of recovery of the money from the delinquent police officer. The other one says
that Government should not pay the compensation and the individual police offi-
cer should pay the amount as per his financial condition and capability. The Gov-
ernment of Andhra Pradesh is of the view that the provision for payment of comp-
ensation to the custodial victims is necessary. It accepts the proposal of the Law
Commission. Further, it highlights that in cases where a commission appointed
by the Government finds the police officer in a particular custodial crime to be
guilty, the departmental enquiries are resulting in these officers, in exoneration.
According to the Government, it will be a travesty of justice. It suggests that where
a departmental officer imposes a minor penalty like stopping of increments, cen-
sure etc., the head of the department should report the matter to the Govern-
ment so that where the Government is satisfied that the punishment is not in
proportion to the gravity, should review the punishment. The Government of
Mizoram endorses this view.

The Government of Karnataka is of the view that there is no need for asepa-
rate provision under the statute for awarding compensation. There should not
be a parallel proceedings in the civil courts for claiming damages.

The Government of Pandicherry is of the opinion that the court trying the
delinquent officer should have the power to award final compensation and not the
civil court. If the victim is not satisfied with final award, he may seek redress in
appellate court and not in a civil court ?

Interim Compensation

ISSUE NO. 8

Whether the law should provide for interim compensation ina case where as
a result of the enquiry Prima facie case of torture, injury or death on account of
injury caused in custody is made out ?

Response of the Academicians

Both the academicians supported the proposal ofj:the Law Commission for
interim compensation if the prima facie case is made out.

Response of the Judges

Out of the fifteen Judges, four agreed with the proposal of interim compensation.
One has suggested the amount of Rs. 1,00,000 in case of death and Rs. 50,000 in
disablement, 20,000 for any other injury. Another gives Rs. 50,000 in death and
Rs. 10,000 for injury. The other says reasonable compensation be given. One
judge who disagreed feels that such a measure will create unnecessary complication.
‘One judge has not responded to the issue directly.

Response of the Advocates}
All the six Advocates are in favour of interim compensation. Out of them three

Advocates are of the view that the interim compensation should be given by the Trial
Court as soon as the charges are framed.

Response of the Police Officers

Out of these twelve Officers, ten have clearly recommended interim compensa-
tion and two have not tauched the issue.


74

Response of State Governments/Union Territories

Out of nine, the views of five are in favour of. interim compensation and four
are opposed to such proposal. The Government of Andhra Pradesh is of the view
that a provision for payment of interim compensation when a prima facie case is
made out, is essential. The Governments of Pondicherry and Mizoram also endorse
this view. The Governments of Bihar and Goa also favoured the proposal.

Recovery from Officers

ISSUE NO. 9

Should the law confer power on the Government to recover the amount of
compensation from the delinquent officer ?

Views of the Academicians

Both are of the view that compensation amount should be recovered from the
delinquent officer in full or in part but one has raised doubt as to how the money will
be collected from individual police man.

Views of the Judges

Out of five judges, four are in favour of recovering the amount from individual
and not from the Government. One has not responded to the issue directly. All of
them have supported the proposal that recovery should be made from delinquent
officer. One has suggested that the recovery should be to the extent it is feasible.
The other Advocate is of the view that the recovery should be imposed only in the
cases of gross neglect of law causing hurt, torture or injury or death.

Views of the Police Officers

Out of twelve Police Officers, only three are in favour while rest of eight
disagreed with the recovery of compensation from iindividual and one is of the view
that it should be left to the discretion of the Government.

Views of State Governments/Union Territories

Out of nine, three of these are in favour of recovering the amount from the delin-
quent officer and two State Governments are in fayour of the recovery from delinquent
officer to the extent of 50 per cent of the amount, The Government of Pondicherry
views that at least a small percentage of the compensation should be made recover-
able from the delinquent officer. The Government of Goa disagrees with the pro-
posal. Government of Andhra Pradesh suggests for considering the issue carefully
because it is a critical issue. The Government of Mizoram also endorses this view.
The Government of Karnataka is of the view that since the trial court will have to
determine the quantum of compensation, there need not be any other provision

Effect of the proposed amendments on police functioning

ISSUE NO. 10

Will the aforesaid steps not affect the functioning and morale of the police
adversely in investigating cases and further whether it will result into non-investiga-
tion of crimes which will affect public order 7? What measures should be taken to
avoid these situations ?

Views of Academicians

None of the academicians have responded to the issue directly.

Views of the Judges

Out of the five judges two are of the view that it will adversely affect and two
are of the view that there will be no adverse effect on the morale of police. One has
not responded to the issue.


75

Views of the Advocates

All the six Advocates who have responded say that this will not affect the morale
of the police and investigation will also not be adversely affected.

Views of the Police Officers

Out of the twelve police officers, six say that it will not affect the morale. 5 sav
that there will be no effect.

Views of State Governments/Union Territories

Out of nine responses reccived, five State Governments/Union Territories do not
agree with the view. Government of West Bengal suggested that a balanced ap-
proach should be taken. The Government of Rajasthan emphasizes that in the
short term the steps recommended will lead to some. dislocation of police function-
ing and also erosion of police morale but ultimately they will help in reducing police
excesses. Once these steps are implemented, the police will function under a lot of
constraints and the courts should take cognizance of the same. The courts would
have to take into account the near absence of recovery of incriminating material and
would have to rely on oral evidence. Thus a new interpretation of the Law of
Evidence would emerge and any failure of the courts to place faith in police investiga-
tion would adversely affect public order in the Jong run.

The Government of Andhra Pradesh is of the view that the steps contemplated
in the working paper will not affect the functioning and morale of the police. On
the other hand, the police excess can be reduced to the minimum. Therefore, there
is need and urgency for the police reforms which cannot brook any further postpone-
ment. The Governments of Mizoram and Pondicherry endorse this view. The
Government of Karnataka states that it certainly does affect the functioning and
morale of the police adversely who are investigating cases. To ensure that third
degree methods are not employed during invsetigation of crimes. t is absolutely
necessary that certain safeguards are provided to prevent such torture or custodial
death of accused persons. “Punishing guilty police officers does not, however, in any
way be construed as weakening the morales of the investigating officer. An investiga-
ting officer should know his limitations and he should not have unbridled power
which can be detrimental to the interests of the citizens,