LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED FIFTY THIRD
REPORT

ON

INTER — COUNTRY ADOPTION

1994


K..N. SINGH he CHAIRMAN

(Former Chief Justice of LAW COMMISSION
India) GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Shastri Bhawan
NEW DELHI-110 001

{Office ; 3384475
SE 4 id :
TELEPHO? 1 Residence ; 3019465

D.O. No. 6(3) (15)/92-LC (LS) August 26, 1994

Dear Prime Minister,

व्‌ am glad to forward herewith Law Commission’s 1530 Report
on “Inter-Country Adoption” (10th Report. of the 13th Law
Commission). :

This Report deals with the matters relating to adoption of
Indian children by foreigners. In our country, about 18 million
destitutes and orphan children are being looked after in various
orphanages. Each year, about fifty thousand children become
destitute as they are abandoned by the helpless parents and unwed
mothers. Hundreds of them die from malnutrition and disease
due to lack of clean water and inadequate sanitation. Since chil-
dren constitute the Human Resource of our country and they are
supremely important national asset, it is the duty of the State and
the society to take effective steps to secure and safeguard their
welfare and to provide opportunities to them to grow and develop
their personality in a healthy atmosphere. A number of Indian
children are being adopted by foreigners, sometimes, such adop-
tions have given rise to malpractices, as under the garb of adop-
tion, Indian children are taken abroad for domestic service and
unscrupulous exploitation. There is, however, no law to regulate
Inter-Country Adoption.

The Commission felt that there was need to regulate Inter-
Country Adoption of children by law; it therefore. took up the
matter suo motu for study. The Commission has, after an indepth
study and empirical research, prepared draft of a Bill on Inter-
Country Adoption which is annexed as Appendix ‘A’ to the Report.
The proposed draft Bill has been prepared keeping in view the
“guidelines laid down by the Supreme Court and the principles laid
down by the various International Conventions. Declarations and
Instruments.

2


di)
We hope, the Government will take immediate steps to imple-
ment the recommendations contained in this Report as that would

alleviate the sufferings of children and prevent the malpractices in
adoption of abandoned and orphaned children.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,

(Sd/)-
(९.1. SINGH)

HON’BLE SHRI P. V. NARASIMHA RAO,
Prime Minister &

Minister for Law. Justice & Company Affairs,
New DELHI


CONTENTS

Cuarrer

Introduction. oe eee . .

2 Present Legal Position पु पु पु पु . .
3 Legislative efforts on Adoption Law . . .
4 The International Law on Adoption. + . .
3 Judicial Guidelines on Inter-Country Adoption
6 The Role of the Child Welfare Agencies . .
7 Recommendations. . . . . . . .
APPENDIX
‘A The Inter-Country Adoption Bill 199 . . . . .
“B Adoption of Children Bill, 1980 . . .
“Cc Home Study Report पु : . .
‘D कद Documents, Certificate ya ‘Declarations 2s mentioned in te
‘EB’ Child Study Report Be
‘F Law Commission of India's Letter to the Institutions . . .
Ge List of cies. २०57३ going Toter-Country | Adoption of Chil-
प्रा List of Agere recognised for Soin intersCouniry Adoption of Children
T Practical working experience of the Child Welfare Agencies
T ote {he Pate port by Re renin 1 Tndian Social/Child Welfare
पा Placement Agency-wise Data relating to Children Adopted by Foreigners

Gi)

PAGES:

on +

24

27

35

37
38

47

50
55


CHAPTER |
INTRODUCTION

1.1. This report is undertaken suo moto to deal with the problem of
inter-country adoption of Indian children by foreigners. Since there is no law
to regulate the Inter-Country Adoption an effort has been made to prepare a
draft of the proposed legislation.

1.2, The Constitution gives paramount consideration to the welfare of
children. Clause (3) of Article 15 enables the State to make special provisions
for children. Article 23 prohibits traffic in human beings and forced labour.
Article 24 provides that no child below the age of fourteen years shall be
employed to work in any factory or mine or engaged in any Other hazardous
employment. Clauses (९) and [0 of Article 39 provide that the State shall
direct its policy towards securing, inter alia, that the tender age of children is
not abused, that children are not forced by economic necessity to enter avoca-
tions unsuited to their age and  streagth ‘and that they are given facility to
develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and
childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and against moral and
material abandonment. -

1,3. It is shocking that a staggering number of about 18 million destitute
and abandoned children in India are lying in several orphanages scattered all
over the country. It is estimated that cach year 50,000 children become desti-
tute and get abandoned by the helpless ents and unwed mothers in our
country. Hundreds of them die from mal Frutrition and disease, due to lack of
clean water and inadequate sanitation. Population explosion in our country
has immensely contributed to the children’s problems. We are the second
largest populated country in the world next to China. The 1991 Census places
the population of our country at £46.3 million out of which about one third
population is living below poverty line. India ranked 134 among 173 countries
in 1993 in terms of the Human Development Index (HDI) of the UNDP.’
Poverty and illiteracy are age-old historical problems 70000 in our social and
cultural set up. Their impact is now felt and experienced by a large number
of children, Elimination of poverty and education to all would take some years
but in the meanwhile the abandoned children cannot be allowed to live in the
lurch,

14. Moral sense of society compels us to search a solution to the problems
of the. abandoned children. In Princip le, every child has a right to love and
be loved and children are a “supremely important national asset” and the future
well being of a nation depends on how its children grow and develop. In our
country Westitete or abandoned children are the shocking reality. There is a
wide gap between the principle and the reality as far as the welfare of destitute
children are concerned. This gap is abridged 10 some extent with adoption of
such children. Adoption is of great help in alleviation of the misery of the
destitute children. For abandoned Children Adoptive parents are the next
best substitute for the biological parents.

1.5. Appalling conditions of children of the third world apply, by and
large, to children in India and therefore if it is not possible to provide to them
in India decent family life where they can grow up under the loving care and
attention of parents “and enjoy the basic necessities of lile such as nutritive
food, health care and education and lead a life of basic human dignity with
stability and security, moral as well as material, there is no reason why such
children should not be allowed to be given in adoption to foreign parents,

1.6. Where the parents want to give their child in adoption or if the
child is abandoned. it would be in the interest of the child to give in adoption.
Nowever, effort must be made first to find adoptive parents for the child within
the copntry ;because such adoption would steer clear of any problem of assiini-
latien of the child in. the family -of $16: aon: five parents. df व 15 not pombe
to Guid: suitable adoptive: parents for the j.dalld within the county, it pay


2

become necessary to give the child in adoption to non-resident Indians, failing
which to foreign parents rather than allow the child to grow up in an orphanage
where it will have no family life and no love and affection of parents and quite
often, in the socio-economic conditions prevailing in the country, it might have
to lead the life of a destitute, half-clad, half-hungry and suffering,

1.7. In India adoption is not popular and the adopter generally chooses
a healthy and fair male child. Girls are not usually taken in adoption. Foreig-
ners on the other hand. do not have any reservation about sex, colour of the
skin or state of the child’s health. There have been innumerable cases of
handicapped children who have been adopted, successfully treated and looked
after by foreign families. During the last four years, the number of children
given to foreign adoptive parents were 1272 in 1990, 1190 in 1991, 996 in 1992
and 1134 in 1993.*

1.8. However, adopticn of Indian children by foreigners has given rise
to malpractices. Under the garb of adoption, Indian children are taken abroad
for domestic services and unscrupulous persons exploit the situation by en-
couraging child trafficking to the West. Judicial cognisance of these aspects
was taken by the Gujarat High Court in 19920 The Court while dealing with
adoption of Indian children by foreigners observed that this entire movement
is not fool-proof. “It is not free from abuse and aberrations. The possible
existence of an international racket trading in such children and selling them
at profit into slavery or prosiitution cannot be altogether ruled out.” The
Supreme Court of India’ also took cognisance of the problem on the basis of a
letter addressed by an advocate, complaining of malpractices indulged in by
social organisations and voluntary agencies engaged in the work of offering
Indian children in adoption to foreign parents. The letter alleged that not
only Indian children of tender age are under the guise of adoption exposed to
Jong horrendous journey to distant foreign countries at great risk to their tives
but in cases where they survive and where these children are not placed in the
shelter or relief homes, they in course of time become beggars or prostitutes for
want ot- proper care from their alleged foster parents,

1.9. To put an end to such child exploitation, the Supreme Court’ has
laid down specific principles and norms and provided the procedure to be
followed for adoption of Indian children by foreign parents. We will discuss
the same in detail in chapter 5 of this report.

1.10. Inter-country adoption is the most sensitive, controversial and
complex aspect of adoption. It involves a variety of principles and procedures
over migration, citizenship, the socio-economic situation of adoptive parents,
matching parents with the child ard acceptance of the child in a different com-
munity and.culture. It requires the participation of the adoption agencies or
authorities in the overseas countries. Simi far views have been expressed by
the New South Wales, Law Reform Commission on Inter-Country Adoption.‘

1.11. In the interest of child, it is necessary to regulate inter-country
adoption by legislation and by strict collaboration between qualified and autho-
rized state and social authorities. It is hoped that as a result adoption will
not be merely based upon legislative arrangement but also facilitate the crea-
tion of an environment in which the child can grow in health and happiness
and be really integrated in the society of its adoption.

1.12. A considerable corpus of Jaw, on adoption and guardianship rele-
vant for the purpose of this report is available. It consists of national enact-
ments and international—privatc !aw and public law—instruments. The
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 and the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act
1956 are carefully examined and the relevant international instruments are
analysed duly. Besides the judicial pronouncements concerning the subject
have received a special consideration in this report.

4.13. In order to elicit responses on the prasent legal, procedural, ad-
ministrative, institutional, supervisory and, othet. rilevant safeguards and pro-
teétions on adoption of Indian children by: fowdlga parents, the Law Cominié-
smn Mf India had undertaken empirical ‘study: If issued @ questionnaite to


3

socia! and child welfare agencies/ organisations, and the Central Adoption Re-
source Agency established under the directives of the Supreme Court’ and
working under the control of the Ministry of Welfare, Government of India.
The replies and suggestions received by the Law Commission have been scruti-
nised and analysed. Cue weightage has been accorded to the suggestions while
formulating the recommendations.

1.14. The Report is structured not only on che guidetines laid down by
the Supreme Court but it is based on empirical investigations. Further the
report has utilised the relevant primary and: secondary source materials avail-
able and the practical work experience gained by the child welfare agencies
over the fast more than a decade or so in the field of inter-country adoption.

FOOTNOTES— CHAPTER 1

3. Economic Survey 1993-94 : Government of India: Chapter 9 : Social Sectors. pp. 146-159

2. Annual Report, 1992-93, Ministry of Weitare, Govt. of India, New Delhi (Hindi Ecn) 0.71,
Annexure 40.

3. Re : Rasiklal Chhagantal Mehta, AUR 1982 Gujarat 193.

4. L. K. Pandey v/s VOI (1984) 2 SCR 795.

5. ibid.

6. Review of the Adoption of Children Act, 1965 (NSW), Issves parce 9, P. 67, para 10.2.
7. LK. Pandey v's VOI (1984) 2 SCR 795.


CHAPTER 2
PRESENT LEGAL POSITION

2.1. There is no enactment on inter-coyntry adoption as such in India.
However, a large number of Indian children have been adopted by foreign
parents belonging to different countries as mentioned earlier.

2.2. The Law Commission of India had incidentally considered’ the
question of appointment of guardian residing ovt of India for a person living
in India. The general consensus at that time was that the matter was in the
discretion of the court and there was no rigid rule prohibiting appcintment of
foreign person as a guardian under Section 7 of the Guardians and Wards Act,
1890: No recommendation suggesting amendment to the Act was made and
the question of appointment of institution as guardians was deferred.

2.3, Presently, inter-country adoptions are regulated and supervised by
ihe principles. norms und procedure laid down by the Supreme Court? Earlier,
the Gujarat High Court grappled with the question and Jaid down guidelines
governing adoption of Indian children by foreigners.’ While doing so the Court
relied upon the Full Rench decision in Marggerare Maria v. Dr. Chacko.

2.4. In R.C, Mehta's’ case District Judge of the Rajkot granted permis-
sion under section 9(4) of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act. 1956 for
giving a minor female child for adoption to a West German couple. The order
was issued on the basis of adoption deed executed for the purpose, although it
did not mention that the child was to be taken away by the adopted parents to
West Germany. Purstrant to the District Judge’s order the adopted parents
applied for issue of passport for the child but the same was refused on the
ground that the order of the District Judge did not contain any direction for
taking the child outside the country. The adopting parents made an applica-
tion to the District Judge for issue of an order directing the Passport Authori-
ties to issue the passport. In the meantime a writ petition was filed in the
High Court for quashing the order of the District Judge. The writ petition was
referred to Division Bench but on the date of hearing of the petition, permis-
sion for. withdrawal of the petition was sovght as it was realised that proper
procedure would be to make an application to the comnetent authority under
the Guardians and Wards Act. 1860. The Court permitted withdrawal.

Another matter relating to adoption of Indian child by foreign parents
was considered by the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court in the absence of
any law regulating the inter-country adoption referred to Articles 15, 34 and
39 of the Constitution and Sections 7 to 9 of Guardians and Wards Act, 1890
in issuing directions to regulate adoption of children by foreign parents.

These cases illustrate as to how the provisions of the Guardians and
Wards Act, 1890 which was never intended to be used for adcption of children
by foreign parents was put to useful purpose in the absence of « Jaw regulating
such adoptions,

2.5. Basically the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 hereinafter referred
to as ‘the 1890 Act’. provides fnr appointment of guardian of miner children
and it does not regfate the adoption of children by foreigners or by Indians.
But its provisions have been pressed into service to facilitate adoption of chil-
dren by foreigners. Where a foreigner desires to adopt an orphan child he
makes an application before the District Court for appointing him as guardian
of that child and after such appointment the foreigner takes away the child to
his country with the permission of the Court.

2.6. As already mentioned there is no enactment having direct bearing
on regulating adoption of Indian children by the foreigners. There is also no

4


5

explicit provision in the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 providing for inter-

country adoption of Indian children. However, the courts in their discretion

have to useful purpose the Act. 1890 and regulated the inter-country
oy 0४908.

FOOTNOTES-—-CHAPTER 2

1. 8328 Report, 1980, on the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 and provisions of the Hindu
Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956

2. LK. Pandey y. UOI (1984) 2 SCR 795
3. In re : R.C, Mehta, AIR 1982 Guj 193
4. AIR 1970 Ker. 1

5. AIR 1982 Gui. 193

2-1 M of L&JIND/95


CHAPTER 3
LEGISLATIVE EFFORTS ON ADOPTION LAW

3.1. In the past, efforts have been made to formulate a comprehensive
law relating to adoption in India but on account of one or the other criticism
the efforts could not succeed.'_ The last attempt to codify the law, on the sub-
ject was made in December 1980, when Adoption of Children Bill was introduced
in Lok Sabha. This did not apply to Muslims. This Bill too was criticised
in some quarters and it also lapsed. Since then no efforts have been made to
introduce the Adoption of Children Bill in order to reform and modernised law
in our country.

3.2. At this stage, it would be appropriate to briefly refer to the salient
features of the 1980 Bill to the extent relevant for the purpose of this Report.
The 1980 Bill proposed that—

(3) Any person who is below 18 years and who is not already adopted
or married could legally be adopted by any person of sound mind
who is at least 25 years old.

{b) An adoption order of the District Court or the City Civil Court could
be necessary. Otherwise, the adoption would be illegal.

(c) A single person, or a married couple jointly, can adopt. There must
be a difference of at least 21 years in_the age of the child and the
adopting. parent or parents unless the Court otherwise permits.

(9) An illegitimate child could be adopted by its parents, either alone os
jointly with the spause.

(©) A female cannet be adopted solely by a male unless he is her father
or there are other ‘special circumstances’ which justify an adoption
order.

(f) The consent of both parents or guardian or the persons managing
the institution of the child care tc be given in adoption is necessary.
The consent of the father of an illegitimate child is not required.
The consent can also be dispensed with by the Court if the parents
or parent cannot be found or are or is guilty of neglect or ill-treatment
of the child.

(g) The Court must be fully satistied that the effect of the adoption order
is understood ty both sets of parents.

(h) The wishes of the child. if grown up enough to understand his interest,
will be an important factor.

(i) The welfare of the child will be the paramount consideration.

(j) The Court can impose suitable conditions in the adoption order in
the best interest of the child. The Court can intervene if an adopted
child is ill-treated.

(k) Any persen aggrieved by an adoption order can appeal to the High
Court.

(0) The legal effect of an adoption order is to sever all the ties of the
child in the family of its birth and give it the status of a child born
in lawful wedlock to the adoptive parents.

{m) A licensing authority for adoption institution for each state is to
be set up by Jaw. One half members of such licensing authority
will be women. - No institution will be permitted to function without
a licence from the authorities.

6


7

(n) The Bill contained two specific and material clauses 23 and 24 for
adoption of an Indian child by a foreigner. These clauses will be
discussed later.

3.3. It is significant to note that the 1980 Bill gave equal rights to @
married woman to adopt a child jointly with her husband. It also required
the corisent of both parents and it further allowed an unmarried woman 10 adopt
a child, The welfare of the child was the paramount consideration for adoption
of a child under the 1980 Bill.

3.4. Incidentally it is relevant to note that the Law Commission’ had
made recommendations, on the Removal of Discrimination against women in
matters relating to guardianship and custody of minor children and elaboration
of the Welfare Principle with a view to facilitate guardianship of an adopted
son or daughter to ‘erase the injustice to the woman’ in obeisance to the letter
and spirit of the Constitution. The report dealt with the Welfare principle and
emphasised the welfare of minor should be the paramount consideration in the
appointment of any person as guardian of a Hindu minor by a Court, be it
a male or female.

3.5. We now proceed to discuss the principles contained in clauses 23 and
24 of the 1980 Bill as they are material provisions directly relevant for the
purpose of regulating the inter-country adoption:

(a) Clause 23 makes the taking or sending of an Indian child outside
India for purposes of adoption punishable except where the child
is so sent or taken out under the authority of a provisional adoption
order passed by a District Court under Clause 24.

(०) Clause 24 empowers the District Court to make a provisional adoption
order permitting a person whe is not domiciled in India and who
wants to adopt under the law of the country of his domicile a child
residing in India, to take the child out of India for the purpose.
This introduces the element of ‘provisional adoption order’ as distin-
guished from ‘adoption order’.

(०) Adoption being a ‘legal fiction, the aforesaid clause introduced a
deeming provision.to: the effect that a child in respect of whom an
adoption order is made shall be deemed to be as the child born to that
adopter or the adopters in lawful wedlock for all pu poses and
all the ties of the child in the family of his birth shall deemed
to be severed and replaced by those created by the adoption order
in the adoptive family.

(8) In respect of a provisional adoption order, the elements present are-—
(1) an applicant, a person who is not domiciled in India, intends to
adopt a child under the law of the country in which he is domiciled;
(2) for the purpose of intended adoption the applicant desires to
remove the child from India to his country; (3) the Court in this
situation may make a provisional adoption order authorising the
applicant to remove the child for éntended adoption; (4) the Court
gives the care and custody of the child to the applicant pending
his adoption in country of his domicile.

(©) A certificate by the Central Government to the effect (i) that the
applicant is in its opinion a fit person to adopt the child; (ii) that
the welfare and interest of the child shall be safeguarded under the
Jaws of the country of the domicile of the applicant; and (iii) that
the applicant has made proper provision to enable to the child to be
Tepatriated to India, if , is to be submitted before a pro-
visional adoption order is passed. by the District Court.

() ‘The child remains in custody of the applicant until eventual adop-
tion within the foreign country of the applicant takes place.


8

3,6. In view of the above discussion, especially as there is no codified

Jaw on inter-country adoption, there is imminent necessity to have enactment
regulating inter-country adoption.

FOOTNOTES— CHAPTER 3

1. A Bill on the subject was first introduced in Parliament by an independent member,
Jayshree Raiji in 1955. It was withdrawn at that time as the then Law Minister wanted
a smooth passage for the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Bill. Later on two other
Bills were introduced in 1967 and 1970 but both these bills also lapsed. Then the
Adoption of Children Bill 1972 was introduced in the Raiya Sabha and was withdrawn
on account“of the stormy opposition by the Muslim Members of the Parliament
od the ground that it would affsct the tenets df their personal laws.

2. 133rd Report, 17290 Removal of Discrimination Against Women in matters Relating
to jouer dianshis d Custody of Minor Childrea and Elaboration of the Welfare
‘inciple.

3. Appendix 'फ-


CHAPTER 4
THE INTERNATIONAL LAW ON ADOPTION

4.1. A radical shift from the ancient laws and practices to the contem-
Porary laws and practices on adoptions in most states in the world has caused
Profound impact on the International Law on adoption. A brief statement
on suth development is therefore pertinent and necessary ai the outset of this
Part of report. It is because the International Law like state law does not
Operate in vacuum but responds to the problems which centre around the gravity
of social and cultural developments in the comity of nations,

4.2. Adoption is so widely recognised that it can be characterised as an
almost worldwide institution with historical roots traceabie into antiquity.

. Continuity of male line in a particular family, the welfare of the adopter
in this world and the next was the primary concern of ancient adoptions. ttle.
attention was paid to the welfare of the child adopted.

In contrast, contemporary laws and practices aim to provide child wel-
fare and are regarded as one facet of the state’s general programme to its
children. Although the desire to continue a family line is still the personal
Motive for adoption, society’s interest now centres more on the creation of a
parent-child relationship between a married couple and a child. This attitude
developed primarily in the period foilowing World War I, when vast numbers
of illegitimate births increased. In the latter part of the 20th century, a decline
in the number of -children available for legal adoption stimulated changes in
traditional restrictions like placements across religious and ethnic lines, Single
Parent adoptions are now accepted in many states.’

4.3. The development as discusséd above has been reflected in the inter-
national efforts in protecting the children from exploitation and advancing their
welfare as the paramount consideration and these efforts have been manifested
in the international instruments, These are as under :

(1) The Geneva Declaration of the Right of the Child of 1924.

(2) Declaration of the Right of the Child adopted by U.N. General
Assembly on November 20, 1959.

(3) Draft Guidelines of Procedure concerning Inter-Country Adoptions
formulated by Expert Group and adopted by the Economic and
Social Council of the United Nations in its 20th Session.

(4) The Hague convention of 15th November, 1956 adopted by the
Hague conference on the Private International Law.

(5) The United Nations Declaration on Social and Legal Principles relat-
ing to the Protection and Welfare of Children, with special reference
to foster placement and adoption nationally and __ internationally
adopted by UN General Assembly on 3rd December, 1986.

(6) Report of the Special Commission of the Hague Conference on the
Private International Law Resolution 14 of 1988.

(7) The UN Convention of the Rights of the Child of November 20, 1989.

(8) Preliminary Draft Convention on International Co-operation and Pro-
tection of Children in’ respect of inter-country adoption drawn up by
the Special Commission of the Hague conference on the Private
International Law, February, 1992.

(9) Private International Law Convention on Protection of Children and

Co-operation in respect of inter-country adoption, Final Act, at the
Hague Conference, 29th May, 1993.

,


10

4.4. These instruments, inter alia, regulate the inter-country adopti
therefore are directly relevant for the purpose of this report. It is शक यह
to discuss each of the aforesaid International Instruments in detail. The salient
features as deduced from the aforesaid Instruments are briefly summarised as
under :

(a) The child shall be entitled from his birth to a name and nationality.
(0) The best interest of the child shall be the paramount consideration.

(c) A child of tender years shall not, save in exceptional cit
be separated from his mother. ceptional circumstances,

(d) Society and the public authorities shall have the duty to extend parti-
cular care to children without a family. 9 10 ex

(०) The child shall be protected against all forms of neglect, cruelty and
exploitation. He shall not be the subject of traffic, in any form.

(0 The child shall be protected from practices which may foster racial,
religious and any other form of discrimination.

(g) The primary aim of adoption is to provide the child with a perma-
nent family and appropriate environment.

(h) If a child cannot be placed in an adoptive family in his own country,
inter-country adoption may be considered as an alternative means of
providing the child with a family.

(i) Persons responsible for foster adoption should have professional
training.

{j) Inter-country adoption should be made through competent authority
or agency with adequate safeguards and no improper financial gain
should be, involved and legal and social interests of the child should

secured.

(k) It must be ensured that the child is legally free for adoption, can

migrate to join the prospective adoptive parents and obtain their
nationality.

() Governments should establish policy, legislation and cffective supe धर
vision for the protection of children involved in inter-country 1१4
tion and further that inter-country adoption should wherever possible,
only be undertaken where such measures have been established in the
state concerned.

(m) The consent of biological parents should be free and without duress
and preferences to their wishes for the religious upbringing of the
child should be given.

(n) The child study report, a family study report and such other investi-
gation should he given due importance.

(०) Reimbursement of cost incurred on a child be made,
(p) Profiteering and trafficking in children shall be prevented

45. The Convento 05 tie ~ights of the child adopted in 1989 is an
importasi cuavention for ch: purpas: of this report, we would therefore consider
the same in detail.

Article 21 is the pivotal provision which contains the principles governing
inter-country adoption, it runs as under :

“Article 21: State parties that recognise and/or permit the system of
adoption shall ensure that the best interests of the child shall be the
paramount consideration and the State shall—

(a) ensure that the adoption of a child is authorised only by competent

thorities who determine, in accordance with applicable law and
procedures and on the basis of all pértinent and reliable information



aa

that the adoption is permissible in’ view of the child's status con-
cerning parents, relatives and legal guardians and that, if required,
the persons concerned have given their informed consent to the
adoption on the basis of such counselling as may be necessary;

(b). recognise that inter-country adoption may be considered as an alter-
native means of child’s care, if the child cannot be placed in foster
or an adoptive family or cannot in any suitable manner be cared
for in the child's country of origin?

(©) ensure that the child concerned by inter-country adoption enjoys safe-
ards and standards equivalent to those existing in the case of
national adoption;

(9) take all appropriate measures to ensure that, in inter- adop-
tion, the placement does not result in improper financial gain for
those involved in it;

(९) promote, where appropriate, the objectives of the present Article by
concluding bilateral or multilateral arrangements or agreements and
endeavour within this frame work, to ensure that the placement of
the child in another country is carried out by competent authorities
or organs.”

This convention has recognised inter-country adoption as an alternative means
of child’s care when he cannot be adopted in the country of his origin and it
emphasises that Objectives of inter-country adoption are to be promoted where
appropriate, by bilateral or multilateral agreemens’

4.6. The Hague Conference on Private International Law had adopted
convention on 15th November 1965 on jurisdiction, applicable law and recog-
nition of decrees relating to adoptions. However, the report of the Special
Commission of the Hague Conference on Private International Law of Janu-
ary 1988 discussed two possible strategies open to the Conference, either a
limited instrument to be elaborated within the Conference only, or an instro-
ment in the elaboration of which non-member countries having a direct interest
in the matter would also be invited and then expressed that—

“All participants agreed that international adoption was posing at pre
Sent very serious problems, of a kind or degree different from those
existing when the Hague Convention of 15 November 1965 was drawn
up.”

It is this seriousness of problem of inter-country adoption that finally led the
Special Commission to decide in favour of tetaining the topic—

“TInter-country adoption on the condition that non-member states con-
cerned express .................. a willingness to participate in the work.”

This decision was taken in spite of doubts expressed as to whether the Hague
Conference on Private International Law was the appropriate forum to deal
with the matter. The Hague Conference since then has been engaged in coor-
dinating inter-Governmental and non-Governmental organisations in international
work on inter-country adoption.

4.7. The draft report of February 1992 was considered by the Hague
Conference on Private International Law in its Seventeenth Session aad adopted
as FinalAct on 29th May, 1993. It may be mentioned that India is a sig-
natory to the Final Act as a non-member country of the Hague Conference.

The Preamble of the Final Act takes into account the principles set forth
in the UN Conventions on the Rights of the Child of 20th November 1989 and
the UN Declaration on Social and Legal Principles relating to the protection and
Welfare of children, with kere teference to Foster Placement and Adoption
Nationally and Internationa Secondly, it has recognised that inter-country
adoption offers the advantage of permanent family to a child who cannot in
any suitable manner be cared for in’ his cowntry of origin. Thirdly, it expresses


12

concern about the necessity to take meagures to ensure that inter-country adop-
tions are made in the best interests of the child and with respect of
the child and with respect for his fundamental rights and to prevent the
abduction, the sale of or trafficin children. It has sought, to estab-
lish a_ system of cooperation amongst contracting States to ensure that
the . safeguards provided therein are respected and inter-country adoptions
are made in accordance with tl:e Convention.

4.8. Article 4 of the Final Act lays down the specific mandatory safe-
goards as under—
(1) The child is to be adoptable;

(2) Placement of the child within the state of origin have to be given
due consideration;

{3) An inter-country adoption is in the best interest of the child;

(4) The persons, institutions and authorities whose consent is necessary
for adoption have been duly counselled and duly informed of the
effects of their consent and of the adoption;

(5) Their consent is given free and unconditional in the required form
and in writing:

(6) Their consent have not been induced by payment or compensation;

(7) Their consent is irtecovable;

(8) The consent of mother, where required, has been given only after
the birth of the child;

(9) The consents have been given in full knowledge of the effects of the
adoption in the receiving state.

4.9. Article 4 provides ‘some optional safeguards depending upon the
age and degree of maturity of the child. These optional oe eguards are as

(1) The child is counselled and duly informed of the effetts of the adop-
tion;

{2) The child’s consent, if required, is obtained;

(3) Consideration is given to the chitd’s wishes and opinions,

(4) The child’s consent, if required, has been given freely and uncon-
ditionally in the required legal form and in writing:

(5) The child’s consent is not induced by payment or compensation of
any kind.

With regard to adoptive parents, convention has laid down that the competent
authorities of the receiving state must determine that—

(1) the Prospective adoptive parents are  cligible and suited to adopt,
an

(2) the child is or will be authorised to enter and reside permanently
in the receiving state.

4.10. As regards the transfer of the child to the Teceiving state, it is
declared that the child would be transferred out only if the competent authori-
ties of both states have verified that no bar exists to the adoption under the
laws of their states and have agreed that the child should be entrusted to the
Prospective adoptive parents.

4.11. It has also provided for Central Authorities and accredited bodies
to discharge duties and to take appropriate measures 19 provide information, sie-
tistics shad “rhe cai A forms and eliminate ad obstacles for 7१/क+/४%/ ado.
tion. C uthority can grant acc कुक, toy unt ie
are professiouslly competent to undertake sinilstrative social task


13

entrusted to them. An accredited body must pursue only non-profit objectives
and staffed by persons specially qualified by their ethical standards and by train-
ing or experience to work in the field of inter-country adoption and will be sub-
ject to supervision by competent authority of state as to their composition, ope-
ration and financial situation.

* 4.12. Concerning procedure, it lays down that person wishing to adopt
a child should apply to the Central Authority in the state of his habitual resi-
dence. : The Central Authority on satisfaction that the applicant is eligible and
suited to..adopt shall prepare a Home Study Report which shall also include
the characteristics of the child for whom they would be fit to adopt. The report
prepared 1 shall then be transferred to the Central Authority of the state of crigin
ie Cl je

२... 4.13. The Central Authority of the State of orig in if satisfied that-the
child is adoptable then it shall prepare a Child Study Report and obtain con-
sent of the persons, institutional and authorities whose consent is necessary and
determine whether the envisaged placement is in the best interest of the child.
The report prepared by the Central Authority of the State of origin shall then
be transmitted to the Central Authority of the state of the applicant.

. The. functions of a Central Authority for the zforesaid purposes may be
performed by public authorities or bodies to the exicnt permitted by. the law
of ‘its state.

444. Other relevant provisions contained in the Final Act have laid
down that the Central Authorities of both states shall take necessary steps to ob-
tain permission for the child to leave the state of origin and to enter and re-
side permanently in the receiving state and transfer takes place in secure cir-
cumstances and they shall keep each other informed about the adoption process
and progress ०6* the placement if a probationary period is required.

_ 4.15. A provision for recognition of adoption made and certified by the
competent authority of the staie of adoption by the state of origin permits the
refusal of recognition if adoption is manifestly contrary to its public policy and
to the best interest of the child. It has also dealt with costs and expenses.

4.16. It -is emphasised that imy proper financial and other gain from an
activity related to an inter-country a ion shall not be desired by any per-
son and only direct and indirect costs and expenses, including reasonable pro-
fessional fees of persons interested in the adoption, may be charged and paid.
‘It -also ptohibits directors, administrators and employees of bodies involved
in--adoption from receiving unreasonably high remuneration in relation to ser-
vices rendered.

4.17 International conventions do not operate as law unless the legisla-
ture enacts law incorporating the principles laid down therein. Since India is
a signatory to the final Act, it is under an international obligation to enact law
with respect to inter-country adoption to give effect to the international con-
ventions, Apart from the principles laid down by the international conventions,
our courts have also laid down certain guidelines regulating inter-country adop-
tion. Any legislative exercise should consider both these set of principles.

FOOTNOTES—CHAPTER 4

1. The New Encyclopaedia Britennica: Volume 1 Micropa€dia, Ready reference: 1987
.d-A-ak Bayes; p- 105.

.2., Emphasis supplied
‘3. Emphasis supplied
4. General Assembly Resoluticn 41/185 of 3rd December 1966.
3-1 Mof L&JINDI9S


CHAPTER 5
JUDICIAL GUIDELINES ON INTER-COUNTRY ADOPTION

5.1. The Supreme Court on a letter addressed to it in public interest
took cognisance of malpractices indulged in by social organisations and volun-
tary agencies engaged in the work of offering Indian children in adoption to

ign parents. The letter sought to restram Indian based private agencies
“from carrying out further activity of routing children for adoption abroad” and
it also sought direction to the Government of India, the Indian Council of
Child Welfare and the Indian Council of Social Welfare to carry out their ob-
ligations in the matter of adoption of Indian children by foreign parents.

The landmark judgement which laid down guidelines was followed by
other eight orders issued from time to time either in clarification, substitution or

for giving effect to the earlier ones on certain points involving inter-country
adoption.

5.2, The Supreme Court has, while laying down the normative and pro-
cedural safeguards on inter-country adoptions of Indian children relied upon
Articles 15, 24 and 39 of the Constitution and sections 7 to 9 and 11 of | the
Guardians and Wards Act. 1890 and the International Conventions. The judi-
cial creativity of the Court filled in the gap by the guidelines, where there were
none before.

5.3. Earlier attempt made by the Gujarat High Court’ for laying down
guidelines was not comprehensive. However, the decision had resolved the
question of adoption of Indian children by foreign parents with reference to
the Guardians and Wards Act. 1890, and excluded application of the Hindu
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956.

5.4. Incidentally it may be mentioned that the procedure to be followed
by the court in disposing of applications for adoption of Indian children by
foreigners was laid down by the High Court of Bombay’ and the High Court
of Delhit under rules and instructions and by the High Court of Gujarat’ by
certain observations made for the same purpose.‘

5.5. Before we proceed to summarisc normative and procedural safe-
guards, it must be mentioned that the Supreme Court in its judgment has em-
phasised at the very outset that a family environment is the best for a child
andthe adoptive parents would be the next best substitute for the bdiological
parents. But when a child is to be given in adoption. then, every effort must
be made first to find adoptive parents for it within the country and only after
such efforts have failed, it may become necessary, to give the child in adop-
tion to a foreigner rather than allow the child to grow up in an orphanage.

5.6. It is in the context of this care and concern shown by the Supreme
Court to the abandoned children, we will proceed to summarise briefly the
normative safeguards first and the procedural safeguards afterwards.

The normative safeguards can be classified as under :

(1) when a child is adoptable;

(2) when children are living with their biological parents;

(3) when children are destitutes or abandoned:

(4) when a foreigner desires to adopt an Indian child; and

(5) the role of the Central Authorities and rccognised organisations in
process of inter-country adoption.

In inter-country adoptions two countries are involved. One, the state
of origin or sending state and, two, the receiving state. Therefore, there are
two Central Authorities of two states which are necessary contracting parties
for inter-country adoptions. These Central Authorities grant or require to grant

4


15

कक ही ition to voluntary cyganisations or agencies on certain stipulations and
fitions on the basis of the work experience, professional skills and inte-
grity in the field of adoption of children by foreigners. Of course, even the
diplomatic missions of both countries are 8150 involved in the process. These
are some important aspects which are iakcu into consideration in classifying
the normative safesuards in inter-country adoptions.

Now we proceed to summarise the normative safeguards as under:
When a child is adoptable

5.7. The first and foremost condition for giving a child in inter-country
adoption is that the child mus! be free and legally available for the adoption.

Firstly, if the consent of biological parents is given, it must be without
duress or inducement and in the best interests of the child or when the pa-
rents have relinquished the child for adoption and there is a document of
surrender, duly attested by the necessary witnesses. the child must obviously
be taken to be free for adoption.

Secondly, where a child is an orphan or destitute or abandoned child
and is living in a social or child welfare agency and it has not been possible
for the concerned agency to trace its parents or where the child is committed
by a juveniie court to un institution, centre or home for committed children
and is declared to be a destitute by juvenile court, such a child must be
regarded as free and legally available for adoption.

The child livmg with biological parents

5.8. Where a child is living with his biological parents, they would
be the best persons to decide whether to give their child in adoption to foreign
parents.

When the parents decide to "give their child in inter-country adoption,
there should be following safeguards:

(1) The biological parents should not be induced or encouraged or
even permitted to take a decision in regard to giving of a child in
adoption before the birth of the child or within a period of three
months from the date of birth of the child.

(2) Proper counselling should be given to the biological parents before
a decision about relinquishing the child for adoption is taken.

(3) The counselling should be done by social or child welfare agency
to which the child is being surrendered and relinquished.

(4) Before a decision is taken by the biological parents, they should be
helped if understand all implications of adoption including the
possibility of adoption by foreign parents.

(S) The biological parents should be specifically told that in case of
the child is adopted. it would not be possible for them to have
any further contact with the child.

(6) The biological parents should not be subjected to any duress . in
making a decision about relinquishment of the child.

(7) Even aftcr the biological parents have taken a decision to relin-
quish the child for giving in adoption a further period of about
three months should be allowed to them to reconsider their decision.

(8) But once the decision is taken and not reconsidered within a fur-
ther period of three months, it must be regarded irrevocable.

(9) In order to eliminate any possibility of mischief and to make sure
that the child has in fact been surrendered by its biological parents,
it is necessary that the social or child welfare agency to which the
child is being surrendered by the biological parents, should take
from the biological paregts, a document of surrender duly sigsed
by the biological parcets.and. attested by at least two responsible


16

(10) Such: surrender document should not only contain the names of the.
biological parents and their addresses but also information in re-*
gard to the birth of the child and its background, health and deve-
lopment.

(11) The procedure for giving the child in adoption.to a foreigner can
then be initiated without any further reference to the biological pa-
tents by filling an application for appointment of the foreigner as
guardian of the child under the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890.

(12) Thereafter, there would be no necessity to consult the biologica: pa-
° rents again as to whether they wish to give the child in adoption
or they want to take it back,

(13) If the boilogical parents have stated a preference for the religious
upbringing of the child, their wish should as far as possible be
respected and given effect accordingly.

(14) However, the biological parents should be informed that the chil@
may be given in adoption even to a foreigner who professes a religion
different from that of the biological parents as ultimately the best
interest of the child alone should be the sole guiding factor and
paramount consideration for giving to the child in adoptién to the
foreigner.

Destitute or abandoned child

5.9. Where the child is an orphan, destitute or abandoned and parents
are not known, the social or child welfare agenty in whose cate the’ child
has come, must try to trace’ the biological parents of the child:

(a) If the biological parents can be traced and if it is found that they
do not want to take back the child, then the same procedure as
outlined for the children living with their biological parents - dis-
cussed earlier should be as far as possible be followed.

(b) But, if for any reason, the biological parents cannot be traced, then
there can be no question. of taking their consent or consulting them.

(c) Then, in a class of cases under (b) as above, the consent of the
child or social welfare agency involved in the field of inter-country
adoption is primarily necessary. © This institutional consent is to be
ultimately guided by the sole factor and paramount consideration of
the, best interest of the child.

When a foreigner desires to adopt an Indian child

5.10. Great care has to be exercised in permitting the child to be given
in adoption to foreign parents. It must be ensured that inter-country adoptions
do not lead to abuse or exploitation of children. The possibility of profiteering
and trafficking in children must be eliminated.

An application from a foreigners with a home study report* must, there-
fore, be sponsored by a Social Welfare Agency recognised by the Government
of the country in which the foreigner is domi and should be accompanied
by such certificates, declarations and documents 88 are necessary.”

It must be ensured that there is no impediment in the way of child
entering the country of the prospective adoptive parents. The travel documents
for the child are obtained at the appropriate time, the law of the country of
the prospective adoptive parents must permit legal adoption of the child and the
child should acquire the same legal status and rights of inheritance as a natural
born child and he should become a citizen in the country of adoption.

The Role of the Central Authority and the recegnised institutions
5.11. Every effort must be made paid the nga child. welfare agency

to find placement for the child in adoption: in ‘an Infian famil It is only if
no Indian family comes forward to take a child in tion within a maximum


17

period’ of two months that the child may be regarded as available for inter-
country adoption. However, if the chi id is handicapped or is in a bad state
of health needing urgent medical attention. the recognised social welfare
agency~ need not wait for a period of two months and it can and must take
immediate steps for the purpose of giving such child in inter-country adoption.

All private adoptions conducted by unauthorised individuals or agencies
should be stopped.” Any application for taking a child in adoption should
be processed only through a child welfare agency recognised by the Govern-
ment of India in order to ensure":

{a) Elimination of the possibility of profiteering and trafficking in child-
ren.

(b) Proper and satisfactory home study report on which court can rely
and decide whether a foreigner would be suitable as a parent for the
child and would be able to handle trans-racial, trans-cultural and
trans-national problems likely to arise from such adoption.

(c) Authority or Agency in the country of the foreigner who could be
made responsible for supervising the progress of the child and ensur-
ing that the child is adopted at the earliest in accordance with the
law grow up in the atmosphere of warmth and affection with moral
and material security assured to it.

On receiving an application from a foreigner for adoption of an Indian
child, the recognised agency must send the Photograph and child study report
of a Suitable child who fit into the environment and community of the prospec-
tive adopter for the purpose of obtaining approval to the adoption of such
child from the foreigner wishing to adopt Indian child. The practice of accept-
ing a general approval of the foreigner to adopt any child should not be allowed.

A child study report’ containing legal and social data in regard to the
child is prepared by the recognised social welfare agency.

5.12. The procedural safequards as laid down by the Court may be
briefly summarised as under:

(1) An adoption application proceedings should be completed" by the
Court expeditiously and as far as possible within a period of two
months from the date of filing of the application for the guardianship
of the child.

(2) The proceedings on the application of guardianship should be held
in camera” and they should be regarded as confidential and as soon
as an order is made on the application, the entire proceedings in-
cluding the paper and documents should be sealed.

(3) When an order appointing guardian of a child is made by the Court,
the immediate intimation” of the same shall be given to the Ministry
of Welfare, Government of India and to the Ministry of Social
Welfare of the Government of the State in which the Court is situated.

(4) It is desirable that a child is given in inter-country adoption as far as
possible before it completes the age of 3 years. It does not mean
that children above the age of three years should not be given in
inter-country adoption. Even children above tne age of 7 years
may be given in inter-country adoption but their wishes may be
ascertained if they are in a position to indicate any preference.

(5) The child not having any Permanent Place of residence would be
ordinarily resident in the || where it is in the care and custody
of social welfare agency or individual. In such event, the Court

within which jurisdiction the mo fai inarily residing will exercise
its jurisdiction on an application nship made by the recogni, है
ed social welfare agency for the 7 wishing to adopt the child.”


18

(6) In order to eliminate trading in children in the name of inter-country
adoptions, the child welfare agency may legitimately receive from
ptospective adoptive parents maintenance expenses,” from the date
of selection of the child by the foreigner until the date the child leaves
for getting to its new home as also medical expenses including hospi-
talisation charges, if any, actually incurred by such social welfare
agency for the child.

(7) A foreigner is not prevented from making voluntary donation® to
any social or child weliare agency but no such donation from him
shall be reccived until after the child has reached his country.

Central Adoption Resource Agency

5.13, The Supreme Court directed the Government of India to set up a
Central Adoption Resource Agen:y™ (hereinafter to be referred to as ‘CARA’)
with regional branches at a few centres which are active in inter-country adop-
tions. Such CARA is expected to act as a clearing house of information in
regard to children available for inter-country adoption and all applications by
foreigners for taking Indian children in adoption can then be forwarded by the
social or child welfare agency in the foreign coyntry to CARA and the latter can
in its turn forward them to one or the other of the recognised social or child
welfare agencies in the country.

5.14 The court laid down conditions* for recognition of the child welfare
agencies are as under:

(a) An agency should have proper staff with professional social work
experience.

(0) It is only an organisation which is engaged in the work of child care-
and welfare which should be regarded eligible for recognition, since
the inter-country adoption must be looked upon not as an indepen-
dent activity by itself, but as part of child welfare programme so
that it may not tend to degenerate into trading.

(0 An agency should maintain proper accounts which shall be audited by
a-chartered accountant at the end of every year.

(@ It. should not charge from the foreigner, wishing to adopt a child,
any amount in excess of that actualiy incurred by way of legal or
other expenses including such reasonable remuneration or honorarium
for the work done and trouble taken in processing, filing and pursu-
ing the application as may be fixed by the Court.

5.15. The duties* of the recognised agency would be as under:
(a) It must maintain a register of the names and particulars of all children
to be given in inter-country adoption.

(b) It must prepare a child study report through, a professional social
worker so as to enable the foreigner to come to a decision on adop-
tion of the child

10) ॥ nvist also a wt 9... भा coming to a decision whether it will be
fer the welfare © 5० +त्रित to be given in adoption to the foreigner.

5.16. The governmen: of India with the assistance of the Government
of State was directed to prepare a list of recognised social or child welfare
agencies with their names. addresses and other particulars and send such list
to the appropriate department cf the Government of such foreign country where
Indian children are ordinarily taken in adoption so that the social or child wel-
fare agencies licensed or recognised by the Government of such foreign country
for inter-country adoptions, would know which social or child welfare agency
in India they should approach for processing an appl plication of its national for
takigg an Indian child in adoption. Such list ae 8 sent to the Government
of Tadia to each High Court with a request. to (gry it.to the district courts


19

within its jurisdiction so that the High Courts and the district courts in the
country would know which are the recognised child welfare agencies operating
in India in the area of inter-country adoption.

5.17. The Central Government was directed to prepare a list™ of social
or child welfare agencies recognised for inter-country adoption by the Govern-
ment of each foreign country where children from India are taken in adoption,
and supply copies thereof to the various High Courts and to the recognised
child welfare agencies operating in India in the area of inter-ccuntry adoption.

5.18. The Central Government is further required to send the aforesaid
list™ to the Indian Embassy or High Commission in the country of the prospec-
tive adoptive parents from time to time with a request to keep watch over the
welfare and progress of such children in order to safesuard against any possible
maltreatment, exploitation or use for ulterior purposes and 0 immediately
report any instance of negligence or exploitation to the Government of India
for suitable action.

5.19. The guidelines Jaid down by the Supreme Court in its judgment
and several orders are comprehensive. The Law Commission is of the opinion
that it is desirable to bear in mind these judicial guidelines in codifying law as
these are directly relevant for the purpcse of the intercountry adoption,

FOOTNOTES--CHAPTER 5

1. The guidelines are laid down in Laxmi Kant Pandey v/s UO} (1984) 2 SCR 795 and were
elucidated in Laxmi Kant Pandey v/s UOI, AIR 1987 SC 232 and Laxmi Kant Pandey
y/s UOLJT 1991 (3) SC 582. Also in re: Jay Kevin Salerno AIR 1988, Bombay 139; SC

Order: 6th August, 1993 etc.
2. In re: R.C. Mehta, AIR 1982 Guj. 193

3. The High Court of Bombay has issued a Notification on 10th May 1972 incorporating
Rule 371-B in Chapter Xs of the Rules of the High Court of Bombay (Original Side),

4, The High Court of Delhi has also issued instructions (1984) 2 SCR, 795

5, In re: R.C. Mehta, AIR 1982 Gui. 193

6. L. X. Pandey vs UOT (1984) 2 SCR pp. 826-828.

7. Ibid —pp. 835, 836, 848

8. Supra p. 838

9. Appendix C

10, Appendix D

11. L.K. Pandey v/s UOI (1984) 2 SCR pp. 833-834

12. Supra p. 837

13. Supra p. 832

14. Appendix E

15. Supra p. 845-847
16. Supra p. 847

17,’ Supra 9. 847

18. Supra p. 845

19, Miscellaneous Petition No. 178 of 1982 quoted in L.K. Pandey (1984)2SCR, p. 795, 843
20. Supra 9. 841

21. Supra p. 842

22, Supra pp. 839-840
23, Supra pp. 837-838
24, Supra 9. 838

25, Supra 9. 839

26, Supra 9. 839

27. Supra p. 848


CHAPTER 6
THE ROLE OF THE CHILD WELFARE AGENCTES

6.1. Only those child welfare agencies as are recognised by the Govern-
ment can undertake the work of inter-country adoption, for the purpose
which no specific statutory law is in force in our country. Therefore, the
Supreme Court in its landmark judgment’ on the sudject had to rely upon the
‘Guardians and Wards Act, 1890? and the Intemational conventions and Decla-
mations’ for laying down the necessary puidelines for regulating inter-country
adoption, reference to which has already n made in the earlier Chapters.

Pursuant to the court judgment, the Central Government issued guide-
lines on adoption of Indian children by foreigners for the information and
guidance of general public, voluntary agencies as well as all other concerned
with the subjeet matter.*

6.2. The guidelines issued by the Central Government are binding on the
child welfare agencies recognised and working for inter-country adoption. The
role of such voluntary agencies is determined, regulated and supervised under
the guidelines issued. which are based on the Supreme Court Judgment.

These guidelines also deal with the role of foreign agencies engaged in
adoption of Indian children. Foreign agencies are required to apply to India’s
adoption of Indian children. Foreign agencies are required to apply to India’s
are protected.

6.3. In order to elicite information, the Law Commission addressed
communication’ to the 41 child welfare agencies which are recognised’ by CARA
for the purpose of placing children in inter-cotntry adoption. In all 31 agen; .
cies’ responded to the communication. The responses received by the Law
Commission disclosed the practical working experiences gained and the
role played by the child welfare agencies in inter-country adoption under the
guidelines issued by the Government of India.

6.4, It is to be into it the outset that all recognised child welfare agen-
cies working in the field forginter-country adoption have shown willingness and
ability to follow the guidelines laid down by the Supreme Court. ५ Institutional
backgrounds and value commitments of the resoonding agencies have been
reflected in their respective responses. These agencies are running childrén’s
homes for crisis-affected babies who are brought to them by the police or aban-
doned by unwed mothers. They believe that society must value its children
and solve the problem of their destitution.

6.5. Various child welfare agencies working in the field of inter-country
adontion had in their responses highlighted the working of the scheme relating
to the adoption of Indian children by foreign aencies. Those agencies have
faced a number cf problems and they have made suggestions for the removal.
of those problems and also for facilitating the smooth functioning of the entire
scheme to provide inter-country adoption. We have gone through the responses
and the various suggestions made therein. The Commission expresses its
deep avpreciation of the commendable work being done by the voluntary orga-
nisations in this field. The details of the responses are contained in Appendix

On a close scrutiny and analysis of the responses, we find that the ex-
ience gained by agencies shows a remarkable phenomenon that contrary to
general belief Indian children adonted by foreign parents are looked after well
and they have full opportunities for their deve opment. Jn our opinion, this
should be an eye cpener to those who express apprehension or spread disinfor-
mation against adoption of Indian children by foreigners. All this has been
possible due to the implementation of the guidelines laid down by the Supreme
Court and also on account of the special interest taken by the Welfare Ministry
of the Central Government.

20


21

The valuable opinions and suggestions as contained in the responses have
been taken into consideration in formulating 09" recommendations and also in
drafting the proposed legis!ation. We do not, ‘therefore. consider it necessary
to express our view in detail on the responses. Some of the Suggestions are
not practicable and as such we have not recommended for their implementation.

6.6. The problems faced and suggestions mace. by the Child Welfare,
agencies, being relevant for the purpose of this repcrt, are summarised as.
under:

1. Law on adoption should be “child centred” and look after the interests
of children on a friority basis.

2. There is no statutory iv providing for adoption of children in India
except the personal law of Hind.s and there is a need to have a seculac law
which should be enabling ard permissive in order to encourage adoption so

that the home to the needy child is provided.

3. Pricr to placing a child with a foreign family, every effort should be
made to locate an Indian family for the child. Should a family for a particu-
lar child be unavailable with the placement agency, then assistance through the
Voluntary Coordinating Agenzy (V.C.A.) within each state should be sought
and utilised. In this way suitable Indian families trom other adoption agencies
can be located. It is through strengthening the local VCAs that the task of
inter-agency coordination cin be accomplished.

The V.C.A. should comprise personnel not involved in the placement of
children for foreign ado>tions. Cnly those children who are not placeable
in our own country should bz placed in foreign adoption. Specific time sche-
dule should be prescribed by i:w for the placement of child within the country
faiting which the child should be considered free for foreign adoption.

4. A wife or a husband who has been deserted by other spouse for more
tan one year should be allowed to relinquish, if necessary, |] Re child below
5 years, to the orphanages legally. ‘This will help to prevent child abuse.
The spouse; having custody of a child, should be considered a sole guardian
of such child for surrendering it to the orphanage.

5. Once an agency applies to CARA for clearance certificate for the
proposed inter-country adoption cf ५ child and: no reply is received within 15
days, the permission should be deemed to have been given in the interest of
the child to provide him love and warmth of a family life at the earliest.

The handicapped children should be exempted from requirement of
clearance from CARA for placement abroad, as such children need special
care, attention and treatment including surgery; and there are families from
abroad who may be willing to take such children but due to the time factor
involved in clearing applications finally do not wish to pursue the matter.

It is, therefore. suggested that CARA should only be a monitoring
body and keep a check on the various agencies through the quarterly reports
that are being regularly sent to it and by holding inspections through its organs
in the states.

6. The first priority is to locate Indian family, in India, for adoption
failing which the next best. is an Indian family abroad’ and only thereafter consi-
deration in the last should be given to the foreign families.

For placing children with Indian families abroad, it is not compulsory
that their applications be routed through foreign agencies that are recognised
by the Government of India. The NRI applications should be routed through
Indian agencies recognised by Government of India to maintain a watch through
follow up reports. !

7. Adoptive parents must enjoy the samme facility of child care leave at
par with paid maternity leave. This is essentidléto help the child’s emotional
adjustment and physical development.

4-1 Mof L&UNTNIOS


22

8. An adopted child must have the right to birth certificate with the name
of the adoptive parent as his parents. It is because it becomes degrading for
a child to function with an affidavit which gives the circumstances of its birth
and abandonment. \

It is informed by a social welfare agency operating in Goa, where
adopted child is regarded illegitimate from older times. There has been a
practice of bringing up illegitimate children to serve as servants of the house
and were referred to as adopted loosely.

It is suggested that this can be mitigated to a certain extent if the adop-

tive parents names are inserted as parents in the birth certificate of the child
adopted.

9. In Sweden there is no concept of il'egitimate child and, therefore, the
child is not looked down upon by its society due to his birth status. It is the
duty of the society as well as of the state to save the child from the stigma
of illegitimacy for no fault of his.

In the circumstances, the concept of illegitimacy of children should be
removed by law.

10. It is observed that the Courts delay considerably to settle adoption
cases by foreign nationals despite the guidelines of the Supreme Court to dispose
them expeditiously. Because of this delay, sometimes foreign adoptive parents
become so impatient that they start looking for another child from some other
country for adoption.

Though adoption is a low priority area, yet there has been months at a
stretch when no judge was available at some places to hear adoption cases
thereby causing great anxiety to waiting parents and children. Therefore,
guardianship applications should be disposed of by the family courts who
understand emotional aspects of a family life.

11. Although the passport to the child proposed to be given in inter-
country adoption be issued within a week under the Supreme Court guidelines,
passport authorities even then take months together to issue passport. It

is suggested that the passport should be issued within two weeks.

12. The limit of the security bond to be furnished by the foreign agency
is required to be curtailed to some reasonable limit from rupees five Jaks as
laid down by the guidelines now.

13. The licence given for agencies doing inter-country adoption should
be for three years instead of one year at present. This would be helpful in a
continuous process of placement of Indian children in foreign adoption.

14. That guidelines with respect to increasing the quota in in-country
adoption should be laid down only after bringing a uniform law of adoption
for all communities in India.

15. The Indian Child Welfare agencies should be given opportunities
to make on the spot study of the adopted children and bring the firsthand
information to be shared with all interested parties about the life of these children
living with their adoptive parents abroad.

16. Although adoption by Indian parents is growing in number, yet the
families normally go around selecting babies of their choice. As such, babies
who are ill-nourished, very dark in complexion, handicapped, having medical

roblems or special need do not find homes in India. If we cannot find the
family life for these children in our country, it is suggested, we must not hesitate
to select foreign families for them.

17. The children suffer trauma and set back in life due to parental poverty,
neglect, abuse and for having too many children to be looked after. A sugges-
tion is, therefore. made that family planning should be encouraged by law
providing fora smaller family unit and ton-discriminatory social status for
the girl child.


23

18. In Goa children are given in guardianship under the Portuguese
Code which applies to all communities in Goa. Though the general civil laws,
in force in Goa, do not permit adoption the Hindus adopt childern under the
law of Usages and Customs, but only from a close family member, preferably
the second issue of the adoptive father’s brother. However, considering the
present trend of having small families, it was becoming increasingly difficult to
find a child to adopt as permitted under the usages and customs and, therefore,
many Hindus could not adopt but only take in guardiarshin as is done by the -
other communities in Goa. People in Goa ask “How do you expect us to
adopt when there is no law of adoption.”

19. m India, we must have a uniform and secular adoption law for in-
country and inter-country adoptions.

20. The capable parents should be allowed to adopt more than one child
at a time even if they are not siblings and may have a living child, male or
female, of their own.

21. All children including the adopted children in a family should get
equal property share.

6.7. It is noticed that certain Diplomatic Missions in Delhi had flouted
inter-country adoption directives. The letter’ had alleged, inter alia, that “it
is a matter of great concern that unsuspecting foreign nationals are misguided
and misled by vested interests of the lawyers, private nursing homes or indi-
viduals.” It is alleged that adoption application to the hospital by foreign
parents having three older children of their own was in response to an advertise-
ment in an “In-house” magazine of foreign mission. It is said that the advertise-
ment in question was itself questionable.

6.8. The above discussion shows that there is need for Inter-Country
Adoption law. The Child Welfare Agencies have suggested for a uniform and
secular law on adoption. The Law Commission is however of the view that
since the scope of this report is confined to Inter-Country Adoption, it is not
possible to express any opinion on this subject.

FOOTNOTES—CHAPTER 6

. Laxmi Kant Pandey v/s UOT (1984) 2 SCR, 795.

. Supra

Supra

. Resolution of July 1989

. Appendix F

. Appendix G

|. Appendix H

. A letter dated 26th August, 1992 addressed by the President of Dethi Council for Child

‘Welfare to the Joint Secretary, Government of India, Ministry of Welfare was forwarded
to the Law Commission.

oN Awe eNS


CHAPTER 7
RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1, In the earlier chapters of this Report we have discussed various
aspects of the problem of inter-country adoption. The position which finally
emerges is that there is a demand for a uniform law regulating adoption in
general, particularly regulating the demand for adoption of abandoned children
by foreign parents. It is, therefore, necessary to enact appropriate legislation
regulating such adoptions as the existing practice and procedure contained in
the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 are inadequate to regulate the inter-country
adoptions. The proposed law should regulate matters relating to adoption of
Indian children by forei%n parents with a view to eliminating profiteering and
trafficking in children and preventing abuse and exploitation of children by
foreign parents and above all ensuring the welfare of the child proposed to be
given in adoption.

7.2. The Commission is of the view that biological parents provide the
best family environment for the full growth and development of a child. But
such environment is not available to an abandoned child placed in an orphanage.
Therefore, adoption of such a child is the best substitute for the biological
family. While considering the question of giving a child in adoption, the first
preference should be given to Indian parents, the second choice should be given
to non-resident Indian parents and if none of these are availab’e, the child
should be given in adoption to the foreign patents. Such child may or may
not be abandoned child.

7.3. The proposed legislation should provide that after an adoption order
is passed, the foreigner should be guardian of the child and he should thereafter
be free to take away the child to his country.

7.4. The inter-country adoption law is recommended in order to regulate
matters relating to adoption of Indian children by foreign parents with a view
to eliminating profiteering and traffi-king in children and preventing completely
abuse and exploitation of children adopted by foreign parents and ensuring
the welfare of the child proposed to be given in adoption to foreign parents.

7.5. The proposed law should regulate adoptiun of a child with the
consent of the biological parents. or in the case of an abandoned child with
the consent of the child welfare agency recognised for the purpose of inter-
country adoption. The consent given should be free from duress or induce-
ment and after the proper counselling in the case of the biological -parents with
regard to the implications of their consent for adoption of their child. When a
child has rational understanding. the consent of the child after proper counselling
should be obtained.

7.6. It should be ensured that on adoption of the child the authorities
will issue a birth certificate to the child indicating the adoptive parents as his
or her parents.

7.7. A passport to a child should be issued within two weeks to enable
him to go out of India to join his proposed adoptive parents.

7.8, The proposed legislation should provide a mechanism to ensure for
the welfare of the child in the country of the adoptive parents.

7.9. The proposed law should provide that the progress reports of the
child should be submitted by the sponsoring foreign agencies for a period of
5 years or till the child attains the age of 12 years, whichever is later. The
reports sent should be quarterly in the first two years, six monthly in the next
three years and thereafter yearly, if required, til the child attains the age of

12 years.
24


25

7.10. The proposed law in our opinion should permit adoption by a
foreigner only if the child can be eventually adopted under the corresponding
law of his country. In other words if the. law of the foreigner’s country does
not provide for adoption, then he should not be entitled to adopt Indian child.

7.11. A provision in the proposed legislation should be made to ensure
that in ease the proposed adoption by foreign guardian is disrupted because
of certain unforeseen circumstances, the child should either be placed with
some other suitable adoptive family with the concurrence of the Government:
vf India or of some other agency designated by it, or is repatriated back a6
the last resort. to the placement agency in India.

7.12. The proposed legislation should have a provision that the spon-
yoring foreign child welfare agency may have its representative in India who
may be an Indian citizen, with professional qualifications and experience in
child welfare work. The representative should not act for more than ons
foreign child welfare agency and have the right to open and operate account
in any Indian Bank for and on behalf of such foreign child welfare agency
with the permission of the Reserve Bank of India.

7.13. When there is a family court, the matter of adoption under the
proposed law should be seized and decided by the family court, or when there
is no family court, a district court having jurisdiction over the place where a
child ordinarily resides shall be the competent court.

7.14. In view of the importance of the matters under the proposed law,
it is necessary that the proceetlings in the court are disposed of at the early
date. It is recommended that the court should not take ordinarily more than
three months in disposing of an application for inter-country adoption and
it is desirable that the proceedings are held in camera.

7.15. With the passage of time, there wil! be heavy demands as to the
efficacy and premptness of the role of the Central Adoption Resource Agency
(CARA) which has been established by the Government of India. The present
CARA appears to be a weak organization in terms of its composition, man
power and working conditions. There is a need to make CARA an effective
organization with its regional branches at appropriate places.

7.16. A provision with regard to fund in order to enable CARA to
perform its functions under the proposed law should be made.

7.17. A provision ensuring accountability of CARA to Parliament through
annual reports reflecting its true and full activities each year should be made

in the proposed law.

7.18. The proposed law should prescribe conditions for recognition of
forei ie oe Indian child welfare agencies and ulso for their derecognition in
app! te cases.

7.19. In order that inter-country adoptions work smoothly and effecitvely
it would be desirable for the Central Government io enter into bilateral treaties
with the countries where the indian children are taken out under the court orders
for their eventual adoptions in accordance with the laws of those ccuntries.

7.20. As far the question of legislative competence is concerned, Parlia-
ment has power to make jaw on the subject of inter-country adoption under
Articles 246(1) and 253 read with Entry 14 in List 1 Union List in the Seventh
Schedule. Article 246(1) confers exclusive power on Parliament tc make laws
with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule.
Article 253 gives Parliament exclusive power to make laws fur giving effect
to international agreements treaties and conventions. Entry 14 of the Union
List rear's as under—

+ 4 Entering into treaties and agreements with foreign countries and
implementing of treaties, agreements and conventions with foreign coun-



26

As noted earlier, india is a signatory to International conventions and declara-
tions governing the inter-country adoption of children. Effect to the conven-
tions can be given only by laws enacted by Parliament.

Moreover, under Article 246(2), Parliament has concurrent power to
make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List [II in the
Seventh Schedule. Adoption, which can be both in-country and inter-country,
is the subject included under Entry 5. Therefere, Parliament has Power to
make law on inter-country adoption under Article 246(2) read with Entry 5
in the Concurrent list in the Seventh Schedule. Such law when enacted will foster
Tespect for international law and treaty obligations as envisaged under Article
51(c) of the Constitution of India.

7.21. In view of the above discussion the Law Commission recommends
that law should be enacted to regulate inter-country adoption and for the
Purpose of legislative convenience a Draft of the proposed enactment is annexed
as Appendix “A’ to the Report.

The Law Commission hopes that the Government will take immediately
effective steps to implement the Report and enact the law in order to safeguard
the interests of children.

Sd/-
({USTICE K. N. SINGH)
Chairman
Sd/- Sd/-
(PROF. D. N. SANDANSHIV) (CH. PRABHAKARA RAO)

Member Member-Secretary

Sd/- Sd/-

(P. M. BAKSHI) (0५. MARCUS)

Member (Part-Time) Member (Part-Time)


APPENDIX ‘A’
The Inter-Country Adoption Bill 199

A Bill to provide for the Inter-Country Adoption and matters connected
therewith.

CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty...... Year of the Republic
of India, as follows : —

1. Short Title, Extent and Commencement.—(1) This Act may be called
the Inter-Country Adoption Act, 199 .

(2) It extends to the whole of India,

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by Notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. Definition—In this Act, unless the conext otherwise requires—

(a) ‘adoption’ means inter-country adoption:

(b) ‘adoption order’ means an order made under section 4:

(०0 ‘child’ means a person who is a citizen of India of either sex, who,
on or before the date on which an application for an adoption order
in respect of such person is ‘made has not completed the age of
eighteen years:

(9) ‘court’ means the family court established under the Family Court
Act, 1984 and where no such court has been established a District
Court:

Provided that the Government may, by Notification in the Official
Gazette, empower. subject to such conditions and restrictions as my be
specified in the ritification. any other civil court to exercise the power
and discharge the functions and duties of the court in respect of all or
any of the matters dealt within this Act and the court so empowered
shall be deemed to be a court for the purposes of this Act in respect
of the matters and subject to the conditions and restrictions as may be
specified in the notification.

(०) ‘foreigner’ means (i) a person who is not a citizen, of India; or (ii) who
is a citizen of India but not domiciled in India:

(f) ‘Government’ means Central Government of India:

(g) ‘institution’ means an institution recognised under Section 23;

(h) ‘inter-country adoption’ means adoption of a child by a foreigner;
{i) ‘notification’ means a notification published in the Official Gazette:
(j) ‘Prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

CuapTer II
ADOPTION ORDER : CONDITIONS AND EFFECT

3. Inter-country Adoption—No: Inter-country adoption shall be made
except in accordance with the provisions of this Act and any adoption made in
contravention of such provisions shall be void.

27


28

4, Power to make Adoption Order,—Subject to the provisions of this Act,
the Court may, upon an application made in the prescribed manner by a foreigner
or institution acting on his behalf make art adoption! order.

5. Conditions for Adoption Order.—If upon an application made by or on
behalf of foreigner, the court is satisfied that the applicant intends to adopt a
child under the Jaw of 07 within the country'in Which he is domiciled, and for
that purpose desires to remove the child from India cither immediately of after
an interval the court may make an adoption order authorising the applicant to
remove the child for the purpose aforesaid and giving to the applicant the care
and custody of the child pendixg his adoption as aforesaid:

Provided that no application shall be entertained unless it is accompanied
by a certificate by the Government to the effect that--

(i) the applicant is in its opinion is eligible and suited to adopt the child:

{ii) the welfare and interests ‘of the child shalt be safeguarded under the
Jaw of the country of domicile of the*applicant:

(ii) the applicant has made proper provisida by way of deposit or bond
or otherwise in accordance with the que 3 Made under this Act to
enable the child to be repatriated to India, should it become. neces;
sary for any reasons:

(iv) law of the applicant's country provides for adop*ion and the applicant
undertakes to adopt the child in accordange with law of his country;

(v) the child shall be treated as il_he was born to adopiers in lawful
wedlock for all purposes with cffcct from the date of adoption in the
foreigner’s country.

6. Effect of Adoption Order.—On the making ‘of an adoption order under
Section 4 of this Act. the chifd shal! be in the custody of the foréign applicant
who will be deemed to be the guardian of the child. from the date of making of
the, adoption order by the court till the child Js eventually adepted according
to the law of the applicart’s country.

Cuapter TT

ADOPTION OF INDIAN CHILDREN BY FOREIGNERS

7. Who may Adopt.—(1) Subject to sub-section (2) and (3), a foreigner
who has completed the age of twenty-five ard is of sound mind may adopt a
child under this Act.

Explanation :.In the case of adoption of a child by spouses the require-
ment as to age under this Sub-section shall be deemed to have been satisfied if
either of the spouses has completed the age of twenty-five years.

(2) A foreigner who is married shall not be entitled to adopt a child him-
self or herself alone but the husband and wife may, jointly adopt a child.

(3) A foreigner who is not married seeking to adopt a child shall be older
than the child by at least twenty-one years: .

Provided that the court may dispense with the requirements of this sub-
section, if it is satisfied that there are any special circums: which render it
necessary to do so.

(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the mother or father of
a child not born in lawful wedlock may. cither algae का jointly adopt such child
whether or not such mother or father of the child-r + . 4

(a) has completed the age of twenty-five y
(b) is older than the child by twenty one years.


29

8. Adoption of a Female Child.—No adoption order shall be made in
respect of a female child if the foreign applicant is the unmarried male, unless
the court is satisfied that there are special circumstances to justify the making
of an adoption order.

9. Consents.—(1) No adoption order in respect of a child shall be made
cxcept with the consent of the parents of the child or the instituion having care
of the child.

(2) Where the child has rational understanding as to the act of adoption,
the court shall ensure that the child has been counselled and informed of the
effect of adoption and has freely consented to it.

(3) The manner in which the consent referred to in sub-section (1) and (2)
may be obtained shalt be such as may be prescribed.

CHAPTER IV
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND PROCEDURE OF THE COURT

10, The Court having jurisdiction to . entertain applications—Application
for making an adoption order shall be made to the court having jurisdiction over
the place where the child to be adopted ordinarily resides on the date of the
application.

11. Powers and Procedure of the Court—(1) Subject to any rules that may
be prescribed in this behalf and Principles of natural justice, the courty may
follow such procedure as it may think just and fair in hearing each application

for adoption order.

(2) The court may receive as evidence any teport, statement, document,
information or matter that may in its opinion assist it to deal with the application.
—
8) In proceedings under this section, any report by an Indian Counsellor
Officer or an Indian diplomatic officer or a deposition made before an Indian
Counsellor Officer or an Indian diplomatic officer and authenticated under the
signature of that officer shall be admissiblé as evidence of the miatters stated
therein, and it shall not be necessary to prove the signature or official character
of the person who appears to have signed any such Teport or deposition.

(4) The Court shall ordinarily dispose of an application for making an
adoption order within a period of three months.

12. Proceedings to be held in Camera.—Proceedings under this Act shall
be held in camera if the Court thinks it necessary or if either party so desires.

13. Matters to be Considered in making Adoption Order—(1) The Court,
before making an adoption order shall satisfy itself:

(a) that the person or the institution whose consent is required under this
Act, and if such consent has not been dispensed with, has given con-
sent after due counselling, with regard to the nature and effect of
the adoption order.

(0) that the inter-country adoption shall be in the best interest of the child.

(©) that efforts made for adoption of the child in India have been unsuc-
cessful; .

(d).that no person has made or offered or agreed to make or give any
payment or other reward in consideration of the adoption except such
as the court may. sanction. .

(2) In determining whether adoption order, if made will be for the welfare
, the court shall have regard to social, financial and marital status and
of the applicant.

& TIND/IS

BS,


0

(3) The court in making adoption order may impose such conditions as it
may think fit, and in particular, it may requite the foreigner by bond or other-
wise to make for the child such provision as in the opinion of the court is just
and proper, for the security of the child as may be prescribed.

(4) An adoption Order made by the Court under Section 4 shall be final.

CHAPTER V

RESTRICTIONS, PROHIBITIONS, CONTRAVENTIONS AND
PUNISHMENT

14. Restrictions on Removal of a Child for Adoptton Ontside India.—
(1) Execpt under the authority of an order under Section 5, it shall not be lawful
for any person to take or send out of India a child to any place outside India
with a view to the adoption of the child by a foreigner.

__ (2) Any person who takes or sends a child out of India to any place
outside Indiz in contravention of sub-section (1} or makes or takes part in any
arrangements for transferring the care and custody of a child to any person with
a view to adoption by a foreigner shalt be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.

___ 15. Prohibition of certain payments-—{1) Subject to the provision of this
section it shal] not be lawful for any person or organization to receive any pay-
ment from a foreigner in consideration of —

(3) the adoption of a child; or

(b) the consent given in connection with the adoption of a child; or
(९) the care and custody wansferred of a child with a view to the adoption;
(d) making any arrangements for the adoption of a child.

(2) Sub-section (1) shall not be applicable if the payment to an institution
by a foreigner is sanctioned by an adoption order of the court in respect of ex-
penses incurred by the institution in connection with the child.

16. Restrictions on advertisements.—Except with the leave of the court,.it
shall not be lawful to publish any advertisement indicating that a foreigner desires
to adopt a child or a child is available for adoption.

17. Panishment.—Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine, or with both.

Cuaprer VI
BIRTH CERTIFICATE AND PASSPORT

18, Isgue of Birth Certificate—Wherein respect of any child an adoption
order is made and particulars relating to the bicth of the child have been registered
before the adoption order under any law, the authority for the time being em-
powered to give certified extracts of such particulars shall, upon an application
made on behalf of the child and upon being satisfied that the adoption order in
respect of the child has taken effect, issue or cause to be issued a provisional certi-
fieate of such particulars setting out the names of the adoptive parents in place of
the names of the natural parents of the child.

19. Issue of Passport.—(1} In case the adoption order is made under Section
4 of the Act, the institution shall be entitled to abtain 2 passport for the child
for whose benefit the order has been made from the passport authority under
the Passport Act, 1967.

(2) Subject to Section 5 of the Passport Act, 1967, on receipt of an appli-

cation under sub-section (1) of this section, the passpoft authority shall ordinarily
issue the passport within two weeks. हु हर


31

Cuaprer VII

THE CENTRAL ADOPTION RESOURCE AGENCY: COMPOSITION,
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS

20. Setting up of Central Adoption Resontee Agency.--(1) The Certtral
Government shall constitute a Central Adoption Resource Agency within six
mente from the commencement of this Act.

(2) The Central Adoption Resource Agency shall consist of a Chairman
and six members having special knowledge or @xperiertce i tegard to matters
relating to child welfare and administration of child welfare institutions:

Provided that not less than one-half of the members shall be wornen.

(3) The term of office of the Chairman and Members, meetings, validity
of proceedings and other matters relating to the effective functioning of the
Central Adoption Resource Agency may be prescribed.

(4) The Central Adoption Resource Agency may have its branches at such
places as it may consider necessary.

21, Powers and Functions ef the Cemwral Adoption Resowrce Agency.
(7 The Central Adoption Resource Agency shall act as a clearing house of intfor-

mation of the children available for inter-country adoption and of the foreigtt
adoptive parents.

(2) The Central Adoption Resoutce Agency may provide information to
the central authority set up by the Government of the foreign country concern-
ing adoption and such other information relating to the welfare of the child as
may be prescribed.

(3) The Central Adoption Resource Agency shall—

(a) collect, preserve and exchange information about the child and the
adoptive parents to the extent it is necessary for the adoption;

(0) maintain the list of recognised foreign welfare institutions:

(जे obtain child progress report from the centre authority of the country
of the adoptive parents as may be prescribed;

(d) facilitate, follow and expedite adoption proceedings; and
(०) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.

22. Fond of the Central Adoption Resource Ageticy—The Central Gov-
ernment may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by iaw, in this behalf,
make ia cach fifancial year such contributfen to the Central Adoption Resource
Agency as it may think necessary to enable the Central Adoption Resource
Agency to perform its functions under this Act.

23. Annual Report—The Central Adoption Resource Agency shall
Prepare once every year, in such form and at such time as may be prescribed,
an annual. report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous
year; and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the
Government shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.

24. Recognition of Institutions for Hiter-country Adoption Work.—The
Central Adoption Resource Agency may recognise any institution for the purpose
of inter-country adoption of chikiren.

25. Conditions for Recognition of Ieetitations.—Before the recoignition to
an: Mstitation iv given the Central Adoption Rasource Agency shalt satisfy iteelf
thse thes iastiostion:

@) pursués only non-profit objectives;

vt ot


32

(b) is managed by persons having training or experience in the field of
inter-country adoption: and

(०) satisfy such other conditions as may be prescribed.

26. De-recognition of Institutions—The Central Adoption Resource Agency
may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, de-recoghise an institution:

Provided that no such order shall be made without affording opportunity
of hearing to the institution.
— ~
27. Appeals against Orders of Central Adeption Resource Agency.—{1)
Any institution aggrieved by an order of the Central Adoption Resource .
de-recognisirig it may, within such time as may be prescribed prefer an appeal to
the Government. | 5

(2) The decision of the Government on such appeal shall be final.

CHAPTER VIII
BILATERAL AGREEMENTS

28. Agreement with Foreign Countries.—The Central Government may
enter into agreement with the Government of any foreign country to ensure the
welfare of Indian Child adopted by foreign parents, with special reference to
matters hereinafter stated:

(a) for determination of eligibility and suitability of an applicant of that
country for adoption of a child from India;

(b) for completing an early adoption of child under the corresponding
law of adoption in force in that country;

(©) for monitoring the welfare of child in that country and for periodical
Teports; -

(9) for enabling the child to be assimilated in the environment. of that
country;

(०) for the prevention of exploitation, discrimination and abuse of child
or investigation of cases relating to such acts.and punitive actions
under the law in force in that country;

(f) for securing equal rights and status to the child as if he was 9001 to
the adopters in lawful wedlock for all purposes:

(g) for enabling the child to be adopted by alternative eligible and suitable
Parents or repatriated to India, should it become necessary for any
Teason; and

(0) for the recognition of the child agencies working in that country. for
child welfare. ढ़

29. Countries with which no agreement Exists.—Where an adoption order
is made undet this Act and the country to which the foreign parents belong has
not entered into agreement, the Central Government may take appropriate steps
to ensure the welfare of the child including the repattiation of the child, should
it become necessary. ‘

i

CuapTer IX
POWER TO REMOVE DIFFICULTIES AND TO MAKE RULES

30. Power to Remove Difficulties—If any difficulty arises int giving effect
to the provisions of this Act, the Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the. :provisiont: of:
this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or oxpedignt for removing the difficulty:

Provided that no order shall be passed after two years from the commence-
ment of this Act.


. 33

31. Power to Make Rules(1) Fhe Govérnment may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, make rules for, carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice, to the generality of the provisions of
sub-section -(1), such rules may provide for—

(a) the manner in which an application fos adoption order shall be, made
under section 4. 4

(0) proper provision by way of deposit or bond in order to enable the
child to be repatriated under proviso (iii) of Section 5. .

(०) the manner in which consent, may be obtained to the adoption of ‘a
child and other matters relating to such consent under sub-section (3)
० ion 9.

(d) the procedure which may be followed in the Court in the proceedings
under sub-section (1) of Section 11; P

(©) the terms of office and quorum for the meetings of the Central Adop-
tion Resource Agency and the procedure to be followed by it -under
sub-section (3) of Section 20;

@® exchange of information under sub-sections (2), 3(c) and (e) of
Section 21;

(g) the form and manner in which the annual reports are to be prepared
under Section 23;

(h) the conditions for recognition in respect of an institution under sub-
section (d) of Section 25;

( the grounds for derecognition. of an institution under Section 26;

@ the form, manner and the: period within which an appeal may be
preferred to the Government under Section 27;

(0 any other matter for which provision has to be made or may be
made’ by’ rules.

(3) Every.rule made by the Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after’ it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
sestion,.for a ‘total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the. session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree
that rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of an effect, as the case may be; however, that any such
modification of annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.


APPENDIX ‘B’

Adoption of Children Sill, 1980
(Clauses 23 and 24)

. 3

“". “23, Restriction on removal of Citild fer Adoption Onitside Iedia—
(1) Except under the authority of an order, under section 24, it shall not be
lawful for any person to take or send out of prerrioiee who is a citizen of India
to any place outside India with a view to the of the child by any pérson.

11-12) Amy person who takes or setids a‘ chiki otit of India to any place out-
अंत India in contravention of sub-section (7) on takes to take part, in arrange-
ments for {ransferring the care and custody of Pa child to ally Petson for that
purpose sha! punishable with impri: AL 9 term which may extend to
six months of with fine, or with vot

-_ (3) kn-any proceeding under this section a report by an Indiay cossular
offices or an Indian diplomatic officer or 2 deposition made before an ladian con-
sular officer or an Indian diplomatic officer and awthenticated under the signature
of that officer shall be admissible as evidence of the matters stated therein, and it
shalf not be necessary to prove the signatate or offitial character of the person
who appears to have signed any such report or deposition.

यु

24. Provisional Adoption न by Person domiciled out hat India.
(1) ४ upon an application le by a person who is not domiciled in India, the
district court is satisfied that the applicant infdnds to adopt a child under the
law of or within the country in which he is domiciled, and for that purpose desires to
remove the efal¢ from India either immedimtedy oF after an interval, the court
may make an order (in this section referred to as a provisional adoption order)
authorisiig the applicant to remove the child for the purpose aforesaid and
giving to the applicant the care as aforesaid:

Provided that no application shall be entertained unless it is accompanied
by a certificate by the Centra] Government to the effect that— हु

@ tho applicant is’ गा its opinion, a fit person to adopt the child:

>. Gi} the welfare and interests of the chilé shalb be safeguarded under the —
1 law of the country of domicile of the applicant;
” @ii) the applicant has made Proper. pr ovision by way of deposit or bord
. 69 or otherwise in accordance with the rules made unden this Act to
enable the child to be repatriated to India, should it beconte necessary
for any reason. हु चिट

(2) A provisionai adoption order may be madé urider this section in case-
where an adoj ption order could be made in respect of the child under this Act
but shaJl not be made in any other case.

(3) The provisions of this Act relating to an adoption order shall, as far
as may be, apply in relation to a provisional adoption order made under this
section.”


aA YN

a

9० 7.०

17.
18.

19.
20.
21.
22.

23.

25.

27.

APPENDIX ९
Home Study Report
Source of referral.
Number of single and joint interviews.
Personality of husband and wife.

Health details such as clinical tests, heart condition, past illnesses etc.
(medical certificates required sterility certificate required, if applicable).

Social status and family background.

Nature and adjustment with occupation.
Relationship with community.

Description of home.

Accommodation for the child.

Schooling facilities.

Amenities in the home.

Standard of living as it appears in the home.
Type of neighbourhood.

Current relationship between husband and wife.

(a) Current relationship between parents and children (if any children)

(b) Development of already adopted children (if any) and their acceptance
of the child to be adopted.

Current relationship between the couple and the members of each other’s
families.

If the wife is working will she be able to give up the job?

If she cannot leave the job, what arrangements will she make to look after
the child?

Ts adoption considered because of sterility of one of the marital partners?
If not, can they eventual have children of their own?
If a child is born to them, how will they treat the adopted child?

If the couple already has children how will these children react to an
adopted child?

Important social and psychological experiences which “have had a bearing
on their desire to adopt a child.

Reasons for wanting to adopt an Indian child.
Attitude of grand-parents and relatives towards the adoption.

Attitude of relatives, friends. community and neighbourhood towards
adoption of an Indian child.

Anticipated plans for the adopted child.
35


28.

29.

31.

32.

33.

36

Can the child be adopted according to the adoption law in the adoptive
parents country?
Have they obtained the neecssary pérméssion to adopt? (Statement of per-

mission required.)

pee
Do the adoptive parents know any one who adopted a child from their
own country or another country? who are they? From where did they
fail to get a child from that source?

Did the couple apply for a child from any other source? If yes, which
source? हु

What type of child is the couple interested in? (sex, age, and for what
reasons.) हे

Worker’s recommendation concetning the family and the type of child
which would best fit into this home.

Name and address of the agency conducting the home study Name of
Social worker, qualification of social worker:

Name of a agency responsible for post placement, supervision and follow
up.


APPENDIX ‘D’

On the Documents, Certificates and Declarations as mentioned in the Supreme
Court Judgement (1984) 2 SCR 2, 7951: To be amnexed with am Application of

{a)

(b)
©

@-

» (e)

(0

(0)

@

®

(k)

0)

Inter-Comntry Adoption
A Home Study Report.
A recent photograph of the family.
A marriage certificate of the. foreigner.

declaration concerning health together with a certificate regarding medi-

cal fitness duly ‘certified by medical doctor.

A declaration tegarding financial status along with supporting documents
including employer’s certificate, where applicable, income-tax assessment
orders, bank references and particulars concerning the properties owned.

A declaration stating that they are willing to be appointed guardian of
the child.

An undertaking that’ they would adopt the child according to the law of
their country within a period of not more than two years from the time
of arrival of the child in their country.

An undertaking that they would give intimation of such adoption to the
Court appointing them as guardian as also to the social or child welfare
agency in India processing their case.

An undertaking that they would maintain the child and provide it neces-
sary education and upbringing according to their status.

An undertaking that they would send to the Court as also to the socia! or
child welfare agency in India reports reiating to the progress of the child
along with its recent photograph, the frequency of such progress reports
being quarterly during the first two years and half yearly for the next
three years.

A power of attorney in favour of an officer of the social or child welfare
agency in India which is requested to process the case and such power
of attorney should authorise the attorney to handle the case on behalf of
the foreigner in case the foreigner is not in a position to come to India.

The socia) or child welfare agency sponsoring the application of the forei-
gmer must also certify that the foreigner seeking to adopt a child is per-
mitted to do so according to the law of his country.

7

6—1 M of LAJINDIS


6)
(2)

७)
(4)

७)
(6)

(7)

APPENDIX फा
Child Stady Report

Identifying information, supported where possible by documents.

Information about original parents, including their health and details of
the mother’s pregnancy and birth.

Physical, intellectual and emotional development.

Health report prepared by a registered medical practitioner preferably by
a paediatrician.

Recent Photograph.

Present environment—category of care (own home, foster home, institution
etc.) relationships, routines and habits.

Social worker's assessment and reasons for Suggesting inter-country adop-
tion.


APPENDIX ‘F’
385931 No. 6(3) (15)/92-LC(LS)

18 Sep 92 and
23 Sep 92.

To

Secretaries of the
Institutions mentioned at
Appendix ‘D’

Sir,

I have the pleasure to inform you that the Law Commission of India has
decided to make a study on the aspect of adoption of Indian children by foreigners
with a view to find out“unscrupulous elements, if any, crept in it and to make
recommendations to the Government of India to enact an effective law to check
illegal trading in Indian chidren under the disguised inter State adoptions. It
has come to the notice of the Law Commission that your society is one of the
esteemed societies, which is involved in rehabilitation of abandoned children to
provide them with a family atmosphere and put in the best efforts for adoption
of these children by Indian as well foreign parents. It is also understood that
your society has given certain children in adoption to the foreigners and is aware
of various difficulties / problems related to such adoptions.

With a view to accomplish the object of making recommendation to the
Government of India for enacting an effective law, I am directed to take this
opportunity and to request you to make us aware on the following points:

(a) How many children have been given in adoption to foreign parents
by your society so far? If possible, please send the details of adop-
tion by the foreign parents, country-wise, sex-wise, religion-wise etc.

(0) Do you have some monitoring mechanism to ensure that the child
growth, physically, emotionally, intellectually, spiritually etc.? Whether
goes into the right family which would provide an atmosphere of full
such monitoring is through the Government of the country of the
adoptive parents or social welfare agencies operating therein?

(c) Whether any discrimination, exploitation, abuse or misuse of the
adopted child by the foreign adoptive parents has come to your
notice? If so, details thereof.

(d) Any other information(s) related to above said issue.
You are requested also to send your suggestions which you feel should be
kept in mind while making recommendations to the Government of India to enact

Jaw so that the welfare of the child becomes the prime concern of the inter-
country adoption.

You are further requested to send a copy of the constitution of your society
to enable us to know about the objectives and working system of your institution.

Yours faithfully,

(Sd/-)
(Dr. SANTOKH SINGH)
Assistant Law Officer


APPENDIX ‘G

List of Agencies recognised for doing Inter-Uomntry Adoption of Childrea to
whom letters at Appendix ‘F° were addressed

Andhra Pradesh

1 Guild of Service (Seva Samajam)
Balika Nilayam, 10-3-561/3
Vijaya Nagar Colony,
Hyderabad-500 457.

2 Indian Council of Social Welfare
(Red Hills, Inside Cancer Hospital)
Hyderabad-560 004:

3. Action for Social Development,
1-3-183/40/46/6,
Gandhi Nagar,
Hyderabad-500 038.

4. $.0.5. Childrens Village of India,
Kailash Colony-110 048.

5. Missionaries of Charity, Nirmala
Shisha Bhawan, 12, Commissioner Lane.
Delhi- 110.054:

6. Delhi Coukicil for Child Welfare
Qadsia Garden,

‘Yamuna Marg, Civil Lines-110 054.

7 Church of North India Shishu Sangopan Greha,
St. Michel's Compound Hospital Road,
Jangpura-110 014.

8. Holy Cross Social Service Centre.

34, Dr. Mukherjee Nagar West,
New -Delhi-110 009.

9. Welfare Home for Children,
68, Raja Garden-110 015.

10. Shri Kathiawar Nirashrit Balashram.
Malviya Road.
Rajkot-360 002.
Goa
11. . Caritas Goa,
Paco. Patriacal,
Altinha Panaji-403 001.
Goa.


4t

Karnataka

12.

13.

14.

15.

Ashraya,

Jawan’s Quarters, BDA Park,
Double Road, Indira. Nagar-I
Bangalore.

Shishu Mandir,

17/11, Cambridge Road,
Ulsoor,

Bangalore-560 038.

St. Michel Home,
Old Madras Road,
Indira Nagar,

Bangalore-560 038.

Society of Sisters of Charity’
St. Genosa Convent

Bal Velero Angelore
Mangalore-560 003.

Kerala

16.

17,

18.

19.

Kerala State Counil for Child Welfare
Thycaud
Thiruvananthapuram-695 014.

Dinasevanasabha
Snehaniketan Social Centre
Pattuvam,

Cannanoz,

Kerala.

Founding Home (Sisu Bhawan)
Padapuram P.O. Via Karukuthy
Emakulam District,

Kerala.

Holy Infants Mary’s Girl Home
53, District Wayanad,
Kerala.

Maharashtra

20.

21.

Hindu Women’s Welfare Society
Sharadhanand Mahilashram.
Sharadhanand Road, Matunga,
Bombay-400 019.

Bal Anand World Children Welfare Trust India
Sai Krupa, 93, Ghatla Village, Chembur,
Bombay-400 071.

St. Catherine’s Home,

Veera Desai Road, Andheri West,
Bombay-400 058.

Shejar Chhaya,

Deodal, Kaman PO. Teluka Vasai
Thane-401 202.


25.

27.

f

30.

42

Bharatya Samaj Seva Kendra,
No. 5, Koregaon Road,
Pune-411 001.

Indian Association for Promotion of Adoption,
RNA. House, Ist Floor, Veer Nariman Road,
Fort, Bombay-400 034.

Family Service Centre,
Euchavistic Congress Building-1I1
No. 5, Convent Street, Bombay-400 039.

Balwant Kaur Anand Memorial Welfare Society,
Preet Mandis, 18, Dr. Coyasi Road,
Pune-400 001.

The Society of Friends of Sassoon Hospital
Pune (Maharashtra).

Subhadra Mahtab Seva Sadan
At/PO G. Udayagiri

Phulbani District

Orissa.

Basundhara (At Chamba Tara)
Khalri Home

Cuttack-753 001

Orissa.

Punjab

31.

Anath Sewa Society
Gulab Devi Hospital Road,
Jallandhar- 144 008.

Pondicherry

32.

Tari
33.

Cluny Children’s Home

Cluny Sisu Iam;

Pouonnier St. Joseph

No. 8, Romain Rolland Street,
Pondicherry-605 001.

Neda

lustitute of the .ssaeisea 2 Missionairs of Marry Society No, 3,

Holy Apostles (७४०77

St. Thomas Mount Babies Home
St. Thomas Mount
Madras-600 016.

S.0.S. Children’s Villages of India,
Chathnath Homes, Karna Prayag,
Reception-cum-Adoption Centre,
12A, Nageswara Road,
Nungambakkam,

Madras-600 034.


37.

43

Grace Kenett Foundation,
34, Kennetts Road,
Madurai-625.010.

Family for Children
(Kuzhanthaikal Kudumpam),
Sunshine House,

93, Mettur Main Road,
Podanur-641 023.

Congregation of the Sisters of the Cross of Vhavanod
P.O. Bag No. 395, Tappakulam

Old Goods Shed Road,

Trichinappali-620 002.

West Bengal

38.

39.

Society of Indian Children’s Welfare
22, Col. Biswas Road,

Ballygunge,

Calcutta.

Missionaries of Charity,
54/A, Lower Circular Road,
Calcutta-700 016.

Indian Society for Rehabilitation of Children,
No. 112 8, Kankulia Road,
Calcutta-700 029.

Now-Placement Agency

Indian Council for Child Welfare,
4, Deen Dayal Upadhaya Marg,
New Delhi-110 022.


APPENDIX ‘H’

List of Agencies recognised for doing Inter-Coumtry Addjfon ofGiiidten whe
responded to the letter at Appendix ‘F”

Andhra Pradesh

1. The Secretary,
Guild of Service (Seva Samajam)
Balika Nilayam, 10-3-561/3
Vijay Nagar Colony,
Hyderabad-500 457.

2. Indian Council of Social Welfare
(Red Hills, Inside Cancer Hospital)
Hyderabad-500 038.

»

S.O.S. Children’s Village of India
Kailash Colony
New Delhi-110 048.

4. Missionaries of Charity,
Nirmala Shishu Bhavan,
12, Commissioner Lane,
Dethi-110 054.

5. Delhi Council for Child Welfare
Qudsia Garden,
Yamuna Marg,
Civil Lane,
Delhi-110 054.

6. Church of North India Shishu
Sangopan Greha,
St. Michel’s Compound Hospital Road,
Jangpura,
New Delhi-110 014.

7. Holy Cross Social Service Centre,
34, Dr. Mukherjee Nagar West,
New Delhi-110 009.

8. Welfare Home for Children,
68, Raja Garden-110 015.
Gujarat

9. Shiv Kathiawar Nirashrit Balashram,
Malaviya Road,

Rajkot-360 002.
Gea
10. Caritas Goa
Paco Patriacal
Althinho

Panaji-403 001.
Goa.


45
Karnataka

ll. Ashraya
Jawan’s Quarters, BDA Park,
Double Road, Indira Nagar-1
Bangalore.

12. St. Michel Home
Old Madras Road,
Indira Nagar
Bangalore-560 038.

Kerala

13. Dinasevanasabha
Snehaniketan Social Centre,
Pattuvam
Cannanore
Kerala.

14. Founding Home (Sisu Bhavan)
Padapuram P.O., Via Karukurthy,
Ernakulam District
Kerala.

Maharashtra

15. Bal Anand World Children Welfare Trust India
Sai Krupa, 93,
Chatla Village, Chembur,
Bombay-400 071.

16. St. Catherine’s Home,
Veera Desai Road, Andheri West,
Bombay-400 058.

17. Shejar Chhaya
Deodal, Kaman P.O., Taluka Vasai,
Thane-401 202.

18. Bharatya Samaj Seva Kendra,
No. 5, Koregaon Road,
Pune-411 001.

19. Indian Association for Promotion of Adoption,
RNA House,
Ist Floor, Veer Nariman Road,
Fort, Bombay-400 034.

20. Family Service Centre
Eochavistic Congress Building-III,
No. 5, Convent Street,
Bombay-400 039.

21.. Balwant Kaur Anand Memorial Welfare Society,
Preet -Mandire, 18, Dr. Coyasi Road,
Pune-411 001. , हे u

7-1 M of L&J/NDI9S



46

22. The Society of Friends of Sassoon Hospital,
Pune (Maharastra).

Orisa

23. Subhadra Mahtab Seva Sadan,
At/PO G. Udayagiri,
Phulbani District,
Orissa.

Punjab

24. ~Anath Sewa Society,
Gulab Devi Hospital Road,
Jallandhar-144 008.

Pondicherry

25. Cluny Children’s Home,
Cluny Sisu Mam,
Pouonnier St. Joseph,
No. 8, Romain Rolland Street,
Pondicherry.

Tamil Nado

26. Grace Kennett Foundation,
34, Kennetts Road,
Madurai-625 010.

27. Family for Children,
(Kuzhanthaikal Kudumpam)
Sunshine House,

93, Mettur Main Road,
Podanur-641 023.

West Bengal
28. Society for India Children’s Welfare,
22, Col. Biswas Road,

Ballygunge,
Calcutta.

29. | Missionaries of Charity,
54/A, Lower Circular Road,
Calcutta-700 016.

30. Indian Society for Rehabilitation of Children,
No. 112B, Kankulia Road,
Calcutta-700 029.

Non-Placement Agency

1. Indian Council for Child Welfare,
4, Deen Dayal Upadaya Marg,
New Delhi-110 002.

Note: Letter was also sent to the Central Adoption Resource Agency, Ministry
of Welfare, Government of India, New Delhi,


APPENDIX ‘T
Practical Working Experience ‘of the Child Welfare Agencies

The practical working experience gained by the child welfare agencies
can be summarised as under:—

हि (1) When the adoption dossier is received from foreign organisation, it
is screened by professional social workers of the recognised child welfare agency.
When approval is accorded by Indian agency then such agency, which has i
proved the adoption dossier, files the case for guardianship in local fa
court, where such court exists or in a district court.

The Indian Council of Social Welfare screens the family documents of
the foreigner and, accordingly, makes a recommendation to the court. The
judge gives his order if he is satisfied with the case. Thus that every family
applying for adoption from overseas is screened by a series of authorities for
their character, motivation, stability, mental and physical health, employment
and income and life style.

After such screening there have been no cases of misuse or abuse and
the problems which have come to light concern the common problems of teenagers
and family situations rooted in the child’s sense of rejection by his birth parents.

(2) By and large the children placed in inter-country adoption are those
who are either relinquished or abandoned. Hence, the religion of the child
has not been determined by the child welfare agencies.

(3) That most of the foreign adoptive couples are Christians and they
prefer to adopt even a handicapped child and an ugly fooking girl-child, which
might not be acceptable to Indian adoptive parents, and the children adopted
by them receive the best possible medical and emotional care,

(4) Those who are old enough for employment were selected for the
job on the basis of their aptitude and did not face any discrimination. Though
they are brought up by white parents, yet the adopted children are totally assimi-
lated into the family net-work and the social fabric. They are not looked
upon as immigrants or refugees.

(5) Occasional instances relating to problems of adjustment faced by the
children and the family are handled and resolved. delicately through counselling
by the social Work Agency. To facilitate the child's adjustment some agencies
abroad have now organised ‘support groups for adoptees’. In these meetings,
adoptees are able to discuss and come to terms with various issues on adoption.

(6) Some of the Indian agencies observed that adoptive parents tend to
be over indulgent and excessively proud of and grateful for their adopted
children.

(7) In some countries agencies through which Indian agencies are making
adoptive placements in the foreign country _ organise social get-togethers at
Christmas time or summer time. Some of them also organise ‘India Day’

celebrations.

(8) The Indian Embassies and High Commissions abroad monitor adop-
tions of Indian children by foreign parents. Post-placement reports are filed
jn the relevant Indian courts for 5 years. “Sueh reports of the child are sent
quarterly during the first two years ‘and half-Vearly for the subsequent three
years until the adoption is effectuated. : है ः

47


48

_ Occasional reports about the welfare and progress of the child are also
received from the adoptive parents by the Indian child welfare agencies.

‘th (9) Every year there are visits to India of some foreign adopted children
with their adoptive parents. The children are every keen to discover their roots

and to know about their country of origin: «

_ 0) Some Indian agencies’s workers are visiting the adopted children and
their families abroad and sometime conduct social gatherings of these children
there in order to get a clear idea about the welfare and progress of the children.

(11) That most of the Indian child welfare agencies have developed close
association with foreign child welfare agencies through their work of inter-
country adoption, This facilitates better monitoring of the welfare and pro-
gress of the Indian children adopted by the foreign parents,

(12) There are some factors which entail the involvement of foreign
government officials in the inter-country adoption. Firstly, one of the documents
required for inter-country adoption is the ‘approval of the country’s Government’.
This is a document which endorses the valid: कि of the-foreign adoption applicants
and consequently grants permission for the adopted child’s entry into the foreign
country. The approval is given after the careful scrutiny of the adoptive parents
by ‘their country’s government officials/immigration department.

Secondly, the factor requiring foreign government involment is that all
inter-country adoption documents prior to their acceptance need to be notarised
and the notarised signature is authenticated by either the Ministry of External
Affairs or Justice or Social Welfare of the Country of the foreigner or by an
officer of the Indian Embassy/Consulate or High Commission in that country.

Thirdly, the, overall monitoring of adoption process and wellbeing of
children adopted, with full status, as citizens having equal rights like others
is the responsibility of foreign governments.

(13) Generally social welfare agencies do not restrict placement of children
to any one country or agency, excepting few of them who resirict their activity
to the selected few countries.

(14) In Sweden when a couple applies for adoption the Government esta-
blished social welfare committee gives an approval of the family checking out
their record as citizens of Sweden. Thereafter, a social worker, who is a Swedish
Government employee, conducts the ‘home study’ interviews, visits the home,
screens the family for suitability for adoption of a foreign child.

Then the family registers for adoption of a child from India with a
licensed adoption agency in Sweden. This agency is also recognised and listed
by the Ministry of Social Welfare of the Igdian Government. It is this agency
which forwards the documents to the Indian re ised child welfare agencies
and is fully responsible for the placement of the cht [0 in case of any problem
and also undertakes to do post placement reporting as per the requirement of
the Indian Courts.

When the child goes to Sweden under the custody of the guardian ap-
pointed by the Indian court, the child is legally adopted under Swedish law.
‘The law of adoption in Sweden confers absolutely equal rights upon the adopted
child.

In Sweden, the children enjoy all social security measures including free
education, health, unemployment benefits, old-age care etc.

The adoptive parents get one year paid matemnity/paternity leave to take
care of the child. They have the option to return to only part time work after
this leave period is over. The child is offered free day foster-care with a foster

waa nemdany am am JaT10 20 to Work.


49

Sweden has a governmental apex body called NIA to monitor inter
country ade option: In case any adoption agency or adoptive family has any
serious ous prob) , it can take action on the same. NIA holds an annual conference

' of welfare policy makers, governmental social workers and members of
the Swedish Parliament at which they discuss issues concerning inter-country
adoption. At this meeting they also invite people involved in child care activi-
ties in India. In this way adoption in Sweden is thoroughly monitored.

., (15) In USA where Indian children are placed for adoption, it being a
federal state, laws differ from state to state.

Some Indian agencies work with a few selected ageacies which are licensed
for adoption by their state government as well as recognised by the Indian”
Government for processing and doing follow up work of Indian children placed
in adoption. For example, society of Friends of the Sassoon Hospital, Pune,
work with the Wide Horizons for Children Inc. in Boston State and Hold
International Children’s Service in Oregon State,

8—1 M of LAJIND/9S


APPENDIX ५*
As per the Data Reported by Recognised Indian Social/Child Welfare
Agencies during

the years 1909, 1990 and 1991
eee
No. Name and address of the Years Years Years
organisation 1989 1990 1991

Foreign Indian Foreign Indian Foreign Indian
Adop- Adop- Adop- Adop- Adop- Adop-
tion tion tion tion tion tion

a) Q) 8) (4) @) © DM ®

Apdhra Pradesh
1. Guild of Service
(Seva Samajam)

¢ Gey majam)

ika Nilayam, 10-3-561/3

Yaya Nagar Colony,

Hyderabad-500 457 4 10 वा 15 4 6

2. Indian Council of Social Welfare
Red Hills, Inside Cancer Hospital

Compound)
Hyderabad-560 004 20 a 23 14 16 7

3, $.0.S. Children’s Villages of India,
4-38, Kailash Colony,
New Delhi-110 048 3 19 4 33

4. Missionaries of Charity
Nirmala आए Bhawan
12, Commissioner Lane,
Delhi-110 054 137 54 126 60 Wt 7

5. Delhi Council for Child Welfare,

sia Garden, Yamuna Marg,

Civil Lines,

Dethi-110 054 22 41 29 43 28 52

w

41

6. Society for Child Development
House No. 630, Caranzelom
Goa-403 002 3 2 12 7 16 9

7 Caritas Goa

Paco Patriarcel .
Altinho Panjim
Goa-403 001 13 6 2 6 6 4

Gojerat

8. Shri Kathiawar Nirashrit Balashram
Malviya road
Rajkot-360 002 3 MW 3 24 8 3

9. Mahipatram Rupam Ashram
Opposite Raipur Gate
Ahmedabad-380 022 27 5 9 15 23 10

Haryana

10. Haryana State Council for Child Welfare
Bal Vikas Bhawan
650, Sector 16 D
Chandigarh-160 016 6 1 ने _ _ -

Karnataka

11, Canara Bank Relief & Welfare Society
27th Cross, Panashankari
2nd Stage
Bangalore-560 070 5 6 14 2 6 16

12, Ashraya
Jawan’s colony. B.D.A. Park
Double R Indira Nagar

Bangalore-560 038 15 1 16 19 9 80



34

(1)

(2) 8)

13

15.

St. Michael's Home

Old Madras Road,

Indira Nagar,

Bangalore -560 038 10

Society of Sister’s of
St. Joseph of Tarbes
17, Promenade Road,
Bangalore-560 005 4

Shishu Mandir

1341, 10th Cross

Indira Nagar, 2nd Stage

Bangalore-560 038 =

Kerala

16.

17.

St. Josephs’s children’s Home
Kummannoor, Cherpunkal P.O.
District Kottayam 38

Foundling Home (Sisu Bhawan)
Padupuram P.O. via Karukutty
District Eranakulam 2

Kerala State Council for Child Welfare,
Thucaud
Trivandrum-695 014 न

Maharashtra

19,

21.

25.

Balwant Kaur Anand Memorial

Welfare ty,

Anand Corner, 18

Dr. Coyaji Road,

“Pune-411 001 10

Indian, Association for Promotion of -
Ae House, Ist Floor,
Veer Nariman 1२६

Bombay- 400 034

Children of the World (India) Trust,
501, At hamber

Bombay- 400 034 17

Pushpawadi Founding Home

Nagpur House of Mary Immaculate
Providence School compound

Civil Lines

‘Nagpur-440 001 4

Bharatiya Samaj Seva Kendra
Pune-411 001 a

Mahila Sewa Mandal
25/20 Karve Road
Pune - 411 004 3

Family Service Centre, r

ucharistic Cor ilding-I1

No. 5, Convent Stree *

Bombay-400 039 3

Maharashtra State Women's Council

Rescue home, Asha Sadan Marg,

Umerkhadi

Bombay-400 009 15
Vivekanand Bala Sadan

Seth Daga, Dharamsala

Opp. Railway Station

Kampte,
‘Nagpur-411 002 3

4)

10

13

17

33

(5)

21

16

17

45

10

34

(6)

17

15

19
15

i

68

43

36

(7) (8)

Not renewed

18 19

Not renewed

38 iW

27 27



Eee ee ooo,

6) (2) ७9) ® ७) © Mm (७)

ANSE aes

28. Hindu Women’s Welfare Society
Sharadhanand Mahilashram,
Sharadhanand Road,

Matunga,

Bombay-400 019 8 32 11 45 16 32
29. W.B.N. Balakashrarms

431 Navi Peth

Pandbarper

District Sholapur 10 9 7 5 7 3
30, Missionaries of Charity

Nirmala Shishu Bhawan,

Mille Fare Cw Parle (West)
est)
0: 55 50 70 70 53 a“
Sewa Sangh
(Founding Home)
of Social Work

Bajaj Nagar
Nagpur-411 010 6 19 4 19 9 1

32, St, Crispin’s He
FR-10, CTS-12, Karve Road
Barabdat

Pune-411 010 1 1 1 i Not renewed

33. Bal Anand World Children
‘Welfare 1!
a Ghatla Village Chembur

31.

47 33 44 40. Not renewed

Veera Dosei Road

Andheri (West)

Bombay-400 059 25 13 19 17... Not renewed
35. Holy Cross Home for Babies

Cjo Holy

Amravati (Camp)-444 602 ~ जन - 2 6 3

36. Kuan Vin Charitable Trust
91, Advent, 12-A, General

Bhondac Road,
Bombay-400 021 - - 26 8 Not renewed
Oriesa

37, Manoj Manjari Shishu Bhawan
AT/P.O. Keonjhargarh
District Keonjargarh
Pin-738 001 15 1 3 3 _- 3
पड Matia> Seva Sadan
Phrulbani-762 100 _ _ - — 3 _

39.} Basundhara
AT. Dhrabatara
Khalasi

‘Tamil Nadu

41, Guild of Service (Central)
28, Casa Major Road

008 6 7 36 5 ay 3
42. Congre of the Sisters of the

Cross 5
P.B. No. 395, Old Goods Shed Road
002 , Woo | 9 28 ०



q@)

(2 ५)

(4)

©

Institute of the Franciscan-

Missionari Mary Society

No. 3, Holy Apostles Convent

St. Thomas Mount Babies Home

St. Thomas Mount

Madras-600 016 ~-

kam
Madras-600 008 4
Grade Kennett Foundation
34, Ke

Madurai-625 010 10

SOS Children’s Villages
of India, th
Praya
Reception-cum-Adoption Centre
1st Main Road,
Thambaram

it
Madras-600 059 जा

‘Uttar Pradesh

51.

52.

53.

Uttar Pradesh Council for Child Welfare
Moti Mahal,

Rana Pratap,

Lucknow

‘Calcutta-700 016 im

Indian for Spon. & Adoption,
Society for Spot dopti

1 Ky.
Calcutta- 700 016 34

International Mission of (Indi

2 Nima Mebat no” एव) Society
Calcutta-700 048 _
Indian Society for Rehab. of Children

112B, KankuliaR oad,

Calcutta-700 029 55
Shri Shraddhanand
Anathalaya Shraddanand Peth
Nagpur

Guild Welfare & Rehabilitation
Akashwani Road,

Patna;800 014 8

Society of sisters of Charit
‘St. Georges convent

mite

i

4

203

13

18 s

Not renewed



eS
0) (2) (3) @ 65) © Mm (8)

58, Welfare Home for Children
68, Raja Garden

New Delhi 23 8 25 13 ua 18
59. Holy Cross Home for Social Service
34, Mukherjee Nagar,
12 6 22 n 2h 3
60, M/s Church of North India
Jangpura,
New Delhi 33 25 36 2 33 35

61. Action for Social Development
Office

inistrative
1-3-183/40/46/6, Gandhi Nagar
‘derabad- _ = _ ~ - _

62. Society of the Friends of the Sassoon
Hospit

‘C/o Medical Social Workers

Departments, Room No. 80,

Sassoon General Hospital

Pune-411 001 _ _ _ _ ” 3

63. Dinasevanasabha
Sneheniketan Social Centre
Pattuvam District
Cannanoore 24 6

64, Shejhar Chhaya Deodal
Kaman P.O.,
Taluka Vasai
Distt. Thana
Maharashtra जा - 10 7

65. Anath Societ;
Gulab Devi Hospital Road
Jalandhar, Punjab - - ता

66. Holy बा Mary’s 0108 Hefie
District-Wynad
Kerala 18 7 28. 10 15 22

Granp ToTaL 1213 757 1272 1075 1190 936

1989 Foreign adoptions—1213
Indian adoptions—757

1990 Foreign adoptions—1272
Indian adoptions—1075

1991 Foreign adoptions—1190
Indian adoptions—936

Sew ve : Central Adoption Ks Agency (Ministry of Welfare) Letter No, 3-53/92-C&A
177 dated 25th 1 ovemiber.

Note.— Central Adoption Mery.
the Joint Secy. Inchai
mation promptly as requisite inputs Person:
useful.

-y not only responded to our communication, but

FCARA was very helpful in providing necessary infor-
interactions with him were quite



APPENDIX ‘K’
Piacement Agency-wise Data relating to Children Adopted by Foreigners

डा. Name of the Ni jven ii i i
=) Agency _ lumber of Children given in Adoption during Total R
1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993
(M) (F) (४) (F) (७४) (9) 0) (४) 0४). (9) (Mm) (9) (M+F)
6) @ (3) @ 0७9) (6 mM (8) (9 Qo (01) (12) (63. (14) (5) (16)
1. Bharatya Samaj Seva Ken- ~_ न - = — _ _ No year-wise break.
dra, Pune. (4 “66; F=238) up given.
2 Caritas Goa, Panjim. _ ~ _ -- _ _ —_ ~ ven from
(M=39: F=48) 1986 to 1991
3. Se etl Children’s Home, _ _ न — जज — _ न = = ~ - Bil from
Pondicherry. (M=98;F=317) 1968 to 1992
4. Delhi Council for Child 6 17 8 18 2 25 3 25 - 25 न — ,, 569 Data given from
(M=158;F=411) 1978 to 1992
5. Dinasevanasabha, Pattuvam, = — - — ~ न _ - — ,.. 185 No break-up and
Cannanore, Kerala. (M=71;F=48) year mentioned
« Families for Children, = न _ 2 1 5 6 3 3 न - _ 20
Podanur, Coimbatore. (M=10;F=10)  —
7. Family — Service Centre, 2 6 1 8 _ 7 1 4 — न ज- ज+ 88 Since 1975
Bom! (M =25;F +63)
8. Grace Kennet Foundation 1 2 _ 10 4 12 5 9 — 9 _ ~ 1 Since 1985 to 1992
Madurai (M14;F=63)
9. Todian Society for Rehabil. 63 ~ 39 न 28 ज+ is _ - —~ 206 eng 7 आन from
Hon ak uj 1" ग
०४४७. 1985 to 1992 (Oct)
10. Missi . _ _ -- = _ — 2358 No sex-wise _ break
ionaries of — Charity, up given and data
from 1960 to 1991
11. Missionaries of ity, 2 23 7 9 - ~ _ a - _ - -
pan ies of Charity,

41
(M=9; F=32)



sad

8B

MGIPCBE—S-2—1 M of L&J/ND/95—13-3-97—285.

}. World

Subhadra Mahtab
Sadan, Ganjam, Orissa.
Children Welfare
Trust India, Bombay.

Welfare Honse for Children,
New Delhi.

. Source: recognised
relating to foreign

Seva Till the date of issue of this receipt processing has been goirig for six children for the clearance in court of law
for adoption. .

0) (2) ७9. ® © © i) (8) ७9७ a apy (602 (69) aH «ay
12, Pingla Ghar, Jalandhar = — - = - - - - _ 1 _ - - 1®
13, Preet Mandir, Pune 3 6 - Woo 8 3 1 3. - - 62
(M=5;F=57) _ Since 1987.
14 Chhaya, Th, = — — - -“- = = - 28
Mabarashera (M=5;F=23) No year-wise
break up given
15. SOFOSH; Pune. 1 13 1 12 1 5 1 कफ = - - 92 Since 1985
(M=10;F=82)
16. SO8, Children’s Villages of 1 4 1 40 - 2 = 3. - - - +- 2 Data from
(M=8;F=19) 1984 to 1991
New Delhi.
17, Shisu Sangopan _ Griha, - - - _- _ - 5 - ना - - तू
Jangpura, New Delhi. (M=64;F =177) break up” given:
Since 1985 to 1992
(Oct.)
18, Society for Indian Children - - _ ad - - - _ - तू जन = ata from 1979 to
-. Welfare, Calcutta, (M=364;F =577) 1991
19. Catherine's Home, “4 18 0 17 9 13 8 3 2 = = ise break
1 Fate (Wy, Mabarasbare. (M=116,F=121) up given
20. SiuBhaben, SisterofNeze- "7... “>>. >> >>» -थ “| - - “| 232 Till October, 1992
woth, Poduspuram, Kerala. (M=99;F = 133)
21. St Michel's Hom, — — = = = = = = = - - - Data given from
Bangalore. (M=95;F=142) 1954 onwards. No
year-wise break up

given

Till September 1992;

~~ (M=95;F=243) No year-wise break

_ 76
(M=22;F=54)

up given
Since 1980 to Oct. 92

social/child welfare agencies responded fo the communication of the Law Commission (Appendix ‘P), but the above mentioned 24 agencies supplied data