LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY FOURTH
REPORT

ON
THE CODB OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE,

1973
(ACT No. 2 OF 1974)

(VOL. 1)

1996


JUSTICE CHAIRMAN

हि LAW COMMISSION
K. JAYACHANDRA REDDY GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI - 110001

Tel. Off. : 3384475
Res. : 3019465

August 22, 1996

Dear Law Minister,
1 have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the 154th
Report of the Law Commission of India on the ‘Code of Crimi-
nal Procedure, 1973”. This brings to a conclusion one of the

major tasks assigned to the Law Commission by the Government
of India.

2. A detailed examination of the Code with a view to do
comprehensive revision was undertaken by the Commission
immediately when 1 assumed charge on 15th July, 1995.

3. In order to elicit public opinion on the subject, the
Commission circulated a working paper and detailed questionnaire
on the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 setting out various
aspects of the subject under study.

4. The Commission had also organised workshops under
the auspices of High Courts at Allahabad, Ahmedabad, Mumbai,
Chandigarh, Delhi, Hyderabad, Cochin, Madras, Patna and at
some selected district Headquarters.

5. The Commission also examined the provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994, while
making out recommendations.

6. We have endeavoured to make the present Report, a
comprehensive one and included in it some of the provisions of
the Criminal Procedure (Amendment), Bill, 1994.

7. Finally, we wish to express our appreciation for valu-
able help received from Dr. S.C. Srivastava, Joint Secretary &
Law Officer in drafting of this report, preparing questionnaire
and assisting the Commission right through.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,
(Sd-)
(K. JAYACHANDRA REDDY)
Hon’ble Shri Ramakant Khalap,
Minister of State for Law & Justice
Government of India,
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi.


CONTENTS

VOLUME 1

CHaPter

वा.

गा.

1५.

५

Mi

vil.

VINE.

XL.

Xt.

xiv.

XIV,

XV.

XVI.

XVII

शा,

XIX,

XX.

XXI.

XX,

Introduction

Establishment of Scrarate Investigating Agency
Independent Prosecuting Agency

Law of Arrest

Custody, Remand and changes in Section 16712)
Bail, Anticipatory tail and Surctics
Buil-Attendance of Accused-Appellate Stage

Summon Cases-Warrant Cases-Summary Trial-Changces in Procedure

Examination of witnesses and Record of their Statements : Sections

161 and 162

Protection and facilities (0 witnesses

Examination of Accused under Section 313

Compounding of offences : Section 320

Plea Bargaining

Nyaya Panchayats

Victimotogy

Enquiry and Trial of persons of Unsound mind

Procedure for Maintenanve of Wives, Children and Parents
Spccial Protection in respect of Womcn

Punishment of Imprisonment for life, sentencing and Set-off

Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994 : Proposed
changes

Speedy Justice

Conclusions and Recommendations

1318
19-20
21-30

at

32-- 36

37--42
43--44
45-46
47--50
51-54
55-56
57--65
66-71

72--75
76-83

84--85

86--89
90--116

117--125


CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

t. After coming into force of the Constitution of India, the First Law
Commission in its Fourteenth Report on Reform of Judicial Administration made
extensive recommendations on the reform of criminal justice system in 1958."
The Commission had examined the subjects of organization of criminal courts.
police investigation, prosecuting agencies. delays in criminal _ trials, committal
proceedings. criminal appeals, revisions and inherent powers. procedure for trial
of perjury cases, etc. As a 1९501. the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 was
amended to give effect to some of the recommendations. On reconstitution. the
Law Commission was asked by the Government of India to undertake a compre-
hensive review of the Code. While this review was in progress. the Commission
rendered certain reports on specific problems arising cut of certain provisions of
the Code. Those were :

(1) Report on the Evidence of Officers of the Mint and of the Indian
Security Press regarding Forged Stamps, Currency Notes, etc. (S. 510
of the Code).*

(2) Report on Section 9 of the Code regarding the Appointment of Ses-
sions Judges. Additional Sessions Judges and Assistant Sessions
Judges?

(3) Report on Section 44 of the Code and a suggestion to add a Provision
relating to the Reporting of, and the Disclosure in Evidence about,
Offence relating to Bribery,‘ and

(4) Report on Sections 497, 498 and 499 of the Code with reference to

the Question of Granting of Bail with Conditions.’
(5) Report on the first fourteen Chapters comprising sections | to 176 of
the Code.‘

1.2. The Fifth Law Commission undertook a detailed study of the Code
from where the previous Commission had concluded its Report, viz., Section 177
and rendered the Forty-first Report representing a compre! Pensive teview of the
Code in 1969. Consequent to that Report, the Parliament enacted the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 which came into effect on April 1. 1974,

1.3. Subsequent to the coming into force of the new Code, the Law Com-
mission has given the following Reports on specific subjects relating to the
criminal justice system.

1. Some Questions under the Code of Criminal Procedure Bill, 1973.’
2. Delay and Arrears in Trial Courts.’

3. Congestion of Undertrial Prisoners in Jails”

4

. Rape and Allied Offences-—Some Questions of Substantive Law, Pro-
cedure and Evidence.

5. Section 122(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Imprison-
ment for Breach of Bond for keeping the Peace with Sureties.”

. Need for Amendment of the Provisions of Chapter 1X of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in order to Ameliorate the Hardship and
Mitigate the Distress of Neglected Women, Children and Parents."

7. Concessional Treatment for Offenders Who on their Own Initiative
Choose to Plead Guilty Without Bargaining.”

8. Report on Custodial Crimes."
1.4. With a view to removing certain difficulties experienced in its work-
ing, the Code of 1973 underwent several amendments in 1974, 1978, 1980. 1983,
1988, 1990, 1991 and 1993 for specific purposes.

1


>

1.5. In May, 1994 the Government of तब introduced the Code of Cri-
minal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994 in the Rajya Sebha incorporating many
amendmenis in the Code. The Bill is at present before the Parliameatary Stand-
ing Committee on Home Affairs.

1.6. In the meantime, the Government of India has made a reference to
the Law Commission to undertake comprehensive revision of the Code of Cri-
minal Procedure and suggest reforms in the law.

In view of the above, the Law Commission has undertaken a study of
comprehensive revision of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973. so as to remove
the germane problems leading to consequential delay in disposal of criminal
cases.

To order to elicit public opinion on the Subject, the Com: ion circulated
a working paper, a detailed questionnaire on the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (Annexure 1 & II) setting out various aspects Of the subject under study.
The questionnaire was sent to all the State Governments, Director General of
Police of ali States, Supreme Court and High Court Judges. Bar Associations,
Professors of Law, Advocates and Non-Governmenial Organisations. Varied
responses received on the questionnaire are summarised in Annexure 111.

The Commission had also organised workshops under the auspices of High
Courts at Allahabad. Ahmedabad, Bombay, Chandigarh, Delhi, Hyderabad. Kochi,
Madras and Patna. At all these places the Commission had the benefit of dis.
cussions with the High Court Judges, senior lawyers, District and Sessions Judges,
Police officers, legal academicians and non-Governmental organisations on the sub-
jects indentified by the Commission for review and reforms. At Jaipur. the Central
Law Commission and the Rajasthan State Law Commission had organised the
workshop, At Guntur and Thiruvananthapuram, the Commission had Meetings
with local Bar Associations and Judges on the scope of the amendment of the
Code (Annexure IV). The Commission has, while formulating this Report, taken
into consideration the views expressed at various workshops.

1.7. The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bitl, 1994 contains 49
clauses incorporating amendments. The significant amendments pertain to the
following subject-matter ;

Grant of autonomy to the prosecution agency (5. 24), setting up of the
Directorate of Prosecution (S. 25A), Procedure of arrests and_safe-
guards thereon for arrest of women (Ss, 45, 46. SOA): medical exa-
mination of the accused generally. (Ss. 53 and 54) of the erson accus-
ed of rape (S. 53A): identification of arrested persons ( g S4A): pro-
clamation of absconded _ persons committing grave offences. under
IPC (S. 82); Dealing with offences under the Foreigners Act, 1946
to check. the flow of undesirable foreigners into the country (5. 110):
raising the ceiling of maintenance of parents, wives and children
(S. 125): empowering the district magistrate to prohibit mass drill or
mass training with arms in a public place in order to check communal
tension and foster a sense of security for the public (S. 144A); medical
examination of the victim of rape by government registered medical
practitioner or in their absence, by any other registered medical
practitioner (S. 164A); to facilitate compounding of offences at the
Stage of investigation for quick disposal of cases {S. 173); manda-
tory judicial inquiry in case of death or disappearance of a person
or rape of women in police custody and conducting of post mortem
exammation within 24 hours of death (S, 176); empowering the ma-
gistrate to authorise further detention in custody of an accused for a
limited period after recording reasons (S$. 190): Protection given to
members of Armed Forces accused of offences to be extended to
other public servants charged with the maintenance of public order
(5. 197); making it obligatory on the magistrate to inquire or direct
investigation of the case before summoning the accused residing
beyond his jurisdiction (§, 202): empowering the Sessions Court also
to hold joint trial on the application of the accused persons (S. 223);
empowering the Sessions Judge to transfer a case not only 10.5 the
Chief Judicial Magistrate but, also. to any other judicial . magistrate.


3

. 228) expansion of the category of cases for stenmary tials
. 260) making memorandum of identification memo prepared by
magistrate admissible in evidence without formal proof of facts stat-
ed therein. with a discretion conferred in the court to examiine she
magistrate on the subject matter of the memorandum on the appli-
cation of the prosecution or the accused (S. 291A): empowering ma-
gistrates to issue directions to any one including an accused person
lo give specimen signatures and handwriting (S$. 311A); permission
to file an appeal in the Sessiens Court instead of High Court on
the basis of inadequacy of sentence passed by a magistrate (S. 377):
provision for appeal against acquittals by magistrate to the Sessions
Court (S. 3781. appellate court to give notice to the prosecution be-
fore releasing on bail a person convicted of an offence punishable
with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of
not less than ten years {S. 389): prayision that, the petiod for which
the life convict remained in detention during investigation, inquiry
or trial be setof against the period of 14 years of actual imprison.
ment (5. 433A): an arrested person accused of a bailable offence, if
indigent and cannot furnish security, be released on execution of
bond without sureties (S. 436) detention of undertrial prisoner, except
the one accused of an offence punishable with death, not to exceed
one-half of the maximum period of imprisonment for the offence;
mandatory release on personal bond with or without sureties;
absolute ben on detention beyond the maximum period of imprison-
merit for the offence (5, 436A): certain restrictions in the grant of
bail to previous convicts of grave offences and other conditions on
the grant of bail with a view to ensuring that the accused on bail
does not interfere or intimidate witnesses (S. 437); provision for
more stringent conditions for the grant of anticipatory bail by the
Sessions Court and High Court (S. 438); surcty to disclose to the
court as to in how many cases he has already stood surety for accus-
ed persons (S. 441A): forfeiture of bond for appearance before a
court and the court's powers thereon (S. 446): amendments to First
and Second Schedules of the Code of Criminal Procedure; amend-
ments to Indian Penal Code, namely, (i) S. 153AA punishment for
violation of prohibitory order on mass drill or srainkig with arms
in public places, (ii) $. 174A prescribing punishment for proclaimed
oftenders, (iii) $. 229A prescribing punishment for persons released
on bail failing to appear and surrender to custody.

1.8. The Law Commission had also undertaken an intensive study of

the Code with a view to eliminating the problems and bottlenecks leading to
delay in the disposal of criminal cases as well as other remedial measures. The
Commission set about its task by identifying the following areas in the Code
which needed redesigning and restructuring:

(i) Establishment of Separate Investigating Agency.

(ii) Independent Prosecuting Agency.

(iii) Law of Arrest.

{iy} Custody, Remand and Changes in Section 167(2).

(v) Bail, Anticipatory Bail and Sureties.

(vi) Bail--Attendance of Accused—-Appellate Stage.

(vii) Summons cases—Warrant Cases—Summary Trial: Changes in Pro-

cedure.

(viii) Examination of Witnesses and Record of their Statements under sec-

2-15 of L & J{ND/97

tions 16) and 162.

{ix) Protection and Facilities 10 Witnesses.
{x) Examination of Accused under Section 313,

(xi) Compounding of Offences : Section 320.
(xii) Plea Bargaining.


4
(xiii) Setting up of Nyaya Panchayats : Scope of Jurisdiction and Nature
of Offences to be Tried by them.

(siv) Victimology and Compensating the Victims: Insertion of New Pro-
visions.

(xy) Inquiry and Trial of Persons of Unsound Mind.

(xvi) Procedure for Maintenance of Wives, Children and Parents,
(xvii) Special Protection in respect of Women.
txviii) Punishment of Imprisonment for Life, Sentencing and Ser Of.

(xix) Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendmenty Bill. 1994: Proposed
Changes.
(xx) Speedy Justice.
We have examined the aforesaid problems in detail keeping in view the
various responses received on the questionnaire and the views expressed in the

workshops. Accordingly, we have made our recommendation particularly from
the point of view of “speedy trials”.

FOOTNOTES
3, 14th Report : Submitied on September 26. 1958. See. Vol. II, 714
—849,
2. 25th Report : Submitted on Sept. 27, 1963.
3. 32nd Report ; Submitted on May 29, 1967.
4. 33rd Report: Submitted on December 15, 1967.
5. 36th Report: Submitted on January 9, 1968.
6. 37th Report: Submitted on February 19, 1968.

. 48th Report: Submitied on July 25, 1972,
77th Report : Submitted on November 27, 1978.

nN

9. 78th Report : Submitted on February 2, 1979.
10. 84th Report: Submitted on April 25, 1980.
11. 1020 Report; Submitted on July 2, 1984.

12, 132nd Report: Submitted on April 19, 1989.
13, 142nd Report: Submitted on August 22, 1991.
14. 152nd Report : Submitted on August 26, 1994,


CHAPTER li

ESTABLISHMENT OF SEPARATE INVESTIGATING AGENCY

1. The need for expeditious and effective investigation of offences as
contributing tv the achievement of the goal of speedy trial cannot be gainsaid.

The investigating agencies have an important role to play in the administration
of criminal justice.

2. Investigatioin of crime is a highly specialized process requiring a lot
of patience, expertise. training and clarity about the legal position of the specific
offences and subject matter of investigation and socio-economic factors. His
basically an art of unearthing hidden facts with the purpose of linking up diffe-
rent pieces of evidence for the purpose of successful prosecution. {1 requires
specialisation and professionalism of a type not yet fully perceived by police
agencies. For discharging such a task efficiently, a separate investigating wing
of the police which replenishes its knowledge and skills from deve {oping tech-
nology is a desideratiun.

3. It is the common complaint of police officers that the police depart
ment is understaffed and has a heavy duty to perform. The requirements of
the law and order situation, bandobast duties, escort of prisoners to courts,
patroi duties, traffic arrangements, security to VIPs, rise in crime graphing the
country in general and the creation of new kinds of substantive Offences have
increased manifold the work of the police. Further, many a time while the
investigating officer is in the midst of the investigation, he would be called away
in connection with some other duty. Consequently, he would be constrained to
suspend the investigation or hand it over to a junior officer. Further, it also
happens that investigating officers arc transferred without being allowed to com-
plete the investigation in hand. Even in grave offences there is piecemeal
investigation by different police officials in the hierarchy which inevitably re-
sults in variation of statements by the witnesses examined and recorded at diffe-
rent times. Such variation would ultimately destroy the efficacy of the evidence
of witnesses when examined in the court. This is a defect in the investigational
process, advantage of which is taken by the defence. .

4. The Law Commission in its Fourteenth Report had examined in de-
tail the drawbacks in the then existing investigative machinery and of the
jnvestigational processes. The Commission made the following suggestions to
improve the quality of investigation :

sWe think on the whole that there is great force in the suggestion that,
as far as practicable, the investigating agency should be distinct
from the police staff assigned to the enforcement of law and order,
We do not. however, suggest absolute separation between the two
,anches. Even officers of the police department have taken the
that if an officer is entrusted with — investi pation duties, his,
services should not be required for other work while he is engaged
in investigation. The separation of the investigating machinery. may
involve some additional cost. We think, however, that the exclu-
sive attention of the investigating officer is essential to the conduct
of an efficient investigation and the additional cost involved in the
implementation of our proposal is necessary. The adoption of such
a separation 511 enswfe undivided attention to the detection of
crime. 1 will also provide additional strength to the police esta-
blishment which needs an increase in most of the States."

5, The National Police Commisyice? in its Fourth Report bemoaned the
lack of exclusive and single minded devotion of ee officials in the investiga-
tion of crimes for reasons beyond their contre The Commission found on #
sample survey carried out in six states in dillerent “parts of the country that an
average investigating officer is able. to devote only 37 par. cent of his time i”
investigational work while the rest of his time is taken up by other duties. In
view of this the Police Commission has pointed out that there is av urgent need

5


6

for iacreasing the cadre of investigating officers and for restructuring the police
hierarchy lo secure. inter alia, a large number of officers « handle invesligalion
work.

6. This is one of the issues on which the Law Commission had consulta
tions with the Members of the Bench and the Bar. prosecuting agencies and
senior police officers during the legal workshops held at various places. [1 is
the unanimous opinion that investigation of serious offences punishable with
sentence of seven years or more should invariably be undertaken by senior offi:
cers not below the rank of Inspector of Police.” 1६ is. therefore, desirable to
Separate the investigating police from the law and order police for the following
reasons :

Firstly. it will bring the investigating police under the protection | of
judiciary and greatly reduce the possibility of political or other types of inter-
ference. The Punjab Police Commission (1961-62), the Delhi Police Commis-
sion (1968), the Goray Committee on Police Training (1972), the National Police
Commission (1977-80). the M.P. Public Police Relations Committee (1983)
have unanimously criticised political interference in the work of the police.

Secondly, wiih the possibility of greater scrutiny and supervision by- the
magistracy and the public prosecutor, as in France, the investigation of police
cases are likely to be more in conformity with the law than at present which is
often the reason for failure of prosecution in courts.

Thirdly, efficient investigation of cases will teduce the possibility of un-
justified and unwarranted prosecutions and consequently of a large number of
acquiltals.

Fourthly, it will cesult in speedier investigation which would entail
speedier disposal of cases as the investigating police would be completely reliev-
ed from performing law and order duties, VIP duties aad other miscellaneous
duties, which not only cause unnecessary delay in the investigation of cases but
also detract {rom their efficiency.

Fifthly, separation will increase the expertise of investigating police.

Sixthly, since the investigating police would be plain clothes men ever
when attached to police station will be in a Position to bave good rapport with

the people and thus will bring their co-operation and support in the investiga-
tion of cases.

Seventhly, not having beea involved in law and order duties entailing the
use of force like tear gas. lathi charge and firing. they would not provoke pyby
anger and hatred which stand in the way of police-public co-operation in 2:
ing down crimes and criminals and getting information. assistance anu
intelligence which the police have a right to get under the provisions gf Ss, 37
to 44 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.* .

7. There should be a separate cadre of investigating agerc, in every
district subject to supervision by the higher auth ies. When a case i taken
up for investigation by an officer of stich agency. he should, be in charge
the case throughout till the conclusion of ihe Irial. H bould take the respon.
sibility for production of witnesses, production of a sed and for assisting the
Prosecuting agency. As observed. in the Fourt

Ose urteerth Report of the Law Com-
mission, there need not be ubsoiule separation bebween the two brasiches,

8. Efficient investigation pre-supposes  induciion vf scientitic work cul
ture in police. New technology, such as CUmputers. photogra:shy videography.
new methods of interrogation technology. new observation gadgets and_ highly
sophisticated search equipment. etc, ata essential for effective investigation of
traditional and new types of organized C-imes, ‘The rapid advances in science
and technology have greatly influenced po! '. investigation as also the techni-
ques adoppted by criminals tc, leave no traces or clues at the scene of crime,
But the average investigatifig officer still depends on traditional methods of
recording Poe witnesses or yetting confessions from accused to com-
plete the procesy“of investigation. Such heavy dependence on these traditional
methods may be ascribed to lack of knowledge and awareness about the scien-


4

tific technologies available to him for crime detection. This difficulty could be
overcome by providing scientific facilities and by imparting regular in-service
training at periodical intervals.’ Thus there is a great need for $ i
training for investigating officers in scientific methods of investigation. The
nature of training and details thereof have to be worked out by the experts.
Further, we are of the view that there is an urgent need to Create a separate
investigating agency. As to how a separate investigating agen: to be struc-
tured, is a matter of details which can be considered by the concerned depart-
ments.

9. We recommend that the police officials entrusted with the Investigation
of grave offences should be separate and distinct from those entrusted with the
enforcement of law and order and other miscellaneous duties. Separate investi-
galing agency directly under the supervision of a designated Superintendent of
Police be constituted. The hierarchy of the officers in the investigating police
force should have adequate training and jacentives for furthering effective inve-
stigations. We suggest that the respective Law and Home Departments of
various State Governments may work out details for betterment of their condi-
tions of service.

The officials of the investigating police force be made responsible for
helping the courts in the conduct of cases and speedy trial by ensuring timely
attendance of witnesses, production of accused and proper co-ordination with
prosecuting agency. Other necessary steps should also be taken for promoting
efliciency in invsetigation. Accordingly, we recommend that necessary changes
in the Police Acts, both Central and State. Police Regultticns, Police Standing
Orders. Police Manuals, be made by the Home Department in consultation with
the Law Departments of State Governments.

FOOTNOTES:

1. Feurigenth Report of the Law Comunission, Vol. Ii para 24, pp.
TAL, 762.

2. Fourth Report of the National Police Commission. para 27.7, p. 3.

3. Sec २. Deb, “Police and Adm‘nistration of Criminal tustice.” Vol.
XXVI1. No. 2 CBI Bulletin 7 at 8-9, (1992).

4. Supra note 1 at 762-763.


CHAPTER Wl
INDEPENDENT PROSECUTING AGENCY

4. In criminal law prosecution has an important role to play. Our system
of administration of criminal justice contemplates fair and effective prosecution of
offences. Under the present scheme of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the pro-
svcution machinery has been completely separated from investigating agency and

ting officers are supposed fo be independent from police. Under sec-
tion 24 of the Code. the public prosecutors of High Courts are appointed by the
Central Government or the State Government. as the case may be, on the recom-
mendations of the High Court. The public prosecutors and additional public
prosecutors are appointed in. Sessions Courts on the recommendations of the
Sessions Judge. Section 24 also provides for appointment of such public prosecu-
tors by the Central Government for the purpose of conducting any case of class
of cases. In some States, Directorates of Prosecution have been set up. However.
there is a common complaint that required number of prosecuting officers have
not been appointed and the prosecutions are not being conducted efficiently and
in the manner expected.

2. lt has to be borne in mind that the quality of criminal justice is closely
inked with the calibre of the prosecution system and many of the acquittals in
courts can be ascribed not only to poor investigations but also to poor quality of
prosecutions. There is a strong opinion in favour of the autonomy of ‘the public

prosecutors arid creation of a separate prosecution agency under the control of a

wate of Prosecution to exercise administrative suppervision over the work
of 2 network of public prosecutors at various levels. The Supreme Court in
5.B. Shahane v. State of Mahurashjra’ held that the prosecution agency be auto<
nomous having a regular cadre of Prosecuting officers. There is ४ general com-
plaint that the public prosecutors in lower courts do not prepare cases carefully
and (hat the quality of prosecutions is poor. Therefore, there should be careful
sclection and appointment of prosecutors who can closely coordinate with the
investigation. No doubt, they have to closely coordinate with the police system
since prosecutions are conducted on behalf of the police. There uld not be
communication gap between the police and the prosecutors during the investiga-
tion stage. The police, however, are of the view that investigation and prosecu-
tion form a continuous link process in the administration of justice and, therefore,
both should be closely coordinated in order to ensure successful prosecution of
criminal cases. They also stress that total detachment of prosecution department
from the police will not only create confliats between the two but also result in
each throwing the responsibility on the other with the result that there will not
be any effective control over.the maintenance of law and order or prosecution of
criminals. The police are firmly of the view that the prosecutors have to cons-
tantly advise the police in investigation of grave offences and collection of evidence
to sustain the prosecution with success.

3. It is a matter of common knowledge. that a public prosecutor has a
dual role to play. namely, as a prosecutor to conduct the trial and as a legal
adviser to the police department in charge of investigation. For some reason or
the other, in the present administration, the latter part is not given duc weight and
a virtual communication gap exists. The police officers also strongly feel tbat
the concept of autonomy has done considerable harm, not from the point of
objectivity but in reducing the scope for securing appropriate legal advice at the
investigation stage. While nobody doubts the need for objectivity, it is felt that
they should provide legal guidance at the stage of investigation. It is also noticed
that some of the mistakes committed by investigating officers could have been
avoided, if there had been some mechanism 10 provide legal guidance and assis-
tance during the course of investigation.

4. The Law Commission in its 14th Report considered this issue. It. is
noted that a man of integrity should be chosen io be in charge of prosecution
and the purpose of a criminal trial being to determine the guilt or innocence of
the accused, the duty of a public prosecutor is not to represent any particular
party but to act in an objective manner. The Commission also noted that very
often there arise complicated cases which require legal assistance even during the

8


9

stage of investigation. But the public prosecutor has. however, neither the power
to interfere in the investigation nor can he call for the police papers and scrutinise
them or otherwise examine the available evidence before a report is actually filed.
This is anomalous because though he is responsible for the conduct of the pro-
secution in court, he has no opportunity of controlling or shaping the material
on which the case is to be founded and presented before. the court, The Law
Commission, after making an in-depth study about the prosecuting systems obtain-
ing in other countries and also the system in our country, made several sugges-
tions. One firm suggestion was that “the prosecuting agency should be completely
scparated from the police department. In every district a separate prosecution
department may be constituted and placed in charge of an official. whe may be
called the Director of Public Prosecutions. The entire prosecution in the district
should be under his control. In order to ensure that he is not regarded as the
part of the police department, he should be an independent official.’ The Com-
mission, however, concluded that as the head of the entire prosecuting machinery
of the district, he should arrange for the prosecution of all cognizable cases through
additional public prosecutors and distribute the work among them and should
advise the police department and cther government departments at the district
level on the legal aspects of the case at any stage of criminal proceedings includ-
ing the stage of investigation. The Commission also suggested “that the Director
of Public Prosecutions should be a full time government servant and should not
be allowed the right of private practice, The Commission has also given some
guidelines for structuring such prosecuting agency at the district level’

5. The Commission also considered the difficulties arising from the lack
of cooperation between the police department and the public prosecutors and
observed that the Superintendent of Police as the Head of the Police in the
district has a duty to see that the prosecutors are given all the assistance and
information they need at the trial.

6. We may also point out that the Law Commission in its 41st Report
endorsed the recommendations made in the 14th Report and regretted that the
same have not been given serious consideration by the State Governments. Further.
it was recommended that “with the abolition of committal proceedings, it will
bé the responsibility of the public prosecutor to scrutinise the police report or
charge-sheet before it is filed and see whether a case, which is exclusively traiable
by Court of Sessions, is made out from the evidence. At this stage, the public
prosecutor should have the authority to send the case back for further investiga-
tion and to modify the proposed charge whenever he finds it necessary to do 50.75
OF cqurse. this will have to be done subject to the constraints of limitation pres-
cribed,

7.1. The National Police Commission in its Fourth Report surveyed the
development of the prosecution agency and suggested a new set up, namely, that
“the post of Assistant Public Prosecutors, Additional Public Prosecutors and
Public Prosecutors should be so designed as to provide a regular career structure
for the incumbents for the entire state as one unit. “The Public Prosecutor in
a district should be made responsible for the efficient functioning of the subordi-
nate prosecuting staff in the district and he should have the necessary supervisory
contro! over them for this purpose.” The Police Commission also recommended
that a supervisory structure over the district prosecuting staff should be develop-
ed with Deputy Directors of Prosecution at the regional or district level and a
Director of Prosecution at the State level.”

7.2. As regards recruitment, the Police Commission also recommended
minimum qualifications for being appointed to these posts and also noted that
judicial officers with experience may be appointed. For appointment to the post
of Assistant Public Prosecutor Grade II, Assistant Public Prosecutor Grade 1.
-Additional Public Prosecutor, Public prosecutor. Deputy Director of Prosecution.
Additional Director of Prosecution and Director of Prosecution. a specified mini-
mum number of years of practice at the Bar or experience as a judicial officer be
stipulated. For the post of Deputy Director of Prosecution. seven years practice
al the Bar or seven years experience as a judicial officer of which at feast three
years should be as a Sessions Judge or three years experience as Additional Public
Prosecutor 6r Public Prosecutor was recommended. For the post of Directar
of Prosecution and Additiona) Director of Prosecution, ten years practice at the


10

Bar or ten years experience as a judicial officer of which at least five years should
be as a Sessions Judge or three years exprience as Deputy Director was recom-
mended.”

8. During our workshops. though it was felt that prosecution agency should
have autonomy, it was suggested that coordination between inv galing agency.
namely police and the prosecuting agency is vital for the efficient proescution of
cases at the trial stage. How to achieve this coordination? The National Police
Commission recommended that the prosecuting cadres be constituted into a sepa-
rate legal wing to function under a Director of Prosecution as an integral part of
state police. This is not valid as it runs contrary to the law laid down by the
Supreme Court in Shahane’s case.

9. We also recommend that the Home Departments of the State Govern-
ments should prescribe guidelines to achieve the desirable coordination between
the Director of Prosecution and the Investigating Agency of the Police for efficient
prosecution of cases.

Pursuant to our recommendation that there should be a Separate investiga-
tion agency for investigation of grave offences. ic. offences punishable with im-
prisonment of seven years and above and/or fine. it is further recommended that
such investigating agency should work in close coordination with the Directorate
of Prosecution at state and district levels. We are of the view that some of the
Prosecutors may be earmarked at one time for advising the investigating ageney.

10. We are of the view that the Directorate of Prosecution shall be struc-
tured as suggested by the National Police Commission and accordingly a cadre
be created on those lines with necessary modifications as the Home and Justice
Departments of the State Governments may deem fit.

11. Clause 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994
seeks to insert the following Explanation to section 24(6) after the proviso which
shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 18th day of December,
1978. है

(a) on ular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers” means a Cadre of Prosecuting

icers which includes therein the post of a Public Prosecutor. and

which provides for promotion of Assistant Public Prosecutors, 10 that
post:

(b) “Prosecuting Officer” means a person appointed to perform the func-
tions of a Public Prosecutor, an Additional Public Prosecutor or an
Assistant Public Prosecutor under this Code.

These changes are sought to be introduced keeping in view the promotional
avenues to the members of the regular cadre of prosecuting officers in a state where
Such cadre exists,

12. We approve of the recommendations of the National Police Commis-
sion to establish a Directorate of Investigation and also clause 4 of the Amend-
ment Bill providing for insertion of new section 254, which reads as under :

“25A(1) The State Government may establish a Directorate of Prosecution
consisting of a Director of Prosecution and as many Deputy Directors
of Prosecution as it thinks fit,

(2) The Head of the Directorate of Prosecution shall be the Director of
Prosecution, who shalt function under the administrative control of
the Head of the Home Department in the State.

(3) Every Deputy Director of Prosecution shall be subordinate to the
Director of Prosecution,
(4) Every Public Prosecutor. Additional Public Prosecutor and Special

Public Prosecutor appointed by the State Government under sub-sec-

tion (1) or as the case may be, sub-section (8) of section 24 to conduct

cases, in the High Court shall be subordinate to the Director of Pro-
. secution,


I

(S} Every Public Prosecutor. Additional Public Prosecutor, and Speciat
Public Prosecutor appointed by the State Government under sub-sec-
tion (3), or as the case may be. sub-section (8) of sectian 24 to conduct
cases in District Courts and every Assistant Public Prosecutor appo-
inted under sub-section (1) of section 25 shall be subordinate to the
Deputy Director of Prosecution,

(6) The powers and functions of the Director of Prosecuiion and the
Deputy Directors of Prosecution and the areas for which each of the
Deputy Directors of Prosecution have been appointed shall be such
as the State Government may by notification specify.

(7) The provisions of this section shall not apply co the Advocate General
for the State while performing the functions of a Public Prosecutor.

We. however. feel that sub-section (4) of new section 25A placing the public
Prosecutors appointed under section 241) to conduct cases in the High Court
to be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution need not be there as, in our view.
the Public Prosecutors appointed exclusively to conduct cases on the appellate
side in the High Court should be differentiated from those prosecining officers
appointed (0 conduct cases in the lower courts. In this context, we may also
point out that the object underlying the establishment of Directorate of Prosecu-
tion is to facilitate and expedite the trial work and also to bring about coordina-
tion with investigating agency which is very much essential in a criminal trial.

We accordingly suggest the deletion of sub-section (4) of the proposed
section 258.

13. We recommend that the Government while appointing Public Prose-
cutors aad Assistant Public Prosecutors under sections 24 and 25 shall, as far as
practicable, appoint sufficient number of woman Public Prosecutors and Assistant
Public Prosecutors so that they can effectively deal with ६8५८५ involving women
who are under 18 years of age and in respect of whom offences under sections
354, 376, 376A to 376E (both inclusive) proposed by the National Commission
for Women and 509 of the Indian Penal Code.

. 14, In Sunil Kumar Pat v. Phota Sheikh® the Public Prosecutor appeared
on behalf of accused persons which lent support to the allegation that the accused
were supported by the ruling political party in the State of West Bengal. The
Supreme Court held that the trial was viliated and remanded the case to another
Sessions Court for re-trial. With regard to the role played by the Public Prosecutor.
the Court observed, “that is inconsistent with the ethics of jegal profession and
fair play in the administration of justice for the Public Prosecutor to appear on
behalf of the accused.”

At this stage while considering the observations made by the Supreme
Court in the case of Simit Kumar Pal v, Phota Sheikh, we are also of the view
thai where there are conflicting interests and where propriety requires that the
prosecution in such a case has to be conducted by someone other than a member
of thé Directorate of Prosecution, such court should have the power. in its discre-
tion, 10 permit any other person competent fo coordinate the prosecution in con-
sultation with the appropriate government, who shall act under section 24(8) expe-
ditiously. The appropriate government should make the appointment in accor-
dance with section 24(8). Section 248) be amended accordingly.

15, In the various workshops. views were expressed that though it is the
bounden duty of the State to conduct prosecution, as crime is against society, the
private complainants or victims of crime or his dependence be also given a role
in bringing the offender to justice. The Code of Criminal Procedure in section
301 permit the private counsel to assist the prosecutor and section 302 empowers
ihe Magistrate to permit the prosecution to be conducted by any ather person
as well.

In Babu v. State of Kerala, the Kerala High Court graphically described
the role of Public Prosecutors as follows:"

“Public Prosecutors are really Ministers of Justice whose job is none other
than assisting the State in the administration of justive. They are not

3—1 M of L & J/ND/97


2

representatives of any party. Their job is 10 assist the Court by placing
before the Court all relevant aspects of the case. They are not there
lo see the innocent go to the gallows: they are also not there (o see
the culprits escape the conviction.”

These observations were made in a case where a magistrate had refused
permission under section 302 of the Criminal Procedure Code to the complainant
te engage an advocate to conduct the prosecution, The High Court exemined
section 301 of the Code under which the advocate engaged by a private Person
can assist the Prosecutor in the conduct of the prosecution. “But under section
302 the magistrate may permit the prosecution itself to be conducted by any
aggrieved person or an advocate. The distinction is that when permission under
section 302 is given, the Public Prosecutor virtually disappears from the scene
and the private lawyer takes over the prosecution. There is a vast difference
between assisting the Public Prosecutor under section 30] and conducting the
Prosecution on the basis of a permission granted under section 302. The Court
pointed out that though the magistrate has a discretion under 302. this discretion
‘be exercised only under exceptional circumstances where he feels that denial of
Permission will obstruct justice.

16. Section 302 has to be used if necessary, by the magistrate in granting
permission to the private complainant where ends of justice require, particularly
where he finds that Public Prosecutors are not effectively discharging their duties
thereby subverting the process of law and justice. So far as the interest of the
complainant in Sessions cases is concerned, section 301 permits a private person
to instruct the prosecutor. To that extent the complainant’s interest is being
taken care of and such private person need not take the place of public prose-
cutor. Consequently. no further change is necessary in section 301. As regards
Section 302 which is applicable only to the trials before the Magistrates. the
magistrate has ample discretion to permit the prosecution to be conducted by any
person. As observed by the Kerala High Court in Babu's case, in appropriate
cases, the Magistrate may exercise that power by permitting the complainant’s
advocate to conduct the prosecution. So no change is necessary.

17. In view of the recommendations to establish the Directorate of Prose-
cuition, section 25(3) and section 302 to the extent that they enable police officers
to conduct prosecution, need to be suitably amended.

Footnotes :
. ATR 1995 SC 1628.

2. Fourteenth Report of the Law Commission. para 15, page 77 (1958).

3. Id at para 17. page 772.

4, Id at patas 19, 20, page 773.

5. ray First Report of the Law Commission, para 18.26. page 152
(1969).

6. १7% Report of the National Police Commission, para 29.6, page
4 (1980).

7. Id at para 29.7, page 24.

8. fd at para 29.12. page 25.

9. dd at para 29.17, page 24-25.
10. (1984) 4 SOC 532.

॥1. 1984 Cri. LJ. 499 (Ker) at 502


CHAPTER IV

LAW OF ARREST

1. Arrest entails deprivation of a person's liberty by legal authority or at
least by apparent Jegal authority. In a democratic countsy such as ours, the Cons-
titution and Jaws value personal liberty of cvery individual and contain provi-
sions for safeguarding it. The right to personal liberty is a basic human right
recognised by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 and the Inter-
national Government on Civil and Political Rights. 1966 which India has ratified.
Furthermore. the Constitution of India recognises it as a fundamental right in
Article 21 thus: “No person shall be deprived of his fife or personal liberty except
according to procedure established by law’. In. Maneka Gandhi vy. Union of
India? (he Supreme Court has interpreted that the procedure under this Article
must be “right, just and fair” and not arbitrary. fanciful or oppressive.

hfs

2. The provisions relating to arrest with or without warrant and the
of arrested persons are incorporated in sections 41 to 60 of the Code of Crimi
Procedure. Section 41 specifies the various categories of persons whom any police
officer may arrest without warrant or an order from a magistrate. Out of this.
the most important category is found in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) which refers
to any person “who has been concerned in any cognizable offence, or against whom
a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has been received.
‘or a reasonable suspicion exists, of his having been so concerned.”

3. One of the compelling issues in the sphere of the law of arrests is how
to balance the protection of human rights to personal liberty consistent with the
society’s interest in crime detection and maintenance of law and order in civil
society. As pointed out very pertinently by the Supreme Court in Joginder Kumar
v. State of U.P.

“The horizon of human rights is expanding. At the same time, the crime
rate is also increasing... The law of arrest is one of balancing individual
rights, liberties and privileges, on the one hand. and individual duties,
obligations and respo ies on the others, of weighing and balanc-
ing the rights, liberties and privileges of the, single individual and those
of individuals collectively; of pe 8 ly deciding what is wanted and where
to put the weight and the emphasis, of deciding which comes first
the criminal or society the law violator or the taw abider...”

4, The National Police Commission had observed in its Third Report
that the power of arrest is one of the sources of police corruption. As a result of
the sample study made of the quality of arrests made in one State during the
three year period 1974-1976, the Commissioin observed :

“t is obvious that a major portion of the arrests were connected with very
minor prosecutions and cannot. therefore, be regarded as necessary
from the point of view of crime prevention. Continued detention in
jail of the persons so arrested has also meant avoidable expenditure
‘on their maintenance. In the above period, it was estimated that 43.2
per cent of the expenditure in the connected jails was over such persons
only who in the ultimate analysis need not have been arrested at all.”

5, The National Police Commission had recommended the following guide-
lines for making arrests.‘ An arrest during the investigation of a cognisable case
may be considered justified in one or other of the following circumstances :

(i) The case involves a grave offence like murder, dacoity, robbery, rape.
etc. and it is necessary to arrest the accused and bring his movements
under restraint to infuse confidence among the terror stricken victims.

Gi) The accused is likely to abscond and evade the processes of law.

(४) The accused is given to violent behaviour and is likely to commit
further offences unless his movements are brought under restraint.

(iv) The accused is a habitual offender and «unless kept in custody hy ix
likely to commit similar offences again.

13


14

It would be desirable to insist through departmental instructions, that a
police officer making an arrest should also record in the case diary the reasons
for making the arrest. thereby clarifying his conformity to the specilied guidelines.

6.1 The Supreme Court in Joginder Kumar's case laid down some guide-
lines regarding the power of arrest by the police. The Court referred to the
Report of Sir Cyrit Phillips Committee—Report of the Royal Commission on
Criminal Procedure (Command Papers 802 1981) wherein the following sugges-
tion was made:*

“To help to reduce the use of arrest we would also propose the introdue-
tion here of a scheme that is used in Ontario (Canada) enabling a
police officer to issue what is called on appearance notice. That pro-
cedure can be used to obiain aitendance ai the police station without
resorting to arrest provided a power to arrest exists, for example to be
fingerprinted or to participate in an identification parade. It would
also be extended to attendance for interview at a Gime conveniem both
to the suspect and to the police officer investigating the case.”

6.2 The Supreme Court also referred to Section 56(1) of the Police and
Criminal Evidence Act. 1984 in the United Kingdom which provides:*

“Where a person has been arrested and is being held in custody in a police
Station or other premises, he shalt be entitled. if he so requests, to
have one friend or relative or other person who is known to him or
who is likely to take an interest in his welfare told. as soon as is
practicable, except to the extent that delay is permitted by this section,
that he has been arrested and is being detained there.”

63 The Court referred to the Royal Commission’s Enunciation of Guide-
lines as follows:’

“We recommend that detention upon arrest for an offence should continues
only on one or more of the following criteria :

(a) the person's unwillingness to identify bimself so that a summons
may be served upon him:

(b) the need to prevent the continuation or repetition of that offence:

(c) the need to protect the arrested person himself or other persons or
property;

(d) the need to secure or preserve eviclence of or relating to that
offence or to obtain ‘such’ evidence from the suspect by question-
ing him; and

(e) the likelihood of the person failing to appear ai court to answer
any charge made against him.”

6.4 The Supreme Court after examining the law in England. proceeded to
lay down guidelines for making arrest. Balancing the need for arrest with the
right to personal liberty in Article 21 of the Constitution, the Court observed:*

The existence of the power to arrest is one thing. The justification for the
exercise of it is quite another. The police officer must be able to jus-
tify the arrest apart from his power 10 do so, It would be prudent
for a police officer in the interest of protection of the constitutional
rights of a citizen and perhaps in his own interest that no arrest should
be made without a reasonable satisfaction reached after some investi-
gation as to the genuineness and bowa fides of a complaint and a
reasonable belief both as to the person’s complicity and even so as to

* the need to effect arrest. Denying a person of his liberty is a scrious
matter... A person is not liable to arrest merely on the suspicion of
complicity in an offence. There must be some reasonable justification
in the opinion of the officer effecting the arrest that such arrest is
necessary and justified. Except in heinous offences, an arrest must
be avoided if a police officer issues notice to person to attend the
Station House and not to leave station without permission would do.


15

6.5. The Court formulated the following requirements for effective protec-
tion of Fundamental Rights of Articles 21 and 221)"

>(1) An arrested person being hekt in custody is entitled. if he so requests
to have one friend relative or other person who is known to him or
likely to take an interest in his welfare told as far as is practicable
that he has been arrested and where is being detained.

(2) The police officer shall inform the arrested person when he is brought
to the police station of this right.

43) An entry shall be required to be made in the diary as to who was
informed of the arrest. ‘These protections from pOwer must be held
to flow from Articles 21 and 2211 and enforced strictly.”

6.6. The Court also laid down that it shall be the duty of the magistrate
before whom the arrested person is produced, to satisfy himself that the require.
menis have been complied with.

7A. The Law Commission in its One Hundred and Fifty Second Report
on Custodial Crimes (1994) has recommended the insertion of two sections,
namely, that in 5. 41 alter sub-section (1), the following new sub-section (1A?
be inserted”:

“4IQIA) A police officer arresting a person under clause (a) of sub-sec-
tion (1) of this section must be reasonably satisfied, and must
record such satisfaction, relating to the following matters:

ta) the complaint, information or — suspicion referred to in that
clause, is not only in respect of a coy pnizable offence having
been committed, ‘ut also in respect of the complicity of the
person to be arrested, in that offence:

(b) arrest is necessary in order to bring the movements of the per-
i son to be arrested under restraint, so as to inspire a sense of
के security in the public or to prevent the person to be arrested
' from evading the process of the Jaw or 10, prevent him from
committing similar offences or trom indulging in violent be-
haviour in general.” |

7.2. A further suggestion to incorporate a new section 41A on the basis
of the Supreme Court’s decision in Joginder Kumar's case was made."

“4A. Notice of apes wrauce——Where the case falls under clause (a) of
sub-section (1) section 41, the police officer may, instead of
arresting the person concerned, issue to him a notice of appearance
requiring him to appear before the police officer issuing the notice
or at such other place as may be specified in the notice and to co-
operate with the police officer in the investigation of the offence
referred to, in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 41.

(2) Where such a notice is issued to any person, it shall be the duty of
that person to comply with the terms of that notice.

(3) Where such person complies and continues to comply with the notice,
he shall not be arrested in respect of the offence referred to in the
notice unless, for reasons to be recorded, the police is of the
opinion that he ought to be arrested.

(4) Where such person, at any time, fails to comply with the terms of
the notice, it shall be lawful for the police officer to arrest him
for the offence mentioned in the notice, subject to such orders as
may have been passed in this behalf by a competent court.” ’

8.1 The Law Commission of India in its 135th Report on “Women in
Custody” the following recommendations regarding the arrest of women:

450B. Arrest of women.—{i) Where a woman is to be arrested under
this Code, then unless the circumstances indicate to the contrary,
her submission to custody on an oral intimation of arrest shall be
presumed, and unless the circumstances otherwise require or unless


16

the: police officer arresting is a female. the police officer shail nor
woman for making her artest.

(2) Except in unavoidable circumstances. no woman shall be arrested
. "after stawet and before sunrise. and where such unayoidable cir-
cumstances exist. the police officer shall, by making a written
report. obtain the prior permission of — the immediate — superior
officer not below the rank of an Inspector for effecting such arrest Or.
if the 6०% is one of extreme urgency, he shall, after making the
डाक, Jorasin repeat ie matter in writing to his such immediate
superior officer, with the reasons for arrest and the reasons for not
taking prior permission as aforesaid and shall also make a similar
teport to the Magistrate within whose legal jurisdiction the arrest
has heen made." — (See pura 2.3).

The aforesai¢ recommendation bas been adopted as sub-section (4) of
section 46 in clause 7 of the 1994 Bill in the feilowing manner:

“"(4) Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be arrested after
sunset and before sunrise and where such exceptional circumstances
exist, the police officer shall, by making a written report, obtain
the prior permission of his immediate superior officer for effecting
such arrest or, if the case is one of extreme urgency and such prior
permission cannot be obtained before making such arrest, he shall.
after making the arrest, forthwith report the matter in writing to
his immediate superior officer explaining the urgency and the rea-
sons लि not taking prior permission as aforesaid “and shall also
make a report to the Magistrate within whose loca! jurisdiction the
arrest had beep made.” i

- We reiterate this recommendation.

‘9.2. We suggest the following amendments (0 Scction 46 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure :

“In the light of the discussion in the preceding para, proviso (b) on the
following lines be added to sub-section (f) of Section 46 in the
following manner: .

\ ‘Provided that where a woman is 10 be, arrested then, unless the
circumstances indicate to the contrary, her submission to cus-
tody on an oral intimation, arrest shall be presumed and.
unless the circumstances otherwise require or unless the police
officer arresting is 2 female the police officer shall not actually

. touch the person of the woman for making her arrest.’”

8.3. We also suggest that the following new sub-section (2) be inserted
in section 46 in the following manner:

(2) Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be arrested after
sunset and before suntise, and where such exceptional circumstan-
ces exist, the police officer shall, by making a written report,
obtain the prior permission of his immediate superior officer for
effecting such arrest, or if the case is one of extreme urgency and
such prior permission cannot be obtained before making such arrest,
he shall, after making the arrest, forthwith report the matter in
writing to his immediate superior officer explaining the urgency and
the reasons for not taking prior permission as aforesaid and shall
also make a report to the Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction
the arrest had been made,”

as provided in Clause 7 of the 1994 Bill.

8.4. In view of above proposed changes, the other existing sub-sections
be re-numbered.


W

9. The Law Cammissién: of India in its 1$2nd Report on Custodial Crimes
recommended that anew section SOA Be inserted alter section 50 in the Code of
Criminal Procedure. 1973 on the following lines:

508. (1) whenever a person is arrested by a police officer, intimation of
the arrest shall be immediately seni by the police officer {along
with intimation about the place of detention) to the following

person :

{a) a relative or friend or other | person known to the arrested
person, as may be nominated by the arrested person:

tb) failing (a) above. the local legal aid committee.

(2) Such intimation shall be sent by telegram or telephone, ४५ may be
‘convenient, and the fact that such intimation has been sent shall
be recorded by the police officer under the signature of the arrested
person

43) The police officer shall prepare a custody memo and body receipt. of
the person arrested, duly signed by him and by two witnesses of
the locality where the arrest has been made, and deliver the same
to a relative of the person arrested, if he is present at the time of
arrest or, in his absence, send the same along with ihe intimation
of arrest to the person mentioned in (1) above.

The custody memo referred to in (3) above shall contain the following
particulars:

तल) name of the person arrested and father’s name or husband’s
name:

(ii) address of the person arrested:

a

(iii) date, time and place of arrest;
(iy) offence for which the arrest has been made:

tv) property, if any, recovered’ from the person atrested and
taken into charge at the time of the arrest: and

(vi) any bodily injury which may be appareat at the time of arrest.

(5) During the interrogation of an arrested person, his legal practitioner
shall be altowed to remain present.

The police officer shall inform the person arrested, as soon as he is
brought to the police station. of the contents of this section and
shall make an entry in the police diary about the following facts:

(a) the person who was informed of, ऐड arrest: :

(0) the facts that the person arrested has been informed of the
contents of this section: and

te) the fact that a custody memo has been prepared, as required
by this section.”

(6

10. The Law Commission of India in its 152nd Report 00 Custodial
Crimes recommended that Section 578 be inserted in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 on the following lines:

“STA. Duty of Magistrate to verify certain facts.

When 4 person arrested without warrant is produced before the Magistrate.
the Magistrate shall. by inquiries to be made from the arrested
person, satisfy himself that the provisions of sections... have been
complied with (sections relating to safeguards in connection with
arrest, rights on arrest, etc. to be entered) . and also inquire
about, and record, the date and time of arrest."



18

: Uh. In view of the guildelines  cnunciaied by the Supreme Court ip

Joginder Kumar's case and also the consequent recommendations of the Law
Commission in its 152nd Report the following new sub-clause to section 41 be
inserted in the Code:

~413). A police officer arresting a person under clause (a) of sub-sec-
tion (1) of this section must be reasonably satisfied that arrest is
necessary and must record such satisfaction in respect of matters
covered every clause of sub-section(1).”

Further a new section 41A be also inserted in the Code on the following

lines:

“41A(1). The police officer may, if satisfied that immediate arrest of
the person concerned is not necessary. issue to him a notice requir-
ing him to appear before the police officer at specified time and
place for further investigation and it shall be the duty of that person
to comply with the terms of the notice.

(2) If such person fails to comply with the terms of the notice. it shail
be lawfal for the police officer fo arrest him for the offence men-
tioned therein.” (Ch. 1५ para 11)

Foorxores
1. AIR 1978 SC 597.
2. Crimes 1994 (2) 106 at 107.
3. Third Report of the National Police Commission, para
pages 30-31 (1980).
५ Ad at 32.
. Supra note 2 at 110.
. dd at 111.
|. 1४ at 109-110.
Fd at 110.
. dd at 111.

10. See {52nd Report on “Custodial Crimes”, paras 14.4.-14.6, pages
165-167 (1994) (Unpublished).

11. Sbid.

12. See 135th Report on “Women in Custody”, page 33 (1989).
13. See note 10, para 14.7 pages 167-169 (1994).

14, See note 10, para 14.9, page 172 (1994).

ey
[
wR
>

een ane


CHAPTER V
CUSTODY, REMAND AND CHANGES IN SECTION 167(2)

1. In the Central Bureau of Investigarion Special tnvestigation Cel-h,
New Delhi vy. Anupem J. Kuikerni, (he Supreme Court held that under the
proviso to Seetion 167(2) of the Code, the police cusiody can be only during
the first 15 days cf the remand and not later. It was generally felt in all the
Workshops that such limitation would cause practical difficulties in carrying
out investigation in some cases. In view of this, we suggest that it should
be permissible for the proscculion to seek police custody during the period of
remand at any time if a need arises. However. the total remand of police
custody should not exceed 15 days.

2. OF late, it has been a matter of common knowledge that invesigation
of many important cases is entrusted to CBI by the appropriate Government
after great delay. Consequently, the CBI has been experiencing considerable
difficulties in obtaining the police custody even if it became absolutely necessary.
There may be cases where the original investigating agency might have obtained
police custody upto 15 days or considerable part of the period, In such a
situation, the CBU is very much handicapped. After having considered the
various views and keeping in view the present scenario and the types of offences
coming to light, it is necessary to see that the investigation by CBI is effective
and meaningful. For this purpose, obtaining of the fresh police custody by
CBI becomes absolutely necessary. Therefore, we are of the view thar a
provision should be made for a fresh police custody if sought by the (छा but
it should not exceed 15 days on the whole. Accordingly, section 1672) be
amended in the following manner:

The Magistrate to whom an accused person is forwarded under this
section may, whether he has or has not jurisdiction to try the case,
from time to time, authorise the detention of the accused for a
iri not exceeding fifteen days at a time but the total petiod shall
not exceed (i) ninety days. where the investigation relates 10. an
offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprison-
ment for a term not less than ten years, ही. sixty days, where the
investigation relates to any cther offence.

2(b) During such custody the Magistrate if he thinks fit, may authorise
the detention of the accused person in custody of the police for a
total number of 15 days on the whole—

Provided that if the investigation is transferred to Dethi Special Police
Establishment, a Magistrate may also authorise detention of accused for another
15 days on the whole irrespective of the earlier period of police custody, on
being ‘satistied with the reasons necessitating such custody mentioned by investi-

gating officer of Delhi Special Police Establishment, afler recording reasons.

On the expiry of the said period of ninety days, or sixty days, as the
case may be. the accused person shall be released on bail if he is prepared
to and does furaish ail, and every person released on bail under this sub-
section shall be deemed to be so released under the provisions of Chapter
XXXITI for the purposes of that Chapter:

2c) No Magistrate shall authorise detention in any custody under this
section unless the accused 15 produced before him:

2:d) No Magistrate of the second class, not specially cmpowered in ims
behalf by the High Court, shall authorise detention in the custody
of the police

19
4>-1 M ५ & J/ND/97


20

Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of doubts. it is hereby declared that,
notwithstanding the expiry of the period specified in paragtaph (a), the accused
shail be detained in custody so long as he does not furnish bail.

Explanation H.—If any question arises whether an accused person was
produced before the Magistrate as required under paragraph (c), the production

of the accused person may be proved by his signature on the order authorising
detention.

FOSTNOTE

1. (1992) 3 SCC 141.


CHAPTER VI
BAIL, ANTICIPATORY BAIL AND SURETIES

1. The Law relating to bail is contained in sections 436 to 450 of
chapter XXXII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

2. The law of bails, which coastitutes an important branch of ihe pro
dural law dovetails two conflicting interests namely, on the one hand,
requirements of shielding the society from the hazards of those committing
crimes and on the other, the fundamental principle of criminal jurispiud
namely, the presumption of innocence of an accused till he is found guilt

3. With a view to fulfilling the above objectives, the legislature has
provided directions for granting or refusing bail. Where jaw aliows discreuon
in the grant of bail, it 1s to be exercised according to the guidelines pivvided
therein; further the courts have evolved certain norms for the proper exivise
of such discretion.

4. Though the Code of Criminal Procedure has not defined bail, the
terms “bailable offence” and “non-bailable offence” have been defined.’ Bail in
essence means security for the appearance of the accused person on giving waich
he is released pending investigauon or trial. ‘The Supreme Court m= Atoti Kom
v. State of M.P? has held that bail covers both release on one’s own bond, wiih
or without securities.

5. The Code has classified all offences into “bailable” and “nos-bailable”
offences. Under S, 2(a) “bailab:e offence” means an offence which is jisted as
bailable in the First Schedule or which is made bailable by any other saw 107
the time being in force and “non-bailable offence” means any other offence.
The Code has not provided any criteria to determine whether any patuicular
affence is bailable or non-bailable. It depends on whether it has been showu
ag bailable or non-bailable in the First Schedule. An examination of the pio-
visions of the Schedule would reveal that the basis of the classification is based
on divergent considerations. However, the gravity of the offences, 1011-13,
‘offences punishable with imprisonment for three years or more have ben
treated as non-bailable offences. But this is not a hard and fast rule. here
are exceptions to the same.

6. A person accused of a bailable offence is entitled to be released on
bail as a matter of right if he is arrested or detained without warrant, But sf
the offence is non-bai.able, depending upon the facts and circumstances oi tne
case, the court may grant bail on its discretion. The scope of discretion varies
in inverse proportion to the gravity of the crime. The courts have formulated
the following guidelines for grant of bail in non-bailable offences:

(i) the enormity of the charge;

(ii) the nature of the accusation;

(iii) the severity of the punishment which the conviction will eniail;
(iv) the nature of the evidence in support of the accusation;

(v) the danger of the accused person absconding if he is released 0.11

ail,

(vi) the danger of witnesses being tampered with;
(vii) the protracted nature of the trial;

(viii) opportunity to the | applicant for preparation of his defence and
access to his counse’,

(ix) the health, age and sex of the accused:

(x) the nature and gravity of the cireumsiances in which the offence is
committed;

21


25

(xi) the position and status of the avcused with relerence 10 the victim
and the witnesses and

(xii) the probability of accused commiting more offences if released जा
bail, etc.

7. These considerations are by 10. means exhaustive. Faclurs such as
previous convictions, criminal records of the accused and the possibility of the
accused committing offences if enlarged on bail are also taken into account
while deciding the question of bail.’

8.1, Does the bail sysiem discriminate against the poor?

8.2. On this question, the Report of the Legal Aid Commitice appointed
by the Government of Gujarat, in 1971 has commented on the bait system
thus’:

The bail system causes discriminativun against the poor since the poor
souk] net be able to furnish bail on account of their poverty while
the wealthier persons otherwise similarly situate would be able tu
secure their freedom because they can afford 10 furnish bail. This dis-
crimination arises even if the ameunt of the bail fixed by the Magis-
trate is not high, for a large majority of those who are brought before
the Courts in criminal cases are so poor that they would find it difit-
cult to furnish bail even in a small amount.

The evil of the bail system is that either the poor avcused lias to fall
back on touts and professional sureties for providing bail or suffer
pre-trial detention. Both these consequences are fraught with great
hardship to the poor. Jn one case the poor accused is fleeced of
his moneys by touts and professional sureties and sometimes hus
even to incur debts to make payment to them for securing his
release: in the other he is deprived of his liberty without ial and
conviction and this leads to grave consequences, name y; (1) though
presumed innocent he is subjected to the psychological and plhrysi+
cal deprivations of free life; (2) he loses his job, if he has one, and
is deprived of an opportunity to work to support himself and: his
family with the result that ourdea of his detention falls heavily on
the innocent members of the family, (3) he is prevented from con-
iributing to the preparation of his defence; and (4) the public ex-
chequer has to bear the cost of maintaining bim in the juil,

8.3. Subsequent’y, a Central Committee on Legal Aid reported in
similar vein’:

.[w]e think that a liberal police of conditional release without monetary
sureties o¢ financial security and release on one’s own recognizance
with punishment provided for violation will go a long way to re-
form the bail system and help the weaker and poorer sections of
the community to get equal justice under law. Conditional release
may take the form of entrusting the accused to the care of his rela-
tives or releasing him on supervision. The court or ihe authority
granting bail may have to use the discretion judiciously. When the
accused is too poor to find suretics, there will be no point in insis-
ting on his furnishing bail with sureties, as it will only compel him
to be in custody with the consequent handicaps in making his
defence.”

8.4, In order to eliminate the discrimination against the poor and the
indigent accused in the grant of bail for bailable offences, Clause 40 of the
Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill, 1994 seeks to amend section 436 of the
Code 10 make a mandatory provision that if the arrested persons accused of
a bailable offence is an indigent and cannot furuish security, the court shall
release him on his execution of a bond without sureties. The amendment is
as follows:


23
In section 436, in sub-section (1)--

(a) in the first proviso, for the words “may, instead of taking bail,” the
words “may, and shall, if such person is indigent and is unable (0
furnish security”. sha] be substiluted:

(0) after the first proviso the following Explanation shall be inserted:

Explanation: Where a person is unable to give bail within a week of
the date of his arrest, it shall be sutlicient ground for the ofticer
or the court to presume that he is an indigent person for the pur-
poses of the priviso.

8.5, The Commission recommends the amendments referred to above as
they are consistent with the Supreme Court’s pronouncements and juristic opin-
ion that poor accused committing bailable offences should not be denied dail _
on the basis of indigency.

Pre-trial Detention:

9. The purpose of pre-trial detention is not punishment. A survey of
decided cases reveals that the Jaw favours release of accused on bail, which
is the rule, and refusal is the exception’.

91 ‘The plight of undetirial prisoners was vividly brought out in Hus
sainara Khatuon t vy. Home Secretary.” Yhe case disclosed a dismal state of
affairs in the State of Bihar in regard to administration of criminal justice.
Hordes of men and women undertrial were languishing in Bihar jails for
periods ranging from three to ten years without the commencement of triais.
They were in jails for much longer periods than they would lave been had
they been found guilty and sentenced after trial, They were in jails not be-
cause they were found guilty but were too poor to afford bail and the trials
did not commence. In this context the following observations of P.N. Bhagwati
J., (as he then was) are apposite’.

“One reason why our Jegal and judicial system continually denies justice
to the poor by keeping them for long years in pre-trial detention
is our highly unsatisfactory bail system. 11 suffers from property
oriented approach which seems to proceed on the erroneous assum-
ption that risk of monetary loss is the only deterrent against fleeing
‘om justice. The Code of Crimina] Procedure, even after its re-
enactment, continues to adupt the same antiquated approach as the
earlier Code enacted towards the end of the last century and where
an accused is to be released on his persona: bond, it insists that
the bond should contain a monetary obligation requiring the accu-
sed to pay a sum of money in case, he fails to appear at the trial,
Moreover, as if this were not sufficient deterrent to the poor, the
courts mechanically and as a matter of course insist that the accu-
sed should produce sureties who will stand bail for him and these
sureties must again establish their solvency to be able 10 pay up
the amount of the bail in case the accused fails to appear to answer
the charge. This system of bails operates very harshly against the

0. and it is only the non-poor who are able to take advantage
of it by getting themselves re’ feased on bail. The poor find it diffi-
cult to furnish bail even without sureties because very often the
amount of the bail fixed by the court is so unrealistically excessive
that in a majority of cases the poor are unable to satisfy "the police
or the magistrate about their solvency for the amount of the bail
and where the bail is with sureties as is usually the case, it becomes
an almost impossible task for the poor to find persons sufficiently
solvent to stand as suretivs. Thg result is that either they are
fleeced by the police and revenue officials or by touts and pro-
fessional sureties and sometimes they have even to incur debts for

securing their release or, being unable to obtain release. they have
jail until such time as the court is able to take up
for tial, keading to grave consequences.”



24

It is high time that our Parliament realises that tisk of monetary
loss is not the only deterrent against fleeing from justice, but there
are also other factors which act as equal delerrents against fleeing

-Parliament would do well to consider whether .considera-
tions such as family ties, roots in the community. job — security,
membership of stab’e organisations e¢te., should be the determinative
factors in grant of bail and the accused should in appropriate cases
be released on his personal bond without monetary — obligation,
Of course, it may be necessary in such a case to provide
by an amendment of the pena. Jaw that if sed wilfully fails
to appear in compliance with the pron ined in his per-
sonal bond, he shall be liable (0 pet But even under
the law as it stands teday the courts ist abandon the antiquated
concept under which pre-trial release is ordered only against bail
with sureties.

9.2. R.S. Pathak J. (as he then was) opined thal there should be a clear
provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure which enables the release, in
appropriate cases, of an undertrial prisoner on his bond without sureties and
without any monetary obligation.

9.3. The first Hussainara decision was followed by orders passed by
the Supreme Court” from time to time furnishing guidelines for release of under-
trials languishing in jails for want of expeditious disposal of pending cases. In
Hussainara Khatvon Vit" a criminal miscellaneous petition was filed seeking
general orders on the basis of guidelines already issued by the court, namely
for undertaking an inquiry for setting up of additional courts in every state,
providing investigating agencies with more experts, simplifying the procedure
for sanction of prosecution, strict compliance with s. 167 of the Code, circula-
tion of guidelines to the courts in states and revision of categories of undettrials
in Bihar jails. The Supreme Court, while refraining from issuing general
orders, observed:

The enforcement of the guildelines by the subordinate courts functioning
in different states should now be the responsibility of the different
High Courts......General orders for release of under-trials without
reference to specific fact situations in different cases may prove to
to be hazardous, While there can be no doubt that undertrial pri-
soners should not fanguish in jail on account of refusal to enlarge
them on bail for want of their capacity to furnish bai. with monetary
obligations, these are matters which have to be dealt with on case-
to-case basis keeping in mind the guidelines laid down by this court
sense General orders in regard to judge sirengih of subordinate judi-
ciary in each State must be attended to, and iis Functioning overseen,
by the High Court of the State .. ..- Withdrawal of
cases from time to time may not always be an appropriate and acce-
ptable remedy, but what is required is to evolve a mechanism which
would enable carly disposa) of cases."

9.4. In a public interest litigation case on the undertrials in Tihar Jail,
Delhi, National Capital Territory, the Supreme Court in R.D. Upadhyay y. State
of Andhra Pradesh’ issued, speciic directions for expediting the wial of under-
trials accused of serious offences as murder, aitempt to murder etc. under LPC,
Arms Act, Customs Act. Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic ~— Substances
Act., Official Secrets Act, Extradition Act, Terrorist and Disruptive
Activities Act and Dowry Prohibition Act. The Court also issued dir-
ections for release on bail without the necessity of application for bail in cases
where undertrials are charged with attempt to murder under IPC and cases have
been pending for more than two years. In cases where undertrials are charged
with the offences of kidnapping, iheft, cheating, counterfeiting, rioting,
hurt, grievous hurt or under the Arms Act. Customs Act if they have been in
detention for more than one year. they should be released on bail without an
application of bail.

9.5. To prevent the undertrial prisoners front languishing in jails for
periods longer than the period of maximum period of imprisonment’ for the


25

alleged offence, clause 4] of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill
Proposes to insert ते new sectian 436A on the following ines

S. 436A where a person has, during the period of investigation, inquiry
or tial under this Code of an offence under any law(not being on offence
for which the punishment of death has been specified as one of the
Punishments under that Jaw) undergone detention for a period ex-
tending up to one-half of the maximum period of imprisonment speci-
fied for that offence under that taw, he shall be released by the Court
on his personal bond with or without sureties:

Provided that the Court may, after hearing the Public Prosecutor and for

reasoas to be recorded by it i ig. extend the peried of deten-
fod longer than one-half of the
bail instead of the personal bond

with or without sureties.

Provided further that no such person shall in any case be detained dur-
ing the period of investigation, inquiry or trial for more than the
maximum period of imprisonment provided for the said offence
under that law:

Explanation---In computing the period of detention under this _ section
for granting bail the period of detention passed due to delay in proceeding
caused by the accused shall be excluded.

10, Section 436A be inserted in the Code as a protection for underirial
Prisoners accused of non-capital offences and release on bail as contained — in
Clause 41 of the Coile of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill except the
words “instead of the personal bond with or without sureties.” occurring in
proviso to clause 41 of the Bill be omitted.

10.1 Section 437 dea's with grant of bail in respect of non-bailable and
cognizable offences. Clause 42 of the Criminal Procedure Code (Amendment)
Bill seeks to amend section 437 to provide that if a person commits a cogni-
zable offence and he has previously been convicted on two or more occasions
of a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment not less than three years,
he shall not be released execpt in the circumstances specified in the provision.

10.2 [is further provided in the Bil that if an accused appears before
the Court while in juidicial custody and prays for bail, or a prayer for bail is made
on his behalf. the Court shall grant bail only after giving an opportunity of
hearing 10 the prosecution, if the alleged offence committed by the accused is
punishable with death. imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than
seven years,

10.3 Under the present sub-section (3) of section 437 of the Code, the
court has the discretion to impose certain conditions for the grant of bail.
Where conditions are thus imposed. the band  exccuted under section 441(2°
shall incorporate those conditions

HL. In order to make the provision under section 437 more stringent and
ensure that the accused release! on bail does not interfere or intimidate the
witnesses, Section 437 be amended as provided under c'ause 42 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, [994:

Tn section 437 of the principal Act. (i) in sub-section (1),

(a) in clause (ii), for the word “a non-bailable and cognizable offence”,
the words “a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment for
not less than three years” shall be substituted:

181 after the third proviso, the following proviso sha’) be inserted,
naniely,

“Provided also that no person shall. if the offence alleged to have
been commiticd by him is punishable with death, imprison-
ment for life or imprisonment for seven years or more be re-
leased on bail by the Court under this sub-section without
giving an opportunity of hearing to the Public Prosecutor,”



26

Gi) in sub-section (3) for the portion beginning with the words -..
Court may impose” and ending with the words “the interests of
justice”, the fol.owing shall be substituted, namely:

“the Court shall impose the conditions,—

(a) that such person shall attend in accordance with the conditions
of the bond executed under this Chapter,

(0) that such person shall not directly or indirectly make any in-
ducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the
facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such
facts to the Court or to any police officer or tamper with the
evidence and may also impose, in the interests of justice, such
other conditions as it considers necessary.”

437 We recommended the adoption of the aforesaid amendments to section

12, The directions issued by the Supreme Court in Common Cause v.
Union of India’. wamely +

“I(a) Where the offences under [P.C. or any other law for . the time
being in force for which the accused are charged before any cri-
minal court ace punishable with imprisonment not exceeding three
yeats with or without fine and if tria’s for such offences are pen-
ding for one year or more and the concerned accused have not
been released on bail but are in jail for a period of six months or
more, the concerned criminal court shail release the accused on bail
or on personal bond to be executed by the accused and subject to
such conditions, if any, as may be found necessary, in the light of
Section 437 of the Criminal Procedure Code [Cr. P.C.].

1(b) Where the offences under 1P.C. or any other law for the time
being in force for which the accused are charged before any cri-
minal court are Punishab’e with imprisonment not exceeding five
years, with or without fine, and if the trials for such offences are
pending for two years or more and the concerned accused have not

nn released on bail but are in jail for a period of six months or
more, the concerned criminal court shall release the accused on bail
or on personal bond to be executed by the accused and subject to
the imposing of suitable conditions, if any. in the light of section 437

I(c) Where the offences under I.P.C. or any other law for the time being
in force for which the accused are charged before any criminal
court are punishab'e with seven years or less, with or without fine,
and if the trials for such offences are pending for two years or more
and the concerned accused have not been released on bail but are
in jail for a period of one year or more, the concerned criminal
court shall release the accused on bail or on personal bond to be
executed by the accused and subject to imposing of suitable condi-
tions. if any, in the light of Section 437 Cr. P.C.”

are salutary in fiberalising the grant of bai! in respect of undertrial prisoners
where trials are pending and not concluded.

However the aforesaid directions should not be applicable in subsequent
offences committed by the same offenders or against whom more than one case is
pending or when a person has been convicted for more than one case.

ANTICIPATORY BAIL

13.1. Section 438 empowers the Sessions Court and the High Court to
grant anticipatory bail, namely a direction to release a person on bail even before
he is arrested.


27

13.2 The Law Commission in its 4Jst Report recommended the jacorpora-
tion of a provision on anticipatory bail, The Commission had observed":

The necessity for granting anticipatory buil arises mainly because some-
times influentia persons try to implicate their rivals in false cases for
the purpose of disgracing them or for other purposes by getting them
detained in jail for some days. In recent times. with the accentuation
of political rivalry, this tendency is showing signs of steady increase.
Apart from false cases, where there are reasonable grounds for hold-
ing that a person accused of an offence is not likely to abscond. or
otherwise misuse his liberty while on bail. there seems no justification
to require him first to submit to custody. remain in prison for some
days and then apply for bail.

13.3 The Code of Criminal Procedure as amended in 1973 has incorpo-
rated the concept of grant of anticipatory baii in Section 438.

134 The Law Commission, in its 48th Report, gave vent to the immpres-
sion that had gained ground in the interregnum about the misuse of the provi-
sion on grant of anticipatory bail in the following observations” :

[711 order to ensure that the provision is not put to abuse at ithe instance
of unscrupulous petitioners, the final order should be made only afte
notice to the Public Prosecutor. The initial order should only be an
interim one. Further, the relevant section should make it clear that
the direction can be issued only for reasons to be recorded and if
the court is satisfied that such a direction is necessary in the interest
of justice.

It wi'l also be convenient to provide that notice of the interim order as
pelt as of the final orders will be given to the Superintendent of Police
rthwith. . यु

14. Since the introduction of the provision of anticipatory bail under
section 438, its scope has been under judicial scrutiny. The leading case on
the subject is Gurhaksh Singh Sibbia v. State of Punjab." The Suprem e Court,
reversing the Full Bench decision of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in
this .case"* which had given a restricted interpretation of the scope of section
438, held that in the context of Article 21 of the Constitution, any statutory

vision (s, 438) concerned with personal liberty could not be whittled down
by reading restrictions and limitations into it. The Court observed” :

“Since denial of bail amounts to deprivation of personal liberty, the
Court should Jean against the imposition of unnecessary restrictions
on the scope of section 438, especially when no such restrictions
have been imposed by the legislature in the terms of that section”.

The Court also held that the conditions subject to which the bail can be
Fane’ under section 4370) should not_be read into section 438. While allow-
ing unfettered jurisdiction to the High Court and the Court of Session, the Sup-
reme Court fondly. hoped that a convention may develop whereby the High
Court and the Court of Session would exercise their discretionary powers in
their wisdom. The Court laid down the following clarifications on certain
points which had given rise 10 misgivings” :

(i) The person applying for anticipatory bail should have reason to
believe that he will be arrested. Mere ‘fear’ of arreat cannot amount
. to ‘reasonable belief’.

(ii) The High Court and the Court of Session must apply their mind
with care and circumspection and determine whether the case for
anticipatory bai] is made out or not.

{iii) Filing of FIR is not a condition precedent to the exercise of power
under section 438.

(iv) Anticipatory bail can be granted even after the filing of FIR.
{v) Section 438 cannot be applied after arrest.

(vi) No blanket order of anticipatory bail ‘can be passed by any court,
$- Moll. & JINDIST ~


28

15. The working of Section 438 has been c1 din that it hampers
effective investigation of serious crimes, the accused misuse their freedom {0
criminally inti te and even assault the witnesses and tamper with valuable
evidence and that whereas the rich, influential and powerful accused resort to
it and the poor do not, owing to their indigent circumstances thus giving rise
to the feeling that some ate “more equal (han others” in the legal process.

16. In view of the above circumstances, some state goveriuments have
made local amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure. Uttar Pradesh Le-
gislature has repealed section 438 by the Amending Act of 1976. West Bengal
Legislature enacted amendments in 1990 incorporating certain limitations on
the power to grant anticipatory bail, Those ate: {i) Mere filing of applica-
tion in the High Court or Court of Session for grant of anticipatory bail does
not debar the police from apprehending the offenders: (if) the High Court or the
Court of Session be required to dispose of an application for anticipatory bail
within thirty days from the date of such application and (iii) in offences puni-
shable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term not less
than 7 years. no final order shall be made without giving the state a minimum
of seven days’ notice to present its case.

17. The Code of Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill in clause 43 seeks
to amend section 438, echoing the recommendations of the Law Commission
in its 48th Report and also on some other grounds referred to above. in the
following mannet :

“In section 438 of the principal Act for sub-section (1), the following
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely :

(1) Where any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested
on accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he
may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a
direction under this section that in the event of such arrest, he
shall be released on bail; and that Court may, after taking
into consideration, inter alia, the following factors, namely:

(i) the nature and gravity of the accusation:

: (ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whe-
ther he has previously undergone imprisonment on conviction
by a Court in respect of any cognizable offence:

(iii) the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice: and

(iv) where the accusation has been made with the objection of in-
juring or humiliating the applicant by having him so arrested.

either reject the application forthwith or issue an interim order for
the grant of anticipatory bail:

Provided that, where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court
of Session, has not passed any interim order under this sub-section
or has rejected the application for grant of anticipatory bail, it shall
be open to an officer-in-charge of a police station to arrest, without
warrant the applicant, if there are reasonable grounds for such arrest.

(1A) Where the Court grants an interim order under sub-section (1),
it shall forthwith cause a notice being not Jess than seven days no-
tice, together with a copy of such order to be served on the Public
Prosecutor and the Superintendent of Police, with a view to give
the Public Prosecutor a reasonable opportunity of being heard when
the application shall be finally heard by the Court.

(18) The presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory bail shall be
obligatory at the time of final hearing of the application and passing
of final order by the Court, if on an application made to it by the
Public Prosecutor, the Court considers such presence necessary in the
interest of justice.”

48, In the various workshops diverse views were expressed regarding
the retention or deletion of the provision of anticipatory bail. One view is that
it:ie being misused by affluent and influential sections of accused in society and



a

hence be deleted from the Code. The other view is that it is a salutary provi-
sion 10 safeguard the personal liberty and therefore be retained. Misuse of the
same In some instances by itself cannot be a ground for its deletion. However,
some restraints may be imposcd in order to minimise such misuse. We are,
however, of the cpinion that the provision contained under section 438 regard-
ing anticipatory bail should remain in the Code but subject to the amendments
suggested in clause 43 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill,
1994 which lays down adequate safeguards.

SURETIES

19.2 The bail procedure is becoming a shame in courts with the accused
in criminal cases absconding after arranging fake sureties on fake identities and
address, Accordingly the procedure of securing release on the basis of forged

documents has become easy.

192 lo Delhi the practice seems to be that when the court allows ac-
cused’s release on bail after a local person is willing to stand surety, the  gua-
rantor has to produce documents to the Court to prove his domicile and sol-
vency. This is done by producing a ration card or a passport. In addition, a
power-of-attorney attested by a Notary Public, a motor vehicle registration docu-
ment, a bank fixed deposit receipt or a certificate from the income Tax Depart-
ment is required to be submitted to authenticate the guarantor’s solvency.

19.3 There are touts operating in the Court permises, who help out, on
a price tag, those accused who scheme to obtain bail with the idea of abscond-
ing. These touts give surety on the basis of fake identity. They operate with
numerous fake ration cards which substantiate their domicile in Deihi each in
a different name and address. A back dated stamp paper is procured on which
details regarding the power-of-attorney of the guarantot’s property in Delhi are
stated and is attested by a Notary Public. They also have in their possession
fake letterheads of private organisations, fake identity cards of themselves as
government servants and fake motor vehicle registration papers. The touts
have to be paid 20% to 30% of the surety amount before the presentation
of the surety”

49.4 Clause 44 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill
seeks to incorporate a new section, $.441A to deal with the abuse of profes-
sional and fake sureties which reads as under:

Every person standing surety to an accused person for his release on bail,
shall make a declaration before the court as to the number. of per-
sons to whom he has stood surety including the accused, giving there-
in all the relevant particulars.

49.5 We are of the view that section 441A be incorporated in.’ the Code
to eliminate the pemnicious evil of professional and fake sureties in the _ bail
process. It will eliminate collusion between professional sureties, admiinistra-
tors of criminal justice system and criminals.

20.1 S. 446 of the Code prescribes the procedure for forfeiture of bonds
either for appearance or production of property. Before forfeiting the surety
bond, the court should give notice to surety to show causo as to why the surety
bond be not forfeited. Once a hearing is given to the surety and the court
ig satisfied that the bond is forfeited, it shall record the grounds of such proof

and call upon. the surety to pay the penalty.

20.2 Sub-section 3 of section 446 empowers the court, at _ its discretion,
to remit any portion of the penalty and enforce payment 10 part only. It has
been held by various decisions of the High Courts that a case for the exercise
of discretion under this sub-section will arise in cases where the accused has
been subsequently artested or the amount forfeited is excéssive and the’ surety
is unable to pay. 31 is also not irrelevant to consider whether the surety. did not
act irresponsibly and there was no connivance or negligence on the part of the
surety” . .

zt 20.4 Clause 45° of the Code of Criminal —_ Procedure (Amendment) Bill
[6 that the court shal! record reasons be-

seeks to amend sub-section(3) to provid
fore reducing the penalty.


30

20.4 The proposed amendment is as follows:

In section 446 of the principal Act, for the words “at its discretion”,
the words “after recording its reasons for doing so” shall be subs-
tituted.

20.5 We are of the view that in keeping with the tune of amendments to
section 436, 437. 438 and the insertion of sections 436A and 441A. the amend-
ment of sub-section (3) of section 446 an the tines set out above to require ri-
gorous exercise of discretion by the Courts by recording reasons prior to the
reduction of penalty and enforcement in Part. is proper and warranted.

Footnotes:

1. Supdt., & Remembrancer of Legal Affairs v. Kumar Roy Choudhury
(1974) 78 Cal W.N. 320. 325.

2. $. 2(a).
3. (1978) 4 SCC 47.

4. See Rao Harnarain Singh v. State, AUR 1958 123, State v. Captain
Jagjit Singh AYR 1962 SC 253: Gurcharan Singh ५, State (Del.
Admn.) (1978) 1 SCC 118; Gudikanth Narasimhulu v. Public Pro-
secutor (1978) 1 SCC 240, Bhagirati Singh v. Judeja, AIR 1984 SC
372; Johny Wilson v. State of Rajasthan, 1986 Cri. L.J. 1235 {Raj).

5. Report of the Legal Aid Committee (1971) quoted in Moti Ram vy.
State of M.P. supra note 3.

6. Report of the Expert Committee on Legal Aid Processual Justice 40.
the People (1973) quoted in Moti Ram case, ibid. a

7. Rao Harnarain Singh v. State Gudikanth Narasimhulu v. Public
Prosecuthor, Gurcharan Singh v. State (Del. Admn.), Supra note 4.

8. Hussainara Khatoon ४! ५. Home Secretary, (1980) 1 SCC 81; (1980)
1 SCC 91; (1980) SCC 93; (1980) 1 SCC 98, (1980) 1 SC 98 3 (1980)
1 SCC 108; (1980) 1 SCC 115.

9. Id at 84, 85, 87,

10. Supra note 8.

11. Hussainara Khatoon Viv. Home Secretary (1995) 5 SCC 326.

12. Id. at 328. पर

13. 1996 (Crimes) 189 (SC).

14, 1996 (4) Scale, 129. हे

15, Forty First Report, para 39.9, page 321 (1969), ae

16, Forty Eighth Report, Some Questions under the Code of Criminal
: Procedure Bill, 1970 para 31, page 10 (1972).

17. (1980) 2 SCC 565.

18. Gurubaksh Singh Sibbia ४, State of “Punjab, AIR 1978 P&H.
19, Supra note 17 at 586. 7
20. Id at 589-590.

21. See “Sureties for Sale—Bail Racket Unearthed”, Statesman (Delhi.
ed.) 28th May, 1995, pages 1, 9. a 9५०

22. See Dayal Chand ९. State of Rajasthan, 1982 Cri. LJ. 1008 (Raj);
Ramakant Simopurkaskar ५, State, 1989 Cri. LJ. 1264 (Bom); OP,

Anand v. State, 1989 Cri. L.J. 2464 (Del). |



CHAPTER Vii
BAIL—ATTIENDANCE OF ACCUSED—APPELLATE STAGE

1. The Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 is silent on the point of secur-
ing attendance of the accused at a later stage after the acquittal in cases where
appeals against acquittals have been filed or in cases where appeals for en-
hancement of sentence are filed. There are many instances where the appel-
late courts having admitted an appeal against acquittal are not in a position
to secure presence of acquitted accused. Even though non-bailable warrants
are issued the police agency has been unable to serve the notices as well as
the non-bailable warrants on the respondents accused in spite of lapse of long
time. Some time they are returned saying that the police have no information

regarding the res] lents or their whereabouts, A large number
of such appeals after admission have been pending in various appellate courts
including the Supreme Court without being disposed of since the service could:
not be effected or where the presence of acquitted accused could not be secured
in spite of issuance of non-bailable warrants. Number of such matters for
want of service are piling up and have added to the pendency. The Division
Bench of Gujarat High Court in Appeal No. 51/91 in its judgment dated
13-1-1994 considered these aspects and have recommended to make a special
provision and amend Form-45 in Schedule II of the Code, suitably.

2, Form 45 pertains to bonds and bail bonds for attendance . before
Office Incharge of Police Station or Court, bearing relevance to section 436,
437, 43B(jii) and 440. The perusal of the form shows that it is prescribed in
two proforma whereby the accused and sureties undertake to appear in the
first instance before the investigating agency and in the 2nd before the Trial.
Court, during the trial. It does not provide for securing the attendance of the
accused at the appellate stage. If this gap is not properly filled, the disposal
of appeals against the acquittal in these circumstances becomes: difficult’ and
even result in injustice, and the same has to be remedied. Accordingly, we
recommend insertion of a new section 437A empowering ail the criminal
courts (including the first appellate court) to take bail and bail bond before the
conclusion of the trial or G | of the appea! requiring the accused to bind-
themselves to appear before next appellate court; in case an appeal against
acquittal or an appeal for enhancement is filed in the higher court such a bond
shall be in force for a period of 12 months from the date of the judgment _dis-.
posing of the case either by the trial court or by the first appellate court, as
the case may be. We feel the twelve months limit would be enough to cover
the period of limitation for processing and filing of such appeals.

3. A question may arise whether such a provision is likely to be chal-
lenged as unconstitutional by virtue of Artic’e 21 of the Constitution on the
ground that the bail bond restricts the personal liberty of the individual. We
are of the view that sections 377 and 378 Cr.P.C. provide for filing such appeals
by the State, and a period of limitation is also prescribed. Therefore binding
over the accused till such time will not amount to a restraint on his personal
freedom. Even oherwise, it may amount to a restriction permissible under law
particularly when there is no deprivation of his liberty or freedom of movement.

4, The proposed section 437-A may be on the following lines:

(1) Before conclusion of the trial and before disposal of the appeal,. the’
trial court or the appellate court; as the case may be, require the
accused to execute bail bonds with sureties, which shall: be in force
for twelve months. undertaking to appear before the higher court. as-
and when such court issues notice in respect of any appeal or peti-

- tion filed against the judgement of those respective courts: -.; ~

‘Ot such accused fails to appear. the bond stands forfeited. and
procedure under section 446 shall be applicable. 7 ५.0

On the same lines Form 45 has to be amended.

3r


CHAPTER Vili

SUMMON CASES—WARRANT  CASES—SUMMARY TRIAI~—CHANGES
IN PROCEDURE

° 1. The Code of Criminal Procedure is essentially a procedural law with
the object of providing a machinery for the punishment of offenders under the
substantive criminal law. It lays down the procedure to be followed in every
investigation, enquiry and trial, for every offence under the Indian Penal Code
or under any other law. The concern for speedy tiai is the main premise under-
lying the Code, both with regard to investigation and also with regard to trial,
In respect of offences other than these itied at the Session Courts, a broad divi
sion into summons cases and warrant cases, is made. हे

2. Section 2 (x) defines warrant-case as one relating to an offence puiiish-
able with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding two
years.

Section 2(w) lays down that the summons-case means a case yelating to
an offence, and not being a warrant case, thereby implying that all cases relating
to offences punishable with imprisonment not exceeding 2 years, shall come in the
category of summons cases.

3. Chapter XIX provides for two types of procedure for the trial of
warrant cases by the Magistrate, viz. those instituted upon a police report and
‘those instituted upon a complaint, The procedure therein is somewhat elaborate.

Tn respect of cases instituted on police report, Section 239 provides for

discharge of the accused if the Magistrate upon consideration of the police
report and the documents sent with it and after making such examination. If any
of the accused, considers the charge to be groundless before framing of the charge
and if the accused pleads guilty conviction foliows under Section 241. Sections
242 and 243 Jay down the procedure for taking evidence by the prosecution
and defence respectively. In respect of the cases instituted otherwise than’ on
police report the Magistrate, as provided under section 244 has to hear the
prosecution and take the evidence as may be produced. | . .

Section 245 provides for discharge of the accused if the ‘evidence taken.
makes out no case against the accused. पु

Sections 246 and 247 elaborate the further procedure where the accused
is not discharged, and in the opinion of the Magistrate, the regular trial has
to go on after framing a charge etc.

Sections 248 to 250 deal with conclusion of the trial and .are common

to both types of cases. t

- 4 In’ respect of the summons cases Chapter XX contains the necessary”
procedure. The main difference between the two procedures is that in respect
of the summons cases there is no need to frame the chafge. . In. this class*-ef:
cases arising on a private complaint or on a police report, the evidenct-of>
both sides generally has to be made ready and has to be recorded at 8. single
sitting and is to be followed by a judgement without any delay. The trial of
the cases under this procedure is thus designed to occupy the minimum amount
of time. | . . aos

° 5. In both procedures section 249 and 256 provide that-in the absence
of the complainant, the accused may be discharged or acquitted. - In the case
of summons procedure section 257 provides ‘for the .ivithdrawa! ‘of the com-
plaint. One other important provision in respect of summons procedure is sec-
tion 259 whereunder the court has the power to convert summons case into
warrant case. If in the course of. the: ‘trial. of a suimitons’ ९४५७ ‘relating to an
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding six months, if the
Magistrate thinks that in the interest of justice the offence should be tried in
accordance with the procedure for the trial of warrant casés, he may..do so. - *

32


33

6. Chapter XXI deals with summary trials. As provided under section
260. ceitain Magistrates of First C ass, especially empowered by the High Court
may try in a summary way any of the offences mentioned therein. Sub-section
2. of Section 260 lays down that when in the course of summary trial it appears
to the Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that it is undesirable -16
try summarily, he may even recall the witnesses and proceed to rehear the case
in the manner provided by the Code. Section 261 gives powers to Second Class
Magistrate to try summarily an offence which is punishable only with fine or with
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months.

7. Section 262, however. lays down that in summary trial the procedure
specified for the trial of summons cases shall be followed cxcept as mentioned
therein. Section 262 (2) further lays down that 10 sentence of imprisonment
for a term exceeding 3 months shall be passed in the case of any conviction
under that Chapter. Section 263 gives the particulars to be entered in the
record to be made at the time of summary trial. Section 264 lays down™that in
every case tried summarily in which accused does not plead guilty, the Magis-
trate shall record the substance of the evidence and a judgment containing 2
brief statement of the reasons for th> finding. A combined reading the provi-
sions of the summons procedure and the summary trial procedure wou'd show
that the latter is meant fo be more brief and the summons procedure to be fol-
lowed in respect of summary trials is further abridged by virtue of sections 263
and 264, The Court is required to record only reasons in a brief manner in
support of the findings.

8. The Fourteenth Report of the Law Commission observed that the
division between the summons cases and warrant cases is arbitrary. It has also
observed that in certain classes of offences, the ingredients of the’ offences are
the same. But some of the them fall under the category of summons cases
merely on the basis of sentence. The Law Commission recommended that as a
general rule all-offences which do not carry punishment of imorisonment for
more than three years can be tried under the summons procedure without any
prejudice to the accused. Tf. such a course is adopted. there will be the addi-
tion of one hundred and twenty seven more offences under the Indian Penal
Coile alone to the existing list of offences triable by the procedure applicable
to sumnions cases and that alone where sentence is of similar nature.

. 9. A perusal of the two procedures would show that they are somewhat
alike, in many respects. To ensure speedy trial, the procedure must be simpli-
fied so that the bulk of cases which ate being handled by the Magistrate can be
disposed of more expeditiously. In all the workshops conducted, it was unani-
mously voiced that the summary procedure is not being adopted and that is
one of the reasons for heavy pendency and delay. It is also suggested that all
the summons cases and the other offences mentioned under section 260 should
be made compulsorily triable by wav cf summary trials. The survey coducted
also shows that there is unanimity about the suggestion to convert all offences
carrying punishment upto three years imprisonment into summons cases and to
make it mandatory that al’ such offences should be tried summarily.

10. The important aspect to be noticed is whether all the summons cases
gan be tried summarily except such of those which by virtue of the nature or
‘Circumstances of the offences or accused warrant a full trial and if in respect
of such class of cases summary procedure is not found to be salutary then
whether a provision has to be made enumerating such offences which cannot be
tried by way of summary triels or leave it to the discretion of the magistrate as
‘provided under sub-section (2) of section 260. This provision applies when the
‘magistrate during the course of the trial discovers that it will be more appro-
priate for the court to try the accused an the regular side because of the character
and nature of the case, Naturally. such a course should be exceptional and the
magistrate should give sufficient reasons for adonting such a course. For such
class of cases, the warrant procedure can b= apolied and all the other catero-
ries of cases called summons cases should be tried summarily. Then the sum-
mons procedure under Chapter XX can be dispensed with. A provision can
also be made by amending section 260 to the effect that in all cases tried sum-
marily. thepunishment cannot exceed six months or fine unto Rs. 30007... Ac-
cordinely Section '262/2) be deleted. If provisions are made to this effect. szc-
‘ton 206 which provides - issuing such summons की ९8968 of --petty- offences



34

enabling the accused to put forward his plea in writing where he pleads guilty and
transmit the same by post or his pleader to plead on his behalf can also be revi-
sed. In such special summons, the amount of fine to be levied can a'so be
specified. Even scope for the accused for plea bargaining as well as indicating
his willingness to compound the offence should be made available. On the basis
of such plea, the magistrate can record his plea and pass appropriate orders, In
all summons cases which can be tried summarily as indicated above, the proce-
dure can be simplified as provided under sections 263 and 264.

11. We are also of the view that as voiced in many workshops, the
summons procedure is not strictly being followed and the summary trial proce-
dure is also not being adhered to and as a result, heavy pendency is there and
trials are inordinately delayed.

12. In the light of the above discussion, we suggest that section 200
defining warrant cases should be amended io the effect that warrant case means
@ case relating to an offence punishable with death, or imprisonment for term
exceeding three years, Likewise Section 2(w) should be amended to the effect
that summons case means re‘ating to an offence and not being a warrant case
summarily triable under Chapter XX1 thereby laying down that all offences,
which do not fall under the definition of warrant case, fall under the category
of summons cases summarily triable. In this context, it can also be noticed that
section 274, which deals with the recording of evidence in summons cases, also
is to the effect that in all summons cases tried, the magistrate shall, as the
examination of each witness proceeds, make a memorandum of substance of the
evidence in the language of the court. This is in accordance with the summary
procedure under Chapter XXT as well as the changes proposed by us and ‘this
fection be changed by adding the word “summarily” after the words “summoris
cases tried”.

13, As we are trying to bring under the umbrella of summons cases all
those offences which are punishable with imprisonment of three years, the cove-
rage thus gets increased and a large number of offences can also be brought
under summary trial. However, we have suggested the amendment of section
260 so that the magistrate shall have the power to award sentence of imprison-
ment upto a period of six months or a fine upto Rs. 3.000/-, But there may
‘be cases of serious nature warranting higher punishment depending upon the
seriousness and gravity of offence and other circumstances. In such a situation.
the magistrate who is trying the case summari’y can have recourse to sub-section
{2) of section 260. It may be mentioned that section 259 in Chapter XX pro-
vides that the courts shall have the power to convert the summons case into a
warrant case where in the course of trial of summon case relating to an offence
punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding six months, in the interest of
justice, it appears to the magistrate that the same should be tried as a warrant
case, he may proceed to do so. Since we are proposing to dispense with sum-
mons procedure altogether. sub-section (2) of section 260 needs further amend-
nient to the effect that where the magistrate takes recourse thereunder should
give valid reasons for doing so, namely, that it is undesirable to try summarily
and he may convert the same info a warrant case and try accordingly.

14. As a consequence of the above proposed changes, Chapter XX pro-
viding for summons cases can be deleted and sub-section (1) of section 260 shall
also be amended to the effect that all summons cases as per the proposed defini-
tion should be summarily tried.

In Section 260(1) the Sub-clauses (i) to (ix) stand deleted. A new clause
(9) under sub-section (1) should be inserted with effect that in all cases tried
summarily, the imprisonment shall be upto six months or fine up to Rs. 3,000/-.
Further Section 260{2) be amended as mentioned above.

15, Coming to the procedure to be adopted in such summarily trials, the
question is to what extent some of the provisions. of summons procedure are
to be followed in view of section 262(1). The said provisions lay down that
in summary trials under Chapter XX, the procedure specified in the Code
for the trial of summons-case shall be followed except 85 thereinafter metition-
ed, Now as we are suggesting the deletion of Chapter XX dealing with the
‘trial of summons cases, some provisions in that chapter have to be incorporated


35

in Chapter XXI, rather appropriately in Section 262. The aspects of proce-
dure contained in sections 251, 252, 253, 256, 257 and 258 of the Code can
suitably be incorporated in Section 262 by way of an amendment. Section 262
should then read as under:

“262. Procedure for summary trials-~-

(1) When in a summons-case the accused appears or is brought before
the Magistrate, the particulars of the offence of which he is accsued
shall be stated to him, and he shall be asked whether he pleads
guilty or has any defence to make. but it shall not be necessary to
frame a formal charge.

(2) If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea as
nearly as possible in the words used by the accused and may, in his
discretion, convict him thereon.

(3) Where a summons has been issued under section 206 and the accused
desires to plead guilty to the charge without appearing before the
Magistrate, he shall transmit to the Magistrate, by post or by mes-
senger, a letter containing his plea and also the amount of fine speci-
fied in the summons,

4

Tf the Magistrate does not convict the accused under sub-sections (2)
and (3), the Magistrate shall proceed to record evidence as provided
under section 274 and conclude the trial as provided under sections
263 and 264,

(5) (a) If the summons has been issued on complaint, and on the day
appointed for the appearance of the accused, or any day subsequent
thereto which the hearing may be adjourned, the complaint does not
appear, the Magistrate shall, notwithstanding anything hereinbefore
contained, acquit the accused, unless for some reason he thinks it
proper to adjourn the hearing of the case to some other day.

(b) The provisions of clause (a) shall, so far as may be. apply also to
cases where the non-appearance of the complainant is due to his
death.

16) If a complaint, at any time before a final order is passed in any
case under this chapter, satisfies the Magistrate that there are suffici-
ent grounds for permitting him to withdraw his complaint against
the accused, or if there be more than one accused, against all or any
of them, the Magistrate may permit him to withdraw the same,
and shall thereupon acquit the accused against whom the complaint
is so withdrawn.

(7) In any summons-case tried summarily instituted otherwise than
upon complaint, a Magistrate of the first class or, with the previous
sanction of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, any other Judicial Magis-
trate, may, for reasons to be recorded by him stop the proceedings
at any stage without pronouncing any judgment and where such
stoppage of proceedings is made after the evidence of the principal
witnesses has been recorded. pronounce a judgment of acquittal, and
in any other case release the accused, and such release shall have
the effect of discharge.”

Accordingly, the existing sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 262 be delet-
ed and substituted by the aforesaid sub-sections (1) to (7) in section 262, How-
ever, if the Magistrate does not convict the accused under section 262(2) and 3
he shall proceed with summary trial in accordance with sections 263, 264 and
265. However, in view of the deletion of clause (i) to (ix) of section 260, clause
(f) section 263 stands deleted.

16. Even in respect of warrant cases triable under Chapter XIX, it has
to be considered whether the procedure can be further simplified.

17, The Law Commission in its 41st Report suggested certain changes to
the then existing provisions’ and we find in the Code of 1973 the changes have
6—1 M of L & J/ND/97


36

been introduced to a large extent. However, even in the existing provisions
under Chapter XIX. we find the two procedures to some extent being the same
with a difference upto a particular stage in respect of the cases arising out of
police report and those arising otherwise than on a police report.

The Law Commission in its Fourteenth Report also noticed the difference
and recommended no change.

18. In the workshops held, it has been voiced that the manner of examina-
tion of the witnesses needs modification. It is also highlighted that unnecessary
time is being taken by postponing the proceedings in view of the procedures
regulating the witnesses for further cross-examination. We find that the views
expressed are correct and some changes have to be made in this regard.

19. In cases arising gut of a police report, all the statements having been
recorded during investigation should be supplied in advance and the cross-exa-
mination should proceed continuously. In the case of other types of cases aris-
ing otherwise than on police report also, evidence already recorded _ before
issuing process would be available furnishing sufficient material for cross-exami-
nation, and many adjournments just for the purpose of carrying on further cross-
examination can be avoided.

Accordingly Sections 242(2) (3) and 246 (4) be amended.


CHAPTER 1X

EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES AND RECORD OF THEIR STATEMENTS:
SECTIONS 161 AND 162

1. These two sections dealing with oral examination of witness
Police, the record to be made of their statements and the use to w
may put subsequently have been the subject matter of many court deci
discussions and consideration by various Commissions including the National Police
Commission and they have attracted a variety of comments and suggestions.
The Fourteenth Report! of the Law Commission is the earliest one to consider
the issues involved. The Commission expressed the view that the discretion
allowed to a Police Officer to record or not to record the statement of witnesses
orally examined by him is in such restricted terms that the whole purpose of
Section 173 would be defeated by a negligent or dishonest Police Officer and.
the Commission, therefore, recommended that the Police Officer should be obliged
by law to reduce in writing to record the statement of every witness against
whom the prosecution proposed to examine at the trial. This view was accepted’
in the Thirty Seventh Report of the Law Commission’. But the recommentda-
tion went further to suggest that statement of every witness questioned by the
police under Section 161 must be recorded thereby suggesting that the record-
ing of statement of witnesses should not be limited. only to those proposed to
be examined at the trial. The Law Commission agaitt in its Forty First Report’.
considered these recommendations and suggested that there is no need to place
any fetter on the discretion of the Policé Officer at the stage of investigation
and better to leave it to him to record only what in his judgment is worth
recording and leave the test to the departmental instructions and supervision.

2. Section 162(1) lays down firstly, the prohibition that ‘no statement made
by any person to a Police Officer in the course of investigation, under this
chapter shall, if reduced in writing be signed by the person making it. In
the Fourteenth Report, the Law Commission recommended that the literate
witnesses should be required to sign the statements‘. In the Thirty Seventh
Report’, the Commission, however, did not favour such a change. But, in the
Forty First Report, the Commission, however, recommended that where the

rson can rea the statement so recorded, his signature can be obtained after
he has read the statement. The second part of Section 162(1) has been found
to be controversial. It provides that no statement of witness to the police or any
record thereof whether in a police diary or otherwise or any part of such state-
ment or record shall be used for any purpose at an enquiry or trial. But, when
a witness is called for the prosecution, any part of the statement if duly quoted
may be used by the accused and with the permission of the Court by the prose-
cution to contradict such witness in the manner provided by Section 145 of
the Evidence Act. But, there had been many complaints that the police record
of a witness is often inaccurate that a dishonest Police Officer can write any-
thing he likes. The Forty First Report* of the Law Commission having con-
sidered the various views also observed that the statement under Section 164
would not be a good substitute for the statement before the police. The Com-
mission ultimately, however, did not recommend any change.

3. The National Police Commission in its Fourth Report’ considered
various views and suggestions and also the voluminous case law built up on
these two sections over several years. The Commission noted that under the
present provisions of Section 162, the Police Officer is precluded from obtaining
the signature of a person and the statement recorded from him. It was represent-
ed before the Commission that this provision operates to the greater disadvantage
of the Police Officer and induces a general feeling among witnesses that they are
not in any way bound by the statement recorded by the police and they could
freely deviate at a subsequent stage without attracting any penal notice. The
Police Commission also noted that it is imperative that the malpracties should
be put down to ensure honesty and integrity of the investigation. The Commis-
sion ultimately suggested that a greater measure of credibility could be imparted
to the statement of facts as recorded by the Police Officer if it is provided in
law that a copy of the statement so recorded shall, if desired by the witness. be
handed over to him under acknowledgment, Coming to the use of the

37


38

statements, the Police Commission suggested that there need not be a detailed re-
cording of the statement as made by a witness and the Investigating Officer can
make a record of the facts as ascertained by him on examination of witnessess
which could be in third person in the Janguage of the Investigating Officer himself
and that would be adequate to assist the evidentiary value Of different witnesses
and accordingly cite them in the chargesheet on conclusion of investigation. Ac-
cording to the Police Commission, such a statement of facts as ascertained and
recorded by the Investigating Officer could not be treated as an earlier Statement
made by the witness himself in his own language, and, therefore, the question of
using that statement for contradiction or corroboration would not arise. The Police
Commission also endorsed the view that no such statement of acts ascertained
by a Police Officer from many persons shall, if reduced to writing be signed by
the said person. But, the Commission, however, recommended that a copy of
such statement duly authenticated by the Police Officer recording it shall be
delivered under acknowledgment to ghat Person on whose examination of such
statement was recorded, if so desire by that person. Based on these Suggestions
the Police Commission also recommended necessary changes in Section 172
Cx.P.C. dealing with police diary, namely, that the Investigating Officer shall
maintain a police diary in which he enters his Proceedings, etc, and the statement
of the circumstances ascertained and also attach to the diary for each day, copies
of statement of facts ascertained and recorded under amended Section 161 Cr.P.C.

4. However, in the Forty First Repost* of the Law Commission, a note
of dissent regarding the proposed amendments to Sections 161(3) and 162 was
made by two Members, Shri R. L. Narasimam and Shri Balakrishnan. It is
observed that “the existing provisions of Section 162 Cr.P.C. have been univer-
sally condemned by the police, the Bar, the Courts and the litigant public. The
need for making substantial changes in the law is accepted by all of us in the
Commission. But we, two, regret our inability to agree with the recommenda-
tions of the majority regarding the proposed amendments in Section 161(3) and
162....”. In the said dissent note, it is also mentioned that the fundamental
anomaly in the existing provisions of Section 162 is that though the statute
prohibits the use of the statements made to the police during investigation for
the purpose of corroboration obviously on the assumption that the police record
is not correct, yet permits their use for contradicting prosecution witnesses and
that even for such contradicting obviously, the earlier statements should be pre-
sumed to have been correctly recorded and that the record cannot be at the
same time to be correct and also incorrect. The two Members having discussed
this issue, ultimately recommended amendment of Section 164 Cr.P.C. so as
make jt mandatory for the Investigating Officer to send to the nearest Magistrate
all material witnesses questioned by him during the course of investigation and
have the statements recorded on oath by that Magistrate within a day or two.
The two Members thus recommended amendments to Sections 16], 162 and 164
and correspondingly 172 and 173 Cr.P.C.

5. In all the workshops the subject has been discussed at great length
and there has been unanimity to a large extent that substantial changes are
necessary and various but divergent views have been expressed. Many of the
advocates appearing for the defence, however, ultimately are of the view that
in the absence of arriving at a satisfactory solution it is batter to leave the
Provisions as they are.

6. Let us at this stage examine the necessity and the purpose of record-
ing such statements by the police during investigation.

As we are aware, investigation in a criminal trial assumes important role
and it helps the court to determine the guilt or innocence of the accused. A
fair and objective investigation can unearth the crime committed and as well
collect the material which can prove the guilt or innocence of the accused, Section
2(b) defines investigation and lays down that investigation includes all the pro-
ecedings under the Code for the collection of evidence conducted by a police offi-
cer or by any person (other than a Magistrate) who is authorised by a Magistrate
in this behalf. Investigation commences on receipt of information as provided in
Sections 154 or 156 and has to be conducted as per the provisions of Chapter XII
of Cr.P.C. Section 160 confers powers on police officer to summon any person.
acquainted with the facts and circumstances’ of the case.


39

Section 161 empowers the Police Officer to record statements of persons.
Then comes Section 162. Though Section 2(b) broadly says that investigation
includes all proceedings to gather “evidence”, the statements recorded by police
do not by themselves constitute evidence. They are part of investigation recorded
while collecting material mainly for the purpose of preparing a report to be
lodged in the court. In such a situation do they attain the status of a previous
statement for the purpose of Sections 145 or 157 of the Evidence Act?

There is unanimity that they are not accurate and also not recorded in
the manner professed to be. Many a time the thinking or ingeauity of the
officer are projected into them. Therefore, they can hardly be called as the
previous statements of the persons examined by the police officer.

7. After giving our earnest consideration and in view of the fact that
there is unanimity in respect of the need for making substantial changes in the
Jaw, we propose that there should be changes on the following lines :

“As recommended by the National Police Commission in its 4th Report,
the Investigating Officer can make a record of the facts as ascertained
by him on examination of witnesses which statements could be
in the third person in the language of the Investigating Officer him-
self, This ensures that the material witnesses have been examined at
the earliest moment. Such a statement recorded in third person
cannot be treated as a previous statement and consequently cannot
be used for contradiction or corroboration. To that extent, a change
in section 162 Cr.P.C. is necessary. The signature of the witness on
the statement thus recorded need not be obtained. But, if the
witness so examined desires a copy of such statement so recorded shall
be handed over to him under acknowledgment. To reflect the shifit
in emphasis, a corresponding amendment to Section 172 should also
be made to the effect that the Investigating Officer maintaining the
case diary should mention about the statement of the circumstances
thus ascertained, and also attach to the diary for each day, copies
of the statement of facts thus recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
Neither the accused nor his agent shall be entitled to call for such
diaries which can be put to a limited use as provided under Section
172 CrP.C. Under the existing provisions of the Code, the prepara-
tion of the earliest record of the statement of witness is left in the
hands of Investigating Officer and as the mode of recording as pro-
vided in Section 162 does not ensure the accuracy of the record
{It is well known that many good cases are spoiled by insidious incor-
rect entries at the instance of the accused and it is also well known
that many innocent persons are sent up along with the guilty at the
instance of the informant’s party),(it is necessary to amend Section
164 Cr.P.C. so as to make it mandatory for the Investigating Officer
to get statements of all material witnesses questioned by him during
the course of investigation recorded on oath by the Magistrate. The
statements thus recorded will be of much evidentiary value and
can be used as previous statements. Such recording will prevent the
witnesses turning hostile at their free will, Such a change will also
help the police to complete the investigation and submit a final report
on the basis of such statements ma de on oath and on other facts
and circumstances, such as recovery, etc.) On the above mentioned
lines, the relevant Sections can be amended as follows:

“161. (1) Any police officer making an investigation under this
Chapter, or any police officer not below such rank as the State
Government may, by general or special order, prescribe in this
behalf, acting on the requisition of such officer, may examine
orally any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and
circumstances of the case.

(2) Such person shali be bound to answer truly all questions relat-
ing to such case put to him by such officer, other than questions
the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him to
a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture.

(3) To be omitted.


40

(4) The police officer may reduce into writing a statement of facis
ascertained from a petson in the course of an examination under
this section: and if he does so. he shall make a separate and true
record of the statement of facts ascertained from each -such
person”.

“162. No statement of facts ascertained by a police officer from any
person in the course of an investigation under this chapter, shall,
if reduced to writing, be signed by the aforeside person; but a copy
of such Statement duly authenticated by the police officer record-
ing it shall be delivered under acknowledgment to the person
on whose examination such statement was recorded, if so desired
by that perso No such statement of facts shall be used by
the prosecution or the accused either for contradiction or for
corroboration under Sections 145 and 157 of the Evidence Act.”

(Proviso to be omitted).

164, (1) No change.
1(A) to be added as follows :

Every Investigating Officer shall send to the nearest Magistrate all
material witnesses during the course of investigation and the
Magistrate on oath record their statements, if such Magistrate
is empowered to take cognizance of the case on police report, he
shall keep such statements along with the FIR received by him
and await the further police report under Section 173. If he
is not empowered to take such cognizance, he shall send the
statements thus recorded on oath to the Magistrate empowered
to take cognizance of the case.

No change in remaining sub-sections.

172(1) Every police officer making an investigation under this chapter
shall day by day enter his proceedings in the investigation in
a diary, setting forth the time at which the information reached
him, the time at which he began and closed his investigation,
the place or places visited by him and a statement of the circums-
tances ascertained through his investigation; and also attach to the
diary for each day copies of statement of facts, if any, recorded
under Section 161 in respect of the person or persons whose
examination was completed that day.

(2) Any criminal Court may send for the police diaries of a case
under inquiry or trial in such court, and may use such diaries.
not as evidence in the case, but to aid it in such inquiry or trial,

(3) Neither the accused nor his agents shall be entitled to call for
such diaries, nor shall he or they be entitled to see them merely
because they are referred (to) by the Court.”

Other alteruative

8. As discussed above most of the defence counsels while acknowledging
the incongruity in the provision ic. Section 162, however, took the stand that
in the absence of having any satisfactory change it would be proper to retain
the provision as it is. They are also firmly of the view that the defence and
the court should know what the earliest version given by the witness and that
can be the only basis for cross examination, In this context they contended
that getting the statements recorded under Section 164 does not solve the problem
and there would be considerable delay. Some of them, however, suggested
that to ensure the authenticity of the statements some checks may be imposed,
One suggestion is that the investigation officer soon after recording the state-
ment should give a copy to the deponent and also send them to the superior officer
at the earliest point of time so that any possible interference by the interested
person can be avoided to a large extent. In this context, they also suggested
that if the separate investigating agency is going to be set up the situation
would be different and statements recorded by such officers of better status would
be more authentic. Coming to the signing of the statements by the witness it


41

is said if he-is a literate the signature can be obtained so that he may not easily
prevaricate.. They also pleaded that mere making a record of the facts ascer
tained as suggested by the Police Commission would be of no use to any body
as the same cannot be used for any purpose.

9. We have also carefully considered these views. It is true that if such
statements are not recorded under section 164, then the record containing state-
ments of the facts ascertained, prepared by the Investigating Officer cannot be
of any use except enabling the court to pursue which may give some aid. We
do visualize that there are quite a few practical difficulties in getting the state-
ments recorded under Section 164. There is bound to be some delay which
may give scope for interference by others trying to influence the witnesses. Even
after making the statement on oath under Section 164, the witness may prevaricate.
Tt cannot also be presumed that all what was stated in such statement under
Section 164 is always true: but the redeeming feature is that it is made on oath.
As it is, the Magistrates who are overburdened and they may not find sufficient
time to record such statements. Therefore. more number of Magistrates have
to be appointed, These are some of the difficulties which we have to bear in
mind, but they are not insurmountable. If sufficient number of Magistrates are
appointed and if the separate investigating agency is set up promptly, the delay
in recording statement under Section 164 can be avoided.

40. At this stage we shall consider one other suggestion namely tape-re-
cording or video recording of such statements. The suggestion is attractive but
the question whether it would be workable under our conditions. Firstly, it
would be costly and secondly, impracticable, even such recordings cannot be
fool proof and are also vulnerable to tampering. In its report the Royal Commis-
sion on Criminal Justice considered this suggestion and also opined that it would
be costly and impracticable.

11. Having seriously considered all these aspects we are of the view that
the other alternative for the time being that can be thought of is to retain the
provision as it is and introduce some safeguards against any error or malprac-
tice in recording with a view to make the statement more authentic.

12. If a separate investigating agency consisting of well trained and better
personnel accountable only to the superior Officer is set up, they would to a
large extent be sincere and honest in recording such statements. However, for
the time being if a provision is made that a copy of the statement should be given
to the deponent under acknowledgment and also send them to the Magistrate and
to the superior officers that provision would ensure against any error or malprac-
tice being committed by the officer Section 162 be, therefore. suitably amended.

13, If the witness is a literate, there is no harm in obtaining his signature,
before giving a copy to him.

14. So for as the use of the statement is concerned, no change is neces-
sary, it be limited for the purpose of cross examination as provided under Section
145 of the Evidence Act. The absence or presence of material omissions as
found in the cross examination would be a factor in appreciating the veracity of the
witness and no further corroboration need be sought from the statement recorded
by the police particularly when it is not on oath recorded by a court and where
its authenticity is not of such high degree.

15. However, in our considered opinion, the first course is more salutary.
As recommended, if a separate investigating agency manned by officers of high
calibre and integrity is established, the statements of facts ascertained by them
will be more authentic, Keeping in view that the witnesses may prevaricate
and the handicaps the defence may face, it is desirable that the statements should
be recorded under Section 164 of the Code, which can be used both for corrobo-
ration and contradiction and that would also help in speedy trial. But this in-
volves appointment of more number of magistrates because their present strength
is wholly inadequate and they are already over-burdened. Likewise setting up


42

and structuring of the separate Investigating Agency is bound to take consider-

able time.

Til! such time these requirements are met, we are of the view that

the other alternative course as suggested above may be adopted and the existing

section 162

may suitably be amended.

FOOTNOTES
है 1.

Fone Report of the Law Connnission, paras 47, page 755
958).

. Thirty-Seventh Report of the Law Commission, paras 437-440

pages 119 to 121 (1967).

. Forty-first Report of the Law Commission, page 70, para 14.9
(1969).
. Fourteenth Report of the Law Commission, page 754. para 46,

Vol. 2 (1958)

. Thirty-Seventh Report of the Law Commission, pages 119 and 120,

para 437(c) (1967).

. Forty-first Report of the Law Commission, page 73, para 14.13,

Vol. 1 (1969).

, Fourth Report Of the National Police Commission, paras 27.12—

27.19, pages 4-6 (1980).

. Four fst Report of the Law Commission, page 373, para 1, 1969
rol. 1).

We


CHAPTER X

PROTECTION AND FACILITIES TO WITNESSES

1. The absence of witnesses or even their presence in the Courts of non-
examination and the absence of a system of day-to-day hearing are some of the
main ca:ses for the delays. In many workshops held. it was highlighted that
there is a plenty of justification for the reluctance of witnesses fo come forward
to attend courts promptly in obedience to the summons. It was also highlighted
that an important reason for the reluctance of the public to cooperate with the
law enforcement agencies and actively associate themselves with proceedings
in the course is the fact that their attendance in courts entails a lot of incon-
venience and harassment. Added to this, the listing of large number of cases
and adjourning them at the fag end of the day is also an important factor which
makes the witnesses refrain from coming forward to cooperate with the law
enforcement agencies either at the investigation or during the trial. This is
despite section 174 IPC and section 350 Cr-P.C. which provide for punishment
for non-attendance by witnesses in obedience to the summons issued by the
court.

2. It is said that the plight of witnesses appearing on behalf of the state
against a criminal is pitiable. While adjourning the case at the fag end of
the day after keeping the witness waiting for the whole day and while fixing
the next date, their convenience is not at all kept in view and if he fails to turn
up on the next date, harsh steps are taken against him. Even if he appears On
the adjourned date, the chances are that the case would be adjourned. again.
After suffering all these inconveniences even if he appears and evidence is
recorded, he is brow beaten by over zealous defence counsel or declared hostile
or unreliable by the prosecutor. Even after undergOing-this agonising
experience the poor witness is not compensated for the loss of earnings of the
day. Even his pocket expenses incurred are not reimbursed by anybody.
Besides, there are no facilities provided whatsoever for the witness to make
their long waiting in the courts bearable. Even basic amenities that are needed
are not provided for to this poor lot in the court premises. Thus they have
to suffer not only indignities and inconvenience but also have to spend time
and money. Added to this, they have to incur the wrath of the accused,
particularly hardened criminals which results in their life being at great peril.

ecause of this traumatic time consuming and humiliating experience, many
tespectables keep themselves away.

3. The allowances paid to the witnesses are very meagre because the
rates of allowances are totally inadequate. Thus, there is an immediate need
to enhance the rates and that witnesses summoned to the court should be paid
better regardless of whether he is examined or not. Further, the proc dure
for disbursement of the allowances should not be cumbersome.

4. The Law Commission in its Fourteenth Report’ as well as the National
Police Commission in its Fourth Report? had examined these issues in depth
and have firmly recommended substantive measures to alleviate the difficulties
of the witnesses. In the Conference of Director Generals of Police held in
1974, it was also recommended that the witnesses should be provided sufficient
protection, Jt has to be remembered that in the present system a poor witness
is caught between the devil and deep sea. If he fails to attend the court, he
shall be penally liable and if he attends, he undergoes an agonising experience
resulting in great inconvenience and loss. In this situation, all the measures
necessary to create good atmosphere, instilling confidence and faith in the
system in the minds of the witnesses have to be immediately chalked out and
implemented.

5. It is also pertinent to note that all causes of aversion and reluctance
on the part of the witnesses should be removed. Such an effort should be
there even from the stage of their examination by the police by treating them
in friendly manner and giving self-confidence by giving adequate protection
for them. .

43
Tai MoofT & 10197


44

6. We recommend that the allowances payable to the witnesses for their
attendance in courts should be fixed on a realistic basis and that payment should
be effected through a simple procedure which would avoid delay and incon-
venience.  Seelion 312 of Cr.P.C. and the rules made thereunder will have
to be suilably amended. — They should be paid allowances for all the days
they attend. Adequate facilities should be provided in the court premises
for their stay. The treatment afforded to them right from the stage of investi-
gation upto the stage of conclusion of the trial should be in a fitting manner
giving them due respect and removing all causes which contribute to any anguish
on their part. Necessary confidence has to be created in the minds of the
witnesses that they would be protected from the wrath of the accused in any
eventuality.

7. Listing of the cases should be done in such a way that the witnesses
who are summoned are examined on the day they are summoned and adjourn-
ments should be avoided meticulously. The lists should be prepared in such
a way that a day or two are devoted continuously to all cases of a particular
police station and cases should not be proceeded mechanically just according
to the chronological order regardless of the fact of the likelihood of their being
tried or not. The courts also should proceed with trial on a day-to-day basis
and the listing of the cases should be on those lines. The High Courts should
issue necessary circulars to all the criminal courts giving guidelines for listing
of cases.

FOOTNOTES
1. Fourteenth Report Of the Law Commission, Paras 3--11 pages
T16—180 (1958).
2. Fourth Report of the National Police Conunission, para 28.15,
page 16 (1980),


CHAPTER Xl
EXAMINATION OF ACCUSED UNDER SECTION 313

1, Section 313 empoweres the court to examine the accused at any stage
of any inquiry or trial for the purpose of enabling the accused to explain any
circumstances in the evidence appearing against him.’ It also makes it _man-
datory for the court to question the accused after the examination of evidence
of the prosecution and before he enters on his defence* The object of ques-
tioning under section 313 is that the important circumstances which if unex-
plained would lead to a conviction, should be specifically pointed out to him
to enable him to give an explanation, if any. The rationale of the provision
is based on the rules of natural justice, audi alteram partem.

2.1. The principles of natural jujstice evolved by the Indian judiciary
comprise the fundamental rules of hye arian namély, that a man’s defence
must always be fairly heard and an adjudicator must give reasons for his deci-
sion. These principles form the bulwark of procedural due process in matters
of judicial and quasi-judicial adjudication. In the criminal _ justice system
the principle of audi alteram or fair hearing is incorporated in section 313
of the Code of Criminal Procedure which empowers a trial judge to give a
reasonable opportunity to an accused to explain incriminating facts and circums-
tances in the case.

2.2. Fair procedure — pre-supposes that both — sides should be heard,
audi alteram partem, ‘hear the other side’. This is the most important prin-
ciple of natural justice as it includes almost every aspect of fair procedure.
This principle is broader in that it would include the rule against bias since a
fair hearing must be an unbiased hearing.

2.3. All the three principles of natural justice form part of a specific
design for ensuring that power is exercised consid jerately and fairly.

3. The accused in compliance with the provision, can file written _ state-
ments with the permission of the court. In Tilkeshwar Singh v. State of Bihar,’
in a prosecution for murder under section 302 read with section 34 of IPC, the
Supreme Court found that written statements were filed by the accused under
section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 and they were found to
be very elaborate and furnished answers to all the points raised in the prose-
cution evidence. Thou; the examination of the accused was not in the
question-answer form, शव Supreme Court found that by filing of written
statements, no prejudice was caused to him, The Supreme Court observed!:

It is no doubt true that s, 342 contemplates an examination in court and
the practice of filing statements is to be deprecated. But that is
not a ground for interference, unless prejudice is established. And
it is nothing unusual for the accused to prefer filing statements
instead of answering questions under s. 342 lest they should suffer
by inadvertent admissions or by damaging statements.

This decision lays down that whatever be the form of examination of
accused under section 313, no prejudice should result to the accused.’

4. The operation of this provision in practice is to have long and elabo-
rate stereotype questions put to the accused to provide answers which many a
time ate found to be mechanical and meaningless without understanding the
implications of the questions. The provision envisages 4 meaningful and
realistic role of the judges in the examination of the accused putting such rele-
vant question to him so that he can explain the circumstances appeating in the
evidence against him. Preparation of questions should be in accordance with
the objective enshrined in the provisions. Unwarranted and time-consuming
examination causes delay of the trial. But we find that many a time the
questions are prepated by the Bench Clerk of the court in a mechanical and
stereotyped manner.

45


46

5. In the Workshops held at various places the Judges and senior
Advocates, while reiterating the need for this provision as a valuable safeguard
to the accused in the trial processes, felt that with a view to eliminating delays
in trials, the Judges could take the help of prosecutor and defence counsel in
preparing relevant questions.

6. We are of the view that the Court can take the assistance of the
prosecutor and defence counsel and prepare the questions which are 10 be put
in a concise form to the accused under section 313. The Court can also permit
the filing of written statements by the accused as sufficient compliance with
section 313,

Foornotes
1. $. 313) (a).
2. S. 313(1) (७).
3. AIR 1956 SC 238.
4. Id at 241.

5. See also Ajmer Singh vy. State of Punjab, AIR 1953 SC 76;
Veer Punerjai v. State of Rajastian, 1990 Cr. LJ, 1692.



CHAPTER XU

COMPOUNDING OF OFFENCES: SECTION 320

1, The Code of Criminal Procedure in section 320 contains detailed
provisions for compo.inding of offences. Sub-section 41) of section 320 lists
21 offences under the Indian Penal Code which may be compounded by the
specified aggrieved party without the permission of the court and sub-section (2)
lists 36 other offences under the Indian Penal Code which also may be com-
pounded but only after securing the permission of the court. Under the scheme
of secticn 320, namely sub-section 9, offences other than those specified in
sub-section (1) and (2) are not compoundable.

2. The rationale for compounding of offences is that the chastened atti-
tude of the accused and the praiseworthy attitude of the complainant in order
to restore peace and harmony in society, must be given effect to in the com:
position of offences.

3.1, The Law commission in its 41st Report on the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1969 had not agreed to the formulation of a general rule for com-
pounding by relating compoundable offences to the punishment provided for
the offence. The Commission felt that it was “better to have clear and specific
provisions such as those contained in section 345 (of the old Code) than a
general rule which is likely to lead to different interpretations™.

3.2. The Commission also did not approve of the abolition of the dis-
tinction between offences compoundable with and without the permission of the
court, The Commission observed that “the safeguard of the court’s permission
is to prevent an abuse of the right to compound and to enable the court to take
into account the special circumstances of the case which may justify composition.
Mt is not in every case that such a safeguard is required”.

3.3. The Commission did not approve of adding to the list of offences
in sub-section (1) or in sub-section (2) of Section 345 those offences which
jeopardize the public peace, order and security e.g. being member of an un-
lawful assembly, (5. 143); rioting (5. 147); false claim in a court of justice
(s. 209), fraudulently obtaining decrees {s. 210); driving or riding on a public
way so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life (s. 279) causing death
by rash. or negligent act (s. 304A); causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapon
(5. 326), wrongful confinement for extortion (5. 347}, Theft in a building (5. 380),
lurking house trespass or house breaking by night (s. 456), the same in order
to commit an offence (s, 457}, and bigamy with concealment (s. 495).

3.4. The Commission’s view was that the offence of unlawful compulsory
labour punishable under section 374 IPC should not be compoundable and
‘should be ommitted from the list in section 345(1)'.

3.5. The Commission opined that “theft where the value of property
stolen does not exceed 250 rupees” should continue to be in sub-section (2) of
section 345 {old Code)*

-3.6. The Commission recommended addition to the list in sub-section (2)
the following offences:

{i) Assault or criminal force on women with intent to outrage her
modesty (s, 354).

(ii) Receiving or retaining stolen property (s, 411).
{iii} Assisting in the concealment or disposal of stolen property (s, 414).

., 3.7. The above recommendations of the Law Commission were incorpo-
rated in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,

4. Of late, various High Courts have quashed criminal proceedings in
respect of non-cognizable offences because of settlement between the parties to
achieve harmony and peace in the society. For-instance, criminal proceedings

47


48

in respect of offences under Section 406, IPC, relating to criminal breach of
trust of dowry articles or /stridhan and offences under section 498A, IPC,
relating 10 cruelty on woman by husband or relatives of husband were quashed

in Arun Kumar Vohra v. Reetu Vohra’, Nirlap Singh v. State of Punjab.

In the Workshops convened by the Law Conumission at various places,
it was felt that as section 498A is not included in the Tables appended to section
320 of the Code, it could not be compounded by the parties. Many instances
were cited where though the parties wanted to compound yet in the absence of
an enabling provision, they coukl not do so, This has created hardship even
in genuine cases. In order to meet this situation, it is recommended that
section 498A be inserted in the Table under sub-section (2) where it can be
compounded with the permission of the Court.

5. Though Section 3203) postulates compoundability of the abetment or
attempt to commit such offences mentioned in the Tables appended to section
320, there is no such provision where the accused is constructively liable under
sections 34 and 149 IPC. ‘If the provision is left as it is, only in respect of
substantive offences mentioned in the Tables, compounding js possi! fe, and
not in respect of cases of constructive liability for the same offences. This
view was highlighted in all the Workshops,

Likewise, in respect of offence Of rioting resulting in the offences men-
tioned in the two Tables there is no provision for compounding. The offences
punishable under sections 147 and 148 of IPC committed during the same trans-
action, the transaction being one and the same, where the guilt is proved, the accu-
sed are to be convicted under all those sections, It will be anomalous if one part
of the offence is compoundable and other part remain non-cOmpoundable w! Fore
the convictions are under both. Accordingly sub-section (3) be amended suitably.

6....The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994, in clause
33, has incorporated the following:

(i) The offence of voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or
means (S. 324) should cease to be a compoundable offence with the
permission of the court in sub-section (2) of section 320.

But we are of the view that offences under sections 324, 325 and 335 IPC
be shifted s the Table under sub-section (1) from the Table under sub-section (2)
of section .

7. We are also of the view owing to the fall in the value of rupee result-
ing from inflationary conditions, the limit of Rs. 250/- in the offences in the
list of offences in sub-section (2), be raised to Rs. 2,000/-, as provided under
clause 33 of the Bill,

8. With the legalisation of abortion under the Medical Termination of
Pregnancy Act, 1971, section 312 of IPC relating to the offence of causing
miscartiage of woman, will have to be interpreted in the Jig of the provisions
of the Act. This offence should be made compoundable by the parties with
the permission of the Court. Accordingly, we recommend the incorporation
of ० धार under section 312, IPC to the Table under sub-section (2) of section

20.

9. We recommend that as a matter of policy more offences be brought
under the category of offences compoundable by the parties themselves without
the intervention of the court. However, offences against the public at large,
howsoever small they may be, should not be compoundable.

10. On an examination of the list of offences in the Table to sub-section
(2) of section 320 (offences compoundable with the permission of the court), we
are of the view that the following offences be deleted from that Table and be
included in the Table to sub-section (1) of section 320. In other words, those
offences be made compoundable by the parties without the permission of the
court:

S.324: Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons.
§.325: Voluntarily causing grievous hurt.


49
$.335: Voluntarily causing grievous hurt on grave and sudden provocation.
§.343:  Wrongfully confining a person for three days or more.
$.344:  Wrongfully confining for ten or more days.
S.346: Wrongfully confining a person in secret,
§.379: Theft, irrespective of the value of property.
§.403: Dishonest misappropriation of property.
$.406: Criminal breach of trust, irrespective of the value of property.
§.407: Criminal breach of trust by a carrier, wharfinger. etc, irrespective of
ihe value of property.

S.411: Dishonestly receiving stolen properly. knowing it to be stolen, irres-
pective of the value of property.

S.414: Assisting in the concealment or dis; 1 of stolen property, knowing
it to be stolen irrespective of the vai Pie of property.

$.417: Cheating.
S.419: Cheating by personation.

$.421: Fraudulent removal or concealment of property, etc. to prevent dis-
tribution among creditors.

S.422: Fraudulently preventing from ‘being made available for his creditors
a debt or demand due to the offender.

$.423: Fraudulent execution of deed of transfer containing false statement Of
consideration.

$.424: Fraudulent removal of concealment of property.

$.428: Mischief by killing or maiming animal of the value of ten rupees or
upwards.

$.429: Mischief by killing or maiming cattle, etc, of any value or any other
animal irrespective of its value.

$.430: Mischief by injury to work of irtigation wrongfully diverting water
when the only loss of damage caused is 1058 or damage to a private
person.

8.451: House-trespass to commit an offence (other than theft) punishable with
imprisonment.

§,482: Using a false trade or property mark,
S.483: Counterfeiting a trade or property mark used by another.

$.486: Knowingly selling, or exposing or possessing for sale or for manu-
facturing purpose. goods marked with a counterfeit property mark.

1, It was also suggested by senior police officers at the various —work-
shops that the Cade of Criminal Procedure should empower the investigating
officer to compound offences, which are compoundable, at the investigation
stage and make a report to the magistrate who will give effect to the composition
of such offences. This step will reduce the number of cases procceding for
trial at the threshold stage itself and relieve the court docket to a great extent.
in fact the National Police Commission in its Fourth Report had suggested that
it would help quicker disposal of cases in the compoundable category if the
procedure is amended to empower the police officers to take note of the desire
of the parties for the compounding of offences from the stage of investigation
and thereupon close cases and report the matter to the court which wil] have
the authority to pass initial order from the police report as in every other case
in which the police submit their report.


50

12. It may be pointed out that clause 20 of — 1994 Bill has inserted the
following new sub-section (3A) to Section 173 to give effect to the recommen-
dations of the National Police Commission:

“(3A) If, however, in respect of offences enumerated in the Table in
section 326, in ihe course of investigation, the person by whom
the offence may be compounded under the said section gives a Teport
in writing to the officer in charge of the police station expressing his
desires 10 compound the ofience as ptovided for in the said section,
the officer shall mention this fact in the police report prescribed का
sub-section 2(1} and forward the compounding report from the
person concerned to the Magistrate who shall thereupon deal with
the case under section 320 as though the prosecution for the offence
concerned had been Jaunched before the Magistrate.””

We are of the view that such a provision will have a salutary effect and
to ensure that there is no coercion or abuse by the police staff, the report of
the investigating police officer incorporating the desire of the disputants to com-
promise can be got attested by a member of the District Legal Services Autho-
rity or a member of the village Panchayat,

FOoTNOTES
1. Law Commission, 415 report, para 24.66, page 213 (1969).
. Id at para 24.67, pages 213-214.
. Id at para 24.69, page 214.
. dd at para 24.72, page 215.

wk 9

. Id at para 24.71, page 214. The offence of petty theft (to the
limited extent) was made compoundable in 1955.

. fd at para 24.70, page 214.
. 1995 1 All India Criminal Law Reporter 31.
. 1993 (2) All India Criminal Law Reporter 800.

cera

. Fourth Report of the National Police Commission, para 28.8, pages
13-14 (1980).


CHAPTER XIN

PLEA BARGAINING

1. The arreares of criminal cases awaiting trail are assuming menacing
proportions. Grievances have been vented in public that the disposal of cri-
minal trials in the courts takes considerable time and that in many cases trials
do not commence for as long as a period as three to four years after the accused
was remitted to judicial custody. Large number of persons accused of criminal
offences have not been able 40 secure bail for one reason of the other and have
to languish in jails as under trail prisoners for years. ft is also a matter of
common knowledge that majority of the cases ultimately end in acquittal. The
accused have to undergo mental torture and also have to spend considerable
amount by way of legal expenses and the public exchequer has to bear the re-
sultant economic burden. During the course of detention as under-trial pri-
soners the accused persons are exposed to the influence of hard-core criminals.
Quite apart from this, the accused have to remain in a state of uncertainty and
are unable to settle down in life for a number of years awaiting the completion
of trial. Huge arrears of criminal cases is a common feature in almost all the
criminal courts. {t is in this background. the Law Commission felt that some
remedial legislative measures to reduce the delays in the disposal of criminal
trials and appeals and also to alleviate the suffering of under-trial prisoners.
The Law Commission in its t42nd Report on Concessional Treatment of Offen-
ders who on their own Initiative Choose to Plead guilty without any Bargain-
ing (1991) considered the question of introduction of the concept of concessional
treatment for those who choose to plead guilty by way of plea-bargaining.

2. The justification for introducing plea-bargaining cannot be expressed
any better than what the Twelfth Law Commission in its 142nd Report had
already done as below :

(1) It is not just and fair that an accused who feels contrite and wants
to make amends or an accused who is honest and candid enough
to plead guilty in the hope that the community will enable him to
pay the penalty for the crime with a degree of compassion and con-
sideration should be treated on par with an accused who claims to
be tried at considerable time-cost and money-cost to the community.

It is desirable to infuse life in the reformative provisions embodied
in section 360 of the Criminal Procedure Code and in the Probation
of Offenders Act which remain practically unutilized as of now.

(2

GB

It will help the accused who have to remain as under-trial prisoners
awaiting the trial as also other accused on whom the sword of do-
mocles of an impending trial remains hanging for years to obtain
speedy trial with attendant benefits such as—

(a) end of uncertainty.
(0) saving in litigation-cost.
(c) saving in anxiety-cost.

10) being able to know his or her fate and to start of fresh life with-
out fear of having to undergo a possible prison sentence at a
future date disrupting his life or career.

(०) saving avoidable visits to lawyer's office and to court on every
date or adjournment.

(4) It will. without detriment to public interest. reduce the back-breaking
burden of the court cases which have already assumed menacing
proportions,

(5) It will reduce congestion in jails.

(6) In the USA nearly 75% of the total convictions are secured as a
tesult of plea-bargaining.

(7) Under the present system 75% to 907, of the criminal cases if not
more, result in acquittals.

31


52

3. The concept of plea bargaining has not beer recognized so for by the
eriminal jurisprudence of India. However. plea bargaining is consi-
dered to be one of the alteratives to deal with the huge arrears of criminal cases.
Plea-bargaining in its most traditional and general sense refers to pre-trial
negotiations between the accused, usually conducted by the counsel and the
prosecution during which the accused agrees to plead guilty in exchange for
certain concessions by the prosecutor. It has two facets. One is “charge bar-
gaining” which refers to a promise by the presecutor to reduce or dismiss some
of the charges brought against the ‘accused in exchange for guilty plea. The
second one is “sentence bargaining” which refers to a promise by the prose-
cutor to recommend a specific sentence or to refrain from making any sentence
recommendation in exchange for a guilty plea.

4. The practice of plea bargaining in USA dates back to a century or
more. The Prosecuting Agency has a leading role in this process in that it has
the discretion to reduce or dismiss some of the charges against the accused
and also to make recommendations to the Court cbout the sentences in ex-
change for a guilty plea. The Supreme Court of USA in Brady v. United States’
and Santobello v. New York’ upheld the constitutional validity ‘and the significant
tole the concept of the plea bargaining plays in the disposal of criminal cases.
It has approved this practice mainly on the premise that the accused who are
convicted on the basis of negotiated pleas of guilt would ordinarily have been
convicted had they been subjected to trial processes. One of the main argue
ments advanced in favour of plea bargaining is that it helps the disposal of ac-
cumulated cases and will expedite delivery of criminal justice.

5. The Supreme Court of India has examined the concept of plea bar-
gaining in Murlidhar Meghraj Loya v. State of Mahorashtra® and Kasambhai v.
State of Gujarat, The Court did not approve of the procedure of plea bargain-
ing on the basis of informal inducement. In Kasambhai’s case the Court
squarely observed that conviction based on the plea of guilty entered by the
accusd as a result of plea bargaining could not be sustained and that it was
opposed to public policy to convict the accused by inducing him to confess to
a plea of guilty “on allurement being held out to him that if he enters a plea
of guilty he wit be let off very lightly”.

6. The Law Commission in its 142nd Report, having considered the con+
cépt as is being practised in other countries, recommended that the scheme for
concessional treatment to offenders who plead guilty on their own volition in
lieu -of a promise to reduce the charge, to drop some of the charges or getting
lesser punishment be statutorily introduced by adding a Chapter in the Code
of Criminal Procedure. tn making such a recommendation, however, the Law
Commission considered the views in favour of ‘the concept as well as against it.

7. We have examined the cases decided in USA as well as by the Sup-
reme Court of India in respect of this concept and the 142nd Report of the
Law Commission.” We are of the view that plea bargaining can be made an
essential component of administration of criminal justice provided it is properly
admnistered. For that purpose, certain guidelines and procedure have to be
incorporated in the Code of Criminal Procedure.

- 8. Having given our earnest consideration, we recommend that this concept
may be made applicable as an experimental measure, to offences which are liable
for punishment with imprisonment of less than seven years and/or fine including
the offences covered by section 320 of the Criminal Procedure Code. Plea bar-
gaining can also be in respect of the nature and gravity of offences and the
quantum of punishment.

9. However, plea bargaining should not be available to babitusl —offen-
ders those who are accused of socio-economic offences of a grave nature and
offences against women and children.

9.1. The process of plea bargaining shall be set in motion after issue of
process and when the accused appears, either on a written application by the
accused to the Court or suo motu by the Court to ascertain the willingness of
the. aceused.. On ascertainment of the willingness of . the accused,’ the Court
shail require him to make an application accordingly. . . न


53

9.2. On the date so fixed for the hearing the court shail ascertain from the
accused whether ihe applicaticn was made by him volumiarily without any im-
ducement or pressure from any quarters, paruculariy from Public Prosecutors
or Police. The Court shall ensure that neither the public prosecutor nor potice
is present at the time of meking the pretiminary examination of the accused.

9.3 Once the Court is fied about the voluntary aature of the apptica-
tion. the Court shall fix a date for bearing the public prosecutor and the aggrieved
party and the accused applicas: i and passing of final ord ॥ the
Court finds that the application has been raade under duress or pi
that the applicant after realising the consequences is not prepared to proceed
with the application, the Court may reject the application.

9.4 Such an application may be rejected either at the initial stage 97
166 hearing the public prosecutor and the i ggrieved party. Hf the Court finds
that, having regard to the gravity of the offence or any of the circumstances
which may be brought to its notice by the public prosecutor or the aggrieved
party, the case is not a fit one for exercise of its powers on plea-bargaining. the
Court may reject the application supported by reasons therefor,

9.5 The order passed by the Court on the application of the accused
applicant shall be confidential and will be given only to the accused if he so
desires, The making of such application by the accused shall not create any
prejudice against the accused at the ensuing trial.

9.6 We are of the view that such a plea bargaining can be availed of
by the accused in the categories of offences mentioned above before the Court
at any stage after the charge sheet is filed by the investigating agency in police
cases and in respect of private complaints at any stage after the cognizance is
taken. An order passed by the court on such a plea shall be final and no
appeal shal] lie against such an order passed by the Court accepting the plea.

9.7 In cases where the provisions of Probation of Offenders Act, 1958
and/or section 360 of Cr. P.C. are applicable to an accused applicant, he would
be entitled to make an application that he is desirous of pleading guilty along
with a prayer for availing of the benefit under the legislative provisions referred
to above. In such cases, the Court after hearing the public prosecutor and the
aggrieved party, may pass appropriate order conferring the benefit of those legis-
lative provisions. The Court may be empowered to dispense with the necessily
of getting a report from the probation officer in appropriate cases. The provi-
sion regarding confidentiality of the making of application and the consequence
of rejection outlined in paragraph 9.5 will be applicable if the application is
rejected by the Court.

9.8 If an accused enters a plea of guilly in respect of an offence for
which minimum sentence is provided for, the Court may, instead of rejecting
the application in limine, after hearing the public prosecutor and the aggrieved
party, accept the plea of guilty and pass an order of conviction and sentence to the
tune of one-half of the minimum sentence provided.

9.9 The Court shall on such a plea of guilty being taken, explain 10 the
accused that it may record a conviction for such an offence and it may after
hearing the accused proceed to hear the Public Prosecutor or the aggrieved per-
son as the case may be:

{i) impose a suspended sentence and release him on probation.

(ii) order him to pay compensation to the aggrived party, or

(iii) impose a sentence, which commensurate with the plea bargaining:
or

(iv) convict him for an offence of lesser gravity than that for which the
accused has been charged if permissible in the facts and circui-
stances of the case.


54

9.10 We recommend that a separate Chapter XXIA on Plea Bargaining
be incorporated in the Code of Criminal Procedure on the lines indicated above.

Footnotes
1.

2.

297 US 742-25 L.Ed. 2d 747.

404 US 257 (1971): Hutto v. Ross 50 L.Ed. 2d 876: Chaffin ४.
Stynchcombe, 412 US 17 (1973); Blackledge ९. Allison. 52 L.Ed. 2d
136: Weatherford v. Bursey. 429 US 545 (1977).

. AIR 1976 SC 1929.
- AIR 1980 SC 854.

|. Law Commission, One Hundred Forty Second Report, Chapter 1X.

Paras 9.1—9.40 pp 24—34 (1991).


CHAPTER XIV

NYAYA PANCHAYATS

1. In India many of the existing state legislation on panchayat raj pro-
vide for some form of adjudicatory bodies by whatever name they may be des-
eribed. These fora for resolution of disputes with people's participation in
the administration of justice is the constitutional goal mandated by Article 39A
of the Constitution. Article 395 directs the State 10 secure -that the operation
of the legal system promotes justice. on the basis of equal opportunity, and
shall, in particular, provide free legal aid, by ble legislation or schemes
or in any other way. to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are nol
denied 10 any citizen on the ground of economic or other  disabiliti The
Constitution now mandates us to remove impediments to access to justice in a
systematic manner. Articles 40 and 243 have to be interpreted afresh in the
light of the mandate in Article 39A.

2. In the past. in the organisation of nyaya panchayats, the predomi-
nant consideration had been to reduce the burden on the State Court system
and not so much as to prevent denial of justice because of economic and ‘other
disabilities. | The “other disabilities” referred to in Article 39A as distinct
from the economic disabilities are those which arise from the profiles of the Indian
legal system because of absence of suitable local grassroots organs for hand-
ling disputes and emphasis on professionalised justice. Professionalised
justice with lawyers dominating the process of the justice-dlelivery system.
cannot be extended to the bulk of the people in the rural ateas because most of
the lawyers are concentrated in urban areas. Moreover, in view of the voluntary
nature of the profession, they cannot be dispersed adequately and equitably to
serve the needs of the masses.

3. Merely procedural alterations are envisaged in Article 39A to ensure
a new legal system and pr jure which is operationally geared to social justice
and elimination of all disabilities of the masses in getting real, remedial justice.
Self-government envisaged by the Constitution must inc! fude judicial powers too
and that is the rationale for nyaya panchayats which implies judicial decenirali-
saticn at the people's level.' Effective access १0 justice is the most basic require-
ment and the most basic human right of a system which purports to guarantee
legal rights?

4, These judicial institutions represent the secular, egalitarian, moder-
nistic legal ideology for assisting the desired social change. The Law Com-
mission in its Fourteenth Report stresses the “educative value of nyaya pan-
chayats”; just as the village panchayats would educate the villager in the art
of self-government, “so would nyaya panchayats” train him in the ast of doin,
justice between fellow citizens and instil in him a growing sense of fairness an
responsibility’, In this respect, nyaya panchayats constitute an aspect of Over-
all development.

5.1, The working of nyaya panchayats has been examined in detail by
the Law Commission in their 114th Report on Gram Nyayalayas. ‘The Law
Commission has recommended setting up of Gram Nyayalayas with the follow-
ing broad features :*

5.2. A munsif or civil judge should preside over the nyaya panchayats.
They would be subject to the jurisdiction of High Courts.

5.3. To provide effective people’s participation in the administration of
justice, the district magistrate and the district and sessions judge for each dis-
trict should draw up a panel of lay persons from respectable residents in the
villages having educational attainments. preferably upto a university degree
or at least a higher secondary school. In order to ensure that marginal farmers.
farm workers etc. get their due share in the panel. if need arises, educational
qualifications may be relaxed in their case. Depending upon the size of each
taluka, the list of panelists may vary from 10 to 20. " The list should be ap-
proved by the High Court.

55


56

5.4. Whenever a dispute is brought fo the panchayat judge having his
headquarters at the taluka level. he would proceed to select two from the panet
of lay persons, keeping in view the [act that they must be as far as possible.
from the geographical location of the dispute. The panchayat judge and the
two members of the panef will constitute a nyaya panchayat for the dispute.
Such a composition would ensure legal expertise and peoples’ participation and
would avoid caste. communal and political contamination.

5.5. The Commission was of the view that the Gram Nyayalaya must
have jurisdiction to wy all offences which can be tried under the Code of Criminal
Precedure. 1973 by the Judicial Magistrate. First Class.

6. We are of the view that the recommendation of the Law Commission
in its 114th Report on the presiding officers of Gram Nyayalaya may not be
feasible because serving Munsifs/Civil Judges will not be able to shoulder the
additional burden of presiding over Gram Nyayalayas in the rural areas. As
it is, there is docket explosion in the civil courts and the civil justice delivering
system is adversely affected by the phenomenon of huge backlog of cases leading
to long delays in disposals. “Restricting to serving judicial officers Only prevents
the consideration of retired judicial officers and other personnel who 1890
served in the government in various capacities. We are also not in favour of
engaging lawyers by the parties to appear before the Nyaya Panchayats for it
would introduce technical leg ai formalities into the system leading to delays in
the disposal of cases. Indeed it would frustrate the very purpose for which
the Gram Nyayalayas are being introduced.

7. We are of the view that the State haye to enact legislation on Nyaya
Panchayats to suit their local needs and conditions. The Andhra Pradesh
Muidal: jaya Panchayats Bill, 1995 may be adopted as a modci on the
composition, powers and jurisdiction of the Nyaya Panchayats, (See Annexure-V).

PooTNoTESs
1. Justice V.R. Krishna lyer, Our Courts on Trial (1987).
. Cappelletti, Mauro and Garth, Bryant (ed) Access to justice 4
volumes (1978-79).
3. The Law Commission of India, Fourteenth report on Reform of

Judicial Administration (1958); see also Government of India, Report
of the stuly Team of Nyaya Panchayats (1962).

4. Upendra Baxi, Access Development and Distributive Justice, Access
Problems of the “Rural” Population. 18 Journal of the Indian
Law Institute 375 (1976).

5. Law Commission of India, One Hundred and Fourteenth Report
on Gram Nyayalayas (1980).

w


CHAPTER XV
VICTIMOLOGY

1. Increasingly the attention of criminologists, penologists and reformers
of criminal justice system has been directed to victimology, control of victimi-
sation and protection of victims of crimes'. Crimes often entail substantive harm
to people and not merely symbolic harm to the social order. Consequently,
the needs and rights of victims of crime should receive priority attention in the
total response to crime. One recognized method of protection of victims is
compensation to victims of crime. The needs of victims and their family are
extensive and varied.

2. One schoot of thought justifies compensation in the criminal process
in terms of the aims of sentencing. The Widgery Committee in Britain has
listed several views about the rationa'e of the concept of compensation, namely,
“benefit to the victims, possible deterrent effect on the offender or on the public,
the possible educative or preventive effect on public morality, the possible re-
formative effective on offender, its effect in depriving the offender of il] got
gains and the view that compensation has an ‘intrinsic moral value of its own
The Law Reform Commission of Canada also was of the same view holding
that compensation was consistent with the ‘core values’ of the community’.

3. The proponents of state compensation justify it as (i) another form of
public assistance for the disadvantaged and (ii) a medium of fulfilment of neg-
lected state obligation to its citizens. The state has a humanitarian responsi-
bility to assist crime victims. The assistance is provided because of the social
conscience of the citizens and as a symbolic act of compassion. The state is
responsible to maintain law and order, ensure peace, harmony and tranquility
in society, to use force to suppress crime and punish offenders, to protect people
and their property. If the law and order machinery of the state, police is negli-
gent or unable to prevent crime. the state is tesponsible to make preparation
to the victims. In addition, state compensation is also considered as a matter
of sacial justice to crieme victims, as the state system namely, its political, econo-
nic and social institutions, generate crime by poverty, discrimination, unemploy-
ment and insecurity.

4.1. Historically, the ancient Babylonian Code of Hammurabi (about 1775
BC) makes the earliest reference to governmental compensation for crime vic-
tims. The Code mandated territorial governors to replace a robbery victim's
lost property if the criminal was not captured. fn the case of a murder, the
governor was to pay the heirs a specific sum in silver from the treasury. In
the succeeding centuries, restitution to the victim by the offender rep'aced com-
pensation of the victim by the state. But that too disappeared during the Middle
ages, the victim of crime was ‘eft with no remedy except to sue for damages
in civil court. ‘

4,2. When movement for prison reform began in Europe during {800s
focussing attention on the plight of convicts interest in compensation surfaced
again, calling attention to the plight of crime victims. Jeremy Bentham conten-
ded {hat crime victims should be protected by the society to which they had
contributed.

43.1. In the Anglo-Saxon legal system it was Margery Fry, an English
magistrate who advocated. state compensation for crime victims in the late
1950s. Thanks to her efforts, Britain set up its programme in 1964.

4.3.2. The scheme was brought into force through the exercise of the
Royal Prerogative and the payments were made ex-gratia in the sense that there
was no statutory authority for the scheme. The necessary funds, however. were
voted by Parliament annually. Compensation was given in the shape of a lump-
sum arrived at in the same manner as a civil award of damages for personal
injury based on tort, subject to an upper limit on the amount attributable to
loss of earnings. The scheme was administered by the Crimina! Iniuries Com-
Pensation Board, consisting of a Chairman and a panel of Queen’s Counsel and
solicitors.

37


58

4.3.3. With a view to giving statutory form to the scheme. the British
Government. acting on the recommendations of an Inter-departmental
Working Party, incorporated Part VI to the Criminal Justice Act. 1988 (sec-
tions 108 to 117 together with Schediies 6 and 7. According to these provi-
sions the scheme would be administered by a statutory board. appointed by
the Secretary of State subject to certain exceptions and limitations. claims for
compensation were to be determined and the amounts payable to be assessed
on the basis of principles of tortious lisbility. There would be a right of appeal
from the Board’s determinatien to the Hi ‘gh Court or the Court of Session. as
the case may be. The statutory scheme was not brought into force.

4.3.4. In the interim. consequent on a policy change reflected in a White
Paper “Compensating Victims of Violent Crime: Changes to the Criminat In-
juries Compensation Scheme” presented to Parliament in 1993, the existing
scheme was replaced with a new tariff scheme in 1994 by a government order.
The tariff scheme broke the link with common law damages. The system is
based on a tariff or scale of awards under which injuries of comparable severity
will be combined together for which a fixed payment is made. A lump sum
award related to the severity of the injury will be paid.

43.3. The method of introduction of the new tariff scheme was held un-
lawful by the Judicial Committee of the House of Lords in Regina y. Secrerary
of State for the Home Department, ex parte Fire Brigades Union', Consequently,
the tariff scheme was withdrawn and the former scheme reinstated. Since the
House of Lords’ decision related only to the method of introduction of | the
tariff scheme and not its merits. the government enacted the Criminal Injuries
Compensation Act. 1995 which incorporates the tariff based scheme with cer-
tain improvements. The scheme provides that the tariff would be increased
in appropriate cases by payment for loss of earnings, snecia} care and depen-
dency. Yn cases where the victim has lost his life. not only will family members
receive a fixed tariff payment but also in cases where they are financially de-
pendant on the victim, they will receive payment for the loss of dependency
and support (5. 2),

4.3.6. The Act repealed the provisions of the Criminal Justice Act. 1988
relating to the Criminal Injury Compensation scheme (s. 12).

4.3.7. The scheme will be administered by Scheme Managers. The Act
provides for internal review of the case for compensation by a person other
than the one who made the decision (s.4.), It also provides for appeal against
decision taken on review to a panel of adjudicators, The panel of adjudicators
will come under the supervision of the Council _ on Tribunals. Anart from
hearing appeals. the pane’ of adjudicators has an advice giving role to the
Secretary of State s5).

5.1. The movement in Britain caught on in the United States of America,
In the United States California was the first State to legislate on victim com-
pensation 10 1965. Since then many more States set up boards and courts to
administer financial aid to victims. In 1984, after a- sustained campaign of
nearly twenty years the Congress enacted the Victims of Crime Act. 1984 to
provide compensation to crime victims. The Act established a fund described
as Crime Victims Fund within the US. Treasury. collected from fines. penal-
ties and forfeitures. Attorney-General administers the fund, half of whieh i
earmarked annually for state compensation Programmes; the balance goes to
help pay for victim assistance programmes and services and victims of federal
crimes’.

5.2, Most of the states in USA have victim compensation —_ programmes
administered by compensation boards. Compensation is given only to innocent
victims. If the boards find evidence to prove victim’s complicity in the crime.
compensaiton is reduced in amount or disallowed entirely. A common feature
is that compensation programme deals only with the most serious crimes, those
which result in injury or death. Payments include medical expenses and for
earnings lost because of missed work. In case of death of victims. their families
are eligible for assistance, reasonable funeral costs and sometimes a death bene-
fit or pension for surviving dependants. All state Programmes prohibit double
‘recoveries, namely any money received from insurance policy or other goyern-
ment agencies is deducted from the board’s financial determination.


59

6.1. 100 need for compensating victims of evime was reiterated by UN
Agencies also. The General Assembly of the United Nations in its 96th plenary
meeting on 29th November, 1985. made a Declaration of Basic Principles of
Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power, recognising that millions of
people throughout the world suffer haem as a result of crime and the abuse of
power and that the rights of these victims have not been adequately recognised
and aiso that frequently their families, witnesses and other who aid them are
unjustly subjected to loss. damage or injury. The Assembly affirmed the neces-
sity of adopting national and international norms in order to secure universal
and effective recognition of and respect for, the rights of victims of crimes and
abuse of power. I. was also declared that offenders or third patties responsi-
ble for their behaviour should. where appropriate. make fair restitution to
victims, their families or dependants. This Deciaration has beer deserid al
“a kind of Magna Carta of the Rights of the Victims” worldwide?

6.2. The Declaration defines victims as “persons who. individually or
collectively, have suffered harm, including physical or mental injury, emotional
suffering, economic loss or substantial impairment of their fundamental rights,
through acts or omissions that are in violation of criminal laws operative with-
in Member States. including those laws prescribing criminal abuse of power.”

6.3. The Declaration states:

“12. When compensation is not fully available from the offender or other
sources, States should endeavour to provide financial compensation
to:

{a) Victims who have sustained bodily injury or impairment of physi-
cal or mental health as a result of serious crimes:

{b} The family in particular dependants of persons who have died
or become physically or mentally incapacitated as a result of
such victimization.”

6.4. “13. The establishment — strengthening, and expansion of national
funds for compensation to victims should be encouraged. Where appropriate.
ether funds may also be established for the Purpose, including those cases where
the state of which the victim is a national is hot in a position ६७ compensate
the victim for the harm.”

As regards assistance to victims the Declaration states:

“14, Victims should receive the necessary material, medical, psychological
and social assistance through governmental, voluntary, community
based and indigenous means.”

65. The Declaration aiso refers to the neces ity of establishing and
strengthening “judicial and administrative mechanisms to enable victims 10
obtain redress through formal or informal procedure that are expeditious, fair,
inexpensive and accessible.”

7, Article 15B of the State of the Council of Europe also hightights the
ideology of victimology. The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
adopted a recommendation on crime victims in the framework of criminal laws
and procedure in accordance with this Article. The preamble of the Statute of
Council of Europe highlights the principles of victimol fosy as laid down below:*

“Considering that the objectives of the criminal justice system have tradi-
tionally been expressed in terms which primarily concern the rela-
tionship between the state and the offender;

Considering that consequently the operation of this system has sometimes
tended to add to rather than to diminish the problems of the victim:

Considering that it must be a fundamenial function of criminal, justice
to meet the needs and to safeguard the interests of the victim;
9-1 M of L & J:ND/97


60

Considering that it is also important to enhance the confidence of the
victim in criminal justice and to encourage his co-operation, espe-
cially in his capacity as a witness:

Considering that, to this end, it is necessary to have more regard in the
criminal justice system to the physical, psychological, materiai aad
social harm suffered by the victims and to consider what steps are
desirable to satisfy his necds in these respects:

Considering that measures to this end need rot necessarily conflict with
other objectives of criminal law and procedure, such as the reinforce~
ment of social norms and the rehabilita‘ien of offenders, but may
in fact assist in their achieveme»t and in an eventual reconciliation
between the victim and the offender:

Considering that the needs and interests of the victim should be taken into
account to a greater degree, throughout all stages of the criminal jus-
tice process.”

The recommendations cover action at the police ‘evel and the state:

“1. Police officers should be frained to deal with victims in a sympathetic
constructive and reassuring manner:

2, The police should inferm the victim about the possibilitizs of obtaining
assistance, practical and legal advice. compensation from the offender
and state compensation;

3. The victim shou'd be able to 09!
police investigation:

4. In any repert of the prosecuting authorities, the police should give as
clear and complete a statement as possible on the injuries and losses
suffered by the victim;

In respect of Prosecution :

5. A discretionary decision wh2ther to prosecute the offender should not
be taken without due consideration of the question of compensation
of the victim, including any scrious effort made to that end by the.

offender:
6, The victim should be informed of the final decision concerning prose-
cution, unless he indicates that he does not want this information:
7. The victim should have the right to ask for review by a competent
authority of a decision not to prosecute. or the right to institute pri-
vate proceedings;”

information on the outcome of the

Questioning of the Victim

At al! stages of the procedure. the victim should be questioned in a
manner giving due consideration to his personal situation. his rights and his
dignity. Whenever possible and avpronriate, children and the mentally ill or
handicapped should be questioned in the presence of their parents or guardians
or other persons qualified to assist them.

8. The movement for compensation for victims of crime has. as-we have
examined above, gained momentum globally and in countries of Anglo-Saxon
‘egal systems as in U.K., Canada. New Zealand. Australia and USA. Statutory
mechanisms are in place for providing succour to crime victims through come

pensation.

9.1. The principles of victimology has foundations in Indian cons!
tional jurisprudence. The provision on Fundamental Rights (Part TT) and Dir-
ective. Principles of State Policy (Part TV) form the bulwork for a new social
order in’ which social and economic justice would blossom in the national life
of the country (Article 38). Article 41 mandates. infer clia. that the State shall
make effective orovisions for “securing the right to public assistance in cases of
disablement and in other cases of undeserved want.” So also Article $1-A makes
it a fundamental duty of every Indian citizen, inter alia 10 have compassion for.


GI

living creatures’ and ‘to develop humanism’. {f emphatically interpreted and
imaginatively expanded these provisions can form tbe constitutional underpina-
ings for victumology.

9.2, However, in India the criminal iaw Provides compensation to the
victims and their dependants जाए in a limited manner, Section 357 of the Code
of Cziminal Procedure incorporates this concept to an extent and empowers the
Criminal Courts to grant compensation to tre victims.

9,3. Under Section 357 compensation can be given in different ways and
that too only when the offender is convicted and sentenced. Under Secsion 357
(1j(b) if the sentence is of Jine, it can be appticd in the payment of compen-
sation, but limits the payment 10 cases when compensation 1s, in the opinion of
the court, recoverable by the victim in a civi, court. Similarly, compensation
may be paid at the sentencing stage to persons who are under the Fatal Acci-
dems Aci, 1555 entitled io recover da: from the convict ६, 357 (Ee).
So also in cases of theft, misappropriation, cheating and the like, the bonatide
purchaser of property from the convict may also be compensated, the victim
of the theft or cheating being also entitled to return of the property (६४, 357 (1)
Under section 357(3) if the sentence is not fine, the court may order the accussi
to pay specified amount of compensation to the victim.

9.4. The code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 made an improvement over
the old Code of 1898 in that under sub-section (3) of section 357, kk ieeegnised
the principle of compensating the victims even when no sentence of fine is imposed.
Under the cld Code, no compensation couid be awarded unless a substantive
sentence of fine was imposed and the amouat of compensation too was limited
ony to the extent of fine actually realised. But order of compensation under
section 35703), will be futiie against an accu.ed without property or other finan-
cial resources or if he dies.

9.5. Under Section 5 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, while
releasing an accused on probation or with admonition, the court may order the
offender to pay compensation as well as cost to the victim.

10. The aspect of compensatory justice in criminal law has been elabo-
rately dealt with by the Supreme Court in the leading case of Hari Singh v.
Sukibir Singh’. The Court pertinently observed :

“[S. 35703)]...... is an important provision but courts have seldom invoked
it. Perhaps due to ignorance of the object of it. It empowers the
court to award compensation to victims while passing judgement of
conviction. In addition to conviction, the court may order the accu-
sed to pay some amount by way of compensation to victim who has
suffered by the action of accused. Jt may be noted that this power
of courts to award compensation is not ancillary to other sentences
but it is an addition thereto. This power was intended to do some-
thing to reassure the victim that he or she is not forgotten in the cri-
minal justice system. It is a measure of responding app ropriately 10
crime as well of reconciling the victim with the offender. It is, 10
some extent, a constructive approach to crimes, It is indeed a step
forward in our criminal justice system. We therefore, recommend to
all courts to exercise this power liberally so as to meet the ends of
justice in a better way.

The payment by way of compensation must, however, be reasonab’e. What
is reasonable, may depend upon the facts and circumstances of. cach
case. The quantum of compensation may be determined by taking
into account the nature of crime, the justness of claim by the victim
and the ability of accused to pay. Reasonable period for payment of
compensation, if necessary by instalments, may also be given. The
court may enforce the order by imposing sentence in default.”

11. In India the principles of comppersation to crime victims need to b~
reviewed and expanded to cover all cases. The compensation should ‘not b>
limited only to fines, penalties and forfeitures realised. The State should: 2.227:


62

the principle of providing assistance to victims out of its own funds. (i) in cases
of acquittals, or (ii) or where the offender is noi traceable but the victim is
identified. or (iii) and also in cases when the offence is proved.

12. The Law Commission of India in its 1S2nd Report on Custodiai
Crimes has recommended insertion of a new Section 357A in the Code of Cri-
minal Procedure regarding compensation to the victims of custodial crimes
which is as follows:

“U) Notwithstanding the provisions of Seclion 357, where the cuurt
convicts a public servant of an offence resulting in death or bodiy
injury. being an offence constituted by an act of such public ser-
vant against a person in his custody. the provisions of this section
shall apply.

(2) The court, when passing judgment in any case to which this Section
applies, shall order that the Government in connection with the
affairs of which such public servant was employed at the time when
such act was committed. shall be [80.6 jointiy and severally with
such public servant to pay, by way of compensation such amount as
may be specified in the order.

(3

An order for payment of compensation under this section may also
be made by an appellate court or by the High Court or Court of
Session when exercising iis powers of revision.

(4) While awarding compensation in any subsequent suit relating to the
same matter, the civil court shall take into account any sum paid
or recovered as compensation under this section.

(5) The amount awarded under this section shall not be less than:

{a) Rupees twenty five thousand in case of bodi'y injury. not resul-
ting in death;

(b) Rupees one lakh, in case of death:

(0) In fixing the amount cf compensation under this section, the
court shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (5). take into
account all relevant circumstances. including but not necessarily
limited to the following:

(i) the type and serverity of the injury suffered dy the victim:
(ii) the mental anguish suffered by the victim:

(ii) the expenditure incurred or likely to be incurred on the
treatment and rehabilitation of the victim:

(iv) the actual and projected earning capacity of the victim and
the impact of its loss on the person entitled to compen-
sation and other members of the family;

(४) the extent, if any. to which the victim himself contributed
to the injury;

(vi) the expenses incurred in the prosecution of the case.
6

Tn case of death or permanent disablement of the victim, the court
may take into account the estimated annual income of the victim as
multip'ied by the number of years of his estimated span of life:

7

Pending final determination of. the proceeding, the court may award,
by way of interim relief. such compensation as it may think proper
in the circumstances of the case at any stage of the case, even
before judgment of conviction is passed.

(8) The Government may recover any amount paid by it as compensa-
tion under this section wholly or partly as it may think proper. from
the delinquent public servant.”

The above recommendations of the Law Commission though confining
to victims of custodial crimes, have not been given effect to.


63

13, In view of the weaknesses of the existing provisions for compensa-
tion to crime victims in the criminal law. we are of the view that it is necessary
fo incorporate a new Section 357-A in the Code to provide for a comprehen-
sive scheme of payment of compensation for all victims fairly and adequately
by the courts. Heads of compensation are for (i) for injury, (ii) for any loss
or damage to the property of the claimant which occurred in the course of
his/her sustaining the injury and (iii) in case of death from injury resulting in
loss of spport to dependants. .

In the State of Tamil Nadu. a Fund called “Victim Assistance Fund”
has been created and Rupees one crore has been allocated to the scheme during
1995-96. The scheme provides for financial assistance to the victim of murder.
serious injuries. rape and particularly to help women. children aad bread win-
ners in distress. The amount is placed at the disposal of the Director-General
of Police who will sub-allocate the amount to the Commissioners of Police of
Madras. Madurai and Coimbatore and Superintendents of Police of other dis-
tricts. with reference to requirements and the cash relief would be sanctioned
to the victims or legal heir in case of murder on the following scales:

$. 1७. Particulars Amount of cash To whom it should

(Rs. ten thousand be paid
only)

1. Murder Rs. 10,000 - To thedegal heir
Rs. ten thousand
only)

2... Grievous injury Rs. 5000'- (85. five To the vietim
thousand only)

3. Rape Rs. 5000/-(Rs. five To the victim
thousand only)

The said Scheme provides for setting up District Vicitims’ Assistance
Committec in each district comprising the following officials with the District
Superintendent of Police/Deputy Commissioner of Police (Headquarters) acting
as Member Secretary:

Name of the Committee Chairman Member

(a) District Victims Assistance Committee District Collector (1) District
Superintendent of
Police

{b) ‘City Victims Assistatce Committec at Commissioner of i) Deputy Ce i=
Madras, Madurai, Coimbatore Potice or ionet of Police
(Head quarters)

it) City Public
Prosceutor,

The application received from the victims Seeking financial assistance
from the fund in District Superintendent of Police ice/Commissioner of
Police Office under the scheme is required to be placed before the Committee
for consideration and decision.

The assistance from the “Victim Assistance Fund” will not be given 10
those victims or to Jegal heirs, if the victim is involved in any cognizable
offence,

__, The Tamil Nadu Scheme which is limited only to a certain class of
victims is being referred to as a model to be adopted in a comprehensive man-
ner covering all victims.


64

14, In order to ensure that epporiunisies for securing justice are not
denied: to any citizen by raising of economic or other bilities as per the
mandate under Article 39 A of tie Constitution, the Legal Services Authorities
‘Act. 1987 was enacted by the Parliament. [t seeks to provide for the constitu-
tion of the National Legal Services Authority consisting of the Chief Justice of
india and some other members. Likewise. the Act provides for constitution
ol the State Legal Services Authority consisting of the Chief Justice of the
High Court or any other serving or retired jrdge of the High Court to act as
rman and’ stich other members possessing the requisite experience and

its Chi
qualifications. The State Authority performs functions, namely to (a) give legai
sic: feo ce ag who setife the ertieria Isid down under this Act; (b) conduct

Lok Adalats: (९) undertake preventive and strategic fegal aid programmes; and
rd) perform such other functions as the State Authority may. in consultation
with the Central Government, fix by regulations,

The Act further provides for the constitution of Legal Services Autho-
“rity for every district in the State consisting of district Judge, who shall be its
Chairman and such other members possessing such qualifications and experi-
ence as may be prescribed and nominated by the Government. The District
Authority performs the functions of co-ordinating the activities of legal services
in the district: organizing Lok Adalats within the district and such other task
as the State Authority may, in consultation with the State Government, fix by
regulations.

15. State and District Services Authoritics may be vested with the power
to award the compensation in the appropriate manner by making a provision
under Section 3576.

16. While awarding compensation the District Legal Services Authority or
the State Legal Services Authority, as the case may be, should make a special
consideration in cases of (i) victims of custodial crimes, (ii) rape victims, (iii)
victims of child abuse, and (iv) physically and mentally disabled victims.

17. Accordingly, a new Section S. 357A may be incorporated in the Code
on the following lines:

Scetion 357A--Victim Compensation Scheme--

(1) Every State Government in co-ordination with the Central Govern.
ment shall prepare a Scheme for providing funds for the purpose of
compensating the victim or his dependents who have suffered loss or
injury as a result of the crime and. who require rehabititation.

Under the Scheme the District Legal Services Authority at the district
level and the State Legal Services Authority at the State level shall
decide the quantum of com; pensation to be awarded whenever a re-
commendation is made by the trial court to that effect,

(2

व the trial court, at the conclusion of the trial, is satisfied, that the
compensation awarded under Section 35703) is not adequate for such
rehabilitation, or where the cases end in. acquittal or discharge and
the victim has to be rehabilitated, it may recommend to the District
Legal Services Authority if the compensation in its view is less than
Rs, 30,000, or to the State Legal Service Authority if the compensa-~
tion is more than Rs. 30,000.

3

(4) Where the offender is not traced or identified, but the victim is identi-
fied, and where no trial takes place it is open to the victim or his
dependents to make an application under sub-section (2) to the Dis-
trict Legal Services Authority at the district level and the State Le-
gal Services Authority at the State level for award of compensation.

(5) On- receipt of such: recommendations or on the application under sub-
section (4), as the case may be, the District Legal Services Authority


{6

65

or the State Legal Services Authority. as the case may be. shall after
due enquiry award adequate compensation by completing the धान
quiry within two months.

The District Legal Services Authority or the Stale Legal Services
Authority. as the case may be. to alleviate the suffering of the victim
may order immediate first aid facility or for medical benefits to be
made available free of cost on the certificate of the police Officer not
helow the rank of the Officer-in-Charge of the police station or 4
fagistrate of the area concerned or any Other interim relief as the
appropriate authority deems fit,

FOOTNOTES,
1.

See generatly Justice V. R. Krishna Iyer, Human Rights——A Judge's
Miscellany (1995), V. N. Rajan Victimelogy in India (1995): R. 1.
Mawby and S. Walklate, Critical Victinology (1994); Essat_A Fattah
ted), The Plight of Crime Victims in Modcrn Society (1989): Andrew
Carmen. Crime Victinis: An Introduction to Victimology (2nd ed.
1989): Chokkalingam ed) Readings in Victimology : Towards «
Victim Perspective in Criminology (1985r, Emilo C Viano, Victims
and Seciety (1976),

. Advisory Council on the Penal system (1970) Reparation by the

Offender (London HMSO) (Widgery Report).

. Law Reform Commission of Canada (1974) Restindion and Compen-

sation; Working Paper No. 5.

. 1995 2 All E.R. 244.
. 42 USC 10601, S. 1402.
. K. Peak, “Crime Victim Reparation: Legislative Revival of 116

Offended Ones”, Federal Probation, September, pp. 36-41 (1986)
quoted in Andrew Karmen Crime Victims: An Introduction to
Victimology 307 (2nd ed. 1989).

. See Essat A Fattah (ed.), The Plight of Crime Victims in Modern

Soci:ty (1989).

. See Justice V. R. Krishna lyer. “A Burgeoning Global Jurispru-

dence of Victimology” in Hunan Rights—A Judge's Miscellany 158-
215 (1995).

. (1988) 4 SCC 551; see also Dr. facob George v. State of Kerala

(1994) 3 SCC 430 (Fine imposed for offence under Section 314 of
Indian Penal Code in addition to sentence of imprisonment, Supreme
Court enhanced the fine from Rs. 5000 as awarded by the High
Court to Rs. 1,00,000 to be paid as compensation for the upkeep
of the deceased's child); Baldev Singh v. State of Punjab (1995) 6
SCC 593 (appellants were directed under section 357{3) to pay com-
pensation to the tune of Rs. 35.000 each to the widow of the
victim and her children); Balraj y. State of U.P., AIR 1995 S.C.
1935 (appellants directed to pay by way of compensation a sum of
Rs, 10,000 to the victim’s widow under section 3573).


CHAPTER XVI

ENQUIRY AND TRIAL OF PERSONS OF UNSOUND MIND

1, It has been recognized that the Primary objective of the law of cri-
minal procedure is to ensure that accused persons are granted a fair trial, The
right to be informed of the accusation and an Opportunily to prefer defence is
granted to the accused by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Cr. P.C.) whilst the
right to consult counsel is conferred by the Constitution.

2. An accused who is of unsound mind at the time of the inquiry or
(rial may not comprehend the charges levelled against him and may be unable
to explain the alleged criminal conduct. The accused being the alleged doer
of the act possesses the best knowledge of his own activities in relation to the
incriminating circumstances. If due to unsoundness of mind he is unable to
provide this vital information to his counsel. his defence cannot be conducted
to his best advantage. If the inquiry or trial is proceeded with in his absence. the
accused cannot impart instructions for cross-examination nor in the course
of his examination under section 342 of the Code explain the circumstances
appearing against him. Due to these dysfunctional consequences provisions
have been incorporated in the Cr. P.C. which lay down that the
inquiry proceedings or trial of a person. who is incapable of defending
himself due to unsoundness of mind, may be postponed. The motivation for
inctuding these provisions in the Cr. P.C. is to ensure that an accused incapaci-
tated due to unsoundness of mind is not denied his basic human right to a fair
ial.

1. This principle is embodied in Section 328 which is as follows:

S. 3280): When a Magistrate holding an inquiry has reason to believe
that the person against whom the inquiry is being held is of un-
sound mind and consequently incapable of making his defence, the
Magistrate shall enquire into the fact of such unsOundness of mind,
and shall cause such person to be examined by the Civil Surgeon
of the District or such other medical officer as the State Government
may direct, and, therefore, shall examine such surgeon or other Offi-
cer as a witness and shall reduce the examination to writing.

(2) ............

(3

If such Magistrate is of opinion that the person referred to in sub-
section (1) is of unsound mind and consequently incapable of mak-
ing his defence, he shall record a finding to that effect and shalt
Postpone further proceedings in the case.

4. Section 329 deals with the procedure of trial of — ~erson of unsound
mind by Magistrate or Court of Session. It runs as:

Section 329(1): If at the trial of any person before a Magistrate or 4
Court of Session, it appears to the Magistrate or Court that such
person is of unsound mind and consequently incapable of making

is defence, the Magistrate or Court shall. in the first instance, try

the fact of such unsoundness and incapacity and, if the Magistrate
or Court, after considering such medical or other evidence as may
he produced before him or it, is satisfied of the fact, he or it shall
record a finding to that effect and shal] postpone further proceedings
in the case,

(2) The trial of the fact of the unsoundness of mind incapacity of the
accused shall be deemed to be part of his trial before the Magistrate
or Court.

5. Once an undertrail is found incapable of standing trail due to un-
soundness of mind the trial has to be postponed. During the interregnum of
the postponement and resumption of the trial, the undertrial can be released on
surety of safe conduct. However, if the case is not fit for the gtant of bail

66


67

or if no stirety for the release of the accused is offered, the accused can be de-
‘tained in safe custody. The safe custody can be that of a jail or a mental
fiospital,

6. The law grants no entitlement of treatment to the insane — undertrial.
A guarantee of safe conduct and not treatment is sought from surety seeking
release of the under(rial. Without a right co treatment, detention in jail will
ofily be custodial guarding against the alleged dangerous propensities of the
uccused but providing no facilities for alleviating the incapacitating condition
of the accused.

7. The Code provides no time-limit for which the postponement wilt
subsist and the only safeguard against indefinite confinement is the obligation
to send six monthly medical reports on the mental condition of the accused to
the state government. This safeguard in no way protects the accused against
needless, il not lifelong, incarceration has been demonstrated by Veena Sethi y.
State of Bihar.’ Veena Sethi unearths from the jails of Bihar cases of individuals
whose triais were postponed because they were incapable of defending them-
selves. Subsequent to postponement of their tials they were lodged in’ Hazari
Bagh Central Jail wherein they were detained for periods ranging from 19 to 37
years.’ This detention continued even after the accused regained sanity,

8. The confinement if insane undertrials in jail even after they have
regained sanity has been held to be an infringement of their constitutional rights
uider Article 21. Section 428 of the Cr. P. C. provides that time spent by
the accused as an underirial should be set off with the sentence ordered on
conviction. This section can be invoked only after the trial is concluded. In
Veena Sethi’s case when insane undertrial had spent periods in jail Jonger than
the maximum period of sentence that could be ordered against them, the
Supreme Court ordered their release invoking this section.

9, Article 14 of the Indian Constitution prohibits both different treat-
ment of similar groups and simitar treatment of different groups. Sections 328
and 329 authorise the postponement of the criminal trial of ‘all persons of un-
sound mindwho are incapable of defending themselves. This postponement
whilst benefiting persons of unsound mind who are suffering from a treatable
condition. could lead to lifelong incarceration of the incurable mentally’ iJ} and
mentally retarded. Both groups are incapable of regaining capacity,’ hence
postponement does not promote fair trial’ for them, rather it operates as #
unitive device. This similar treatment of the incurables and the curables vio~
bites the: equality: provision.

10, Section 330 provides for release of persons of unsound mind pending
inquiry or trial. It reads as:

Scetion 330(1}: -Whenever a person is found, under section 328, or
seetion. 329, 10 be of unsound mind and: incapable of making: his
defence. the Magistrate or Court, as the case may ‘be, whether the
case is One in which bait may be taken or not, may release him on
-Sulficient security being given that he -shall be properly. taken care
of and shall be prevented from doing injury to himself or to aay
-other person, and. for his appearance when required before the
+ Magistrate or Court. or such officer as the Magistrate or Court

+ appoints in this behalf. — - पर

(2) If the case is one’ in which, in the opinion of the Magistrate or Court,
bait should not be. taken, or if sufficient _ security is not given, . the
Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, shall order the accused to
be detained in sale custody in such place and manner as he or it

may think fit. and shall report. the action taken to the State.Govern-
ment.

Provided. that no .order for the detention of the accused in a lunatic
asylum shall be made otherwise than in accordance with such rules as the State
Government may have made under the Indian Lunacy Act, 1912 (4 of 1912)

sid 11, Recognition to -the therapeutic rights -of insane undertrails is also
mandated. by the right of speedy.-trial guaranteed under Article 21. The provisions
1-1 M of L & JIND97


68

io the Code which accord recognition to the tight of speedy trial do not
apply to the insane undertrial. Since an insane undertrial is treated differently
from 8 sane undertrial, it can be logically contended that the manner of their
Uisposition should be suited to their varied needs. A sane undertrial who is
to be released on bail is kept in jail in order to prevent him from fleeing or
tampering with the investigation procedure. An insane undertrial not released
on surety can also be confined in jail. Confinement in jail can be only protec-
tive custody, and protective custody is not what the insane detenu needs for
carly resumption of trial. The right of speedy trial as extended to the insane
undertrial requires that the detena should be confined in conditions which would
alleviate the incapacity and aid early resumption of trial, The speedy trial
rights of insane undertrials are infringed not only by their confinement in jails
but also because no time limit is provided for keeping the trial in abeyance and
the accused in detention. In Hussainara Khatoon? the Supreme Court whilst
enunciating the right to speedy trial ordered the release of those undertrials
whese trial had not_ commenced even after the period specified for such com-
mencement in the Code has expired. The rationale of specifying a time limit
within which a trial should begin is to save the accused from the disadvantages
occasioned by stale or tampered evidence and frail memory of witnesses.

12. The trial of a person of unsound mind who is incapable of defending
himself is postponed to promote fair trial. If this postponement operates for
periods as long as 10 years then even when the accused regains sanity he may still
be incapable of defending himself not due to unsoundness of mind but because
the evidence has gone stale or witnesses are lost. The Tight of speedy trial
as extended to the insane undertrial mandates that a time limit should be fixed
for the period of postponement of trial. Indefinite postponement is an infringe-
ment of the personal fiberty and rights of insane undertrials,

13. Jt is the standard of treatability that should Provide justification for
postponement of enquiry or trial; hence treatability and not dangerousness should
be the guiding force of sections 328 and 329. It is the prospect of recovery
alone which explains the postponement of enquiry or trial of persons of unsound
mind and the continuance of the Proceedings for persons for who are not of un-
sound mind. The criterion of treatability should be accorded recognition at each
stage of the enquiry or trial. At the stage of observation, medical opinion should
be sought not only on whether the accused was of unsound mind and incapable
of defending himself but also whether the mental condition was amen-
able to treatment. For the accused whose mental condition is diagnosed as
incurable at this stage, a procedure different from Postponement needs to be
devised, For those categorized as treatable the time required to regain fitness
needs to be inquired. The time needed for treatment should be accorded due
cognizance in fixing the period of postponement.

14. All accused categorized as treatable May not respond to treatment.
In order that personal liberty is not arbitrarily deprived in the name of therapy,
it is essential that the period for which the enquiry or trial can be postponed,
should be subject to limitation.

15. For the accused whose condition is treatable and who can be better
equipped to defend themselves, postponement of trial furthers fair trial. For
incurables, postponement is of little utility and only operates as a mechanism for
punishing without trial. It, therefore, seems appropriate that they should be
discharged of the charged offence. If their mental condition makes them a
danger to themselves or others i.e. they are incapable of looking after themselves
and nobody is available who is willing to look after them, then the procedure
for involuntary civil commitment should be initiated to institutionalize these
persons.

16. We accordingly suggest the following amendments to sections 328, 329
and 330 in respect of the pre-inquiry and pre-trial proceedings,

16.1 After section 328 (1) a new sub-section (1A) may be inserted on
the following Jines.

S.328(1A): “Thai if the civil surgeon finds the accused is of unsound

mind, the accused shall be referred to a psychiatrist or clinical psycho-
logist for care, treatment and for prognosis of the condition. The


69

psychiatrist or clinical psychologist shall also inform the Magistrate
whether the accused is suffering from unsoundness of mind or mental
retardation.”

16.2. Further, for the existing sub-section (3) of Section 328 the follow-
ing sub-section (3) be substituted :

$.328(3) : If such magistrate is informed that the person referred in sub-
ction (1A) is a person of unsound mind, the magistrate shal! further
termine whether the unsoundness of mind renders the accused
incapable of entering defence and if the accused is found so in-
capable, the magistrate shall record a finding to that effect.
Cn suck a finding of unsoundness of mind of — the accused arriv-
ed by the Magistrate. he shali examine the record of evidence pro-
duced by the prosecution and after hearing the Jawyer of the accused
but without questioning the accused, if he finds that no _ prima facie
case is made out against the accused, he shall, instead of postponing
the enquiry, discharge the accused and deal with the accused in the
manner provided under the proposed section 330(3) :

Provided that if the Magistrate finds that a prima facie case is made out
against the accused in respect of whom a finding of unsoundness of mind is
arrived at, he shall postpone the proceeding for such period, as in the cpinion of
the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, is required for the treatment of the
accused and order the accused to be dealt with as provided under the proposed
section 330(3).

16.3. A new sub-section (4) to Section 328 be inserted as follows :

If such magistrate is informed that the person referred to in sub-section
(IA) is a person with mental retardation, the magistrate shall further
determine whether the mental retardation renders the accused incap-
able of entering defence and if the accused is found so incapable, the
magistrate shall order closure of the inquiry and deal with the accused
in the manner provided under the proposed Section 33003).

16.4. Section 3291) shall be amended as follows:

S. 3291) : If at the trial of any person before a Magistrate or Court of
Session, it appears to the Magistrate or Court that such person is of
unsound mind and consequently incapable of making his defence, the
Magistrate or Court shail refer such person to a psychiatrist or clinical

sychologist for care, treatment and for prognosis of the condition.
he psychiatrist or clinical psychologist shall also inform the Magis-
trate or Court whether the accused is suffering from unsoundness of
mind or mental retardation.

16.5. In place of existing sub-section (2) of section 329, the following sub-
section (2) shall be inserted :

$. 329(2). If such Magistrate or Court is informed that the person referred
to in sub-section (1) is a person of unsound mind, the Magistrate or
Court shall further determine whether unsoundness of mind renders
the accused incapable of entering defence and if the accused is found
so incapable, the Magistrate or Court shall record a finding to that
effect. On such a finding of unsoundness of mind of the accused
arrived at by the Magistrate or Court, he or it shall examine the
record of evidence produced by the prosecution and after hearing the
lawyer of the accused but without questioning the accused, if he or
it finds that no prima facie case is made out against the accused, he
or it shall, instead of postponing the trial, discharge the accused and
deal with the accused in the manner provided under the proposed
section 3303) :

Provided that if the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima facie case is
made out against the accused in respect of whom a finding of unsoundness
of mind is arrived at, he or it shall postpone the trial for such period, as in the
opinion of the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, is required for the treatment

accused,


70

. A new sub-section (3) of. Section 329 shall be inserted. in the following
manner: a:

S. 3293): If the Magistrate or the Court finds that a prima facie case
is made out against the accused and he is incapable of entering de-
fence by reason of mental retardation. he or it shall not hold the trial
and order the accused to be dealt with in accordance with the proposed
section 330(3).

16.6, The existing Section 33001) shail be amended as follows :

Section 330(1): Whenever a person is found under section 328 or section
329 to be incapable of entering defence by reason of unsoundness of
mind or mental retardation. the magistrate or court. as the case may
be, whether the case is one in which bail may be taken or not, order
release on bail provided the accused is suffering from unsoundness of
mind or mental retardation which does not mandate. inpatient treat-
ment and a friend or relative undertakes to obtain regular out-patient
psychiatric treatment from the nearest medical facility and (0 prevent
from doing injury to himself or to any other person.

16.7. The existing Section 330(2) shall be amended as follows :

S. 330(2): If the case is one in which. in the opinion of the magistate: or
court, as the case may be. bail shall not be granted or if an appropriate
undertaking is not given, he or it shall order the accused to be kept:
in such a place where regular psychiatric treatment can be provided.
and shall report the action taken to the State Government.

16.8. A new sub-section (3), be inserted in Section 330:

$. 330(3): Whenever a person is found under Section 328 or Section
329 to be incapable of entering defence by reason of unsoundness of
mind or mental retardation, the Magistrate or Court. as the case
may be, shall keeping in view the nature of act committed and the
extent of unsoundness of mind or retardation further determine if the
release of the accused can be ordered.

6) If on the basis of medical and other specialist opinion the Magis-
trate or Court, as the case may be, decide to order discharge of
the accused, as provided under sections 328 (3) and (4) and
329 (2) and (3), such release may be ordered if sufficient security
is given that the accused shall be prevented from ‘doing injury
to himself or to any other person.

(ii) Jf the Magistrate or Court is of opinion that discharge of the
accused cannot be ordered, the transfer of the accused to a resi-
dential facility for persons of unsound Mind or mental retardation
may be ordered wherein the accused may be provided care and
appropriate education and training.

17. Coming to the proceedings after the Person concerned has ceased to
be of unsound mind and on the consequent resumption of inguiry or trial, the
relevant section to be noted are sections 331 to 339 of the Code.

18, Acceptance of the defence of insanity results in acquittal but not
discharge. A court acquitting on the ground of insanity is required to make an
express finding whether the accused had committed the act. If the accused had
committed the alleged act, the Magistrate or Court is required to either make an
order for the accused to be detained in a place of safe custody or to be discharged
on surety of safe conduct to a relative or friend. The Place of safe custody
can either to a jail on a mental hospital. Commitment to a mental hospital is to
be ordered according to rules made under the Lunacy Act. From first of April
1993 the rules made under the Mental Health Act. 1987 would be applicable
because the Lunacy Act. 1912 has been tepealed by the Mental Health Act.
1987. No order for delivery of the accused to relative or friend can be. made.
except on the application of such relative giving security to the satisfaction. of
the court that the accused shall be prevented from causing injury to others Or to,

himself? >


7

19. Sections 335 to 339 deal with the accused acquitted after the comple-
tion of the trail held in accordance with sections 331 to 334. These sections
may suitably be modified to provide better treatment and rehabilitation of such
persons on the lines indicated in the proposed section 330(3) and the provisions
of the Mental Health Act, 1987. All references to the Indian Lunacy Act, 1912
in the Code shall be deleted.

FootNotes :

1. AIR 1983 SC 339. see also “Acquitted after 32 Years." in वीवो
Express (Delbi ed) May 1. 1996 {Sixty five year old A.N. Ghosh. was
arrested in 1964 on charges of murdering his brother. A city ‘court
in Calcutta found him to be insane and asked the jail authorities
to keep him for treatment. Though Ghosh regained his mental bafance
after some time, he continued to languish behind the bars awaiting
trial. He was released from the Presidency jail in Calcutta after
his case was taken by a local NGO, Antara.)

2. Hussainara Khatoon, Re (1980) 1 SCC 91.
3. Ahaul Latif y. State of Assam, 1981 Cri. LJ, 1205.


CHAPTER XVII

PROCEDURE FOR MAINTENANCE OF WIVES. CHILDREN AND
PARENTS

1. Sections 125—128 in Chapter 1X of the Code of Criminal Procedure
lay down a self-contained speedy procedure for provision of maintenance to wife.
including divasced wives. children and parents. The provisions are aimed at
ensuring that the neglected wives, children and parents are not left destitute on
the scrap-heap of society and consequently driven to a life of vagrancy. immora-
lity and crime for their sustenance’.

2. These provisions are applicable to all persons, irrespective of the reli-
gions they profess, and thus have no relationship with the personal law of the
parties.’

3. Since the comprehensive review of the Code in 1973, many problems
have arisen in the working of these provisions. Though it is supposed to be a
summary remedy to help wives, children and parents in distress, several factors
leading to hardships und injustice have been visible in the operation of these
provisions. As a consequence, the Law Commission undertook an exercise suo
motu and rendered a comprehensive report in 1989. One Hundred Thirty-Second
Report entitled “Need for Amendment of the Provisions of Chapter IX of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in order to ameliorate the Hardships and Miti-
gate the Distres: of Neglected Women, Children and Parents". The Report con-
tains several valuable recommendations to alleviate the hardships to women
(wives), children and parents. However, the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amend-
ment) Bill, 1994 has not incorporated any of those recommendations, The only
amendment made in the Bill is the one relating to the quantum of maintenance,
un increase in statutory ceiling from Rs. 500 to Rs. 1500/-. At the several work-
shops held under the auspices of the Law Commission of India. it was unani-
mously recommended that section 125 needs to be amended on the lines indicated

Ww

4, We may examine the following issues arising from the scope of section
125 creating hardship to awardees.

5. Ceiling.—The fixation of the ceiling of Rs. 500/- made in 1955 and
which continued in 1973. is a source of hardship and injustice to the claimants
after a passage of more than 41 years.

The Law Commission in its 132nd Report strongly felt that the ceiling
on the quantum of maintenance be dropped altogether. The Commission
observed :

It cannot be overlooked that if a ceiling is retained, it would require
to be revised from time to time taking into account the inflation
rise in cost of living. 10 would be extremely difficult to amend the
provision periodically, time and again, for it would result in invest-
ment of legislative time unnecessarily. The present experience rein-
forces this apprehension in as much as the ceiling of 500/- has
remained unrevised for 30 years without anyone (including women’s
activist groups) even becoming aware of the resultant anomaly and
injustice.

Accordingly, it recommended that the ceiling limit in sub-section (1) of
section 125 and in the first proviso to sub-section (1) of section 127 be deleted.

We are of the view that the increase in ceiling from Rs. 500/- to Rs. 1500/-
suggested in the 1994 Bill would not serve the purpose owing to spiralling infla-
tionary conditions. We are also not in favour of dropping altogether the ceiling
limit provided under the Code. We feel that justice would be done to awardees
if the ceiling is raised to Rs. 5000/-. This view has found unanimous support
in the various Workshops conducted by the Law Commission.

72


73

6.1. Date from which order for monthly payment of maintenance he made.

Section 125 (2), as it stands. provides that monthly allowance shall be
payable from the date of the order or from the date of the application for main-
tenance, if so ordered. by the magistrate. It is left to the discretion of the magis-
trate to order payment from the date of application for maintenance. In view of
the fact that right to claim maintenance existed on the date on which the petition
was instituted and also because of the time-lag in the disposal of the proceeding
in the courts of first instance, it would be fair and just that the amount of main-
tenance be payable from the date of the making of the application by the clai-
mant, Section 125(2) needs to be amended accordingly

6.2. Should be concept of ‘potentiality to carn’ be included as a factor im the
interpretation of the phrase “unable to maintain herself” in section 125 (1a)?

In section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 the pre-condition
“unable to maintain itself” existed in relation only to the child. But in section
125 of the Code of 1973 this condition has been expressly made applicable to the
case of wife. This phrase was introduced in 1973 for the first time in case of
wives presumably in the light of conflict of decisions among some High Courts
on the question whether separate income of the wife can be taken into account
in determining the amount of maintenance payable under section 488 of the
Code of 1898. The Delhi High Court in Nanak Chand v. Chander Kishore’
and the Punjab High Court in Major Joginder Singh v. Bibi Raj Mohinder Kaur
had held that the separate income of the wife could not be taken into account.
But the Kerala High Court had ruled to the contrary in P.7. Ramankutty Achan
v. Kalyanikutty’. This controversy was ultimately settled by the Supreme Court
in Bhaewan 12075 case in 1975 by overruling the Delhi and Punjab High Court
decisions and upholding the Kerala High Court view. Since the law had not been
settled by the time the Code of 1973 was formulated, the phrase “unable
to maintain herself” was introduced.

6.3, The Bombay High Court has also held in Vimal’s* case that while
construing the expression “unable to maintain herself”, the concept of the able
bodied. person’s ability to earn cannot be presume. However, the Kerala and
Karnataka High Courts have held to the contrary‘a.

64, The Law Commission in its 132nd Report had recommended that
there was no warrant to inject the concept of “potentiality to earn” in the
expression “unable to maintain herself” in section 125 (1)(a). The only condi-
tion is that the wife has no adequate income of her own for her maintenance
on the date of the institution of the petition. Consequently. it was recommend-
ed that “an Explanation should be added to $. 125(1) that the phrase “unable
to maintain herself” concerns itself with the actual separate income. if any,
of the wife and not with the possibility or potentiality of the wife being able
6 carn for herself by securing employment or by exerting herself’. We endorse
the above view.

7. Need for criteria for determining the quantum of maintenance.

An analysis of judicial decisions of High Courts” on the amount of main-
tenance awarded reveals that the amount has invariably been determined with
reference to the monthly income of the husband and not the assets. movable
and immovable. of the husband on the date of the institution of the petition:
The Law Commission in its 132nd Report suggested that for a fair and just
determination of the amount, the provision may be amended to lay down that
not only the monthly income of the husband but also all his other resources
existing on the date of the institution of the petition, may be taken into account.

We reiterate the aforesaid recommendation.

8.1, Recovery of Monthly Aflowance: Problems.

The awardee is required to approach the court for enforcement of the order
of maintenance every month if a recalcitrant person defaults or neglects to make
payment regularly. This would involve considerable effort. costs for engaging
legal counsel. etc. It is unlike the problem of a dectee-holder in a civil matter
where he has to file an execution application in one proceeding. In the present


74

case. whenever there is.a-default. the aggrieved person has to go toCourt.” To
ameliozate the distress of the awardees. the 13210 Repert had recommended the
Tollowing” :

The Magistrate passing the order for monthly allowance should be em-
powered to direct the person held liable to pay the allowance to
deposit in advance six months’ allowance at the rate determined by
him and keep it deposited till the order of maintenance holds the
field unless, for reasons to be recorded in writing. he considers it
unjust to do so in the circumstances of the case... The magistrate
must also be empowered to direct the employer, if any. of the person
held responsible to make a deduction of the amount of monthly
allowance from the salary of the person held liable to pay it to the
awardee in the manner specified by the learned magistrate. It should
also be provided that wilful default in making the deduction will
constitute contempt of court.

8.2, First proviso to section 125(3) precludes the awardee from going
to.the court for issuance of a warrant for recovery after the lapse of one year
from the date on which it fell due. The Law Commission. in. its 132nd Report
felt that the period of one year limitation was unjust and oppressive to the
claimants and no prejudice would be caused to the person held liable if no
period, of limitation exists. Accordingly the Commission recommended the. dele-
tion of the first proviso to section 125(3). We are in agreement with this view,

8.3. The second proviso to section 125(3) allows reopening the contro-
versy. at the stage of recovery whether or not wife is entitled to refuse to live with
the husband. This question would have been examined at the stage of determi-
nation of the right to maintenance on merits.

The Law Commission in its 132nd Report recommended the deletion of
the proviso along with the explanation on the ground that “the ence of the
provision serves no better purpose than. providing.a weapon of harassment to the
errant husband in as much as a husband can always make an application Just
in order to tire out the wronged wife wha has won a decision in her favour
alter a prolonged, costly and unequal battle’, We are in favour of the deletion
as -suggested above., . . _—

9.1... Right of: Appeal

_ 1) Under the existing law. there is no right to appeal against an order passed
by. the magistrate under Section 25. Only a revision. is possible. There is néed
to amend the law providing right to appeal in the fol owing manner.

9.2, With ‘the passing of the Family Courts Act, 1984. the jurisdiction.
fo hear proceedings for maintenance is now vested in the family court under
sections 7(1) and 7(2Xa). Consequently, wherever family courts have ‘been set
up, pending proceedings stood transferred to them. Under section 19 of the
Family Courts Act an appeal: is provided against every final decision of the
family court, In the very same state. there will be discrimination against two
sets of litigants, One set under the jurisdiction of family courts will enjoy the
right of appeal and the other set under the jurisdiction of the ynag istrate under
section 125 will be deprived of the right of appeal. This is patently discrimingtory.
Under. the. circumstances, in order to bring. uniformity and to avoid discrimi-
nation, Section 125 may be amended to. provide for a right of appeal against
an order passed by 8 magistrate, however, if the person liable 10 pay maintenance
prefers an appeal, the appeal shall be maintainable. only when it is suppotted
by an affidavit of the appellant to the effect that he has deposited or paid all
arrears of maintenance and shall make future payments regutarly.. The. appel-
late court may be empowered to relax this rule in case of genuine hardship to
the appellant and may extend the time for making the deposit.or exempt him
from making deposit of only portion of arrears." [t is apposite that similar
conditions be also imposed under the Family Courts Act.

' 9.3. Since section 125 procedure is summary for expeditious justice. it
needs to be. further streamlined for achieving the objective. One way. is to
empower the magistrate to decide the matter on affidavits with opportunity, to
the other party to cross examine the deponents of the affidavits. The procedure


75

under section 126 in this regard should be summary for expeditious justice and
as such we are recommending the deletion of summons procedure under the Code.
Summary trial procedure for recording evidence etc. be adopted and the evidence
by way of affidavits also be made admissible. Accordingly section 126(2) be
amended.

9.4. At the stage of execution of the  magistrate’s order. the awardees
are. put to great hardship. If. the order is flouted with impunity what. remedy
will .the awardees have? It-is necessary to empawer the magistrate: tor. attach
the..property of the person liable and sell in order to recover the amount: Hf’
the. husband: is employed. the magistrate shall have power to direct the employer
to-deduct the amount of maintenance and arrange the payment. To -give effeete:
to the suggestion, section 128 to be amended suitably. The magistrate:
may also pass orders for detaining such person in jail for a limited period.
The magistrate may transmit the order. for attachment and sale of the property
to a civil Court with a request to enforce the order in.the:same manner - ine which.
a decree papsed by a civil court may be executed. The civil court can enforce.
the order as if it -was execuiting an order under rule 2A of Order XXXIX. of -.
tho Céde of Civil Procedure 1908”.

Foor NoTEs:

Bhagwan Din. Kamala Devi (1975) 2 SOC*386.

Nanak. Chand ५. Chand Kishore Aggarwal (1969) 3 SCC 802.

. See-Law Coinmission of India. 132nd Report, para 34, page 5 (1989).

4

4. Id at-para: 3.5, page 6; see also Prentata Sahai |... Ram Niranjan Sahil
1989 Supp (2) SCC: 731 wherein the Supreme Court held that reduction
of amount of maintenance and making: the:same payable from:datet of!
ordet instead -of the date of application..was. improper. Tlie order तन
the -magistrate was. restored.

5. AIR 1969 Del. 235.
6. ATR'1960 Punj. 249:
7. AIR 1971 Ker. 22.°
8. 19817 Cri. LJ. 210 (Bom).

Ba. See Saraswati v. Madhavan 1961 (2) Cri. Ld. 642 (Kerk Abdul Manf.
v. Satima. 1974 Cri. L-J..172 (Kant).

9. 132nd Report, supra note 3, para 3.6, puge’9. *
10. 4d at para 3.7. page 10.

Il. fd at para 3.10. page 12.

12. dd at pura 3.12, page 12:

13, / ut paras 3.13. 3.14. page 13.

vo

14, 132nd: Réport: supra note 3 at para 4.4, page.
15. 1 at para 4,7. page 16.

11 -1 Mot 1, & ॥अ0[77


CHAPTER XViL

SPECIAL PROTECTION IN RESPECT OF WOMEN

The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1983 incorporated important amend-
ments to the Indian Penal Code, 1860 on the law of rape introducing the con-
cept of custodial rape and minimum sentence therefor, to the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872 setting up a presumption as to absence of consent in custodial rapes
and to the Code of Criminal Procedure mandating enquiry into and trial of
Tape in camera and prohibiting publication of the proceedings of such inquiry
or trial without the permission of the Court.

2. The amendments were a sequel to the 84th Report of the Law Com-
mission “Rape and Allied Offences—Some Questions of Substantive Law, Pro-
cedure and Evidence” in 1980. The Report had incorporated the major de-
mands of the campaign on rape law reform by women’s organisations triggered
off by the Supreme Court decision in the Mathura case’. The Commission had,
dimer alia recommended certain pre-trial procedures, namely, women should not
be arrested at night. a policeman should not touch the body of a woman while
arresting her, and the statements of women should be recorded in the presence
of a relative, friend or social worker. It also recommended that a porice offi-
cer’s refusal to register a complaint of rape should be treated as an offence. How-
ever, the Bill introduced by the Government in 1980 did not incorporate the
above recommendations of the Commission regulating powers of the police. The
Bill had sought to make publication of proceedings of rape trial a non-bailable
offence which was rather harsh in that it blocked out media publicity which
would help in the articulation of public protests against heinous offence like rape.
In the face of public criticism, the Bill was referred to a Joint Committee of
Parliament for further discussion. In so far as relevant to the Code of Criminal
Procedure, the publication of reports of rape trials was made into a bailable
offence,

3. In the decade following the 1983 amendments to the Code, a signifi-
cant develo; pment took place. The National Commission for Women was set-
up under the National Commission for Women Act. 1990. The Commission
had organised a seminar on Child Rape which made recommendations for
amending the Indian Penal Code, Code of Criminal Procedure and the Indian
Evidence Act. Pursuant to the Seminar, a Bill to give effect to its recommenda-
tions was formu'ated. The Bill was examined by the Commission's Expert
Committee on Law and Judiciary which gave its opinion and the Bill then was
approved by the Commission. For the purpose of identification. the Bill as ap-
proved by the National Commission for Women is hereinafter referred to as Bill

'). हैं

4.1. The Bill (NCW) has made the following recommendations for the
amendment of Code of Criminal Procedure.

4.2. 5. 26. specifies the different courts by which offences under the
Indian Penal Code and other laws are triable.

The Bi'l (NCW) has recommended the incorporation of a proviso to
clause (a), namely,

“Provided that an offence under section 376 of the Indian Penal Code
[rape] shall be tried only by any such court presided over by a
woman.”

However, the Code of Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill, 1994 does not
vontain the above amendment.

We are of the view that an abso'ute condition provided in proviso to
clanse (8) of the Bill formulated by National Commission for | Women.
namely, that an offence under section 376 of the Indian Penal Code frapei shall
be tried only by any such court presided over by a woman may not be feasible

76


7

in practice always. As the aim is to have speedy irial. emphasis should be dn
speedy investigation and commencement of rape trials. So we suggest that the
word “only” 08 substituted by “as far as practicable” in the above proviso.

43.1, S. 54 provides Cor examination of arrested person by niedical prac-
titioner at the request of the arrested person.

4.3.2. The Law Conunission in its 135th Report on “Women in Custody”
bad recommended that where a female accused desires a medical examination in
order to prove her innocence. sie could insistant such an examination be done
by a femate registered medical practitioner and with regard to decency’. The
National Commission for Women had endorsed the Law Commission's recom-
mendation.

4.3.3. The Bill (NCW) has recommended the insertion of the fallowing
proviso to section 54, namely:

“Provided Uiat where the arrested person is a female, the examination of
the body of such person shall be made only by or under the supervi-
sion of a female registered medical practitioner.”

in essence this amendment reflects the principle underlying sub-section (2)
of section 53 which deals with examination of women accused by women dociors
at the request of police officers.

43.4. The 1994 Bill does not contain a provision to this effect.

4.3.5. We, however, are of the view that the proviso referred to above is
a salutary provision and section 54 bs amended to that effect.

5.1. Section 157 deals with the proceduie for investigation of offences by
the police.

5.2. The Bill (NCW) has proposed the insertion of the following proviso
to section 157, namely:

“(a) Provided further that in relation to an offence of rape, the investiga-
tion under this sub-section shali be conducted only at her residence
by a woman police officer and the person on whom such offence is
alleged to have been committed is a woman under fifteen years of
age, she should be questioned only in the presence of her parents or
social workers appointed for the locality and the questioning should
be as brief as possible”.

©

in sub-section (2), for the word “proviso”, the word “the first Proviso”
shall be substituted.

5.3. The 1994 Bill does not contain this provision.

5.4, We are in agreement with the amendment as approved by the Nationa!
Commission for Women. However, we feel that the age of the woman to be
juestioned only in the presence of her parents etc. should be eighteen and not
Hyteen, The U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child, 1989 to which India
is a party, defines ‘child’ as:

“For the purposes of the present Convention a child means every human,
being below the age of eighteen years, unless, under the law applicable
to the child, majority is attained earlier.”

Consequently, in accordance with the Convention, it is desirable to raise the age
to eighteen in the above provision.

6.1. Section 160(1) deais with police officer's power to require attendance
of witnesses. Under this provision, the investigating police officer. can, by a
wrilten order, require the attendance of any person who is acquainted with the
facts and circumstances of the case and is within the limits of his police statin
or. of any adjoining police station. The proviso to sub-section (1) exempis. a
person below fifteen years of age or a woman from attending any place ‘othe:


78

than their place of residence. The provision is intended to afford special protee-
stion to children and woman against exploitation and karassment resulting from
the abuse of powers by the police.

6.2. Thissamendment- has: been -effected as a- sequel. to*the Law Commis-
sion Reports on “Rape and Allied Offences” and *Women: ia Custody”.

6.3." But the Bill (NCW) has suggested that in sub-section (1): for the pro-
viso; the following proviso. shall be .cubstituted.. namely : हि हे

“Provided that no male person under the age of cighteen -.years or a
woman should be: required :.to attends at. any, place -othen than wthe
Place in which such male person or woman resides.”

6.4, We approve of this recommendation as eminently desirable; as a pro-
tection to children (both male and female) and women. By ;specifying the age
of eighteen years only to male persons, the provision extends to all women irres«
pective ‘of their age.

6.5. The 811 (NCW) has also suggested the incorporation of the follow-
ing provisions after sub-section (2) of section 160 in the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure:

“(3) Where under this Chapter, the statement of a person-under ‘the age

of twelve years is to be recorded cither as first information of an

offence or m the course of investigation into an Offence, or the woman

is a person against whom an offence under sections 354 or 376B of

‘the Indian Penal Code is alleged to have been committed or attempt-

ed, the statement shall be récorded either by a female police ‘officer

or by a person authorised by such organisation interested in the wel-

~ fare of women or children ‘and recognised in this behalf by the State
Government by notification in the Officia! Gazette. .

44) Where the case is one to which the-provisions of sub-section (3) apply
and it female police officer is not available. the officer incharge - of
the police station shall, in order to facilitate the recording of the
statement, forward to the person referred to in- that sub-section, a
written request: setting out the pomts on which information is re-
quired to be elicited from the woman.

+ (5) The person to whom such a- written request is forwarded shall, after
recording the statement of the woman, transmit the record to the
officer incharge of the police station.

6) Where the .statement recorded by .such person..as forwarded under
sub-section (5), appears in any respect. to. require: clarification or am-
plification on specified matters and such person shall thereupon re-
cord the further statement: of the. woman. in conformity. with the re-
quest and return the papers to the officer incharge of the police
station.

(7)' The statement of the woman recorded and forwarded ‘uhder“Sibssec-
tions (3) to (6) shall, for the purpose of the Jaw relating to the admis-
sibility in evidence of the statement made by any person, be deem-
ed to be a statement recorded by a police officer.”

» 6.6, The origin of this suggestion..in its embryonic.form can be traced to
the Law Commission’s Reports on “Rape and Allied. Offences” and “Women
in Custody”.*

6.7. The Bilt (NCW) has gone beyond the Law Commission’s earlier re-

tions in that, insisting on. the presence of a female police officer.

Though the presence of such female officer is useful and necessary, their. absence

should not lead to delay in the investigation of the offences. - Sub-sections * (4).

435) (6) and (7) referred (0 above obligates the officer incharge of the police ‘sta-

tion 10 forward the person to a_ representative of. a government, — recognised

women’s organisation and’ the ‘statement recotded by such: person shalt be deem-
ed to be a statement recorded by the police’ officer. .


79

* 6.8: It may be pointed out that the 1994°Bill does not incorporate - the
above amendment.

6.9. We_are of the opinion. that section’ 160 be amended on: the _ lines
-suggested above subject to certain modifications. The .recommendation made
in sub-section (4) of NCW Bill is not practicable having regard to the ~ present
condition und dearth of female police officers. It may also net be practicable
for the victim. or any: person interested in. her. tovapproach: the person-mentioned
«in subssection (3). “Instead,. we suggest that sub-section (4) may .bewamended to

“othe -effect that where a female police ‘officer .is. not. availablecahd to -eantactuthe
“person mentioned in sub-section (3).is. difficult, the officer. in.charge..of the: palice

“station, for-reasons to be. recorded in writing. shalt proceed: with. the revording of
the statement of the victim in the presence of a relative of the victim.

che raised. to

i Further, the age of “twelve -yea
ights of the Ch:

formity with. the Convention on the

eighteen years’) in, .con-
di

7.1. Clause 19 of the 1994 Bill seeks to insert new. section +164A.:in. the

Code: ta provide for a medical examination of the victim of rape by a registered

«medical practitioner of. a goverament hospital or in. his absence, by. any - other

registered medical practitioner and also tor an early despatch of the. medical

cTepact to the investigating officer. who shai) forward it to the concerned magis-
vi trate. .

“164A (1) Where, during the stage when an offence of committing rape
or attempt to commit rape isvunder investigation; it is proposed to
get the person of the woman with whom rape is alleged: or/attempt-

red to-have been committed or attempted, examined by a medival
expert, such examination. shall be conducted by. a.registered medical
practitioner employed in a hospital run by the Government or a
local authority and in the absence of such a practitioner, by any
other registered medical practitioner. with the consent of — such
woman 07 of a person competent to give such consent on her be-
half and such. woman shall. be forwarded to such registered medical
practitioner withcut delay.

+.(2) The cregistered:. medical: practitionsr,.to. whom such woman is for-
«warded .shall- without delay, examine her, person::and, .prepare. a. re-
port of her examination, giving the following particulars namely:

- (i) the name: and. address of the .woman and of the, person by
«whom .she.was brought;

(ii) the ‘age ‘of the woman:

(iii) whether the. woman was, previously -used to’. sexual intercourse;
(iv) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the woman;

{v) general mental condition of the woman; and

(vi)-other materia! particulars in reasonable detail.

5 (3). The repontishall state-precisely! the reasons: for, each .conshisignyastiv-
ed:at.

(4) The report shall specifically record that the consent of the woman
"07 .of the, person competent to give such consent on her behalf to
:.such examination had been Obtained.

(5) The exact time of commencement and completion of ‘the examina-
-tion shall also be noted in the .report.

--(6) The registered medical practitioner stiall, without: delay forward the
report to the investigating officer who'shall forward it to the Magis-
trate referred to in section 173 as part of the’ documents referred to
in clause (a) of sub-section (5) of that section.

(7) Nothing in this section. shall be construed: as rendering’ Jawful any
examination without-the consent ofthe’ woman ‘or of-any -person
competent to give such consent on her behalf.


80

Explanation—For the purposes of this section, “examination” and “registered
medical practitioner” shall have the same meaning as in section 53,

7.2. The recommendation of new section 164A was made by the Law
Commission us early as 1980 in its 84th Report on Rape and Allied Offences.
However. it was not incorporated in the 1983 Ciriminal Law (Amendment) Bill.

73, We are of the view that the insertion of scction 1644 is eminently desi-
rable subject to the modification that medical examination be made preferably
by a female medical practitioner. A speedy and detailed medical examination
of rape vicubls by dociors as esscniial for eliective trial of rape offences. Like-
wise. speedy despatch of the report to the investigating officer is also necessary.

8.4. Under section 167 when a person is arrested or detained in custody
and it appears that investigation cannot be competed within the period of 24
hours as fixed under section 57 and there are grounds for believing that the ac-
cusation is well founded the officer incharge of the police station or the investi-
gating police officer (not below the rank of sub-inspzctor) shall forthwith send
a copy of the entries in the case diary to the nearest Judicial Magistrate and
shalt also at the same time forward the accused to such magistrate. If Judicial
Magistrate is not available. the copies of the entries in the case diary as well us
the accused. person may be sent to the nearest Executive Magistrate on whom the
powers of a Judiciat Magistrate or Metropolitan Magistrate have been conferred.

8.2. The Bill (NCW) has suggested the following amendment to sub-sev-
tion (2) of section 167:

Provided that where the accused person is a woman who is under
eighteen years of age, the detention of such accused shall be authoris-
ed to be in the custody of a remand home or recognised social insti-
tution.”

8.3. This provision is to safeguard the female child accused from being
sent to prison. We endorse the above recommendation.

9.1, Section 173 (1) mandates that every investigation of offence shall be
completed without unnecessary delay. With a view to completing investigation
of child rape offence speedily, the Bill (NCW) has suggested the addition of the
following clause in sub-section (1) of section 173 at the end, namely:

“and where the offence is under [proposed by the National Commission
for Women} sub-section (3) of section 376 of the Indian Penal Code,
it shall be completed within three months from the date on which
the information relating to the commission of offence was first record-
ed by the officer incharge of the police station.”

On the completion of investigation, the officer-in-charge of the police sta-
tion is required to send a report of the concerned magistrate stating the names of
the parties. the nature of the information, the names of persons who appear to be
acquainted with the circumstances of the case, whether any offence Ras been

and if so, by whom, whether accused has been arrested, whether he
has been released on his bond, and, if so, whether with or witbout sureties and
whether he has been forwarded to custody of the magistrate under section 170,

9.2, The Bill (NCW) has suggested another amendment. In sub-section
(2) of section 173 in clause (ii) after sub-clause (g) the following sub-clause shall
be inserted :

“(h) Whether the report of the medical examination of the woman con-
cerned has been attached where the investigation relates to an offence
under section 376. 376A, 376B, 376C or section 376D of the Indian
Penal Code.”

9.3. This amendment aims at ensuring that the police report in cases of
rape and custodial rape includes the report of the medical examination. This
is a salutary provision. We are of the opinion that the aforesaid amendments in
section 173 be made.


St

10.1. Section 198 deals with prosecution of offences against marriage.
Sub-section (6) of section 198. prohibits the court from taking cognizance of the
offence of marital rape when the wife is under fifteen years of age, if more than
one year has elapsed from the date of the commission of the offeace. “

10.2. The Bill (NCW) has increased the age-limit of wife from “fifteen
years” fo “seventeen years”.

10.3. We endorse this amendment subject to the modification that the
age-limit be raised to “eighteen years”. :

11.4. Section 309 mandates the court to conduct inquiry and trial expedi-
tiously; it also empowers the court to grant adjournments after recording reasons
therefor.

11.2. In order to prevent trials in rape cases including child rape from
being undu!y delayed. the Bill (NCW) has sought to prescribe a time-limit of
two months from the date of commencement of the examination of witnesses. for
completion of trial,

In sub-section (1) of section 309 of the Code, the following proviso shall
be added, namely:

“Provided that when the inquiry or trial related to an offence under
section 376 to 376E {proposed by the both inclusive] of the Indian
Penal Code, judgment shall. as far as possible. be delivered within a
period of two months from the date of commencement of the exami-
nation of witnesses.”

12.1, Consequent on the recommendations of the Law Commission in its
84th report of Rape and Allied Offences, the Code of Criminal Procedure
was amended by Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1983. Section 4 of the
Amending Act incorporated new sub-sections (2) and (3) 10 section 327 intro-
ducing the concept of trial in camera for trial of the offences of rape includiny
castodial rapes and also preventing the printing or publication of the — tria
Proceedings except with the permission of the Court respectively.

12.2, The Bill (NCW) seeks to amend sub-section (2) and (3) in the fol-
lowing manner:

“In sub-section (2), for the words “shall be conducted in camera” the words
“shall be conducted only by a woman judge or magistrate in camera”
sha"l be substituted.

(b) For sub-section (3) the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namel: Wy: “Where any proceedings are held under sub-section (2) it
shall lawful for any person to print or publish any matter in re-
lation to such proceedings except with the previous permission of the
court but the names and addresses of the parties to such proceedings
shall not, in any case, be included in such matters.”

4. 12.3. While we agree with the spirit of the amendment in sub-section (2)
that trial of rape cases including custodial rape offences be tried by woman
judges or magistrates. to limit such trials only by woman judges or magistrates
as a mandatory condition could, in our opinion, unduly delay trials resulting
in loss of relevant evidence and trial memory of witnesses etc.  Expeditious
completion of trial whether by judges and magistrates of either sex should
be the aim. Therefore, we recommend that the word “only” be substituted by
the words “85 far as practicable” in sub-section (2).

__, 12.4. We approve of the amendment in sub-section (3) lifting the ban on
Printing or publication of rape trial proceedings but maintaining confidentiality
of the names and addresses of the parties.

13.1. Under section 416 if a woman sentenced to death is found to be
pregnant. the High Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be post-
poned and may if it thinks fit, commute the sentence to imprisonment for life.


82

13.2. The Law Commission in its 135th Report on “Women in Custody”
had: recommended that commutation of death sentence to one. of life imprison--
ment be. made mandatory in case of convicted pregnant woman. Accordingly,
the Commission suggested the amendment of section 416 on the following lites.’

“S. 416. If a woman sentenced to death is found to be pregnant. — the
igh Court shall commute the sentence to one of imprisonment. for

13.3, We approve of this amendment which makes it mandatory for the.
High Court to commute the sentence of death to one of life imprisonment.

14.4.’ Section 437° deals with the grant of bail in cases-of non-bailable'
offences. First proviso to sub-section (1) of -section 437 confers discretion 01-06
Court. to release on bail persons committing grave offences with previous con-
vietions. if they are under the age of sixteen years or woman or sick.

14.2. The Bil (NCW) seeks to amend the first proviso referred to: above
in the following manner:

“In sub-section (1) of section (1) of section 437 of the Code,.for the first
proviso, the following proviso shall be subtituted.” namely :

“Provided that where: such person is a female. she shall ordinarily be
released on bail. un'ess the court considers it otherwise for special
reasons to be recorded by it. in writing.”

14.3. We approve of this amendment. But it shall be second proviso.
In-the first proviso. the age. of “sixteen years” be:raised to. “eighteen years”.

The.-existing second proviso shall. be third proviso - and ..the -existing ;
third proviso. shall ‘be fourth . proviso.

15.1. Section 432 eropowers the -appropriate government to: suspend to:
execution of sentence or remit the whole or any part of the punishment to
ich an accused .is sentenced. In. criminal jurisprudence ‘sentencing is a judi-
cial function. Suspension or remission of sentence by the government does. not. .
interfere with the order of conviction passed by the court: it only affects the
execution of +the:-sentence.

15.2, Section 433 empowers the appropriate government to: commute diffe-
rent types of sentences as laid down therein.

15.3, In 1978. the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act added
4 new section 433-A. which is.as follows:

“§. 433-A: Notwithstanding . anything contained in $, 432, where a sen-
tence of imprisonment for life is imposed on conviction of any erson.
for an offence for which death is one of the punishments provided by
law. or where a sentence of death impgsed "on a person has’: been
commuted undet 85. 433 in to-one-of iniprisonment for tifef-such person”
shall not ‘be released: from prison unless he hdd served: at feast fours’
teen: years of imprisonment. .

15.4. ‘The purport of this section is that “lifers” convicted df-«apital offéh-.-
ces-should undergo actual imprisonment for at least-fourteen years. THe objeci:
tive of enacting this section seems to be to place restrictions on the government's
power of remission of sentences under section 432. The experience of the work-
ing .of section 432 in many States revealed that “lifers” of capital offences are
granted emission under the relevant rules leading to their release-in’a few yeaps.« *

15.5. The constitutionality of this section was challenged but upheld by
the Supreme Court in Maru Ram v. Union of India’ and Ashok Kimar vy,
Union of indiat | .॥#॥



$3

15.6. The question whether women should not be exempied from the bar
imposed by section 433-A was examined by the Law Commission in its 135th
Report on “Women in Custody”. The Commission posed the issue thus’:

“In the case of a woman Prisoner, sentenced to imprisonment for life (and
therefore subjected to the stringent provisions of section 433-A of the
Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973). is it proper that the ‘aw should
insist on the prisoner's undergoing minimum 14 years of imprison-
ment mandatorily laid down in section 433-A?”

The Commission was of the view that rigorous application of this section
to women prisoners would cause grave hardship. Therefore, the Commission
recommended the removal of bur incase of women prisoners. Such removal would
not mean that women ‘lifers’ would not have to undergo 14 years of imprisan-
ment but it would only mean that the appropriate government could grant re-
mission of sentence on the merits of each case under section 432, ~ Section
433-A has been held not to apply to juveni‘es convicted under the Borstal schools
Act applicable in Andhra Pradesh.” Consequently, the Commission had recom-
mended that a similar approach should be adopted in regard to women priso-
ners, particularly because long and continuous imprisonment of women priso-
ners might prejudicially affect the welfare and well-being of other members of
their familics.

15.7, We are also of the view that women prisoners be exempted from
rigour of section 433-A for the reasons set out above,

16. Special provisions on the law of arrest for proteation of women are
dealt with in Chapter 1५.

Foor Notes:
1. Tukram ४. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1979 $C 185.
. See paras 2.5—2.6 (1989).
See paras 3.24 and 3.25. page 18 (1980).
See para 2.11, (1989).
See para 2.13, (1989).
See Maru Ram y. Union of India (1981) 1 SCC 107.
Ibid.
. 1991) 3 SCC 498.
. See paras 2.17, 2.18, 2.19 (1989).
See State of A.P. ४, Vallabhapuram Ravi (1984) 4 SCC 410.

LENA A ROD
g

ड़

12-1 Mofh & J/ND/97


CHAPTER XIX

PUNISHMENT OF IMPRISONMENT FOR LIFE, SENTENCING AND
SET-OFF

Section 53 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 as in stood prior to amendment
in 1955 sets out six different punishments, the second one being “transporta-
tion”. Under section 55 IPC in every case in which sentence “transpostation™
was passed, the Provincial Government could commute the punishment 10
imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

In section 53, the punishment, namely, “transportation for life” was
substituted by the words “imprisonment for life” by Act 26 of 1955. Section
53A which has been added by Act 26 of 1955 states that in every case in which
a sentence of transportation for a term has been passed the offender shail
be dealt with in the same manner as if sentenced to rigorous imprisonment
for the same term. Questions often arose before the courts whether the
punishment of “imprisonment for life’ means “rigorous imprisonment for
life’. In Gopal Vinayak Godse v. State of Maharashtra the Constitution
Bench held that a sentence for “imprisonment for life” prima facie means
imprisonment for whole of remaining period of the convicted person's natural
life unless the said sentence ig commuted or remitted by the appropriate autho-
rity uader the provisions of 1.P.C or Cr.P.C. The Law Commission of India
in its 39th Report noted that there is no clear provision as to how the person
sentenced imprisonment for life should be dealt with under the law as it now
stands, namely, whether it should be treated same as sentence of rigorous
imprisonment for life or simple imprisonment for life and whether it is @
punishment different in quality despite ‘being different in duration from the
sentence of imprisonment of either description or for a specified term and
whether it is legally permissible for a court passing a sentence to lay down that
the imprisonment for life shall be rigorous or simple. In Godse's case (supra)
the Supreme Court, while referring to the Section 53A, observed that under
that Section a person transported for life or any other term before the enactment
of that section would be treated as a person sentenced to rigorous imprisonment
for life or for a said term. The question again came up 10 Naib Sia case’,
The Bench after referring to the earlier cases affirmed the view by ad ‘an that
by necessary implication the sentence for transportation for life which is now
substituted by “imprisonment for life” by section 53 awarded for serious offen-
ces must mean rigorous imprisonment for life. The Supteme Court also over-
ruled the decision of the Kerala High Court in Mathammal Saraswathi_ v.
State of Keral@. The Bench also referred to the Law ‘Commission’s 39th
Report in which the amendment was s ted, namely, that a new section
56 be inserted to the effect “imprisonment tier life shall be rigorous”, with a view
to resolve the doubts regarding the nature of punishment of imprisonment for
life. Accordingly we recommend insertion of new section 56 in the Indian
Penal Code to that effect.

2. A perusal of several sections of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, as well
as the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shows that both the Codes appear
to make a distinction between “imprisonment for life” and “imprisonment for
aterm’. Section 53 of the Indian Penal Code mentions the nature of punish-
ments which can be awarded. “Imprisonment for life” and “imprisonment
of either description, namely, rigorous or simple” are two types of punish-
ments prescribed therein. So far as sentence of imprisonment for life is con-
cerned, its nature, namely, whether it should be rigorous or simple, is not
specified therein. Section 55 provides for commutation of sentence of impri-
sonment for life which could be imprisonment of either description for a term
not exceeding fourteen years. Section 57 lays down that in calculating frac-
tions of terms of punishment, imprisonment for life shall be reckoned as equi-
valent to imprisonment for twenty years. A combined reading of these sections
would go to show the imprisonment for life could be for a term, namely, for
twenty years or, if commuted, for a term of fourteen years. Chapter XXX
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 deals with execution, suspension,
remission and commutation of sentences. Sections 432 to 435 specifica ty deal

84


85

with suspension, remission and commutation of sentences. Section 433(b)
provides that a sentence of imprisonment for life can be commuted by the
appropriate government for imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen
years or for fine. However. section 433A which was introduced in 1978 by
‘Act No. 45 of 1978, section 32 places a restriction on powers of remission or
commutation in certain cases and lays down that notwithstanding anything con-
tained in section 432, where a sentence of imprisonment for fife is imposed
जा conviction of a person for an offence for which death is one of the punish-
ments provided by law, or where a sentence of death imposed on a person
has been commuted under section 433 into one of imprisonment for life, such
person shall not be released from prison unless he has served at least fourteen
years of imprisonment. Even though this provision has a nexus with section
38 of the Indian Penal Code but imposes a restriction that a convicted person
who is sentenced to imprisonment for life, shall not be released unless he has
served for at least fourteen years of imprisonment.

A question arose whether the benefit Of the set-off contemplated by
seclion 428 of the Code of Criminal Procedure should be available to life
convicts and whether the sentence of imprisonment for life can be equated as a
seatence for a term. In Kartur Singh vy. State of Haryana’ a Bench of three
judges held that a clear distinction between imprisonment for life and an im-
prisonment for a term is maintained in both the Codes and that Section 428
would apply only to cases where the sentence of imprisonment is for a term and
not in cases where the sentence imposed is imprisonment for life. दी arriving
al this conclusion. the Bench referred to 6०656 case and Maru Ram's case’
wherein it was held that imprisonment for life means imprisonment for the
whole of the remaining period of the convicted person's natural life. However,
the same question came up for consideration again in before a Constitution Beach
in Bhagirath’s case’. The Constitution Bench, having noted that the expres-
sions “imprisonment for life” and “imprisonment for a term” are used in the
Tadian Penal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure, however, ruled that
a person sentenced to imprisonment for life should be held to have beeg sen-
tenced to a term, namely, the term of his life. The Constitution Beach also
observed that the assumption that the word “term” used in section 428 implies
a concept of ascertainability runs contrary to the letter of the law as found in
that section which is a benevolent provision. In that view of the matter, the
Constitution Bench overruled Kartar Singh's case (supra). It is clear from
the aforesaid decision that the Constitution Bench based its finding more on
equity, justice and fair play.

We fee] that in order to make the provision explicit so as to give benefit
of set-off to the life convicts Section 428 can be amended by adding the words
“or imprisonment for life” after the words “sentenced to imprisonment for a
term”.

__ Cnn OOIc on Tr ne Ea
Foornotes

1. A.LR. 1961 SC 600.

2. 1983 (2) SCC 454.

3. ALR. 1957 Ker 102.

4. ALR. 1982 SC 1439.

5. AdR. 1961 SC 600.

6. ALR. 1980 SC 2147.

7. ALR. 1985 SC 1050.


CHAPTER XX

CODE OF CRIMINAL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1994
PROPOSED CHANGES

1. The Bill was introduced in Rajya Sabha for carrying 001 a mumber of
changes in the Code. While the Bill is at present pending before the Parlia-
mentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs. the Government in February
1995 had made the reference to the Law Commission of India to undertake a
comprehensive revision of the Code of 1973 and make necessary recommenda-
tions particularly from the point of view to have speedy trials. The Statement
of Objects and Reasons for introducing the Bill shows that the recommendations
already made by the Law Commission, Police Commission and the suggestions
received from the State Governments and others in this regard have been taken
into account.

2, The Law Commission has undertaken the study of the comprehensive
revision of the Code 50 as to remove the germane problems relating to delays
in the disposal of criminal case.

3. There are altogether forty nine clauses in the Bill (Annexure), A
detailed Questionnaire was issued and views of severat authorities concerned
with criminal justice delivery system were obtained. As mentioned already
several Workshops were also held at several places and views of cross sections
were gathered. Apart from the areas covered by the Bill. the Commission,
in the background of the discussions held and the responses to the Questionnaire.
has made an indepth study of various other aspects and has made several
recommendations which are incorporated in the earlier chapters and they haye
a_ bearing on some of the clauses of the Bill. We, therefore, feel that some
of the clauses require to be considered and we propose to deal with them in this
chapter,

4. Clauses 2, 3, 6. 9. U1 to 16, 23 to 27, 30. 31. 34 ,35, 45 to 48 of the
Bill deal with minor changes which may be retained.

5.1. Clause 18: ‘After section 144 a new section 144A is to be inserted
in the Code to enable the District Magistrate to prohibit mass drill (or training)
with the arms ‘in public places. 'e are also of the view that in order to
curb the militant activities of certain communal organisations thete is a need to
strengthen the hands of the State authority. For effectively checking commu-
nal tension, such a provision is necessary.

"35.2, Clause 21: Under this clause section 176 is being amended to
provide that in the case of death or disappearance of a person or a rape of a
woman while in the custody of police, there shall be a mandatory judicial
inquiry and in case of death, examination of the dead body shall be conducted
within twenty-four hours of death. In view of the increase in the incidence
of custodial crimes, such an amendment is a welcome measure.

5.3. Clause 22: This clause seeks to insert a proviso to sub-section (1)
of section 190 of the Code to empower a magistrate to authorise further deten-
tion in custody of an accused person for a period not exceeding a week, after
recording reasons, during the interim period of submission of th © police report
and before taking cognizance of the offence disclosed by the police report.
Such 8 provision is necessary to enable the Magistrate to pass ap order of
remand where it is not possible for him to take cognizance of an offence under
clause (9) of Section 190.

5.4. Clause 29: Under this clause a new section 291A is scught 10
be inserted with a view to making a memorandum of identification prepared by
the Magistrate admissible in evidence without formal proof of facts stated there-
in where they are not in dispute. But in case the court on an_ application
deems fit to examine such Magistrate, it can do so. We also feel that dispens-
ing with the examinate of the Magistrate would save time.

86


8?

5.5, Clause 32: It is in respect of obtaining specimen signatures or
handwriting of any person including accused. Section 311A is sought to be
introduced pursuant to the observations made by the Supreme Court in State of
UP. v. Ram Babu' when the Magistrate is entrusted with such power, other
proceedings would be more ellective.

5.6. Clase 38: This clause adds two provisos to sub-section (1) vot
section 389 of the Code to the effect that the Appellate Court would give notice
10 the prosecution before releasing a convicted person on bail, _if he was con-
vicled of an offence punishable with death. imprisonment for life or imptison-
ment for a term of not less than ten years. It also enables the prosecution to
move an application for cancellation of such bai! granted by the Appellate
Court, Having regard (0 the fact that the convict: person after being released
on bail by the Appellate Court continues to indulge in committing crimes, such
@ provision is necessary.

5.7. Clause 39: This clause adds a provise to Section 428 providing
for a set off of the period of detention during investigation and trial against
period of [4 years of actual imprisonment. This amendment is necessary so
that the convicted accused can get a benefit of the period suffered by him as
detention during the trial and investigation being set off against period of 14
years mentioned in section 433A.

5.8, Clause 40: In respect of bailable offences. there are instances
where the person has to remain in jail for his inability to furnish bait, till the
case is disposed of. The amendment of section 436(1) to make mandatory
provision to release such indigent person on an execution of a bond without
sureties, is a salutary provision,

5.9. Clause 43: Under this clause Section 438 providing for antivipa-
tory bail is sought to be amended by adding some more clauses regarding giving
notice to the Public Prosecutor etc. We have already dealt with this aspect
in Chapter V (Bail and Anticipatory Bail) and, therefore. some amendments
on those lines are necessary.

5.10. Clause 44: Some of the persons have taken it as a professoin
to stand sureties for any number of accused which is a highly pernicious prac-
tice. This clause seeks to include section 441A which provides that a person
standing surety for an accused person shall disclose as to in how many cases
he has already stood surety for accused persons. Such an information may
entail the rejection of the surety.

5.11. Clause 49: This clause provides for the addition of new sections
15382. 174A and 229A to the Penal Code. Since the Bill for amendment
of the Indian Penal Code is also likely to come up before the Parliament, relevant
clauses in this context inserting these three new sections can be added. We shall
‘give our recommendations of amendment to 1PC in this regard.

6. Then we are left with the remaining clauses Nos. 4, 5. 7, & 10. 17,
19, 20, 28, 33, 36, 37, 41, 42.

6.1, Clause 4: This clause seeks insertion of a new section 258
empowering the State Government to establish the Directorate of Prosecution.
We have already discussed this topic and have recorded Our recommendations
giving approval 10 this clause in chapter II]. However, we have indicated
that the Government while inting the Public Prosecutor and Additional
Public Prosecutor shall, as Re as practicable, appoint sufficient number of
women Public Prosecutors so that they can effectively deal with the cases in
respect of offences against women.

62, Clause 5: This clause seeks to amend section 29 of the Code to
enhance the sentencing power of the Magistrate of the First Class to impose
fine from. five thousand rupees upto twenty five thousand rupees and Magistrate
of the Second Class from one thousand 19665 upto five thousand rupees, This
Proposal is made keeping in view the depreciation of the value of the Tupee.
Further, in the Questionnaire issued the opinions of the cross sections were
sought and there was unanimous approval to enhance the Sentencing power
of the Magistrate.


88

6.3. Clause 7: This clause sceks to amend section 46 to empower
the police officer concerned to use «il niwaus necessary lo effect the arrest in-
cluding causing death in the case of proclaimed offender under sub-section (4)
of section 82. The new sub-section (4) is being added to section 46 to prohibit
arrest of a woman after sunset and before sunrise except, in unavoidable cir-
cumstances. We have considered the issue of arrest in detail in Chapter Il.
We have opined thal the Law Commission of India in its 135th Report on
“Women in Custody” made such a recommendation and on that basis a new
sub-section is being added to section 46 and we have approved the same.
However, we recommend a proviso to section 46(1) regarding the ar of a
woman providing that where the woman is to be arrested and submissicn 10

0 the arrest shall be presumed. However, we

custody, on an oral intimatio 3
suggested that existing sub-section (2) will be numbered as sub-section (3) and

sub-section (3) as sub-section (4).

6.4. Clause 8: Under this clause a new section SOA is sought to be
inserted requiring the police to give information about the artest of the person
as weil as the place where he is being held to any one who may be nominated
by him for communicating information. Jn our discussion in Chapter Tl
we have referred to the recommendation of the Law Commission of India in
its 152nd Report on “Custodial Crime” which recommended insertion of @
similar section. Section SOA is sought to be included on the same Sines. But
the section as recommended in the 152nd Report is more elaborate and section
50A sought to be inserted may be framed on those lines,

6.5. Clause 10: Under this clause a new section 533A is sought to be
inserted providing for an_ examination of the person accused of rape by a
registered medical practitioner. With a view to obtaining valuable evidence
‘at the earliest such a provision will be an eminently desirable one.

64. Clause 17; On the recommendations made in the Chief Justice’
Conference and in view of the depreciation of the value of money it is proposed
to amend section 125 of the Code to enhance the payment of maintenance.
On this subject our recommendations are in Chapter XIII wherein we have
recommended that the upper limit may be raised to Rs. 5,000/-, taking into
consideration the unanimity expressed in the several workshops. and this
change may be incorporated under clause 17.

6.7. Clause 19: This clause seeks to insert. new section 164A in the
Code to provide for a medical examination of the victim of rape by a registered
medical practitioner. We have adverted to this clause in Chapter XIV on
“Special Provisions in respect of Women”. We have pointed out that the
recommendation for insertion of new section 164A was made by the Law Com-
mission of India in 1980 itself and therefore we have observed that insertion

of this section is very much required.

6.8. Clause 20; A new sub-section (3A) is sought to be added to section:
173 to enable the police to take note of the desire of the parties to compound
offences even at the stage of investigation. In our Questionnaire we have
mentioned about this clause and have also discussed in Chapter IX. There
has been unanimity that such a provision is salutary one.

6.9, Clause 28: Under this clause it is proposed to amend _ section

260 to make summary trial of offences specified therein mandatory. We have

considered the three procedures, namely summon cases, watrant cases and

५ summary trial, in ‘detail in Chapter VII. We have recommended the deletion

of summons procedure and instead suggested summary trial of all cases pusish-

able upto three years. The amendment sought to be made under this clause
has to be modified on the lines of the recommendations made in this regard.

6.10. Clause 33: Under this clause amendment to the Table appended
10 sub-section (2) of section 320 of the Code is sought to be inserted. In
Chapter IX we have dealt with amending of section 320 comprehensively and
have made several recommendations and this clause may be redrafted in accor-
dance with those recommendations.

6.41. Clause 36: Section 377 is sought to be amended to permit the
filing of an appeal in the Court of Session instead of the High Court on the


89

ground of inadequacy of sentence passed by a Magistrate. ‘The amendment

sought is a salutary one.

6.12. Clause 37; In order to guard against the arbitrary exercise of
power and to reduce reckless acquittals, section 378 is sought to be amended
providing an appeal against an order of acquittal passed by a Magistrate वा
respect of cognizable and non-bailable offence filed on a police report to the
Court of Session as directed by the District Magistrate. In respect of all
other cases filed on a police report, an appeal shail lie to the High Court against
an order of acquittal passed by any other court other than the High Court, as
directed by the State Government. The power to recommend appeal in the
first category is sought to be vested in the District Magistrate and the power in
respect of second category would continue with the State Government, In
our Workshops we have highlighted this issue and there was near unanimity
in favour of incorporating such a provision.

6.13. However. the next question is whether an appeal or revision would
lie against an order passed by the Sessions Court in such appeal against acquit-
tal or in an appeal for enhancement. The Bill is silent on this aspect. Section
376(b) lays down that where Sessions Court passes a sentence of 3 months no
appeat would lie, but this would apply to a trial before that court, But a
similar limitation can be made appl fieabte to the orders passed by Sessions
Court in the appeals filed under the proposed amendment of sections 377 and
378. Consequently. we suggest a further amendment by way of a proviso
to clauses (a) and (c) of Section 386 to the effect that where the sentence
passed by Sessions Court does not exceed six months no appeal would lie.

6.14. Clause 41: A new Section 436A. be inserted in the Code
providing for release of undertrial prisoners who are in jail for a long period.
We have discussed this aspect in great details in Chapter V dealing with bail
and anticipatory bail. After an indepth study dealing with bail we have
recommended certain changes in section 437 etc. Regarding the inclusion of sec-
tion 436A, we recommended certain changes in para 10.5 of that chapter and the
new section proposed under this clause may accordingly be modified.

6.15. Clause 42: This clause seeks to amend section 437 and in the
chapter dealing with the bail we have adverted to this aspect and in para 11.1.5
we have made some recommendations. Paragraphs 11.1.3 to 11.1.5 may be
referred to and the changes may accordingly be incorporated in this clause.

6.16. Pursuant to the changes suggested above, we are of the view that
the relevant clauses be modified accordingly.

6.17. In the earlier chapters, we have dealt with some more aspects
and haye made recommendations for incOrporating certain new provisions
which may also be included in the Bill in a comprehensive manner before the
same comes up before the Parliament.

Footnotes :
1, AIR 1980 SC 791.


CHAPTER XXI

SPEEDY JUSTICE

1, Speedy justice is sine gua non of criminal jurisprudence.' It is not
only an important safeguard to prevent undue and oppressive incarceration. to
minimise anxiety and concern accompanying the accusation but also to limit
the possibility of impairing the ability of an accused to defend himself. Indeed
there is a societal interest in providing a speedy justice. This right has been
actuated in the recent past and the courts in a series of decisions opened new
vistas of fundamental rights.

The concept of speedy trial has been incorporated into the Virginia De-
claration of Rights of 1776 and from there into the Sixth Amendment of the
Constitution of United States of America which reads, “in all criminal prosecu-
tions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial”. It may be
pointed out, in this connection. that there is a Federal Act of 1974 called
“Speedy Trial Act. establishing a set of time-limits for carrying out the major
events, e.g., information, jictment, arraignment, in the prosecution of viiminal
cases and similar provisions exist in Canada.

The right to speedy trial is recognised as a common law right flowing
from the Magna Carta. This is the view in UK. USA. Canada and New
Zealand. However, this view is not accepted in Australia. The right whether
under common law or otherwise is not absolute relief is to be given based on
various well settled guidelines evolved in the judicial decisions.

Under Article 14 of the Intemational Convention Civil and Peliticat
Rights, 1966. the right to a speedy trial is provided. Similarly Article 3 of
the European Convention of Human Rights and the Sixth Amendment to the
US Constitution refers it as a basic right.

2. The right to speedy trial is an integral and essential part of funda-
mental right to life and liberty enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution _ of
India.

3. The Supreme Court is Hussainara Khatoon (1) ५४. Home Secretary,
State of Bihar’ while dealing with Article 21 of the Constitution of India has
observed thus :

“No procedure which does not ensure a reasonably quick trial can be
regarded as ‘reasonable, fair or just’ and it would fall foul of Article
21, There can. therefore, be no doubt that Speedy trial, and by
speedy trial we mean reasonably expeditious trial, is an integral and
essential part of the fundamental right to life and liberty enshrined
in Article 21. The Question which would, however. arise is as to
what would be the consequence if a Person accused of an offence
is denied speedy trial and is sought to be deprived of his liberty by
imprisonment as a result of a long period of time and convicting him
after such trial would constitute violation of his fundamental right
under Article 21.”

4. The Supreme Court, while delivering its constitutional bench judgment
in the case of Abdul Rehman Antulay v. R. S. Nayak’ declated that right to
speedy trial is implicit in Article 21 of Constitution and thus constitutes a funda-
mental right of every persons accused of a crime. is one among them. The Court
referred to the following observations made in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India
regarding integral connection between Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution.

“The procedure contemplated by Article 21 must answer the test of reason-
ableness in order to be in conformity with Article 14. It must be
‘right and just and fair’ and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive:
otherwise it would be no procedure at all and the requirement of
Article 21 would not be satisfied.”

90


oI

The Supreme Court in A-R. Antuley’s case (Supra) held that the aforesaid
observations establish in unmistakable terms that the law and procedure con-
templated by Article 21 must answer the test of reasonableness in order to be
in conformity with Articles 19 and 14. It establishes that the procedure pres-
cribed by law within the meaning of Article 21 must be right and just and fair
and not arbitrary. fanciful or oppressive. I emphasised that it is this principle

of fairness and reasonableness which was construed as taking within its purview
the right to speedy trial. in the Hussainara Khatoon(I)’ Bhagwati J. had
observed :

“Now obviously procedure prescribed by law for depriving a person of
his liberty cannot be ‘reasonable or just’ unless that procedure
ensures a speedy trial for determination of the guilt of such person.
No procedure which does not ensure a reasonably quick trial can
be regarded as ‘reasonable, fair or just’ and it would fall foul of
Article 21. There can. therefore. be no doubt that speedy trial, and
by speedy trial we mean reasonably expeditious trial, is an integral

and essential part of the fundamental right to life and liberty
enshrined in Ariticle 21.7

While quoting the aforesaid observations. the Supreme Court in Antulay’s
case (Supra) posed the questions “what is the consequence of denial of this
right? Does it necessarily entail the consequence of quashing of charges/ trial?
These questions were not answered by Bhagawati J. in Maneka Gandhi's case.”
However. the Supreme Court in A. R. Antulay’s case (Supra) has dealt with that
question and approved the ratio of the Mavicka Gandhi's! case laying down the
following propositions :

1.

Right to speedy trial is implicit in the broad sweep and content of
Article 21,

That unless the procedure prescribed by law ensures a speedy trial,
it cannot be said to be reasonable, fair or just. Expeditious trial and
freedom from detention are part of human rights and basic freedoms
and that a judicial system which allow incarceration of men and women
for long periods of time without trial must be held to be denying
human rights to such undertrials.

2.4. The right to speedy trial begins with the actual restraint imposed by
arrest and consequent incarceration and continues at all stages, namely. the stage
of investigation. inquiry, trial, appeal and revision so that any possible prejudice
that may result from impermissible and avoidable delay from the time of the
conmmission of the offence till it consummates into a finality, can be averted.
In this context, it may be noted that the constitutional guarantee of speedy trial
is properly reflected in Section 309 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

The Supreme Court laid down in A. है, Antulay's case’ the following
propositions meant to serve as guidelines. These propositions are :

(1) Fair just and reasonable procedure implicit in Article 21 of the Con.
stitution creates a right in the accused to be tried speedily. Right to
speedy trial is the right of the accused. The fact that a speedy
trial-is also in public interest or that it serves the social interest also,
does not make it any the less the right of the accused. It is in the
interest of all concerned that the guilt or innocence of the accused is
determined as quickly as possible in the circumstances.

Right to speedy trial flowing from Article 21 encompasses all the
stages, namely the stage of investigation, inquiry. trial. appeal, revision

and re-trial. That is how, this Court has understood this right and
there is no reason to take a restricted view.

(3) The concerns underlying the right to speedy trial from the point
of view of the accused are:

(a) the period of remand and pre-conviction detention should be as
short as possible. In other words, the accused should not be
subjected to unnecessary or unduly long incarceration :prior to his
con ;

13 1 %1 01 L & J/ND/97


{4)

(5)

(6)

92

(b) the worry, anxiety, expense and disturbance to his vocation and
Peace, resulting from an unduly prolonged investigation. inquiry
or trial should be minimal: and

{c) wndue delay may well result in impairment of the ability of the
accused to defend himself. whether on account of death. dis-
appearance or non-availability of witnesses or otherwise.

At the same time. one cannot ignore the fact that it is usually the
accused who is interested in delaying the Proceedings . As is often
pointed out, “delay is a known defence tactic”. ince the burden
of proving the guilt of the accused lies upon the prosecution, delay
ordinarily prejujdices the prosecution. Non-availability of witnesses,
disappearance of evidence by lapse of time really work against the
interest of the prosecution. The prosecution for whatever reason, also
delays the proceedings. Therefore in every case. where the right to
speedy trail is alleged to have been infringed. the first question to be
put and answered is -- who is responsible for a delay? Proceedings
taken by either party in good faith. to vindicate their rights and
interest, as time taken in pursuing such proceedings be counted towards
delay. It goes without saying that frivolous proceedings or proceed-
ings taken merely for delaying the day of reckoning cannot be treated
as proceedings taken in good faith. The mere fact that an appli-
cation/petition is admitted and an order of stay granted by a superior
court is by itself no proof that the proceeding is not frivolous. Very
often these stays are obtained on ex parfe representation.

While determining whether undue delay has occurred (resulting in
violation of Right to Speedy Trial) one must have tegard to all the
attendant circumstances, including nature of offence. number of
accused and witness, the workload of the court concerned, prevailing
local conditions and so on — what is called. the systemic delays.
It is true that it is the obligation of the State to ensure a speedy
trial and State includes judiciary as well, but a realistic and Practical
approach should be adopted in such matters instead of pendantic one,

Each and every delay does not necessarily prejudice the accused.
Some delays may indeed work to his advantage. As has been observed
by Powell, J. in Barker “it cannot be said how long a delay is too
long in a system where justice is supposed to be swift but deliberate”.
The same idea has been stated by White, J. in U.S. v. Ewell’ in
the following words :

*.... the Sixth Amendment right to a speedy trail is necessarily ‘relative,
is consistent with delays and has orderly expedition, rather than
mere speed, as its essential ingredients; and whether delay in
completing a prosecution amounts to an unconstitutional depri-
vation of rights depends upon all the circumstances,’

However, inordinately Jong delay may be taken as presumptive proof of

0)

8).

prejudice. In this context. the fact of incarceration of accused will
also be a relevant fact. The prosecution should not be allowed to
become a persecution. But when does the prosecution become per-
secution, again depends upon the facts of a given case.

We cannot recognize or give effect to, what is called the ‘demand’
rule. An accused cannot try himself: he is tried by the court at the
behest of the prosecution. Hence, an accused’s plea of denial of
speedy trial cannot be defeated by saying that the accused did at
no time demand a speedy trial. If in a given case, he did make such a
demand and yet he was not tried speedily, it would be a plus point
in his favour, but the mere non asking for a speedy trail cannot be put
against the accused. Even in USA, the relevance of demand rule
has been substantially watered down in Barker and other succeeding
cases.

Ultimately, the court has to balance and weigh the several relevant
factors — ‘balancing test’ or ‘balancing process’ — and determine


93

in each case whether the right to speedy trial has been denied in a
given case.

(9) Ordinarily speaking. where the court comes to the conclusion that
tight to speedy trial of an accused has been infringed the charges or
the conviction, as the case may be. shail be quashed. But this is
not the only course open. The nature of the offence and other ci
cumstances in a given case may be such that quashing of Proceedings
may not be in the interest of justice. In such a case, it is open to
the court to make such other appropriate order—including an
order to conclude the tial within a fixed time where the trial has
concluded as may be deemed just and equitable in the circumstances
of the case.

(10) It is neither advisable nor licable to. fx any time-limit for triat
of offences. Any such rule is bound to be qualified one. Such rule
cannot also be evolved merely to shift the burden of proving justifi-
cation on to the shoulders of the prosecution. In every case of
complaint of denial of right to speedy trial, it is primarily for the
prosecution to justify and explain the delay. At the same time, it
is the duty of the court to weigh all the circumstances of a given
case before pronouncing upon the complaint, The Supreme Court
ot USA too has repeatedly refused to fix any such outer time-limit
in spite of the Sixth Amendment. Nor do we think that non-fixing
of any such outer limit infatuates the guarantee of right to speedy
trial.

(11) An objection based on denial of right to speedy trial and for relicf
on that account, should first be addressed to the High Court. Even
if the High Court entertains such a plea, ordinarily it should not stay
the proceedings, except in a case of grave and exceptional nature
Such proceedings in High Court must, however, be disposed of on a
priority basis. However, these propositions were held by the court
to be not exhaustive. According to the Court, “it is difficult to foresee
all situations. Nor is it possible to lay down any hard and fast rules.”

5.In Sheela Barse v. Union of India where a petition was filed for the
release of all children, below the age of 16 years detained in various jails in
different states, and seeking detailed information in respect of them, the Court
observed that the problem of children under detention would more easily be
solved if the investigation and trial in respect of the charges against them could be
expedited. The Court directed the state governments to take steps for com-
leting the investigation within three months in cases lodged against children
Below the age of sixteen and to establish adequate number of courts to expedite
trial of such cases.

6. The Supreme Court in Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee v. Union
of India’ while dealing with NDPS Act and section 309 Cr. 2.८. Supreme Court
has given a number of directions, With sespect to pending cases it directed as
under :

“@ Where the undertrial is accused of an offence(s) under the Act preseri-
bing a punishment of iny Prisonment of five years or less and fine, such
an undertrial shall be re! on bail if he has been in Jail for a
period which is not less than half the punishment provided for the
offence with which he is charged and where he is charged with more
than one offence, the offence providing the highest punishment. If
the offence he is charged with prescribes the maximum fine. the
bail amount shall be 50% of the said amount with two sureties for
like amount. If the maximum fine is not Prescribed bail shall be
to the satisfaction of the Special Judge concerned with two sureties
for like amount, :

ii) Where the undertrial accused is charged with an offence(s) under the
Act providing for punishment exceeding five years and fine, such an
undertrial shall be released on bail on the term set out in (i) above
provided that his bail amount shall in no case be less than Rs. 50,000
with two sureties for like amount.


94

Gi} Where the undertrial accused is charged with an offence(s) under the
Act punishable with minimum imprisonment of ten years and a m
mum fine of Rupecs onc lakh, such an undertrial shall be released
on bail if he has been in jail for not less than five years provided
he furnishes bail in the sum of Rupces one lakh with two sureties for
like amount.

(iv) Where a undertrial accused is charged with the commission of an
offence punishable under sections 31 and 31-A of the Act. such an
undertriat shall not be entitled to be released on bail by virtue of
this order.

The directives in clause (i}. (i). andl {iii} above shall be subject to the
following general conditions :

(i) The undertrial accused entitled to be retcased on bail shall deposit
his passport with the learned judge of the Special Court concerned
and if he does not hold a passport he shall file an affidavit to that effect
in the form that may be prescribed by the learned Special Judge.
In the latter case the learned Special Judge will. if he has reason to
doubt the accuracy of the statement, write to the Passport Officer con-
cerned to verify the statement and the Passport Officer shall verify
his record and send a reply within three weeks. If he fails to reply
within the said time. the learned Special Judge will be entitled to act
on the statement of the undertrial accused:

Gi) the undertrial accused shalt on being released on bail present hinsself
at the police station which has prosecuted him at least once in a month
in the case of those covered under clause (i), once in a fortnight in the
case of those covered under clause (ii) and once in a week in the case
of those covered by clause (iii), unless leave of absence is obtained in
advance from the Special Judge concerned;

(iii) the benefit of the direction in clause (ii) and (iii) shall not be avail-
able to those accused persons who are. in the opinion of the learned
Special Judge, for reasons to be stated in writing, likely to tamper
with evidence or influence the prosecution witnesses:

(iv) in the case of undertrial accused who are foreigners, the Special Judge
shall. besides impounding their passports, insist on a certificate of
assurance from the Embassy/High Commission of the country and
shall appear before the special Court as and when required:

{v) the undertrial accused shall not 1९४४० the arca in relation to which
the Special Court is constituted except with the permission of 016
learned Special Judge: हु

(vi) the undertrial accused may furnish bail by depositing cash cqual to
the bail amount; .

(vii) the Special Judge will be at liberty to cancel bail if any of the
above conditions is violated or a case for cancellation of bail is
otherwise made out; and

(viii) after the release of the undertrial accused pursuant to this order,
the cases of those undertrial who have not been released and are in
jail will be accorded priority and the Special Court will proceed
with them as provided in section 309 of the code.

The above directions are intended to operate as one-time directions for
cases in which the accused persons are in jail and their trials are delayed. They
are not intended to intefere with the Special Courts power to grant bail under
Section 37 of the Act. The Special Court will be free to exercise that power
Keeping in view the complaint of inordinate delay in the disposal of the pending
cases. The Special Court will, notwithstanding the directions, be free to cancel
bail if the accused is found to be misusing it and grounds for cancellation of
bail exist. Lastly. we grant liberty to apply in case of any difficulty in the
implementation of this order.”


95

7. Lot of cases are coming before the courts for quashing of proceedings
on the ground of inordinate and undue delay stating that the invecation of this
tight even need not wait Jormal indictment or charge.”

. 8. A survey of the aforesaid cases reveals that Supreme Court in a
series of judicial pronouncements has emphasised and re-emphasised that speedy
tial is one of the facts of the fundamental right (o Jife and liberty enshrined
in Article 21 and the law must ensure reasonable, just and fair procedure
which has a creative connotation after the decision of this Court’ in Mancka
Gandhi.

We now propose to refer to the recommendations made by various Com-
mittees and Commissions to achieve speedy justice.

9.6 Rankin Commitice

To deal with the question of delay i Cie disposal of civil case: both
in the High Courts and in the subordinate courts. a Committee was appointed
in 1924 under the Chairmanship of Mr. Justice Rankin of the Calcutta High
Court. The task of the Committee was “to enquire into the operation and
effects of the substantive and adjective law, whether enacted or otherwise, fol-
jowed by the courts in India in the disposal of civil suits, appeals. applications
for revision and other civil Ii tion (including the execution of decrees and
orders), with a view to ascertaining and reporting whether any and what changes
and improvements should be made so as to provide for the more speedy, econo-
mical and satisfactory despatch of the business transacted in the courts and for
the more speedy, economical and satisfactory execution of the process issued
by the Courts”. The Committee. after a thorough and careful enquiry into
the various aspects, forwarded an exhaustive report in 1925.

9.2 Arrears Committee of 1949

In 1949, a High Courts Arrears Committee was. set up by the Govern-
ment of India under the Chairmanship of Mr. Justice S. R. Das, for enquiring
and reporting as to the advisability of curtailing the right of appeal and revi-
sion, the extent of such curtailment, the method by which such curtailment
should be effected, and other measures, if any. which should be adopted to
reduce the accumulation of arrears. A number of recommendations were then
made by the Committee.

9.3. Review Committee appointed by the Government of India
In 1967, the Government of India, greatly concerned at the problem of

accumulation of arrears in various High Courts, conducted a review of the state
of work in each High Court and found that inadequacy of judges was the main
cause of the accumulation of arrears. i Government increased the strength of
judges in some of the High Courts, taking into account the arrears of cases then
vom » fresh institutions and disposals. Though this had some effect, no
appreciable result was produced. 7

At the end of the year 1969, the Government of India constituted a Com-
mittee presided over by Mr. Justice Hidayatullah, the then Chief Justice of India,
to suggest ways and means for reducing arrears of cases pending in the High
Courts. Upon the retirement of Mr. Justice Hidayatullah, . Justice Shah was
appointed the Chairman of the Committee. When Mr. Justice Shah retired as
the Chief Justice of India, Government requested him to continue as Chaitman
of the Committee. The Report of the Committee will be referred to in due course.

9.4 Committees appointed im various States

Apart from the above three Committees which worked at all India level,
some Committee were appointed in different States to look into the problem of
delay and other matters concerning judicial administration.

One such Committee was in West Bengal. The Committee was constitu-
ted in 1949 under the Chairmanship of Sir Tervor Harries, the then Chief Justice


96

of the Calcutta High Court. Another Committee was constituted in 1950 in
Uttar Pradesh under the Chairmanship of Mr. Justice K. N. Wanchoo.

10. Law Comission of India

10.1, The Law Commission made various recommendations in the past
in its Thirty Second Report on Section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
(1967); Thirty Third Report on Section 44 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
(1967); Thirty Fifth Report on capiial Punishment (1967); Thirty Seventh Report
on Sections | to 176 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (1967) and Forty first Re-
port on the Code of Criminal Procedure (1969) to remove anomalies, ambiguity of
the Criminal Justice Process and to suggest ways and means of speedy trials and
avoiding delays.

in view of the recommendations made by the Law Commission, the new
Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 has been cnacted taking into consideration the
need for speeding up disposal of criminal cases on the following aspects:

(i) The pretiminary inquiry otherwise known as committal proceedings
is abolished, since it causes delay:

(ii) the jury trial is abolished;

(iii} a provision is made for the summons procedure for trial of offences
punishable with imprisonment upto two years;

(iv) a provision is made for the summons procedure for ali summary
trials for offences punishable with imprisonment upto two years:

(५) the powers of revision against interlocutory orders are taken away;

(vi) the compulsory stoppage of proceedings by a subordinate court on
mere intimation from a party of his intention to move a higher court
for transfer of the case is omitted;

(viiy a provision is made for payment of costs by the party at whose in-
stance adjournments are granted. a

(viii) a provision is made for service of summons by registered post in cer-
tain cases;

(ix) in petty cases, the accused is enabled to plead guilty by post and re-
mit the fine specified in summons:

(x) a re-trial need not necessarily be ordered in case a court of appeal
or revision discover any error, omissions or irregularity in the ८| barge
leading to failure of justice; and

(xi) continuation of part-heard cases by the successors in office in respect
of courts of magistrate is extended to courts of sessions. :
Section 167. 309 and 468 of the new Code synthesis the above mentioned
changes particularly relating to speedy trial, elimination of delays. in investigat-
ing and trial proceedings. "A

10.2. Earlier the Law Commission of India presided over by Mr. M. 0.
Seialvad, in its Fourteenth Report made in 1958, went into all aspect ts relating
to Reform of Judicial Administration, including the question of delay in the
disposal of cases in different courts and exhaustively dealt with the matter. Suc-
cessive Law Commissions have, after that also, when making their recommenda-
tions for revision of the procedural Codes, addressed themselves, inter alia, to
the need for reducing delay at various stages of the trial, both in civil and in
criminal cases, Reference may be made, in particular, to the 27th and 54th
Reports of the Law Commission dealing with the Code of Civil Procedure and
the. 4ist Report dealing with the Code of Criminal Procedute.

When the Law Commission reviewed the structure and jurisdiction of the
higher judiciary (58th Report), it took note of the imperative need to reduce
arrears in the bigher courts.


97

While dealing with the question of delay and arrears im Trial Courts in
criminal cases, the Law Commission of India in its 77th Report on “Delay and
Artears in Trial Courts’ made the following recommendations ;

“In criminal cases. it is particularly necessary that dealy be eliminated.
since the decision upon oral rather than documentary evidence, and
with the passage of fime. the memory of witness fades.”

Every criminal court should keep a register showing the number of wit-
nesses summoned for a date, the number examined, the number sent
back and reasons for sending them back without examination. The
tendency of some criminal courts of sending back witnesses without
examining them must be deprecated,

The law should be amended to enable a Session Judge to act on evidence
partly or wholly recorded by his predecessor,

At least two police officials at every police station should be set apari for
getting service of summons effected upon witnesses for cases relating
to that police station and for ensuring their presence on the date of
hearing.

The police quite often deliberately refrain from producing all material
witnesses on one date, the object being to clear up the lacunae in the
Prosecution evidence after the defence case becomes manifest by
cross-examination. This practice is unfair and not warranted by the
Criminal Procedure Code, and results in protongation of the trial,

In one metropolitan city, in the courts of Magistrates. there was a huge
pending file re'ating to traffic and municipal offences to be tried
summarily, some of which were more than one or two years old.
Delay in disposal was attributed to the fact that the police had not
been able to get service effected upon the accused.

Officials at the police station who are concerned with investigation should
concentrate on investigation. As far as possible, they should not be
deputed for other purposes.

Desirability of separating the investigating agency of the police from that
dealing with law and order may have to be considered. The ques-
tion whether the investigating agency shou'd not be susceptible to
executive interference and, for that purpose. be independent of exe-
cutive control may also need consideration.

Th

ढ़

Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, section 13061) provides for a special pro-
cedure for certain itraffic offences whereunder the accused can plead
guilty to the charge by post and remit the specified fine. In the case
of persons other than professional drivers for some specified offen-
ces of a minor nature, the ticket issued by the policeman should also
contain separately the amounts of fine for various categories of tra-
ffic offences in respect of different types of vehicles, so that if the
person committing the infraction of law is so inclined. he can plead
guilty and also remit the amount of fine to the court concerned before
the date of hearing.

Disposal of cases in which there is a large number of accused. gets delay-
ed because one of the accused absents himself on the date of hearing.
The trial court in such contingencies should consider the advisability
of directing representation of the accused by counsel,

Having regard to the importance attached to the framing of the charge.
the trial magistrates should not leave it to the prosecutor to frame a
charge.

In recording statements of the accused under section 313, Cr. 7.0. the
magistrates should ensure that all incriminating pieces of evidence
are put to the accused. . 7 nes


७8४20 by Justice V. S. Malimath has also identified various causes for accu-
mulation of arrears in High Courts which,

98

Complaints have been heard that there are not cnough number of proses
cutors, particularls in cases under the Prevention of Food Adulte:
tion Act and those — inve ted by the central Bureau of [nvesti

tion, Steps should be taken “to ensure that there are as many presecu-
tors as there are Criminal Courts.

Where the same Judicial Officer exercises both civil and criminal powers,
normally he should not fix both types of cases on the same day. If

such a course cannot be avoided. he should set apart separate time
for civil and criminal cases.

in which there is possibility of death sentence should receive prio-
rity over all other cases.

Causes for Accumulation of Arrears

The Satish Chandra Committee as also the Arrears’ Committee, 1990

inter alia inchide:
1. Litigation explosion.

2. Radical change in the pattern of litigation.

प्र

. Increase in Legislative activity.
|. Additional burden on account of Election Petitions,
- Accumulation of First Appeals.

au >

. Continuance of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction in some High
Courts.

_

', Inadequacy of judge strength.

8. Delays in filling up vacancies in the High Courts.
9. Unsatisfactory appointment of judges.

10. (nadequacy of staff attached to the High Courts.
11. Inadequacy of accommodation.

. Failure to provide adequate forums of appeal against quasi judicial
orders.

. Inordinate concentration of work in the hands of some members of
the Bar.

14, Lack of punctuality amongst judges.
15.

16.

Civil Revisions—Indiscriminate exercise of jurisdiction.

Second Appeals—ignoring the limitations on exercise of jurisdiction,
17. Long arguments and pprolix judgements.

18. Lack of priority for disposal of old cases.

19, Failure to utilise grouping of cases and those covered by rulings.

20. Granting of unnecessary adjournments.

21. Unsatisfactory selection of Government Counsel,
22. Lawyers not appearing in courts due to strikes, etc.
23. Population explosion.

24. Hasty and imperfect legislation.

25. Plurality of appeals and hearing by Division Benches,

26. Inordinate delay in the supply of certified copies of judgements/orders.

27. Indiscriminate resort to writ jurisdiction.
28. Letters Patent Appeals.


29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

99

Inadequacy in classification and grouping of cases.
Constitution of Benches and their frequent changes.
Indiseriminate closure of courts.

Appointment of sitting Judges as Commissions of fnquiry.

Printing of Paper Books in Criminal matiess. (pp. 118-19 59. the
Report.)

12. Arrears’ Committee

The Arrears’ Committee (Supra) recommended various remedial measures
for arrears on crimina] side as follows:

“36.

37.

38,

39.

40.

Al.

45.

46.

47.

13.

. Criminal appeals involving sentence of death or imprisonment for
life and appeals against acquittals in cases which are likely to result
in the imposition of the sentence of death or imprisonment for life
should alone be heard by a Bench of two Judges. The relevant
rules or statutory provisions applicable to different High Courts
should be suitably amended.

The Court of Session should have exclusive power of revision
against orders of criminal courts subordinate thereto. High. Coust
should have power of revision onty against the orders of the Court
of Session/Special Courts other than those passed in exercise of
their revisional jurisdiction. Section 397 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure be suitably amended.

Power of granting anticipatory bail under section 438 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure should be restricted to the Court of Session
by effecting suitable amendment.

State Governments may set up proper machinery to carefully and
objectively scrutinise proposals for preferring appeals against orders/
judgments of acquittals to prevent frivolous appeals being filed by the
State against such decisions.

State Governments should appoint not less than two Additional
Public Prosecutors for zach Criminal Courts. Adequate attention must
be paid to appoint competent lawycrs as Public Prosecutors.

No paper books need be prepared in criminal appeals which are
required to be heard by a single Judge.

. The statutory rules or provisions which require printing of paper

books/record in criminal cases involving sentence of death be suita-
bly modified providing for typed or cyclostyled paper books.

. Every criminal court should be provided with at feast one photo-

copying machine to speed up preparation of paper books and furnt-
shing of copies under section 207 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

. Adequate number of police constables should be attached to each

police station exc‘usive! iy to attend to the work of each court as per
its direction.

Appropriate provision should be made for effecting services cn medi-
cal officers, expert witnesses and even investigating officers thtough
their respective Heads of Departments. है

Respective State Governments should take immediate steps for pro-
viding presiding officers to man all the criminal courts.

All States Governments should promptly provide adequate staff, funds
and stationery for all the criminal courts within their respective
States.”

The National Police Commission felt that substantial improvement ia

criminal justice system could be effected by reducing the institution of fresh

cases, with
expediting
Men M of L & JIND/97

drawing old cases from courts according to some accepted norms and
the disposal of pending cases by simplifying the procedure. (Para 28.5,


100

Ch XXVIL | i Reports Gf the National Police Commission) Venugopal
Rao in “Criminal Justice—Problems and Perspectives in India” at p. 195 while
endorsing the recommendations of the National Police Commission and recom-
mendations of Arrears Committee observed :

“It would a good proposition to devise some guidelines regarding the
disposal of old cases and fix priorities for the disposal of new ones.

If this strategy is properly planned and more time is provided for the
disposal of new cases in preference to the old, the system can im-
prove, At the same time as suggested by the Natianal Police Com-
mission, a periodical review of the old pending cases can be under-
taken with a view to striking them out from the court calendars. Ty
may appear contrary to the principles of natural justice. but what is
happening in the present situation is not only a gross violation of
the Directive Princip'es of the Constitution but a virtual denial of
justice. It is a question of choice of the better of two bad options.”

14. All the aforesaid reports demonstrate the frightful urgency for com-
bating the problems of over-loading and arrears. Indeed, the Problem of delay
in trial of criminal cases has. of late, assumed gigantic proportions. It has
shaken the confidence nf the peonte in the criminal justice system. While the
teforms that emerge from the recommendations of various committees and

commissions as mentioned above, if fully implemented might meet the long term
requirements of the current situation of judicial stagnation.

We. however. feet that there is stil] ample scope for additional measures
mentioned below which might relieve the Present stagnation and help the judicial
machinery to start rolling smoothly for dispensation of justice. The reforms which
we have suggested in are intended to avoid delay in disposal of criminal cases
and expedite the disposal of pending cases as well as discharge of the accused
in certain old and long pending cases involving minor offences.

15. There should be a separate cadre of investigation agency in every
district subject to supervision by the higher authorities. In this regard an officer of
such agency should be the in charge of the case throughout till the conclusion of
the trial. He should be enjoined the responsibility of production of witnesses,
production of accused and for assisting the prosecuting agency. Such a mea-
sure will have a definite impact of speeding up the trial in as much as the offi-
cér in charge of the investigation will be accountable and responsible for expedi-
tious prosecution of the case. (Ch. I, para 7)

16, With the advent of the modern scientific gadgets and technology. ac-
cused aré often using modern scientific techniques to commit crime as well as to
avoid tracing out their involvement. In such a situation, outdated methods of
investigation do not match the modern techniques of committing the crime. Con-
sequently, new technology such as computers, Photegraphiy/ videography, new
methods of interrogation technology. new observation gadgets and highly sophis-
ticated search equipments, etc, are essential for effective investigation ‘of tradi-
tional and new types of organised crimes. (Ch. HH. para 8)

17. Much delay in trial of cases has been caused due to lack of coordina.
tion between investigating agency and the prosecuting agency. In order to mini-
mise delay on this ground, there should be coordination between investigating
agency, namely police and prosecuting agency for the efficient prosecution of
cases at thé stage. (Ch. TH. paras 8, 9 & 10)

“ 18. A Directorate of Prosecution be established as provided in clause 4 of
the Code of Crimiral Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994 and a new section 254 be
inserted on those lines. However, sub-section 4 of the Proposed section 25A
whereby public prosecutor appointed for the High Court has been placed subordi-
jates to the Directorate of Prosecution be deleted as the public prosecutor appoin-
ted to conduct cases on the appellate side in the High Court should be separate
from those public prosecutors appointed to conduct cases in the lower courts . (Ch:
HI, papra 12) गा


101

19. The Government while appointing public prosecutors and assistant
public prosecutors under section 24 and 25 shail. as far as practicable, appoint
suflicient number of Women Public Prosecutors and Asstt. Public Prosecutors to
effectively deal with cases involving women. (Ch. Ui, para 14)

20. A provision should be made in the Code for obtaining a fresh police
custody of accused if sought by CBE during investigation but it should not exceed
15 days on the whole. Accordingly, Section 167(2) be amended. (Ch. V. para 2).

. 24, in order to avoid delay in disposal of appeals against acquittal and
for crhancement and to secure presence of the acquitted accused, a new section
437A be inserted in the Code, empowering all the criminal courts tincluding the
First Appellate Court) to take bail and bail bond before the conclusion of the
trial or disposal of the appeal requiring the accused to bind themselves to appear
before the next appellate court in case an appeal against acquitial or for enhance-
ment of sentence is filed in the higher court. Such a bond shali be in force for
a period of 12 months from the date of the judgment disposing of the cases
either by the trial court or by the First Appellate Court as the case may be.
subject to order by the higher Appellate Court, if any for furnishing fresh” bail
bond. (Ch. VII, para 2)

22. In order to reduce the pendency in the High Courts, we suggest
amendments to Section 377 and 378 of the Code permitting of filing of appeals
in the Sessions Court against the orders of the Magistrate in respect of erhance-
ment or against the order of acquittal. (Ch. शा, Para 3)

23, In order to avoid multiplicity of procedure which is resulting in delay
of trials, summons procedure can be dispensed with. We feel that ail summons
cases should be tried summarily except those which by virtue of their nature or
ciccunstances of the offences or accused warrant a regular full trial when the
court finds that the summary procedure is not salutary. However, when a magis-
trate wants to have recourse to such a procedure, he should give valid reasons
for dispensing with the summary procedure in that particular case. © This will
act as a check in exercising the discretion indiscteetly.« Since the summons pro:
cedure is being dispensed with. a suitable amendment to section 260 to cover
such situations is also recommended. Further section 2(x) defining “warrant
cases” be amended to the effect that warrant case means a case relating to an
offence punishable with death, or imprisonment for term exceeding three years.
Likewise Section 2(w) should be amended to the effect that summons case means
relating to an offence and not being a warrant case summarily triable under
Chapter XXI thereby laying down that all offences, which do not fall under
the definition of warrant case, fall under the category of summons cases sum-
marily triable. (Ch. VLU, Paras 12 and 14)

24, In order to curtail the delay in trial of cases we recommend that in
cases arising out of a police [00 rt, all statements having been recorded during
investigation should be supplied in advance and the cross examination should
proceed continuously. In cases other than on police report also, evidence already
recorded before issuing process would be available furnishing sufficient material
for cross examination. and thus many adjournments granted by the court just
for the purpose of carrying on further cross-examination can be avoided, Accor-
dingly, Sections 242(2), (3) and 246(4) of the Code be amended on the aforesaid
lines. (Ch. शा, para 17)

25. We feel that some changes are necessary with regard to the examtina-
tion of witnesses by police and recording of their statements under sections 161
and 162 to make the police statements more authentic so that they can properly
be used while examining the witnesses during the trial for corroboration or con-
tradiction. In view of the inaccuracies that may creep in the recording ता
the statement by the police, we recommend that statements of material witresses
should be recorded under section 164 which should be more authentic and also
prevent the witnesses from turning hostile. We also feel that sections 161, 162,
164 and 172 be aslo amended on the lines suggested in Chapter IX. para 7, This
course is more salutary and can be very effective in rendering criminal justice
im a speedy manner. However, the changes contemplated, namely, setting up
and separating the investigating agency, and structuring the same and appoint:
ment of large number of magistrates will take some time. We, in the alternative:


102

fecommend to retain the provisions of sections 161. 162 and 172 as they are but
with some checks in the direction of improving the authenticity of such state-
ments recorded by the police and also obtaining signatures of the persons exa-
mined, if they are literate. Further, a copy of the statement should be given to
the deponent under acknowledgement and also send them to the Magistrate and
to the superior officers. That provision would ensure against any error or mal-
practice being committed by the officer. Accordingly. section 162 be suitably
amended, (Chapter [X paras 7, 8. 11. 12. 13 & 15).

26. In order to avoid delay in trials the listing of cases should be done
in such a way that the witnesses who are summoned. are examined on the day
they are summoned. for and adjournment should be avoided meticulously. The
list should be prepared in such a way that a day or two are devoted continuously
to all cases of a particular police s‘ation and cases should not be proceeded
mechanically just according to the chronological order regardless of the fact of
their likelihood of their being tried or not, The courts should also proceed with
trial on a day to day basis and the listing of the cases should be on those lines

(Chapter X para 7).

27. The plight of witnesses appearing on behalf of the State expenses is
pitiable. The allowances paid to them are very meagre. That apart, they are
kept waiting for the whole day without being examined and the cases are ad-
journed in the last moment, Therefore. necessary steps have to be taken in the
Tatter of paying allowances on realistic basis for all the days they aitend, They
should also be provided with adequate facilities for their stay in the Court pre-
mises and they should be given necessary protection and instil confidence and
faith in their minds so that they can dutifully attend the Courts.

(Chapter X, para 2).

28. In order to reduce the docket explosion in the Courts, State should
enact legislation on Nyaya Panchayats to suit their local needs and conditions.
The Andhra Pradesh Mandala Nyaya Panchayats Bill, 1995 may be adopted as
a model on the composition, powers and jurisdiction of the Nyaya Panchayats,

However, we feel that the recommendations of the Law Commission in its
114th Report on the presiding officers of Gram Nyayalayas may not be feasible
because serving Munsifs/Civil Judges will not be abie to shoulder the additiona’
burden of presiding over Gram Nyayalayas in the rural areas, We are also not
in favour of engaging lawyers by the parties to appear before the Nyaya Pancha-
yats for it would introduce technical legal formalities into the system leading to
delays in the disposal of cases, Indeed it would frustrate the very purpose for
which the the Gram Nyayalayas are being introduced.

(Chapter XIV, para 6)

29, To minimise the delay in trial we recommend that the court can take
the assistance of the prosecutor and defence counsel and Prepare the questions
which are to be put in a concise form to the accused under section 313 of the
Code. The court can also permit the filing of written statements by the accused
as sufficient compliance with section 313 of the Code.

(Chapter X1, para 6)

30. As a measure of rendering speedy justice to the accused at an early
stage we are of the view that there is need to properly avail the scope of stages
provided under sections 227, 239, 245 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

Section 226 of the Code obliges the prosecution to describes the charge
brought against the accused and to state by what evidence the guilt of the accused
would be proved. Under Section 227 of the Code, if upon consideration of the
record of the case and the documents submitted therewith and after hearing the
prosecution and the accused, the Judge comes to the conclusion that no sufficient
Bround exists to proceed against the accused he shail discharge him. However.
he’ has to record the reasons in writing therefor. Similarly under Section 239 of
the Code (which deals with trial of warrant cases) on prosecution and the
aceused an opportunity of being heard besides considering the police report and
the documents sent therewith.


103

Section 245 contemplates when accused shal] be discharged in cases
instituted oiherwise than on police report. It envisages that if upon taking all
the evidence referred to in section 244. the Magistrate considers that no case
against has been made out shall. if rebutted would warrant his conviction. the
Magistrate shall discharge him. However he has to record reasons in writing
therefor

In the aforesaid = previsions the common question arises whether the
accused shall be discharged or whether there is sufficient ground to proceed
against the accused. In so deciding the Judge under section 226 has to consider
(i) the record of the case and (ii) the documents produced therewith. Under
section 239 the Magistrate has to consider the police report and the documents
sent with it under Section 173 and making such examination, if any. of the
accused as the Magistrate thinks necessary. Under section 245(1) the Magis-
trate has to consider all the evidences referred to i section 244. Further an
incidental question arises as to what would be the scope of hearing the submis-
sions of the practice. Should it be confined to hearing oral arguments alone.
We feel that if the accused succeeds in producing any relevant material at that
stage which might fatally affect even the very sustainability of the case. it would
be too harsh in the interest of the accused to suggest that no such material shall
be looked into by the Court at that stage.

If the case ends at that stage itself. it will save a lot of time of the Court.
avoid human efforts. cost and harassment to various parties. he underlying
fact is that if the materials produced by the accused even at that early stage
can clinch the issue. there is no reason as to why the Court should shut it out
only on the ground that such material would be looked into only during the trial
despite the fact that the Court feels certain that there is no prospect of the case
ending in conviction. The heavy pressure of work load on the Coutts is undeni-
able.

In a recent case of Satish Mehra ४. Delhi Administration" the Supreme
Court also laid down under paragraphs 13, 14. 15 as follows: हि

“Similar situation arises under Section 239 of the Code (which deals with
trial of warrant cases on police report), In that situation the Magis-
trate has to afford the prosecution and the accused an op portunity
of being heard besides considering the police report and the docu-
ments sent therewith. At these two stages the Code enjoins on the
Court to give audience to the accused for deciding whether it is
necessary to proceed to the next stage. It is a matter of exercise of
judicial mind. There is nothing in the Code which shrinks the scope
of such audience to oral arguments. If the accused succeeds in pro-
ducing any reliable material at that stage which might fatally affect
even the very sustainability of the case, it is unjust to suggest that
no such material shall be looked into by ‘the Court at that stage.
Here the “ground” may be any valid ground including insufficiency
of evidence to prove charge.

The stage of providing such an opportunity as is envisaged in Section
227 of the Code is to enable 10 Court to decide whether it is neces:
sary to proceed to conduct the trial. If the case ends there it gains
a lot of time of the Court and saves much human effort and cost.
If the materials produced by the accused even at that carly stage
would clinch the issue, why should be Court shut it out saying that
such documents need be produced only after wasting a lot more
time in the name of trial proceedings. Hence. we are of the view
that Sessions Judge would be within his powers to consider even
materials which the accused may produce at the stage contemplated
in Section 227 of the Code.

But when thet Judge is fairly certain that there is no prospect of the
case ending in conviction the valuable time of the Court should not
be wasted for holding a trial only for the purpose of formally com-
pleting the procedure to pronounce the conclusion on a future date.
We are mindful that most of the sessions courts in India are under
heavy pressure of work-load. If the Sessions Judge is almost certain


104

that the trial would गाए be an execcise in futility or a sheer waste
of time ॥ is advisable 10 truncate oF snip the proceedings at the stage
of Section 227 of the Code itself.”

Tn order to make the scope of such stage effective. as suggested by the
Supreme Court. any materials produced by the accused even at that early stage
which would clinch the issue, the Court shail take them into consideration at
that stage itself instead of putting them off for consideration at a fat: stage so
that delay can be avoided. This aspect has to be borne in mind by the Criminal
Courts at the stage contemplated under Sections 227, 239 and 245 as well as
in the pretimiuary stages of the summary trials.

3H, On the aspect ef compounding of offences under subsection (2) of
section 320 (offences compoundable with the permission of the court) we recom-
mend that sections 324. 325, 335. 343. 344, 346, 379. 403, 406. 407, 411, 414.
417, 419, 421, 422. 423, 424, 428, 429. 430, 451. 482. 483 and 486 should be
deleted from the Table laid down under sub-section and be included in the
Table to sub-section (1) of section 320. (Chapter X11. para 10)

Further, Section 498A be inserted in table under sub-Section (2) of Section
320 whereby it can be compounded with the permission of the Court in order to
avoid hardship in cases. wherein though the parties wanted to compound yet in the
absence of enabling provision, they could not do so. The parties, therefore,
have lo resort to proceedings under Section 482 of the Code to get quashed
the proceedings pending against the accused. (Chapter XII. para 4)

There is no provision mentioned in the tables appended to the Section
320 regarding compoundability where the accused is constructively liable under
Sections 34 and 149, IPC. If the provision is left as it is, then ouly in respect
of substantive offences mentioned in the tables. compounding is possible and
not in respect of cases of constructive liability for the same offence. Likewise,
in respect of offence of rioting resulting in the offence mentioned in the two
Tables, there is no provision for compounding. The offences punishable under
Sections 147 and 148 of IPC committed during the same transaction. the tran-
saction being one of the same, where the guilt is proved, the accused are ta be
convicted under all those sections. It will be anomafous if one part of the offence
is compoundable and other part remains non-compoundable where the convic-
tions are capable of being made under both the provisions. Accordingly, sub-
section 3 be amended suitably. (Ch. XID

32. In order to reduce the arrears of cases pending before the trial courts
or appellate courts, we feel that in case of offences compoundable with the pet-
mission of the court under section 320, if the accused pleads guilty, the couct
may pass an order of conviction and suspend the sentence if the accused agrees
to pay the aggrieved party compensation. If the accused, however. [ails to pay
compensation to the aggrieved party, he will be required to undergo imprison-
ment for default in payment. In cases of offences compoundable by the agree-
ment of the parties, the proceedings may be terminated by recording the com-
promise and the accused may be acquitted by the court. (Chapter XII).

33. We are also of the view that the Code of Criminal Procedure should
empower the investigating officer to compound offences which are compound-
able, at the investigation stag [८ and make a report to the magistrates who will
give effect to the compounding of such offences. This step will reduce the
number of cases proceeding for trial at the threshold Stage itself and relieve
the court docket to a great extent. We recommend for insertion of a new
sub-section (3A) to section 173 of the Code on the lines indicated. In order to
ensure that there is no coercion or abuse by the police staff, the report of the
investigating police officer incorporating the desire of the disputants to com-
promise can be got attested preferably by a member of the District Legal Ser-
vices Authority after the same is signed by the respeative disputants. Such a
measure will have salutary effect and will be contributory in expeditious dis-

posal of cases. (Chapter XII, Paras 11 & 12)

34. In order to reduce delay in disposal of criminal trials and appeals
and also to alleviate the suffering of undertrial prisoners. we feel that the concept


105

of plea bargaining be made applicable as an experimental measure 40 offences
which ave liable for punishment with imprisonment of less than 7 years aud/or
fine including the offences covered by Section 320 of the Code. We further
recommend that plea bargaining can also be availed of in Tespec! of nature
and gravity of offences and the quantum of punishment. (para 8. Chapter X11).
However. plea bargaining should not be available to habitual offenders, accused
of social/economic offences of a grave nature and offences against women and
children.

(Chapter जता. para 8)

3S. To enable a quick disposal of petty cases and to reduce congestion
in the court of Magistrate. we recommend that under Section 206(1) of the
Code the amount of fine be raised from Rs. 100. 10 Rs. 1.000 since the yaluc
of the money has gone down considerably as laid down in Section 25 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure {Amendment} Bill, 1994. Accordingly, we endorse
the proposed amendment in sub-section (1) of Section 206 on the following
lines:

(a) in the opening para h, after the words and figures “under section
260". the words and figures “os section 261” shall be inserted:

ib) in the proviso, for the words “one hundred rupees”, the words Sone
thousand rupees” shalt be substituted,

36. In order to give discretion to the Session Judge to transfer a case
either to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or to any other Judicia) Magistrate of
the First Class and to fix a date for the appearance of the accused before the
Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Judicial Magistrate as the case may be, so that
Jot of time which is wasted in summoning the accused by the Magistrate, may
be saved, as provided in clause 27 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amend-
“ment) Bill, 1994, we feel that in section 228 of the principal Act, in sub-section
(1). in clanse (a), for the words “and thereupon the Chief Judicial Magistrate”,
the words “or any other Judicial Magistrate of the first class direct the accused
to appear before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or, as the case may be, the
Judicial Magistrate of the first class. on such date as he deems fit and there-
upon such Magistrate” shall be substituted, Accordingly, we have endorsed the
provisions of clause 27 of the bill in Chapter XIX.

37. The right of speedy trial as extended to the insane undertrial man:
dates that a time limit should be fixed for the period of postponement of trial.
Indefinite postponement is an infringement on personal liberty and rights of
insane undertrials. We also suggest that amendments — to sections 328. 329 and
330_in respect of pre-enquiry and pre-trial procecdings as specified in para 16
of Chapter XVI be made.

(Chapter XVI. para 16)

38. For expeditious justice in respect of the maintenance of wives. chif-
dten and parents. we recommend that the summary trial procedure for record-
ing evidence etc. be adopted and the evidence by way of affidavits also be
made admissible, Accordingly, Section 126 (2) of the Code be amended,

{Chapter XVII, para 9.3)
39. Adjournment in Criminal Trials

39.1. Section 309 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 which deals
with postponement and adjournment of Criminal proceedings provides:

11) In every inquiry or trial, the proceedings shall be held as expeditious.
ly as possible. and in particular, when the examination of witnesses
has once begun, the same shall be continued from day to day until
all the witnesses in atiendance have been examined, unless the court
finds the adjournment of the same beyond the following day to be
necessary for reasons to be recorded.

(2) If the Court after taking cognizance of an offence, or commencement
or trial. finds it necessary, or advisable to postpone the commence-
ment of, or adjourn, any inquiry or trial, it may, from. time to time,


106

for reasons (o be iecorded. pestpone or adjourn the same जा such
terms as if thinks fil, for such Cime as it considers reasonable. and
may by a warrant remand the accused if in custedy :

Provided that no Magistrate shall remand an accused person to custody
under this section for a term exceeding fifteen days at a lime:

Provided further that when witnesses are in attendance. no adjournment
or postponement shal! be granted, without examining them, except for special
reasons to be recorded in writing:

Provided also that no adjournment shall be granted for the purpose only
ef enabling the accused person to show cause against the sentence proposed 0
be imposed on him.

Explenation \.--Af sufficient evidence has been obtained to raise a sus-
picion that the accused may have committed an offence, and it appears likely
that further evidence may be obtained by a remand, this is a reasonable cause
for a remand.

Explenation 2.--The terms on which an adjournment or — postponement
may be granted include, in appropriate cases, the payment of costs by the pro-
secution or the accused.

39.2 In A. Lekshnum Rav y. Judicial Magistrate” the Supreme Court
while examining the Constitutional validity of section 344 of the Code of 1898
which corresponds to section 309 of the Code of 1973 observed:

“Apart from the fact that it is only when either from the absence of a
witness or some other reasonable cause the Court considers it either
to be necessary or advisable to postpone the commencement of the
inquiry or trial or adjourn the hearing of the case that the order can
be made, the court ts also required to record the order in writing
giving the reasons why it thinks fit that the case should be  post-
poned or adjourned. It is further open to the Court to impose terms
and to fix the period which cannot exceed 15 days at one time.
This discretion being vested in Court of law has to be exercised
judicially on well-recognised principles and is in our view immune
trom challenge on the ground of arbitrariness or want of guidelines.
Im our opinion, therefore. not only are the guidelines clearly con-
tained in the statute but the discretion being judicial is required to
be exercised on general principles guided by rules of reason and
justice on the facts of each case, and not in any arbitrary on fanciful
manner. It may also be remembered that if the discretion is exer-
cised in an arbitrary or unjudicial manner remedy by way of resort
10 the higher Courts is always Open to the aggrieved party.”

39.3 It is, however, unfortunate that despite the provision under section
309 of the Code which contemplates for holding the proceedings as expeditious-
ly as possible and examination of witnesses day to day. yet it is an Open fact
that on account of adjournments there is inordinate delay in disposal of criminal
cases. Such adjournments often take place on unsOund grounds at the instance
of the accused and prosecution and also duc to laxity on the part of the court
and the investigating agency. The causes which led to such untenable and
avoidable adjournment h at the stage of trial, appeal and revision may be
classified as under:

During the Trial
1. Non-appearance of the accused

1

. Non-production of the accused from jail.
. Copies of the documents not ready/not supplied.

. Non-appearance of the witness after service.

wh we

. Witness not served/summons not issued or not retumed by police
station. °-


107

6.

Non-production of case property.

7. Non-availability of the Defence Counsel.
है. Non-preparedness of the Defence Counsel,
9. Non-appearance of the Prosecutor.

10. Non-preparedness of Prosecutor.

11. Presiding Officer on feave.

12. No time lett/Court busy with other case
13. The day of hei
114. Judgment /Order not ready.

2 declared a holiday.

15. Stage completed (hence, adjourned for next stage).

16. Listed for mise. work. therefore, adjourned.
During the Appeal and Revision

1. Information not available.

. Non-appearance of the Petitioner,

wn

. Non-appearance of the Respondent.
Pr

esiding Officer on leave /officitl duty.
. Awaiting Order of transfer.

wos

6. Non-supply of record of lower court:

7. Non-preparedness of counsel for petitioner.

8. Adjourned for next stage.

9. No time left/court busy with other case.

10. Listed for miscellaneous work, therefore, adjouroed,
11. Judgment/Order not ready.

12. Information not ayailable.

A perusal of the aforesaid causes reveals that they are not insurmountable
and can be avoided by taking prompt and necessary steps by concerned autho-
rities, namely, investigation agencies. prosecuting agencies, defence counsel and
witness and the process servers and above all the courts.

39.4 Experience shows that the accused often adopt delaying tactics so
that prosecution witnesses may not be examined early against him so that he
may be able to win them over with the passage of time or as is well said that
scars of wound heel up with the passage of time. In many Cases, the intensity
of vengeance to teach bitter lesson to the accused for his deeds, fades away with
the passage of time. Thus, ultimately, the accused goes scot free sheerly on
account of manoeuvring adjcurnments by the accused, during the trial. Even
the prosecution also can be absolved from the blame of seeking adjournments
on various grounds. Mr. Justice 0. Chinnappa Reddy in State of Maherashtra v.
Champatal” observed :

“We are not unmindful of the delays caused by tardiness and tactics ot
the prosecuting agencies. We know of trials which are over delayed
because of the indifference and somnolence of the deliberate inacti-
vity of the prosecuting agencies. Poverty struck dumb accused per-
sons too feeble to protest, languish in Prisons for months and years
on and awaiting trial because of the insensibility of the prosecuting
agencies.........Sometimes when the evidence is of a weak character
and a conviction is not probable result the Prosecuting agencies
adopt delaying tactics to keep the accused persons in incarceration
as long as possible and to harass them. This is a well known tactic
in most conspiracy cases. Again, an accused person may be seriously
jeopardised in the conduct of his defence with the Passage of time.

1स्‍$--1 M of L & J/ND/97


108

Witnesses for the defence may become unavailable and their memo-
ries 100 may jade like inuse vi ihe wiinesses for the prosecution. in
such situations. in appropriate cases, we may readily infer an in-
iringement oi the right to life and liberty guaranteed by Article 21
of the Constitution :

39.5 The Conslitatius Bench of the Supreme Court in M.S. Sheriff v
State o} Madras" held that “it is undesirable that a criminal prosecution should
wait till everybody concerned has forgotten all about the crime. The public:
jnterests demand that criminal justice should be swift and sure; that the guilty
should be punished while the events are still fresh in the public mind and that
the innocent should be absolved as early as is consistent with a fair and
impartial trial. Another reason is that it is undesirable to let things slide till
memories have grown too dim to trust.”

39.6 It is therefore, quiet-essential to combat with the problem of ad-
journments on this count. This can be dealt with by providing the similar mea-
sures as laid down under order XVII of the Code of Civil Procedure introduced
with effect from Feb. 1, 1977 by Act 104 of 1976. The Law Commission in
its Seventy Seventh Report on Delay and Arrears in Trial Courts, chapter 6,
para 6.10 has aiso recommended for strict enforcement of these provisions,
Clauses (a) to (e) of the Proviso to sub-order (2) of Order XVII are repro-
duced herein below for our ready sefeence:

“Provided that

{a) when the hearing of the suit has commenced, it shall be continued
fram dav to day until all the witnesses in attendance have been
examined. unless the court finds that. for the exceptional reasons to
be recorded by it, the adjournment of the hearing beyond the follow-
ing day is necessary.

(b) no adjournment shall be granted at the request of a party, except
where the circumstances are beyond the control of that party.

(ले the fact that the pleader of a party is engaged in another Court, shalt
not be a ground for adjournment.

{d) where the illness of a pleader or his inability to conduct the case
for any reason, other than his being engaged in another Court, is
put forward as a ground for adjournment, the Court shall not grant
the adjournment unless it is satisfied that the party applying for ad-
journment could not have engaged another pleader in time.

(९) where a_ witness is present in court but a party or his pleader is not
present or the party or his pleader, though present in Court, is not
teady to examine or cross-examine the witness, the court may, if
it thinks fit, record the statement of the witness and pass such
orders as it thinks fit dispensing with the examination-in-chief or
cross-examination of the witness, as the case may be. by the party
or his pleader not present or not ready as aforesaid.”

The Law Commission in its Seventy-Seventh Report also observed that
the sugsestions made regarding delay and arrears in respect of civil cases will
also hold good for criminal cases.

39.7 We feel that in view of dealy in trial of criminal cases also on
account of adjournment it is desirable to incorporate the following additional
provision in the light of the decision in State of Gujarat ९. Narender Singh
Lakhubhai :

(f) Where the court is of the opinion that the inquiry or trial of the case
is being delayed or adjourned on account of any official belonging
to the prosecuting agency or associated with it. the court shall make
an order holding the person responsible for such act and communi-
cate the order to the concerned head of the agency for incorporating
in the service records of the concerned official as well as for recom-
mending suitable criminal and disciplinary action against him.


109

का order to further keep a check upon the court there is a need to fur-

ther provide the following measures:

(g) Every criminal court shali send a return in the prescribed proforma
to the Chief Justice of the High Court stating the particulars of the
cases in which the adjournments were granted by them during the.
inquiry or trial of cases detaiied reasons therefor”. .

We feel that the aforesaid measure, if strictly adhered to, would further
curtail to a great extent delay caused on account of adjournments unduly
jought by the accused as well as the prosecuting agencies.

40.1 Appointment of Special Magistrates— 10 India, the Criminal Proce-
dure Code, 1898, provided for appoimment of Hovorary Magistrates. These
magistrates were appointed by the government to relieve the regular magisterial
courts. However, it was felt that the system was used to reward many persons
who were loyal 10 the government. Many persons were appointed as Special
Magistrates who did not possess either quaiification or experience to discharge
judicial duties. it is also alleged that such persons were attracted by the honuur
attached to the post rather than by a sense of duty or service. They did not
have the knowledge or inclination to perform magisterial work.

40.2 Atter India became independent, the desirability of haviug honorary
magistrates was examined by a Joint Select Committee of Parliament while
considering the Code of Criminal Procedure Bill, 1970. The Committee took
note of the criticism of the working of honorary magistrates but at the same
time did not ose sight of the possible assistance the honorary magistracy could
render to the judiciary to relieve it of some of its burden of work, The Com-
mittee came to the conclusion that the facility of appointment of Special Magis-
trates should be retained. However, safeguards were introduced in the Code
of Criminal Procedure to forestall abuse of system. .

40.3 The Code of Ciriminal Procedure, 1973 brought following changes in
the system of special magistrates:

(i) Magisterial powers could be conferred on Special Magistrates by the
High Coust of a State and not by the State Government as was the
position earlier.

(ii) The persons to be appointed as Special magistrates had to be persons
who held or had held any post under the government.

(iii) The High Courts were given the power to prescribe qualifications or
experience in relation to legal affairs to be satisfied by a person be-
fore his appointment as a Special Magistrate.

(iv) The term of Gppe intment of a Special Magistrate was restricted to
a maximum one year at a time; and

(९) The High Courts could grant ali or any of the powers of a first class
or a second class magistrate on a Special Magistrate.

40.4 Section 13 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 which provides

for the institution of Special Magistrates reads:

(1) The High Court may, if requested by the Central or State Govern-
ment so to do, confer upon any person who holds or has held any
post under the Government, all or any of the powers conferred or
conferrable by or under this Code on a Judicidh Magistrate of the
first class or of the second class, in respect ito particular cases or
to a particular classes of cases, in any local area, not being a metro-
politan area.

Provided that no such power shall be conferred on a person unless he
possesses such qualification or experience in relation to legal affairs
as the High Court may, be mules, specify.

(2) Such Magistrates sha‘l be called Special Judicial Magistrates and
shall be Pou inted for such term, not exceeding one year at 8 time,
as the High Court may by general or special order, direct.


110

(3) The High Court may empower a Special Judicial Magistrate to
vxcrcise the powers of a Metropolitan Magistrate in relation to any
metropolitan area outside his local jurisdiction.

40.5 Likewise, Section 18 of the Code which provides for the institution
of Special Metropolitan Magistrates runs as follows:

(1) The High Court may. if requested by the Central or State Govern-
ment so to do, confer upon any person who holds or has held any
post under the Government, all or any of the powers conferred: or
conferrable by or under this Code जा a Metropolitan Magistrate in
Tespect to particular cases or 10 particular classes of cases. in any
metropolitan area within its iocal jurisdiction.

Provided that no such power shall be conferred on a person unless he
possesses such qualitication or experience in relation to 1९891 affairs
as the High Court may. by rules, specify.

(2) Such Magistrates shall be called Special Metropo‘itan Magistrates
and shall be appointed for such term, not exceeding one year at a
time, as the High Court may, by general or special order, direct.

(3) The High Court or the State Government, as the case may be. may
empower any Special Metropolitan Magistrate to exercise, in any
local area outside the metropolitan area. the powers of a ‘Judicial
Magistrate of the first class.

406 Though after the amendment of the Code of Criminal Procedure in
1978. first class magisterial powers can be conferred upon Special Judicial
Magistrates, but even with second class powers the Special Judicial Magistrates "
can try a wide variety of cascs. The offences enumerated in the [PC which
can be tried by a second class Judicial Magistrate are enumerated in the Sche-
du‘e and fall in the following broad categories:

(a) Offences against public tranquillity like. being a member of an un-
lawful assembly; knowing! ly joining or conducting any assembly of
five or more ‘persons after it has been commanded to disperse:
giving provocation with intent to cause riot; harboring persons
hired for an unlawful assembly or committing affray.

(b) Offences relating to weights and measures like fraudulent use of
false instruments for weighing: fraudulent use of false weights or
measures,

(©) Offences affecting public health, safety, convenience decency, and
morals; for example, negligently doing any act known to be likely
to be spread infection of any disease, adulterating food or drink in-
tended for sale so as to make it noxious or selling any good or
drink knowing the same to be noxious; offering for sale or issuing
from a dispensary any drug or medical Preparation known to have
been adulterated; making the atmosphere noxious to health; driving
or riding on a public way so rashly or negligently as to endanger
human life: committing a public ‘nuisance or singing obscence
songs,

(d) Offences relating to aon for example, causing disturbance to an
assembly engaged in religious worship with intention to wound the
feelings of the members of such assembly; to insult the religious
feelings of any person or uttering any word or making any sound
in the hearing of any person or making any gesture in the sight of
any person with the intention to wound his religious feelings.

(०) Offences affecting the human body like attempt to commit suicide:
voluntarily causing hurt; wrongfuily confining any person: unlawful
compulsory labour.

) Offences relating to property like cheating; mischief, criminal tres-
pass.


111

(9) Criminal intimidation, insult and annoyance, for example. uttering
any word or making any gesture intended to insult the modesty of
a woman: appearing in a public place in a state of intoxication and
ihereby causing annoyance to any person.

In addition, a targe number of crimes selaied to violations of special Acts.
such as Municipal Acts and bye laws, Cinematography Act. Police Act ure
amenable to the jurisdiction of a Special Jucicial Magistrate.

40.7 Many State Governments and Union Territories have, however. not
appointed special magistrates which Jed to the delay and arrears of crimi-
nal cases. The statement of contents of the affidavit filed before the Supreme
Court in Kadra Pahadia & Ors. v. State of Bihar” veveals that State of Maha-
rashva has not taken action to make request to the High Court under section 13
and [8 of the Code on the plea that it has forwseced a proposal to the Central
Government to amend section 13 of the Code. Likwise. the State of Uttar
Pradesh has also not taken any initiative in this direction. In the State of
Karanataka even though the State Government has taken initiative and written
to the High Court, the High Court has not yet finalised the proposal. In
th: Statc of Kerala. there is no such appointment. However, in the State of
Himachal Pradesh the provision has also been invoked and the High Court has
framed mules and has conferred powers on three officers, In the State of Bihar,
the government has also moved the High Court to confer powers to judicial

magistrates. However, no notification has been issued. Likewise, in the State
of Punjab the Government has written to the High Court under section 13 and
18 and the proposal is still pending in the High Court. The State of Assam
has, however, appointed 97 LA.S. Officers as Special Judicial Magistrates. So
far as Delhi is concerned, despite the fact that two lakh traffic cases were pen-
ding in magistrate courts, it has not taken any action to appoint judicial magis-
trates of the 2ad class under section 6(4) and Meropotitan Magistrates under
section 18 of the Code. This is not a happy state of affairs. In view of this
the Supreme Court in Kadra Pahadia v. State of Bihar (supra) issued certain
directions with a view to ensure that the machinery contemplated by those pro-
visions would be put into effect with the view to clearing of the backlog of petty
criminal cases and further relieve the magisterial court of over work so that it
is able to attend to more serious business.

40.8 In the Chief Ministers & Chief Justices conference held in 1993,
Resofution was adopted expressing the view that the provisions of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in regard to appointment of Judicia) Magistrates of
2nd class. Special Judicial Magistrates and Special Metropolitan Magistrate.
should be put to use by identifying cases which they are empowered to deal with
unde? the Code.

40.9 In various workshops organised by the Law Commission in various
States. it was generally agreed that the system of special magistrate be revived
with certain modifications.

40.10 The Law Commission has considered the various difficulties
experienced in the working of the system of honorary magistrates in the pre-
1973 period. We feel that in order (0 meet the situation leading to delay in
disposal of cases and to activate disposal of cases and timely action in’ the
matter, ew section 273A ‘be inserted in the Code providing that the “State
Government may. after consultation with the High Court review the strength
of courts once in two yeass for setting up a new/additional court depending
upon the pendency of the cases therein.”

40.11 We feel that there is need for appointing more Special Magistrates
lo deal with the above types of criminal cases. We, therefore, Suggest neces-
sary changes be made in sections 13 and 18 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
in the following mamner:

(i) In every district or metropolitan area there may be as many Special
Magistrates at such places as the State Government may after
consultation with the High Court, by notification specify to be
manned by a person who holds or has held any post in the Govern-


(id

shi)

tivt

12

provided he possesses such

ment. iocal authorities or corporatio 5
h Court by rules specitied

qualifications and expericnce as the H
in the legal affairs.

Such Magistrates shall be appointed by the High Court and shall
be called Special Magistrates.

Such Magistrates shall be appointed for such term, not exceeding
two years at a time. as the High Court may. by general or special
order. direct.

Such Magistrates shall have all er any of the powers under this
Cade of a 4 class or a I] class Magistrate as the High Court may
confer.

Al. Dispospai of old cases

41.1 Ihe Supreme Court in the very recent epoch-making jndgment of
‘Common Cause’ « registered socieiy through its Directors y. Union of India.”
showed its deep concern over the unduly prolonged pendency of criminal cases
when it observed :

“it is a mater of common experience that in many cases where the persons

are accused of minor offences punishable not more than three years
or even less-—-with or without fine, the proceedings are kept pend-
ing for years together. If they are poor and helpless, they lanquish
in jails for long periods either because there is no one to bail them
out or because there is no one to think of them. The very pen-
dency of criminal proceedings for long period by itself operates as
80 engine of oppression. Quite often, the private complainants
institute these proceedings out of oblique motives. Even in cases
of offences punishable for seven years or less with or without
fine--the prosecutions are kept pending for years and years together
in criminal courts. In a majority of these cases, whether instituted
by police or private complainants, the accused belong to poorer
sections of the society, who are unable to afford competent legal
advice. Instances have also come before courts where the accused,
who are in jail, are not brought to the court on every date of hear-
ing and for that reason also the cases undergo several §adjourn-
ments.

From the aforesaid observation it is evident that in order to ensure and
obviate the pendency of criminal proceedings for long period, which by itself
operates as an engine of oppression, it was considered essential to issue appro-
priate directions to protect and effectuate the right to life and liberty of the citi-
zens guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution.

The relevant excerpts of the directions relating to delay in criminal trial
and eflect thereof are given below:

war

20७0)

Where criminal proceedings are pending regarding traffic offences in
any criminal court for more than two years on account of non
serving summons to the accused or for any other reason whatso-
ever, the court may discharge the accused and close the case.

Where the cases pending in criminal courts for more than two years
under I.P.C. or any other law for the time being in force are com-
poundable with permission of the court and if in such cases trial
have still not commenced, the criminal court shall, after hearing
the public prosecutor and other parties represented before it or their
advocates, discharge or acquit the accused, as the case may be,
and close such cases.

3(०) Where the cases pending in criminal courts under I.P.C, or any other

jaw for the time being in force pertain to offences which are non-
cognizable and bailable and if such pendency is for more than two
years and if in such cases trials have still not commenced, the
criminal court shall discharge or acquit the accused, as the case
may be, and close such cases.


113

2d) Where the cases pending in criminal courts under J-P.C. or any other
jaw for the time being in force are pending in connection with
offences which are punishable with fine only and are not of recur-
ring nature. and if such pendency is for more than one year and
if in such cases trials have still not commenced, the criminal court
shall discharge or acquit the accused. as the case may be, and
close such cases.

अब Where the cases pending in criminaf courts under 1.P.C. or any other
law for the time being in force are punishable with imprisonment
upto one year, with or without fine, and if such pendency is for
more than one year and if in such cases trials have still not com-
menced, the criminal court shall discharge or acquit the accused.
as the case may be. and close such cases.

2(f) Where the cases pending in criminal courts under I.P.C. or any other
law for the time being in force are punishable with imprisonment
upto three years. with or without fine, and if such pendency is
for more than two years and if in such cases trial have still’ not
commenced, the criminal court shall discharge or acquit the ac-
cused, as the case may be, and close such cases.

3. For the purposes of directions contained in clauses (1) and (2) above,
the period of pendency of criminal cases shall be calculated from
the date the accused are summoned to appear in the court,

4. Directions (1) and (2) made hereinabove shall not apply to cases of
offences involving; (a) corruption. misappropriation of public funds.
cheating, whether under the Indian Penal Code, Prevention of
Cormuption Act or any other statute; (b) smuggling, foreign ex-
change violation and offences under the Narcotics Drugs and Psycho-
tropic Substances Act; (ले Essential Commodities Act, Food Adul-
teration Act, Acts dealing with Environment or any other econo-
mic offences: (d) offences under Arms Act. Explosive Substances
Act, Terrorists and Disruptive Activities Act. (९) offences relating
to the Army. Navy and Air Force: (f) offences against public
transquility: (g) offences relating to public servants, (h) ‘offences
relating to coins and Government stamp, (i) offences relating to
elections, {j) offences relating to giving false evidence and offences
against public justice: {k) any other type of offences against the
State: (I) offences under the Taxing enactment: and (m) offences
of defamation as defined in Section 499 L.P.C.

5. The criminal courts shall try the offences mentioned in Pata (4) above
on a priority basis. The High Courts are requested to issue neces-
sary directions in this behalf to all the criminal courts under their
control and supervision.

6. The criminal] courts and all courts trying criminal cases shall take
appropriate action in accordance with the above directions. These
directions are applicable not only to the cases pending on this day
but also to cases which may be instituted hereafter.

41.2 We have carefully persused the aforesaid directions from the point
of view of speedy trial. The aforesaid directions laid down under para 2(b).
however. do not cover the offences which are compoundable without the permis-
sion of the Court. We feel that the scope of para 2(b) be widened to cover
all offences which are compoundable without the permission of the Court but
which could not be compounded.

41.3 The directions given by the Supreme Court prima facie are uppli-
cable only to cases where trial has not commenced. It is a matter of common
knowledge that even though trial has commenced but is still kept pending inordi-
nately many 3. time without justifiable reasons. We are of the view that in
such cases also some remedial measures on the same lines have to be evolved.

With reference to para 2(b) of the direction. we feel that if the trial
has commenced but not concluded then in such cases (under IPC) which are
compoundable without the permission of the Court or cases under any other law .


114

for the time being in force for offences punishable upto one year. are pending
in the criminal courts for more than two years then the criminal court shall after
hearing the public prosecutor and ot.er parties represented before it or their
advocates discharge or acquit the accused. Likewise, where the cases under
IPC which are compoundable with the permission of the court or in cases under
any other law for the time being in force for offences punishable up to three
years are pending in the criminal courts for mere than three years then the
criminal court shall after hearing the public prosecutor and other parties repre-
sented before it ता their advocates. discharge or acquit the accused as the case
may be and close such cases. The difference in approach adopted by us in
the above categorics of offences is necessitated in view of the minor nature of
offences involved in the said categories without permission of the court.

41.4. Likewise. the directions under paras 2(c), (d). (e) and (f) do not
deal with the situation where the trials are commenced but not concluded within
the period specified therein. In order to meet the situation the directions even
under those paras should be made applicable on the same lines to such cases
whete the trials are commenced but not concluded and delayed without justifiable
reasons.

41.5. For the aforesaid purposes the trial shall be deemed to have com-
menced when the accused appears in pursuance to the summoOns/ warrant issued
by the court.

41.6. In computing the period in respect of the case pending trail after
commencement but not concluded, the period of delay attributable on the part
of the accused or his counsel shall be excluded.

41.7. We are of the opinion that the aforesaid directions should not — be
made applicable to cases where the accused has been convicted more than once
or against whom more than one case is pending,

41.8. We have made the aforesaid suggestions in respect of cases where
trial has commenced but not concluded and kept indefinitely in view of the fact
that the direction given by the Supreme Court in cOmmon cause caSe (supra)
would not apply to such cases. It is a matter of common knowledge that in
Such cases, the parties have to undergo greater stress and strain as they remain
bound over or remanded to custody.

41.9. We are also of the view that these directions should be made appli-
cable only to the pending cases and not in respect of the future cases which may
be launched. However, in respect of the future cases there. should be a perio-
dical review from time to time preferably every three years and on the lines
laid down by the Supreme Court Legal Aid Case (supta) and also in Hussainara
Khatoon and Hussainara Khatoon(VII)".

42. In 7.12. Upadhyay v. State of Andhra Pradesh & Others," the Supreme
Court emphasising the right to speedy trial guaranteed under Article 21 of the
Constitution directed the State Govt. to nominate/designate ten Additional
Judges to take up exclusively trial and decide fong pending cases of murder
within a period of six months. This is an important measure to be adopted
wherever it is necessary.

43. Quit apart from the observations made above pilot projects have |
been undertaken in some States by utilising the services of Retd. District
and Scssions Judges to preside over the courts where backlog is heavy. Such
pits: rrojecis may be adopted for disposal of cases pending for mOre than two
years. We also feel that crash programme for establishing such courts to deal
with old cases have to be worked up in each State and put them into operation
immediately. These steps, in our opinion, would reduce the arreurs.

44. Other Measures

44.1. We are of the view that there should be a periodical review of  the-
Strength of the courts to. effectively deal with arrears pending in thé courts and


Ms

accordingly it is of the view that a new section 235 should be incorporated
under the Code of Criminal Procedure which shall provide that the State Govern-
ment may after consultation with the High Court review the strength of courts
once in two yeats for setting up a new/additional court depending upon the
pendency of the cases therein in order to meet the situation leading to delay in dis-
posal of cases and to activate disposal of cases and timely action in the matter.

44.2. There is a general complaint that there is undue delay in the serv-
ing of summons or execution of warrants issued by the court which in turn
results in the delay of the trial. Likewise, service is not made at the correct
residential address which again results in delay. At present the service system
is completely in the hands of the police in criminal cases who take their Own
time as they are otherwise employed. It is a common experience that more
than 25% -cases are adjourned due to non-appearance of the accused. It is,
therefore, higlily desirable that a separate process serving agency directly under
the control of the courts is established so that these delays can be avoided.

44.3. Lack of police personnel to escort the accused to the court is yet
another cause for the delay, non-production of the accused by the police due
to lack of police personnel is causing delay in a number of cases. Therefore,
a special machinery has to be provided with proper vehicles for producing the
accused before the court on each date in time.

Footnotes
1. See Black's Law Dictionary, 6th Edn. p, 1400.
2. (1980) 1 SCC 81.

3. (1992) 1 SCC 225; The Supreme Court referred to various decisions
concerning delays in trial e.g. Hussainare Khatoon (iii) v. Home
Secretary, State of Bikar, (1980) 1 SCC 98: State of Bihar v. Uma
Shankar Kejriwat, (1982) 1 SCC 75; Kadar Pahadiya y. State of
Bihar, (1983) 2 SCC 104; 1983 SCC (Cri) 361 : State of Maharashtra
१. Champalal Punjaji Shah (1981) 3 SCC 610: 1981 SCC (Cri) 762:
(1982) 1 SCR van T.V. Vatheeswaran v. State of T.N. (1983) 2 SCC
68 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 342 : (1983) 2 SCR 348 : Sheela Barse v. Union
of India (1986) 3 SCC 632; S. Guin v. Grindlays Bank Ltd., (1986)
1 SCC 654; Reghubir Singh v. State of Bihar (1986) 4 SCC 481; 1986
Sppl. SCC 505; Srinivas Gopal v. Union Territory of Arunachal
Pradesh (1988) 4 SCC 36; TJ. Stephen v, Parle Bottling Co. Pyt,
Ltd., 1988 Sppl. SCC 458.

4. AIR 1978 SC 597.

. Bussainara Khatoon(l) v. Home Secretary, State of Bihar, (1980) 1
6. 15 L Ed 2d 627.

7. Willie Mac Barkar v. John Wingo, 33 L. Bd. 2d 101. See also
Strunk v. United States, 37 L Ed. 2d 56.

8. ALR. 1986 SC 1773, 1778.
9. (1994) 6 SCC 731.

10. See also(1) Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration(D, (1978) 4 SCC
494:(2)  Hussainara Khatoon (1) v. Home Secretary, State of Bihar,
(1980) 1 SCC 81, Hussainara Khatoon (IV) v. “Home Secretary,
State of Bihar, Patna, (1980) 1 SCC 98 (4) Hussainare Khatoon (20
v. Home Secretary, State of Bihar, Patna, (1980) 1 SCC 115, (5)
Kadia Pahadia v. State of Bihar, (11) (1983) 2 SCC 104, (6),
T.V. Vatheeswaran v. State of Tamil Nadu (1983) 2 SCC 68 and 07)
Abdul Rehman Antulay ४. R.S. Nayak, (1992) 1 SCC 225.

108, See also K.L. Bhatia, Gurdeep Singh, Jagmohan Singh: “A Riddle
asset in 4 Mystery inside an Enigma” 37 J.LL.1. PP. 42, 45-46

cy

6-1 M of L & YND/97


At.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

19.

20.

16

19965) SCALE 523.
AIR 1971 SC 186.
AIR 1981 SC 1675.
AIR 1954 SC 397, 399.
1995(1} Crimes 445.
1995(6) SCALE 45.
1996(4) SCALE 127.

(1980) 1 SCC 81; (1980) 1 SCC 91; (1980) 1 SCC 93; (1980) 1 SCC
98; (1980) 1 SCC 108 and (1980) 1 SCC 115.

Hussaina Khatoon & Other (VI) v. Home Secretary Bihar (1995)
5 SCC 326.

1996 (1) Crimes 189 (SC).


CHAPTER XXII

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

1. In the light of the discussions made in the earlier chapters of this
report the Commission is of the opinion that it is essential to make appropriate
amendments in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, particularly for rendering
Speedy Justice. We have also examined the proposed changes brought out in
the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994.

2. We have indicated in each chapter of the report, the provisions which
should be made in lieu of, or in addition to, the existing provisions, and also
the amendments, both major and minor, to be made in them. We do not
consider it necessary to give a complete summary of all the recommendations
made in the foregoing pages. The main changes proposed by us are set Out
below in broad outlines.

3. There should be a separate and_ exclusive cadre of investigating
agency to investigate grave offences in every district subject to supervision by
the higher authorities. When a case is taken up for investigation by an officer
of such agency, he should be in charge of the case throughout till the conclusion
of the trial. He should take the responsibility for production of witnesses, pro-
duction of accused and for assisting the prosecuting agency.

(Ch. वा, para 7)

4. The police official entrusted with the investigation of grave offences
should be separate and distinct from those entrusted with the enforcement of
law and order and other miscellaneous duties. Separate investigating agency
directly under the supervision of a designated Superintendent of Police be con-
stituted. The hierarchy of the officers in such agency should have adequate
training and incentives for furthering effective investigations. The respective
Law and Home Departments of various State Governments may work out de-
tails for structuring and betterment of their conditions of service.

(Ch. II, para 9)

5. The officials of the investigating police force be made responsible for
helping the courts in the conduct of cases and speedy trail by ensuring timely
attendance of witnesses, production of accused and proper co-ordination wil
prosecuting agency. Other necessary steps should also be taken for promoting
efficiency in investigation. Accordin, aly. that necessary changes in the Police
Acts, both Central and State, Police Regulations, Police Standing Orders, Police
Manuals, be made by the Home Department in consultation with the Law
Departments of State Governments.

(Ch. वा, para 9)

6. A Directorate of Prosecution be established as provided in clause 4
of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994, and new section
25A be inserted. However, sub-section (4) of new section 25A placing the
public prosecutors appointed under section 24(1) to condug t cases in the High
Court to be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution ni not be there as, the
Public Prosecutors appointed exclusively to conduct cases on the appellate side
in the High Court should be differentiated from those prosecuting officers ap-
pointed to conduct cases in the lower courts. Accordingly, sub-section (4) of
the proposed section 2543 be deleted.

(Ch. TH, para 12)

7. The structuring of the proposed Directorate of prosecution shall be on
the lines recommended by the National Police Commission. Some of them
may be earmarked to advise the investigating agencies and to examine whether
there is a fit case for filing the chatge-sheet, However, the Government while
appointing Public Prosecutors and Assistant Public Prosecutors under sections

117


118

24 and 25 shall, as far as practicable, appoint sufficient number of woman Pu-
blic Prosecutors and Assistant, : Public- Prosecutors so that they can effectively
deal with cases involving women’ who are under 18 years of age and im respect
whom offences under sections 354, 376, 376A to 376E (both inclusive) proposed
by the National Commission for Women and 509 of the Indian Penal Code,

(Ch. IIL, paras 9, 10 & 13)

: 8. In view of the recommendations to establish the Direciorate of Pro-
secution, section 25(3) and section 302 to the extent that they enable police
officers to conduct prosecution, needs to be suitably amended.

(Ch. शा, para (7)

9. Regarding law of arrest in view of the guidelines enunciated by the
Supreme Court in Joginder Kumar's case and also the consequent recommenda-
tions of the Law Commission in its 152nd Report on “Custodial Crimes” the
new sub-section to section 41 be inserted in the Code. Further a new section 414
be also inserted in the Code.

(Ch. IV, para 11)

10. The police custody need not be during the first fifteen days of re-
mand alone. A provision should also be made for a fresh police custody, if
sought by the CBI during investigation but it should not exceed 15 days in the
whole. Accordingly, Section 167(2) be amended.

(Ch. V, paras 1 & 2)

हा, In order to eliminate the discrimination against the poor and the
indigent accused in the grant of bail for bailable offences, clause 40 of the
Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill, 1994 seeks to amend section 436 of the
Code to make a mandatory provision that if the arrested persons accused of a
bailable offence is an indigent and cannot furnish security, the court shall release
him on his execution of a bond without sureties. The amendments referred to
above as those are consistent with the Supreme court’s pronouncements and
juristic opinion that poor accused committing bailable of ffences should not de
denied bail on the basis of indigency.

(Ch, VI, paras 8.4 & 8.5.)

42. Section 436A be inserted in the Code asa protection for undertrail
prisoners accused of non-capital offences and released जा bail as contained in
Clause 41 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994 except
the words “instead of the personal bond with or without sureties” occurring in
the proviso to clause 41 of the Bill.

(Ch. VI, para. 10)

13. In order to make the provision under Section 437 more stringent and
ensure that the accused released on bail does not interfere or intimidate the wit-
nesses section 347 be amended as provided under clause 42 of the Code of Cri-
minal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994.

(Ch. VI, para 11)

14. The provision contained under Section 438 regarding anticipatory
bail should remain in the Code but subject to the amendments suggested in
clause 43 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994 which
provides adequate safeguards.

(Ch. VI, para 18)
15. To eliminate’ the pernicious evil of professional and fake “sureties in

the bail process Section 441-A be incorporated in the Code as provided in
clause 44 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1994.

{Ch. VI, paras 19.4 and 19.5)


119

16. In keeping with the tune of amendments to sections 436, 437, 438
and the insertion of sections 436A and 441A. the amendment of sub-section Q)
of section 446 on the lines set out in clause 45 of the Bill be inserted.

(Ch. VI. paras 20.3 to 20.5}

17. A new section 437A be inserted empowering all the criminal courts
(including the Ist appellate court) to take bail and bail bond before the conclu-
sion of the trial or disposal of the appeal requiring the accused to bind them-
selves to appear before the next appellate court: in case an appeal against ac-
quiital or an appeat for enhancement is filed in the higher court. Such a bond
shall be in force for a period of 12 months from the date of judgement dis-
posing of the case either by trial court or by the Ist appellate court as the case
may be. We feel, the twelve months limit would be enough to cover the period
of. limitation for processing and filing of such appeals,

(Ch. शा, para, 2)

18. Summons Procedure be dispensed with. Accordingly, Chapter XX
be deleted. The definition of warrant case be amended as one relating to an
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding three years. Like-
wise, definition of summons cases be amended relating to an offence not being
warrant case summarily triable. Section 260 be also amended that all summons
cuses as per the proposed definition should be summarily tried and the magis-
(rate shall have the power to award sentence of imprisonment only up to a
period of six months or a fine up to Rs. 3000. However, in case of serious
nature if the Magistrate is of the opinion that it is undesirable to try summarily,
he may convert the same into a warrant case and try accordingly ‘after giving
sufficient and valid reasons.  Sub-sections (I) and (2) of the section 260 be
amended accordingly. The new comprehensive procedure as per the amended
Section 262(2) and also in the existing sections 263 and 265 shall be followed.

{Ch. शा, paras 12, 13, 14 & 15)

19. In cases arising out of a police report, all the statements having been
recorded during investigation should be supplied in advance and the cross-
examination should proceed continuously. a the case of other types of case
arising otherwise than on police report also, evidence already recorded before
issuing process would be available furnishing sufficient material for cross-exa-
mination, and many adjournments just for the purpose of samy ing on further
bess examination can be avoided. Accordingly, tions 242(2X3) and 246(4)
९ amended.

(Ch. शा, para 17)

20. The statements of material witnesses recorded under section 164
which could be more authentic and also prevent the witnesses from tuming
hostile. Further sections 161, 162, 164 and 172 be amended on the lines Suggest-
ed in Chapter IX, para 7. This course is more salutary and will prove to be
very effective in rendering criminal justice in 8 speedy manner. However, the
changes contemplated, namely, setting up and separating the investigating
agency, and structuring the same and appointment of large number of magis-
trates will take some time. We, in the altemative, recommend to retain the
provisions of sections 161, 162 and 172 as they are but with some checks in the
direction of improving the authenticity of such statements recorded by the police
and also obtaining signatures of the persons examined, if they are literate,
Further, a copy of the statement should be given to the deponent under acknow-
ledgement and also send them to the Magistrate and to the. superior officers.
That provision would ensure against any error or malpractice being committed
by the officer.

(Ch, IX, paras 7, 8, 11, 12. 13 & 15)

21, The allowances payable to the witnesses for their attendance in courts
should be fixed on a realistic basis and that payment should be effected through
a simple procedure which would avoid delay and inconvenience. . Section 312
of Cr. P. C, and the rules made thereunder will have to be suitably amended.
They should be paid allowances for all the days they attend. Adequate facili- '
ties should be provided in the court premises for their stay. The treatnient

॥1-- M of L&J ND/97


120

afforded to them right from the stage of investigation up to the stage of con-
clusion of the trai snuwld be in a Giting manner giving them due respect and
removing all causes which contribute to any anguish on their part.

(Ch. X, para 6)

22. Listing of the cases should be done in such a way that the witnesses
who are summoned are examined on the day they are summoned and adjourn
ments should be avoided meticulously. The lists should be prepared in such
a way that a day or two are devoted continuously to all cases of a particular
police station and cases should not be proceeded mechanically just according to
the chronological order regardless of the fact of the likelihood of their being
tried or not. The courts also should proceed with trial on a day-to-day basis
and. the li of the cases should be on those lines. The High Courts should
issue necessary circulars to all the criminal courts giving guidelines for listing,
of cases.

(Ch. ऊँ, para 7)

23. We are of the view that the Courts can take the assitance of — the
prosecutor and defense counsel and prepare the questions which are to be put
in a concise form to the accused under section 313. The Court can also permit
the filing of written statements by the accused as sufficient compliances with
section 313.

(Ch. XT, para 6)

24, On the aspect of compounding of offences under sub-section (2) of
section 320 (oflences compoundable with the permission of the court) we re-
commend that sections 324, 325, 335, 343, 344, 346, 379, 403, 406, 407, 411,
414, 417, 419, 421, 422, 423, 424, 428, 429, 430. 451, 482, 483, and 486 should
be deleted from the table laid down under sub-section and be included in the
table to sub-section 1 of section 320. Further, Section 498A be inserted in
table under sub-section (2) of section 320 whereby it can be compounded with the
permission of the Court.

(Chapter XII, paras 4 & 10)

25. There is no provision mentioned in the tables appended to the Sec-
tion 320 regarding compoundability where the accused is constructively liable
under Sections 34 and 149, IPC. If the provision is left as it is, then only in
respect of substantive offences mentioned in the tables, compounding is possible’
and not in respect of cases of constructive liability for the same offence, Like-
wise, in respect of offence of rioting resulting in the offence mentioned in the
two tables, there is no provision for compounding. The offences punishable
under Sections 147 and 148 of IPC committed during the same transaction, the
transaction being one and the same, where the guilt is proved, the accused are
to be convicted under all those sections. It will be anomalous if one patt of
the offence is compoundable and other part remains non-compoundable where
the convictions are capable of being made under both the provisions, Accord-
ingly, we are of the view that sub-section (3) be amended suitably.

(Ch. XII, para 5)

26. We recommend that the concept of plea bargaining may be made
applicable as an experimental measure, to offences which are liable for punish-
ment with imprisonment of less than seven years and/or fine including the
offences covered by section 320 of the Criminal Procedure Code. Plea bargain-
ing can also be in respect of the nature and gravity of offences and the quantum:
of punishment. However, plea barga ing should not be available to habitual
offenders, those who are accused socio-economic offences of a grave nature
and offences against women and children.

(Ch. XIII, paras 8 & 9)

.. 27. A plea bargaining can be availed to by the accused in the categories
of offences mentioned above before the Court at any stage after the charge sheet
is filed by the investigating agency in police cases and in respect of private

eae N 19 ८ ०४


121

complaints at any stage after the cognizance is taken. An order passed by the
court on such a plea shall be finat and no appeal shall lie against such an order
passed by the Court accepting the plea.

(Ch. XII, para 9.6)

28. A separate chapter XXIA on Plea Bargaining be incorporated in the
Code of Criminal Procedure on the lines indicated in para 7 to 9.9.

(Ch. X11, paras 7 to 9.10)

29. The recommendations of the Law Commission in its 114th Report on

alaya regaiding appointment of presiding afficer may not be feasible
Munsifs/Civil Judges will not be able to shoulder the additional
burden of presiding over Gram Nyayalayas in the rural areas. As it is, there
is docket explosion in the civil courts and the civil justice delivering system is
adversely affected by the phenomenon of huge backlog of cases leading to jong.
slefays in disposals. Restricting to serving judicial Officers only prevents the
consideration of retired judicial officers and other personnel who have served
in the government in various capacitics. Engaging lawyers by the patties to
appear before the Nyaya Panchayats would introduce technical legal formalities
into the system leading to delays in the disposal of cases. Indeed it would
frustrate the very purpose for which the Gram Nyayalayas are being introduced.

{Ch. XIV, para 6)

30. The state should enact legislation on Nyaya Panchayats to suit their
local needs and conditions. The Andhra Pradesh Mandala Nyaya Panchayats
Bill, 1995 may be adopted as a model on the composition, powers and jurisdic-
tion of the Nyaya Panchayats.

(Ch. XIV, para’ 7)

31. In view of the weaknesses of the existing provisions for compensa-
tion to crime victims in the criminal law. it is necessary to incorporate a new
Section.357-A in the Code. है

: (Ch. XV, paras 13 & 17)

32. A time limit should be fixed for the period of postponement of trail of
insane undertrial. Indefinite postponement is an infringement of the personal
libertly and rights of insane undertrails. In order that personal liberty is not
arbitrarily deprived in the name of therapy, it is essential that the period for
which the enquiry or trial can be postponed, should be subject to limitation.

For the accused whose condition is treatable and who can be better
equipped to defend themselves postponement of trial furthers fair trial. For
incurables postponement is of little utility and only operates as a mechanism
for. punishing without trial. It, therefore, seems Spproptiate that they should
be: discharged of the charged offence. If their mental condition makes them a
danger to themselves or others i.e. they ate incapable of looking after them-
selves and nobody is available who is willing to look after them, then the pro-
cedure for involuntary civil commitment should be initiated to institutionalize
these persons. Accordingly, sections 328, 329, 330 of the Code in respect of
pre-enquiry and pre-trial proceedings be amended.

(Ch. XVI, paras, 12, 14,415 & 16)

33. Regarding maintenance under Section 125 the increase in ceiling
from Rs. 500 to Rs. 1500 suggested in the 1994 Bill would not serve the
purpose owing to spiralling inflationary conditions. Nor altogether dropping
the ceiling limit is desirable. Justice would be done to awardees if the ceiling

is raised to Rs. 5000,
(Ch. XVII, para 5)

34. Under the existing law, there is no right to appeal against an order
passed by the magistrate under section 125. Only a revision is possible. There
is need to amend the law providing right to appeal.

. (Ch. XVIT, para 9.1)


4122

35. Summary trail procedure for recording evidence ete, under section 126
be adopted and the evidence by way of affidavits also be made admissible.
Accordingly section 2062) be amended.

(Ch. XVI. para 9.3)

36. it is necessary to empower the magistrate to attach the property of
the person liable to pay maintenance and 5९ in order to recover the amount.
If the husband is employed, the magistrate shall have power to direct the em-
ployer to deduct the amount of maintenance and arrange the payment, To
give effect to this suggestion, section 128 has to be amended suitably.

(Ch. XVH, para 9.4)

37. An absoulte condition provided in proviso to clause (a) of Bill for-
mulated by the National Commission for Women, namely, that an offence under
section 376 of the Indian Penal Code (rape) shall be tried oy by any such
court presided over by a woman may not be feasible in practice always. The
word “only” be substituted by “as far as practicable” in the proviso.

(Ch, XVIU, para 4.2)

38. The age of the woman to be questioned only in the presence of her
parents etc. should be eighteen and not fifteen as suggested by the National
Commission for Women.

(Ch, XVII, para 5.4)

39. Section 160 be amended on the lines suggested by the National Com-
mission for Women subject to certain modifications. In sub-section (3) the age
of “twelve years” be raised to “eighteen years” in conformity with the Conven-
tion on the Rights of the Child. The recommendation made in sub-section (4)
of National Commission on Women Bill is not practicable having regard to the
present condition and dearth of female police officers. It may also not be pfac-
ticable for the victim or any person interested in her to approach the person
mentioned in sub-section (3). Instead sub-section (4) may be amended to the
effect that where a female police officer is not available and to contact the per-
son mentioned in sub-section (3) is difficult, the officer in charge Of the police
station, for reasons to ‘be recorded in writing, shall proceed with the recording
of the statement of the victim in the presence of a relative of the victim.

(Ch. XVIIE, para 6.9)

40, The insertion of section 164A as recommended by the Nationat
Commission for Women is eminent desirable subject to the modification that
medical examination be made preferably by a female medical practitioner.
Further a speedy and detailed medical examination of tape victims by doctors
is essential for effective trial of rape offences. Likewise speedy despatch of the
report to the investigating officer is also necessary.

(Ch. XVIII, para 7.3)

.41. Some of the amendments to section 327 mentioned in the Bill pro-
posed by the National Commission of Women are not practicable. According-
Jy, in sub-section (2), the word “only” be substituted by the words “as far as
practicable” because to limit such’ trials only by women judges ag man-
datory would unduly delay the trial, However, the amendment in sub-section
(9) lifting the ban on printing or publication of Tape trial proceedings but man-
dating confidentiality of the names and addresses of the parties be made.

(Ch. XVI, para 12)

42, The Women prisoners be exempted from the rigour of section 433-A
of the Code for the reasons set out in Chapter XVIII.

(Ch. XVII, para 15.7)


123

43,..Jn order to make the provision explicit so as to give benefit of set-off
to the life convicts aiso section 428 can be amended by adding the words “or
imprisonment for life” after the words “sentenced to imprisonment far a term.”

(Ch. XIX, para 2)

44, After section 144 a new section 144A is to be inserted in the Code
to enable the District Magistrate to prohibit mass drill (or training) with arms
in public places; in order to curb militant activities of certain communal
organisations and to strengthen the hands of the State authority for effectively
checking communal tension.

(Ch. XX, para 5.1)

45. Section 176 be amended to provide that in the case of death or dis-
appearance of a person or a rape of a woman while in the custody of police.
there shall be a mandatory judicial inquiry and in case of death, examination
of the dead body shall be conducted within twenty-four hours of death,

(Ch. XX. para 5.2)

46. A new proviso to sub-section (1) of section 190 of the Code be inserted
to empower a magistrate to authorise further detention in custody of an accused
person for a period not exceeding a week, after recording reasons, during the
interim period of submission of the police report and before taking cognizance
of the offence disclosed by the police report. Such a provision is necessary to
enable the Magistrate to pass an order of remand where it is not possible for
him to take cognizance of an offence under clause (b) of section 190.

(Ch. XX, para 5.3)

47. Two provisos to sub-section (1) of section 389 of the Code be added
to the effect that the Appellate Court would give notice to the prosecution before
releasing 2 convicted person on bail, if he was convicted of an offence punishable
with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than
ten years and also to enable the prosecution to move an application for caincella-
tion of such bail granted by the Appellate Court.

(Ch. XX, para 5.7)

48. A proviso be added to Section 428 providing for a set-off of the
period of detention during investigation and trial against period of 14 years of
actual imprisonment. This amendment is necessary so that the convicted accused
can get a benefit of the period suffered by him as detention during the trial and
investigation being set against period of 14 years mentioned in section 433A.

«Ch. XIX and XX)

49. In respect of bailable offences, there are instances where the person
has to remain in jail for his, inability to furnish bail, tilt the case is disposed of.
The amendment of section 43660) to make mandatory provision to release such
indigent person on an execution of a. bond without sureties, is a salutary provision.

(Ch. XX, para 5.9)

50. The new sub-section (4) added to section 46 to prohibit to arrest
of a woman after sunset and before sunrise except in unavoidable circumstances.

(Ch. XX, para 6.3)

Si. A proviso be added to section 46(1) regarding the arrest of a woman
providing that where the woman is to be atrested and submission to custody on
an oral intimation the arrest shall be presumed. However, we suggested that exist-
ing. sub section {2} will be numbered as sub-section (3) and sub-section (3) as
sub-section (4).

(Ch. XX, para 6.3)


124

52. -A new section 164A be inserted'in the Code to provide for a medical
examination of the victim of rape by a registered medical practitioner.

(Ch. XX, para 6.7)

53. A wew sub-section (3A) be added to section 173 to enable the police
to take noie of the desire of the parties 10 compound offences.even at the stage

of investigation. . ee
° (Ch. “XX, pata 6.8)

584. In order to guard ‘against the arbitrary exercise of power and to
reduce reckless acquittals. section 378 be amended providing an appeal against
an order of acquittal passed by a Magistrate in respect of cognizable and non-
bailable offeticé filed on a police report to the Court of Session as directed by the
District Magistrate. In respect of all other cases. filed on a police-vepert, an
appeal shall lie to the High Court against an order of acquittal ‘passed by. any
other court other than the High Court, as directed by .the State .Government..
‘The power to recommend appeal in the first category. is sought to be vested in
the District Magistrate and the power in respect of second category would continue
with the State Government. Section 376 be accordingly amended prescribing
limitations for filing the appeal and limiting the scope thereof.

{Ch. XX,paras 6,12: and 6.13)

55. A new Section 436A be inserted providing for release of undertrial
prisoners who are in jail for a long period, with necessary modification.

(Ch. XX; para 6.14)

56. To combat with the problem of adjournments the measures as laid
down under-order XVIf of the Code of Civi! Procedure be inserted in the Code.
Further an additional provision as laid down in State of Gujarat v, Narendar
Singh: Lukhubhai, 1995, Vol. ‘1 Crimes 445 be incorporate.

(एफ XX]. para 42.7 and 42.8)

. 57, There is need for appointing more Special Magistrates: to deal with
minor nature of criminal cases. Necessary changes accordingly be made in
sections 13 and 18 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

(Ch. XX, Para 43.11)

58. The Court may consider materials’ produced. by the accused affecting
the very maintainability of the case at the preliminary. stages contemplated under’
sections 227. 239 and 245 as well as in the preliminary stages of the summary trials.

(Ch. XXT, Para 31)

59. In order to minimise the Jong pending cases, it is necessary to adopt
the directions given by the. Supreme Court in Common. Cause vy. UniOn of India
1996(4) SCALE 127 with certain modifications. Further the directions given
by the Supreme Court should not be made applicable to, cases where ‘the arcused”
has been convicted more than once or against whom more than one case is
pending. Moreover, the directions of the Supreme Court should be made appli-
cable only to pending cases and not in respect of future cases. However, there
should be a periodical review from time to time preferably every three years.

(Ch. XXT, para 41,9) >
60. It is highly desirable a separate Process Serving Agency under the
control of courts be established to avoid delay in the service of summons or

execution of warrants issued by the court, दि
(Ch, जड़ा, para 41,3),

| 61, A special machinery should be provided in order to procure vehicles
for producing the accused before the court on each date any time. o

(Ch. XXI, para 41.4)


125

62. There should be a periodical review of the strength of the courts
to effectively deal with the arrears pending in the courts and accordingly a
new Section 23A be incorporated in the Code.

(Ch. XX1, para 41.2)

63. The Court may consider materials produced by the accused which
affects the very maintainability of the case at the preliminary stages coniem-
plated under sections 227, 239 and 245 as well as in the preliminary stages of
the summary trials.

(Ch. XXI, para 30)

We recommend accordingly.

Sd/-
GUSTICE K. JAYACHANDRA REDDY)
Chairman
Sd/- Sdj-
GUSTICE R. L. GUPTA) (Ch. G. KRISHNAMURTHY)
Member Member

Sd/-
(PROFESSOR ALICE JACOB)
Member

MGIPCBE—S&—1 M of L&:JIND/97-~27 4.92-~$00