LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT
ON
NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC
SUBSTANCES ACT, 1985

(ACT NO. 61 OF 1985)

JULY, 1997


CHAIRS
LAW ९:

Eo

JUSTICE
KL JAVA

D.O.No.6(3)(35}/96-LC(LS) duiv

Bear Hon'ble Minister,

J have great pleasure in forwarding herewith ihe
Report on the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act.
abuse has become one of the curses of the secic
is a mena which threatens public life and Jjeads to de
not only of the family but also of the society. There a
control this malady. It has been felt that the Narcotic Iv
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, despite amendment tt
1988, has not yielded the desired results. Th
has, ther considered it necessary to undertake a
Narcotic and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.

Lay
La

In order to elicit public opinion on the
Commission circulated a questionnaire setting out varic
the subject under study. The Commission also organised a we
at Goa and a National Seminar on Criminai Justice in Indie
Belhi wherein the various aspects of law relating to control st |
have been ciscussed.

The recommendations have been made with a view
loophcies and make the provisions more clfective. We
recommencations, if implemented, will control the
considerab

mal

bac extent.

With regards,

Hon'ble Shri Ramaikant D.Khalap,
Minister of State for Law & Justice,
Shastri havan,

New Delhi.


CHAPTER I

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER LV

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER VI

ANNEXURE I

ANNEXURE If

ANNEXURE III

ANNEXURE IV

ANNEXURE V

ANNEXURE VI

CLO NT ६511 1 5

INTRODUCTION

MENACE OF DRUG ABUSE AND DRUG
TRAFFICKING.

CONSTITUTIONAL GOALS AND THE
INTERNATIONAL COMVENTION ON DRUGS.

NARCUTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC
SUBSTANCES ACT: A REVIEW.

MANDATORY AND DIRECTORY PROVISIONS:

DUTIES OF EMPOWERED OFFICER.

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.

ANNEXURES

THE QUESTIONNAIRE ON THE NODPS ACT,

PAGES

11-16

17-50

hy 68

8509-84

85-92

94-300

ACT, 1985 ISSUED BY THE LAW COMMISSION.

COMMENTS RECEIVED ON THE
QUESTIONNAIRE ISSUED BY THE LAW
COMMISSION.

THE PUNISHMENTS PROVIDED FO?
OFFENCES UNDER NOPS ACT, 1985 (AS
AMENDED BY ACT NO.2 OF 1989).

NATIONAL DRUG ENFORCEMENT
STATISTICS AS ON 31.8.1996
(PROVISIONAL).

PROCEEDINGS OF THE WORKSHOP HELD
AT GOA.

PROCEEDINGS OF THE WORKSHOP HELO
AT NEW DELHT.

101-1209

121-173


CHAPTER I

1.1 Administration of Criminal Justice System.

With the evolution of mankind from primitive stage to
the stage of social welfare state, the administration of
criminal law has assumed great importance. As long as the
human beings were “God-fearing” and had faith that their
actions were being watched by the “ALMIGHTY” the need for
the administration of criminal justice was not felt.
However, with the passage of time and the people becoming
more materialistic, a section of the society consisting of
misguided and disgruntled human beings lost faith in the
“ALMIGHTY” and started thinking that their actions could not
be seen by anybody. These misguided persons indulged in
criminal activities which Jed to the necessity for
administration of criminal justice. In additicen, the
activities to be termed as “criminal activities’ have also
undergone change with the passage of time. What was
regarded not harmful fifty years ago has become the greatest
evil of the day in view of changed circumstances, new

researches, new thinking and modern way of life.


1.2 Emergence of white collar crimes.
The crimes are generally of two kinds:

(a) Traditional crimes affecting individual persons, like
murder, theft, assault, etc.;

(b) White Collar Crimes or Socio Economic Crimes
affecting the public at large like smuggling, hoardings,
adulteration, illicit trafficking and sale of narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances etc. White collar crimes are of
recent origin and may be defined as 811 illegal acts
committed by unlawful means -the purpose being to obtain
money or property or business or personal gain 6 profit.
Such crimes are committed by the organised gangs having
influence. Some of the salient features of the white collar

crimes are as under:-

(a) there is no social sanction against such white
collar crimes;

(b) these crimes are committed by organised gangs
equipped with most modern technology;

(c) there 15 generally a nexus between the
politicians, law enforcing agencies and the offenders
indulging directly in such crimes;'

(d) there is no organised public opinion against such

crimes; and


137

(e) the traditional crimes are isolated crimes, while
the white collar crimes are part and parcel of the

society .?

1.3 Drug Trafficking and illicit use of Narcotic Drugs

and Psychotropic Substances.

The genesis and development of the Indian drug
trafficking scenario are closely connected with the
strategic and geographical? location of India which has
massive inflow of heroin and hashish from across the
Indo-Pak border originating from “Golden Crescent"
comprising of Iran, Afganistan and Pakistan which is one of
the major illicit drug supplying areas of the world.3 On the
North Eastern side of the country is the “Gold Triangle”
comprising of Burma, Loas and Thailand which is again one of
the largest sources of illicit opium in the world.‘ Nepal
8150 is a traditional source of cannabis, both herbal and
resinous.5 Cannabis is also of wide growth in some states of
India. As far as illicit drug trafficking from and through
India is concerned, these three sources of supply have been
instrumental in drug trafficking. Prior to the enactment of
the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985,
the statutory control over narcotic drugs was exercised in
India through a number of Central and State enactments. The
principal Central Acts were (a) the Opium Act, 1857, (b) the

Opium Act, 1878 and (c) the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930.


The preamble to the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic

Substances Act, 1985 provides as under:

Drugs

"An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to
narcotic drugs, to make stringent provisions for the
control and regulation of operations relating to
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, to
provide for the forfeiture of property derived from,
or used in, illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, to implement the provisions
of the International Conventions on Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances and for matters connected

therewith.”

The Statement of Objects and Reasons for the Narcotic

and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (NOPS Act) laid

down as under:

“ "The statutory control over narcotic drugs is

exercised in India through a number of Central and
State enactments. The Principal Central Acts,
namely, the Opium Act, 1857, The Opium Act, 1878 and
the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 were enacted a _ long
time ago. With the passage of time and the
developments in the field of illicit drug traffic and
drug abuse at national and international level many
deficiencies in the existing laws have come to

notice, some of which are indicated below:


(i) Tne scheme of penalties under the present Acts is
not sufficiently deterrent to meet the challenge of
well organised gangs of smugglers, The Dangerous
Grugs Act, 1930 provides for a maximum term of
imprisonment of three years with or without fine and
four years imprisonment with or without fine with
repeat offences. Further, no minimum punishment is
prescribed in the present laws, as a result of which
drug traffickers have been sometimes let off by the
courts with nominal punishment. The country has’ for
the last few years been increasingly facing the
problem of transit traffic of drugs coming mainly
from some of our neighbouring countries and destined

mainly to western countries,

(ii) The existing central Taws do not provide for
investing the officers of a number of important
central enforcement agencies like narcotics, customs, ~
central excise etc., with the power of investigation

of offences under the said laws.

(iii) Since the enactment of the aforesaid three
Central Acts a vast body of international law in’ the
field ef narcotics control has evolved through
various international treaties and protocols. The

Government of India has been a party to these


treaties and conventions which entail several
obligations which are not covered or are only partly

covered by the present Acts.

(iv) During the recent years new drugs of addiction
which have come to be known as psychotropic
substances have appeared on the scene and _ posed
serious problems to national governments. There is
no comprehensive law to enable exercise of control
over psychotropic substances in India in the manner
as envisaged in the convention on Psychotropic

Substances 1971 to which also India has acceded.”

In view of what has been stated above, an urgent need
was felt for the enactment of a comprehensive legislation on
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, which,
inter-alia, should consolidate and amend the existing laws
relating to narcotic drugs, strengthen the existing controls
over drug abuses, considerably enhance the penalties
particularly for trafficking offences, make provisions for
exercising effective control over psychotropic substances
and make provisions for the implementation of international
conventions relating to narcotic drugs and psychotropic

substances, to which India is a party.


1.4 The effect of illicit trafficking and use of Narcotic

Orugs and Psychotropic Substances,

The illicit trafficking in Narcotic Drugs and

Psychotropic Substances has led to drug addiction.
anguish of the Supreme Court of India was expressed In canse
“Durand Didier v. Chief Secretary, Union Territory of Goat"

in the following words:=

“With deep concern, we may point out that the
organised activities of the underworld and the
clandestine smuggling of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances into this country and illegal
trafficking in such drugs and substances have led to
drug addiction among a sizeable section of the
public, particularly the adolescents and shudents of
both sexes and the menace has assumed serious and
alarming preportions in the recent years. Prerefore,
in order to effectively control and eradicate the
proliferating and booming devastating manace, causing
deleterious effects and deadly impact on the society
as a whole, the Parliament in its wisdom, has made
effective provision by introducing this Act 61 of

1985 specifying mandatory minimum imprisonment and

fine. The senlance of hen yoars rigoraus
imprisanment and the fine of 1, | ,09,000/ with the
dofaull clause, as modified by Lhe High Gourt, 016७८

not call for interference.”


1.5 However, inspite of enactment = of the NbPS Aah 85%
amended in 1989, the menace of drug trafficking and drug
abuse is on the increase and the conviction rate in cases
under this Act is extremely low. From this it appears that
either the innocent persons are beating sent bo Lhe courbes or
there is some procedural defect or deficiency which benefits
the accused blo get acquittal from the courts. In view of
the deep concern at the growing incidence of drug abuse

rent parts of the country to plug the

occurring in di

loopholes in the law and procedure for combating illicit

t

trafficking and, among others, to effectively deal with drug

offenders the Law Commission has suo motu taken up the study

of the following:-

(a) to study the monaee of Lhe drug abuse and 111 11५
trafficking and its effect on youth in 11011 86:

(b) to scrutinise the Directive Principles of State
Policy enshrined in the Constitution of India and the
provisions of International Conventions on tlarcobic
Drugs and Psychotropic substances;

(c) to understand the magnitude of the problem of
illicit trafficking and use of narcotic drugs and
psychotropla substances viewasvin Lhe infirmities in
the NDPS Act;

(d) to examine theo oredavant provisaans of Lhe Tbe


Act and their interpretation by the Courts and
(e) to identify the amendments required for more

affective implementation of the NDPS Act.

1.6 In order to elicit public opinion on the subject, the
Commission circulated a questionnaire on NOPS Act to the
Registrars of High Courts, Presidents of High Court Bar
Associations and District Courts Bar Associations, Home
Secretaries of 811 States and Union Territories, Police
officials and Chairmen of State Law Commissions, setting out
various aspects of the subject under study. Comments
received on the questionnaire are summarised in Annexure IT.
The Commission had also organised Seminar on “Criminal law
and Narcotic Drugs Psychotropic Substances” in collaboration
with the Government of Goa on 18th January, 1997 at Panaji,
Goa and “National Seminar on Criminal Justice in India" at
Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi on 22nd & 23rd February, 1997. In
the seminar, judges, jurists, advocates, law professors,
magistrates, public prosecutors and police officers
expressed their views on various aspects of the subject.
The Commission while formulating this report has taken into

consideration the views expressed at the seminars.


FOOT NOTES

CHAPTER-I

Barowaiia J.N., commentary on the Narcotic Drugs and

Psychotresic Substances Act, 1985 (1992) pp.

614-615.

S.V.Joga Rao, “Law and Policy on Drug Trafficking: A
Phenomenological study with special reference to

Bangalore City”, 35 JILI (1993) p.56.

A.I..R. 1989 S.C. 1966 at 1971.


CHAPTER II

MENACE OF DRUG ABUSE AND DRUG TRAFFICKING

2.1 The use of narcotic drugs for scientific and

medicinal purpose.

The use of narcotic drugs and psychotrorcic substances
for scientific and medicinal purpose is indisrensable. For
the preparation of a number of life saving drugs like
morphine, pethadine and tranquilisers, thes= drugs and
substances are required. India is one of the leading
producers of opium in the world for medicinal and scientific
purposes. Due to the use of narcotic drugs anc psychotropic
substances for scientific and medicinal purposes, the
production of the same cannot be banned altogetrer, but the
production can be controlled and regulated by tne government

to prevent illicit trafficking and illicit use of the same.

2.2 The menace of drug abuse.

Drug addiction has become one of the curses of our
times a menace whicn threatens public health anc results in
the dissolution of human personality, premotizg conditions
for varicus forts of human degradation, wrose consequences
spread to crime and lawlessness. One of its tragedies lies

in its morbid assault on youth resulting mcre o*ten than not


in mental disorientation and emotional derangement, pushing
the victim towards a fate from which there is seldom any
hope of recovery. The evil is insidious and onerates

secretly and it often comes to be known to others only after

the addict has crossed the point of no return. fhe

consequences are far-reaching, because in oathackiay tne
younger generation of a country, it destroys the flower of 4
nation’s future. History provides many examples of the
wilful subversion of a nation’s culture- its social values
and its integrity by the systematic corruption of its youth
through smuggled drugs. The dangers following iilict

traffic in narcotic drugs have been recognised worldwide,
and so agitated is the conscience of the world conmnunity

that they ara now the subject of International Convention.

For the effective implementation of शवों and sacral
measures to tackle the problem of drug addiction, ito ois
necessary to ascertain the causes of drug addiction which
can be detailed as under:

(a) Drug War.

The drug war is being fought by some other countries
on our 1710 with our men, money and.our materials. fhe drug
addicted boy is more prone to be a criminal and the evannles
are there that the Indian youths are being made drug addicts

|

and then given drugs and wanpons white sending them back be

Indian territory to use the same to make more addicts and to

create barrorist achivities. Therefore, है. न, हा, छा is

required to check these activities.


(b) Organised gangs of the smugglers.

Drug addication is the result of Lhe work of gangs o
smugglers who want to create demand for the supply of their
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and if the demand
is more the prices for the narcotic drugs would be higher
apd on bis way the osmudgglere are teanponnible for drag
addiction. This type of activities of smugglers alse
requires striet action,

(०) Personal or family reasons.

There are some personal or family reasons leading to
drug addiction which can be detailed as new experiment,
curiosity, bad environment, lack of family care, jack of
discipline, hippy or peer cult, to escaping from their
realities of life and having some pleasure and thrilling
experience. This type of drug addiction requires
reformative approach to bring addicts back into the main

stream of life.?

2.38 The menace of drug trafficking.

The trafficking in illegal drugs means to amass
iliegal wealth in a short time, which is ano aet oof perfidy
which no society can condone. Traffickers in illicit drugs
have been described as “merchants of death and destruction”.
A murderer may kil] one oor  bwo persons, but oa drug
traffichor destroys the lives of thousands of boys and gir ts

cil the same time, to whom he supplies the drugs, by puching


them to a stage from where there is no return and thereby

not only ruining them and their families but also the

nation.
2.4 Drug abuse and AIDS.

The menace of drug abuse has become more serious in
recent times due to spread of HIV virus in India. HOOK OG

victims of AIDS can be linked with drug abuse. HIV can be
acquired in three ways - (a) through sex, (b) through bined

by birth from parents suffering from HIV. As far as

and (
acquiring of HIV through sex 15 concerned, the drug addicts
are more exposed to the same because a drug addicted boy) or
gir} can pay any price and unmindfully can goa Lo the ee sent
cf even in indulging in sex abuse. 11५ can also he acauired
by the drug addicts Lhrough blood while Sharing of | the
needles, A stage comas when drug addicts require
intravenous jnjections of drug to get kick and quick «effect
and such an addict is not mentally sound ab that stade ane
can use any needle timely available and = thereby prone to
acquire HIV if the needle was previously used by any person

infected with HIV.

2.5 An Appraisal.
bor dealing with Lhe menace ol 1111] thease and iitiedit
trafficking therein due to aaographical location of 11611;

detiveen “GOLDEN TRIANGLE” and “GOLDEN CRESCENE”, the mejor


sources for illicit opium and its derivatives, their markets
being in western countries, the danger of India being a
transit rout is always there which has its own impact and
effect locally particularly on the youth because the supply
for them becomes easier. Therefore, it is imperative to
take stringent measures by bringing about suitable
amendments in the NDPS Act by making it more effective to

combat this menace.


FOOT NOTES

CHAPTER - IT

See foreward of Mr. Justice R.S. Pathak, former
Chief Justice of India ‘and former Judge,
International Court of Justice, to Barowalia’s

Commentary on the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic

Substances Act, 1985 (1992)

Barowalia J.N.’s lecture in National Seminar on Drug
Abuse held in Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel National.
Police Academy, Hyderabad (3rd May,

1974). (Unpublished)


CHAPTER III

CONSTITUTIONAL GOALS AND THE INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION ON
DRUGS

3.1. The Directive Principles of State Policy.

The Directive Principles of State Policy enshrined in
Part IV of the Constitution of India are fundamental in the
governance of the country as jaid down in Article 37 of the

Constitution, which is reproduced below:

“The provisions contained in this Part shall not be
enforceable by any Court, but the principles therein
laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the
governance of the country and it shall be the duty of

the State to apply these principles in making laws.”

The Directive Principles can be described as sacared
and inalienable as they represent the policies and the
programmes which the tate snould achieve. While the
Fundamental Rights impose a duty on the State not to violate
them, the Directive Principles of Statae Policy impose
corresponding duty on the State to apply them in making the
Jaws for the welfare of the people. The objectives

underlying both in the Fundamental Rights and in the


Directive Principles of State Policy are equality important
and go together and represent the kind of the society which
we wish to create in India. One of the Directive Principles
of the State Policy enshrined in Article 47) of the
Constitution of India lays down as under:
“The State shall regard the raising of the level of
nutrition and the standard of living of its people
and the improvement of public health as among its
Primary duties and, in Particular, the state shall
endeavour to bring about Prohibition of the
consumption, except for medicinal purposes, of
intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious

to health."

3.2. International Conventions on Narcotic Drugs

1912-1953.

To control and regulate the supply of opium and other
narcotic drugs, the following International Conventions were

entered into between 1912-1953:-

1912, International Opium Convention (the Hague,
2-3,1912).
1925 Agreement Re manufacature, international

trade and use of prepared opium (Geneva,

13.7.1925).


1931 Concention manufactaurae and distribution of
narcotic drugs (Geneva 12.7.1921) Agreement.
Re Opium smoking in the Ffar-East (Bangkok
27.11.1931).

1936 Convention for the supression of illieit
traffic in dangerous drugs (Geneva 26.6.1946)

and

1946 Protocol Amending the 1912, 1925, 1G

1936 instruments (Lake Success, 11.12, 19041, |

1948 Protocol extending the 1931 Convention to

synthetic narcotic drugs (Paris, 19.411.°948)

19538 Protocol Re cultivation of the optum  Popny
and production Trade and Use of Opium Chew

York, 23.6.1952).

3.3. Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs 1961.

tn the second half of 20th century, Lhe white colle
crimes assumed alarming proportions. Under white collor
crimes also the ’drug addiction’ and the ‘f1licit traffic in
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances’ became such a
menace that the dangers following illicit traffie in
naracotic drugs affected tha world community and the sere
became the subject of [11,छ1 111, [6111 | Convert tone, 11117 ae oa

8. Dragan, 18]

party to 168. "Single Convention on [1:11 १.४1



the preamble of which briefly out-lined the importance of
effective measures against abuse of narcotic drugs in the

following words:

“The parties,
concerned with the health and welfare of mankind,
Recognizing that the medical use of narcotic
drugs continues to be indispensable for the relief of
pain and suffering and that adequate provision must
be made to ensure the availability of narcotic drugs
for such purposes,
Recognizing that addiction to narcotic drugs
constitutes a serious evil for the individual and is

fraught with social and economic danger to mankind,

Conscious of their duty to prevent and combat

this evil,

Considering that effective measures against
abuse of narcotic drugs require co-ordinated and
universal actaion,

Understanding that such universal action
calls for international co-operation guided by the
same principles and aimed at common objectives,

Acknowledging the competence of the United
Nations in the field of narcotics control and
desirous that the international organs concerned
should be within the framework of that organisation.

Desiring to conclude a generally acceptable


international convention replacing existing treaties
on narcotic drugs, limiting such drugs to medical and
scientific use, and providing for continuous
international co-operation and control for the

achievement of such aims and objectives.”

The Convention after laying down in Article 33 that
the party was not permitted the possession of drugs except
under legal authority provided fcr action against the
illicit traffic in Article 35 and for penal provision in

Article 36 of the convention which provide as under:

“Article 35

Action against the illicit traffic.

Having due regard to their constitutional, legal and

administrative systems, the parties shali:

.(a)} Make arrangements at the national level for
co-ordination of preventive and repressive action
against the illicit traffic; to this end they may
usefully designate an appropriate agency responsible
for such co-ordination;

(b) Assist each other in the compaign against the
jllicit traffic in narcotic drugs;

(c) Co-operate closely with each other and with the
competent international organizations of which they

are members with a view to maintaining a co-ordinated


compaign against the illicit traffic;

(d) Ensure that international co-operation between
the appropriate agencies be conducted in an
expeditious manner; and

(e) Ensure that where legal papers are transmitted
internationally for the purposes of a prosecution,
the transmittal be effected in an expeditious manner
to the bodies designated by the Parties; this
requirement shall be without prejudice to the right
of a party to require that legal papers be sent to it

through the diplomatic channel;

Article 36

PENAL PROVISIONS

1. (a) Subject to its constitutional limitations,
each party shall adopt such measures as will ensure’ that
cultivation, production, manufacture, extraction,
preparation, pessession, offering, offering for sale,
cistribution, purchase, sale, delivery on any terms
whatscever, brekerage, dispatch, despatch in transmit,
transport, impertation and exportation of drugs contrary to
the provisions of this convention, and any other action
wnich in the opinion of such party may be contrary te the

provisions of this Convention, shall be punishabie offences


when committed intentionally, and that se-ious offences
shall be liable to adequate punishment particularly by

imprisonment or other penalities of deprivatior. of liberty.

(b) Nothwithstanding the preceding subparagraph, when
abusers of drugs have committed such offence, the Parties
may provide, either as an alternative to conviction or
Punishment cr in addition to conviction or punishment, that
such abusers shall undergo measures of treatment, education,
after-care, rehabilitation and social reintegration in

conformity with paragraph 1 of article 38.

2. Subject to the constitutional limitations of a

Party, its legal system and domestic law,

(a) (i) Each of the offences enumerated in paragraph
1, if committed in different countries, shall be considered
as a distinct offence;

(11). Intentional participation, in  censpiracy to
commit and attempts to commit, any of such offences, and
Preparatory acts and financial operations in connection with
the offences referred to in this article, shall be
punishable offences as provided in paragraph 1;

(iii) Foreign convictions for such offences 50311 be
taken into account for the purpose of estadlishing
recidivism; and

(iv) Serious offences heretofore referred to

committed either by nationals or by foreigners shall be


prosecuted by tne Party in whose territory the offence was
committed, or by the Party in whose territory the offender
is found if extradition is not acceptabie in conformity with
the law of the party to which application is made, and if
such offender has not already been prosecuted and judgment
given.

(b) (1) Each of the offences enumerated in paragraphs 1 and
2 (a) (ii) of this article 50811 be deemed to be included as
an extraditable offence in any extradition treaty existing
between Parties. Parties undertake to include such offences
as extraditable offences in every extradition treaty to be
concluded between them;

(ii) If a party which makes extradition conditional on the
existence of a treaty receives a request for extradition
from another party with which it has not extradition treaty,
10 may at its option consider this convention as the legal
basis for extradition in respect of the offences enumerated
in paragraphs 1 and 2(a) (ii) of this article. Extradition
shall be subject to the other conditions provided by the law
of the requested party;

(iii) Parties which do not make extradition conditional an
the existence of a treaty shall recognize the offences
enumerated in paragraphs 1 and 2(a) (11) of this article as
extraditable offences between themselves, subject to the
conditions provided by the law of the requested party; and
Civ) Extradition shall be granted in conformity with the
law of the party to which application is made, and,

notwithstanding subparagraphs (b) (i), (ii) and (iii) of


this parasrapn, =hs party shail have the right to refuse te
grant the extradition in cases where the competent
authorities consider that the offence is not sufficiently

serious.

3. The. provisions of this article shall be subject to
the provisions of the criminal law of the party concerned on

questions of jurisdiction.

4. Nothing contained in this articie shall affect the
principle that the offences to which it refers shall be
defined prosecuted and punished in conformity with the

domestic law of a party.

3.4 The Convention on Psychotropic Substances 1971.

Thereafter the Convention of Psychotropic Substances
1971 was adopted to which India is a party and the preamble

to said convention provide as under:-

“The parties,
Being concerned with the health and welfare of
mankind.

Noting with concern the public healtr and
social problems resulting from the abusa of certain
psychotropic substances;

Determined to prevent and combat ,abuse of


such substances and the illicit traffic to which it
gives rise;

Considering that rigorous measures are
necessary to restrict the use of such substances to
legitimate purposes;

Recognising that the use of psychotropic
substances for medical and scientific purposes is
indispensable and that their availability for such
purposes should not be unduly restricted;

Believing that effective measures against
abuse of such substances require co-ordination and
universal action;

Acknowledging the competence of the United
Nations in the field of control of psychotropic
substances and desirous that the international organs
concerned should be within the framework of that
organization;

Recognising that an international convention

jis necessary to achieve these purposes;

After providing for special provision regarding the
control of preparations psychotropic substances, the
convention provide for measures against the abuse of
Psychotropic substances in article 20, action against the
illicit traffic in article 21 and the penal provision in

article 22 in the following words:-


Article 20

MEASURES AGAINST THE ABUSE OF PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES

1. The parties shall take all practicable
measures for the prevention of abuse of psychotropic
substances and for the early identification,
treatment, education, after-care, the rehabilitation
and social reintegration of the persons involved, and
shall co-ordinate their efforts to these ends.

2. The parties shall as far 85 possible
promote the training of personnel in the treatment,
after-care, rehabilitation and social reintegration
of abusers of psychotropic substances.

3. The parties shall assist persons whose

work so requires to gain an understanding of the
problems of abuse of psychotropic substances and of
jts prevention, and shall also promote such
understanding among the general public if there is a
risk that abuse of such substances will become

widespread.

Article 21

ACTION AGAINST THE ILLICIT TRAFFIC

Having due regard to their constitutional,
legal and administrative systems, the parties shall:

(a) Make arrangements at the national level


for the co-ordination of preventive and repressive
action against the illicit traffic; to this end they
may usefully designate an appropriate agency
responsible for such co-ordination;

(b) Assist each other in the campaign against
the illicit traffic in psychotropic substances, and
in particuiar immediately transmit, through the
diplomatic channel or the competent authorities
designated by the parties for this purpose, to the
other parties directly concerned, a copy of any
report addressed to the Secretary~General under
article 16 in connection with the discovery of a case
of illicit traffic or a seizure;

(०) Co-operate closely with each other and
with the competent international organizations of
_which they are members with a view to maintaining a
co-ordinated campaign against the illicit traffic;

(d) Ensure that international co-operation
between the appropriate agencies be conducted in an
expeditious manner; and

(e) Ensure that, where legal papers are
transmitted internationally for tne purpose of
judicial proceedings, the transmittal be effected in
an expeditious manner to the bodies designated by the
parties; this requirement shall be without prejudice
to the right of a party to require that legal papers

be sent to it through the diplomatic channel.


Article 22

PENAL PROVISIONS

1. (a) Subject to its constitutional limitations,
each Party shall treat as a punishable offence, when
committed intentionally, any action contrary to a law
or regulation adopted in pursuance of its cbligations
under this Convention, and shall ensure that serious
offences shall be liable to adequate punishment,
particularly by imprisonment or other penalty of
deprivation of liberty;

(b) Not-withstanding the preceding sub-paragraph,
when abusers of psychotropic substances have
committed such offences, the parties may provide
either as an alternative to conviction or punishment
or in addition to punishment that such abusers
undergo measures of treatment, education, after care,
rehabilitation and social reintegration in conformity

with paragraph 1 of article 20.

2. Subject to the constitutional limitations of

a party, its legal system and domestic law:-

(a)(i) If a series of related actions constituting
offences under paragraph 1 has been committed in
different countries, each of them shall be treated as
a distinct offence;

(ii) Intentional participation in, conspiracy to

commit and attempts to commit, any of such offences,


and preparatory acts and financial operations in
connection with the offences referred to in this
article, shatl be punishable offences as provided in
paragraph 1;

(iii) Foreign convictions for such offences shall be
taken into account for the purpose of establishing
recidivism; and

(iv) Serious offences heretofore referred to
committed, either by nationals or by foreigners shall
be prosecuted by the party in whose territory the
offence was committed, or by the party in whose
territory the offender is found if extradition is not
acceptable in conformity with the law of the party to
which application is made, and if such offender has
not already been prosecuted and judgment given.

(b) It is desirable that the offences referred to in
paragraph 1 and paragraph 2(a)(ii) be included as
extradition crimes in any extradition treaty which
has been or may hereafter be concluded between any of
the parties, and, as between any of the parties,
which do not make extradition conditional on the
existence of a treaty or on reciprocity, be
recognized as extradition crimes; provided that
extradition shall be granted in conformity with the
law of the party to which application is made, and
that the party shall have the right to refuse to
effect the arrest or grant the extradition in case

where the competent authorities consider that the


offence is not sufficiently serious.

3. Any psychotropic substance or other substance, as
well as any equipment, used in or intended for the
commission of any of the offences referred to in
paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be liable to seizure and
confiscation.

4. The provisions of tiis article shall be subject
to the provisions of the domestic law of the party
concerned on questions of jurisdiction.

5. Nothing contained in this article shall affect
the principle that the offences to which it refers
shall be defined, prosecuted and punished in

conformity with the domestic law of a party.

3.5. The Protocol of 1972 amending the single Convention

on narcotic drugs (Geneva, 25.3.1972).

With the passage of time, it was found that the
illicit trafficking and illicit use of narcotic drugs is on
the increase at the international level and, therefore,
resolutions were adopted by United International Conference
to consider the amendment of Single Convention on narcotic
drugs, 1961, had passed the following resolutions 171 and

III:-

Resolution II
Assistance in Narcotics Control.

The Conference


Recalling that assistance to developing countries is
a concrete manifestation of the will of the
international community to honour the commitment
contained in the United Nations Charter to promote
the social and economic progress of all people;
Recalling the special arrangements made by the United
Nations General Assembly under its resolution 1295
(XIV) with a view to the provision of technical
assistance for drug abuse control;

Welcoming the establishment pursuant to United
Nations General Assembly resolution 2719(XXV), of a
United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control;

Noting that the Conference has adopted a new article
14 viz. concerning technical and financial
assistance to promote more effective execution of the
provisions of the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961;

1. Declares that, to be more effective, the measures
taken against drug abuse must be co-ordinated and
universal;

2. Declares” further that the fulfilment by the
developing countries of their obligations under the
Convention will be facilitated by adequate technical
ard financial assistance from the internationa?

community.


Resolution IIL

Social Conditions and protection against drug addiction

The Conference;

Recalling that the preamble to the Single

convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, states that the

parties to the Convention are “concerned with the

health and welfare of mankind” and are “conscious

their duty to prevent and combat" the evil of drug

addiction,

Considering that the discussions at the

Conference have given evidence of the desire to take

effective steps to prevent drug addiction;

Considering that, while drug addiction leads

to personal degradation and social disruption,

happens very often that the deplorable social and

economic conditions in which certain individuals and

certain groups are living predispose them to drug

addiction;

Recognizing that social factors have

certain and sometimes preponderant influence on the

behaviour of individuals and groups;

Recommends that the parties:

1. Should bear in mind that drug addiction is often

the result of an unwholesome social atmosphere

which those who are most exposed to the danger of

drug abuse live;

2. Should do everything in their power to combat the


spread of the illicit use of drugs; and
3. Should develop leisure and other activities
conducive to the sound physical and psychological

health of young people.

Apprehension about the sharp increase in drug
problems during the late seventies led to formulation by the
General Assembly in 1981 of an International Drug Abuse
Control Strategy and a five year action programme (1982-86).
It provided for a series of policy measures dealing with
various aspects of drug control, traffic and treatement of
addicts. The six-point strategy called for, (i) improving
the international drug control system through wider
adherence to existing treaties; (ii) co-ordinating efforts
to ensure balance between supply and demand of drugs for
legitimate use; (iii) steps for eradication of illicit drug
traffic including finding income producing alternatives for
illicit drug producers; (iv) intensifying efforts to detect
and dismantle clandestine laboratories and trafficking
organisations; and (v) measures to prevent drug abuse and
promote treatment, rehabilitation and social integration of
drug abusers. The programme of action set out’ specific
activities for UN and member governments to achieve these
objectives. The Commission on Narcotic Drugs was asked to

monitor and co-ordinate their implementation.!


The 1984 Declaration on the Control of Drug
Trafficking and Drug Abuse viewed drug trafficking and drug
abuse as “an international criminal activity” a grave threat
to the security and development of many countries and

peoples which should be combated by all moral, legal and

institutional means, at the national, regional and
international levels. It identified the eradication of this
evil as the collective responsibility of all States and

affirmed the willingness of member States to intensify

efforts and co-ordinate their strategies in that area.?

Further the Commission on Narcotics was called upon
in 1984 to begin preparing a new International Convention
against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances to address areas that seemed to be inadequately

covored by existing instrumonts.3

3.6. The Convention Against illicit traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances 1988 (Vienna,
20.12.1988).

Finally, the convention against illicit traffic in
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances was held by
United Nations in 1988 and preamble to the said convention
recalls deep concern on illicit traffic in narcotic drugs

and psychotropic substances in the following words:-


"The parties to this Convention,
Deeply concerned by the magnitude of and rising trend
in the illicit production of, demand for anc traffic
in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, which
pose a serious threat to the health and welfare of
human beings and adversely affect the economic,
cultural and political foundations of society;
Deeply concerned also by the steadily increasing
in-roads into various social groups made sy illicit
traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances, and particulariy by the fact that
children are used in many parts of the world as the
illicit drug consumers market and for purposes of
illicit production, distribution and trade in
_ narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, which
entails a danger of incalculable gravity;
Recognizing the links between illicit traffic and
other related organized criminal activities which
undermine the Jegitimate economies and threaten the
stability, security and sovereignty of States;
Recognizing also that illicit traff-cc is an
international criminal activity, the suppression of
which demands urgent attention and the highest
priority;
Aware that illicit traffic generates large financial
profits and wealth enabling transnaticna™ criminal
organizaticns to penetrate, contaminate anc corrupt

the structures of government, legitimate commercial


37

and financial business, and society at all 108
levels;
Determined to deprive persons engaged in illicit
traffic of the proceeds of their criminal activities
and thereby eliminate their main incentive for doing;
Desiring to eliminate the root causes of the
problem of absue of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances, including the illilcit demand for such
drugs and substances and the enormous profits derived
from illicit traffic;
Considering that measures are necessary to monitor
certain substances, including precursors, chemicals
and solvents, which are used in the manufacture of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, the ready
availability of which has led to an increase in the

clandestine manufacture of such drugs and substances;

Determined to improve international
co-operation in the suppression of illicit traffic by
sea;

Recognizing that eradication of illicit
traffic is a collective responsibility of all States
and that, to that end, coordinated action within the
framework of international co-operation is necessary;

Acknowledging the competence of the United
Nations in the field of control of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances and desirous  Lhat the

international organs concerned with such , control



should be within the framework of that organization;

Re~affirming the guiding principles of
existing treaties in the field of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances and the system of control
which they embody;

Recognizing the need to reinforce and
supplement the measures provided in the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, the 1972 protocol
Amending the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs,
1961, and the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic
Substances, in order to counter the magnitude and
extent of illicit traffic and its grave consequences;

‘Recognizing also the importance of
strengthening and enhancing effective legal means for
international co-operation in criminal matters for
suppressing the international criminal activities of
illicit traffic;

Desiring to conclude a comprehensive,
effective and operative international convention that
is directed specifically against illicit traffic and
that considers the various aspects of the problems as
a whole, in particular those aspects not envisaged in
the existing treaties in the field of narcotic drugs

and psychotropic substances;”


In article 3, the Convention provide for offences and

sanctions as under:-

1.

Article 3

OFFENCES AND SANCTIONS.

Each Party shall adopt such measures as may be

necessary to establish as criminal offences under its

domestic law, when committed intentionally:

(a) (1) The production, manufacture, extraction,

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

Preparation, offering, offering for sale,
distribution, sale, delivery on any terms
whatsoever, brokerage, dispatcn, dispatch in
transit, transport, importation or
exportation of any narcotic drug or any
psychotropic substance contrary to the
provisions of the 1961 Convention, the 1961
Convention as amended or the 1971 Convention;
The cultivation of opium poppy, coca bush or
cannabis plant for the purpose of the
Production of narcotic drugs contrary to the
Provisions of the 1961 Convention and the
1961 Convention as amended,

The possession or purchase of any narcotic
drug or psychotropic substance for the
Purpose of any of the activities enumerated
in (i) above;

The manufacture, transport or distribution of

equipment, materials or of substances listed


(५)

(8) (1)

(ii)

in Table I and Table II knowing that they are
to be used in or for the illilcit cultivation
production or manufacture of narcotic drugs
or psychotropic substances;

The organization, management or financing of
any of the offences enumerated in (i), (ii),
(iti) or (iv) above;

The conversion or transfer of property,
knowing that such property is derived from
any offence or offences established in
accordance with subparagraph (a) of this
paragraph, or from an act of participation in
such offence or offences, for the purpose of
concealing or disguising the illicit origin
of the property or of assistance any person
who is involved in the commission of such an
offence or offences to evade the legal
consequences of his actions;

The concealment or disguise of the true
nature, source, location, disposition,

movement, rights with respect to, or

. ownership of property, knowing that such

property is derived from an offence or
offences established in accordance with

subparagraph (a) of this paragraph;


(c) Subject to its constitutional principles and the

basic concepts of its legal system-

Ci)

(ii)

(iii)

The acquistion, possession or use of
property, knowing at the time of receipt,
that such property was derived from an
offence or offences, established in
accordance with subparagraph (a) of this
paragraph or from an act of participation in

such offence or offences;

The possession of equipment or materials or
substances listed in Table I and Table II,
knowing that they are being or are to be used
in or for the illicit cultivation production
or manufacture of narcotic drugs or

psychotropic substances;

Publicly inciting or inducing others, by any
means, to commit any of the offences
established in accordance with this article
or to use narcotic drugs or psychotrpic

substances illicitly;


Civ) Participation in, association or conspiracy
to commit, attempts to commit and aiding,
abetting, facilitating and counselling the
commission of any of the offences established

in accordance with this article.

Subject to its constitutional Principles and the
basic concepts of its legal system, each party shall
adopt such measures as may be necessary to establish
as a criminal offence under its domestic law, when
committed intentionally, the possession, purchase or
cultivation of narcotic drug or psychotropic
substances for personal consumption contrary to the
provisions of the 1961 Convention, the 1961
Convention as amended or the 1971 Convention.
3. Knowledge, intent or Purpose required as
an element of an offence set forth in
Paragraph I of this article may be inferred
from objective factual circumstances.
4 (a) Each party shall make the commission of
the offences establishd in accordance with
Paragraph I of this article . liable to
sanctions and take into account the grave
nature of these offences, such as
imprisonment or other forms of ceprivation of
liberty, pecuniary sanctions and
confiscation.

(b) The parties may provide, in addition to


conviction or punishment, for an _ offence
established in accordance with paragraph I of
this article, that the offender shall undergo
measures such as treatment, education,
aftercare, rehabilitation or social
reintegration.

(०) Notwithstanding the preceding
subparagraph, in appropriate cases of a minor
nature, the Parties may provide, as
alternatives to conviction or punishment
measures such as education, rehabilitation or
social reintegration, as well as, when the
offender is a drug abuser, treatment and
aftercare.

(d) The parties may provide, either as an
alternative to conviction or punishment, of
an offence established in accordance with
paragraph 2 of this article, measures for the
treatment, education, after care,
rehabilitation or social reintegration of the
offender.

5. The parties shall ensure that their
courts and other competent authorities having
jurisdiction can take into account factual
circumstances which make the commission of
the offences, established in accordance with
paragraph I of this article particularly

serious, such as;


(a)

(b)

(०)

(d)

(e)

(7)
(9)

(h)

6.

The involvement of the offence of an
organized criminal group to which the
offender belongs;

The involvement of the offender in
other international organised criminal
activities;

The involvement of the offenders in
other illegal activities facilitated by
commission of the offence;

The use of violence or arms by the
offender;

The fact that the offender holds a
public office and that the offence is
connected with the office in question;
The Victimization or use of minors;

The fact that the offence is committed
in a penal institution or in an
educational institution or social
service facility or in their immediate
vicinity or in other places to which
school children and students resort for
educational, sports and social
activities;

Prior conviction, Particularly for
similar offences, whether foreign or
domestic, to the extent permitted under
the domestic law of a party.

The Parties shall endeavour to ensure


-: AB ore
that any discretionary legal powers under
their domestic Jaw relating to the
prosecution of persons for offences

tablished in accordance with this article

es
are exercised to maximize the effectiveness
of law enforcement measures in respect of
those offences and with due regard ८0४० the
need to deter the commission of such
offences.

7. The Perties shall ensure that their
courts or other competent authorities bear in
mind the serious nature of the offences
enumerated in paragraph I of this article and
the circumstances enumerated in paragraph 5
of this article when considering the
eventuality of early release or parole of
persons convicted of such offerces,

8. Each Party shall, where appropriate,
establish under its domestic law long statute
of limitations period in which to commence
proceedings for any offence established in
accordance with paragraph I of this articte,
and a longer period where the alleged
offendor has evaded the administration of
justice,

9. Each Party shall take appropriate

measures, consistent with its legal stam,

to ensure that a person charged, with or


convicted of an offence established in
accordance with paragraph I of this article,
who is found within its territory, is present
at the necessary criminal proceedings.

10. For the purpose of co-operation among
the Parties under this Convention, including,
in particular co-operation under articles 5,
6, 7 and 9, offences established in
accordance with this article shall not be

considered as fiscal offences or as political

offences or regarded as politically
motivated, without prejudice to the
constitutional limitations and the

fundamental domestic law of the Parties.
11. Nothing contained in this article shall affect the
principle that the description of the offences to which it
refers and of legal defences thereto is received to the
domestic law of a Party and that such offences shall be

prosecuted and punished in conformity with that law.

3.7 Controlled delivery.

Article 11 of the Convention against Illicit Traffic
in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, 1988 provides
for use of ’Controlled delivery’, if permitted by domestic
legal system. Article 11 is reproduced below for the sake
of convenience:-

“ae If permitted by the basic principles of their

respective domestic legal systems, the Parties shall


take the necessary measures, within their
possibilities, to allow for the appropriate use of
controlled delivery at the international level, on
the basis of agreements or arrangements mutually
consented to, with a view to identifying persons
involved in offences established in accordance with
article 3, paragraph 1, and to takaing legal action
against them.

2. Decisions to use controlled delivery shall be
made on a case-by-case basis and man, when necessary,
take into consideration financial arrangements and
understandings with respect to the exercise of
jurisdiction by the Parties concerned.

3. Illicit consignments whose’ controlled
delivery is agreed to may, with the consent of the
Parties concerned, be intercepted and allowed to
continue with the narcotic drugs or psychotropic
substances intact or removed or replaced in whole or

in 7470. /

Therefore, it is imperative to give effect to this

provision of the Convention, to which India is a party, by

bringing out suitable amendment by incorporating a new

50A in the Act to trace the onward movement of the

consignment and to apprehend, arrest and prosecute the

persons including the ultimate persons taking delivery of

the consignment.

Since 1990 when this Convention came into effect a


large number of countries have ratified the Convention.
Many States have legislated mew laws or have amended the
existing ones and introduced regulations to implement money
laundering counter-measures. Some countries have gone a
step further and adopted the recommendations made by the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) which was established by
the heads of state or government of the ’Group of Seven’
major industrialised countries and the President of CEC.4
Notwithstanding the foregoing efforts and measurres,
money laundering continues unabated in most parts of the
world, though the cost of money laundering has considerably
gone up in some parts of the world on account of effective

counter-measures by some states.5

3.8 Suitable legislative amendments.

The study of the Directive Principles of State policy
enshrined in the Constitution of India and the International
Conventions has been done with the object to incorporate
necessary amendment in the Jaw dealing with control and
regulations of Narcotic Drugs and *Psychotropic Substances
in India because the directive principles of State Policy
enshrined in the Constitution of India must guide the
Government to frame suitable law in consonance with Article
47 of the Constitution of India and International
Conventions, to which India is a Party, and its provisions
should duly find place at the time of amendment of the
domestic law especially in view of the provisions of section

4(2)(0) of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances


¥

Act, 1985, which provides as under: -

4. Central Government to take measures for

preventing and combating abuse of and illicit traffic

1m narcotic drugs, etc,

(1) Subject to the provisions of this

the Central Government. shall take al? such measures

as it deems necessary or expedient for the purpose of

preventing and combating abuse of narcotic drugs

psychotropic substances and the illicit traffic

therein.

(2) In particular and without prejudice

the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1),

the measures which the Central Government may

under that sub-section include measures with respect

to all or any of the fol lowing mathara, namaly:

(a) Co-ordination of actions by various officers,

State Governments and other authorities

(i) Under this Act, or

(ii) Under any other law for the time
in force in connection with
enforcement of the provisions of

Act;

(b) Obligations undor the International

Conventions


FOOT NOTES

CHAPTER-III

S.V.Joga Rao, “Drug Addiction Penal Policy” 34 JILI

(1992) P.277-278.

Ibid

Ibid

D.I.G. Saleem Tariq Lone, “Assets Forefeitures as an
effetive strategy against Drug Trafficking”, Paper
presented in the Third Asia Money Laundering
Symposium, 12-14, December, 1995.

Ibid


CHAPTER IV

NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES ACT: A REVIEW

4.1 The Context. The law relating to narcotic drugs was
being administered in India by three Central Acts, namely;
(a) Opium Act, 1857, (b) Opium Act, 1878 and (०) Dangerous
Drugs Act, 1930, besides the State Legislation, which
provided for punishment for the offences but not
commensurating with the increasing menace of drug addiction.
It was felt that drug addiction and illicit trafficking in
drugs have taken such an alarming proportion that it had not
only affected the heaith of the individual citizen but had
shaken the entire Nation. Noticing this menace the Indian
Parliament realised the gravity of the situation and the
need for stringent provisions for the control and regulation
operations relating to narcotic drugs and psychotrapic
substances. Accordingly, the NOPS Act was enacted by
repealing the earlier Acts thereby prescribing punishment of
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than ten years and a fine which shal} not be Jess than one
lakh rupees in respect of most of the offences. As per the
Preamble of the NDPS Act the aim of the Act is (a) to
consolidate and amend the law relating to narcotic drugs;

(b) to make stringent Provisions for the control and


regulation of operations relating to narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances; and for matters connected

therewith.

The NDPS Act was enacted as the penalties under the
previous Acts were not sufficiently deterrent to meet the
challenge of well organised gangs of smugglers. For
example, Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 provided for maximum term
of imprisonment of three years with or without fine and four
years imprisonment with or without fine with respect to the
subsequent offences and no minimum punishment was prescribed
as a result of which drug traffickers have been very often
jet off by the courts with nominal punishment. With the
passage of time, a vast body of international Jaw on
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances has emerged
through various international treaties and protocol to which
India was a party which entailed several obligations, which
were not either fully or partly covered by the NDPS Act.
Therefore, it was felt that the Act of 1985 required further
amendment to make it more stringent to curb the menace of
drug abuse and drug trafficking. Accordingly, the NDPS
(Amendment) Act (No.2 of 1989) was passed and the salient

features thereof are as under:

(a) Insertion of new section 31A providing for
death penalty on second conviction in respect
of specified offences involving specified

quantities of certain drugs.


(b)

(०)

(०)

(e)

(1)

(9)

No sentence awarded under this Act, (other
than section 27) should be suspended remitted

or commuted.

Offences punishable under the Act shall be
tried by a Court of Sessions until a Special
Court is constituted under the new section

36A.

Insertion of new section 36A providing for

constitution of special courts.

Insertion of new section 37 which replaced
the old section 37 of the principal Act
providing that every offence punishable under

the Act shall be cognizable and non-bai lable.

Empowering officers authorised under section
42 of the Principal Act to order attachment/

destruction of illicit crop.

Insertion of new section 52A to provide for
disposal of seized Narcotic Drugs and

Psychotropic Substances.

a)


(h)

(i)

(3)

Insertion of new section 53A to provide that
a statement made and signed by a person
before any officer authorised under section
53 for the investigation of offences shall be
relevant for the purpose of providing an

offence under the Act.

An officer on whom any duty has been imposed
under the Act or any person who has been
given the custody of any addict or any other
person charged with an offence under the Act,
and who wilfully aids in or connives at the
contravention of any provision of the Act
shall be punishable with the same punishment
as that awardable to drug trafficking

offenders.

Immunity from prosecution to an addict
volunteering for treatment for de-addiction
or de-toxification once in his life time.
The immunity may be withdrawn if the addict
does not undergo the complete treatment for

the purpose.

Addition of new chapter to cover all aspects
relating to forfeiture of property derived
from, or used in, illicit traffic. This

Chapter inter alia, prohibits holding of


illegally acquired property which 185. been
defined as property acquired from illicit
traffic in Narcotic Drugs or Psychotropic
Substances. It also provides for
identifying, seizure or freezing of illegally
acquired property. It further provides for
setting up of Offices of Competent Authority
to deal with all aspects relating to
forfeiture; to appoint officers as
Administrators for the management of
properties seized or forfeited and an

Appellate Tribunal for such properties.

(1) Insertion of new section 74A to empower the
Central Government to give directions to
State Governments for implementing the

provisions of the Act.

4.2 Punishments for offences under the Act.

The NDPS Act provides stringent punishment for the
offences. The punishments for the offences under the NDPS
Act as amended by Act No.2 of 1989 are detailed in Annexure

१३%

4.3 The Magnitude of the problems of illicit trafficking.
In spite of the provisions for deterrent punishment
including death penalty provided under section 31A of the

NDPS Act, the menace of illicit trafficking and use of

ase
aye?


narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances is on the
increase. Every day we learn from the media that huge
quantities of heroine, charas, opium or some other narcotic
drug or psychotropic substances have been caught in one or
the other part of India. Drug addiction has become one of
the curses of our times, a menace which threatens public
health and results in the dissolution of human personality,
promoting conditions for various forms of human degradation
whose consequences spread to crime and lawlessness. The
explosive escalation of the illicit use of narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances, which account for more deaths
than the most deadly diseases, has become a lethal
phenomenon everywhere today, and India is not an exception.
The impact of this tragic development has not been fully met
by the existing law with the result that the rich and the
poor alike, including students of both sexes, are falling a
prey in the hands of the powerful organised smugglers of
these drugs and substances who amass wealth in no time.
This is mainly due to the fact that there are still some
inherent infirmities in the procedural law which require
immediate amendments for making the Act more effective to
tackle the problems of drug addiction and drug trafficking

in India.

oT


4.4 The latest trends in narcotic cases detected.

A summary of seizure of Narcotic Drugs,

Substances

reported during the month of August,

and Controlled Substances

(Acetic

Psychotropic
Anhydride)

1996 (Provisional), the

preceding month and that of the corresponding period of the

previous year is as under:

QUANTITY IN KG/LTRS. OD

DESCRIPTION AUGUST, 96 DURING THE DURING

PRECEDING CORRESPONDING

MONTH PERIOD LAST

(JULY, 96) YEAR

(AUGUST, 95)

HEROIN 113.181 54.026 84.946
OPIUM 23.915 65.610 55.173
CHARAS/HASHISH 236.207 40.463 638.495
COCAINE -- -- --
MORPHINE -- --
GANJA 431.525 831.550 5240.105


METHAQUALONE/  -- -~ --

MANDRAX

ACETIC ANHYDRIDE 140 LTRS = 140 LTS

Source: Govt. of India, Narcotics Control Bureau,

Drug Situation Report, August, 1996.

The table at Annexure IV shows the quantity of
various drugs seized in kilograms with number of cases

during the years 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995 and 1996.

4.5 Infirmities in the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic

. Substances Act.

From the above discussion it is clear that the
enactment of the NDPS Act has not yielded the desired
results to curb the menace of drug trafficking and drug
addiction in India. The reasons are the inherent weaknesses
in the enforcement of NOPS Act which required to be tackled
by proper amendment to the Act. The weaknesses and the

remedies therefor are detailed as under:-

(a) Lack of social sanction against such
offences.

There is lack of public opinion and public


eta * ने अमल tte, TINA Lorem

awareness qua the impact of such offences on the
society and nobody bothers to bring the matter to
light unless somebody in the family is affected by
the problem of drug addiction. Therefore, the need
is to create social awareness through education. and
publicity qua the dangers of drug abuse and
conducting of training programme and seminars more
frequently by publishing the reports in newspapers
and even the dangers of drug abuse may be
incorporated in education curricula of Senior
Secondary School and colleges to create awareness
amongst the students. Further, in order to meet the
situation, it is desirable that sub-section (2)(d) of

section 4 of the NDPS Act may be substituted as

under: ८
“(d) identification, treatment, education,
aftercare, rehabilitation, social
re-integration of addicts, creation of social
awareness qua dangers of drug abuse through
education, publicity, training programmes and
seminars with wide publicity to the
deliberations and the reports thereof in the
media.”

(b) Wild growth of coca plant, opium poppy and

cannabis plants.
While the unnoticed wild growth of cannabis

or coca plant or opium poppy is not the offence under


the Act, unlicensed cultivation thereof is an
cffence. This leads to cultivation of these plants
on the government Jand/forest land on the pretext of
wild growth by unscrupulous drug traffickers.
Therefore, it is required that wild growth of such
plants should be reported by the forest department
regarding growth on forest land and by revenue
officers regarding growth on the government land, on
information, and take stern steps regarding
systematic destruction of growth in a phased manner.
Accordingly, a new section 47A be inserted in the
NDPS Act on the following lines:-
"478. Duty of the Forest officer and Revenue
officer to take action - Every Forest officer
and Revenue officer shall give immediate
information of the wild growth of coca plant,
opium poppy or cannabis plant on the forest
land or government land within his
jurisdiction, as the case may be, when. it may
come or brought to his knowledge at any
stage, to the Metropolitan Magistrate,
Judicial Magistrate of the First Class or any
Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf
by the State Government or any officer of a
gazetted rank empowered under section 42 who,
upon receipt of such information, may pass
such appropriate order including order to

destroy the plants as he thinks fit, and

बट


every such forest officer or revenue officer
who knowingly neglects to give such

information, shall be liable to punishment”.

(c) The inherent infirmities in procedural laws.

Chapter V of the NDPS Act provides for
procedure to conduct search and seizure. AS a
deterrent punishment is provided, the Legislature has
made the procedure more. strict. Some of the High
Courts have held that the procedure jaid down in
Chapter V is mandatory, while others have held the
same to be directory. However, the controversy has
finally been resolved by the Supreme Court in State

of Punjab V Balbir Singh! by holding some provisions

to be mandatory and others to be directory. Thus,
the amendment is required to be made in the
Procedural Jaw incorporated in Chapter v keeping in
view the land mark judgment of the Apex Court in

Ralbir Singh's casa to make tho law mora effective.

(d) Change of Investigating Officers during the

investigation of case.

It has been seen that many times the
investigation of narcotic cases is carried out by

more than one Investigating Officers with the result


that the proper investigation is not there and some
Tacunae creeps in the investigation benefiting the
accused on technical grounds thereby making the
stringent provision of the Act redundant. Therefore,
it is required that investigation of the case under
the Act should be conducted and completed by one
Investigating Officer, as far as possible, and a new
section 67A be inserted in the 075 Act on the

following lines:-

"67A. Completion of the investigation by an
empowered officer- Every empowered officer
who is making investigation of a case under
the provisions of this Act or who takes any
step under Chapter ५ thereof shall be
incharge of the investigation till it is
completed, unless there are compelling
reasons to be recorded requiring a change and
it shall be his duty to take such step under
the law far speedy investigation and submit
the case to the competent court without any

unnecessary delay.”


(e) Non establishment of Special Courts for
speedy trial under Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic

Substances Act.

Section 36 of the NOPS Act provides for
establishment of Special Courts for the trial of the
cases under the Act. Under this Act, the Government
may, for the purpose of providing speedy trial of the
offences under this Act, by notification in the
official gazette, constitute as many Special Courts
as may be necessary for such areas as may be
specified in the notification. A Special Court shall
consist of a single judge who shall be appointed by
the Government with the concurrence of the Chief

Justice of the High Court.

Although the aforesaid section inserted by
the Amendment Act No.2 of 1989 came into force with
effect from 29th May, 1989 vide notification No.2/89
dated 29.5.1989, issued by the Government of India,
yet even after the lapse of about eight years, most
of the State Governments have not consituted the
Special Courts thereby making the provision
redundant. The Central Government should, therefore,
take up the matter with the State Governments so that
these Special Courts under the Act are constituted
for the speedy trial of the offences under the NDPS

Act in each and every State without any delay. It

eo


must be remembered by every State Government that the
administration of criminal justice is the primary
duty of every State Government and the constitution
of the Special Courts envisaged in the Acts passed by
the Parliament should not be held up due to financial
constraints. The State Government cannot avoid its
constitutional obligation to provide speedy trial to
the accused by pleading financial or administrative
inability. The State is under a _ constitutional
Mandate to ensure speedy trial and whatever is
necessary for this purpose has to be done by the
State. Therefore, mandatory provisions should be
incorporated for the creation of appropriate number
of special courts in every State of the country
without any delay. Accordingly, after sub-section
(1) of Section 36 of the NDPS Act, the following
proviso shal] be inserted, namely-

“Provided that at least one special court

shall be constituted by the Government as

soon as the number of pending cases under the

Act exceeds one hundred and fifty.”
(1) The sentencing structure in the Act.

In the NDPS Act, the minimum punishment of 10
years rigorous imprisonment and fine of rupees one
lakh is prescribed for most of the offenders without

taking into consideration whether the recovered

2


contraband is of 1७55 quantity or commercial
quantity; except in case of recovery of small
quantity from any person for personal consumption
under section 27 of the NDPS Act. The Department of
Revenue in its recommendations on the amendment of
the Act has suggested rationalization of the
sentencing for offences committed under the Act and
for effective implementation of the Act, particularly
in cases of possession of small quantities. It isa
well recognised principle that punishing is an art
which involves the balancing of several factors like
gravity of the offence and other circumstances. It
is also accepted by the jurists that the provisions
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 have fairly stood the
test of the time in the matter of awarding
punishment. The Law Commission is of the view that
on the same Jlines the provisions in the NDPS Act
prescribing sentences require a fresh look on the
basis of sentencing methods reflected in the Indian
Penal Code and other amendments. It is needless to
mention that a lenient sentence does not always meet
the needs of justice, but at the same time the courts
also are generally reluctant to award always a severe
sentence irrespective of the gravity. Likewise
section 27 providing punishment in respect of the

persons found in possession of small quantities under


the circumstances stated therein need to be amended
inserting a new sub-section (3) therein on the

following lines:

“(3) Where a person who is shown to have been
in possession of a small quantity of narcotic
drug or psychotropic substance fails to prove
that it was intended for the personal
consumption of such person and not for sale
or distribution, such person shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in this
Chapter, be punishable-

(a) Where the narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance possessed or consumed is cocaine,
morphine, diacetyl-morphine or any other
narcotic drug or any psychotropic substance
as may be specified in this behalf by the
Central Government, by notification in the
official gazsette, with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to two years or with
fine or with both; and

(b) Where the narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance possessed or consumed is other than
those specified in or under clause (a), with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to

one year or with fine or with both.”

3


(g) Establishment of centres as provided under

section 71 of the Act.

Although provision has been inserted in the

Act for the establishment of centres for
identification, treatment and rehabilitation of
addicts, but it has been observed that some of the
State Governments have not. established adequate
number of such centres with the result that the
addicts are running after drug traffickers for
getting the drugs require and the purpose of this
provision for de-addiction and rehabilitation has
been frustrated. Thus there is need for the
Government to see that the object underlying the
section is achieved by utilising the services of
- Non-governmental organisations and if necessary by

establishing a wing in Government hospitals.

Conclusion.

In view of the above discussion, it is imperative
that the changes suggested by the Commission be implemented
by carrying out suitable amendments in the NDPS Act to make
it more effective to check the evil of drug trafficking and

drug addiction.


(1)

AIR

1991

sc 558.

FOOTNOTES

CHAPTER IV


CHAPTER V

MANDATORY AND DIRECTORY PROVISIONS : DUTIES OF EMPOWERED

OFFICERS

5.1 There are generally five stages in the investigation and
trial of a case, under the NDPS Act.

(a) information

(b) Investigation

(c) search, seizure and arrest

(d) submission of final report to the court and

(e) trial of the case in the Court.

In these the possession and search are of vital
importance. As stringent punishments have been provided for
the offences under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985 with minimum punishment of rigorous
imprisonment for ten years and fine of rupees one lakh for
most of the offences, the Parliament, in its wisdom, has
imposed corresponding strict special procedure to be adopted
at the time of search, seizure and arrest of the culprits in
Chapter V of the Act. It is not out of place to mention
here that the experience has shown that the Act has not
yielded the desired results and a 18798 number of cases
instituted for various offences under the Act have ended in
acquittal not on merits but on technical grounds of
non-compliance of mandatory provisions of sections 42 and 50
of the Act and in some cases on the prejudice caused to the

accused for non-compliance of the directory provisions of


sections 52, 55 and 57 of the Act and the like.

The investigating officer must understand hefore
starting bhe investigation of a case under tha Act that the
jinvastigation is not an end but means to find out the truth.
A good investigating officer must know right steps to be
taken for conducting the search and seizure in strict
conformity of the relevant provision. To avoid acquittal on
technical grounds of non-compliance of mandatory or
directory provisions, he should not only strictly comply
with mandatory provisions of sections 42 and 50 of the Act
but also the directory provisions incorporated in sections
82,55,57 and the like in the Code of Criminal Procedure as
far as applicable. Moreover, he must ensure that the link
evidence of the sample, being analysed by the chemical
examiner, should be complete including taking of the sample
and property to the S.H.O. and sealing by S.H.O. with his
seal, deposit of the same intact in the malkhana and sending
of the sample to chemical examiner etc. It is necessary to
examine some of the judgments of the courts on various

provisions of the Act.

In the first case (Durand Didier v. Chief Secretary,
Union Territory of Goal which came up in the Supreme Court,

the accused Durand Didler, a French national was apprehended

by the police at Colva (Goa) and was found in possession of
51 grams of brown sugar (heroine), 45 grams of ganja oil and
55 grams of opium. The counsel for the accused took up the

plea that the investigating officer did not deliberately


join with him respectable inhabitants of the locality. The
Supreme Court rejected this plea by holding that where the
witnesses to search and seizure of contraband drugs from the
accused at midnight were inhabitants of the locality in
which police outpost was situate and nothing brought out in
the cross-examination of these panch witnesses so as to
discredit their testimony, the fact that the witnesses were
not residing in the vicinity of place of seizure is
immaterial and the plea that there was violation of
Statutory safeguards relating to search and seizure was
untenable. On the other plea of the counsel for the accused
that the accused was found in possession of small quantity
for personal consumption, it was held by the Apex Court that
the substances seized from the possession of the accused
cannot be held to be in small quantity so ब5 to bring him
only within the mischief of section 27(a) of the Act in view

of explanation I to the section and the notification

thereunder.
5.3 Interpretation qua the bail provisions under the NDPS
Act

On the question of grant of bail to the persons
accused of the commission of the offences under the Act, in

Narcotic Control Bureau v. Narcotic Contro] Bureau v. Kishan Lal_and_others,? the

Supreme Court laid down the following propositions of law:-


"Section 37 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985 (as amended) starts with oa
non-obstante clause stating that notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, no person accused of an offence’ prescribed
therein shall be released on bail unless the
conditions contained therein are satisfied. The NDPS
Act is a special enactment and was enacted with a
view to make stringent provisions for the control and
regulation of operations relating to narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances. That being the
underlying object and particularly when the
provisions of section 37 of NDPS Act are in negative
terms limiting the scope of the applicability of the
provisions of Cr.P.C regarding bail, it can not’ be
said that High Court’s powers to grant bail under
section 439 Cr.P.C. are not subject to the
limitations mentioned under Section 37 of the NDPS

Act"

Patel and another. ve

In__Rajnikant _Jivanial

Intelligence Officer, Narcotic Control Bureau, New Delhi,3,

the accused, arrested for offences punishable under sections

21,23 and 29 of the Narcotic Drugs = and Psychotropic


13

Substances Act, 1985 were enlarged on bail by the magistrate
on failure of the prosecution to present thea challan within
80 days under proviso to section 167(2) Cr.P.Cc. The High
Court cancelled the bail order. While upholding the order
of the High Court, the Supreme Court observed: “An order
for release on bail under proviso (a) to 5. 16702) may
appropriately be termed as an order-on-default. Indeed, it
is a release on bail on the default of the prosecution in
filing charge-sheet within the prescribed period. The right
to bail, under &.167(2) proviso (8) thereto, is absolute.
it 15 legislative command and not court's discretion. If
the invostigating agency fails to File charge-sheet before
the expiry of 90/60 days, as the case may be, the accused in
custody should be released on bail. But ab that stage,
merits of the case are not to be examined. Not at all. In
Pach, Lhe magistrate has no power boo remand a person beyond
the stipulated period of 90/60 days. He must pass an order
of bail and communicate the same to the accused to furnish

the requisite bail bonds.

The accused cannot, therefore, claim any special
right to remain on bail. If the investigation reveals that
the accused has committed a serious offence and charge~sheet
is Filed, the bail granted under proviso fa) to %.167(2)

could be cancelled.”


5.4 On the question of discharge of the accused, the

Supreme Court in State of Himachal Pradesh v.  Pirthi Chand

and another‘ has laid down the following principles:
"The evidence collected in a search in violation of
Jaw does not become inadmissible in evidence under
the Evidence Act. The consequence would be that
evidence discovered would be to prove unlawful
possession of the contraband under the Act. It is
founded in Panchnama to seize the contraband from the
possession of the suspect/accused. Though the search
may be illegal but the evidence collected i.e.
Panchnama etc. nonetheless would be admissible at
the trial. At the stage of filing charge-sheet it
cannot be said that there is no evidence and the
Magistrate or the Sessions Judge would be committing
illegality to discharge the accused on the ground
that Section 50 or other provisions have not been
complied with. At the trial an opportunity would be
available to the Prosecution to prove that the search
was conducted in accordance with law. Even if search
is found to be in violation of law, what weight
should be given to the evidence collected is yet
another question to be gone into. Under these
circumstances, the learned Sessions Judge was not
justified in discharging the accused, after filing of
the charge~sheet holding that mandatory requirements

of Section 50 had not been complied with".


In some of the responses received and also during
discussions in the workshops it was pointed out that a plain
reading of the above judgment, particularly para 3 regarding
the applicability of section 50 would create a doubt whether
the Supreme Court laid down that the provisions of section
50 would also apply to search of ae place. It may be
mentioned that it was a case of search of a place and not of
a person. Therefore, the provisions of section 50 do not
apply. The section itself makes it clear that the
provisions contained therein would apply only to search of a
person. The reference to section 50 here and there in the
judgment was in the context of the discharge of the accused
by the sessions court at a preliminary stage. We, however,
feel that the Supreme Court may clarify the position by
demarcating the parameters between “search of a place” and
“search of a person” in the context of applicability of
section 50 to the effect that it applies only to “search of
a person" and not to the “search of a place”, so as to make
the law clear, particularly for the guidance of the lower

courts.

5.5 In State of Punjab v. Balbir Singh> » the Supreme

Court while examining the steps to be taken by the
investigating officer went into the question as to which
provisions are mandatory and which are directory and
concluded thus. ८

"(1) If 8 oolice officer without any prior

information as contemplated under the provisions of


pend

the NDPS Act makes a search or arrests a person in
the normal course of investigation into an offence or
suspected offences as provided under the provisions
of Cr.P.C. and when such search is completed at that
stage Section 50 of the NDPS Act would not be
attracted and the question of complying with the
requirements thereunder would not arise. If during
such search or arrest there is a chance recovery of
any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance then the
police officer, who is not empowered, should inform
the empowered officer who should thereafter proceed
in accordance with the provisions of the NDPS Act.
If he happens to be an empowered officer also, then
from that stage onwards, -.-he should carry out the
investigation in accordance with the other provisions

of the NDPS Act.

(2-A) Under Section 41(1) only an empowered
Magistrate can issue warrant for the arrest or for
the search in respect of offences punishable under
Chapter IV of the Act etc. when he has reason to
believe that such offences have been committed or
such substances are kept or concealed in any
building, conveyance or place. When such warrant for
arrest or for search is issued by a Magistrate who is
not empowered, then such search or arrest if carried

out would be illegal.


Likewise only empowered officer or duly
authorised officers as enumarated in Sections 41(2)
and 42(1) can act under the provisions of the NDPS
Act. If such arrest or search is made under the
provisions of the 075 Act by anyone other than such

officers, the same would be i?legal.

(2-8) Under Section 41(2) only the empowered
officer can give the authorisation to his subordinate
officer to carry out the arrest of a person or search
as mentioned therein. If there is a contravention,
that would affect the prosecution case and vitiate

the conviction. ©

(2-C) Under Section 42(1) the empowered
officer if has a prior information given by = any
person, that..should necessarily be taken down in
writing. But if he has reason to believe from
personal knowledge that offences under Chapter IV
have been committed or materials which may furnish
evidence of commission of such offences are concealed
in any building etc. he may carry out the arrest or
search without a warrant between sunrise and sunset
and this provision does not mandate that he should
record his reasons of belief. But under the proviso
to Section 42(1) if such officer has to carry out
such search between sunset and sunrise, he must

record the grounds of his belief.


To this extent these provisions are mandatory
and contravention of the same would affect the

prosecution case and vitiate the trial.

(3) Under Section 42(2) such empowered
officer who takes down any information in writing or
records the grounds under proviso to Section 42(1)
should forthwith send a copy thereof to his immediate
official superior. if there is total non-compliance
of this provision the same affects the prosecution
case. To that extent it is mandatory. But if there
is delay whether it was undue or whether the same has
been explained or not, will be a question of fact in

each case.

(4-A) If a police officer, even if he happens
to be an “empowered” officer while effecting an
arrest or search during normal investigation into
offences purely under the provisions of CR.P.C.
fails to strictly comply with the provisions of
Sections 100 and 165 CR.P.C. including the
requirement to record reasons, such failure would

only amount to an irregularity.

(4-B) If an empowered officer or an
authorised officer under Section 41(2) of the Act

carries out a search, he would be doing so under the


provisions of CR.P.C. namely Sections 100 and 165
CR.P.C. and if there is no strict compliance with
the provisions of CR.P.C. then such search would not

per 56 be illegal and would not vitiate the trial.

The effect of such failure has to be borne in
mind by the courts while appreciating the evidence in

the facts and circumstances of each case.

(5) On prior information the empowered
officer or authorised officer while acting under
Sections 41(2) or 42 should comply with the
provisions of Section 50 before the search of the
person is made and such’ person should be informed
that if he so requires, he shall be produced before a
Gazetted officer or a Magistrate 35. provided
thereunder. It is obligatory on the part of such
officer to inform the person to be searched. Failure
to inform the person to be searched and if such
person so requires, failure to take him to the
Gazetted Officer or the Magistrate, would amount to
non-compliance of Section 50 which is mandatory and
thus it would affect the prosecution case and vitiate
the trial. After being so informed whether such
person opted for such a course or not would be a

question of fact.


The provisions of Sections 52 and 57
whicn deal with the steps to be taken by the officers
after maving arrest or seizure under Sections 44. to
44 are Cy themselves not mandatory. If there is

are lasses like delay etc.

then the same has to te

prejudice has been caused to the accused and such

examined to ses whether any

failure will have a bearing on the appreciation of
evidence regarding arrest or seizure as well as on

merits of the case.”

It may be pointed out at this stage that Kerala High

Court in V.Mohd. V.Mond. Bashir v.  State® has misread the judgment

of the Supreme Court in holding that the search made under

Section 43 in respect of Section 50 is not attracted.

5.6 We have considered the proposal of the Department of
Revenue that if the empowered officer, while searching a
person is of the view that taking the person to the nearest
gazetted officer/magistrate would result in the delay in
search or wouid give opportunity to the person to
disassociate him from the contraband, the search can be
conducted tefore two or mere indepencent and respectful
persons cf the locality cr of the adjoining locality. We
are, however, of the view tnat to safeguard the interest of

the innecent cersans, particularly wnen there is a minimum

mandatory nent under the Act, sucn amendment 18. not

desirable.


The above discussion makes it clear that the
emcowered officers nave important duties ८०. perform under
the provisions of the Act, particularly wen section 42 and
section 50 are heic mandatory. Even in respect of the
provisions heid cirectory they cannot slacken, although
mandatory provisicns of section 42 and section 50 are most
important and must be complied with sy the empowered
officers. The resgonses to the questionnaire, and the views
expressed in worksnops also suggest that for carrying out
search effectively in a practical and meaningful manner some
changes in section 50 are necessary. We are of the view
that the amendment of section 50 is necessary.

The nature of non-compliance of section 50 leading to
many acquittals has to be examined carefully from the point
of view of bringing about suitable amendments. Section 50
Jays down that any duly authorised officer who is about to
search any person, if he so requires, take him without
unnecessary delay to the nearest Gazetted Officer of any , of
the departments mentioned in section 42 or to the nearest
magistrate and if such requisition is made by the person to
be searched, the authorised officer concerned can cGetain him
until he, can produce him before such Gazetted Officer or the
Magistrate and thereafter the search snould be conducted.
It is held that it is a valuable right given to such a

trough the section does nct say so in clear

and

terns, yet the cerson must be told about his right and

failure to do sc results in non-compliance of section 50.


eoc,

~ EE LR OL A IC I ्् स्‍उशओ

Whether such person was informed or not would always be a
question of fact depending upon the oral assertions and
counter assertions made by the accused and the searching

officer and the non-compliance has 160 to many acquittals.

The other types of non-compliance resulting in
acquittals as noticed by the courts are of highly technical
nature. In some cases, the accused were acquitted on the
grounds that the notice given by the investigating officer
only mentioned the word “magistrate” and in some cases only
the word “gazetted officer" yet in other cases words
“magistrate or garettad police officer". [In such cases, the
accused were acquitted by holding that the notice was not
complete and in consonance with the provisions of Section 50
of the Act. Although taking of such technical view by the
courts may be a debatable issue but to check such lapses, on
the part of the empowered officers, resulting in such
acquittal, the Commission feels it necessary to suggest
suitable amendments in Section 50 of the Act to clear all
the misgivings of the scope of Section 50. Also keeping in
view the difficulties expressed in the replies to the
questionnaire and the discussions held in the workshops
regarding the possibilities of throwing of tha contraband by
the person or the planting of the same while in transit to
the nearest Magistrate or Gazetted Officer, We are of the

Sion 50 of Lhe NDPS Act may be on

view Lhat amendments in se

the following lines:~


(a) 11. sub-section (1), after the words ‘he shall’
and before the words ¢ if such porson’ » tha fol lowing
words shall be inserted, namely-
“inform such person that he has a right to be
searched in the presence of 4 gazetted
officer or the magistrate referred to in
section 41; and”
(b) in sub-section (1), for the words “or to the
nearest magistrate", the following words shall be
substituted, name ly-
“or to the nearest Magistrate referred to in
section 41 of the Act, as the empowered

officer may deem fit."

This would amount to substantial compliance.


FOOT NOTES

CHAPTER V

AIR 1989 SC 1966.
AIR 1991 SC 558.
AIR 1990 SC 71.
1996(1) Scale 48.
1994(1) Crimes 753.

1993(2) Crimes 686.


CHAPTER - VI

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.4 INFIRMITIES IN NDPS ACT.

The drug traffickers are Fignting guerilla war

humanity and, therefore, deterrent punisnment has

been csrovided under the NDPS Act (as amended by Amendment
Act No.2 of 1989). Tne Act has provided for deatn penalty
for specified offences by the previcus convict and for
forfeiture of property derived from, or use in illicit
trafficking. However, even these previsions have not
yieided fruitful resuits in curbing and controlling illicit
trafficking and use of marcotic drugs. Scme of the
infirmities found in tne implementation of NDPS Act may be

summarised below:-

(a) Lack cf social awareness against offences of
illicit trafficking and illicit use of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances;

(b) The severe punishment for small quantity
under section 27 of the Act if it is not for

personal consumption;
fc) Non establishment of Special Courts for trial
of the offences under the NDPS Act by some

directions in

States in spite of speci

id) Wild ¢rewth of cannabis pliant, ccca pliant or


opium poppy and chances of

cultivation of

such plants in the guise of wild growt by

unscrupulous smugglers;

Ce Tre inherent problems in the impiementartion
cf section 59 of the NDPS Act to make the
search effective and meaningful;

(=, Frequent changes in officers investigazing
the offences; and

(5५ Non establishment of the centres for
identification, treatment, education and
after care of the addicts by the Government.

RECOMMENDATIONS.

After discussing the concern

community against illicit trafficking and use

drugs anc

psychotropic substances 88 borne

of the ४० 7106
of narcotic

out from the

proceedings of the International conventions, the ¢rocedural

suoject to

and other weaknesses of the present law on the
deal to overcome the menace of drug abuse and
traffick therein and after taking into consideration the

landmark 2rucgments of the Supreme Court of India, especially

State of Punjab v Balbir Singh and after consicering the

in
valuacle ggestion, we feel that the NDPS
further dments to make it more effective.

Act requires


1
wo
Nt

|

Wie nereby recctimenc the following amendments

Narcotic Orugs and Fsychctropic Substances Act,
namelyi-
6.2.1 AMENDMENT IN SECTION 4 OF THE ACT

In clause (2; of section 4 of the 14078

sub-clause (d) ४9

utec as follows:-

in the

1985

Act,

"(c) identification, treatment, education, aftercare,

renabdilitation, social re-integration cf addicts,

creation of scsial awareness qua dangers of drug

abuse through education, publicity, training

programmes and seminars with wide publicity to the

न dejiiberations and the reports thereof in the media.”

[Chp.iV, Para 4.5(a)]

6.2.2 AMENDMENT IN SECTION 27 OF THE ACT

In Section 27, tre Foilowing new sub-section

inserted to crovide or 2 Iesser punishment for

3 be

small

quantities if not proves to se for personal consumpticr:-

Where a person wno is shown &

of

oO
D
©
है]
o
®

»
3

11 quantity of narcotic crug or

endec for the personal consumption cf such cerson

anc not for sale or csistribution, sucn person snail,


the fol

1

©

wo
1

notwithstanding anytning contained in tnis Chapter,

punishable-

suostance

morpnine,

in tnis

er2if by the Central Government, by nceztification in

icial gazsette, witn imprisonment or a term

which may extend to two years cr with fine or with

both; and

(६) Where the narcotic drug or psychotroric substance
possessed or consumed is otner than those specified
im or under clause (a), with imprisonment for a term
whicn may extend to one year or with fine or with

both.”

a {[Chp.IV, Para 4.5(f)]

AMENDMENT _IN SECTION 36 OF THE ACT

After Clause (1) of Section 36 of the Principal Act,
cxting proviso shall be inserted, namely-

“Provided that at least.one special court shall be
ituted by the Government as soon 2s the numbder
गे cencing cases uncer the Act erceeds <cne Auncred

[Che.IV, Fara 4.8(e>

di


INSERTION OF NEW SECTION 477A IN THE AGT 47-A_ IN THE ACT

47 of the NDPS Act, te follewing

namely-

“at. Duty of the Forest officer and Revenue officer

to take action - Every Forest officer and Revenue

mmediate information cf the wilc

give i

growth oF coca plant, opium poppy or cannabis plant
on the forest land or government lanc within his
jurisdiction, as the case may be, when it nay come or
brought to his Knowledge at any stage, to the
Metropolitan Magistrate, Judicial Magistrate of the
First Class or any Magistrate specially emoowered in
this behaif by the State Government or any officer 67
a gazetted rank empowered under section +2 who, upon
receipt of such information, may pass sucn
aperopriate order including order to destroy the

plants as he thinks fit, and every such forest

or revenue officer who knowingly neglects to
give sucn information, shall be liable to

punishment”

(0०07-7५, Para 4.5(b))


90

AMENDMENT IN TION 50 OF THE ACT

In section 50 of the NDPS Act,
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words ‘he shall’
and before the words ‘if such person’, the following
words shall be inserted, namely-
“inform such person that he has a right to be
searched in the presence of a gazetted
officer or the magistrate referred to in
section 41; and”
(b) in sub-section (1), for the words “or to the
nearest magistrate”, the following words shall be

substituted, namely-

“or to the nearest magistrate referred to in

section 41 of the Act, as the empowered

officer may deem fit.”

(Chp.V, Para 5.6)


INSERTION OF NEW SECTION TO GIVE EFFECT TO ARTICLE 11

oD
nh
wo

OF THE CONVENTION AGAINST ILLICIT TRAFFICKING IN
NARCOTIC ORUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES, 1988

REGARDING “CONTROLLED DELIVERY".

In orcer to ¢giva effect to the aforesaid provisions
ontained in trticle 11 of the aforesaid Convention, the
NOPS Act ce suitably amended by incorperating a new secticr
thereunder te trace ths onward movement of the consignment
and to aoprehend, arrest, prosecute the persons including

the ultimete sersons taking delivery of the consignment.

(Chp.IiI, Para 3.7)

6.2.7 INSERTION OF NEW SECTION 67 A_ IN THE ACT

After Section 57 of the NDPS Act, the following new
section shall be inserted, namely-

. Completion of the investigation by an

empowered officer- Every empowered officer who is
making investigation of a case under the provisions
of this Act or wno takes any step under Chapter ४
therec= shall. be incharge of the investigation till
it jis cenpleted, unless there are compelling

tances requiring a change anc it snall be his

cirs
duty tc tare suc n step under tne law for speedy
invest-gat-on ard submit the case to the competent

court withcut any unnecessary del

(Chp.I\, Para 4.5(d))

a


6.2.8 EFFECTIVE IMPLEMENTATION OF SECTION 71 0!

| ACT.

We feel that there is a need for the Gover
। see that the object underlying the section be = achi-

utilising the services of Non-governmental organisations

ह if necessary by establishing a wing in Government

| 5
[Cho.IV, Para 4A.8¢<

We recommend accordingly.

ji ese chee kee “4

1 ( JUSTICE K.JAYACHANDRA REDDY )
है CHAIRMAN

!
el Eee, ‘ fet
SES oy, ec ft

(JUS. R.L.GUPTA) ~ (CH.G@.KRISHNAMURTHY ) (PROF.
MEMBER MEMBER. ——-— 4 ,
uo Ue

Reb MEENA )
MEMBER-SECRETARY

tines


ANNEXURES


ANNEXURE-I

D.O.No.6(3)(35)/36-LC(LS)

DR.S.C.SRIVASTAVA GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
JOINT SECRETARY & MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE
LAW OFFICER DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS

LAW COMMISSION
SHASTRI BHAVAN

NEW DELHI-110 001.

Dated 5.7.1996

Sir,

This is to encroach upon your valuable time for the

cause of national importance.

The Law Commission has undertaken a study on the
examination of the provisions of the Narcotics Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (Act No.61 of 1985) in
the light of the judgment of the High Court and
particularly the landmark judgment of the Supreme Court in
the State of Punjab vs. Balbir Singh AIR 1994 SC 1872 with
the emphasis on the changes brought about in section 50 of
the Act. It is felt there is a need to review the

relevant provisions of the Act. Accordingly the


-: 94 :-

Commission seeks to elicit your considered opinion on the

questionnaire prepared by the Commission relating to

certain proposed amendment to the said Act.

I would, therefore, request you to kindly spare some

of your precious time in giving your valued opinion on the

issues at your earliest convenience preferably by 14th

August, 1996.

Looking forward to your co-operation.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,

Sd/

( S.C.Srivastava )

Encl: As above.


-: 95 :८

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi-110 001.

Questionnaire
on
amendment to the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act, 1985

( Act No.61 of 1985 )

CHAPTER-IT

Section 4 of the Act.

Q.1 Do you agree that there is need to make specific
provision for creation of social awareness qua
dangers of drug abuse through education and publicity
and conducting of -training programmes and seminars?

CHAPTER-IV

Section 15 of 25 of the Act.

Q.

2

Whether the existing penal provisions providing
minimum punishment require any amendment? If so, to

what extent?


-: 96 i-

Whether the sentence to be awarded under the Act,
should be according to quantum of seizure of the

contraband?

Whether there is need to delete the provision of
minimum sentence provided in sections 15 to 25 of the

Act?

Section 27 of the Act.

Do you suggest that the benefit of section 27 shal}
given to all the persons found in possession of small
quantity irrespective of the fact whether the same

was intended for personal consumption or not?

Section 36 of the Act.

Whether the State Government has not created separate
courts of Special Judges for trial of cases under

section 36 of the Act in your State?

Do you agree that for speedy disposal of cases under
the Act, the provision should be inserted in the
section, for setting up of adequate number of
independent courts of Special Judges for the trial of

cases under the Act in every State?


CHAPTER-V

Section 47-A

Whether you think it necessary that the duty should
be cast upon the forest and revenue officers to
report the wild growth of cannobis and opium plants
on forest and other government land and to take steps
for its destruction, as the State Government may

direct?

Section 50

Do you subscribe to the view that section 50 of the

Act requires amendment?

Do you agree that in view of the landmark judgment in

State of Punjab Vs. Balbir Singh, AIR 1994 SC 18/2 Balbir Singh, AIR 1994 SC 1872

section 50 of the Act should be redrafted as under by

incorporating suitable amendment: ८

"50- Conditions under which search of persons shalt of ersons shall

be conducted:-

(1) When any officer duly authorised under
Section 42 is about to search any person under the
provisions of section 41, section 42 or section 43,

he shall (inform such person that he has a right to


-: 98 iH

be searched in the presence of a gazetted officer or
the magistrate referred to in section 41, and ) if
such person. so requires, take such person without
unnecessary delay to the nearest Gazetted officer of
any of the departments (or the nearest magistrate
referred to in section 41 of the Act, as the
empowered officer may deem fit).

Provided that the Central Government may
specify the form of notice to be given ८० such
person, informing him that he has a right to be
searched in the presence of a gazetted officer or
magistrate, for the purpose of this sub-section,

(2) If such requisition is made, the officer
may detain the person until he can bring him before
the Gazetted Officer or the Magistrate referred to in
sub-section (1); (or if the empowered officer, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, deems it necessary
to summon the gazetted -officer or the magistrate
referred above to the spot, he may requisition the
services of such gazetted officer or the magistrate,
and it shail be the duty of such gazetted officer or
the magistrate, as the case may be to the = spot
without delay).

(3) The Gazetted officer or the, Magistrate
before whom any such person is brought (or whose
services have been requisitioned) shall, if he sees
no reasonable ground for search, forthwith discharge
the person, but otherwise shall direct that search be
made.

(3A) The search shall then be made in the


-: 99 :-

presence of the gazetted officer or the ~agistrate,
as the case may be, who may assvc1ate two
independent witnesses, if available, and 2naid take

two samples and after sealing the samp°<¢s ang the
recovered articles, keep the seal intact with nim;
and hand over the samples, recovered artic’ ¢s ard the
sample of the seal used to the empowered ०८7 71८87.

(4) No female = shall be searchez cy anyone

excepting a female.”

Q.11 Whether the empowered officer should De given
discretion that in case he is of the otinion, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, that ८: is not
practicable “to take the person to be searzned to the
nearest magistrate or the gazetted office~; or the
services of such magistrate or the gazetted officer
cannot be requisitioned, the empowered o-ficer may

conduct search himself in the presencs= of two

independent witnesses?

Section 50-A

Q.12 Do you suggest that new section should b= inserted
for the use of controlled delivery system Dy certain
officers, to trace the onward movement of the
consignment under supervision and to Boorenend,
arrest and prosecute all the offenders, inf °ucing the
persons taking delivery of the consignment oF 7 port

drugs or substances at the destination?

Be


-: 100 :-

Section 67-A

Q.13 Do you agree with the suggestion tnat ६८

o

e7 powered
officer, who commences the investigation cf a case

under the provisions of this Act, shall ८

w

incharge
of the case till investigation is completes as far as

possible?

CHAPTER-VI

Section 71

Q.14 Whether the state government has not established

adequate centres for the identification ang treatment

of addicts in your state?

9.15 Do you agree that it should be made mandatory by
suitable amendment in the Act that atleast one centre
for the identification and treatment of accict should
be established in every district in the country?

GENERAL

Any other suggestion

9.16

Do you suggest any other amendment in the

give your valuable suggestions.


51 101 i>

Annexure-IT

Comments received on 1 the Questionnaire issued

by the Law Commission

The Law Commission had circulated a questionnaire
(Annexure I) regarding certain amendments to the Narcotics
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 to elicit
opinion from various quarters. In the said questionnaire
the Law Commission formulated sixteen Questions on various

aspects of the subject.

The Questionnaire was sent to the Registrars of
sixteen High Courts, Bar Associations, Home Secretaries of
twenty five States and Union Territories, twenty eight
Police Officers and the Chairmen of five State Law
Commissions. Responses were received only from seven
Judges/ Registrar of High Court, three Advocates/
Prosecutors and twenty seven Police Officers and other

expert officers as under -

Q.No.14 Six Judges, Registrars of various High
Courts, two advocates, 21 Police Officers and one
Acacdemician have responded in the affirmative. However,

the Deputy Legal Adviser, Ministry of Finance, Govt. of
India is of the view that sub-clause(e) of Section 4 of
the N.D.P.S.Act serves the purpose. The Add1i.Director
General of Police, (Crime), Punjab is 10 favour of

retaining the existing provisions under clause (d) of



“ 1 102 :-

sub-section (2) of Section 4 of the Act. Zonal Director,
NCB, Bombay, is of the view that Section 4 takes care of
the issue involved in Question 1. However, he feel that
there is a need to have a specific provision making it
obligatory on the part of the State Government to take
necessary steps for creating awareness in regard to the
dangers of drug abuse among the targetted groups and also
stressed the need for involving the Non-Government
voluntary organisations. The Deputy Commissioner of
Police Narcotics & Crime Prevention, Delhi is of the view

that section 4 of the Act does not require any amendment.

Q.No.2 About the suggestion for the amendment in the
existing penal provisions providing minimum punishment,
four Judges, two advocates and ten Police Officers have
agreed with the suggestion. They have also suggested that
the rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than five years but may extend up to ten years and
fine not less than rupess fifty thousand may be provided.
It is also suggested that the minimum sentence may be
reduced to seven years and thereafter the sentence should
run in proportion to the quantity seized up to twenty
years. However, O.G.P. Tripura has suggested that
minimum punishment should vary having regard to the
quantity of drug seized, the nature of offences and
offenders etc. However, others have replied either in the
negative or are satisfied with the existing penal
provisions. Addl. D.G.P. (Narcotics Wing), Bhopal is of
the view that sections 15 to 20 do not need any amendment

but section 21 to 25 should be amended to enhance the


punishment to life imprisonment and confiscation of

property for subsequent offences. However, & 7.0.G.P.,
Crime, Punjab has suggested to reduce the amcuct of fine

from rupees one lack to fifty thousand. One of the

High Court, Bombay has suggested that discretic~ be given
to court to award lesser punishment for special “easons to
be recorded depending upon antecedents of accused,
quantity of contraband etc....- Two police of7°cers have
responded in the negative. According to an academician
maximum punishment should be life imprisor-ent, but

minimum sentence should be left to the court’s c-scretion.

Q.No.3 A High Court Judge, Registrar of His" Courts,
an Advocate, Thirteen Police Officers and cne academician
have answered the question in negative whereas rest of the
persons have agreed with the suggestion cf imposing
punishment proportionate to the quantum of seizu-e of the

contraband.

Q.No.4 Most of the responses are in the -egataive.
But a Judge of the High Court, two Police Offices and one
academician have responded in the affirmative. Further
the Hon'ble Judge has observed that there are number of
cases in which big bosses dealing 1n narcot-< trading
traffic have started using old men anc wome~, widows,

women having small children, crippled persons children

by exploiting their poverty and other weaxnessss. Such

people do not get arrested or indicted. Howes + due to

such practice being adopted by big bosses, #05703' caps are

required to undergo severe sentences. The Court does not


<tc deal with such handicapred persone

at the time of encing them. According =o them this
causes ~™"scarriz of justice. They, tnerefore, sug¢eester

that the worcs “erte-cing to" should be used far =
sentence is .
Q@.No.5 Twenty solice officers ard one ¢cacemicians
in negative. Accorcing ts the
Macras, the benefit as to

०8८६-७७ it is difficult to preve that the

given ८०
drug was not intsncec for personal consumption. As per
the Director Gsenerai of Police, Jammu & “ashimr the
provisicns oF tne section 27 of the Act is only aoplicable
to those persons who are in illegal possessior cf smal”
quantity of tne drugs ive. personal consumpticy and smal”
quantity cf the crugs have been notified by the Govt.of
India from tite to time. However, accord-ng to. one
Advocate, thos Section is meaningless and jiable to be
struck ccown because “or personal consumption Jicence is
being issued. A vucse of the High Court has responded ir

the affirmative. Further the Addl. Special Public

Prosecutor -7¢n Court, Madras, is of the view that let

it stands now. It is for the rersor

section =
who Claiv™s tre bene=-t thereof to prove that he was having
it for cris cersona? consumption. This is ircseed a very
generous provision to take care of accicts

ccording to the Inspector General of

-

sympathetica Me

the Add1.D.G. Crime, ab, the

Police,

27 snould be given ०019५ for persona”

consumpt7 on ata not ctnerwise. However, 2 Jucse of the


~: 105 :-

High Court Bench, Indore is of the view that the section
27(2) needs to be deleted. One Police Officer has opined
that no benefit should be given to all persons found in
possession of small quantity irrespective of the fact
whether the same was intended for personal consumption.
Two Judges and one Police Officer have replied in

affirmative.

Q.No.6 Special Courts under Section.36 of the NDPS
Act have not yet been created in Orisa, Sri B.Pande feels
that there is no need for such courts at Present in view

of the small number of cases.

The Registry of Madras High Court and two Advocates,
have responded saying that under the said Act, no special
courts have been set up in Tamil Nadu. However
additional powers have been conferred on the essential
commodities special courts.

In J&K every Session Judge is invested with the power
to try cases under the NDPS Act, 1985. However, no

separate courts of Special Judges have been created.

Likewise the Principal Sessions Judge of each
District is invested with the power of court of Special

Judge in Kerala.

In Madhya Pradesh, in an order dated 14.11.94 passed
in Misc.Cri. case 140. 2901/94 by High Court Bench, Indore,
the proposed attention of State Government was drawn and

now to constitute nine special courts has been finalised.


-: 106 :-

4
Y
0
«o
at
mw

== Government cf Goa and Tripura has cr

rt anc nas appointed special jucge for the

HOPS ८८

o
»

with की उठी Court For creation of separate courts but

ea

tec

rn Administration has taxen vo the matte-

High Ccurt cf Furjab and Haryana has refused to creats

specia™ court cn the ground that number cof cases are

Ir the of Nagaland, separate courts of specia™
judges nave 7०८ been created. However, the Sessions

Courts save ceer ceclared as Speciai Courts for

purpose.

has responded in the

Ir Sikeim

the Question asxed by the Law Commission.

Scecia. cucses have been appointed for conductins

under section 36 of NDPS Act in the

encicherry.

the State Government nas nov

courts under the Act.

oy

Ir Mar-sur, the State Government nas estabdiished

court cf Judge for trial of cases under tre
Act. « "3.7. is of the view that atleast
Acdl. Sol.lcurt culd be established “or soesay atsposa

of existing "uTDe" of pencing cases uncer the Act.

Un

jor

yet

one

NOF=



In the State of Maharashtra, speciai courts have been

ne State cof Rajasthan has created sercarate courts

In Uttar Pradesn and Bihar, no spec-21 courts under

wy

a

sectin 26 of the Act have been constitute

Courts of the Add1.Sessions judge have been

designated as special courts for trial c* sucn cases in

the State of Gujarat.

The State Government of Assam nas not yet created
separate courts of soecial judges for trial of cases under
section 36 of the Act.

Special courts have already been establisned in

Q.No.7 Most cf the responses are in affirmative.
One acvocate is of tne view that the Special Courts are
failure attemet to cispose of the cases. Superintendent,
CE Panaji. Superintendent, CE, North Goa nave respcnded in

the negative.

Q@.No.$ Most oF the Judges. Poltce c*Fficers
and Acveocates nave resoconded in affirtative. Add- tional
Specia: Public Prosecutor, High Couct Madras and

Add1.0.G.°. (Crime. Punjab are of tne view tnat section


-: 108 :-

47 of NOPS Act starts with every officer of the
Government." which naturally includes even the Forest and
Revenue officials. Hence, there is no need to have a

separate Section 47 A.

Q.No.9 Most of the Judges/Officers/Advocates have
agreed with the proposal of the Law Commission. However,

the proposal did not find the approval of two judges of
the High Court. They are of the view that the said
provisions take care of the interest of the accused. A
Public Prosecutor, High Court, Madras,Shri P.N.Prakash has
referred to a number of judgements of the Supreme Court
and High Courts viz. AIR 1956 SC 411, 1994 6 SCC 569 All
Mustafa v. State of Kerala, 1995 (1) Crimes 77. Amarjit
Singh v. Delhi Admn, Punjab v. Jasbir Singh (1996 (1)
SCC 288), State of Punjab v. Balbir Singh (1995, 3 Scc
610), Saiyad Mohd v. State of Gujarat (1995 Cri.J. 2662,
Raghubir Singh v. State of Haryana (1996(1) crimes page
55 SC) etc. He is of the view that Section 50 should read
“when any officer, other than such officer of gazetted
rank mentioned in Sec.41(2) on prior information is about
to...." The Add1.D.G.P. (Crime) Punjab has suggested that
the words “Non-Gazetted” should be inserted in Sub-section
(1) of Section 50 because if the officer making search of
a person is himself a Gazetted Officer, then he is not
required to take the person to be searched before some
other Gazetted Officer/Magistrate. The Director Genera’
of Police, Bangalore and Commissioner, CE&C, Rajkot have
responded in negative. A Judge of the High Court, Bombay,

has suggested an amendment in the following lines ८


-: 109 i

"Notwithstanding that the procedure laid down in
chapter V of NDPS Act (Section 41 to 68) is not
foilowed it is hereby declared and clarified that the
trial is not vitiated. Such non-compliance of
procedure shall be taken into consideration while
apereciating the evidence of Investigating Officer.
The said procedure is declared to be directory in

nature for the guidance of Investigating Officer.”

Q.No.10 Twenty-six Judges, officers and advocates
have agreed with the proposal by the Law Commission for
re-drafting Section 50 of the Act by incorporating
suitable amendment. Further, a lawyer feels that ifoa
privilege is given why should it be waived by writing. He
observes that if the accused is apprehended, he may
immediately be taken before the Magistrate and seizure
should te before him-only or at the time of remand. The
Magistrate should satisfy whether the privilege was either
complied with or duly waived. A Judge of M.P. High
Court, Indore Bench has suggested that if at all the
amendment is to be brought in existence it should be
provided in Section 50 that the Gazetted Officer should
not be the member of the raiding party... Another Judge
after referring to Misc.Cri.case No. 2768/50 decided on
28.4.96 of Indore Bench, M.P.High Court finds no
justification for making a special provision about
Gazettec Officer or Magistrate. He is of the view that if
section 50 is retained in whatever form, it should be made
director» instead of being mandatory and plea should be

permissible on prejudice or on failure of justice in


accorda-ce with Section 455 of the code of Criminal

The Commissicner, CE&C, Rajxot ras responded

in the -egative. Superintendent, CE, Pacaji ras suggested

azetted Officer/zne Magistrate only De a wit

that tre

on the same ८०117 -

to the

Q.No. 14 Most of the responses are a*firmazive. But

some cot them have expressed it in negative pecause

cord:7-g to them the discretionary powe~ may ce misused.

Q.No.12 All persons except the Registry of Madras
High Court have agreed with the proposal for zne insertion

of new section.

Q.No.

Twenty nine persons have replied in the
affirmative. A Judge of the M.P. High Court has
suggested that the incharge should be liable to action in
case of default in submission of charge-sheet within the
statutory period. Four of them feels that tne suggetions
are not practicable and if implemented, may lead to
administrative difficulties. The Acditienal Special

Public =resecutor, High court Madras however added that it

would affect the working of agencies like
N.C.B./Customs/DRI because they are not potice officers

and thes collect materials from all sources and submit it

witha complaint. They do not fie charge sheet.
Therefo-s. there is no need for statutory amendments.
Adcl.D.3. (Crime) Pun:ab, has not agreed to the

contained in tris question cecause the same



according ‘could be done by an executive/administrative
order. The Superintendent, CE, North Goa, has responded

jn the negative.

Q.No.14 The Registry and Addl. Spl. Public
Prosecutor of Madras High Court and One Police Officer
have replied in the affirmative. The State Government has
created centres for the identifiction and treatment of
addicts at the State capital and more would be created at
other places depending upon the need and availability of

finance.

The Director-General of Police, J & K, has also

replied in the affirmative.

The State of Kerala and Madhya Pradesh have also

responded in the affirmative to the question.

The Supdt. of Police, ANC, Panjai, Goa has pointed
out that the State Government has established centers for
identification and treatment of addicts in the State of

Goa.

The Inspector-General of Police, Union Territory,
Chandigarh has informed that the State Government has not
established adequate centres for the identification and

treatment of addicts.


-2 112 :-८

A Senior Supdt. of Police (Narcotics)Kohima, is of
the view that there are very few centres in Nagaland which

are not adequate at all.

No centre for identification and treatment of addicts
has been established by the Union Territories of

Pondicherry, Manipur and Sikkim.

The State of Maharashtra -has established centre for
detoxication and rehabilitation of addicts. N.G.O.’s are
also doing commendable service in this field in Mumbai and

in other parts of Maharashtra.

The State Government has established rehabilitation
centre in Rajasthan. However, according to Commissioner,

C&CE, Jaipur, number of such centres should be increased.

The number of centres for identification/dediction of
addicts instituted by the State Governments (U.P. and
Bihar) is negligible as per Zonal Director, NCD, Varanasi,

In Vadodara, there is a centre for identification and
treatment of addicts in 5.5.6. Hospital run by the
Government of Gujarat.

Q.No.15 Most of, the persons who responded to our
questionnaire have agreed with the suggestion of the La
Commission. However, a few of them are of the view that
there is no need to establish such centre in some

districts/States. Thoy, thorofore, Fool that it should


Xu

-: tS :८

accordingly be left to the discretion of the State

Government to establish centres according to the need.

Q.No.i16 The following suggestions were made by

various Judges, Advocates, Police Officials and

Academicians:

(1) The application of Section 167 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure be excluded.

(2) Express provision be made for taking second

sample.

(3) Section 32A be amended in the light of Gyan Chand

Vv. State of Rajasthan, 1993 Cr.L.J. 442.

(4) The Assistant Commissioner should be the
Authorising Officer so far State is concerned. The
Deputy Commissionerof Police should be the immediate

superior officer.

(5)'Gazetted Officer’ of the other Government
department viz. School Head Master etc. may also be
brought within the purview of section 41 of the NDPS

Act.

(6) By making necessary amendment in the Act a duty
should be cast on .the State Government/Central

Government for the purpose of giving training the


\
{
I

-2: 114 27>

officers of C.B.N., Central Excise Department and
Police for detection of crimes and investigation in

accordance with the provisions of NDPS Act.

(7) A duty should be cast on State Government/Central
Government to open rehabilitation centres in each
district of the State by appointing medical officers,

psychiatrists and social welfare officers.

(8) Section 37 of the Act be amended on the lines of
the proviso to section 437 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure for releasing an infirm or sick person or a

child,juvenile and a woman.

(9) The word ” conveyance” may be deleted from
section 42 since section 43 and section 49 will take

care of it.

(10) The words"Government offices” may be included in

the explanation to section 43 of the Act.

(11) Section 368 (1) (9) and (c) of the Act requires
to be redrafted so as to clearly State as to who
should exercise the power of remand if detention is

considered necessary.


-: 115 i

(12) Section 29 (2) limits the operations of section
29 (1). If the explanation in section 29 (2) is made
an inclusive one then it will take care of not only
conspiracy/abetment in India but also bring operators

who are abroad within its told.

(13) Chapter V A dealing with forfeiture of property
should be amended so as to prevent drug traffickers
from transferring away the wealth amassed due to
illicit trafficking in Narcotic Drug and Psychotropic

substances.

(14) Section 37 be amended to contain. sufficient
guidelines on which the public prosecutor may not

oppose the application for release on bail.

(15) Section 36D (2) be amended to permit and provide
transfer of pending cases to special courts despite
taking of cognizance also in view of the dacision in
(1993) 2 SCC 16 and and misc. Cri. Case No.2901/94

decided by M.P. High Court, Indore Bench.

(16) Section 32 A be deleted or amended/conferring
discretion to court in appropriate cases in the face
of judicial pronouncements for suspension of

sentence.

(17) Policy of award merits to be mortalised so as to
avoid possible registration of fake cases and

introduce element of more fairness.


(18) Proper procedure be followed for sealing,

sampling, deposit and despatch be provided for.

(19) Subsection (b) of section 36 A(1) may be

deleted.

(20) There should be Uniformity in cash awarad to all

the departments concerned with N.D.P.S.Act.

(21) Special training centres be opened to train
Police personnels with regard to 811 the provisions

of NDPS Act.

(22) More sniffer - Dogs be employed and more

training centres for them be opened.

(23) Cash award be given not only in the name of
Sniffer - dog on seizure of Narcotics but also to the

police personnel accompanying the dog.
(24) More incentives be given to informers.

(25) The definition of “illegally acquired property”
{Sec.68-B(g)] be widened so as to include the
provisions of ‘illegally acquired property’ defined
under Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators

(Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976.


m2 117 in

(26) Proviso of sub-section (2) of section 68(c)

should be deleted.

(27) The words “has been charged with any offence
punishable under this Act, whether committed in India
or outside after the words “chapter applies” in

sub-section (1) of section 68-E should be deleted.

(28) Selling of opium/poppy ganja etc. through
authorised shops by the State Governments should be

stopped.

(29) The amount of reward should be increased.

(30) The provisions of Sections 9, 41 & 42 of the Act

be reviewed.

(31) Sections 68A vis-a-vis 68E, of the NDPS Act be
reviewed doubt/ambiguity about the word “charged” be

removed.

(32) Licencing of “Bhang Thekas"” by the State Excise

Department requires ‘to be looked into.

(33) More harsh punishment for drug syndicates be

awarded.

(34) Provisions related to forfeiture of proverty
(ch.V.A) need immediate amendment as section 68-A and

eaction BA-F are contradictory.


LIST_OF THE PERSONS WHO RESPO!

(35) New provisions be added to depute state
officials to be utilised as witnesses in the 1४075 Act

cases by State enforcement agencies.

(36) Section 50(3) of proposed amendment (of the

Questionnaire) should be deleted.

(37) Classification between soft drugs and hard drugs

must be made and punishment should vary between them.

(38) No rewards for seizing drugs be given to the
officers. It may be only in case of private parties

who gave information that such reward be given.

(39) Simple possession of drugs should not be
punishable unless he knowingly possesses the same.

DED. TH JUESTIONNATIRE/

pe)

CONTRIBUTED ARTICLES FOR THE NATIONAL, SEMINA

Judges/Registrars etc.

1.

Justice J.G.Chitre,
Judge, High Court, Madhya Pradesh, Bench, Indore.

Justice A.R.Tiwari,
Judge, High Court Bench, Indore.

Registrar, High Court of Madras.
Shri M.N.Krishnan, Registrar, High Court of Kerala.

Justice (Smt.) P.D.Upasani, High Court of Bombay.


5४1 119 :८

Justice (Smt.) R.G.Vaidyanatha, High Court of

Bombay.
Shri J.N.Barowalia, Senior Sessions Judge-cum-Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Mandi District, Mandi (H.P).

Shri Syed Basir Ud Din, Registrar, High Court of
Jammu & Kashmir.

Advocate/Prosecutors

1. Dr.G.Krishnamurthy, Advocate, High Court, Madras.

2. Shri Binu Kumar, Advocate, the President Bar
Association, Trivandrum (Kerala).

3. Shri P.N.Prakash - Addl.Special Public Prosecutor,
Narcotics, Govt.of India, High Court, Madras.

4, Shri K.T.S.Tulsi, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court, New
Delhi.

Police Officers/other officers

1. Shri B.Pande - Add1.0.G. of Palice, C.1I.D.Crime,
Orissa, Cuttack.

2. Director General of Police, J&K Srinagar.

3. Shri M.C.Mehanathan - D.L.A., Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue, N.C.B., New Delhi.

4. Shri A.K.Singh - Superintendent of Police, ANC
Panaji-Goa.

5. Shri $.K.Chaterjee - IPS, DGP Tripura

6. Inspector General of Police, U.T. Chandigarh.

7. Shri G.P.Giri, IPS - Sr.Supdt. of Police
(Narcotics), Nagaland, Kohima.

8. Shei Yabish Chandra - Add1.0.G.P. (Narcotics Wing)
Police Headquarters, Bhopal.

9. Shri Ashok Joshi, IAS - Secretary to Govt.of Madras.

10. Shri P.S.Bawa, IPS, ~- D.G.P., Sikkim.

it Addl. D.G.P., Crime, Punjab.

12 Director, Crime Records Bureau, Pondichorry.

12. Director General of Police, Bangalore, Karnataka.

1a. the Director General of Police, Manipur, Pmphat.

16. Zonal Director, NCB, Bombay.

Commissioner, Ch&C, Pune.


19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

-: 120 :-

Commissioner, CE&C, Vadodara
Commissioner, C&aCE, Jaipur.
Zonal Director, NCB, Varanasi.
commissioner, CE&C, Rajkot.

Sp1.Superintendent of Police, CID, Assam,
Gauhati.

Deputy Commissioner of Police, Narcotics & Crime
Prevention, Delhi.

Superintendent of Customs (Legal) Goa.
Super intendent,CE, Panaji.
Superintendent, CE, North Goa, Champara, Goa.

Commissioner, Customs & Central Excise, Chandigarh.

Prof.Joga Rao, National Law School of India
University, Bangalore.

Prof. M.R.K.Pragad, Mahadevrao College of Law,
Panaji, Goa.


a)
9)

ch

4)
e)

f)

-2 121 in

ANNEXURE-III

THE PUNTSHMENTS PROVIDED FOR OFFENCES UNDER NDPS ACT, 1965
(AS AMENDED BY ACT NO.2 OF 1989)

Description of Offen Minimum Varinun
imprisonment. Fine आय आय
ih (a) (4) (3) 16]
Cultivation, production, manufacture,
possessicn, sale, purchase, transport-
ation, concealment, use or consumption,
import/export inter-state
Poppy stram (Sec. 15) 10 years’ RI Ps.1 lakh © 20 Years’ R.1. Rs.2 lakhs
Coca giants and coca leaves(Sec. 16) 10 Years’ हि Rs.t lakh 20 Years’ RI. 2s.2 lakhs
Opium poppy, opium and prepared 10 Years’ है. Rs.1 lakh © 20 Years’ RI, Rs.2 lakhs
opium (Secs.i7, 18, 19)
Cannabis other than ganja(Sec.20) 10 fears’ RI Rs.1 lakh 20 Years’ RAE. Rs.2 186१5
Ganja (Sec. 20) Upto 5 Years’ Upto Rs.50,000.
RAI.

Manufactured drugs and preparations 10 Years’ R.I, Rs.i lakh 20 Years’ RI. Rs.2 lakns
(Section 21)
AN] psychotropic substances (Sec.22) 10 Years’ है. Rs.1 lakh 20 Years’ R.1. Rs.2 lakns
Punishment for 1}legal import into
India, export from India, or
transhipment of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances (Sec. 23). 10 Years’ RI 18.1 lakh © 20 Years’ RAT. 95,2 lakns
Punishment for external dealings in
narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances in contravention of ;

on 12 (See. 24) 10 Years’ Rl. -As.d lakh «= 20 Years’ R.1. 75.2 lakhs
Punishment for allowing premises,
enclosure, space, place, animal or
conveyance, knowingly for commission
of offence (Sec. 251 10 Years’ Rul. Rs. lakh 20 Years’ १1. Ps.2 lavas
Punishment for production, manufacture. Upto 10 Years’ lipto Ps.t lah
possessivn, inpartfexport imber stale, Wd
sale, purchase , consumption, ४७९, storage
91 1001.10॥, dispesal or acquisition of
aay contfalled substancel Sec. 244)

for certain acts by licensee Npto 2 Years’ 07 with fine

vantsi Sec. 76) mori sonment, or with both


(b)

Punistmant for 111093) possession in
snail quantily for persona! consumption
of cocaine, morphine, dicetyl-morphine or
any abhor tiarcolre drug at psycholropye
substance as may be notified by Central
Government (Sec.?7)

Punishment for illegal possession in small
quantity for personal consumption of

narcotie drugs or psychotropre SUDSLANCES.
other than those specified in 7(a}(Sec.27)

122 :-

Upto | year
imprisonment

Upto 6 months’
Inprisonment

Punishment for financing, directly or 10 Years’ R.J. 19.1 lakh 20 Years’ R.I.

indirectly, abetting or conspiring in the
furtherance of an offence or harbouring
persons engaged in the aforementioned
activities (Sac.27A)

Punishment for attempts to commit any offence
unishable under Chapter IV of the Act or
cause such offence to be committed and 1n
such attempt does any act towards the
commission of the offence( Sec. 28)

Punish: for abetment and criminal
conspiracy to commit, an offence punishable
under Chapter IV of the Act, whether such
offence be or be not committed in consequence
of such abetment or in pursuance of such
criminal conspiracy (Sec.29)

Punishwent for preparation to do anything

‘ar commission to do anything which constitutes
an offence punishable under any of the
provisions of sec.15 to 25 (both

inclusive) (Sec. 30)

Repeat offences (Sec. 41)

Punrshiment for subsequent conviction in
respect of commission of, or allempt to
commit, or abelment of, or criminal
conspiracy to commit, an offence
relating Lo, production, manufacture,
possession, transportation, ymport into
India, or transhipment of narcotic drugs

sychotrapic substances for specified
tities of certain narcotic drugs or
hoLropic substances as mentioned in
ec. SIA).

Death Penalty

or with fine
or with both

or with fing
or with both

Rs.2 lakhs
As provided for that particular offence,
As provided for that particular offence.
Half the normal Half the normal
punishment punishment
Double the normal Double the normal
punishment punishment


-2 123 :-

Death penalty has been provided under the NDPS (Amendment)
Act, 1988 for the first time in the history of India. Under
section 31A cited, where a person has_ been convicted by a
competent court of criminal jurisdiction outside India, he shall

be dealt with as if he had been convicted by a court in India.

2. Besides, as per the provisions of Section 32A,
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 or any other law for the time being in force(but
subject to the provisions of section 33), no sentence awarcca
under this Act (other than section 27) shall be suspended or

remitted or commuted.

3. Section 36 provides for constitution of Special Courts for

the speedy trial and punishment of offenders.

4. Section 37 stipulates that offences shall be cognizable and

non bailable.

5. Under Section 59, dereliction of duty cast on an officer
under this Act or wilful abetment/connivance shall be punishable
with 10 Years’’ R.I./fine Rs.1 lakh extensible to 20 Years’’
R.1./fine of Rs.2 lakhs. (The term ‘officer’ includes for the
purpose any person employed in a hospital/institution

maintained/recognised by the Government/local authority).

6. Section 64A provides for immunity from prosecution to

addicts volunteering for treatment.


|
|

न पल मे व under PITNDPS Act,1988

ANNEXURE- IV

NATIONAL DRUG ENFORCEMENT STATISTICS
AS ON 31/08/96 (PROVISIONAL)

1992 13993 _1994 1995 1996

1. SEIZURES OF VARIOUS DRUGS IN KG WITH NO. OF CASES

OPIUN SEIZURES 1918 3011 2256 1339 1338
CASES 1286 ३3679 _ 272 871 349
MORPHINE SEIZURES 35 36 हि _51 _4 1
CASES 158 ३105 __145 ही 35 20
HEROIN SEIZURES 7753: 23088 _ 3013 1678 877
CASES 2779 3383 3331 3236 1245
GANJA. SEIZURES 64341 98867 187896 121873 26531
CASES _ 5839 . 5214 6827 5737 2309
HASHISH SEIZURES 8... 6६४६० ४2३७ 6992 3629 4825
CASES 2516 2827 2672 2691 986
COCAINE " SEIZURES 0.420 2 1.58 40 0

CASES 4 4 6 _&
METHRQUALONE SEIZURES 7475 45319 हि 20485

CASES 167 457 196
PHENOBARBITAL SEIZURES 118020 हि - न ’

CASES | 2 ee os oO
L.s.D SEIZURES 50 164 256 113 _
(Sq. Papers) "CASES - 1 - 1
ACETIC ANHYDRIDE SEIZURES ~ 19758 47740 9282 a
(in ltrs.) CASES - 22 40 26

2. PERSONS ARRESTED

a) No. of Persons Arrested 12650 13723 15452 14673
including Foreigners

b) No. of Foreigners 116 _ 214 136 108
arrested ee cee रे ee oo
3. ACTION TAKEN AGAINST PERSONS INVOLVED IN DRUG TRAFFICKING

a) No. of Persons prosecuted 7172 9964 9154
b) No. of Persons convicted 761 3488 1245
2) ४०. of Persons acquitted 1762. 1633 3165
4. ACTION TAKEN UNDER PITNDPS(NDPS) ACT, 1988 PITNDPS(NDPS) ACT, 1988

No. of detention orders | 97 116 156

= detained 80 92 . 123,

NCB, NEW DELHI


जप 1235 2

55. DESTRUCTION OF NARCOTICS DRUG YIELDING PLANTS

_a) Poppy Plant

Area (in Acres) 19 67 9.5 5 ०
Potential Yield (in Kgs.) 135 754 20 9
_b) Cannabis Plant /$/“...७&ः
Area (in Acres) 1219 2587 858 638 16
Potential Yield (Kgs.) 1230209 3279661 1073334 694617 9850
6. DESTRUCTION OF MANUFACTURING FACILITIES
_a) Facilities detected and quantity of finished drug seizedin Kg. _ _
HEROIN . _ 2.020 सर 27 6 ०
Facilities detected 5 4 3 8 0
HASHISE . . - ae ct ० ०0
Facilities detected - - - ° °
METHAQUALONE 3653 .000 1710 6091 2336 °
Facilities detected 3 2 8 4 1
MORPHINE 0.760 = = 9 0
Facilities detected 1 = - ° 0
__8) No. of persons arrested 7 3 25 Ww 1
_§) incriminating materials seized in Kg. हि
“acetic sonpRIDE - 21040 - a 0
ACETYL ANTHRANILLIC ACID (1६२. ) = = = 561 °
ACETYL ANTHRANILLIC POWDER = 5 = 100 9
ACETYL CHLORIDE =: - = | ०
20७४८काा ए।4 CHLORIDE - - 18.5 7 0
DIETHYAL ETHER - - - ° °
METHENOL - = - _o 9
OPIUM 37.950 2.750 32 ०0
OPIUM SOLUTION (ltrs) 7: 7 st 0
SOQDIUN CARBONATE - - - 0
7. DISPOSAL OF SEIZED NARCOTICS DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES
QPIuN 254 449 33.3 5 15
NORFSINE a = 7 9 9
HEROIN 807 240 463 404 22
GANS 5962 - 10699 32850 1809 46
RASEISH 1117 1135 2234 8709 99
COCAINE 7 2 = 9-95 0 9
METEAQUALONE 714 17345 9449

PSENORARBITAL

(Sq. Paper)
C ANHYDRIDE (ltrs.)

NCB, NEW DELHI

“


Yea. 1992 1993

i994 2995 1996

8. FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY

a) Value of property 988337 ~___1024400 309479 274479
Forfeited (Ra.)
No. of Cases 5 = 1 3 1
b) Value of property 37026070 904044 85067573 210428345 456000
Frozen (7२७. ) 7
No. of Cases 4 7 17 eu 2
9. AGENCY-WISE NUMBER OF SEIZURES
ALL INDIA wa 22752 13528 14657 12799 4928
NARCOTICS CONTROL BUREAU _ _ 88 16 90 ee 35
DIRECTORATE OF REVENUE S_ _18 29. __ 28 51
INTELLIGENCE
CUSTOM & CENTRAL EXCISE 518 474 7 477 272 __ 76
CENTRAL BUREAU OF NARCOTICS 114 79 70 65 16
ORGANISATIONS _ . _ हा है
B.S.F _ 42 125 180 276 112
C.B.r . - ___ 12 6 है °
STATE AGENCIES (TOTAL) 11984 12694 13865 12119 4671
POLICE है > 32497 13526 11833 4649
EXCISE ot (197 339 286 22
JOINT OPERATION - - - - 13
10. AGENCY-WISE BREAK-UP OF QUANTITY SEIZED (IN KGS.
A. NARCOTICS CONTROL BUREAU
OPIUM 50 166 1.4 40 12

MORPRINE - -

HEROIN 85 69 101 75 78
GANJA 359 3349 3228 462 52
HASHISH 2 347 261 27 है 29
COCAINE - 0.06 - 0 0
METHAQUALONE . 1491 5776 676 1064 0
PHENOBARBITAL 63590 Tabs. - - _: 0
Lsp . - - - 0
* ANHYDRIDE (ltrs.) . > = 7 0

8. DIRECTORATE OF REVENUE INTELLIGENCE

OPIUN _ 243 393 0.04
MORPHINE 9.190 = =
HEROIN लि 7 0.035 1400 _. 15
GANJA है हे = 703 1170 ~

HASHISH
COCAINE.

METHAQUALONE _-

PHENOBARBITAL

NCB, NEW DELHI


-—

Year 19921993994 1995 1996
7.50 हि - - - - 9
ACETIC ANHYDRIDE (itrs.) : 2000 = 7 - 9
€. CUSTOM AND CENTRAL EXCISE

oPIUM 68 131 26 61 76

MORPHINE 2 - 30 2 9
HEROIN 83 114 152 207 212
GANJA 22222 - 22146 22621 6754 789
EASHISH 115 2369 1294 850 576
COCAINE हर 0.310 1 = 3 0
METHAQUALONE 1638 4140 11361 205 4
PHENOBARBITAL 54430 Tabs = - ” ०
isp ~ - - - 9

ACETIC ANHYDRIDE (itrs.) = 8000 25275 78 2117

2. CENTRAL BUREAU OF NARCOTICS (C.B.N, .

OPIUM 533 127 468 165 1i6

MORPHINE — 20 - 2 _ = °

HEROIN 10 25 22 609 2

2 _ 53. 152 168 52 9

RASHISH or 9 1 - ० .

METHAQUALONE - - - -
PHENOBARBITAL - - - =
Lsp = = -
ACETIC ANHYDRIDE (ltrs.) - - -

&. BORDER SECURITY FORCE(BSF) ||... B.S.F,
OPIUN -
MORPHINE ~
BEROIN 29
GANJA 281
HASHISH 373
COCAINE > - - =
YETEAQUALONE x - - -
PHENOBARBITAL = = - =
1.59 - - न
ACETIC ANHYDRIDE (1६:29. ) = - - 4715

F CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (C.B./
OPIUM -
| MORPRINE - - "रे 2
HEROIN - 13
GANJA है -

_ HASHISH - 7 6 a:
COCAINE ie ~ et 2
METHAQUALONE - -._ ८: -

clolololo|

NCB, NEW DELL


Me

m1 128 १०

=
1.50 चर

ACETIC ANHYDRIDE (ltra,)
__G. STATE POLICE

1751

2196

. OPIUM ee
| MORPHINE, 30 34 20
HEROIN _ 938 638 नि 530
GANJA - “4937468310 144754
HASHISH 2057 5680 3571
EOENINE 0.120 1
—_METHAQUALONE, . «a6 4736
PHENOBARBITAL - -
Lap (8q. Paper) nO 164
ACETIC ANHYDRIDE (tra ) - 2257
H. STATE EXCISE
i ae 7 3
___ MORPHINE . _ दि a 69
SHEROTN 8 मम
GANJA . 2053 3049
MASHISH - 3
COCAINE . - . -
METHAQUALONE - -
__ PHENOBARBITAL . - -
Lsp -

ACETIC ANHYDRIDE (ltre.)
1, JOINT OPERATION

MORPHINE _
HEROIN

HASHISH
COCAINE z= oc ce
METHAQUALONE

PHENOBARBITAL

NCB, NEW DELHE


129

ANNFXURE V

SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS OF WORKSHOP AT GOA

A workshop oon ‘Criminal Law & Narcotics Drug

Psychotropic substances’ was held under the auspices

of

on

6.

the Government of Goa and Law Commission of India

18 January, 1997 at Hotel Mandovi, Panji, Goa.

The following were present:

Shri P. Sundararajan, Addl. District Judge,
Margao. .

Shri A.D.Salkar, Addl. Distric Judge 8&8 SJM
N.D.P.S., Mapusa,.

Shri A.P. Cardoso, Advocate.
Shri 5.5. Faria, Public Prosecutor, Margao.

Smt. Shobha Dhumaskar, Public Prosecutor,
Mapusa.

Shri A.K.Singh, Supdt., of Police (11.0. ),
Panaji, Goa.

Shri Gopal M. Jadhav, Police Inspector.
Shri N.V.  Mhamal, P.S.1.
Shri Zeller C.De Souza., Adovcate, Goa.

Shri Narendra S.A.Sawaikar, Advocate, (High
Court. Bar Association ).

Shri M.P. Carvalho, Supdt. of Excise

Prof. Dr. Carmo D'Souza, M.S. College,
Panaji.

Prof. M.R.K. Prasad, Collage of Law, Panaji.

she » Suresh Narulkar,Advocate, North Goa
District हु



16.
17.

18.

19.
20,
ai.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

30.

31.
32.
33.

34.

sri

Shri Devanand Shetkar, Advocates Association
Prof. J.G. Prabhudessai. G.R.KARE Coticce
Prof. K.V.Kuncolienkar of Law, Margao.

Shri I.D.Shukla, Dy. Supdt. of Police,
Panaji, Goa.

Shri Rajendra Raut Dessai, P.S.1T

Shri Pandurang S.Kalangutka”,P.SI.

Shri D.S. Sawant, P.S.1.

Shri G.V.Dhume, Public Prosecutor.

Shri Bhanudas Gaunkar, A.P.P.

Smt Edna Rodrigues, Public Prosecutor.

Shri Pramod S. Hede, Public Prosecutor.
Shri V.N.S. Malkarnekar, Public Prosecuter.
smt. Asha Arsekar, A.P.P., Margao.

Shri J.C. da Costa,Asstt., Public Prosecuta: -
Shri Shekhar S. Parab, A.P.P., Pdnaji-

Smt. Teodolinda §.Sardinha, Asstt. Public
Prosecutor.

Shri Subhas P.Dessai, A.P.P. Quenem.
Shri Devidas Kerkar, Asstt. Public Prosecuss
Shri Shailesh Kalangutkar, A.P.P., Panaji.

Shri Ladislau M. Fernandes, A.P.P. Vasco.

The Chairman, Law Commission of India, Hon

Justice K. Jayachandra Reddy, presided ovar fine

workshop. He emphasised the need for amending various

provisions of the Narcotics Drug and = Psvchoetrenic


abe

Substances Act, 1985
questionnaire issued by

invited the participants

Some participants
Grugs should be brought
them punishment alone wi
should also be social
effects of drug abuse.
activist should be invo

also play an effective r

Some other partic

131 :-

in tne context of the
the Law Commission. He
to project their views.
were of the view that more
under NDPS Act. According to
11 not be sufficient. There
awareness against the 111
For the purpose social
lved. The Press and media can
oie in this regard.
ipants pointed out that the

provision fo: small quantities of various Narcotics

drugs prescribe. inder t

prescribed therefor are

he NDPS Act and = punis

not satisfactory.

hment

To overcome

this anomaly, the relevant provisions of the NDPS Act

need to be amended.

A few of them exp
27 of the 4075 Act

smal} Quantity of dru

veted.

should de dé

su

dea

ressed the view that se

dealing with the possessi

ction

on of

gs for personal consumption

gGsested that soecial c

1 exclusive with the



-: 132 :-

It was further suggested that there is a _ need
to bring users of soft drugs, both regular and

occasional, within the purview of the NDPS Act.


w
wo
॥

VI

SUMMARY OF THE FFOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL

SEMINAR ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE HELD AT VIGYAN

BHAVAN, NEW DELHI, ON 22-23 FEBRUARY, 1927

The following persons attended the seminar.

Agarwal Anita - High Court, Bombay

Agarwala —E.C. - Advocate, Supreme Court.
Agarwal Mahesh-Advocate, Supreme Court.
Agarwal S.K. - Advccate

Agarwal Sharda Ms. Addl. ODt.S.J, Delhi.

Anand A.S.Dr.Justice, Judge, Supreme Court.
Anand Pinki Ms. Advocate Delhi High Court.
Anand S.D. Joint Sscretary,(Law) Haryana.
Arunachalam T.S. Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court.
Arya Aditya Or. Dy. Commissioner of Police,
Delhi. .

Bagga Reena, Advocate.

Balaji V., Advocate.

Bakshi P.M. Former Member,Law Commission.
Baichandran M., DIG, CBI.

Banarjee D., Addl. DC, Intelligence, Calcutta.
Bhagat Achal, Sr. Consultant, Appollo
Hospital.

Bhatnagar A.P. Add? D.G.P. Punjab.
Bharadwaj Omendra, G, Rajasthan.

Biswas A.M. Member, National Commission for SC

oO

&ST.

Chandra Bharat, Addi. DGP,Andhra Pradesn.
Chandra Satish Dr. Addi. LO. Law Commission.
Chaudhary musharraf “s. Advocate.

Chawla S.C. Advocate.

Chopra R.C. Addi. “Dist. & Session Judge,
Celhi.

Das B.S. Advocate, ittack.
Das Manoj K. Advo .
ve V.S. Justice, =etd. Chairman, State Law
Commission, Rajast
Rania R.P., Chi
osecution. Delhi.

ale Sujatna, Cortederation of Doctors Assn.
hit &.C., Addl. D.G.P., Uttar Pradesh.
ex., 0.1.6.

mohir S.RK.,
mohic Viveh,

Prosecutor. Directc-ate of

Delhi.
Celhi.



Ganguly A.K. Justice.

Garg Manish, Advocate, Delhi.
Gautam D.N., D.I.G., I.T.B.P.
Ghildiyal Subodh, Journalist.
Gulati B.L., Secretary (Law), Haryana.

Gupta Aruneshwar, Advocate.

Gupta Arvind, Advocate.

Gupta A.K., Advocate.

Gupta Dipankar, Sr.Advocate.

Gupta K.L., A.D.G. Police (Crime), Uttar
Pradesh.

Gupta R.L. Justice, Member, Law Commission.
Gupta Naresh Kumar, Advocate.

Gupta Shekhar, Editor, Indian Express.

Jacob Alice Mrs., Member, Law Commission.

Jain R.C., New Delhi.

Jain R.K., Sr.Advocate, New Deihi.

Jha S.N. Justice., Judge, Patna High Court.
Kak Purnima Bhat Ms., Advocate, Supreme Court.
Kapoor Suman, Advocate.

Katara Parmanand Pt., Advocate.

Kaw Sanjay, Journalist.

Khalap Ramakant, Union Minister of State for
Law & Justice.

Khurana Ruchi Ms., Trainee Advocate.
Krishnamurthy Ch.G., Member, Law Commission.
Kumar Mukesh, Trainee Advocate.

Kumar Sushil, Sr.Advocate.

Kumar Swatanter Justice, Judge, P&H High Court.
Kumaraswamy K., Add1.D.G.P.(Crimes), Tamil
Nadu.

Lalit Uday, Advocate.

Manchardi Ramesh, Chief Prosecutor, Directorate
of Prosecution, Delhi.

Manohar Sujatha V.Justice, Judge, Supreme
Court.

Mansharamani G.G. ODr., Delhi.
Mathur S.P., B.P.R & D.

Mathew Anne, Advocate.

Meena M.D., I.G., Police, Surat
Meena R.L., Member-Secretary, Lew Commission of
India.

Nair Vipin, Advocate.

Narayan Nand Indra, Advocate.
Narayan Ranjana Mrs, Advocate.
Nariman F.S., Sr.Advocate.
Niklesh R., Advocate.

Pahwa Vikas, Advocate.

Pali Anand, Advocate.

Palli Rekha Ms, Advocate.
Pandher G.S., D.G., 3.P.R.3 D.
Pandian S.R. Justice.
Parthasarathy K., Law Secretar). Pondicherry.
Parekh P.H., Advocate.
Perreria Maxwell, Adcd]l.Commiss
Pradhan B.R., Law Department, =

er of Police.
2. of Sikkim.



Prasad P.S.v., Jt.O:rector, S.N.P.A.

Punchh MLM. Justice, Judge, Supreme court.
Puri S.S., Directcr of Public Prosecutions
Mumbai. ,
RPachhdya P.MN., I.P.S.

Paina $.C. Or, Project Director, B.P.7. ६ D.

Paneja Devinder, Chairperson, Law Dept,
Kurukshetra University.

Ram Mani, I.P.S.

Ramalingam P.N., Acvocate.

Rao A.T.,Advocate.

Pao D.K. Prahiada, President, Institute of
Company Secretaries of India.
Rao M. Jagannadha Justice, Chief Justice,

Delhi High Court.
Rao M.V.Krishna, Director, A.P.Police Academy.
Rao P.P., Sr.Acvocate.

Rao Sulaxan J.T., A- .O., Law Commission.
Rangam A.V., Acvocat
Ranganathan Buddy, Trainee Advocate.

Rath Srilok N., Trainee Advocate.

Rathore S.P.S., D.G.P. (Crimes), Rajasthan.
Reddy C.S.-R., ssp., Chandigarh.

Reddy K.Jayachandra Justice, Chairman, Law
Commission of India.

Reddy Sadashiva, Advocate’.

Reddy Usha MS., Advocate.

Sainghar N.K.,; I.P.S.(Retd)

Salve Harish, Sr.Advocate.

Sampath A.T.M., Advocate.

Sandhu H.S., s.P., ०.8.1.

Sankrityayana K 907. + Member, National
Commission for Minorities.

Satish R., Advocate.

Seth Padma Ms., Memter, National Commission for
women. हि
Sharma Atul, Advocate.

Sharma M.K. Justice, Judge, Delhi Hign Court.
Sharma Pawan Mrs, A.L.O., Law Commissicn.
Sharma T.C.,; Advocate.

Sharma Vibdhakar, I.G., Tirunelvel-, Tamil
Nadu.
Sharma Vishnu, vecate.

Shroff M.N., Advocate.

Shinghal N.K.  Retc. I.P.S.

Sibal Kapil. Sr.Advecate.

J.P. Addi.D Judge, Detni.
vast
Aavo
Acv ocate.

ecretary, Las Comm7ssion.

J&K, Jammu.

National

33 0 0 8) (0

कै


1
प्र
Qa

1

Thakker Chnilal Justice, Judge, Gujarat High
Court.

Tromas K.T. Justi
Sanjay Tripathi,
Trivedi 8.¥ Or., A
Tulsi «.7T.S., Sr.Acyv
Upadhaya A.K., A-L.O
Varshy Anup Kumar Or.

Venkatachalliah MLM. Justice, Chairman,
National Human Rights Commission.

Wadhwa D.P. Justice, Chief Justice, Patna
Court.

Yadav R.K., Addl.0t.Judge.

Yadhav Ranbir, Advocate.

» Supreme Court.
न Commission
ector, 8.P.F.42D.

Commission.

On 23rd February, 1997, one session was devoted

to Narcotic Orugs & Psychotropic Substances Act.

Mr.Justice K.1T.Thomas, Judge, Supreme Court = India
chaired the session. He observed that provisions of

sections 43 to 52 were sufficient.

He pointed out the qualities which the public
prosecutor should possess and emphasised the need Yor
appointing competent persons as public prosecutors.

He also referred to the UN Conventions on Drugs.

According ta nim the provisions of the NDPS Act are
ceterrent and stringent. He, however, emphasised tne
need to plug the loopnoles in regard to severa: ower
provisions of the Act. He said that many pecpale 578
not axen aware that their statements ars to एड

recorces in the oresance oF a



-: 137 :<

Mr. K.T.S. Tulsi, Senior Advocate referred to
the problems leading to the collapse of the criminal
justice system . He said that the search must be
conducted before the Gazetted Officer or the
Magistrate, as it is an important safeguard of the
rights of the accused. However, he emphasised that
the police agency has to be trusted. He further
pointed out that legislation has to balance the
various situations. Mr.Tulsi gave various statistical
data to show the effect of non-compliance of the

provisions of the Act.

Mr.H.S.Sandhu, a senior police officer,
highlighted the factors leading to failure of
investigation and prosecution. He also referred to

the law prevailing in USA.

Mr.R.C.Dixit, a senior police officer also

pointed out the various loopholes in the NDPS Act.

Mr.Kapil Sibbal, Senior Advocate pointed out
that under the provisions of NDPS Act, carrier of
drugs is convicted. He questioned, whether it was
fair? He further emphasised the various issues
related to burden of proof and evidentiary vatue. In
this connection, ne referred to Jaws in the United

States of America.