LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED FIFTY - SIXTH
REPORT

ON

THE INDIAN PENAL CODE

{ VOLUME I )

AUGUST, 1997.


bce CHAIRMAN
JAYACHANDRA REDDY LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI- 110001
—— Tol. Off. : 3384476
Res.: 3019465

D.0.No.6(3)(36)/95-LC(LS} August 39. 1997.

Dear Law Minister.

I have pleasure in forwarding herewith the 156th Report on “Indian
Penai Code”. This brings to a conclusion one of the mator tasks
assigned to the Law Commission by the Government of India.

2. Pursuant to the reference made by the Government of India.
Commission undertook a comprehensive revision of the Indiar Penal Csde,
with special reference to the 1PC (Amendment) Bill. 1978, immediately
after I assumed charge on July 15, 1995.

3. In order to elicit public opinion, tne Commission circulated a
detailed questionnaire and working paper setting out various aspects of
the subject under study. The Commission organised workshops/seminars
at Chennai, Hyderabad, Visakhapatnam, Panjim. Shimla and New Deihi.
The Commission also examined the provisions of the IPC (Amendment)
Bill, 1978 while making its recommendations.

4, We have endeavoured to make the present report a comorehensive
one, particularly after a careful scrutiny of ail the provisions of the IPC
{Amendment} Bill, 1978.

5. The recommendations have been made with a view to slugging the
loopholes and making the provisions of the Code more effective. We
hope that the cecommendations, if implemented. will make the Code more

comprehensive.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,

ao

( K.Jayachandra Reddy )

Shri Ramakant D0.Khalap,

Hon'ble Minister of State for Law & Justice,
Government of India,

Shastri Bhavan,

New Delhi.


CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER °

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

m4
4

VIIi

Ix

xI

XII

XIIT

CONTENTS

VOLUME-~I

INTRODUCTION

SENTENCES AND SENTENCING POLICIES
& PROCEDURES

DEATH PENALTY

CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY

FINANCIAL SCAMS

ATTEMPT~ INSERTION OF NEW SECTIONS
120C & 1200

TATE

OFFENCES AGAINST THE

oo

SUICIDE: AS3ETMENT AND ATTEMPT

OFFENCES AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILOPREN

ABDUCTION INCIDENTAL TO HIJACKING

DOCUMENT- SCOPE OF ITS DEFINITION

THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT )
BILL, 1978

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

tata



ANNEXURE T
ANNEXURE IT

ANNEXURE III

ANNEXURE IV

ANNEXURE V
ANNEXURE VI

ANNEXURE VIT

ANNEXURE VIII

ANNEXURE IX

VOLUME-IT

QUESTIONNAIRE ON THE INDIAN PENAL
CODE, 1860.

WORKING PAPER ON THE INOTAN PENAL
0008.

RESPONSES RECEIVED ON THE
QUESTIONNAIRE AND OTHER RESPONSES/
CONNECTED MEMORANDA,

RESPONSES RECEIVED ON THE
WORKING PAPER.

PROCEEDINGS OF THE WORKSHOP HELD
AT SHIMLA, H.P.

PROCEEDINGS OF THE WORKSHOP HELD
AT PANJIM, GOA,

PROCEEDINGS OF THE WORKSHOP HELD
AT VISAKHAPATNAM, A.P.

PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL
SEMINAR ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE
HELD AT VIGYAN BHAVAN, NEW DELHI.

PROCEEDINGS OF THE WORKSHOP HELD
AT ANDHRA PRADESH JUDICIAL
ACADEMY, SECUNDERABAD.

PAGES

395-455

456-469

470-487

4988-505

506-513

514-520

521-531

532-544

545-572

!


CHAPTER - I

INTRODUCTION

The origin of Crimes and of Criminal Law lies in a

primitive system, by which all wrongs were redressed by
© rivate revenge; a system of self-redress, based on the
principle of Retaliation. "A system of self-redress” says
Mr. Moyle, an eminent scholar, “in the form of private
vengeance, preceded everywhere the establishment of a regular
judicature; the injured person, with his kinsmen or
dependents, made a foray against the wrong-doer, and swept
away his cattle, and with them, perhaps, his wife and
children or he threatened him with supernatural penalties by
“fasting” upon him, as in the East even at the present day;
or finally, he reduced his adversary to servitude, or took
his life. Such savage retaliation did not constitute law,
but it was the germ from which the Penal Law gradually
developed, for the idea of such a procedure was not
compensation but punishment. This system led naturally to
terrible anarchy. The offender was often as strong, if not
stronger than his adversary, and the assistance of the
kinsmen on each side created a blood feud, lasting perhaps

for generations."!


1.02. Thus, there was no systematic criminal Jaw in

uncivilized society. Every man was liable to be attacked in
his person or property at any time by any one. The person
attacked either succumbed or overpowered his opponent. “A

tooth for a tooth, an eye for an eye, a life for a life” was
the forerunner of criminal justice. As time advanced, the
(injured person agreed to accept compensation, instead of
killing his adversary. Subsequently, a sliding scate came
into existence for satisfying ordinary offences. Such a
system gave birth to archaic criminal Jaw. For @ long time,
the application of these principles remained with the parties

themselves, but gradually this function came to be performed

by the State.

In India anciently, the genesis of criminal
jurisprudence can be traced to Smrtis but came into existence

particularly from the time of ‘Manu’. In the category of

‘crimes’, Manu had recognized assault, theft, robbery, false
evidence, slander, criminal breach of trust, cheating,
adultery and rape. The king protected his subjects and the

subjects in return owed him allegiance and paid him revenue.
The king administered justice himself, and, if busy, the
matter was entrusted to a Judge. If a criminal was fined,
the fine went to the king’s treasury, and was not given as

compensation to the injured party.


1.03. Vasco Da Gama, a subject of Portugal, first
discovered the passage to India around the Cape of Good Hope,
the southernmost point of Africa. Briefly stated,
thereafter, the Portuguese began to carry on trade with
India, and later, the Englishmen came on the scene and began’
to carry on trade with India. As they were very successful,
Queen Elizabeth granted, in 1600, a Charter which
incorporated the East India Company. The Charter also gave
the power to the Company for making laws. In 1609, James I
renewed the Charter, and in 1661 Charles II again gave

similar powers while renewing it.2

1.04 . The Charter of 1668 transferred Bombay to the East
India Company, and directed that proceedings in the court
should be like unto those that were established in England.
The Court of Judicature which was established in 1672 sat
once a month for its general sessions and cases that remained
undisposed of were adjourned to “Petty Sessions” which were
held after general sessions. This Court inflicted punishment
of slavery in cases of theft and robbery. In ordinary cases
of theft the offender had to pay monetary compensation, or

else he was forced to work for the owner of the article

stolen.3

In 1683, Charlies II granted a further Charter for
establishing a Court of Judicature at such places as the

Company might decide. In 1687, another Charter was granted


by which a Mayor and Corporation were established at Fort St.
George, Madras, in order to settle small disputes. By these
Charters Englishmen who came to India were entrusted with
administration of justice, both civil as well as criminal.
In these Courts the powers exercised by the authorities were
very arbitrary. Strange charges were framed and strange.

punishments were inflicted.‘

In 1726, the Court of Directors made a
representation to the Crown for proper administration of
justice in India tn civil and criminal matters. Thereupon,
Mayors’ Courts were established for proper administration of
justice. But the laws administered were arbitrary because
the Mayor and Aldermen were the Company’s mercantile
servants, and they possessed very little legal knowledge.
The law that was administered was utterly incapable of
suiting the social conditions of either the Hindus or the
Mohammedans. In 1753, another Charter was passed under which
Mayors were not empowered to try suits between Indians; and
no person was entitled to sit as a judge who had an interest
in the suit. English law was no more applicable to Indians,
and they were left to be governed by their own laws and
customs. In 1765, Robert Clive came to India for the third
time and succeeded in obtaining the grant of the Dewani from
the Moghul Emperor. The grant of the Dewani included not
only the holding of Dewani Courts, but the Nizamat also, i.e.
the right of superintending the whole administration in

Bengal, Bihar and Orissa.$


In 1772, Warren Hastings took steps for proper
administration of criminal justice. A Fouzdari Adalat was
established in each district for the trial of criminal
offences. With these Courts the Company’s European subjects
had no connection, nor did they interfere with their
administration. The Kazi or Mufti sat in these Courts to
expound the law and determine how far criminals were guilty
of the offence charged. The Collector of each district was
ordered to exercise a general supervision over their work.
In addition to District Courts a Suddar Nizamat Adalat was
also established. This Court was to revise and confirm the
sentences of Fouzdari Adalat in capital cases and offences
involving fines exceeding one hundred rupees. The officers
who presided over these Courts were assisted by Mohammedan
Law officers. The scheme of justice adopted by Warren
Hastings had two main features. First, he did not apply
English law to the Indian provinces; and, secondly, Hindu and
Muslim laws were treated equally. The administration of
criminal justice remained in the hands of Nawabs, and
therefore, Mohammedan criminal law remained in force. These

“were the Courts in the capital. In the rest of the country
the administration of justice was in the hands of Zamindars.
In Bengal and Madras, Muslim criminal law was in force. In
Bombay Presidency, Hindu criminal law applied to the Hindus,
and Muslim criminal Taw to the Muslims. The Vyavahara

Mayukha was the chief authority in Hindu law. But the Hindu


criminal law was a system of despotism and priestcraft. It
did not put all men on equal footing in the eye of law, and

the punishments were discriminatory.®

In 1773, the Regulating Act was passed, which
affected the administration of criminal justice. Under that
Act a Governor-General was appointed and he ४88 to be
assisted by four Councillors. A Supreme Court of Judicature
was established at Fort William, Bengal. This court took
cognizance of all matters - civil, criminal, admiralty and
ecclesiastical. An appeal against the judgement of the
Supreme Court lay to the King-in-Council. Ali offences which
were to be tried by the Supreme Court were to be tried by a
‘jury of British subjects resident in Calcutta. Any crime
committed either by the Governor-General, a Governor, or a
judge of the Supreme Court, was triable by King’s Bench in
England. The Charter of Justice that laid the foundations of
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court was dated March 26,
1774, and the justice administered in Calcutta remained so

until the establishment of the High Court under the Act of
1861.

In 1781, amending Act was passed to remedy the
defects of the Regulating Act. This Act expressly laid down
and defined the powers of the Governor-General in Council to
constitute provincial Courts of Justice and to appoint a

Committee to hear appeals therefrom. The Governor-General


was empowered to frame regulations for the guidance of these
Courts. Muslim criminal law was then applicable both to the

Hindus and Muslims in Bengal.

In 1793, towards the close of Lord Cornwallis’
Governor-Generalship, fresh steps were taken to renew the
Company’s Charter. Accordingly, the Act of 1793, which
consolidated and repealed certain previous measures, was

passed.

1.05. In the mofussi] towns in 8engal, the law officers
of the Zilla and City Courts, who were Suddar Ameens and
Principal Suddar Ameens, were given limited powers in
criminal offences, They could fine up to Rs.50 and award
imprisonment, with or without labour, upto one month only.
An appeal from their decision lay to the Magistrate or Joint
Magistrate. Offences for which severe punishment was
prescribed were tried by Magistrates, who were empowered to
inflict imprisonment extending to two years with or without
hard labour. There were also Assistant Magistrates and
Deputy Magistrates but they had not full magisterial powers.
Offences requiring heavier punishment were transferred to the
Sessions Judge. Death sentence and life imprisonment ,
awarded by Sessions Judges, were subject to confirmation by
the Nizamat Adalat. An appeal from the decisions of Sessions
Judges lay to the Nizamat Adalat. Such was the criminal

administration in Bengal up to 1833.


In Madras, District Munsiffs had limited criminal
jurisdiction. They could fine up to Rs.200 or /and award
upto one month’s imprisonment. By regulation X of 1816,
Magistrates were empowered to inflict imprisonment upto one
year. There were also Suddar Ameens who tried trivial
offences. Offences of heinous nature were forwarded for
trial to the Sessions Judge, Offences against the State were
referred to the Fouzdari Adalat. The Fouzdari Adalut was the
Chief criminal court in the Madras Presidency, and was vested
with all powers that were given to the Nizamat Adalat in

Bengal.

The administration of criminat justice in Bombay
was on the pattern of Bengal and Madras presidencies with

certain minor changes.

The practice and procedure in Courts in 80981,
Madras and Bombay were prescribed by Regulations which were
passed from time to time. In Bengal 675 Regulations wers
Passed from 1793 to 1834; in Madras 250 Regulations were
Passed from 1800 to 1834; and in Bombay 259 Regulations were
passed during the same period.
1.06. The History of the Indian Penal Code, or the Code
of Criminal Law prevailing in British India, commences) with
the year 1833, the year which followed the Reform 8111, a
Period which was full of the subject of Law Reform, and of
the Reform of Criminal Law in particular. Indirectly the

Indian Penal Code owed its origin to Bentham, the most


conspicuous writer of the day on the subject of Law Reform,
whose death had occurred only in the previous year. James
Mill, Bentham’s favorite disciple, had written the History of
British India under the influence of Bentham’s ideas. Thus,
owing, in a great measure, to the influence of these two
authors, the necessity for extensive legislation for India

was keenly and widely felt.

1.07. In 1833, Macaulay moved in the House of Commons to
codify the whole criminal law in India and bring about
uniformity. Lord Macaulay, while speaking on the 8111 in the

British Parliament, said -

“I believe that no country ever stood so much in
need of a Code as India, and I believe aiso that
there never was a country in which the want might
be so easily supplied. Our principle is simply
this - uniformity when you can have its diversity
when you must have it; but in all cases,

certainty."7

Lord Macaulay also told the House of Commons that
Mohammedans were governed by the Koran and in the Bombay
Presidency Hindus were governed by the institutes of Manu.
Pandits and Kazis were to be consulted on points of law, and
in certain respects, the decisions of Courts were arbitrary.

Thus the year 1833 is a great landmark in the history of


codification in India. The Charter Act of 1833 introduced a
single Legislature for the whole of British India. The
Legistature had power to legislate for Hindus and Mohammedans

alike for Presidency towns as well as for mofussil areas.

1.08. Accordingly, the Charter Act of 1833 (3 and 4 Will,
1५.०. 85) was passed, by which the Governor-General of
India, was empowered to legislate for the whole of India. To
assist this project a Commission under the Chairmanship of
Lord Macaulay was constituted which consisted of himself and
two members namely, - Mr. Millet and Sir John M’Leod,
Ouring the years 1834-38 the Commission drafted what
afterwards became the Indian Penal Code. From 1838 to 1860
the draft Code remained in the form of a mere draft. After
undergoing elaborate revision by the Legislative Council,
Under the supervision of late Sir Barnes Peacock the 8111
concerning the Penal Code was passed into law and became Act

XLV, of 1860.

1.09. The Title of “Indian Penal Code" given by the Law
Commission to the basic criminal law aptly describes its
contents. The word “penal” no doubt, emphasizes the aspect
of punishing those who transgress the law and commit

offences, but it could hardly be otherwise, $0 long as


punishment and the threat of it are the chief methods known
to the State for maintaining public order, peace and

tranquillity.

1.10. In June 1971, the Law Commission had submitted its
42nd Report for revision of the Indian Penal Code.
Accordingly, the Government had introduced a Bill, namely,
the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) 8111, 1978 in Rajya Sabha.
That Bill was passed by the Rajya Sabha. However before
passing the Bill, the then Lok Sabha was dissolved and the

said Bill could not find a place in the book of statutes.

Since then much water has flown and a number of new
problems and issues have come to light, which gave rise to
the necessity of undertaking a further comprehensive revision
of the Indian Penal Code, with special reference to the
provisions of the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1978.
It was precisely for that purpose that the Government of
India requested the Law Commission to undertake revision of
the Indian Penal Code, with special reference to the

aforesaid Bill, in the light of current socio legal scenario.

In this background, a comprehensive study for
revision of the Indian Penal Code, particularly with

reference to the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1978 was

undertaken.


1.41. In order to elicit public opinion on the relevant
issues the Commission circulated a detailed questionnaire and
also working paper in respect of the main issues to all the
State Governments, Director-Generals of Police of all States,

Supreme Court and High Court Judges, Bar Associations,

Professors of law, Advocates and Non-Governmental °
Organisations. Various responses were taken into
consideration ( vide Annexures). The Commission organised

several workshops at Hyderabad, Vishakhapatnam, Goa, Shimla
and a National Seminar was held at Delhi. At all these
places the Commission had the benefit of discussion with
judges, senior lawyers, police officers, legal academicians
and non-governmental organisations. 611 the clauses of the
I.P.c. (Amendment) 8111, 1978 were discussed thread-bare in
811 these workshops. After making an intensive study, the
Commission apart from focussing on the important issues, has
in a separate chapter discussed every clause of the 8111 and
has made the necessary recommendations keeping in view the
new trends since 1978, and they have to be duty considered

before introduction of a fresh Bill.

However, at this stage, we may also mention that
under Clause 197 of the Bill, for the existing Chapter XIX, a
new Chapter bearing the same number (Chapter XIX) is sought
to be inserted to deal with “Offences against Privacy”. In
the existing Chapter XIX, three sections namely, sections

_ 490, 491 and 492 are mentioned. But out of them sections 490

md 492 are repealed and the only remaining section 491 deals


with “Breach of Contract” to protect the contractual rights
of helpless persons. In the proposed new Chapter XIX which
is sought to be substituted in place of the existing Chapter,
sections 491 to 492 are mentioned and they deal with
“Offences against Privacy” like use of artificial listening
or recording apparatus either to listen or to record
conversation of person or persons without their knowledge or
consent or making unauthorised photographs, etc. We have
dealt with this clause in detail in Chapter XII after duly
referring to the contents of 42nd Report as well as the
concept of right to privacy as extended under Article 21 of
the Constitution and also various reports of foreign Law
Commissions and ultimately recommended that these offences
cannot appropriately be incorporated in the Indian Penal Code
and that a separate legislation should be there to
comprehensively deal with such offences against privacy. It
is also mentioned that Law Commission is proposing to take up

a comprehensive study on this subject separately as early as

possible.


Nelson, “Indian Penal Code", (1897) Pp.

Ratanlal & Dhirajlal, “The Indian
(1982) p.i.

Id. 2-11
Ibid.
Ibid.
Id. p.iii

Diwan Anil, “Indian Advocates", Vol.

4

Penal Code”,

XXV,

9.9.


CHAPTER - II

SENTENCES AND SENTENCING — POLICIES & PROCEDURES

A healthy administration of criminal law is
essential for a proper functioning of the constitutional
democracy. It is the criminal law that protects the society
from the intentional and culpable acts of individuals or
group of individuals. Criminal law also prescribes many
preventive measures for, it is well-settled that prevention
is better than cure. However, we have to refresh our views
on the problems of crime and its punishment keeping abreast

with the fast developments all around.

2.02. The purpose which punishment achieves or is
required to achieve are fourfold.! First, retribution; i.e.
taking of eye for eye or tooth for tooth. The object behind
this is to protect the society from the depredations of
dangerous persons; and so, if somebody takes an eye of
another, his eye is taken in vengeance. This form of
Punishment may not receive general approval of the society in
०७७ present state of social conditions and understanding of

human psychology.


The other purpose of sentencing is preventive. We
are sure that the sentence of imprisonment suffered would be

an eye opener to the convict and he would definitely not

venture to repeat the illegal act again.

Deterrence is another object which punishment is
required to achieve. Incarceration of sentence undergone by
the convict and’ upholding of his conviction by Court its
likely to have its effect, and should deter others from

indulging in similar illega? acts.

AS against the retributive, deterrent and
preventive theories of punishment, the reformative approach
to punishment as a measure to reclaim the offender lays
emphasis on rehabilitation so that the offenders are

transformed into good citizens.

The various theories have been reviewed from time
to time. The theory of expiation and the theory of
retribution have faded out. Some jurists also have their own
doubts about the theory of deterrence. They doubt whether
there is something inherent in it which is aimed at the

Protection of society.

(2.03. Coming to the question of abolition of death
MBentence which we will examine in the next chapter, it is
MEBesonably felt that the deterrence does work in appropriate

Mm™mtes depending on circumstances and it cannot altogether be


eliminated in the administration of criminal Justice. There
are certain types of offences for which deterrent sentence is
necessary. The growing menace of economic offences does
warrant awarding deterrent sentence and a minimum sentence of
imprisonment should be made compulsory. We find such
provisions in certain enactments dealing with economic

offences.

But at the same time there are certain offences
which, when examined in the background of circumstances, do
not attract deterrent sentence. In the case of juvenile
delinquency, it is the reformative theory that has gained
significant recognition. By a systematised reformation, the
juvenile offenders can successfully be prevented from
resorting to criminal activities and the tendency towards
crime can be curbed. If they are left untouched they may
Prove to be greater menace to the society by becoming
hardened criminals as they get mentally developed. It is on
the mental development that the reformative theory lays its

stress,

2.04, Now coming to the other types of offences against
Person and property, the provisions of the Indian Penal Code
have fairly stood the test of time in the matter of awarding
Punishment. Depending upon the gravity of the offence the

Punishment varies. It is generally felt that too lenient a

id

हू Sentence does not meet the ends of justice. But the courts

3

हा


are seen generally reluctant to award always a severe
sentence. Therefore, it i8 well-settied that the punishment

is an art which involves the balancing of several factors.

It is accepted that punishment jis only the
manifestation of crime, the second half of which 4s
necessarily pre-supposed in the first, and the deed of the
criminal Judgés itself. The State as the punishing authority
never thinks in terms of retribution and old notion of
retribution has no place in the modern world. Our penal
laws, particularly the Indian Penal Code, gives Tlatitude to
the court in awarding the prescribed sentence. In the matter
of infliction, the punishment as a deterrent is expected

to serve twofold purpose -- individual and general.
The object is to teach the offender a lesson and at the same
time to demonstrate to the public that such offences would
attract a severe punishment. Deterrence does work, but it
may not be correct to presume that it works well in all

circumstances and in all cases.

2.05, Our system recognises reformative theory also. The
Borstal School Act, 1926: The Juvenile Justice Act; 1986 and
The Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 are some of the

enactments which reflect the reformative approach. Catdwe?)

observes thus:


|
|

-: 18 :८

“Punishment is an art which involves the balancing
of retribution, deterrence and reformation in terms
not only of the court and the offender but also of
the values in which it takes place and in the
balancing of these purposes of punishment, first
one and then another, receives emphasis as the

accompanying conditions change. “2

It is generally felt that punishment under the

Indian Penal Code needs review. The sentence of 14 years as

it works out ultimately in the case of sentence for murder,

is considered to be low and lenient. Likewise, the sentences

in respect of certain offences against property are

considered to be not commensurating with the degree of crime

like cheating and forgery, particularly committed in respect

of the public institutions. So far as the economic offences

are concerned, it is universally accepted that severe and

deterrent sentences should be awarded. Illogical and

unreasonable variations in punishment have brought the courts

under criticism. To enable the court to arrive at a correct

determination of punishment, it is essential that all the

information about the antecedents of the accused should be

there. There are so many relevant factors in determination

of the quantum of sentence. So far as habitual offenders are

1 concerned, section 75 of the I.P.C. provides for enhanced
© punishment of imprisonment. Many eminent jurists have
‘Bointed out that when the discretion is given to the judges

be the matter of awarding punishment and for an effective


exercise of such a discretion, the judge has to resort to the
additional fact-finding processes. Therefore, a time has
come to conaider whether an independent authority Tike
Probation Officer should be required to gather the necessary
information about the accused and which information should be
made available to the judge before awarding punishment. to
that individual accused. Having regard to the fast changes
in the society and social thinking, it has also become
necessary to modify the provisions of the Borstal Schools
Act, 1926, Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 and Probation of

offenders Act, 1958 suitably.

2.06. A survey of the provisions of the Indian Penal Code
reveals that out of 511 sections in the Indian Penal Code,
330 are punitive provisions, the remaining being definitions,
exceptions and explanations. The offences covered by these
punitive provisions are broadly divided into two categories
(i) cognizable and (ii) non-cognizable on the 11183 of

arrestable and non-arrestable.

In our law the Police are prohibited from
investigating the non-cognizable offences mainly on the
ground that most of them are trivial. The offences are then
further divided into bailable and non-bailable depending upon
ithe gravity of the offence. About 120 offences in the Indian

nal Code are non-cognizable. In many workshops it was
Bointed out that this division requires to be re-examined in

Ee context of rapid social changes and that some of them


should be made cognizable. It is voiced that some trivial
offences affecting public order also can 19806 to serious
developments if they are not dealt with promptly and,
therefore, it is desirable that such offences are made liable

for public intervention.

We are of the view that such a
re-examination is necessary and the offences punishable
under sections 290, 298, 431, 432, 434, 504, 505 and 510

should be made cognizable.

In ection 53 Indian Penal Code, the punishments
that can be imposed are mentioned. Section 53 is in the

following terms:

"53. Punishments.- The punishments to which
offenders are liable under the provision of this
Code are ८

First,- Death;

Secondly,- Imprisonment for life;

Thirdly,- (Replaced by Act 17 of 1949); Fourthly,
which is of two descriptions, namely:-

(1) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour;

(2) Simple;

Fifthly,- Forfeiture of property;

Sixthly,~- Fine”


-: 22 i-

2.07. The Law Commission in its 42nd Report considered
the question whether any changes are necessary but did not
recommend any change regarding the types of punishment. It,
however, recommended certain changes only in sections 64 to
69, 71 and 75. The Commission also recommended that a new
section 55 should be inserted with effect that the
imprisonment for life shall be rigorous. To the same effect
are the recommendations made by the Law Commission in its
39th Report regarding the punishment of imprisonment for

life.

In the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1978,
however, certain other types of punishments are proposed to
be added in section 53 and these are community service,
disqualification from holding office, order for payment of
compensation and public censure. In the various workshops
held it is highlighted that the punishment of community
service is not practicable. It is also voiced that the fine
amount fixed many years ago have no relation to the realities
to the present changed economic scenario and therefore, an
upward revision is necessary. Doubts have been expressed
whether the respective punishments, namely, disqualification
from holding office and public censure should be included in
section 53. It is said that when there is conviction and
Punishment is awarded, disqualification from holding office

Should automatically be called for by virtue of the service

५

rules or in view of the regulations governing the management

ier corporations. Likewise, it was voiced that public censure


does not relate to the concept of punishment and, therefore,
it would be out of place to include the same in section 53.
The National Commission for Women recommended that more

- gevere punishment should be awarded under section 376.

At this stage it is necessary to consider 8 few
important criteria in the assessment of the value and impact
of punishment. It has to be borne in mind that crime is a
phenomenon of time and an opportunity to which the need and
compulsion are to be added. These factors reflect the
problems like environmental, social, psychological and
economic, in the society. The ultimate object of criminal
Jaw is to prevent crime. Regarding the determination of what
should be the proper sentence in a particular case should
necessarily be left to the court except in respect of the
offences where minimum sentences are prescribed, and where
the discretion of the court is curtailed. The Law Commission

in its 14th Report observed:

"The determination of what should be the proper
sentence in a particular case has always been left
to the court for the very weighty reason that no
two cases would ever be alike and the circumstances
under which the offence was committed and the moral
turpitude attaching to it would be matters within
the special knowledge of the court which has tried
the case. There can be no rule of general

application laying down a specific quantum of >


punishment that should be inflisted in the case of
a particular offence. A sound judicial discretion
on the part of the trial judge in awarding
punishment can alone distinguish between case and
case and fit the punishment to the crime in each

individual case.”

2.08. The Law Commission in its 42nd Report also
considered the position whether the present distinction
between simple and rigorous imprisonment should be done away
with and all offenders deserving jail sentence should be
simply sentenced to imprisonment for a specified term,
leaving it to the jail authorities and the prison rules to
reguiate the kind of work to be taken from particular classes
of prisoners. The Commission, however, ultimately
recommended that the legislative policy underlying the
classification is sound and should be maintained. It may be
mentioned that under the Indian Penal Code the majority of
the offences are punishable with “imprisonment of either
description", and only few with simple imprisonment thereby
leaving it to the discretion of the court. No doubt the
court while awarding sentence has to take into consideration
the nature of the offence, the motive, state of mind, the
extent of breach of duty, the manner of commission of a
‘ae the "means employed in its commission, the age and
tecedents of the perpetrators, etc. In view of the changes
E. the social set up that have taken, a fresh look to

se
sider the efficacy of punishments have become necessary.


A serious study on the question of revising the list of
offences and also ‘of describing punishments is felt
necessary. Then the time scale and the aystem ef punishment
has to undergo a change. Taking up the justification of
deterrent punishment, we find that the objective aimed at the
protection of the society, and the expectation that people
will refrain from committing the offence for fear of
deterrent punishment have not resulted in refraining the
people from committing offences. However, in the matter of
infliction, the deterrent punishment is expected to serve
twofold purpose individual and general. A survey of the
system of punishment obtaining in various countries would
show that the concept of deterrence cannot be entirely
eliminated from the present day policy of criminal Jaw.
However, the reformative theory of punishment has gained
considerable importance and it aims at reformation by
stressing that the offender should while being punished by
detention, there is a need to expose him to educative,
healthy and ameliorating influences. If the offender can be
re-educated and traits of his character can be re-shaped, he

can be put once again in the mainstream.

2.09. Now coming to the sentencing, policy in the various
workshops it is voiced that the amounts of fine to be imposed
should considerably be enhanced and it should, as far as
Possible, be substitute for short-term imprisonment. It is
also expressed that the poor victims of uses and abusee of

criminal law should be compensated by way of reparation and

न Tee


that the amounts of fine prescribed long ago have lost their
relevance and impact in the present day and the fines imposed
have no relation to the economic structure of society and

necessary element of deterrence is generally absent.

An examination of the vartous sections in the Code
where sentence of fine, is provided for, reveals that from a
minimum fine of Rs.100/- it varies up to Rs.t,000/-. In
respect of most of the offences it is below Rs.500/-.
Therefore, a change regarding the quantum of fine should be
made in all those sections correspondingly, at least by 20
times and make a provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure
regarding the powers of the First Class Magistrates to impose

such a fine.

The main problem with the fine is in respect of the
defaulter. In this context, the financial status of the
offender also becomes relevant. A rich man can pay the fine
and avoid being imprisoned in default whereas a poor man who
jannot. = af ford to pay the fine has to undergo the

Imprisonment.

2.10. A statistical survey shows that imposition of fine
by the criminal courta is much more frequent than before. To
ameliorate the problem regarding payment of fine by an
Andigent accused 10 would be salutary to make him pay the
tine in instalments, namely, a gradation between different

Penalties corresponding to the resources of the offender.


Some of the eminent jurists have observed that a provision of
instalment payment of fines besides saving the tax-payer’s
money and the prisoner from an unwhotesome experience and
incidental demoralisation, creates a wholesome effect on the
family of the offender. In the case of defautters, even
where such benefit is given, some other course can also be
evolved. He can be put on compulsory work outside the
prison, ¢@.g., ‘on public projects like dams, roads or rural
construction. Thus there are so many advantages of fine
being the punishment as far as possible besides the same
having a reformatory treatment. The fines thus collected can
usefully be utilised by the State. Of course, there are
certain disadvantages noticed, One of them is that fines in
practice are adjusted to the offence and therefore bear
unequally on the rich and the poor. The fear of fine does
not stop rich people from committing certain offences. No
doubt some of the objections are of some importance; but
taking an overall view it cannot be denied that fines have an
important role to play in law enforcement but they must be
imposed with the sound discretion and understanding
Particularly the means to pay. They, however, should not be
used ‘n dealing with habitual offenders, prostitutes, drug
addicts, etc. since imposition of fine on them cannot have

any expected reformative results.

with this background, we propose to examine the

fer ious types of punishment proposed in the Bill.


2.11. Section 53 to 75 in Chapter III of tha Code deal
with punishments that can be awarded under the Code. Clause
18 of the Bill provides for substitution of section 53 by a

new section which is as follows:

“53. Punishments.- The punishment which may be

imposed on conviction for any offence are -

(i) death;

(ii) imprisonment for life which shalt be
rigorous, that is, with hard labour;

(iii) imprisonment for a term which may be -

(a) rigorous, that is, with hard

Jabour, or

(b) simple, that is, with light
Jabour;
(iv) Community service;
(v) Disqualification from holding office;
(५1) order for payment of compensation;
(vii) forfeiture of property;
(viii) fine;
(ix) public censure.”

We find that in the proposed section the imprisonment for
Tife shall be rigorous, that is, with hard labour. This
Mescription of imprisonment is not there in the existing

ection. Likewise simple imprisonment can be with light
fabour.


Four new types of punishments are included, namely,
(i) community service, (ii) disqualification from holding
office, (iii) order for payment of compensation and (iv)
public censure. In section 53 the punishment, namely,
“transportation for life" was substituted by the words
-"imprisonment for life" by Act 26 of 1989. Section 53& which
has been added by Act 26 of 1959 states that in every case in
which a sentence of transportation for a term has been
passed, the sentence shall be dealt with in the same manner
as rigorous imprisonment for the same. Questions often arose
before the courts whether the punishment “imprisonment for
life” means “rigorous imprisonment for life". The Law
Commission in its 39th Report noted that there is no clear
provision as to how the person sentenced to imprisonment for
life should be dealt with under the law as it now stande,
namely, whether it should be same as sentence of rigorous
imprisonment for life or simple imprisonment for life and
whether it is a punishment different in quality despite being
, different in duration when the sentence of imprisonment of
.@ither description or for a specified term and whether it is
Jegally permissible for a court passing a sentence to lay
Hown that the imprisonment for life shall be rigorous or
Bimple. Since there is no clear provision, a new section 66
Ks sought to be inserted in the Code of criminal Procedure to
BEhe effect “imprisonment for life shall be rigorous with a
Btew to resolve the doubts". Correspondingly, the proposed

BBendment making imprisonment for life rigorous is necessary.


The other change, namely, that simple imprisonment 46
compared to rigorous imprisonment can be with a light labour

jis also a desirable change.

2.12. Now coming to the “community service” by way of
punishment, the question is whether it is practicable. The
punishment by way of community service is a new concept and
closely connected with reformative theory. In “Declaration
of Principles of Crime and Punishment of the Cincinnati, Ohio
meeting of the First Congress in 1880", it was observed, “the
supreme aim of present discipline is the reformation of
criminals, not the infliction of indigent suffering". On
these lines the All India Jai? Manual Committee has also
suggested the system of open jails for the rehabilitation and
pre-release preparation of the prisoners. It is an accepted
principle that the ultimate object of punishment 18 to make
the anti-social person a good citizen. The open air jail
system is recommended to achieve this object of
rehabilitation and pre-release of the prisoners by giving
them necessary training and adopting correctional methods.
It is recognised that with a view to rehabilitate the
Prisoners socially, they should be employed in work which
will prepare them for useful and remunerative employment
after release. However, it is to be borne in mind that in
this open air prison system the prisoner enjoys a degree of

freedom but not fully. The community service no doubt is


another innovation in the direction of correctional methods
but as votced in many workshops 10 may not be practicable to

give an effect to and also may not amount to a punishment.

Clause 27 of the 8111 provides for insertion of a
new section 74A exclusively to deal with punishment of

community service and is in the following terms:

“744. (1) Where any person not under eighteen
years of age is convicted of an offence punishable
with imprisonment of either description for a term
not exceeding three years or with fine, or with
both, the court may, instead of punishing him as
aforesaid or dealing with him in any other manner,
make an order (hereinafter in this section referred
to as the Community Service Order) requiring him to
perform, without any remuneration, whether in cash
or in kind, such work and for such number of hours
and subject to such terms and conditions, as may be

specified in the said Order:

Provided that the number of hours for
which any such person shall be required to perform
work under a Community Service Order shalt be not
less than forty hours and not more than one

thousand hours:


Provided further that the court shall
not make a Community Service Order in respect of

any such person, unless-

(a) such person consents in writing to
perform the work required of him under such Order:

(b) the court is satisfied that such person
is a suitable person to perform the work required
of him and that for the purpose of enabling him to
do such and such work under proper supervision,
arrangements have been made by the State Government
or any 10०41 authority in the area in which such

person is required to perform such work.

(2) Every Community Service Order made under
"sub-section (1) shall specify the nature of the
work to be performed by such person which shall be

of general benefit to the community.

(3) Where the court by which any Community
Service Order was made is satisfied at any time

that-

(a) any person against whom a Communit)
Service Order has been made under sub-section (1
has failed, without reasonable cause or excuse, t
comply with any of the terms and condttion

specified in such Order: or


=: 33 i-

(०) having regard to the circumstances that
exist subsequent to the date of making the
Community Service Order, it is necessary or
expedient in the interests of justice so to do, it
may-

(1) ina case falling under clause (a),
modify or revoke the Community Service Order and
deal with the person convicted of the offence in
such manner as he may have been liable to be dealt
with for the offence in relation to which such
Order was made or, without prejudice to the
continued operation of the Community Service Order,
impose on hima fine not exceeding one hundred
rupees; or

(11) in a case falling under clause (०),
modify or revoke the Community Service Order and
deal with the person convicted of the offence in
such manner as he may have been Tiable to be dealt
with for the offence in relation to which such

Order was made.

(4) Where a court makes two or more

Community Service Orders against a person convicted
of two or more offences at the same trial, it may
direct that the hours of work required to be done
under any Community Service Order shall be

concurrent with or in addition to the hours of work


ider“any “GF’ the Community service Orders made sby
peo . पु न्दु हु . HF
the court at the * Same trial, subject to the

condition that the total number of hours of work to

befdone-by: such person under all or any -s
Community Service Orders shall not exceed one

thousand hours.”

2.13 A careful reading of this.new section shows that
the punishment of community service can be awarded to any
person above eighteen years of age convicted of an offence
punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term
not exceeding three years or with fine or with both and the
court instead of sending him to the prison or dealing with
any other manner make an order, namely, “community service
order" requiring the said convict to perform without any
remuneration such work for such number 97 hours subject to
certain terms and conditions. In other words, an order
called community service order is Passed after conviction by
way of punishment with all those conditions mentioned in the
Proposed section 74A. The implementation part of it is
Provided in sub-section 1A and 1B and work is to be performed
"under Proper supervision as per the arrangements to be made
by the State Government or any local authority. Sub-section
(2) lays down that the nature of the work to be performed by
the convict has to be specified. The object underlying in
awarding this kind of punishment though outwardly appears to
he attractive, but there are any number of difficulties in

enforcing the same. A mere reading of sub-section (3) makes


the point clear. This section contemplates a supervisory
authority to see whether the convict is working and rendering
service for the number of hours specified and if he fails to
do so by way of default, he has to be sentenced thereafter.
we think an open air prison system is better suited from the
point of view of the correctional measures rather than the

proposed punishment of community service.

2.14. The next aspect is whether the punishment
“disqualification from holding office” should be incorporated
in section 53 of the Indian Penal Code. In some types of
cases particularly involving public servants and other
persons holding office in corporations, companies, registered
societies, etc., ending in conviction should necessarily
entail with the disqualification from hotding office, but
such a course is intrinsically connected with their
respective service rules and regulations. It is a matter of
common knowledge that in almost all such service rules we
4 fine some provision or other disqualifying such a person
after conviction, from holding the office. Therefore, it
would be appropriate to leave the issue to be decided by the
concerned authorities under all those rules and regulations
i because incidentally some other questions pertaining to the

Service conditions may also arise which warrant a further

inquiry.


ह.15- Coming to the payment of compensation by way of
punishment, the Supreme Court in Shri Bodhigattawa Gautan v
prise Subhra Chakraborty,” citing its earlier decision in
8101 Domestic Working Women’s _Ferum v Union of India‘
Bpserved:

“It is necessary, having regard to the Directive
Principles contained under Article 38(1) of the
Constitution of India to set up Criminal Injuries
Compensation Board. Rape victims frequently incur
substantial financial loss. Some, for example, are
too traumatised to continue in employment.

Compensation for victims shall be
awarded by the court on conviction of the offender
and by the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board
whether or not a conviction has taken place. The
Board will take into account pain, suffering and
shock as well as loss of earnings due to pregnancy
as a result of the rape.”

jThe Court added:

“The decision recognises the right of
the victim for compensation by providing that it
shall be awarded by the Court on conviction of the
offender subject to the finalisation of Scheme by
the Central Government. If the Court trying an
offence of the rape has jurisdiction to award the

compensation at the final stage, there is no reason


to deny to the Court the right to award interim
compensation which should also be provided in the

scheme.”

On the basis of principles set out in
the aforesaid decision in Delhi Domestic Working
Women’s Forum, the jurisdiction to pay interim
compensation shall be treated to be part of the
overall jurisdiction of the Courts trying the
offences of rape which, as pointed out above is an
offence against basic human rights as also the

Fundamental Right of Personal Liberty and Life.”

2.16. The Law Commission in its 154th Report on the Code
of Criminal Procedure has recommended insertion of a new
provision, namely, 357A providing for framing victim
compensation scheme by the respective State Governments under
which the compensation can be awarded to the victims on the
lines indicated therein wherever it is found to be necessary
apart from the compensation awarded by the court under
section 357 out of the fines. We may also indicate that
awarding sufficient compensation depends upon many
circumstances which require some inquiry. Further in some
cases an order for payment of compensation need not
necessarily be by way of punishment. Therefore, we are of
the view that it is not appropriate to include order for

Payment of compensation in section 53 by way of punishment.


Another punishment which is sought to be inctuded
in section 53 is "public censure’, namely, publication of the
nama of the offender and details of the offence and sentence.
The proposed Section 740 provides for imposition of the
i punishment by way of public censure in addition to the
substantive sentence under sub-section (3) and this is
limited to offences mentioned in chapters XII, XIII, sections
272 to 276, 383° to 389, 403 to 409, 415 to 420 and offences
under chapter XVIII of the case as offences under proposed
new Sections 420A and 462A under the Indian Penal Code
(Amendment) Bill. These are all offences where persons
entrusted with some public duties commit offences. Such @
punishment has great relevance in respect of anti-social
offences, economic offences, otherwise called white-collar
offences particularly committed by sophisticated persons. It
is of common knowledge that while these offences affect a
large number of people, the offenders are not readily booked.
However at Teast in such cases which end in conviction, the
punishment of public censure is likely to act as a greater
deterrence because of the fear of infamy resulting from the
publicity and consequent repercussions like lose of business
etc. Such a censure is one of the prescribed punishments in
USSR, Columbia and other countries. In India such form of
punishment is included in the Prevention of food Adulteration
Act and Income-tax Act. The Law Commission in its 42nd
Report considered the inclusion of such a punishment and
recommended that such additional punishment would be useful

in the case of persons convicted for the second time of any


a

of the offences under chapter XII and XIII,like extortion,

criminal misappropriation, cheating and of offences relating

to documents. We are also of the view that such public /
censure by way of an additional punishment should be there
and accordingly be included in section 53 of the Indian Penal

Code and it should be left to the discretion of the court

regarding imposition of the same in selective cases.

2.17. There are only few sections in the Indian Penal
Code which prescribe death as . . penalty. They are
sections 121, 132, 194, 302, 305, 2nd part of 307 and 396.
However, by virtue of Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1983,
minimum sentence in respect of offence of rape has been
prescribed under section 376 (1) & (2). A question whether
there should be such minimum sentence in respect of some more
offences was debated and ultimately consensus is that
restrictions on judicial pronouncements in the matter of
award of sentence on principle is not a healthy practice.
There may be instances occasionally where judges have failed
to award proportionate sentences, but that cannot, however,
be a factor to assume that the judges as a whole have failed
to award adequate sentences. In the 14th Report as well as
in the 42nd Report, The Law Commission examined this question
and took the view that except in exceptional cases there
Should not be any provision for a minimum sentence. We agree

with this view.



In respect of number of offences the punishment
है rescribed is “imprisonment or with fine or with both". It
; is voiced in various workshops that in view of the changes in
| the modern society, the type of crimes and the repetition of
. those crimes or the frequent occurrence of certain types of
i crimes, it ts necessary that the punishment should be

imprisonment and in addition fine also. Having examined
various provisions in the IPC and the modern trends of crime,
we are of the view that in respect of the offences under
sections 153, 153A, 160, 166 to 175, 177, 182, 221, 269 to
291, 292, 294 to 298, 336, 465 and 477A, the punishment
should be imprisonment as well as fine. Incidentally, we
also suggest that the extent of imprisonment should be

enhanced suitably in respect of these offences.


EQOTNOTES

Dr.Jacob George v. State of Kerala, 1994(2) Crimes
100

Caldwell, Criminology, p.403 cited by R.C.Nigam.
“Law of Crimes in India*- Principles of Criminal
Law, Vol.I, p.232.

JT 1995(9) SC 509

JT 1994(7) SC 183



CHAPTER ~- IIT

DEATH PENALTY

Retention of Capital Punishment

Clause 125 of the 8111 seeks to substitute existing

Section 302 by inserting the following provisions:

"302(1) Whoever commits murder shall, save as
otherwise provided in sub-section (2), be punished
with imprisonment for life and shall also be liable

to fine.

(2) Whoever commits murder shall ~

(a) if the murder has been committed
after previous planning and involves extreme

brutality; or

(b) if the murder involves exceptional

depravity; or

(c) if the murder is of a member of any
of the armed forces of the union or of a member of
any police force or of any public servant and was

committed -


(4) while such member or public servant

was on duty;

or
(11) in congequence of anything done or
attempted to be done by such member or public
servant in the lawful discharge of his duty as such
member or public servant whether at the time of
murder he was member or public servant, as the case
may be, or had ceased to be such member or public
servant; or
!
(७) if the murder is of a person who had
acted in the lawful discharge of his duty under
section 43 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973,
or who had rendered assistance to a Magistrate or &
police officer demanding his aid or requiring his
assistance under section 37 or section 129 of the

said Code; or

(e) if the murder has been committed by
him, while undergoing sentence of imprisonment for
life, and such sentence has become final, be
punished with death or imprisonment for life, and

shall also be liable to fine.


(3) Where a person while undergoing sentence
of imprisonment for life is sentenced to
imprisonment for an offence under clause (e) of
sub-section (2), such sentence shall run

consecutively and not concurrently.”

The basic issue which needs consideration is

e

whether the capital punishment should be abolished?

3.02. The framers of the Bill intended to list out the
cases when death sentence should be awarded. The question is
whether such categories can be or may be prescribed
thereunder. We would like to examine the punishment as death
penalty in detailed manner and give our conclusions.
However, before taking up the examination of the relevant

Provision, it would be desirable to refer to the development

and the judicial response on the subject.

The controversy of capital punishment is an age old
‘Phenomenon. For the past few decades there has been a move
“to abolish death sentence. There has been a growing public
Pinion in favour of it. Some countries have even abolished
the death penalty. In Britain, there has been a move for
restoration of death penalty supported by substantial

sections of public opinion.
b


There has been a worldwide feeling of humanistic

E to the crimina?ts and punishment. Efforts have been

ide and are being made to make punishment liberal and reform

ie prisons. For quite some time, there has been a move to
lish death santence. There has been a growing public
jnion in favour of it. Though it has not been abolished so

mar, the law has growingly become liberal in this respect.

In all the offences falling under sections 121,
432, 194, 302, 305, Second part of 307 and 396 of the Indian
Penal Code provide for punishment of death or in the
alternative, imprisonment for life. Thus, it is seen that
all grave offences are made punishabie with death sentence.
Peath sentence is executed in India by hanging by a rope

anti the person is declared dead.
डे

t

3.03. In India the constitutionality of death penalty for
‘murder provided under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code
lang the sentencing procedure embodied in Sec.354(3) of the
0०4० of Criminal Procedure, 1973 was challenged in the

bsuorene Court on the ground that they are violative of

Brticles 14, 19 and 2t of the Constitution of India. The
Beajority view of the Constitution Bench, to whom the matter
Pas referred, held that the provisions of death penalty as an
Blternative punishment for murder and also the sentencing

Brecedure in 58०, 353(3) Code, did net violate Articles 14, 19


* and 21 of the Constitution of India. The Supreme Court,
however, upheld the constitutional validity of a death

penalty.

Thus, in Jagmohan Singh v. State of Punijabt the
Supreme Court was invited to dwell upon the constitutional
validity of such a wide, unguided and uncontrolled judicial
discretion to’ make a choice between “death” and “life” of a
convict. It was forcefully argued before the five-member
Bench that such a discretion results in discrimination and
involves arbitrariness violating article 14 of the
Constitution. The Court rejected the argument and justified
such a wide judicial discretion owing to impossibility of
laying down sentencing norms as facts and circumstances of no
two cases are alike and, wrong discretion in matter of

sentence, if any, ia liable to be corrected by superior

courts.

3.04, Again in Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab? the
Supreme Court reacting to the argument that the sentencing
Procedure embodied in section 354(3) of Cr.P.Cc. allowing
death sentence only in undefined and unguided “special
reasons" is unfair, unreasonable and unjust, and is,
therefore, violative of articles 14, 19 and 21 of the
Constitution, showed its reluctance to formuijate rigid
Standards to determine what could be “special reasons". But
it advised the courts to pay due regard to the crime and

criminal, and weigh relatively the aggravating and mitigating


factors and to resort to the death sentence in the most
exceptional class of cases - “the rarest of rare cases" -

when the alternative option is unquestionably foreclosed.

Section 354(3) is in the following terms:

“when the conviction is for an offence punishable
with death or, in the alternative with imprisonment
a# for life or imprisonment for a term of years, the
Judgment shall state the reasons for the sentence
awarded and, in the case of sentence of death, the

special reasons for such sentence”.

From a reading of section 354(3) of Cr.P.c. and other
related provisions it is clear that for making the choice of
punishment or for accepting the existence in that context,
the court must pay due regard both to the crime and the
criminal, The relative weight that can be given to the
aggravating and mitigating factors depends on the facts and
circumstances of the particular case. In imposing sentence
the main aspects of the character and magnitude of the
offence and the court has to keep in view the proportion
which must be maintained between offence and the penalty and

the other attendant circumstances that exist. in the case.

The Supreme Court in a series of cases ruled that

death penalty be awarded in "rarest of rare” cases.


In Machhi Singh v. State of Punjab? a Bench of
three Judges of the Supreme Court having noted the principles
laid down jin Bachan Singh’s case (supra) regarding the
formula of ‘rarest of rare cases’ for imposing death
sentence, observed that the guidelines indicated in Bachan
Singh’s case will have to be culled out and applied to the
facts of each individual case where the question of imposing

of death sentence arises. It was further observed as under:

"If upon taking an overall global view of al] the
circumstances in the tight of the aforasaid
proposition and taking into account the answers to
the questions posed hereinabove, the circumstances
of the case are such that death sentence is

warranted, the court would proceed to do 80"“-

Likewise in Allauddin Mian and Others v. State of

Bihar’ the same view has been reiterated thus:

“However, in order that the sentences may be
property graded to fit the degree of gravity of
each case, it is necessary that the maximum
sentence prescribed by Taw should, as observed-in
Bachan Singh's case (A.I.R. 1980 S.C. 898), be
reserved for the rarest of rare cases which are of
a exceptional nature. Sentences of severity are
imposed to reflect the seriousness of the crime, to

promote respect for the law, to provide just


punishment for the offence, to afford adequate
deterrent to criminal conduct and to protect the
community from further similar conduct. It serves
a three-fold purpose (1) punitive, (11) deterrent
and (iii) protective. That is why this Court in
Bachan Singh’s case observed that when the question
of choice of sentence is under consideration the
court’ must not only look to the crime and the
victim but also the circumstances of the criminal
and the impact of the crime on the community.
Unless the nature of the crime and the
circumstances of the offender reveal that the
criminal is a menace to the society and the
sentence of life imprisonment would be altogether
inadequate, the Court should ordinarily impose the
lesser punishment and not the extreme punishment of
death which should be reserved for exceptional

cases only.”

In Mithu v. State of Punjab’ the Conatitution
Bench, held:-
:
“The gravity of the offence furnishes the
guidelines for punishment and one cannot determine
how grave the offence is without having regard to
the circumstances in which it was committed, the
motivation and its repercussions. The legislature

cannot make relevant circumstances irrelevant,


deprive the courts of their legitimate jurisdiction
to exercise their discretion not to impose the
death sentence in appropriate cases, compel them to
shut their eyes to mitigating circumstances and
inflict upon them the dubious and unconscionable
duty of imposing a preordained sentence of death.
Equity and good conscience are the hallmarks of

justice".

In Kehar Singh v. Delhi Administration® similar

rinciples are reiterated and it is further observed "it is a
ruesome murder committed by the accused who was employed as
ecurity guard to protect the Prime Minister. It is one of
he rarest of the rare cases in which extreme penalty is

alled for”.

The aforesaid principles have been approved in many

ater cases’.

).05. The campaign against capital punishment no doubt
tas gained momentum in recent years. In 1962, a resolution
fas moved in the Lok Sabha for the abolition of capital
junishment. The Government assured the House to refer the
Batter to the Law Commission of India and consequently the
Ratter was referred to the Law Commission. The Law
zommission after considering the matter thoroughly, felt that

H
in the particular circumstances existing in India, it cannot


risk the experiment of abolition of capital punishment. In
its 35th report the Commission has elaborately dealt with the

retention of death penalty and ultimately observed as under:

“The issue of abolition or. retention has ts be
decided on a balanctng of the various arguments for
and against retention. No single argument for
aboTition or retention can decide the issue. In
arriving at any conclusion on the subject, the need
for protecting society in general and individual

human beings must be borre in mind.

It is difficult to rule out the validity of the, or
the strength behind many of the arguments for
abolition. Nor does the Commission treat lightly
the argument based on the irrevocability of the
sentence of death, the need for a modern approach,
the severity of capital punishment and the strong
feeling shown by certain sections of public opinion

in stressing deeper questions of human values.

Having regard, however, to the conditions in India,
to the variety of the social upbringing of its
inhabitants, to the disparity in the level of
morality and education in the country, to the
vastness of its area, to the diversity of its

population and to the paramount need for


maintaining Jaw and order in’ the “country at the
Present juncture, India cannot risk the experiment

of capital punishment.

Arguments which would be valid in respect of one
area of the world may not hold good in respect of
another area, in this context. Similarly, if
abolition in some parts of India may not make a
material difference, it may be fraught with serious

consequences in other parts,

On a consideration of all the issues involved, the
Commission is of the opinion that capital
punishment should be retained in the Present state

of the country.”

3.06, However, the Law Commission has recommended that
children below 18 years of age at the time of the commission
of the offence should not be sentenced to death. The
Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 made a further progress in the
direction of liberalisation. The shift towards
liberalisation in imposing life imprisonment as against dGsath
sentence in capital offences has also been highlighted by the

Supreme Court in Sarweshwar Prasad Sharma ५. State of M,P.8

in the following words:


"The recent benign direction of the penal law is
towards life sentence as a rule and death as an
exception, awarding of which must be accompanied by

recorded reasons.”

Thus in cases where there are extenuating circumstances, the
accused is punished with life imprisonment. In the absence
of extenuating: circumstances and in the “rarest of rere

cases", capital punishment is awarded.

3.07 We have carefully considered the question from
several angles after making comparative study of the law in
other countries and after examining various judgments ४111
date rendered by the apex court, we reiterate the
recommendation of Law Commission in its 35th Report for
retention of the capital punishment, but to be awarded in
accordance with the guidelines laid down by the Supreme

Court.
PART - IT

Specification of categories of awarding of categori of awardi
death penalty - not necessary

3.08. We now turn to examine the second issue arising out
‘Proposed sub-section (2) of Section 302 occurring under

‘clause 125 of the bill, namely, whether categories of cases
iy


should be specified for awarding death penalty. The
categories specified in the proposed sub-section (2) of

Section 302 is not exhaustive.

Section 354(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, as has been seen earlier, mandates the judge called
upon to exercise his choice between the alternative sentence
of death and imprisonment for life to state “special reasons”
for the death sentence awarded. The provision, in the light
of its legislative history, in unmistakable terms makes it
evident that imprisonment for life is a rule in case of
offences punishable with death or in the alternative
imprisonment for life and it is only in exceptional cases,
for special reasons to be recorded, death sentence can be
imposed. But it is nowhere indicated in either the Code of
Criminal Procedure or any other statutory instrument as to
what constitutes the so-called “special reasons” justifying
imposition of sentence of death. This is, again, entirely

left to the discretion of the court®,

3.09, Before the amendment of section 367(5) of the
Criminal Procedure Code, 1898 by Act 26 of 1955, the normal
rule was to impose the sentence of death on a _ person
convicted of a capital offence and if a lesser sentence was
to be imposed, the court was required to record reasons in
writing. But by the aforesaid amendment, the provision in

section 367(5) was omitted and consequently, the court became


free to award either death sentence or life imprisonment and

no longer death sentence was the rule and life imprisonment

the exception.

Interpreting the liberal provision brought about. by
Jegisiation, Justice Krishna Iyer tn E,Annamma v. State of

Andhra Pradesh'®, observed:

"That the disturbed conscience of the State on the
vexed question of legal threat of the life by way
of death sentence has set to express itself
legislatively. The screen of tendency being
towards cautious, partial abolition and a retreat

from total retention.”

Justice Krishna Iyer, admitted the impossibility to
“feed into a judicial computer" al? the situations warranting

life imprisonment or death sentence”

He, however, suggested factors to be taken into
consideration while making a choice between death sentence
and life imprisonment Tike personal, social, motivational and
physical circumstances: horrendous features of the crime;
hapless and helpless state of the victim, intense suffering
endured by prison, torture, and excruciating death penalty
hanging over head of tha convict consequent of the legal

Process.


One can also visualise even in cases falling under
the proposed sections 302(2)(a) or (७) (०) or (०), that there
may be extenuating, mitigating circumstances which may deter
imposition of death sentence, and thus again the principle
laid down in .Jagmohan Singh v. State of ७७११ and Bachan
singh’s case’? as discussed earlier comes into play. This is
even statutorily recognised in section 354(3) of Code of
Criminal Procedure 1973 which enjoins that the scope and
concept of mitigating factors in the area of death penalty
must receive a liberal and expansive construction by the
courts. Therefore, in spite of the proposed amendment in the
tpc Bill under section 302(2), the situation will be

virtually be the same.

3.10. Therefore, we are of the view that it is better to
retain section 302 as it is instead of reading any
limitations into the same regarding imposition of death
sentence for the reason that it is impossible to put them in
any straight jacket for the reason that what ciroumstances
make a case a ‘rarest of rare one’, cannot be fixed by way of
8 legal provision. Therefore, we would not recommend any

change in section 302 as is proposed in clause 125 of the

8111.
PART = 137
Proposed clause (3) of section 302 in IPC 8111 Ie} claus 3 f 30 j
3.11, We now turn to examine the sub-clause (3) of clause

; 125 of the 8111 which provides:


“Where a person while undergoing sentence of
imprisonment for life is sentenced to imprisonment
for an offence under clause (9) of sub-secton (2),
such sentence shall run consecutively and not

concurrently.“

We wish to examine the aforesaid provisions of the

Bill in the light of recent legislative and judicial policy.

Under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 if a
person undergoing the sentence of transportation for life for
another offence, the latter sentence was to commence at the
expiration of the sentence of transportation to which he was
previously sentenced, untess the court directed that the
subsequential sentence of transportation was to run

concurrently with the previous sentence of transportation.

3.12. It was in 1955 that section 307 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure of 1898 was replaced by a new section 397
by Amendment Act 26 of 1955. Under the new sub-section (2)
of section 397 which came into force on January 1, 1956 if a
Person already undergoing a sentence of imprisonment for life
was sentenced on a subsequent conviction to imprisonment for
life, the subsequent sentence had to run concurrently with
the previous sentence. Section 427(2) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure, 1973 is to the same effect.



Further in Bhagirath v. 09111 Administration}? ,

(Constitution Bench), it was held:

“Graver the crime, longer the sentence, greater the
need for set offs and remissions. Punishments are

no longer retributory. They are reformative.”

We feel that clause (3) of section 302 of IPC 8111
providing for running of sentence of 1176 imprisonment
consecutively instead of concurrently, will be a retrograde
step in accord with deterrent and retributive theories of the
past as observed by the Supreme Court. In view of this, we

do not approve the proposed clause (3) of section 302 in the

Bill.
PART ~ IV
Punishment for murder by life convict
3.13, Section 303 of the Indian Penal Code provides:

“whoever being under sentence of imprisonment of

life commits murder shail be punished with death.”

The Law Commission in its 42nd Report did not
‘recommend any change in the aforesaid section since it is

“very rarely applied”.


The Supreme Court in Mithu v. State of Punjab’¢
declared that the aforesaid provisions of Section 303 violate
the guarantee of equality contained in Article 14 as also the
right conferred by Article 21 of the Constitution. Chinnappa

Reddy J in his concurring opinion observed:

“it is impossible to uphold section 303" as valid
as it excludes judicial discretion. He added that
“the scales of justice are removed from the hands
of the judge as soon as he pronounced the accused
guilty of the offence. So final, so irrevocable
and so irrestitutable (sic irresuscitable) is the
sentence of death that no law which provides for it
without involvement of the judicial mind can be
said to be fair, just and reasonable. Such a law
necessarily be stigmatised as arbitrary and
oppressive. Section 303 is such a law and it must

go the way of 811".

Clause 126 of the 8111 seeks to omit Section 303 of

lthe Indian Penal Code.

3.14. We have carefully considered the various provisions
lor the Bill and feel that if section 303 is omitted the
Becond Part of Section 307 which provides that “when a person
Bffending under this Section is under sentence of

Beer isonment for life, he may, if hurt is caused, be punished


with death” cannot be retained, on the same analogy and
principles which hold section 303 to be arbitrary and
oppressive and violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the
constitution. We accordingly recommend deletion of the

second part of Section 307.


10.
11,
12.
13.
14.

FOOTNOTES

1973(2) SCR 541

AIR 1980 SC 898

4983(3) 800 470

1983(3) scc 5

1983(2) SCC 277

1988 SCC 389

See K.J.Chatteriee v. State (1994(2) SCC p.220),

Bhairon Singh v. State of Rajasthan (1994(2) scc
p.467). Gauri Shankar & Ors. v. State of Tamil
Nadu (JT 1994(3) SCC 54); Amrutial Someshwar Joshi

vy. State of Maharashtra (1994(3) Crimes 197).

AIR 1977 SC 2423

Balwant Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1976 SC 280;
AIR 1976 SC 2196; AIR 1977 SC 2423.

AIR 1974 SC 799

1973 (2) SCR 541

1980(2) SCC 684

1985(2) SCC 580

(1983) 2 SCC 277.


CHAPTER - IV

CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY

So long as a crime generates in the mind, it is not
punishable. Thoughts even criminal in character often
involuntary are not crimes. But when the thoughts take the
concrete shape of an agreement to do cr cause to be done an
illegal act or an act which is not illegal by iljegal means
then even if nothing further is done, the agreement is
designated as criminal conspiracy. However, the proviso to
section 120A makes it clear that except on agreement to
commit an offence, a bare agreement of the aforementioned
nature would not amount to an offence of criminal conspiracy
unless some act besides the agreement is done by one or more
Parties to the @reement in pursuance thereof. “It is the
next overt step which may otherwise be of a preparatory
Nature such as buying arms to implement the criminal
conspiracy that makes it punishable. The act of purchasing
arms pursuant to an agreement to do an illegal act or an act
which is not illegal by illegal means shall constitute an

offence. Section 120A of the IPC is as follows:~

“420A. Definition of criminal conspiracy.- When

two or more persons agree to do, or cause to he

done,


(1) an illegal act, or

(2) an act which is not illegal by
illegal means, such an agreement is designated a

criminal conspiracy:

Provided that no agreement except an agreement to
commit an offence shall amount to a criminal
conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement is
done by one or more parties to such agreement in

pursuance thereof,

Explanation- It is immaterial whether the illegal
act is the ultimate object of such agreement, or is

merely incidental to that object.”

4.02. The offence of criminal conspiracy was introduced
in the Penal code by the Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1913,
which inserted a separate Chapter VA consisting of only two
sections 120A and 120B. Despite the obvious and considerable
Overlapping between the provisions of these two sections and
the provisions governing abetment of an offence by conspiracy
contained in Chapter vV, the legislature did not think it
necessary to amend the earlier Chapter in any way. Now
whether or not some act or illegal omission takes place, he
is guilty of a criminal conspiracy as soon as he becomes a

i Party to the agreement to commit the offence and is


punishable under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of
section 120B, as the case may be. So far as conspiracies to
commit serious offences are concerned, section 1208 (1) puts
a party to the conspiracy in exactly the same position as an
abettor of the offence for the purpose of punishment.
Although it is theoretically possible to charge a person with
conspiring to commit an offence even where no overt act in
pursuance of the conspiracy has been done, it seldom, if
ever, happens that two or more persons are prosecuted for a
criminal conspiracy merely on the strength of evidence

proving the agreement and nothing mors.

4.03. However, that may be, there is no doubt that, after
the enactment of Chapter VA, abetment by conspiracy is of
little practical use, and is redundant as a criminal law
concept. It may be noted, that in England there is no
separate mention of conspiracy as a species of abetment.
Therefore, in the 42nd report, the Law Commission had
recommended the omission of the second paragraph of section
107 and all subsequent references in Chapter V of the Code of

abetment by conspiracy.

One is struck by the wide sweep of the definition
of criminal conspiracy in section 120 A. It covers not only
(i) an agreement to commit an offence, but also (ii) an
agreement to commit an illegal act, and (111) an agreement to
commit an act not illegal by illegal means. This distinction

between achievement of any object by iltegal means must


-: 66 :-

involve the doing of something illegal, i.e. the committing
of an iltiegal act. The act which is an offence punishable
under sub-section (i) or sub-section (2) of section 1208 is
being a party to a criminal conspiracy as defined in section
120A. In other words, now criminal conspiracy is not an
offence ancillary to another offence, but an independent and

substantive offence by itself.

4.04. In fact, the modern crime of conspiracy is almost
entirely the result of the manner in which a conspiracy waa
treated by the Court in the doctrine of conspiracy which does
not commend itself to jurists of civil law countries, despite
universal recognition that an organised society must have
legal weapons for combating organised criminality. Most
other countries have devised what they consider more
discriminating principles upon which to prosecute criminal

gangs, secret associations, and subversive syndicates.

According to the definition of criminal conspiracy -
two or more persons mustzbe parties to such an agreement and
one person alone can never be held guilty of criminal
conspiracy for the simple reason that one cannot conspire
with oneself.’ The offence of criminal conspiracy consists in
the very agreement between two or more persons to commit a
criminal offence irrespective of the further consideration

whether or not those offences have actually been committed.


The very fact of the conspiracy constitutes the offence and
it is immaterial whether anything has been done in pursuance

of the unlawful agreement.?

Thus, even if there is concurrence in the intention
of the accused persons to do an illegal act it is not enough
for the purpose of establishing a charge of conspiracy. In
other words, where there is no meeting of minds there cannot

be a conspiracy.?

4.05. It is not an ingredient of the offence under this
section that all the parties should agree to do 8 single
illegal act. It may comprise the commission of a number of
acts. Where the accused are charged with having conspired to
do three categories of illegal acts, the mere fact that 311
of them could not be convicted separately in respect of each
of the offences has no relevancy in considering the question
whether the offence of conspiracy has been committed. They
can all be held guilty of the e*fence of conepiracy to do
illegal acts, though for individual offences ७1] of them may
not be Ilable.‘ It is not necessary that each member of the
conspiracy must know all the details of the conspiracy.’ An
offence under this section consists in the conspiracy without
any reference to the subject-matter of the conspiracy and it
is not necessary to establish the offence that there must
have been definite purpose about which the parties are

negotiating or which they have conspired.


4.06. The Law Commission in ite 42nd report was of the
view that there is neither theoretical jurisdiction nor
practical need for punishing agreements to commit petty
offences or non-criminal illegal acts. In practice, few
private prosecutions of such petty conspiracies are
sanctioned by the State government or its officers under the
Criminal Procedure Code. Therefore, it was recommended that
section 120A which defines criminal conspiracy should be

revised as follows:-

"120A. When two ore more persons agree to
commit an offence punishable with death,
imprisonment for life or imprisonment of either
description for ६ term of two years or upwards or
to cause such an offence to be committed, the

agreement is designated a criminal conspiracy.

Explanation 1. ~ It is immaterial whether the
commission of the offence is the ultimate object of

such agreement or is merely incidental to that

object.

Explanation 2. - To constitute a criminal
conspiracy, it is not necessary that any act or
illegal omission shall take place in pursuance of

the agreement.”


4.07. It may be mentioned that the IPC (Amendment) 8111,
1978 is silent and has not indicated any change about’ the
offence of criminal conspiracy. But the then Law Commission
in its 42nd report was of the view that criminal conspiracy
for petty offences should not be covered under this chapter.
In this context, it is submitted that a petty offence may
lead to an offence of serious nature and it would not be easy

to separate such crimes as per doctrine of Res-gestae.

Moreover, the crime of criminal conspiracy differs
from other offences. In other offences, the intention to do
a criminal act is not a crime in itself until something is
done amounting to the doing or the attempting to do some act
to carry out the intention. On the other hand conspiracy
consists simply in the agreement or confederacy to do some
act, no matter whether it is done or not. Further, section
120A does not just contain a principle of constructive
liability, therefore, if an accused is found guilty of
criminal conspiracy, may be for a petty offence, he should be

convicted under this section.

4.08. Therefore, it is suggested not to disturb this

section as the same 15 working well.

“1208. Punishment of criminal conspiracy.- (1)
Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy to
commit an offence punishable with death,

imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for


a term of two years or upwards, shall, where no
express provision is made in this Code for the
puntshment of such a conspiracy, be punished in the

same manner as if he had abetted such offence.

(2) Whoever is a party to a criminal
consptracy other than a criminal conspiracy to
commit an offence punishable as aforesaid shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term not exceeding six months, or with fine

or with both.“

4.09. This section is the supplement of previous section
and provides punishment for the crime committed thereof. It
will be noticed that, for the purposes of punishment, section
1208 divides criminal conspiracies into two classes. Where
the conspiracy is to commit a serious offence, i.e. an
offence punishable with imprisonment for two years or
upwards, a party to the conspiracy is punished in the same
Manner as if he had abetted the offence. In the second
category there are included conspiractes to commit any other
offence (including offences punishable only with fine) and
conspiracies to commit illegal acts other than offences; and
for these, sub-section (2), provides a uniform punishment,
viz. imprisonment of either description upto six months or
fine or both. Recognistng that it would be dangerous to
leave these petty conspiracies to be alleged before courte by

any person so provision is made in the Criminal Procedure


Code, that no court shall take cognizance of them except upon
complaint made by order or under authority from the State

Government or some officer empowered in this behalf.

In other words, the punishment for a criminal
conspiracy ts more severe if the agreement is one to commit a
grave offence; and less severe if agreement is to commit an
act, which although illegal, is not an offence punishable
with death, imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment
for more than two years. This section applies where no
offence has been actually committed by the members of the
conspiracy who are parties during the period of conspiracy

for which they are charged under this section.

4.10, In England the law of conspiracy is not so widely
drawn as in India. Conspiracy is a common law misdemeanour
punishable with fine or imprisonment at the discretion of the
court, except in the case of murder where by statute there 18
a maximum punishment of ten years. It consists in the
agreement between two ore more persons to effect some
-“unlawful” purpose. While the commission of a crime, even a
non-indictable crime, is naturally recognised as an unlawful
Purpose, there are no precise or clear rules in regard to
nhon-criminal unlawful purposes of an indictable conspiracy.
Conspiracies to defraud, to commit a tort involving malice,
or to commit a public mischief, are, broadly speaking,
indictable. A conspiracy to commit or induce breach of

contract is probably not indictable at the present day.


4.11. Though the Present sub-section (1) of section 1208
only refers to offences punishable with rigorous imprisonment
for a term of two years or upwards, the offences which are
punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term
of two years or upwards, should be brought within the
definition of criminal conspiracies. The second Explanation
as suggested by the Law Commission in its 42nd Report is on
the same lines as the explanation to section 121A; though not
strictly necessary, it seems desirable to have it in this

section also.

Under sub-section (1) of seation 1208 a party to a
criminal conspiracy is liable to be punished in the same
manner as if he had abetted the intended offence. This means
that, in every case of conspiracy, the appropriate provision
contained in Chapter V wit] have to be found out and applied.
It would obviously be preferable to make the section

self-contained.

Therefore, in the 42nd report, the then Law
Commission had recommended that section 1208 should be

revised as follows:


“1208. Whoever ig a party to a criminal
conspiracy shall; where no express provision is

made for the punishment of such a conspiracy, -

(a) if the offence which it is the object of
the conspiracy to commit or cause to be committed
is committed in pursuance of the conspiracy, be
punished with the punishment provided for that

offence; and

(b) if the offence is not committed in
pursuance of the conspiracy, be punished with
imprisonment of any description provided for that
offence for a term which may extend to one-half of
the longest term provided for that offence, or with

such fine as is provided for that offence, or with

both.”
4.12. It appears that the Law Commission made the
recommendation for the revision of section 1208 with the
intention to make the section self-contained. But the
recommendation will make the language ambiguous. Therefore,

this recommendation could not find a place in the IPC

(Amendment) 8111, 1978 which is silent about this section.


This section, no doubt, is very important as it

provides a punishment only for criminal conspiracy where no
express provision is made in the Code for the punishment of
_ such a conspiracy. Where, therefore, a criminal conspiracy
<amounts to an abetment under section 107, it is unnecessary
to invoke the provisions of this section, because the Code
has made specific provisions for the punishment of such a

: conspiracy. Now it is well settled that ai criminal
conspiracy is a separate offence, punishable separately from

the main offence.®

4.13, In the light of the above discussion, we are of the
view that our recommendation in the matter is same for both
the sections for the reasons mentioned earlier. In other
words, there is no need to disturb Chapter VA as it works

like residuary provision for the crime of conspiracy.


2.

3.

4.

Topandas Vs. State, (1955), 25 SCR 881.

Noor Mohammad Vs. State, (1970) ScCfcri) 274.
Union of India Vs. Prafulla K. Sonal, (1979)
scc(Cri) 609.

Major EG Barsay Vs. State. AIR 19614 SC 1762.

Datlmia R.K. Vs. Delhi Administration (1962) II
Cr.L.J 805.
Mahesh Chand, 1986 (1) Crimes 63. Also “Hazari

Baria,1928, 30 Cr. L.J 473.


CHAPTER - V

FINANCIAL SCAMS

CONSPIRACY TO DEFRAUD PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS

There are various serious economic offences which
are damaging the society. It is needless to say that the
motive for commission of these crimes is the greed of the
person and the method employed is nothing short of fraud.
The Union Government appointed a Committee known as
“Santhanam Committee"! in the year 1962 which, after a
careful survey, categorised 8 kinds of Socio-Economic
offences such as, inter alia ,

i) Offences calculated to prevent or obstruct the economic
development of the country and endanger its economic health,
ii) Evasion and avoidance of taxes, and

4ii) Profiteering, black-marketing and hoarding.

5.02 Recently, various sort of scams in various fields,
e.g., banks, hospitals, investment of public shares involving
crores of rupees have surfaced. In Shiv Sagar Tiwari ४.
Union of Indig,? the Supreme Court has also observed that
there are various scams in the country.

§.03 Apparently, financial scams have the genesis of
committing fraud with the public money running into’ crores

and crores of rupees, The nation’s economy is put in


doldrums when such colossal amount is pocketed in by vested
interests through fraudulent means leaving the poor citizen’s
hard earned money which he invested for his Prosperity or to
cater for his evenings of his life, for being siphoned off by
few culprits. Above all, if such culprits go scot free after
even a protracted trial, or are met with Punishments similar
to an accused of fraud of insignificant amount as compared to
those of scams, people start loosing faith in the
jurisprudence of justice prevailing in the country. This has
the direct inroad into the confidence of democratic set up of
the country and the very existence of an orderly society is
put at stake. In A.Jayaram and Another v. State of Andhra
Pradesh by CBI,? the Supreme Court deprecated that officials
involved in a fertilizer scandal of large scale went scot

free because of tardy inquiries made by State Police. It

held:-
"It is really unfortunate that in fertilizer

scandal of such magnitude, appropriate steps at the
right time had not been taken and for want of
convincing and unimpeachable evidence, the accused
who were government officials have been acquitted
by giving them benefit of doubt. It appears to us
that such large scale scandal in transporting
imported fertilizer would not have occurred if
larger number of government officials and other
than prosecuted were not involved. It is not
unlikely that the superior government officials had

also played a vital role in perpetrating the said


fraud or concealing the same. The tardy enquiries
made by the State Police thereby necessitating an
enquiry by the CBI at a belated stage is only a sad
commentary on the efficiency of the police

administration...”

In Delhi Development Authority v. Skipper
4 Construction Company (०) Ltd.* , it was held:-

“The concept of corporate entity was evolved to
encourage and promote trade and commerce but not to
commit illegalities or to defraud people. Where,
therefore, the corporate character is employed for
the purpose of committing illegality or for
defrauding others, the court would ignore the
corporate character and will look at the reality
behind the corporate veil so as to enable it to
pass appropriate orders to do justice between the
parties concerned...”

" We feel impelled to make a few observations.
What happened in this case is illustrative of what
is happening in our country on a fairly wide scale
in diverse forms. Some persons in the upper strata
(which means the rich and the influential class of
the society) have made the ‘property career’ the
sote aim of their life. The means have become
irrelevant - in a land where its greatest son born

in this century said “means are more important than


the ends". A sense of bravado prevails; everything
can be managed; every authority and every
institution can be managed. All it takes is to
“tackle” or “manage” it in an appropriate manner.
They have developed an utter disregard for law nay,
a contempt for it; the feeling that law is meant
for lesser mortals and not for them. The courts in
the country have been trying to combat thie trend,
with some success as the recent events show. But
how many matters can we handle. How many more of
such matters are still there? The real question is
how to swing the polity into action, a polity which
has become indolent and soft in its vitals? can
the courts alone do it? Even so, to what extent,
in the prevailing state of affairs? Not that we
wish to launch upon a diatribe against anyone in
particular but Judges of this Court are also
permitted, we presume, to ask in anguish, “what
have we made of our country in less than fifty
years"? Where has the respect and regard for law
gone? And who is responsible for it?”
Thus no more support is required to conctude that
scams of diverse forms cited above, have to be very

effectively tackled.

5.04 Needless to say that that most of the frauds
generally are not committed individually but with the aid and

assistance of others in an organised manner.


§.05 The Law Commission (UK) in its report’ on "Criminal
Law: conspiracy to defraud” (LAW COM No.228) has considered
conspiracy to defraud, which remains a common law offence.
The scope of conspiracy to defraud is extremely wide. As its
name indicates, it cannot be committed by one person acting
alone.

The Commission (UK) explained the conspiracy to

defraud as follows:-

“2.7 The decision of the Court of Appeal in Moses (1991)
Crim LR 617, provides a recent illustration of the
use of conspiracy to defraud to deal with an
agreement to deceive a public official into acting
contrary to his public duty. The defendants
conspired to facilitate applications for work
permits by immigrants who were barred by a passport
stamp from obtaining such permits. The deception
consisted in the withholding from departmental
supervisors of information about the applicants,
which increased the likelihood of a national

insurance number being issued to them.

2.8 The extent to which a conspiracy to cause
non-economic 1088 extends beyond this category ia
unclear. The authorities conflict. Olfferent

judicial views were expreased in the House of Lords


3.16.

5.06

jin Withers (1975 AC 842). the narrower view, that
this type of case was the only form of non-economic
loss covered by conspiracy to defraud, was also
expressed by Lord Diplock in Scott (1975) Ac 819,
841 8-0. The wide views expressed in Welham
((1961) AC 103) by Lord Radcliffe and Lord Denning
were specifically approved by the Privy Council in
Wai Yu-tsang ((1992)1AC 269,) in which Lord Goff of
Chieveley, who delivered the Board’s opinion, said
that the cases concerned with public duties did not
comprise a special category, but merely exemplified
the general principle that conspiracy to defraud
need not involve an intention to cause economic

loss."

There is, however, a significant distinction in
this respect between conspiracy to defraud and a
conspiracy to commit an offence. Where the parties
to a statutory conspiracy have carried out their
scheme, they are not normally charged with
conspiracy as well. On the other hand, whether or
not the plan of conspirators to defraud has
succeeded, they can be convicted only of

conspiracy.”

Analysis of above position particularly the

observations of the Supreme Court made in Skippers case

Clearly

indicate a need to carve out an aggravated form of


conspiracy particularly in cases when fraud is committed
against Government, Public Sector Banks or Public Financial
Institutions, local authority, or any State Undertaking or
Agency. In the Skipper’s case,* the offence was committed by
the Skipper’s Construction Company (P) Ltd. in collusion
with 0086 officials, We are of the view that this Problem can
be tackled if the following new section, namely Section

120BB, is inserted in IPC:-

"12088. Criminal conspiracy to defraud public

institution, etc.

When two or more persons agree to defraud a public
institution or a local authority, fraudulently or
dishonestly, to cause, or cause to be done,
wrongful gain to themselves or to any person, or to
cause or cause to be done, wrongful loss to such
public institution or local authority, such an
agreement is designated a criminal conspiracy to
defraud and whoever is a party to such criminal
conspiracy shall be punished with imprisonment for
life or with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to ten years, and shalt
also be liable to fine:

Provided that no agreement shall amount
to a criminal conspiracy to defraud unless some act
besides the agreement is done by one or more

parties to such agreement in furtherance thereof.


Explanation - Any bank or financial organisation or
company or body or body corporate, which is owned
or controlled by the Government, shall be deemed to
be a ‘public institution’ for the purposes of this

section”.


EQOTNOTES

Committee on Prevention of Corruption, 1962 Report,
headed by Chairman Shri K.Santhanam

1996(9) SCALE 680.

1995(4) SCALE 393.

AIR 1996 SC 2005.

The Law Commission (UK) (LAW COM. NO. 228)
*Criminal Law Conspiracy to defraud’ Item 5 of the
Fourth Programme of Law Reform: Criminal Law.

Supra note 4.


~: 84 is

CHAPTI - vi

ATTEMPT - INSERTION OF NEW SECTIONS 120 6 & 120
BY WAY OF NEW CHAPTER VB IN THE BILL

The IPC (Amendment) Bill, 1978 made a provision for

~j this new Chapter under Clause 45. Also by mistake, clauses
46 to 51 of the 8111 were incorporated in this Chapter which,
in fact, constitutes an independent Chapter, i.e., Chapter VI
as per IPC contents. Therefore, this new Chapter is confined

to sections 120 C and 120 D only which are dealing with the

“Attempt”.

6.02 The subject of attempt has already been
incorporated in the last Chapter i.e. XXIII (containing only
one sectton 511 of the Code as a residuary provision.
“However, in the 8111 it is inserted just after Chapter va,
Perhaps, in view of the importance of the concept and its
close connection with abetment and conspiracy. In the Bill,
section 511 has been omitted by inserting this new Chapter

which has only two sections, namely sections 120 C and 120-0,

6.03 It may be mentioned that numerous sections in the
Code, while defining the acts which constitute particular
offence, place attempts to do those acts at par with doing
the acts themselves and make’ them punishable to the same

extent. Such provisions of the Code may be summed as under:-


{1) Under section 121, with which the next chapter
begins, waging war against the Government of India
and any attempts to wage such war are both capital

offences.

(2) Section 124, attempt wrongfully to restrain the
President and other high officials with intent to
induce or compel them to exercise or refrain from

exercising any of their lawful powers.

(3) Section 125, attempt to wage war against the
Government of an Asiatic Power in alliance or at

peace with the Government of India.

(4) Under section 130, one who attempts to rescue a
prisoner of war is punished to the same extent as

one who actually rescues a prisoner of war.

If one were to construe section 511 strictly as a
residuary provision, none of the ideas contained therein
would be applicable for interpreting what constitutes an
attempt to wage war under section 121 or an attempt to rescue
a prisoner of war under section 130. These sections

themselves do not furnish any guidance for this purpose.

(5) Section 153A - attempt to promote feelings of

enmity, etc.


(6) Section 161 - attempt by a public servant to

obtain an illegal gratification.

(7) Section 162 - attempt to obtain a gratification
in order by corrupt or illegal means to influence a

public servant.

(8) Section 163 - attempt to obtain a gratification
for exercising personal influence over a public

servant.

(9) Section 165 - attempt by public servant to
obtain a valuable thing without consideration from
a person concerned in proceeding or business

transacted by the public servant.

(10) Section 196 - attempt to use as true, evidence

known to be false.

(11) Section 213 “८ attempt to obtain a
gratification to screen an . offender from

punishment.

(12) Sections 239 and 240 - attempt to induce a

person to receive a counterfeit coin.


(13) Section 241 - attempt to induce a person to
receive as genuine a counterfeit coin which, when
the offender took it into his possession, he did

not know to be counterfeit.

(14) Section 307 which, without using the word
attempt except in the margin, defines attempt to

murder.

(15) Section 308 which similarly defines attempt to

commit culpable homicide not amounting to murder.

In the preceding last two sections, the attempt
consists in doing any act with such intention or knowledge,
and under such circumstances, that if_the actor by that act
caused death, he would be guilty of murder or, as the case
may be, culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The
hypothetical condition if he by that act caused death is not
easy to apply in cases where the act done was physically
incapable of causing any one’s death. The question whether
there could be an attempt to murder not falling within
section 307, or an attempt to commit culpable homicide not
falling within section 308, but punishable as such under
section 511, the residuary section, is not entirely

theoretical as it has been raised before the courts fairly

often.

(16) Section 309 - attempt to commit suicide.


6.04

(17) Section 385, 387 and 389 - attempt to put a
person in fear of injury or accusation in order to

commit extortion.

(18) Section 391 - conjoint attempt of five or more

persons to commit a dacoity.

(19) Sections 393, 394 and 398 ~ attempt to commit

robbery.

(20) Section 460 - attempt by one of many joint
house-breakers by night to cause death or grievous

hurt.

Finally, there is section 511 which runs as under:-

"511. Punishment for attempting to commit offences
punishable with imprisonment for life or other
imprisonment. - Whoever attempts to commit an
offence punishable by this Code with imprisonment
for life or imprisonment, or to cause such an
offence to be committed, and in such attempt does
not act towards the commission of the offence,
shall where no express provision is made by this
Code for the punishment such attempt, be punished
with imprisonment for any description provided for

the offence, for a term which may extend to


-: 89 :“८

one-half of the imprisonment for tife or, as the
case may be, one-half of the longest term of
imprisonment provided for that offence, or with
such fine as is provided for the offence, or with

both.

Illustrations

(a) A makes an attempt to steal some jewels by
breaking open a box and finds, after so opening the
box, that there is no jewel in it. He has done an
act towards the commission of theft, and therefore

is guilty under this section.

(b) A makes an attempt to pick the pocket of Z by
thrusting his hand into Z’s pocket. A fails in the
attempt in consequence of Z’s having nothing in his

pocket. A is guilty under this section."

6.05 However, the Law Commission in its 42nd report
(para 5.43) found that the language used in section 511 is
very confusing. It was also mentioned that section 309
defines attempt to commit suicide in the same way “whoever
attempts to commit suicide and does any act towards the
commission of such offence..." Therefore, to constitute a
criminal attempt two requirements are apparently to be

satisfied, namely


-(i) The offender must first attempt to commit an
offence, which presumably he can only by doing some act, but

that apparently is not sufficient.

(ii) He must, in doing that act which is the

attempt, also do something else towards the commission of the

offence.

6.06 The crux of the problem of defining attempt seems
to tie in stating with precision a test as to when the act

has travelled beyond the preparatory stage.
There are two tests to determine the “attempt”.

(i) First test is of proximity. The much-quoted
dictum is that acts remotely leading towards the commission
of an offence are not to be considered as attempts to commit

it, but acts immediately connected with it are, states the

proximity rule.

In other words, to constitute an attempt, the act
done must be immediately, and not merely remotely, connected

with the commission of the offence.

(ii) Secondly, test is known as the test of last
act. Acts remotely leading towards the commission of the
offence are not to be considered as attempts to commit it,

but acts immediately connected with it are.



But this test of last act has, however, obvious
flaws. It cannot be applied to a situation where the accused
intends to accomplish hie object by degrees, such as, murder
by slow poisoning. Moreover, the act which remains to be
done by the offender puts poison in a glass and also intends
to pour wine in it, but the wine is actually poured by the

६४ victim. Here the “last act” which the offender wished to do
was not, in fact, done by him, but that need not prevent the

act from being an attempt.

6.07 In order to constitute an attempt, the acts of the
accused must be such as to clearly and unequivocally indicate
of themselves, the intention to commit the offence.:

Salmond, whose view is most frequently quoted, observed, (१)

“An act done with intent to commit a crime is not a
criminal attempt unless it is of such a nature as
to be in itself sufficient evidence of the criminal
intent with which it is done. A criminal attempt
is an act “which shows criminal intent on the face
of it....An act..... which in its own nature and on
the face of it innocent..... cannot ०७ brought
within the scope of criminal attempt by evidence
aliunde as to the criminal purposes with whtch it

is done.”


6.08 It is, therefore, suggested that a practical test
for the actus reug in attempt is that the prosecution must
prove that the steps taken by the accused must have reached
the point when they themselves clearly indicate what was the
end towards which they were directed. In other words, the
steps taken must themselves be sufficient to show, prima
facie, the offender’s intention to commit the crime which he

4. charged with attempting.

It is also to be mentioned that the actus reus
necessary to constitute an “attempt” is complete if the
accused does an act which is a step towards the commission of
the specific crime, which is immediately and not merely
remotely connected with the commission of it, and the doing
of which cannot reasonably be regarded as having any other

purpose other than the commission of specific crime.

a The Supreme Court had expressed its view regarding

an attempt as under ? -

“A person commits the offence of attempt to commit
a particular offence when (i) he intends to commit
that particular offence; and (11) he, having made
preparations and with the intention to commit the
offence, does an act towards its commission; such
an act need not be the penultimate act towards the
commission of that offence but must be an act

during the course of committing that offence.”


Eminent Jurist Sir James Stephen, in his Digest of

Criminal Law, Article 50, defines an attempt as follows:-

“an act done with intent to commit that crime, and
forming part of a series of acts which would
constitute its actual commission if it were not
interrupted. The point at which such a series of
acts begins cannot be defined, but depends upon the

circumstances of each particular case.”

6.09 After having a glance of juristic interpretation of
an “attempt”, it is crystal clear that for an “attempt”, a
futile act of the accused is a must. Had he been successful,
the same would have been a crime. But his failure for the
same converts the crime into an “attempt”. Similar approach
was taken in both the illustrations of section 511, where it
is stated that a person during the futile act is guilty of

attempting to commit theft.

6.10 The Law Commission in its 42nd report had
recommended that the last Chapter of the Code containing only
section 511 be omitted and, instead, a mew chapter V-8
entitled “Attempt” consisting of two sections 120C and 1200

be inserted after Chapter VA as follows:-


1200. Definition of attempt:- A person

attempts to commit an offence punishable by this

Code, when -

(a) he, with the intention or knowledge requisite
for committing it, does any act towards its

commission;

(b) the act so done is closely connected with, and

proximate to, the commission of the offence; and

(c) that act fails in its object because of facts
not known to him or because of circumstances beyond

his control.

liustrations

(a) A, intending to murder Z, buys a gun and
10898 it. A is not yet guilty of an attempt to
commit murder. A fires the gun at Z, he is guilty

of an attempt to commit murder.

(b) A, intending to murder 2 by poison,
Purchases poison and mixes the same with food which
remains in A’s keeping; A is not yet guilty of an

attempt to commit murder. A places the food on 2’e


table, or delivers it to Z’s servant to place it on
2’s table. A is guilty of an attempt to commit

murder.

(०) A, with intent to steal another person’s
box, while travelling in a train, takes a box and
gets down. He finds the box to be his own. As he
has not done any act towards the commission of the
offence intended by him, he is not guilty of an

attempt to commit theft.

(d) A, with intent to steal jewels, breaks
epen Z’s_ box, and finds that there is no jewel in
it. As his act failed in its object because of
facts not known to him, he is guilty of an attempt

to commit theft."

"1200. Punishment for attempt: Whoever is guilty

of an attempt to commit an offence punishable by
this Code with imprisonment for 1116 or with
imprisonment for a specified term, shall, where no
express provision jie made by thte Code for the
punishment of such attempt, be punished with
imprisonment of any description provided for the
offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of

the imprisonment for life, or, as the case may be,


-: 96 iH

one-half of the longest term of imprisonment
provided for that offence, or with such fine as is

provided for the offence, or with both.”

6.11 In view of this definition of attempt, which could
be applied in retation to murder and culpable homicide not
amounting to murder without any serious difficulty, the Law
“commiasion in 42nd report did not consider it necessary to
have a different formula to define attempt to commit aither
of these offences. It was also recommended to revise

Sactions 307 and 308 as follows:

“307.Attempt to murder:~ Whoever attempts to commit

murder shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine; and if hurt is caused to

any person by such act, the offender may -

(a) if under sentence of imprisonment for life, be

punished with death; and

(७) in any other case, be punished with

imprisonment for life.”

"308. Attempt to commit culpable homicide: Whoever

attempts to commit culpable homicide not amounting
to murder shall be punished with imprisonment of

either description for a term which may extend to


three years, or with fine, or with both; and if
hurt is caused to any person by such act, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, or with

fine, or with both.
Illustration

A, on grave and sudden provocation, fires a pistol
at Z, under such circumstances that if he thereby
caused death he would be guilty of culpable
homicide not amounting to murder. A has committed

the offence defined in this section.”

6.12 In the IPC (Amendment) Bill, 1978, the
recommendations made by the Law Commission were incorporated

with minor amendments like -

(i) Illustration (०) to section 1200 was dropped

and illustration (d) was made illustration (c).

(ii) At the end of section 307 (b), the following

words were inserted:

“or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may

extend to ten years.”


r

In the Bill, the texts of sections 120-0 and 120-0

runs as under.

120-C, Definition of Attempt:- A person attempts to commit

an offence, when —

(a) he, with the intention or knowledge requisite

for committing it, does any act towards its commission;

(b) the act so done is closely connected with, and

proximate to, the commission of the offence; and

(c) that act fails in its object because of facts

not known to him or because of circumstances beyond his

control.

(a) A, intending to murder 2, buys a gun and loade it.
A is not yet guilty of an attempt to commit murder. A fires

the gun at Z, he is guilty of an attempt to commit murder.

(b) A, intending to murder 2, by poison, purchases
poison and mixes the same with food which remains in A’s

keeping; A is not yet guilty of an attempt to commit murder.


A places the food on Z’s, table, or delivers tt to Z’a
servant to place it on Z’e table. A is guilty of an attempt

to commit murder.

(c) A, with intent to steal jewels, breaks open 2’s
box, and finds that there is no jewel in it. As hie act
gfatled in its object because of facts not known to him, he 18

guilty of an attempt to commit theft.

1200. Punishment of attempt:- Whoever is guilty of an
attempt to commit an offence punishable with imprisonment for
life or with imprisonment for specified term, shall, where no
express provision is made for the punishment of such attempt,
be punished with imprisonment of any description provided for
the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the
imprisonment for life or, as the case may be, one-half of the
longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence, or

with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both”

6.13 After examining the suggestions of the Law
Commission in its 42nd report, judicial as well as academic
interpretation pertaining to “attempt”, it has become clear
that there are four distinct stages through which an act
ordinarily passes before it becomes a crime punishable by the
Code. The first stage is described as intention to commit a

crime i.e.‘mens rea’. The intention, however, criminal


51; 100 :-

itself, without anything more is not punishable. The next
stage is described as preparation and excepting a few

exceptional categories, preparation 18 not punishable.

Section 511 of the Code deals with the third stage,
namely, the stage of attempt. One who commits offence first
intends to commit an offence, then prepares for committing
offence and then attempts to commit offence and when
succeeds, he is said to have committed an offence. This

third stage is made punishable under section 511.

No doubt that this ie a general and residuary
provisicn dealing with attempts to commit offences not made
punishable by any other specific sections. It makes
punishable al} attempts to commit offences punishable with

imprisonment and not those punishable with death only.

An “attempt” is made punishable, because every
‘attempt’, although it fails in achteving the result, must
create alarm, which of itself is an injury, and the guilt of
the offender is the same as if he had succeeded. Guilt must
be related to injury in order to justify punishment; when the
injury is not as great as of the act committed, only upto
half the punishment prescribed is awarded. However,
preparation to commit an offence is not punishable except
when the preparation is to commit offences under section 122
(waging war against the Government of India) and section 399

(preparation to commit dacoity).


कला

5४ 101 :०८

6.14 It is very vital to note that the offence of an
“attempt” leaves untouched attempts to commit, or to cause to
be committed offences under special or local laws which also
are not offences under the Code. Ne criminal liability can
be incurred under the Code by an attempt to do an act which,

if done, will not be an offence under the Code.

To constitute a crime of an attempt under tha Code,
the offender’s intention to commit a complete offence is
necessary. The very wording in section 511 that "10 cause
such an offence to be committed” will include an attempt ४०
abet an offence. So it has been held that it is not legally
possible to attempt the abetment of an offence, the abetment
of an offence being itself an offence. A common form of such
attempt is the saliciting of another to commit an offence.
The act done towards the commission of the offenca consists
in the soticitation itself. It will not affect the offence

though the person solicited declines the persuasion.

Similarly, the wording of section 511 “Does any act
towarda the commiseion of the offence” are also vital words.
“Intention alone, or intention followed by preparation are
not sufficient to constitute an attempt. But intention
followed by preparation, followed by any act done towarde the
commission of the offence, ara sufficient.” In each of the
two illustrations given under thia section there is not

merely an act done with the intention to commit an offence,


which act is unsuccessful because it could not possibly
result in the completion of the offence, but an act is done

“towards the commission of the offence,” that is to say, the
offence remains incomplete only because something yet remains
to be done, which the person intending to commit the offence
is unable to do by reason of circumstances independent of his

own volition. Thus, in illustrations

(a) the act of breaking open the box is done
towards the commission of the theft of the jewels.
The theft itself, that is, actual removal of the
jewels, still remains to be done and it remains
undone only because it turns out that there are no

jewels to remove.

(0) 2 faiis to comply with the essentials of theft

simply because there is nothing in the pocket.

For the conviction under this section it 18 not

necessary that the accused should complete the stage in the
actual offence except the final stage. it is enough if in

the attempt he did any act towards the commission of the

offence.


ue

6.15 Section 511 was never meant to cover only the
penultimate act towards completion of an offence and not the
preceding acts. If such acts are done in the course of the

attempt to commit the offence, then they are done towards its

commission.

It appears from the above discussion, that it would
be most difficult to frame 8 satisfactory and exhaustive
definition which shall lay down for all cases where
preparation to commit an offence ends and where attempt to
commit that offence begins. The question is not one of mere
proximity in time or place. Many offences can easily be
conceived where, with all necessary preparations made, a Jong
interval will still elapse between the time when the attempt
to commit the offence commences and the time when it is
completed. The offence of cheating and inducing delivery is
an offence on point. The time that may elapse between the
moment when the preparations made for committing the fraud
are brought to bear upon the mind of the person to be
deceived and the moment when he yields to the deception
practised upon him may be 8 very considerable interval of
time. There may be the interposition of inquiries and other
acts upon his part. The acts whereby those preparations may
be brought to bear upon the mind may be several in point of
number, and yet the first act after preparations completed
will, dif criminal in itself, be beyond all doubte, equatiy an

attempt with the ninety ninth act in the series.


~: 104 :-

Moreover, the definition in section 511 uses the
word ‘attempt’ in a very 18796 sense; it seems to imply that
such an attempt may be made up of a series of acts, and that
any one of those acts done towards the commission of the
offence is itself punishable, and, though the sections does
not use the words, it can mean nothing but punishable as an
attempt. It does not say that the last act which would form

She final part of an attempt in the larger sense is the only
act punishable under the section. The words, “whoever
attempts to commit an offence” obviously have the larger
meaning to cover any act, done towards the commission of the
offence. The term ‘any act’ excludes the notion of the final

act.

6.16 In the light of above discussion, it is very clear
that section 511 is working well? and there is no need to omit
F it, Therefore, no need to introduce a new Chapter ४-8
containing sections 120 C and 120 D. Nonetheless, if need

be, the language of section 511 may be amended.


Russell on Crime, (1964) Vol.1 page 184. (Edited

by Dr.Turner).

Abhayanand Mishra Vs. State of Bihar, (1962) 2 SCR

241.


“ : 106 :-

CHAPTER - VIT

OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE

Offences against the State are included in this

chapter. It has the flavour of the approach of Empire
gouilders. The chapter has undergone very little amendment
"save for the introduction of section 121A by the Act XXVII of
1870 and section 1244 by the Act IV of 1898. These
additional sections were introduced to plug 3 loophole
because of an inadvertent omission of a special provision for
the punishment of the offence of abetment of rebellion, to
protect at the relevant time the Empire builders. However,
no Government can afford to allow a threat to develop to its
existence by a small coterie of people. There is no country
on earth in which there is not a small minority group
F commonty known as terrorists which is always up 7. arms
against the established Government. The secessionist
activity has reared its ugly head even jin countries which
appeared to have an integrated personality. It has become
necessary to provide permissible norms of political

behaviour, violation of which must be punishable.

This chapter provides for punishment of those
engaged in waging a war against the Government of India,
conspiracy to commit such offences, preparation to commit

such offences such as collecting arms etc. with intention of


-: 107 :-

waging war and concealing the existence of a design to wage
war. Section 124A which provides punishment for sedition was
described by the Father of the Nation as the prince amongst
the political sections of the Indian Penal Code. It may be
mentioned that such renowned personalities as Mahatma Gandhi,
the Father of the Nation, and 8al Gangadhar Tilak were also
tried and punished during the heyday of British Empire under

section 124 A,

The line dividing preaching disaffection towards
the Government and legitimate political activity in a
democratic set-up cannot be neatly drawn. Where legitimate
political criticism of the Government in power ends and
disaffection begins, cannot be ascertained with precision.
The demarcating line is thin and wavy. What was sedition
against the Imperial rulars may today pase off ae a
legitimate political activity in a democratic set-up under
our libertarian Constitution. The interpretation of the
relevant sections in this chapter will nave to be moulded

within the letter and spirit of the Constitution.

In this chapter, the first five sections deal with
what may be called acts of high treason waging war against
the Government of India, conspiring to wage war, preparation
to wage war, facilitating of such activities and overawing

the Government or the Head of State by force.



-: 108 :-

Next section is the punishing one of sedition.

Then three sections aim at preserving friendly relations with
foreign States by punishing those who attempt to prejudice
those relations by unwarranted aggressive action. The last
three sections of the chapter, which relate to prisoners of
war and state prisoners, are not of much practical importance
during peace time, especially since the category referred to
as "State prisoners" during the British regime no longer
exists, having given place to the less dignified appellation

of “persons under preventive detention”.

7.02 With this chapter begins the definition of
particular offences which the makers of the Code thought fit
to include in it. Oespite the large. number - about 400 - of
such offences for which the punishment is prescribed in the
Code, the compilation cannot in the nature of things be
exhaustive. Other types of wrongful, injurious or
qf anti-social conduct made punishable under other special Jaws
like Army Act, Air Force Act, and 80 on. The Law Commiseion
in its 42nd report observed that while an entargement of the
scope of the Penal Code by including therein some of the
offences now punishable under a special or local law may be
desirable, it is neither necessary nor practicable to attempt
to make the Code an absolutely complete- law of crime.
However, in brief some of these special 18७8 which are
dealing treason, sedition and other kindred offences against

the security and integrity, may be mentioned as under -


-: 109 :-

(1) The Foreign Recruitment Aot, 1874

(11 )1#6 Indian Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908

(iii)The Official Secrets Act, 1923

(iv) Tne Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1938

wer

(५) The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1961

(vi)The Unlawful Activities (Prevention)

Act,1967; and so on

7.03 It is clear that treason, sedition and cognate
offences which may be classified as offences against the
security of the state, are dealt within codes of other
countries in much greater detail than in our Penal Code. In
particular, it is noticeable that treason and treasonabie
activities are spelt out elaborately, and not limited to
waging war against the Government and assaulting the head of
State. On a preliminary study of the problem it appears that
the strengthening, consolidation and revision of some of the
provisions of this important branch of criminal law would be
necessary. However, in the Amendment Bill only two changes
are proposed, namely, insertion of a new section 123A and
substitution of section 124A and changing the nature of
sentence to rigorous imprisonment under sections 122 and 123.

Having regard to the importance of the Penal provisions in


=: 110 :-

this regard, we would also examine the question whether any
changes are necessary in these existing provisions, namely,

section 121 and 121A.

7.04 Section 121 prescribes the punishment, namely death
or imprisonment for life, for the principal offence of waging
war against the Government of India and for abetting that
offence or attempting to commit that offence. Neither 42nd

faport nor IPC (Amendment) 8111, 1978 has suggested any

change.

Therefore, this section does not require any
change.
7.05 Section 121A provides as under:-

"121A. Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by
section 121- Whoever within or without India
conspires to commit any of the offences punishable
by section 121, or conspires to overawe, by means
of criminal force or the show of criminal force,
the Central Government or any State Government,
shal] be punished with imprisonment for life, or
with imprisonment of either description which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be Tiable to

fine.


“1 111 :८

Explanation: To constitute a conspiracy under this
section, it is not necessary that any act, or

illegal omission shall take in pursuance thereof.”

Section 121A punishes two different kinds of
conspiracy. The first is a conspiracy to wage war against
the Government of India, and the second is a conspiracy to
overawe by force the Central Government or any State
Government. In view of section 120 8, there is hardly any
need for a separate section to deal with the first kind of
conspiracy. If any such conspiracy actually results in the
waging of war against the Government of India, or even an
attempt to wage such war, the conspirators will be punishable
with death or imprisonment for life under section 121 read
with section 120 8; and the conspiracy is infructuous, they
will be punishable with half the longest term of imprisonment
provided for the offence, that ten years, which may be

sufficient.

7.06 On reading, it looks difficult that purpose is
served at present by the words “within or without India”
which appear at the beginning of the section. When it was
enacted in the last century, | the extra-territorial
application of the Code was limited during colonial days, to
offences committed by Government servants in the territory of
any Indian State. By referring to conspiracies entered into
“without British India", the section was apparently intended

to cover British subjects and not foreigners.


-: 112 :८

In view of sections 1 and 4 of the Code as they
stand at present, it is fairly clear that section 121A cannot
apply to the acts of foreigners committed outside India. It
was also considered by the Law Commission in its 42nd report
that the words “within or without India” are of no practical

consequence and should be omitted.

7.07 In the 42nd report, it was also recommended to
extend the idea to overawe by criminal force or by show of
criminal force, the Parliament of India or the legistature of
any State in addition to overawing the Central Government or
any State Government as an offence of conspiracy. At
present, the award of simpie imprisonment is permissible
under the section, which in view of the gravity of the
offence is not appropriate. It was accordingly proposed by

then Law Commission that section 121A may be revised ae

follows:-
“421A. Conspiracy to oyerawe the Parliament or to overawe the rliement ०
Goyernment of India or the Legislature or f 81
Government _of ७1५ State: Whoever conspires to

overawe, by means of force or show of force, the
Parliament or Government of India, or the

Legislature or Government of any State, shalt be


-:. 113 :८

punished with imprisonment for life or with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend

to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Explanation:- To constitute a conspiracy under this
section, it is not necessary that any act or
illegal omission shall take place in pursuance

thereof.”

The Law Commission observed in its 42nd report that
since this offence is akin to the one described in section
124, it would be logical to bring it after the three sections
dealing with waging war and the proposed new section about

assisting India's enemies, and to number it 123B.

7.08 Pertaining to the second kind of conspiracy (para
05 above), in the 42nd report it was recommended that section
121A may be amended but in the IPC (Amendment) 8111 1978, the
same was not accepted. Also in the proposed amendment, the
idea to overawe by criminal force as an offence was extended
to the Parliament or the State’s On the other hand, the
original text of section 121A (which was inserted by tha Act
3 of 1951) provides general and wide scope to cover all types
of conspiracy for the offence mentioned in section 121 of the

Code. Needless to mention that the words,


5४ 114 :-८

गा conspires to overawe, by means of criminal
force or the show of criminal force the Central
Government or any State Government, shall be

punished...”

are sufficient to cover the words, “Parliament or the Stats
Legislature” as the legislative is an essential part/wing of
every democratic government. About the said recommendations

nothing has been mentioned in the Amendment Bill.

7.09 Having earnestly considered in the aforesaid manner
these provisions, namely, section 121A, we are of the view
that no changes are necessary and we endorse that the absence
of any major policy changes in the 8111 is of no consequence.
Likewise, having examined sections 121, 122, 123 and 8190
having noted that the Law Commission in its 42nd Report did
not suggest any amendment, and these sections will remain as
they are except that the words “imprisonment of either

description” being substituted with “rigorous imprisonment”.

7.10 The Law Commission in its 42nd Report recommended
for inserting a new section 123A and the same finde place in
the Amendment Bill. The New Section 123A as recommended by
the Law Commission reads as follows:
"123A. Assisting India’s enemies: Whoever
assists in any manner an enemy at war with India,
or the armed forces of any country against whom the

a 1.



armed forces of India are engaged in hostilities,
whether or not a state of war exists between that
country and India, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for 8 term which may extend to ten

years, and shall also be liable to fine.”

The above recommendation for inserting a new
section 123-A got a place in the IPC (Amendment) 8111. But
in the Bill, an Explanation was added in the proposed

section. The said Explanation may be read as under:~
“Explanation - In this section -

(i) “Armed forces of India" means the mititary,
naval and air forces, and includes any other armed

forces of the Union;

(ii) “enemy” includes any person or country
committing external aggression against the Union,

or any person belonging to such country.”

7.11 Proposed section 123A in the Bill is based on the
recommendation of the Law Commission in its 42nd Report. An
Explanation is, however, added in the Bill which explains the
expressions ‘armed forces of India’ and ‘enemy’ in the
context of the offence covered by the main section 123A as

recommended by the Law Commission. Therefore, there ts no

harm in having this Explanation.

|
|
I


7.12 The existing section 124A defines the offence of
sedition. Despite the umbra of repression which a mention of
this section is likely to evoke in one’s “mind, it is a
provision which has to find a place in the Penal Code for the
reason that every State, whatever its form of Government, has
to be armed with the power ४० punish those who by their
conduct, jeopardise the safety and stability of the State, or
disseminate such feelings of disloyalty as have the tendency

to lead to the disruption of the State or to public disorder.

7.13 In England, the crime of sedition is a crime
against society nearly allied to that of treason, and it
frequently precedes treason by a short interval. The objects
of sedition generally are to induce discontent and
insurrection and stir up opposition to the Government, and
bring the administration of justice into contempt; and the
very tendency of sedition ig to incite the people to
insurrection and rebellion. Sadition has been described as
disloyalty in action and the law considers as sedition all
those practices which have for their object to excite
discontent or dissatisfaction, to create public disturbances,
or to lead to civil war; to bring into hatred or contempt the
Sovereign or the Government, the laws or Constitution of the
realm, and generally atl endeavours to promote public

disorder.



1.14 It may be observed that criticism on political

natters is not of itself seditious. The test is the manner

in which it is made. Candid and honest discussion is
yermitted. The law only interferes when the discussion
yasses the bounds of fair criticism. More especially will

shis be the case when the natural consequence of the

yrisoner’s conduct is to promote public disorder.

It may be mentioned that the definition of sedition
in the existing section 124A is limited to exciting
disaffection towards the Government established by Jaw.
ixciting disaffection towards the Constitution or Parliament
or the administration of justice is not mentioned as a
seditious activity. On the other hand, while promotion of
gublic disorder in some form or other is considered an
assential ingredient of seditious conduct in England, this

1668 is not brought out in the wording of section 124A.

7.15 In view of the controversy which has raged round
section 124A for all this time, it is clearly necessary to
revise the formulation of the offence so as to make it a
patently reasonable restriction under Article 19 (2). The
elements mentioned in this Article which are relevant to the
offence of sedition are integrity of India, security of the
State and public order. The section has been found to be
defective because “the pernicious tendency or intention”
underlying the seditious utterance has not been expressly

related to the interests of integrity or security of India or



: 118 i-

of public order. The Law Commission in its 42nd report
observed that this defect should be removed by expressing
“mens rea” as “intending or knowing it to be likely to

endanger the integrity or security of India or of any State

or to cause public disorder.”

7.16 Another defect already noticed in the definition of
sedition is that it does not take into account disaffection
towards (a) the Constitution, (b) the Legislatures, and (०)
the administration of justice, all of which would be as
disastrous to the security of the State as disaffection
towards the executive Government. These aspects are rightly
emphasised in defining sedition in other Codes and section

124 A should be revised to take them in.

The punishment provided for the offence is very
odd. It could be imprisonment of life, or else, imprisonment
upto three years only, but nothing in between. The Law
Commission observed that there is a need to give a firmer
indication to the Courts of the gravity of the offence by
fixing the maximum punishment at seven years rigorous
imprisonment and fine. That is why, the Law Commission in
its 42nd report asked that this section be revised as

follows:-

“424A. Sedition - Whoever by words, either spoken
or written, or by signs, or by visible

representation, or otherwise,


excites, or attempts to excite, disaffection
towards the Constitution, or the Government or
Parliament of India, or the Government or
Legislature of any State, or the administration of

justice, as by law established,

intending or knowing it to he likely thereby to
endanger the integrity or security of India or of

any State, or to cause public disorder,

shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall

also be liable to fine.

Explanation 1: The expression “disaffection”

includes feelings of enmity, hatred or contempt.

Explanation 2; Comments expressing disapprobation
of the provisions of the Constitution, or of the
actions of the Government, or of the measures of
Parliament or a State Legislature, or of the
provisions for the administration of justice, with
a view to obtain their alteration by lawful means
without exciting or attempting to excite
disaffection, do not constitute an offence under

this section.”


-: 120 :-

17 This recommendation found 8 place in the IPC
(Amendment) 8111, 1978 under the heading “sedition”. Clause
48 of the Bill is substituting a new section for section
124-A as was originally proposed by the Law Commission in its

42nd report.

7.18 For the reasons discussed above, the section 124-A

ay be substituted.

7.19 The then Law Commission had suggested in its 42nd
report that the Code should contain a provision for punishing
insults to the book of the Constitution, the national flag,
the national emblem and the national anthem. Burning of the
copies of the Constitution, desecration of the national flag
or national emblem and offering deliberate insults to the
national anthem, are not only unpatriotic acts but are also
likely to cause a disturbance of public order. As such, they

are reprehensible enough to be made offences in the Penal

Code.

Legislative competence of Parliament in the matters
is derivable from the entry relating to criminal law tn the
Concurrent List and from the residuary entry in the Union
List. It could hardly be said that such a provision curtails
the freedom of expression unreasonably, and the restriction

would be clearly in the interests of public order.


~: 12t iH

7.20 The Law Commission had already racommended that a

new section be inserted after section 124 8, as follows:-

"1248, Insult to the book of the Constitution,
national flag, national embiem or national anthem.

- Whoever deliberately insults the book of the
Constitution, the national flag, the national
emblem or the national anthem, by burning,
desecration or otherwise, shal? be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend up to three years, or with fine, or with

both.”

The above recommendation was incorporated in clause

48 of the IPC (Amendment) Bil}, 1978.

7.21 Under this clause a new section 1248 is also sought
to be inserted. Under this new section, whoever deliberately
insults the Constitution of India or any part thereof, the
national flag, the national emblem or the national anthem, by
burning the national flag etc., shall be punishable. The Law
Commission in its 42nd Report observed that there should be a
provision for punishment for insults to the Constitution,
national flag, embtem and the national anthem which may
include burning of the Constitution and deliberate insults to
the national anthem which are unpatriotic. Therefore, they

recommended the insertion of this new section. However, on

— - a


-: 122 :-

the basis of those recommendations, Prevention of Inaulte to
National Honour Act, 1971 has been enacted. Therefore, thia
new section 1248 need not be inserted again in IPC and the

same may be deleted from clause 48 of the Bill.
7.22 The existing section 125 reads as under:-

"126. Waging war against any Asiatic Power in
alliance with the Government of India - Whoever
wages war against the Government of any Asiatic
Power in alliance or at peace with the Government
of India or attempts to wage such war, or abets the
waging of such war, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added,
or with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, to which fine

may be added, or with fine.”

7.23 Section 125 makes it an offence to wage war against
the Government of any Asiatic Power in alliance or at peace
with the Government of India. The reference to ‘Asiatic
Power’ is now meaningless, and the words “in alliance or” are
unnecessary. It would be sufficient to refer to the

Government of any foreign State at peace with India.

The punishment of life imprisonment for the offence
is unduly severe; on the other hand, if ever the offence is

committed, the offender ought not to be let off with a fine


४ 123 :-

as now provided in the section. Tne Law Commission had
already proposed that the punishment should be imprisonment

of either description not exceeding ten years, and .also fine.

The section may accordingly be revised as follows:-

"425. Waging war against any foreign state at t

peace with India. - Whoever wages war against the
Government of any foreign State at peace with
India, or attempts to wage such war, or abets the
waging of such war, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which

may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable

to fine.”

7.24 The same recommendation was incorporated in the IPC

(Amendment) Bill, 1978. Clause 49 of the Bill runs as under:

“49. In section 125 of the Penal Code, for the

words “any Asiatic Power in alliance or at peace

with the Government of India", the words any
foreign State at peace with India: shall be
substituted.”

Thus the recommendation for reducing the quantum of
the punishment was not accepted. It may be mentioned that in

the existing provision the punishment is prescribed “with


imprisonment for life to which fine may be added, or with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may

extend to seven years.....

When there is already a provision for reducing the
punishment, then there is no need to reduce expressly the

upper limit of the punishment.

7.25 In view of the above, section 125 may be amended as

proposed in the IPC (Amendment) Bill, 1978.


CHAPTER-VIII

SUICIDE : ABETMENT AND ATTEMPT

Section 306: Abetment of Suicide

Section 306 of the Indian Penal Code penalises

abetment of suicide. It reads as :

"306. Abetment of Suicide.- If any person commits
suicide, whoever abete the commission of such
suicide, shall be puntshed with imprisonment of
either description for a term not exceeding ten

years, and shall also be liable to fine.”

8.02. The constitutionality of section 306 was challenged
in smt.Gian Kaur v State of Punjab:' Upholding the

constitutionality of section 306, the Supreme Court held that
section 306 enacted a distinct offence which is capable of

existence independent of section 309. The Court observed:?

“Section 306 prescribes punishment for ‘abetment of
suicide’ while Section 309 punishes ‘attempt to
commit suicide’. Abetment of attempt to commit
suicide is outside the purview of section 306 and
it is punishable only under section 309 read with

section 107, IPC. In certain other jurisdictions,


even though attempt to commit suicide 18 not a
penal offence yet the abettor is made punishable.
The provision there provides for the punishment of
abetment of suicide as well as abetment of attempt
to commit suicide. Thus even where the punishment
for attempt to commit suicide is not considered
desirable, its abetment is made a penal offence.
In other words assisted suicide and assisted
attempt to commit suicide are made punishable for
cogent reasons in the interest of society. Such a
provision 18 considered desirable to aleo prevent
the danger inherent in the absence of such a penal

provision.”

8.03. In England and Wates, the Suicide Act of 1961 has
abrogated the rule of law whereby it is a crime for a person
to commit suicide (S.1). Section 2(1) of the Act imputes
criminal liability for complicity in another's suicide. It
reads:
"2(1).- A person who aids, abets, counsels or
procures the suicide of another, or an attempt by
another to commit suicide, shall be 118016 on
conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term

not exceeding fourteen years.”


7: 127 ४-८

Il. Section 309 - ATTEMPT TO COMMIT SUICIDE

8.04. Section 309 of IPC punishes attempt to commit
suicide with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend

to one year or with fine or with both.

8.05. The Law Commission in its Forty Second Report had
examined whether attempt to commit suicide be retained as a
penal offence. The Commission referred to the Dharma Sastras
which legitimised the practice of taking one’s life in
certain situations’ and also referred to the provisions of
Suicide Act, 1961 in Britain which decriminalised the offence
of attempt to commit suicide.‘ After examining these viewe,
the Commission recommended that section 309 18 harsh and

unjustifiable and it should be repealed.

8.06. In pursuance of the recommendations of the Law
commission, clause 131 of the Bill omits section 309 from

Ipc.

8.07. Subsequently, there have been significant judicial
developments. The Delhi High Court in State v Sanjay Kumar
Bhatia’ speaking through Sachar J, as he then was, for the
Division Bench observed that the continuance of section 309
is an anachronism and it should not be on the statute book.
However, the question of 108 constitutional validity wae not

considered in that case.


जप 128 :-

8.08. Soon thereafter the Bombay High Court in Maruti v
Shripati Dubal v State of Maharashtra® speaking through
Sawant J., as he then was, examined the constitutional
validity of Section 309 and held that the section is
violative of Article 14 as well as Article 21 of the
Constitution. The Section was held to be discriminatory in
nature and also arbitrary and violated equality guaranteed by
Article 14. Article 21 was interpreted to include the right
to die or to take away one's life. Consequently it was held

to be violative of Article 21.

8.09. The Andhra Pradesh High Court also considered the
constitutional validity of section 309 in Chenna Jagadeeswar

v State of Andhra Pradesh.’ Amareshwari Jey speaking for the
Division Bench, rejected the argument that Article 21
includes the right to die. The court also held that the
courts have adequate power to ensure that “unwarranted harsh
treatment or prejudice is not meted out to those who need
care and attention". The court also negatived the violation

of Article 14.

8.10. The Supreme Court examined the constitutional

validity of section 309 in P.Rathinam v Union of India® with

reference to Articies 14 and 21. The Court considered the
decisions of the Delhi, Bombay, and Andhra Pradesh High

Courts and disagreed with the view taken by Andhra Pradash


-: 129 ४-८

High Court on the question of violation of Article 21,

Agreeing with views of the Bombay High Court, the Supreme

Court observed:*®

"On the basis of what has been held and noted
above, we state that section 309 of the Penal Code
deserves to be effaced from the statute book to
humanise our penal taws. It is a cruel and
irrational provision, and it may result in
punishing a person again (doubly) who has suffered
agony and would be undergoing ignominy because of
his failure to commit suicide. Then an act of
suicide cannot be said to be against religion,
morality or public policy, and an act of attempted
suicide has no baneful effect on society. Further,
suicide or attempt to commit it causes no harm to
others, because of which State's interference with
the personal liberty of the persons concerned is

not called for.

We, therefore, hold ‘that section 309
violates Article 21, and so, it 18 void. May 10 be
said that the view taken by us would advance not
oniy the cause of humanisation, which is a need of
the day, but of globalisation also, as by effacing
section 309, we would be attuning this part of

criminal law to the glokhal wavelength".


3.11. But this view of Supreme Court was overruled by @
larger Bench in Smt. Gian Kaur v. State of Punjab’? wherein

ferma J.,(as he then was) speaking for the Court, ‘held that

2,Rathinam’s case was wrongly decided. The Court observed:'t

“When a man commits suicide he has to undertake
certain positive overt acts and the genesis of
those acts cannot be traced to, or be included
within the protection of the ’right to life’ under
Article 21. The significant aspect of ‘sanctity of
life’ is 8150 not to be overlooked. Article 21 is
a provision guaranteeing protection of life and
personal liberty and by no stretch of imagination
can ‘extinction of life’ be read to be included in
‘protection of life’. Whatever may be the
philosophy of permitting a person to extinguish his
life by committing suicide, we find it difficult to
construe Article 2t to include within it the ‘right
to die’ as a part of the fundamental right
guaranteed therein. Right to life is a natural
right embodied in Article 21 but suicide ie an
unnatural termination or extinction of 1110 and,
therefore, incompatible and inconsistent with the
concept of ‘right to life’. With respect and in
all humility, we find no similarity in the nature
of the other rights, such as the right to ‘freedom
of speech’ etc. to provide a comparable basis to

hold that the ‘right to life’ also includes the


‘right to die’. With respect, the comparison is
inapposite, for the reason indicated in the context
of Article 21. The decisions relating to other
fundamental rights wherein the absence of
compulsion to exercise a right was held to be
included within the exercise of that right, are not
avaitable to support the view taken in P,Rathinem
agua Article 21.

To give meaning and content to the word ‘life’ in
Article 21, it has been construed 86 life with
human dignity. Any aspect of life which makes it
dignified may be read into it but not that which
extinguishes it and is, therefore, inconsistent
with the continued existence of life resulting in
effacing the right itself. The ‘right to die’ if
any, is inherently inconsistent with the ‘right to

life’ as is ‘death with life’.”

8.12. On the question of violation of Article 14, the
Court agreed with the view taken by Hansaria J. in

P.Rathinam’s case.

8.13. Verma J. further observed that the arguments “on
the desirability of retaining such a penal provision of
punishing attempted suicide, including the recommendation for
its deletion by the Law Commission are not sufficient to
indicate that the provision is unconstitutional being

violative of Articla 14. Even if those facta are to weigh,


2 132 :-

the severity of the provision is mitigated by the wide
discretion in the matter of sentencing since there is no
requirement of awarding any minimum sentence and the sentence
of imprisonment is not even compulsory. There is also no
minimum fine prescribed as sentence, which alone may be the
punishment awarded on conviction under Section 309, IPC.
This aspect is noticed in P.Rathinam for holding that article

14 is not violated."12

8.14. The Supreme Court’s decision in Smt. Gian Kaur has
thus categorically affirmed that right to life in Article 21
does not include the right to die. Consequently section 309
which penalises attempt to commit sucide is not

unconstitutional.

8.16. There 18 a school of thought which advocatee the
decriminalisation of the offence of attempt to commit
suicide. They plead for a compassionate and sympathetic
treatment for those who fail in their attempt to put an end
to their lives. They argue that deletion of section 309 is
not an invitation or encouragement to attempt to commit
suicide. A person indulges in the act of attempt to commit
suicide for various reasons some of which at times are beyond

hie control.'9

8.16. On the other hand, certain developments such as
rise in narcotic drug-trafficking offences, terrorism in

differant parts of the country, the phenomenon of human


7: 133 :-

bombs, etc. have led to a rethinking on the need to keep
attempt to commit suicide an offence. For inatance, a
terroriet or drug trafficker who faile in his/her attempt to
consume the cyanide 9111 and the human bomb who faile in the
attempt to kill himself or herself along wtth the targets of
attack, have to be charged. under section 309 and
investigations be carried out to Prove the offence. These
groups of offenders under section 309 stand under a different
category than those, who due to psychological and religious

reasons, attempt to commit suicide.

3.17. Accordingly, we recommend that section 309 should
continue to be an offence under the Indian Penal Code and

clause 131 of the Bill be deteted.


10.
11.
12.
13.

FOOTNOTES

1996 (2) Scale 881.

Id at 891.
Law Commission, Forty Second Report, para 16.31,
page 243.

Id, para 16.32, page 243.

(1985) Cri.L.J. 931.

(1987) Cri. ४७.०. 743.

(1988) Cri. LJ. 549.

(1994) 3 500 394.

Id at 429.

Supra note 1.

Id at 888.

Id at 890.

Justice R.A.Jahagirdar (Retd.), “ Attempt at

Suicide - A Crime or a Cry” (1996).


CHAPTER-EX
OFFENCES AGAINST WOMEN ANO CHILDREN
1. _RAPE.

The Law Commission in its Eighty-fourth Report. on

Rape and Allied offences: Some Questions of Substantive
Law, Procedure and Evidence has defined rape as “the ultimate
violation of the self. It is a humiliating event in a

woman’s life which leads to fear for existence and a sense of
powerlessness”.’ Other scholars have described rape as an
internal assault or sexual invasion which is characterised by
violent taking away of control] over the sexual autonomy of
the woman. Rape is an act of violence affecting the physical

and emotional integrity and dignity of th® victim.?

9.02. The Law Commission in its Forty Second Report had
recommended certain changes in Section 375 which deals with
the offence of rape. The following were the changes

recommended by the Commisston to Section 376.

Clause ‘Thirdly’ of Section 375 defines sexual
intercourse as rape with the woman’s consent when it has been
obtained by putting her in fear of death or of hurt. The
Commission had recommended that the words “either to herself
or to anyone else present at the place” be added after the

word.“hurt”.


—: 136 in

On the question of consent, the Commission had
pointed out that section 90 of IPC includes the term “injury”
which ts of wider import. Injury includes any injury to
mind, body, reputation or property. The Commission, however,

did not recommend any amendment on this count.

9.03. The Commission also recommended that marital rape
should be removed from the scope of Section 375 and placed as

a separate offence. The Commission observed:?®

“The exception in Section 375 provides that sexual
intercourse by a man witn his own wife, the wife
not being under 15 years of age is not rape. The
punishment for statutory rape by the husband is the
same when the wife is under 12 years of age but
when she is between 12 and 15 years of age the
punishment is mild, being imprisonment upto two
years, or fine or both. Naturally, the
prosecutions for this offence are very rare. We
think, it would be desirable to take this offence
altogether out of the ambit of section 375 and not
to call it rape even in a technical sense. The
punishment for the offence also may be provided in

a separate section.”


9.04. The Commission considered the position of legally
separated wife vis-a-vis the offence of rape. It wae
observed:

“Under the exception, a husband cannot be guility of
raping his wife if she is above fifteen years of
age. This exception is to take note of one special
situation, namely when the husband and wife are
living apart under a decree of judicial separation
or by mutual agreement. In such a case, the
marriage technically subsists and if the husband
has sexual intercourse with her against her will or
without her consent, he cannot be charged with the
offence of rape. This does not appear to be right.
We consider that, in such circumstances, sexual
intercourse by a man with his wife without her

consent will be punishable as rape."

9.05. Explanation II as recommended by the Commission is

as follows:

“A woman living separately from her husband under a
decree of judicial separation or by mutual consent
shall be deemed not to be his wife for the purpoce

of this Section."

9.06. The Forty-Second Report had recommended amendment

in Section 375 on the following lines:


7: 138 r=

“Section 375 - Rape - A man is said to commit rape
who has sexual intercouree with a woman other than
his wife - ;

(a) against her will ; or

(b) without her consent; or

(c) with her consent when it has been obtained by
putting her in fear of death or of hurt, either to
herself or to anyone else present at the place; or
(d) with her consent, knowing that it is given in

the belief that he is the husband.

Explanation I. ~ Penetration is sufficient to
constitute the sexual intercourse necessary to the
offence of rape.

Explanation II. - A woman living separately from
her husband under a decree of judicial separation
or by mutual agreement shal? be deemed not to be

his wife for the purpose of this section. "5

9.07. The existing Section 375 stipulated a maximum
sentence of life or imprisonment of either description for 10
years for rape. The Commission suggeeted that it should be

rigorous imprisonment for a term upto 14 years.

9.08. The Commission recommended the incorporation of
५ Sections 376A and 376B. Section 376A distinguished sexual

ae between a wife of 12 to 15 years of age and a

17७ of less than 12 years of age, sexual intercourse with


—: 139 :-

the wife over 15 years of age without her consent not being
an offence. The Commission recommended rigorous imprisonment
upto 7 years if the wife was under 12 years and in any other

case, imprisonment upto 2 years of either description.

9.09. Section 3768 made 1111610छ७ intercourse with a girl
under 16 years but not under 12 years of age even with her
consent punishable with imprisonment of either description

upto 7 years.

9.10. The Commission added that it shall be a defence to
a charge under this section for the accused to prove that he,
in good faith, believed the girl to be above sixteen years of

age.®

9.11, The Forty-Second Report’s signal’ contribution to
the reform of rape laws was the introduction of the concept
of custodial rape. The Commission recommended the addition
of sections 376C,376D and 376E dealing with custodial rape by
a public servant or by a superintendent etc. of a women’s or
children’s institution, and by a manager of a hospital with a

woman patient suffering from mental disorder respectively.‘

9.12. The provisions on rape law remained unamended, as
the Indian Penal Code Amendment 8111 could not be passed due

to the dissolution of the Lok Sabha in 1979.


“४7४ 140: ४८

9..13. ‘In the interregnum the Supreme Court of India
decided some cases which took a restricted view of the scope

of the offence of rape and acquitted the accused. The

relevant decisions are Pratap Misra v. State of Origsa’ and
Iuka Ram v. State of Maharashtra.® The latter case popularly

known as the Mathura Rape case involved the rape of a young
girl aged between 14-16 years of age by two police constable
in the police station. The Bombay High Court reversed the
order of acquittal of the accused by the Session Court and
sentenced them to rigorous imprisonent of varying terms. The
High Court came to the conclusion that the policemen had
“taken advantage of the fact that Mathura was involved in a
complaint filed by her brother, and she was alone in the dead
hour of the night “ in a police station. This proved that
she could not tn any probability, have consented to
intercourse. The Supreme Court after assessing the evidence
on record concluded that the circumstantial evidence was such
that it did not lead to “reasonable evidence of guilt" and
reversed the Bombay High Court decision and acquitted the
accused. This led to four law teachers writing an Open
Letter to the Chief Justice of India criticising the
judgment. The Open Letter generated nationwide protests from
women’s organisations and different sections of the Indian
society.? Their collective demand was for reform of the Taw
on rape. The Union Government responded to the public
Campaign and referred the matter of reforming rape laws to

the Law Commission.


£9.14. The Law Commission sent its 84th Report on “Rape
and Allied Offences; Some Questions of Substantive Law,

Procedure and Evidence” to the Government in 1980.

9.15. The Commission gave particular attention to the
definition of consent and to rape of girls below the minimum
age. It also took into account some of the recommendations
incorporated in the Forty Second Report. The Commission had
dispensed with the suggestions in the earlier Report which

had characterized rape as -

1. rape proper;
2. rape with child-wife and
3. Rape i.e. sexual intercourse with the gir?

between 12-16 years of age, with her consent.

The reasons given by the Commission for discarding the above

categorisation were:'?

“,..the Commission now feels that such a
restructuring would be out of tune with the current
thinking on the question of trial of offenders for
rape and, therefore, structure of Section 375
should not be altered. Since the making of the
recommendation by the Commission in its earlier
Report, there has been a radical and revolutionary
change in the approach to the offence of rape; its

enormity is frequently brought into prominence and


—: 142 :-

heightened by the revolting and gruesome
circumstances in which the crime is committed; the
case law has blurred the essential ingredients of
the offence and introduced instability into the
previously well established taw bearing on the
offence of rape. The Commission feels that
restructuring will produce uncertainty and
distortion in section 375, which should in its
opinion, retain its present logical and coherent

structure.”

Consequently, the Commission recommended the omission of
Section 3754 and Section 3758. Instead, the Commission
recommended leaving rape of child-wife (S.375A) in the
general Section 375 instead of placing it in a separate
section. Section 3758 which dealt with rape on 8 girt
between 12-16 years of age with her consent was omitted
altogether. Further, the Commission retained Sections
376C,376D and 376E which dealt with custodial rape; but

renumbered them as Sections 376A,376B and 376C.

9.16. On the question of consent, the Commission observed
that they would not only include the suggestions made in the
earlier Report but suggested further amendments which would
strengthen the concept of “free consent” for the purposes of
Section 375. The Commission felt that the term “consent” was
inadequate and should be substituted by the phrase “free and

voluntary consent". The Commission observed:!?


-: 143 :-

“The substitution of the expression “free and
voluntary consent” for ‘the word “consent” in the
second clause makes it clear that the consent
should be active consent as distinguished from that

consent which is said to be implied by silence.”

The Commission proceeded to say:
“Under the amendment as recommended, it would not
be open to the Court to draw an inference of
consent on the part of the woman from her silence
due to timidity or meekness or from such
circumstances without any more,- as that the girl
meekly followed the offender when he pulled her,
catching hold of her hand, or that the woman kept
silent and did not shout or protest or cry out for

help.”

The Commission further stated:'?

“The modifications recommended by us in the third
clause vitiated consent not only when a woman is
put in fear of death or hurt, but also when she is
put in fear of any “injury” being caused to any
person (including herself) in body, mind,
reputation or property and also when her consent 18
obtained by criminal intimidation, that is to say

by any words or acts intended or calculated to put


—: 144 :-

her in fear of any injury or danger to herself or
to any person in whom she is interested or when she
is threatened with any injury to her reputation or
property or to a reputation of any one in whom she
is interested. Thus, “af the consent is obtained
after giving the woman a threat of spreading false
and scandalous rumours about her character or
destruction of her property or injury to her
children or parents or by holding out other threats
of injury to her person, reputation or property,
that consent will also not be consent under the

third clause as recommended to be amended.“

9.17. The Commission made significant recommendations on
age of consent. The age of consent as applicable to the
offence under Section 375 has been amended several times
since the framing of IPC. The 84th Report has graphically

presented in the form of a chart which is given below:13

CHART
Age of Age men- Minimum
consent tioned in age of
under the Exception marriage
Year $.375, to $.375, under
5th I.P.c, the Child
clause, Marriage
I.P.c. Restraint
Act,1929
1860 10 yrs. 10 yrs. -
1891 12 yrs 12 yrs. ८:

(Act 10 of 1891)
(after the amendment
of IPC)

ra


2 145 c=

: 1925 14 yrs. 13 yrs. -
feerver the amendment
Ff IPC)
1929 14 yrs. 13 yrs. 14 yrs.

(after the passing of
ithe Child Marriage Act)

1940 16 yrs. 15 yrs. 15 yrs.
(after the amendment
of the Penal Code
and the Child Marriage
Act)
1978 veeee 16 yrs 15 yrs. 18 yrs.

9.18. As may be seen from the chart, the minimum age of
marriage for girls has been increased to 18 years after the
amendment of the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 in 1978.
The Commission recommended that “since marriage with 8 girl
below eighteen years is prohibited ... sexual intercourse

with a girl below eighteen years should also be prohibited.”

9.19. The 84th Report did not recommend any changes in
section 376 which provides punishment for the offence of
rape. The Commission was of the view that judicial

discretion be not fettered by prescribing a minimum sentence.

9.20. The 84th report by introducing a broader concept of
“misconception of fact” has eliminated any examination of
morality or the sexual antecedents of the victim of rape.
Section 375, fourthly (b) allows this under 8 broader
misconception of fact which includes the narrower mistake of

identity.


9.21. Consequent on the recommendations of the Law -
Commission in its 84th Report, the Government introduced in
the Lok Sabha the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 1980 to
amend, inter alia, the Indian Penal Code. The Government
accepted the following recommendations of the Law Commission:
1. Accepting the concept of consent as free
and voluntary consent; ,
2. making a distinction between judicially
separated wife and wife; and
3. accepting the three concepts of
custodial rape as recommended in the

Commission’s 42nd Report.

9,22. The 8111 made a significant addition by introducing

the separate offence of gang rape by two or more persons.

9.23. The 8111 was sent to the Joint Committee of the

Parliament. The changes made by the Committee were:

1. It reduced the age of marital rape. The
exception to Section 375 stated that
sexual intercourse by a-man with his own
wife, the wife not being under 15 years
of age, is not rape. The Committee

reduced this age to 12 years.


2. A new section, section 376A was
incorporated, which deals with sexual
intercourse with judicially separated
wife without her consent. The Committee
provided a lower punishment for rape of

a judicially separated wife

3. The Committee did not accept the
expanded concept of free and voluntary

consent in Section 375.

9.24, In the Draft 8111 reported by the Joint Committee,
one change was made in its final reading stage. The age
above which sexual intercourse with the wife is not rape was

retained at 15.

9.25. The Parliament enacted the Criminal Law (Amendment)
Act,1983. The chief features of which, so far as the offence

of rape in IPC was concerned, were:

1. Increase in the punishment of rape;
2. distinction between gang rape. and

custodial rape and stiffer penalties for

the same;

3. separate category of rape on pregnant
woman;

4. distinguishing rape on a judicially

separated wife and provision for a lower


~: 148 :-

punishment for it than in other
instances of rape;

5. reduction in the punishment of rape on
wife between 12 and 15 years of age;

6. distinguishing rape on woman of unsound

mind or one who is intoxicated.

& 9.26. Accordingly sections 375 and 376 were amended and
new sections 376A,376B and 376C were inserted. All the
important recommendations of the Law Commission have been

incorporated.
The provisions read as follows:

“375.Rape.- A man is said to commit “rape” who,
except in the case hereinafter excepted, has sexual
intercourse with a woman under circumstances
falling under any of the six following
descriptions:-

First.- Against her wilt.

Secondly.-Without her consent.

Thirdly .-with her consent, when her consent has
been obtained by putting her or any person in whom
she is interested jin fear of death or of hurt.
Fourthly.-wWith her consent, when the man knows that

he is not her husband, and that her consent is


-: 149 ४८

given because she believes that he is another man
to whom she is or believes herself to be lawfully

married.

Fifthly.-With her consent, when at the time of
giving such consent, by reason of unsoundness of
mind or intoxication or the administration by him
personally or through another of any stupefying or
unwholesome substance she is unable to understand
the nature and consequences of that to which she

gives consent.

Sixthly.-with or without her consent, when she is

under sixteen years of age.

Explanation.-Penetration is sufficient to
constitute the sexual intercourse necessary to the

offence of rape.

Exception.-Sexual intercourse by a man with his own
wife, the wife not being under fifteen years of

age, is not rape.“

"376, Pwnishment for rape.- (1) Whoever, except in
the cases provided for by sub-section (2), commits
rape shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which shall not be less than

seven years but which may be for life or for a term


-: 150 :-

which may extend to ten years and shall also be
liable to fine unless the woman raped is his own
wife and is not under twelve years of age, in which
case, he shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to

two years or with fine or with both;

Provided that the court may, for adequate and
special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment,
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of
less than seven years.
(2) Whoever ,-
(a) being a police officer commits rape-
(i) within the limits of the police

station to which he is appointed ; or

(ii) in the premises of any station
house whether or not "situated in the
police station to which he is appointed;
or

(iii) on a woman in his custody or in
the custody of a police officer

subordinate to him; or

(b) being a public servant, takes
advantage of his official position and

commits rape on a woman in his custody


as such public servant or in the custody
of a public servant subordinate to him;

or

(०) being on the management or on the
staff of a jail, remand home or other
place of custody established by or under
any law for the time being in force or
of a women’s or children’s institution
takes advantage of his official position
and commits rape on any inmate of such
jail, remand home, place or institution;
or

(d) being on the management or on the
staff of a hospital, takes advantage of
his official position and commits rape

on a woman in the hospital; or

(०७) commits rape on a woman knowing her
to be pregnant; or
(#) commits rape on a woman when she is

under twelve years of age; or

(9) commits gang rape,


shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which shall] not be less than ten years but
which may be for life and shall also be liable to

fine;

Provided that the court may, for adequate and
special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment,
impose a sentence of imprisonment of either

description for a term of less than ten years.

Explanation 1.-Where a woman is raped by one or
more in a group of persons acting in furtherance of
their common intention, each of the persons shall
be deemed to have committed gang rape within the

meaning of this sub-section.

Explanation 2.-“Women’s or children’s institution”
means an institution, whether called an orphanage
or a home for neglected women or children or a
widows’ home or by any other name, which is
established and maintained for the reception and

care of women or children.

Explanation 3.-“hospital” means the precincts of
the hospital and includes the precincts of any
institution for the reception and treatment of
persons during convalescence or of persons

requiring medical attention or rehabilitation.”


—: 163 ४-८

“376A. Intercourse by a man with his wife during
separation.- Whoever has sexual intercourse with
his own wife, who is living separately from him
under a decree of separation or under any custom or
usage without her consent shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years and shall also be liable to

fine.”

376B. Intercourse by public servant with woman in
his custody.- Whoever, being 8 pubtic servant,
takes advantage of his official position and
induces or seduces, any woman, who 18 in his
custody as such public servant or in the custody of
a public servant subordinate to him, to have sexual
intercourse with him, such sexual intercourse not
amounting to the offence of rape, 80811 be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years and shall also be

liable to fine.

3760. Intercourse by Superintendent of jail,
remand home, etc.- Whoever, being the
superintendent or manager of a jail, remand home or
other place of custody established by or under any
law for the time being in force or of a women’s or

children’s institution takes advantage of hte


official position and induces or seduces any femate
inmate of such jail, remand home, place or
institution to have sexual intercourse with him,
such sexual intercourse not amounting to the
offence of rape, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to five years and shall also be liable

to fine.

Explanation 1.-"superintendent” in relation to a
jail, remand home or other place of custody or a
women’s or children’s institution includes a person
holding any other office in such jail, remand home,
place or institution by virtue of which he can

exercise any authority or control over its inmates.

Explanation 2.~-The expression “women's or
children's institution” shall have the same meaning
as in Explanation 2 to sub-section(2) of section

376.

"376D. Intercourse by any member of the management
or staff of a hospital with any woman in that
hospital.- Whoever, being on the management of a
hospital or being on. the staff of a hospital takes
advantage of his position and has sexual
intercourse with any woman in that hospital, such

sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of


9.27.

rape, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to five

years and shall also be Tiable to fine.

Explanation.- The expression ‘hospital’ shall have
the same meaning as in. Explanation 3 to sub-section

(2) of section 376.”

Now we shall examine the recommendations of the

National Commission for Women(NCW) and other suggestions made

in response to the Questionnaire. Following are the

recommendations of the National Commission for Women:

1. Section 375 be amended to change the reference
to 16 years in paragraph, sixthly, to 18 years to
provide for the increase in the age of majority of

girts to 18 years.

2. Also a consequential amendment to change the
reference to 15 years to 18 years. has also been
made in the Exception which deals with “sexual
intercourse by a man with his own wife not being

under 15 years of age”.

3. Section 376 providing for punishment of rape be

amended thus:



-: 156 :-

(a) The reference of sentence of punishment to 2
years for rape by the husband with his own wife who
is more than 12 years of age is proposed to be

increased to 5 years(Section 376 sub-clause(1)).

(b) The punishment provided in sub-section (2) is
Proposed to be increased from a minimum punishment
of 10 years to punishment of rigorous tmprisonment
for life. At the same time, the punishment for
rape when a woman who is less than 12 years.of age
is proposed to be taken out of this section and
dealt with in a separate Section providing for
higher punishment. This is sought to be done by
incorporating a new section, namely sub-section (3)

to saction 376 which would read as :

Whoever commits rape on.a woman when she ia under
twelve years of age shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be lees

than ten years and shall also be liable to fine.

It is also recommended that three new sectione,
section 376E, Section 376F and Section 376G be incorporated

in the Indian Penal Code.

Saction 376E: Offence under Section 376A to

Section 376D against children:

see re ----


—: 18% 2

Whoever commits an offence under Section 376A ‘to
Section 376D (both tnclusive) shall, if the woman
is under eighteen years of age, be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to

fine.

Section 376F: Offence of eve-teasing.- Whoever
intending to annoy any woman utters any word or
makes any sound or gesture or exhibits any object
or does any other act in any public place intending
that such word or sound shall be heard or that such
gesture or object shall be seen or that such act
shall be noticed or felt by such woman, commits the

offence of eve-teasing.

' gection 376G: Punishment for eve-teasing.- Whoever

commits the offence of eve-teasing shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to 5 years and shall

also be liable to fine.

9.28. According to the latest report of the National
Crime Records Bureau entitled Crime in India, 98,948 cases of

crime against women were registered in 1994 compared to

83,954 cases in 1993 and 79,037 cases in 1992. This amounts

to an increase of 17.9 per cent in crime against women at the

national level in 1994 with considerable increase in caees

— ee dl


registered under rape, kidnapping and abduction. The Report
points out that Delhi, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh,
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka and Pondicherry have been
categorised as “high crime prone” States. In 1994 Madhya
Pradesh reported the highest incidence of rape (2,929)
accounting for 22.2 per cent of the national ratio. This was
followed by Uttar Pradesh(2,078), Maharashtra (1,304), Bihar
(1,130), Rajasthan (1,002). Other States which recorded more
than 500 cases of rape during the year were. Andhra Pradesh,
West Bengal and Assam. Delhi reported 309 incidents

contributing 2.3 per cent towards national average.

Among the cities, Delhi and Mumbai continued to
record more cases of rape. At the national level, victims of
rape were the highest in the age group of 16-30 years
accounting for 56.3 per cent of the total victims. But in
the metropotitan cities, the situation was altogether
different as 50 per cent of the total victims were girls

below 16 years of age.'4

The Delhi State Commission for Women in its Report
Situation of Girls and Women in Dajhi (1997) has pointed that
the “rate of rape" in delhi is twice as high as in the whole
country. Ouring 1993 as many as 233 rape cases were reparted
which rose to 321 in 1994, to 362 in 1995 and to 470 in 1996.
An analysis of 1996 crime data showed that in 88 per cent of
the rape cases relatives and acquaintances were involved and

in 89 per cent of the cases the crime was committed at home.


~~

the Report also points out that 60 per cent of the reported
cases in Dalhi are of 91718 below 16 years. Further in 1993
as many as 18 per cent of rape victime were below 10 years of
age as against 5 per cent in the-whole country. About 42 per
cent of the rape victims were in the 10 to 16 age groups

compared to 23 per cent in the country.t$

9.29. The UN Commission on the Status of Women in its
Draft Declaration of Violence Against Women declares that
“violence nullifies women’s enjoyment of human rights of
freedom”. The Convention for the Elimination of All Forme of
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW 1979), ratified by Indta
recently, 39150. does not speak of gender-based violence. It
is generally agreed that violence against women is an
infringement of their fundamental rights to life, liberty and
dignity

9.30... There is a school of thought that the existing
definition of rape in IPC is narrow and -does not cover
different forms of sexual violence experienced by women.’®
The present definition requires proof of penetration by penis
and lack of consent by the complainant. Consent plays a

cructal part in a rape trial .


a

: Further, section 354 (assault or criminal force on
* जाता with intent to outrage her modesty) and section 509

word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a

re

Boman) ag interpreted by the courts do not cover virutent

forms of sexual assault on women.

9.32. The proponents of this: view advocate that the
sections of IPC dealing with rape (sections 375 and 376) and
sections 354 and 509 be repealed and be substituted by
provisions on “Sexual Assault" - to be defined broadly to

include all forms of sexual violence on women including rape.

9.33. After giving considerable thought to the point of
view referred to above, the Law Commission is of the opinion
that the offence of rape including custodial rape and its
punishment be retained in IPC subject to the modifications

stated below in para 9.34.

9.34, The Law Commission recommends that clause ‘Thirdly’

in section 375 be amended on the following lines:

Section 375: <A man is said to commit rape -
Firstly -...

Secondly -

Thirdly - With her consent, when her consent has
been obtained by putting her or any person in whom
she is interested, in fear of death or of hurt, or

of any other injury.



-: 161 in

i

The words "or of any other injury” expand the scope of this
‘clause to provide for situations of rape by persons in
position of trust, authority, guardianship or.of economic or
social dominance. These cases will include incestuous rape

and other instances where a victim of rape is totally

dependent on the offender who is in a dominant position.

The National Commission for women has recommended
that section 375 be amended to change the reference of age to
16 years in clause ‘sixthly’ (rape with or without her
consent) to 18 years. The Law Commisaion approves that the
charge proposed by NCW ig necessary particularly in view of
raising the age in section 361 (Kidnapping from lawful

guardianship - age changed from 16 to 18 years).

The Law Commission, however, does not endorse the
change proposed by NCW in the Exception to Section 375
(sexual intercourse by a man with his wife) increasing age
from 15 years to 18 years. Consequently, there need not be
any amendment to section 198(6) Cr.P.c. ae suggested by the

National Commission for Women.

The Law Commission is of the opinion that the
offence of child rape and its punishment is provided for

under the existing Section 376(2)(f). Consequently, the


-: 162 :-

incorporation of a new sub-section (3) to Section 376, as
recommended by the National Commission for Women, is not

called for.

9.35. To deat with the issue of increasing sexual
violence on women and female children, the Law Commiseton
recommends that the offence of sexual assault be added to the
existing offence of outraging the modesty of women in Section
354 and punishment be increased from two years to five years.

Accordingly, Section 354 be amended on the following lines:

Section 354. Assault or criminal force to woman
with intent to outrage her modesty.- Whoever
assaults or uses criminal force to any woman,
intending to outrage her modesty or to commit
sexual assault to her or knowing it to be Vikely
that he will thereby outrage her modesty or cammit
sexual assault to her, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either deacription for a term which
may extend to five years and shall also be liable

to fine.

Expanding the scope of Section 354 in the above manner, would
in our view, cover the varied forms. of sexual violence other

«
than rape on women and femate children.


The Law Commission is further of the view that the
offence of eve teasing falls within the scope of Section 509
and there is no need for a new section 376F as recommended by
the National Commission for women. However, the Law
Commission 19818 that the quantum of punishment be increased
from 1 year to 3 years and fine. Accordingly, we recommend

that Section 509 be amended in the following manner:

Section 509. Word, gesture or act intended to
insult the modesty of a woman.- Whoever, intending
to insult the modesty of any woman, utters any
word, makes any sound or gesture, or exhibits any
object, intending, that such word or sound shall be
heard, or that such gesture or object shall be
seen, by such woman, or intrudes upon the privacy
of such woman, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend

to three years and shall also be liable to fine.

9.36. Section 494 defines bigamy as the act of a person
who, having a husband or wife living, marries but only in a
case where such subsequent marriage 18 void under hia or her

Personal law.


c=: 164 :-

9.37. Till the enactment of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955,
the impact of this section fell only on Christians and
Parsis. fut after the coming into force of that Act, Hindus
also have come within the purview of this provision. Muslims
and some tribes, who are permitted by their family Jaw and

customs to practice polygamy, are excluded.

9.38, The Law Commission in its 42nd Report had revised

the section as follows:

"494. Bigamy.- Whoever, being married, contracts
another marriage in any case in which such marriage
is void by reason of its taking place during the
subsistence of the earlier marriage, commits

bigamy.

Explanation.- Where a marriage has been dissolved
by the decree of a competent court under an
enactment but the parties are, by virtue of a
provision of the enactment under which their
marriage is dissolved prohibited from re-marrying
within a specified pertod, then, for the purposes
of this section, the marriage shall,
notwithstanding its dissolution, be deemed to

subsist during that period.


Exception. - The offence is not committed by any
person who contracts the later marriage during the 7
life of the spouse by earlier marriage, if, at the
time of the later marriage, such spouse shall have
been continually absent from such person for seven
years and shall not, within that period, have heard
of by such person as being alive, provided the
person contracting | the later marriage inform the
person with whom it is contracted of the real state
of facts so far as the same are within his or her

knowledge.” -

The Commission felt that the punishment for bigamy
was “unnecessarily high” and so be reduced from seven years

to three years.'7

9.39. The Commission also recommended the reduction of
punishment for the aggravated form of bigamy, under section
495 mamely where bigamy is accompanied by the concealment of
the fact of former marriage from the person with whom the
subsequent marriage is contracted, from ten years to seven

years,'®

9.40. But the IPC Bill (Clause 198) has not accepted the
recommendation of reduction of punishment for bigamy under

section 494.


sagt

-: 166 :-

9.41. The Bill significantly has added Explanation. I
which stipulates that a person shall be deemed to marry again
whatever Jegal defect there may be in contracting,

celebrating or performing such marriage.

For prosecution for bigamy to succeed, prosecution
must show first of all that at the time of second marriage,
there was a valid subsisting marriage. Where proof of either
marriage is unsatisfactory, there would be no conviction.
Explanation I to Section 494 in the Bill has introduced a
deeming fiction. It deems the second marriage valid despite
legal defects in contracting, celebrating or performing such
marriage. By this, the accused cannot take the defence of
non performance of ceremonies in the second marriage to save |

himself from the clutches of the offence of bigamy.

The incorporation of this deeming provision in
Exptanation was in consequence of the judicial decisions on
the scope of section 17 of the Hindu Marriage Act,1955, The
Supreme Court in Bhaurag v. State of Maharashtra'® held that
the offence of bigamy was not proved unless it was
established that the second marriage was celebrated with
Proper ceremonies and due form. This conclusion was reached
on the ground that S.17 of the Hindu Marriage Act, had used
the word “solemnized”. Accordingly the court held that it
was essential for the purpose of section 17, that the
Marriage to which section 494 applies on account of the

provisions of the Act, should have been celebrated with


proper ceremonies and due form. As the law requires no
specific ceremonies but recognises ceremonies of marriage
according to custom, it becomes extremely difficult to
determine which ceremony or ceremonies were really essential.
Bhaurao decision was reiterated in two subsequent decisions
of the Supreme Court in Keyal Ram v. H.P,. Administratian 2°
and Priya Bala v. Suresh Chandra andra.2' Consequently a great
burden is cast on the prosecution to show that the second
marriage is performed with all due formalities. This burden
fn many cases cannot be discharged satisfactorily to prove
the offence of bigamy. Therefore, it was felt necessary to
add the Explanation. The Committee on the Status of Women in
its Report "Towards Equality” (1975) had recommended the
incorporation of Explanation to Section 17 of the Hindu
Marriage Act that an omission to perform some essential
ceremonies by parties shall not be construed to mean that the
offence of bigamy was not committed. This recommendation has
also found a place in Explanation (1) to Section 494 in the

Bill.

Explanation 2 has been added to section 494 by which it ts
made clear that where the relevant divorce law prohibits
re-marriage of the parties within a specified period after
the decree of dissolution, such re-marriage amounts to

bigamy. Explanation 2 is as follows:



-: 168 :-

“Where a marriage has been dissolved by a decree of
a competent court but the parties are, by virtue of
a provision of the enactment under which their
marriage is dissolved, prohibited from re-marrying
within a specified period, then for the purposes of
this section, the marriage shall, notwithstanding
its dissolution, be deemed to subsist during that

period.”

हि The Supreme Court in Sarla Mudgal's?? case held
that conversion from a monogamous religion (Hinduism) to a
polygamous religion (Islam) for the purpose of second
marriage, during the subsistence of first marriage, would
make the second marriage violative of justice, equity and
good conscience etc. The Court also held that the apostate
husband would be guilty of the offence of bigamy. The Court
has thus removed the uncertainty as regards the effect of

conversion on marriage.

9.42. We recommend that another Explanation, Explanation
3 be added to section 494 inéorporating the principle laid
down by the Suprqaeme Court in the 58718 Mudgal’s case on the

following lines to put the matter beyond doubt:

“Explanation 3: The offence of bigamy is committed
when any person converts himself or herself to
another religion for the purpose of marrying again

during the subsistence af the earlier marriage.”

_. - ns |


-: 169 s-

11, ADULTERY

9.43. In the First Report on the Draft Indian Penal Code,
adultery was not made an offence. However, the First Law
Commission in its Second Report on the Draft Indian Pena?
Code, after giving due consideration to the subject, came to
the conclusion that it was not advisable to exclude this

offence from the Code.23

9.44. The offence of adultery under section 497 16 very
limited in scope in comparison to the misconduct of adultery
in divorce (civil) proceedings. The offence is committed
only by a man who has sexual intercourse with the wife of
another man without the latter’s consent or connivance. The
wife is not punishable for being an adulteress or even ae an
abetter. Punishment is imprisonment of either description

for a term up to five years or with fine or with both.

9.45. The Law Commission in its 42nd Report recommended
the retention of section 497 in its present form with the
modification that, even the wife, who has sexual relations
with a person other than her husband, should be made
punishable for adultery. The Commission also recommended

that five years’ imprisonment is “unreal and not called for


-: 170 :-

n any circumstances and should be reduced to two years”.24

‘he Commission recommended that the section may be revised as

‘ol lows: -
“497. Adultery.- If a man has sexual intercourse
with a woman who is, and whom he knows or has
reason to believe to be the wife of another man,
without the consent or connivance of that man, such
sexual intercourse net amounting to the offence of
rape, the man and the woman are guilty of the
offence of adultery, and shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with

both. “25

9.46. The constitutionality of section 497 was challenged
under article 32 as violative of the right to equality in
article 14 in Sowmithri Vishnu v. Union of India of 182 , The
basis of challenge was that the section makes an irrational
classification between men and women and it unjustifiably
denies to women the right given to men. This section confers
upon the husband the right to prosecute the aduiterer but
does not confer any right upon the wife of the adulterar to
do so. The Supreme Court negatived the contention and upheld

the constitutionality of section 497.

Clause 199 of the Indian Penal Code Amendment AITI,

1978 reads as Section 497:



“whoever has sexual intercourse with a person who
is, and whom he or she knows, or has reason to
believe, to be the wife or husband as the case may
be, of another person, without the consent or
connivance of that other person, such sexual
intercourse by the man: not amounting to the offence
of rape, commits adultery, and shall be puntshed
with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years, or with fine, or

with both.”

The IPC (Amendment) Bill has brought in the concept
of equality between sexes in marriage vis-a-vis the offence
of adultery in the substituted section 497. However, the Law
Commission recommends that the phraseology of clause 199 has
to be modified on the following lines to reflect the concept
of equality between sexes. Accordingly clause 199 shall read

as:

“Section 497.- Whoever has sexual intercourse with
a person who is, and whom he or she knows, or haa
reason to believe, to be the wife or husband, as
the case may be, of another person, without the
consent or connivance of that other person, such
sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of

rape, commits adultery, ‘and shall be punished with


imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to five years, or with fine or with

both.”

The Supreme Court in Sowmithri Vishnu case had
observed that “it is for the Legislature to consider whether
section 497 should be amended appropriately so as to take
nete of the ’transformation’ which the society has
undergone”. The proposed change reflects the transformation
of women's status in the Indian society. The punishment of

five years remains the same.

9.47. If section 497 is amended on the lines indicated
above, sub-section (2) of section 198 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure,1973 needs to be suitably amended.

IV. UNNATURAL OFFENCES

9.48. Section 377 deals with unnatural offences like
sodomy, buggery and bestiality. This section was amended in
1955 making the punishment more stringent to one of
imprisonment for Vife or with imprisonment of either
description for a term up to ten years and fine. Section 377

reads as:


a: 173 i-

“Whoever voluntarily has carnal intercourse against
the order of nature with any man, woman or animal,
shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or
with imprisonment of either description for a term

which may extend to ten years”.

9.49. The Law Commission in its 42nd Report had
recommended that cases of bestiality should be regarded as
pathological manifestations to be ignored by the criminal

law.

9.50. The Commission, however, felt that “Indian Society,
by and large, disapproves of homo-sexuality and this
disapproval is strong enough to justify it being treated as a
criminal offence even where adults indulge in it in private”,
and observed that "“Buggery” may continue as an offance
punishable less severely than at present but, where it is
committed by an adult on a minor boy or girl, the punishment
be higher. So the Commission had “recommended that section
377 be revised as followe:~
"377. Buggery- Whoever voluntarily has carnal
intercourse against the order of nature with any
man or woman shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to

two years, or with fine or with both;


and where such offence is committed by a person.
over eighteen years of age with a person under that

age, the imprisonment may extend to seven years.

Explanation: Penetration is sufficient to
constitute the carnal intercourse necessary to the

offence described in this section.

The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill (clause 160)

188 adopted the above recommendation of the Law Commission.

54 We recommend that in view of the growing incidence
of child sexual abuse in the country, where unnatural offence
is committed on a person under the age of eighteen years,
shere should be a minimum mandatory sentence of imprisonment
of either description for a term not less than two years, but
vhich may extend to seven years. The court shall, however,
ave discretion to reduce the sentence for adequate and
special reasons to be recorded in the judgment. Consequently

section 377 be amended on the following lines:-

“$.377. Unnatural offences.- Whoever voluntarily
has carnal intercourse against the order of nature
with any man or woman shall be punished with
imprisonment of either deacription for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with

both; and where such offence is committed by a


4

person over eighteen years of age with a person
under that age, he shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
shall not be less than two years but may extend to

seven years and fine.

Provided that the court may for adequate and
special reasons to ‘be recorded in the judgment,
impose a sentence of imprisonment of either

description for a term of less than two years.

Explanation - Penetration is sufficient to
constitute the carnal intercourse necessary to the

offence described in this section.“

¥. CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE

9.52. Child sexual abuse (CSA) is considered one of the
‘new’ epidemics of the last decade. CSA could be any kind of
“physical or mental violation of the child with sexual intent
usually by an elder person who is in possession of trust or
power viz-a-viz the child".27 The experience may vary from an
adult exposure of genitals to the child or to persuade the
child to do the same, the adult touching the child’s genita}

or making the child to touch his own, involving the child in


-: 476 :-

; - both printed and visual, having oral, vaginal
‘or anal intercourse with the child, making verbal or other
sexual suggestions or indecent overtures. In . addition,
fondling or fingering, touching or voyeurism or any such

attempt could also be CSA.28

9.53. According to the statistics reported in Crime in
India, of the total victims of rape cases, children accounted
for more than 25 per cent. There is an increasing trend

gince 1990 as regards child rape.

While 3,393 cases of child rape were reported in
1993, it increased to 3,986 in 1994. Giving the state-wise
incidence of child rape, the Report says Madhya Pradesh led
in reporting the highest number of 809 child rape cases,
followed by Uttar Pradesh (538), Rajasthan (2065) and Delhi
(206) in 1994, Among the cities, Delhi and Mumbai reported
more victims of child rape in the age group below 10 years

and also in the age group of 10-16 years.?9

While conducting the study of CSA in Delhi, the
Delhi Police found that information regarding the offences of
molestation or outraging of modesty (S.354 IPC) and unnatural
sex offences (5,377 IPC) committed on children below 16 years
was not readily available. Information was collected for
1994 wherein a total number of 291 cases was recorded out of

which 69 girls were below 16 years.(31%). “In respect of


annatura?l offences, out of 24 cases, there were 22 boys and 2
jirls indicating that 96.9% of the victims, were children

90108 16 years.3°

It is difficult to get hard data on the extent of
SSA in the country. But there is a silver lining in the
norizon. Some NGOs have undertaken studies on CSA and
greliminary findings are none too happy. Samvada, a
Bangalore based NGO found, in a study of 348 college girls,
that 47 per cent of students had been subjected to sexual
abuse. About 45 per cent had experienced such abuse before
the age of 14. The most common offender was a known male
family member. Similar are the findings of Sakshi, a Delhi
based NGO in 8 study made of 357 girls of government and
private schools. It was found that 63 per cent of the
children had suffered some form of sexual abuse, about 22 per
cent suffered serious sexual abuse and in 29 per cent of the
cases, the abuse was by a person whom they trusted fully. In
their analysis of 19 cases of CSA in 1995 it was found that
in majority of the cases, the victims were children between

one and twelve years.

9.54, The Constitution of India provides special
Protection to children. Article 15(3) confers powers on the
State to make special provisions for women and children.
Article 39(f) provides that children are given opportunities
and facilities to develop in a healthy manner and in

conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood and


‘a

‘youth are protected against exploitation Sand against moral
and material abandonment. This provision was added to the
Constitution by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment
Act), 1978. Article 45 mandates the State to provide for
free and compulsory education for all children until " they

complete the age of 14 years.

9.55. Since 1945 the welfare and rights of children have
been a matter of great concern for the United Nations. One
of the first acts of the General Assembly was to establish
the United Nations Children Fund (UNICEF). In 19659, the
Declaration on The Rights of the Child was drafted which has
been serving as a guide post to private and public action in
the interest of children on the basis “that mankind owes to
the child the best it has to give". This Declaration
ultimately led to the drafting of the Convention on The
Rights of The Child which was adopted unanimously by the
General Assembly on 20th November, 1989. 187 States have
ratified this Convention. The Convention came into forca in
India on 11th January, 1993. Some of the provisions of the
Convention specifically deal with the protection of children
from sexual offences and violation, in particular Articles
34,35 and 36. Article 34 of the Convention imposes an
obligation on the State parties to protect the child from 811
forms of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse. For these
Purposes the States are mandated to take appropriate measures
to prevent (i) the inducement or coercion of children to

engage in any unlawful sexual activity; (ii) the exploitative


-: 179 :-

use of children in prostitution or other unlawful sexual
ractices and (iii) the exploitative use of children in
‘pornographic Performances and materials. Article 35 requires
“states to take all measures to prevent the abduction of the
sale of or traffic in children for any purpose or in any
‘form. Article 36 mandates states to protect the children
against all other forms of exploitation prejudicial to any

aspects of the child’s welfare.

9.56. So far as rape of children under 12 years is
concerned, the existing section 376(2)(f) provides a minimum
mandatory sentence of 10 years rigorous imprisonment which

may extend to life and fine.

9.57. To counter the evil of all other forms of sexual
abuse of female children, the Law Commission's
recommendations for amendment of section 354 as stated in
Para 9.35, in Part-IV should be adequate. In addition, the
Law Commission’s recommendation in para 9.52 of Part-IV for
aggravated punishment for the commission of unnatural
offences under section 377 IPC, on both male and female
persons under eighteen years of age by adults would cover

child sexual abuse on children, both male and female.

9.58. In the opinion of the Law Commission, the existing
Section 376(2)(f), and the Law Commission’s recommendations
for amendment of sections 354 and 377 are adequate to deal

with child sexual abuse. Consequently, the Law Commission


“does not recommend the incorporation of new section 354A as
suggested in clause 146 of the Indian Penal Code (Amendment)
8111.

9.59 Sexual-child abuse may be committed in various
forms such 385 sexual intercourse, carnal intercourse and
sexual assaults. The cases involving penile péhetration into
vagina are covered under section 375 of the IPC. If there is
any case of penile oral penetration and penile penetration
into anus, section 377 IPC dealing with unnatural offences,
j.e., carnal intercourse against the order of nature with any
man, woman or animal, adequately takes care of them. If acts
such as penetration of finger or any inanimate object into
vagina or anus are committed against a woman or a female
child, the provisions of the proposed section 354 IPC
whereunder a more severe punishment is also prescribed can be
invoked and as regards the male child, the penal provisions
of the IPC concerning ‘hurt’, ‘criminal force’ or ‘assault’
as the case may be, would be attracted. A distinction has to
be naturally maintained between sexual assault/use of
criminal force falling under section 354, sexual offences
falling under section 375 and unnatural offences falling
under section 377 of the Indian Penal Code. It may not be
appropriate to bring unnatural offences punishable under
section 377 IPC or mere sexual assault or mere sexual use of
criminal force which may attract section 354 IPC within the
ambit of ‘rape’ which is a distinct and graver offence with ६

definite connotation. It is needless to mention that any


5४ 184 :-

attempt to commit any of these offences is also punishable by
virtue of section 511 IPC. Therefore, any other or more

changes regarding this law may not be necessary.


10.

11.
12.

FOOTNOTES
Law Commission, Eighty Fourth Report, para 1.2,

page 1 (1980).
See Susan Brownmiller, Against Our Wil] Men. Women
and Rape (1990); Lotika Sarkar, “Rape A Human

Rights versus a Patriarchal Interpretation,” I

Indian Journal of Gender Studies 69 (1994); Flavia
Agnes, “Protecting Women against Violence?” 27
Economic and Political Weekly (EPW) 19 (1992); algo
by the same author, State, Gender and the Rhetoric
of Law Reform (1995) Lorenne Clark and Debra Lewis,
Rape - The Price of Coercive Sexuality (1977).

Law Commission, Forty Second Report, para 16.115,
page 277.

Ibid.

Id., para 16.117, pages 277-278.

Id., para 16.120, page 278,

AIR 1977 SC 1307.

AIR 1979 SC 185.

See Vasudha Dhagamwar, Law, Power and Justice
237-287 (2nd ed. 1992).

Law Commission, Eighty Fourth. Report, 89709 note 1,
para 2.21, page 9.

Id., para 2.8, page 6.

Id., para 2.9, page 6.


13.
14.

15.

16.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21

22.

23.

24.

5: 183 :-

id., para 2.19, page 8,

See, “Upsurge in Crime against Women: Report”,
Hindy (Delhi ed.) 9.12.1996.

See “ Delhi’s Shame: Women Most unsafe,”
incorporating an analysis of the Report of the
Delhi State Commission for Women, Hindustan Times
(Delhi ed.) 5.21997.

See provisions of the Sexual Assault Draft 8111,
1993 prepared by the Ad hoc Committee of the
National Commission for Women; also see the
Memorandum on Reform of Laws relating to Sexual
Offences prepared by Shomona Khanna and Ratna
Kapur, Centre for Feminist Legal Research, New

Delhi.

Report, para 20.10, page 323.

Ibid, para 20.10.

AIR 1965 SC 1964.

AIR 1966 SC 1564,

AIR 1971 SC 1153.

Sacla Mudaal v Union of India, AIR 1996 8C 1631.
Second Report on the Draft Indian Penal Code 134-35

(1847), Law Commission.

Forty Second Report on the Indian Penal Code, para
20.18, page 327 (1971).



- 26.

(शा.

26.

29.

30.

5“: 184 :-

AIR 1985 SC 1618; 1985 (Supp) SCC 137.

Child Sexual Abuse literature by ‘Sakshi’ New

Delhi.

Schwartz, Horovitz and Cardarelli Child Sexyal

Abuse 58-59 (Sage Publications 1990)

Amod Kanth, “CSA” Legal and Investigative,
Perspective”, in Sheela Barse (Ed) Child

Victims’Rights: Report of International Conference

on Child Sex Abuse, Victim Protective Investigation

and Trial Procedure 11 at 13(1996).

See Pioneer (Deihi ed.) dated 7.11.1996, page 3.

See also “Incestuous Father Poisons Pregnant
Daughter to Death,” Indian Express - Express

Newsline (Delhi ed.) 3.12.1996.


>४ 186 :-

CHAPTER-X

ABDUCTION INCIDENTAL TO HIJACKING

The Indian Penal Code hae been-spoken of as a model
piece of legislation as the premier Code of Criminal law, and
as the monument of the great genius of Lord Macaulay under
whose supervision it was constructed. The Code deals with

territorial as well as extraterritorial crimes.

Section 4 extends the Code to extraterritorial
offences. Accordingly, the provisions of the Code apply also
to any offence committed by any person on any ship. or

aircraft registered in India wherever it may be.

To deal with the problem of “Piracy” which was very

common in the last Century, two special legistations were

enacted namely:-

(1) Admiralty Offences Act, 1894; and

(ii) The Merchant Shipping Act, 1894.

But the framers of the Code never thought about the
crime of “Alr-Piracy” which is commonly known aa

“Air-Hijacking” now a days. So the Code confines to the



-: 186 :-

crimes of the abduction of person only but not the abduction
of the aircraft or vehicles. Hence a need has been felt to

include the crime of “Air-Hijacking” in the Code.

PRESENT POSITION IN THE IPC

10.02. Section 362 of the Indian Penal Code is dealing

vith the abduction which runs as under:

"362. Abduction:- whoever by force compels, or by

deceitful means induces, any person to go from any

Place, is said to abduct that person.”

The ingredients necessary to constitute an

ibduction of a person are-

1. that the person must have been made to go
from any place, and

2. that such going must have been -

(a) under compulsion by the use of
force, or

(b) induced by deceitful means -

{1)Abduction by itself is not

punishable as a substantive offence.

(2) But if it falls within the
categories dealt with by sections 364 to

369 except 366A, 3668 and 368 by reason



of other additional elements apart from
force or fraud, it will be an offence

punishable under those sections.

Of course, Section 362 is dealing with the problem
of "Abduction" of a “person”. But in the crime of
Air-hijacking, the “Aircraft” is a juristic “pergéon”.
Moreover, at the time of committing the crime of
Air-Hijacking, there may be persons inside the aircraft

either as passengers or as crew members or both.

But legally, it will be very difficult to cover the
crime of Air-Hijacking under Section 362 of the IPC as'this
crime was never {maginated by the framers of the Code. And
as society progressed, the notions of property and revenge
grew up which germinates new crimes in the society and one of

them is the modern crime of Air-Hijacking.

Proposal to Include “Air-hijacking” in the [pc
10.03. In the recent past, the new crime of air hijacking
has increased. Despite the steps taken by the countries as

well as International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO)

there is no reduction in the incidence of hijacking.

arene ee ao



The Law Commission of India in ite letter dated

26th December 1996 sought the suggeetions to tackle the
पु

पफू०ठछाशा of hijacking of aircrafts or other vehicles.

Sof the letter says that-

“ the cases of hijacking of aircraft and
in recent past have been galore in parts

country ridden with terrorism. In view of

Item 13

vehicles
of our

this, it

is felt that the hijacking of an aircraft or

vehicle be made punishable under the Indian Penal

Code. Do you think that there should be a uniform

punishment for both the offences or it should vary

according to gravity of the offence

and be

deterrent punishment in case of hijacking of an

aircraft on board or in flight?“

Similarly in its questionnaire on IPC, 1860 (Item

18 p. 36), the Law Commission has asked the opinion to

include this crime in the IPC, namely~

(i) hijacking of aircraft; and

(iijhijacking of the vehicles.


“४ 189 :-

In the questionnaire, the option has been suggested
whether there should be a uniform punishment for both the
_offances or it should vary according to the gravity of the
‘offence and be deterrent punishment in case of hijacking of

‘an aircraft on board or in flight.

कं

EARLIER REPORT (42nd) OF JHE LAW COMMISSION
10.04. The Law Commission of India has submitted its 42nd

Report in June 1971. In the said report (Item 16.96 p.296),
the problem of abduction incidently to hijacking was
discussed. The Commission had received the suggestion that,
to cover the crime of hijacking of aircraft or other vehicle,
an amendment may be made so as to punish those who indirectly
cause persons to be transported to a place which is not their
intended destination. In other words, extradition was
sought. The need for such amendment was emphasised on the
ground that the compulsion in such cases, at least so far 88
the passengers are concerned, is indirect. However, the Law
Commission expressed its view that such cases could be
regarded as falling within the Section 362, notwithstanding
the indirect nature of the compulsion and therefore, no

amendment is necessary.

Nonetheless, IPC (Amendment) 8111, 1978 made an

“attempt to include the crime of “Air-hijacking in a new

‘Section 362A.

TEE



7: 190 :-

Insertion of section 362A in the IPC:

10.05. By clause 149 of the IPC (Amendemnt) 8111, 1978, it
is proposed to add a new section 362A. The proposed section
which explains the meaning of Air-hijacking and hijacking of
she Vehicles and also prescribed the punishment for the said

srime reads as follows:

"362A. (1) Whoever on board an aircraft in flight,
being an aircraft registered in India, or any other
aircraft in flight over Indian air space,
unlawfully by force or show or threat of force or
by any other form of intimidation seizes such
aircraft or exercises control over it or attempts
to seize or exercise control over it for the
purpose of tanding it at a ptace other than the
place of its destination or for any other purpoee,
is said to commit the offence of hijacking of
aircraft and whoever commits such hijacking shall
be punished with imprisonment for tife, and shall

also be liable to fine.

(2) Whoever on board a vehicle in India ora
vehicle registered in India unlawfully by force or
show or threat of force or by any other form of
intimidation seizes such vehicle or exercises

control over it or attempts to seize or exercise


control over it for the purpose of taking it to a
place other than the place of its destination or
for any other purpose, is said to commit the
offence of hijacking of vehicle and whoever commits
such hijacking shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten

years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation- In this section-

(i) the period during which an aircraft
is in flight shall be deemed to include
any period from the moment when power is
applied for the purpose of the aircraft
taking off on a flight until the moment
when the landing run, if any, at the

termination of that flight ends;

(ii) the "word “vehicle” include any
vessel but does not include an

aircraft.”

10.06. Apart from the above, the following offences are
३150 contained in the Bill:
{. Jo substitute of section 103 IPC, (Clause 35(d) of the
3111)

Clause 35 of the Bill substituting section 103

relevant sub-clause 35(d)



“Sub-Clause 35(d) mischief to property used or
intended to be used for the purposes of the
Government or a _ local authority or a Corporation
owned or controlled by the Government, where such
mischief is committed by intentional destruction

of, or substantial damage to, property, or”
(e) hijacking of aircraft, or
(f) sabotage.”

However, this clause does not deal with the

lischief intended to be committed with the private aircraft.

‘I. To substitute of section 105 IPC (clause 37 of the Bill)
“Clause 37 of the Bill for substituting section 105
४ the IPC runs as under:
106. “The right of private defence of property

commences when a reasonable apprehension of danger

to the property commences; and it continues—

(a)....


Tir.

: 193 :-

(b)....
(c) against mischief, criminal trespass, hijacking

of aircraft, or sabotage, as long as the offender

continues in the commission of the offence.”

To substitute sections 426 to 432 and 434 to 440 of bstitute i 426 to 43 9 4 1
the IPC: (clauses 179 and 180 of the Bill) -

In Clause 179, it ie proposed to substitute

Sections 426 to 432 of the IPC. Similarly, it is proposed in

clause 180 to substitute Sections 434 to 440. The most

important proposed section in the 8111 relating to the

Mischief of Aircraft runs as under:-

"432. Whoever commits mischief by doing any act
whereby he destroys or moves or renders less useful
any air-route, beacon or aerodrome light, or any
Tight at or in the neighborhood of an air-route or
aerodrome provided in compliance with Taw, or any
other thing exhibited or used for the guidance of
aircraft, such act not amounting to the offence of
sabotage, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to

seven years, or with fine, or with both.”



10.07. The IPC (Amendment) 8111, 1978, though paseed by
the Rajya Sabha, but could not become an Act due to
dissolution of the then Lok Sabha. In the meantime, the
problem of “Air Hijacking" was increased and it was felt
urgently to have an effective piece of legislation to deal
with the burning problem. Therefore, two principal Acts came
into force in 1982 and after amendments the Acts are known as

under:

(i) The Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982;

(ii) The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Act, 1994;

(iii)The Suppression of Unlawful acts against

Safety of Civil Aviation Act, 1982;

(iv) The Suppression of Unlawful acts against

Safety of Civil Aviation (Amendment) Act, 1994,

The Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982

10.08. This Act was enacted to give effect to the
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of
Aircraft and for matters connected therewith. The said Act

(No 65/1982) came into existence on 15th November 1982.


Section 3 of the Act explains the crime of

hijacking” as under-

“3.(1) Whoever on board an aircraft in flight,
unlawfully, by force or threat of force or by any
other form of intimidation, seizes or exercises
control of that aircraft, commits the offence of

hijacking of such aircraft.

(2) Whoever attempts to commit any of the acts
referred to in sub section (1) in relation to any
aircraft, or abets the commission of any such act,
shall also be deemed to have committed the offence

of hijacking of such aircraft.

(3) For the purposes of this section, an aircraft
shall be deemed to be in flight at any time from
the moment when atl its external doors are closed
following embarkation until the moment when any
such door is opened for disembarkation, and in the
case of a forced landing, the flight shall be
deemed to continue until the competent authorities
of the country in which such forced landing takes
place take over the responsibility for the aircraft

and for persons and property on board.“


Section 4 has prescribed the punishment for the

rime of hijacking. It says that whoever commits the offence
; hijacking shall be punished with imprisonment

or life and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 7 explains the provisions as to
नए 2०1 100: Accordingly, the offences under the Act shal}
jbe deemed to have been included as extraditable offences and
srovided for in atl the extradition treaties made by India
‘with Convention countries and which extend to, and are

binding on, India on the date of commencement of this Act.

10.09. This Act was amended in 1994 (No. 39/94). Through
the amendment any police officer by notification was made
competent to arrest, investigate and prosecute the criminal
of hijacking. The Amendment Act also prescribed the
establishment of special Designated Court and the Designated
Court shall presume, unless the contrary 18 proved, that the

accused had committed such offence.

Ihe Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against Safety of
Civil Aviation Act, 1982

= The said Act was enacted to give effect to the
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful acts Against the
afety of Civil Aviation and for matters connected therewith.

This Act came into force on 15th November 1982.


Section 3 of the Act defines the offence committing
violence on board an aircraft in flight, etc. Section 3 runs

fas under -

"3.(1) Whoever unlawfully and intentionally-
{a} commits an act of violence against a person on
board an aircraft in flight which is likely to

endanger the safety of such aircraft; or

(b) destroys an aircraft in service or causes
damage to such aircraft in such a manner as to
render it incapable of flight or which is likely to

endanger its safety in flight; or

(c) places or causes to be placed on an aircraft in
service, by any means whatsoever, a device or
substance which is likely to destroy that aircraft,
or to cause damage to it which renders it incapable
of flight, or to cause damage to it which is likely

to endanger its safety in flight; or

(d) communicates such information which he knows to
be false so as “to endanger the safety of an

aircraft in flight,

shall be punished with imprisonment for life and

shall also be liable to fine.


-: 198 :-)

(2) Whoever attempts to commit, or abets the
commission of, any offence under sub-section (1)
shall also be deemed to have committed such offence
and shat? be punishable with the punishment

provided for such offence.”

E: This Act was amended by an Amendment Act (No.14/94)
and Section 3A was added which explains the mischief too. It

wuns as under.

f

After Section 3 of the Principle Act, the following

{sections shall be inserted, namely:-

"3A.(1) whoever, at any airport, unlawfully and
intentionally, using any device, substance or

weapon-

(a) commits an act of viotence which is likely to

cause grievous hurt or death of any person; or

(b) destroy or seriously damages any aircraft or
facility at an airport or disrupts any services at

the airport,

endangering or threatening to endanger wafety at
that airport, shall be punished with imprisonment

for life and shall also be liable to fine.


~: 189 :-

3(2) whoever attempts to commit, or abets the
commission of, any offence under sub-section (1)
shall also be deemed to have committed such offence

and shalt be punished for such offence.”

The Section 9A was atso inserted in the Principle
Act and accordingly the Designated Court shall presume,
unless the contrary is proved that the accused had committed

such offence mentioned in the Act.

Thus, it is crystal clear that this Special Act is
dealing about the mischief to aircraft and its operation in
an effective manner, and certainly in a better manner than
Proposed section 432 in the IPC (Amendment) 8111 of 1978
(Clause -179).

Thus these two special legislations are sufficient
for dealing with the offences relating Hijacking, Safety, and

mischief of Civil Aviation in an effective manner.

Special Legistation vis-a-vis Indian Penal Code

10.12. For the framers of the Code, it was impossible to
Make the Code exhaustive of all offences. Section 5 of the
Code is important and has wisely left all pre-existing,

special, or local laws. The Code deals only with general


-: 200 :-

pffences, and it cannot cover the. offences which are covered.
by. local or special laws. The saving of special or local law
ps, in accordance with the general . Principle generalia
poacialibus non derogant hon dero: which means that general words do
pot derogate from special. In other words, general words do
ot repeal or modify special legislation. (Seward ve. Vers,
[0 ac 68)

10.13. The effect of this section is to qualify the
general repeal contained in section 2 of the code seeking to
repeal all other laws for punishment of offence. Thus the
code was intended to be a general one, it was not found
desirable to make it exhaustive and hence offences defined by
local or special laws were left out of the code, and merely

declared to be punishable as thereto fore.

Therefore, it is provided in Section 26 of the

General Clauses Act, 1897 that-

“Where an act or omiasion constitutes an offence
under two or more enactments, then the offender
shall be liable to be prosecuted and punishable
under any of those enactments, but shall not be
liable to be punished twice for same offence.”
(Also double jeopardy Article 20 (2) of the

Constitution).


-: 201 :-

ie But this, of course, assumed, that there is nothing
Gn the one to exclude the-operation of the other. In other
words, where a special or tlocat Act prescribes its own
penalties they are presumed to be exhaustive, unless there is
anything in the Act to save general law. Moreover, it is
well settled law that where an Act is punishable both under
the code as well as under a special or local law, the
preferable course is to convict under the special Jaw and not

under the code, both because specialia generalibus  derogant,

as well] as because the special Acts are primarily constituted

to punish such delinquencies.

Moreover, it is proposed in clause 3 of the IPC

(Amendment) 8111, 1978 to substitute section 5 of the IPC as

under:
“Nothing in this code shall affect the provisions
of any special or local law.”
Problem of hijacking of aircraft or vehicles sum
up.

10.14, The existing general provisions in the IPC cover

moving of any property unlawfully amounting to theft and when
a force is used it may become robbery and if committed by
five persons or more it amounts to dacoity. But in view of
hew trends of crime Tike hijacking of aircraft or vehicles,

in 1978 8111 certain provisions are sought to be included and


rc
hijacking of aircraft or vehicies are being made specific

Porenegse

offences by virtue of section 362A under clause 149,
Incidentally, some changes are suggested in the provisions
o
relating to private defence and are sought to be made in
te

seditions 103, 105 by adding hijacking of aircraft or

sabotage. The other existing provisions relating to mischief
also cover some of the alleged offences committed in respect
of the aircraft or vehicles. In view of the changes to be
brought about relating the offence of hijacking in the Bil},
they have explained under the proposed section 437 the
meaning of sabotage which is sought to be introduced or
inserted under clause 180. Likewise, some changes are
suggested in the Bil? in the proposed new section 432
regarding mischief committed in respect of the air services
like beacon, lights, etc. at the airport. The IPC
{Amendment ) Bill was prepared in 1978, thereafter the
Anti~hijacking Act of 1982, subsequently amended in 1994.
Also the Suppression of Unlawful acts against Safety of Civil
Aviation Act, 1982 was enacted which was also amended in
1994, An examination of the provisions of these Acts it is
crystal clear that the changes what are sought to be brought
about in this regard under clause 179 are being taken care of
in these special enactments both in respect of hijacking as

well as the mischief to the service as such.

Therefore, there is no necessity now to have
Section 362A as proposed in the IPC (Amendment) Bill, 1978 in

respect of hijacking of aircraft. Consequently, the changes


Broposed under clauses 35 and 37 of the IPC (Amendment) Bill,
—is78 for the amendments in sections 103 and 105 of the IPC
Which deal with the mischief to property including hijacking
Bf aircraft, would not be necessary. Needless to mention
Ehat the mischief to the air service etc. has been made a
Erime and punishable under the special enactments mentioned
wabove. Hence, no amendment is also required in section 432

fof the IPC as proposed in the IPC (Amendment ) Bill, 1978.

10.15. In the light of above discussion, it is recommended
that section 362A is not required to be inserted in the IPC.
Similarly there is no need to amend sections 103, 105, 432 of
the IPC for covering the crime of air hijacking and mischief

to air service etc.

10.16. But this crime is tremendously increasing
throughout the world. The legistation of a country fails
when the jurisdiction for the crime of air hijacking or
criminal arises in two or more countries. It is the need of

the hour that to prevent this crime international cooperation

®

& ४ . .
8 required. Therefore, it is very necessary to have a look
b

for international trends towards the problem specially where

tthe crime is a continuing crime and have jurisdiction of two
or more countries. In brief, discussion pertaining to
‘international trends and convention pertaining air hijacking
shall be useful not only for our recommendations but also for

cademic value.


International Trends and Conventions relating to
the Crime of Air-hijacking:-

४7:10. 17. Aircraft hijacking is a contemporary addition to
3.the roster of international and national crimes and the
‘necessity for its control at international and national level
is only beginning to be recognized by States. In its wide
sense hijacking is an act against the safety of civil

aviation and resembles piracy.

Tokyo Conventions, 1963.

10.18, According to Article 1, when a person on board has
unlawfully committed, by force or threat thereof, an act of
interference, seizure or wrongful exercise of control of an
aircraft in flight or when such an act is about ० the
committed, contracting States shall take all appropriate
Measures to restore control of the aircraft to ita awful
commander or to preserve its control] of the aircraft.
Further, the contracting State, when the aircraft lands,
shall permit its passengers and crew to continue their
journey as soon as practicable and shall return the aircraft
and its cargo to the persons lawfully entitled to the
“possession. Article 13 further provides that any contracting
४» State shall take the delivery of any person whom the aircraft
commander delivers and that it shall immediately make a

Preliminary enquiry into the facts. It is clear from the


hove provisions that an attempt to define the term
hijacking’ has not been made, but it simply imposes certain
pligations upon a contracting State and lays more emphasis
की the return of the hijacked aircraft and its passengers to
chose persons who are entitled to its possession and to
yermit its passengers and crew to continue their journey as

1001 as practicable.

‘he Hague Convention of 1970

0.19. Article 1 provides that "Any person who on board an

‘ircraft in flight:

(a) unlawfully, by force or threat thereof, or by
any other form of intimidation, seizes or exercises
control of that aircraft or attempts to perform any

such act, or

(b) is an accomplice of a person who performe or
attempts to perform any such act, commits an

offence..... .

This provision also. does not define the term
hijacking’, but simply mentions its essential elements.
lonethetess, according to International Law, following are

he essential elements of the offence of hijacking:



(i) Unlawful use of force or threat thereof or any

other form of intimidation;

(41) To do above-mentioned acts with a view to

seize the aircraft or to exercise control over it;

(iii) The said acts should have been committed on

board an aircraft in flight;

(1५) Accomplice of person who performs to attempts
to perform the above-mentioned act is also guilty

of the offence of hijacking.

The above-mentioned essential elements are similar
to those mentioned in Article 11 of the Tokyo Convention,
1963. The only innovation in “Hague Convention, 1970" is
that it includes an accomplice of a person who performs or

attempts to perform any such act.
The Montreal Convention, 1971.

10.20. A conference was called by ICAO at Montreal from
8th to 23rd September, 1971. As a result of this conference,
a Convention (Known as Montreal Convention For The
Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Civil
Aviation, 1971) was adopted. Article 1 of the Montreal
Convention provides that any person commits an offence if he

unlawfully and intentionally-


7: 207 :-

(a) performs an act of violence against a person on
board an aircraft if that act is likely to endanger

the safety of that aircraft;

(b) destroys an aircraft in service or causes
damages to such an aircraft which renders it
incapable of flight or it is likely to endanger its

safety in flight; or

(c) places or causes to be Placed on an aircraft in
service, by any means whatsoever, a device or
substance which is likely to destroy that aircraft,
or to cause damage to it which renders it incapable
of flight, or to cause damages air navigation
facilities or interferes with that operation, if
any act is likely to endanger the safety or

aircraft in flight; or

(d) destroys or damages air navigation facilities
or interferes with that operation, if any such act
is likely to endanger the safety or aircraft in

flight; or

(e) communicates information which he knows to be
false, thereby endangering the safety of an

aircraft in flight.


-: 208 :-

Besides this, it ts further provided that a person

‘also. commits an offence if he attempts to commit any of the

offences mentioned above or if he is an accomplice of a
' a

person who commits or attempts tb commit any such offence.

No doubt, Under Article 1 of this Convention, the
concept of the offence of hijacking was further widened.
Under this Convention, the State parties have undertaken that
they will provide deterrent punishment to the hijackers.
Other provisions are similar to that of the Hague Convention.
It would not be wrong to say that it is simply an improvement
of the Hague Convention. As a matter of fact, it would have
been better if the provisions of Montreal Convention had been

adopted as protocol! to the Hague Convention.

Principle of universal jurisdiction in respect of

the crime of the hijacking.

10.21. The principle of universal jurisdiction is
universally recognised in respect of the crime of piracy.
Since hijacking is generally described as aerial piracy, the
principle of universal jurisdiction should apply in respect
of the crime of hijacking. By universal jurisdiction in
respect of a crime, it is meant that the crime is against the
interests of international community and in order to suppress
such a crime, 811 States can exercise jurisdiction in respect
of the crime. The Hague Convention, 1970, and the Montreal

Convention, 1971 on hijacking have gone a long way to confer


Eniversal jurisdiction to a great extent on all States, if an
betender or alleged offender is within the territory of a
state, both conventions contain provisions for him to be
taken into custody, and if he is not extradited, for his case

to be placed before the prosetution authorities.

Although neither Convention creates a duty to
axtradite or an inescapable duty to prosecute authorities are
yevertheless under a duty to take their decision in the same
nanner as in the case of any ordinary offence of a serious
vature under the law of that State. If the decision is in
the affirmative, the above mentioned universal jurisdictional

slause ensures that the courts will be competent to hear the

ase.
Proposal for the Establishment of an International
Criminal Court:
0.22. The idea of the establishment of an International
riminal Court is not a new. one. It has been a much

iscussed topic since the end of the first World War. It has
ssumed urgency in view of the fact that political aspects
re not sufficiently regulated in the Hague convention of
970, On September 14, 1970,the than Secretary-General of
he U.N. proposed that hijacker should be brought to trial
3fore an international tribunal. In his view, the proposed
‘ternational tribunal would defend the interests of all

30ples and nations and would be effective if governments


४ 210 :-

pledged themselves to extradite hijackers to be brought
before the tribunal. One of the reasons for the
astablishment of an International Criminal Court is that some

times it will be difficutt for a National Court to punigsh an

International delinquent.

In this connection, following three kinds of

proposals have been made.

(t) A separate court administered by the United

Nations;

(2) A Special Division of the International Court

of Justice; or

(3) A court by means of International Conventions.

But since many States do not still seem to be
prepared to take stringent measures against hijackers and in
view of the present state of international relations and
affairs, preventive measures comprising of thorough searches
of all passengers, and their luggage constitute the best

means to prevent or at least minimise the incidents of

hijacking.

Problems of Extradition of the Hijjackers:-



10.23. Yet another shortcoming tn the existing law is in
reapact of axtradition of the hijackers. Extradition of
alleged offenders is obligatory only when there is a_ treaty
to that effect. Moreover, the hijacking is not included as
an extradition offence in some extradition treaties. Also
extradition treaties often provide that State is under no
obligation to extradite its own nationals, or persons who
have committed crimes of political nature. Further, the
reluctance of States to extradite hijackers who have acted
for political motives is understandable, hijacking an
aircraft is often the only way in which an individual can
escape from a country where he is liable to political, social
or religious persecution and it would be undesirable to
require other States to send him back to a country where he
faces such persecution. But unless such an individual is
punished, there is danger that other people with less
excusable motives will be tempted to imitate him. It is,
therefore a matter of regret that the Hague and Montreal
Conventions stopped short of requiring States prosecute

hijackers, who are not extradited.

As regards action against States which refuse to
extradite or prosecute, it may be suggested that an amendment
to the Chicago Convention which empowered the Council of
I.C.A.O. to order the suspension of all services to or from
member States or I1.C.A.0. which refused to extradite or
Prosecute hijackers would override air service treaties

Previously concluded between member States. If member States


-: 212 :-

were forced to choose between accepting such an amendment and
ceasing to be members of I.C.A.0. they would probably accept
the amendment, because they would not tike to lose the
advantage of membership of I.C.A.0. It was unfortunate that
such an amendment when presented to the I.C.A.0. Assembly in
1973 could not be adopted as it failed to secure the
requisite 67 votes. It could secure only 65 votes, i.e.

only two votes less than the requisite number.

Extradition and Indian Law

10.24. In India, there is the Extradition Act, 1962. The
Act felicitate the Extradition Treaty with other countries if
the same provides extradition of the accused of the crime

including Crime of Air-Hijacking.

Moreover, Section 7(2) of the Anti-Hijacking Act,
1962 provides that for the purposes of the application of the
Extradition Act, 1962 to offences under this Act, any
aircraft registered in a Convention country shall, at any
time while that aircraft is in flight, be deemed to be within
the jurisdiction of that country, whether or not it is for

the time being also within the jurisdiction of any other

country.


=: 213 :-

10.25. In the light of the above . discussion, it appears
that there is an urgent need to have an International Court
of Civil Aviation. The proposed Court will deal with the
crimes of Air hijacking, mischief in the air service where
the jurisdiction wilt ariso in two or more countr laos. The
Law Commission is aware that making a direct recommendation
in International Law is not within its jurisdiction,
nevertheless this recommendation is being made incidentally
and in the interest to prevent the crime of international
civil aviation. Therefore, jit is expected from the
Government of India to take up this recommendation with the
‘international comity as and when possible.
HIJACKING OF THE VEHICLES ETC. THE VEHICLES ETC.
10.26. In the recent past the crime of vehicle hijacking
has increased in various parts of the countries. To take
away the passenger vehicle sometimes by miscreants like
‘terrorists etc. has created the problems for the

administration of Law and order.

10.27. In this connection, it is proposed that amendment
is required in the IPC to tackle this problem. Though the
Chapter XVII of the IPC “ offences against the property” is
already dealing with the offence against the property but not
dealing with hijacking of vehicles as there is no motive to

take the ownership of vehicle in case of hijacking of


vehicle. In the hijacking, generally motive may be to create
terror or damand ransom or counter bargaining. But on the
other hand, in Chapter XVII of the IPC; sole motive 18 to
take the property for the purpose of ownership ultimately,
If the criminals for the hijacking of vehicles will be booked
under this Chapter as well as Section 362 of the IPC which is
dealing with the abduction of the person either in the

vehicle or outside the vehicle, then prosecution may face
problem in proving “mens rea“. Another problem may be to

punish and identify the actual group behind the crime.

The establishment of the principle that there must
be a mental,even though objective, in crime, is now 8 few
centuries old. Tracing the evolution of this principle,
Russell on Crime (tith Edition p.23) says: “The riew
conception that merely to bring about a prohibited crime
should not involve a man in liability to punishment unlese in
addition he could be regarded 88 morally blameworthy, came to

actus 101 facit reum

be enshrined in the weil-known maxim
nisi mens sit rea”. This ancient maxim which means that an

act dees not make a man guilty unless there be gufity
intention propounds a moral test of criminal liability which
has lingered in the law for no man can be convicted of a

crime at common Jaw ७1888 both the physical and mental

elements are prasent in the crime.


४ 216 :-

Statutory Offence:

10.28. The law relating to mens rea in statutory offences
is substantially the same. The basic rule of interpretation
of statutory offences 13 that “unless the statute, either
clearly or by necessary implication rules out mens rea as a
constituent part of a crime, a defendant should not 06 found
guilty of an offence against the criminal law unless he has a
guilty mind”. This rule is “of the utmost importance for the
protection of liberty of the subject". With this view their

Lordships of the Privy Council agreed in Srinivasa Mall vs.

Emperor (AIR 1947 P.C.135). This statement of the law by the

Privy Council was approved by the Supreme Court in Ravula

Hariprasada Rao vs. State (AIR 1951 SC 204)

Though it is true that actus non facit reum nisi

mens sit rea is a cardinal doctrine of criminal law the
Legislature can create an offence which consists solely in
doing an act, whatever the intention or state of mind of the
person acting may be. Whether mens rea 18 a conatituent part
of a crime or not must in every case depend upon the wording
of the particular enactment. The Privy Council observed in
Srinivasa Mall's case that in a limited class of offences
which are usually of a comparatively minor character the
offance can be committed without a guilty mind. This class
is generally made up of acts mala prohibjta and the

prohibitions are intended to protect the public or to promote


the general welfare, and , therefore, mens rea is not

Pen upon as an essential ingredient of the offence

Fyntess so declared in express words by the Legislature.

However, so far as the Indian Penal Code is

concerned, every offence under it virtually imports the idea

: of criminal intent or mens rea. Intent denotes 311 those
states of mind which the statute creating the offence in
question regards as necessary that an accused must have in

order to fix the guilt in him.

Needless to mention that to constitute a crime the
act must, except in the case of certain statutory crimes, be
accompanied by a criminal intent or by such negligence or
indifference to duty or to consequences as is regarded by the
law as equivalent to criminal intent. Intention, however, is
not capable of positive proof: it can only be implied from
overt acts. As a general rule, every sane man is presumed to
intend the necessary or the natural and probable consequences
of his acts and this presumption of Taw will prevail unlesa
from a consideration of all the evidence the Court entertains
8 reasonable doubt whether such an intention existed. This
Presumption, however, is not conclusive, nor alone sufficient

to justify a conviction and should be supplemented by other

testimony.


-: 247 :-:

10.29. The gravity is such that it cannot be left as
theft. Therefore, there is an urgent need to make it a
separate offence. Therefore, to avold doubte, it 18

recommended to incorporate the Crime of “Hijacking of
Vehicles” etc. in the 17८. By making this crime a

"Statutory Crime”,all the controversies (like whether the

said crime can be covered or mot in Chapter XVII), will
disappear.

10.30. In the light of the above, it is recommended that-
I. Section 362A (1) as mentioned in the IPC

(Amendment) 8111, 1978 (Clause 149) may be omitted but clause

(2) may be inserted in the IPC as under:

$.362A. Whoever on board a vehicle in India or a
vehicle registered in India unlawfully by force or
show of threat or force or by any other form of
intimidation seizes such vehicle or exercises
control over it or attempts to seize or exercise
control over it for the purpose of taking it to a
place other than the place of its destination or
for any other purpose, is said to commit the
offence of hijacking of vehicle and whoever commits
such hijacking shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten

years and shall also be liable to fine.


-: 218 i-

Explanation- In this section-

(i) The word “Vehicle” include any vessel but does

not include an aircraft.

Il. Section 432 of the IPC (Amendment) Bill, 1978

(Clause 179) may be dropped.

III. In the above mentioned explanation the words,

"helicopter, air glider etc.” may be inserted. It may read

as under:~

(i) The word “Vehicle” include any vessel including
helicopter, or air-glider etc., but does not

include an aircraft.

OR

The words “helicopter, air-glider etc.” may be
inserted in S.2 (a) of the Anti-~Air Hijacking Act
1982, as well as in the Suppression of Unlawful,

acts Against Safety of Civil Aviation Act, 1982.

Iv. If need be, necessary amendment may be carried out

tn the special legistations, mentioned above.


-: 219 :-

CHAPTER-~ XI

DOCUMENT - SCOPE OF ITS DEFINITION

Section 463 defines the term “forgery”. This
section provides that “whoever makes any false document or
part of a document with intent to cause damage or injury, to
the public or to any person, or ४० support any claim or
title, or to cause any person to part with Property, or to
enter into any express or implied contract, or with intent to
commit fraud or that fraud may be committed, commits
forgery". Section 464 defines making of a false document and
enumerates various situations as to when a person can be said
to make a false document. The Commission proposes to
further examine the scope of the term ’document’ in view of
the latest scientific developments in the field of computers
as well as in the context of forgery of a copy of a document
as also the implications of fabricating a document to conceal
a past injury or fraud to escape liability for criminal

Prosecution.

11.02 Commission of fraud through the use of computers:

With the advent of electronics many transactions
are dono through computors. Recent ecam of Fraud in New
Selhi Municipal Corporation electricity bills through use of

computers is an illustration of computer fraud.


-: 220 :-

The topic of computer crime has recently formed the
subject of a report by the Scottish Law Commission. In this
respect the Scottish Law Commission identified eight distinct
forms of behaviour, while the English counterpart referred to
five main headings. In both cases, however, three critical
issues stand out, namely (i) the involvement of the computer
in a scheme to secure unlawful financial advantage or the
unauthorised * amendment or deletion of data, (ii) the
unauthorised use of a computer system or the securing of
unauthorised access to data held therein and (iii) the
‘theft’ of the information.

The Audit Commission (U.K.)(1) has conducted a
triennial survey of ‘computer fraud and abuse’. The
Commission was only able, in their survey covering the years
1984-87 to discover 118 incidents of frauds within England
and Wales with total losses amounting to a little over 2.5
million pounds. It has also been alleged that clearing banka
have set aside the sum of 85 million pounds to cover tosses
arising from computer fraud. The Audit Commission (U.K.)
further found that the concept of computer frauds spans a
wide range of activities ranging from sophisticated
multimillion pound frauds to the misuse of a bank’s automatic
teller machine.

Therefore, ‘there is a need to explicitty bring the
computer frauds within the purview of Chapter XVIII of the

IPC dealing with offences relating to documents by enlarging


-: 221 :-

the scope of the term ‘document’.

11.03

follows:~

The term ‘document’ is defined in Section 29 IPC as

"29. Document. + The word “document” denotes any
matter expressed or described upon any substance by
means of letters, figures, or marks, or by more
than one of those means, intended to be used or
which may be used, as evidence of that matter.

Explanation I. - It is immaterial by what means or
upon what substance the letters, figures or marks
are formed, or whether the evidence is intended,

for or may be used in, Court of Justice, or not.

Illustrations

A writing expressing the terms of a contract, which
may be used as evidence of the contract, is a
document.

A cheque upon a banker is a document.

A power-of-attorney is a document.

A map or plan which 18 intended to be used or which
may be used as evidence, is a document.

A writing containing directions or instructions is

a document.


हज: 222 :-

Explanation 2. - Whatever is expressed by means of
letters, figures or marks as explained by
mercantile or other usage, shall be deemed to be
expressed by such letters, figures or marks within
the meaning of the section although the same may

not be actually expressed.

Illustration

A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange
payable to his order. The meaning of the
endorsements, as explained by mercantile usage, is
that the 95111 is to be paid to the holder. The
endorsement is a document, and must be construed in
the same manner as if the words “pay to the holder”

or words to that effect had been written over the

signature.”

Evidently, this definition though wide in nature,
needs to contain explicitly a provision in the light of the
recent electronic developments. The Law Commission in its

42nd Report, para 2.56, observed that :-

“2.56 The main idea in all the three Acte 18 the
same and the emphasis is on the “matter” which is
rocorded, and not on the substance on which the
matter is recorded. ४७ feel, on the whole, that

the Penal Code should contain 8 definition of


11.04

४: 223 :-

“document” for its own purpose and that section 29
should be retained.

The two Explanations attached to section
29 are, we think, helpful. The first Explanation
helps to clear ambiguity about the import of the
word “evidence” used in the section, and is in

accord with the view of the Courts.”

It may be noticed that in the Forgery and

Counterfeiting Act, 1981 {U.K.), Section 8(1), the term

"instrument’ means:

Arlidge &

“... in this part of this Act ’instrument’ means -
(a) any document, whether of a formal or informal
character;

(9) any stamp issued or sold by the Post Office;

(c) any Inland Revenue Stamp; and
(d) any disc, tape, sound track or other
device on or in which information is

recorded or stored by mechanical,

electronic or other moana.”

Parry on Fraud,(2) pr.5-012, observes:

“in particular it is submitted that the words “any
device on or in which information is recorded or
stored by mechanical, electronic or other means” in
section 8(1){d) include the magnetic stripe on a

payment card: the stripe is clearly a device on


~: 224 :-

which encoded information about the holder’s
account ig recorded and stored. The same must
apply to electronic chip used on “smart” card.
Since the stripe or chip is attached to the card,
it follows that information is also stored on the
card; but is the card a “device"? It is submitted
that if it is not a “document” within section
section 8(1){d). It is clear that cheque cards and
credit cards, at least, are intended to qualify as
instruments because they are expressly included
among the special category of inetrumants
possession of which can be an offence. Other forms
of payment card are not so included; but it would
be strange if a credit card were an instrument and
a debit card were not."
%

11.05 A survey of definition of ‘Document’ in other

legislations would be of great use. According to Black's Law

Dictionary,(3) ‘Document’ means-
“An instrument on which is recorded, by means of
letters, figures, or marks, matter which may be
evidentially used. In this sense the term
"document" applies to writings; to words printed,
lithographed, or photographed; to seals, plates or
stones on which inscriptions are cut or angraved;
to photographs and pictures; to maps or plans. The
inscription may be on stone or gems, or on wood, 88

well as on paper or parchment.”


-: 225 :-

under Section 3 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, the term
"Document’ “means any matter expressed or described upon any
substance by means of letters, figures or marks, or by more
than one of those means, intended to be used, or which may be

used, for the purpose of recording that matter.

Illustrations

A writing is a document; words Printed lithographed
or photographed are document;

A map or plan is a document;

An inscription on a metal plate or stone is a
document ;

A caricature is a document.”

Under section 10(1) of the Civil Evidence Act, 1968 (U.K.)
the word ‘document’ is defined as follows:-
“Document: A written paper or something similar
which may be put forward as evidence.
‘Document’ includes in addition to a document in
writing.
(a) any map, plan, graph or drawing;
(b) any photograph;
(c) any disc, tape, sound track or other device in
which sounds or other data (not being vieunl
images) are embodied so as to be capable (with or

without the aid of some other equipment) of being


reproduced from it; and

(8) any film, negative tape or other device in
which one or more visual images are embodied so as
to be capable (as aforesaid) of being reproduced

from it.”

Under clause 11 of the Companies (Amendment) 8111,
1996 the following Section was proposed to be inserted in the
Company’s Act, 1956:-

“610A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in

any other law for the time being in force, -

(a) a micro film of a document or the reproduction

of the image or images embodied in such micro film

whether enlarged or not); or

(Bb) ee eee seas

(c) a statement contained in a document and

included in a printed copy produced by 8 comnuter

(hereinafter referred to as a computer printout),

if the conditions mentioned in sub-section 2 are

satisfied
shall be deemed to be also a document
for the purposes of this Act......

(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section (1)

in respect of a computer print-out shal] be the

following, namely:-

(a) the information contained in the statement

reproduced or is derived from returns and documents

Filed by the company on paper or on computer


~2 227 :-

network, floppy, diskette, magnetic, cartridge

tape, CD-rom or any other computer readable media;

11.06 It is, thus, evident that there is a trend of
widening the scope of the term ‘document’ having regard to
the latest scientific inventions in the field of electronics.
Consequently, there is apparent need to combat frauds
committed through computers. This would give rise to the
need to exhaustively define the term ‘document’ under section
29, IPC. In this connection, it is pertinent to refer to
clause 11 of the Bill which seeks to amend section 29 of the

Penal Code.

Under sub-clause (a) of clause 11 of the Bill, it
is provided that in section 29 of the Penal Code, for the
words “expressed or described”, the words “expressed,
described or recorded” shall be substituted. By virtue of
sub-clause (b) of clause 11, for the worde “figures or
marks", the words “figures, images, marks or sounds” shall be

substituted in section 29, IPC.

11.07 The Law Commission in its 42nd report, para 2.57
recommended for a slight alteration of the language of
section 29 of the Penal Code. It observed that the
definition under section 29 relating to the term “document”

18 wide Oonough to cover avery kind of document. Some doubt


was however, noticed as to whether it includes mechanical

records of sound or image. It recommended that it should

include such, as mechanical devices like “tape-records” which

are in frequent use. It referred to the decision of the

Supreme Court in Pratap Singh Kairon, (AIR 1964 sc

pr.15) that a conversation recorded on a tape

72, 86,

is good

evidence, and obviously if a person forges a tape record, he

ought to be punishable the same way aS a person preparing a

false document. The Commission recommended to make this

clear by adding an illustration to section 29,

The

Commission recommended that section 29 should be revised to

read as follows:-

"29, Document - The word ‘document’ denotes any

matter recorded upon any substance by

means of

letters, figures, or marks, or by more than one of

those means, intended to be used, or which

used, as evidence of that matter.

Explanation I. - It is immaterial by what
upon what substance the letters, figures
are formed, or whether the evidence is

for, or may be used in, a Court of Justice

may be

means or
or marks
intended

or nok.


Illustrations

The foilowing are documents-

(a) a map or plan;

(b) a caricature;

(c) a writing on a metal Plate, stone or tree;

(d) a film, tape or other device on which sounds or

images are recorded.

Explanation 2, - Whatever is expressed by means of
letters, figures or marks as understood by
mercantile or other usage, shal? be deemed to be
recorded by such letters, figures or marks within
the meaning of this section, although the same may

not be actually expressed.

I}lustration

A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange
payable to his order. The meaning of the
endorsement as understood by mercantile usage, i8

that the bill is to be paid to the holder. The
endorsement is a document, and must be construed in
the same manner as if the words ‘pay to the holder’
or words to that effect had been written over the

signature."


The proposed substitution of the words “expressed
or described” under sub-clause (a} of clause 11 of the Bill
by the words “expressed, described or recorded” are thus
intended to widen the scope of the term “document” by
bringing within its import any matter even “recorded”. One
may argue that by virtue of the insertion of the word
“recorded” in the definition of term ‘document’ under section
29, IPC that any matter recorded on any disc, tape, sound
track or other device on or in which information is recorded
or stored by mechanical, electronic or other means would fall
within the ambit of the proposed amended definition of
‘document’ vide clause 11 of the 8i11. Nevertheless, the
matter is arguable both ways. Accordingly, it would be
advisable to define the term ‘document’ on the Vines of
definition of ‘document’ given under section 8(1)(d) of the

Forgery and Counterfeiting Act, 1981 (UK).

11.08 Therefore, the term ‘document’ as defined in
Section 29, IPC may be enlarged so as to specifically include
therein any disc, tape, sound track or other device on or in
which any matter is recorded or stored by mechanical,
Slectronic or other means. These words also find place in
Sec.8(1)(d) of the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act, 1981(U.K.)
Quoted above. In order to achieve this purpose, in addition
to the amendment proposed to be added vide clause 11 of the
8111, we recommend that a new Explanation 3 be also inserted

in Section 29, IPC on the following lines:-


-: 231 :-

“Explanation 3. - The term “document” also
includes any disc, tape, sound track or other
device on or in which any matter or image or sound

is recorded or stored by mechanical or other

means.”

The aforesaid proposed amendment 17 section 29

would also necessitate consequential amendment of the term

“document” under section 3 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872

on the lines indicated above.


-: 232 :-

FOOT NOTES

Audit Commission (U.K.)
Arlidge & Parry on Fraud, -edn, ch.5 pr.5.012

Black’s Law Dictionary, Fifth Edn., p.432.


~: 233 :-

CHAPTER XII

THE INOIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1978

i The Indian Penal Code was placed on the statute

‘pook in the middle of the last century and the title “Indian
‘Penal Code" given by the then Law Commission refers to the
basic criminal law. The Indian Penal Code which is the basic
penal law of India, is thus more than 134 years old and the
task of bringing it to date was taken up by the Law
Commission of India in the year 1969 and it presented its
42nd Report in 1971. The Government after a careful
examination of the recommendations made by the Law
Commission, introduced a comprehensive Bill in the Rajya
Sabha in 1972. A Joint Parliamentary Committee scrutinised
the same for nearly four and a_ half years. After
finalisation by the Partiamentary Committee, the Bill was
passed in the Rajya Sabha in November, 1978. However, it
could not be passed in the Lok Sabha as it was dissolved in
1979. For some reason or the other this Bill was not again
introduced. The Government of India, however, made a
reference to the Law Commission of India to undertake a
comprehensive revision of the IPC and to come up with

appropriate recommendations.

12.02 Since the provisions of the 8i11 are mainly based
On the recommendations made in 42nd Report, we propose to

examine the recommendations made by the Law Commission in its


Ena Report and the chafiges in the circumstances in the
feanwhile and make our own assessment of the necessity to
fring about the changes and also indicate modifications to

[0० various clauses in the Bill wherever it is necessary.

In the present Bill there are 151 amendments, 95
jubstitutions, 32 omissions and 25 insertions. Apart from
\ ace, new sections 130A to 140° are substituted to the
saisting Chapter VII and sections 490, 491 and 492 are
substituted under Chapter XIX by changing the heading as
‘offences against Privacy’ instead of the existing heading
‘Criminal Breach of Contracts of Service’. In addition, two
yew chapters, namely, Chapters VB and XVIIIA are inserted and
thapter XXIII containing section 511 under the title
‘Attempts to Commit Offences” has been omitted. Sections 161
30 165A have been omitted by and transposed to the Prevention
»f Corruption Act, 1988. Besides, some of the sections or
slauses or sub-clauses are renumbered. After introduction of
the proposed Bill, sections 228A (Disclosure of identity of
the victim of certain offences, etc.) and 3048 (Dowry death)
fere inserted by Acts 43 of 1983 and 43 of 1986,
‘espectively. Sections 375 and 376 (Sexual offences) and
leading of the chapter were substituted by sections 375, 376,
'76A, 3768, 3760 and 3760 by Act 43 of 1983. A partial
mendment to Explanation 1 to section 405 has been made. In
‘ddition, a new chapter XXA containing a new section 498A was

Nserted by Act 46 of 1983.


“: 235 :-

There are 207 clauses in the 1978 Bill. Clauses 1,
6, 7, 8, 12, 16, 39, 40, 44, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 53, 55, 56,
57, 59, 60, 61, 62, 65, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77,
78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 32, 95,
96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108,
109, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 120, 121, 126, 127,
129, 132, 133, 135, 136, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 147,
148, 150, 153, 154, 156, 157, 158, 185, 186, 189, 191, 192,

193, 195, 200, 202, 205 and 207 are only inconsequential.

The changes proposed in the other clauses
contemplate to bring about the basic penal statute of this
country updated to remove lacunae and make it useful for
meeting the optimum needs. Several new offences are proposed
to be included which would result in large scale changes in

the First Schedule of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

We have carefully perused these clauses of the Bill
and we find that some of the changes contemplated go beyond
the recommendations made by the Law Commission in its 42nd
Report. Therefore, we think it necessary to examine each of

these clauses as indicated already.

Clauses 2 to 8

12.03 Chapter II provides for general explanations,
Sections 6 to 52A contain various definitions and

explanations. The object of definition is to avoid the


—: 236 :-

necessity of frequent repetitions in describing the
subject-matter to which the word or expression is intended to

apply. The definitions may be restrictive and exhaustive but

sometimes may be inclusive and exchysive. In other words, a
definition may be inclusive and exclusive, i.e., it may
include certain things and exclude others. It is well

settled that the definition is not to be read in isolation
but must be read in the context of the phrase which defines
because the function of a definition is to give precision and

certainty to a word or a phrase which would otherwise be

vague and uncertain. In The Vanguard Fire and General

Insurance Co. Ltd., Madras vs. M/s Fraser and Ross and

another (AIR “1960 SC 971), the court observed -"It is well
settled that all statutory definitions of abbreviations must
be read subject to the qualification variously expressed in
the definition clauses which created them and it may be that
even where the definition is exhaustive inasmuch as the word
defined is said to mean a certain thing, it is possible for
the word to have a somewhat different meaning in different
sections of the Act depending upon the subject of the

context”.

Section 6 lays down that throughout the Code (IPC),
every definition of an offence, every penal provision, etc.,
Shall be understood subject to the exceptions contained in
the chapter titled “General Explanations”, though those
exceptions are not repeated in such definition, penal

Provision or illustration.


7: 237 :-

Sectton 7 adds that every expression which is
explained in any part of the Code, is used in every part of

the Code in conformity with the explanation.

In these sections, various words and explanations

used in the Code are defined.

The Law Commission, in its 42nd Report, clearly
observed that neither the definitions nor the general rules
of construction contained in General Clauses Act are
applicable to the Indian Penal Code except to a very limited
extent but, however, noted that tc some extent there is
overlapping resulting in duplication which can be removed by
expressly providing that the General Clauses Act shall apply
for the interpretation of the Code. To that extent, the
Commission recommended the omission of certain sections
containing the definitions which are there in the General
Clauses Act also. In this view, the Law Commission

recommended deletion of sections 8, 9 and 10 which define

‘gender’, ‘number’, ‘man’, ‘woman’ and section 11 defining
‘person’. In the Bill, by virtue of clause 5, these sections
8, 9 and 11 stand deleted since these expressions are in the

Same terms as they are found in the General Clauses Act.

A perusal of the General Clauses Act, 1897 would
show that the definitions and the General Rules of

Construction contained therein are not specifically made


~: 238 :-

applicable to the Indian Penal Code except to a very limited
extent. It is well accepted that all penal statutes are to
ve construed strictly and that the court must see that any
act or omission charged of, amounts to an offence within the
plain meaning of the words used in the Code and the word
should not be strained in construing the penal statutes, its
. cardinal principle being that in case of doubt the
construction favourable to the subject should be preferred.
The framers of the Indian Penal Code had in view this general
scope of the substantive law in incorporating the definitions
in the chapter of General Explanations. It is also an
accepted principle that the essence of a penal law is to be
exhaustive on the merits in respect of which it declares the
Yaw. In so construing very often the meaning and the object
‘underlying the definitions with reference to the offence
(charged assumes importance. To determine that a case is
“within the ambit of the statute, its language must be
lexplicit and facilitate the court as to what to say and how
fto interpret. Having regard to these aspects, it is better
Bo retain the definitions in the Penal Code instead of
Beitting them as recommended by the Law Commission in its
Beng Report. In the result, we do not recommend any changes
Bi sections 8, 9 and it. Consequently, clauses 2 to 8 of the

Br have to be deleted.

Ms. ५
Mio. By virtue of this clause, sections 18 to 21 are

z=: to be substituted. Existing section 18 says- “India”


7: 239 :-

means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu &
Kashmir. As pointed out by the Law Commission, there is a
need to amend this definition to make it clear that the
Indian Penal Code extends to the territorial waters of India
in the same manner as it extends to the land territory. The
Law Commission, in its 42nd Report suggested an amendment to
section 18, namely, “India” means ai territory of India
including territorial waters but does not include the
territory of Jammu & Kashmir." In recommending this
amendment, the Law Commission laid more stress in extending
the Code to the land territory as wel? as internal waters of
India, Though clause 2 has more clearly covered the
territorial Jurisdiction, it is silent as to the extension of
the Code to the State of Jammu & Kashmir. It has been voiced
in’ many workshops as well as observed in court judgments and
Suggestions from the members of legal fraternity and Jurjists
to extend the applicability of Indian Penal Code to the
entire country Cincluding Jammu & Kashmir). Though this is a
laudable object, new section 18 is not in conformity with the
same,

The existing section 1 reads, “the title and extent
Of operation of the Code- this Act shall be called the Indian
Penal Code and shall extend to the whole of India except the
State of Jammu & Kashmir". The words “extend to the whole of
India" were introduced by way of an amendment in the year
1950 and the words “except the State of Jammu & Kashmir” were
Substituted in the year 1951. The existing section 18

defines India as “India means the territory of India


=: 240 :-

excluding the State of Jammu & Kashmir”. It may be noted
that this section was substituted in the year 1950, By
reading these two sections together it appears that the
intention was not to extend the Penal Code to the State of
Jammu & Kashmir as can be noticed from section 1. But India
as defined in section 18 is somewhat incongruous, i.e., as
the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu &
Kashmir. However, in the 8111 the existing section 1 18 not
touched upon whereas the oxisting definition of India ag
found in section 18 is sought to be substituted by now
section 18 which reads, “the word ‘India" wherever jit occurs
in this Code means the territories to which this Code
extends”. When the existing section 1 is not modified then
the definition of India in the new section does not carry the
Matter further because it says that India means the
territories to which this Code extends, thereby clearly
implying that this Code would not be applicable to the State
of Jammu & Kashmir. In the 42nd Report, the Law Commission
made a recommendation for amendment of section 18 ina
Slightly different way than what we find in the new section
18 sought to be substituted under the Bill. Having examined
the matter carefully and also bearing in, mind that in the
Bill there is no reference to section 1 at all, there is no
need to substitute the existing section 18 by the Proposed
new section. However, to make things clear if necessary and
to remove any ambiguity, namely, that the restricted meaning

Of India for the purpose of applicability of this Code would


—: 24t i-

be the territories to which this Code extends, as found in
the existing section 1, the proposed new section 18 may

suitably be worded.

The existing section 19 defines ‘judge’ and section
20 ‘Court of Justice’. There was some confusion as ५० the
interpretation of the expression ‘judge’. Section 19 is
sought to be substituted by the new section. The existing
section 19 reads-~
“Judge~ the word “judge” denotes not only every
person who is officially designated as a Judge, but
also every person-
who is empowered by law to give, in. any
Jegal proceeding, civil or criminal, definitive
judgment or a judgment which, if not appealed
against, would be definitive, or a judgment which
is confirmed by some other authority, would be
definitive, or
who is one of a body of person, which
body of persons is empowered by law to give such a

judgment.”

The Law Commission in its 42nd Report noticed some
lacunae in this and recommended that illustrations can be
omitted and section suitably be amended. Now the section

that is sought to be substituted reads as follows-


2 242 :-

“The word "judge" denotes not only every person who
is officially designated as a Judge, but also-
(a) every person-

(i) who is empowered by law to give, in
any tlegal proceeding, civil or criminal, a
definitive judgment, or a judgment which, if not
appealed against, would be definitive or a judgment
which, if confirmed by some authority, would be
definitive, or

(11) who is one of a body of persons,
which body of persons is empowered by law to give
such a judgement; and

(b) a magistrate.”

While retaining the emphasis on giving a
‘definitive judgment’ and while recommending it, the only
change brought out is inclusion of magistrate. We endorse

the changes sought to be introduced by the Bill.

The existing section 20 defines a “court of
justice" as meaning a judge or body of judges empowered by
Taw to act judicially when such judge or body of judges is
acting judicially. The Law Commission, in its 42nd Report,
having examined the language of the Section, observed that
the definition is unnecessarily lengthy and suggested that

the same may be simplified. As mentioned above, section 19


४ 243 :-

defining ‘judge’ as we find in the Bill comprehensive and 811
those words need not be repeated again. Section 20, as we

find in the Bill after the change is simple and sufficient.

The existing section 21 defines ‘public servant’.
The same contains the categories of persons which come within
the meaning of ‘public servant’. The concept of ‘public
servant’ is quite important from the point of view of
administration of criminal justice. The definition of
‘public servant’ in section 21 has nexus to section 197
Cr.P.c. whereunder sanction is necessary for prosecuting a
public servant. Now, it is well settled that if the act
complained of is connected with official duties of the
accused and if reasonably found that it was done in the
course of discharging of his official duties, section 197 is
attracted and sanction is essential for 115 prosecution.
Therefore, it becomes necessary to find out whether the
accused is a public servant as defined in section 21. The
Law Commission having examined the existing section observed
that the elaborate enumeration of various categories of
Public servants in section 21 jis primarily based on the
functions discharged by such servants and further noted that
there is considerable overlapping particularly after the
recast of clause twelve by the amending Acts of 1958 and 1964
and that some of the clauses require drastic revision. In

the Bill, the new section 21 reads as follows-


21. “Public Servant” means,-
(i) any person in the service or pay of the
Government, or remunerated by the Government by
fees or commission for the performance of any
public duty;
(ii) any person in the service or Pay of a local
authority;
(iii) any person in the service or Pay ofa
corporation owned or controlled by the Government;
(iv) any judge, including any person empowered by
law to discharge, whether by himself or as a member
of a body of persons, any adjudicatory functions;
(v) any person specially authorised by a Court of
Justice to perform any duty in connection with the
administration of justice, including a liquidator,
receiver or commissioner appointed by such court;
(vi) any arbitrator or other person to whom any
cause or matter has been referred for decision or
Report by a court of justice or by a competent
authority;
(vii) any person employed or engaged as an examiner
or as an invigilator by any public body in
connection with any examination recognised or
approved by or under any law.

Explanation-- The expression “public

body", includes-

(3) a University, Board of Education or

other body or institution, either


7: 245 :-

established by or under a Central, State
or Provincial Act or constituted by the
Government;
(b) a local authority:
(viii) any person who holds an office by virtue of
which he is empowered to Prepare, publish, maintain
or revise an electoral roll or to conduct an
election or part of an election; or
(ix) any person who holds an office by virtue of
which he is authorised or required by law to
perform any public duty.
Explanation 1.- Persons falling under any of the
above clauses are public servants whether appointed
by the Government or not.
Explanation 2.- A person calling under any of the
above clauses by virtue of any office or situation
he 18 actually holding is a= public servant,
whatever legal defect there may be in his right to

hold that office or situation.

The Law Commission in its 42nd Report having
carefully examined the various clauses in section 21
Suggested certain changes which are incorporated in the new
section. In this context, the Law Commission has examined

various judgments of the High Courts and Supreme Court.


—: 246 :-

The corresponding provisions in existing section
reads as follows-—

“Twelfth - Every person -

(a) in the service or Pay of the government or
remunerated by fees or commission for the
performance of any public duty by the government.
(b) in the service or pay of local authority, a
corporation established by or under a Central,
Provincial or State Act or a Government company as
defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956

(1 of 1956)."

It can be seen that in this clause there is
emphasis on public duty. In G.A.Monterio v, The State of
Aimer , (1956 SCR 682), the Supreme Court indicated that the
requirements of pay and Public duty are cumulative. The
court observed, “If therefore, on the facts of a particular
case, the court comes to the conclusion that a person 15 not
only in the service or Pay of the government but is also
Performing a public duty he has delegated to him the
functions of the government or is in any event performing
duties immediately auxiliary to those of some one who is an
officer of the government and is, therefor, an officer of the
government within the meaning of section 21(9), Indian Penal
Code, The Supreme Court reiterated the same view in State of

Aimer ५, _ Shivii Lal, (1959 Supp(2) SCR 739), After noting



४ 247 :-

these observations, the Law Commission opined that the
Usp
expression “public servant” cannot: be easily defined and no

court has attempted any such definition.

Taking into consideration various aspects mentioned
above, the Law Commission recommended in its 42nd Report
substitution of section 21. The definition of “public
servant” as found in the Bill (new section 21) elaborately
contains the recommendations made by the Law Commission.
However, the Law Commission specifically mentioned one clause
to be included, namely- “any person who is a Member of
Parliament or of a State Legislature". In view of the
various political developments and where numerous instances
of criminalisation of politics are alleged it is necessary to

have a provision, but in what manner can it be effectively

done?

The existing provisions to the effect that any
person receiving remuneration for discharging public duty may
in a general way cover them since they are receiving some
remuneration and also discharging a public duty. The Law
Commission in its 42nd Report clearly recommended that these
Peopte should specifically be included as public. servants
Under the relevant provisions. But the question would be
whether or not suitable amendments are also necessary to
section 19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act and
correspondingly section 197 of Cr.P.C. because a reading of

these provisions would show that the emphasis is on the


~: 248 :-

government service and the power to remove the delinquent
officer by the State Government or the Central Government as
the case may be. But in the case of legislators these
provisions providing for grant of sanction as such do not
contemplate as to who should be the sanctioning authority in
case a legislator is to be prosecuted for an act of criminal
misconduct while discharging or purporting to discharge his
official duties which to whatever limited extent may be a
public duty performed by them, namely, being members of the
jegislatures. It is but logical that the power should rest
only with the presiding officer of the legislature since the
proceedings or any acts connected with such proceedings
including voting or defecting also are within the privileged
category and it is oniy the presiding officer who can take a
decision whether the act has any nexus of public duty of a
legisitator. Consequently, in case of legislators committing
misconduct, the sanctioning authority can be only the
presiding officers of the legislatures. Unless such changes
in the provisions providing for sanction are also brought
about it may not be appropriate to just include them as
Public servants in the relevant provisions. If for
argument’s sake no sanction would be necessary under section
19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act or section 197 of
Cr.P.c., then it would be ironical to say that only such
Protection can be extended to the other public servants and
not to the members of the legislatures who are aiso by virtue

of performance of public duty fall in the category of public

Servants. Unless such major changes are brought about, it is


-: 249 :-

not desirable and highly inappropriate to just merely bring
them within the purview of public servants under section 21
by inserting a new clause and make them amenable to any of

the relevant penal provisions.

Clause 10
12.05 The existing section 25 defines the expression
“fraudulently” - a person is said to do a thing fraudulently

if he does that thing with intent to defraud but not
otherwise. The expression “fraudulently” occurs 11 few
sections, namely, 206, 207, 208, 242, 243, 246, 247, 252,
253, 261, 262, 263 and sections 421 to 424. The existing
section 23 explains the terms “wrongful gains" and “wrongful
loss”. Section 24 says that a person does a thing
dishonestly if he does it with the intention of causing
wrongful gain to one person or wrongful Joss to another
person. These definitions are in clearer terms. But the
same cannot be said about the definition of “fraudulently”.
The courts, however, observed that to attract the definition,
there must be some advantage on the one side with the
corresponding loss on the other. The Supreme Court in

Or.S.Dutt ५४५. State of U.P. (1966 (1) SCR 493) observed that

the words “with intent to defraud” in section 25 indicate not
a bare intent to deceive but an intent to cause a person to
act or omit to act, as a result of deception played upon him,

to his advantage.” Having examined various views, the Law


-: 250 :-

Commission recommended the change in the definition, so that
the meaning can be brought out in clearer terms. The

amendments suggested in the Bill serve the purpose.

Clause i1

12.06 The existing section 29 defines a document and
there are two Explanations. Section 3 of the Evidence Act
and section 3(18) of the General Clauses Act also define the
word ‘document’. A reading of these three sections would
show that the main idea in all the three Acts is the same and
the emphasis is on the matter which is recorded. The Law
Commission in its 42nd Report examined the provisions in 811
these Acts and recommended an amendment. It also observed
that the existing definition with its Explanations is wide
enough to cover every type of document. A doubt was
expressed whether it includes mechanical records of sound or
image like tape recording etc., which are in frequent use.
Taking these aspects into consideration, the Law Commission
suggested slight alteration in the language of the definition
to make ite intention clear. It is on this basis, in clause
11, the words “particularly expressed, described or recorded”
and the words “figures, images, marks or sounds" are sought
to be substituted. A detailed discussion on this aspect can
be found in Chapter XI entitled "“Document-Scope of its
Definition”. In view of the changes in the audio and video
technology and computers, it is recommended that another

Explanation (3) can be added to the existing section. So we


-: 251 :-

recommend that Explanation (3) namely, “The term document
also includes any disc, tape, sound track or other device on
or in which any matter or image or sound is recorded or

stored by mechanical or other means”.

Clause 12

12.07 Under this clause, existing sections 31, 32 and 33
which define the words “will” referred to in the Act are
sought to be omitted. A perusal of the 41st Report of the
Law Commission shows that the omission of this section was
recommended on the basis that they are defined in the General
Clauses Act. Having given our earnest consideration, we have
already noted that such words which are defined in the
General Clause Act and which are specifically found in the
other provisions of the IPC should be retained for several
reasons already mentioned. For the same reasons we are of
the view that there is no harm in retaining existing sections

31, 32 and 33 and Clause 12 has to be omitted.

Clause 13

श्र
12.08 By virtue of this clause the words

several
persons” wherever they occur are sought to be substituted by
the words “two or more persons”. A perusal of some of the
Judgments would show that the courts felt that there is some
ambiguity in the language of the section, particularly in

respect of the meaning to be given to the expression “several


-: 252 :-

persons”. Section 34 embodies the principle of constructive
liability in the doing of a criminal act, the essence of that
jiability being the existence of a common intention. Section
34 explains that when a criminat act is jointly done by
several persons who are actuated by common’ intention, in
furtherance of that intention each of them is liable for it
as if the whole of it had been done by him alone. Starting

from Baredra Kumar Ghosh _v. King Emperor, (AIR 1925 PC1)

uptil now there have been a number of judgments rendered by
the courts about the scope of section 34. The expression
“several persons” has been examined with reference to the
question whether two persons should at least be there as
participants for section 34 and whether a single known
offender can be convicted by application of section 34 if the
facts show that he along with one unknown offender at least
must have committed the offence. The Law Commission with a
view to see that this ambiguity is not there recommended in
its 42nd Report the substitution of the words "two or more
persons” for the words "several persons” which expression is
rather wide and vague. 8y carrying out this amendment the
language of section 34 becomes more explicit. For the same
reason the expression “several persons” occurring in sections

35 and 38 also can be substituted by the expression “two or

more persons”.


5“: 253 :-
Clause 14
12.09 Under this clause it is proposed to substitute

section 40 by another section. The existing section 40 has
three clauses giving three different definitions of the
expression “offence”. The first clause provides that except
in the chapters in sections mentioned in clauses 2 and 3, the
word “offence” denotes "a thing made punishable by the Code”.
Clause 2 lays down that the offences covered by Chapters IV
and VA and also several sections enumerated therein, the word
“offence” denotes “a thing punishable under the Code or under
any special or local jaw". According to clause 3, the word
“offence” in respect of the eight sections mentioned therein
has “the same meaning when the thing punishable under the
special or local law is punishable under such law with
imprisonment for a term of six months or upwards, whether

with or without fine.”

It has to be noted that the expression “offence”
has a definite meaning. The existing section lacks clarity
nor is it conducive. The Law Commission in its Report
Pointed out that whenever a question arises as to the meaning
of the word “offence” appearing in a particular section of
the Code, one has to go to section 40 and go to the clauses
to find out where the section in question is mentioned. In
the General Clauses Act, section 3(38) says that “offence”
Shall mean any act or omission made punishable by any law for

the time being in force. The language in this definition is


४ 254 :-

precise and would be sufficient to cover all the offences
under the Penal Code since they are a result of an act or
omission made punishable under the court. However, there are
some sections having the expression “offences punishable with
death or imprisonment for life". The Law Commission
suggested that there should be a separate definition for
capital offence incorporated in section 40 which has to
substitute the existing section. The expression “offences
punishable with death or imprisonment for life” occur in many
sections like 115, 118, 120B, 388, 389, 506, etc. It was
suggested by the Law Commission and as proposed in the Bill,
a new section 40 shall contain the definition of capital
offence wherever the expression “offences punishable with
death or imprisonment for life” occurs. Even this expression
has to be substituted by the words “capital offence” which
would be more specific and from the .Bill.we find in all those
sections the expression “capital offence” had been used. The
amendment by way of substitution of section 40 as proposed
under clause 14 defining “capital offence is an appropriate
change. In our considered view and as noted already, to make
IPC as a self-contained Code, it would be better to have the
definitions of the relevant words in IPC itself. The section
40 as mentioned above is sought to be substituted on the
ground that the word “offence” is clearly defined in the
General Clauses Act and the definition of offence in the
existing section 40 defining offence jacks clarity. In that
view of the matter and to provide a definition in respect of

the offences punishable with imprisonment for life and death,


-: 255 :-

section 40 is to be only substituted by the new. section
defining capital offences. Therety if one want to know the
section, one has to refer to the General Clauses Act which in
the process while adopting may not be necessary. Therefore,
10 is better to have the meaning of the offence as defined in
the General Clauses Act also incorporated in that new section

40 which shall read as follows:-

"Section 40~ Offences which mean any act or
omission made punishable by any law for the time
being in force and “capita? offence” means offence

for which death is one of the punishments provided

by the law”
Clause 15
12,10 The existing section 43 defines the expressions

"i1llegal"- “legally bound to do” and lays down that the word
“illegal” is applicable to everything which is an offence or
which is prohibited by law or which furnishes ground for a
civiji action and a person is said to be “legally bound to do
whatever is illegal in him to omit.” Under this clause in the
Bill, this section is sought to be substituted by a new
section having two clauses. The proposed section is in the
following terms~

"43.(1) A thing is “illegal” if it is an offence or

is prohibited by law or furnishes ground for a


5; 256 :-

civil action.
(2) A person is “legally bound to do” a thing when
he is bound by law to do that thing or when it is

illegal in him to omit to do that thing.”

It can be noticed that according to the definition in the
existing section a person is legally bound to do only what is
“illegal” in him to omit and the word “illegal” is applicable
to everything which is an offence or which is prohibited or
which furnishes ground for civil action.” The Law Commission
also noticed that these definitions are in a circle and have
led to some difficulties as is seen from decisions rendered
by the courts including the privy council in Ali  Mohomed
Adamalli_v. Emperor, (AIR 1945 PC 147), it was recommended
by the Law Commission in the 42nd Report to omit the
definition of the expression “offence” in the Pena? Code and
go by the wider definition of the word in the General Clauses
Act as it would obviate the difficulty pointed out by the
courts. However, there may eee Situations creating
difficulties if the omission to do What is enjoined by law is
not made an offence under the particular Act in question.
The Law Commission in its 42nd Report observed in other words
under the present definition of the term “legally bound to
do” unless a Taw which enjoins a person to do a= particular
thing also lays down, in so many words, that the person shall

not omit to do that thing, then the person cannot be


considered “legally bound to do” that thing. In this view a

new section is sought to be substituted which appears to be

sound.
Clause 16
12.41 Under this clause, existing sections 48, 49 and 50

defining words “vessel, year, month, section” respectiveiy
are sought to be omitted for the reasons that they are
defined in the General Clauses Act. For the same reasons
mentioned above in respect of clause 12, etc., the section
need not be omitted and accordingly Clause 16 of the Bill has

to be omitted.

Clause 17
12.12 The existing section 52 defines the word “good
faith” and section 52A defines the word “harbour”. As per

this clause, these two sections are to be substituted by new
Sections. In the existing section 52 the definition of “good
faith” is different from that which we find in the General
Clauses Act. In the Generali Clauses Act the term “good
faith” is defined in the following terms-
“A thing shall be deemed to be done in good faith
where it is in fact done honestly whether it is
done negligently or not”.

It can be seen that so far as the other laws are concerned,


-: 268 :-

the definition in the General Clauses Act appears to lay down
that honesty of purpose alone is sufficient to make an act
bona fide. Under the Penal Code the emphasis is on due care
and attention. The Supreme Court in Harbhajan Singh v.
State of Punjab, (1965 SCR 235-243) while reversing the
judgment of the Punjab High Court, however, observed “the
element of honesty which is introduced by the definition
prescribed by the General Clauses Act is not introduced by
the definition prescribed by section 52 of the Code". It can
also be noticed that the language of the definition jn
section 52 is in the negative form as compared to the
language in the General Clauses Act. From the observation of
the Supreme Court it can be seen that the Code does not
expressly exclude the requirement of honesty. However, the
Code stresses the aspect of care and attention but honesty is
implicit in the idea of good faith. Therefore, taking the
overall view a substitution of section 52 is an appropriate
one. The existing section 52A was introduced in the year
1942 and lays down that except in sections 130 and 157 in the
case in which the harbouring is given by the wife or husband
of that person, the word “harbour” includes supplying a
person shelter, food, drink, etc. The Law Commission noticed
that special mention of sactions 130 and 157 in the general
definition is inappropriate and section 52A has to be

revised. A new section sought to be introduced under this

clause in the Bill reads as follows-


-: 259 :-

"52A.Harbouring-The expression ‘harbouring’ means
giving shelter to a person, and includes supplying
a person with food, drink, money, clothes, arms,
ammunition or means of conveyance or assisting a

person in any manner to evade apprehension.”

It can be seen that the expression harbouring in the proposed
section is clear and explicit. Therefore, we recommend a

substitution of sections 52 and 52A.

Clause 18

12.13 Under this clause, the existing section 53 is
sought to be substituted. The proposed section 53 enumerates
various kinds of punishments. Under this proposed new
section 4, new forms of punishments such as Community
service, Disqualification from holding office, Order for
payment of compensation and Public censure have been added.
The sentencing policy and the proposed changes have already
been discussed in detail in Chapter II. For the reasons
stated in that Chapter, we do not endorse the addition of

those new forms of punishments except public censure.

Clause 19

12.14 Under this clause sections 54, 55 and 55A of the
Penal Code are sought to be omitted. Section 54 provides for

commutation of sentence of death and lays down that in every


-: 260 :-

case in which sentence of death has been passed, the
appropriate government may without the consent of the
offender commute the punishment for any other punishment
provided by IPC. Section 55 provides for commutation of
sentence of imprisonment for 11186 by the appropriate
government for a term of imprisonment of fourteen years.
Section 55A defines appropriate government that can exercise
the powers under sections 54 and 55, namely, the Central and
State Governments. The Law Commission in its 41st Report on
the Code of Criminal Procedure having examined section 402(1)
of Cr.P.C. 1898 as well as sections 54, 55 and 55A of the
Penal Code noticed that the appropriate government as
mentioned in section 402(3) Cr.P.C., 1898, is somewhat
ambiguous. However, the Law Commission noticed that the
provisions regarding commutation in sections 54, 55 and 5A
are mostly repeated in section 402, 1898 Cr.P.C. and
recommended that this duplication should be removed and the
law should be stated at one place, namely, Cr.P.C. In this
view of the matter in 42nd Report, the Law Commission
recommended deletion of these three sections. On that basis
clause 19 is incorporated in the Bill. In the 1973 Code of
Criminal Procedure this recommendation has been taken care of
and incorporated in the newly numbered sections, namely, 432
and 433. It can be noticed that the Law Commission in its
4150 Report on Cr.P.c. 1898 mentioned that section 402
should be revised incorporating some of the provisions of
sections 54, 55 and 55A to remove the ambiguity particularly

in respect of the definition of appropriate government. In


४ 261 :-

section 432(7) the meaning of the expression “appropriate
government” is given and the ambiguity which is noticed by
the Law Commission in the language in section 55A has been
removed. So for as the commutation is concerned the
provisions in sections 54 and 55, IPC have been duly
incorporated in section 433, Cr.P.c. 1973, Therefore,
clause 19 under which sections 54, 55 and 55A are sought to
be omitted is very appropriate in view of the changes in the

Cr.P.C. as noticed above.

Clause 20

12.15 Under this clause the words “imprisonment for 20

years", are sought to be substituted by the words “rigorous

imprisonment for 20 years". This is necessary in view of

some of the judgment as discussed in Chapter II.

Clause 21
12.16 By virtue of this clause, sections 64 and 65 are to

be substituted by revised sections. These revised sections
Provide for the sentence to be imposed in default for payment
of fine etc., and the amendments are incidental and they may

be carried out.

Clause 22

12.17 In view of the revised sections 64 and 65, section

66 may be omitted.


-: 262 :-

12.18 Under this clause section 67 and 68 are sought to
be substituted by the revised secticns providing for imposing
imprisonment for default of Payment of fine in case of
offence punishable with fine only. In the amended sections

it may be included.

Clause 24

12.19 Under this clause the existing section 69 providing
for termination of imprisonment on payment of proportional
part of fine is sought to be omitted.. This omission is

necessary in view of the new revised section 68.

Clause 25

12.20 Under this clause the existing sections 70, 71 and
72 providing for the limitation of time for levy of fine and
limit of punishment in case made of several offences are
Sought to be substituted by revised sections. The revised
sections are comprehensive on these aspects and the

amendments may be carried out.


Clause 26

12.21 Under this clause secticns 73 and 74 providing for
solitary confinement by way of punishment is sought to be
omitted. In earlier Reports the Law Commission has observed
that this punishment is out of tune with the modern thinking.
Therefore, it has to be omitted as solitary confinement
cannot be one of the general punishments under the statute
like IPC. It may be necessary in case of indiscipline in the
jail for which the prison laws may provide for. Therefore,

it is necessary to omit these two sections.

Clause 27

12.22 Under this clause new sections 744, 748, 740 and
74D are sought to be incorporated. New section 74A Provides
for imposition of punishment of community service. We have
already discussed this aspect in Chapter II. We have reached
the conclusion that the punishment by way of community
Service cannot be executed in a practical manner. The
Proposed section 748 provides for compensation to the
Victims. In our Report on Cr.P.C. we have Proposed suitable
amendments to section 357 Providing for such compensation and
all the aspects mentioned in section 74B in IPC have been
incorporated there. Therefore, we do not recommend addition

or incorporation of new sectione 74A and 748,


7: 264 :-

Section 740, however, provides for imposition of
the punishment by way of censure in addition to the
substantive sentence under sub-section (3) and this is
timited to offences mentioned in Chapters 12, %3, sections
272 to 276, 383 to 389, 403 to 409, 415 to 420 and offences
under chapter 18 as well as offences under proposed new
sections 420A and 462A under the Bill. These are al?
offences where persons entrusted with some public duties
commit offences. Therefore, the additional punishment by

censure will have salutary effect.

The new section 74D provides for imposition of
additional punishment, namely, disqualification for holding
office. This applies to public servants. We have discussed
this aspect in Chapter II and reached the conciusion to leave
this aspect to the concerned Departments for taking
disciplinary action under the relevant Acts or rules.
Therefore, we do not recommend incorporation of this new
Section 74D. Consequently, the new section 740 providing for
additional punishment by way of censure can be numbered as

744 and may be added.

Clause 31

12.23 Proposed new section 94 - The existing section 94
Jays down that except murder and offences against the state
Dunishable with death, nothing is an offence which is done by

4 person who is compelled to do it by threats which at the


-: 265 :-

time of doing it, reasonably cause apprehension that instant
death to that person will otherwise be the consequence.
However, a rider is there to the effect that the person doing
the act did not of his own accord place himself in the
situation. This section embodies the principle that a person
compelled by force or threat of force to do any act should
not be punished for that act. However, two exceptions are
also there. The Law Commission in its 42nd Report suggested
that such defence of duress can be usefully extended so as (०
include the threats to “near relatives” enumerating them as
parents, spouse, son or daughter. The two exceptions and

also the embargo are provided for in the he new section.

A view has atso been expressed that a person may
not be close or near relative but may be one “=n whom a person
compelled is very much interested and that he concept of
“person interested in” is not new to the I.P.C. as we find
the same embodied in section 97 I.P.C. We are of of the view
that such an inclusion of threats to any other person in whom
the person committing the act is interested would be very
wide and may not be an acceptable concept from the point of
view of the principles of jurisprudence. In view of the
recent threats of kidnapping of children for ransom,
advancing threats to cause the death or grievous bodily
injury to the victim have become a common feature.
Therefore, the inclusion of threats to near relatives like
Parents, son, daughter, etc. would adequately serve the

Purpose.


—: 266 :-

It may be noted that two exceptions in the existing
section 97 are murder and offences against the state.
Further the threat must be of instant death to the person
made to commit the offence. To that extent he gets the
benefit under this provision. Section 99 I.P.c. enumerates
the restrictions to the exercise of right of private defence.
Section 100 enumerates the circumstances under which the
right of private defence of the body extends to causing the
death, Exception 2 to section 300 is to the effect that
culpable homicide is not murder if the offender in the
exercise in good faith of the right of private defence,
exceeds the power given to him and commits the death of the
person without pre-meditation and without any intention of

doing more harm than is necessary.

A question may arise as to what would be the nature
of offences when a person under threat causes death as
contemplated under section 94 or under the new section to be
substituted. Would it be culpable homicide not amounting to
murder under certain circumstances ? Causing death prima
facie amounts to culpable homicide. The question is whether
it amounts to murder or not depends on the attendant
circumstances. If they satisfy the requirements of section
300, then it would be murder. This aspect would be a matter
for consideration of the court while extending the benefit of
section 94. With these clarifications, we recommend

Substitution of section 94,


~2 267 :-

Proposed new sections 944 and 948 new sections 94A and 948 - Under this

clause two more new sections 944A and 948 are also sought to
be inserted. Section 94A seeks to cast prima facie absolute
and strict liability upon a company and punish the company
concerned whenever any employee commits an offence in the
course of furthering the affairs of the company. It also
specifies that any act constituting such offence must either
be authorised, requested, commanded, ratified or facilitated
by any violation of a duty to maintain effective supervision
by the management, the board of directors or any other person
who is placed in a position of control over other employees
or in the evolution of company policy and affairs. Section
94A(2) discusses the class of offences in which the existence
of a culpable mental state is a condition and fixes absolute
Viability upon the company for the offence committed by an
employee whatever his position may be. Section 948 is
supplementary to section 944 under which the persons who were
in charge of or were responsible to the company for the
conduct of the business of the company, are also made
constructively liable for the offence committed by the
employee and the whole concept underlying the two provisions
is that the persons who are in charge or control of the
company affairs and their employees should also be made
constructively liable which denotes that they are expected to
02076150 the duty of loyalty and the duty of cars In managing
the affairs of the company and if they in any manner

authorise, request, command, ratify or facilitate an offence


-: 268 :-

of that nature by an employee by violation of the duty,
should be equally responsible. We have gone through every
117 of the two provisions carefully. In the several
workshops, detailed discussions and deliberations were there
about the desirability of incorporating these two new
provisions in the Indian Penal Code which is substantive
loss. It needs no mention that if any of the offences under
IPC are committed then the provisions of the IPC may apply
and the concept of constructive liability would be taken care
of by the relevant provisions including abetment, attempt and
conspiracy. That apart, the offences that could be envisaged
being committed with reference to the affairs of the company
would be altogether of a different nature and some of them
could be statutory. There are several other special
enactments which to a large extent cover many such offences
which could be capable of being committed by the companies.
Acts like MRTP Act, Essential Commodities Act, FERA Act,
Prevention of Adulteration Act, Fertilizers Act, are some
such, With regard to the employment there are other labour
laws including Shops and Establishment Acts, Factories Act
etc. That apart, in the new emergence of giobalisation,
liberalisation of trade and commerce, insertion of such
provisions in IPC may prove to be counter-productive to the
growth of bdusiness and any regulation that impedes the
production and productivity and also creation of wealth
should be discouraged as in the final analysis the overall
growth of the nation’s wealth would be impaired. Therefore,

we are of the view that sections 394A and 948 should be


-: 269 :-

deleted from clause 31. If necessary we may add some of such
provisions in the other enactments including the Companies

Act, which may be strengthened to meet such a situation.

Ciauses 32 to 37

12.24 Under these clauses some of the existing sections
relating to right of private defence of persons and property
are either sought to be amended or substituted. The law of
private defence of person and property in India is codified
in sections 96 to 106 based on the concept that the right of
self-preservation is a basic one. The right of private
defence must be distinct from the doctrine of necessity
though the right of self-defence arises out of the necessity
for self preservation. Still the latter is wider for there
cannot be a right of self defence in all cases of necessity.
The motive of self preservation is inherent in every man.
The authors of the 1860 Code, Rattan Lal & Dhiraj Lal “Law of

Crimes” (23rd Edition 1987) p.273, said

“We propose to excepting from the operation of the
penal clauses of the Code large class of acts done
in good faith for the purpose of repelling unlawful
aggression. In this part of the chapter we have
attempted to define as such exactness as the
subjact appoars to ua to admit the limita of the
right of private defence. It may be thought that

we have allowed to accord a latitude to the


-: 270 :-

exercise of this right; and we are ourselves of the
opinion that if we have in framing laws for a bold
and high spirited peopte, accustomed to take the
law in their own hand, and to go beyond a line of
moderation in repelling injury, it would have been
convenient to provide additional restrictions. In
this country the danger is on the other side; the
people are too little deposed to help themselves,
The punishments with which they submit to the cruel
depredations of gang murders, dacoities and
mischiefs committed in the most Outrageous manner
by all of us of ruffians, is one of the most
remarkable and at the same time most discouraging
society in India presents to us. In these
circumstances we are desirous rather to rouse and
to encourage a manly trade than to multiply
restrictions on the exercise of a right to self
defence. We are of opinion that all the evil which
is likely to arise from the abuse of that right is
far tess serioug than the evil which would arise
from the execution of one person for overstepping
what might appear to be the exact line of

moderation in resisting a body of dacoits."



7: 271 :-

If we take the present scenario into consideration,
we find that the situation in respect of such crimes noted by
the authors has not in any way changed. Therefore, the law
of private defence of persons and property based on the right

of self-preservation is absolutely necessary.

The existing sections 96 to 106 analyse and delimit
the right of private defence. These provisions have very
often come up before the courts for interpretation and
application. Section 96 states that nothing is an offence
which is done in exercise of this right. This right is
analysed in the subsequent sections from two aspects, namely,
defence of the body and defence of property. Section 97
defines these two aspects while sections 98 and 99 are
applicable to both the aspects. Sections 100, 101, 102 and
106 are concerned with defence of the body and sections 103,

104 and 105 are concerned with the defence of property,

The Law Commission in its 42nd Report proposed a
rearrangement of the provisions bringing together those
relating to the right to defend the body in one section and
those relating to the Property in another for the purpose of
an easier understanding and for facilitating their
application. In the 8111 no change in respect of sections 987
and 98 is mooted. Coming to section 99 the Law Commission
after having considered the various clauses in section 99
recommended the insertion of a new Provision in section 99 so

as to make the immunity conferred by section 97 co-extensive


with the deprivation of right of private defence ard such
action in the first paragraph of section 99, The Law
Commission was also of the view that extra protection should
be given only when the public servant acts in pursuance of an
order of a court of justice. Coming to the third paragraph
of section 99, the Law Commission recommended for deletion of
the third paragraph. It may be neted that the chird
paragraph in the existing section 29 lays down a restriction,
namely, debarring the right of private defence in cases where
there is time to nave recourse to the public authority

However, whether there was sufficient time to have re

rse

to the public authorities is a question of fact in each case,

If this restriction is removed altogether, then ever in
respect oF acts where there is no immediate darger
Particularly those relating to property, people with impunity

may resort to exercise this right even though they had amole
time to go to the public authorities for the purpose of
averting the danger to the property. Therefore, we are oF

the view that this restriction should be retained.

Under clause 32 of the Bill the existing section 29
is Sought to be substituted and to altogether remove “he
third clause. Therefore, we recommend that the thi-d
Daragraph in the existing section should be inctuded jn the

Proposed section and rearrange the clause.


-: 273 :-

The existing section 100 justifies the killing of
an assailant when apprehension of serious crimes enumerated
in several clauses thereunder is caused and they should be
read subject to the provisions of section 99. Tha section
lays down that the right of private defence of body extends
under the restrictions mentioned in section 99 to the
voluntary causing of death or of any other harm to the
assailant for an offence which occasions the exercise of the
right by any of the descriptions enumerated in clauses 1 to
6. In these clauses { to 6 serious offences like death,
grievous hurt, committing rape, unnatural lust, kidnapping or
abducting, wrongful confinement are mentioned. The Law
Commission, after examining the existing section 100 did not
suggest any amendment in respect of 3rd, 4th and 5th clauses,
However, minor change is suggested, namely, that in the 5th
clause the right to exercise in respect of abducting should
be limited where the abduction is punishable under the Code,
since abduction by itself is not punishable unless it is
committed with one or the other of the intents specified in
sections 364 to 369, Under clause 33 of the Bill some more
changes have been added. The clauses are numbered as (a) to
(e). Assault with the intention of having carnal intercourse
is aiso added and with regard to abduction it should be one
punishable under the Code. However, there is clause (e)
which is to the same effect - as clause "sixthly” in the
existing section. Therefore, the proposed change is

appropriate.


Under the existing section 101 the words
“voluntarily causing to the assailant of any harm other than
death" are sought to be substituted in clause 34 of the 8111
by the words “voluntary causing of any harm other than death
or the involuntary causing of the death to the assailant”.
The Law Commission suggested such a change because there may
be cases of involuntary causing of death, for example, death
by rash and negligent act. This change appears to be

appropriate.

Section 103 indicates as to when a person can act
in defence of property and enumerates the offences in clauses
1 to 4 in respect of which the right extends. The right
under this section extends not only when the offences thus
enumerated are committed but also when an attempt to commit
is made. The Law Commission in its 42nd Report noted that
clause “secondly” mentions housebreaking by night, but not
lurking house trespass by night, which is 88 severely
punishable as housebreaking by night, and that it is often
difficult to decide whether the offender has committed
lurking housetrespass or housebreaking. The Law Commission
also observed that since certain amendments in chapter XVII
relating to offences against property where housebreaking by
night would cease to be a separate offence recommended to
omit clause “secondly” also on the ground that the existing
clause 4 governs aggravated forms of criminal trespass.
Existing section 441 defines criminal trespass, 442 house

trespass, 443 Iurking house trespass, 444 lurking house



-: 278 :-

trespass by night, 445 house breaking, 446 housebreaking by
night. These sections were there incorporated in the
extsting Code, taking into consideration the circumstances
prevailing in India. The Law Commission in its 42nd Report
white dealing with offences under chapter XVII that is
relating to property recommended deletion of these provisions
and introduced a new section 445 under the head “Burglary”.
We have considered these changes while examining clause 182
of the Bill and are of the view that the changes proposed are
salutary. Consequently, the changes proposed by the Law
Commission in respect of clause “secondly” of section 103
need to be incorporated. The Law Commission also recommended
that clause 3 relating to offence ~ mischief by fire should
be amplified including mischief by explosive substances,
mischief by fire or explosive substances committed on any

vehicle should be added.

In the proposed section 103 of the Bill, there is a
new clause (d) relating to the offences of mischief to
Property, house, or intended to be used for the Purpose of

Government or any corporation,

Two more new clauses (e) and (1) are sought to be
added in the proposed section. Clause (e) includes hijacking
of aircraft and clause (f) includes sabotage. While
discussing the offence of hijacking under new section 362A,
we have indicated that the same need not be incorporated

because of the reasons stated in Chapter xX. Therefore, here


-: 276 :-

also clause (@) has to be omitted. we may also add that
clause (@) was added in conformity with the new section 362A
applying to the offence of hijacking of an aircraft. If that
section is to be deleted, clause (e) need not be there. It
may be mentioned that in every offence of hijacking, there
would be an offence being committed against property or
person. To that extent the relevant provisions of right of
private defence would be applicable. Under (1), the offence
of sabotage is mentioned. In our discussion under clause 180
we have suggested that the new provisions with reference to
the offence of sabotage can be retained. Therefore, clause

(f) can be retained but may be renumbered as (७).

Under clause 36 a minor amendment to section 104 is

Proposed. The words “voluntary Causing to the wrong-doer of
any harm other than death" are sought to be substituted on
the same lines as in clause 34 with reference to section 101,

These changes can be carried out.

Clause 37

12.25 Under this clause the existing section 105 is
sought to be substituted by a new section bearing the same
number. The existing section 105 deals with commencement and
continuance of private defence of Property. The Law
Commission did not propose any change to the section.

However, it recommended to omit 8th Para which deals with

house breaking by night. The new section 99818 with house


7: 277 :-

trespass which has been considered by us under clause 182 and
because of the consequent changes approved thereunder the
clause 5 has to be accordingly omitted. In the new section,
however, we find clause (c) which also mention hijacking of
aircraft. While considering changes in clause 35 with
reference to section 103, we observed that clause (e) dealing
with “hijacking of aircraft" should be omitted. For the same
reason, the words “hijacking of aircraft” in clause (c) in
the proposed new section 105 have to be omitted,

Clauses 38 to 44

12.26 Under the Indian Penal Code ‘abetment’ is a
separate and distinct offence provided a thing abetted is an
offence. AS a general rule, a charge of abetment fails if
the substantive offence is not established against the
principle assailant. The Supreme Court in Jamuna Singh's
case, (AIR 1967 SC 553) has held that it cannot be held in
law that a person cannot ever be convicted of abetting a
certain offence when the person alleged to have committed
that offence in consequence of abetment, has been acquitted
and that the question of abettor’s guilt depends upon the

nature of abetment and the manner that the abetment was made.

Sections 107 to 120 in Chapter V relate to the
abetment. Section 107 classifies abetment under three heads,
1.6, , by instigating or by conspiracy or by intentional aids.
These are explained in both Sections 107 and 108, The Law

Commission in its 42nd Report examined Section 120-A which


~: 278 :-

Jays down that when two persons agree toa commit an offence or
to cause an offence to be committed, they are guilty of
criminal conspiracy to commit that offence whether or not any
of the parties thereto does any act besides the agreement in
pursuance thereof and noted that the persons who are
initially guilty of conspiracy to commit an offence become
guilty of abetting the offence as soon as an act or illega)
omission takes place in pursuance of the conspiracy and that
after an enactment in 1913 of Sections 120A and 1208 making
conspiracy itself punishable in the same manner as abetment.
Abetment of an offence by conspiracy has lost its relevance
and, therefore, all references in Chapter V including Section
107 ’abetment by conspiracy’ should be omitted. The Law
Commission also examined Sections 108 and 108A and after
referring to some of the decided cases recommended that
Explanations 2 and 3 may be combined and revised and that
Explanation 4 may be reworded and that Explanation 5 which
mentions about the abetment by conspiracy to be omitted. on
these lines, the Law Commission recommended that Section 108
and 108A may be combined and revised. Clause 38 of the
(Amendment) Bil) 1978 has incorporated these recommendations
but with some changes. By and large, Section 108 as
mentioned in clause 38 is in conformity with the
racommendations made by the Law Commission. Therefore, we do

hot recommend any further change.


-: 279 :-

Sections 115 and 116 deal with the punishments” for
successful abetment of offence. Section 115 specifically
deals with the punishment for unsuccessful abetment of
offence punishable ‘with death or imprisonment for life’.
The Law Commission in its 42nd Report noted that the words
‘death or imprisonment for life’ are ambiguous and they may
cover sedition. Therefore, they recommended to limit it to
capital offences for which death is the only punishment or
one of the punishments provided by Jaw and accordingly
recommended revision of this Section. Existing Section 116
prescribes punishments of offences punishable with
imprisonment when the offence is not committed. The Law
Commission recommended that in order to avoid any overlapping
between Section 115 and 116, it is desirable to exclude
capital offences by inserting the words in Section 116 ‘not
being a capital offence’. The Law Commission also noted that
the maximum punishment for abetment if that offence be nor
committed is only 1/4th of the longest term and this was too
low and should be increased to 1/2 of thea maximum term
provided for the offence. The Law Commission also examined
second paragraph of Section 116 and recommended that where
the abettor is a private person who abetted a public servant
should not be dealt with more severely than In a case where
the person abetted is a private individual. Section 117
applies to abetment of the commission of an offence by the
public generally or a number of ciass of persona axceeding
ten. The Law Commission having noted judgments of some High

Courts recommended a new Section 117A to be inserted which is


-: 280 :-

to the effect shat whoever commits the commission of an
offence punishable with imprisonment by a child under 15
years of age whether or not the offence, is committed shall be
punished with imprisonment of any description provided for
that offence which may be extend twice the longest term of
imprisonment provided for that offence. Likewise, the Law
Commission also examined Sections 118 and 119 and suggested
some minor changes like the words ‘a capital offence’ be
substituted. A perusal of the new provision sought to be
included would show that they are in conformity with the
recommendations of the Law Commission and we are also of the

view that the changes are warranted.

The changes suggested in clause 39 of the Bill are

of minor nature.

Clause 45

12.27 Under this clause a new Chapter VB is sought to be
inserted under which new section 120C, 120D defining attempt
and punishment for offence of attempt. The existing section
511 is sought to be omitted. We have carefully examined this
clause and the scope of these new two sections in Chapter
No.VI and recommend that section 511 be retained and this

clause be deleted.


-: 281 :-

Ciause 47

12.28 Under this clause a new section 123A 18 sought to
be inserted. The new section lays down that whoever assists
in any manner an enemy at war with India, or the armed forces
of any country against whom the armed forces of India are
engaged in hostilities, whether or not a state of war exists
between that country and India, shall be punishable. The Law
Commission in its 42nd Report recommended insertion of a new
section but in the Bill we find that an Explanation is also
added to the section which is explanatory in nature. We are

also of the view that the new section may be inserted.

Clause 48

12.29 Under this clause, the existing section 1244 which
deals with Sedition is sought to be substituted by a new
section bearing the same number, Most of the clauses
mentioned in the existing section 124A find a place in the
new section. In addition, certain acts are included. The
new section postulates that whoever by words, either spoken
or written, or by signs, or by visible representations, or
Otherwise, excites, or attempts to excite, disaffection
towards the Constitution, or the Government or Parliament of
India, or the Government or Legislature of any State or the
administration of justice, intending or knowing it to be
likely theraby to endanger the integrity or security of India
or of any State or to cause public disorder shali be
Bunishable. The expression “disaffection” is the same except

the word “disloyalty” is omitted. This change is in


2 282 :-

conformity with the addition of offence of disaffection
towards Parliament, Legislatures, adminiatration of justice
which was not there in the existing section. Having
considered both these provisions, we are of the view that the
changes as found in the Bill can be carried out. We have
discussed all these aspects in Chapter No.VII in detail and
we have also given reasons why the changes should be carried

out.

Under this clause a new section 1248 is also sought
to be inserted. Under this new section, whoever deliberately
insults the Constitution of India or any part thereof, the
national flag, the national emblem or the national anthem, by
burning the national flag etc., shall be punishable. The Law
Commission in its 42nd Report observed that there should be a
provision for punishment for insults to the Constitution,
national flag, emblem and the national anthem which may
include burning of the Constitution and deliberate insults to
the national anthem which are unpatriotic. Therefore, they
recommended the insertion of this new section. On the basis
of that recommendations, Prevention of Insults to National
Honour Act, 1971 has been enacted. Therefore, this new
section 1248 need not be inserted and the same may be deteted

from clause 48. (Vide Chapter VII)

12.30 Under this clause the existing Chapter VII is

Sought to be substitutod by @ new Chapter bearing the name


-: 283 :-

number. This chapter deals with offence which might be
committed by the civilians in relation to the defence
services personne}. In the Bill a new section.130A 15 there
which only deals with definitions occurring in the sections
131 onwards. The new section 131 deals with abetment of
mutiny. Section 132 deals with attempts, 133, 134 & 135 with
abetment, 136 & 137 with Deserter, 138 with abetment and 138A
with incitement etc. The Law Commission in its 42nd Report
recommended these changes. It is observed that civilian
population are not dealt with severely as service personnel
involved. Therefore, the Law Commission suggested that there
should be co-relation between such offences punishable under
the Penal Code and the offences punishable by court martial.
Likewise the Law Commission also referred the Air Force Act
also. The new section 139 clearly lays down that persons
subject to certain laws like Army Act, Navy Act, Air Force
Act not to be punishable under this chapter. Taking the
implications recognised by the Law Commission, there is no
harm in having this Chapter inserted in place of existing

Chapter.

Clause 54

12.31 Having regard to the large scale riotings of
various crimes that are taking place, the Law Commission in
its 42nd Report observed that it is desirable that rioting
should be checked at the earliest stage and also mentioned
collecting sticks, knives, other weapons by anti social

elements who are bent upon committing mischief and with a


view to check such preparation, the Law Commission

recommended insertion of a new section 1“ Accordingly a
. . .

new section 147A is sought to be added vide clause 54 of the

Bill. We agree with that proposed insertion:

Clause 58

12.32 Under this clause a new section 1530 18 sought to
be added. Sections 153A and 1538 were added in the year 1972
in chapter VIII which deals with offences against public
tranquillity. Under section 153A whoever by words, either
spoken or written, promotes disharmony, ill-will, etc., or
commits any act, organise any movement etc. with a view to
promote enmity between different groups on grounds of
religion etc., is punishable. Under section 153B whoever, by
words either spoken or written, etc. makes or publishes any
imputation, asserts, propagates, makes or publish any
assertion or an appeal concerning the obligation of any
person belonging to any religion, language, caste or
community, is also punishable. In its 42nd Report, the Law
Commission having traced the legislative history of these
sections referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court in

Kedarnath’s case (AIR 1962 SC 955) wherein the validity of

section 1244 was upheld. On a parity of reasoning the Law
Commission noted that the validity of section 153A could also
be supported. Thereafter, the Law Commission proceeded to
consider the scope of section 1534 and observed that
explanation to section 153A protects honest criticism or any

act of the person criticising a political party without a


72 285 27

malicious intention. The Law Commission, however, did not
recommend insertion of section 163C. It may be noted at this
stage that the existing section 505 deals with offence of
making statements conducive ta public mischief and lays down
that whoever makes, publishes or circulates, etc., with
intent to cause fear to the personne] of the defence services’
or with a view to cause fear to public etc. would be
punishable. The Law Commission in its 42nd Report
recommended deletion of this saction. However, there was a
recommendation to bring changes in sections 153A and 1538,

but section 153C, however, ts being added under clause 58 of
the Bill and the same carries the essence of section 505

except omitting the soldiers, Navy, etc. Obviously, because,

these offences against defence personnel have been taken care
of in the respective Acts applicable to those services. we
have atready discussed this in this Chapter dealing with

offences against armed forces, etc. We agree that section

1530 may accordingly be added.

Clauses 63 & 64

12.33 Clauses 63 and 64 of the 87111 seeks to amend
sections 161, 162 and 163 of the IPC. Since these sections
shad and already been repealed by the Prevention of Corruption
iact, 1988 and transposed thereto, clauses 63 and 64 have to
pe. therefore, omitted.


> जी

5“: 286 :-

Clause 66

12.34 Under this clause a new section 166A is sought to
be inserted which deals with offences by or relating to
public servants. It may be mentioned that sections 161 to
165A which deal with offences of misconduct have been deleted
in the IPC and made offences under the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988. The remaining sections 166 to 171 deal
with other kinds of offences committed by a public. servant.
The existing section 166 deais with offences of disobeying
law by public servants with intent to cause injury. The Law
Commission in its Forty Second Report observed that the Code
does take into account this kind of misconduct by a public
servant where the misconduct takes the shape of bribery. It
is further observed that it is desirable to ensure that no

public servant shall in the exercise of the duties of his

‘of#ice while acting under colour of his office, do any act

which is wrongful in itself, or do an otherwise iawful act ‘n
wrongful manner. From this point of view the Law Commission
recommended that there will be a penalty to punish misconduct
and also recommended insertion of new section 166A. The
content of new section 166A proposed is different from the

content of section 166 as we finds earlier. The words 38 to
“maliciously to cause injury to any person" are added,
otherwise the spirit behind the section is more or less same.

Therefore, 166A may be inserted.


-: 287 :-

12.35 Under this Clause a new section 167A is sought to
be inserted in Chapter tx which deals with offences by or
relating to public servants. The Law Commission in its 42nd
Report noted that even in their earlier Report namely 29th
Report it was recommended that to tackle the problem of
cheating of Government on large scale by dishonest
contractors while supplying goods or executing works,
unauthorised payment in respect of such contracts should be
made punishable under specific Provisions. Having noted so
the Law Commission in its 42nd Report recommended insertion
of new section 167A. A perusal of the provision would show
that it is a salutary one Particularly in the present
scenario where large scale execution of public works is

taking place. Therefore we agree that 167A may be inserted,

Clause 91

12.36 Under this clause new sections 198A and 1988 are
sought to be added in Chapter x1 which deals with the
offences of giving false evidence and offences against public
Justice. The unscrupulous persons do not hesitate to use
False medical certificate to gain advantage in the course of
the litigation and sometimes for purposes unconnected with
the Courts. The Law Commission recommend that issuing false
Medical certificates and using the same should be mada

specifically punishable under the new provisions. Wa find


7: 288 :-

from the Report that in so recommending the Commission noted
that people are accepting generally the medical certificates
because they are issued by doctors and therefore it would be
better to have a specific Provision. In the workshops and in
the National Seminar in particular it was deliberated in
detail whether such a provision dealing with medical
certificate issued by any practitioner should be made a
separate offence. The consensus particularly from those
Practitioners who participated was to the effect that
provisions are unnecessary and if ina given case a false
certificate is deliberately given with intention that it
should be used in the judicial Proceedings and if any person
uses such certificate then he would be punishable under
section 197 of the IPc, That apart, section 196 is in
general terms and may cover any such usage or attempt to use
such document as evidence. Having. given our earnest
consideration and also having regard to the fact that the
medical practitioners are also brought within the provision
of Consumer Protection Act which is a later Act, we think
that addition of new sections 198A and 1988 is unnecessary.

Consequently clause 91 has to be omitted.

Ciause 93
12.37 Chapter XI of the Code deals with offences of false
evidence and offences against public justice. The existing

sections 206 and 207 punish certain fraudulent acts designed

to prevent the seizure of Property under the order of court.


~: 289 :-

Section 206 deals with fraudulent removal or concealment of
Property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in execution.
Likewise section 207 deals with an offence of a fraudulent
claim to property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in
execution. It can be seen that while section 206 deals with
removal or concealment or such property, section 207 deals
with a fraudulent claim to such property. There is no
specific provision to deal with other types of removal or
interference of such property. Once property is lawfully
attached by an order of a court, it is obligatory that no
removal of any kind or interference whether fraudulent or
otherwise should be there. The Law Commission in its 42nd
Report having considered this aspect, painted out that once
any movable property has been lawfully attached by a court
order, any unauthorised removal or any interference with that
property should be punishable irrespective of the motive or
the intention of the person concerned. Accordingly, the Law
Commission recommended insertion of a new,M@@ction 208A under
this clause. This provision appears to be necessary as the
concept is that the court’s order should prevail under any

circumstances to promote ends of justice.

Clause 94

12, 38 The existing section 182 deals with the offence of
giving false information with an intent to cause public
servant to use his lawful power to the injury of another

Person. Section 211 deals with the offence of making false


charge of offence of making false charge of offence made with
intent to injure and it is in two parts. The second part
deals with such a 18168 charge of an offence punishable with
death, imprisonment for life, etc. and makes it to be a
graver offence punishable with higher sentence. Ta some
extent the contents of these two provisions overlap. The Law
Commission in its 42nd Report rightly noted that the
practical importance of this overlapping or conflict lies in
the procedural rule with reference to section 195 of the
Criminal Procedure Code. The Law Commission also noted that
the wording of section 211”is not as clear and unambiguous as
could be desired". Consequently the Law Commission
recommended rawording of that saction and the new secticn is
to substitute the existing section. The change proposed is

an appropriate one.

Clause 100 गा ना इक
12.39 In Chapter XI the existing section 229 deals with

an offence of personation of a juror or assessor. 10 has no
relevancy. Therefore, it has been rightly suggested to omit
that section. The Law Commission however recommended in its
42nd Repart to substitute two new sections in the place of
; Section 229, namely, sections 229A and 2298. As per that
recommendation section 229A is to deal with the offence of

z. interference with witnesses and section 2298 is to deal with

&the offence of failure by a person who is on bail or on bond


7: 291 :८

to appear in court. Under clause 100, however, they are
numbered as sections 229 and 229A. In the present scenario
of criminal trials, the enormous delay is due to various
reasons, particularly the non-attendance of the witnesses due
to some reason or the other and in many cases mainly because
of threats and corrupt means etc. and likewise absence of
persons who are on bail. Therefore, these two proposed
sections under this clause which are in conformity with the

recommendations of the Law Commission are much needed.

Clause 110

12.40 The existing sections 254 and 263A deal with
offences of delivery of coins as genuine and using fictitious
stamps that occur in chapter XII dealing with the offences
relatinggto coins and government stamps. New types of
criminal acts are coming to light, namely, dishonest use of
slugs in vending machines, misuse by inserting something else
in the place of a coin. Though this recommendation was made
by the Law Commission in 1971, as at present we noticed that
such machines are being largely used even by public
authorities or private concerns and in places where such
services are being rendered. The insertion of new section
254A under this clause is a salutary on that will combat such

malady.


-: 292 :-

Ciause 111

12.41 Under thi clause new sections 263A, 2638 and 263C
are sought to be substituted. These sections also deal with
offences relating to fictitious postage stamps and also
preparation to commit such offences. The existing section
263A lays down that whoever makes, knowingly utters, deais or
sells any fictitious stamps or has in possession are sought
to be punished. In its place the new sections are sought to
be substituted. In the new proposed sections we find more
coverage of such offences and having regard to the targe
scale use of stamps at present by the public and to prevent

misuse, it would be better to have these provisions.
Clause 112

12,42 In Chapter XIII sections 264-267 deai with offences
-of using false instruments for weighing and measuring = and
being in possession of false weights or measures or making or
selling the same. In 42nd Report the Law Commission having
regard to such offences committed on large scale recommended
that the sentence should be two years instead of one year and
en the basis of that recommendation in clause 112 the
substitution of words “two years” for “one year" in those

sections is sought to be contemplated.


-~: 293 :-

In this context, in several workshops it was
highlighted whether the retention of those sections in
Chapter XIII would be necessary in view of the Standards of
Weights and Measures Act, 1976. A perusal of the penal
provisions of sections 50-70 and an examination of the scope
and object of the Act would reveal that the main purpose in
enacting this Act is to see that the standards of measures
and weights are established and the same to be used in trade
and commerce. This aspect is also clear from an examination
of the definition of “falsa weight or measure” which means

any weight or measure which does not conform to the standard

established by or under this Act of 1976. Therefore, any
such violation, mamely, using non-standard weights and
measures per se amounts to an offence. The word

“fraudulently” which is used in each of the sections 264, 265
and 266 IPC and the words “which he knows" occurring in
sections 266 and 267 IPC are not found jin the various
offences enumerated in Part 6 of the Standards of Weights and
Measures Act. That means for an offence punishable under
those sections, the question of mens rea or an element of
fraud is not relevant. Whereas in respect of those offences
in Chapter XIII of IPC such a state of mind is an important
factor. It can also be noticed that the sentence in respect
of offences punishable under the Standards of Weights and
Measures Act 18 much more tenient and a complaint can be
filed only by a Director or an authorised officer mentioned

therein and a private citizen who is a victim cannot


-: 294 :-

prosecute in a court. Therefore, it is appropriate that the
said sections in IPC should be retained as they are and

increase the sentence as proposed under clause 112.

Clause 119

12.43 Under this clause a new section 279A is sought to
be inserted. The existing section 279 deals with one tyne of
offences relating to rash driving or riding on a public way.
Under the new section the offence of driving unsafe or
overloaded vehicle on a public way is sought to be punished.
Having regard to the increase in the volume of road traffic
and indiscriminate use of vehicles whether they are

roadworthy or not, such a provision is very much needed.

Clause 122

12,44 The existing section 292 in chapter XIV dealing
with offences affecting the public health, safety,
convenience, decency and morals, punishes the obscene books
etc. This section has been aiso amended in the year 1963.
As to the nature of the test of obscenity, the assessment of
the same depends upon so many factors and there have been
judgements rendered on it. There have always been a
Practical probtem in deciding what is “lascivious” and what
appeals to the “prurient” interest, and what does or does not

tend to deprave or ccrrupt. The Law Commission in its 42nd

Report observed that “more important than this attempted


—: 295 :-

definition is the new exception, which allows a defence on
the ground that the publication is in the interest of art or
science or literature or learning. This will actually turn
on “expert evidence”, which would be permissible under
section 45 of the Evidence Act. The Law Commission however
recommended that it would be safer if in the section itself a
provision is specifically made for admission of such expert
evidence. We are also of the view that such expert evidence
in respect of the facts and circumstances in a case on the
question whether they are of lascivious nature atc. should
be covered by the section on the lines recommended by the Law
Commission in the new sub-section sought to be inserted in
section 292 under clause 122 of the Bil} which would be an

appropriate addition.

Clause 123

12.45 After section 292 a new section 2920 is sought to
be inserted. Under this clause the new section deals with an
offence of printing etc. of grossly indecent or
surreptitious matter or matter intended for blackmailing. A
perusal of this new section shows that the object of
inserting the same is to prevent the irresponsible way of
printing newspapers, periodicals or other exhibits meant for
public view in such matter when the same is intended for
blackmailing. This wil] be a good check on such printings
etc. which are grossly indecent. This section also provides

for a minimum punishment if the same offence is committed


we

again on the same lines as we find in section 292. There are
also explanations to this new section dealing with good faith
etc. Explanation 2 gives certain guidelines to the court and
provides certain considerations regarding. general character
of the person incharge etc. to be taken into consideration
by the court. However, we are of the view that the sentence
may be made three years so that it may be on par with the new
section 292A to be inserted. Further, in conformity with our
recommendations on sentencing Policy vide Chapter II, the
punishment under this proposed new section 292A should ‘also

be imprisonment and fine.

Clause 124
12.46 The existing section 294A deals with offence of
keeping lottery office. This section is sought to be

substituted by a new sections 2944 and 2948 under this
clause. The existing section lays down that whoever keeps
any office or ptace for the purpose of drawing any lottery
net being a State lottery shall be punished with imprisonment
and also deals with publication of any proposal to pay any
sum, The new section is more elaborate and enumerates the
various steps and prescribes the necessary punishment. In
view of the modern trends in proliferation of the lotteries,
this new section is a salutary one and it. is on the lines
recommended by the Law Commission in its 42nd Reoort.
Likewise, section 2948 though a new section only prescribe

the necessary punishment in respect of the offences of sale,


~: 297 :-

distribution of lottery tickets. Section 2948 deals with the
sale, distribution of lottery tickets of a State lottery
without authorisation by the respective Governments and makes
such sale punishable. The object underlying is cbvious,
namely, to prevent illegal dealing with the State lottery
tickets. In conformity with our recommendations on
sentencing policy vide Chapter II, the punishment under these
proposed new sections 2944 and 2948 should also be

imprisonment and fine.

Clause 125
12,47 In this clause Section 302 is sought to be

substituted by the new section bearing the same number.
Under Section 3Q2 a person who commits murder shall be
sentenced to‘ bigdog weath. The question in what type of
cases the, deal, BG SasgR8. fuld be gwarded has been considered
in a number WFsdases by the Supreme Court and a concept of
“rarest of rare cases" have been evolved. But in the
Broposed section it is sought to be enumerated as to in what
type of cases death sentence can be awarded. We have
considered this aspect jin Chapter III and arrived at a
conclusion that all categories of such cases can not be in

the said Chapter. Consequently, Section 302 should be left

as it is and clauSe 125 may stand deleted.


Clause 128

12.48 Under this clause a new section 3048 is sought to
be inserted. At the outset we must point out that in 1986 by
amending Act 43 of 1986, the existing section 3048 dealing
with dowry death was inserted. Therefore, the new section
namely 3048 under this clause cannet be given the same
number. It is obvious that the 8111 is much anterior.
However, a perusal of the new section shows that all those
offenders who indulge in rash and negligent driving, drive or
run away without informing any police station within a
reasonable time after having caused death or injury. This its
a phenomenon, namely, “hit and run” to escape from the
liability. Therefore, this provision can be inserted as
mentioned above, but the number cannot be 3048, We recommend

that this may be inserted in 304A as subsection (2).

Clause 139

12,49 Under this clause sections 307 and 308 are sought
to be substituted. In general, both the sections area
analogous in Many respects to the existing sections.

Titustrations to section 307 are, however, sought to be
deleted under the proposed section. The Law Commission in

tts 42nd Report proposed a new Chapter 58 defining attempt

and aiso prescribing punishment by inserting sections 120C

and 1200. Consequently, the Law Commission also have
recommended substitution of the new sections 307, 308 while

dealing with Chapter VB and the proposed sections 120C and


-: 299 :-

1200. We make it clear that it is not necessary to have
these new sections 120C and 1200 and also recommended = to
retain sections 307, 308 and 511 as they are except to delete
the second part of existing section 307 which prescribes
death as the punishment for any attempt made by a life
convict. This has to be deleted for the same reasons for

deleting section 303. (Vide Chapter VI)

Clause 131

12.50 Under this clause the existing section 309 which
makes attempt to commit suicide punishable is sought to be
omitted. 8070 in view of the recent judgement by the Supreme
Court In Gian Kaur (Smt) VS State of Punjab, {( 1996
scc(Cr)374) vires of the section has been upheld.
consequently, the existigg. section 309 has to be retained and
clause 131 has to "5 Aibitted from the Bi11.( Vide Chapter

VIII)

Clause 134

12.51 Under this clause the existing section 320 defining
grievous hurt is sought to be substituted. The Law
Commission in its 42nd Report observed that the word
“privation” used in the existing section is archaic and
“emasculation” in that clause may be omitted as the same is
covered by the widened 45th clause. The proposed changes are
Only peripheral, but a 10018 more explanarative. Therefore,

that can be carried out.


Clause 137

12.52 Under this clause the existing section 328 is
sought to be substituted by the new section. In content
though both the sections are same except in the new section
in place of “unwholesome drug or other thing” the word

“unwholesome substance" are inserted which are of same effect

but little wider.

Clause 144

12.53 Under this clause the existing sections 341 and 344
are sought to be substituted. The Law Commission in its 42nd
Report recommended that under section 341 the sentence of
imprisonment is unnecessary but fine may be upto Rs,
1,000/and where, however, the offence is Jointly committed by
ten or more persons, it should be more severely punishable
with imprisonment of either description upto one year, or
fine or both. Accordingly, the Commission recommended the
revision of section 341 and also section 342. While dealing
with section 343 and 344 the Law Commission recommended that
both of them could be incorporated in one section and
proposed new section 343 dealing with wrongful confinement
for five days or more. In the 8111, however, we find on the
same 11185, the new sections are being incorporated. The
question is whether the offence is aggravated if there are
ten persons and whether there should be such a Timit. We are

of the view that the number of persons on the basis of


7 301 :-

constructive liability can be limited to two or more persons
as we find in the proposed amendment in section 34, 35 and 38

Ipc.

Clause 146

12.54 Under this clause a new section 354A dealing with
offence of indecent assault on a minor is sought to be
inserted. This aspect was considered in Chapter IX and
accordingly for the reasons stated therein, this clause has

to be omitted.

Clause 149

12,55 Under this clause, the existing section 362 is
sought to be substituted by the new section. This existing
section 362 deals with offence of definition of abduction.
Under the new section it is elaborated. This new section
362A dealing with hijacking of aircraft or any other vehicle
is sought to be added. We have discussed about this new
section in Chapter X. For the reasons mentioned therein the
new section 362A need not be inserted. However, so for as
the new section 362 is concerned, it has enlarged the meaning

of abduction and it can be inserted.


Ciause 151

12,56 Under this clause, after section 364, a new section
364A dealing with offences of kidnapping is sought ‘to be
inserted. Having regard to the present crime scenario of
this nature, the new section is a salutary one and has been

rightly carried out by Act No.42 of 1993.

Clause 152
12.57 Under this clause, the existing section 365 ang
366A are sought to be substituted by the new section. "he

second half of the section 366 and 366A are closely connectes

with each other. The Law Commission aiso accorc*ng

recommended that they could aepropriate’y te out in tee
section. Accordingly, the second half of section 3
incorporated 366A. Tne change 15 only consequential anc ve

endorse the same.

Clause 155

12.58 Under this clause the existing section 3658 is
sought to be substituted, The Law Commisston in its 420d
Report observed that the existing section 268 which dea's

with wrongfully concealing a person knowing

or abducted, leaves the punishment to be regui

to the ounishment for the principal offence of kidnapping oF

abduction. It would be better if specific punishmens 3


provided in the section. The new section is on the same
lines suggested by the Law Commission. Therefore, the

substitution accordingly be made.

Clause 159

12.59 Under this clause, the existing sections 375 and
376 area sought to be substituted by new sections 375, 375A to
376C. For the reasons stated in Chapter IX this clause may
be omitted. We, however, recommend a modification in clause
3 of section 375 by inserting the word “injury”. The change

may be brought about.

Clause 160

12.60 Under this clause the existing section 377 is
sought to be substituted by the new section. This existing
section makes as unnatural offence punishable and the

sentence prescribed is imprisonment for life or imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years and also shall be liable to be fined. The Law

Commission in its 42nd Report examined the question whether

the sentence of imprisonment for life or far the ten years is

a serve one. A questionnaire was issued and one of the
Questions was whether unnatural offences should be punishable

at all and the replies received appears to be conflicting.


“४ 304 :-

However, having regard to the social values in our country,
the Law Commission recommended some changes particularly in
respect of punishment. The Law Commission rightly observed
that the sentence of imprisonment for life or ten years in
every case is unrealistic and very harsh. They, however
recommended that such assault on a minor by an adult should
be punishable sever. On those lines, the new section 377 is
formulated. So the same may be substituted, on the lines

suggested in Chapter Ix,

Clause 161

12.61 Under this clause, the existing Sections 380 and
381 which deal with offences of theft are sought to be
substituted by Sections bearing the same numbers. This
existing Section 380 deals with theft in any building,
dwelling house, tent or vessel etc. and lays down that such
an offence shall be punishable with imprisonment of either
description, which may extend to seven years and shall 3150
be liable to fine. In the new Section, more number of places
where such theft is committed are added. For instance
aircraft ete and Sub-section (2) specifically includes theft
of “antiquity or art treasure” and theft in respect of those

things is made a graver offence and is punishable with ten

years. In Clause (d) of the Section in the 8111 the words
“shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term" appear to be missing. They have to be added.

Another new Section 380A deals with theft of property


-: 305 :-

affected by accident, fire, flood etc. The property thus
affected cannot be easily protected and committing the theft
of the same is rather easy and, therefore, this Section is
specifically meant to deal with the offence of theft of such
property. There is no existing provision which covers such

crime. The changes may be carried out.

Section 381

12.62 The existing Section 381 deals with theft by clerk
or servant of property. The scope: of the Section is
broadened by the new Section 381. The earlier Section

covered only theft by clerk or servant but the new Section
says that whoever being employee in any capacity would be

liable when he commits such theft.

Section 381 A, a new Section intends to cover
thefts of any property by putting any person in a State of
intoxication. Though in a way, it may be covered by the
Section dealing with theft in general but the object appears
to be to make the sentence severe by making the same rigorous

and the same may be inserted.

Clause 162

12.63 Under this clause a new section 285A 15 sought ५८०

be inserted. The proposed section is intendea to cover an

offence of blackmailing with the dishonest intention, The


-: 306 :-

existing section 383 defines extortion and section 385 lays
down that putting the person in fear of injury im order to
commit extortion irrespective of delivery of . any property
etc. is an offence punishable under the Code. The Law
Commission in its 42nd Report examined the question whether
the definition of extortion as it exists covers every case as
blackmail as, for instance, where money is obtained by
threatening to expose something true put unsavory about a
person and when such conduct though reprehensible may not
squarely attract the definition of extortion or at any rate
an ambiguity is there because it is not clear whether such a
threat would amount to a threat of injury. The word ‘injury’
is defined as to denote any harm whatever illegally caused to
any person in body, mind or reputation or property. The word
‘dishonesty’ is defined to mean that “whoever does anything
with the intention of causing wrongfuTt gain to any person or
wrongful loss to any person is said to have acted
dishonestly”. Now the new section 385A ig to the effect that
whoever by words either spoken or intended to be read or by
signs or by visible representations, dishonestly threatens
any person with the making or publication of any imputaticn—_—_—
which is Tikely to harm his reputation or the reputation of
any near relative or any person shall be punishable. The
object underlying the new section is that such an act of
blackmailing with the dishonest intention 15 to threaten in
the manner mentioned therein which may result in harm should
be made punishable. The Law Commission in the proposed

section did not use the words “any near relative” but on the


~: 307 :-

other hand used the words “any other person". In the new
section in place of words “any other person" we find the
words “any near relative of that person.” The change brought
about in the new section appears to be more coherent than
make it so wide as to cover harm to any “other person”. A
doubt may arise whether this new section can properly be
added after 385 for the reason that the word “extortion” as
defined in Section 383 envisages extortion of same property
or putting the person in fear. But in the new section the
word “dishonestly” itself indicates the intention of causing
wrongful gain or wrongful loss which naturally implies the
dejlivery of property or valued security, ete. The further
usage of the word likely to harm the reputation would mean
causing an injury. In the present crime scenario the

stackmailing has become very rampant. Therefore, the new

section dealing with such offences is very necessary.

C* ause 163

12.64 Under this clause the words “may be punished with
imprisonment for life" occurring in sections 388 and 389 are
scught to be substituted with imprisonment of lesser periods.
Sections 388 and 389 deal with specific offences of extortion
by threat or accusation or putting a person in fear in order
ts commit extortion. Under section 388 the threat or
accusation contemplated is one of putting any person in fear

oF such an accusation of having committed or attempted te

commit any offence punishable with death etc. and the


punishment for such extortion is imprisonment upto 10 years,
and if the accusation is with reference to an offence under
section 377 then the punishment is imprisonment for life.
Likewise, under section 389 where in order to commit
extortion puts a person in fear of accusation of offences
mentioned therein then he would be punishable with a sentence
extendable to 10 years and if the accusation is with
reference to the offence under section 377 “may be punished
with imprisonment for life". A bare perusal of these
sections would show that sentences are severe = and
disproportionate and perhaps violate the doctrine of
proportionality. Therefore, the substitution of the words
“may be punished with imprisonment for life” with “lesser

periods of sentence” is catied for.

Clause 164
12.65 Under this clause a new section 396 is sought to be
substituted in place of existing section. The existing

section lays down that when a person while committing dacoity
commits murder, every one of the persons participating in the
offence shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life
or rigorous imprisonment for ten years. Imposition of death
sentence is made to be applicable to some categories
mentioned in the proposed section 302. We have already dealt
with this aspect in Chapter III and suggested that it should

be left to the court as to in what circumstances the death

sentence can be imposed. In this context, we have also


~: 309 :-

referred many of the Supreme Court judgements where the
concept of rarest of rare cases has been vividly considered,
We finally suggest that section 302 must be jeft as it is.
For the same reasons in respect of section 396, na changes
are necessary thereby leaving it to the discretion of the

court to give death sentence in appropriate cases.

Clauses 165 & 166

12.66 Under these clauses the words “uses any deadly
weapon, or” in section 397 is sought to be omitted and
section 378 after the words “at the time of” the words
“committing or" are sought to be inserted and for the words

“seven years”, the words “five years are sought to be

substituted.

Section 397 contemplates even use of any deadiy
weapon while committing robbery or dacoity apart from causing
grievous hurt or attempt to cause death or grievous hurt.
Likewise section 398 which deals with attempt toa commit
robbery or dacoity also lays down that if the offender is
armed with any deadly weapon the imprisonment shall not be
jess than seven years. It can be seen that under section 397
the emphasis is on use of any deadly weapon or whereas in
section 398 mere being armed with any deadly weapon. This ts
More explanatory. This clause is proper and in the same
section the words “five years” in piace of "seven years”

thereby making the punishment less severe also appears to be


7-2 310 :-

proportionate with the gravity of offence. However, we do
not find any reason as to why the words “uses any deadly
weapon” should be omitted in section 397. Otherwise, in a
case where a daccit being armed: with deadty weapon puts into
use any deadly weapon for creating fear without causing
grievous hurt or attempting to cause hurt may not be covered
by the section. So it is better to retain the words and

clause 165 may be omitted.

Clause 167

12,67 Under this clause in section 399 for the words “ten
years _ the words “seven years" are sought to be
substituted. This offence is with reference to making

Preparation and making the sentence lesser appears to be

proportionate.

Clause 168

12.68 Under this clause a new section 399A i$ sought to
be inserted. The existing section 399 makes “preparation to
commit dacoity” punishable. The dacoity is only an

aggravated form of robbery when committed by five or more
persons. Therefore, it is logical, if Preparation to commit
robbery is also made punishable under section 399A which 18 a

new section. We suggest that the change may be made.


=: 311 re

Clauses 169 and 170

12.69 The changes proposed under these sections ard diiTy—

consequential and can be made.

Clause 171

12.70 A new Explanation I is sought to be added in
section 403. Consequently renumbering of the existing
Explanation is 81560 sought, The new Explanation which

relates to offence of misappropriation committed by partner
in respect of the Property belonging to the Partnership is
sought to be covered. Therefore, the proposed changes can be

brought about.

Clause 172-173

12.71 Under these clauses some minor changes are proposed

in sections 404 and 408. The changes can be brought about.

Clause 174

12.72 Under this clause the word “factor” occurring in
section 409 is sought to be omitted. May be in certain
respects the word “factor”“ may be obsolete, but there is no
no harm in retaining this word. Accordingly clause 174 may

be omitted.


Clause 175

12.73
be substituted

expression “stoten Property”

describes the

has been transferred by

theft

: 312 :-

Under this clause the existing section is sought to

by way of giving an extended meaning to the

The existing section 410

stolen property as property a portion whereof

or by extortion etc. A

question arose whether a Property a portion whereof has been
transferred by committing an offence of cheating would also
amount to stolen Property. The Law Commission in its 42nd
Report examined this aspect and recommended that property
obtained by cheating should also be included. The Law
Commission also considered the question whether the procerty

which is subject matter of a

who gets the benefit of general exceptions under Section

83 or 84 can be described as
(7०7४० has been transferred.
“the Law Commission recommended
transfer of a portion of such
the meaning of stolen property

not be punishable by virtue of

theft committed by an offender
82,

stolen property when a portion

Having considered this tissue,

that it is but logical and

Property will also come within
though the actual offender may

the applicable exceptions. To

amplify the point, an illustration also was recommended to be

added. The proposed new section 410 with illustration is
based on the Law Commission's recommendations, which is
appropriate having regard to the meaning which can logically

be given to the expression stolen property.


m2 313 :-

Clause 176

12.74 Under the existing Section 411 dishonestly
receiving a stolen property is made punishable and under
Section 414 ditshonestly receiving stolen property in the
commission of dacoity is made a graver offence. There were
suggestions that such dishonest receipt of stolen property
belonging to the government or local authority or corporation
etc. should be made punishable with very severe punishment.
Accordingly under this clause the words mentioned therein to
carry out this suggestion are sought to be inserted in both

the Sections which would serve the purpose.

Clause 177

12.75 Under this clause the existing Section 415 is
sought to be substituted by a new section with some changes.
In the existing section, the damage or harm likely to be
caused is with reference to only the person deceived but in
the proposed section the scope of the damage is sought to be
extended to not only that person but to any person.
Therefore, the words “to any person” are virtually substitute
to the words “to that person" thereby extending the sweep.
The onty other change is the words “wrongful gain" after the
words “reputation or property” are sought to be added which
are in line with the change contemplated in clause (a) viz.
adding the words "to any person”. The scope of the existing

explanation is expanded by including that if any person


we

-: 314 :-

dishonestly omits to disclose the fact which he ts bounc

under the law to disctose also amounts to deception. We may
mention here by way of clarity that the 8111 does not
specifically refers to Explanations under Section 415 but 85
cheating is of such a wide connotation it would be better tc

retain the illustrations.

Clause 178

12.76 Under this clause Section 420 is sought to be
substituted by a new Section with some changes. Likewise.
anew Section 420A relating to cheating of public authorities
in performance of certain contracts is sought to be inserted.
Yet two new Sections, Section 420B relating to publication of
false advertisements and Section 420¢ relating to fraudulent
acts in relation to property of a company are also sought te
be added. The existing Section 420 lays down that whoever
cheats thereby dishonestly induces a person to deliver “the
property to any person or to make or alter, destroy etc.
shall be punished. A question came up that in a case where
by deceiving any person fraudulently induces to consent that
any person shall retain any property would also be covered,
The Law Commission in its 42nd Report recommended that such 4
clause be added. That is the only change in the proposec

Section 420 which makes the Section more explicit. The

change may be carried out.


-: 316 :-

The Law Commission in its 29th Report considered as
to how to tackle the problem of cheating of government on a
large scale by dishonest contractors while supplying Goodgv—
The Law Commission in its 42nd Report adverted to this aspect
and recommended that a provision should be made making such
offences punishable. The new Section 420A is fairly
exhaustive to cover such offences and the punishment provided
is not severe. In the modern trend of trade and commerce, a
number of false advertisements are being made to mistead the

public. Though the Law Commission in its 42nd Report has not

adverted to that, the proposed new Section 420B appears to be

salutary.
420C

Fraudulent transfer of Property in relation to
companies is sought to be covered by this Section. This

section Jays down that whoever with an intent to mislead or
injure a person or public, makes Or causes to make any
transfer of property belonging to a company by a gift, sale
etc. or with such intent-alters, removes and conceals any
sign or name plate of the company to indicate that the
company has ceased to exist shall be punishable. This is in

line to check fraudulent acts by way of cheating as mentioned

therein.


Pa

Ciause 179

12.77 Under this clause the existing sections 426 to 432
are sought to be substituted by new sections covering in
general the offence of mischief. The existing section 425 in

general defines mischief. Sections 426 to 440 are punishing
sections applicable to different kinds of offences of
mischief and higher punishments are prescribed in respect of
aggravated offences of mischief like destroying public
property or public services atc. The Law Commission in its
42nd Report considered these sections and recommended that in
respect of certain offences the punishment should be
increased from five ta seven years. With reference to
section 437 it is also recommended that a reference to
aircraft should be added. The वेश Commission however
recommended that sections 426 to 440 should be substituted.
Section 426 prescribes punishment for mischief and the Law
Commission recommended enhancement of sentence from three
months to one year. Sections 427 to 436 as proposed by the
Law Commission deal with the offence of causing mischief to
the public property or machinery to the amount of Rs.100/- or
more, mischief by killing or maiming animals, injury to
public road, aircraft etc. and mischief by fire or explosive
substances with intent to destroy place of worship. So far
as sections 438 to 440, the only changes are with regard to
sentence and omission of saction 433. In the 8171, the new
sections 426 to 432 cover the offences of mischief more or

less as proposed by the Law Commission in the above mentioned


sections to be substituted as per its Report. We hav

examined the new sections 426 to 431. However, we recommer

that the sentence of three years prescribed under each c

these sections may be enhanced to five years. Now coming t
section 432 proposed in the Bill, we find that the type o-

mischief covered by this section is with reference tc
destroying, moving or rendering less useful any air route or
a beacon or lights etc. used for guidance of the aircraf-
and such a mischief is made punishable and the sentence being
seven years, but it is also mentioned there that if it does
not amount to sabotage then it would be a different matter tc
be covered by section 437. This Bill was prepared in 1978.
perhaps having noticed the alarming increase in the types of
offences of hijacking and rendering air service unsafe, the
Anti-Hijacking Act of 1982 and the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts against Safety of 01५1 Aviation Act, 1982 (SUACA) were
passed. | These two Acts were further amended in 1994. We
have discussed the offence of hijacking in Chapter X with
reference to the new section 362-A proposed in the 8111. anc
we suggested that in view of the provisions of the
Anti-Hijacking Act as amended it may not be necessary to have

this proposed provision.

In the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against Safety
of Civil Aviation Act as amended in 1994 a new section 3A was

inserted which reads as follows:-


-: 3Ta8 ८

"3A.(1) Whoever, at any airport, unlawfully anc
intentionally, using any device, substance or

weapon—

(a) commits an act of violence which is likely te
cause grievous hurt or death of any person; or

(b) destroys or seriously damages any aircraft or
facility at an airport or disrupts any service at
the airport, endangering or threatening to endanger
safety at that airport, shall be punished with
imprisonment for 1176 and shall also be liable tc

fine.

(2) Whoever attempts to commit, or abets the
commission of any offence under subsection (1)
shall also be deemed to have committed such offence
and shail be punished with the punishment provided

for such offence.”

A comparison of the contents of this sectian with
the contents of section 432 would show that the acts of
violence mentioned in the latter are in a general way covered
by the words used in section 34-18 of the SUACA Act.

However, the disruption of the words used in section 432,

namely, less useful route etc. and the damage to various
other gadgets would be of a specific type of mischief. To
make the section more camprehensive and effective we

recommend that section 3A of the SUACA Act may further 98

amended incorporating some of the acts mentioned in the


“51 319 :-

proposed section 432. We may 4150 add that we are making
these suggestions, firstly because we have already
recommended deletion of new section 362A to the extent
applicable to the aircraft and also for the reason that so
many technical issues would be involved in these kinds af
offences and the special courts with the help of technicians
acting as assessors would be in a better position to
understand and decide the complicated questions that may
arise. If amendment of section 3A is not to be carried out
in the above manner then the new proposed section 432 may be
retained in the clause. If $0, then the sentence under

section 432 may be brought in accordance with section 3A.

Clause 180

12.78 Under this clause the new sections 434 to 440 which
also deal with graver or serious type of mischief are sought
to be substituted in the place of the existing sections. We
nave already mentioned that the changes suggested by the Law
Commission with reference to sections 438 to 440 were only
regarding sentence. But in the 8111 in these proposed
sections the mischief caused to the public institutions,
public services and to aircraft etc. with a view to impair
the efficiency or impede the working thereof of any of these
public institutions rendering service is made punishable
severely. The proposed sedtion 434 again deals with mischief
to any aircraft or to any docked vessel or to any vessel of a

burden of 20 tones upwards with a view to render it unsafe


-: 320 :-

etc. Section 435 covers the offence of mischief by fire or
any explosive substance intending to cause or knowing it to
be likely that thereby would be causing damage to any
property to the amount of Rs.100/- or upwards. Section 436
again covers the offence of mischief by fire or any explosive
etc. which results in destruction of any building or any
object which is held sacred. The language of this section is
somewhat analogous to existing section 436, Section 437 is a
new one and the offence mentioned therein is “sabotage”.
This saction is very exhaustive. A careful reading of this
section which contains several types of acts of mischief
would reveal that the intention of the Legislature is to
combat the destructive acts of violence with an intent to
impair the efficiency of the public institutions and the
services which in the present type of organised crime
sometimes of international ramifications. Sub-sections (2)
has been rightly added in this section. Sub-Sections (3) and
(4) also have been properly added in this very section.
Though preparation by itself in general is not an offence but
having regard to the magnitude and the propensities the
Preparation for committing sabotage also 18 made punishable
under section 438, but the sentence of three years may be
enhanced to five years. However, the word “aircraft”
eccurring in section 434 may be omitted in view of our
suggestions made in Chapter xX, In respect of other types | oF

mischief regarding the aircraft section 3A of the SUACA Act


is to be amended. If not, the section as proposed may be
retained and the sentence be brought in accordance with

section 3A of SUACA Act.

Clause 181
12.79 Under this clause the word "“Tawfully” found in the
existing section is omitted in the the proposed section. [In

the existing section the second limb of the definition of
criminal trespass reads: “naving lawfully entered into or
upon such property unlawfully remains......... “The new
clause (b) in the proposed section 441 also carries out the

same meaning.

Clause 182

12.80 Under this clause sections 443-460 dealing with
various kinds of house trespass are sought to be substituted.
In the proposed section 443 a new expression ‘burglary’ is
defined and it says that a person commits burglary if he

commits house-trespass in order to commit or having committed

house-trespass he commits theft. The existing section 443
gives the meaning of offence in Turking trespass. In the new
Proposed section such an offence is not mentioned. It can be

seen from the existing sections 443, 444, 445 and 446 that
the various types of trespassing by night and by house
breaking by night are with reference to commit an offence

like theft. The framers of the 8111 by introducing the


“7: 322 :-

offence of burglary were of the opinion that the various
types of offences of house-trespassing or lurking
house-trespassing by night etc. would be covered. The Law
Commission having considered some judgments of the High
Courts and amendments made by the UP Government suggest the
change in section 441 to which we have already adverted. The
Law Commission also recommended that sections 443 and 444
which define JIurking house trespass and turking house
trespass by night should be omitted and instead of
house~breaking the burglary should be defined in section 445,
These suggestions of the Law Commission are logically
reflected in the proposed sections and it may be noticed at
this stage that the existing section 445 is somewhat lengthy
and enumerates six ways of house-breaking and section 446
mentions that whoever commits house-breaking after sun-set or
before sun-rise is said to commit house-breaking by night and
in other sections the punishment is prescribed. Coming to
the proposed sections we find “burglary” as recommended by

-the Law Commission, is defined.

Sections 444 to 447 deal with various types of
criminal trespass. Some of them prescribe punishment varying
from 3 years to 7 years. Section 448 prescribes punishment

for burglary being extended to ten years and with fine.


“: 323 :-

Section 449 tays down that whoever whilst
committing burglary causes grievous hurt or attempts to cause
death or grievous hurt to any person shall be punishable with
imprisonment for life or with rigorous imprisonment for a

term which may extend to ten years and with fine.

Section 450 deals with conjoined liability of other
- persons who were also concerned in committing house-burglary
during which one of them commits offence under section 449

and all of them made constructively liable.

we have carefully considered these provisions and
we think that such substitution in the place of the existing

sections will 958 salutary.

Clause 183

Under this clause, Chapter XVIIA is sought to be

| introduced by way of inserting section 462A. A perusal of
this new section manifestly shows that it is meant to cover
the offences committed in relation to private employment.
The relationship between = an employer and employee in a
private employment is different as compared to the employment
relating to a public servant as defined in section 21 of IPC.
Corruption by public servant is of public concern and is
specifically dealt with under the Prevention of Corruption
Act as well 85 by some of the provisions in IPC. The same

principle cannot be made applicable to private employees even


-: 324 :-

if the acts mentioned under the new section amount to 4 kind
of misconduct with reference to discharge of his duty vis~a
-vis the employer. If during the course of such employment
the employee commits offences like forgery, cheating,
criminal breach of trust, misappropriation etc., then that
would definitely amount to an offence punishable under the
Penal Code. But other types of acts like taking some
remuneration other than jegalt remuneration for doing some act
by themselves may not amount to any one of these offences and
if such act or omission by the employee results in injury or
loss to the employer then that would be a cause for
dismissing or claiming damages and the liability will be one
of the tortuous nature. Having carefully considered ali the
aspects, we are of the view that this new Chapter dealing
with offences relating to private employment need not be

there. So consequently clause 183 should be omitted.

‘Clause 184

12.82 The Law Commission in its 42nd Report recommended
that (7) the word “place” be also added in the first
Paragraph of section 464 and that (ii) the words “addition’
and “obliteration” be also added in the second paragraph
thereof in addition to the existing word “cancellation” and
that (iii) sections 463 and 464 be combined and the
iVlustrations provided thereunder be omitted. Clause 184 of

the 8111 seeks to bring about the aforesaid recommendations


(1) and (11) except (iii). While we agree with the aforesaid
changes proposed in Clause 184 of the Bill, we propose to

further examine the scope of section 464 I.P.Cc.

While section 463 defines “forgery”, section 464
defines “making a false document" and enumerates various
circumstances which would amount to making of a false
dogysment. It is not clearly spelt out under either of the
sections 463 or 464 as to whether forgery of a copy of a
document or copying a false document or making a false copy
of a document, would also amount to forgery within. the
meaning of section 464, IPC. It would not be out of place to
mention that under sections 2 and 4 of the Forgery &
Counterfeiting Act, 1981(U.K.) copying a false document and
using a copy of a false document, has been specifically made
Puntshable. As regards the position in India, there existed
a controversy on the above point (see H.S,Shamosundorariah v.
State of Mysore, (1968) 1 Mys LJ 294 at p.297; Gobinda Prasad
Parui vy, 9७8७७ Vv. State, AIR 1962 Cal.174 at p.i75) (cited at page
3939 of Penal Law Of India by Or.Hari Singh Gaur, 1000. Edn,
and 5 Bom HC Rep cc 56 (ref.Law of Crimes (A Handbook) by

V.V.Raghavan, Second Edition, page 931).

However, the Supreme Court has finally settled the

Position in Rama Shankar Lal vy. State of U.P., 1970 UJ(SC)

507 by approving the following observations in Essan Chunder
Dutt & others v. Baboo Prannauth Chowdry & others, 1

Marshalia’s Reports 270


~: 326 :-

"we regard the forgery of a copy clearly to come
within the purview of the section just cited.
Forgery of a copy which was not true copy, would be
the offence there rendered penal, and the criminal
intention to make a false document serves the
purpose of a true one would be clear by such act of

forgery.”

We are of the view that though the position is now
settled it would be desirable to add an Explanation in
section 464, IPC so as to make it specifically clear that
knowingly committing forgery of a copy of a document or
knowingly making copy of a false document or making a false
copy of a document would also amount to forgery within the

meaning of section 464, IPC.

We recommend that in order to meet the above
situation, Explanation 3 in Section 464 may be added on the

following lines:-

“Explanation 3. <- Knowingly committing forgery of
a copy of a document or knowingly making a false
copy of a document or copying a false document
which he knows or believes to be a fatse document,
with the intention that he or another shall ७७७ it

to induce somebody to accept it as a copy of a


genuine document to do or not to do some act to his
own or any other person’s prejudice, will amount to

making a false document.”

Clause 187

12.83 The proposed changes under sub-cltauses (a), (b) and
(c) of clause 187 of the Bill are on the basis of the reasons
and recommendations contained under paras 18.8, 18.10 and

18.11 of Chapter 18 of the aforesaid 42nd Report.

By virtue of sub-clause (a), the words “in respect
of a document which is, or purports to be...” are proposed to
be substituted in Section 467, IPC for the sake of clarity as
stated under the preceding paragraph in respect of Sec.466
IPC and also as recommended under para 18.10 of the 42nd
Report. We also concur with the proposed changes under sub
clause (a) that the words “authority to adopt a son or”
should be substituted by the words “authority to adopt any

person or as a female may also be adopted as a daughter
(vide the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1966).
Besides, adoption of a female child may also be permissible

under the laws or customs or usages governing other

religions.


~: 328 :- —

Under sub-clause (७) the Proposed substitution by
the words “or an acquittance” is in the interests of clarity
as recommended in the revised form of Section 467 IPC as

stated under Para 18.11 cf the 42nd Report.

By virtue of sub-clause (c) the words “with
imprisonment for life, or" are sought to be omitted under
Section 467 IPC. This is necessary because the imprisonment
for life provided in Section 467 for forgery of valuable
securities appears to be too harsh as observed in the 42nd

Report. We also concur with this change.

Clause 188

12.84 The proposed changes in sections 470 and 471 of the
Penal Code are on the basis of the reasons and
recommendations contained under paras 18.13 to 18.15 of

Chapter 18 of the aforesaid 42nd Report.

Section 470, IPC is proposed to be substituted
because the existing section 470 which defines a “forged
document” as “a false document made wholly or in part by
forgery” is defective as observed by the Law Commission in
105 42nd Report, (para 18.13) thereof. This is in view of
the fact that forgery is itself defined in Section 463 read
with Section 464, IPC as "making a false document” with the
requisite intent, so that, when one reads section 470 and

sections 463 and 464 together, one meets the idea of “making


“5 329 :-

a document" twice. By virtue of second part of clause 188,
section 471, IPC is proposed to be substituted. The proposed
changes are in accordance with the recommendations of the Law

Commission and the changes can be carried out.

Clause 190
12.85 Under this clause the existing section 474 is
sought to be substituted by the proposed new section. The

change suggested is only peripheral and the proposed new
section simply lays down that whoever has in his possession
any document of the description mentioned in both the
sections 466 and 467 knowing the same to be forged and
intending to use the same fraudulently or dishonestly shall

be punished with rigorous imprisonment of seven years.

Clause 194

By virtue of clause 194 of the 8111, certain
amendments are sought to be made under the Explanation Clause
of Section 489A of the Code. These include (a) the
Explanation Clause shall be numbered as [A Explanation I and
in the Explanation as so numbered, the words “and includes a
traveller’s cheque” shall be inserted at the end; (b) the
following shall be inserted as Explanation II:

“Explanation II. For the removal of doubt it is


—: 330 :-

hereby declared that in this section and in
sections 4898, 489C, 4890 and 4896 the expression

“currency notes" includes a foreign currency note”.

Since the proposed changes are clarificatory

nature, the changes sought to be made under sub-clauses (a)

and (b) of clause 194 of the Bill may be carried out.

Clause 196

12,87 Clause 196 of the Bill seeks to insert a new
section 489 F which provides for punishment for ’preparation’

for committing offences under Section 489A to Section 4896,

Counterfeiting of currency notes is 8 serious
offence since it affects the economy of the country. we

agree with the insertion of the proposed new section 489F,

Ciause 197
12.88 The existing Chapter XIX entitled "OF THE CRIMINAL

BREACH OF CONTRACTS OF SERVICE” contains only Section 491.

The Law Commission in its 42nd Report under para
19.2 has recommended for deletion of the chapter XIX of IPC
which includes Section 491, 170 mainly on the ground that it
is not of practical utility. A close took at the provision

would indicate that the provision is implemented to protect


2 331 i-

the contractual rights of helpless or incapable person who,
by reason of youth or of unsoundness of mind, or of a disease
or bodily weakness is helpless or incapable of providing for
his own safety or of supplying his own wants. In other words
the provision intends to protect the rights of such persons
on the grounds of humanity. Such persons May not be in a
position to seek -civil remedy. Therefore in the present
context of the human rights, it may be desirable to retain
this provision with enhanced punishment. We recommend that
the existing punishment may be enhanced from three months to
one year and the existing limit of imposing fine of Rs.200
May be substituted by the word "fine" only so that the Court
may fix the quantum of fine depending upon circumstances of
the case. We also recommend that this offence be made
cognizable, if information relating to the Commission of the
offence is given to an officer incharge of a Police Station
by the person aggrieved by the offence or by any person
related to him by btood, marriage or adoption or by any
public servant belonging to such class or category as may be

notified by the State Government in this behalf.

This clause also seeks to substitute Chapter XIX_
and insert thereunder new sections 490, 491 and 492 providing

for the offences against privacy.

The Law Commission examined the various aspects of
right to privacy under Chapter 23 of its 42nd Report and

recommended for insertion of a new Chapter on "Offences


: 332 :-

against Privacy”. While adopting the recommendations of the
Law Commission, with certain modifications, Clause 197 of the
वि
Bill seeks to substitute the existing Chapter XIX of the
Penal Code for the said purpose which contains new sections
490, 491 and 492. Under the proposed section 490 use of
artificial Jistening or recording apparatus for listening the
to or recording any conversation in any premises without the
knowledge or consent of the person in possession of the
premises is made punishable for imprisonment upto six months.
In case any one publishes. such conversation while knowing
that it was so listened to or recorded, he will be liable for
a higher punishment of imprisonment upto one year. The
Proposed section 491, makes the taking of unauthorised
Photography js made punishable for imprisonment upto six
months, and if one pubiishes such photograph, the
imprisonment may extend to one year. However, the proposed
Sec.492 provides for exceptions regarding certain acts of

public servants, and persons acting under their directions.

Right to privacy is a vast subject and its scope
has been widened considerably under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India by the Supreme Court under its various
decisions. Various countries abroad have also dealt with the
various aspects of right to Privacy in separate legislations.
For example, the Law Reform Commission of Hongkong in its
Report of December 1996 entitled “Privacy: regarding the
Interception of Communications”, has referred to various

legislations in different countries regulating interception


“: 333 :-

of communications. It observed under para 4.11 of its Report
that several jurisdictions, including common Taw
jurisdictions, have legislation regulating interception of
communications and although the scope of protection by such
legislation varies, all the statutes apply criminal sanctions
to safeguard the privacy interests of individuals in one way
or another. The Law Reform Commission of Hongkong suggested
various legislative measures under Chapter 6 of its Report to
provide Protection against undue interference with the

privacy of the individual and in the interest of public

security. Similarly, the Law Reform Commission of the
Treland in its Consultation Paper headed "Privacy;
Surveillance and Interception of Communications’ has

provisionally recommended for the enaction of a separate Act
to protect the privacy of the individual from intrusive

surveillance.

It may be pointed out that in the National Seminar
on Criminal Justice in India, organised by the Law Commission
on 22nd & 23rd February, 1997 New Delhi, many participants
viewed that the proposed provisions under clause 197 of the
811 are bare and sketchy and do not meet the existing
demands of society for protection of right of Privacy of
individuals. A view was also expressed in that Seminar that
the exceptions carried out under the proposed section 492
virtually render the provisions of the proposed sections 430

and 491 meaningless.


In view of the above discussion, we are of the view
that a separate legislation should comprehensively deal with
various aspects of offences against right to privacy in the
context of the present day needs. The Law Commission is
proposing to take up a comprehensive study on this subject
separately. It is, therefore, recommended that ctause 197 of
the Bill which seeks to substitute the existing Chapter xXIx

of the Penal Code, may be deleted.

Clause 198 .

12.89 Under this clause the existing Section 494 is
sought to be substituted by néw section. We have discussed
the proposed amendment in Chapter IX and for the reasons
stated therein. The proposed new Section can be substituted
but as already noted, another Explanation 3 should be added
in accordance with the principle laid down by the Supreme
Court in Smt. _Sarla Mudgal_y. Union of India, (AIR 1995 SC

1531).

Clause 199

12.90 Under this Clause again, the existing Section 497
is sought to be substituted by a new Section. This Section
deals with offence of committing adultery. We have discussed
about this proposed amendment in Chapter No. IX in detail
and we suggested some changes by way of corrections in the

proposed Section so as to make the woman also punishable = and


~: 335 :-

to carry out the consequential changes in the provision of
Cr.P.C. Accordingly, in the proposed Section, the words “by

the man" have to be omitted.

Clause 201

12.91 Under this clause the existing section 500 is
sought to be substituted. The Law Commission in its 42nd
Report considered this aspect and observed that certain
changes are necessary in the existing section. Under the
existing section the punishment for defamation is one of
simple imprisonment which may extend to two years, The Law
Commission considered the suggestions for enhancing the same
but opined in its 42nd Report that there is no practical
justification for doing so. They, however, recommended that
the imprisonment to be imposed should be of either
description and accordingly suggested a change. Another
suggestion made is that, where the defamatory statement has
been published in a newspaper and thus made known to a large
number of persons, the fact of the offender's conviction
should be similarly published and costs should be made
recoverable from the convicted person as if it were a fine.
The amendments are in conformity with the recommendations of
the Commission and may be carried out. Likewise, the other
sub-sections (1) and (2) are also in accordance with the

recommendations of the Law Commission.


-: 336 :-

Clause 203

12.92 The Law Commission has recommended in para 22.6
read with para 7.9 of its 42nd Report that Clause (a) of
sub-section (1)) of Section 505, IPC should be incorporated
with certain modifications in Chapter VII as new section 138A

on the lines mentioned in the Report.

The Commission further recommended under para 22.6
read with para 8.26 of 42nd Report that the rest of the
section 505 should be taken in Chapter VIII as new section

1588:

By virtue of clause 52 of the 8111, Chapter VII is
proposed to be substituted and under the proposed section
138A thereof, the provisions of existing sub-section (1) of
section 505, IPC are proposed to be _ transposed with
modifications. Similarly, by virtue of clause 58 of the
Bill, sub-sections (2) & (3) of the existing section 505 are
proposed to be transposed with modifications, as section

1530.

The Law Commission in para 22.6 read with para 7.9
of its 42nd Report, recommended that clause (a) of
sub-section (1)) relating to statements made with intent to
cause mutiny, dereliction of duty, insubordination etc.
among the armed forces should find a place in the Chapter

relating to offences against the armed forces. The


-: 337 :-

Commission recommended to add it as section 138A on the lines
stated under para 7.9 of the Report. The proposed section
138A is in accordance with the said recommendations to which

we agree.

However with regard to the rest of section 505 1.७.
section 505(2) and (3) of the Pena} code, the Commission
recommended under pr.22.6 read with para 8.26 that the
provisions could well” be regarded as Speating offences
against public tranquillity and should be taken in Chapter
VIII as section 1588. It felt that the provisions of section
505(2) and (3) of the Penal Code really relate to public
tranquillity. This part of the section is very simidar to,
though not wholly covered by section 153-A and thus it would
be logical to include it in Chapter 8 immediately after

section 153-A.

A perusal of the proposed section 153-C under
clause 58 of the Bill shows that these provisions are on the
lines of the proposed section 1588 recommended under para
8.26 of the 42nd Report which incorporates the provisions of
section 505 (2) and (3) with certain modifications. Thus the
Provisions under the existing section 505 may be omitted
since these are covered and transposed in the proposed

Provisions as stated above.


४ 338 :-

Clause 204

12.93 By virtue of clause 204, after section 507, a new
section 507A is proposed to be,inserted. Proposed section
507A provides punishment with: imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both for causing damage etc. to places open to
public view. The term "place open to public view" and
“objectionable matter” are comprehensively clarified under

the sub-section (2) of proposed section 507A.

Proposed section 507 A has a laudable objective for

creating an orderly society and we endorse the same.

Clause 206

12.94 The Law Commission in its Forty second Report
recommended that the last chapter of the Indian Penal Code
containing section 511 be omitted and, instead, a new Chapter
VB entitled “Attempt” consisting of two sections 1200 and
1200 be inserted after Chapter VA on the lines indicated by
the Commission under para 5.54 thereof. Accordingly, clause
206 of the Bill seeks to omit chapter XXIII of the Indian
Penal Code. After having carefully considered the matter, we
are of the view that section 511 is working wel? and there is
no need to omit it and transpose its provisions to a new
Chapter VB containing sections 120C and 1200 for the reasons

discussed in Chapter VI of this Report.


7: 339 :-

CHAPTER - XIII

CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

We have now come to the end of our detailed study
of the Code. The recommendations which we have made for its
improvement are numerous, ranging from verbal changes
designed to remove ambiguities and clarify undertying ideas,
to substantial changes with a view to its simplification and
modernisation along with some additions in the existing

provisions.

13.02. No doubt, the evaluation of The Indian Penal Code
(Amendment) 8111, 1978 was the main task in this Report. The
said Bill was based on 42nd Report of the Law Commission, and
could not become an Act in spite of having been passed by the
Rajya Sabha as the then Lok Sabha was dissolved. Beside the
said 8111, the Law Commission also examined a number of new
problems and issues which gave rise to the necessity of
undertaking a further comprehensive revision of the Indian

Penal Code in the light of current Socio-legal Scenario.

13.03, We have given special attention to the extent and
nature of the punishments prescribed in the Code for various
offences and suggested modifications to bring them into
accord with modern notions of penology. ४७ have indicated in

each Chapter of this Report, corresponding to a Chapter of


-: 340 :-

the Code, the provisions which should be made in lieu of, or
in addition to, the existing provisions, and also the
amendments, both major and minor, to be made in them. A sum
up of the principal recommendations made in each Chapter is

as under:-

CHAPTER - ६

13.04. At this stage, we may 8150 mention that under
Clause 197 of the IPC (Amendment) 8111, 1978, for the
existing Chapter XIX, a new Chapter bearing the same number
(Chapter XIX) ts sought to be inserted to deal with “Offences
against Privacy”. In the existing Chapter XIX, three
sections namely, sections 490, 491 and 492 are mentioned.
But out of them sections 490 and 492 were repealed and the
only remaining section 491 deals with "Breach of Contract” to
protect the contractual rights of the helpless persons. In
the proposed new Chapter XIX which jis sought to be
substituted in place of the existing Chapter, sections 491 to
492 are inserted and they deal with “Offences against
Privacy” like use of artificial listening or recording
apparatus either to Jisten or to record conversation of
person or persons without their knowledge or consent or
making unauthorised photographs, etc. We have dealt with
this clause in detail in Chapter XII after duly referring to
the contents of 42nd Report as well as the concept of right
to privacy as extended under Article 21 of the Constitution

and also various reports of foreign Law Commissions and


+ 341 :-

ultimately recommended that these offences cannot
appropriately be incorporated in the Indian Penal Code and
that a separate legislation should be there to

comprehensively deal with such offences against privacy.

It is also mentioned that Law Commission is
proposing to take up a comprehensive study on this subject
separately as early as possible.

(Para 1,11)

13.05. CHAPTER ~ IT

SENTENCES AND SENTENCING - POLICIES & PROCEDURE

1. In the context of fast changes in the sociolegal
scenario warranting application of the reformative theory of
punishment, it is necessary to modify provisions of the
BORSTAL School Act, 1970, Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 and
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 suitably.

(Para 2.05)

2. In the Indian Penal Code, the offences are divided
into bailable and non-bailable depending upon the gravity of
the offence. About 120 offences in the Indian Penal Code are
non-cognizable. It is voiced that some trivial offences

affecting public order also can lead to serious developments


“ : 342 :-

if they are not dealt with promptly and, therefore, it is
desirable that such offences are made liable for public

intervention.

It is recommended that the offences punishable
under sections 290, 298, 431, 432, 434, 504, 505 and 510 be
made cognizable.

(Para 2.06)

3. The amounts of fine to be imposed should
considerably be enhanced and it should, as far as possible,
be substituted for short-term imprisonment. Further, the
poor victims of uses and abuses of criminal law should be
compensated by way of reparation and that the amounts of fine
prescribed long ago have lost their relevance and impact in
the present day and the fines imposed have no relation to the
economic structure of society and necessary element of

deterrence is generally absent.

An examination of the various sections in the Code.
where sentence of fine, is provided for, reveals that from a
minimum fine of Rs.100/- it varies up to Rs.1,000/-. In

respect of most of the offences it is below Rs.500/-.

Therefore, a change regarding the quantum of fine
should be made in all those sections correspondingly, at

least by 20 times and make a provision in the Code of


Criminal Procedure regarding the powers of the First Class

Magistrates to impose such a fine.

( Para 2.09)
4. The proposed amendment vide clause 18 of the IPC
(Amendment) Bilt, 1978 making imprisonment for life rigorous,

that is, with hard labaour, is necessary.

(Para 2.11)

5. Clause 27 of the IPC (Amendment) Bill, 1978,
provides the insertion of a new Section 74A exclusively to
deal with punishment of community. service. It means that
convict will have to perform the service without any
remuneration. The implementation part of it provides that
the work is to be performed under proper supervision as per
arrangements to be made by the State Government or any local

authority.

The Commission felt that there are a number of
difficulties in enforcing the same like that supervisory
authority will have to see whether the convict is working and
rendering service for the number of hours specified and if he
fails to do so by way of default, he has to be sentenced

thereafter.


—: 344 :-

Therefore, we think an open air prison system is
better suited from the point of view of correctional measures
rather than the proposed punishment of community service.

( Para 2.13)

6. Another suggestion was whether the punishment
“disqualification from holding office” should be incorporated
in section 53 of the Indian Penal Code. In some types of
cases particularly involving public servants and other
persons holding office in corporations, companies, registered
societies, etc., ending in conviction should necessarily
entail with the disqualification from holding office, but
such a course is intrinsically connected with their
respective service rules and regulations. It is a matter of
common knowledge that in almost all such service rules we
find some provision or other disqualifying such a person

after conviction, from holding the office.

It is recommended that it would be appropriate to
leave the issue to be decided by the concerned authorities
under all those rules and regulations because incidentally
some other questions pertaining to the service conditions may
also arise which warrant a further inquiry.

(Para 2.14)

7. The Law Commission in its 154th Report on the Code
of Criminal Procedure has recommended insertion of a new

provision, namely, 3578 providing for framing victim


—: 345 :-

compensation scheme by the respective State Governments under
which the compensation can be awarded to the victims on the
lines indicated therein wherever it is found to be necessary

apart from the compensation awarded by the court under

section 357 out of the fines. We may also indicate that
awarding sufficient compensation depends upon many
circumstances which require some inquiry. Further in some
cases an order for payment of compensation need not

necessarily be by way of punishment.

Therefore, we are of the view that it is not
appropriate to include order for payment of compensation in
section 53 by way of punishment.

(Para 2.16)

8. Another punishment which is sought to be included
in section 53 is ‘public censure’, namely, publication of the
name of the offender and details of the offence and sentence.
The proposed Section 74C provides for imposition of the
punishment by way of public censure in addition to the
substantive sentence under sub-section (3) and this is
limited to offences mentioned in chapters XII, XIII, sections
272 to 276, 383 to 389, 403 to 409, 415 to 420 and offences
under chapter XVIII of the Code as offences under proposed
new Sections 420A and 462A under the Indian Penal Code
(Amendment) Bill, 1978. These are all offences where persons
entrusted with some public duties commit offences. Such a

punishment has great relevance in respect of anti-social


7: 346 :-

offences, economic offences, otherwise called white-collar
offences particularly committed by sophisticated persons. _ It
is of common knowledge that while these offences affect a
Jarge number of peopte, the offenders are not readily booked.
However at least in such cases which end in conviction, the
punishment of public censure is likely to act as a greater
deterrence because of the fear of infamy resulting from the
publicity and consequent repercussions like loss of business,
etc, Such a censure is one of the prescribed punishments in
Russia, Columbia and other countries. In India such form of
punishment is included in the Prevention of Food Adulteration
Act and Income-tax Act. The Law Commission in its 42nd
Report considered the inclusion of such a punishment and
recommended that such additional punishment would be useful
in the case of persons convicted for the second time of any
of the offences under chapter XII and XIII, like extortion,
criminal misappropriation, cheating and of offences relating

to documents.

It is recommended that such public censure by way
of an additional punishment should be there and accordingly
be included in section 53 of the Indian Penal Code and it
should be left to the discretion of the court regarding
imposition of the same in selective cases.

(Para 2.16)


४ 347 :-

9. In respect of number of offences the punishment
prescribed is “imprisonment or with fine or with both”. It
is voiced in various workshops that in view of the changes in
the modern society, the type of crimes and the repetition of
those crimes or the frequent occurrence of certain types of
crimes, 10 is necessary that the punishment should be
imprisonment and in addition fine also.

Having examined various provisions in the IPC and
the modern trends of crime, we are of the view that in
respect of the offences under sections 153, 153A, 160, 166 to
175, 177, 182, 221, 269 to 291, 292, 294 to 298, 336, 465 and
477A, the punishment should be imprisonment as well as fine.
Incidentally, we also suggest that the extent of imprisonment

should be enhanced suitably in respect of these offences.

(Para 2.17)
13.06. CHAPTER ~ TIL
DEATH PENALTY
1. The Commission carefully considered the question

from several angies after making comparative study of the law
of other countries and after examining various judgments till

date rendered by the apex court.


We reiterate the recommendation of Law Commission
in its 35th Report for retention of the capital punishment,
but to be awarded in accordance with the guidelines laid down

by the Supreme Court.

(Para 3.07)

2. It is already recommended to retain section 302 as
it is instead of reading any Jlimitations into the same
regarding imposition of death sentence for the reason that it
is impossible to put them in any straight jacket for the
reason that what circumstances make a case a “rarest of rare

one" cannot be fixed by way of a legal provision.

The Law Commission recommends that no change is
required in Section 302 as is proposed in clause 125 of the
Bill.

(Para 3.10)

3. Clause (3) of section 302 of IPC (Amendment) Bill,
1978 is providing for running of sentence of life
imprisonment consecutively instead of concurrently. It will
be a retrograde step in accord with deterrent and retributive

theories of the past as observed by the Supreme Court.

Therefore, we do not approve the proposed clause
(3) of section 302 in the 8111.

(Para 3.12)


“2 349 :-

4. Section 303 of the Indian Pena? Code Provides:
"303. Punishment for murder by life
convict.whoever, being under sentence of

imprisonment for life commits murder, shall ७७

Punished with death.”

The Supreme Court in Mithu ७. State of Punjab

(1983) 2 SCC 277, declared that the aforesaid provisions of
Section 303 violate the guarantee of equality contained in
Article 14 as also the right conferred by Article 21 of the

Constitution.

We have carefully considered the various provisions
of the Bill and feel that after section 303 is omitted, the
second part of Section 307 which provides that “when any
person offending under this Section is under sentence of
imprisonment for life, he may, if hurt is caused, be punished
with death" cannot be retained on the same analogy and
principles on the basis of which section 302 has been held to
be arbitrary and oppressive and violative of Article 14 and
21 of the Constitution. We accordingly recommend deletion of

the second part of Section 307.

(Para 3.14)


-: 350 :-

13.07. CHAPTER - IV

CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY ~

1. Though the IPC (Amendment) Bill, 1978 is silent
about the offence of criminal conspiracy but the Law
Commission earlier in its 42nd Report recommended that the
criminal conspiracy for petty offences should not be covered
under this Chapter. Therefore, a revision of Section 120 of

this Chapter.was recommended.

Now after re-examining, -it is recommended that

there is no need to disturb Chapter VA as it works well even

it covers conspiracy for petty economic crimes. (Para
4.08)
2. The Law Commission in its 42nd Report had

recommended that Section 120B should be revised to make the
section self-contained. But the same was not incorporated in

the IPC (Amendment) Bill, 1978.

We are of the view that a Criminal Conspiracy is a
separate offence and punishable separately from the principal
offence. Chapter VA works like residuary provision for the
crime of conspiracy. Therefore, no need to disturb the
current provisions pertaining to criminal conspiracy.

(Para 4.13)


~: 351 :-

13.08. CHAPTER V
FINANCIAL SCAM

1. Recently, various sort of financial scams in
various fields like banks, hospitals, non-financial

institutions involving crores of rupees have surfaced.

We are of the view that this problem can be tackled
if the following 16४ section, namely, Section 12088 is

inserted in the IPC,

“12088. Criminal conspiracy to defraud public
institution, etc.

When two or more persons agree to defraud a public
institution or a local authority, fraudulently or
dishonestly, to cause, or cause to be done,
wrongful gain to themselves or to any person, or to
cause or cause to be done, wrongful 1055 to such
public institution or local authority, such an
agreement is designated a criminal conspiracy to
defraud and whoever is a party to such criminal
conspiracy shall be punished with imprisonment for
life or with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to ten years, and shall

also be liable to fine:


7: 352 :-

Provided that no agreement shall amount to a
criminal conspiracy to defraud unless some act
besides the agreement is done by one or “more

parties to such agreement in furtherance thereof.

Explanation - Any bank or financial organisation or
company or body or body corporate, which is owned
or controlled by the Government, shall be deemed to
be a 'public institution’ for the Purposes of this
section”.

(Para 5.06)

13.09. CHAPTER -VI

ATTEMPT ~ Insertion of new sections

120 C & 120 D by way of new Chapter ४8 in the Bill

1. The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1978 made a
Provision for this new Chapter under clause 45. Clauses 46
to 51 of the Bill seem to be incorporated by mistake in this
Chapter 1.8. Chapter VI of the IPC. Therefore, this new
Chapter ought to be confined to sections 120C and 120D only

which are dealing with "Attempt".

After examining from various angles, it. 18.........
recommended that there is no need to insert proposed sections
in the IPC as Section 511 is working well and covers the said

aspects. Therefore, in view of it, no need to introduce a


~: 353 :-

new Chapter VB containing Section 120C and 1200. If need be

the language of section 511 may be amended.

(Para 6.16)

13.170. CHAPTER - VII

OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE

SECTIONS 121 - 130

1. Having considered the provisions of section 121-A,
we are of the view that no changes are necessary. Similarly
sections 121, 122 and 123 need not be disturbed as already
suggested in the 42nd Report of the Law Commission except,
the words “imprisonment of either description” be substituted

with “rigorous imprisonment”.

(Para 7.09)

2. The proposed section 123 A in the Bill is based on
the recommendations of the Law Commission jin its 42nd Report.
However, the Bill, apart from incorporating new section 123A
in the IPC, sought to add an Explanation thereto. We are of
the view that there is no harm in having the said
Explanation.

(Para 7.11)

3. The Law Commission in its 42nd Report had
recommended the revision of section 1244 dealing with
sedition. The same has been incorporated in the IPC

(Amendment) Bill, 1978 under clause 48. After reexamining


“४ 354 :-

the matter, we are of the view that section 124A may be

substituted as recommended.

(Para 7.18)

4. On the basis of earlier recommendations made by the
Law Commission in its 42nd Report, Prevention of Insults to

National Honour Act, 1971 was enacted.

Therefore, the proposed section 124B in the 17८
(Amendment) 8111, 1978, is not required to be inserted in the
IPC and the same may be deleted from Clause 48 of the Bill.

(Para 7.21)

5. We agree with the proposed Clause 49 of the IPC
(Amendment) 811, 1978 that section 125 of the IPC may be

revised as follows: °

"125, Waging war against any foreign state at

peace with India. - Whoever wages war against the
Government of any foreign State at peace with
India, or attempts to wage such war, or abets the
waging of such war, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable

to fine.”

(Para 7.25)


-: 355 :-

13.11. CHAPTER - VIII

SUICIDE : ABETMENT AND ATTEMPT

1. Law Commission in its 42nd Report had recommended
that Section 309 is harsh and unjustifiable and it should be

repealed.

However, on re-examining, we recommend that Section
309 should continue to be an offence under the Indian Penal
Code and Clause 131 of the Bill be deleted.

(Para 8.17)

13.12. CHAPTER - IX

OFFENCES AGAINST WOMEN AND OFFENCES AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN

1. The Law Commission recommends that clause Thirdly

in Section 375 be amended as under:-

Section 375: A man is said to commit rape-
Firstly- .....

Secondly- .....

Thirdly - With her consent, when her consent has

been obtained by putting her or any person in whom


2.

violence

-: 356 :-

she is interested, in fear of death or of hurt, or

of any other injury.

(Para 9.34)

To deal with the issue of increasing sexual

on women and female children, the Law Commission

recommends that the offence of sexual assault be added to the

existing offence of outraging the medesty of women jin Section

354 and punishment be increased from two years to five years.

Accordingly, Section 354 be amended on the following lines:

“354. Assault or criminal force to woman with
intent to outrage her modesty.- Whoever assaults or
uses criminal force to any woman, intending to
outrage her modesty or to commit sexual assault to
her or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
outrage her modesty or commit sexual assault एफ
her, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to five

years and shall also be liable to fine.”

Expanding the scope of Section 354 in the above manner, would

jn our view, cover the varied forms of sexua) violence other

than rape on women and female children.

(Para 9.35)


-: 357 :-

3. The Law Commission is further of the view that the
offence of eve teasing falls within the scope of Section 509
and there is no need for a new section 376F as recommended by
the National Commission for Women. However, the Law
Commission feels that the quantum of punishment be increased

from one year to three years and fine.

Accordingly, we recommend that Section 509 be

amended in the following manner:

"Section 509: Whoever, intending to insult the
modesty of any woman, utters any word, makes any
sound or gesture, or exhibits any object, intending
that such word or sound shall be heard or that such
gesture or object shaii be seen, by such woman, or
intrudes upon the privacy of such woman, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to 3 years and shall
also be liable to fine.”

(Para 9.35)

4, We recommend that another Explanation, Explanation

3 be added to section 494 which reads as under:-


5“: 358 :-

“Explanation 3: The offence of bigamy is committed
when any person converts himself or herself to
another religion for the purpose of marrying again
during the subsistence of the earlier marriage.”

(Para 9,42)

5. About Adultery, the IPC (Amendment) 8111, 1978 has
brought in the concept of equity between sexes in marriages
vis-a-vis offence of adultery in the subsequent section 497.
However, the Law Commission recommends that the
phraseology of clause 199 has to be modified on the following
lines to reflect the concept of equality between sexes.

Accordingly clause 199 shall be amended as under:

“497.Adultery.- Whoever has sexual intercourse with
a person who is, and whom he or she knows, or has
reason to believe, to be the wife or husband, as
the case may be, of another person, without the
consent or connivance of that other person, such
sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of
rape, commits adultery, and shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to five years, or with fine or with
both.”

(Para 9.46)


४ 359 :-

6. If section 497 is amended on the tines indicated
above, sub-section (2) of section 198 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure,1973 would also need to be suitably amended.

(Para 9.47)

7. We recommend that in view of the growing incidence
of child sexual abuse in the country, where unnatural offence
is committed on a person under the age of eighteen years,
there should be a minimum mandatory sentence of imprisonment
of either description for a term not less than two years, but
which may extend to seven years. The court shall, however,
have discretion to reduce the sentence for adequate and
special reasons to be recorded in the judgment. Consequently

section 377 be amended on the following lines:-

"377. Unnatural offences.- Whoever voluntarily has
carnal intercourse against the order of nature with
any man or woman shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both; and where such offence is committed by a
person over eighteen years of age with a _ person
under that age, he shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
shall not be less than two years but may extend to

seven years and fine.


-: 360 :-

Provided that the court may for adequate and
special reasons to be recorded in the judgment,
impose a sentence of imprisonment of either

description for a term of less than two years.

Explanation - Penetration is sufficient to
constitute the carnal intercourse necessary to the
offence described in this section.”

(Para 9.52) —

8. In the opinion of the Law Commission, the existing
Section 376(2)(f), and the Law Commission’s recommendations
for amendment of Sections 354 and 377 are adequate to deal

with child sexual abuse.

The Law Commission, therefore, does not recommenc
the incorporation of a new Section 354A as suggested in
clause 146 of the IPC (Amendment) Bill, 1978.

(Para 9.59}

13.13. CHAPTER X

ABDUCTION INCIDENTAL TO HIJACKING |

1. Clause 149 of IPC (Amendment) Bill, 1978 proposed
to insert a new Section 362A in respect of hijacking of

aircraft. The proposed clauses 35 and 37 of tha IPC


-: 361 :-

(Amendment) Bill, 1978 also seek amendments in Section 103
and 105 of the IPC, inter alia, regarding hijacking of

aircraft.

We recommend that there is no need to insert
Section 362A as well as to amend Sections 103 and 105.

(Para 10.15)

2. The Law Commission is aware that making direct
recommendation in International Law is not within its
jurisdiction. Nevertheless, we recommend incidentally that

there is an urgent need to have an International Court of
Civil Aviation. It is in the interest to prevent the crime
of international civil aviation. The proposed court will
deal with the crimes of Air-Hijacking, mischief in the air
service, etc. where the jurisdiction will arise in two or
more countries. It is expected from the Government of India
to take up this recommendation with the International Comity
as and when possible. oem

(Para 10.25)

3. About the crime of “Hijacking of Vehicles” etc.,
the following Clause 2 in Section 362A may be inserted in the
Ipc. The Law Commission also recommends that Clause(1) as
proposed in the the IPC(Amendment) 8111, 1978 may be omitted.

The Clause (2) may be read as under:


-: 362 :-

"362A(2).- Whoever on board a vehicle in India or a
vehicle registered in India unlawfully by force or
show of threat or force or by any other form of
intimidation seizes such vehicle or exercises
control over it or attempts to seize or exercise
contro? over it for the purpose of taking it toa
Place other than the place of its destination or
for any other purpose, is said to commit the
offence of hijacking of vehicle and whoever commits
such hijacking shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten

years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation- In this Section-

(1) The word “Vehicle” include any vessel but does

not include an aircraft.”

(Para 10,30)

4, Clause 179 of the IPC (Amendment) Bill, 1978 to
amend Section 432 may be dropped.

(Para 10.30)

5. The words “helicopter, air-glider etc.” may be
inserted in Section 2 (a) of the Anti-Air Hijacking Act 1982,
as well as jin the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against Safety
of Civil Aviation Act, 1982.

(Para 10.30)


~: 363 :-

13.14, CHAPTER - XT
DOCUMENT ~ SCOPE OF ITS DEFINITION

1. The term “document” as defined in Section 29 in IPC

needs to be enlarged.

Therefore, we recommend that an Explanation 3 may

be inserted in Section 29 of the IPC on the folitowing lines:-

“Explanation 3. - The term “document” also
includes any disc, tape, sound track or other
device on or in which any matter or image or sound
is recorded or stored by mechanical or other

means.”

(Para 11,08)

2, If the proposed amendment in Section 29 is carried
out then there would also be a need for consequential
amendment of the term of the “document” under Section 3 of
the Indian Evfdence Act, 1872 on the lines indicated above.

(Para 11.08)


-: 364 :-

13.15. CHAPTER — XII

THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1978

We have carefully perused the IPC (Amendment) Bill,
1978 which have 151 amendments, 95 substitutions, 32
omissions and 25 insertions. The changes proposed 171. the
Bill contemplate to bring about the basic penal statute of
this country updated to remove lacuna and make it useful. for
meeting the optimum needs. ४७ find that some of the changes
contemplated go beyond the recommendations made by the Law
Commission in its 42nd Report. Therefore, we think it

necessary to re-examine all clauses of the Bill.

1. The amendments sought in clauses 1, 6, 7, 8, 12,
16, 39, 40, 44, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 53, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60,
61, 62, 65, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80,
81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 92, 95, 96, 97, 98,
99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 112,
113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 120, 121, 126, 127, 129, 132,
133, 135, 136, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 147, 148, 150,
153, 154, 156, 157, 158, 185, 186, 189, 191, 192, 193, 195,
200, 202, 205 and 207 are only Inconeequential and the same

may be carried out.

(Para 12,02)

2. fon

es 2 to 8 - By these clauses, some amendments

are sought in Sections 4 to 17 of the Code. We do not

recommend any changes in Section 8,9 and 11 of the Ipc.


Consequently, clauses 2 to 8 of the 8111 have to be deleted.
Remaining amendments in various Sections are pertaining to

various words and explanations used in the Code and the same

are based mainly on 42nd Report.

(Para 12.03)

3. Clause 9- By virtue of this clause Sections 18 to

21 are sought to be substituted.

We are of the view that unless major changes are
brought out, it is not desirable to insert new clause and
make them amenable to any of the relevant penal provisions.

(Para 12.04)

4. Clause 10 - By virtue of this clause, the
definition in the existing Section 25 is sought to be

substituted.

We agree to the proposed substitution.

(Para 12.05)

5. Clause 11 - By this clause, an amendment in

Section 29 of the IPC is sought.

In view of the changes in the audio and video
technology and computers, it is recommended that following
Explanation (3) may be added to the existing Section.

“Explanation (3):- The term ‘document’ includes any


-: 366 :-

disc, tape, sound track or other device on or in
which any matter or image or sound 15 recorded or
stored by mechanical or other means”.

(Para 12.06)

6. Clause 12 ~- In this clause, existing
Sections 31, 32 and 33 which define the word “will” are

sought to be omitted.

On examining, we are of the view that there is no
harm in retaining the existing Sections 31, 32 and 33 of the
170, Therefore, Clause 12 has to be omitted.

(Para 12.07)

7. Clause 13 - By virtue of this clause, the

words "several persons” whenever they occur are sought to be

substituted by the words “two or more persons”.

We are of the view that by carrying out this
amendment the language of Section 34 becomes more explicit.
For the same reason the expression “several persons”
occurring in Sections 35 and 38 also can be substituted by
the expression “two or more persons”.

(Para 12.08)

8. Clause 14 - Under this clause it is proposed

to substitute Section 40 by another Section.


-: 367 i-

We recommend that Section 40 may be substituted on

the following lines ८:

“Section 40- Offences which mea

1. 619५

act or

omission made punishable by any law for the time

being in force and capital offence

means

offence

for which death is one of the punishments provided

by the law”.

9. Clause 15 - By this Clause

sought to be substituted by a new Section.

(Para 12

Section

.09)

43. is

We agree that Section 43 needs amendment as sought

in this clause,

10. Clause 16 ~ Under this cl

(Para 12

ause,

10)

existing

Sections 48, 49 and 50 defining words “vessel, year, month,

Section" respectively are sought to be

omitted

for the

reasons that they are defined in the General Clauses Act.

We are of the view that these Sections need not to

be omitted and accordingly Clause 16 of the B

deleted.

111. has

(Para 12

to be

211)


11.4 Clause 17 - The existing Section 52 defines
the word “good faith" and Section 52A defines the word
“harbour”, As per this clause, both these Sections are to be

substituted by new Sections.

We agree to the substitution of Sections 52 and

528.

(Para 12.12)

12. Clause 18 - Under this clause, the existing

Section 53 is sought to be substituted.
We do not endorse the addition of new forms of
punishments except public censure.

(Para 12.13)

13, Clause 19 - Under this clause Sections 54,

55 and 558 of the Indian Penal Code are sought to be omitted.

We agree and are of the view that clause 19 is very

appropriate in view of the changes in the Cr.P.C.. (Para
12.14)
14. Clause 20 - Under this clause the words

“imprisonment for 20 years", are sought to be substituted by

the words “rigorous imprisonment for 20 years”.


We agree to the proposal.

(Para 12.15)

15. Clause 21 - By virtue of this clause,

Sections 64 and 65 are to be substituted.

We are of the view that the proposed amendments are
incidental and they may be carried out.

(Para 12.16)

16. Clause 22 - By this clause Section 66 of the

IPC is sought to be omitted.

In view of the revised Sections 64 and 65, Section
66 may be omitted.

(Para 12.17)

17. Clause 23 - Under this clause, Sections 67 and 68

are sought to be substituted.

We are of the view that the existing Sections may
be substituted.

(Para 12.18}

18. Clause 24 - Under this clause the existing
Section 69 providing for termination of imprisonment on

payment of proportional part of fine is sought to be omitted.


-: 370 :-

We are of the view that this omission is necessary
in view of the new revised Section 58.

(Para 12.19)

19. Clause 25 - Under this clause the existing
Sections 70, 71 and 72 providing for the limitation of time
for levy of fine and limit of punishment in case made of

several offences are sought to be substituted.

We are of the view that amended Sections are
comprehensive and the amendments may be carried out.

(Para 12.20)

20. Clause 26 — Under this clause, Sections 73
and 74 providing for solitary confinement by way of

punishment is sought to be omitted.

We are of the view that it is necessary to omit
these two Sections.

(Para 12.21)

21. Clause 27 - Under this clause new Sections

748, 748, 740 and 740 are sought to be incorporated.

We are of the view that proposed Sections 74A and
748 need not to be incorporated. ४७ 8150 do not recommend

incorporation of new Section 74D. Consequently, the new


2 371 i-

Section 74C providing for additional Punishment by way of
censure can be numbered as 74A and may be added.

(Para 12.22)

22. Clause 31 - Under this clause, Section 94 is

sought to be substituted. Also new Sections 94A and 948 are
sought to be inserted.

We are of the view that with the classifications
indicated, Section 94 may be substituted. We also recommend
that the proposed new Section 948 and 948 be deleted from
clause 31. If necessary some of such provisions may be added
in the other enactments including the Companies Act to
strengthen the same to meet such a situation.

(Para 12,23)

23. Clauses 32 to 37 - Under these clauses, some of the
existing Sections relating to right of private defence of
persons and property are either sought to be amended or
substituted. However, in the 8111, no change in respect of

Sections 96 to 98 is mooted.

(ii) We recommend that the third Paragraph in the
existing Section be included in the Proposed Section and
rearrange the clauses.

(Para 12.24)


(iii) We are of the view that the proposed change in

Section 100 is appropriate.

(iv) Clause 34 seeks an amendment in the existing
Section 101. This change appears to be appropriate.
(v) In the proposed Section 103 of the Bill, there is a

new clause (d) relating to the offences of mischief to
Property, house, or intended to be used for the purpose of
Government or any corporation. Two more new clauses (e) and

(f) are sought to be added in the Proposed Section.

In this context, it is recommended that if the new

Section 362A is to be added then there is no need of clause

(e). Clause (f) can be retained but may be renumbered as
(8).

(vi) Under clause 36, a minor amendment to Section 104
is proposed, We are of the view that the changes may be

carried out.

{Para 12,24)

34. Clause 37 - Under this clause, the existing
Section 105 is sought to be substituted by a new Section

bearing the same number.


7: 373 :-

We are of the view that in the proposed new clause
(c), the words “hijacking of aircraft” have to be omitted.

(Para 12.25)

25. Clauses 38 to 44 - (i) Clause 38 of the IPC

(Amendment) Bill, 1978 has incorporated some changes.
Section {108 as mentioned in clause 38 is in conformity with
the recommendation made by the Law Commission in its 42nd
Report and, therefore, we do not recommend any further
change.

(Para 12.26)

(ii) Under clause 39, changes sought are minor in nature

and are warranted.

(iii) The changes suggested in clauses 40-44 are
warranted.

(Para 12.26)

26. Clause 45 - Under this clause, a new Chapter
VB seeks to insert new Sections 120C and 1200 defining
attempt and punishment for offence of attempt. The existing

Section 511 is also sought to be omitted.

Wwe have carefully examined this clause and
recommend that Section 511 be retained and this clause be

deleted. (Para 12.27)


-: 374 :-

27. Clause 47 - Under this clause, a new Section

123A is sought to be inserted.

We are of the view that the proposed Section May be

inserted.

(Para 12.28)

28. Clause 48 - Under this clause, the existing
Section 124A which deals with Sedition is sought to be
substituted by a new Section bearing the same number. ४७

agree.

We are of the view that the proposed Section 1248

need not be inserted.
(Para 12.29)

29, Clause 52 - Under this clause, the existing
Chapter VII is sought to be substituted by a new Chapter

bearing the same number.

We are of the view that there is 10 harm in
substituting the existing chapter.

(Para 12,30)


-: 375 :-

30. Clause 54 - By this clause, a new Section
147A is sought to be added.
We agree with the proposed insertion.

(Para 12.31)
31. Clause 58 ~ Under this clause, a new Section
153C is sought to be added.

We agree that Section 153C may be added.

32. Clauses 603 & 64 ~- Clauses 63 and 64 of the Bill

seek amendments in Sections 161, 162, and 163 IPC.
Since these Sections had already been repealed by
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and transposed

thereto, clauses 63 and 64 have to be, therefore, omitted.

33. Clause 66 Under this clause, a new Section 166A is
sought to be inserted.

We are of the view that the proposed Section 1668
may be inserted.

(Para 12.34)

34. Clause 68 - Under this Clause, a new Section

167A is sought ta be inserted in Chapter 12.

We agree that the proposed Section may be inserted.

(Para 12.35)


~: 376 :-

35. Clause 91 = Under this clause, two new
Sections 198 A and 198 B are sought to be added in Chapter
XI.

We think that addition of new Sections 198A and
198B is unnecessary. Consequently, clause 91 has to be
omitted.

(Para 12.36)
36. Clause 93 - By this clause, a new Section

207A is sought to be added,

we are of the view that the new Section 207A may be

inserted in the Code.

(Para 12.37)

37. Clause 94 - By this clause, the existing
Section 211 is sought to be substituted by a new Section with

the same number.

The change proposed is an appropriate one.

(Para 12.38)

38. Clause 100 - By this clause, the existing
Section 229 is sought to be substituted by the two new

Sections, namely, 229 and 229A.


We are of the view that both the Sections are very

much needed in the Code.

(Para 12.39)

39. Clause 110 - By this clause, a new Section

254A is sought to be inserted in the Code.

We are of the view that the new Section may be

inserted in the Code.

(Para 12.40)

40, Clause 111 Under this clause, for Section 263A of
the Code, new Sections 263A, 263B and 263C are sought to be

substituted.

We agree to the proposal.

(Para 12.41)

41. Clause 112 By this clause, the substitution of
words “two years” for “one year” in the Sections 264-267 is

sought to be contemplated.

We agree to the proposal.

(Para 12.42)

42. Clause 119 - Under this clause, a new Section

279A is sought to be inserted.


४ 378 :-

Having regard to the increase in the volume of road
traffic and indiscriminate use of vehicles whether they are
roadworthy or not, such a provision is very much needed.

(Para 12.43)

43. Clause 122 - Under this clause, a new
sub-Section is sought to be inserted in Section 292 of the

IPC.

We are of the view that the proposed amendment
would be appropriate addition. However, we are of the view
that the sentence may be made “three years” in Section 292 in
place of “two years” to be on par with the new secion 292A,

(Para 12.44)

44. Clause 123 = Under this clause, after Section
292, a new Section 292A is sought to be inserted to deal with
an offence of printing etc. of grossly indecent or

scurrilous matter or matter intended for blackmail.

We are of the view that Section 292A may be
inserted.

(Para 12.45)


-: 379 :-

45. Ciause 124 - The existing Section 294A deals
with offence of keeping lottery office. By this clause this
Section is sought to be substituted by a new Section. New
Section 2948 for sale distribution etc. of lottery tickets

is also sought to be added.

The proposal is salutary one.

(Para 12.46)

46. Clause 125 - By this clause, Section 302 is
sought to be substituted by the new Section bearing the same

number.

We are of the view that this clause may be deleted
as there is no need of any amendment in Section 302.

(Para 12,47)

47. Clause 128 - Under this clause, a new Section

304B is sought to be inserted.

At the outset we must point out that in 1986 by
amending Act 43 of 1986, the exisitng Section 304 B dealing

with dowry death was inserted.

Therefore, we recommend that this may be inserted
in Section 304A as sub-section (2).

(Para 12.48)


—: 380 :-

48. Clause 130 - Under this clause, Sections 307

and 308 are sought to be substituted.

We are of the view that there is no need to disturb
the existing Sections 307 and 308 of the Code except the
second part of existing Section 307.

(Para 12.49)

49. * Clause 131 - Under this clause, the existing
Section 309 which makes attempt to commit suicide punishable

is sought to be omitted.

We are of the view that the existing Section 309
has to be retained and the clause be omitted.

(Para 12.50)

50. Clause 134 - Under this clause, the existing

Section 320 defining grievous hurt is sought to be

substituted.

We are of the view that the proposed changes are
only peripheral, but a little more explanarative. Therefore,
that can be carried out.

(Para 12.51)


5“; 381 :-

51. Clause 137 - Under this clause, the existing
Section 328 is sought to be substituted by a new Section. In
content, both the Sections are same except in the new Section
in place of “unwholesome drug or other thing” the words
“unwholesome substance” are inserted which are of same effect
but Tittle wider.

(Para 12.52)

52. Clause 144 - Under this clause, the existing

Sections 341 to 344 are sought to be substituted.

We are of the view that the number of persons on
the basis of constructive liability can be limited to two or
more persons as we find in the proposed amendment in Sections
34, 35 and 38 IPC. Therefore, the proposed clause may be
amended accordingly.

(Para 12.53)

53. Clause 146 - Under this clause, a new Section

354A dealing with offence of indecent assault on a minor is

sought to be inserted.

We are of the view that this clause has to be
omitted.

(Para 12.54)

54. Clause 149 - Under this clause, the existing

Section 362 is sought to be substituted by the new Section.


~: 382 :-

We are of the view that the proposed change may
enlarge the meaning of abduction and the same may be carried

out.

55. Clause 151 - Under this clause, a new Section
364A dealing with offences of kidnapping is sought ‘. be

inserted.

Having regard to the Present crime scenario of thos

Nature, the new Section is a Saiutary one and, ‘the

inserted in the Code.

56. Clause 152 - Under this clause, the

Section 366 and 366A are sougnt to be substituted by the

Section.

We are of the view that the change 5 फ्री

consequential and we endorse the same.

m4

a

Clause 155 - Under this clause the e-‘sting

Section 368 is sought to be substituted.

We endorse the substitution.



-: 383 :-

58. Clause 159 - Under this clause, the existing
Sections 375 and 376 are sought to be substituted by new

Sections 375, 376A to 376८.

We are of the view that this clause may be omitted.
However, Wa recommend a modification in clause ३3 of Section
375 by inserting the word “injury”.

(Para 12.59)

59. Clause 160 —- Under this clause, the existing

Section 377 is sought to be substituted by a new Section.
We endorse the substitution on the lines suggested
in Chapter Ix.
(Para 12.60)
60. Clause 161 - (i) Under this clause, the
existing Sections 380 and 381 are sought to be substituted.

Also a new Section 380A is proposed to be inserted.

The changes may be carried out.

(Para 12.61)


—: 384 :-

(ii) Similarly, a new Section 381A needs to be inserted

in the Code.

(Para 12.62)

61. Clause 162 — Under this clause, a new Section
385A is sought to be inserted. The proposed Section is
intended to cover an offence of blackmailing with the

dishonest intention.

We are of the view that the new Section dealing
with such offences is very necessary and insertion may be
carried out.

(Para 12,63)

62. Clause 163 - Under this clause, the words
“may be punished with imprisonment for life” occurring in
Sections 388 and 389 are sought to be substituted with

imorisonment of lesser periods.

We are of the view that the substitution of the
words “may be punished with imprisonment for life” with
“lesser periods of sentence” is called for.

(Para 12.64)

63. Clause 164 - Under this clause, Section 395

ig sought to be substituted.


-: 385 :-

We are of the view that no change in this Section

is necessary.

(Para 12.65)

64. Clauses 165 & 166 - Under these clauses, the
words “uses any deadly weapon, or” in Section 397 is sought
to be omitted and in Section 398 after the words “at the time
of" the words “committing or” are sought to be inserted and

for the words “seven years”, the words “five years” are

sought to be substituted.

We are of the view that it is better to retain the

existing words and the said clauses may be omitted.

(Para 12.66)

65. Clause 167 - Under this clause, in Section
399 for the words "ten years", the words “seven years” are

sought to be substituted.

we are of the view that as the offence in this
Section is with reference to making preparation, making the
sentence lesser appears to be proportionate.

(Para 12.67)

66. Clause_i68 - Under this clause, a new Section

399A is sought to be inserted.


-: 386 :-

We agree to the proposal and the required change

may be carried out.

(Para 12.68)

67. Clauses 169 and 170 - By virtue of these
Clauses, a few words in Section 400-402 are sought to be

substituted.

The proposed changes are only consequential and we
are of the view that the same may be carried out.

(Para 12.69)

68. Clause 171 - A new Explanation I is sought to

be added in Section 403.

We are of the view that the proposed changes may be
brought about.

(Para 12.70)

59. Clause 172-173 - Under these clauses, some minor

changes are proposed in Sections 404 and 408.

We are of the view that the proposed changes may be
carried out.

(Para 12.71)

70. Clause 174 - Under this’ clause, the word

“factor” occurring in Section 409 is sought to be omitted


-: 387 i-

We are of the view that there is no harm ir
retaining this word. Accordingly, this clause may be

omitted.

(Para 12.72)

71. Clause 115 - Undor this clause, the existing

Section 410 is sought to be substituted.

We are of the view that the proposed new Section is

appropriate and may be carried out.

72. Clause 176 - By this clause, the existing Sections

411 and 414 are sought to be amended.

We agree to the amendments in both the Sections.

(Para 12.74)

73. Ciause 177 - Under this clause, the existing

Section 415 is sought to be substituted.

We are of the view that the substitution may be
carried out but we may also mention that it would 08 better
to retain the existing illustrations in the Section.

(Para 12.75)


7. BOO +

74. Clause 178 — Under this clause, Section 420
15 sought to be substituted. New Sections namely, Section

420A, 420B and 420C are also sought to be inserted.

The proposed changes may be carried out.
(Para 12.76)
75. Clause 179 - Under this clause, the existing
Sections 426 to 432 are sought to be substituted by new

Sections covering in general the offence of mischief.

(1) We have examined new Sections 426 to 431 and
recommend that the sentence of “three years” prescribed under

each of these Sections may be enhanced to “five years”.

(ii) About Section 432, it may be mentioned that after
the IPC (Amendment) Bill, 1978, special legislations were
brought in 1982 which were amended in 1994, as mentioned in

Chapter X. We recommend deletion of new Section 362A.

For the same reasons, we recommend that Section 3A
of the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against Safety of Civil
Aviation Act, 1982(SUACA) may be amended. If amendments to
Section 3A of this Act is not to be carried out in the same
manner, then the proposed Section 432 may be retained in the
clause, but the sentence under Section 432 may be brought in
accordance with Section 3A of the said Act.

(Para 12.77)


=: 389 :-

76. Clause 180 - Under this clause, the new
Sactions 434 to 440 are sought to be substituted.

(i) We recommend that the word “Aircraft” occuring in
the proposed Section 434 may be omitted in view of our
suggestion made in Chapter xX.

(119) In respect of other types of mischief regarding

aircraft, Section 3A of the SUACA is to be amended. If not,
the Section as proposed may be retained and the sentences be

brought in accordance with Section 3A of the SUACA Act.

{iii) In the proposed Section 438, the sentence cf three

years may be enhanced ४० five years.

(Para 12.78}

Clause 181 - Under this ciause, Section 441

is sought to be substituted.

However, it may ba mentioned that the proposed
amendment does not carry any substantial change.

(Para 12.79)

78. Clause 182 - Under this clause, Sect

ans

443-460 ara sought to be substituted.


-: 390 :-

We have considered this provision and we think that
such substitution in the place of the existing Section will

be salutary.

{Para 12.80)

79. Clause 183 - Under this clause, Chapter XVIIA

is sought to be introduced by way of inserting Section 462A.

We are of the view that this new Chapter dealing
with offences relating to private employment is not
necessary. 50 consequently this clause may be omitted.

(Para 12.81)

80. Clause 184 - By this clause, an amendment is

sought to be inserted in Section 464 of the IPC.

We recommend that an Explanation 3 in Section 464
of the IPC on the following lines may also be added-

"Explanation 3. - Knowingly committing forgery of
a copy of a document or knowingly making a false
copy of a document or copying a false document
which he Knows or believes to be a false document,
with the intention that he or another shall use it
to induce somebody to accept it as a copy of a

genuine document to do or not to do some act to his



४; 391 :-

own or any other person's prejudice, will amount to

making a false document.”

(Para 12.82)

81. Clause 187 - Under this clause, Section 467

is sought to be amended.

We agree to this change.

(Para 12.83)

82. Clause 188 - By this clause, substitution of

new Sections for existing Section 470 and 471 is sought.

We recommend that the changes may be carried out.

(Para 12.84)

83. Clause 190 - Under this clause, the existing

Section 474 is sought to be substituted.

The change suggested is only peripheral and the
same is endorsed.

(Para 12.85)

84. Clause_194_- By virtue of this clause,
certain amendments are sought to be made under the

Explanation part of Section 489A of the Code.


-: 392 :-

Since the proposed changes are clarificatory in

nature, the same may be carried out.

(Para 12.86)

85. Clause 196 - By this clause, a new Section

489F is sought to be inserted.

We agree to the insertion of the proposed Section.

(Para 12.87)

86. Clause 197 - Under this clause, the existing
Chapter XIX is sought to be substituted regarding offence

against privacy.

(i) Since there is a need to have separate legislation
on the subject, the proposed substitution may not be carried

out.

(ii) We further recommend that existing Section 491 IPC
may be retained and the punishment therein may be enhanced
from “three months” to “one year" and the existing Timit of
imposing fine of Rs.200/= may be substitued by the words
"fine only", And the offence be inade cognizable.

(Para 12.88)

87. Clause 198 - Under this clause, the existing

Section 494 is sought to be substituted.


We think that the proposed new Section may be
substituted but as already mentioned, the Explanation 3
should be added in accordance with the principle laid down by
the Supreme Court.

(Para 12,89)

88. Clause 199 ~ Under this Clause, the existing

Section 497 is sought to be substituted.

We have already suggested some changes in Chapter
IX. In the proposed Section, the words “by the man” have to
be omitted. .

(Para 12.90)

89. Clause 201 - Under this clause, the existing

Section 500 is sought to be. substituted.

We recommend that the changes be carsied out

(Para 12.91)

90. Clause 203 - By this clause, the omission of

Section 505 is sought.

A perusal of the proposed Section 1530 under clause
58 of the Bill shows that these provisions are on the lines
of the proposed Section 158B recommended under para 8.26 of
the 42nd Report which incorporates the provisions of Section

505 (2) and (3) with certain modifications.


Thus the provisions under the existing sect है
may be omitted since these are covered and transposed 2

proposed provisions as stated above.

(Para 12.98

91. Clause 204 ~ By virtue of this clause, a ‘new:
RS

Section 507A is proposed to be inserted.

We endorse the proposal.

(Para 12.93)

92. Clause 206 - By this clause, it is sought
that Chapter XVII, containing only Section 511, of the Indian
Penal Code shall be omitted.

We are of the view that Section 511 is working well

and there is no need to omit it.

We recommend accordingly.

1
/ A cay
fi Dayockanm 8%
(JUSTICEMK. JAYACHANDRA REDDY)
i CHAIRMAN
i? suc S \ ene?
ae — _ Vbss Wau he J: ‘
(JUSTICE R.L.GUPTA) (CH.G.KRISHNAMURTHY ) (MRS ALICE JACOB}
MEMBER MEMBER - MEMBER
a
+/7७०.,

(R.L. MEENA)

MEMBER-SECRETARY