LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT

ON

SECTION 52: THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY

ACT, 1882 AND ITS AMENDMENT

APRIL, 1998


IUSTICE, LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
3. P. JKVAN REDDY SHASTRI BHAWAN

chairman, Law Commission of India NEW DELHI- 110001
TEL. : 3384475

—— Residence
1, JANPATH
NEW DELHI - 110011
TEL. : 3019468

0.0.No.6(3)(46)/98-LC(LS) April 23, 1998.

Dear Law Minister,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the One
Hundred Fifty Seventh Report of the Law Commission. on
“Section 52: Transfer of Property Act, 1882 and its
Amendment”. This section deals with transfer of property
pending suit or proceeding relating thereto.

2. It may be mentioned that a few years ago, the Law
Commission forwarded to the Government of India its
Seventieth Report on the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. The
report awaits implementation. In the meantime, the
Commission considered it proper to take up the subject suo
motu, having regard to the urgent and pressing need, 10. the
present day situation, of ensuring a minimum degree of
certainty in the matter of title to immoveable property. The
wide wording of the said provision as it stands at present,
presents numerous difficulties and has a great impact on the
certainty of title to land and other categories of immoveable
property. Land being a resource of vital importance in = any
economy, it is necessary that title thereto should be as
clear as possible.

3. The recommendations have been made with a view to
plug the above loophole and make the provisions contained in
section 52 more purposeful and justice oriented. We hope
that the recommendations, if implemented, will protect the
bonafide purchasers for value to a considerable extent.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,
a
fy why
(B.P.Jeevan Reddy)
Or. M. Thambi Durai,

Hon’ble Minister for Law,Justice & Company Affairs,
Shastri Bhavan,
New Dethi. न


CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

I

II

IIl

Iv

CONTEN

—t
a”

INTRODUCTION

DOCTRINE OF LIS PENDENS- ITS
GENERAL MEANING AND RELEVANCE

SECTION 52: TRANSFER OF PROPERTY

ACT, 1882 AND ITS AMENDMENT

SECTION 52 AND ALLIED PROVISIONS

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

1-18

19-38

39-76

77-96

97-104


CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

1. INSTINCT OF MAN TO HAVE PROPERTY :

1.4 Property

10 @ sense ac

is, on

“s  Tabour

@
a
5
c
ct
fe

i

perishable can only 98 stored in or

universally recognisec fact that ev

natural Instinct to enjoy tne F
According to some surists, it
brings the peing.
recognises confers

individuals

which ६७

”
»
oO

projects the rignt to property as ma

right and a
tnat the natura’ state of man was
Freedom, in which men were ina
their actions and dispose of
possessions as they saw fit,
furthermore, a state of equality, in
man in this state was subjected to
of any other man. This state of nat

law of mature which, looking tow.

preservation of mankind, taught

umulated labour, that

as  jabdour otherwise

oO
fej
o
+
at
+
ct

8 almost
ery man nas got a

rutts of his labour,

Inszinct thar

noc. of thought which
“s supreme natural
State. Locke assumed
& state cf perfect
position to determine
their persons and

ard that it was,
the sense that no
the will or authority
ure was governed by a
ards the peace and

men that all persons


being eoual and independent, no one ought to harm another
in his life. health. liberty, or possessions.'! As Jong as
the state of nature existed, everybody had the power to
execute the jaw of nature and punish offences against it
with his own hana. This situation was fraught with
disadvantages, inconveniences, and dangers. In the first
Place, the enjoyment of the natural rights of life,
liberty, and property was uncertain. and constantly
exposed to the invasions of others. Second, in punishing
infractions of the law of nature, each man was a judge in
his own cause and liable to exceed the rule of reason in
avenging trans¢cressions.? In order to ena the confusion

and ciserder i

“hn

to tne state c nature, men
contemplated & boay politic or a community. In contrast

to Hobbes, who construed the social contract as a pact of

compiste subjection to an absolute sovereign, Locke
assertec that men in establishing a political authority
retained those natural rights of life, liberty, and

property (०1087 grouped by Locke under the singie concept
of property3) which were their own in pre-political

stage. In Locke’

8 contemplation the right to property
was not created by the community or state, but existed
already in the state of nature. To him, State came into
existence for its protection. His follower Pound
expresses “In civilized society men must be able to
assume that they control, for purposes beneficial to

themselves, what they have discovered and appropriated to

themselves, what they have created by their own labour,



and what they have acquired under existing social order.”
To Aristotle property is the' condition of good life. He
regards it as the extension of human personality. He is
of the view that property is essential for satisfaction
of a natural instinct of possession as of an equally

natural impulse of generosity.

1.3 Locke wrote: “The measure of property Nature
well set, by the extent of men’s jabour and the
conveniency of life. No man’s labour could subdue or
appropriate ali, nor could his enjoyment consume more
than a small part, so that it was impossible for any man.
this way, to entrench upon the right of another or
acquire to himself a4 property to the prejudice of his
neighbour, who would still have room for as good and as a4
large a possession (after the other had taken out his) as

bdefore it was appropriated.+

1.4 In 1302 John of Paris argued that property was a
means to enable ciergy to do their spiritual work and
therefore, there was nothing wrong in their owning
property. Similarly in Mahabharat, it is engrafted “From
wealth come all religious acts (like cnarity); it is the
means of enjoying ali pleasures, heaven itself can be
attained, Oh king, through (Artha) wealth." Kautaliya
also holds that "wealth and wealth alone 18. important
inasmuch as charity and desire depend upon wealth for

their realisation."7



|

1.5. To Bodin as to Locke the right of property is
rooted in the law of nature, for basic instinct of man is
self preservation. Bodin regards property as an
attribute of family and family according to him jis the
basis of the State. Hegel maintained that property was
necessary for the expression of man’s personality. “It
is in possession first of all", he said, “that a man
becomes rational". He justifies private property as the

objectification of man’s will.” 8

1.6. According to Bentham property is the basis of
man’s expectations and he enjoins on the legislature not
to disturb man’s expectations if it wants to promote

social happines.

1.7. Right to property is, therefore, an incentive to
effort. It induces men to industry and prudence. The
State should guarantee it not only to meet the demand of
natural justice that man should be entitled to the reward

of his labour but also to promote economic growth.9

1.8 The concept of property also changes with
economic evolution.1° In the primitive stage (hunting and
fishing) of man’s existence right to property was
confined to effective occupation. Ownership and use went
together. Roussseau defends the rule of “first

occupancy” as forming the basis of property right in



7
i
ad

land. In the past,with the knowledge of agriculture, the
land and cattle became important forms of wealth. Later,
the invention of money was a landmark in the history of
propety. Prior to it, barter system also prevailed but
barter economy inherently restricted the extent and scope
of property right. Monetary economy revolutionised,
property relations in society. With the application of
machines to the process of production, monetary economy
turned into capitalism. Capitalism has brought further
development in the concept of property. We have arrived
at a concept of property consisting, inter-alia, of
bundle of paper representing securities, promissory
notes, shares, certificates, bonds, debentures, stocks
and other negotiable instruments. In the Hindu religious
endowment’s case’! the Supreme Court took the view that
the term property should be given a liberal and wide
connotation and extend to those well recognised types of
interests which have the insignia or characterstics of

proprietary right.

1.9 Legal concepts of what is property differ from
time to time and place to place. What is property in one
legal system may not be so according to another legal
system, in as much as the law may fail to provide that
the particular assertion deserves to be recognised or

protected by law. This is partly due to the differences



ia

in the social order in which a legal system operates, and
partly due to the state of juristic thinking in the

particuiar country.

1.10 NEED TO RECOGNISE MAN’s RIGHT TO PROPERTY.- It is

trite saying that property can be earned only under the
Protection of the State. Indeed property is that to
which law gives recognition. Nevertheless, it goes
without saying that property rights cannot be absojute.
As Lindsay remarked, right to property requires social
recognition. There is no inherent right to appropriate
any commodity irrespective of social approval. In the
early times, even property right in ’slaves’ was duly
recognised but with the abolition of slavery no. such
claim could be advanced on any supposed theory of rights.
Without social recognition, therefore, there is no right
to property even over one’s own person.'2 (Locke asserts

that every man has property in his own ‘person’ )

The property and its recognition depend on social
recognition. It was an aspect weli-kKnown to Hindu
jurists. According to some Hindu jurists, the idea of
property is exclusively indicated in the Sastras and
ownership can be acquired only in the modes recognised'3
by them. This view is favoured by Dhareswara,
Jimutayahana and their followers. On the other hand,
Vijnaneswara and his followers maintain that the idea of

property has its basis on popular recognition without any

LL 2७ यमाकाक.


dependence on Sastras, the modes of acquisition of
ownership being to collect and prescribe those means of
acquisition recognized by popular usage that are regarded
as commendable and as such worthy of being pursued. This

latter view represents the doctrine that property has its

basis in popular recognition. Right to property is also

recognised as one of the basic human rights. Article 17
of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights declares
that “every one has the right to own property alone as
well as in association with others” and that “no one

shall be arbitrarily deprived of his property”.

Property is, therefore, a creation of social
recognition and economic evolution. The State which
directs social recognition and promotes economic
development must ultimately determine the measure in
which right to property shall be guaranteed. Right to
property is thus indicative of the social and political
philosophy of a State. It goes to the very foundations

of the political system.14

1.11 Recognition of subsequent dispositions.- Any

society must, as a pre-requisite of social order,
allocate rights of control over the land and goods
existing in its territory. The pattern of allocation may
vary, but there must be some allocation of its resources.
Once proprietorship/ownership of the resources is

recognised, there must also be a provision for


im)

recognising subsequent dispositions of the rights as
recognised in their origin. This shows the significance
of a law relating to the transfer of property. Transfer
of a right, of course, pre-supposes the existence of that

right.

The rights may be allocated according to the
norms of the particular society, but there must be some
form of allocation. The transition from the natural
state to civil society, according to Rousseau,'5 “changes
usurpation into a true right and enjoyment into
proprietorship”. Civilized society thus postulates the
transformation of de facto acts into legal doctrines in
the field of property. Once the rights are recognised by
society-setting its seal of approval-their transfer must
also be provided for. The provisions for transfer could
also vary according to the norms of the particular

society but the provisions must be there.16&

K.K.Mathew observes’? that a system of property,
in the sense of a set of norms allocating control over
the physical resources at its disposal, is essential to
any community. By referring to Hobbes and Rousseau, he
infers that any society must allocate rights of control
over the land and goods at its disposal as a

pre-requisite of a social order.18


Property is an essential guarantee of human
dignity, for, in order that a man may be able to develop
himself in 4 human fashion, he needs a certain freedom

and a certain security.12

1.12 Right to Property 11 the Constitution of

India-sRealising the man’s natural instinct and
expectation to enjoy the fruits of his jabour, right to
property was initially included in the Constitution of
India as a Fundamental Right under Articles 19(1)(f) and
31, subject, of course, to certain exceptions carved out
therein keeping in view the larger interests of the
society. Now, while clause (1) of article 31 has been
shifted from Part III to article 300A, clause 2 of that
article, which dealt with compulsory acquisition of
Property, has been repealed by the Constitution (44th
Amendment) Act, 1978. Sub-clause (f) of clause 1 of
article 19 which guaranteed the right to acquire, hold
and dispose of property has also been deleted by that
Act. Newly inserted article 300A of the Constituion now
provides that “no person shall be deprived of his
property save by authority of law". The result of these
changes, in short, is that the right to property has
ceased to be a fundamental right under the Constitution
of India but has been retained as a constitutional right

under article 300A.



bes

cy

1.13 Machinery for settlement of disputes.- Once a man’s

right to acquire and hold the property is recognised by
the State, need to allow him to enjoy his property
without any disturbance, subject to certain well defined
exceptions which may be made by the state to protect
public interests as also to ensure socio-economic
justice, naturally arises therefrom. Unless peaceful
enjoyment of property by its owner is ensured by the
state, his right to property would be meaningless. In
the absence of State protection, ultimately the rule
"might is right” would govern the state of affairs. This
may lead to conflicts and tension having tendency to
disturb law and order in the society, if no machinery for
settlement of such disputes is provided by the State.
Therefore, it is the fundamental obligation of every
government to provide for mechanism for resolution of
such disputes. No government can afford to have their
citizens perpetually engaged in finding solutions to
their disputes by an unending proces. It is a
fundamental principle of law that where there is a right

there is a remedy - ubi jus ibi remedium.

Keeping in view the paramount importance and need
of providing effective means for settlement of disputes,
adequate provisions have been made in our country for the
purpose not only under our Constitution but also under
other laws. Apart from constitutional remedies, in our

country a litigant having.a grievance of a civil nature



has, independently of any statute, a right to institute a
suit in civil court having jurisdiction over the matter
unless its cognizance is expressly or impliedly barred

(section 9, CPC). The Supreme Court has held -

"There is an inherent right in every person to
bring a suit of a civil nature and unless the
suit is barred by statute one may, at one’s

peril, bring a suit of one’s choice. "20

It may also appear to be justified in terms of
providing simple procedure which may help in fighting the
delay in the disposal of disputes simultaneously reducing
the cost and making justice effective, inexpensive and
substantial in characater. Inevitable, it is to conclude
that such a forum for resolution of disputes should also
be able to resolve the lis of interests arising out of

disposition of properties.

As observed in the Fifty Fourth Report of the Law

Commission on the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,

4 procedure is a means to justice and it is the duty of the
State to see that its legal system does not leave scope

for processess which are likely to hinder or defeat

justice (pr. 1.8.2. thereof). दि



1
}

en

1.14 Jurisdiction of machinery for resolution of dispute

is not ousted during pendency of proceedings.- Once a

suit or petition is instituted before a court or forum
having jurisdiction over the subject matter of the case,
it is empowered to pass all suitable directions for
administration of justice till it becomes functus
officio. Thus it is well established that if a suit was
validly filed and the Court had jurisdiction to entertain
jit on the date of institution, subsequent events would
not lead to the defeat of the suit unless expressly
provided to that effect by a legislative enactment?1. A
Court must have jurisdiction throught the proceedings
until termination of those proceedings by the judgment of
the Court.?2 Once the jurisdiction of court is attached,
private dealings that may remove the subject matter of
litigation from the ambit of the power of the court to
decide a pending dispute or which may frustrate its
decree should not be allowed as a matter of public
policy. If sale of property in dispute is permitted
during the pendency of suit or proceeding, it would not
only defeat the proper administration of justice, but it
would also lead to multiplicity of proceedings which
itself may create an unacceptable situation in the
administration of justice. In order to ensure that such
a situation does not occur, a provision was rightly
enacted in section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act
1882 to the effect that during the pendency of any suit

or proceeding, the property cannot be transferred or



i
‘
i

otherwise dealt with by any party to the suit or
proceeding so as to affect the rights of any other party
thereto under any cecree or order which may be made
therein, except under the authority of the court.
Although the doctrine of lis pendens enacted in the above
section is a noble concept which not only aims at
preventing multiplicity of proceedings, but it also
ensures uninterrupted process of dispensation of justice,
yet there are certain vital issues having a bearing on
the just application of this principle in all situations
which require consideration in order to meet the demands
of justice in an even manner so as to protect various
interests involved therein. We Propose to discuss these

issues in the succeeding chapters of this report.

1.15 Scope and object of the Report and object of the Report.- This Report

deals with a short question arising out of section 52 of
the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, which is concerned
with the transfer of immoveaple property pendente jite.
The subject has been taken up by the Law Commission of
India suo motu, having regard to the magnitude and
frequency of the difficulties that arise from the wide
wording of the section as it stands at present. These
difficulties will be presently dealt with (Chapter III,

infra).



1.16 Earlier Report and need for present report.- It may

be mentioned that a few years ago, the Law Commission
forwarded?3 to Government a comprehensive report on the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882. The report awaits
implementation. In the meantime, the Commission has
considered it proper to take up the subject under
consideration, having regard to the urgent and pressing
need, in the present day situation, of ensuring a minimum
degree of certainty in the matter of title to immoveable
property. The statutory provision with which this Report
is concerned has a vital impact on the certainty of title
to land and other categories of immoveable property.
Land being a resource of vital importance in any economy,
it is necessary that title thereto should be as clear as
possible. And, since certainty of title depends, to a
large extent, on the soundness of legal provisions
relevant thereto and to their practical application and
impact, it is obvious that those provisions should be
subjected to scrutiny and review at reasonable intervals,
so that the law may adequately achieve its objective of
promoting the certainty of title to the important

economic resource of land.

1.17 Legislative Competence.- Fortunately, the subject of
transfer of property, and the connected subject of
registration (which is also proposed to be dealt with in
the legislative proposals formulated in this Report), are

matters included in the Concurrent List in the Seventh


t

1 न ory

Schedule to the Constitution of India, entry 6 of which
covers transfer of property other than agricultural land,

registration of deeds and documents.



we

Bete

Chapter - I

Footnotes

Locke, of Civil Government (Everyman’s Library
ed., 1924), Bk.II, ch.ii, secs. 4 and 6. On Locke
see Frederick Pollock, “Locke’s Theory of the
State" in his Essays in the Law (London 1922),
pp. 80-102; Cains, Legal Philosophy from Plato to
Hedgel, pp.335-361; G.J.Schocher, Life, Liberty
and Property (Belmont, Cal, 1971) c.B.
Macpherson, The Political Theory of Possessive

Individualism (Oxford, 1962) pp.194-262.

Locke, of Civil Governement, Bk.II, ch.ix,

sec.123; ch.ii, secs.12-13.

Id., ch.vii, sec.87; ch.ix, sec.123.

Refer to, H.M.Jain, Right to Property under the

Indian Constitution,pp.1-2.

Mahabharat Sutra Parva, Ch.VIII, Sloka 17(Gita

Press, Gorakhpur), referred in Id., p-2.


10.

11.

12.

13.

14,

15.

16.

Arthshastra B.K.I Ch.VII para

12(tr.R.Shamsastry). referred in ibid.,p-2.

See note 5.

Ibid.

Id., pp.7-9

Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras

Vs. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar, AIR 1954 SC

282.

Cf.Locke, referred in note 2, pages 6-7.

PLN. Sen, Hindu Jurisprudence(1918), page 42,

cited in Law Commission of India’s 70th Report on

the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, p-6.

See note 5, 70.9.

Rousseau, Social contract, referred in Law

Commission of India’s 70th Report on The Transfer

of Property Act, 1882, p-2.

Ibid.


5 te

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

rl

Mr. Justice K.K,. Mathew, former Judge of
Supreme Court of India and former Chairman of
LCI, The Right to Equality and Property under the

Indian Constitution, Lecture II, p.47.

Id., page 49.

Id., page 75.

Smt. Ganga Bai Vs. Vijay Kumar & Others, AIR

1974 SC 1126, pr.15.

Venugopala Reddiar Vs. Krishna Swami Reddiar,
AIR 1943 FC 24 referred in Official Receiver Vs.

Jugal Kishore, AIR 1963 All 459.

AIR Commentaries on the Code of Civil; Procedure,

1908, 9th Edn., Vol.1,page 86.

70th Report of the Law Commission on “The

Transfer of Property Act 1882".



we

nwt

(१

CHAPTER IT

DOCTRINE OF LIS PENDENS- ITS GENERAL MEANING AND
RELEVANCE

2.1 Rights depend upon remedies.’ This also holds
good as regards the right to property. Since speedy and
efficient remedies are of utmost importance, it has to be
ensured that once a person has initiated legal process in
any court to seek remedy against any invasion on his
right or threat of invasion thereto, the legal process
should not be defeated on account of private deals or any
transaction, that is, transfer of property in dispute or
on account of any other action of any party to such legal
process, otherwise the very purpose of seeking relief
against any grievance would be meaningless and
ineffective. In order to ensure that the legal remedy
remains efficient throughout the legal process, jurists
had evolved a_ general principle known as "lis pendens"
basing it on the necessity that neither party to the
litigation should alienate the property in dispute so as

to affect his opponent.2

2.2 What we are concerned with in this Chapter is not
so much the application of a specific statutory provision

as of the general principle governing such matters.

Lis" means an action or a _ suit. “Pendens” is the

present participle of “Pendo” meaning continuing: or



pending, and the doctrine of Lis pendens may be defined
as “the jurisdiction, power, or control that courts have,
during the pendency of an action over the property

involved therein". (34 American Jurisprudence 360).

2.3 The basis of the doctrine is given as follows in
the aforesaid volume:
“Two different theories have been advanced as the
basis of the doctrine of lis pendens. According
a to some authorities, a pending suit must be
4 regarded as notice to all the world, and pursuant
to this view it is argued that any person who
deals with property involved therein, having
presumably known what he was doing, must have
a . acted in bad faith and is therefore, properly
bound by the judgment rendered. Other
- authorities, however, take the position that the
doctrine is not founded on any theory of notice
at all, but is based upon the necessity, as a
matter of public policy, or preventing litigants
. from disposing of the property in controversy in
such manner as to interfere with execution of the
court’s decree. Without such a principle, it has
been judicially declared, all suits for specific

property might be rendered abortive by successive ‘

’ ह alienations of the property in suit, so that at
4 the end of the suit another would have to be

commenced, and after that, another, making it



almost impracticable for a man ever to make his
rights available by a resort to the courts of
justice.” (34 American Jurisprudence 363);

and its origin and history;

“The doctrine of 115 pendens is of ancient
lineage. Originating, it is said, in the civil
law, it seems to have been operative at an early
cate as the basis of the common law rule by
virtue of which the judgment in a real action was
regarded as overreaching any alienation made by
the defendant during its pendency. In the course
of time the doctrine was adopted by equity, being
embocied in one of the Lord Bacon’s ordinances
“for the better and more regular administration
of justice in the court of Chancery”. This

ordinance, commonly known Bacon’s Tweifth

Rule, provides “that 010 decree bindeth any that
cometh in bone fide by conveyance from the
defendant, before bi11 is exhibited, and is made
no party neither by bill nor order; but where he
comes in pendente lite, and while the suit is in
full prosecution and without any color of
allowance or privity of the court, there
regularly the decree bindeth; but if there were
any intermission of the suit, or the court made
acquainted with, the court is to give order upon

the special matter according to justice. The

principle thus adopted at an early period in the


nee

a!

oY

history of chancery jurisprudence has been
followed and acted on by various successive
chancellors, and is admitted by writers on the
subject to be the established doctrine."(34

American Jurisprudence 365).

Bennet in his Treatise on the Law of Lis Pendens

not inclined to accept ‘notice’ as the basis of the

He quoted Lord Chancellor Cranworth3:

"It is scarcely correct to speak of lis pendens
as affecting the purchaser through the doctrine
of notice, though undoubtedly the language of the
courts often so describes its operation. It
affects him not because it amounts to notice, but
because the law does not allow litigant parties
to give to others pending the litigation rights
to the property in dispute so as to prejudice the
opposite party..... The necessities of mankind
require that the decision of the court in the
suit shall be binding not only on the litigant
parties, but also on those who derive title under
them by alienation made pending the suit, whether
such alienees had or had not notice of the
pending proceedings. If this were not so there
could be no certainty that the litigation would
ever come to an end, and said:

“The foundation for the doctrine of lis pendens

does not rest upon notice, actual or


ee oe nd

I LLL

constructive; it rests solely upon necessity- the
necessity, that neither party to the litigation
should alienate the property in dispute so as to

affect his opponent".

2.5 The doctrine of lis pendens is an expression of
the principle of the maxim “ut lite pendente nihil
innovetur" (pending litigation nothing new should be
introduced). In the Corpus Juris Secundum (LIV, p.570)
as quoted by the Supreme Court in Jayaram Mudaliar ५.
Ayyaswami4 and Rajendar Singh v. Santa Singh,® we find
the following definition:-
“Lis pendens literally means a pending suit, and
the doctrine of lis pendens has been defined as
the jurisdiction, power, or control which a court
acquires over property involved in a suit pending
the continuance of the action, and until final

judgment therein”.

AS was observed by the Supreme Court in Jayaram’s
case, supra, “Expositions of the doctrine indicate that
the need for it arises from the very nature of the
jurisdiction of Courts and their control over the subject
matter of litigation so that parties litigating before it
may not remove any part of the subject-matter outside the
power of the Court to deal with it and thus make the

proceedings infructuous.”



{

a on)

2.6 The principle on which the doctrine of lis

pendens rests is explained in the jJeading case of Bellamy

v. Sabine® where Turner, L.d. observed-
“It is as 1 think, a doctrine common to the
courts both of Law and Equity, and rests, as I
apprehend, upon this foundation- that it would
plainly be impossible that any action or suit
could be brought to a successful termination, if
alienations pendente lite were permitted to
prevail. The plaintiff would be liable in every
case to be defeated by the defendant’s alienating
before the judgement or decree, and would be
driven to commence his proceedings de novo,
subject again to be defeated by the same course

of proceeding.”

In the same case, Lord Cranworth explained that the

doctrine did not rest on the ground of notice. His

Lordship said:
“It is scarcely correct to speak of is  pendens
as affecting purchaser through the doctrine of
notice, though undoubtedly the language of the
Courts often so describes its operation. It
affects him not because it amounts to notice but
because the law does not allow litigant parties
to give to others, pending the litigation, rights
to the property in dispute, so as to prejudice

the opposite party”.

en semen


2.7 The above judgement was quoted and followed by
the Privy Council in Faiyaz Husain Khan v. Munsiff Prag
Narain’, which is a leading case on the doctrine of lis
pendens in India. It would be pertinent to briefly
mention the relevant facts of that case in order to
understand the ratio laid down by the Judicial Committee
of the Privy Council. On June 14, 1889, Hamid Husain,
the owner of Mauza Bangawan, mortgaged it to Newal
Kishore. On July 13, 1891, Newal Kishore brought a suit
on his mortgage. On August 23, 1892, he obtained a
decree for sale, which was made absolute on November 21,
1895. On February 21, 1901 the property was sold in
execution of Newal Kishore’s decree and purchased by the
respondent Prag Narain, who was the son and the
representative of the decree holder. On July 2, 1901,
Prag Narain obtained a sale certificate and attempted to
recover possession of the property. He was however,
obstructed in every possible way by the appellant Faiyaz
Husain, who was in possession under a decree for sale
obtained on a _ subsequent mortgage. Prag Narain was,
therefore, compelled to bring the suit. There was no
encumbrance upon the property either at the date of the
mortgage of June 14, 1889, to Newal Kishore or at the
date of the institution of Newal Kishore’s suit on July
13, 1891. But on July 15, 1891, before any summons’ in
Newal Kishore’s suit was served, a second mortgage was

granted by the mortgagor to Mirza Muzaffar Beg. Mirza



Muzaffar Beg put his mortgage in suit on March 20, 1894,
without making the first mortgagee a party, and in the
absence of the first mortgagee obtained a decree for
sale. In execution of this decree the property mortgaged
to Mirza Muzaffar Beg was put up for sale on December 20,
1900, and bought by the appellant Faiyaz Husain, who was
the son of Hamid Husain, and who had obtained his
majority in 1894. Faiyaz Husain managed to get
possession and resisted all attempts on the part of the
respondent Prag Narain to dispossess him. Their

Lordships observed as follows:-

“The mortgage to Mirza Muzaffar Beg was made
during the pendency of Newall Kishore’s suit,
which was in its origin and nature a contentious
suit, and was at the time being actively
prosecuted. Therefore, under section 52 of the
Transfer of Property Act (No.IV of 1882), it did
not affect the rights of Newal Kishore under the
decree made in his suit. Their Lordships are
unable to agree in the view which seems to have
obtained in India that a suit contentious in its
origin and nature is not contentious within the
meaning of section 52 of the Act of 1882 until a
summon is served on the opposite party. There
seems to be no warrant for that view in the Act,
and it certainly would lead to very inconvenient

results in a country where evasion of service is


tae जन

on Soe

probably not unknown or a matter of any great
difficulty.

The doctrine of lis pendens, with which section
52 of the Act of 1882 is concerned, is not as
Turner L.J. observed in Bellamy v. Sabine
“founded upon any of the peculiar tenets of a
Court of Equity as to implied or constructive
notice. It is.... a doctrine common to the
Courts both of law and of equity, and rests....
upon this foundation, that it would plainly be
impossible that any action or suit could be
brought to a successful termination if
alienations pendente lite were permitted to
prevail." The correct mode of stating the
doctrine, as Cranworth L.C. observed in the same
case, is that "“pendente lite neither party to the
litigation can alienate the property in dispute
so as to affect his opponent.

Apart, however, from the doctrine of lis
pendens, which seems to their Lordships to apply
to the present case, it is plain that at the date
of his purchase Faiyaz Husain knew all 800५0 the
mortgage to Newal Kishore and the decree made on
the basis of that mortgage, and he knew that the
sale proceedings were actually in progress, for
in July 1898, he brought a suit against Prag

Narain asking for a declaration that Newal


Kishore’s mortgage, and the decree passed upon
it, were invalid, and that the property was not

liable for attachment and sate."

2.8 The principle is, therefore, based not on the
doctrine of notice, but on expediency, that is, the
necessity for final adjudication. It is quite reasonable
that when the jurisdiction of the Court once attached, it
should not be ousted by the transfer of the defendant’s
interest. If that were not so, there would be no end to
litigation and justice would be defeated.® In the
following case, however, it has been said that the
principles contained in this section are in accordance
with the principle of equity, good conscience or justice
because they rest upon an equitable and just foundation.
Therefore, where section 52 of the Transfer of Property
Act is not applicable as such the principle contained in

it will be applicable.

2.9 While considering the true import of lis pendens
in relation to the principle of res judicata, Bhagwati J.
in Digambararao v. Rangarao (AIR 1949 Bom 367) observed
as follows:~-
“Res judicata means a matter adjudicated upon or
a matter on which judgment has been pronounced.
The rule of of res judicata has been put on two
grounds, the one the hardship to the individual

that he should be vexed twice for the same cause,



and the other, public policy, that it is in the
interest of the State that there should be an end
of litigation; See Lockyer ५. Ferryman, 1877-2
A.C. 519. The rule is based on this principle
that the cause of action which would sustain the
second suit does not any more survive, it being
merged in the judgment of the first. It is well
established that every suit has got to be
sustained by a cause of action, and if by the
decision reached in the first suit, meaning
thereby a previously decided suit, the cause of
action no more survives, being merged in the
judgement, where could be the cause of action
left which would sustain the second suit after
the decision was reached in the first suit? Up
to the time the decision was reached in the first
suit it would be possible to say that there is a
cause of action which could sustain both the
suits. The suits are pending and the cause of
action can be litigated between the contending
parties. Once, however, the cause of action
ceases to exist being merged in a judgment duly
Pronounced by a Court, the decision reached in
that suit becomes res judicata. The cause of
action which till then sustained the second suit
does not survive any more and no court after such
decision has been reached by a competent court in

the previously decided suit would under the



provisions of s.11, Civil P.C. or otherwise on
general principles try any suit in which the same
cause of action is contested between the same
parties or parties under whom they or any of them
claim litigating under the same title....... Lis
Pendens is an action pending and the doctrine of
lis pendens is that an alienee pendente lite is
bound by the result of the litigation. As Turner
1.०. said in the leading case of an Bellamy ५.
Sabine, (1857) 1 De.G.& J.566: (26 L.J.Ch.797)
(pp.578, 584):
“It is, as I think a doctrine common to
the courts both of Law and Equity, and
rests, as I apprehend, upon this
foundation,- that it would plainly be
impossible that any action or suit could
be brought to a successful termination,
if alienations pendente lite were
permitted to prevail. The plaintiff
would be liable in every case to be
defeated by the defendant’s alienating
before the judgment or decree, and would
be driven to commence his proceedings, de
novo subject again to be defeated by the
same course of proceeding.”
The Privy Council also has adopted the same
principle in Faiyaz Husain Khan v. Prag Narain,

29 ALL 339:(34 I.A.102 P.C.) where they lay


stress on the necessity for final adjudication
and observe that otherwise there would be no end
to litigation and justice would be defeated. The
doctrine of lis pendens is expounded in Story’s
Equity Jurisprudence Vol.I, $§.406 in the terms
following:
“Ordinarily, it is true, that the decree
of a court binds only the parties and
their prives in representation of estate.
But he who purchases during the pendency
of a suit, is held bound by the decree
that may be made against the person from
whom he derives title....Where there is a
real and fair purchase, without any
notice, the rule may operate very hardly.
But it is a rule founded upon a great
public policy; for otherwise alienations
made during a suit might defeat its whole
purpose, and there would be no end to
litigation. And hence arises the maxim,
pendente Tite, nihil innovetur; the
effect of which is not to annul the
conveyance, but only to render it
subservient to the rights of the parties
in the litigation. As to the rights of
these parties, the conveyance is treated
as if it never had any existence; and it

does not vary them.”



It 15 also settled law that in the absence cf

frauc or collusion the doctri

of 115 pendens

क्र

applies to suit which is decided ex parte or by
compromise, If the compromise has not been
fairly and honestly obtained, the suit which

ended 7 70 sompromisé will not operate as “is

Tris is the doctrine of lis pendens.

These principles are quite clear, and we have got
to determine whether in the event cf @ conflict
arising between the rule of res judicata and the

goctrine oF lis pendens either the one or the

other should prevail. As has peen observed
before, the rule of res judicata rests on the
in Jitigation. and

Tis pendens. Both have

the same end ir view. the former that as between
the same parties, or their
representatives-in-interest litigating under the
same title, once the decision is reached in a
suit, the same question shall not be canvassed in
any other suit, and the latter that whatever the
party may choose to do by way of transfers
pendente lite, the transferee pendente lite shal}
be bound by the result of the litigation. There
is, however, this difference between the two that

the rule of res judicata is concerned with more


ry
oo

B previous y ceci9ed suct is
action छाए to sustain tne seconc

seit Iv the case of “ig pencens noweve 7

cause oF action continues as it was sustesring

tne suttoowr nas peer Focec For

ac

a

case where

Gudgment 8 pronouncec anc

the cause

action is merged in the Judgment

that judgment is the final sronouncement which

binds mot on’y the parties to the

w

UlT Dut aise

the transferees pendente lite from them. The



conveyance is treated as if it never had any
existence. As Story has put it in the passage
above quoted the effect of it is not to annul the
conveyance but only to render it subservient to
the rights of the parties in the litigation.
Whether this decision is reached in the same suit
or in a different one and whether the cause of
action which sustained the suit in whicn the
doctrine of 115 pendens applies was merged in the
judgment pronounced in the very same suit or in
another one, the position would be that decision
would determine the rights of the parties and
would be binding on them as weil as the
transferees pendente lite from them. The
transferee pendente lite would be iegitimately
treated as the representative-in-interest of the
parties to the suit and the judgment which has
been pronounced, whether in the same suit or in
another, would be determinative of the rights of
the parties. There would be then no lis or
action which would survive. The lis or action
can only be sustained by a cause of action. If
the cause of action was merged in a judgment duly
pronounced by a competent court there would be no
more occasion for any lis to continue pending.
If a judgment duly pronounced on that particular
cause of action was to merge the cause of action

in itself, that judgment would govern the rights


2.

10

of the parties, whether it is pronounced in the
same suit in which the doctrine of lis pendens
applies or in any other. If it is in the same
suit, there would be no question of the
applicability of the rule of res judicata. The
rule of res judicata would come into operation
only if it was pronounced in another suit which
came to be decided earlier than the one in which
the doctrine applied. But once that judgment was
pronounced it would have the effect of finally
determining the rights of the parties and the
cause of action which would sutain the suit in
which the doctrine of lis pendens applied would
be merged in the judgment duly pronounced in what
may be described as the previously decided suit.
In our opinion, therefore, the rule of res
judicata prevails over the doctrine of lis
Pendens and we have come to the conclusion that
once a judgment is duly pronounced by a competent
court in regard to the subject matter of the suit
in which the doctrine of lis  pendens applies,
that decision is res judicata and binds not only
the parties thereto but also the transferees

pendente lite from them."

In Simla Banking Industrial Co. Ltd. v. Firm

Luddar Mal (AIR 1959 Punj 490), Tek Chand, J., said:


++..the rule of is pendens lays down that
whoever purchases a property during the pendency
of an action, is held bound by the judgment that
may be made against the person from whom he
derived his title (to the immovable property, the
right to which is directly and specifically in
question in the suit or proceeding) even though
such a purchaser was not a party to the action or

had no notice of the pending litigation....

The intention of the doctrine is to invest the
Court with complete control over alienations in
the res which is pendente lite, and thus to

render its judgment binding upon the alienees, as

if they were parties, notwithstanding the
hardship in individual cases...."
2.11 From the analysis of the aforementioned decisions

of different courts on the subject, it would appear that
the doctrine of lis pendens, as Turner L.J., observed in
Bellamy’s case, supra, is a principle of law common to
both the courts of law and equity which mandates from the
point of view of expediency that suit or proceeding once
instituted should be brought to a logical termination.
It would be impossible to achieve this purpose if
alienations pendente lite are permitted to prevail.

Since the principle is based on expediency, that is, the


necessity for final adjudications, it would bring about
frustrating results in the administration of justice if
the alienations pendente lite are allowed. The
principle, thus, is in accordance with the principle of
equity, good conscience and justice. As stated by the
Kerala High Court in Govinda Pillai’s case, supra, since
the principle rests upon an equitable and just
foundation, it will apply even in the absence of law.
Since there seems to be utmost relevance and need of the
principle in the administration of justice, it may be
difficult to entirely dispense with the same.
Nevertheless, we are of the view that in the interests of
justice, that is, to bring about equitabie results, if
certain conditions such as registration of the notice of
suit or proceeding are set out as a pre-requisite for the
applicability of the principle, it may not run counter to
the basic spirit of the doctrine of jis pendens. Wwe

propose to discuss this aspect in the subsequent Chapter

oT

TI.


Chapter II

Eootnotes

Administrative Law (7th Edition) by H.W.R.Wade

and Forsyth, at p.579.

Govinda Pillai v. Aiyyapan Krishnan, AIR 1957

Kerala 10, para 7.

Bellamy v. Sabine (1857) 1 De.G & J 566 (A).

AIR 1973 SC 569, para 47.

AIR 1973 SC 2537; (1974) 1 SLR 381.

1857 1 08.5 & J 566 (A).

34 Law Reports (Indian Appeal) p.102.

Jahar Lal Bhutra v. Bhupendra Nath, (1922) 49

Cal.495, 67 IC 108, (1922) AC 412.

Govinda Pillai v. Aiyyappan Krishnan, AIR 1957

Kerala 10 at 11.


CHAPTER III

SECTION 52: TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882 AND ITS
AMENDMENT
3.1 Dealing with the effect of Transfer of immoveabie

Property during the pendency of a suit or proceeding,
Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 was

originally enacted as follows:

“During the active prosecution in any Court
having authority in British India or established
beyond the limits of British India by the
Governor-General in Council, of a contentious
suit or Proceeding in which any fright to
immovable property cannot be transferred or
otherwise dealt with by any party to the suit or
proceeding so as to affect the rights of any
other party thereto under any decree or order
which may be made therein, except under the
authority of the court and on such terms as it

may impose.”

3.2 The section was amended by Act 20 of 1929 by
substituting the word “pendency” for the words “active
prosecution" and the words “any suit or proceeding which
is not collusive” for the words “a contentious suit or

proceeding” and by the addition of an Explanation which



“४६ 40 :-

fixes the time during which a suit is deemed to be
pending for the purposes of the section. The section as

amended reads as follows:

“During the pendency in any Court having
authority within the limits of India excluding
the State of Jammu and Kashmir or established
beyond such limits by the Central Government, of
any suit or proceeding which is not collusive and
in which any right to immoveable property is
directly and specifically in question, the
Property cannot be transferred or otherwise dealt
with by any party to the suit or proceeding so as
to affect the rights of any other party thereto
under any decree or order which may be made
therein, except under the authority of the Court

and on such terms as it may impose.

Explanation - For the Purposes of this section,
the pendency of a suit or proceeding shall be
deemed to commence from the date of the
Presentation of the plaint or the institution of
the proceeding in a court of competent
jurisdiction, and to continue until the suit or
Proceeding has been disposed of by a final decree
or order, and complete satisfaction or discharge
of such decree or order has been obtained, or has

become unobtainable by reason of the expiration


of any period of limitation prescribed for the
execution thereof by any law for the time being

in force.”

Scope of section 52 analysed

Analysing section 52, one can note its important

ingredients, as under

(a) The suit or proceeding should be one in which
“any right to immoveable property is directly and
specifically in question”. (The section does not

extend to suits concerning moveable property).

(b) The suit or proceeding should be pending in -

(1) any court within India having
authority or

(11). any court outside India established
by the Central Government (This would be
a court established under a statutory
order issued by the Central Government
under legislation enacted in pursuance of
Parliament’s power to legislate on
foreign jurisdiction).


(०) the suit or proceeding must not be collusive.
Collusion in judicial proceeding is a secret
arrangement between two persons that the one
should institute a suit against the other in
order to obtain the decision of a judicial
tribunal for some sinister purpose. (Wharton’s
Jaw Lexicon, 14th Edn., p.212). In such a
proceeding, the claim put forward is fictitious,
the contest over it is unreal, and the decree
passed therein is a mere mask having the
similitude of a judicial determination and worn
by the parties with the object of confounding

third parties.1

If these conditions are satisfied, then the
effect would be, that a party to the suit or proceeding
cannot transfer or otherwise deal with the property, so
as to affect the rights of any other party thereto,
except with the authority of the court and on terms

imposed by the Court.

Theoretically, every party to the suit is subject
to the restrictive effect of section 52. In practice,
however, it is the party against whom relief is claimed

in the suit that would be the transferor.


3.4 Section 52 applies to transfers during the entire
“pendency” of the suit or proceedings. The question then
arises is for what period can a suit or proceeding be
said to be pending for the purpose of this section. The
question is to a great extent answered by the Explanation
now added by the Amendment Act 20 of 1929, and the
principle laid down in the Explanation has been applied
as a rule of justice, equity and good conscious. The
Explanation under section 52 provides that for the
purposes of this section, the pendency of a suit or
proceeding shall be deemed to commence from the date of
presentation of the plaint or the institution of a
proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction, and to
continue until the suit or proceeding has been disposed
of by a final decree or order and complete satisfaction
or discharge of such decree or order has been obtained or
has become unobtainable by reason of the expiration of
any period of any limitation prescribed for the execution
thereof by any Jaw for the time being in force. This
abunduntly makes it clear that even appeals and execution
proceedings are continuation of the pendency of the suit
or proceeding within the meaning of the section and
accordingly lis pendens continues to have force even

during the appeal or execution also.

3.5 While considering the true import and scope of
section 52 of the Act the Supreme Court in Jayaram

Mudaliar v. Ayyaswami2 observed:



"It is evident that the doctrine as stated in
section 52, applies not merely to actual
transfers of right which are subject-matter of
litigation but to other dealings with it “by any
party to the suit or proceeding, so as to affect
the right of any other party thereto”. Hence, it
could be urged that where it is not a party to
the litigation but an outside agency, such as the
tax collecting authorities of the Governement,
which proceeds against the subject matter of
litigation, without anything done by a litigating
Party, the resulting transaction will not be hit
by section 52. Again, where all the parties
which could be affected by a pending litigation
are themselves parties to a transfer or dealings
with property in such a way that they cannot
resile from or disown the transaction impugned
before the court dealing with the litigation, the
court may bind them to their own acts. ४11 these
are matters which the court could have properly
considered. The purpose of section 52 of the
Transfer of Property Act is not to defeat any
just and equitable claim but only to subject them
to the authority of the court which is dealing
with the property to which claims are put

forward.”


3.6 If one acquires property by way of transfer or
otherwise pendente lite, he will be bound by the decree
which may be ultimately obtained in the proceedings
pending at the time of acquisition. This result is not
avoided by reason of the earlier attachment. This was
made clear by the .Supreme Court in Kedarnath v.
Sheonarain® observing as follows:-
“Attachment of property is only effective in
preventing alienation but it is not intended to
create any title to the property. On the other
hand, section 52 places a complete embargo on the
transfer of immovable property right to which is
directly and specifically in question in a
pending litigation. Therefore, the attachment
was ineffective against the doctrine. Authority
for this clear position is hardly necessary but
if one is desired it will be found in Moti Lal v.

Karrab-ul-Din, (1897) 24 Ind App 170 (PC)."

3.7 Apart from doctrine of lis pendens under section
52 of the Transfer of Property Act, the subsequent
purchaser does not get any right to lead any evidence as
he steps into the shoes of the defendant who has given up
the right to lead evidence. (Dhanna Singh v. Baljinder
Kaur, (1997) 3 SCALE 747 at 748) Defendants or any party
is prohibited by operation of section 52 to deal with the
Property or transfer or otherwise to deal with it in any

way affecting the rights of the other party except with


the order or authority of the court. Alienation made
during the pendency of the suit or proceeding would
obviously be hit by the doctrine of 115 pendens by
operation of section 52. (Sarvinder Singh v. Dalip

Singh 1996 (6) SCALE 59, para 6.)

3.8 The effect of the doctrine of lis pendens is not
to annul the transfer, but only to render it subservient
to the rights of the parties to the litigation. In other
words, the section 52 in fact, does not have the effect
of wiping out a transfer pendente lite aitogether, but
only subordinates it to the parties based on the decree
to the suit. As between the parties to the transfer,
that is, the transferor and the transferee, transfer of
the title is perfectly valid, and operates to vest the
title of the transferor in the transferee. The words “so
as to affect the rights of any other party thereto under
any decree or order which may be made therein” make it
quite clear that the transfer is good except to the
extent that it might conflict with rights decreed under
the decree or order (vide T.Bhup Narain Singh v. Nawab
Singh, AIR 1957 Patna 729 at 731). A transfer or a
dealing | by a party to a suit during the pendency of the
suit or proceeding is not, ipso facto void. It only
cannot affect the rights of any other party to the suit
under any decree or order that may be made in the suit or

proceeding‘.


3.9 Thus, the effect of section 52 is not to wipe out
a sale pendente lite altogether, but to subordinate the
rights based on the decree in the suit. As between the
parties to the transaction, however, it is perfectly
valid and operates to vest the title of the transferor in
the transferee. While considering and analysing the true
effect of section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act ona
sale pendente lite, the Supreme Court in Nagubai v.

B.Sharma Rao®> concluded as foljows:-

"(24) 3. It was finally contended that the
purchase by Devamma in execution of the decree in
0.S.No.100 of 1919-20 was void and conferred no
title on her, because the Official Receiver in
whom the estate of Keshavanada, the mortgagor,
had vested on his adjudication as insolvent on
19.2.1926 had not been made a party to those
proceedings, and that, in consequence, the title
of Dr.Nanjunda Rao and his successors under the
saie deed dated 30.1.1920 continued to subsist,
notwithstanding the court auction sale on
2.8.1928.

The obvious answer to the contention is that the
properties which were sold on 2.8.1928 did not
vest in the Official Receiver on the making of
the order of adjudication on 19.2.1926, as they
had been transferred by the mortgagor, long prior

to the presentation of Insolvency Case No. 4 of


1925-26 under the very sale deed dated 30.1.1920
which forms the root of the appellants’ title.
That sale was no doubt pendente lite, but the
effect of 8.52 is not to wipe it out altogether
but to subordinate it to the rights based on the
decree in the suit.

As between the parties to the transaction,
however, it was perfectly valid, and operated to
vest the title of the transferor in the
transferee. Under section 28(2) of the
Insolvency Act, what vests in the Official
Receiver is only the property of the insolvent,
and as the suit properties had ceased to be his
properties by reason of the sale deed dated
30.1.1920, they did not vest in the Official
Receiver, and the sale held on 2.8.1928 is not
liable to be attacked on the ground that he had
not been impleaded as a party thereto.

(25) But it is argued for the appeliants that
having regard to the words in section 52 that
pendente lite “the property cannot be
transferred", such a transfer must, when it falls
within the mischief of that section, be deemed to
be non est, that in consequence Keshavananda
must, for purposes of 118 pendens, be regarded as
the owner of the properties, notwithstanding that
he had transferred them, and that the Official

Receiver who succeeded to his rights had a right



to be impleaded in the action.

This contention gives no effect to the words
“so as to affect the rights of any other party
thereto under any decree or order which may be
made therein", which make it clear that the
transfer is good except to the extent that it
might conflict with rights decreed under the
decree or order. It is in this view that
transfers pendente lite have been held to be
valid and operative as between the parties
thereto.
It will be inconsistent to hold that the sale
deed dated 30.1.1920 is effective to convey the
title to the properties to Dr.Nanjunda Rao, and
that at the same time, it was Keshavanada who
must be deemed to possess that title. We are,
therefore, unable to accede to the contention of
the appellants that a transfer pendente lite
must, for purposes of section 52 be treated as

still retaining title to the properties.”

3.10 It may be stated that the rule/principle enacted
in this section is in a sense an extension of the rule of
res judicata, and makes the adjudication in the suit
binding on alienees from parties during the pendency of
the suit, just as much as the doctrine of res judicata
makes the adjudicating binding, not only on the parties

themselves but also on, alienees from them after the


decree, It affects a purchaser pendente lite, not
because it amounts to notice, but because the law does
not allow a litigant party to give to others, pending the
litigation rights, to the property in dispute, so as to
prejudice the opposite party. If this were not so, there
would be no certainty that the litigation would ever come
to an end. Ordinarily, a decree binds only the parties
to the suit, but he who purchases during the pendency of
the suit, is bound by the decree, that may be made
against the person from whom he derives the title. The
litigating parties are exempted from the necessity of
taking any notice of a title so acquired. As to them it
is as if no such title existed. Otherwise, suits would
be indeterminable, or which would be the same, in effect,
it would be in the pleasure of one Party at what period

the suit should be determined.

3.11 Rationale.- The rationale underlying section 52 is
simple enough and easily intelligible. If 8 party

against whom relief is claimed were to be allowed to
transfer his right pendente lite, then the plaintiff
would be indirectly compelled to make the transferee a
party to the litigation. If the first transferee is
himself free to transfer his own right, then (on such a
transfer), the plaintiff would be indirectly compelled to

make the second transferee a party. The process could


thus turn out to be endless, and so would be the hardship
that might be experienced by the plaintiff, unless some

restriction on the right of transfer is imposed by law.

It is precisely this object which section 52 has
in view, when it enacts that the transfer or other
dealing shall not affect the rights of any other party
thereto under any decree or order to be passed in the
suit (except with the authority of the court). Thus, the
section, in effect, freezes proprietary rights as they
stood at the time when the suit was instituted. No
subsequent transactions can make a change in the
situation as it existed when the suit was commenced. The
law throws its cloak of protection around the party’s
rights, protecting those rights against the onslaughts of
subsequent transfers. It is to be pointed out that the
section does not totally invalidate the transfer. It
only prevents the transfer from affecting the right of
any other party.® In other words, it introduces its own
scheme of priority, its own scale of superior and

inferior rights, consequential on transfer pendente lite.

The underlying principle is that a litigant who
has obtained a judgment is entitled, not to be deprived

of it, without any solid grounds. Interest rei_publicae

ut sit finis litium.? (Public interest requires finality

in litigation).



3.12 Object and purpose of the section.- As was

observed by the Supreme Court in Jayaram’s case,® “the
purpose of section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act is
not to defeat any just and equitable claim but only to
subject them to the authority of the court which is
dealing with the property to which claims are put
forward." The doctrine of lis pendens was intended to
strike at attempts by parties to a litigation to
circumvent the jurisdiction of a court, in which a
dispute on rights or interests in immovable property is
pending by private dealings which may remove the subject
matter of litigation from the ambit of the court’s power
to decide a pending dispute or frustrate its decree.
Alienees acquiring any immoveable property during a
litigation over it, are held to be bound by the
application of the doctrine, by the decree passed in the
suit even though they may not have been impleaded in it.
The whole object of doctrine of lis pendens is to subject
parties to the litigation as well as others, who seek to
acquire rights in immoveable property, which are the
subject matter of a litigation, to the power and
jurisdiction of the court so as to prevent the object of

a pending action from the defeated.?

Section 52 seeks to subordinate all derivative
interests or all interests derived from parties to a suit
by way of transfer pendente lite to the rights declared

by the decree in the suit and to declare that they shall



not be capable of being enforced against the rights
acquired by the decree holder. A transferee in = such
circumstances, therefore, takes the consequences of the
decree which the party who made the transfer to him would
take as the party to the suit. The principle of lis
pendens embodied in section 52 being a principle of
public policy, no question of good faith or bona fides
arises. Such being the position, the transferee from one
of the parties to the suit cannot assert or ciaim any
title or interest adverse to any of the rights and
interests acquired by another party under the decree in
suit. The principle of lis pendens prevents anything
done by the transferee from operating adversely to the
interest declared by the decree.1°

3.13 Conclusion.- As already stated as between the
transferor and the transferee, the transfer of the title
by way of sale or otherwise may be valid, but the fact
remains that such a transfer cannot affect the rights of
any other party which may be decreed by the court under a
decree or order. Consequently, the interest of
transferee in such transactions are definitely affected.
As already stated, even the bona fide purchaser or the
purchaser acting in good faith is not saved by the
existing provisions of section 52 of the Act. It is a
common perception that if such persons are put on a sort
of notice about the pendency of the suit or proceeding

between the parties, most. of the persons may not buy

निज ee


Property. So there is definitely a need to strike a
Proper balance between the public convenience which seeks
to bar the transfer of title during the pendency of suit
or proceeding and the interests of persons who buy the
Property in dispute in good faith and acting bona fide.

It is evident that the doctrine as stated in
section 52 applies not merely to actual transfers of
right which are subject matter of litigation but to other
dealings with it “by any party to the suit or
proceedings, so as to effect the right of any other party
thereto". Hence, it could be urged that where it is not
a party to the litigation but an outside agency, such as
Tax Collection Authorities of the Government, which
proceeds against the subject matter of Vitigation,
without anything done by a litigating party, the
resulting transaction will not be hit by section 52.
Again, where all the parties which could be affected by a
pending litigation are themselves parties to a transfer
or dealing with property in such a way that they cannot
resile from or disown the transaction impugned before the
court dealing with the litigation, the court may bind
them to their own acts. All these are matters which need
to be properly considered.

The doctrine of lis pendens enshrined in section
52 of the Transfer of Property Act is presently attracted
even where the transferee has no prior knowledge of the
suit or proceeding. In other words, at present it is

immaterial for the applicability of the doctrine of lis



pendens under section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act
whether the alienee pendente lite had, or had not, notice
of the pending proceeding. No question of good faith or
bona fides is relevant. (Mohd. Ali Abdul Chanimomin v.
Bisahemi Kom Abdulla, (1973) A.Mys.131) This is of
course, no longer the case in Gujarat and Maharashtra
where, in view of the Bombay Amendment Act, doctrine of
lis pendens only affects transactions pendente lite if

the lis has been duly registered.

3.14 Need for amendment of section 52- Notwithstanding

this laudable objective of the doctrine of lis pendens
(underlying section 52) there are certain difficulties
arising from the categorical manner in which it finds

expression in section 52. In practically prohibiting

transfers pendente lite, the section, if one may say so,
has overlooked the interests of prospective purchasers of

the disputed property.

3.15 Practical experience.-Experience has shown that

very often, the defendants transfer the suit property to
third parties without intimating them of the pendency of
the suit. There is no proper or convenient means
available to the purchasers for finding out the pendency
of a suit with respect to the Property being purchased by
them. Searching the registers of courts is not a
Practical course, particularly in Major cities and towns

where there are a number of courts and the number of


suits run into thousands, and when there is no
comprehensive system of indexing of suits. It is just
not possible for any person to find out whether any of
these pending suits pertains to the property being
purchased by him. In such a situation, they purchase the
property and, much later, they come to know that the
property was directly and specifically in question ina
suit and that the purchase is, therefore, subject to the
decree or order passed in that suit. In many cases, they
lose the property completely by virtue of the operation

of the rule contained in section 52.

3.16 Bona fide purchase not relevant.- It is rejevant

in this behalf to point out, that in such a situation,
the plea of “bona fide purchaser for value without
notice” is not available to such a purchaser.1! Indeed,
he is not even entitled to be compensated for
improvements, if any made by him.12 It has been held
that he is bound by any compromises entered into by his
transferor, as also by the decree based upon. such
compromises.'3 Absence of notice is immaterial.14

Such a situation not only gives room for mischief
by unscrupulous parties to the suit (in which the
property being sold by them is directly and specifically
in question), but also results in grave loss and
deprivation to the unwitting and bona fide purchasers of

the property in dispute.


3.17 Reforms elsewhere.- It appears that the rigour of
the strict common law doctrine of lis pendens (which is
the doctrine incorporated in section 52) has been sought
to be softened in many jurisdictions by statutory
modifications which provide for notice. It is understood
that such a reform has been effected in England'’ as well
as in certain American jurisdictions.'6& The previous
U.K. Land Charges Act, 1925 contained the following

provision:-

“Register of pending actions

2.- (1) A pending action, that is to say, any

action, information or proceeding pending in

court relating to बात or any interest in or
charge on land, and a petition in bankruptcy
filed after the commencement of this Act, may be
registered in the register of pending actions.

(2) Subject to general rules, every application
to register a pending action. shall contain
particulars of -

(a) the name, address, and description of the
estate owner or other person whose estate
or interest is intended to be affected
thereby; and

(b) the court in which the action,
information or proceeding was commenced
or filed; and

(c) the title.of the action, information or



proceeding; and
(d) the day when the action, information or
proceeding was commenced or filed.
(3) The Registrar shall forthwith enter the
particulars in the register, in the name of the
estate owner or other person whose estate or
interest is intended to be affected.

(4) In the case of a petition in bankruptcy
filed against a firm, the application to register
the pending action shall state the names and
addresses of the partners, and the registration
shall be effected against each partner as well as
against the firm.

(5) No fee shall be charged for the
registration of a petition in bankruptcy as a
pending action if the application therefor is
made by the registrar of the court in which the
petition is filed.

(6) The court, if it thinks fit, may, upon the
determination of the proceedings, or during the
pendency thereof if satisfied that the
proceedings are not prosecuted in good faith,
make an order vacating the registration of the
pending action, and direct the party on whose
behalf the registration was made to pay all or
any of the costs and expenses occasioned by the
registration and vacating thereof.

(7) When an-office copy of an order of


discharge or an acknowledgement of satisfaction
in the prescribed form is lodged with the
registrar, he may enter discharge or satifaction
of the registered pending action to which it
refers, and may issue a certificate in the
_Prescribed form of such discharge or
satisfaction.

(8) The registration of a pending action shall
cease to have effect at the expiration of five
years form the date of registration, but may be
renewed from time to time, and, if renewed, shall
have effect for five years from the date of

renewal.

Protection of purchasers against unregistered

pending actions.

3.- (1) A pending action shall not bind a
purchaser without express notice thereof unless
it is for the time being registered pursuant to
this Part of this Act:

Provided that as respects a petition in
bankruptcy, this subsection only applies in
favour of a purchaser of a legal estate in good
faith, for money or money’s worth, without notice
of an available act of bankruptcy.

(2) As respects any transfer or creation of a

legal estates, a petition in bankruptcy filed


3.18
Charges

pending

after the commencement of this Act, which is not
for the time being registered as a pending
action, shall not be notice or evidence of any
act of bankruptcy therein alleged.

(3) The title of a trustee in bankruptcy
acquired after the commencement of this Act shall
be void as against a purchaser of a legal estate
in good faith for money or money’s worth without
notice of an available act of bankruptcy claiming
under a conveyance made after the date of
registration of the petition in bankruptcy as a
pending action, unless, at the date of the
conveyance, either the registration of the
pending action is in force, or the receiving
order is registered pursuant to Part III of this

Act.”

The relevant section 5 of the present U.K.Land
Act, 1972 which provides for the registration of

actions is as follows:-

“The register of pending actions
5.- (1) There may be registered in the register
of pending actions-
(a) a pending land action;
(b) a petition in bankruptcy filed on or after
ist January 1926.

(2) Subject to general rules under section 16


of this Act, every application for registration
under this section shall contain particulars of
the title of the proceedings and the name,
address and description of the estate owner or
other person whose estate or interest is intended

to be affected.

(3) An application for registration shall also
state-

(a) if it relates to a pending land action, the
court in which and the day on which the action
was commenced; and

(b) if it relates to a petition in bankruptcy,
tne court in which and the day on which the

petition was filed.

(4) The registrar shall forthwith enter the
Particulars in the register, in the name of the
estate owner or other person whose estate or

interest is intended to be affected.

(5) An application to register a petition in
bankruptcy against a firm shall state the names
and addresses of the partners, and the
registration shall be effected against each

partner as well as against the firm.



(6) No fee shall be charged for the
registration of a petition in bankruptcy if the
application for registration is made by the
registrar of the court in which the petition is

filed.

(7) A pending land action shall not bind a
purchaser without express notice of it unless it
is for the time being registered under this

section.

(8) A petition in bankruptcy shal] not bind a
purchaser of a legal estate in good faith, for
money or money’s worth, without notice of an
available act of bankruptcy, unless it is for the

time being registered under this section.

(9) As respects any transfer or creation of a
legal estate, a petition in bankruptcy which is
not for the time being registered under this
section shall not be notice or evidence of any

act of bankruptcy alleged in the petition.

(10) The court, if it thinks fit, may, upon
the determination of the proceedings, or during
the pendency of the proceedings if satisfied that
they are not prosecuted in good faith, make an

order vacating a registration under this



section and direct the Party on whose behalf it
was made to pay all or any of the costs and
expenses occasioned by the registration and by

its vacation,”

3.19 Bombay _amendment.- Presumably inspired by the
reforms effected in Western countries, the (erstwhile)
Province of Bombay had amended section 52 as far back as
1939, (being Bombay Act 14 of 1939). The Bombay
amendment is to the following effect:
“(2) Section 52 shall be renumbered as
sub-section (1) of that section, and -
(i) in sub-section (1) so renumbered,
after the word “question”, the words and figures
“if 8 notice of the pendency of such suit or
proceeding is registered under section 18 of the
Indian Registration Act, 1908’, and after the
word “property”, where it occurs for the second
time, the words “after the notice is so
registered," shall be inserted; and
(ii) after the said sub-section (1) so
renumbered the following shall be inserted,
namely:-
"(2) Every notice of pendency of a
suit or proceeding referred to in sub-section (1)
shall contain the following particulars, namely:-
(a) the name and address of the owner of

immoveable property or other person whose right


to the immoveable property is in question;

(b) the description of the immoveable
property, the right to which is in question;

(c) the Court in which the suit or
proceeding is pending;

(d) the nature and title of the suit
or proceeding;

(e) the date on which the suit or
proceeding was instituted.” [(vide Bombay Act 14

of 1939, sections 2 & 3 (w.e.f. 15.6.1939)].”

The Bombay amendment contains a salutary
principle and serves to eliminate any mischief on the
part of dishonest and unscrupulous parties to the suit,
besides protecting bona fide purchasers. The amendment
contemplates!’ that for the rule in section 52 to
operate, it is necessary that a notice of the pendency of
such suit or proceeding is registered under the Indian
Registration Act, 1908 with the necessary particulars.
Normally, it is the party who files the suit (i.e. the
Plaintiff) who would be interested in registering the
pendency of such a suit or proceeding. A normal diligent
purchaser is expected to obtain what is called a
‘non-encumbrance certificate’ from the registration
office with respect to property being purchased by him.
If the notice of the suit or proceeding is so registered
under the Registration Act, the registration office will

naturally include the said information in the certificate


issued by it, which would put the purchaser on notice.
He cannot thereafter complain if he suffers any 1055 by
operation of the rule contained in section 52.

We may mention that by virtue of the Bombay
Amendment Act XIV of 1939, rule of "115 pendens” applies
only when a notice of pendency of the suit in which any
right to involve property is directly and specifically in
question, is registered under section 18 of the
Registration Act vide Anand Nivas (P) Ltd. Vv.

Anandji.18

The Commission, in its earlier report (70th
report, pr.47.11) had occasion to consider the issue of
the necessity of providing for registration of notice of
a suit on the lines of the Bombay Amendment but was not
inclined to recommend such an amendment because it was
thought that it may involve an amendment of the
Registration Act; secondly, such an amendment in that Act
was not favoured by the Law Commission in its report on
that Act and besides the Commission was not certain
whether the amended procedure would be appropriate for
all the territories to which the Transfer of Property Act

extends.

The Commission has given a serious thought to the
problem and is of the considered view that having regard
to the escalating prices of land there is an inherent

tendency of committing fraud,upon a bona fide purchaser,


whose interest will be jeopardised to a greater extent in
the existing scenario. He becomes a victim to mischief
by unscrupulous parties to the suit ( in which the
property being sold by them is directly and specifically
in question), apart from suffering from grave loss and

deprivation.

With a view to check such inequitous situations,
it is felt that it is essential to bring in the amendment
to remedy the wrong. It may, however, be noted that upon
the incorporation of the requirement of the registration
of a notice of the pendency of suit or proceeding on the
lines of the amendment made to this section by the Bombay
Act No.4 of 1939, one more ingredient, viz., registration
of notice of the pendency of suit or proceeding under the
Indian Registration Act, would stand incorporated in the
section. It is quite natural that if any essential
ingredient of any provision of Jaw is missing ina
particular situation, the applicability of the section
would not be attracted. In other words, where notice of
the pendency of suit or Proceeding is not got registered
by any party, section 52 would not be attracted and
obviously in the absence of such registration, the
parties will be legally at liberty to dispose of the
property in dispute, which is at present not legally
permissible under the existing section 52. On account of

certain facts and circumstances beyond the control of any



party, there may be some delay in getting the notice of
the pendency of suit or proceeding registered. It really
gives rise to a vital question as to whether any party to
the suit or proceeding should have legal sanction to
dispose of the property in dispute during such an
interregnum. Such a situation may arise in a case where
the plaintiff is in the need of immediate relief in the
nature of temporary injunction or interim orders, etc.
and he may not have any time to simultaneously get the
notice of the pendency of suit or proceeding registered
under the Indian Registration Act. This grey area
requires to be plugged, preferably by allowing some
reasonable time to the party for having the notice of the
pendency of suit or proceeding registered. The other
course which may be adopted is to provide for
non-applicability of the requirement of registration of
the notice of suit or proceeding for reasons beyond the
control of any party to the suit or proceeding. In such
an event, if any party is not in a position to get the
notice of the pendency of a suit or proceeding, so
registered for reasons beyond its control, mere
non-registration of such notice shall not give right to
the other party to transfer or otherwise deal with the
Property so as to affect the rights of any other party to
the suit or proceeding under any decree or order which
may be made therein. As regards the option for making a
Provision dispensing with the requirement of the

registration of notice of. suit or proceeding under the


Indian Registration Act for reasons beyond one’s control,
it may be stated that making of such a provision may at
times give rise to disputed questions of fact as to
whether the reasons for the purpose which may be given by
any party to the suit or proceeding can be said to be the
reasons beyond its control. Therefore, we are of the
view that the first option mentioned above regarding
prescription of a reasonable time limit for the
registration of the notice of a suit or proceeding would
appear to be more appropriate. However, while
prescribing any reasonable time limit, it has to be
ensured that no party should get any right to transfer or
otherwise deal with the property in dispute durtnge the
pendency of the suit or Proceeding til] the expiration of
the prescribed time limit. Having regard to different
geographical conditions of our country, it appears to us
that the period of three months may be sufficient to
enable the parties to the suit or proceeding to get the
notice of suit or proceeding registered under the Indian

Registration Act.

3.20 Recommended amendment of Recommended amendment of section 52, Transfer of

Property Act. - We are of the view that the provision
regarding “Notice of lis _pendens", introduced by the
Bombay amendment is a salutary one and it should be
incorporated on an all India basis by amending section 52

of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. We would,


however, also like to provide (in substance) that if the
purchaser has notice of the actual pendency of litigation
then he should not be protected (even where no notice of
lis pendens has been registered), because the very object
of providing for registration of notice of a suit or
proceeding is that if a person comes to know about the
pendency of a suit or proceeding on account oF
registration, then the doctrine of lis pendens contained
in section 52 should have full effect against him. The
same analogy can be appropriately applied to a person who
has knowledge or notice of the pendency of a suit or
Proceeding and the doctrine of lis pendens can be
logically applied to such person also even in the absence
of registration of notice of a suit or Proceeding under
the Indian Registration Act. Since the provisions
contained in sections 64, 74 and Order XXI, rule 102 of
the Code of Civil Procedure are a distinct and
self-contained code, the same need to be saved for the
reasons discussed by us in Chapter Iv. Our
recommendation, therefore, is that section 52 of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 should be revised as

under:

" 52. Transfer of immoveable property pending of immoveable propert endin

Suit relating thereto.

(1) If, during the pendency, in any court
having authority within the limits of India

excluding the State’ of Jammu and Kashmir or



established beyond such limits by the Central
Government, of any suit or proceeding which is
not collusive and in which any right to
immoveable property is directly and specifically

in question and the notice of the pendency of

such suit or proceeding, containing the

Particulars specified in sub-section (2), is

registered under section 18 of the Indian

Registration Act, 1908, within a period of 90

days from the date of institution of the suit or,

proceeding in the case of plaintiff or petitioner

or from the date of the knowledge of the pendency

thereof in the case of any other party, as the

case may be, then, after the notice is 50

registered, the property cannot be transferred or
otherwise dealt with by any party to the suit or
proceeding so as to affect the rights of any
other party thereto under any decree or order
which may be made therein, except under the
authority of the Court and on such terms as the

court may impose.

Provided that during the aforementioned
period of 90 days, no party shall have
any right to transfer or otherwise deal

with the property so as to affect the


rights of any other party to the suit or
proceeding under any decree or order

which may be made therein.

Provided further that nothing in
sub-section (1) shall affect sections 64,
74 and Order XXI, rule 102 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this section,
the pendency of a suit or proceeding shall be
deemed to commence on and from the date of the
presentation of the plaint or the institution of
the proceeding jn a Court of competent
jurisdiction, and to continue until the suit or
proceeding has been disposed of by a final decree
or order, and complete satisfaction or discharge
of such decree or order has been obtained, or has
become unobtainable by reason of the expiration
of any period of limitation prescribed for the
execution thereof by any law for the time being

in force.

(2) Every notice of pendency of a suit or
proceeding, referred to in sub-section (1), shall

contain the following particulars, namely:



ts

(my

(a) the name and address of the owner
of the immoveable property or of

other person whose right to the

immoveable property is in
question;
(b) the description of the immoveable

property, the right to which is
in question;

(c) the Court in which the suit or
Proceeding is pending;

(d) the nature and title of the suit
or proceedings; and

(e) the date on which the suit or

proceeding was instituted."

(3) The provisions of sub-section(1) shall
also apply to any transfer or other dealing with
the immoveable property, effected by a party to
the suit or proceeding in favour of any person
who has actual knowledge of the pendency of such
suit or proceeding, even where no notice thereof

has been registered."

Amendment __in the Registration Act, 1908

(insertion of a proviso to Section 78) .

We are further of the view that in order that the

parties, to a suit may be encouraged to get notices of

lis

pendens (as envisaged above) registered, the


CMY

registration fee should be kept at a Tow level. Our
recommendation therefore is, that in the Indian
Registration Act, 1908, the following proviso should be

inserted in section 78:-

“Provided that the fee for the registration of
notice of the pendency of a suit or proceeding,
whether given by referring to section 52 of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 or otherwise,
shall not exceed rupees one hundred, irrespective
of the value of the property to which the notice
relates but in the case of any suit or proceeding
instituted in forma pauperis, no fee for the
registration of notice of the pendency of a suit

or proceeding shall be payable.”

प्र

3
nm

Amendment of section 18 of the Registration Act,

७
0
100

It is also desirable to amend section 18 of the
Indian Registration Act, 1908 which deals with documents
whose registration is optional. It opens with these

words —

“18, Any of the following documents may be

registered under this Act, namely"


The clauses of the. section that follows these
words contain an enumeration of documents. Clauses (e)

and (1), read as under -

“Ce). wills; and

(Ff). all other documents not required by section

17 to be registered.”

It would be convenient to add in section 18, a
new clause, as under:

“(ee). notices of pending suits or proceedings,

referred to in section 52 of the Transfer of

Property Act, 1882.”


Chapter III
Footnotes

Nagubai v. B.Shama Rao, AIR 1956 SC 593.
AIR 1973 SC 569 at 581.
AIR 1970 SC 1717 at 1721.
Prabhakar v. Antonia, AIR 1971 Goa 42 at 43, and
M/s Agarwal & Co., v. State of Rajasthan, 1985
RLW 676.

AIR 1956 SC 593 at 602.

T.Bhup Narain Singh v. Nawab Singh, AIR 1957

Patna 729, 731 para 9.

T.Bhup Narain Singh v. Nawab Singh, AIR 1957
Patna 723 (Ramaswamy CJ. and Raj Kishore Prasad
Je).

AIR 1973 SC 569.

Rajendar Singh v. Santa Singh, AIR 1973 SC 2537.


10.

11.

13.

14.

15.

16.

18.

Mohd. Ali v. Abdullah, AIR 1973 Mysore 131 at

133.

Balwinder Jit Kaur ७. Financial Commissioner

(Appeals), Punjab AIR 1987 P&H 189-190.

Hari Bachan v. Har Bhajan, AIR 1975 P&H 205, 210,

para 11.

Uttam & Co. v. Babu Ram, (1982) All. Lu 188, 191,

192, par 10-11.

a. Feuyaz Hussain Khan v. Prag Narain, ILR 29

Ali. 1339 (PC).
b. Rappel Aujushi v. Ramakrishna, AIR 1970 Ker.

188.

Section 5(7), Land Charges Act, 1972 (U.K.)

Black Law Dictionary (1990) page 932, left hand

column.

Anand Nivas (P) Ltd. v. Anandji, AIR 1965 50

414.

Ibid, and Karbi Vaju Vasta v. Kanbi Popat Vasta,
AIR 1985 Gujarat 184,


CHAPTER IV
SECTION 52 AND ALLIED PROVISIONS

4.1. Applicability of section 52 does not depend on
any attachment of a property which may be ordered by the
court. In fact, it is ineffective against tne doctrine
of lis pendens'’. It may, nowever, be pointed out that
transfer of property during the pendency of the
Proceedings are barred under section 64 of the Code of
Civil Procedure de hors section 52 of the Transfer of
Property Act, which provides as fotlows:-
64.Private ajienation of property after
attachment to be void.- Where an attachment has
been made, any private transfer or delivery of
the property attached or of any interest therein
and any payment to the judgment-debtor of any
debt, dividend or other moneys contrary to such
attachment, shall be void as against all claims

enforceable under the attachment.

Explanation.- For the purposes of this section,
claims enforceable under an attachment include

claims for the rateable distribution of assets.



4.2. While considering the true import and scope of
this section, the Supreme Court in Nancy John Lyndon v.
Prabhati Lal? observed that even if it is doubtful 88 to
whether an order for restoration of the suit or
execution, application dismissed for default would have
the effect of restoring attachment levied in execution
retrospectively so as to affect alienations made during
the period between dismissal of the suit or execution and
the order directing restoration, it is quite clear that
an order of restoration would certainly restore or revive
attachment for the period during which it was in
subsistence, namely, prior to the dismissal of the suit
or execution application. As such where the sale by the
judgment-debtor of the property attached in execution was
effected during the subsistence of the judgment and
before the case was dismissed for default, it would be
incorrect to say that by reason of the dismissal of the
execution case, the attachment came to an end and the
order for restoration of the execution case would not
affect any alienation made before the restoration
although such alienation have been made during the

subsistence of the attachment.

4.3. Section 64 of the Civil Procedure Code puts a
complete ban on alienation of property after attachment.
Under the section where an attachment has been made, any
private alienation or delivery of the property attached

or of any interest thereim and any payment to the



judgment-debtor of any debt, dividend or other moneys
contrary to such attachment, shall be void as against all
claims enforceable under the attachment. For the
purposes of this section, claims enforceable under an
attachment include claims for the rateable distribution
of assets. In M/s Supreme General Films Exchange Ltd.
Vv. Brijnath singhji Deo? lease of a theatre executed
during the attachment was upheld to have been struck by
the doctrine of lis pendens and also by provisions of
section 64 of the Civil Procedure Code. While
considering the inter-relationship of section 52 of the
Transfer of Property Act and section 64 of the Civil
Procedure Code, the Supreme Court observed as foilows:-
“18. The contention that the case fell outside
the purview of section 52 of the Transfer of
Property Act as the lease was executed in
Purported satisfaction of an antecedent claim
rests upon the terms of an agreement of 1948,
embodied in a letter, on the strength of which
the defendant-appellant had filed his suit for
specific performance. We find that the terms of
the compromise decree in that suit and lease-deed
of 1956 purported to confer upon the
defendant-appellant new rights. Indeed, there
are good grounds for suspecting that the
compromise in the suit for specific performance
was adopted as a device to get round legal

difficulties in the execution of the lease of



.

1956 in favour of the defendant-company. We are
unable to accept the argument, sought to be
supported by the citation of Bishan Singh v.
Khazan Singh, 1959 SCR 878 = (AIR 1958) SC 838)
that the lease was merely an enforcement of an
antecedent or pre-existing right. We think that
it purported to create entirely new rights
pendente lite. It was, therefore, struck by the
doctrine of Jlis-pendens, as explained by this
court in Jayaram Mudaliar v. Ayyaswami, (1973) 1
SCR 139 = (AIR 1973 SC 569), embodied in section
52 of the Transfer of Property Act.

19. An alternative argument of the appellant was
that a case falling within section 65-A(2)(e) of
the Transfer of Property Act, confining the
duration of a lease by a mortgagor to three
years, being a special provision, displaces the
provisions of section 52 of the Transfer of
Property Act. This argument overlooks the
special objects of the doctrine of lis-pendens
which applies to a case in_ which litigation
relating to property in which rights are sought
to be created pendente lite by acts of parties,
is pending. Moreover, for the purpose of this
argument, the defendant appellant assumes that
the provisions of section 65-A (2) (e), Transfer

of Property Act are applicable. If that was so



im)

jit would make no substantial difference to the
rights of the defendant-appellant which would
vanish before the suit was filed if section 65-A
applies. We, however, think that as the special
doctrine of lis pendens is applicable here, the
Purported lease of 1956 was invalid from the
outset. In this view of the matter, it is not
necessary to consider the applicability of
section 65-A(2)(e) which the defendant-appellant

denies, to the facts of this case.

20. As regards the applicability of section 64,
Civil Procedure Code, we find that parties
disagree on the question whether the attachment
made by the Central Bank on 20.4.1955, in
execution of the decree of which the
Plaintiff-respondent was the assignee existed on
the date of the impugned lease of 30.3.1956.
Learned Counsel for the appellant relied upon the
terms of an order recorded on the order sheet, in
the court of Additional District Judge, Jabalpur
in Civil Suit No.3-B of 1952 on 25.1.1956 showing
that in view of the stay order received from the
High Court execution could not proceed. The
order sheet, however, also contains the enigmatic
statement that execution was dismissed as
infructuous but the attachment was to continue

for six months. + The High Court had treated the



last part of the statement in the order sheet as
void and ineffective presumably on the ground
that the Additional District Judge had no
jurisdiction either to lift the attachment or to
dismiss the execution Proceedings after the High
Court had given its order staying all further
action in execution proceedings. The terms of
the High court’s order are not evident from
anything placed before us. On the other hand,
learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent
relies upon a subsequent order of the same court
passed on 30.4.1960 in the same suit. This order
shows that a compromise had been arrived at
between the decree holder and the
judgement-debtor under which the decree holder
had agreed to lift attachment of property except
with regard to Plaza Talkies which was to
continue. We are, therefore, unable to hold that
the concurrent findings of the trial court and
the High Court that the Plaza Talkies was
attached in execution of a decree in suit No.3-B
of 1952 on 4.5.1955 and that this attachment was
in existence when the impugned lease was executed
on 30.38.1956 are erroneous. On these findings,
the lease of 1956 was certainly struck by the

provisions of section 64 Civil Procedure Code


also. Section 64 Civil Procedure Code in fact,
constitutes an application of the doctrine of lis

pendens in the circumstances specified there.”

4.4 Section 74 of the Code of Civil Procedure which
bars any resistance or obstruction to execution of a
decree without any just cause also appears to be

relevant. This section reads as follows:-

“Where the court is satisfied that the holder of
a decree for the possession of immovable property
or that the purchaser of immovable property sold
in execution of a decree has been resisted or
obstructed in obtaining possession of the
property by the judgement-debtor or some person
on his behalf and that such resistance or
obstruction was without any just cause, the Court
may, at the instance of the decree holder or
purchaser, order the judgment-debtor or such
other person to be detained in the civil prison
for a term which may extend to thirty days and
may further direct that the decree holder or
purchaser be put into possession of the

property.”

Any person who acquires property pendente lite in
violation of the provisions of section 52 would naturally

be covered by the aforesaid section 74. In other words,


the transferee acquiring property from the
judgement-debtor against the provisions of section 52
will have no legal authority or any just cause to resist

or obstruct execution of decree.

4.5 Provisions contained in Rules 97, 98, 99, 100,
101, 102, 103 and 104 of Order 21 of the Code which also
recognise the principle of lis pendens, are reproduced

below:~-

“97. Resistance or obstruction to possession of
immovable property.- (1) Where the holder of a
decree for the possession of immovable property
or the purchaser of any such property sold in
execution of a decree is resisted or obstructed
by any person obtaining possession of the
property, he may make an application to the court
complaining of such resistance or obstruction.

(2) Where any application is made under sub-rule
(1), the court shall proceed to adjudicate upon
the application in accordance with the provisions

herein contained.

98. Orders after adjudication.- (1) Upon the
determination of the questions referred to in
rule 101, the court shall, in accordance with

such determination and subject to the provisions



of sub-rule (2),-
(a) make an order allowing the
application and directing that the
applicant be put into possession of the
Property or dismissing the application;
or
(b) pass such other order as, in the
circumstances of the case, it may deem
fit.
(2) Where, upon such determination, the court is
satisfied that the resistance or obstruction was
occasioned without any just cause by the
judgement-debtor or by some other person at his
instigation or on his behalf, or by = any
transferee where such transfer was made during
the pendency of the suit or execution proceeding,
it shall direct that the applicant be put into
possession of the property, and where the
applicant- is still resisted or obstructed in
obtaining possession, the court may also, at the
instance of the applicant, order the
judgement-debtor, or any person acting at his
instigation or on his behalf, to be detained in
the civil prison for a term which may extend to

thirty days.


99. Dispossession by decree-holder or
purchaser.- (1) Where any person other than the
judgment-debtor is dispossessed of immovable
property by the holder of a decree for the
possession of such property or, where such
property has been sold in execution of a decree,
by the purchaser thereof, he may make an
application to the court complaining of such
dispossession.

(2) Where any such application is made, the court
shall proceed to adjudicate upon the application
jin accordance with the provisions herein

contained.

100. Order to be passed upon application
complaining of dispossession.- Upon the
determination of the questions referred to in
rule 101, the court shall, in accordance with
such determination,-—
(a) make an order allowing the
application and directing that the
applicant be put into the possession of
the property or dismissing the
application; or
(b) pass such other order as, in the
circumstances of the case, it may deem

fit.


101. Question to be determined.- All questions
(including question relating to right, title or
interest in the property) arising between the
parties to a proceeding on an application under
rule 97 or rule 99 or their representatives, and
relevant to the adjudication of the application,
shall be determined by the court dealing with the
application and not by a separate suit and for
this purpose, the court shall, notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in any other
law for the time being in force, be deemed to

have jurisdiction to decide such questions.

102. Rules not applicable to transferee pendente
lite.- Nothing in rules 98 and 100 shall apply to
resistance or obstruction in execution of a
decree for the possession of immovable property
by a person to whom the judgement-debtor has
transferred the property after the institution of
the suit in which the decree was passed or to the
dispossession of any such person.

Explanation.- In this rule, ‘transfer’ includes a

transfer by operation of law.

103. Orders to be treated as decrees.- Where any
application has been adjudicated upon under rule

98 or rule 100, the order made thereon shall have



the same force and be subject to the same
conditions as to an appeal or otherwise as if it

were a decree.

104, Order under rule 101 or rule 103 to be
subject to the result or pending suit.- Every
order made under rule 101 or rule 103 shall be
subject to the result of any suit that may be
pending on the date of commencement of the
proceeding in which such order is made, if in
such suit the party against whom the order under
rule 101 or rule 103 is made has sought to
establish a right which he claims to the present

possession of the property".

4.6 A perusal of the scheme contained in the above
rules would show that by virtue of rule 102 of Order 24,
an exception to the operation of orders passed under
rules 98 and 100 of order 21 of CPC, is carved out where
the resistor or the obstructor to the execution of the
decree is the person to whom the property 15 transferred
by the judgment-debtor during the pendency of the suit in
which the decree was passed. This exception is primarily
based on the principle that a transfer of possession of
immoveable property during the pendency of the suit which
involves any right to the Property in question would be
incapable in law of affecting the rights that arise in

relation to such property: from a decree that may be



passed in the suit. The transfer referred to in this
rule in not merely transfer of title to the property but
also of its possession, whether accompanied by transfer
of title or not (Kanagasabai v. Poornathammal, AIR 1957
Mad. 458). On the question whether rule 102 applies or
not to involuntary sales, there was difference of opinion
of the High Courts. The Patna High Court held the view
that it did not (Guna Durga v. Krishna Rao 24 Patna 6954
while the Calcutta High Court held that it did (Bepin v.
Hem Chandra),5 This controversy now no longer subsists
after the insertion of an Explanation under rule 102 of
Order XXI by the C.P.C.(Amendment) Act, 1976, by which
the word ‘transfer’ has now been defined as including a
transfer by operation of law. The Calcutta High Court in
Nagendranath Sau v. Ramkrishnarao Sau® while relying on
its earlier decision in Bepin’s case,’ supra, considered

the precise effect of Rule 102 of Order XXI as follows:-

"(21) The reasons which weighed with Edgley J.
in the case reported in ILR (1939) 2 Cal 63:

(AIR 1939 Cal 709) are hereinbelow quoted:

“The general provisions of the Jaw with
regard to the principle of 115 pendens are
contained in S.52 of the Transfer of Property
Act. Having regard, however, to the terms of
S.2(d) of the Transfer of Property Act, the

provision of 98.52 would not directly apply as



regards the matter with which we are now deaTing.
At the same time, as regards transfers in the
course of execution proceedings, the rule of lis
pendens is expressly recognised in O.XXI r.102 of
the Code of Civil Procedure. The precise effect
of this Rule must therefore be considered. ....
In order to ascertain the precise meaning of this
rule some reference is necessary to some of the
preceding rules of O.XXI. If there is resistance
or obstruction to the execution of a decree for
the possession of immoveable property, the
decree-holder may complain under R.97. R.98 of
O.XXI provides that, when the resistance or
obstruction was occasioned without any just
cause, the decree-holder will be put into
possession of the property. If however, there is
any just cause for the resistance or obstruction
of the nature mentioned in R.99 of O.XXI, the
decree-holder’s application is rejected. But,
having regard to the provisions of R.102, the
person in possession cannot be said to have a
right to be in possession if he has received the
property on transfer from the judgment-debtor,
after the institution of the suit in which the
decree was passed. In such a case the
decree-holder’s application would be allowed
under २.98. The two succeeding rules 100 and

101, relate to applications which may be made by


the person other than the judgment-debtor in
possession of property which is the
subject-matter of the execution proceedings. If
any person in possession of the such property
other than the judgment-debtor is dispossessed,
he may complain under R.,100 of O.XXI. If it is
found that he was in possession on his own
account, the court will order him to be restored
to possession, unless in view of the provisions

of -R.102, the judgment-debtor has transferred

property to him after the institution of the suit

in which a decree was passed. The terms of R.102
are therefore such as to exclude from the benefit
of २.99 a transferee pendente lite from the
judgment-debtor, who has resisted or obstructed
the execution of the decree, and from the benefit
of R.101 any such transferee who has been

dispossessed of the transferred property.

It has been argued that the words “a
person to whom the judgment-debtor has
transferred the property” can only refer to a
voluntary alienation on the part of a
judgment-debtor and not to a transfer by a court
sale or a sale under the Public Demands Recovery
Act. Admittedly, the general doctrine of lis
pendens under S.52 of the Transfer of Property

Act has been extended by judicial decision to


involuntary alienations and I see no reason why

the same principle should not apply in the case

of transfers which are covered by R.102. The
transfer of property belonging to the
judgment-debtor, whether such transfer be

voluntary or involuntary, nevertheless operates
as a transfer by the judgment-debtor and in this
view of the case, I think that the language of
R.102 is sufficiently wide to cover both kinds of
alienations by a judgment-debtor”.
4.7 The conjoint effect of Section 52 of the Transfer
of Property Act and rule 102 of Order XXI, CPC as
observed in the case of J.P. Shankar Singh & another vs.

Pachee Bee & Others®, is as follows.

“A combined reading of Sec.52 of the Transfer of
Property Act and Order 21, Rule 102 07०८
postulates that a purchaser pendente lite does
not acquire any title to the property to the
detriment of the rights of other party and if
such a purchaser makes any obstruction or
resistance to the execution of the decree so
passed, an enquiry is not contemplated under

Order 21, Rule 99 or 100 07८."



ene en oe es ee Oe

4.8 Further in the case of Shubhchandra Jain vs.
Amit Jain,® the High Court held that for attracting the
provisions of Order 21 Rule 102, it was enough for the
decree holder to show that the applicants claim their
title to the property on a date subsequent to the date of
the institution of the suit in which the decree was
ultimately passed by the appellate court in favour of the

decree-holder.

4.9 On a glance through the aforecited decisions it
is evident that having regard to the provisions of rule
102 of order XXI CPC, the person in possession of
immoveable property cannot be said to have a right to be
in possession if he has received the property on transfer
from the judgment debtor, after the institution of the
suit in which the decree was passed. The effect of rule
102 is, therefore, such as to exclude from the benefit of
rule 99, a transferee pendente lite, from the
judgment-debtor who has resisted or obstructed the
execution of the decree, and from the benefit of rule 100
any such transferee who has been dispossessed of the
transferred property. It is settled law that the general
doctrine of lis pendens under section 52 of the Transfer
of Property Act has been extended to involuntary
alienations and the same principles have been applied to

the cases of transfer covered by rule 102 .


4.10 The main objective behind the various provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure discussed herein above is
to ensure that the decree-holder should not be deprived
of the fruits of the decree. With this end in view, the
Civil Procedure Code provisions have been enacted which
are a distinct self-contained code having independent
application de hors section 52 of the Transfer of
Property Act. It would run counter to the basic object
of the administration of justice if the decree passed by
a court is allowed to be rendered nugatory during the

execution proceedings. Therefore we are of the view that
e-

the provisions of the Code of civil Procedure contained
in Sections 64, 74 and Order XXI, rule 102 serve a
definite purpose and they are, as such, very much
required to be retained and that the proposed amendment
in section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act should not
in any way have the direct or implied effect of repealing
the said provisions. If no saving clause is added for
the purpose, the possibility of a controversy arising in
this regard cannot’ be ruled out, particularly when the
provisions of section 52, as already stated by us, also
continue to have force until completion of the execution
proceedings. We are, therefore, of the view that by way
of abundant caution and in order to eliminate any
controversy, it would be necessary to incorporate
expressly a provision to the effect that nothing in

sections 64, 74 and rule 102 of Order XxXI CPC shall be


affected by virtue of the proposed incorporation of the
requirement of registration of the notice of suit or

proceeding in section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act.



Chapter IV

Footnotes

Kedarnath v. Sheonarain, AIR 1970 SC 1717.

AIR 1987 SC 2060.

AIR 1975 SC 1810.

AIR 1946 Patna 134.

AIR 1939 ८

a

709.

AIR 1960 Cal. 299.

AIR 1939 Cal.709.

1985 (Vol.52) Andhra Law Times (Notes ०0. recent

cases) 32.

1989 (2) Delhi Lawyer 399.


CHAPTER V

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

5.1. Conclusions.- The doctrine of lis pendens as enacted
in section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, which is
an expression of the principle of the maxim “ut lite
pendente nihil innovetur" (pending litigation nothing new
should be introduced), aims at preventing multiplicity of
Proceedings by disallowing transfer or otherwise dealing
with the property in dispute during the pendency of a
suit or proceeding. In fact, this principle is a noble
and salutory one which is based on public policy and
convenience, that is, the necessity of final
determination of the matter. Since the principle as
contained in section 52 plays a vital role in the
administration of justice, it may be difficult to
entirely dispense with the principle, because if sale of
Property in dispute is permitted during the pendency of
suit or proceeding without any limitations, proper
administration of justice will suffer. Nevertheless, one
has also to note one aspect, that is, since the present
provision does not even protect the purchaser of the
property acting under good faith during the pendency of a
suit or proceeding, justice requires that a suitable
amendment in the provision needs to be made to ensure
equitable results in the matter of administration of

justice by inserting therein the requirement of


registration of the notice of a suit or proceeding under
the Registration Act so that purchasers of the property
in dispute during the pendency thereof are put on notice.
However, we feel that during the time allowed for
registration of such notice, any party to the suit should
not get any right to transfer or deal with the property
so as to affect the other party. Having regard to the
varying conditions in different parts of our country, a
reasonable period which may be three months needs to be
prescribed for the purpose. That apart, it may be stated
that since certain Civil Procedure Code provisions,
namely, sections 64, 74 and Order XXI, rule 102 of the
Code of Civil Procedure also contain the principle of lis
pendens, the same needs to be saved so that no party may
be in a position to deprive the decree holder of the
fruits of a decree. Further, the amendment of section 52
may need consequential amendments in the Registration

Act, 1908.

5.2 The following benefits will mainly flow from the
Proposed amendment to section 52 of the Transfer of

Property Act:-

(i) It would prevent unnecessary litigation
because if persons know beforehand about
the pendency of 8 suit or proceeding,
they may not purchase the property in

dispute. :


(ii) The proposed amendment will enable the
persons to know whether the property is
involved in litigation and this would
enable them to make a right decision in

the matter.

(iii) The proposed amendment will be of a great
assistance to persons in the matter of
finalising property dealings without
jeopardising their interests by avoiding

transactions in disputed properties.

Civ) The proposed amendment will ultimately
have the effect of preventing
multiplicity of proceedings by putting
persons on notice before indulging in

dealings of disputed property.

5.3 Recommendations.- Having regard to the various
beneficial effects which would flow from the proposed
amendment in section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act,
1882, discussed hereinabove, we hereby recommend the
following amendments in the Transfer of Property Act and

the Registration Act, 1908:-



follows:

-: 100 :-

Amendment of section 52 of the Transfer of

Property Act, 1882.

Section 52 be amended and substituted as

52. Transfer of immoveable property pending

Suit relating thereto.

(1) If, during the pendency, in any court

having authority within the limits of India
excluding the State of Jammu .and Kashmir or
established beyond such limits by the Central
Government, of any suit or procéeding which is
not ccllusive and in which any right to

immoveable property is directly and specifically

in question and the notice of the pendency of

such suit or proceeding, containing the

particulars specified in sub-section (2), is

registered under section 18 of the Indian

Registration Act, 1908, within a period of 90

days from the date of institution of the suit or

proceeding in the case of plaintiff or petitioner

or from the date of the knowledge of the pendency

thereof in the case of any other party, as the

case may be, then, after the notice is so

registered, the property cannot be transferred or
otherwise dealt with by any party to the suit or
proceeding so as to affect the rights of any

other party thereto under any decree or order



-: 101 :-

which may be made therein, except under the
authority of the Court and on such terms as the

court may impose.

Provided that during the aforementioned
period of 90 days no party shall have any
rights transfer orgotherwise deal with
the property so as to affect the rights
of any other party to the suit or
proceeding under any decree or order

which may be made therein.

Provided further that nothing in
sub-section (1) shall affect sections 64,
74 and Order XXI, rule 102 of the Code of

civil Procedure, 1908.

Explanation.- For the purposes of this section,
the pendency of a suit or proceeding shall be
deemed to commence on and from the date of the
presentation of the plaint or the institution of
the proceeding in a Court of competent.
jurisdiction, and to continue until the suit or
proceeding has been disposed of by a final decree
or order, and complete satisfaction or discharge
of such decree or order has been obtained, or has

become unobtainable by reason of the expiration


-: 102 :-

of any period of limitation prescribed for the
execution thereof by any law for the time being

in force.

(2) Every notice of pendency of a suit or
proceeding, referred to in sub-section (1), shalt

contain the following particulars, namely:

(a) the name and address of the owner
of the immoveable property or of

other person whose right to the

immoveable property is in
question;
(b) the description of the immoveable

Property, the right to which is

in question;

(c) the Court in which the suit or

Proceeding is pending:

(d) the nature and title of the suit

or proceedings; and

(e) the date on which the suit or

Proceeding was instituted.”



w

-: 103 :-

(3) The provisions of sub-section(1) shall
also apply to any transfer or other dealing with
the immoveable property, effected by a party to
the suit or proceeding in favour of any person
who has actual knowledge of the pendency of such
suit or proceeding, ever where no notice therecf

has, been. registered.”

Amendment of the Registration Act, 1908.

In section 78 of the Registration Act, the

Following proviso be inserted:-

“Provided that the fee for the registration of
notice of the pendency of a suit or proceeding,
whether given by referring to section 52 of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 or otherwise,
shall not exceed rupees one hundred, irrespective
of the value of the property to which the notice
relates but in case of any suit or proceeding
instituted in forma pauperis, no fee for the
registration of notice of the pendency of a suit

or proceeding shall be payable.”



5.3.3. Amendment of section 18 of the Registration Act,

1908.

In section 18, the following new clause (ee)

after the existing clause (e) be inserted:-

“(ee) Notices of pending suits or proceedings,
referred to in section 52 of the Transfer of

Property Act, 1882."

We recommend accordingly.

rly

(JUSTICE B.P Sebdn he REDDY )

CHAIRMAN
(प्र Ae
॥ Wneene
(MRS.JUSTICE LEILA SETH) (R.L.MEENA)

Oo MEMBER-SECRETARY