198

ONE HUNDRED FIFTY EIGHTH REPORT

OF

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ON

THE AMENDMENT OF

THE INDUSTRIES (DEVELOPMENT & REGULATION)

ACT, 1951

JUNE, 1998



LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

- SHASTRI BHAWAN
8. P. JEEVAN REDDY NEW DELHI - 110 001
Chairman, Law Commission of India ws TEL. : 3384475
Residence :
err जकते 1, JANPATH
~ NEW DELHI . 110 011
TEL. : 3019465
D.0.No.6(3) (47) /98-LC(LS) Dated ist June, 1998
Dear Minister,
I am forwarding herewith the One Hundred-.- and Fifty

Eighth Report of the Law Commission of India on "The Amendment,
of the Industries (Development & Regulation) Act, 1951".

2. The subject was taken up by the Law Commission on its
own. The need for taking up the subject is on account of the
emerging of several practical problems asa sequel to the
decision of the Constitution Bench-of the Supreme Court in the
case of Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. and others Vs. State
of U.P. and others, (1990)1 SCC 109, as discussed in Chapter
II of the Report. The import of the said Synthetics case
decision has caused inconsistency in later Supreme Court
decisions, discussed in Chapter II of the Report.

3. This Report seeks to do away with the doubts so that
the conflicts in the discharge of functions of the Central and

State Governments pertaining to the subject are reconciled as
soon as possible.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,

Tay
(B.P.JEEV REDDY )
Or. M. Thambi Durai,

Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
Shastri Bhavan,
NEW DELHI - 110 001.


CONTENTS.

S1.No.

Particulars

From

Pages

To

Chapter I - Introduction

Chapter II - The emerging of
several practical problems as
a sequel to the decision of
the Constitution Bench

Chapter III - The Need for
amending item 26, First
Schedule of the IDR Act, 1951

Chapter IV - Conclusion

12

34

43

VW

33

42



CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

1.1 The Scope:

The Law Commission of India has taken up, suo
motu, for consideration the amendment of Item 26 in the
First Schedule to the Industries (Deve lopment &
Regulation) Act, 1951 in view of, and with a view to
remove the difficulties expressed by the Supreme Court in
its various decisions discussed in this Report (Chapter

II, infra) in interpreting the Constitutional provisions

pertaining to the subject.

In a recent decision of the Supreme Court in Coir
Board Vs. Indira Devi P.S., 1998 (2) SCALE 195, Prs 20 &
21, the Court noticed the uncertainty prevailing in

interpretation of the term ‘industry’ in Industrial


Disputes Act, 1947 despite the decision of the majority

of five Judges Bench decision in Bangalore Water Supply Water Supp1
and Sewerage Board vs. A. Rajappa, (1978) 2 scc 213),

and observed:-

“24, Undoubtedly, it is of paramout importance
that a proper law 15 framed to promote the

welfare of labour employed in industries”

In Murari Lal Mahavir Prasad v. B.R.Vad, (1975)

2 SCC 736 it was observed:-

“if the statute contains a lacuna or a loophole,
it is not the function of the Court to plug it by
a strained construction in reference to the
supposed intention of the legislature. The
legislature must then step in to resolve the
ambiguity and so long as it does not do so the
tax payer will get the benefit of that ambiguity;
but equally the court ought not to be astute to

hunt out ambiguities by an unnatural construction

of a taxing section."

A duty is enjoined upon the legislature to frame the
appropriate law when the issue becomes complex and thorny

and is frequently raised in the courts (see para 2.2.4,



infra) and above all there are inconsistencies in the
Supreme Court decisions on the subject (see para 2.2.5,

infra).

The Law Commission is also of the opinion that
since clarity and certainty of law has been lacking on
the subject dealt with in this report, grave doubts
arising in the judicial battlefield, should be removed
legislatively, in view of the colossal amount of revenue
and manifold activities involved in it viz., power to
legislate on liquors, that is to say, production,
manufacture, processing, transport, purchase and sale
thereof, and licensing, control of supply, distribution,

price, fees, duties, etc.

1.2 The Background: -

The object behind the enactment of the Industries
(Development & Regulation), Act, 1951 is to provide the
Central Government with the means of implementing their
industrial policy which was announced in their Resolution
No.1(3)-44(13) 48 dated 6th April, 1948 and approved by
the Central legislature. The Act brings under Central
control the development and regulation of a number of
important industries the activities of which affect the

country as a whole and the development of which must be



governed by economic factors of all-India import. The
Planning of future development on sound and balanced
lines is sought to be secured by the licensing of all new
undertakings by the Central Government. The Act confers
on Government power to make rules for the registration of
undertakings and for regulating the production and
development of the industries specified in the schedule.
The Act also provides for the constitution of a Central
Advisory Council, prior consultation with which will be
obligatory before the Central Government takes certain
measures such as_ the revocation of a licence or taking
over the control and management of any industrial concern
(Refer to the statement of Objects and Reasons of the

Bill concerning the Act cited in the AIR Manual, vol.

30, page 891, 5th Edn.).

The Act was amended by the Amending Act 72 of
1971; Amending Act 67 of 1973; Act 4 of 1984; Section 2
of the Industries (Development & Regulation) Act, 1951
declares that it is expedient in the public interest that
the Union should take under its control the industries
specified in the First Schedule. Chapter II of the Act
provides for establishment of Central Advisory Council
and Development Councils. Chapter III deals with
regulation of scheduled industries. Section 10 requires

registration of existing industrial undertakings.


Section 10A empowers the Central Government to revoke
registration in certain cases. Section 11 deals with the
licensing of new industrial undertakings. Section 11A is
concerned with the requirement of a licence for producing
or manufacturing new articles by the owner. Section 11B
empowers the Central Government to specify the
requirements which shall be complied with by small. scale
industrial undertakings. Section 12 deals with the

revocation and amendment of licences in certain cases.
Section 14 deals with the procedure for the grant of
licences or permission. Section 15 confers power of
investigation to be made into scheduled industries or

industrial undertakings. Section 15A empowers Central

Government to investigate into the affairs of a company
in liquidation. Under Section 16 the Central Government
is empowered to carry out action as is desirable on
completion of the investigation under section 15.
Further Chapter IIIA deals with the direct management of
control of industrial undertakings by Central Government
in certain cases. Chapter III-AA deals with the
management of control of industrial undertakings owned by
companies in liquidation. Chapter III-AB confers power
on the Central Government to provide relief to certain
industrial undertakings. Chapter III-AC is concerned
with the liquidation or reconstruction of companies.

Chapter III-B of the Act contains Section 18-G whereby



the Central Government is empowered to control the
supply, distribution and price etc. of certain articles,
for securing equitable distribution and availability at
fair prices of any article or class of articles relatable

to any scheduled industry.

1.3 Relevant Constitutional Provisions concerning the

subject under consideration:-

The subject of ‘industries’ is assigned to the

States under Article 246 read with the Seventh Schedule

to the Constitution of India. It is, however’, made
subject to certain Entries in the Union List. ‘Entry 24’
in List II (State List) reads: “industries subject to

the provisions of Entries 7 and 52 of List I”.

Entries 7 and 52 of List I (Union List) read as

follows:

“Ty Industries declared by Parliament by law to
be necessary for the purpose of defence or for
the prosecution of war.”

52. Industries, the control of which by the
Union is declared by Parliament by Jaw to be
expedient in the public interest."



It would be appropriate to set out Entry 33 of
List III (Concurrent List) at this stage in view of its
relevance to the subject considered herein. In so far as

it is relevant, the Entry reads:-

"33. Trade and Commerce in, and the production,
supply and distribution of - (a) the products of
any industry where the control of such industry
by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to
be expedient in the public interest, and imported
goods of the same kind as such
products;.. "

1.3.2 Effect of enaction of Industries (Development &

Regulation Act, 1951 upon the powers of the State

Governments: ८

By virtue of the Constitution of India which came
into effect from January 26, 1950, the powers of
legislation in respect of alcohol were distributed
between List I and List II of the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution. Duties of excise on tobacco and other
goods manufactured or produced in India except, inter
alia, alcoholic liquors for human consumption, and opium,
Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics, but
including medicinal and toilet preparations containing
alcohol or any assistance included in sub-paragraph (b)

of this entry, were given to Parliament under Entry 84,

List I. But duties of excise on goods manufactured or


produced in the State and countervailing duties at the
similar rates, inter alia, alcoholic liquors, the State
was given power by Entry 51 of List II to legislate. By
Entry 8 of List II, the States were given power to
legislate on liquors, that is to say production,

manufacture, processing, transport, purchase and sale

thereof.

The entries in the three lists of the Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution of India are legislative
heads or fields of legislation. These demarcate the area
over which appropriate legistation can operate. - These
neither impose any implied restriction on the legislative
power conferred by Article 246 of the Constitution, nor
prescribe any duty to exercise that legislative power in
any particular manner. Hence the language of the entries
should be given the widest scope, “to find out which of
the meaning is fairly capable because these set up
machinery of the Government. Each general word should be
held to extend to all ancillary or subsidiary matters
which can fairly and reasonably be comprehended in it.
In interpreting an entry it would not be reasonable to
import any limitation by comparing or contrasting that

entry with any other one in the same list. It is in this



background that one has to examine the present
controversy. (India Cement Ltd. and others Cemen d. 309 others vs. State

of Tamil Nadu 309५ others, 1990 (1) SCC 12, para 18)

Legislative power normally includes all
incidental and subsidiary powers, except the power to tax
which is neither incidental nor subsidiary to the power
to legislate on a matter or a topic (M.P.V.

Sundararamier & Co. vs. State of Andhra Pradesh (1958)

SCR 1422 referred in State of Mysore vs. M/s D.  Cawasji
& Co., (1971) 2 SCR 799.

1.3.3 On or about May 8, 1952, Parliament enacted the
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (IDR
Act) declaring in terms of Entry 52 of List I, that the
control by Parliament of the industries specified in the
First Schedule to the said Act is expedient in public
interest. The result of this declaration read with the
First Schedule to the said Act was, that the States were
denuded of their power to legislate conferred upon them

by Entry 24 of List II to the extent of industries

specified in the First Schedule to the IDR Act.


mi: 10 ::-८

1.3.4 In the year 1956 the First Schedule to the IDR
Act, was amended including some more industries therein.
Item 26 which was one of the industries so added, reads:-
७४ 26. Fermentation Industries: (1)
alcohol; (ii) other products of

fermentation industries".
Therefore, by way of insertion of Item 26 in the
First Schedule to the said Act, the Central Government
was empowered to control the Fermentation Industries

including alcohol industries.

1.3.5 Magnitude of use of alcohol and all pervasive

control of State Governments prior to the

commencement of the Constitution of India:-

There are several industries located all over the
country manufacturing alcohol. Alcohol is also known by
the name ‘rectified spirit’. Alcohol has manifold uses.
It is used for obtaining alcohol - all that one has to do
is to add water to reduce its power. It is used for
manufacture of Indian-made foreign liquors like whisky,
brandy, rum, gin, etc. Alcohol is also used 17 several
other industries. Until a few decades ago and even today
in certain States like Uttar Pradesh, alcohol is used
mainly for the purpose of obtaining country liquor

therefrom and for manufacture of Indian-made foreign


liquors, which together may be referred to hereinafter as

‘intoxicating liquors’ or as ‘alcoholic liquors for human

consumption’.

Almost every State in the country has an Excise
Law in force - some of them enacted prior to the
commencement of the Constitution - governing the
manufacture, distribution, sale and possession of liquor.
The definition of ‘liquor’ in these enactments made no
distinction between liquor used for human consumption and
liquor used for other purposes. These Acts purported to
regulate all liquors. The Excise Duty on the manufacture
of liquors was collected by the State Governments which
also closely regulated and controlled the manufacture,
possession, sale and transportation of these liquors. As

a fact - and speaking generally - the Union Government

had no say in the matter.


CHAPTER II

THE EMERGING OF SEVERAL PRACTICAL PROBLEMS AS A

SEQUEL TO THE DECISION OF THE CONSTITUTION BENCH
2.1 Browsing of the Problem:-

The State of U.P. levied, inter alia,a fee called
‘Vend Fee’ on the sale of liquor manufactured in that
State. The rule imposing Vend Fee made no distinction

between the JTiquor sold for obtaining country liquor or

for manufacturing liquors for human consumption or
liquors sold to industries (other than those engaged in
the manufacture of liquors for human consumption). A
company called Synthetics and Chemicals Limited
(Synthetics) filed a writ petition in the Allahabad High
Court challenging the levy of Vend Fee on the liquors
sold for industrial purposes. Its contention was that by
virtue of Item 26 of the First Schedule to the IDR Act,
the State of U.P. is not competent (after 1956) to levy
any duty, tax or fee on denatured spirit, which it was
dealing in. (Denatured spirit by its very nature is
liquor rendered unfit for human consumption). Its
contention was that Parliament alone is entitled to make

any law and levy any duty, tax or fee on the denatured

spirit. The writ petition was dismissed by the High


wis 13 i

Court holding that expression “intoxicating liquors”
eccurring in Entry 8 of List II of the Seventh Schedule
to the Constitution included within its ambit denatured
spirit as a whole and, therefore, the State was perfectly
competent to Tevy the impugned fee. Synthetics carried
the matter in appeal to the Supreme Court which was
dismissed in the year 1980. The decision is reported in
(1980) 2 SCC 441 [ = (1980) 2 ScR 531 ]. The Supreme
Court referred to the history of State Excise Laws in
this country and to the wide definition of liquor in
these enactments and observed that while enacting the
Government of India Act, 1935, the British Parliament
must have been aware and must be deemed to have accepted
the said wide definition. (It may be mentioned that the
relevant Entries in the Seventh Schedule te the
Government of India Act, 1935 and in the Seventh Schedule

to the Constitution are identical). The Supreme Court

held as follows:-

es rn Dealing with the meaning of word
‘liquor’, the Court referred to the various
Abkari cases in several provinces and found that
all the Provincial Acts of this country have
consistently included liquor containing alcohol
in the definition of ‘liquor’ and ‘intoxicating

liquor’ and, therefore, the framers of the


wir 14 ::८

Government of India Act, 1935 could not have been
entirely ignorant of the accepted sense in which
the word ‘liquor’ has been used in the various
excise Acts of this country and concluded that
the word 'liquor’ covers not only those alcoholic
liquids which are generally used for beverage
Purposes and produce intoxication, but also all
liquids containing alcohol.... In the context it
is clear that the decisions proceeded on the
basis that the word ‘intoxicating liquor’ is not
confined to potable liquor alone but would

include all liquor which contain alcohol.”:

Synthetics, however, was not satisfied with the judgment.

It filed a review petition in the Supreme Court which

remained pending for quite some time. Meanwhile, several

other writ petitions were filed in the Supreme Court

raising the very same contention. All these matters

including the review petition filed by Synthetics were

referred to a larger Constitution Bench of seven-Judges
which rendered its judgment on 25.10.1989 (reported in
(1990) 1 Scc 109 [ = (1989) Supp. 1 SCR 623 ]. The
Constitution Bench held that the expression “intoxicating
liquors" occurring in Entry 8 of List II means and refers

only to potable liquors i.e., liquors fit for human

consumption and that potability is determined by the



standards specified by the Indian Standards Institute
viz., the alcohol content should not exceed 43% v/v.
Entry 51 of List II, it held, is also similarly limited
to potable liquors. The Bench held that the power of the
States to legislate in respect of liquors was restricted
to potable liquors only. The Bench held further that
“rectified spirit" - which expression was used
interchangeably with the expression “ethyl alcohol” and
“industrial alcohol” - is of 95% and above purity and
cannot, therefore, be treated as potable liquor. It held
that rectified spirit falls exclusively within the power
of the Union by virtue of the IDR Act. The ‘Bench
observed that after the 1956 amendment to the IDR Act
bringing alcohol industries (under fermentation
industries) as Item 26 of the First Schedule to the IDR
Act, the control of this industry has vested exclusively
in the Union. It thus held as follows:-

cane
"B85. After the 1956 amendment to the IDR Act
bringing alcohol industries (under fermentation
industries) as Item 26 in the First Schedule to
IDR Act the control of this industry has vested
exclusively in the Union. Thereafter, licences
to manufacture both potable and non-potable
alcohol is vested in the Central Government.

Distilleries are manufacturing alcohol under the



Central licences under IDR Act.

manufacture even
transferred to the
The

State cannot

alcohol

Government. The

right which they do not possess.

States claim
manufacture
manufactured
Central Government.

upon coming into
amenable to States’
of privilege. The
Entry 8 of List II

basis for such a

that

industrial alcohol

industry, because
of the IDR Act,
eccupy the
like Sections
not constitute
industrial alcohol
industry. On the

with the

without the

States

exclusive
industrial

under the grant of licence from

claim,

under Entry 3

as a product of the

has evinced
whole Field.
24-A and 24-B of the U.P.
any regulation

as
contrary,

so-called

No privilege for

if one existed, has been

distilleries by the State.

itself manufacture industrial

permission of the Central

cannot claim to pass a

Nor can the

right to produce and

alcohol which

the

Industrial alcohol cannot

existence under such grant be

claim of exclusive possession

State can neither rely on

nor Entry 33 of List III as a

The State cannot claim

of List III, it can regulate

scheduled

the Union, under Section 18-G

clear intention to

Even otherwise sections

Act do

jn respect of the

product of the scheduled

these purport to deal
transfer

of privilege



sr: 47 oii-

regarding manufacturing and sale. This power,
admittedly, has been exercised by the State
purporting to act under Entry 8 of List II and

not under Entry 33 of List III.

86. The position with regard to the control of
alcohol industry has undergone material and
significant change after the amendment of 1956 to
the IDR Act. After the amendment, the State is
left with only the following powers to legislate

in respect of alcohol:

(a) Tt may pass any legislation in the nature
of prohibition of potable liquor
referable to Entry 6 of List II and
regulating powers.

(8) Tt may lay down regulations to ensure
that non-potable alcohol is not diverted
and misused as a substitute for potable
alcohol.

(c) The State may charge excise duty on
potable alcohol and sales tax under Entry
52 of List II. However, sales tax cannot
be charged on industrial alcohol in the
present case, because under the Ethyl

Alcohol (Price Control) Orders, sales tax



cannot be charged by the State on
industrial alcohol.

(d) However, in case State is rendering any
service, as distinct from its claim of
so-called grant of privilege, it may
charge fees based on quid pro quo. See
in this connection, the observations of
Indian Mica case (AIR 1971 SC 1182).

xX “xx XM XX xx
88. On an analysis of the aforesaid decisions
and practice, we are clearly of the opinion that
in respect of industrial alcohol the States are
not authorised to impose the impost they have
purported to do. Im that view of the matter, the
contentions of the petitioners must succeed and
such impositions and imposts must go as being
invalid in law so far as industrial alcohol is
concerned. We make it clear that this will not
affect any impost so far as potable alcohol as
commonly understood is concerned. It will also
not affect any imposition of levy on industrial
alcohol fee where there are circumstances to
establish that there was quid pro quo for the fee
sought to be imposed. This will not affect any

regulating measure as such.”



2.2.1 Nature of problems created in pursuance to the of problems created in ursuance to the

decision in Synthetics & Chemicals Ltd. case Synthetics & Chemicals Ltd. case

(supra)

The decision of the Constitution Bench created
several practical problems. As is explained in the later

decisions of the Supreme Court, to be referred to

presently, there is (0०0 such thing as “industrial
alcohol". What is manufactured is alcohol, namely, of
95% and above purity which, it appears, is known as
“ethyl alcohol" and also as ‘rectified spirit’. This

rectified spirit can be used for both industrial and
non-industrial purposes. (In the following paragraphs
wherever reference is made to “industrial” purposes, it
means purposes of industries other than those engaged in
the manufacture of intoxicating liquors/IMFL and wherever
the expression ‘non-industrial’ Purpose is used, it means
the use of alcohol for obtaining country liquor/arrack by
mixing water therein or by industries engaged in
manufacture of intoxicating liquors/IMFL). Rectified
spirit can be used both for industrial Purposes) and
non-industrial purposes. What is very often done and
insisted upon by the State governments is to denature the

rectified spirit meant for industrial purposes. This is

done because once the rectified spirit/alcohol is



mi: 20 ::८

denatured by adding denaturants, the alcohol/rectified
spirit becomes unfit for obtaining country liquor or for
manufacturing intoxicating liquors/IMFL. It can be used
only for industrial purposes like manufacture of paints,
varnishes and other industrial purposes, But what is
important to notice to repeat - is that even without
mixing denaturants, rectified spirit/alcohol can be used

for industrial purposes. Now, a plant producing

alcohol/rectified spirit may remove it (according to the

Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 and the Rules made

thereunder, it may be remembered, duty is payable at the
stage of “removal”. Though the duty of excise is
leviable and levied on the manufacture or production of
the goods, it is collected at the stage of removal from

the place of production or the bonded warehouse, as the

sase may 08. This position is well established by the

several decistons of the Federal Court and the Supreme

Court) and sell it either for industrial purposes or for
non-industrial purposes as may be directed by the
appropriate regulating authority. There are also units
which manufacture rectified spirit for their own
consumption j.e., for manufacturing intoxicating

liquors/IMFL. The difficulty, however, arises
(particularly in view of the indisputable fact that for
obtaining the country liquor/arrack, all one has to do is

to mix water with the rectified spirit) in the matter not



mir 21 :६४८

only of levy of duty, tax and fees but more so in the
matter of regulating and controlling the manufacture,
possession, sale and transportation of the rectified
spirit which is not denatured. According to the
aforesaid judgment of the Constitution Bench, as
interpreted and understood by one section of lawyers,
States have no power either to levy any duty/tax/fees on
the rectified spirit or to regulate its manufacture,
possession, sale or transport it being the exclusive
domain of the Union - and that they come in only when the
potable Jiquors including country JViquor is manufactured

or obtained, as the case may be. The - other

. interpretation and understanding of the aforesaid

decision of the Constitution Bench is that the said
decision is confined only to industrial alcohol i.e.
denatured spirit or the denatured rectified spirit, as
the case may be, and is not relevant to non-denatured
spirits and that so far as non-denatured
alcohol/rectified spirit is concerned, the States alone
have the exclusive power to levy duty, tax and fee
thereon and to regulate their manufacture, possession,

sale and transportation.

2.2.2 The horizon of the decision in Synthetics case

(supra) considered by the Supreme Court:-



wit 22 ::-८-

In a judgment of Allahabad High Court rendered on

9.9.91 in Vam_ Organic Chemicals Ltd. v. State of U.P.,

in C.M.W.P. No.16782 of 1990, the latter view (second of
the two views mentioned above) was affirmed. This
judgment has been approved in its totality by the Supreme

Court in Vam_ Organic Chemicals Ltd v. State of U.P.

(1997) 2 SCC 715. This was a case, where the Govt. of
U.P. made a rule requiring the distilleries in the State
holding PD2 and persons holding FL 16, 39, 40, 41 or PD2
to obtain a new licence from the Collector and pay a

denaturation fee of Rs.7/- per litre in advance. This

rule and the = said 18५५ was challenged by : the
petitioner-distillery on the ground that the State of
U.P. was not competent to make any rule or levy any fees
on the denaturing of alcohol. In other words, their

contention, based upon Synthetics, was that the State has

no power to make any Jaw respecting alcohol and
industrial alcohol or to levy any fees/tax thereon. This
contention was rejected both by the High Court and the
Supreme Court. Before, however, setting out the grounds
on which the power of the State was upheld, it is
necessary to notice the following opening observations in
the judgment rendered by A.M. Ahmadi, C.J. on behalf of

Bench:


" Before proceeding further, it will be proper to
understand the difference between industrial
alcohol, denatured spirit and potable liquor.
Ethyl alcohol is rectified spirit of 95% v/v in
strength. Rectified spirit is highly toxic and
unfit for human consumption. However, rectified
spirit diluted with water is country liquor.
Rectified spirit, as it is, can be used for
manufacture of various other products like
chemicals etc. Rectified spirit, produced for
industrial use is required by a _ notification
issued under the Act to be denatured in order to
prevent the spirit from being directed to human

consumption, Rectified spirit is denatured by
adding denaturants which make the spirit
unpalatable and nauseating. As such rectified

spirit can be converted to potable liquor but
once denatured, it can be used only as industrial

alcohol.”

Now coming to the grounds on which the power of
the State to make the impugned Rule and to levy the
impugned fee was upheld, they are the following, in the

words of the Bench itself:-

(a) "Thus, the power under Section 18-G can be
exercised only so far as is permitted by
sub-section (1) viz. for securing the equitable

distribution and availability at a fair price of
any article or class of articles relatable to any
scheduled industries. To this extent, the State
Legislature can not make any law. The High Court
concludes that in other respects the field is
still open to the State Legislature. The High
Court goes on to say that the impugned
Notification is issued to ensure that rectified
spirit sought to be used for industrial purposes
is not diverted for obtaining country liquor or
other forms of potable liquor and that it is not
concerned with equitable distribution and
availability ata fair price of either rectified
spirit or the denatured spirit. The notification
was, thus, justified under Entry 6 of List II
Public Health; and Entry 8 of List II -
Possession and Sale of Intoxicating liquor”



wi: 24 ::-

(bd) “This Court dealt with the question of
_ Tegislative competence of the State to impose tax
or levy ०0. industrial alcohol in the case of
Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. and Chemicals Ltd. ४. State of U.P.
and ruled in the negative. The High Court took
the view that the distinction between ethyl!
alcohol/rectified spirit as such and denatured
spirit was not in issue, nor was it considered in
that judgment and held that this Court cannot be
said to have ruled that every rectified
spirit/ethy1] alcohol is industrial alcohol. The
High Court reiterated that once denatured, the
alcohol becomes exclusively industrial alcohol
since it cannot be used for obtaining country
liquor or for manufacturing IMFLs and said that
it is to ensure that ethyl alcohol meant for
industrial use jis not misused or diverted for
human consumption that impugned regulation is
provided for by the State and further that the
regulation being part of general regulation of
the trade in alcohol in the interest of public

health is relatable to Entries 6 and 8 of List
Ir.” हु

(०) "Tt is to be noticed that the States under
Entries 8 and 51 of List Il read with Entry 84 of
List I have exclusive privilege to legislate on
intoxicating liquor and alcoholic liquor for
human consumption. Hence, so long as any
alcoholic preparation can be diverted to human
consumption, the States shall have the power to
legislate as also to impose taxes etc. In this
view, denaturation of spirit 18 not only an
obligation on the States but also within. the
competence of the States to enforce."

(8) The Bench also retied upon a recent decision of
the Supreme Court in State of etate of A.P. v McDowell ((1996) 3
scc 709), and quoted the following holding therein with
approval: -

“It follows from the above discussion that the
power to make a law with respect to manufacture
and production and its prohibition (among other
matters mentioned in Entry 8 in List II) belongs
exclusively to the State Legislatures. Item 26
in the First Schedule to the IDR Act must be read
subject to Entry 8 - and for that matter, Entry 6
- in List पा, So read, the said item does and
cannot deal with manufacture, production of
intoxicating liquors. ४11 the petitioners before


us are engaged in the manufacture of intoxicating

liquors. The State Legislature is, therefore,
perfectly competent to make a law prohibiting
their manufacture and production - in addition to

their sale, consumption, possession and transport
- with reference to Entries 8 and 6 in List II of

the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution read
with Article 47 thereof”.

2.2.3 Import of Synthetics case decision (supra) again

considered by the Supreme Court :-

The question of states’ power in the matter of
regulating the manufacture, possession, sale and
transport and its power to impose prohibition came up
directly for consideration before a three Judge Bench of

the Supreme Court in State of State of 8.2. ४५. McDowell & Co.

((1996) 3 SCC 799). The said judgment sought to explain
the decision of the Constitution Bench in Synthetics. It
was explained that Entry 52 over-rides Entry 24 alone and
does not over-ride any other Entry in List II. Reliance
was also placed on Entry 23 in List III which empowers
both the Union and the States to make a law concerning
“trade and commerce in, and the Production, supply and
distribution of the products of any industry where the
control of such industry by the Union is declared by
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest,
and imported goods of the same kind as such products”.
It was held that in so far as industries engaged in
manufacture of intoxicating liquors are concerned, the

States have the exclusive power to legislate. The other



“>:: 26 ::-

part of this decision has already been set out in the
preceding paragraph while setting out the grounds of the

judgment in Vam Organics.

2.2.4 Emphasis on the problem being a thorny one, laid on the problem being a thorny one laid

by the Supreme ० Court in Bihar Distillery case

Cinfra) and the Court _ enunciated parameters:-

Another matter came up before the Supreme Court
where a distillery situated in Bihar, which has been
obtaining licences throughout under the Bihar Excise Act,
sought to raise the contention - when the Bihar’ State
Authorities proposed to cancel its licence for certain
alleged violations - that the State has no power to do so
because according to the decision in Synthetics, the
power to grant and cancel the licence of industries
engaged in the manufacture of alcohol vested exclusively
in the Union. When this matter came up before the
Supreme Court of India, it gave a notice to the Union of
India and to all the State Governments under the

Following Order:

The question arising herein is a thorny one.
It is also arising frequently. The decision of
the larger Constitution Bench of this Court in
Synthetics & Chemicals Ltd v. State of U.P.
((1990) 1 SCC 109) calls for demarcation of the
spheres of the Union and the States particularly
in the matter of alcoholic liquors. Recently,
this Court has held in State of ४.7. Vv.
McDowell & Co. ((1996) 3 SCC 709) that so far as



ait शा ::-८

the intoxicating Jliquors/potable liquors are
concerned, it is the exclusive province of the
States. But for manufacturing intoxicating
liquors, or for manufacturing industrial alcohol
as the case may be, one must have to manufacture
or purchase alcohol. It is only thereafter that
the alcohol is either converted into industrial
alcohol (by denaturing it) or into potable
liquors by reducing the strength of alcohol
(which is normally of 95% purity or above).
Indeed, alcohol can be used for industrial
purpose even without denaturing it. Saying that
States step in only when alcohol becomes potable
and not before it leaves a large enough room for
abuse apart from difficulties of supervision and
regulation. In the matter of licensing too,
problems would arise, as to who should license
such industry - whether the Centre alone or the
States or both. Having regard to the importance
of the question, we think that this is a proper
case where notice should go to all the States who
will be heard on this question. The Union of
India is already a party to the writ petition.”

2.2.4(a) In response to the notice so issued, the Union

Government as well as a large number of State Governments
appeared and filed their submissions. They were heard
through their respective advocates and judgment rendered

on 29.1.1997 - reported in Bihar Distillery and Ors v.

Union of India & Ors (1997) 2 Scc 727. After discussing

the earlier decisions of the Court and the several

problems arising therefrom, the Court made the following

observations and gave the following directions:-

It is these and many other situations which
have to be taken into consideration and provided
for in the interests of Jaw, public health,
public revenue and 8150 in the interests of
proper delineation of the spheres of the Union
and the States. The line of demarcation can and
should be drawn at the stage of clearance/removal


of the rectified spirit. Where the
removal/clearance is for industrial purpose
(other than the manufacture of potable liquor),
the levy of duties of excise and all other
control shall be of the Union but where the
removal/clearance is for obtaining or
manufacturing potable liquors, the levy of duties
of excise and all other control shall be that of
the States. This calls for a joint control and
supervision of the process of manufacture of

rectified spirit and its use and disposal. We
proceed to elaborate:

(1) So far as the industries engaged
in manufacturing rectified spirit meant
exclusively for supply to industries (industries
other than those engaged in obtaining or
manufacture of potable liquors), whether after
denaturing it or without denaturing it, are
concerned, they shall be under the total and
exclusive control of the Union and be governed by
the IDR Act and the Rules and Regulations made
thereunder. In other words, where the entire
rectified spirit is supplied for such industrial
purposes or to the extent it is so supplied as
the case may be, the levy of excise duties, and
all other control including establishment of
distillery shall be that of the Union. The power
of the States in the case of such an industry is
only to see and ensure that rectified spirit
whether in the course of its manufacture or after
its manufacture, is not diverted or misused for
potable purposes. They can make necessary
regulations requiring the industry to submit
periodical statements of raw material and the
finished product (rectified spirit) and are
entitled to verify their correctness. For this
purpose, the States will also be entitled to post
their staff in the distilleries and levy a
reascnable regulatory fees to defray the costs of
such staff, as held by this Court in. Shri
Bilelshwar Khand Udyog Khedut Sahakari Mandali Khand  Udyo Khedut Sahakari Mandali
Ltd v. State of Gujarat ((1992) 2 scc 42) and
Guichem Distillers India Ltd. ve State of
Gujarat ((1992) 2 566 399)

(2) So far as industries engaged in
the manufacture of rectified spirit exclusively
for the purpose of obtaining or manufacturing
potable liquors - or supplying the same to the


State Government or its nominees for the said
purpose - are concerned, they shall be under the
total and exclusive control of the States in all
respects and at all stages including the
establishment of the distillery. In other words,
where the entire rectified spirit produced is
supplied for potable purposes - or to the extent
it is so supplied, as the case may be the levy of
excise duties and all other control shall be that
of the States. According to the State

Government, most of the distilleries fall under
this category.

(3) So far as industries engaged in
the manufacture of rectified spirit, both for the
Ppurpese of (a) supplying it to industries (other

than industries engaged in obtaining or
manufacturing potable liquors/intoxicating
liquers) and (b) for obtaining or manufacturing
or supplying it to Governments/persons for

obtaining or manufacturing potable liquors are
concerned, the following is the position: The
power to permit the establishment and regulation
of the Functioning of the distillery is
concerned, it shall be the exclusive domain of
the Union. But so far as the levy of excise
duties is concerned, the duties on rectified
spirit removed/cleared for supply to industries
(other than industries engaged in obtaining or
manufacturing potable liquors), shall be levied
by the Union while the duties of excise on
rectified spirit cleared/removed for the purposes
of obtaining or manufacturing potable liquors
shall be levied by the State Government
concerned. The disposal, i.¢., clearance and
removal of rectified spirit in the case of such
an industry shall be under the joint control of
the Union and the State concerned to ensure
evasion of excise duties on rectified spirit
removed/cleared from the distillery. It is
obvious that in respect of these industries too,
the power of the States to take necessary steps
to ensure against the misuse or diversion of
rectified spirit meant for industrial purposes
(supply to industries other than those engaged in
obtaining or manufacturing potable liquors) to
potable purposes, both during and after the
manufacture of rectified spirit, continues,
unaffected. Any rectified spirit supplied,
diverted or utilised for potable purposes, ji.e.,
for obtaining or manufacturing potable liquors



-it 30 ::-

shall be supplied to and/or utilised, as the case
may be, in accordance with the State excise
enactment concerned and the rules and regulations
made thereunder. If the State is so advised, it
is equally competent to prchibit the use,

diversion or supply of rectified spirit for
potable purposes.

(4) It is advisable - nay, necessary
that the Union Government makes necessary
rules/regulations under the IDR Act, directing
that no rectified spirit shall be supplied to
industries except after denaturing it save those
few industries (other than those industries which
are engaged in obtaining or manufacturing potable

liquors) where denatured spirit cannot be used
for manufacturing purposes.

(6) So far as rectified spirit meant
for being supplied to or utilised for potable
purposes is concerned, it} shal} be under the

exclusive control of the States from the moment
jt is cleared/removed for that purpose from the

distillery - apart from other powers referred to
above,

(7) The power to vermit the
establishment of any industry engaged in the
manufacture of potable liquors inc uding IMFLs.
beer, country liquor and = other intoxicating
drinks is exclusively vested in the States. The
power to prohibit and/or seguiate the

“ manufacture, production, sale, transport or
consumption of such intoxicating Tiquors is

equally that of the States, as held in McDowell
((1996) 3 SCC 709).

The writ petition is disposed of with the

above directions.”

2.

2.

5

Inconsistency in Supreme Court decisions on the

subject pointed out by the Supreme Court in

Haryana Brewery Ltd. case (infra):-



Another matter in C.A. 1999 & 2000/1997

(Government of Haryana v. | of Haryana ५. Haryana Brewery), cited in

((1997) 5 SCC 758), came up before the Court wherein the
industry engaged in the manufacture of alcohol relied
upon a three-Judge Bench decision of the Supreme Court in

State of U.P. ७५. Modi Dist

161५ (1995 (6) JT 523] and

a two-Judge Bench decision in Mohan Mohan Meakin Ltd. ४५.

Excise and Taxa

1 Commissioner, H.P. [1996 (9) SCALE

1621 tn support of their contention that States do not
come into the picture until alcohol attains potability.
Since it appeared that there was a certain inconsistency

between the principles underlying the decision in’ Bihar

Distillery and Yam Organics and the aforesaid decisions

in Haryana Distillery and Mm s Modi Distillery, the matter

has been referred to the Constitution Bench to pronounce
authoritatively upon the situation arising from the
several decisions of the Supreme Court which do net
necessarily speak in one voice. The order of reference

dated 11th March, 1997 reads as follows:-

“Certain impertant questions arise in
these matters which, in our opinion, require to
be decided authoritatively by a Constitution
Bench. Much water has flowed since the decision
of the seven Judge Constitution Bench of this
Court in Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. v. State and Chemicals Ltd. v. State
of Uttar Pradesh [1990 (1) SCC 109]. In State of
Andhra Pradesh ४. Mcdoweil [1996 (3) UT (SC)
679], it has been held by a three-Judge Bench of
this court that so far as intoxicating liquors
are concerned, their production, manufacture,
possession, transport, purchase and sale is the



exclusive province of the States by virtue of
Entry 8 of List-II. It has also been held that
the imposition of prohibition and levy of duties
thereon is also the prerogative of the States
alone. In Vam Organic & Chemicals itd. ७५. Organic & Chemicals Ltd. Vv.
State of Uttar Pradesh [1997 (1) UT (SC) 625], it
has been held by a two-Judge Bench of this Court
that the decision in Synthetics and Chemicals was
concerned only with industrial alcohol and that
so long as any alcoholic preparation can be
diverted to human consumption, the States have
the power to legislate in that behalf and also to
impose taxes. Tt has been held that rectified
spirit can be converted into country liquor by
mere addition of water and, therefore, the States
are not totally excluded from control over the
rectified spirit. In Bihar Distillery v. Union
of India (1997)2 scc 727, it has been held by
another Bench of two Judges that having regard to
the fact that by merely adding water, rectified
spirit can be converted into country liquor and
also because rectified spirit can also be used
for manufacturing IMFLs, the States are entitled
to joint control over production, storage and
distribution of rectified spirit. It has been
held that so far as levy of duties are concerned,
the point of departure is the stage of removal.
The rectified spirit which is removed for
industrial purposes (purposes other than
manufacture of IMFLs or country liquor] can be
taxed by the Union while the rectified spirit
which is removed for the purpose of manufacture
of IMFl. or country liquer or other intoxicating
liquors can be taxed by the States. oe sag fe

In State of Uttar Pradesh & others ५.
Modi Distillery [1995 (6) JT (SC) 523], a three
Judge Bench of this court held that any wastage
occurring in the course of manufacture of
alcoholic liquors occurring before it reaches the
stage of alcoholic liquor for human consumption
is outside the State’s jurisdiction but any
wastage occurring after they reach the alcoholic
liquor for human consumption is the province of
the State. This was held in the context of power
to levy duty upon liquors. To the same effect is
the decision of a two Judge Bench jin Mohan
Meakins Ltd. v. Excise & Taxation Commissioner, Ltd. ४. Excise & Taxation Commissioner
Himachal Pradesh & others.[1996 (9) SCALE 162].



we are of the opinion that the
legislative power conferred upon the States by
the Constitution and recognised even in
Synthetics & Chemicals should include all
incidental and ancillary powers and it is this
aspect which was emphasised in Bihar Distillery,
Any principle enunciated with respect to the
respective powers of the Union and the States
should be practical and realistic and such as not
to give room for abuse or misuse. Since the
decisions aforementioned project different points
of view, it is necessary to evolve a coherent and
effective formula so that the Union and the State
should know what are their respective powers and
jurisdiction.

The papers may accordingly be placed
before Hon'ble the Chief Justice for orders
reaarding placing these matters before the
Constitution Bench”.



CHAPTER III

THE NEED FOR AMENDING ITEM 26, FIRST SCHEDULE OF
THE IDR ACT, 1951

3.1 Having observed in the preceding chapter, the
apparent conflict in the Supreme Court decisions on the
import of the important subject relating to item 26 of

the First Schedule to the IDR Act, 1951, it

is quint

essential to do away with the doubts as early as possible

so that the conflicts in the discharge of functions of

the Central and State Governments are reconciled as held

in M/s Murari lal Mahavir Parsad ४. B.R.Vad (1975) 2 $cc

736 quoted under para 1.1 supra

3.2 Before embarking upon the effort to seek a solution

to the problem, it is pertinent to refer to arguments
advanced by the State Governments in Bihar Distillery

case (supra) as follows:-

During the hearing of the case in Bihar

Distillery, all the States uniformly contended that
rectified spirit is “intoxicating liquor” within the

meaning of Entry 8 of List II, that the decision in
Synthetics is confined to industrial denaturant alcohol

only and that if it is understood as applying to



non-denatured alcohol too, the decision requires

reconsideration. They pleaded for exclusive control over

alcohol viz., for the position obtaining before the
Synthetics judgment. The following extracts from the

judgment bear out the strength and justification behind

the submissions made by the State Governments of West

Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka, Maharashtra,

Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Goa, Orissa and

Himachal Pradesh.

“6. Accordingly, notices have been issued to all
the State Governments. We have directed notice
to learned Attorney General as well. ४७, 18५8
heard Shri Bimal Kumar Sinha, learned counsel for
the writ petitioner, Shri Shanti Bhushan for the
State of West Bengal, Shri Rakesh Dwivedi
Additional Advocate General for the State of
Uttar Pradesh far Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, Shri
Santosh Hegde for the State of Karnataka, Shri
M.S. Nargolkar for the State of Maharashtra,
Shri ४. Krishnamurthi for the State of Tamil

७. Shri. Ram Kumar for the State of Andhra
adesh, Shri 98. Prakash for the State of
Kerala, Ms Subhashini for the State of Goa, Shri
P. oN. Misra for the state of Orissa and Shri T.
Sridharan for the State of Himachal Pradesh.
Shri M.S.  Usgaocar, learned Additional Solicitor
General appeared for the Union of India. We also
requested Shri Harish N. Salve. who was
appearing in the connected matter [ Special Leave
Petition (0) No. 9863 of 1996 - involving
jnteralia the guestion at issue herein] Lo
address us on the general question which he has
agreed gracefully to do.

"43, The several State Governments. to whom
notices have been given, have responded. Some of
them have filed very elaborate counters setting
out their case. The first and foremost
contention urged on their behalf is that
rectified spirit is “intoxicating liquor” within



the meaning of Entry 8 of List II. In other
words, their contention, based upon the ratio in
McDowell, is that rectified spirit is
“intoxicating liquor” within the meaning of Entry
8 of List II, and hence, outside the purview of
Entry 24 of List II, which in turn means that the
Union cannot take over its control by making a
declaration in terms of Entry 52 of List and
further that item 26 of the Schedule to IDR Act
is ineffective and invalid in so far as it seeks
to regulate the production, manufacture et al of
rectified spirit. In support of their
submission, they have relied upon the legislative
history of the several State enactments in India
apart from a wealth of material including
technical data. They submit that the decision to
the contrary in Synthetics is not correct and
requires reconsideration. They have also
assigned several reasons why the holding in
Synthetics insofar as the meaning of
“intoxicating liquor" is concerned should be held
to be obiter. They submitted that in the
interests of maintaining’ the balance between’ the
Centre and the States and to preserve the federal
nature of our Constitution - which is one of its
basic features - the matter must be referred to a
larger Bench to consider the correctness of
Synthetics. They submitted that the relevant
words in Entry 51 of List II and Entry 84 of List
I are “alcchol liquors for human consumption” and
not “alcoholic liquors fit for human consumption”?
They complained with a good amount of emotion
that the decision in Synthetics reads the word
"fit" into the said entries and makes it a basis
for curtailing the legislative power of the
States. There is no warrant for such addition,
they submitted. In addition to the above
submissions, the following facts are stated in
the affidavit filed on behalf of the State of
Uttar Pradesh: the reduction process of
converting rectified spirit into country liquor
involves mixing of water and stirring. By adding
water, the alcoholic content is reduced to 35%
v/y to make it country liquor. Adding of spices
is optional. Rule 45 of the Uttar Pradesh Excise
Rules defines the expression “reduction of
liquor”. According to the definition, it means
“the reduction of liquor from a higher to a lower
strength by the addition of water". Mere mixing
of water, it is submitted, makes rectified spirit
country liquor. On this basis too, it is
submitted, rectified spirit is really and



made as

essentially an intoxicating liquor and merely
because water is required to be added to make it
country liquor, it does not cease to, intoxicating
liquor. By way of analogy, it is submitted that
even the whiskies and brandies are not ordinarily
consumed as such but only after mixing water or

soda. Addition of water or soda, it is
submitted, does not change the character of
whisky or brandy either. It is next submitted
that bulk of rectified spirit manufactured in
Uttar Pradesh is used for the purpose of

obtaining country liquor or IMFLs. Only a small
quantity is used for industrial purposes. Having
regard to the predominant use to which rectified
spirit is put, it is submitted, it must be
understood as intoxicating liquor. The adding of
denaturants is only with a view to ensure that
the rectified spirit is not used for potable
purposes. Yet another submission put forward by
the State of Uttar Pradesh is that even during
the course of manufacture of rectified spirit,
potable liquor comes into existence. It is

- submitted that the main raw material for

rectified spirit is molasses. The process of
manufacture is elaborately set out, supported by
technical literature. The samples taken from
certain distilleries by the excise staff and the
result of the analysis of the said samples” is
also relied upon, Th is submitted that the
process of manufacture of rectified spirit
involves increasing the alcoholic. content by
repeatedly processing it. The alcoholic content
keeps on rising from stage to stage. It is
submitted that at several intermediary stages,
the liquor can be taken out and used for drinking
purposes, whether as it is or after mixing water,
as the case may be. Shri Rakesh Dwivedi, learned
Additional Advocate General for the State of
Uttar Pradesh, placed strong reliance upon. the
reasoning and conclusions in the judgment of the
Allahabad High Court in Vam Organic Chemicals
Ltd. ४५. State of U.P., which, it is brought to
our notice by written submissions, has since been
affirmed by this Court in Vam Organic Chemicals
ltd. v. State of U.P. by a Bench consisting of
the Hon’ble Chief Justice and Sen, J.”

It may be remembered that these submissions were

Tate as in 1996-97.

Z be


3.3 Consideration of the problem and of the roblem 3009

The Law Commission has considered the pros and
cons of the problem including the import of various
decisions cited in the report from various perspectives

and also parameters envisaged in Bihar Distillary's case

(cited in para 2.2.4 (supra). While construing the scope
of provisions it is a well settled principle of
construction that where alternative constructions are
equally open that alternative is to be chosen which will
be consistent with the smooth working of Ehe system which

the statute purports to be regulating; and that

alternative is to be rejected which ४ ig to be rejected which will introduce

uncertainty. friction or confusion into the working of

the system (Collector of Customs v. O. S$&W Mills Ltd.

AIR 1961 SC 1549 = (1962) 1 SCR 9396). Besides one
cannot ignore the fact that a duty is cast upon the State
to protect the fundamental right of citizens under
Article 21 read with Article 47 of the Constitution, 1.9.
the duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and
the standard of living and to improve the public. health.

The Sarkaria Commission on Centre-State relations in its


ए: 39 ::-

report (Part I) has also comprehensively dealt with the

scope of the I.D.R. Act in the context of Union-State

relations and recommended as follows:-

"12.11.01. If Union control of a specific aspect
of an industry is considered expedient in the
public interest, it would be advisable that the
IDR Act is suitably amended to facilitate the
Union Government's regulation of that aspect
only. Parliament may have to pass a separate law
under Entry 52 of List I..... If such new
legislation presents any serious difficulty, an
alternative may be to replace the present First
Schedule of the IDR Act by several Schedules,
each of such would specify the purpose for which
a particular control was imposed on an industry
so that all 00087 areas of Entry 24 of List II
remain unoccupied by the Union. The Planning
Commission, in consultation with the Ministries
of Industry and Law and Justice, should prepare a

paper on this subject for the consideration of

the NEDC at an early date.

12.11.02 As a mandatory legal requirement, there
should be a periodical review, say, every three

years, to determine whether in respect of any of


the industries the Union’s control should be
continued or relaxed or lifted. Such a review
may be undertaken by a Committee of Experts on
which the State Governments should be represented
on a Zonal basis. The result of the review may

also be placed before the NEDC.”

Thus the Sarkaria Commission has also recommended
that the Union control of a specific aspect of an
industry which is considered expedient in the public

interest, should be dealt with by the Centre by amending

the IDR Act fo facilitate the Union Government's
regulation of that aspect only. Besides. the said
Commission has emphasised the need for a mandatory legal

requirement whereunder there should be a periodical
review, say. every three years, to determine whether in
respect of any cf the industries the Union’s control

should be continued or relaxed or lifted.

In order to attain the smooth working of the
system and to remove uncertainties, friction and
confusion in the working of the system, as also to
realise the constitutional objectives set out above, and
above all by treading in the direction set out in the
Sarkaria Commission's report quoted above to minimise the

Union’s control on a _ specific aspect of an industry,


ar: 40 ::८

instead of its all pervasive control of industries, we
are of the view that there is urgent need to amend the

IDR Act, 1951 in the manner set out below.

The Law Commission of India is of the opinion
that the above matter should be clarified by enacting
appropriate amendments to the IDR Act instead of leaving
the matter to be fought out in Courts. This controversy
has already attracted four or more judgments and the
confusion has not been cleared. In the interests of
maintaining balance between the Union and the States and
also with a view to eliminate the room for abuse of law
and misuse of alcohol, to enable the States to levy and
collect the income which they were receiving by levying
excise duties on alcohol for more than a century prior. to

the decision in Synthetics and also to put an end to the

legal wrangling, it is eminently proper and expedient to,

substitute the following item as item 26 in the First

Schedule to the IDR Act _in the place of the existing item

26: “Fermentation Industries but not including alcohol".

This would make the law, and more so its administration,
clear, and unambiguous. It would also help the States to
raise a little more revenue than at present and remove
their grievance as expressed by them during the hearing

of Bihar Distillery Case.



wir 42 ::-८

For removal of any doubts, it may be clarified
that so far as the levy of excise duty is concerned, the
position should be as indicated in the decision of the
Supreme Court in Bihar Distillery viz., the alcohol
*removed’ for purposes other than potable purposes (for
obtaining arrack or for manufacturing alcoholic drinks)
shall be subject to the central excise duty while the
alcohol removed for potable Purposes (for obtaining
arrack or for manufacturing alcoholic drinks) shall be
subject to the State excise duty and shall be levied and
collected accordingly. Indeed, the collection of the
central excise duty can be entrusted, if found adVisable,
to the State Excise officials, who will in turn make it
over to the designated authcrities of the Central

Government,



४४ 43 otic

CHAPTER IV
CONCLUSION

4.1 The Law Commission recommends for substituting

the following item as Item 26 in the First Schedule to

the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 in

the place of the existing Item 26 in the First Schedule

thereto: -

“Fermentation Industries but not inciuding

alcecho?.”

जी पु
A bate आआ

(8.7. Jeevan Ready:
Cated: 20th May, 1998.

Chairman
जज
पर — ve रच ~
प्ल्म्प्ट्ण्ल a oe
(R.L. Meena) (Leijia Seth)

Member-Secretary Member