LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY NINTH REPORT

ON

REPEAL AND AMENDMENT OF LAWS : PART I

1998


Jus cE
8. 7. JEEVAN REDDY
Chairman, Law Commission of India

Dear Dr.

)/98-LC(LS) Law COMMISSION OF INDIA

SHASTRI BHAWAN
NEW DELHI - 110 001
TEL. : 3384475

Residence :
1, JANPATH
NEW DELHI. 110 011
TEL. : 3019465

Dated 28th July,1998

Thambidurai,

I am forwarding herewith the One Hundred Fifty Ninth

Report on “Repeal and Amendment of Laws:

2. The subject w
pursuance of the

Commission of India by which
sequel to the said terms of reference,

Part I"
as taken up by the Commission in
terms of references of the Law
it was constituted. As a

the Commission

requested the various Ministries to send us the views of
the expert groups/departmental committees constituted in
the respective departments set up for the review of the

enactments admi
Ministries/Departme
few proposal

Ministries/Departments.

exercise is still

nistered by the respective
nts. The Commission received quite a
s/responses from various

Some have
to be completed.

stated that their
Since, there are

large number of Ministries/Departments and hundreds of

the Acts are being
the proposals and

administered by them, waiting for all
making a comprehensive single report

would involve substantial and uncalled-for delay.
Accordingly, the Commission decided that it would send
more than one Report on the issue of "Repeal and

Amendment of Laws".

3.

This is the first such Report.

This Report focuses on the need for the Repeal of

certain Central Acts which have become obsolete in view

of enactments of subsequent legislation,

have become anomal
conditions, which,

With regards,

Dr. M. Thambidurai,
Minister of Law,
and Co. Affairs,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 001

or laws which
ous or out-dated in view of changed
therefore, need to be repealed.

Yours hie? क ,

(B.P. Jeevan Reddy)

Justice


CHAPTER I

CHAPTER IT

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER-LV

ANNEXURE-I

ANNEXURE-IT

ANNEUXRE-III

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

PRINCIPLES TO BE FOLLOWED IN
RECOMMENDING REPEAL AND AMENDMENT
OF LAWS

CENTRAL ACTS RECOMMENDED FOR REPEAL/
AMALGAMAT ION/ AMENDMENT

CONCLUSION

LETTER DATED 10.10.97

LETTER DATED 23.2.98

LETTER DATED 5.3.98

PAGES

1-8

11-36

37-49

50

51

52


CHAPTER-I
INTRODUCTION

1.4 Scope

This report focusses on the need for the repeal of
certain Central Acts which have become obsolete in view of
enactment of subsequent legislation, or laws which have ‘become
anomalous or out-dated in view of changed conditions, which,
therefore,need to be repealed. The Law Commission has taken
up the subject in pursuance of the terms of reference of the
Law Commission by which it was constituted. The relevant

terms of reference are extracted below -
“The terms of reference of the Law Commission are as under:-
I. Review/Repeal of obsolete laws:

a) To identify laws which are no longer needed or

relevant and can be immediately repealed.

b) To identify laws which are in harmony with the
existing climate of economic liberalisation

which need no change;


>:2 :-८

6) To identify Jaws. which require changes or
amendments and to make suggestions for their

amendment;

d) To consider in a wider perspective the
suggestions for revision/amendment given by
Expert Groups in various
Ministries/Departments with a view to

coordinating and harmonising them;

e) To consider references made to it by
Ministries/Departments in respect of
legislation having bearing on the working of

more than one Ministry/Department;
f) To suggest suitable measures for quick
redressal of citizens grievances, in the field

of law.”

Besides one of the terms of reference of the

Commission is:-

“VI. To recommend to the Government measure for
bringing the statute book up-to-date by repealing
obsolete laws and enactments or parts thereof which

have outlived their utility.”


It may be emphasised at the cost of repetition that the para
I(d) of the aforequoted terms of reference of the present Law
Commission of India, as set out in the Order of the Ministry
of Law and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs dated 16.9.97,

inter alia, expects the Commission -

“(d) To consider in a wider perspective the
suggestions for revision/amendment given by Expert
Groups in various Ministries/Departments with a view

to coordinating and harmonising them.”

1.2 AS a sequel to the aforesaid terms and references, the
Law Commission addressed letters dated 10.10.97, 23.2.98 and

5.3.98 fAnnexures-I, II & III respectively) Il & IT respectively) to various

ministries to send us the views of the expert
groups/departmental committees constituted in the respective
departments set up for the review of the enactments
administered by the respective ministries/departments. The
Commission has received quite a few proposals/responses from
various Ministries/Departments. While some of them have sent
specific proposals, some others have stated that either they
do not administer any Act or that the Acts administered by
them do not require any amendment. Some have stated that
their exercise is still to be completed. The Commission has

considered all such responses/proposals.

In view of the large number of Ministries/Departments
concerned and the hundreds of Acts being administered by them,

the Commission was faced with the question how to go about



w:4o:-

these several proposals. Waiting for all the proposals and
making a comprehensive single report would involve substantial
and uncalled-for delay. Accordingly, the Commission has

decided that it would send more than one report on the issue

of ’Repeal and Amendment of Laws’. This is the first such
report.
1.3 Necessity for repealing obsolete enactments:-

The need for periodical review of the statute book is
evident. Citizens of a country are expected to be familiar at
least with the statutes relevant to their lives and affairs.
Such familiarity cannot be satisfactorily acquired and
properly maintained if the statute book contains statutes
which are really "७७४०" though formally alive. Citizens are
concerned with the living law. They should not be made to
wade through a forest where obsolete or anachronistic statutes
cloud the scenario. Such a situation is bound to confuse the
vision, besides leading to a waste of energy, time and —
resources. The co-existence of dead Jaw with living law
creates confusion even in the understanding. (Law Commission
of India, one hundred forty eighth report on Repeal of certain

Pre-1947 Central Acts, para 1.2).
1.4 Functions of statute law revision:-
The function of statute law revision and the

Principles on which its exercise should proceed have been

lucidly put by Lord Westbury, Lord Chancellor, while speaking


5४:८5 i-

in 1863 on the Statute Law Revision Bill. This is what he

‘said: (Lord Westbury, “Parliamentary Debates” (1863) 3rd
Series, Vol.171, col.775, quoted by Lord Simon of QGlaisdale
and Webb, "Consolidation and Statute Law Revision” (1975),
Public Law 285. 291).

“The Statute Book should be revised and
expurgated-weeding away all those enactments that no
longer in force and arranging and classifying what is
left under proper heads, bringing the dispersed
statutes together, eliminating jarring and discordant
provisions, and thus getting a harmonious whole
instead of a chaos of inconsistent and contradictory

enactments." (see Law Commission of India 96th report,

para 1.4).

As envisaged by Lord Westbury, statute law revision is
intended to achieve four main objectives:- (See Law Commission

of India 148th report, para 1.8)

(i) renovation - which is achieved by “weeding
away” obsolete enactments;

(ii) order and symmetry - which can be introduced
by arranging and classifying the enactments
really in force;

(iti) @asy acce3s to legislation - promoted through

consolidation by “bringing the dispersed



—:6 iH

statutes together” and

(iv) harmony - perfected by “eliminating discordant

and jarring provisions.”

These goals, pursued systematically, can obliterate so
much of the past as is useless, organise the present and equip

us for meeting the challenges of the future.

1.5 Need for formal repeal and law _reform:—

As pointed out by the Law Commission in its earlier
report, (Law Commission of India 148th report, para 1.6)
statutes, unlike human beings, do not die a natural death,
excepting in respect of statutes whose life is pre-determined
by the legislature at the time of their enactment. A statute,
unless it is expressly enacted for a temporary period,
survives until it is killed by repealing it. To this extent,

the statutes enjoy immortality.

This consequence flows from the well-established
proposition that long desuetude of a statute does not amount
to its repeal. (Perrin v. U.S.(1914) 58 L.Ed.69). Even
where an earlier enactment relating to a particular subject
matter is followed by a later enactment on the subject matter
covering almost every inch of the area covered by the earlier
enactment, the earlier enactment may still be held to retain
its vitality because courts lean against implied repeal. Thus
neither the obsolescence of an old enactment nor the fact that

its content is substantially covered by a later enactment, has


the effect of robbing the old enactment of its vitality in
Jaw. That effect can be achieved only by a formal repealing

Act.

Besides these objectives, the Law Commission is also
required to see in wider perspective laws which do not comport
with the existing climate of economic liberalisation according
to the changing scenario of globalisation in economic sector.
Thus change in conditions on political and economic front also
necessitate the considering of changes in the relevant law

when it was enacted.

1.6 Earlier reports:—

The present report is not the first one of the Law
Commission of India in the nature of such examination. The
Law Commission has, in the past, had more than one occasion
for such examination. In 1958, the Commission examined all
the British statutes then in force as applicable to India, the
Commission forwarded a Report recommending the repeal of the

Converts Marriage Dissolution Act (18th Report). Thereafter,

ra

he Commission forwarded another Report recommending repeal of

ct

he Hindu Widows Remarriage Act (81st Report). Besides this,
the Law Commission forwarded comprehensive Report in 1984 on
the repeal of certain obsolete Central Acts. (Law Commission
of India, 96th report on Repeal of Certain Obsolete Central
Acts (1984), That Report, inter alia, incorporates certain
important materials relating to the function and significance

of repealing Acts and we made use of some of those materials.



—:8 i=

The Commission again undertook the question of repeal of the
Central Acts passed before 15th August, 1947, in its 148th

report on Repeal of certain pre-1947 Central Acts, in 1993.

1.8 Scheme of the discussion:-

Having referred to these introductory observations, we
proceed to deal, in the next chapter, with the principle to be
followed in recommending the repeal of central Acts.
Thereafter we shall summarise the results of our study and

make our conclusions thereon.


“79 :-

CHAPTER-IT

PRINCIPLES TO BE FOLLOWED IN RECOMMENDING REPEAL AND AMENDMENT

In pursuance of the terms and reference constituting
the Law Commission quoted in the previous chapter, the
Commission addresed the letters to various
ministries/departments of the Central Government vide our
letters dated 10.10.97, 23.2.98 and 5.3.98 (Annexures I, II &
Ill, respectively) to send us the suggestions for
revision/amendment given by the Expert Groups set up in
various ministries/departments with a view to coordinating and

harmonising them.

The Expert Groups set up in the various
ministries/departments of the Central Government have made

recommendations which can be broadly categorised under four

heads-
(i) Acts which do not need any change;
(ii) Acts which require to be repealed;

(iii) Acts which require to be amalgamated and re-enacted as

single enactment; and

(iv) Acts, changes wherein are still under consideration.



—:10:-

In so far as the Acts mentioned in item (i) above are

concerned, the Commission has obviously no comments to offer.

However, with regard to the other items stated above,
the Commission has examined the recommendations of the Expert
Groups and proposes to recommend for repeal, amalgamation or
amendments,as the case may be, the Acts mentioned in the

succeeding chapter of this report.

2.2 Scheme of the study:-

The Law Commission thought it convenient to take up
the examination of the central laws falling under the
respective ministries of the Central Government and the laws
administered by them, department-wise. We shall take up the
response of each department and offer our comments thereon.
The Commission has perused the various Acts mentioned in the
responses/reports of various departments and has come to its
own conclusions which may not necessarily be identical with

the views of the departments.


milti-

CHAPTER -III

CENTRAL ACTS RECOMMENDED FOR REPEAL/AMALGAMATION/ AMENDMENT

3.1 Proposals received from the Ministry of Finance

{Department of Economic Affairs):—

we shall first take up the proposals received from the
Department of Economic Affiars, Minsitry of Finance in the
shape of the “Report of the Expert Group for the Department of
Economic Affairs", which were forwarded to the Commission
under their letter dated 9.3.98. The said Report sets out, in
the first instance, the role of the Department of Economic
Affairs and its changed role in the current liberalised
economic environment. Since the liberalisation of aconomic
environment is a policy of the Government, the Law Commission
has no comments to offer thereon. At the same time, it is
necessary to mention that liberalisation should not and cannot
involve a total withdrawal of the Government from the ecanomic
scene of the country. Until 1991-92 the Indian economy was,
what may be called, a ‘command economy’ where the commanding
heights were supposed to be occupied by the public sector.
The private sector was closely regulated and had to operate
subject to numerous restrictions contained in various
enactments in force or enacted from time to time, as the case
may be. Probably in the present day world economic scenario,
India had no option but to adopt market-oriented or what may
be called market-friendly economic policies. The shift was

unavoidable. But, it must be said on the basis of experience



-212:-

in this country as well as in the former communist States,
that any such shift from a totally controlled and sheltered
economy to a market-friendly and liberalished economy ought
not to be achieved in a sudden lurch. It has to be a gradual
process. The several large-scale financial irregularities
which came to light during the years 1993 to 1997 are perhaps
attributable to such an abrupt shift among other causes.
While lifting of restrictions which operate as hurdles to
increase in production and the growth of industries is
welcome, the Government cannot abdicate its role as the
regulator of the economy. In the matter of establishment of
new industries and/or in the matter of maintaining the
standards and qualities of industrial products too, ‘its role
is unique and can be performed by it alone. Import and export
policies have to be kept under constant watch and closely
monitored and regulated in the interest of a healthy economy
and this can be done and ought to be done by the Government.
Transparent economic laws and procedures are welcome, but at
the same time the establishment of industries depending upon
forest produce, non-renewable and irreplaceable natural
resources and those giving rise to serious environmental and
ecological problems have still to be regulated in the larger
interest of the nation including sustainable development and
inter-generational equity. Several decisions of the Supreme
Court rendered during the years 1994 to 1997 amply bear out

the above principles.


Now coming back to the proposals/responses of the
Department of Economic Affairs, a reference is made to
R.V.GUPTA COMMITTEE REPORT 1994 (Chapter V) which contains
several recommendations to amend various provisions of the
statutes administered by the Department. It is stated that
“most of the recommendations of the Gupta Committee have
already been implemented by the Department". In this view of
the matter, no purpose will be served by offering any comments
on the recommendations mentioned in Chapter V of R.V.GUPTA

COMMITTEE REPORT.

The proposals sent by the Department then speak of the
Proposals made by the ‘new Expert Group’ constituted on 5th
November 1997 under the Chairmanship of the Finance Secretary
to review Acts, rules and regulations pertaining to the
Department. It is stated that for expeditious completion of
the work, the said new Expert Group constituted a
sub-committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Vinod Dhall,
Additional Secretary (Insurance) and comprising certain
non-official members as well. It is stated that the said
Committee submitted its Report on 18.12.1997 which was
finalised by the Expert Group in its final meeting held on
29.12.97. The recommendations of the Expert Group can be
broadly categorised under four heads as stated in the

preceding chapter, pr.2.1, and are being repeated hereunder : -


“:14:-

(i) Acts which do not need any change;
(ii) Acts which require to be repealed;
(iii) Acts which require to be amalgamated and

re-enacted as single enactment; and

(iv) Acts, changes wherein are still under
consideration.
(i) In so far as the Acts mentioned in item (i) above are

concerned, the Commission has obviously no comments to offer.

(ii) Under this item, the following Acts are proposed to be
repealed:-
(a) Banking Service Commission Act, 1984

It is stated that the Banking Service Commission
contemplated by the Act was never constituted and that in view
of the decision to enhance the functional autonomy of public
sector banks, no such Commission is proposed to be
constituted. The decision to repeal this Act being a policy

decision, calls for no comments.

(b) Currency Ordinance 1940

It is stated that since the printing of one rupee
denomination notes has been discontinued, this Ordinance is no

longer required. The view of the Department appears

unexceptionable.


—218:-

(०) The Shipping Development _ Fund Committee
(Abolition) Act, 1986

This Act was enacted "to abolish the Shipping
Development Fund Committee constituted under the Merchant
Shipping Act, 1958" and for disposal of its funds, assets and
liabilities. Since the object of the Act has already been
achieved, there is nothing further to be done under the Act

and accordingly it is but proper that it is repealed.

(d) Compulsory Deposit Scheme Act, 1963 and
Additional Emoluments (Compulsory Deposit)

Act, 1974

The Compulsory Deposit Scheme was enacted requiring
every person mentioned in Section 2 to make certain deposits
compulsory every year. The Additional Emoluments (Compulsory
Deposit) Act, 1974 provided for compulsory deposits into two
separate accounts j.e., additional wages deposit account and
additional dearness allowance deposit account into which the
persons mentioned in Section 3 have to make the deposits.
Actually, the deposits were to be made by the disbursing
authority. No reasons are given in the proposals sent by the
Department of Economic Affairs in support of the proposal to
repeal these enactments. However, on being contacted, the Law
Commission was told that the Department did not think that in
future any occasion or necessity will arise for such
compulsory deposits. It is for this reason, it was. stated,

the Acts were proposed to be repealed while no doubt making


EEE IIE Ee

-216:-

provision for disposal of the amounts already in deposit under
the respective enactments. Since it appears to be a matter of
policy, more or less, to repeal these enactments, the Law

Commission has no particular comments to offer.

(iii)(a) The proposal to amalgamate and enact a single
Act in the place of Government Savings Bank Act, 1873,

Government Savings Certificate Act, 1959 and Public Provident
Fund Act, 1968 may be a welcome feature. The main purpose of
the 1873 Act is to provide that the nomination made by the
depositor should prevail notwithstanding any law being in
force or any disposition whether testamentory or otherwise. A
nominee is entitled to get amount on the death of the
depositor. Similarly, the 1959 Act provides that nomination
by a holder of certificate should prevail over any other
circumtance. Of course, certain other provisions are also
made. The 1968 Act, of course establishes the Public
Provident Fund Scheme, the manner of subscription thereto and
withdrawal therefrom as well 88 for the interest payable.
This Act too provides that in the case of nomination, the
nominee will get the amount on the death of the depositor
notwithstanding any other circumstance. It would be
appropriate that these enactments are repealed after enacting
a consolidated Act providing for the subject-matters dealt

with by these three enactments.

It is pertinent to mention that there was a difference
of opinion between different High Courts as to whether the

nominee was entitled to the amount payable under the policy as


>:17:-“

a beneficiary in his own right to the exclusion of the heirs
of the deceased assured or whether the nominee was merely a
person authorised to make collection on behalf of the legal
heirs of the deceased assured. This issue was settled by the
decision of the Supreme Court in Sarbati Devi’s case [AIR 1984
SC 346], which upheld the latter view that the nominee is
merely empowered to collect the amount for the benefit of the
legal heirs. In the context of this legal position, the Law
Commission in its 137th report on "Need for Creating Office of
Ombudsman and for evolving legislative-Administrative Measures
inter-alia to relieve hardships caused by inordinate delays in
settling provident fund claims of beneficiary, examined under
Chapter V thereof the status of a nominee under the Emp loyees
Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 and the
Schemes framed thereunder, and suggested three options by way

of solution to the issue.

However, it preferred adoption of the third option as
it appeared to be just and fair as the employee would be fully
aware and conscious of what he jis doing by making the
‘nomination’ and the consequences thereof. The said third

option recommended by the Commission is quoted below:-

“Third course which commends itself is to make a
statutory provision enabling an employee to clearly
state in writing in the very application making

nomination either that he wants that ‘the nominee


-:18:-

shall take the amount absolutely in his or her own
right” or that the “nominee shall collect it and pay

to my family members..."

We recommend that similar Provision, should be adopted

for the sake of clarity in the Proposed enactment.

(111)(७) Similarly, the proposal to amalgate and enact

a consolidated Act in the place of the Indian Coinage Act,
1906, Metal Tokens Act, 1889 6 tal kK: 1 and Small Coins (Offences) Act, i fF Act,

1371 is a welcome proposal. The Indian Coinage Act prohibits
the making of any piece of copper, bronze or any other metal
to be used as money by any other person than the Government.
The Indian Coinage Act Provides for establishment of mints,
coining of coins at such mints and other incidental matters.
The Small Coins (Offences) Act was enacted to prevent melting
or destruction of small coins as well as hoarding of small
coins for the purpose of melting and destroying. This Act was
made to meet the acute shortage of coins. These three Acts

can be conveniently clubbed into one Act.

(111)(०) So far as the Legal Tender (Inscribed Notes) nder cr d No
Act, 1964 is concerned, it is proposed to be continued in the
Present form and the Law Commission has no comments to offer

thereon.

(iv) Before considering the Trusts Act, amendments whereto
are said to be still under consideration, the Law Commission

may deal with the proposal to repeal clauses (a) to (७) of


—:19:-

Section 20 of the [The Indian] Trusts Act, 1882. Section 20
provides for a situation where the trust property consists of
money but cannot be applied immediately or at an early date to
the purposes of the trust. In such a situation, the trustee
is placed under an obligation to invest the money in any of
the securities mentioned in clauses (a) to (f). Now, the
Department of Economic Affairs says that clauses (a) to (e)
have become redundant. At the same time, it says that they
are concerned with the Law Department. The Law Commission is
not able to appreciate as to why it can be said that clauses
(a) to (6) have become redundant and require to be repealed.
It is true that clause (a) of Section 20, to take an instance,
speaks of investment “in promisory notes, debentures, atock or
other securities, of any State Government or of the Central
Government or of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and

Ireland.” It is not stated that no such promissory notes etc.,
were issued by the State Government or the Central Government.
The promissory notes of the U.K. are referred to because the
Act is of 1882. It is one thing to say that the references in
these clauses to securities, bonds, stocks, etc., of the
Government of U.K. or other foreign countries may be repealed
but it is altogether a different thing to say that all the
clauses (a) to (e) are to be repealed. In the absence of any
further material, the Commission is not in a position to agree
with the proposal to repeal clauses (a) to (e) of Section 20
altogether. Appropriate amendments thereto can, however, be

considered, as mentioned above.


It is also stated in the Report of the Department that
necessary steps have already been taken to replace FERA with
FEMA. Since the matter is closely connected with the policies
of the Government and also because a copy of the FEMA has not
been made available to the Commission, it is not possible to

express any opinion.

The Report of the Department of the Economic Affairs,
further, states that amendments to other Acts which are being
implemented by the Department are under consideration of the

Expert Group.

Among other matters, the Report states that in place
of the existing Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions)
Act, 1985, a new Bill called “Sick Industrial Companies
(Special Provisions) 8111 1997" was introduced in the Lok
Sabha on 16th May, 1997. It is stated that the said Bill was
prepared taking into consideration the various suggestions
received in the matter including the recommendations of the
Goswami Committee. Though a copy of the 8111 was not made
available to the Law Commission, it has obtained a copy
thereof and has perused the same. It is true that in certain
respects the proposed Act is an improvement upon the present
Act, yet the basic scheme remains the same. 5.28 of the 8111,

which corresponds to 8.22 of the present Act does not provide


« अ४१21:-“

for an automatic suspension of legal proceedings, recoveries
and other contractual obligations (as is provided by 5.22 of
the present Act) and it empowers the Board to pass orders to
the above effect after hearing the parties and if the
circumstances of the case call for such an order. The Bill
provides for a three-way solution viz., rehabilitation, sale
(of industrial concern or a going concern) and winding up, as
the case may be. There is another aspect requiring
clarification: 5.1(4) says that it (Act) shall apply, in the
first instance to all the scheduled industries other than the
scheduled industry relating to ships and other vessels drawn
by power; there are two schedules to the Bill; the first
schedule sets out the declaration of fidelity and “secrecy
while the second schedule sets out the matters which can be
provided for while restructuring the industrial company; there
is no other schedule mentioning the industries to which the
Act is supposed to apply. Be that as it may, having regard to
the provisions of the present Act and the Bill aforesaid, the
Law Commission thinks it necessary to make the following

observations:

Several private/public limited companies are started
with the aid of and are sustained with the aid of public
funds. It is immaterial whether the public funds flow from
the banks (nationalised or otherwise), or from other financing
bodies and public financial institutions. Experience shows
that quite a few entrepreneurs exploit this situation. They
start a company, mainly with the aid of public funds and then

either by mis-management, inefficient management or rank



—222:-

dishonesty, drive the company to sickness. The matter is
reported to the BIFR with the result that all the recoveries
against them are instantly stayed. Even the taxes due to the
Government cannot be recovered let alone the debts due to the
banks and others financial institutions. This kind of blanket
immunity results in grave injustice to  banks/financial
institutions as well as to the Government and breeds financial
indiscipline among the persons in charge of industrial
companies. It is a serious matter to be examined by the
Government whether in the light of the new liberalised
economic policy, the Government should try to keep alive every
sick industry. One of the underlying principles of a market
economy is to allow inefficient and non-viable industries to
die their natural death instead of seeking to sustain them by
pumping in more and more public funds. The policy followed
hitherto viz., keeping several central and State public sector
undertakings afloat by pumping in huge amount of public funds
every year has already come in for serious criticism by
various economists. One can understand if a key industry,
whose existence/continuance is crucial to the nation’s
economy, is sought to be revived and continued. But the
policy of seeking to revive and rehabilitate every sick
industry may not be consistent with the present day economic
policy. The 1986 Act, it may be remembered, was enacted at a
time when the reigning philsophy was altogether different
Today the ruling philosophy is not the same. Indeed, if one
looks at the working of the nationalised banks and the extent
of “non-performing assets” - an euphemism for bad debts - one

is driven to the conclusion that sooner the public sector - is



~223:-

privatised (barring some key defence and defence-related
industries) the better it would be for the country and its
economy. Some of the nationalised banks have run up bad debts
in thousand of crores of rupees e.g., Indian Bank, whose bad

debts are said to exceed Rs.2,000 crores. The Law Commission,

therefore, recommends that before enacting a new Act in the
place of the present Act, a policy decision may be taken on
the subject 89 8 whole and then steps should be taken to enact

entire exercise as such.

3.2 MINISTRY 07 FINANCE

{DEPARTMENT OF COMPANY AFFAIRS) :—

In their letter dated 9th March, 1998, the Secretary
of the Department has stated that they had not constituted any
Expert Group for reviewing the enactments administered by
their Department. They have only stated that they propose to
repeal Companies (Donation to National Funds) Act, 1951 by
incorporating the relevant provisions in the Companies Bill,

1997.

At the same time, it is stated in the brief note
appended to the letter that certain amendments are being
contemplated to MRTP Act, 1969; Chartered Accountants Act,

1949; Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959. The proposed



>:24:-

amendments are not forwarded to the Law Commission. No

comments can, therefore, be offered so far as this Department

is concerned.

3.3 MINISTRY OF FINANCE (E,Coord) :-

This Department has indicated that they are not
independently administering any Act and, therefore, there is

no occasion for them to suggest any amendments to any

enactment.

3.4 MINISTRY OF COMMERCE :-

The Ministry of Commerce, in their letter dated March

16, 1998 have stated that they are administering ten Acts,

namely, ८

1. The Spices Board Act, 1986 (No.10 of 1986)
2. The Rubber Act, 1947 (No.24 of 1947)

3. The Tea Act, 1953 (No.29 of 1953)

4. The Coffee ACt, 1942 (No.7 of 1942)

5. The Marine Products Export Development Authority Act,
1972 (No.13 of 1972)

6. The Tobacco Board Act, 1975 (No.4 of 1975)

7. The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export
Development Authority Act, 1985 (No.2 of 1986)

8. The Enemy Property Act, 1968 (No.34 of 1968)

9. The Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963
(No.22 of 1963)


>:26:-

10. The Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act,

1992 (No.22 of 1992)

Barring the last two enactments, extensive amendments
to other enactments are said to have been suggested by the
Expert Committee constituted by the Ministry under the
Chairmanship of Shri 0.7. Bagchi, Additional Secretary and
Financial Advisor, Ministry of Commerce. It is also stated
that the concerned administrative sections have been advised
to prepare Cabinet Note in respect of the said proposals for
amendment wherever required and take further necessary action.
A copy of the amendments suggested by the Expert Committee has
also been forwarded to the Commission with the said letter.
As stated above, the amendments are extensive and
wide-ranging. The amendments are mainly directed to achieve
the goal of liberalised and market-friendly economy. The
object is to remove all restrictions and allow the relevant
industries to grow and function on their own. Neither is it
possible nor desirable - much less the function of the Law
Commission - to examine and pronounce upon the desirability of
each and every amendment. suggested by the Expert
Committee.According to the terms of reference constituting the
present Commission (15th Law Commission), it is required to
examine proposals so received ina wider perspective. Para
4.1(d) of the Order constituting the present Law Commission,

in so far as it is relevant, reads thus:-



~:26:-

“To consider in a wider perspective the suggestions
for revision/amendment given by Expert Groups in
various Ministries/Departments with a view to

coordinating and harmonising them.”

The wider perspective contemplated in the above
clause, the Law Commission presumes is to be understood in the
light of and on a comprehensive reading of its first term of

reference quoted under pr.1.1, supra which means to examine

the amendments in the light of the existing climate of

economic liberalisation. Examined from the above standpoint,
the Law Commission does not find any of the proposed

amendments undesirable. The Commission, however, seeks to

reiterate its comments (made under Para 3.1, supra of this
Report) that while the lifting of restrictions may be all
right, regulation should continue. In other words, a
distinction should be made between restrictions and
regulation. Even in a market economy, the Government cannot
afford to abdicate its function of regulating the economy. It
may not impose restrictions but the overall control and
regulation of the entire economy including industrial sector
should be in the hands of the Government. To protect and
Promote the national interest, the Government ought to
exercise overall control over industrial and commercial

establishments, their astablishment and functioning This is

what may be called the regulatory function of the Government.



>+:27:-

The Law Commission, however, wishes to draw attention
of Government of India to Section 19 of the Agricultural and
Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985
read with the items 1, 2, 4 and 9 of the Schedule to the Act.

Section 19 and aforesaid items of the schedule read as

follows :-

“19 (1) The Central Government may, by order published
in the Official Gazette, make provision for
prohibiting, restricting or otherwise controlling the
import or export of the Scheduled products, either

generally or in specified classes of cases.

(2) All. Scheduled products to which any order under
sub-section (1) applies, shall be deemed to be goods
of which the export has been prohibited under section
11 of the Customs Act, 1962, and all the provisions of

that Act shall have effect accordingly.

(3) If any person contravenes any order made under
sub-section (1), he shall, without prejudice to any
confiscation or penalty to which he may be liable
under the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, as
applied by sub-section (2), be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year,

or with fine, or with both.”



>:28:-

“THE SCHEDULE

1. Fruits, vegetables and their products.
2. ५००६ and meat products

4. ०३१०५ product.

9. coreat products.”

In

view of the acute scarcity and sky-rocketing prices

of vegetables, meat and fruits all over the country, driving

away these products from the reach of the common man, it would
be appropriate that the Government issues notification
Prohibiting the exports of vegetables, meat (excluding beef)

and fruits altogether. Such prohibition would ensure

availability of these products at reasonable rates which alone

would enable the poorer sections of the society to purchase

and consume them. A separate report on this subject will be

submitted in due course.

3.5 MINISTRY OF FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE FOF Ni PAR N’ IF VENUE :-

Through their letter dated 21.10.1997, the Ministry

had informed the Law Commission that the Department has

constituted an Expert Group for the purpose of identifying the
obsolete laws and the amendments needed in the existing
enactments. It was stated that an interim Report would be

sent to the Commission shortly. on 13.2.98, the Commission

received a communication stating that the Expert Group is of



-:29:-—

the unanimous view that out of the said 30 Acts (being

administered by the Department) the following six Acts can be

abrogated:-

1. Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988.

2. Central Excise Laws (Amendment & Validation) Act,
1982.

3. Sugar (Special Excise Duty) Act, 1959.

4. Mineral Products (Additional Duties of Excise &

Customs) Act, 1958.

5. Central Duties of Excise (Retrospective Exemption)

Act, 1986, and

Customs & Excise Revenue Appellate Tribunal Act, 1986.

Since no reasons were stated as to why aforasaid six
Acts are required to be repealed, the Law Commission addressed
a letter dated 4.3.98 asking the Department to state reasons

for which the said Acts, in its opinion are to be repealed.

By their letter dated April 8, 1998, the Ministry has informed
the Commission that “the Benami Transactions (Prohibition)
Act, 1988 was recommended to be abrogated since no

notification bringing the Act into force has been issued so

far." On verification, however, the Commission finds that the

above ground is not correct. As a matter of fact, $.1(3) of
the Act says that Sections 3, 5 and 8 will come into force at
once and that the remaining provisions will be deemed to have
come into force on 19th May, 1988. In fact, there have been
two decisions of the Supreme Court on the provisions of this

Act namely, Mithilesh Kumari (AIR 1989 SC 1247) and



—:30:-

R.Rajagopal Reddy (AIR 1996 SC 238) See para 5. The
Commission, therefore, cannot agree that this Act requires to

be repealed. Indeed, this Act serves a very laudable

objective.

The Sugar (Special Excise Duty) Act, 1959 was confined
to stocks which were available with the factories on the date
of commencement of the Act. It has no further application.

It can be repealed as suggested.

So far as the Central Excise Laws (Amendment and

Validation) Act, 1982 is concerned, the Commission finds on a

perusal of the provisions of the Act that it was enacted for
the purpose of providing the manner in which exemption
notifications should be issued under “every Central Law

providing for the levy and collection of any duty of excise
which makes the provisions of the Central Excise Act and Rules
made thereunder applicable by raference to the levy and
collection of the duty and excise under such Central Law.” The

Act further seeks to validate several exemption notifications

issued earlier which may not have cited or referred to the
relevant provisions of the Act or the Rules under which or
with reference to which they were issued. It is not known
whether any disputes are pending with respect to the exemption
notifications which are validated by sub-section (4) of
Section 2 of this Act. So far as the sub-sections (2) and (3)
of Section 2 are concerned, they merely prescribe the mode and
manner in which the exemption notifications under certain

Central Laws [referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 2]



-“:31:«“

shall be issued. In the circumstances, it is difficult to

agree that this Act can be repealed without further

verification. Only if it is found on due verification that no

disputes or litigation is pending with respect to the

notifications which were validated by sub-section (4) of

Section 2 that this Act can be repealed.

So far as the Mineral Products (Additional Duties

of Excise and Customs) Act, 1958 is concerned, it appears

that the said Act pertained to a limited period namely, the

period commencing on 1.4.59 and ending on 31.10.59. This

Act can, therefore, be repealed with a specific provision

that anything done or any action taken thereunder shall

continue to be good and valid. Similarly, the Central

Duties of Excise (Retrospective Exemption) Act, 1986

appears to be confined to Notifications issued during a

particular period (3.3.86 to 8.8.86) giving them

retrospective effect. This Act can also be repealed

subject to a specific provision that anything done
thereunder or any action taken thereunder shall continue to

be good and valid.

The Commission agrees with the reasons given for
repealing the Customs and Excise Revenue Appellate Tribunal

Act 1986. In view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in

&£.Chandra Kumar and also because an appeal is now provided
directly to Supreme Court against the Orders of the CEGAT
concerning matters of valuation and classification, this

Act can be said to be unnecessary and may be repealed.



~232:-

3.6 (1) DEPARTMENT OF SUPPLY
(11) DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT

(111) MINISTRY OF NON-CONVENTIONAL ENERGY SOURCES

The above three Departments have stated that they are
not administering any Acts and, therefore, no question arises
of any proposals being formulated for repeal or amendment.
The Department of Supply, however, expressed certain practical
difficulties in the matter of conduct of arbitration of
disputes arising out of contracts entered into by the DGS&D.
Though the difficulties pointed out appear to be real and

urgent, it is not a matter upon which this Commission is

expected to offer any comments.

3.7 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS: -
The Department of Electronics has stated that “there

is no specific statute which is being implemented" by the said
Department apart from general rules and producers applicable
to all the Government organisations. In their letter dated
26.11.97, they have, however, stated that the Department “has
already identified in the National Information Infrastructure

(NII) Plan-2000 of the Department with relation to the Cyber

Laws and setting up of NII", It is stated that

Inter-Ministerial Standing Committee is reviewing all the

related aspects and that in addition thereto another high

level Inter-Ministerial Sub-Group is also engaged in draft

resolution on “Layout Design in respect of Integrated Circuits



—:33:-

(Ics)". In the absence of any specific proposal being sent by

this Department, no comments can be offered by the Law

Commission.

3.8 MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES

In their letters dated 6th August, 1997 and 16th
October, 1997, they have stated that they are administering
four Acts/Orders, namely, out of which Rice Milling Industry
(Regulation) Act, 1958 and Rice Milling Industry (Regulation &
Licensing) Rules, 1959 have already been repealed. The third
Act MZI Act, 1981 is stated to have been transferred to Animal
Husbandry Department and the fourth 22, namely Fruit Product
Order (FPO) 1955 promulgated under the Essential Commodities
ACt has already been amended. Accordingly, it is stated that

no proposals are called for from the said Department.

3.9 MINISTRY OF URBAN AFFAIRS AND EMPLOYMENT,

DEPARTMENT OF URBAN EMPLOYMENT AND POVERTY ALLEVIATION

Though in their letter dated 27.10.1997, it was stated
that they had constituted an Expert Group to review the
existing laws and suggest modifications and that their
Proposals as and when finalised will be intimated to the
Commission, in their subsequent letter dated 24.11.1997, the
Department has stated: “On the subject mentioned above and to

state that information may be treated as 'NIL’ so far as this

Department is concerned”.


—:34:-

3.10 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS,

DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS:-

The Department #88 stated that they are not
administering any enactment except the Fertilizer Movement

(Control) Order, 1973 and that no amendments are contemplated

therein.

3.11 DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY : -

In their letter dated 10.11.1997, the Department has
stated that they are administering the Atomic Energy Act, 1962
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. They have
stated that they have periodically undertaken internal reviews

and additional ragulations framed as and when required. No

Proposals either for the repeal or amendment has been sent by

the Department.

3.12 MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS,
DEPARTMENT OF POSTS:-

In their letter dated 17.11.1997, the Department has
stated that so far as the Indian Posts Office Act, 1898 is
concerned, a review committee was set up in 1982 which
submitted its report in January, 1993. It is then stated that

it has been decided to retain the Act "with some amendments

where required". No proposals, however, are communicated to

us. It is also stated that the other two enactments are



-“:35:-“

Government Savings Bank Act and the Government Savings

Certificate Act but these enactments are: dealt with in the
communication received from the Department of Economic
Affairs, Ministry of Finance which has proposed the merger of
these two Acts with Public Provident Fund Act. This aspect
has already been dealt with and commented elsewhere in this

report.
3.13 MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: -

In their letter dated 19.11.1997, the Ministry has
stated that they are dealing with only two enactments, namely,
Research & Development Cess Act, 1986 and Technology
Development Board Act, 1995. It is stated that first of the
two Acts have recently been amended in 1995 and because both

the Acts are in harmony with the existing climate of economic

liberalisation, no proposals of amendments are forwarded.

3.14 MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING: -

According to their letter dated 28.11.97 of the
Ministry, it is administering four Acts, namely, (i) Press and
Registration of Books Act, 1867; (11) Prasar Bharti Act, 1990:
(iii) The Cinematograph Act, 1952; and (iv) The Press Counci1
Act, 1978. So far as the 1867 Act is concerned, it is stated
that amendments to the Act have been examined by the Law

Ministry and that no further review of the Act is called for

at this stage. Regarding the Cinematograph Act, 1952 it is


-:36:-

stated that the amendments have already been introduced and
are now pending in the Rajya Sabha. With respect to Press
Council Act, 1978, it is stated that the Press Council of
India has suggested some amendments and that the matter is

under consideration and that proposals in that behalf will be

sent to the Law Commission later. With respect to the Prasar

Bharti Act, 1990, it is stated in the aforesaid letter that no
further review of the Act is called for at the present
juncture. But it appears that the present Government is
contemplating a review of the Act. Be that as it may, no
comments are called for from the Law Commission at this stage,
except to say that while enacting any amendments to the Prasar
Bharati Act, 1990 or while contemplating a new enactment on
the subject, as the case may be, the concerned authorities
will do well to study closely the two opinions in the judgment

of the Supreme Court in The Secretary, Ministry of Information

and Broadcasting, Government of India vs. Cricket Association

of Bengai & Ors., AIR 1995 SC 1236. The said

opinions refer

to the Broadcasting Law obtaining in several countries of the
world and lay down the basic concepts relevant to the subject

in the light of the Indian Constitutional Law.



-:37:-

CHAPTER - IV
Conclusion

4.1 On the basis of the discussions contained in the
preceding chapters, the Commission is of the considered
opinion that the following central enactments falling under
the administrative control of the respective ministries of the
Central Government need changes; or require to be repealed: or
require to be amalgamated and re-enacted as a single
enactment; or no opinion can be given on enactments regarding
changes which are still under consideration, by the concerned

department, as the case may be.

4.2 Enactments falling under Ministry of Finance,

Department of Economic Affairs:

(a) Banking Service Commission Act:- The decision to
repeal this being a policy decision, calls for no comments.

(para 3.1 (ii)(a), supra)

(b) Currency Ordinance 1940:- The repeal of this

enactment is recommended.

(para 3.1 (11)(b), supra)

(c) The Shipping Development Fund Committee (Abolition)

Act, 1986:- Repeal of this Act is reccommended.

(Para 3.1 (i1)(c), supra)



“:38:-

(७) Compulsory Deposit Scheme Act, 1963 and Additional
Emoluments (Compulsory Deposit) Act, 1974:- On the basis of
the policy decision of the Government, repeal of these

enactments is recommended.

(para 3.1 (11)(0), supra)

(e) Government Savings Bank Act, 1873, Government Savings
Certificate Act, 1959 and Public Provident Fund Act,
1968:Amalgamation of these Acts and enactment of consolidated
single Act in the place of these Acts is recommended subject

to the observations made in the relevant para.

(para 3.1 (iii)(a), supra)

(1) Indian Coinage Act, 1906, Metal Tokens Act, 1889 and

Small Coins (Offences) Act, 1971-- Amalgamation of these Acts

and enactment of consolidated single Act in the place of these

Acts is recommended.

(para 3.1 (111)(9), supra)

(g) Legal Tender (Inscribed Notes) Act, 1964:-Continuation
of the Act is raccommended by the Department and the Commission

has no comments to offer thereon.

(para 3.1 (111)(०), supra)

(h) The Indian Trusts Act, 1882:- The amendments to the
Act are said to be still under consideration by the
Department. However, the Commission is not ina position to

agree with the proposal of the Department to repeal clauses

(a) to (9) of section 20 altogether, in the absence of any



—:39:-

further material. However, the reference in these clauses to

securities, bonds, stocks, etc. of the Government of U.K. or

other foreign countries may be repealed.

Since the replacement of FERA with FEMA is a matter of
policy of the Government and also because a copy of the FEMA
has not been made available to the Commission, it is not

possible to express any opinion.

The report of the Department of Economic Affairs

states that amendments to other Acts which are being

implemented by the Department are under consideration of the
expert group and that as and when suggestions are made, they

will be communicated to the Commission.

Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act,

1985:~ The Law Commission, recommends that before enacting a
new Act in the place of the present Act, a policy decision may
be taken on the subject as a whole and then steps should be
taken to enact a necessary and appropriate enactment or put an

end to the entire exercise as such.

(para 3.1(iv), supra)

4.3 Minsitry of Finance, Department of Company Affairs:
Companies (Donation to National Funds) Act, 1951:- The
Department have only stated that they propose to repeal the
Act by incorporating the relevant provisions in the Company ’s

Bill, 1997.



>:41:-

(No.22 of 1963)

10. The Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) ACt,
1992 (No.22 of 1992)

Barring the last two enactments, extensive amendments
to other enactments are said to have been suggested by the
Expert Committee constituted by the Ministry. The Commission
does not find any of the proposed amendments undesirable. The
Commission, however, seeks to reiterate its comments (made at
the inception of this Report) that white the lifting of
restrictions may be all right, regulation should continue. In
other words, a distinction should be made between restrictions
and regulation. Even in a market aconomy, the Government
cannot afford to abdicate its function of regulating the
economy. It may not impose restrictions but the overall
sontrol and regulation of the entire aconomy including
industrial sector should be in the hands of the Government.
To protect and promote the national interest, the Government
ought to exercise overall control over industrial and
commercial establishments, their establishment and functioning

This is what may be called the regulatory function of the

Government.

The Law Commission, however, wishes to draw attention
of Government of India to Section 19 of the Agricultural and
Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985
read with the items 1, 2, 4 and 9 of the Schedule to the Act.

Section 19 and aforesaid items of the schedule read as

follows:-


~:42:-

“149 (1) The Central Government may, by order published
in the Official Gazette, make provision for
prohibiting, restricting or otherwise controlling the
import or export of the Scheduled Products, either

generally or in specified classes of cases.

(2) All. Scheduled products to which any order under
sub-section (1) applies, shall be deemed to be goods
of which the export has been prohibited under section
11 of the Customs Act, 1962, and all the provisions of

that Act shall have effect accordingly.

(3) If any person contravenes any order made under
sub-section (1), he shall, without Pprajudice to any
confiscation or penalty to which he may be liable
under the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, as
applied by sub-section (2), be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year,

or with fine, or with both."

“THE SCHEDULE

1. Fruits, vegetables and their products.
2. Meat and meat products
4. Dairy products.

9. Cereal products."



-:43:-

-rocketing prices
In view of the acute scarcity and sky-"

untry, driving
of vegetables, meat and fruits 811 over the ©?

ld
on man, it wou
away these products From the reach of the comm

a notification
be appropriate that the Government issues

cluding beef)
prohibiting the export of Vegetables, meat (2%

would ensure
and fruits altogether, Such prohibition

tes which alone
availabllity of these Products at reasonable r"

ty to purchase
would enable the poorer sections of the s0cie

gubject will be
and conaume them. a4 separate report on this

submitted in due course,

(para 3-45 supra)

anue : ८
4.6 Ministry of Finance, Department of Rev

iniatered by the
Sut of the 30 acts (being adminis

following six Acts
Department), the Department viewed that the fo

can be abrogated: -

: 1988.
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act.

2. Central Excise Laws (Amendment a Validation) Act,
1982 .

3. Sugar (Special Excise Duty) Act, 1959.

4. Mineral Products (Additional Outies of Excise &
Customs) Act, 1958. tion)

5. Central Duties of Excise (Retrospect !ve Exemption
Act, 1986; and

6

1986.
{bunal Act,
Customs & Excise Revenue Appellate Tr


-:44:-

Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988

The Ministry has informed the Commission by their
letter dated April 8, 1988 that “the Benami Transactions
(Prohibition) Act, 1988 was recommended to be abrogated since

no notification bringing the Act into force has been issued so

far.” On verification, however, the Commission finds that the

above ground is not correct. As a matter of fact, Section
1(3) of the Act says that sections 3, 5 and 8 will come into
force at once and that the remaining provisions will be deemed
to have come into force on 19th May, 1988. The Commission,

therefore, cannot agree that this Act requires to be repealed.

(para 3.5, supra)

Central Excise Laws (Amendment & Validation) Act,
1982.

It is difficult to agree that this Act can be repealed

without further verification. Only if it is found on due
verification that no disputes or litigation is pending with
respect to the notifications which were validated by
sub-section (4) of Section 2 that this Act can be repealed.

(para 3.5, supra)

Sugar (Special Excise Duty) Act, 1959 Special Excise Dut Ac 1959



“:45:-

This Act was confined to stocks which were available
with the factories on the date of commencement of the Act. It
has no further application. It can be repealed as suggested

by the Department.

(para 3.5, supra)

The Mineral Products (Additional Duties of Excise & Mineral Products (Additional Duties f is &

Customs) Act, 1958. 9118 ) A 1958.

This Act can be repealed with a specific provision
that anything done or any action taken thereunder shall

continue to be good and valid.

(para 3.5, supra)

Central Duties of Excise (Retrospective Exemption) Duties of Excise (Retrospective Exemption

Act, 1986

This Act can also be repealed subject to a specific
provision that anything done thereunder or any action taken

thereunder shall continue to be good and valid.

(para 3.5, supra)

Customs and Excise Revenue Appellate Tribunal Act. fe) and cis Revenue Appel] Tribunal Ac

1986

The Commission agrees with the reasons given for
repealing the Act. In view of the judgment of the Supreme

Court in L.Chandra Kumar and also because an appeal is now

Provided directly to Supreme Court against the orders. of the


“:46:-

CEGAT concerning matters of valuation and classification, this
Act can be said to be unnecessary and may be repealed.

(para 3.5, supra)

4.7 DEPARTMENT OF SUPPLY; DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT;
MINISTRY OF NON-CONVENTIONAL ENERGY SOURCES: -

These Departments have stated that they are not
administering any Acts and, therefore, no question arises of

any proposal being formulated for repeal or amendment.

(para 3.6, supra)

4.8 Department of Electronics:-

The Department has stated that there is no specific
statute which is being implemented by the said Department. In
the absence of any specific proposal being sent by this

Department, no comments can be offered by the Law Commission.

(para 3.7, supra)

4.9 Ministry of Food Processing Industries:-

Rice Milling Industry (Regulation) Act, 1958 and Rice
Milling Industry (Regulation & Licensing) Rules, 1959 :these
have already been repealed. The third Act MZI Act, 1981 is
stated to have been transferred to Animal Husbandry Department

and the fourth YN, namely Fruit Product Order (FPO) 1985



>:47:-

promulgated under the Essential Commodities Act has already

been amended. Accordingly it is stated that no proposals are

called for from the said Department.

(para 3.8, supra)

4.10 Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment, Department

of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation:—-

They have informed that thers is no proposal to review

the existing laws or suggest modifications.

(para 3.9, supra)

4.11 Ministry of Chemical and Fertilisers, Department of

Fertilisers:-

The Fertiliser Movement (Control) Order, 1973:- No

amendments are contemplated by the Department therain.

(para 3.10, supra)

4.12 Department of Atomic Energy:-
No proposal either for the repeal or amendment has

been sent by the Department.

(para 3.11, supra)

4.13 Ministry of Communications, Department of Posts:-



~:48:-

The Department has decided to retain the Indian Post
Office Act, 1898, with some amendments where required.
However, no proposals regarding this are communicated to the
Commission. Merger of the Governments Savings Bank Act and
the Governments Savings Certificate Act with the Public
Provident Fund Act has been agreed to in this report under

para 3.1 (iii)(a), supra.

(para 3.12, supra)

4.14 Ministry of Science and Technology :-

No proposal of amendments to the Research and
Development Cess Act, 1986 and Technology Development Board

Act, 1995 have been received.

(para 3.13, supra)

4.15 Ministry of Information & Broadcasting:-

(i) Regarding Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867,
no further review of the Act is called for by the Department.

(ii) As regards Cinematograph Act, 1952, amendments have
already been introduced in the Act and are now pending in the

Rajya Sabha.

(111) Pertaining to the Press Council Act, 1978, it is

stated that the Press Council of India has suggested some
amendments and the matter is under consideration and the
Proposals in that behalf will be sent to the Commission later.
(iv) Regarding the Prasar Bharti Act, 1990 it is stated by

the Department that no further review of the Act 18 called for


~249:-

at the present juncture. Since it appears that the new
Government is contemplating a review of the Act, it is felt
that while enacting any amendments to the Act or contemplating
a new enactment on the subject, the opinions in the specified
Supreme Court judgment should be closely observed.

(para 3.14, supra)

We recommend accordingly.

a सा
“ ८2.2
री हु
(JUSTICE 8.7, JEEVAN REDDY) (RETD.)}



" D.0.N0.48(1)/97-LC -50- ANNEXURE - I

October 10, 1997.
Dear ,

Pursuant to the Prime Minister's announcement on [5th August, 1997.
one of the terms of reference set out by the Government of India for the Law
Commission is 'review/repeal of obsolete laws', that is, -

(a) to identify laws which are no longer Fleeded or relevant and can
be immediately repealed;

(b) to identify laws which are in harmony with the existing climate ता
economic liberalisation which need no change;

(c) to identify laws which require changes or amendments and to make
suggestions for their amendment;

(d) to consider in a wider perspective the suggestions for

revision/amendment given by Expert Groups in various
Ministries/Departments with a view to coordinating and harmonisiny
them;

(e) to consider references made to it by Ministries’ Departments ©
respect of legislation having bearing on the working of more tha
one Ministry/Department; and

(1) to suggest suitable measures for quick redressal of
grievances, in the field of law.

2. In pursuance of the above, the Law Commission has commenced the
examination of laws, with special reference to the desirability or otverwis>
of repealing obsolete laws. You are, therefore, requested to > repare an

exhaustive list of. all the laws/Acts with which your Department is concernes
and send the same to the Commission’ alongwith your comments thereon with
particular reference to items (a), (b), (c) and (६) above so as to enable us
to complete the task at the earliest. The Expert Group referred to at item
(d) above, may also be advised to keep in touch with the Law Commissior
for necessary coordination for the purpose.

3. Since the Government has set out a time limit for the Law Commissicn
to complete the task, you are requested to send the aforesaid materiai
within a month positively.

With regards,

Yours sincerely,

( R.L. MEENA
To

(As per list enclosed)



-5t- ह Low
ANNEXURE-IT

LAW COMMISSION
8. L. MEENA yoomiss|
Member - Secretary & GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Secretary to the Govt. of India

शास्त्री भवन
. 3383382 . .
moe Tel. 33 A SHASTRI. BHAWAN
ag दिल्‍ली
NEW DELHI-110 001
D.O.No.6(3)/41/97-LC(LS) February 23, 1998.
Dear ।

Please refer to my 0.0. “letter No.
re 44(1)/97-LC dated the 10th October, 1997, regarding
ar ‘review/repeal of obsolete laws’ (Copy enclosed).

2. The Law Commission 188 not received any

reply/information from your Department till date.
The study..of the Commission is being held up for
want of requisite information from your side.

3. You are requested to send the relevant
information at the earliest.
With regards,

Yours faithfully,

( २.७. MEENA )



- ANNEXURE~ It”

: -52- — विधि आयोग
LAW COMMISSION
i BR Lt. MEENA भारत सरकार
Member- Secretary & GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Secretary to the Govt. af India MENT भवन
meoweve Tel, 3389302 SHASTRI BHAWAN
नई दिल्‍ली

NEW 08111-110 oor
D.O. No-6(3)/41/97-Le( LS)

7 March 5, 199A

Dear

Please refer to D.O.letter No.Z-13023/1/97-
Coord. (ii) dated October 29, 1997 wherein it has
been stated that an Expert Group/Departmental
Committee has been constituted to review the
specific enactments. The Commission has been
awaiting the views of the Expert Group/Departmental
Committee constituted for the purpose.

2 The study of the Law Commission is being
held up for want of requisite information fram you
side.

You are requested to send the detailed repiy
“at the earliest.

With regards,
Yours sincerely,
(lywore

(R.L. Meena)